SIR HENRY LEE, Knt.
portrait of Sir Henry Lee

OF LONDON.

DOMINE DIRIGE NOS.


LONDON. Printed for ROBT. FAULDER, No. 42, New Bond Street. MDCCXC.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS work is composed from the observations of perhaps half my life, made
without the lest original view of publication, from the numberless walks taken
in and about our capital, with a mind occupied with more ideas than the
frivolous visit, or the mere object of the hour.

SOME were made in company of different friends, stricken, like myself, with
the love of the science of antiquities; and with the desire of tracing the
progress of perhaps the first city (comparing all its advantages) in the
universe.

THE remarks made in these latter walks were committed to my tablets till they
became rather considerable. In that state I determined to lay them before the
public, not urged by desire of friends, nor the wish of the people, or any
similar motives, but by my own continued propensity to writing.

I HAVE two things to apologize for in this performance. First, its
irregularity: but I do assure my friends it is given nearly in the same manner
in which the materials were collected, and quite according to the course of the
walk of the day.

Secondly, Let me request the good inhabitants of London and Westminster, not
to be offended at my having stuffed their Iliad into a nut-shell: the account
of the city of London, and liberties of Westminster, into a quarto volume. I
have condensed into it all I could; omitted nothing that suggested itself, nor
amplified any thing to make it a guinea book. In a word, it is done in my own
manner, from which I am grown too old to depart.

I FEEL within myself a certain monitor that warns me to hang up my pen in
time, before its powers are weakened, and rendered visibly impaired. I wait not
for the admonition of friends. I have the archbishop of Grenada in my eye: and
fear the imbecility of human nature might produce, in long-worn age, the same
treatment of my kind advisers, as poor Gil Blas had from his most reverend
patron. My literary bequests to future times, and more serious concerns, must
occupy the remnant of my days. This closes my public labors.

To every particular friend and correspondent I send my most cordial thanks,
for their candid and unremitted attention to my various enquiries: and for
their bearing so long with my yearning after information; and with my uncommon
curiosity, without which no writer can proceed with the confidence of accuracy,
or ought to lay any thing before the public unsanctioned by local information.
So much for acknowlegement of private favors. -- I take leave of a partial
public, with the truest gratitude for its long endurance of my very voluminous
writings: for its kind fostering my few merits: for its affected blindness to
my numerous defects. The last act concluded!

Valete et Plaudite. THOMAS PENNANT.
Downing, March 1, 1790.
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE BOOK-BINDER.
Frontispiece, SIR HENRY LEE; see p. 96. Page 98, ROBERT DUDLEY, Earl of
LEICESTER, armed for the Tilt-yard. 100, Cabinet of CHARLES I. and part of Old
Whitehall. 103, The Old Horse Guards. 136, The SAVOY Hospital. 191, Ruins of
the Church of St. JAMES'S, CLERKENWELL. 193, St. JOHN'S GATE. 218, The Gigantic
PORTER, and Little HUDSON, the Dwarf, in Newgate-street. The BOAR'S HEAD Sign
in EASTCHEAP. 219, The Sculpture of the Boy in Pannier Ally. 221, ALDERSGATE,
and part of the Walls and Towers on each side, taken from a very ancient
Drawing in the archives of St. Bartholomew's: communicated by Doctor COMB.
389, Sir RICHARD CLOUGH, knight, from the original in possession of Mrs.
CLOUGH, of Glan y wern, in the county of Denbigh. 416, The ancient Hall at
CROSBIE PLACE. -- N. B. This, and the prints at pp. 136, 191, 193, 218, and
219, drawn and etched by Mr. John Carter.
LONDON and WESTMINSTER in the Reign of QUEEN ELIZABETH, Anno Dom. 1563.
LONDINUM ANTIQUA.

This Plan shows the ancient (...) of the famous (...) of London and
Westminster as it was near the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth* (...)
Plates ^or their (...) are re-engraved to oblige the Curious and (...) ^^nd to
Posterity th^^ Old prospect whereby at one view may be seen, how much was built
of this populous City, and parts adjacent, at that time.

(...) in (...) Antiqua* published in 1^78 says* Near ten years past the Author
made a doubt,

whether to print or lay this work aside,
Until he first had ^ondon platted out.
The following Buildings were not (...) when this Plan (...). The Whitehall
Banqueting House Royal ^^^^hange not ^uilt before 1^70. Moor Fields not
divided nor pla^^^ed* ^am^s (...) on Snow ^ill in 1^8^* Puget Plan (...) till
the death of ^.^^ Puget 15^^.


A St. Margaret B Palace Gates C Gates D Fountain E St. Mary ^^ou^^ival F St.
Mar^in^s G Walks H Temple Gate I Bridewell Palace K City Walls


map of London and Westminster

OF LONDON.
WHENEVER a party of the original inhabitants of this island found an impulse
toward civilization; ESTABLISHMENT OF A BRITISH TOWN.
to withdraw from their native dens in depth of woods, and to form society;
they cleared a spot in the midst of their forests, and founded their towns,
similar to those which the first discoverers of the new world met with occupied
by the savages of America De Brie's Virginia, tab. xix. xx.
; similar to, but probably inferior in economy to those of the more polished
race of Pholey Negroes Moore's Travels into Africa, 26.
of Guinea. The Britons soon found the danger of living in families separated
and undefended. They sought for security in places surrounded with woods or
morasses, and added to the natural strength by forming ramparts and sinking
fosses Oppidum autem Britanni vocant quum sylvas impeditas vallo atque fossa
munierunt. Caesar. de Bell. Gal. lib. v. -- Locum egregie et natura et opere
munitum. Ibid. Strabo, lib. iv. p. 306.
. But they preferred spots fortified by nature; and made artificial works only
where nature showed herself deficient. Within such precincts they formed their
towns; their buildings were most mean and simple, covered with reeds or sticks
like American wigwams, or like modern hovels of the peasants of Lo^haber, or
the cabins of the Irish commonalty, to this moment as rude as the British
aborigines. To these precincts the Britons resorted with their cattle, their
wives and children Dioderus Siculus, lib. v. c. 11.
, whom they left thus protected, while they sallied out to war, or to the
employments of the chase: for their clothing was the skins of beasts, and
their food the flesh, with the addition of milk, and farinaceous diet. The
Britons soon became acquainted with one great use of the cow, notwithstanding
they remained ignorant of the making of cheese till the arrival of the Romans.
Agriculture was soon introduced among those who earliest formed towns or
communities: possibly by strangers who visited them from the continent. They
cleared the land in the neighborhood of their dwellings, they sowed corn, they
reaped and deposited it in granaries under ground, as the Sicilians practice to
this very day; but the latter lodged it in the grain, our predecessors in the
ear, out of which they picked the grains as they wanted them, and, ignorant of
mills, at first bruised, and then made them into a coarse bread Conjuges et
liberos in loca tuta transferrent. Tacitus in vit. Agric.
. The same nation who taught them the art of agriculture, first introduced a
change of dress. From the Gauls of the continent, they received the first
cloth; the dress called the Bracha, a coarse woollen manufacture. But probably
it was long before they learned the use of the loom, or became their own
manufacturers. This intercourse laid the foundation of commerce, which in
early times extended no farther than to our maritime places. They first
received the rudiments of civilization, while the more remote remained, in
proportion to their distance, more and more savage, or in a state of nature. In
the same degree as the neighboring Gauls became acquainted with the arts, they
communicated them to the nearest British colonists; who, derived from the same
stock, and retaining the same language and manners, were more capable and
willing to receive any instructions offered by a congenerous people. For this
reason Cantium, the modern Kent, and probably the country for some way up the
Thames, was, as Caesar informs us, far the most civilized of any part of
Britain: and that the inhabitants differed very little in their manner of life
from the Gauls. It was from the merchants who frequented our ports, he received
the first intelligence of the nature of our country, which induced him to
undertake the invasion of Britain, and which in aftertimes laid the foundation
of its conquest by the Romans.

THERE is not the lest reason to doubt but that London existed at that period,
and was a place of much resort. LONDON.
It stood in such a situation as the Britons would select, according to the
rule they established. An immense forest originally extended to the river side,
and even as late as the reign of Henry II. covered the northern neighborhood of
the city, and was filled with various species of beasts of chase Fitzstephen's
Descr. London, 26.
. It was defended naturally by fosses; one formed by the creek which ran along
Fleet-ditch, the other, afterward known by that of Walbrook. The south side
was guarded by the Thames. The north they might think sufficiently protected by
the adjacent forest.

LONDON STONE.
NEAR St. Swithin's church is a remnant of antiquity, which some have supposed
to have been British; a stone, which might have formed a part of a Druidical
circle, or some other object of the ancient religion, as it is placed near the
center of the Roman precincts. Others have conjectured it to have been a
milliary stone, and to have served as a standard, from which they began to
compute their miles. This seems very reasonable, as the distances from the
neighboring places coincide very exactly. At all times it has been preserved
with great care, was placed deep in the ground, and strongly fastened with bars
of iron. It seems preserved like the Palladium of the city. It is at present
cased like a relic, within freestone, with a hole left in the middle, which
discovers the original. Certainly superstitious respect had been paid to it;
for when the notorious rebel Jack Cade passed by it, after he had forced his
way into the city, he struck his sword on London stone, saying, "Now is
Mortimer lord of this city Holinshed, 634.
;" as if that had been a customary ceremony of taking possession.

WHEN FOUNDED.
THERE is every reason to suppose that the Romans possessed themselves of London
in the reign of Claudius; under whom Aulus Plautius took Camalcdunum, the
present Maldon, in Essex, and planted there a colony, consisting of veterans of
the fourteenth legion, about a hundred and five years after the first invasion
of our island by Caesar. This was the first footing the Romans had in Britain.
It seems certain that London and Verulam were taken possession of about the
same time; but the last clames the honor of being of a far earlier date, more
opulent, populous, and a royal seat before the conquest of Britain. Camalodunum
was made a Colonia, or a place governed entirely by Roman laws and customs;
Verulamium, a Municipium, in which the natives were honored with the privileges
of Roman citizens, and enjoyed their own laws and constitutions; and Londinium,
ONLY A PRAEFECTURA.
only a Praefectura, the inhabitants, a mixture of Romans and Britons, being
suffered to enjoy no more than the name of citizens of Rome, being governed by
Praefects sent annually from thence, without having either their own laws or
magistrates. It was even then of such concourse, and such vast trade, that the
wise conquerors did not think fit to trust the inhabitants with the same
privileges as other places, of which they had less reason to be jealous.

THERE is no mention of this important place, till the reign of Tiberius; when
Tacitus speaks of it as not having been distinguished as a colony, but famous
for its great concourse of merchants, and its vast commerce: this indicates, at
lest, that London had been at that time of some antiquity as a trading town.
The exports from hence were cattle, hides, and corn; dogs made a small article;
and, let me add, that slaves were a considerable object. Our internal parts
were on a level with the African slave coasts; and wars among the petty
monarchs were promoted for the sake of a traffic now so strongly controverted
Strabo, lib. iv. p. 265.
. The imports were at first salt, earthen ware, and works in brass, IMPORTS.
polished bits of bones emulating ivory, horse-collars, toys of amber, and
glasses, and other articles of the same material The same, p. 307.
. We need not insist on the commerce of this period, for there was a great
trade carried on with the Gauls in the days of Caesar: that celebrated invader
assigning, as his reason for attempting this island, the vast supplies which we
gave to his Gaulish enemies Bell. Gall. lib. iv.
, and which interrupted his conquests on the continent.

WHEN FIRST MENTIONED.
THE first mention of London was occasioned by a calamity, in the year 61, in
the reign of Nero, which nearly occasioned the extinction of the Roman power in
Britain. The heroine Boadicia, indignant at the personal insult offered to her
and her family, and the cruelties of the conquerors to the unhappy Britons,
made a sudden revolt, and destroyed Camolodunum, after putting all the
colonists to the sword. Tacitus gives us the prediction of the ruin of that
city, with all the majesty of historical superstition. Nulla palam causa
delapsum Camaloduni simulacrum victoriae, ac retro conversum, quasi cederet
hostibus. Et foeminae in furore turbatae, adesse exitium canebant. Externosque
fremitus in curia eorum auditos, consonuisse ululatibus theatrum, visamque
speciem in aestuario, notam esse subversae coloniae. Jam oceanum cruento
aspectu: dilabente aestu, humanorum corporum effigies relictas, ut BRITANNI ad
spem ita veterani ad metum trahebant Annals, lib. xiv. c. 32.
.

THE Roman general Paulinus Suetonius, on this news, suddenly marched across
the kingdom, from his conquests in North Wales, to London; which, finding
himself unequal to defend with his small army, he evacuated to the fury of the
enemy, after reinforcing his troops with all the natives who were fit to serve.
Neither the tears nor prayers of the inhabitants could prevale on him to give
them his protection. DESTROYED BY THE BRITON^
The enraged Boadicia destroyed all who continued behind. Verulamium met with
the same fate. In all the three places seventy thousand Romans and British
allies perished Tac. Annals, lib. xiv. c. 33.
.

WHEN the Romans became masters of London, ENLARGED BY THE ROMANS.
they enlarged the precincts, and altered their form. It extended in length
from Ludgate Hill to a spot a little beyond the Tower. The breadth was not half
equal to the length, and at each end grew considerably narrower. Mr. Maitland
suspects that the walls were not built till a very late period of the empire,
and that it was an open town; because the city happened to be surprised, LONG
AN OPEN TOWN.
in the days of Dioclesian and Maximilian, by a party of banditti, who were cut
off by a band of Roman soldiers, who fortunately had, at the very time they
were engaged in the plunder, come up the river in a fog. The time in which the
wall was built is very uncertain. Some ascribe the work to Constantine the
great. WHEN WALLED.
Maitland, to Theodosius, governor of Britain in 369. As to the last, we know
no more, than that, after he had cleared the country of the barbarians, he
redressed grievances, strengthened the garrisons, and repaired the cities and
forts Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. xxviii. c. 3.
which had been damaged. If London was among those, it certainly implies a
prior fortification. Possibly their founder might have been Constantine, as
numbers of coins of his mother Helena have been discovered under them placed
there by him in compliment to her. To support this conjecture, we may
strengthen it by saying, that in honor of this empress, the city, about that
time, received from her the title of Augusta; which, for some time, superseded
the ancient one of Londinium. Long before this period, it was fully romanized,
and the customs, manners, buildings, and arts of the conqueror adopted. The
commerce of the empire flowed in regularly; came in a direct channel from the
several parts then known, not as in the earlier days (when described by Strabo)
by the intervention of other nations; for till the settlement of the Roman
conquest, nothing could come immediately from Italy. The ancient course of the
walls was as follows: -- It began with a fort near the present site of the
Tower, EXTENT AND FORM.
was continued along the Minories, and the back of Houndsditch, across
Bishopsgate street, in a strait line by London-wall to Cripplegate; then
returned southward by Crowder's Well Alley, (where several remnants of lofty
towers were lately to be seen) to Aldersgate; thence along the back of Bull and
Mouth street to Newgate, and again along the back of the houses in the Old
Bailey to Ludgate; soon after which it probably finished with another fort,
where the house, late the King's Printing House, in Black Friars, now stands:
from hence another wall ran near the riverside, along Thames street, quite to
the fort on the eastern extremity. In another place I shall have occasion to
mention that the river at present is moved considerably more to the south, than
it was in the times in question.

TOWERS.
THE walls were three miles a hundred and sixty-five feet in circumference,
guarded at proper distances, on the land side, with fifteen lofty towers; some
of them were remaining within these few years, and possibly may still. Maitland
mentions one, twenty-six feet high, near Gravel-lane, on the west side of
Houndsditch; another, about eighty paces south-east toward Aldgate; and the
bases of another, supporting a modern house, at the lower end of the street
called the Vineyard, south of Aldgate. But since his publication, they have
been demolished, so that there is not a trace left. The walls, when perfect,
are supposed to have been twenty-two feet high, the towers, forty. These, with
the remnants of the wall, proved the Roman structure, by the tiles and
disposition of the masonry. London-wall, near Moorfields, is now the most
entire part left of that ancient precinct.

I MUST not omit the Barbican, A SPECULA.
the Specula or Watchtower belonging to every fortified place. This stood a
little without the walls, to the north-west of Cripplegate.

THE gates, which received the great military roads, were four. THE GATES.
The Praetorian way, the Saxon Watling street, passed under one, on the site of
the late Newgate; vestiges having been discovered of the road in digging above
Holborn-bridge: it turned down to Dow-gate, or more properly Dwr-gate or
Watergate, where there was a Trajectus or Ferry, to join it to the Watling
street, which was continued to Dover. The Hermin street passed under
Cripplegate; and a vicinal way went under Aldgate, by Bethnal Green, toward
Oldford, a pass over the river Lee to Duroleiton, the modern Leiton, in Essex.

IN most parts of ancient London, ANTIQUITIES.
Roman antiquities have been found, whenever it has been thought necessary to
dig to any considerable depth. Beneath the old Saint Mary le Bow were found the
walls, windows, and pavement of a Roman Temple; and not far from it, eighteen
feet deep in adventitious soil, was the Roman causeway. The great elevation of
the present ground above its former state, will be taken notice of in another
place.

IN digging the foundation for the rebuilding of St. Paul's, was found a vast
coemetery: first lay the Saxons, in graves lined with chalk-stones, or in
coffins of hollowed stones; beneath them had been the bodies of the Britons,
placed in rows. Abundance of ivory and boxen pins, about six inches long,
marked their place. These were supposed to have fastened the shrouds in which
the bodies were wrapped Parentalia, p. 266.
. These perishing, left the pins entire. In the same row, but deeper, were
Roman urns intermixed, lamps, lacrymatories; fragments of sacrificial vessels
were also discovered, in digging toward the north-east corner; and in 1675,
not far from the east corner, at a considerable depth, beneath some flinty
pavement, were found numbers of vessels of earthen ware, and of glass, of most
exquisite colors and beauty, some inscribed with the names of deities, heroes,
or men of rank. Others ornamented with variety of figures in bas relief, of
animals and of rose-trees. Tesulae of jasper, porphyry, or marble, such as form
the pavement we so often see, were also discovered. Also glass beads and rings,
large pins of ivory and bone, tusks of boars, and horns of deer sawn through.
Also coins of different emperors, among them some of Constantine; which at once
destroys the conjecture of Mr. Maitland, who supposes that this collection were
flung together at the sacking of London by our injured Boadicia.

IN 1711, another coemetery was discovered, in Camomile street, adjoining to
Bishopsgate. It lay beneath a handsome tesselated pavement, and contained
numbers of urns filled with ashes and cinders of burnt bones; with them were
beads, rings, a lacrymatory, a fibula, and a coin of Antoninus.

IN SPITTLEFIELDS.
IN Spittlefields was another Roman burying-place, of which many curious
particulars are mentioned by old Stow, in p. 323 of his Survey of London: and
Camden gives a brief account of another, discovered in Goodman's fields. Among
those sound in Spittlefields, was a great ossuary made of glass, encompassed
with five parallel circles, and containing a gallon and a half; it had a
handle, a very short neck, and wide mouth of a whiter metal. This was presented
to Sir Christopher Wren, who lodged it in the Museum of the Royal Society
Parentalia, p. 267. Grew's Museum, 380.
. I point out these as means of discovering the ancient Roman precincts of the
city. The coemeteries must have been without the walls: it being a wise and
express law of the XII tables, that no one should be buried within the walls. I
cannot think that the urns found near St. Paul's were funebrial; if that should
have been the case, the Roman walls must have been much farther to the east
than they have been placed, which by no means appears to have been the fact.

I WILL only mention two other antiquities found here: very few indeed have
been preserved, out of the multitude which must have been found in a place of
such importance, and the capital of the Roman empire in Britain. The first is a
sepulchral monument, in memory of Vivins Marcianus, (a Roman soldier of the
second legion, quartered here) erected by his wife Januaria Matrina. His
sculpture represents him as a British soldier, probably of the Cohors Britonum,
dressed and armed after the manner of the country, with long hair, a short
lower garment fastened round the waist by a girdle and fibula, a long Sagum or
played flung over his breast and one arm, ready to be cast off in time of
action, naked legs, and in his right hand a sword of vast length, like the
^lymore of the later Highlanders; the point is represented resting on the
ground: in his left hand is a short instrument, with the end seemingly broken
off. This sculpture was found in digging among the ruins, after the fire in
16^6, in the vallum of the Pr^t^ion camp near L^dgate. The soldiers were always
buried in the ^ll^; the citizens in the Pe^rium Parentalia, p. 266. -- The
P^m^erium was a space on the outside of fortified towns, on which all buildings
were prohibited.
, without the gates. It is very differently represented by Mr. Gale. The hair
in his figure is short, the sword also short, and held with the left hand
across his body, the instrument is placed in the left hand, and resembles an
exact Bet^: the ^ss also differs. I give the preference to the figure given by
Mr. Hers^ly Gale's Iter Anton. 68. Britannia Romana, 331. tab. 75.
, which he corrected after the figure given by Doctor Prid^x, from the
Arundelian marbles. But Mr. H^sely fairly confesses that the representation is
far more elegant than in the mutilated original.

SAXON INVATION.
AFTER the Romans deserted Britain, a new and fierce race succeeded. The warlike
Saxons, under their leaders Hengest and Horsa, landed in 448, at Upwines fleot,
the present Ebbsflete, in the isle of Thanet. The Britons remained masters of
London at lest nine years after that event; for, receiving a defeat in 457, at
Creccanford, (Crayford) they evacuated Kent, and fled with great fear to the
capital Sax. Chron.
. By the year 604, it seems to have recovered from the ravages of the invaders.
It became the chief town of the kingdom of Essex. Sebert was the first
Christian king; and his maternal uncle Ethelbert, king of Kent, founded here a
church dedicated to St. Paul. At this time Bid informs us that it was an
emporium of a vast number of nations, who resorted there by sea and by land.

IN the reign of that great prince ALFRED, London, or, to use the Saxon name,
Lundenburg, was made by him capital of all England. In consequence of a vow he
had made, he sent Sighelm, bishop of Sherbourn, first to Rome, and from thence
to India, with alms to the Christians of the town of St. Thomas, now called
Bekkeri, or Meliapour: who returned with various rich gems, some of which were
to be seen in the church of Sherbourn, in the days of William of Malmesbury
Sax. Chron. 86. Will. Mel^sh. lib. ii. 248.
. It must not be omitted that he was the first who, from this island, had any
commerce with that distant country. Our commerce by sea, even in the next
century, was not very extensive, the wise monarch Athelstan being obliged, for
the encouragement of navigation, to promise patents of gentility to every
merchant, who should, on his own bottom, make three voyages to the
Mediterranean.

THE succeeding ravages of the Danes reduced London, NORMAN CONQUEST.
and its commerce, to a low ebb: yet it seems in some measure to have recovered
itself before the Conquest. We are wonderfully in the dark respecting its state
of government, both in the Saxon period, and that of the Conquest: in respect
to the former, we know no more than that it was governed by a Portreve or
Portgrave, LONG GOVERNED BY A PORTGRAVE.
or guardian of the port; and this we learn from the concise charter granted to
the city by William the Conqueror, in which he salutes William the bishop, and
Godfrey the Portreve, and all the burgesses. WILLM^ king griet Willm^ bishop
and Godfreg' porteren and eall the boroughwaren bynnen London franchisce and
englisce jich kyd eth yr jck yell yr great be^ ealbra yeara laga ye die ye great
yer anen EDWARDIS dage king end ick ill yet sulke child be his fader yr faum
achter his fader dage and ick nel geyolian that ening man each doig prungbede.
God ye beheld Customs of London, p. 23.
. It is probable that the bishop of London for the time being, and the
Portgrave, were united in the government, for in the Saxon charters they are
mentioned together: in the time of Edward the Confessor, Alswar the bishop, and
Wolfgar my Portgrave. William bishop, and Swerman my Portgrave.

LONDON certainly could not have been in the very low condition which some
writers represent it to have been, at the time of the Conquest. It had ventured
to sally out on the Conqueror, but without success. It fell more by internal
faction, than its own weakness; yet there was strength enough left, to make
William think proper to secure their allegiance, by building that strong
fortress the Tower. In seventy years from that event, an historian Fitzstephen.
of that period pretends, that London mustered sixty thousand foot, and twenty
thousand horse. If this is any thing near the truth, is it possible but London
must have been very powerful at the time of the Conquest? for the reigns
between that period and of Stephen, were not well calculated for a great
increase of population. I rather concur with them who think that the muster
must have been of the militia of the neighboring counties, and London the place
of rendezvous. A writer Peter de Blois, archdeacon of London. See Fitzstephen,
p. 28, in the note.
of that period, and at the very time resident in the capital, with more
appearance of truth, makes the number of inhabitants only forty thousand.

DURING the time of the Conqueror, and till the reign of Richard I. the name of
the civil governor continued the same. That monarch, to support the madness of
the crusade, received from the citizens a large sum of money; and in return,
permitted them to choose annually two officers, under the name of bailiffs, or
sheriffs; who were to supersede the former. The names of the two first upon
record are Wolgarius, and Geffry de Magnum.

IN the next reign was added the office of mayor, CHANGED TO A MAYOR.
a title borrowed from the Norman Maire, as well as the office. Henry
Fitz-alwyn was the first elected ^o that trust. He had been before mayor, but
only by the nomination of his prince.

IN the reign of Henry III. after the citizens had suffered many oppressions,
he restored a form of government, and appointed twenty-four citizens to share
the power. In his son's reign, we find the city divided into twenty-four wards;
the supreme magistrate of which was named Alderman, ALDERMEN.
an exceeding ancient Saxon title. Aelder-man, a man advanced in years, and
accordingly supposed to be of superior wisdom and gravity. In the time of
Edgar, the office was among the first in the kingdom. Ailwyn, ancestor to the
first mayor, was alderman of all England; what the duties of his office were,
does not appear.

HE must be a Briarcus in literature, who would dare to attempt a history of
our capital, on the great, the liberal, the elegant plan which it merits. I, a
puny adventurer, animated with a mind incapable of admitting a vacant hour;
restless when unemployed in the rural scenes to which my fortunate lot has
destined me, must catch and enjoy the idea of the minute. In the pursuit of my
plan, I wish to give a slight view of the shores I am about to launch from: the
account must be brief and confined, limited to what I shall say of their
ancient state, to the period bounded by the REVOLUTION; intermixed with the
greater events, which have happened in nearer days.

THE choice of the situation of this great city was most judicious. It is on a
gravelly soil; and on a declivity down to the borders of a magnificent river.
The slope is evident in every part of the ancient city, and the vast modern
buildings. The ancient city was defended in front by the river; on the west
side by the deep ravine, since known by the name of Fleet-ditch; on the north
by morasses; on the east, as I suspect, by another ravine. All the land round
Westminster Abbey was a flat sen, which continued beyond Fulham: but a rise
commences opposite to it, and forms a magnificent bend above the curvature of
the Thames, even to the Tower. The Surry side was in all probability a great
expanse of water, a lake, a Llyn, as the Welsh call it; which an ingenious
countryman of mine Mr. William Owen, of Barmouth, now resident in London.
, not without reason, thinks might have given a name to our capital; Llyn Din,
or the city on the lake. This most probably was the original name: and that
derived from Llong a ship, and Din a town, might have been bestowed when the
place became a seat of trade, and famous for the concourse of shipping. The
expanse of water might have filled the space between the rising grounds at
Deptfor and those at Clapham; and been bounded to the south by the beautiful
Surry Hills. Lambeth Marsh, and the Bank Side, evidently were recovered from
the water. Along Lambeth are the names of Narrow Walls, or the mounds which
served for that purpose; and in South-wark, Bankside again shows the means of
converting the ancient lake into useful land: even to this day the tract beyond
South-wark, and in particular that beyond Bermondsey street, is so very low,
and beneath the level of common tides, that the proprietors are obliged to
secure it by embankments.

I BEGIN my account by crossing over the Thames into Surry, SURRY.
which, with Sussex, formed the country of the ancient Regni, being part of
this island to which the Romans permitted a kingly government, merely to enjoy
the insolent boast of having kings as their slaves. The Saxons bestowed on this
part their own names of Suthry or Suthrea, from its situation on the southern
part of the river. I proceed to my accustomed walk of LAMBETH. LAMBETH.
In the earlier times it was a manor, possibly a royal one, for the great
Hardiknut died here in 1042, in the midst of the jollity of a wedding dinner:
and here, without any formality, the usurper Harold is said to have snatched
the crown, and placed it on his own head. At that period it was part of the
estate of Goda, wife to Walter earl of Mantes, and Eustace earl of Boulogne;
who presented it to the church of Rochester, but reserved to herself the
patronage of the church. It became, in 1197, the property of the sea of
Canterbury, by exchange transacted between Glanville bishop of Rochester, and
the archbishop Hubert Walter. Glanville reserved out of the exchange a small
piece of land, on which he built a house called Rochester Place, for the
reception of the bishops of Rochester, whenever they came to attend parliament.
In 1357, John de Shepey built Stangate stairs, for the convenience of himself
and retinue to cross over into Westminster. Fisher and Hilsley were the last
bishops who inhabited this palace; after their deaths it fell into the hands of
Henry VIII. who exchanged with Aldridge bishop of Carliste, for certain houses
in the Strand. Its name was changed to that of Carlisle house Ducarel's
Lambeth, 72.
. The small houses built on its site still belong to that see. It had been the
design of archbishop Walter, A COLLEGE OF SECULAR MONKS PROJECTED HERE
to have erected here a college of secular monks, independent of those of
Canterbury. It was originally designed, by archbishop Baldwyn, to have been
built at Hackington, near that city: but such a jealousy did those holy men
conceive at the thought of a rival house so near to their own, that by their
interest with the pope the project was laid aside. It was afterward resumed
by Hubert Walter, who thought he could give no offense by erecting the college
on this distant manor; but the monks obtaining a bull from the pope in their
favor, and such humiliating terms prescribed to the archbishop, that from
thenceforth he entirely desisted from the design 8, 9.
. The mortifications which the primates met with in the prosecution, seem to
have first determined them in fixing their residence here. Walter and Langton
successively lived at the manor-house of Lambeth. The last improved it, but the
building was afterward neglected and became ruinous. No pious zeal restored
the place, but the madness of priestly pride. Boniface, a wrathful and
turbulent primate, elected in 1244, took it into his head to become a visitor
of the priory of St. Bartholomew, to which he had no right. The monks met him
with reverential respect, but assured him the office did not belong to the
bishop. The meek prelate rushed on the sub-prior, knocked him down, kicked,
beat, and buffeted him, tore the cope off his back, and stamped on it like one
possessed, while his attendants paid the same compliments to all the poor
monks. The people, enraged at his unpriestly conduct, would have torn him to
pieces; when he retired to Lambeth, and, by way of expiation, rebuilt it with
great magnificence.

THIS palace was very highly improved by the munificent Henry Chichely, who
enjoyed the primacy from 1414 to 1443. I lament to find so worthy a man to have
been the founder of a building so reproachful to his memory as the Lollards
tower, at the expense of near two hundred and eighty pounds. Neither
protestants or catholics should omit visiting this tower, the cruel prison of
the unhappy followers of Wickliffe. The vast staples and rings, to which they
were chained before they were brought to the stake, ought to make protestants
bless the hour which freed them from so bloody a religion. Catholics may glory,
that time has softened their zeal into charity for all sects, and made them
blush at these memorials of the misguided zeal of our ancestors.

THIS palace suffered greatly in the civil wars. After those of York and
Lancaster, it was restored by archbishop Morton. He also built the gateway; in
the lower room of which are still to be seen the rings to which the
overflowings of the Lollards tower were chained.

AFTER the civil wars of the last century, FANATICAL FURY.
when fanatical was united with political fury, it was found that every
building devoted to piety, had suffered more than they had done in all the rage
of family contest. The fine works of art, and the sacred memorials of the dead,
were, except in a few cases, sacrificed to puritanical barbarism, or to
sacrilegious plunder. Lambeth tell to the share of the miscreant regicide Scot.
He turned the chapel into a hall, and levelled, for that purpose, the fine
monument of archbishop Parker: he pulled down the noble hall, the work of
Chichely, and sold the materials for his own profit. Juxon, on the Restoration,
found the palace of his predecessors a heap of ruins. His piety rebuilt a
greater part than could have been expected from the short time he enjoyed the
primacy. He rebuilt the great hall on the ancient model, when the archbishop
with his particular friends sat at the high table: the steward with the
servants, who were gentry of the better rank, sat at the table on the right
hand side: the almoner, the clergy, and others, occupied the table on the left.
None but nobility or privy counselors were admitted to the table of the
archbishop. The bishops themselves sat at the almoner's; the other guests at
the steward's. All the meat which was not consumed, was regularly given to the
idle poor, who waited in crowds at the gate. It is not the defect of charity in
modern prelates that this custom is difused; but the happy change in the times.
Every one must now eat the bread of his own industry; a much more certain
support than the casual bounty of the great; which misfortunes often prevented,
and left the object a prey to misery and famine. What is styled the luxury of
the times, has by no means superseded deeds of alms. Wealth is more equally
diffused; but charity is equally great: it passes now through many channels,
and makes less noise than when it was poured through fewer streams.

LIBRARY.
THE fine library in this palace was founded by archbishop Bancroft; who died in
1610, and left all his books to his successors, for ever. The succeeding
archbishop, Abbot, bequeathed all his books in his great study, marked C. C. in
the same unlimited manner.

ON the suppression of episcopacy, this valuable library was preserved by the
address of the celebrated Mr. Seldom. It seems that archbishop Bancroft had
left his books to his successors, on condition that the immediate successor was
to give bond that they should not be embezzled; but delivered entire from one
to the other for ever. On failure of this article, they were to go to Chelsea
College, in case it was built in six years after his decease. The college never
was finished: but whether any of Bancroft's successors gave the security does
not appear. The books were remaining at Lambeth in 1646, two years after the
execution of archbishop Laud; when probably fearing for their safety in times
so inimical to learning, Mr. Seldom suggested to the university of Cambridge
their right to the books; and the whole were delivered into their possession.
On the Restoration, archbishop Juxon demanded the return of the library; which
was repeated by his successor Sheldon, as founded on the will of the pious
founder: and they were restored accordingly. Archbishop Sheldon added a
considerable number: and archbishop Tenison augmented it with part of his books.

THAT very worthy prelate archbishop Secker, besides a considerable sum
expended on making catalogues to the old registers of the sea, left to the
library all such books from his own, as were not in the former, which
comprehended much the largest and most valuable part of his own collection.

ARCHBISHOP Cornwallis bestowed many valuable books in his lifetime. And the
present archbishop has given a considerable sum for fitting up a proper
repository for the valuable collection of manuscripts. The whole number of
printed books amounts to twenty-five thousand.

THE other apartments have within these few years received considerable
improvements. G^S
The great gallery, which is near ninety feet long by fifteen feet nine inches
broad, has lately had the addition of a bow window, by the present amiable
primate. An opening has been made toward the river, by the cutting down of a
few trees, which admits a most beautiful view of the water, part of the bridge,
and of the venerable abbey. This gallery is filled with portraits of primates
or prelates, among others, that of cardinal Pole, the founder of this very
room. Over the chimney are the heads of those of the earlier times, such as
archbishop Warham, by Holbein; St. Dunstan, and archbishop Chichely: the first
imaginary, the last probably taken from painted glass. Among these
distinguished characters, Katherine Parr has found a place, and not without
just clame; it being reasonable to suppose, but for the death of her tyrant,
she would have been devoted to the stake for the favor she bore to the reformed
religion. I must not omit mention of the two portraits of archbishop Parker,
second primate of the protestant religion; one is by Holbein, the other by
Richard Line, who jointly practiced the arts of painting and engraving in the
service of this great patron of science Granger, i. 202.
.

IN the dining room is a succession of primates, from the violent and imprudent
Laud to the quiet and discreet Cornwallis. The portrait of Laud is admirably
done by Vandyke; Juxon, from a good original which I saw last year at
Longleate; Tenison, by Simon Dubois; Herring, by Hogarth; Hutton, by Hudson;
Secker, by Reynolds; and Cornwallis, by Dance. Here are besides in the gallery,
by the last master, portraits of Terrick late bishop of London, and Thomas late
bishop of Winchester: and another of bishop Hoadley, which does honor to the
artist, his wife, Sarah Curtis. When I looked into the garden I could not but
recall the scene of conference between the great the wise earl of Clarendon,
and the unfortunate Laud. Hyde laid before him the resentment of all ranks of
people against him for his passionate and ill-mannered treatment even of
persons of rank. The primate attended to the honest chancellor with patience,
and palliated his faults Life of Edward earl of Clarendon, octavo ed. i. 62.
. The advice was forgotten, nor his folly cured till he had involved himself
and master in destruction.

A MORE phlegmatic cohabitant of the garden, LONGEVITY OF A TORTOISE.
enjoyed his situation during many successions to this self-devoted
metropolitan. A Tortoise, introduced here in his days (in 1633) lived till the
year 1753, the time of archbishop Herring, and possibly might have lived till
the present, had it not been killed by the negligence of the gardener.

IN the vestry is a portrait of Luther and his wife; the lady appears pregnant.
This great reformer left three sons, John, Martin, and Paul.

IN one of the apartments of the palace is a performance that does great honor
to the ingenious spouse of a modern dignitary; a copy in needlework of a
Madonna and child, after a most capital performance of the Spanish Murillo.
There is most admirable grace in the original, which was sold last winter at
the price of eight hundred guineas In Mr. Vandergucht's sale.
. It made me lament that this excellent master had wasted so much time on
beggars and ragged boys. Beautiful as it is, the copy came improved out of the
hand of our skilful countrywoman; a judicious change of color of part of the
drapery, has had a most happy effect, and given new excellence to the admired
original.

CHURCH.
THE parish church of Lambeth is at a small distance from the palace, has a
plain tower, and the architecture of the gothic of the time of Edward IV. It
has very little remarkable in it, except the figure of a pedlar and his dog,
painted in one of the windows. Tradition says, that the parish was obliged to
this man for the bequest of a piece of land, which bears the name of The
Pedlar's Acre.

BEFORE I go any farther, let me mention the sad example of fallen majesty in
the person of Mary d'Este, the unhappy queen of James II; who flying with her
infant prince from the ruin impending over their house, after crossing the
Thames from the abdicated Whitehall, took shelter beneath the ancient walls of
this church a whole hour, from the rain of the inclement night of December 6th,
1688. Here she waited with aggravated misery, till a common coach, procured
from the next inn, arrived, and conveyed her to Gravesend, from whence she
sailed, and bid an eternal adieu to these kingdoms Rapin, 2d ed. folio ii, 781.
.

IN this place rest from their labors several of the later primates, without
any remarkable monument, except their good works, to preserve them from
oblivion; among them is Bancroft, Tenison, Hutton; and in a passage leading to
the palace, are the remains of Secker.

HERE likewise was interred the mild, amiable, BISHOP TUNSTAL.
and polished prelate Cuthbert Tunstal, bishop of Durham, who, deprived on
account of his attachment to the old religion, by Edward VI. was restored by
Mary, and again deprived by Elizabeth: here he found an asylum in the family of
archbishop Parker, so highly was he esteemed even by the protestants; here he
passed his days with honor and tranquillity, till his death in 1559.

IN the same church are the remains of Thirlebye, BISHOP THIRLEBYE.
once bishop of Ely, deprived for the same cause by Elizabeth. By the charity
of the abovementioned great prelate, he found the same protection as his
fellow-sufferer Tunstal. To show the humanity of protestantism, he was indulged
with the company of his secretary. He merited every favor. Being joined in
commission with Bonner for the degradation of Cranmer, he performed his office
with as much tenderness, as his associate did with brutality, and melted into
tears over fallen greatness. His body was found in digging the grave for
archbishop Cornwallis. His long and venerable beard, and every part, was
entire, and of a beautiful whiteness: a slouched hat was under his left arm:
his dress that of a pilgrim, as he esteemed himself to be upon earth.

A NEAT bust, with the body in armor, and with artillery, ROBERT SCOT.
drums, and trophies around, exhibits the military character of Robert Scot,
who entered into the service of Gustavus Adolphus, and brought with him two
hundred men. He was made muster-master general to that hero; afterward he went
into the service of Denmark; and finally, in 1631, closed his life in that of
Charles I. who made him gentleman of his privy chamber, and bestowed on him a
pension of six hundred a year. He was of the family of the ancient barons of
Bawtrie, in North Britain; but his character surpassed his origin. INVENTOR OF
LEATHERN ARTILLERY.
He was the inventor of leathern artillery, which he introduced into the army
of Gustavus, and by that means contributed highly to the glorious victory of
Leipsic. Heart, and other historians of that illustrious prince, speak of the
invention and its important services, but were either ignorant of the inventor,
or chose to suppress his merit Harte's Hist. Gustavus Adelphus, 2d ed. i. 92.
ii. 42.
. Tilly himself confesses the superiority of these portable cannons, after his
own heavy artillery, so admirably served as they were, sunk under the vivacity
of the fire of these light pieces.

TOMB OF THE TRADESCANTS.
IN the churchyard is a tomb which no naturalist should neglect visiting, that
of old John Tradescant, who, with his son, lived in this parish. The elder was
the first person who ever formed a cabinet of curiosities in this kingdom. The
father is said to have been gardener to Charles I. But Parkinson says,
sometimes belonging to the right honorable lord Robert earl of Salisbury, lord
treasurer of England in his time; and then unto the right honorable the lord
Wotton, at Canterbury, in Kent; and lastly unto the late duke of Buckingham
Parkinson 's Paradi^ur Terrestris, 152.
. Both father and son were great travelers; the father is supposed to have
visited Russia and most parts of Europe, Turkey, Greece, many of the eastern
countries, Egypt, and Barbary; out of which he introduced multitudes of plants
and flowers, unknown before in our gardens. His was an age of florists: the
chief ornaments of the parterres were owing to his labors. Parkinson
continually acknowleges the obligation. Many plants were called after his name:
these the Linnaean system has rendered almost obsolete: but the great
naturalist has made more than reparation, by giving to a genus of plants the
title of TRADESCANTIA Species Plantarum, i. 411.
. MUSEUM TRADESCANTIANUM.
The Museum Tradescantianum, a small book, adorned by he hand of Hollar with
the heads of the father and the son, is a proof of their industry. It is a
catalogue of their vast collection, not only of the subjects of the three
kingdoms of nature, but of artificial rarities from great variety of countries.
The collection of medals, coins, and other antiquities, appears to have been
very valuable. Zoology was in their time but in a low state, and credulity far
from being extinguished: among the eggs is one supposed to have been of the
dragon, and another of the griffin. You might have found here two feathers of
the tail of the phoenix, and the claw of the ruck, a bird able to trusse an
elephant. Notwithstanding this, the collection was extremely valuable,
especially in the vegetable kingdom. In his garden, at his house in South
Lambeth, THEIR GARDEN.
was an amazing arrangement of trees, plants, and flowers. It seems to have
been particularly rich in those of the east, and of North America. His merit
and assiduity must have been very great; for the eastern traveller must have
labored under great difficulties from the barbarity of the country: and North
America had in his time been but recently settled. Yet we find the names of
numbers of trees and plants still among the rarer of much later times. To him
we are also indebted for the luxury of many fine fruits; for, as Parkinson
observed, The choysest for goodness, and rarest for knowledge, are to be had
of my very good friend Master John Tradescante, who has wonderly labored to
obtain all the rarest fruits he can hear off in any place of Christendom,
Turkey, yea, or the whole world Parkinson's Paradisus Terrestris, p. 575.
. He lived at a large house in this parish, and had an extensive garden, much
visited in his days. After his death, which happened about the year 1652, his
collection came into the possession of the famous Mr. Elias Ashmole, by virtue
of a deed of gift which Mr. Tradescant, junior, had made to him of all his
rarities, in true astrological form, being dated December 16, 1657, 5 hor. 30
minutes post merid. Ashmole's Diary, 36.
. Mr. Ashmole also purchased the house, which is still in being, the garden
fell to decay. In the year 1749, it was visited by two respectable members of
the Royal Society The late Sir William Watson, and Doctor Mitchel. -- See Ph.
Trans. vol. xlvi. p. 160.
, who found among the ruins some trees and plants, which evidently were
introduced here by the industrious founder. The collection of curiosities were
removed by Mr. Ashmole, to his Museum at Oxford, where they are carefully
preserved. Many very curious articles are to be seen: among others, several
original dresses and weapons of the North Americans, in their original state;
which may in some period prove serviceable in illustrating their manners and
antiquities.

MONUMENT DESCRIBED.
THE monument of the Tradescants was erected in 1662, by Hester, relict of the
younger. It is an altar tomb: at each corner is cut a large tree, seeming to
support the slab: at one end is an hydra picking at a bare scull, possibly
designed as an emblem of Envy: on the other end are the arms of the family: on
one side are ruins, Grecian pillars, and capitals; an obelisk and pyramid, to
denote the extent of his travels: and on the opposite, a crocodile, and various
shells, expressive of his attention to the study of natural history. Time had
greatly injured this monument; but in 1773 it was handsomely restored, at the
parish expense; and the inscription, which was originally designed for it,
engraven on the stone. As it is both singular and historical, I present it to
the reader.

Know, stranger, ere thou pass, beneath this stone
Lie John Tradescant, grandsire, father, son;
The last died in his spring; the other two
Lived till they had traveled Art and Nature through,
As by their choice collections may appear,
Of what is rare, in land, in sea, in air;
Whilst they (as Homer's Iliad in a nut)
A world of wonders in one closet shut:
These famous Antiquarians that had been
Both gardiners to the Rose and Lily Queen,
Transplanted now themselves, sleep here; and when
Angels shall with their trumpets waken men,
And fire shall purge the world, these hence shall rise,
And change this garden for a paradise See the form of the tomb and sculpture
in Doctor Ducarel's App. to the History of Lambeth, p. 96. tab. iv.v. -- and
Ph. Trans. lxiii. tab. iv.v.
.
IN contrast to these innocent characters, GUY FAUX.
I shall mention that desperate miscreant Guy Faux, or Vauxe, as an inhabitant
of this parish. He lived in a large mansion called Faux-hall, and, as Doctor
Ducarel imagines, was lord of the manor of the same name. In foreign parts a
colonne infame would have been erected on the spot: but the site is now
occupied by Marble-hall, and Cumberland tea-gardens, and several other
buildings.

FROM Lambeth I returned by the waterside, near the end of Westminster bridge,
along a tract once a dreary marsh, and still in parts called Lambeth marsh;
about the year 1560, there was not a house on it, from Lambeth palace as far as
Southwark. Sir William Dugdale Dugdale's embankments, p. 67.
makes frequent mention of the works for securing it, in old times, by
embankments or walls as they are styled, to restrain the ravages of the tide.
The embankments in Southwark must have been the work of the Romans, otherwise
they never could have erected the buildings or made the roads of which such
frequent vestiges have been found. Most of this tract is become firm land, and
covered with most useful buildings even to the edge of the river. MRS. COADE'S
ARTIFICIAL STONE.
In a street called Narrow Wall (from one of the ancient embankments) is Mrs.
Coade's manufacture of artificial stone. Her repository consists of several
very large rooms filled with every ornament which can be used in architecture.
The statue, the vase, the urn, the rich chimney-pieces, and, in a few words,
every thing which could be produced out of natural stone or marble by the most
elegant chisel, is here to be obtained at an easy rate. Proof has been made of
its durable quality. The inventor has been able to ward off the attacks of
time, but not of envy: a beautiful font, now the ornament of Dibden church in
Essex, and which was formed on a most admirable antique model, was denied to
the public eye, in a place where liberality ought to have enjoyed the freest
reign.

ENGLISH WINES;
NOTWITHSTANDING the climate of Great Britain has, at lest of late years, been
unfavorable to the production of wines: yet, in the year 1635, we began to make
some from the raisins or dried grapes of Spain and Portugal. Francis
Chamberlayne made the attempt, and obtained a patent for fourteen years, in
which it is alleged that his wines would keep good during several years, and
even in a voyage under the very line Rymer's Foedera, xix. 719.
. The art was most successfully revived, several years ago, by Mark Beaufoy,
and the foreign wines most admirably mimicked. Such is the prodigality and
luxury of the age, that the demand for many sorts exceeds in a great degree the
produce of the native vineyards. We have skilful fabricators, who kindly supply
our wants. It has been estimated, that half of the port, and five-sixths of the
white wines consumed in our capital, have been the produce of our home
wine-presses. The product of duty to the state from a single house, was in one
year, from July 5th, 1785, to July 5th, 1786, not less than L. 7,363.9s 8 d.
The genial banks of the Thames opposite to our capital, yield almost every
species of white wine; and, by a wondrous magic, Messrs. Beaufoy pour forth the
materials for the rich Frontiniac, to the more elegant tables; the Madeira, the
Caleavella, and the Lisbon, into every part of the kingdom.

THIS great work, and that for the making of vinegar, AND VINEGAR.
is at a small distance from Mrs. Coade's. I can scarcely say how much I was
struck with the extent of the undertaking. There is a magnificence of business,
in this ocean of sweets and sours, that cannot fail exciting the greatest
admiration: whether we consider the number of vessels, or their size. GREAT
TONS.
The boasted ton at Heydelberg does not surpass them. On first entering the
yard, two rise before you, covered at the top with a thatched dome; between
them is a circular turret, including a winding staircase, which brings you to
their summits, which are above twenty-four feet in diameter. One of these
conservatories is full of sweet wine, and contains fifty eight thousand one
hundred and nine gallons; or eighteen hundred and fifteen barrels of Winchester
measure. Its superb associate is full of vinegar, to the amount of fifty six
thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine gallons, or seventeen hundred and
seventy-four barrels, of the same standard as the former. The famous German
vessel yields even to the last by the quantity of forty barrels According to
Mr. Keysler, the Heydelberg vessel holds two hundred and four tons.
.

BESIDES these, is an avenue of lesser vessels, which hold from thirty-two
thousand five hundred, to sixteen thousand nine hundred and seventy-four
gallons each. After quitting this Brobdignagian scene, we pass to the acres
covered with common barrels: we cannot diminish our ideas so suddenly, but at
first we imagined we could quaff them off as easily as Gulliver did the little
hogsheads of the kingdom of Lilliput.

THIS ground, so profitable to the proprietors, and so productive of revenue to
the state, was in my memory the scene of low dissipation. CUPER'S GARDEN.
Here stood Cuper's Garden, noted for its fireworks, and the great resort of
the profligate of both sexes. This place was ornamented with several of the
mutilated statues belonging to Thomas earl of Arundel, which had been for that
purpose begged from his lordship by one Boyder Cuper, a gardener in the family
Howard Memoirs, 98.
. The more valuable part were bought by lord Lemster, father of the first earl
of Pomfret, and presented by the earl's widow to the university of Oxford.
These grounds were then rented by lord Arundel. On the pulling down of
Arundel-house, to make way for the street of that name, these, and several
others of the damaged part of the collection, were removed to this place.
Numbers were left on the ground, near the riverside, and overwhelmed with the
rubbish brought from the foundation of the new church of St. Paul's. These in
aftertimes were discovered, dug up, and conveyed to the seat of the duke of
Norfolk, at Worksop manor. Injured as they are, they appear, from the etchings
given by Doctor Ducarel, to have had great merit.

THE great timber-yards, GREAT TIMBER-YARDS.
beneath which these antiquities were found, are very well worthy of a visit.
One would fear that the forests of Norway and the Baltic would be exhausted, to
supply the want of our overgrown capital, were we not assured, that the
resources will successively be increasing, equal to the demand of succeeding
ages.

IN this parish are the vast distilleries, GREAT DISTILLERY.
till of late the property of Sir Joseph Mawhey. There are seldom less than two
thousand hogs constantly grunting at this place; which are kept entirely on the
grains. I lament to see the maxim of private vices being public benefits so
strongly exemplified in the produce of the duty on this Stygian liquor. From
July 5th, 1785, to July 5th, 1786, it yielded L. 450,000. And I have been told
of a single distiller who contributed to that sum L. 54,000.

TO the south are St. George's Fields, ST. GEORGE'S FIELDS.
now the wonder of foreigners approaching by this road to our capital, through
avenues of lamps, of magnificent breadth and goodness. I have heard that a
foreign ambassador, who happened to make his entry at night, imagined that
these illuminations Written before the shameful adulteration of the oil has
almost given to this once glorious splendour, as well as that of most of our
streets, little better than a "darkness visible."
were in honor of his arrival, and, as he modestly expressed, more than he
could have expected. On this spot have been found remains of tesselated
pavements, coins, and an urn full of bones Gale's I^n. Anton. 65.
, possibly the site of a summer camp of the Romans. In this place it could have
been no other. It was too wet for a residentiary station. Its neighbor, Lambeth
marsh, was in the last century overflown with water: but St. George's Fields
might, from their distance from the river, admit of a temporary encampment.

(...)
ON approaching St. George's Fields from Westminster-bridge are two charities of
uncommon delicacy and utility. The first is the Westminster Lying-in Hospital.
This is not instituted merely for the honest matron, who can depose her burden
with the consciousness of lawful love, but also for the unhappy wretches whom
some villain, in the unguarded moment, has seduced, and then left a prey to
desertion of friends, poverty, want, and guilt. Least such may be driven to
despair by such complicated misery, and be tempted to destroy themselves, and
murder their infants See the account of the institution.
, here was founded, in 1765, this humane preventative The Westminster New
Lying-in Hospital. To obviate all objection to its being an encouragement to
vice, no one is taken in a second time: but this most excellent charity is open
to the worthy distressed matron as often as necessity requires. None are
rejected who have friends to recommend. And of both descriptions upwards of
four thousand have experienced its salutary effects.

FARTHER on is another institution of a most heavenly nature, ASYLUM, OR HOUSE
OF REFUGE.
calculated to save from perdition of soul and body, the brighter part of the
creation: such on whom Providence has bestowed angelic faces and elegant
forms, designed as blessings to mankind, but too often debased to the vilest
uses. The hazard that these innocents constantly are liable to, from a thousand
temptations, from poverty, from death of parents, from the diabolical
procuress, and often from the stupendous wickedness of parents themselves, who
have been known to sell their beauteous girls for the purpose of prostitution,
induced a worthy band to found, in the year 1758, the Asylum, or House of
Refuge. Long may it flourish, and eternal be the reward of those into whose
minds so amiable a conception may have entered!

FOR the salvation of those unhappy beings who had the ill fortune to lose the
benefits of this divine institution, at a small distance is the Magdalen
Hospital, MAGDALEN HOSPITAL.
for the reception of the penitent prostitutes. To save from vice is one great
merit. To reclame and restore to the dignity of honest rank in life is
certainly not less meritorious. The joy at the return of one sinner to
repentance, is esteemed by the highest authority worthy of the heavenly host.
That ecstasy, I trust, this institution has often occasioned. Since its
foundation, in the same year with the former, to December 25th, 1786, not fewer
than 2,471 have been admitted. Of these (it is not to be wondered that long and
evil habits are often incurable) 300 have been discharged, uneasy under
constraint; 45 proved lunatics, and afflicted with incurable fits; 60 have
died; 52 never returned from hospitals they were sent to; 338 discharged for
faults and irregularities. -- How to be dreaded is the entrance into the bounds
of vice, since the retreat from its paths is so difficult! Finally, 1608
prodigals have been returned to their rejoicing parents, or placed in reputable
services, or to honest trades, banes to idleness, and securities against a
future relapse.

^IAN ^TRES.
IN this neighborhood are two theaters of innocent recreation, (in which every
government should indulge its subjects, as preservations from worse employs,
and as relaxations from the cares of life) of a nature unknown to every other
part of Europe; the British Hippedromes, belonging to Messrs. Astley and
Hughes, where the wonderful ^gacity of that most useful animal the horse is
fully evinced. While we admire its admirable docility and apprehension, we
cannot less admire the powers of the riders, and the graceful attitudes the
human frame is capable of receiving. But there is another species of amusement,
usually reckoned of a despicable kind, yet, ever since I read Doctor Delaney's
thoughts Observations upon lord Orrery's remarks on the life and writings of
Doctor Sw^ft, p. 162 to 165.
on the subject, I have looked on the art of tumbling with admiration. It shows
us how fearfully and wonderfully we are made. What infinite misfortunes would
befall us, (which almost every step is liable to) was it not for that wise
construction of parts, that pliability of limb, that, unperceived by us,
protects us in every contrived motion, or accidental slip, from the most dire
and disabling calamities!

BOROUGH OF SOUTHWARK.
THE borough of Southwark joins to the parish of Lambeth on the east, and
consists of the parishes of St. Olave's, St. Savior's, St. George's, and St.
Thomas's.

IT was called by the Saxons, Suthverke, or the South work, in respect to some
fort or fortification bearing that aspect from London. It was also called the
Borough, or Burg, probably for the same reason. It was long independent of the
city of London: but, in consideration of the inconveniences arising from the
escape of malefactors from the great capital into this place, it was, in 1327
granted by Edward III. to the city, on payment of ten pounds annually. It was
then called the village of Southwark; it was afterward styled the bailiwick of
Southwark, and the mayor and commonalty of London appointed the bailiff. This
power did not seem sufficient to remedy the evil, a more intimate connection
was thought necessary: in the reign of Edward VI. on a valuable consideration
paid to the crown, it was formed into a twenty-sixth ward, by the title of
Bridge ward without, and Sir John Ayliff was its first alderman. It had long
before enjoyed the privilege of sending members to parliament. It is mentioned
among the boroughs in the time of Edward III; but the names of the first
members which appear, are Robert Acton and Thomas Bulle, in 1542. The members
are elected by the inhabitants paying scot and lot, and returned by the bailiff.

THE first time that Southwark is mentioned in history, is on occasion of earl
Godwin's sailing up the river to attack the royal navy of fifty ships, lying
before the palace of Westminster; this was in 1052, when we are told he went ad
Suthwecree, and stayed there till the return of the tide Simeon Dunelm, in x
Script. i. 186.
.

ST. GEORGE's church is of considerable antiquity; it is mentioned in 1122,
when Thomas of Arderne and his son bestowed it on the neighboring monks of
Bermondsey Stow's Surva^e, 789.
. It was rebuilt in 1736, by Price, with a spire steeple most aukwardly
standing upon stilts.

(...) OF CHARLES BRAND^N.
NOT far from this church stood the magnificent palace of Charles Brandon duke
of Suffolk, the deserved favorite of Henry VIII. After his death, in 1545, it
came into the king's hand, who established here a royal mint. It at that time
was called Southwark Place, and in great measure preserved its dignity. Edward
VI. once dined in it. His sister and successor presented it to Heath archbishop
of York, as an inn or residence for him and his successors, THE MINT
whenever they repaired to London. As to the Mint, it became a sanctuary to
insolvent debtors; at length becoming the pest of the neighborhood, by giving
shelter to villains of every species, that awakened the attention of parliament;
which, by the statutes 8 and 9 William III. c. 27. 9 George I. c. 29. and 11
George I. c. 22. entirely took away its abused privileges.

KING'S BENCH PRISON.
THE King's Bench prison, in this parish, is of great antiquity. To this prison
was committed Henry prince of Wales, afterward Henry V, by the spirited and
honest judge Gascoigne, for striking or insulting him on the bench. It is
difficult to say which we should admire most, the courage of the judge, or the
peaceful submission of the prince to the commitment, after he was freed from
the phrenzy of his rage. The truth of the fact has been doubted; but, it is
delivered by several grave historians, such as Hall, who died in 1547, who
mentions it folio 1; Grafton, perhaps his copyist, at p. 443; and the learned
Sir Thomas Elyot, a favorite of Henry VIII. in his book called The Governor,
relates the same in p. 102, book ii. c. 6, of that treatise. These were all
long prior to Shakespeare, or the author of another play, in the time of queen
Elizabeth, styled Henry V. It must have been the poets that took up the
relation from the historians, and not the historians from the poets, as some
people have asserted. This was not the only time of his commitment. In 1411 he
was confined by John Hornesby Dugdale's Hist. of Warwickshire, i. 148.
, mayor of Coventry, in the Cheleysmor in that city; and arrested with his two
brothers in the priory, probably for a riot committed there. The reform of this
great prince was very early: for I never can believe him to have been a
hypocrite when he wrote in that strain of piety to his father, on the subject
of a victory obtained at Usk, over the famous Glyndwr Tour in Wales, i. 369.
. The other play of Henry V. which I allude to, was written before the year
1592. In the scene in which the historical account of the violence of the
prince against the chief justice is introduced, Richard Tarlton, a famous
comedian and mimic, acts both judge and clown. One Knell, another drole
comedian of the time, acted the prince, and gave the chief justice such a blow
as felled him to the ground, to the great diversion of the audience. Tarlton
the judge, goes off the stage; and returns, Tarlton the clown; he demands the
cause of the laughter, "O," says one, had thou beenst here to have seen what a
terrible blow the prince gave the judge." "What, strike a judge! says the
clown, terrible indeed must it be to the judge, when the very report of it
makes my cheek burn Br. Biog. iii. 2145.
.

MARSHALEEN.
THE prison of the Marshalsea, which belongs to that court, and also to the
king's palace at Westminster, stands here; this court had particular cognizance
of murders, and other offenses, committed within the king's court: such as
striking, which in old times was punished with the loss of the offending hand.
Here also persons guilty of piracies, and other offenses on the high seas, were
confined. In 1377 it was broke open by a mob of sailors, who murdered a
gentleman confined in it for killing one of their comrades, and who had been
pardoned by the count Stow's Survaie, 781.
. It was again broke open by Wat Tyler and his followers, in 1381. It escaped
in the infamous riots of 1780; but the King's Bench, and the Borough prison,
and another Borough prison called the Clink, were nearly at the same instant
sacrificed to their fury.

PARIS-GARDEN.
IN this parish, near the water, on Bank-side, stood Paris-garden, one of the
ancient playhouses of our metropolis. Ben Johnson is reproached by one Decker,
an envious critic, with his ill success on the stage, and in particular with
having performed the part of Zuliman, at Paris-Garden. It seems to have been
much frequented on Sundays. This profanation was at length fully punished, by
the dire accident which, heaven-directed, befell the spectators in 1582, when
the scaffolding suddenly fell, and multitudes of people were killed or
miserably maimed. The omen seems to have been accepted, for, in the next
century, the manor of Paris-Garden was erected into a parish, and a church
founded, under the name of CHRIST's. This calamity seems to have been predicted
by one Crowley, a poet, of the reign of Henry VIII; who likewise informs us,
that in this place were exhibited bear-baitings, as well as dramatical
entertainments, and upon Sundays, as they are to this time at the Combat des
Animaux, at Paris.

What folly is this to keep, with danger,
A great mastive dog, and foul ouglie bear;
And to this an end, to see them two fight,
With terrible tearings, a full ouglie sight.
And methinkes those men are most fools of al,
Whose store of money is but very small,
And yet every Sunday they will surely spend
One penny or two, the Bearwards living to mend.
At Paris Garden each Sunday a man shall not fail
To find two or three hundred for the Bearwards vale.
One halfpeny a piece they use for to give,
When some have not more in their purses, I believe.
Well, at the last day their conscience will declare,
That the poor ought to have all that they may spare.
If you therefore give to see a bear fight,
Be sure God his curse upon you will light.
BEYOND this place of brutal amusement were the Bear-Garden, and place for
baiting of bulls; the British circi: "Herein," says Stow Survaie, 770.
, were kept bears, bulls, and other beasts to be bayted, as also mastives in
several kenels, nourished to bayt them. These bears and other beasts are there
kept in plots of ground scaffolded about for the beholders to stand safe. In
the old maps these circi are engraven.

BEAR-BAITING.
BEAR-baiting made one of the amusements of the romantic age of queen Elizabeth;
for there was still left a strong tincture of those of the savage and warlike
period. It was introduced among the princely pleasures of Kenilworth, in 1575;
where the drole author of the account introduces the bear and dogs, deciding
their ancient grudge per duellum. Well, Sir, (says he) the bearz wear brought
forth intoo coourt, the dogs set too them, too argu the points eeven face to
face, they had learnd coounsell also a both parts: what may they be coounted
parciall that are retaind but a to side, I ween. No weary feers both ton and
toother eager in argument: if the dog in pleadyng woold pluk the bear by the
throat, the bear with trauers woould claw him again by the skaip, confess and a
list; but a void a coold not that waz bound too the bar: and hiz counsel tolld
him that it coold be ^o him no poliecy in pleading. Thearfore thus with
sending and proouing, with plucking and tugging, skratting and biting, by plain
tooth and nayll, a to side and toother, such erspes of blood and leather waz
thear between them, az a moonths licking I ween will not recoouer, and yet
remain az far oout az ever they wear. It waz a sport very pleazaunt of theez
beastz: to see the bear with hiz pink nyez leering after hiz enmiez approach,
the nimblness and wayt of ye dog too take hiz advantage, and the fors and
experiens of the bear again to avoid the assauts: if he wear bitten in one
place, hoow he woold pynch in an oother too get free: that if he wear taken
onez, then what shyft with biting, with clawyng, with roaring, tossing and
tumbling, he woold work to wind himself from them; and when he was lose, to
shake hiz earz twyse or thryse with the blud and the slaver aboout hiz fiznamy
was a matter of a goodly releef Princely pleasures of Kenilworth, 22.
.

THIS was an amusement for persons of the first rank; our great princess
Elizabeth thought proper to cause the French ambassadors to be carried to this
theater, to divert them with these bloody spectacles Strype's Annals, i. 191.
.

NOT far from these scenes of cruel pastime was the Bordello, THE STEWS.
or Stews, permitted, and openly licensed by government, under certain laws or
regulations. They were farmed out. Even a lord mayor, the great Sir William
Walworth, did not disdain to own them; and he rented them to the Froes, i. e.
the bawds of Flanders. Among other regulations, no stewholder was to admit
married women: nor, like pious Calvinists, in Holland, to this present day,
were they to keep open their houses on Sundays; nor were they to admit any
women who had on them the perilous infirmity of burning, etc. etc. Stow's
Survaie, 771.
These infamous houses were suppressed in the reign of Henry VIII. The pretense
of these establishments was to prevent the debauching the wives and daughters
of the citizens, so that all who had not the gift of continence might have
places to repair to. Perhaps, in days when thousands were tied up by vows of
celibacy, these haunts might have been necessary; for neither cowl nor cope had
virtue sufficient to annihilate the strongest of human passions. Old Latimer
complains bitterly, that the offense was not taken away with the suppression of
the houses. "One thing I must here," says the zealous preacher, desire you to
reform, my lords; you have put down the Stews. But, I pray you, whow is the
matter amended. What avayleth that you have but changed the place, and not
taken the wh -- d me away. -- There is now more wh -- d-me in London then ever
there was on the Bancke Third Sermon preached before king Edward, p. 42.
.

THE signs were not hung out, but painted against the walls. I cannot but smile
at one: the Cardinal's Hat. I will not give into scandal so far as to suppose
that this house was peculiarly protected by any coeval member of the sacred
college. Neither would I by any means insinuate that the bishops of Winchester
and Rochester, or the abbots of Waverley or of St. Augustine's, in Canterbury,
or of Battle, or of Hyde, or the prior of Jews, had here their temporary
residences for them or their trains, for the sake of these conveniences, in
that period of cruel and unnatural restriction.

BESIDES these temporary mansions of holy men, were others, for those who
preferred the monastic life. The first religious house was that of St. Mary
Overie, ST. MARY OVERIE.
said to have been originally founded by a maiden named Mary, for sisters, and
endowed with the profits of a ferry cross the Eye, or river Thames. Swithen, a
noble lady, changed it into a college of priests: but in the year 1106 it was
re-founded by William Pont de L'arche, and William Dauncy, Norman knights, for
canons regular. The last prior was Bartholomew Linsted, alias Foul, who
surrendered the convent to Henry, in October 1540, and received in reward a
pension of L. 100 a year. Its revenues, according to Dugdale, were L. 654. 6 s.
6 d. Tanner, -- I heartily wish that the editor of the last edition of this
useful author had paged the work; I have caused my copy to be paged with a pen;
for my own use, so have left a blank to be filled.
William Giffard, bishop of Winchester, in the reign of Henry I, was a great
benefactor to this place, and built the conventual church. It certainly was not
the present church, for in the days of Giffard the round arch and clumsy pillar
was in full fashion. This church was probably burnt in the fire which consumed
the priory, in 1207: for we know it was rebuilt in the time of Richard II. or
Henry IV. The whole is a beautiful pile of gothic architecture, in form of a
cross, but much deformed by a wooden gallery, which the increase of the
congregation occasioned to be built. On the dissolution, the inhabitants of
Southwark purchased the church of the king, and converted it into a parish
church; and, by act of parliament, united it with that of St. Margaret's of the
Hill, under the name of St. Savior's.

WITHIN, beneath a rich gothic arch in the north wall, TOMB OF THE POET GOWER.
is the monument of the celebrated poet John Gower. His figure is placed
recumbent, in a long gown; on his head is a chaplet of roses; and from his neck
a collar of SS; under his feet are three books, denoting his three principal
works. On one is inscribed Speculum Meditantis, which he had written in French;
on the second, Vox Clamantis, written in Latin; and on the last, Confessio
Amantis, in English. Above, on the wall, are painted three female figures
crowned, and with scrolls in their hands.

The first, which is named Charity, has on her scroll En toy qui es fite de
Dieu le pere,
Sauve soit que gist souz cest piere.


On that of the second, who is named Mercy, O bone Jesu fait ta mercy,
Al alme don't le corpse gist icy.


And on the scroll of the third, named Pity, Pur ta pite JESU regard!
Et met cest alme en sauve guard.


HE founded a chauntry for himself within these walls, and was also a signal
benefactor to the church. He was a man of family, and had a liberal education,
according to the times, in the inns of court. Notwithstanding the word Armiger
in the modern inscription, it is probable he was a knight Leland Collect. iii.
. He was cotemporary with, and the great friend of Chaucer, whom he styles his
pupil and his poet; a proof of seniority, notwithstanding he survived him.

Great well CHAUCER, when ye mete,
As my Disciple and my Poet;
For in the flours of his youth,
In sondrie wise, as he well couth,
Of Detees and of Songs glade,
The which he for my sake made.
Chaucer is not a bit behind hand in marks of respect.

O moral GOWER, this book I direct
To the, and to the philosophical Strode.
To vouchsafe there need is to correct,
Of your benignities and zelis good.
THESE excellent characters lived together in the most perfect amity: Chaucer
was a severe reprover of the vices of the clergy; and each united in their
great and successful endeavor to give a polish to the English language.
Chaucer gave a free rein to his poetical mirth. Gower's poetry was grave and
sententious. He has much good sense, solid reflection, and useful observation.
But he is serious and didactic on all occasions. He preserves the tone of the
scholar, and the moralist, on the most lively topics Mr. Thomas Warton.
. These fathers of English poetry followed each other closely to the grave.
Chaucer died in 1400, aged 72. Gower in 1402, blind and full of years.

A RECUMBENT figure of a bishop, in his robes and badges, OF BISHOP ANDREWS.
as prelate of the Garter, commemorates the pious, hospitable, and witty
Lancelot Andrews, bishop of Winchester, who died in his adjacent palace, in
1624, aged seventy-one. James I. at dinner, attended by Neale, bishop of
Durham, and this amiable churchman, asked of the first, whether he might not
take his subjects money without the assistance of parliament? "God forbid," says
the servile Neale, but you should: you are the breath of our nostrils. Then,
turning to Andrews, Well, my lord, what say you? The good bishop would have
evaded the question, but the king being peremptory, he answered, Then, Sir, I
think it lawful to take my brother Neale's, money, for he offers it.

WINCHESTER-HOUSE.
Winchester-house was a very large building, not far from this church: the
founder is unknown. Till the civil wars of the last century, it was the
residence of the prelates during their attendance in parliament. Much of it is
yet standing, tenanted by different families, or converted into warehouses. The
great court is called Winchester-square, and in the adjacent street is the
abutment of one of the gates.

THE CLINK.
THE Clink, or manor of Southwark, is still under the jurisdiction of the
bishops of Winchester; who, besides a court leet, keeps a court of record on
the Bank-side, by his steward and bailiff, for pleas of debt, trespasses, etc.

IN Southwark Park, on the back of Winchester-house, was found, by Sir William
Dugdale, knight, in 1658, in sinking the cellars for new buildings, a very
curious tesselated pavement, with a border in form of a serpentine column
Dugdale on embanking, 65.
.

MONUMENT OF LOCKYER, A QUACK DOCTOR.
A FIGURE with its head reclined on one hand, in a great wig, and furred gown,
represents Lionel Lockyer, a celebrated quack of the reign of Charles II. His
virtues and his pills are thus expressed: His virtues and his pills so well are
known,
That envy cannot confine them under stone;
But they will survive his dust, and not expire
Till all things else, at the universal fire.
This verse is lost, his pills embalm him safe
To future times without an epitaph.


I believe the last to be prophetic; his pills being to be found among the long
list of quackeries which promise almost immortality to the credulous taker.

HERE are two other ridiculous epitaphs, RIDICULOUS EPITAPHS.
which promise to the deceased a place in court, after they have passed the
limits of the grave. Thus, John Trehearne, porter to James I. is told of the
reversion he is to have in heaven: In thy king's court good place to thee is
given,
Whence thou shall go to the King's court of heaven.


But Miss Barford is flattered in a still higher manner: Such grace the King of
kings bestowed upon her,
That now she lives with him a maid of honor.


AGAINST a wall is a singular diminutive figure, one foot three inches long,
said to represent a dwarf, one William Emerson, who died in 1575, aet. 92. He
is represented half naked, much emaciated, lying in his shroud on a mat, most
neatly cut.

I SHALL conclude this list with the monument of Richard Humble, his two wives,
and children; not on account of their grotesque figures, but for the sake of
the pretty and moral inscription cut on one side.

Like to the damask rose you see, A PRETTY ONE.

Or like the blossom on the tree,
Or like the dainty flower of May,
Or like the morning of the day;
Or like the sun, or like the shade,
Or like the gourd which Jonas had:
Even so is man, whose thread is spun,
Drawn out and cut, and so is done.
The rose withers, the blossom blasteth,
The flower fades, the morning hastes;
The sun sets, the shadow flies,
The gourd consumes, and man he dies.
A LITTLE to the west of this church is a lane called Stoney street, which ran
down to the waterside, nearly opposite to Dow-gate, and probably was the
continuation of the Watling-street road. This is supposed to have been a Roman
Trajectus, and the ferry from Londinum into the province of Cantium. Marks of
the ancient causey have been discovered on the London side. On this, the name
evinces the origin. The Saxons always give the name of Street to the Roman
roads; and here they gave it the addition of Stein or Stoney, from the pavement
they found it composed of.

DEADMAN's place lies a little farther: tradition says that it took its name
from the number of dead interred there in the great plague, soon after the
Restoration.

FROM the calamity which destroyed this church, and the religious house, in the
year 1207, arose one of our noblest hospitals, that of St. Thomas. ST. THOMAS'S
HOSPITAL.
After the fire, the canons built, at a small distance from the priory, an
occasional building for their reception till their house could be rebuilt. But
in 1215, Peter de Rupibus, bishop of Winchester, disliking the situation,
removed it to a place on which Richard, a Norman prior of Bermondsey, had, in
1213, erected a hospital for converts and poor children, which he called the
Almery. Peter de Rupibus new founded it for canons regular, and endowed it with
three hundred and forty-four pounds a year. It was held from the prior and
abbot of Bermondsey, till the year 1428, when a composition was made between
the abbot and the master of the hospital of St. Thomas, for all the lands and
tenements held of the abbey for the old rent, to be paid to the said abbot. At
the dissolution it was surrendered into the hands of the king. In 1552, it was
founded a third time by the citizens of London, who purchased the suppressed
hospital: in July they began the reparation, and in November following, opened
it for the reception of the sick and poor; not fewer than two hundred and sixty
were the first objects of the charity. The patron was at the same time changed:
the turbulent Thomas Becket very properly giving place to the worthy apostle
St. Thomas.

TOWARD the end of the last century, the building fell into decay. In the year
1699 the governors solicited the benevolence of the public for its support: and
with such success, that they were enabled to re-build it on the magnificent and
extensive plan we now see. It consists of three courts, with colonnades between
each: three wards were built at the sole cost of Thomas Frederic, esquire, of
London: and three by Thomas Guy, citizen and stationer. The whole containing
eighteen wards, and 442 beds. The expenses attending this foundation are about
L. 10,000 a year. In the middle of the second court is a statue in brass of
Edward VI. and beneath him the representation of the halt and maimed.

IN that of the third court is a stone statue of Sir Robert Clayton, knight,
lord mayor of London, dressed in character, in his gown and chain. He gave L.
600 toward re-building this hospital; and left L. 2,300 toward the endowing
it. The statue was erected before his death, which happened in 1714.

THIS excellent institution has, within the last ten years, admitted and
discharged, of In-patients, 30,717. Out-patients, 47,099.
And in the last account of 1787, it appears there were admitted and discharged
2,758 In-patients, 5,191 Out-patients, Total in the year -- 7,949.


MR. GUY'S HOSPITAL.
MR. Guy, not satisfied with his great benefactions to the hospital of St.
Thomas, determined to be the sole founder of another. The relation is very
remarkable. At the age of seventy-six, he took a lease, of the governors of the
former, of a piece of ground opposite to it, for the term of nine hundred and
ninety-nine years, and on it, in 1721, at the expense of L. 18,793. 16 s. began
to build the hospital which bears his name: and left to endow it, the
prodigious sum of L. 219,499, amassed from a very small beginning, chiefly by
purchasing seamen's tickets, in the reign of queen Anne; and by his great
success in the buying and selling South Sea stock, in the memorable year 1720;
and also a vast sum by the sale of bibles. He seems to have profited both of
GOD and Mammon. I think he was a native of Tamworth, and representative for
that borough. His death happened on December 27th, 1724; before which he saw
his hospital covered with the roof. In the first court is his statue in brass,
dressed in his livery gown. Besides his public expenses, he gave, during life,
to many of his poor relations, L. 10 or L. 20 a year; and to others money to
advance them in life; to his aged relations, L. 870 in annuities; and to his
younger relations and executors, the sum of L. 75,589!

IN the chapel (shouldering GOD's altar) is another statue of Mr. Guy, a most
expensive performance by Mr. J. Bacon, in 1779, in white marble. He is
represented standing, in his livery gown, with one hand raising a miserable
sick object, and with the other pointing to a second object, on a bier, carried
by two persons into his hospital. This superfluity cost a thousand pounds; a
proof of the exuberant wealth of the foundation, which could spare such a sum
to be wasted on an idle needless occasion. I was told that at this time there
were only two hundred beds: three wards being out of use, undergoing certain
alterations. But I could not obtain the lest account of the annual number of
patients, or of expenditure, or revenue; which other hospitals never fail of
laying before the public.

IN the laboratory is a large medallion in white marble of the great and pious
BOIL.

THE other religious house in Southwark was Bermondsey, BERMONDSEY ABBEY.
founded in 1082, by Aylwin Child, a citizen of London, for monks of the
Cluniac order: a cargo of which were imported hither by favor of archbishop
Lanfranc, in the year 1089, from the priory De Caritate, on the Loire, in
Nivernois. Soon after the resumption of the alien priories, it was converted
into an abbey by Richard II. In 1539 Tanner.
, it was surrendered into the king's hands by Robert de Wharton, who had his
reward, not only of a pension of L. 333. 6 s. 8 d. but also the bishopric of
St. Asaph Willis's Abbeys, i. 230.
in commendam. The revenues of the house at the dissolution were L. 474. 14 s.
4 d.; the poor monks received the annual pension of from ten to about five
pounds apiece.

THE conventual church was then pulled down by Sir Thomas Pope, who built a
magnificent house on the site. This became the habitation of the Ratcliffs,
earls of Sussex. Thomas, the great rival of the favorite earl of Leicester,
breathed his last within its walls.

THE present parochial church of St. Mary Magdalen was founded by the priors of
Bermondsey, for the use of their adjoining tenants.

THE remains of antiquity in this neighborhood are, the ancient gate of the
abbey, with a large arch and a postern on one side. Adjoining is part of a very
old building; and on passing beneath the arch, and turning to the left, is to
be seen, within a court, a house of very great antiquity, called (for what
reason I know not) king John's court.

BERMONDSEY street may at present be called the great Wool Staple of our
kingdom. Here reside numbers of merchants, who supply Rochdale, Leicester,
Derby, Exeter, and most other weaving countries in this kingdom, with that
commodity. As Southwark may be considered as a great suburb to London, numbers
of other trades are carried on there to a vast extent: the Tanners, Curriers,
Hatters, Dyers, Iron-founders, Rope-makers, Sail-makers, and Block-makers,
occupy a considerable part of the borough.

THE most eastern parish in Southwark, is that of St. Olave or Olaf, so named
from the Danish prince who was massacred by his Pagan subjects. ST. OLAVE, OR
OLAF'S CHURCH.
The church appears to have been founded near five hundred years ago Maitland,
ii. 1389.
. The parish extends from the spot on London Bridge, on which was the
drawbridge, and stretches along the waterside as far as St. Savior's Dock.
In this parish, near the church, was the inn or lodging of the abbot of Jews
in Sussex. The chapel is still remaining, converted into a cellar, and, by the
accumulation of earth, sunk under ground: and a gothic building, now turned
into a wine vault belonging to the King's-head tavern, may have been part of
the mansion.

ON Sellenger's wharf stood the townhouse of the abbot of St. Augustine's at
Canterbury; which being granted to Sir Anthony Saint-Leger, the wharf was named
after him, but corrupted according to the modern spelling Maitland, ii. 1389.
.

THE abbot of Battle had also here his city-mansion. Battle-bridge, or rather
Stairs, took its name from the house: as did the streets called the Mazes, from
the luxurious intricacies in his magnificent gardens Strype's Stow, I. Book iv.
p. 24.
.

ST. Savior's Dock, or, as it is called, Savory, ST. SAVIOR'S DOCK.
bounds the eastern end of this parish. St. Savior's Dock may be considered as
the port of Southwark. It is in length about four hundred yards, but of most
disproportionable breadth, not exceeding thirty feet. The borough will
certainly give it a more useful magnitude: and also re-build the warehouses and
magazines on each side. It is at present solely appropriated to barges, which
discharge coals, copperas from Writtlesea in Essex, pipe-clay, corn, and
various other articles of commerce. If the dock was deepened, and correspondent
wharfs erected, sloops and lesser vessels might come from different seaports,
and here discharge their cargoes, without the expense of re-loading lesser
craft, in order to re-land them at this dock.

IT anciently belonged to the priory of St. Savior's Bermondsey, as did
certain adjacent mills, which, in 1536 were let by the monks to one John
Curlew, for L. 6, then the value of eighteen quarters of good wheat; and he was
besides bound to grind gratis all the corn used in that religious house.

ROTHEPHITHE.
ON the east side of the dock commences the parish of Rotherhithe or Redriff,
which consists chiefly of one street of a vast length, running along the shore,
and winding with the great bend of the river, to a very small space from
Deptford. The church, dedicated to St. Mary, is remarkable for its steeple, a
fluted spire terminating in the Ionic scroll. I introduce this parish, because
it is comprehended in the bills of mortality, having been taken in, in the year
1636, with five other parishes. Near the extremity of this parish are the docks
for the Greenland ships; a profitable nuisance, very properly removed to a
distance from the capital. The greater dock is supposed to have been the mouth
of the famous canal, cut in 1016 by king Canute, in order to avoid the
impediment of London Bridge, and to lay siege to the capital by bringing his
fleet to the west side.

THE LOOK HOSPITAL.
THE Look, in Southwark, was a hospital for leprous persons. It was dedicated to
St. Leonard, and existed in the time of Edward II: till lately, it was, under
the care of the hospital of St. Bartholomew, appropriated to the cure of
another loathsome disease. The word changed into Lock, possibly has allusion to
the necessity of their being locked or kept apart from all other patients.

AS the Borough High Street was the great passage into a great part of our
kingdom, to and from our capital, TABARD, CHAUCER'S INN.
it was particularly well furnished with inns. I shall only mention one
immortalized by Chaucer. The sign is now perverted into the Talbot. It
originally was the Tabard, so called from the sign -- a sleeveless coat, open
on both sides, with a square collar, and winged at the shoulders; worn by
persons of rank in the wars, with their arms painted on them that they might be
known. The use is now transferred to the Heralds. This was the rendezvous of
the jolly pilgrims, which formed the troop which our father of poetry describes
sallying out to pay their devotions to the great St. Thomas Becket, who for a
long time superseded almost every other Saint.

Befelle that in that seson, on a day,
In Southwerk at the Tabard as I lay,
Ready to wenden on my pilgrimage
To Canterbury, with devoute courage,
At night was come into that hostellerie
Well nine and twenty in a compagnie,
Of sundry folk, by aventure yfalle,
In felawship, and pilgrims were they all,
That toward Canterbury wolden ride.
The chambres and the stables weren wide,
And well we weren esed at best.
The memory of our great poet's pilgrimage is perpetuated by an inscription
over the gateway: This is the inn where Sir Jeffry Chaucer, and nine and twenty
pilgrims, lodged, in their journey to Canterbury, in 1383.

A LITTLE west of St. Mary Overie's (in a place still called Globe Alley) stood
the Globe, THE GLOBE, SHAKESPEARE'S THEATER.
immortalized by having been the theater on which Shakespeare first trod the
stage, but in no higher character than the Ghost in his own play of Hamlet. It
appears to have been of an octagonal form; and is said to have been covered
with rushes See an engraving of it in vol. I. of Johnson's Shakespeare.
. I have been told that the door was very lately standing. James I. granted a
patent to Laurence Fletcher, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, Richard Burbage, Augustine
Philippes, John Heminges, Henry Condell, William Sly, Robert Armin, and
Richard Cowlie, and others of his majesty's servants, to act here, or in any
other part of the kingdom. Notwithstanding the modesty of Shakespeare made him
decline taking any considerable part in his own productions, his goodnature,
and friendship for the morose Ben Johnson, induced him to act both in the
Sejanus and Every Man in his Humor; a benevolence that greatly contributed to
bring the latter into public notice. But in Shakespeare's own plays, Dick
Burbage, as he was familiarly called, was the favorite actor. Condell and
Heminges were his intimate friends: and published his plays in folio, seven
years after his death.

THE playhouses, in and about London, were by this time extremely numerous,
there not being fewer than seventeen between the year 1570 and 1629.

WESTMINSTER.
I NOW return to the extremity of the western part of our capital on the
opposite shore. In the time of queen Elizabeth, the shore correspondent to
Lambeth was a mere marshy tract. Mill-bank, MILL-BANK.
the last dwelling in Westminster, is a large house, which took its name from a
mill which once occupied its site. Here, in my boyish days, I often experienced
the hospitality of the late Sir Robert Grovenour, its worthy owner, who enjoyed
it, by the purchase, by one of his family, from the Mordaunts, earls of
Peterborough. All the rest of his vast property about London devolved on him in
right of his mother, Mary, daughter and heiress of Alexander Davies of Ebury in
the county of Middlesex. I find, in the plan of London by Hollar, a mansion on
this spot, under the name of Peterborough-house. It probably was built by the
first earl of Peterborough. It was inhabited by his successors, and retained
its name till the time of the death of that great but irregular genius Charles,
earl of Peterborough, in 1735. It was rebuilt in its present form by the
Grovenour family.

A LITTLE farther was the ancient Horse-ferry between Westminster and Lambeth:
HORSE-FERRY.
suppressed on the building of Westminster-bridge.

A LITTLE beyond the Horse-ferry stands the church of St. John the Evangelist,
one of the fifty voted by parliament, to give this part of the town the air of
the capital of a christian country. It was begun in 1721, and finished in 1728.
The architect was Sir John Vanbrugh. Notwithstanding it is deservedly censured
for its load of ornaments, they are by no means destitute of beauty. The aim at
excess of magnificence is not a fault peculiar to the builder.

AT a small distance to the east is that noble specimen of gothic architecture,
WESTMINSTER ABBEY.
the conventual church of St. Peter's abbey of Westminster. The church is said
to have been founded about the year 610, by Sebert king of the East Saxons,
FOUNDED BY SEBERT.
on the ruins of the temple of Apollo, flung down, quoth legend, by an
earthquake. The king dedicated his new church to St. Peter; who descended in
person, with a host of heavenly choristers, to save the bishop of Mellitus the
trouble of consecration. The saint descended on the Surry side, in a stormy
night; but, prevaling on Edric, a fisherman, to waft him over, performed the
ceremony: and, as a proof, left behind the chrism, and precious droppings of
the wax candles, with which the astonished fisherman saw the church
illuminated. He conveyed the saint safely back; who directed him to inform the
bishop that there was no farther need of consecration. He likewise directed
Edric to fling out his nets, who was rewarded with a miraculous draft of
falmons: the saint also promised to the fisherman and his successors, that they
never should want plenty of salmon, provided they presented every tenth to his
church. This custom was observed till at lest the year 1382. The fisherman that
day had a right to sit at the same table with the prior; and he might demand of
the cellerer, ale and bread; and the cellerer again might take of the fish's
tail as much as he could, with four fingers and his thumb erect.

THE place in which it was built was then styled Thornie island, from its being
overrun with thorns and briers; and it was besides insulated by a branch of
the Thames. This church was burnt by the Danes; BURNT BY THE DANES. REBUILT BY
EDGAR.
and restored by the incontinent king Edgar, in 958, under the influence of St.
Dunstan, the most continent of men, and such a lover of celibacy that he drove
out of the church every married priest. Edgar ravished nuns: but he founded or
re-founded fifty monasteries; and planted, with very poor endowments, in this,
twelve monks of the Benedictine order.

AGAIN BY EDWARD THE CONFESSOR.
IT was reserved for the pious Confessor to rebuild both church and abbey; he
began the work in 1049, and finished it in a most magnificent manner in 1066,
and endowed it with the utmost munificence. An abbey is nothing without
relics. RELIQU^S.
Here was to be found the veil, and some of the milk of the virgin: the
blade-bone of St. Benedict: the finger of St. Alphage: the head of St. Maxilla:
and half the jaw bone of St. Anastasia. The good Edward was buried in his own
church. William the Conqueror bestowed on his tomb a rich pall: and in 1163,
Henry II. lodged his body in a costly ferretry, translating it from its
pristine place.

WHETHER from the decay of the building, REBUILT A THIRD TIME BY HENRY III.
or a particular zeal and affection Henry III. had for the royal Confessor, I
cannot say, but that prince pulled down the Saxon pile, and rebuilt it in the
present elegant and magnificent style. In 1245 he began this great work, in the
mode of architecture which began to take place in his days. He did not live to
complete his design, which was carried on by his successor, and finished in his
fourteenth year. A casual fire destroyed the roof; but by the piety of Edward
and several of the abbots it was restored to the beauty and splendour we so
justly admire.

HENRY performed two acts of pious respect to the remains of the founders of
this abbey, which must not be omitted. He translated those of Sebert into a tomb
of touchstone, beneath an arch made in the wall. Above were paintings, long
since defaced, done by order of the king, who was strongly imbued with the love
of the arts. Mr. Walpole Anecdotes of Painting, i. 2, and seq.
has preserved several of the precepts for number of paintings in this church,
and other places. Among them is directions for painting duos CHERUMBINOS cum
hilar i vultu et jocoso.

SHRINE OF EDWARD THE CONFESSOR, BY CAVALINI.
BUT what does that prince the most honor is the shrine Engraven by Mr. Virtue,
and published among the Vetusta Monumenta, ^ab. xvi.
, which he caused to be made in honor of the Confessor, placed in a chapel
which bears his name. This beautiful mosaic work was the performance of Peter
Cavalini, inventor of that species of ornament. It is supposed that he was
brought into England by the abbot Ware, who visited Rome in 1256. Weever
expressly says, He brought from thence certain workmen, and rich porphery
stones, whereof he made that curious, singular, rare pavement before the high
altar; and with these stones and workmen he did also frame the shrine of Edward
the Confessor Funeral Monuments, 485.
. This beautiful memorial consists of three rows of arches; the lower pointed:
the upper round. And on each side of the lower is a most elegant twisted
pillar, an ornament the artist seems peculiarly fond of. Children, or childish
age, has greatly injured this beautiful shrine, by picking out the mosaic,
through the shameful connivance of the attendant vergers.

ANOTHER, BY THE SAME ARTIST.
THIS is not the only specimen of Cavalini's, skill, which we possess in this
kingdom. Mr. Walpole has, at his beautiful villa near town, another shrine of
his workmanship, brought, in 1768, from the church of Santa Maria Maggiore, in
Rome; and placed in a chapel in his gardens. It was erected, in 1256, over the
bodies of the holy martyrs Simplicius, Faustina, and Beatrix, by John James
Capoccio, and Vinia his wife. It differs in form from the shrine of St. Edward,
but is formed of the same materials, and adorned with the same twisted columns.

ALONG the freeze of the screen of the chapel, are fourteen legendary
sculptures respecting the Confessor. They are so rudely done, that we may
conclude that the art at this time was at a very low ebb. The first is the
trial of queen Emma. The next the birth of Edward. Another is his coronation.
The fourth tells us how our saint was frightened into the abolition of the
dane-gelt, by his seeing the devil dance upon the money bags. The fifth is the
story of his winking at the thief who was robbing his treasury. The sixth is
meant to relate the appearance of our SAVIOR to him. The seventh shows how the
invasion of England was frustrated by the drowning of the Danish king. Eighthly
is seen the quarrel between the boys Tosti and Harold, predicting their
respective fates. In the ninth sculpture is the Confessor's vision of the seven
sleepers. Tenthly, how he meets St. John the Evangelist in the guise of a
pilgrim. Eleventhly, how the blind were cured by their eyes being washed in his
dirty water. Twelfthly, how St. John delivers to the pilgrims a ring. In the
thirteenth they deliver the ring to the king, which he had unknowingly given to
St. John as an alms, when he met him in the form of a pilgrim. This was
attended with a message from the Saint, foretelling the death of the king. And
the fourteenth shows the consequential haste made by him to complete his pious
foundation All these are accurately engraven, and fully explained, in the first
volume of Mr. Carter's Antiquities.
.

IN this very chapel is a third proof of the skill of either Cavalini or some
of his pupils. HENRY III. HIS TOMB BY THE ^E.
It is an altar tomb of Henry himself, enriched like the shrine, and with
wreathed columns at each corner See Sandf^rd's Genealogies, 92. -- Dart, tab.
85. vol. ii. -- Gough's Sepulch. Mon. i. 57, tab. xx, xxi.
. The figure of this prince, who died in 1272, is of brass, and placed
recumbent. This is supposed to have been the first brazen image known to have
been cast in our kingdom. The little book, sold to the visitors of this solemn
scenery at the door, will be a sufficient guide to the fine and numerous
funebrial memorials of the place. Let me only observe, that here may be read an
excellent lecture on the progress of these efforts of human skill, from the
simple altar tomb to the most ostentatious proofs of human vanity. The humble
recumbent figure with uplifted hands, as if deprecating the justice of Heaven
for the offenses of this mortal state; or the proper kneeling attitude,
supplicating that mercy which the purest must stand in need of, may be seen
here in various degrees of elegance. The careless lolling attitude of heroes in
long gowns and flowing perriwigs, next succeed; and after them, busts or
statues vaunting their merits, and attended with such a train of Pagan deities,
that would almost lead to suppose oneself in a heathen Pantheon instead of a
Christian church.

IN the ancient tombs there is a dull uniformity. The sides are often
embellished with figures of the offspring of the deceased; often with figures
of mourners, pleureurs, or weepers See the curious contract, in Dugdale's
Warwickshire, p. 354, between the executors of Richard Beauchamp earl of
Warwick, and John Essex, marbler; William Austin, founder; and Thomas Stevens,
copper-smith; for their making xiv lords and ladies in diverse vestures called
weepers, and xiv images of mourners, to be gilt by Bartholemew Lambespring,
Dutchman, and goldsmythe of London. -- Consult also Mr. Gough's Sepulchral
Monuments, i. preface, p. 7.
, frequently in monastic habits, as whole convents were wont (and still are
accustomed, in Catholic countries) to pour out their pious inhabitants to form
processions at the funerals of the great. The tomb of Aymer de Valence, in this
abbey, is surrounded by his mourners.

IN the reign of queen Elizabeth, and James I. begins to appear a ray of taste
in the sculptors. I shall instance one of the six sons of Henry lord Norris,
who appear kneeling round his magnificent cenotaph (for he was buried at Rycot)
in the chapel of St. Andrew. This figure has one hand on his breast, the other
a little removed from it, in attitude of devotion, inexpressibly fine. Lord
Norris died in 1589 Dugdale's Baronage, ii. 404. -- Dart, by mistake, calls
this nobleman Francis; who was grandson to Henry, and left only one child, a
daughter. He fell a suicide, in a fit of proud resentment, for an imaginary
affront on account of a lord Scrope, which he had not the sense, or the
courage, to accommodate in a proper manner.
.

ANOTHER proof is in the monument of Sir Francis Vere, who died in 1608,
distinguished by thirty years of able service in the low countries, in the
reign of Elizabeth. He lies in a gown recumbent; over him four ^ne figures of
armed knights, kneeling on one knee, support a marble slab, on which are
strewed the various parts of his armor. At Bredah is the tomb of Ingelbert II.
count of Nassau, who died in 1504; executed on the same idea.

THE figure of young Francis Hollis, son of John earl of Clare, cut off at the
age of eighteen, in 1622, on his return from a campaign in the Netherlands, has
great merit. He is placed, dressed like a Grecian warrior, on an altar, in a
manner that did great credit to Nicholas Stone, or rather to the earl, to whom
Mr. Walpole justly attributes the design.

THE figure of Doctor Busby, master of Westminster school, who died in 1695, is
elegant and spirited. He lies resting on one arm; a pen in one, a book in the
other hand: his countenance looking up. His loose dress is very favorable to
the sculptor, who has given it most graceful flows: the close cap alone is
inimical to his art.

I CANNOT go through the long series of tombs: nor will I attempt, like the
Egyptians of old, to bring the silent habitants to a posthumous trial, or bring
their frailties to light. I will only mention the crowned heads who here
repose, till that day comes which will level every distinction of rank, and
show every individual in his proper characters. Qualis erat, says a beautiful
and modest inscription, iste dies indicabit.

EDWARD I.
THE second of our monarchs who lies here, is the renowned Edward I. in an altar
tomb, as modest and plain, as his fame was great. A long inscription in monkish
lines imperfectly records the deeds of the conqueror of Scotland, and of the
ancient Britons. In 1770, antiquarian curiosity was so urgent with the
respectable dean of Westminster, as to prevale on him to permit certain members
of the society, under proper regulations, to inspect the remains of this
celebrated hero; and discover, if possible, the composition which gave such
duration to the human body.

IN the minute relation given by that able and worthy antiquary the late Sir
Joseph Ayloffe, bart. almost every particular is given. On lifting up the lid
of the tomb, the royal body was found wrapped in a strong thick linen cloth,
waxed on the inside: the head and face were covered with a sudarium or
face-cloth of crimson sarcenet, wrapped into three folds, conformable to the
napkin used by our Savior in his way to his crucifixion, as we are assured by
the church of Rome. On flinging open the external mantle, the corpse was
discovered in all the ensigns of majesty, richly habited. The body was wrapped
in a fine linen cere-cloth, closely fitted to every part, even to the very
fingers and face. The writs de cera renovanda circa corpus regis Edwardi primi
Archaelogia, iii. 376, 398, 399. -- Similar warrants were issued on account of
Edward III. Richard II. and Henry IV.
being extant, gave rise to this search. Over the cere-cloth was a tunic of red
silk damsk; above that a stole of thick white tissue crossed the breast, and on
this, at six inches distant from each other, quatre-foils of philligree-work,
of gilt metal set with false stones, imitating rubies, sapphires, amethysts,
etc.; and the intervals between the quatre-foils on the stole, powdered with
minute white beads, tacked down into a most elegant embroidery, in form not
unlike what is called the true lover's knot. Above these habits was the royal
mantle of rich crimson satin, fastened on the left shoulder with a magnificent
fibula, of gilt metal richly chased, and ornamented with four pieces of red,
and four of blue, transparent paste, and twenty-four more pearls.

THE corpse, from the waist downwards, is covered with a rich cloth of figured
gold, which falls down to the feet and is tucked beneath them. On the back of
each hand was a quatre-foil like those on the stole. In his right hand is a
scepter with a cross of copper gilt, and of elegant workmanship, reaching to
the right shoulder. In the left hand is the rod and dove, which passes over the
shoulder and reaches the royal ear. The dove stands on a ball placed on three
ranges of oak leaves of enamelled green; the dove is white enamel. On the head
is a crown charged with trefoils made of gilt metal The dress is represented on
a seal of this monarch's, in Sandford's Genealogy, 120, with tolerable accuracy.
. The head is lodged in the cavity of the stone-coffin, always observable in
those receptacles of the dead. I refer the reader to the Archaelogia for the
other minutiae attendant on the habiting of the royal corse. It was dressed in
conformity to ancient usage, even as early as the time of the Saxon Sebert. And
the use of the cere-cloth is continued to our days: in the instance of our late
king, the two serjeant-surgeons had L. 122. 8 s. 9 d. each for opening and
embalming; and the apothecary L. 152 for a fine double cere-cloth, and a due
quantity of rich perfumed aromatic powders Archaelogia, iii. 402.
.

ELIANOR HIS QUEEN.
ELIANOR of Castile, the beautiful and affectionate queen of Edward, was in 1290
deposited here. Her figure Sandford, 131.
, in copper gilt, rests on a tablet of the same, placed on an altar tomb of
Petworth marble.

THE murdered prince Edward II. found his grave at Gloucester: his son, EDWARD
III.
the glorious warrior Edward III. rests here. His figure at full length, made
of copper once gilt, lies beneath a rich gothic shrine of the same material.
His hair is disheveled, his beard long and flowing. His gown reaches to his
feet. Each hand holds a scepter. The figures of his children in brass surround
the altar tomb Sandford, 177. -- Gough's Sepulch. Mon. i. 139. tab. lv. lvi.
. His worthy queen Philippa was interred at his feet Sandford, 172. -- Gough,
i. 63. tab. xxiii.
. Her figure in alabaster represents her as a most masculine woman. She died in
1369: her royal spouse in 1377. His latter end was marked with misfortunes; by
the death of his son the Black Prince; by a raging pestilence; but more by his
unseasonable love in his doting years. How finely does Mr. Gray paint his
death, and the gay entrance of his successor into power, in the bitter taunt he
puts into the mouth of a British bard!

Mighty victor, mighty lord,
Low on his funeral couch he lies
No pitying heart, no eye, afford
A tear to grace his obsequies.
Is the sable warrior fled?
Thy son is gone: he rests among the dead!
The swarm, that in thy noontide beam were born?
Gone to salute the rising morn.
Fair laughs the morn, and soft the Zephyr blows,
While, proudly riding over the azure realm,
In gallant trim the gilded vessel goes;
Youth on the prow, and pleasure at the helm;
Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind's sway,
That, hushed in grim repose, expects his evening-prey.
THE tomb of the wasteful unfortunate prince Richard II. and his first consort
Anne, daughter of Wincelaus king of Bohemia, RICHARD II.
is the next in order Sandford, 203. -- Gough's Sepulch. Mon. i. 163, tab. lxi.
lxii.
. Their figures, in the same metal as the former, lie recumbent on it. He had
directed these to be made in his lifetime, by B. and Godfrey, of Woodstreet,
goldsmiths: the expense of gilding them cost four hundred marks. The
countenance of Richard is very unlike the beautiful painting of him on board,
HIS PORTRAIT.
six feet eleven inches high, by three feet seven inches broad. He is
represented sitting in a chair of state, with a globe in one hand, the scepter
in the other; a crown on his head; and his dress extremely rich and elegant;
many parts marked with his initial, R. surmounted with a crown. His countenance
remarkably fine and gentle, little indicative of his bad and oppressive reign
Vetusta Monumenta, tab. iv.
.

THIS picture, after the test of near four hundred years, is in the highest
preservation; and not less remarkable for the elegance of the coloring, than
the excellent drawing, considering the early age of the performance. We must
allow it had been re-painted; but nothing seems altered, if we may collect from
the print made by Virtue, excepting a correction in the site of the cross
issuing out of the globe. The back ground is elevated above the figure, of an
uneven surface, and gilt. The curious will find, in Mr. Walpole's Anecdotes,
vol. i. an ingenious conjecture of the method of painting in that early period,
which has given such amazing duration to the labors of its artists.

THIS portrait was originally hung up in the choir of the abbey; but about a
dozen years ago was removed to the Jerusalem chamber.

HENRY V.
WITHIN a beautiful chapel of gothic workmanship, of open iron-work, ornamented
with various images, is the tomb of the gallant prince Henry V. Sandford, 289.
a striking contrast to the weak and luxurious Richard. This was built by Henry
VII. in compliment to his illustrious relation and predecessor. His queen
Catherine had before erected his monument, and placed his image, cut in heart
of oak, and covered over with silver, on an altar tomb; the head was (as the
guide tells us) of solid silver, which, in the reign of Henry VIII. was
sacrilegiously stolen away. The wooden headless trunk still remains.

ON each side of this royal chapel is a winding staircase, enclosed in a turret
of open iron-work, which leads into a chauntry founded for the purpose of
masses, for the repose of the soul of this great prince. The front looks over
the shrine of the Confessor. Here is kept a parcel of human figures, which in
old times were dressed out and carried at funeral processions; but at present
very deservedly have got the name of the ragged regiment. More worthy of notice
is the elegant termination of the columellae of the two staircases, which
spread at the top of the turrets into roofs of uncommon elegance.

ONE end of this chauntry rests against that of the chapel of Henry VII. Among
the stone statues placed there is the French patron St. Dennis, most composedly
carrying his head in his hand.

ON the south side of the chauntry, over his monument, is the representation of
his coronation. The figure of Henry is distinguished by a wen under his chin.
It is probable that it was belonging to that monarch, as it is not to be
supposed that the sculptor would have added a deformity Mr. Carter intends to
engrave this in his specimens of ancient sculpture.
.

CATHERINE, his royal consort, HIS QUEEN.
had less respect paid to her remains. She had sunk from the bed of the
conqueror of France, to that of a common gentleman: yet gave to these kingdoms
a long line of princes. She died in 1437, and was interred in the chapel of our
lady in this church. When her grandson Henry VII. ordered that to be pulled
down, to make room for his own magnificent chapel, he ungratefully neglected
the remains of this his ancestress, and suffered them to be flung carelessly
into a wooden chest, where they still rest near her Henry's tomb.

EDWARD V. AND HIS BROTHER.
NEXT is the cenotaph of the two innocents, Edward V. and his brother Richard
duke of York. In the reign of Charles II. certain small bones were found in a
chest under a staircase in the Tower. These, by order of Charles, were removed
here; and, under the supposition of their belonging to the murdered princes,
this memorial of their sad fate was erected, by order of that humane monarch,
after a design by Sir Christopher Wren Parentalia, 333.
.

HENRY VII. HIS CHAPEL.
IN order of time I must pass into the beautiful chapel of Henry VII. nearly the
rival in elegance with that of King's College Cambridge. Who can look at the
roof of either without the highest admiration! Henry, finding the chapel of the
Confessor too much crowded to receive any more princes, determined on the
building of this. That of the Virgin was sacrificed to it; also an adjacent
tavern, distinguished by the popular sign of the White Rose. Abbot Islip, on
the part of the king, laid the first stone, on February 11th, 1503. The royal
miser scrupled no expense in this piece of vanity. By his will it appears, that
he expressly intended it as the mausoleum of him and his house, and that none
but the blood royal should be interred in this magnificent foundation. It was
built at the expense of fourteen thousand pounds Will of Henry VII. preface p.
iv.
. In the body of this chapel is his superb tomb, the work of Pietro Torregiano,
a Florentine sculptor; who had, for his labor and the materials, one thousand
pounds. This admirable artist continued in London till the completion of his
work in 1519. But the reigning prince and Torregiano were of tempers equally
turbulent, so they soon separated Anecdotes of Painting, i. 97.
. To him is attributed the altar tomb of Margeret countess of Richmond, with
her figure recumbent in brass. Henry VII. had made a special provision for this
tomb in his will Will of Henry VII. published 1775, p. 3, 34.
, for the images and various other ornaments, HIS TOMB.
which were to decorate this his place of rest. The tomb itself is, as he
directed, made of a hard Basaltic stone, called in the language of those days
Touch. The figures contained in the six bas reliefs in brass on the sides, are
strong proofs of the skill of the artist. The figures suit the superstition of
the times: St. Michael and the devil, joined with the Virgin and Child: St.
George with St. Anthony and his pig: St. Christopher, and perhaps St. Anne:
Edward the Confessor, and a Benedictine monk: Mary Magdalen, and St. Barbara:
and several others. One pretense is a respect to his grandmother, whose bones
he left flung into an ordinary chest. He and his quiet neglected queen lie in
brass on an altar tomb within the beautiful brazen precinct; his face resembles
all his portraits. I have seen a model, a still stronger likeness, in
possession of Mr. Walpole; a bust in stone taken from his face immediately
after his death. A stronger reluctance to quit the possessions of this world
could never be expressed on the countenance of the most griping mortal.

WITHIN the grate of the tomb was an altar of a single piece of touchstone,
destroyed by the fanatics, to which he bequeathed our great piece of the holy
cross, which, by the high provision of our Lord God, was conveied, brought,
and delivered to us from the isle of Cyo, in Greece, set in gold and garnished
with perles and precious stones: and also the preciouse relic of oon of the
legs of St. George, set in silver parcel gilte, which came into the hands of
our brother and cousyn Lewys, of France, the time that he wan and recovered the
city of Millein, and given and sent to us by our cousyne the cardinal of
Amboise Will of Henry VII. 34.
.

QUEEN ELIZABETH AND MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS.
HERE also rest, freed from the cares of their eventful reigns, the rival
queens, Elizabeth, and the unhappy Mary Stuart. The same species of monument
incloses both, in this period of the revival of the arts. The figures of each
lie under an elegant canopy supported by pillars of the Corinthian order Dart,
i. 152, 171.
. Two great blemishes obscure the characters of this illustrious pair.
Elizabeth will never be vindicated from treachery, hypocrisy, and cruelty in
the death of Mary. The love of her subjects was the pretext: the reality, a
female jealousy of superior charms at the bottom, with the spretae injuria
formae, discovered in a letter of passion, accusing another female See the
famous letter of Mary Stuart, in Burghley's state papers, 558.
, perhaps equally touched with the same tormenting passion. The long and
undeserved sufferings of Mary, from one of her own sex, a sister princess, from
whom she had reason to expect every relief, makes one forget her crime, and
fling a veil over the fault of distressed, yet criminal beauty.

THE peaceful pedant James I, his amiable Henry, JAMES TO GEORGE II.
and the royal rakish Charles, the second of the name; the sullen mis-treated
hero William, his royal consort the patient Mary, Anne, glorious in her
generals, and George II. repose within the royal vault of this chapel. No
monument blazons their virtues: it is left to history to record the busy, and
often empty tale of majesty. George I. was buried at Hanover; his son caused a
vault to be made in this for himself, his Caroline, and family, and directed
that the side-board of her coffin, and that of his own (when his hour came) to
be constructed in such a manner as to be removed, so that their loving dust
might intermingle.

I SHALL drop these subjects of mortality, with pointing out a single monument
of inferior note. A very fine figure of Time, cut in Italy, in white marble,
holds in his hand a scroll, with an inscription of uncommon elegance, written
by Doctor Friend, to commemorate the premature death of the honorable Philip
Carteret, at the age of 19. Time thus seems to address himself to him Dart, ii.
112.
: Quid breves te delicias tuorum,
Naeniis Phoebi chorus omnis urget
Et mei falcis subito recisum
Vulnere plangit?
En puer! vitae pretium caducae
Hic tuum custos vigil ad favillam
Semper ad^tabo et memori tuebor
Marmore famam:
Andies claros pietate, morum
Integer, multae studiosus artis:
Hic frequens olim leget, haec sequetur
Aemula pubes.
Why flows the M^se's mournful tear
For thee, cut down in life's full prime? ELEGANT INSCRIPTION ON A YOUTH.

Why fighs for thee the parent dear,
Cropped by the scythe of hoary Time?
Lo! this, my boy's the common lot --
To me thy memory entrust;
When all that is dear shall be forgot,
I Will guard thy venerated dust.
From age to age, as I proclaim
Thy learning, piety, and truth,
Thy great example shall inflame,
And emulation raise in youth Thus translated in the little historical
description, etc.
.


I SHALL quit these solemn scenes But I shall not quit them without mentioning
an error in my Journey to London, p. 389, in naming the lad^, who died by the
pricking her finger with a needle, lady Susanna Gray: whereas the fabulists in
Westminster Abbey attribute the misfortune to lady Elizabeth Russel.
with the beautiful reflection of Mr. Addison, made on the spot: and hope it
may have the same weight with the reader, as it has on me whenever I peruse the
following piece of instructive eloquence. When I look (says the delightful
moralist) upon the tombs of the great, every emotion of envy dies in me: when I
read the epitaphs of the beautiful, every inordinate desire goes out: when I
meet with the grief of parents upon a tombstone, my heart melts with
compassion: when I see the tomb of the parents themselves, I consider the
vanity of grieving for those whom we must quickly follow: when I see kings
lying by those who deposed them, when I consider rival wits placed side by
side, or the holy men that divided the world with their contests and disputes,
I reflect with sorrow and astonishment on the little competitions, factions,
and debates of mankind. When I read the several dates of the tombs, of some
that died yesterday, and some six hundred years ago, I consider that great day
when we shall all of us be contemporaries, and make our appearance together.

ON the dissolution, this great monastery, the second mitred abbey in the
kingdom, underwent the common lot of the religious houses. In 1534, the abbot,
William Benson, subscribed to the king's supremacy, and in 1539 surrendered his
monastery into the royal hands, and received as a reward the office of first
dean to the new foundation, consisting of a dean and twelve prebendaries. He
also erected it into a bishopric, but its only bishop was Thomas Thirleby; it
being suppressed in 1550, on his translation to Norwich. When the protector
Somerset ruled in the fullness of power, this magnificent, this sacred pile
narrowly escaped a total demolition. It was his design to have pulled it down
to the ground, and to have applied the materials toward the palace he was then
erecting in the Strand, known by the name of Somerset House. He was diverted
from his design by a bribe of not fewer than fourteen manors. -- Mortals should
be very delicate in pronouncing the vengeance of Heaven on their
fellow creatures: yet, in this instance, without presumption, without
superstition, one may suppose his fall to have been marked out by the Almighty,
as a warning to impious men. He fell on the scaffold on Tower Hill, lamented
only because his overthrow was effected by a man more wicked, more ambitious,
and more detested than himself. In their ends there was a consent of justice:
both died by the ax: and both of their headless bodies were flung, within a
very short space, into the same place, among the attainted herd.

IN the reign of queen Mary, the former religion of the place experienced a
brief restoration. She with great zeal restored it to the ancient conventual
state; collected many of the rich habits and insignia of that splendid worship;
established fourteen monks, and appointed for their abbot John Feckenham, a man
of great piety and learning, who, on his expulsion in the succeeding reign,
finished his days in easy custody in Wisbech castle.

IN 1560 it was changed into a collegiate church, consisting of a dean and
twelve secular canons, and thirty petty canons, and other members, two
schoolmasters, and forty king's or queen's scholars, twelve almsmen, and many
officers and servants Tanner.
. But there seems to have been a school there from the first foundation of the
abbey. Ingulphus, abbot of Crowland, speaks of his having been educated at it;
and of the disputations he had with the queen of the Confessor, and of the
presents she made him in money in his boyish days Quoted by Stow, book 1. vol.
i. 123.
.

CLOISTERS, AND CHAPTER HOUSE.
BESIDES the church, many of the ancient parts remain. The cloisters are entire,
and filled with monuments. The north and west cloisters were built by abbot
Littlington, who died in 1386: he also built the granary, which was afterward
the dormitory of the king's scholars; of later years rebuilt.

THE entrance into the chapter house (built in 1250) is on one side of the
cloister, through a most rich and magnificent gothic portal, the mouldings most
exquisitely carved: this is divided into two gothic doors. After a descent of
several steps, is the chapter house, an octagon, each side of which had most
superb and lofty windows, now filled up, and lighted by lesser. The opening
into this room is as noble as that from the cloister. The stone roof is
destroyed, and one of plank is substituted. The central pillar remains, light,
slender, and elegant, surrounded by eight others; bound by two equidistant
fasciae, and terminated in capitals of beautiful simplicity. By consent of the
abbot, in 1377, the commons of Great Britain first held their parlements in his
place; the crown undertaking the repairs. Here they sat till the year 1547,
when Edward VI. granted the chapel of St. Stephen for that purpose. It is at
present filled with the public records, among which is the original Domesday
book, now above seven hundred years old: it is in as fine preservation as if it
was the work of yesterday.

BENEATH the chapter house is a very singular crypt. The roof, which forms the
floor of the former, is supported by a short round pillar, quite hollow. The
top spreads into massy plain ribs, the supports of the roof. The walls are not
less than eighteen feet thick, and form a most firm base to the superstructure.
They had been pierced with several small windows, which are now lost by the
vast increase of earth on the outside This crypt is only accessible through the
house of Mr. Barrow.
; one is just visible in the garden belonging to Mr. Barrow.

THE Jerusalem chamber was part of the abbot's lodgings; and built by
Littlington. It is noted for having been the place where Henry IV. breathed his
last: he had been seized with a swoon while he was paying before the shrine of
St. Edward; and, being carried into this room, asked, on recovering, where he
was? being informed, he answered, (I will speak his reply in the words of
Shakespeare, borrowed from history) Laud be to God! -- even there my life must
end.
It has been prophesied to me many years
I should not die but in Jerusalem,
Which vainly I supposed the HOLY LAND!
The devil is said to have practiced such a delusion on pope Sylvester II.
having (on consultation) assured his holiness that he should die in Jerusalem;
and kept his word, by taking him off as he was saying mass, in 1003, in a
church of that name in Rome Brown's Fasciculus, i. 83, 88.
.

I OMITTED to mention the revenues of this great house, which, in its monastic
state, Speed makes to amount to L. 3977 per ann. Dugdale to L. 3471.

SANCTUARY.
NOT far from the abbey stood the Sanctuary, the place of refuge absurdly
indulged, in old times, to criminals of certain denominations. The church
belonging to it was in form of a cross, and double; one being built over the
other. Such is the account that Doctor Stukely gives of it, for he remembered
it standing Archaelogia, i. p. and tab. 39.
: it was of vast strength; and was with much labor demolished. It is supposed
to have been the work of the Confessor. Within its precincts was born Edward V;
and here his unhappy mother took refuge, with her younger son Richard, to
secure him from his cruel uncle, who had already possession of the elder
brother. Seduced by the persuasions of the duke of Buckingham, and (...)
archbishop of York, she surrendered the little innocent, who was instantly
carried to his brother in the Tower, where they were soon after involved in one
common fate.

TO the west of the sanctuary stood the Eleemosynary or Almory, where the alms
of the abbey were wont to be distributed. But it is still more remarkable for
having been the place where the first printing press ever known in England was
erected. It was in the year 1474; when William Caxton, probably encouraged by
the learned Thomas Milling, then abbot, produced The Game and Play of the
Chesse, the first book ever printed in these kingdoms. There is a slight
difference about the place in which it was printed, but all agree that it was
within the precincts of this religious house. Would the monks have permitted
this, could they have foreseen how certainly the art would conduce to their
overthrow, by the extension of knowledge, and the long-concealed truths of
Christianity?

BENEATH the shadow of the abbey stands the church of St. Margeret, built
originally by Edward the Confessor. ST. MARGARET'S CHURCH.
The parish church had been in the abbey, to the great inconveniency of the
monks. It was rebuilt in the time of Edward I. and again in that of Edward IV.
This church is honored with the remains of the great Sir Walter Raleigh, who
was interred here on the same day on which he was beheaded in Old Palace Yard.
It was left to a sensible churchwarden to inform us of the fact, who inscribed
it on a board, about twenty years ago.

THE east window is a most beautiful composition of figures. ITS FINE WINDOW.
It was made by order of the magistrates of Dort, and by them designed as a
present to Henry VII; but he dying before it was finished, it was put up in
Waltham abbey: there it remained till the dissolution; when it was removed to
Newhall in Essex, afterward part of the estate of general Monk, who preserved
it from demolition. In 1758 it was purchased from the then owner by the
inhabitants of the parish for four hundred guineas. By the opposition and
absurdity of a cotemporary prebend, this fine ornament run a great risque of
being pulled down again. The subject is the crucifixion; a devil is carrying
off the soul of the hardened thief; an angel receiving that of the penitent.
Silly enough! but the other beauties of the piece might surely have moved the
reverend zealot to mercy. The figures are numerous, and finely done. On one
side is Henry VI. kneeling; above him his patron saint, St. George. On the
other side is his queen in the same attitude, and above her the fair St.
Catherine with the instruments of her martyrdom. This charming performance is
engraved at the cost of the Society of Antiquaries.

PALACE AT WESTMINSTER.
THE royal palace which clames seniority in our capital, was that of
Westminster, founded by the Confessor, who was the first prince who had in it
regular residence. It stood near the Thames: the stairs to it on the river
still keep the name of Palace stairs; and the two Palace Yards were also
belonging to this extensive pile.

THE New Palace Yard is the area before the hall. In old times a very handsome
conduit, or, as it was called, fountain, graced one part: and opposite to the
hall, on the site of the present passage into Bridge-street, stood a lofty
square tower, which, from its use, was called the Clock Tower. This may be seen
in Hollar's print, No 6, and in the old plan of London, as it was in the
beginning of the reign of queen Elizabeth.

WESTMINSTER HALL.
MANY parts of this ancient palace exist to this day, sunk into other uses.
Succeeding monarchs added much to it. The great hall was built by William
Rufus, or possibly rebuilt; a great hall being too necessary an appendage to a
palace, ever to have been neglected. The entrance into it from New Palace Yard,
was bounded on each side by towers Kip has given a view of it, No 40.
, most magnificently ornamented with numbers of statues in rows above each
other, now lost, or concealed by modern buildings; a mutilated figure of an
armed man, supposed to have been one, was discovered under the Exchequer
staircase in 1781 Carter's ancient sculptures, No 1.
. The size may be estimated, when we are told that Henry III. entertained in
this hall, and other rooms, six thousand poor men, women, and children, on
new year's day, 1236. It became ruinous before the reign of Richard II. who
rebuilt it in its present form in 1397; and in 1399 kept his Christmas in it,
with his characteristical magnificence. Twenty-eight oxen, three hundred sheep,
and fowls without number, were daily consumed. The number of his guests each
day were ten thousand. We need not wonder then, that Richard kept two thousand
cooks. They certainly were deeply learned in their profession; witness The
Form of Cury, compiled about 1390, by the master cooks of this luxurious
monarch, in which are preserved receipts for the most exquisite dishes of the
time. This book was printed by the late worthy Gustavus Brander, esquire with an
excellent preface by that able antiquary the reverend Mr. Pegge. Mr. Brander
favored me with a copy: but, excepting a magician of Laputa could conjure up a
few of Richard's cooks, I despair of ever treating my brethren with a feast a
l'antique.

THIS room exceeds in dimension any in Europe, which is not supported by
pillars; its length is two hundred and seventy feet; the breadth seventy-four.
Its height adds to its solemnity. The roof of timber, most curiously
constructed, and of a fine species of gothic.

PARLEMENTS HELD IN IT.
PARLEMENTS often sat in this hall. In 1397, when, in the reign of Richard II.
it was extremely ruinous, he built a temporary room for his parliament, formed
with wood, and covered with tiles. It was open on all sides, that the
constituents might see every thing that was said and done: and, to secure
freedom of debate, he surrounded the house with four thousand Cheshire archers,
with bows bent, and arrows nocked ready to shoot Stow's Survaie, 888, 889.
. This fully answered the intent: for every sacrifice was made to the royal
pleasure.

COURTS OF JUSTICE.
COURTS of justice, even in early times, sat in this hall, where monarchs
themselves usually presided; for which reason it was called Curia Domini Regis,
and one of the three now held in this hall is called the court of king's bench.
The first chief justice was Robert Le Brun, appointed by Henry III. The judges
of the courts were made knights bannerets, and had materials given them for
making most sumptuous habits for the occasion. Among others, they had for a
cloak cxx bellies of minever pure, i. e. the ermine, which they retain to this
day; but I observe green to be the predominant color of their robes. The judges
in old times rode to court: at first on mules; but in the reign of queen Mary,
they changed those restive animals for easy pads.

CHARLES I. TRIED HERE.
THE solemn trial of Charles I. was held in this hall, before a packed court of
judicature: during the intervals of this mockery of justice, he was carried to
the neighboring house belonging to Sir Thomas Cotton, in which a room was
fitted up by Mr. Kinnersley, a servant of the king's, belonging to the
wardrobe. This was the residence of his father, Sir Robert, the famous
antiquary, and owner of the noble collection of manuscripts, which, with great
public spirit, he got together and secured for ever to the use of his country.
They were at first kept in Cotton-house, which was purchased by the crown. They
were afterward removed to another house in Westminster, and finally deposited
in the British Museum. Let me add, that the room in which the books were
originally lodged, had been the oratory of Edward the Confessor.

THE house of lords is a room ornamented with the tapestry which records our
victory over the Spanish Armada. HOUSE OF LORDS.
It was bespoke by the earl of Nottingham, lord high admiral, and commander in
chief on the glorious day. The design was drawn by Cornelius Vroom, and the
tapestry executed by Francis Spiering. Vroom had a hundred pieces of gold for
his labor. The arras itself cost L. 1628. It was not put up till the year 1650,
two years after the extinction of monarchy, when the house of lords was used as
a committee-room for the house of commons. The heads of the naval heroes who
commanded on the glorious days, form a matchless border round the work,
animating posterity to emulate their illustrious example!

IN the Prince's chamber, where his majesty puts on his robes when he comes to
the house of lords, is a curious old tapestry, representing the birth of queen
Elizabeth. Anne Bullen in her bed; an attendant on one side, and a nurse with
the child on the other. The story is a little broken into by the loss of a
piece of the Arras, cut to make a passage for the door. But beyond is Henry
with his courtiers; one of which seems dispatched to bring back intelligence
about the event. On the south side of this room are three gothic windows.

COURT OF REQUESTS.
THE court of requests is a vast room modernized; at present a mere
walking-place. The outside of the south end shows the great antiquity of the
building, having in it two great round arches, with zigzag mouldings, our most
ancient species of architecture. This court has its name because the masters of
it here received the petitions of the subjects to the king, in which they
requested justice; and the masters advised the suppliants how they were to
proceed Coke's Inst. iv. c. 9.
.

THAT court of justice so tremendous in the Tudor and part of the Stuart reign,
the Star Chamber, still keeps its name; which was not taken from the stars with
which its roof was said to have been painted (which were obliterated even
before the reign of queen Elizabeth), but from the Starra From the Hebrew,
Shetar.
, or Jewish covenants, which were deposited there by order of Richard I. in
chests under three locks. No starr was allowed to be valid except found in
those repositories: here they remained till the banishment of the Jews by
Edward I. In the reigns of Henry VII. and VIII. a new-modelled court was
erected here, consisting of diverse lords spiritual and temporal, with two
judges of the courts of common law, with the intervention of a jury Blackstone,
book iv. c. 19.
. The powers of this court were so shamefully abused, and made so subservient
to the revenge of a ministry, or the views of the crown, as to be abolished by
the reforming commons in the 16th of Charles II See lord Clarendon's curious
account of its abuse, Hist. Rebel. book i.ii.
, to the great joy of the whole nation. The room is now called the Painted
Chamber, and is used as the place of conference between the lords and commons.
It makes a very poor appearance, being hung with very ancient French or Arras
tapestry, which, by the names worked over the figures, seems to relate to the
Trojan war. The windows are of the ancient simple gothic. On the north outside,
beyond the windows, are many marks of recesses, groins, arms, on the remains of
some other room.

NUMBERS of other great apartments are still preserved on each side of the
entrance into Westminster Hall, in the law court of exchequer, and adjacent;
and the same in the money exchequer, and the duchy of Lancaster: all these had
been the parts of the ancient palace.

AT the foot of the staircase is a round pillar, having on it the arms of John
Stafford, lord treasurer from 1422 to 1424. On the opposite part are the arms
of Ralph lord Botelar, of Sudley, treasurer of the exchequer in 1433 Mr.
Carter, vol. i. tab. i. p. 1.
.

CLOSE to Mr. Waghorn's coffee-house, in Old Palace Yard, GUY FAUR'S CELLAR.
is the vault or cellar in which the conspirators of 1605 lodged the barrels of
gunpowder, designed at one blow to annihilate the three estates of the realm in
parliament assembled. To this day, the manner in which Providence directed the
discovery is unknown. The plot evidently was confined to a few persons of
desperate zeal and wickedness: they did not dare to trust so dreadful a design
to the multitude. The success, they knew, must be followed with a general
insurrection, and completion of their wishes. The opportunity would have been
too irresistible, even to those who, in cool blood, would have rejected with
horror a plan so truly diabolical.

HOUSE OF COMMONS, ONCE ST. STEPHEN'S CHAPEL.
THE commons of Great Britain hold their assemblies in this place, which was
built by king Stephen, and dedicated to his namesake the protomartyr. It was
beautifully rebuilt by Edward III. in 1347, and by him made a collegiate
church, and a dean and twelve secular priests appointed Newcourt, i. 745.
. Soon after its surrender to Edward VI. it was applied to its present use. The
revenues at that period were not less than L. 1085 a year.

WEST FRONT.
THE west front, with its beautiful gothic window, is still to be seen as we
ascend the stairs to the court of requests; it consists of the sharp-pointed
species of gothic. Between it and the lobby of the house is a small vestibule
of the same sort of work, and of great elegance. At each end is a gothic door,
and one in the middle, which is the passage into the lobby. On the south side
of the outmost wall of the chapel, appear the marks of some great gothic
windows, with abutments between; and beneath, some lesser windows, once of use
to light an under chapel. The inside of St. Stephen's is adapted to the present
use, and plainly fitted up.

SUB-CHAPEL.
THE under chapel had been a most beautiful building: the far greater part is
preserved, but frittered into various divisions, occupied principally by the
passage from Westminster Hall to Palace Yard.

BUST OF CHARLES I.
IN the passage stood the famous bust of Charles I. by Bernini, made by him from
a painting by Vandyck, done for the purpose. CHARLES the 1st. From an Original
Bronze by Bernini, From a Lecture by Vandyke.
Bernini is said, by his skill in physiognomy, to have pronounced from the
likeness, that there was something unfortunate in the countenance.

THE far greater part of the under-chapel of St. Stephen, is possessed by his
grace the duke of Newcastle, as auditor of the exchequer. One side of the
cloister is entirely preserved, BEAUTIFUL CLOISTER.
by being found convenient as a passage: the roof is gothic workmanship, so
elegant as not to be paralleled even by the beautiful workmanship in the chapel
of Henry VII. Several parts are walled up for the meanest uses; even a portion
serves, with its rich roof, for a coal-hole. That which has the good fortune to
be allotted for the steward's room, is very well kept. In one part of the roof
is cut a neat, and, I believe, true representation of the front of the chapel,
bounded on each side by a turret. Another of the same kind, held by an angel,
appears on the wall.

ON one side of the cloister, SMALL ORATORY AND CHAUNTRY.
projects into the area a small oratory, as richly ornamented as other parts of
this building: above is a neat chauntry in the same style. A gallery runs over
each side of the cloister, with windows of light stone tracery, looking into
the court or area, which is deformed by a modern kitchen and its appendages.

FROM one part of the gallery is a stairs, ANCIENT SQUARE TOWER.
which leads to a very ancient square tower of stone, standing almost close to
the side of Westminster Hall. It probably was a belfry, to hold the bells that
roused the holy members of the chapel to prayer.

IN what is called the grotto room, SCULPTURES OF ST. STEPHEN.
are fine remains of the roof and columns of this sub-chapel. The roof is
spread over with ribs of stone, which rest on the numerous round pillars that
compose the support. The pillars are short; the capitals round and small, with
a neat foliage intervening. In a circle on the roof, is a martyrdom of St.
Stephen, cut in stone. In another circle, is a representation of St. John the
Evangelist cast into a cauldron of boiling oil, by command of the emperor
Domitian.

WOOL-STAPLE.
NOT far from Westminster Hall, in New Palace Yard, stood the staple of wool,
removed to Westminster, and several other places in England, in 1353, by Edward
III. These before had been kept in Flanders: but this wise measure brought
great wealth into the kingdom, and a considerable addition to the royal
revenue: for the parliament in those days granted to the king a certain sum on
every sack exported. Henry VI. had six wool-houses here, which he granted to
the dean and canons of St. Stephen's Strype's Stow, ii. book vi. p. 7.
. The concourse of people, which this removal of the wool-staple to Westminster
occasioned, caused this royal village to grow into a considerable town: such is
the superiority of commerce. Part of the old gateway to the staple was in being
as late as the year 1741, when it was pulled down to make room for the abutment
of the new bridge Anderson's Dict. i. 184.
.

WESTMINSTER BRIDGE.
THE first stone of that noble structure was laid on January 24th, 1739, by
Henry earl of Pembroke, a nobleman, of whom Mr. Walpole says, none had a purer
taste in architecture. It was built after the design of Monsieur Labelye, an
ingenious architect, a native of France. The last stone was laid in November
1747, so that it was eight years and nine months in completing, at the expense
of L. 389,500. Its length is 1223 feet; the number of arches fourteen, that in
the center seventy-six feet wide. In this bridge, grandeur and simplicity are
united. Fault has been found with the great height of the balustrades, which
deny to the passengers a clear view of the noble expanse of water, and the fine
objects, especially to the east, which are scattered with no sparing hand. I
cannot agree with the happy thought of the French traveller M. Grosley's tour
to London, i. 27, 28.
, who assures us, that the cause was to prevent the suicide to which the
English have so strong a propensity, particularly in the gloomy month of
November; for, had they been low, how few could resist the charming opportunity
of springing over, whereas at present, the difficulty of climbing up these
heights is so great, that the poor hypochondriac has time to cool; and,
desisting from his glorious purpose, think proper to give his days their full
length, and end them like a good christian in his peaceful bed.

THE tide has been known to rise at this bridge twenty-two feet; TIDE.
much to the inconveniency of the inhabitants of the lower parts of
Westminster, for at such times their cellars are laid under water; but its
height depends much on the force and direction of the wind at the time of flood.

BEYOND this palace, to the north, CANON, OR CHANNEL ROW.
stood some streets and lanes by the waterside, distinguished in older times
by the residence of some of our nobility. In Canon Row, so named from being
inhabited by the canons of the church, but corrupted into Channel Row, was the
stately house built by the termagant Anne Stanhope, wife to the protector
Somerset; whose dispute, about some point of female precedence, is said to have
contributed in some degree to her husband's fall. She left this house to her
son Edward earl of Hertford. Here William earl of Derby had, in 1603, a fair
mansion; and Henry Clinton earl of Lincoln, another; and in this row, Anne
Clifford tell us, that on the first of May, 1589, she was begotten by her most
valiant father George earl of Cumberland, on the body of her most virtuous
mother Margaret, daughter of Francis earl of Bedford. Astonishing accuracy!

IN this part of the town were some other houses of our nobility. In the remote
Tothil street, stood the houses of lord Gray, and of lord Dacres, mentioned in
Norden's map of London, in 1603; and in Lea's map, published in 1700, is the
earl of Lindesey's house near Old Palace Yard; of which I find no other
account, than that it was inhabited, in 1707, by one of the Dormers, earl of
Caernarvon New view of London, ii. 627.
.

PALACE OF WHITEHALL.
IMMEDIATELY beyond these buildings began the vast palace of Whitehall. It was
originally built by Hubert de Burgh earl of Kent, the great, the persecuted
justiciary of England, in the reign of Henry III. He bequeathed it to the Black
Friars in Holborn, and they disposed of it to Walter de Gray archbishop of
York, in 1248. It became for centuries the residence of the prelates of that
see, and was styled York-house. In it Wolsey took his final leave of greatness.
The profusion of rich things; hangings of cloth of gold and of silver;
thousands of pieces of fine Holland; the quantities of plate, even of pure
gold, which covered two great tables See Fiddes's life of Wolsey, 497.
, (all of which were seized by his cruel rapacious master) are proofs of his
amazing wealth, splendour, and pride. Henry deigned to purchase the palace from
his fallen servant: the ancient palace of Westminster having some time before
suffered greatly by fire. From this time it became the residence of our
princes, till it was almost wholly destroyed by the same element in 1697.

HENRY had an uncommon composition: his savage cruelty could not suppress his
love of the arts: his love of the arts could not soften his savage cruelty. The
prince who could, with the utmost sang froid, burn Catholics and Protestants,
take off the heads of the partners of his bed one day, and celebrate new
nuptials the next, had, notwithstanding, a strong taste for refined pleasures.
He cultivated architecture and painting, and invited from abroad artists of the
first merit. To Holbein was owing the most beautiful gate at Whitehall, built
with bricks of two colors, FINE GATE.
glazed, and disposed in a tesselated fashion. The top, as well as that of an
elegant tower on each side, were embattled. On each front were four busts in
baked clay, in proper colors, which resisted to the last every attack of the
weather: possibly the artificial stone revived in this century. These, I have
been lately informed, are preserved in a private hand. This charming structure
fell a sacrifice to convenience within my memory: as did another in 1723, built
at the same time, but of far inferior beauty Both these gates are engraven in
plates xvii.xviii. of the Vetusta Monumenta, published by the Society of
Antiquaries -- and also by Kip.
. The last blocked up the road to King Street, and was called King's-gate.
Henry built it as a passage to the park, the tennis-court, bowling-green, the
cockpit, and tilting-yard; for he was extremely fond of athletic exercises;
they suited his strength and his temper.

IT was the intention of William duke of Cumberland, to rebuild the beautiful
gate, first mentioned, at the top of the long walk at Windsor, and for that
purpose had all the parts and stones numbered; but unfortunately the design was
never executed.

TILT-YARD.
THE tilt-yard was equally the delight of his daughter Elizabeth, as singular a
composition: for, with the truest patriotism, and most distinguished abilities,
were interwoven the greatest vanity, VANITY OF QUEEN ELIZABETH.
and most romantic disposition. Here, in her sixty-sixth year, with wrinkled
face, red perriwig, little eyes, hooked nose, skinny lips, and black teeth
Hentzner's Travels, in vol. i. Fugitive Pieces, p. 278.
, she could suck in the gross flattery; of her favored courtiers. Essex (by
his squire) here told her of her beauty and worth. A Dutch ambassador assured
her majesty, that he had undertaken the voyage to see her majesty, who for
beauty and wisdom excelled all other beauties in the world. She labored at an
audience to make Melvil acknowledge that his charming mistress was inferior in
beauty to herself Memoirs, 98.
. The artful Scot evaded her question. She put on a new habit of every foreign
nation, each day of audience, to attract his admiration. So fond was she of
dress, that three thousand different habits were found in her wardrobe after
her death. Mortifying reflection! in finding such alloy in the greatest
characters.

SHE was very fond of dancing. I admire the humor she showed in using this
exercise, whenever a messenger came to her from her successor James VI. of
Scotland: for Sir Roger Aston assures us, that whenever he was to deliver any
letters to her from his master, on lifting up of the hangings, he was sure to
find her dancing to a little fiddle, affectedly, that he might tell James, by
her youthful disposition, how unlikely he was to come to the throne he so much
thirsted after Weldon's Court of King James, 5.
.

HENTZNER, who visited this palace in 1598, HER LIBRARY.
informs us that her royal library was well stored with Greek, Italian, Latin,
and French books. Among others, was a little one in her own handwriting,
addressed to her father. She wrote a most exceeding fair hand, witness the
beautiful little prayer book, sold at the late duchess of Portland's sale for
L. 106, written in five languages, HER LEARNING.
two in English, and one in Greek, Latin, French, and Italian. At the beginning
was a miniature of her lover the Duc d'Anjou, at the end one of herself, both
by Hilliard: by the first she artfully insinuated that he was the primary
object of her devotions. His mother, Catherine de Medicis, had been told by an
astrologer, that all her sons were to become monarchs. Anjou visited England,
and was received with every species of coquetry. On the first of January, 1581,
in the tilt-yard of this palace, GREAT TOURNAMENT HELD IN HONOR OF THE DUC
D'ANJOU.
the most sumptuous tournament ever celebrated, was held here in honor to the
commissioners sent from France to propose the marriage. A banqueting house,
most superbly ornamented, was erected at the expense of above a thousand seven
hundred pounds. The gallerie adjoining to her majesty's house at Whitehall,
says the minute Holinshed, whereat her person should be placed, was called,
ROMANTIC FOOLERIES.
and not without cause, the castle or fortress of perfect beauty! Her
majesty, at the time aged forty-eight, received every flattery that the charms
of fifteen could clame. This fortress of perfect beauty was assailed by
Desire, and his four foster children. The combatants on both sides were persons
of the first rank: a regular summons was first sent to the possessor of the
castle, with the delectable song of which this is part: "Yield, yield, o
yield, you that this fort d^o hold,
"Which seated is in spotless honors feeld,
" Desires great force, no forces can with hold;
"Then to Desires desire o yield, o yield."
Which ended, two canons were fird off, one with sweet powder, and the other
with sweet water: and after there were store of pretty scaling ladders, and
then the footmen threw flowers, and such fancies against the walls, with all
such devises as might seem fit shot for Desire. In the end Desire is repulsed,
and forced to make submission; and thus ended an amorous foolery; which, if the
reader is endowed with more patience than myself, he may find to fill near six
great pages in the historian aforesaid From p. 1316 to p. 1321.
.

NOBLE BAND OF KNIGHTS TILTERS.
TWO principal heroes of the time were Sir Henry Lee, knight of the garter, the
faithful devoted knight of this romantic princess, SIR HENRY LEE, THE QUEEN'S
CHAMPION;
and George earl of Cumberland. The first had made a vow to present himself
armed at the Tilt-Yard, on the 27th of November annually, till he was disabled
by age. This gave rise to the annual exercises of arms during the reign. The
society consisted of twenty-five of the most distinguished personages about the
court The list is given in the Appendix.
. Among them was Sir Christopher Hatton, and even the lord chancellor, DISABLED
BY AGE, RESIGNS IN GREAT FORM.
I think Sir Thomas Bromley. Age overtook Sir Henry in the thirty-third year of
her majesty: when he retired with great ceremony, and recommended as his
successor the famous hero, the earl of Cumberland, of whom I have given an
ample account in another place Tour in Scotland, 1772, vol. ii.
. Sir Henry, in the year 1590, invested his successor with much form; and in
the true spirit of chivalry and romance, in the presence of the queen and the
whole court, armed the new champion and mounted him upon his horse. His own
armor he offered at the foot of a crowned pillar, near her majesty's feet:
after which he clothed himself in a coat of black velvet pointed under the arm,
and instead of a helmet, covered his head with a buttoned cap of the country
fashion See Mr. Walpole's Miscellaneous Antiquities, No 1. p. 41.
. He died aged 80, in the year 1611, and was interred in the once elegant
little church of Quarendon, near Aylesbury. It is difficult to say whether that
or the tomb is most ruinous. The figure of the knight appears in armor
reclining, with one hand supporting his head, the other on his sword; on his
neck is a rich collar with the George pendant; his hair is short and curled;
his face bearded and whiskered. He lies beneath a rich canopy, supported by
suits of armor like ancient trophies. The epitaph tell us, The wars abroad
with honor he did pass,
In courtly justs his sovereigns knight he was.
Six princes he did serve.
In a work which furnished so few architectural subjects for the engraver, I
present the reader with the portrait of this venerable knight, taken from an
original in possession of the late Mrs. Sydney Lee, of Chester; who with great
politeness obliged me with a reduced copy. He was sprung from a Cheshire
family, the same which produced the Lees, earls of Lichfield. Sir Henry has by
him a large dog, to which he once was indebted for his life. By accident it was
left one night in his bedchamber, unknown to a faithless servant, who entered
the room with an intent to rob and murder his master, but was seized on his
entrance by the affectionate animal.

THE other print is one of Sir Henry's associates in the gallant society,
Robert earl of Leicester, clad for the tilt-yard, in complete armor The
knights of this gallant band were drawn at the time in their proper armor. The
book was in possession of the late duchess dowager of Portland, who, with her
usual condescension and friendship, permitted me to have any copies I chose.
.

OTHER AMUSEMENTS OF ELIZABETH.
Rowland White has left us a curious account of the amusements of this reign,
and with what spirit her majesty pursued her pleasures as late as her
sixty-seventh year. Her majesty says she is very well. This day she appoints a
Frenchman to do feate^ upon a rope in the conduit court. Tomorrow she has
commanded the bears, the bull, and the ape to be bayted in the tilt-yard. Upon
Wednesday she will have solemn dawncing Sydney's State Papers, i. 194
.

ORIGIN OF THE PRESENT BANQUETING HOUSE.
IN the time of James I. Whitehall was in a most ruinous state. He determined to
rebuild it in a very princely manner, and worthy of the residence of the
monarchs of the British empire. He began with pulling down the banqueting
rooms built by Elizabeth. That which bears the name at present was begun in
1619, from a design of Inigo Jones, in his purest manner; and executed by
Nicholas Stone, master-mason and architect to the king: it was finished in two
years, and cost seventeen thousand pounds; but was only a small part of a vast
plan, left unexecuted by reason of the unhappy times which succeeded. The note
To Inigo Jones, surveyor of the works done about the king's houses, 8 s. 4 d.
per diem, and L. 46 per ann. for house-rent, a clerk, and other incidental
expenses. -- Mr. Walpole.
will show the small pay of this great architect.

THE cieling of this noble room cannot be sufficiently admired. It was painted
by Rubens, who had three thousand pounds for his work. The subject is the
apotheosis of James I; it forms nine compartments; one of the middle,
represents our pacific monarch on his earthly throne, turning with horror from
Mars, and other of the discordant deities, and as if it were giving himself up
to the amiable goddess he always cultivated, to her attendants. Commerce and
all the fine arts. This fine performance is painted on canvass, and is in fine
preservation; but, a few years ago, underwent a repair by Mr. Cipriani, who, as
I am told, had two thousand pounds for his trouble. Near the entrance is a bust
of the royal founder.

LITTLE did James think that he was erecting a pile from which his son was to
step from the throne to the scaffold. He had been brought, in the morning of
his death, from St. James's across the park, and from thence to Whitehall,
where, ascending the great staircase, he passed through the long gallery to his
bedchamber, the place allotted to him to pass the little space before he
received the fatal blow. It is one of the lesser rooms marked with the letter
A, in the old plan of Whitehall. He was from thence conducted along the
galleries and the banqueting house, through the wall, in which a passage was
broken Herbert's Memoirs, 135. -- Warwick's Memoirs, 334.
, to his last earthly stage. This passage still remains, at the north end of
the room, and is at present the door to a small additional building of late
date. At the time of the king's death, contiguous to the banqueting house was
a large building with a long roof, and a small cupola rising out of the middle
Represented in one of Hollar's prints.
. The late duchess of Portland did me the honor of showing to me a rich pearl
surmounted with a crown, which was taken out of the ear of the murdered
monarch, after his head was struck off This is figured in one of the private
plates engraven at the expense of her grace.
.

THE banqueting house has been, many years past, converted into a chapel.
George I. appointed a salary of L. 30 a year to he paid to certain select
preachers, to preach here every Sunday.

CABINET OF CHARLES I.
THE collection of paintings formed by this most accomplished prince, was
esteemed the first in Europe. They were kept in a room called the Cabinet-room,
in this palace; which was built by order of prince Henry, from a design of
Inigo Jones. I have a view of it, and some of the ancient parts of Whitehall
which stood next to St. James's park. This building is distinguished by the
Venetian window. It stood on the fite of the duke of York's house. Vanderdort
was appointed keeper, with a salary of L. 50 a year. On the death of Henry it
was confirmed to him by Charles, at the reduced salary of forty. The view is
taken from a drawing by Levines, an artist who had worked under Rembrandt. This
I owe to the liberality of Doctor Combs.

THE pictures were sold by order of the ruling powers. As a proof of his
majesty's judgment in collecting, several were sold for a thousand pounds
apiece; a price seldom known in these days, when money bears so far less a
value.

IN 1680 a complete plan of this great palace was taken by John Fisher, and
engraven by Virtue, in 1747. PLAN OF WHITEHALL.
It appears that extended along the river, and in front along the present
Parliament and Whitehall street, as far as Scotland Yard; and on the other side
of those streets to the turning into Spring Garden, beyond the Admiralty,
looking into St. James's Park. The merry king, his queen, the royal brother,
prince Rupert, the duke of Monmouth, and all the great officers, and all the
courtly train, had their lodgings within these walls; and all the royal family
had their different offices, such as kitchens, cellars, pantries, spiceries,
cyder-house, bake-house, wood-yards and coal-yards, and slaughterhouse. We see
among the fair attendants of queen Catherine, many names which make a great
figure in Grammont, and other chronicles of the time: such as the countess of
Castlemaine, Mrs. Kirk, and Mrs. Killegrew. As to Nell Gwynne, NELL GWYNNE.
not having the honor to be on the good queen's establishment, she was obliged
to keep her distance, at her house in what was then called Pall Mall. It is the
first good one on the left hand of St. James's Square, as we enter from
Pall Mall. The back room on the ground floor was (within memory) entirely of
looking glass; as was said to have been the cieling. Over the chimney was her
picture; and that of her sister was in a third room. At the period I mention,
this house was the property of Thomas Brand, esquire of the Hoo, in Hertsordshire.

THE other royal favorites had the sanction of offices, such as maids of honor
and the like, which, in all ages, like charity, were sure to cover a multitude
of sins.

I MUST not omit, that from the palace into the Thames were two stairs, one
public, the other the privy stairs for the use of majesty alone; the first is
still in use, the other is made up in the old wall adjacent to the earl of
Fife's, but the arch of the portal remains entire. Henry, and his daughter
Elizabeth, made all their parties by water or on horseback; or now and then the
last went mounted on a litter, carried on men's shoulders. Coaches had been
introduced into England by Henry Fitzalan earl of Arundel, one of her admirers;
but the spirited princess seems to have disdained the use. She rode in a dress
of form and magnificence equal to what she appeared in at the drawing room; but
never put on breeches or boots, like the late Czarina; nor yet the equivocal
dress of the ladies of the present age.

NO one is unacquainted with the noble and commodious improvements which
succeeded. The space occupied by the former palace, most part of Privy Garden,
is covered with houses of nobility or gentry, commanding most beautiful views
of the river. Among the first (on the site of the small-beer cellar, of which a
view is preserved in No 4. of Hollar's prints of Whitehall) is the house of the
earl of Fife. EARL OF FIFE'S.
From his judicious embankment, is a matchless view of its kind, of the two
bridges with the magnificent expanse of water, Somerset House, St. Paul's, and
multitudes of other objects less magnificent, but which serve to complete the
beautiful scene.

IN the great room is some very fine Gobelins tapestry. I never can
sufficiently admire the expression of passions, in two of the subjects: the
fine history of Joseph disclosing himself to his brethren, and that of Susanna
accused by the two elders. Here are also great numbers of fine paintings by
foreign masters; but, as I OLD HORSE GUARDS
confine myself to those which relate to our own country, I shall only mention
a small three-quarters of Mary Stuart, with her child, an infant, standing on a
table before her. This beautiful performance is on white marble.

A HEAD of Charles I. when prince of Wales, done in Spain, when he was there in
1625, on his romantic expedition to court the Infanta. It is supposed to have
been the work of Velasco.

A PORTRAIT of William earl of Pembroke, lord high chamberlain in the beginning
of the reign of Charles I; a small full length in black, with his white rod in
one hand, his hat in the other, standing in a room looking into a garden. Such
is the merit of this piece, that, notwithstanding it is supposed to have been
the performance of Jameson, the Scotch Vandyck; yet it has been often
attributed to that great Flemish painter Mr. Walpole.
.

IN the vacant part of Privy Garden is still to be seen a noble statue in brass
of our abdicated monarch, executed by Grinling Gibbons, the year before he
deserted his throne.

THE horse-guards had their stables in the place they occupy at this time: but
the present elegant building was erected in the reign of his late majesty,
after a design, I think, by Vardy. I have given a print From a painting in
possession of the earl of Hardwick.
of the Horse-guards as they were in the time of Charles II. In it is the merry
monarch and his dogs; and in the back view, the banqueting house, one of the
gates, the present treasury in its ancient state, and the top of the cockpit.

THE Admiralty-office stood originally in Duke-street Westminster; but in the
reign of king William was removed to the present spot, to the house then called
Wallingford-house, I believe from its having been inhabited by the Knollys's,
viscounts Wallingford. From the roof, the pious Usher, archbishop of Armagh,
then living here with the countess of Peterborough, was prevaled on to take the
last sight of his beloved master Charles I. when brought on the scaffold before
Whitehall. He sunk at the horror of the sight, and was carried in a swoon to
his apartment.

THE present Admiralty-office was rebuilt in the late reign: it is a clumsy
pile, but properly veiled from the street by Mr. Adams's handsome skreen Mr.
Walpole.


PALACE FOR KINGS OF SCOTLAND.
A LITTLE farther to the north stood, in the place now occupied by
Scotland-yard, a magnificent palace built for the reception of the Scottish
monarchs, whenever they visited this capital. It was originally given by king
Edgar to king Ken, for the humiliating purpose of his making to this place an
annual journey, for the purpose of doing homage for the kingdom of Scotland,
and in after times for Cumberland and Huntingdon, and other fiefs of the crown.
Here Margaret, widow of James V. of Scotland, and sister to Henry VIII. resided
for a considerable time after the death of her husband: and was entertained
with great magnificence by her royal brother, as soon as he was reconciled to
her second marriage with the earl of Angus.

CHARING CROSS.
A LITTLE above stood one of the celebrated memorials of the affection of Edward
I. for his beloved Elianor, being the cross erected on the last spot on which
the body rested in the way to the abbey, the place of sepulture. This and all
the others were built after the designs of Cavalini. This was destroyed by the
religious fury of the reformers. From a drawing communicated to me by Doctor
Combs, it appears to have been of an octagonal form, and in an upper stage
ornamented with eight figures: but the gothic parts far from being rich.

THE cross was in the next century replaced by a most beautiful and animated
equestrian statue in brass, FINE STATUE OF CHARLES I.
of Charles I. cast in 1633, by Le Soeur. It was not erected till the year
1678, when the parliament had ordered it to be sold and broke to pieces: but
John River, the brazier who purchased it, having more taste or more loyalty
than his masters, buried it unmutilated, and showed to them some broken pieces
of brass in token of his obedience. M. d' Archenholz gives a diverting anecdote
of this brazier: that he cast a vast number of handles of knives and forks in
brass, which he sold as made of the broken statue. They were bought with great
eagerness; by the loyalists, from affection to their monarch; by the rebels, as
a mark of triumph over the murdered sovereign See M. Archenholz's Tableau d'
Angleterre, i. 163.
.

ON the site of part of Northumberland-house, ST. MARY ROUNCEVAL.
stood the chapel of St. Mary Rounceval, a cell to the priory of Rouncevaux, in
Navarre. It was founded by William Marshal earl of Pembroke, in the time of
Henry III. It was suppressed by Henry V. among the alien priories, but rebuilt
by Edward IV. who fixed a fraternity in it Newcourt, i. 693.
. In the reign of Edward VI, a grant was made of the site to Sir Thomas
Cawarden Tanner.
.

NOT far from hence, opposite to Charing Cross, was an hermitage, with a chapel
dedicated to St. Catherine Stowe's Survaie, 839.
. This, in 1262, belonged to the sea of Llandaff; for I find in that year that
William de Radnor, then bishop, had leave from the king to lodge in the
cloister of his hermitage at Charing, whenever he came to London Willis's
Landaff, 51.
.

ON the north side of Charing Cross stand the royal stables, called, from the
original use of the buildings on their site, the Mews; having been used for
keeping the king's falcons, at lest from the time of Richard II. In that reign
the accomplished Sir Simon Burley, knight of the garter, was keeper of the
king's falcons at the Meuse, near Charing Cross. This office was by Charles II.
granted to his son by Nell Gwyn, Charles duke of St. Albans, and the heirs male
of his body. In the reign of Henry VIII. the king's horses were kept here. In
1534 an accident by fire destroyed the building, with a great quantity of hay,
and several great horses. It was rebuilt in the reigns of Edward VI. and queen
Mary. In the year 1732 the present handsome edifice arose.

ST. JAMES'S PALACE.
ST. JAMES's palace was originally a hospital, founded and dedicated to St.
James, by some pious citizens, before the Conquest, for fourteen leprous
females: and eight brethren were added afterward, to perform divine service.
On the quarrel between the great earl of Warwick and lord Cromwell, about the
cause of the first battle of St. Albans; lord Cromwell, fearing the rage of that
violent peer, was at his own desire lodged here, by way of security, by John
Talbot earl of Shrewsbury, at that time lord treasurer of England Fenn's
Letters, i. 110.
. It was surrendered to Henry VIII. in 1531, who sounded on its site the
present palace, which Stowe calls a goodly manor. His majesty also enclosed the
park, which was subservient to the amusement of this and the palace of
Whitehall. Charles II. was particularly fond of it, planted the avenues, made
the canal, and the aviary, adjacent to the Bird-cage walk, which took its name
from the cages which were hung in the trees. Charles, says Cibber, was often
seen here, amidst crowds of spectators, feeding his ducks, and playing with his
dogs Apology for the life of Colley Cibber, 26.
, and passing his idle moments in affability even to the meanest of his
subjects, which made him to be adored by the common people; so fascinating in
the great are the habits of condescension!

DUCK ISLAND was erected into a government, and had a salary annexed to the
office, in favor of M. St. Evremond, who was the first and perhaps the last
governor S. Pegge, esquire
: and the island itself is lost in the late improvements.

IT does not appear that the palace was inhabited by any of our monarchs till
after the fire at Whitehall. James I. presented it to his accomplished son
Henry, who resided here till his lamented death in 1612. Charles I. was brought
here from Windsor, on January 19th Whitelock.
, by the power of the army, which had determined on his death; his apartment
was hastily furnished by his servant Mr. Kinnersley, of the wardrobe Herbert's
Memoirs, 106.
. Some of the eleven days which he was permitted to live, were spent in
Westminster Hall, and of the nights in the house of Sir Robert Cotton, adjacent
to his place of trial. On the 27th he was carried back to St. James's, where he
passed his three last days in exemplary piety. On the 30th he was brought to
the place of execution; and walked, unmoved at every insult, with a firm and
quick pace, supported by the most lively sentiments of religion.

HIS son, the bigoted James, sent to the prince of Orange, when he had
approached in force near to the capital, a most necessitated invitation to take
his lodgings at this palace. The prince accepted it: but at the same time
hinted to the frightened prince that he must leave Whitehall. It was customary
to mount guard at both the palaces. The old hero lord Craven was on duty at the
time when the Dutch guards were marching through the park to relieve, by order
of their master. From a point of honor he had determined not to quit his
station, and was preparing to maintain his post; but, receiving the command of
his sovereign, he reluctantly withdrew his party and marched away with sullen
dignity Dalrymple's Memoirs.
.

DURING the reign of king William, St. James's was fitted up for the residence
of the princess Anne (afterward queen) and her spouse prince George of
Denmark. From that time to the present it has been regularly the court of our
monarchs.

JAMES, the son of James II. who so long made pretensions to the British
throne, was born in the room now called the old bedchamber; at present the
antichamber to the levee room. The bed stood close to the door of a
back-stairs, which descended to an inner court. It certainly was very
convenient to carry on any secret design; and might favor the silly warming-pan
story, was not the bed surrounded by twenty of the privy council, four other
men of rank, twenty ladies, besides pages and other attendants. James, with
imprudent pride, neglected to disprove the tale: it was adopted by party, and
firmly believed by its zealots. But, as James proved false to his high trust,
and his son showed every symptom of following his example, there was certainly
no such pretense wanting for excluding a family inimical to the interests of
the GREAT WHOLE.

UNCREDITABLE as the outside of St. James's palace may look, it is said to be
the most commodious for regal parade of any in Europe. Every one knows that the
furniture of this palace is unbecoming the place. PORTRAITE.
Yet in a ramble I once made through the apartments, I saw several portraits of
personages remarkable in their day. Among others (in one of the rooms behind
the levee rooms) is a small full-length of Henry prince of Wales, son of James
I. He is dressed in green, standing over a dead stag, and sheathing a sword. A
youth, the accomplished lord Harrington, of Exton, is kneeling before him: each
of them have hunting horns, and behind the prince is a horse, and on the bough
of a tree are the arms of England, and behind the young lord, another coat of
arms, perhaps his own. Another fine small piece, of Arthur, elder brother to
Henry VIII. painted very young, with a bonnet on his head. Henry stands by him,
and his sister Margaret, of infant ages. This picture is by Mabuse, who visited
England in the reign of their father.

HENRY VII. and VIII. full-lengths, and each of them with a queen before an
altar. The fortunate Jane Seymour (who died in her bed) is the consort of the
son, here represented. This is a copy from Holbein, in small, by Van Lemput ^n
1667, taken by order of Charles II. The original was painted on the wall in the
privy chamber of Whitehall, and destroyed in the fire of 1697.

Two half-lengths, by Lely, of the duchess of York, and her sister.

A CHILD in the robes of the garter: perhaps the youngest knight known. He was
the second son of James II. while duke of York, by Anne Hyde his duchess. On
December 3d, 1666, he was elected knight of the garter, at the age of three
years and five months. The sovereign put the George round his neck; and prince
Rupert, the garter round his little leg. Death, in the following year,
prevented his installation Sandford, 677.
.

THE diminutive manhood of the dwarf Geoffry Hudson, is to be seen in another
picture. He appears less by being placed walking under some very tall trees.

IN the lords old waiting-room is Henry Darnley, in black, tall and genteel.
His hand is resting on his brother Charles Stuart, earl of Lenox, dressed in a
black gown.

IN another room is Charles II. of Spain, at the age of four, in black, with a
scepter in his hand, strutting and playing the monarch. He was inaugurated in
1665. His reign was unhappy. Spain at no period was in so low, so distressful a
condition. His dominions were parcelled out in his lifetime: but he
disappointed the allies, and, after some struggle, the designation of his will
in favor of the house of Bourbon took place.

HERE is to be seen the famous picture by Mabuse, of Adam and Eve. Mr. Evelyn
justly remarks the absurdity of painting them with navels, and a fountain with
rich imagery amidst the beauteous wilds of paradise. Raphael, and Michael
Angelo, made the same mistake of the navel, on which the learned Sir Thomas
Brown Vulgar Errors, p. 194.
wastes a long page and a half to disprove the possibility.

IN the queen's library (built by queen Caroline, QUEEN'S LIBRARY.
and ornamented by Kent) now a lumber-room, I saw a beautiful view from
Greenwich park, with Charles I. his queen, and a number of courtiers, walking.
And two others, of the same prince and his queen dining in public. And another
of the elector palatine and his spouse at public table; with a carver, looking
most ridiculous, a monkey having in that moment reared from the board and
seized on his beard. Possibly this feast was at Guildhall, where he was most
nobly entertained by the hospitable city, in 1612, when he made the match with
the daughter of our monarch, which ended so unhappily for both parties.

TO the east of St. James's palace, in the reign of queen Anne,
MARLBOROUGH-HOUSE.
was built Marlborough-house, at the expense of the public. It appears by one
of Kip's views of St. James's, published before the existence of this house,
that it was built in part of the royal gardens, granted for that purpose by her
majesty. The present duke added an upper story, and improved the ground floor,
which originally wanted the great room. This national compliment cost not less
than forty thousand pounds.

IN Pall Mall the duke Schomberg had his house. PALL MALL.
It was in my time possessed by Astley the painter, who divided it into three,
and most whimsically fitted up the center for his own use.

TO take a review of the space between this palace and Charing Cross, as it was
about the year 1560, it will appear a tract of fields; there were no houses,
excepting three or four on the east side of the present Pall Mall: and a little
farther, on the opposite side, a small church, the name of which I cannot
discover.

BY the year 1572, Cockspur-street filled up the space between those houses and
Charing Cross. Pall Mall was also laid out as a walk, or a place for the
exercise of the Mall, a game long since disused. The north side was also
planted with a row of trees. On the other side was the wall of St. James's
park. Charles II. removed it to its present place, planted the park, and made
all those improvements, which we now see. It was Le Notre, the famous French
gardener, the director of taste under Louis XIV. who ordered the disposition of
the trees. Of late, the French have endeavored to borrow taste from us. In the
days of Charles, HAYMARKET. HEDGE-LANE.
the Haymarket, and Hedge-lane, had names; but they were literally lanes,
bounded by hedges; and all beyond, to the north, east, and west, was entirely
country. In the fine plan of London, published by Faithorn, in 1658, no traces
of houses are to be met with in the former, any more than a single one, named
the Gaming-house, at the end next to Piccadilly. Windmill-street consisted of
disjoined houses; and a windmill, standing in a field on the west side, proves
from what its name was derived. All the space occupied by the streets radiating
from the Seven Dials, was at that period open ground.

LEICESTER-HOUSE.
Leicester-fields was also unbuilt; but the house of that name is found in the
same plan, and on the site of the present. It was founded by one of the Sydnies
earls of Leicester. It was for a short time the residence of Elizabeth,
daughter of James I. the titular queen of Bohemia, who, on February 13th, 1661,
here ended her unfortunate life Sandford, 565.
. It has been tenanted for a great number of years. It was successively the
pouting-place of princes. The late king, when prince of Wales, after he had
quarrelled with his father, lived here several years. His son Frederick
followed his example, succeeded him in his house, and in it finished his days.
No one is ignorant of the magnificent and instructive museum exhibited in this
house by the late Sir ASHTON LEVER. It was the most astonishing collection of
the subject of natural history ever collected, in so short a space, by any
individual. To the disgrace of our kingdom, after the first burst of wonder was
over, it became neglected: and when it was offered to the public, by the chance
of a guinea lottery, only eight thousand, out of thirty-six thousand, tickets
were sold. Finally, the capricious goddess frowned on the spirited possessor of
such a number of tickets, and transferred the treasure to the possessor of only
two, Mr. Parkinson; who, by his spirited attention to, and elegant disposition
of the Museum, well merited the favor.

BEHIND Leicester-house stood, in 1658, the Military-yard, THE MILITARY YARD.
founded by Henry prince of Wales, the spirited son of our peaceful James. M.
Foubert afterward kept here his academy for riding and other gentleman-like
exercises, in the reign of Charles II. It is to this day a noted riding-school.

A LITTLE beyond stood Gerard-house, GERARD-HOUSE.
the habitation of the gallant Gerard earl of Macclesfield See Journey to
London.
. It is lost in the street of the same name. The profligate lord Mohun lived in
this street, and was brought there after he was killed in the duel with the
duke of Hamilton. I have heard that his good lady was vastly displeased at the
bloody corse being flung upon the best bed.

COVENTRY-HOUSE stood near the end of the Haymarket, and gave name to
Coventry-street. It was the residence of lord keeper Coventry; and Henry
Coventry, secretary of state, died here in 1686. This house is said to be on
the site of one called, in the old plans of London, the Gaming-house.

PICCADILLY.
LORD Clarendon mentions a house of this name, in the following words. Mr. Hyde
(says he, speaking of himself) going to a house called Piccadilly, which was a
fair house for entertainment, and gaming, with handsome gravel-walks with
shade, and where were an upper and lower bowling-green, whither very many of
the nobility and gentry of the best quality resorted for exercise and
conversation Clarendon's Hist. Oxford ed. 1705, i. 241, sub anno 1640.
.

AT the upper end of the Haymarket, stood Piccadilla-hall, where Piccadillas or
Turn-overs were sold, which gave name to that vast street, called from that
circumstance Piccadilly. This street was completed in 1642, as far as the
present Berkeley-street. The first good house which was built in it was
Burlington-house; the noble founder, father to the late earl of Burlington,
said he placed it there because he was certain no one would build beyond him.
Nobody is ignorant of the vast town that, since that period, has extended
itself beyond this palace. After this rose Clarges-house, and two others
adjacent, inhabited, says Strype, by lord Sherbourne and the countess of Denby.

THE Pest-house-fields were surrounded with buildings before the year 1700, but
remained a dirty waste till of late years, when Carnaby-market occupied much of
the west part. Golden-square, of dirty access, was built after the Revolution,
or before 1700. In these fields had been the lazareto, during the period of the
dreadful plague of the year 1665. It was built by that true hero lord Craven,
who stayed in London during the whole time; and braved the fury of the
pestilence, with the same coolness as he fought the battles of his beloved
mistress Elizabeth, titular queen of Bohemia; or mounted the tremendous breach
at Creutznach. He was the intrepid soldier, the gallant lover, the genuine
patriot.

IN 1700 Bond-street was built no farther than the west end of Clifford-street.
New Bond-street was at that time an open field, called Conduit Mead, from one
of the conduits which supplied this part of the town with water: and
Conduit-street received its name for the same reason.

GEORGE- street, Hanover-square, and its church, rose about the same time. The
church was built by John James, ST. GEORGE's, HANOVER-SQUARE.
and finished in 1724. Its portico would be thought handsome had you space to
admire it. It now looks Brobdignagian. This was one of the fifty new churches,
and the parish stolen out of that of St. Martin in the Fields. It is the last
parish in this part of Westminster, excepting the distant Mary-bonne. Every
part besides was open ground, covered with dunghills, and all sorts of
obscenity. May Fair was kept about the spot now covered with May Fair chapel,
MAY FAIR.
and several fine streets. The fair was attended with such disorders, riots,
thefts, and even murders, that, in 1708, it was presented by the magistrates.
It revived again, and I remember the last celebrations: the place was covered
with booths, temporary theaters, and every enticement to low pleasure.

AT the time of Sir Thomas Wiat's insurrection, in February, 1554, part of the
army marched to make their attack on London over this tract, then an open
country as far as Charing Cross. On the spot called Hay-hill, near the present
Berkeley-square, there was a skirmish between a party of the insurgents and
another of the royal army, in which the former were repulsed. After the
execution of Sir Thomas, his head (on that account) was set up on a gallows, at
that place Strype's Memorials, iii. 120.
, and his parboiled quarters in different parts of the neighborhood of the
capital. Three of the insurgents were also hung in chains near the head of
their leader.

THIS extensive tract, at present a vast seat of the most elegant population,
is far from being destitute of places of devotion: but chapels arose instead of
churches, subordinate to their respective rectors. In this enlightened age it
was quickly discovered that "Godliness was profitable to many." The projector,
the architect, the mason, the carpenter, and the plasterer united their powers.
A chapel was erected, well-pewed, well-warmed, dedicated, and consecrated. A
captivating preacher is provided, the pews are filled, and the good undertakers
amply repayed by the pious tenantry.

HANOVER AND CAVENDISH SQUARES.
IN 1716, Hanover-square, and Cavendish-square, were unbuilt: but their names
appear in the plans of London of 1720. Oxford-street, from Princes-street
eastward as far as High Street St. Giles's, was almost unbuilt on the north
side. I remember there a deep hollow road, and full of sloughs: there was here
and there a ragged house, the lurking-place of cutthroats: insomuch that I
never was taken that way by night, in my hackney-coach, to a worthy uncle's,
who gave me lodgings at his house in George-street, but I went in dread the
whole way. The south side was built as far as Swallow-street. SOHO-SQUARE was
begun in the time of Charles II. The duke of Monmouth lived in the center
house, facing the statue. Originally the square was called, in honor of him,
Monmouth-square; and afterward changed to that of King-square. I have a
tradition, that, on his ^ath, the admirers of that unfortunate man changed it
to Soho, being the word of the day at the field of Sedgemoor. The house was
purchased by the late lord Bateman, and let by the present lord to the Comte de
Guerchy, the French ambassador. After which it was leased on building leases.
The name of the unfortunate duke is still preserved in Monmouth-street.

AFTER this digression, let me return into Piccadilly. BERKELEY-HOUSE.
-- Before the date of Burlington-house, was built a fine mansion, belonging to
the Berkelies, lords, and afterward earls Berkeley. It stood between the south
end of Berkeley-square and Piccadilly, and gave name to the square and an
adjacent street. The misery and disgrace which the profligacy of one of the
daughters brought on the house, by an intrigue with her brother-in-law, lord
Gray, (afterward engaged in the Monmouth rebellion) is too lastingly recorded
in our State Trials, ever to be buried in oblivion.

ON the site of this house, fronting Piccadilly, DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE.
stands Devonshire-house; long after the year 1700 it was the last house in
this street, at that time the portion of Piccadilly. The old house, which was
built by the first duke, was burnt in the reign of George II. It was rebuilt by
the third duke, after a design by Kent. Here is an excellent library, and a
very fine collection of medals. I once saw the house, by the favor of my friend
the Reverend Doctor Lort, at that time librarian; to whose liberal
communications I have been invariably indebted. The portraits are so numerous
in this noble house, that I must leave the complete list to those who have more
opportunities of forming it than I had. Among others, is a fine portrait of
Marc Antonio de Dominis, the vain desultory archbishop of Spalato, who,
abjuring the Roman catholic religion, came over to England, and was appointed
master of the Savoy. He had not been here long, but he publicly retracted all
he had wrote against the church of Rome. James ordered him to depart the
kingdom in three days. He had the folly to trust himself at Rome; where, his
sincerity being doubted, he was flung into prison, where he ended his days. He
is painted by Tintoret, represented in his study, sitting, in black, and with a
square cap.

ARTHUR Goodwin, the friend of Mr. Hampden, and, like him, active in the cause
of liberty; a fine full length, by Vandyck, 1639: in long hair; his dress a
yellow cloak and jacket, and white boots.

HIS daughter Jane, second wife of Philip lord Wharton; in black, enriched with
chains of gold.

A HEAD of the favorite character of lord Clarendon, the virtuous and
accomplished lord Falkland.

SIR Thomas Brown, author of the Religio Medici, his lady, and four daughters,
by Dobson. Sir Thomas and his lady are in black; one child is on her lap, two
stand before him, on whom he looks with great affection. When I thought of a
passage in his famous book, I could but smile at the number of children. His
sentiments on the consequence of matrimony are most singular. I dare not quote
the passage: but must refer the reader to the strangeness of his ideas on the
subject Religio Medici, part ii. sect. 9.
. Let it be remembered he was a bachelor when he wrote.

THE delightful portrait of the Jewish Rabbi, by Rembrandt.

A HEAD of Titian, by himself. And another of the painter Carlo Cignani, also
by himself.

THE unfeeling Philip II. by Titian; a full-length, in armor, enriched with
gold. The only time he ever buckled it on, was when he showed himself to his
troops going on the assault of St. Quintin. He merited to be stripped of the
honorable dress: he never appeared in the field; and carried on his wars like
an assassin.

I WILL close this very imperfect list, with the famous countess of Desmond; a
popular subject with the painters: and refer the reader to the account I have
given of her in my visits to that worthy peer the late earl of Kinnoul, in both
my tours in Scotland.

THE collection of pictures by the great Italian masters, is by far the finest
private collection now in England.

THE house of that monster of treachery, that profligate minister the earl of
Sunderland, who, by his destructive advice, premeditatedly brought ruin on his
unsuspecting master James II. stood on or near the site of the present
Melbourne-house. At the very time that he sold him to the prince of Orange, he
encouraged his majesty in every step which was certain of involving him and his
family in utter ruin.

PICCADILLY is continued near half a mile farther to the west All the west part
was originally called Portugal-street.
: the north side only consists of houses, most of them mean buildings; but it
finishes handsomely with the magnificent new house of lord Bathurst, at
Hyde-park corner. On the south side is the Green-park, bounded by a wall; but
in many places are rows of benevolent railings, which afford a most elegant
view of that park, the trees in that of St. James's, the majestic venerable
abbey soaring far above, and the more remote rural view of the Surry hills.
Beyond the Turnpike-house, stood the house of a noble, celebrated by Mr. Pope
for his passion for dancing; who demanded an audience from queen Anne, after
the death of George prince of Denmark, to advise her majesty to dispel her
grief by applying to that exercise: The sober Lanesh^row dancing in the gout. I
have heard it said, that this was only his country house; which might possibly
have been, at that time.

ST. GEORGE'S HOSPITAL.
IN 1733 arose on its site that great charity St. George's hospital, founded by
the voluntary contributions of the inhabitants of Westminster. The
subscriptions, in 1786, were L. 2,239. 5 s.; but the benevolence of the
governors, or increase of accidents, caused an increase of expense, which
threatened most serious consequences, till the house was happily relieved by
the bounty received from the third of the profits arising from the musical
entertainments of the abbey. -- This hospital has discharged from it, since it
was opened, on the first of the year 1733, not fewer than a hundred and
sixty-four thousand seven hundred and forty-six patients.

HYDE-PARK was in the late century, and the early part of the present,
celebrated, by all our dramatical poets, for its large space railed off in form
of a circle, THE RING.
round which the Beau-monde drove in their carriages, and in their rotation;
exchanging as they passed smiles and nods, compliments, or smart repartees.

OPPOSITE to this hospital at Hyde-park Corner, stood a large fort with four
bastions, which formed one of the many flung up in the year 1642. It is
incredible with what speed the citizens flung a rampart of earth all round the
city and suburbs of London, and again round Southwark and Lambeth, strengthened
with batteries and redoubts at proper intervals. This was occasioned by an
alarm of an attack from the royal army. Men, women, and children assisted by
thousands. The active part which the fair sex took in the work is admirably
described by the inimitable author of Hudibras; who, says he, Marched rank and
file with drum and ensign,
TO entrench the city for defense in:
Raised rampires with their own soft hands,
To put the enemy to stands;
From ladies down to oyster-wenches,
Labored like pioneers in trenches,
Fallen to their pick-axes and tools,
And helped the men to dig like moles.
Have not the handmaids of the city
Chos'n of their members a committee,
For raising of a common purse,
Out of their wages to raise horse?
And do they not as Triers fit,
To judge what officers are fit?


THERE were a few more great houses, BERKSHIRE, OR CLEVELAND-HOUSE.
not remote from St. James's palace, which merit mention. Berkshire-house,
belonging to the Howards, earls of Berkshire, stood very near the royal
residence. It was afterward purchased, and presented by Charles II. to that
beautiful fury Barbara duchess of Cleveland, and its honorable name changed
into that of her dishonored title. It was then of great extent. She sold part,
which was built into various houses. She built a large one for herself, which
still remains, and may be distinguished by the row of round windows in the
upper story.

TART-HALL.
TART-HALL stood near the present Buckingham-gate: it was built in 1638, by
Nicholas Stone, for Alathea countess of Arundel, wife to Thomas earl of
Arundel. After the death of the countess it became the property of her second
son, the unfortunate William lord Stafford, a most gentle and amiable
character, who fell an innocent victim to the detestable violence of party, and
the perjured suborned evidence of the ever infamous Oats, Dugdale, and
Tuberville. Good men, who had no share in that part, hurried away by
intemperate passion, were at the period disgraced by their rage against this
inoffensive peer. Even the virtuous lord Russel committed in this cause the
single opprobrium of his life: when the unhappy lord was condemned, RUSSEL
could wish to deny the king the amiable prerogative of taking away the cruel,
the disgraceful part of the penalty. Within three years, this excellent man
himself tasted the bitter cup; but cleared, by royal indulgence, from the
aggravating dregs, with which he wished to agonize the dying moments of the
devoted Stafford.

HERE were kept the poor remains of the Arundelian collection. They were buried
during the madness of the popish plot. The mob would have mistaken the statues
for popish saints. They were sold in the year 1720; and the house soon after
was pulled, down. Mr. Walpole; who saw the house at the time of the second
sale, informed me that it was very large, and had a very venerable appearance.

ARLINGTON-HOUSE.
HENRY BENNET earl of Arlington, one of the famous Cabal, had a house near the
site of the present Buckingham-house, which went by his name. It was afterward
purchased by John Sheffield duke of Buckingham, who, after obtaining an
additional grant of land from the crown, rebuilt it, in a magnificent manner,
in 1703. BUCKINGHAM-HOUSE.
He describes it most minutely, as well as his manner of living there, in a
letter to the duke of Shrewsbury London and its environs.
. He has omitted his constant visits to the noted gaming-house at Marybone, the
place of assemblage of all the infamous sharpers of the time. His grace always
gave them a dinner at the conclusion of the season, and his parting toast was,
May as many of us as remain unhanged next spring, meet here again. I remember
the facetious Quin telling this story at Bath, within the hearing of the late
lord Chesterfield, when his lordship was surrounded by a crowd of worthies of
the same stamp with the above. Lady Mary Wortley alludes to the amusement in
this time; Some dukes at Marybone bowl time away. Anciently there was a park at
Marybone: for I find that in queen Elizabeth's, time, the Russian ambassadors
were entertained with the amusement of hunting within its pale. The duke died
in 1720. His duchess, daughter to James II. by Catherine Sedley, lived here
till her death. She was succeeded by the duke's natural son, Charles Herbert
Sheffield, on whom his grace had entailed it after the death of the young duke,
who died a minor. It was purchased from Sir Charles by his present majesty; is
the retreat of our good king and queen; and dignified with the title of the
QUEEN'S HOUSE.

The virtuous chancellor the earl of Clarendon, CLARENDON-HOUSE.
had a house facing the upper end of St. James's- street, on the site of the
present Graften-street. It was built by himself, with the stones intended for
the rebuilding of St. Paul's. He purchased the materials; but a nation soured
with an unsuccessful war, with fire, and with pestilence, imputed every thing
as a crime to this great and envied character: his enemies called it
Dunkirk-house, calumniating him with having built it with the money arising
from the sale of that town, which had just before been given up to the French,
for a large sum, by his master. Clarendon was so sensible of his vanity, of his
imprudence, in building so large a house, and of the envy it drew upon him,
that he thinks fit to apologize for that act of his; which he declares so far
exceeded the proposed expense, as to add greatly to the embarrassment of his
affairs Continuation of the life of the earl of Clarendon, octavo, vol. iii. p.
971. -- The house is engraven by Dunstal.
. It cost fifty thousand pounds, and three hundred men were employed in the
building. It was purchased from his lordship by George M^k duke of Albemarle,
and afterward by another nobleman, inferior indeed in abilities, but not
inferior in virtues. In 1670, ATTACK ON THE DUKE OF ORMOND BY BLOOD.
James duke of Ormond, in his way to Clarendon-house, where his grace at that
time lived, was dragged out of his coach by the infamous Blood, and his
associates, who intended to hang his grace at Tyburn, in revenge for justice
done, under his administration in Ireland, on some of their companions. This
refinement in revenge saved the duke's life: he had leisure to disengage
himself from the villain on horseback, to whom he was tied; by which time he
was discovered by his affrighted domestics, and rescued from death. Blood was
soon after taken in the attempt to steal the crown. The court had use for so
complete a villain, and sunk follow as to apply to his grace for pardon for the
offense against him; the duke granted it with a generous indignation. Blood had
a pension of five hundred a year, and was constantly seen in the
presence chamber: as is supposed, to show to the great uncomplying men of the
time, what a ready instrument the ministry had to revenge any attempt that
might be made against them in the cause of liberty.

I WOULD not make this little work a Tyburn chronicle; MURDER OF MR. THYNNE.
yet I cannot omit the horrible assassination, in 1681, of Thomas Thynne, esquire
of Longleat, by the instigation of count Koningsmark, in revenge for his having
married lady Elizabeth Ogle, the rich heiress, on whom the count had a design.
The three assassins were executed in Pall Mall on the bloody spot: but the
court, in love with profligacy, contrived to save the principal Reresby's
Memoirs, 142.
. The gallant William earl of Devonshire would have avenged the death of his
friend: the count accepted the challenge; but his conscience prevented him from
meeting the earl. He afterward met with a fate suited to his actions: he
attempted an intrigue, in 1686, in Germany, with a lady of distinguished rank:
he was one night waylayed, by order of the jealous husband; was literally cut
to pieces, and his remains flung into a privy, which was instantly bricked up.

JERMYN, JERMYN-HOUSE.
and St. Alban's streets took their names from the gallant Henry Jermyn earl of
St. Alban's, who had a house at the head of the last. He was supposed to have
been privately married to the queen dowager, Henrietta Maria. By this time
misfortunes had subdued that spirit which had contributed to precipitate her
first husband into the ruin of his house. She was awed by her subject-spouse
Reresby, 4.
: her fear of him was long observed before the nearness of the connection was
discovered.

ST. JAMES'S CHURCH.
ON the ground of this gay peer, was built the present church of St. James,
founded in the latter part of the reign of Charles II. and consecrated in the
first of James II. and named in honor of both saint and monarch. London was so
vastly increased about this period, that a new church in this place was
necessary. Accordingly, as much was taken from the parish of St. Martin in the
Fields, as to form another. It is a rectory, to which, at first, the bishop of
London had a right of two turns in the presentation. Lord Jermyn, nephew to the
earl, had the third: but the last was fully resigned to the bishop. FINE FONT
BY GIBBONS.
The most remarkable thing in the church is the fine font of white marble, the
work of Grinlin Gibbons. It is supported by the tree of life; the serpent is
offering the fruit to our first parents, who stand beneath: on one side of the
font is engraven the Baptist baptizing our Savior: on another, St. Philip
baptizing the eunuch: and on the third, Noah's ark, with the dove bringing the
olive branch, the type of peace to mankind See this font engraven by Virtue,
tab. iii. of the Vetusta Monumenta.
.

THE chancel, above the altar, is enriched with some beautiful foliage in wood,
by the same great artist.

THE STRAND; ITS ANCIENT STATE.
THE further progress of this part of the town I shall defer mentioning till I
have reached the most eastern part of Westminster. I shall resume my account at
the opening of the Strand into Charing Cross, by observing, that in the year
1353, that fine street the Strand was an open highway, with here and there a
great man's house, with gardens to the waterside. In that year it was so
ruinous, that Edward III. by an ordinance directed a tax to be raised upon
wool, leather, wine, and all goods carried to the staple at Westminster, from
Temple Bar to Westminster-abbey, for the repair of the road; and that all
owners of houses adjacent to the highway should repair as much as lay before
their doors. Mention is also made of a bridge to be erected near the royal
palace at Westminster, for the convenience of the said staple Rymer's Foedera,
v. 762.
: but the last probably meant no more than a stairs for the landing of the
goods, which I find sometimes went by the name of a bridge.

THERE are several instances of grants for building, in this extensive road, in
very early times. Edward I. granted to Walter le Barbur, a void space in the
high street, in the parish of St. Clement Danes and St. Mary Strand: and Robert
le Spencer had from the same prince another grant.

THERE was no continued street here till about the year 1533: THE STREET
COMPLETED IN 1533.
before that, it entirely cut off Westminster from London, and nothing
intervened except the scattered houses, and a village which afterward gave
name to the whole. St. Martin's stood literally in the fields. But about the
year 1560 a street was formed, loosely built; for all the houses on the south
side had great gardens to the river, were called by their owners names, and in
aftertimes gave name to the several streets that succeeded them, pointing down
to the Thames; each of them had stairs for the convenience of taking boat, of
which many to this day bear the names of the houses. As the court was for
centuries, either at the palace at Westminster or Whitehall, a boat was the
customary conveyance of the great to the presence of their sovereign. The north
side was a mere line of houses from Charing Cross to Temple Bar; all beyond was
country. The gardens which occupied part of the site of Convent-garden were
bounded by fields, and St. Giles's was a distant country village. These are
circumstances proper to point out, to show the vast increase of our capital in
little more than two centuries.

IN the same century was a second epoch respecting the buildings of this part
of the town. The first was at the time we have mentioned, or, to speak from
strong authority, as they appear in the plan of London, made about the year
1562, by Ralph Aggas See the plan of London, as it was in the year 1600,
published by John Bowls.
. Our capital found itself so secure in the glorious government of Elizabeth,
that, by the year 1600, most considerable additions were made to the north of
the long line of street just described. St. Martin's-lane was built on both
sides. St. Giles's church was still insulated: but Broad street, and Holborn,
were completely formed into streets with houses, all the way to Snow-hill.
Convent-garden, and Lincoln's-inn-fields, were built, but in an irregular
manner. Drury Lane, Clare-street, and Long-acre, arose in the same period.

NORTHUMBERLAND-HOUSE.
THE present magnificent palace, Northumberland-house, stands on the site of the
hospital of St. Mary Rounceval. Henry VIII. granted it to Sir Thomas Caverden.
It was afterward transferred to Henry Howard earl of Northampton; who, in the
time of James I. built here a house, and called it after his own name. He left
it to his kinsman the earl of Suffolk, lord treasurer; and, by the marriage of
Algernoon Percy, earl of Northumberland, with Elizabeth daughter of Theophilus
earl of Suffolk, it passed into the house of the present noble owner. The
greater part of the house was built by Bernard Jansen, an architect in the
reign of James I; the portal, since altered by the late duke of Northumberland,
by a cotemporary architect, Gerard Christmas, who left on it his mark, C. Ae
Mr. Walpole.
. I must not omit, that in this house is the noble picture of the Cornaro
family, by Titian. It is very unfortunate that nothing can be more confined
than the situation of this great house. The noble front is pent up by a very
narrow part of the Strand; and behind by a cluster of mean houses, coal-wharfs,
and other offensive objects, as far as the banks of the Thames. Fortunately, by
the favor of government, it enjoys the power of giving the place the most
magnificent improvement. The late duke received a lease from the crown of all
the intervening ground as far as the river; and, within these very few years,
an absolute exchange for certain lands in Northumberland, to erect batteries on
against foreign invasion, at the period when the project of universal
fortification prevaled. A little time may see every nuisance removed, and a
terrace arise in their stead, emulating that of Somerset House.

A LITTLE farther is Hungerford stairs and market; HUNGERFORD STAIRS.
which take their name from the great family of the Hungerfords of Fairleigh,
in Wiltshire. Sir Edward, created knight of the Bath at the coronation of
Charles II. had a large house on the site, which he pulled down, and multiplied
into several others.

ON the other side of the Strand, ST. MARTIN'S IN THE FIELDS.
almost opposite to Hungerford-market, stands the church of St. Martin in the
Fields, once a parish of vast extent; but much reduced at present by the
robbing it of the tract now divided into the parishes of St. James, St. Anne,
and St. Paul, Covent Garden. We cannot trace the time of its foundation. It was
early bestowed on the abbot and convent of St. Peter, Westminster. In 1222,
there was a dispute between the abbot and the city of London, about the
jurisdiction of this church. And in 1363, we first find the name of a vicar, in
room of Thomas Skyn, who had resigned. In the reign of Henry VIII. a small
church was built here at the king's expense, by reason of the poverty of the
parishioners, who possibly were at that period very few. In 1607 it was
enlarged, because of the increase of buildings. In 1721 it was found necessary
to take the whole down, and in five years from that time, this magnificent
temple It is engraven by H. Hulsebergh.
was completed, at the expense of near thirty-seven thousand pounds. This seems
the best performance of Gibbs, the architect of the Ratcliff Library. The
steeple is far the most elegant of any of that style which I named the
Pepper-box; and with which (I beg pardon of the good people of Glasgow) I
marked their boasted steeple of St. Andrew.

YORK-HOUSE.
HEATH, archbishop of York, about the year 1556, purchased a house a little
beyond Hungerford-market, which had originally been the inn or lodgings of the
bishops of Norwich. When Henry VIII. had dispossessed the primates of York of
their house at Whitehall, the daughter, by way of reparation, made to them a
grant of Suffolk-house, in Southwark; which he sold, and with the N^court, i.
691.
money purchased Norwich-house, which afterward was called York-house, when
George Villiers duke of Buckingham became owner of it. On his disposal of it,
several streets were laid out on the site and ground belonging to it. These go
under the general appellation of York-buildings; but his name and title is
preserved in George, YORK-BUILDINGS.
Villiers, Duke, and Buckingham streets, and even the particle of is not
forgotten, being preserved in Of-alley.

THE gate to York-stairs is the work of Inigo Jones, and deserving of all the
praises bestowed on it by the author of the Critical Review.

DURHAM-YARD takes its name from a palace, DURHAM-PLACE.
built originally by the illustrious Thomas de Hatfield, elected bishop of
Durham in 1345; designed by him for the town residence of him and his
successors. It was called Durham-place, i. e. palace. Be it known to all whom
it concerns, that the word is only applicable to the habitations of princes, or
princely persons, and that it is with all the impropriety of vanity bestowed on
the houses of those who have luckily acquired money enough to pile on one
another a greater quantity of stones or bricks than their neighbors. GREAT
FEASTING HERE IN 1540.
At this place, in 1540, was held a most magnificent feast, given by the
challengers of England, who had caused to be proclaimed, in France, Flanders,
Scotland, and Spain, a great and triumphant justing to be holden at
Westminster, for all comers that would undertake them. But both challengers and
defendants were English. After the gallant sports of each day, the challengers
rode unto this Durham-house, where they kept open household, and feasted the
king and queen ( Anne of Cleves) with her ladies, and all the court. In this
time of their housekeeping, they had not only feasted the king, queen, ladies,
and all the court, as is aforeshewed: but also they cheered all the knights and
burgesses of the common house in the parliament; and entertained the mayor of
London, with the aldermen and their wives, at a dinner, etc. The king gave to
every of the said challengers, and their heirs for ever, in reward of their
valiant activity, 100 marks, and a house to dwell in of yearly revenue, out of
the lands pertaining to the hospital of S. John of Jerusalem Stow's Survaie,
837.
.

IN this a^ part of the following year, is most strongly exemplified the
unfeeling heart of this cruel prince, His sudden transitions from nuptials, and
joyous festivities, to the most tyrannical executions, often for offenses of
his own creation. In that small space of time, he married one queen, and put
her away, because he thought her a Flanders mare. He espoused another, and (not
without cause) put her and the confident to her incontinence to death. He
caused to be executed a hopeful young peer, and three young gentlemen, for a
common manslaughter resulting from a sudden fray. He burnt numbers for denying
the religion of Rome, and inflicted all the barbarous penalties of high treason
on multitudes, for denying a prerogative which he had wrested from the pope,
the head of that very worship which he supported with such rigor.

IN the reign of Edward VI. the mint was established in this house, under the
management of Sir William Sharrington, and the influence of the aspiring Thomas
Seymour, lord admiral. Here he proposed to have money enough coined to
accomplish his designs on the throne. His practices were detected: and he
suffered death. His tool was also condemned; but, sacrificing his master to his
own safety, received a pardon, and was again employed under the administration
of John Dudley earl of Northumberland. It afterward became the residence of
that ambitious man; who, in May 1553, in this palace, caused to be solemnized,
with great magnificence, three marriages; his son, lord Guildford Dudley, with
the amiable lady Jane Gray: lord Herbert, heir to the earl of Pembroke, with
Catherine younger sister of lady Jane: and lord Hastings, heir to the earl of
Huntingdon, with his youngest daughter lady Catherine Dudley Holinshed, 1083.
. From hence he dragged the reluctant victim, his daughter-in-law, to the
Tower, there to be invested with regal dignity British Biog. iii. p. 1779.
. In eight short months his ambition led the sweet innocent to the nuptial bed,
the throne, and the scaffold.

DURHAM-HOUSE was reckoned one of the royal palaces belonging to queen
Elizabeth; who gave the use of it to the great Sir Walter Raleigh.

DURHAM-YARD is now filled with a most magnificent mass of building, called the
Adelphi, ADELPHI.
in honor of two brothers its architects. Before the front to the Thames is a
terrace, commanding a charming view to the river, when not obscured by the
damps and poisonous fogs, which too often infest the air of the lower part of
our capital.

To the north of Durham-place, fronting the street, THE NEW EXCHANGE.
stood the New Exchange, which was built under the auspices of our monarch, in
1608. The king, queen, and royal family, honored the opening with their
presence, and named it Britains Bursse. It was built somewhat on the model of
the Royal Exchange, with cellars beneath, a walk above, and rows of shops over
that, filled chiefly with milleners, sempstresses, and the like. This was a
fashionable place of resort. In 1654 a fatal affair happened here. Mr. Gerard,
a young gentleman, at that time engaged in a plot against Cromwell, was amusing
himself in the walk beneath, when he was insulted by Don Pantaleon de Saa,
brother to the ambassador of Portugal, who, disliking the return he met with,
determined on revenge. He came there the next day with a set of bravos, who,
mistaking another gentleman for Mr. Gerard, instantly put him to death, as he
was walking with his sister in one hand, and his mistress in the other. Don
Pantaleon was with impartial justice tried and condemned to the axe. Mr.
Gerard, who about the same time was detected in the conspiracy, was likewise
condemned to die. By singular chance both the rivals suffered on the same
scaffold, within a few hours of each other; Mr. Gerard with intrepid dignity:
the Portuguese with all the pusillanimity of an assassin Clarendon. Whitelocke,
595.
.

THE WHITE MILLENER.
ABOVE stairs sat, in the character of a millener, the reduced duchess of
Tyrconnel, wife to Richard Talbot, lord deputy of Ireland under James II; a
bigoted papist, and fit instrument of the designs of the infatuated prince,
who had created him earl before his abdication, and after that duke of
Tyrconnel. A female, suspected to have been his duchess, after his death,
supported herself for a few days (till she was known, and otherwise provided
for) by the little trade of the place: had delicacy enough to wish not to be
detected; she sat in a white mask, and a white dress, and was known by the name
of the White Millener.

THIS exchange has long since given way to a row of good houses, which form a
part of the street.

A LITTLE beyond was Ivy-bridge, which crossed the Strand, and had beneath it a
way leading to the Thames. This was the boundary between the liberties of the
duchy of Lancaster and those of Westminster. Near this bridge the earls of
Rutland had a house, at which several of the noble family breathed their last.
The earls of Worcester had a very large house between Durham-place and the
Savoy, with gardens to the waterside. The great earl of Clarendon lived in it,
before his own was built, and paid for it the extravagant rent of five hundred
pounds a year. This was pulled down by their descendant, the duke of Beaufort;
and the present Beaufort-buildings rose on its site. This had originally been
the townhouse of the bishops of Carlisle Fuller's Chapter Hist. book iii. p. 63.
. Opposite to these was the garden belonging to the abbot of Westminster; which
extended quite to St. Martin's church: it was called the Convent Garden, and
retains the name to this day. It was granted, after the dissolution, by Edward
VI. first to the protector Somerset: and afterward to lord Russel, created
earl of Bedford. About 1634, Francis earl of Bedford began to clear away the
old buildings, and formed the present handsome square. The arcade and the
church were the work of Inigo Jones. Bedford-house, the former townhouse of
the noble family, stood in the Strand, but has long since given way to Little
Bedford-street.

GREAT part of the palace called the Savoy is now standing, THE SAVOY.
but is little better than a military prison. The palace of the potent Simon de
Montford, earl of Leicester, stood on this place Strype's Stow, ii. book iv.
104.
. Henry III. had granted to Peter of Savoy, uncle to his queen Elianor,
daughter of Berenger of Provence, all the houses upon the Thames where this
building now stands, to hold to him and his heirs, yielding yearly at the
exchequer three barbed arrows for all services. This prince founded the Savoy,
and bestowed it on the fraternity of Montjoy. Queen Elianor purchased it, and
bestowed it on her son Edmund earl of Lancaster. It was rebuilt in a most
magnificent manner by his son Henry. It was made the place of confinement of
John king of France, in 1356, after he was taken prisoner at the battle of
Poitiers. In 1381 it was entirely destroyed by Wat Tyler, out of spleen to the
great owner John of Gaunt. Henry VII. began to rebuild it, with a design of
forming it into an hospital for a hundred distressed people. He says in his
will, he intended by this foundation to do and execute vi out of the vii works
of pity and mercy, by means of keeping, susteynyng, and mayntenyng of commun
hospitallis; wherein if they be duly kept, the said need pouer people be
lodged, viseted in their sicknesses, refresshed with mete and drink, and if
need be with clothe, and also buried, if they fourtune to die within the same;
for lack of them, infinite nombre of pouer need people miserably daillie die,
no man putting hand of help or remedy. This building was in form of a cross:
the walls of which are entire to this time. His son continued and completed the
design. The revenues, at the suppression by Edward VI. amounted to above five
hundred pounds a year. Savoy Hospital. 106.
Queen Mary restored it: and her maids of honor, with exemplary piety,
furnished it with all necessaries. It was again suppressed by queen Elizabeth:
and at present part serves as lodgings for private people, for barracks, and a
scandalous infectious prison for the soldiery, and for transports.

HERE is besides the church of St. Mary le Savoy. CHURCH OF ST. MARY LE SAVOY.
It was originally the chapel to the hospital; but was made parochial on the
impious destruction of St. Mary le Strand by the duke of Somerset. The roof is
remarkably fine, flat, and covered with elegant small compartments cut in wood;
and shields, containing emblems of the passion, surround each, with a neat
garland.

AMONG the monuments, in the chancel, that in memory of the wife of Sir Robert
Douglas merits notice. The lady, who died in 1612, is but a secondary figure,
and placed kneeling behind her husband, dressed in a vast distended hood.
Before her is her husband, in an easy attitude, reclined, and resting on his
right arm; the other hand on his sword. He is represented in armor, with a
robe over it; on his head a fillet, with a bead round the edge: a motto on his
arms, Toujour sans taches See the inscription in the New View of London, ii.
402. She died in 1612.
. The sculptor has much merit in this figure.

IN a pretty gothic niche, on the opposite side (occupied probably in old times
by the image of our lady) is now the figure of a kneeling female, with a
countess's coronet on her head. This commemorates Jocosa, daughter of Sir Alan
Apsley, lieutenant of the Tower: first, wife to Lyster Blunt, esquire and
afterward, of William Ramsay, earl of Dalhousie.

ANOTHER fine monument of a recumbent lady, in a great ruff and long gown, with
her arms cut on it, attracts our notice; but unfortunately the inscription is
lost.

BURLEIGH, O^ EXETER HOUSE.
BURLEIGH-HOUSE was said to have been a noble pile, built by that great
statesman the lord treasurer Burleigh, who died here in 1598. It was built with
brick, and adorned with four square turrets. It was afterward called
Exeter-house, from the title of his son and successor. On its site was erected
Exeter-exchange. It had been a very handsome pile, with an arcade in front, a
gallery above, and shops in both. The plan did not succeed; for the New
Exchange had the preference, and stole away both tenants and customers. A part
of the old house is still to be seen. All originated in sacrilege. On the site
stood a house belonging to die parson of St. Martin's: Sir Thomas Palmer, a
creature of the duke of Somerset, obtained it by composition, in the time of
Edward VI. and began to build there a magnificent house of brick and timber
Stow's Survai^, 835.
. This afterward came into the hands of lord Burleigh, who finished it in the
magnificent manner we have mentioned.

WIMBLEDON-HOUSE.
A LITTLE farther (where Doyley's warehouse now stands) was Wimbledon-house,
built by Sir Edward Cecil, son to the first earl of Exeter, and created by
Charles I. viscount Wimbledon.

NOT far from hence stood the Strand Bridge, which crossed the street, and
received the water which ran from the high grounds, through the present
Catherine street, and delivered it into the Thames.

OTHER ANCIENT BUILDINGS.
ON the south side of the Strand stood a number of buildings, which fell victims
to sacrilege, in the reign of Edward VI. St. Mary le Strand, was a very ancient
church and parish, a rectory, in the gift of the bishops of Worcester, who had
near it their inn, or town residence. The bishops of Litchfield and Coventry
had another, built by Walter de Langton, elected bishop of that see in 1296. It
was also called Chester Inn, CHESTER INN.
as that bishopric was at the time annexed to the former. The bishops of
Landaff had also another house or inn. Finally, the Strand Inn, an inn of
Chancery, belonging to the Temple Dugdale's Origines Judiciales, 230.
. I must stop a moment to say, that Occleve, the poet of the reign of Henry V.
studied the law here: the place of his education is called Chestres Inn Mr.
Thomas Warton.
; but, as that was never appropriated to the study of the law, I little doubt
but it is a mistake for this adjacent house. Every one of these were levelled
to the ground by the protector Somerset, to make way for the magnificent palace
which bears his name. SOMERSET HOUSE.
The architect is supposed to have been one John of Padua, who had a salary in
the preceding reign, under the title of devizor of his majesty's buildings
Anecdotes of Painting, i. 114.
, which was continued to him in the reign of the son. No atonement was made, no
compensation to the owners. Part of the church of St. John of Jerusalem, and
the tower, were blown up for the sake of the materials. The cloisters on the
north side of St. Paul's underwent the same fate, together with the
charnel-house and chapel: the tombs were destroyed, and the bones impiously
carried away and flung into Finsbury Fields. This was done in 1549, when the
building was first began: possibly the founder never enjoyed the use of this
palace; for in 1552 he fell a just victim on the scaffold. The crime of
sacrilege is never mentioned among the numerous articles brought against him.
This is no wonder, since every great man in those days, protestant and papist,
showed equal rapacity after the goods of the church.

AFTER his death his palace fell to the crown. Queen Elizabeth lived here at
certain times, most probably at the expense of her kinsman lord Hunsdon, to
whom she had given the use. Anne of Denmark kept her court here: and Catherine
queen of Charles II. lived here for some time in the life of her unfaithful
spouse; and after his death, till she retired into her native country.

ANCIENT B^ING.
THE architecture of old Somerset House was the mixture of Grecian and Gothic,
introduced into England in the reign preceding its erection. The back-front,
and the watergate, were built from a design of Inigo Jones, after the year
1623. A chapel was begun by him in that year, and afterward finished. It was
intended for the use of his catholic spouse the Infanta of Spain; but, on the
failure of that romantic match, it served for the uses of the professors of her
religion.

AS Charles II. did not find it compatible with his gallantries that his spouse
Catherine should be resident at Whitehall, he lodged her, during some part of
his reign, in this palace. This made it the haunt of the Catholics: and
possibly, during the phrenetic rage of the nation at that period against the
professors of her religion, occasioned it to have been made the pretended scene
of the murder of Sir Edmonbury Godfrey, MURDER OF SIR EDMONBURY GODFREY.
in the year 1678. The infamous witnesses against his supposed murderers
declared, that he was waylaid, and inveigled into the palace, under pretense of
keeping the peace between two servants who were fighting in the yard: that he
was there strangled, his neck broke, and his own sword run through his body:
that he was kept four days before they ventured to remove him; at length, his
corpse was first carried in a sedan-chair to S^ho, and then on a horse to
Primrose-hill, between Kilburn and Hampstead. There it certainly was found,
transfixed with the sword, and his money in his pocket, and his rings on his
fingers. The murder therefore was not by robbers, but the effect of private
revenge: but it is not probable that it was committed within these walls; for
the assassins would never have hazarded a discovery by carrying the corpse
three miles, when they could have so safely disposed of it into the Thames. The
abandoned characters of the evidences, Prance and Bedloe (the former of whom
had been treated with most horrid cruelties, to compel him to confess what he
declared he never was guilty of) together with the absurd and irreconcilable
testimony they gave on the trial, has made unprejudiced times to doubt the
whole. That he was murdered there is no doubt: he had been an active
magistrate, and had made many enemies. The marks of strangling round his
throat, and his broken neck, evince the impossibility of his having put an end
to his own existence, as some have insinuated. But the innocence of the three
poor convicts would not avail, the torrent of prejudice prevaling against them;
and they were executed, denying the facts in the moment of death. One was a
Protestant: the other two Roman Catholics, and belonging to the chapel; so
probably were fixed on, by the instigators of the accusation, in order to
involve the queen in the uncharitable suspicion.

THIS tragedy became at the time the subject of many medals See Evelyn's
Medals, 171, 172, 173.
. On one is the bust of Sir Edmondbury, and two hands strangling him: on the
reverse, the pope giving his benediction to a man strangling another on the
ground. On a second, with the same bust, is the representation of the carrying
the magistrate on horseback to Primrose-hill. A third, makes him walking with
his broken neck, and sword buried in his body: and on the reverse, St. Dennis
with his head in his hand, with this inscription: GODFREY walks up hill after
he was dead,
DENIS walks down hill carrying his head.


THE present magnificent building is after a design by Sir William Chambers:
when completed, it is to be the station of numbers of our public offices. The
Navy Office, and indeed almost every one, excepting the Treasury, the Secretary
of State's, the Admiralty, and the War Office.

THE Royal Society, and the Society of Antiquarians, hold their meetings here:
and here also are annually exhibited the works of the British painters and
sculptors.

THE terrace on the south side is a walk bounded by the Thames, and
unparalleled for grandeur and beauty of view.

BATH'S INN.
TO the east of Somerset House, stood Bath's Inn, inhabited by the bishops of
Bath and Wells, in their visits to the capital. It was wrested from them, in
the reign of Edward VI. by lord Thomas Seymour, high admiral, and received the
name of Seymour-place. This was one of the scenes of his indecent dalliance
with the princess Elizabeth, afterward queen. At first he certainly was not
ill received, notwithstanding he had just espoused the unhappy Catherine Parre.
Ambition, not lust, actuated this wretched man: his designs on Elizabeth, and
consequently on the crown, spurred him on. The instrument of his design was
Thomas Parrye, cofferer to the princess, to whom he offered, for her grace's
accommodation, his house and all the furniture, during her stay in London
Burghley's State Papers, p. 95.
. The queen's death, and her own suspicions on her deathbed, give just cause
of the foulest surmises Burghley's State Papers, p. 103. The whole of his
infamous conduct in this affair is fully related from p. 95 to 103.
. His execution, which soon followed, put an end to his projects, and saved
Elizabeth, and the nation, from a tyrant, possibly worse than him from whom
they had been just released.

THIS house in aftertimes passed to Thomas Howard earl of Arundel, and was
called Arundel palace. The Duc de Sully, ARUNDEL PALACE.
who was lodged in it during his embassy to England, on the accession of James
I. says, it was one of the finest and most commodious of any in London, from
its great number of apartments on the same floor: the views from the extensive
gardens, up and down the river, were remarkably fine. Here was kept the
magnificent collection of statues formed by the earl. Howsoever faulty the
noble historian may have represented him in some respects, his judgment in the
fine arts will remain indisputable. His relation, the duke of Norfolk, had a
house at a very small distance from this. Both were pulled down in the last
century, but their names are retained in the streets which rose on their sites.

AFTER it came into the possession of the duke of Norfolk (the same who
presented his library to the Royal Society) he permitted that learned body to
hold their meetings in Arundel-house; but on its being ordered to be pulled
down, the meetings were removed to Gres^am college Memoirs of the Howards, p.
94.
.

AN OLD CROSS.
OPPOSITE to Chester Inn, stood an ancient cross. According to the simplicity of
the age, in the year 1294, and at other times, the judges sat without the city,
on this cross, to administer justice; and sometimes they made use of the
bishop's house for that purpose.

MAY POLE.
IN the beginning of the present century, somewhat east of the site of the cross
was the rural appearance of a May Pole. In 1717, it fell to decay, and the
remainder was begged by Sir Isaac Newton, who caused it to be carried to
Wansted, in Essex, where it was erected in the park, and had the honor of
raising the greatest telescope then known. On its place rose the first of the
fifty new churches, which is known by the name of the New Church in the Strand.
The first stone was laid in 1714. The architect was Gills; who loaded it with
ornaments to such a degree as to gain very little credit to his own taste, or
that of his employers.

DRURY-HOUSE.
IN Drury Lane, which points toward the church, stood Drury-house, the
habitation of the great family of the Druries, and, I believe, built by Sir
William Drury, knight of the Garter, a most able commander in the Irish wars;
who unfortunately fell in a duel with Sir John Boroughs, in a foolish quarrel
about precedence See Kenne^'s Hist. ii. 449, 457, 473, 557.
. I cannot learn into whose hands it passed afterward. During the time of the
fatal discontents of the favorite Essex, it was the place where his imprudent
advisers resolved on such counsels, as terminated in the destruction of him and
his adherents.

IN the next century we find the heroic William lord Craven, AFTERWARD
CRAVEN-HOUSE.
afterward earl Craven, possessed of this house: he rebuilt it in the form we
now see, a large brick pile now concealed by other buildings. It is at present
a public-house. In searching after Craven-house, I instantly knew it by the
sign, that of the queen of Bohemia's head, his admired mistress, whose battles
he first fought, animated by love and duty. When he could aspire at her hand,
it is supposed he succceded: it is said they were privately married; and that
he built for her the fine seat at Hampstead Marshal, in the county of Berks,
which was destroyed by fire. I have before given an account of this illustrious
nobleman Journey to London.
. I may repeat the service he rendered to this his native city in particular.
He was so indefatigable in preventing the ravages of the frequent fires of
those days, that it was said, that his very horse smelt it out. He, and the
duke of Albemarle (the noted Monk) heroically stayed in town during the
dreadful pestilence; and, at the hazard of their lives, preserved order in the
midst of the terrors of the time.

IN the court in Craven-buildings is a very good portrait of this hero, in
armor, with a truncheon in his hand, and mounted on his white horse: on each
side is an earl's and a baron's coronet, and the letters W. C. It is painted al
fresco, and in good preservation.

THE theater royal, in this street, originated on the Restoration. The king
made a grant of a patent for acting in what was then called the Cockpit, and
the Phoenix. The actors were the king's servants, were on the establishment,
and ten of them were called Gentlemen of the Great Chamber, and had ten yards
of scarlet cloth allowed them, with a suitable quantity of lace Cibber's
Apology, 75.
.

IT is singular that this lane, of later times so notorious for intrigue,
should receive its title from a family-name, which, in the language of Chaucer,
had an amorous signification: Of bataille and of chevalrie,
Of ladies love and Druerie,
Anon I wol you tell.


IN this neighborhood, toward the Temple, are several little seminaries of
law, or inns of Chancery, belonging to the Inner and Middle Temple: such as
Lions-inn, in use as long at lest as the reign of Henry V; the New-inn, where
the students of the Strand-inn nestled, after they were routed from thence by
the duke of Somerset; and Clements-inn, mentioned in the time of Edward IV. I
must not omit, that in New-inn the great Sir Thomas More had the early part of
his education, before he removed to Lincoln's End Dugdale's Origines, 187, 230.
.

CHURCH OF ST. CLEMENT DANES.
BETWEEN Clements-inn and the Strand, is the church of St. Clement Danes, called
so either from being the place of interment of Harold the Barefooted, or of the
massacre of certain Danes who had taken refuge there: it was one of the
churches built on this tract before the Conquest. At the time of the
insurrection of the unhappy earl of Essex, a piece of artillery was placed on
the top of the tower, which commanded Essex-house. The present was rebuilt in
1640 Newcourt, i. 591.
. Here, beneath a tomb with his figure expressed in brass, was buried John
Arundel, bishop of Exeter, who died in 1503, at Exeter-house, the town
residence of the bishops of Exeter. EXETER-HOUSE.
It was founded by Walter Stapleton, bishop of that see, and lord treasurer of
England, unfortunately a favorite with Edward II. in those factious days: he
was seized by the mob, hurried to Cheap Side, where they beheaded him, and
carried his corpse before his own palace, and there buried it beneath a heap of
sand. The house was said to have been very magnificent. Lacy, bishop of Exeter
in the reign of Henry VI. added a great hall. The first lord Paget, a good
catholic, made no scruple of laying violent hands on it, in the grand period of
plunder. He improved it greatly, and called it after his own name. PAGET-HOUSE.
At this house it was alleged that the great duke of Somerset designed the
assassination of several of the council. This involved the noble owner in his
ruin. In the reign of queen Elizabeth, it was possessed by the great earl of
Leicester, and changed its name to Leicester-house. LEICESTER-HOUSE.
The earl left it by will Sydney Papers, i. 73.
to his son-in-law Robert earl of Essex, the unfortunate imprudent favorite of
Elizabeth, and it was called after his name. This was the scene of his frantic
actions; ESSEX-HOUSE.
from hence he sallied on the vain hope of exciting the city to arm in his
behalf against its sovereign; to this place he forced his way back, and after a
short siege submitted, and soon afterward received his due punishment,
reluctantly inflicted by his mistress, hesitating between fear and unseasonable
love. The memory of these transactions is still retained in the name of
Essex-street, and Essex-stairs, and Devereux-court. In the last, on the outside
of a house, is placed a bust of the parliament general, son of the unfortunate
favorite.

TEMPLE BAR.
THE Strand was divided, in 1670, from Fleet Street, by the gate called
Temple Bar; before the great fire, by nothing but posts, rails, and chains. On
this gate have been the sad exhibition of the heads of such unhappy men who
attempt the subversion of the government of their country. The last (and may
they be the last!) were of those who fell victims, in 1746, to principles
fortunately extinct with the family from which they originated. This gate is
the western limit of Farringdon Ward Without, or the western extremity of the
city of London. On the right hand are the entrances into the Temple, THE TEMPLE.
one of our celebrated seats of law, which took its name from that gallant
religious military order the knights templars. They were originally crusaders,
who happening to be quartered in places adjacent to the holy temple in
Jerusalem, in 1118, consecrated themselves to the service of religion, by deeds
of Newcourt's Repertorium, i. 589,
arms. Hugo de Paganis, Geoffry of St. Omers, and seven others, began the
order, by binding themselves, after the manner of the regular canons of St.
Augustines, to chastity and obedience, and professing to protect the pilgrims
to the Holy Land from all wrong and robbery on the road. At first they
subsisted on alms, and had only one horse between two of them; a rule was
appointed for them, and they wore a white habit, afterward distinguished by a
red cross on their left shoulder. By their devotion, and the fame of their
gallant actions, they became very popular in all parts of Europe; and so
enriched by the favor of princes, and other great men, that, at the time of
their dissolution, the order was found possessed of sixteen thousand manors. It
became at last so infected with pride, and luxury, FALL OF THE KNIGHTS TEMPLARS.
as to excite general hatred; a persecution, founded on most unjust and
fictitious accusations, was formed against them in France, under Philip le Bell.
Their riches seem to have been their chief crime: numbers of innocent and
heroic knights suffered in the flames, with the piety and constancy of martyrs;
some of them, at the stake, summoned their chief enemies, Clement V. and
Philip, to appear in a certain time at the divine tribunal; both of those
princes died about the time prescribed, which, in an age of superstition,
proved the validity. This potent order came into England in the reign of king
Stephen, and had their first house in Holborn, which was called the Old Temple.
They founded the New Temple in 1185, where they continued till the suppression
of the order in 1310, when they were condemned to perpetual penance, and
dispersed into several monasteries. Edward II. granted this house, and all
their other possessions in London, to Thomas earl of Lancaster, and, after his
rebellion and forfeiture, to Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke; on his death,
they reverted to the crown, and were given to the knights hospitallers of the
order of St. John of Jerusalem, a few years after they had so valiantly driven
the Turks out of the isle of Rhodes. These knights again granted the Temple to
the students of the common law, in the reign of Edward III. to whose use it has
been ever since applied.

THE church was founded by the templars in the reign of Henry II. upon the
model of that of the holy sepulcher, ITS ROUND CHURCH.
and was consecrated in 1185, by Heraclius, patriarch of Jerusalem. The
entrance is through a door with a Saxon arch. Within, the form is circular,
supported by six round arches, each resting on four round pillars, bound
together by a fascia. Above each arch is a window with a rounded top, with a
gallery, and rich Saxon arches intersecting each other. On the outside of the
pillars is a considerable space, preserving the circular form. On the lower
part of the wall are small pilasters meeting in pointed arches at top, and over
each pillar a grotesque head.

JOINED to this building, is a large choir of a square form, with narrow gothic
windows, evidently built at another time. On the outside is a buttress between
every window.

MONUMENTS.
ON the floor of the round church are two groups of knights. In the first are
four, each of them cross-legged, three of them in complete mail, in plain
helmets flatted at top, and with very long shields. One is known to have been
Geoffry de Magnaville, created earl of Essex in 1148. His end was singular;
for, driven to despair by the injustice of his monarch king Stephen, he gave
loose to every act of violence. He was mortally wounded at an attack of Burwel
castle, in Cambridgeshire; and, being found by some templars, was dressed by
them in the habit of the order and carried from the spot: as he died
excommunicated, they wrapped his body in lead, and hung it on a crooked tree in
the Temple orchard. On being absolved by the pope (it being proved that he
expressed great penitence in his last moments) he was taken down, and buried
first in the cemetery, and afterward in the place where we find this memorial
of him Mr. G^ugh's Monum. i. 24. tab. v.
.

ONE of these figures is singular, being bare-headed, and bald, his legs armed,
his hands mailed, his mantle long, round his neck a cowl, as if, according to a
common superstition in early days, he had desired to be buried in the dress of
a monk, least the evil spirit should take possession of his body. On his shield
are three fleurs de lis.

IN this group is a stone coffin of a ridged shape, conjectured to have been
the tomb of William Plantagenet, fifth son of Henry III.

IN the second group are other figures, but none of them cross-legged, except
the outmost: all are armed in mail. The helmets much resemble the former, but
two are mailed. One figure is in a spirited attitude, drawing a broad dagger;
one leg rests on the tail of a cockatrice, the other in the action of being
drawn up, with the head of the monster beneath. None of the eight figures,
except Geoffry de Magnaville, are ascertained; but Cambden conjectures that
three are intended to commemorate William earl of Pembroke, who died in 1219,
and his sons William and Gilbert, likewise earls of Pembroke, and Marshals of
England Cambden, i. 382. -- The others are engraven in plate xix.
. In the first group, one of them bears a lion on his shield, the arms of that
great family. Gilbert was brought up to the church, and, notwithstanding he was
totally unskilled in exercises of chivalry, would enter into the gallant lists;
but mounting a fiery courser, was run away with, flung off, and killed, at a
tournament at Ware, in 1242.

THE being represented cross-legged is not always a proof of the deceased
having had the merit either of having been a cru^sader, or having made a
pilgrimage to the holy sepulcher. I have seen, at Mitton in Yorkshire, two
figures of the Sherbornes, thus represented; one died in 1629, the other in
1689: who, I verily believe, could never have had any more than a wish to enter
the holy land.

TO these ancient monuments may be added that of a bishop, in his episcopal
dress, a mitre, and a crosier, well executed in stone.

OF illustrious persons of later date, is the famous Plowden, a Shropshire man,
treasurer of this society in 1572, and a lawyer of most distinguished
abilities. Cambden says of him, that in integrity he was second to none of his
profession. His figure is represented recumbent, and in his gown.

HERE is interred the celebrated Seldom, who died in 1654. He was the best
skilled in the constitution, and the various branches of antiquity, of any man.
Yet, toward the close of his life, he was so thoroughly convinced of the
vanity of all human knowledge, as to say, that the 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th
verses of the second chapter of the epistle to Titus, afforded him more solid
consolation than all that he had ever read.

SIR John Vaughan, born at Trawscoed, in Cardiganshire, lies near his friend
Mr. Seldom: both their principles were anti-monarchical. After the Restoration,
he declined preferment offered by the chancellor Clarendon, but afterward
accepted the office of chief justice of the common pleas, from the enemies of
that illustrious character. He died in 1674.

HALL.
THE magnificent hall was rebuilt in the treasurership of Plowden. It is
ornamented with paintings by Sir James Thornhill: and by two full-length
portraits of those pillars of the law, Lyttleton, who died in 1481; and his
commentator, the able but insolent Coke, who departed in 1634.

THE account of the great feast given in this hall, by the sergeants, in 1555,
is extremely worth consulting Origines Judiciales, 128.
; and also of the hospitable Christmassings of old times. Dudley earl of
Leicester once enjoyed them, and, with the romance of his mistress, styled
himself Palaphilos, prince of Sophie. He was entertained here by a person
representing a sovereign prince. Palaphilos, on seeing him, calls Largess, and
receives instantly a chain of the value of a hundred talents. I must refer to
the Origines Judiciales 156.
for the relation of the ceremony of the reign of the Lord of Misrule, and of
his courtiers, Sir Francis Flatterer, Sir Randle Rackabite, and Sir Bartholomew
Baldbreech; with the humor of hunting the fox and the cat round the hall, with
ten couples of hounds, and all the other merry disports of those joyous days.

IN the parliament chamber are painted all the arms of the treasurers, since the
first who possessed the office. It is also adorned with some of Gibbon's
carving.

THE Middle Temple gate was erected by Sir Amias Powlet, on a singular
occasion. It seems that Sir Amias, about the year 1501, thought fit to put
cardinal Wolsey, then parson of Lymington, into the stocks Fiddes's life of
cardinal Wolsey, 7.
. In 1515, being sent for to London, by the cardinal, on account of that
ancient grudge, he was commanded not to quit town till farther orders. In
consequence, he lodged five or six years Holinshed, 918, who calls him Sir
James. He was ancestor of earl Powlet.
in this gateway, which he rebuilt; and, to pacify his eminence, adorned the
front with the cardinal's cap, badges, cognizance, and other devices, of this
butcher's son: so low were the great men obliged to stoop to that meteor of the
times This gate was burnt in the great fire.
!

THE TEMPLE GARDEN.
THE garden has of late been most judiciously enlarged, by a considerable
embankment into the river; and part of the filthy muddy shore is converted into
a most beautiful walk. The view up and down the water is most extremely rich.
Blackfriars-bridge, part of Westminster-bridge, the Adelphi, and the elegant
back-front of Somerset House, rival the world in variety and magnificence of
objects. If elegance alone was to be consulted, it is heartily to be wished
that these embankments may make a farther progress; the defect of which, alone,
gives to the Seine, at Paris, a boasted superiority. Without the prejudices of
an Englishman, I will venture to dare a comparison of the bridges; but the most
partial foreigner will never hazard the comparison of the rivers.

SHAKESPEARE (whether from tradition, or history, I know not) makes the Temple
garden the place in which the badge of the white and red rose originated, the
distinctive badge of the houses of York and Lancaster, under which the
respective partisans of each arranged themselves, in the fatal quarrel which
caused such torrents of English blood to flow.

The brawl today
Grown to this faction in the Temple Garden,
Shall send, between the red rose and the white
A thousand souls to death and deadly night First part of Henry VI. act ii. sc.
iv.
.
THE DEVIL TAVERN.
NEAR Temple Bar is the Devil Tavern, so called from its sign of St. Dunstan
seizing the evil spirit by the nose with a pair of hot tongs. Ben Jonson has
immortalised it by his Leges Conviviales, which he wrote for the regulation of
a club of wits, held here in a room he dedicated to Apollo; over the
chimney-piece of which they are preserved. The tavern was in his days kept by
Simon Wadloe; whom, in a copy of verses over the door of the Apollo, he
dignified with the title of King of Skinkers.

OPPOSITE to this noted house is Chancery Lane, CHANCERY LANE.
the most ancient of any to the west. It was built in the time of Henry III.
and then called New-lane; which was afterward changed into its present name,
on account of its vicinity to the courts.

SERJEANTS-INN is the first which opens into the lane: SERJEANTS-INN.
it takes its name from having been in old times the residence or lodgings of
the sergeants at law, as early at lest as the time of Henry VI. It was at that
time, and possibly may be yet, held under a lease from the dean and chapter of
York. In 1442 William Antrobus, citizen and tailor of London, held it at the
rent of x marks a year, under the law Latin description of Unum messuagium cum
gardino in parochia S. Dunstani, in Fleet Street, in suburbio civitatis
LONDINI, quod nuper fuit Johannis Rote, and in quo Joh. Ellerkar, et alii
servientes ad legem nuper inhabiterunt Origines Judiciales, 326.
.

CLIFFORDS-INN is the next, so named from its having been the town residence of
Robert de Clifford, CLIFFORDS-INN.
ancestor to the earls of Cumberland. It was granted to him by Edward II; and
his widow granted it to the students of the law, in the next reign, for the
yearly rent of ten pounds The same, 187.
.

FARTHER up is the Rolls. THE ROLLS.
The house was founded by Henry III. for converted Jews, who there lived under
a learned Christian, appointed to instruct and govern them. In 1279, Edward I.
caused about two hundred and eighty Jews, of both sexes, to be hanged for
clipping. He bestowed one half of their effects on the first preachers, who
undertook the trouble of converting the unbelieving race; and the other half
for the support of the converts: the house was called Domus Conversorum. In
1377, it was first applied to its present use: and the master was called Custos
Rotulorum: the first was William Burstal, clerk. The masters were selected out
of the church, and often king's chaplains, till the year 1534, when Thomas
Cromwell, afterward earl of Essex, was appointed. It is an office of high rank,
and follows that of chief justice of the king's bench. The master has his
chaplain, and his preacher.

CHAPEL.
THE chapel is adjacent to the house, and was built by Inigo Jones; begun in
1617, and finished at the expense of two thousand pounds. It was consecrated by
George Mounteigne, bishop of London, and the sermon preached by the famous
Doctor Done. Among the monuments is one of the masters, Sir Edward Bruce,
created by James I. after his accession, baron of Kinloss. He is represented
lying reclined, with his head resting on one hand. His hair is short; his beard
long, and divided toward the end; his dress a long furred robe. Before him is
kneeling a man in armor, possibly his son lord Kinloss, who perished in the
desperate duel between him and Sir Edward Sackville, in 1613; and ancestor to
the earls of Elgin and Aylesbury. The sad relation is given by Sir Edward
himself. He seems solely actuated by honor. His rival by the deepest See the
Guardian, Nos 129, 133 -- and Collins's Peerage, ii. 195 to 197.
revenge.

HE was one of the ambassadors sent by James to congratulate queen Elizabeth on
the defeat of Essex's insurrection. He then commenced a secret correspondence
with the subtle Cecil; and, when James came to the throne, was, besides the
peerage, rewarded with the place of master of the rolls for life. He died
January 14th 1610.

THE monument of John Young, D. L. L. is the work of Torregiano Mr. Walpole.
. His figure is recumbent on a sarcophagus, in a long red gown, and deep square
cap; his face finely executed, possibly from a cast after his death; his chin
beardless. Above him is the head of our Savior, and two cherubims: resistless
superstitions of the artist. This gentleman was appointed master of the rolls
in 1510, and died in 1517.

THERE is another handsome monument, of Sir Richard Allington, knight (son of
Sir Giles Allington, of Horseheath, in Cambridgeshire, knight, ancestor, by his
first wife, of the lords Allington) who lies here, by the accident of his
marriage with Jane daughter of John Cordall, esquire of Long-Melford, in Suffolk,
and sister and coheir of Sir William Cordall, of the same place, knight, and
master of the rolls. Sir Richard, I presume, died here: the date of his death
is 1561. His figure is represented kneeling, in armor, with a short beard and
hair. His wife is opposite; and beneath, on a tablet, are three female figures,
also kneeling: these were his daughters. After his death his widow lived in
Holborn, at a house she built, which long went by the name of Allington-place.
She appears, by some of the parochial records of this town, to have been a lady
of great charity.

MY countryman Sir John Trevor, who died master of the rolls, in 1717, lies
here. Wisely his epitaph is thus confined, Sir J. T. M. R. 1717. I will not
repeat the evil, which regard to veracity obliged me to say of him in another
place Tour in Wales, i. 293, 2d. ed.
. Some other masters rest within these walls; among them, Sir John Strange, but
without the quibbling line, Here lies an honest Lawyer, that is Strange!

CHICHESTER RENTS.
ADJACENT to Chancery Lane, the bishops of Chichester had their town house. It
was built in a garden, once belonging to John Herberton, and was granted to
them by Henry III. who excepted it out of the charter of the Domus Conversorum
Chapter J. Brook, esquire
. At present the site is covered with houses, known by the name of Chichester
Rents.

LINCOLN'S END.
THE gate to Lincoln's End is of brick, but no small ornament to the street. It
was built by Sir Thomas Lovel, once a member of this inn, and afterward
treasurer of the household to Henry VII. The other parts were rebuilt at
different times, but much about the same period. None of the original building
is left, for it was formed out of the house of the Black Friars, which fronted
Holborn; and of the palace of Ralph Nevil, chancellor of England, and bishop of
Chichester, built by him in the reign of Henry III. on a piece of ground
granted to him by the king. It continued to be inhabited by some of his
successors in the sea. This was the original site of the Dominicans, or Black
Friars, before they removed to the spot now known by that name. On part of the
ground now covered with buildings, Henry Lacy, earl of Lincoln, built an Inn,
as it was in those days called, for himself, in which he died in 1312. The
ground did belong to the Black Friars, and was granted by Edward I. to that
great earl. The whole has retained his name. One of the bishops of Chichester,
in after times, did grant leases of the buildings to certain students of the
law, reserving to themselves a rent and lodgings for themselves, whenever they
came to town. This seems to have taken place about the time of Henry VII.

THE chapel was designed by Inigo Jones; CHAPEL.
it is built upon massy pillars, and affords, under its shelter, an excellent
walk. This work evinces that Inigo never was designed for a gothic architect.
The lord chancellor holds his sittings in the great hall. This, like that of
the Temple, had its revels, and great Christmasses. ANCIENT REVELS.
Instead of the Lord of Misrule, it had its King of the Cocknies. They had also
a Jack Straw; but in the time of queen Elizabeth he, and all his adherents,
were utterly banished. I must not omit, that in the same reign sumptuary laws
were made to regulate the dress of the members of the house; who were forbidden
to wear long hair, or great ruffs, cloaks, boots, or spurs. REGULATIONS ABOUT
BEARDS.
In the reign of Henry VIII. beards were prohibited at the great table, under
pain of paying double commons. His daughter Elizabeth, in the first year of her
reign, confined them to a fortnight's growth, under penalty of 3 s. 4 d.; but
the fashion prevaled so strongly, that the prohibition was repealed, and no
manner of size limited to that venerable excrescence!

LINCOLN'S-INN-FIELDS would have been one of our most beautiful squares, had it
been built on a regular plan. LINCOLN'S-INN-FIELDS.
The disposition of it was, in 1618, committed to the care of the lord
chancellor, the earls of Worcester, Pembroke, Arundel, and others. Inigo Jones
drew the ground-plot, and gave it the exact dimensions of the base of one of
the pyramids of Egypt. In the side called Portugal Row, is Lindesey-house, once
the seat of the earls of Lindesey, and of their descendants the dukes of
Ancaster; built after a beautiful design of that great architect. The view of
this side of the square, and of Lincoln's End gardens, is most particularly
pleasing, when shone on by the western sun. Here also was, in the time of king
William, a playhouse, erected within the walls of the tennis-court, under the
royal patronage. In this theater Betterton, and his troop of actors, excited
the admiration of the public, if we may credit Cibber, as much as Roscius did
the people of Rome, or G^rrick those of England in recent days.

EXECUTION OF LORD RUSSEL.
ON another stage, of a different nature, was performed the sad tragedy of the
death of the virtuous lord Russel, who lost his head in the middle of the
square, on July 21st, 1683. Party writers assert that he was brought here in
preference to any other spot, in order to mortify the citizens with the sight.
In fact, it was the nearest open space to Newgate, the place of his lordship's
confinement: otherwise the dragging him to Tower Hill, the usual concluding
scene on these dreadful occasions, would have given his enemies full
opportunity of indulging the imputed malice.

NEWCASTLE-HOUSE.
IN the same square, at the corner of Queen Street, stands a house inhabited by
the well known minister, the late duke of Newcastle. It was built about the
year 1686, by the marquis of Powis, and called Powis-house, and afterward sold
to the late noble owner. The architect was captain William Wind.

IN the last century Queen Street was the residence of many of our people of
rank. Among others was Conway-house, the residence of the noble family of that
name; Paulet-house, belonging to the marquis of Winchester; and the house in
which lord Herbert, of Cherbury, finished his romantic life.

ON the back part of Portugal Row, is Clare-market; close to which, the second
John earl of Clare had a palace of his own building, in which he lived about
the year 1657, in a most princely manner Howel's Hist. London, 345.
.

I SHALL pursue, from Queen Street, my journey westward, and point out the most
remarkable places which rose into being between the years 1562 and 1600, and
incidentally of some others of later date. I have before mentioned the streets
which rose in that period. Let me add, LONG-ACRE.
that Long-acre was built on a piece of ground, once belonging to
Westminster-abby, called the seven acres, and which, in 1552, were granted to
John earl of Bedford.

ST. GILES's church, and a few houses to the west of it, ST. GILES'S IN THE
FIELDS.
in the year 1600, was but barely separated from Broad-street. The church is
supposed to have belonged to an hospital for lepers, founded about the year
1117, by Matilda queen to Henry I. In ancient times it was customary to present
to malefactors, on their way to the gallows (which, about the year 1413, was
removed from Smithfield, and placed between St. Giles's High Street, and
Hog-lane) a great bowl of ale, as the last refreshment they were to receive in
this life Newcourt, i. 611.
. On the door to the churchyard is a curious piece of sculpture, representing
the last day, containing an amazing number of figures, set up about the year
1686.

HERE was executed, in the most barbarous manner, the famous Sir John
Oldcastle, baron Cobham. His crime was that of adopting the tenets of Wycliffe.
He was misrepresented to our heroic prince, Henry V. by the bigoted clergy, as
a heretic and traitor; and that he was actually at the head of thirty thousand
Lollards, in these very fields. About a hundred inoffensive people were found
there: Cobham escaped; but was taken some time after in Wales. He suffered
death on this spot: was hung on a gallows, by a chain fastened round his body,
and, thus suspended, burnt alive. He died, not with the calm constancy of a
martyr, but with the wildest effusions of enthusiastic ravings.

CHURCH.
THIS church was rebuilt in 1625. By the amazing raising of the ground by filth,
and various adventitious matter, the floor, in the year 1730, was eight feet
below the surface acquired in the intervening time. This alone made it
necessary to rebuild the church, in the present century. The first stone was
laid in 1730; it was finished in 1734, at the expense of ten thousand pounds,
in a manner which does great credit to its architect, Mr. Henry Flitcraft.

IN the churchyard I have observed with horror a great square pit, with many
rows of coffins piled one upon the other, all exposed to sight and smell. Some
of the piles were incomplete, expecting the mortality of the night. I turned
away disgusted at the view, and scandalized at the want of police, which so
little regards the health of the living as to permit so many putrid corpses,
tacked between some flight boards, dispersing their dangerous effluvia over the
capital.

NEAR the church was the house of Alice duchess Dudley, who died here in 1669,
aged ninety. She was the widow of the great Sir Robert Dudley, son to Robert
earl of Leicester, who, by various untoward circumstances, was denied
legitimacy, and his paternal estates. He assumed the title of duke of
Northumberland, and lived and died in great estimation in Tuscany. This lady
was advanced to the title of duchess by Charles I. She merited the honor by
the greatness of her mind and extent of her charities. Her body was interred at
Stonely, in Warwickshire, the place of her family, she being third daughter of
Sir Thomas Leigh, of Stonely, ancestor of the late lord Leigh. A fine monument
was erected to her honor at Stonely See Dugdale's Warwickshire, i, 260; in
which is a print of the tomb, and a list of her great charities.
, and a grateful memorial of her in this church.

THE mention of St. Giles's bowl, naturally brings one to the late place of the
conclusion of human laws. It was called in the time of Edward III. when the
gentle Mortimer finished his days here, The Elms; but the original as well as
present name was Tybourne, TYBOURNE.
not from tie and burn, as if it was called so from the manner of capital
punishments, but from Bourne, the Saxon word for a brook, which gave name to a
manor before the Conquest. Here was also a village and church denominated St.
John the Evangelist, which fell to decay, and was succeeded by that of Mary
bourne, corrupted into Mary-la-bonne. About the year 1238, this brook furnished
nine conduits for supplying the city with water: but the introduction of the
New River superseded the use of them. Here the lord mayor had a
banqueting house, to which his lordship and brethren were wont to repair on
horseback, attended by their ladies in wagons: and, after viewing the
conduits, they returned to the city, where they were magnificently entertained
by the lord mayor Maitland, ii. 1373.
.

IN 1626, queen Henrietta Maria was compelled by her priests to take a walk, by
way of penance, to Tyburn. What her offense was we are not told; but Charles
was so disgusted at this insolence, that he soon after sent them, and all her
majesty's French servants, out of the kingdom Whitelock, 8.
.

I SHALL return through the mile and a quarter of country, at this time formed
into Oxford-street, as handsome a one as any in Europe, and, I believe, the
longest. After passing through Broad-street, and getting into Holborn, is
Bloomsbury, the ancient manor of Lomesbury, in which our kings in early times
had their stables: all the space is at present covered with handsome streets,
and a fine square. This was first called Southampton-square; and the great
house which forms one side, built after a design of Inigo Jones, BEDFORD-HOUSE.
Southampton (now Bedford) house. From hence the amiable relict of William lord
Russel dates her letters; this being her residence till her death in 1723. The
late duke fitted up the gallery, and bought the cartoons, copied by Sir James
Thornhill, at the sale of that eminent artist.

MONTAGUE-HOUSE.
MONTAGUE-HOUSE (now the British Museum) was built on a French plan, by the
first duke of Montague, who had been ambassador in France. The staircase and
ceilings were painted by Rousseau and La Fosse: the apotheosis of Iris, and the
assembly of the gods, are by the last. His grace's second wife was the mad
duchess of Albemarle, widow to Christopher, second duke of that title. She
married her second husband as emperor of China, which gave occasion to a scene
in Sir Courtly Nice. She was kept in the ground apartment during his grace's
life, and was served on the knee to the day of her death, which happened in
1731, at Newcastle-house, at Clerkenwell J. C. Brook, esquire
. The second duke and duchess lived only in one of the wings, till their house
at Whitehall was completed.

I MUST mention, that to the east of Bloomsbury-square, POWIS-HOUSE.
in Great Ormond-street, stood in my memory Powis-house, originally built by
the marquis of Powis, in the last century. When it was occupied by the Duc
d'Aumont, ambassador from Louis XIV. in 1712, it was burnt down, and rebuilt at
the expense of that magnificent monarch. It was of brick, and ornamented with
fluted pilasters. On the top was a great reservoir, as a guard against fire,
and it also served as a fish pond. This house was pulled down and the ground
granted on building leases.

I SHALL just mention Red-lion-square, RED-LION-SQUARE.
not far to the south of this house, merely for the sake of some lines on its
clumsy obelisk: Obtusum
Obtusioris Ingenii
Monumentum.
Quid me respicis viator?
Vade.


NOT far from Holborn, is the church of St. George, ST. GEORGE's BLOOMSBURY.
in Bloomsbury, which, with its magnificent porch supported by pillars of the
Corinthian order, placed before a plain body, and its wondrous steeple, I
cannot stigmatize stronger than in the words of Mr. Walpole, who styles it a
masterpiece of absurdity. On the tower is a pyramid, at each corner of which
are the supporters of England, a lion and an unicorn alternate, the first with
its heels upwards: and the pyramid finishes with the statue of George I. The
architect was Nicholas Hawksmoor. The church was consecrated in 1731: and is a
parish taken out of that of St. Giles. The square was, in the beginning of this
century, the residence of many of our nobility; in later times, that of the
more wealthy gentlemen of the long robe.

WE now enter again on the stormy latitude of the law. Lincoln's End is left a
little to the south. Chancery Lane gapes on the same side, to receive the
numberless malheureuses, who plunge unwarily on the rocks and shelves with
which it abounds. The ancient seminary of the law, GRAY'S-INN.
Gray's-Inn, stands on the north side. It was originally the residence of the
lord Grays, from the year 1315, when John, the son of Reginold de Gray, resided
here, till the latter end of the reign of Henry VII. when it was sold, by
Edmund lord Gray of Wilton, to Hugh Dennys, esquire by the name of the manor of
Portpole; and in eight years afterward it was disposed of to the prior and
convent of Shene, who again disposed of it to the students of the law. Not but
that they were seated here much earlier, it appearing that they had leased a
residence here from the lord Grays as early as the reign of Edward III.
Origines Judiciales, 272.
It is a very extensive building, and has large gardens belonging to it.
Gray's-Inn-Lane is to the east. I there observed, at a stone mason's, a
manufactory of stone coffins quite a l'antique, such as we sometimes dig up in
conventual ruins, or old churches. I enquired whether they were designed for
any particular persons, but was told they were only for chance customers, who
thought they should lie securer lodged in stone than in wood.

THE OLD TEMPLE.
NEAR the entrance into Chancery Lane were the bars: adjacent stood the Old
Temple, founded in 1118, the first seat of the knights templars, before they
removed to the New Temple. About the year 1595, one Agaster Roper Stow's
Survaie, 824.
, who was engaged in building on the spot, discovered ruins of the old church,
which was of a circular form, and built of stone brought from Caen in Normandy.

A LITTLE beyond is Southampton-buildings, SOUTHAMPTON-HOUSE.
built on the site of Southampton-house, the mansion of the Wriothesleys earls
of Southampton. The King's-head tavern, facing Holborn, is the only part which
now remains: the chapel to the house is now rented by Mr. Lockyer Davies, as a
magazine for books. Here ended his days Thomas, the last earl of that title,
the faithful virtuous servant of Charles I. and lord treasurer in the beginning
of the reign of the ungrateful son. He died in 1667, barely in possession of
the white rod, which his profligate enemies were with difficulty dissuaded from
wresting out of his dying hands. He had the happiness of marrying his daughter
and heiress to a nobleman of congenial merit, the ill-fated lord Russel. Her
virtues underwent a fiery trial, and came out of the test, if possible, more
pure. I cannot read of her last interviews with her devoted lord, without the
strongest emotions. Her greatness of mind appears to uncommon advantage. The
last scene is beyond the power of either pen or pencil. In this house they
lived many years. When his lordship passed by it in the way to execution, he
felt a momentary bitterness of death in recollecting the happy moments of the
place. He looked toward Southampton-house: the tear started into his eye, but
he instantly wiped it away Introduction to lady Rachel Russel's letters,
octavo, p. lxxvi.
.

NOT far from hence, on the north side, in the street called Brook-street,
BROOK HOUSE.
was Brook-house, the residence of Sir Fulke Grevill^ lord Brook, the nobleman
whose chief ambition was to be thought, as he caused to be expressed on his
tomb at Warwick, the friend of Sir Philip Sydney. He was a man of abilities,
and a particular patron of learned men; who repayed his bounty, by what cost
them little, numbers of flattering dedications. He died by the hand of Ralph
Haywood, a gentleman who had passed most of his days in his lordship's service.
For some reason unknown, he had left him out of his will, and was weak enough
to let him know of it. In September, 1628, Haywood entered into his lord's
bedchamber, and, expostulating with great warmth on the usage he met with, his
lordship answering with asperity, received from him a mortal wound with a
sword. The assassin retired into another room, in which he instantly destroyed
himself with the same instrument. His lordship languished a few days, and,
after gratefully forming another codicil, to reward his surgeons and attendants
for their care, died in his 75th year Edmondson's account of the Greville
family, 86.
.

FURNIVALS-INN.
IN this neighborhood, on each side of Holborn, is a tremendous array of inns of
courts. Next to Brook-street is Furnivals-Inn, in old times the town abode of
the lord Furnivals, extinct in the male line in the 6th of Richard II.
Thavies-Inn is another, THAVIES INN.
old as the time of Edward III. It took its name from John Tavye; who directed,
that, after the decease of his wife Alice, his estates, and the Hospicium in
quo apprentici ad legem habitare solebant, should be sold in order to maintain
a chaplain, who was to pray for his soul and that of his spouse. The original
use of this inn continues to this day.

A THIRD is Staples-Inn, STAPLES-INN.
so called from its being a staple in which the wool merchants were used to
assemble: but it had given place to students in law, possibly before the reign
of Henry V. And a fourth is Barnard^s-Inn, originally Mackworth's-Inn,
BARNARD'S-INN.
having been given by the executors of John Mackworth, dean of Lincoln, to the
dean and chapter of Lincoln, on condition that they should find a pious priest
to perform divine service in the cathedral of Lincoln, in which John Mackworth
lies interred. As to Scroop's-Inn, it was an inn for sergeants at the law, in
the time of Richard II.; it took its name from having once been the townhouse
of one of the lord Scroops, of Bolton. It is now an extinct vulcano, and the
crater used as a quiet court, bearing its ancient name.

HATTON-STREET, the late Hatton-garden, HATTON-GARDEN.
succeeded to the townhouse and gardens of the lord Hattons, founded by Sir
Christoper Hatton, lord keeper in the reign of queen Elizabeth. He first
attracted the royal notice by his fine person, and fine dancing; but his
intellectual accomplishments were far from superficial. He discharged his great
office with applause; but, distrusting his legal abilities, never acted without
the assistance of two able lawyers. The place he built his house on, was the
orchard and garden belonging to Ely-house. By his interest with the queen he
extorted it from the bishop, Richard Cox, who for a long time resisted the
sacrilege. Here he died, and was interred in the cathedral of St. Paul's.

THIS palace was long before distinguished by the death of a much greater man;
for, at this house of the bishop of Ely, say historians, John duke of
Lancaster, otherwise John of Gaunt, in 1398, breathed his last, after
(according to Shakespeare) giving his dying fruitless admonition to his
dissipated nephew Richard II.

ELY-HOUSE.
ADJACENT stood, in my memory, Ely-house, the residence of the bishops of Ely.
John de Kirkby, who died bishop of Ely, in 1290, laid the foundation of this
palace, by bequeathing several messuages in this place; others were purchased
by his successor William de Luda; at length the whole, consisted of twenty,
some say forty acres, was enclosed in a wall. Holinshed has recorded the
excellency of the strawberries cultivated in the garden by bishop Morton. He
informs us that Richard duke of Gloucester (afterward Richard III.) at the
council held in the Tower, on the morning he put Hastings to death, requested a
dish of them from the bishop. Mr. Gross has given us two representations of the
buildings and chapel. Here was a most venerable hall, seventy-four feet long,
lighted with six gothic windows; and all the furniture suited the hospitality
of the times: this room the sergeants at law frequently borrowed to hold their
feasts in, on account of its size. GREAT FEASTS HELD HERE.
In the year 1531, eleven gentlemen, who had just been honored with the coif,
gave a grand feast here five days successively. On the first, the king and his
queen, Catherine of Arragon, graced them with their presence. For quantity of
provisions it resembled a coronation feast: the minutiae are not given; but the
following particular of part will suffice Stow, book iii.
to show its greatness, as well as the wonderful scarcity of money in those
days, evinced by the smallness of the prices compared to those of the present
days: L. s. d. Brought to the slaughterhouse 24 beeves, each 1 6 8 One carcass
of an ox from the shambles 1 4 -- One hundred fat muttons, each -- 2 10
Fifty-one great veales, at -- 4 8 Thirty-four porkes, at -- 3 3 Ninety-one
pigs, at -- -- 6 Capons of Greece, of one poulter (for he had three) ten
dozens, at (apiece) -- 1 8 Capons of Kent, nine dozen and six, at -- 1 -- Cocks
of gross, seven dozen and nine, at -- -- 8 Cocks course xiii dozen, at 8 d.
and 3 d. apiece Pullets, the best 2 ^/2 d. each. Other pullets -- -- 2 Pigeons
37 dozen, each dozen -- -- 2 Swans xiii dozen Larkes 340 dozen, each dozen --
-- 5

THE chapel (which was dedicated to St. Etheldreda, CHAPEL.
foundress of the monastery at Ely) has at the east end a very handsome gothic
window, which looks into a neat court, lately built, called Ely-place. Beneath
is a crypt of the length of the chapel. The cloisters formed a square on the
south side.

THE several buildings belonging to this palace falling into ruin, it was
thought proper to enable, by act of parliament, in 1772, the bishop to alienate
the whole. It was accordingly sold to the crown, for the sum of six thousand
five hundred pounds, together with an annuity of two hundred pounds a year, to
be paid to the bishop and his successors for ever. Out of the first, five
thousand six hundred was applied toward the purchase of Albemarle-house, in
Dover-street, with other messuages and gardens. The remainder, together with
three thousand pounds paid as dilapidations by the executors of bishop Mawson,
was applied toward building the handsome house at present occupied, in
Dover-street, by my respected friend the present prelate. This was named
Ely-house, and is settled on the bishops of Ely for ever. It was the fortune of
that munificent prelate Edmund Keen, to rebuild or repair more ecclesiastical
houses than any churchman of modern days. He bestowed most considerable repairs
on the parsonage-house of Stanhope, in the bishopric of Durham. He wholly
rebuilt the palace at Chester. He restored almost from rain that at Ely; and,
finally, Ely-house was built under his inspection.

TO revert to ancient times. John duke of Lancaster, styled usually John of
Gaunt, resided in this palace, and died here in 1399: possibly it was lent to
him, during the long possession that bishop Fordham had of the sea, after the
duke's own palace, the Savoy, was burnt by the insurgents.

ST. ANDREW's HOLBORN.
FROM hence is a steep descent down Holborn-hill. On the south side is St.
Andrew's church, of considerable antiquity, but rebuilt in the last century in
a plain neat manner. Here was buried Thomas Wriothesley, lord chancellor in the
latter part of the life of Henry VIII; a fiery zealot, who, not content with
seeing the amiable innocent Anne Askew put to the torture, for no other crime
than difference of faith, flung off his gown, degraded the chancellor into the
Bourreau, and with his own hands gave force to the rack Ballard's lives of
British ladies, 52.
. He was created earl of Southampton, just before the coronation of Edward VI;
but, obstinately adhering to the old religion, he was dismissed from his post,
and confined to Southampton-house,, where he died in 1550.

THE well-known party tool Doctor Sacheverel was rector of this church. He had
the chance of meeting in his parish a person as turbulent as himself, the noted
Mr. Whiston: that singular character took it into his head to disturb the
doctor while he was in his pulpit, venting some doctrine contrary to the
opinion of that heterodox man. The doctor in great wrath descended from on
high, and fairly turned wicked Will. Whiston into the street.

IN ascending to West Smithfield, Cock-lane is left to the right; COCK-LANE
GHOST.
a ridiculous scene of imposture, in the affair of the Cock-lane ghost, which
was to detect the murderer of the body it lately inhabited, by its appearance
in the vault of St. John's church, Clerkenwell. The credulity of the English
nation was most fully displayed, by the great concourse of people of all ranks,
to hear the conversation held by one of the cheats with the ghost. It ended in
full detection and exemplary punishment of the several persons concerned in the
villainy.

SMITHFIELD is celebrated on several accounts: at present, SMITHFIELD.
and long since, for being the great market for cattle of all kinds.
BARTHOLOMEW-FAIR.
For being the place where Bartholomew-fair was kept; which was granted, during
three days annually, by Henry II. to the neighboring priory. It was long a
season of great festivity; theatrical performances by the better actors were
exhibited here, and it was frequented by a great deal of good company; but,
becoming the resort of the debauched of all denominations, certain regulations
took place, which in later days have spoiled the mirth, but produced the
desired decency. The humors of this place will never be lost, as long as the
inimitable print of Bartholomew-fair, of our Hogarth, shall exist.

PLACE FOR TOURNAMENTS;
FOR a long series of reigns, Smithfield was the field of gallant tilts and
tournaments: and also the spot on which accusations were decided by duel,
derived from the Kamp-fight ordeal of the Saxons. Here, in 1374, the doting
hero Edward III. in his sixty-second year, infatuated by the charms of Alice
Pierce, placed her by his side in a magnificent car, and, styling her the Lady
of the Sun, conducted her to the lifts, followed by a train of knights, each
leading by the bridle a beautiful palfrey, mounted by a gay damsel: and for
seven days together exhibited the most splendid justs in indulgence of his
disgraceful passion.

HIS grandson, Richard II. in the same place held a tournament equally
magnificent. There issued out of the Tower of London, says the admiring
Froissart, "first threescore coursers apparelled for the justes, and on every
one a squire of honor riding a soft pase. Than issued out threescore ladies of
honor mounted on fair palfreyes, and every lady led a knight by a cheyne of
sylver, which knights were apparelled to just. I refer to my author Froissart,
tom iv. chapter xxii. Lord Berner's translation, ii. p. ccix.
for the rest of the relation of this splendid spectacle; certainly there was a
magnificence and spirit of gallantry in the dissipation of those early times,
which cherished a warlike and generous spirit in the nobility and gentry of the
land. Something like is now arising, in the brilliant societies of archers in
most parts of Britain, which, it is to be hoped, will at lest share the hours
consumed in the enervated pleasures of music; or the dangerous waste of time in
the hours dedicated to cards.

FOR TRIALS BY DUEL;
I WILL not trespass on my readers patience any more on this subject, than just
to mention one instance of duel. It was when the unfortunate Armourer entered
into the lists, on account of a false accusation of treason, brought against
him by his apprentice, in the reign of Henry VI. The friends of the defendant
had so plied him with liquor, that he fell an easy conquest to his accuser.
Shakespeare has worked this piece of history into a scene, in the second part of
Henry VI. but has made the poor Armourer confess his treasons in his dying
moments: for in the time in which this custom prevaled, it never was even
suspected but that guilt must have been the portion of the vanquished. Let me
add, that when people of rank fought with sword and lance, Plebeian combatants
were only allowed a pole, armed with a heavy sand-bag, with which they were to
decide their guilt or innocence.

IN Smithfield was also held our Autos de Fe; but, FOR EXECUTIONS.
to the credit of our English monarchs, none were ever known to attend the
ceremony. Even Philip II. of Spain never honored any, of the many which were
celebrated by permission of his gentle queen, with his presence,
notwithstanding he could behold the roasting of his own subjects with infinite
self-applause, and sang-froid. The stone marks the spot, in this area, on which
those cruel exhibitions were executed. Here our martyr Latimer preached
patience to friar Forest, agonizing under the torture of a slow fire, for
denying the king's supremacy: and to this place our martyr Cranmer compelled
the amiable Edward, by forcing his reluctant hand to the warrant, to send Joan
Bocher, a silly woman, to the stake. Yet Latimer never thought of his own
conduct in his last moments; nor did Cranmer thrust his hand into the fire for
a real crime, but for one which was venial through the frailty of human nature.

THE last person who suffered at the stake in England was Bartholomew Legatt,
who was burnt here in 1611, as a blasphemous heretic, according to the sentence
pronounced by John King, bishop of London. The bishop consigned him to the
secular arm of our monarch James, who took care to give to the sentence full
effect See part iv. of the history of the first fourteen years of king James.
. -- This place, as well as Tyburn, was called The Elms, and used for the
execution of malefactors even before the year 1219. -- In the year 1530, there
was a most severe and singular punishment inflicted here on one John Roose, a
cook, who had poisoned seventeen persons of the bishop of Rochester's family,
two of whom died. By a retrospective law, he was sentenced to be boiled to
death, which was done accordingly. -- In 1541, Marg^ret Davie, a young woman,
suffered in the same place and manner, for the same species of crime. -- In
Smithfield the archrebel Wat Tyler met with, in 1381, the reward of his treason
and insolence. The youthful king, no longer able to bear his brutality, ordered
him to be arrested; when the gallant Walworth, lord mayor of London, struck him
off his horse, and the attendants of the monarch quickly put him to death.

I CANNOT help indulging myself with the mention of William Pennant, an honest
goldsmith, my great great great great great great uncle, who, at his house, the
Queen's-head in Smithfield, acquired a considerable fortune in the latter end
of the reign of Elizabeth, and the beginning of that of James I. It appears by
his will, dated May 4th 1607, that he was employed by the court, for numbers of
his legacies were to the royal servants. His legacy to Sir William Fortescue,
knight, his wife's brother, has now a singular appearance: -- one chain of gold
and pearl, weighing about 12 ounces and a quarter; one billament of gold and
pearl, being 19 pieces; a round salt of silver and a cover thereto, weighing 15
ounces and somewhat more; six white silver spoons; one feather bed, bolster,
two pillows, two blankets, one blue rug; a testearn of satin, figured russet
and black, and vallance to the same; 5 curtains of taffety sarcenet; one chair,
and a stool with a back of satin figured russet; ten black, and six stools
covered with black wrought velvet; and also a great chest covered with black
leather, with an in-lock and all things in it, excepting certain plate
hereafter bequeathed. He left to his nephew Hugh Pennant, of Bychton,
Flintshire, the manor of Moxhall, in Essex, with a considerable estate; but the
fruits of the labors of this industrious tradesman, were all dissipated by a
gentleman of the family, who fortunately quitted this life before he had wasted
our paternal acres. But the charities of William Pennant, to the poor of
Whiteford, Flintshire, are more permanent: for to this day they completely
cloth twenty poor people; and in a few years more the trustees of the
bequeathed lands flatter themselves with the hopes of doubling the number.

WE now reach a great extent of holy ground, consecrated for the purposes of
monastic life, or for the humane purpose of affording relief to our distressed
brethren, in their passage through this world. I have not in view a conventual
history of London: but only mean to give a brief account of those foundations
which have a clame to pre-eminence. The church of St. Bartholomew the Greater
is a small distance from Smithfield; CHURCH OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW.
it is only the choir of the ancient building, and the center on which stood
the great tower. In the choir are the remains of the old architecture; massy
columns, and round arches: part of the cloisters are still preserved in a
neighboring stable, and consists of eight arches. Adjacent is part of the south
transept, now converted into a small burying-ground. PRIORY OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW.
This was a conventual church, belonging to a priory of Black Canons, founded
in 1102, by one Rahere, minstrel or jester to Henry I; who, quitting his
profligate life, became the first prior of his own foundation. Legend relates,
that he had a most horrible dream, out of which he was relieved by St.
Bartholomew himself, who directed him to found the house, and to dedicate it to
him. Rahere has here a handsome monument, beneath an arch divided by elegant
tabernacle-work. His figure is recumbent, with an angel at his feet, and a
canon in a great hood kneeling on each side, as if praying over him. It was
afterward repaired by William Bolton, the last prior. At the dissolution its
revenues, according to Dugdale, were L. 653.15 s. It was granted by Henry to
Sir Richard Rich. Queen Mary re-peopled it with Black, or Preaching Friars; but
on the accession of Elizabeth, they were turned out. Rich, who was made lord
chancellor in the reign of Edward VI. made it his place of residence; as did
Sir Walter Mildmay, chancellor of the exchequer to queen Elizabeth.

ST. BARTHOLOMEW's HOSPITAL.
ST. BARTHOLOMEW's hospital will ever be a monument of the piety of Rahere; for
from him it took its origin. On a waste spot, he obtained a grant of a piece of
ground from his master, and built on it an hospital for a master, brethren, and
sisters; and for the entertainment of poor diseased people, till they got well;
of distressed women big with child, till they were delivered, and were able to
go abroad; and for the support of all such children whose mothers died in the
house, till they attained the age of seven years. It was given to the
neighboring priory, who had the care of it. Its revenues at the dissolution
were L. 305, according to Dugdale. The good works of Rahere live to this day.
The foundation was continued through every reign. The present handsome
building, which surrounds a square, was begun in 1729. The extent of the
charity is shown, by saying, that in the last year there were under the care of
the hospital three thousand seven hundred and fifty in-patients; and eight
thousand one hundred and twenty three out patients.

THE great staircase is admirably painted by Hogarth, at his own expense. The
subjects are, the good Samaritan, and the pool of Bethesda. In another part is
Rahere laying the foundation stone; a sick man carried on a bier attended by
monks. The hall is at the head of the staircase, a very large room, ornamented
with a full-length of Henry VIII. who had good reason to be complimented, as he
presented this house to the citizens. Doctor Ratcliff is also here at
full-length. He left five hundred pounds a year to this hospital, for the
improvement of the diet; and one hundred a year for buying of linen. Happy had
it been had all his wealth been so directed, instead of wasting it on that vain
mausoleum, his library at Oxford. The patron saint has over the chimney-piece
his portrait, but not in the offensive circumstances which Spagnolet would have
placed it in; for he is clothed, and has only the knife, the symbol of his
martyrdom, in his hand. In the windows is painted Henry VIII. delivering the
charter to the lord mayor; by him is prince Arthur, and two noblemen with white
rods.

AT no great distance from this hospital stands (within the walls of the city)
that of Christ-church; CHRIST-CHURCH HOSPITAL,
a royal foundation for orphans and poor children, who are taken care of, and
apprenticed, ONCE THE GRAY FRIARS.
at different ages, to proper trades. It was originally the house of the Gray
Friars, or Mendicants, of the order of St. Francis, founded by John Ewin, ITS
FINE CHURCH.
mercer, about the year 1225. The church was reckoned one of the most superb of
the conventual: and rose by the contributions of the opulent devout. Margaret,
daughter of Philip the Hardy, and second queen to Edward I. in 1306 began the
choir. Isabella, queen to Edward II. gave threescore and ten pounds; and queen
Philippa, wife of Edward III. gave threescore and two pounds, toward the
building. John de Bretagne, duke of Richmond, built the body of the church, at
a vast expense: and Gilbert de C^are, earl of Gloucester, gave twenty great
beams out of his forest at Tunbridge. No order of monks seem to have the powers
of persuasion equal to these poor friars. They raised vast sums for their
buildings among the rich: and few of their admirers, when they came to die, who
did not console themselves with the thought of lying within their expiating
walls; and if they were particularly wicked, thought themselves secure against
the assault of the devil, if their corpse was wrapped in the habit and cowl of
a friar.

PERSONAGES INTERRED HERE.
MULTITUDES therefore of all ranks were crowded in this holy ground. It boasts
of receiving four queens; Margaret, and Isabella, FOUR QUEENS.
above mentioned; Joan, daughter to Edward II. and wife of Edward Bruce, king
of Scotland; and, to make the fourth, Isabella wife of William Warren, titular
queen of Man, is named. Of these, Isabella, whom GRAY so strongly stigmatizes,
She-wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs,
That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled mate,
I hope was wrapped in the friars garment, for few stood more in need of a
daemonifuge. With wonderful hypocrisy, she was buried with the heart of her
murdered husband on her breast Strype, i. book iii. 132.
.

HERE also rest Beatrix, daughter of Henry III. and duchess of Bretagny.
Isabella, daughter of Edward III. and wife of Ingelram de Courcy, created earl
of Bedford. John Hastings earl of Pembroke, slain in Woodstoke-park, at a
Christmas festivity, in 1389. He was then very young, and, being desirous of
instruction in feats of chivalry, ran against a stout knight of the name of
John Saint John: but it remains uncertain whether his death was the result of
design or accident Holinshed, 471.
.

John Duc de Bourbon, one of the noble prisoners taken at the battle of
Azincourt, after eighteen years imprisonment, in 1443 here found a tomb. Walter
Blunt lord Mountjoy, lord treasurer of England in the time of Edward IV, and
many other See Strype as above.
illustrious persons, were deposited here.

AMONG the unfortunate who fell victims to the executioner, in the wretched
times of too many of our monarchs, as often unjustly as otherwise, were the
following. I do not reckon, in the list of the first, the ambitious profligate
Roger Mortimer, paramour of Isabella, wife to the unhappy Edward of Caernarvon.
He was surprised with the queen in Nottingham castle. In vain did she cry, Bell
fitz, bell fitz, ayez pity du gentile Mortimer. He was hurried to London, and,
after a summary hearing, dragged to Tyburn, where he hung like a common
malefactor two days upon the gallows.

SIR Robert Tresilian, chief justice of England; and Sir Nicholas Brembre, the
stout mayor of London, suffered the same ignominous death in the next reign.
The first, as a warning to all judges for too great a complaisance to the
pleasure of the court; Sir Nicholas, for his attachment to his royal master.
Tresilian fell lamented: especially as the proceedings were hurried in a
tumultuary manner, and more indicative of revenge than justice. Superstition
records, that when he came to Tyburn, he declared that he should not die while
he had any thing about him; and that the executioner, on stripping him, found
certain images, the head of a devil, and the names of diverse others See State
Trials, vol. 13. old ed.
. The charm was broken, and the judge died.

HERE, in 1423, were interred the mangled remains of Sir John Mortimer, knight,
a victim to the jealousy of the house of Lancaster against that of York. He was
put to death on a fictitious charge, by an ex post facto law, called the
Statute of Escapes, made on purpose to destroy him: he was drawn to Tyburn, and
underwent the rigorous penalty of treason Stow's Annals, 364, 365. Parliam.
Hist. 190. -- This fact is scarcely noticed by our modern historians.
. Thus was Henry VI. stained with blood even in his infancy, and began a bloody
reign with slaughter, continued to the end of his life, by ambition and cruelty
not his own.

IN the same ground lies another guiltless sacrifice, Thomas Burdet, esquire
ancestor of the present Sir Robert Burdet. He had a white buck, which he was
particularly fond of; this the king, Edward IV. happened to kill. Burdet, in
anger, wished the horns in the person's body who had advised the king to it.
For this he was tried, as wishing evil to his sovereign, and for this only lost
his head Holinshed, 703.
.

TO close the list, in 1523, a murdress, a lady Alice Hungerford, obtained the
favor of lying here. She had killed her husband; for which she was led from the
Tower to Holborn, there put into a cart with one of her servants, and thence
carried to Tyburn and executed Stow's Annals, 517.
.

THE library founded here in 1429, LIBRARY.
by the munificent Whittington, must not be forgotten. It was a hundred and
twenty-nine feet long; thirty-one broad: it was cieled with wainscot, had
twenty-eight desks, and eight double settles of wainscot. In three years it was
filled with books, to the value of five hundred and fifty-six pounds: of which
Sir Richard contributed four hundred pounds; and Doctor Thomas Winchelsey, a
friar, supplied the rest. This about thirty years before the invention of
printing.

ON the dissolution, this fine church, after being spoiled of its ornaments for
the king's use, was made a storehouse for French prizes, and the monuments
either sold or mutilated. Henry, just before his death, touched with remorse,
granted the convent and church to the city, and caused the church to be opened
for divine service. It was burnt in 1666, and rebuilt by Sir Christopher Wren,
at a small distance from its former site. I must mention, that with the old
church was destroyed the tomb of lady Veneti^ Digby My Journey to London, 335.
-- The tomb is engraven in the Antiquaries Repository.
.

THE buildings belonging to the friars were by Edward VI. applied to this
useful charity: that amiable young prince had not any reason to be stimulated
to good actions: but it is certain that, after a sermon of exhortation,
preached before him by Ridley, bishop of London, he founded three great
hospitals in this city, judiciously adapted to the necessities of the poor,
divided into three classes: the hospital of St. Thomas, Southwark, for the sick
or wounded poor; this for the orphan; and that of Bridewell for the thriftless.
Charles II. founded also here a mathematical school for the instruction of
forty boys, and training them up for the sea. Many able mathematicians and
seamen have sprung from this institution. In the last year, a hundred and
sixty-eight were apprenticed out; of which nine were from the last-mentioned
institution. The governors have a seminary to this hospital at Hertford. At
London and at Hertford are nine hundred and eighty-two children.

PART of the old buildings and cloister are yet remaining; but the greater part
was rebuilt in the last century, under the direction of Sir Christopher Wren.
The writing school was founded in 1694, by Sir John Moor, alderman, who is
honored with a statue in front of the building.

GREAT HALL.
IN the great hall is a fine picture of Charles II. in his robes, with a great
flowing black wig. At a distance is a sea view with shipping: and about him a
globe, sphere, telescope, etc. It was painted by Lely, in 1662.

HERE is the longest picture I ever saw. King James II. amidst his courtiers,
receiving the president of this hospital, several of the governors, and numbers
of the children, all kneeling; one of the governors with a gray head, and some
of the heads of the children, are admirably painted. Chancellor Jefferies is
standing by the king. This was painted by Verrio, who has placed himself in the
piece, in a long wig.

THE founder is represented in another picture sitting, and giving the charter
to the governors, who are in their red gowns kneeling; the boys and girls are
ranged in two rows; a bishop, possibly Ridley, is in the piece. If this was the
work of Holbein, it has certainly been much injured by repair.

IN the court-room is a three-quarters length of Edward, a most beautiful
portrait, indisputably by the hand of that great painter. The figure is most
richly dressed, with one of his hands upon a dagger.

IN this room are the portraits of two persons of uncommon merit. The first is
of Sir Wolstan Dixie, lord mayor in 1585. He is repr^nted in a red gown furred,
a rich chain, and with a rough beard. The date on his portrait is 1593. He was
descended from Wolstan Dixie, who was seated at Catworth, in Huntingdonshire,
about the reign of Edward III. Sir Wolstan was the founder of the family of
baronets, settled at Market-Bosworth, in Leicestershire, which was bestowed by
him on his great nephew in the reign of queen Elizabeth Collins's Baronets,
iii. 103.
. Sir Wolstan was distinguished by the magnificent pageantry of his mayor's
day; and by the poetical incense bestowed on the occasion by George Peele, A.
M. of Christ-church College, Oxford: who, among other things, wrote the life of
our last prince Llewelyn, the loves of king David and the fair Bathsheba, and
the tragedy of Absalom Wood's Athenae Oxon. i. 300.
. But Sir Wolstan immortalized himself by his good deeds, and the greatness of
his charities. At Bosworth he founded a free school; every prison in the
capital felt his bounty; he portioned poor maidens in marriage; contributed
largely to build a pesthouse; established two fellowships in Emanuel College,
Cambridge, and two scholarships; and left to this hospital an annual endowment
of forty-two pounds for ever.

BUT a lady, dame Mary Ramsay, wife of Sir Thomas Ramsay, lord mayor in 1577,
greatly surpassed Sir Wolstan in her charitable deeds. By the gift of twenty
pounds a year, to be annually paid to the master and usher of the school
belonging to this hospital; and also to the hospital the reversion of a hundred
and twenty pounds annually. She was complimented with having her picture placed
in this room. She is dressed in a red-bodied gown and petticoat. She augmented
fellowships and scholarships; clothed ten maimed soldiers, at the expense of
twenty pounds annually; she did not forget the prisoners in the several gaols;
she gave the sum of twelve hundred pounds to five of the companies, to be lent
to young tradesmen for four years; she gave to Bristol a thousand pounds, to be
laid out in an hospital; she married and portioned poor virgins; and, besides
other charities I omit, left three thousand pounds to good and pious uses. This
excellent woman died about the year 1596, and was interred in the church of St.
Mary Woolnoth The charities of both these worthy characters may be seen in
Stow's Sur^aie, 203, 207.
.

CHARTER-HOUSE-SQUARE.
IN this square, at the time called the Charter House Yard, was a townhouse
belonging to the earls of Rutland, which, in the year 1656, was converted into
an opera-house, over which Sir William d' Avenant presided British Biogr. 2d
ed. ii. 286.
; for in those times of hypocrisy, tragedies and comedies were not permitted.

THE Charter House is the next object of attention. CHARTER HOUSE.
This had been a house of Carthusians (from which the name is corrupted)
founded by Sir Walter de Manni, a most successful commander in the French wars,
under Edward III. He had purchased, in the year 1349, a piece of ground
consisting of thirteen acres, for the purpose of interring the dead, at a time
in which a dreadful pestilence raged. Not fewer than fifty thousand people were
buried in it, during the time of this dreadful calamity; which shows how very
populous London must have been at that period. In the preceding year Ralph
Sratford, bishop of London, had bought another piece of land, adjoining to
this, which he enclosed with a brick wall, built on it a chapel, and applied to
the same use, under the name of Pardon Churchyard. Here also were buried
suicides, and such who had been executed. They were brought here in what was
called the Friars cart, which was tilted, and covered over with black: in it
was a pendent bell, so that notice was given, as it passed along, of the sad
burden it was carrying Stow's Survaie, 806 -- 7.
.

SIR WALTER first intended to found here a college for a warden, dean, and
twelve secular priests; but, changing his design, he, in conjunction with
Northburgh, bishop of London, founded a priory for twenty-four monks, of the
rigid order of Carthusians, which was finished in 1370 Tanner.
. The last prior but one, John Howghton, subscribed to the king's supremacy in
1534; yet, was executed soon after, for his opposition to the royal will. Three
years after that there was a second subscription, in which William Trafford,
the last prior, and two and twenty of his house, subscribed to the king's
supremacy Willis's Abbeys, ii. 126.
. At the dissolution its revenues were reckoned, according to Dugdale, at L 642
a year. It was first granted, in 1542, to John Bridges and Thomas Hall, for
their joint lives; and in April 1555, to Sir Edward North, who sold it to
Thomas duke of Norfolk, for twenty-five hundred pounds; and his son the earl of
Suffolk, the rapacious treasurer, alienated it to Thomas Sutton, esquire for
thirteen thousand pounds.

MR. SUTTON's FOUNDATION.
THAT gentleman made a most dignified use of his purchase. In the time of James
I. he converted it into a most magnificent hospital, consisting of a master, a
preacher, a head schoolmaster, and second master, with forty-four boys, eighty
decayed gentlemen, who had been soldiers or merchants, besides physician,
surgeons, register, and other officers and servants of the house. Each decayed
gentleman has fourteen pounds a year, a gown, meat, fire, and lodgings: and one
of them may, if he chooses, attend the manciple to market, to see that he buys
good provisions. This is the greatest gift in England, either in protestant or
catholic times, ever bestowed by a single man, till we come to the time of the
foundation of Guy's Hospital, in Southwark.

THERE is scarcely any vestige of the conventual building, which is said to
have stood in the present garden. The present extensive house was the work of
the duke of Norfolk. It was inhabited by the noble purchaser: the last time, it
was made his easy prison; for, having been committed to the Tower in 1569, he
was permitted to return to his own house, under the custody of Sir Henry Nevil,
the plague at that time raging within the Tower liberties. But soon relapsing
into his romantic design of a marriage with the unhappy Mary Stuart, he was
here seized, and conveyed to his former place of confinement. In the great hall
are the Howard arms, and the date 1571; the very year of his final imprisonment.

HIS grandson, lord Thomas Howard, was in possession of this house at the
accession of James I. This monarch, to show his respect for a family which had
so severely suffered in the cause of his mother, made his first visit, on
entering his new capital, on May 7th 1604, to this nobleman. His majesty and
his train were most splendidly entertained here four whole days Stow's Annals,
823.
; at his departure, he was as profuse of his honors as he had been at Theobalds
just before, for he dubbed here not fewer than fourscore knights.

IN one of the great apartments is a very good half-length of Mr. Sutton, in a
black gown furred, and with a white beard. He himself intended to have filled
the post of master; but being seized with his last illness, by deed nominated
the Reverend John Hutton to the office. He died December 12th, 1611, aged 79:
his body was embalmed, kept in his own house till May 1612, when it was
deposited with great pomp in Christ-church; from whence, in 1614 (the chapel in
his hospital being by that time finished) it was carried on the shoulders of
the poor into the vault prepared for its reception. His figure, in a gown, lies
recumbent on the tomb: on each side is a man in armor standing upright; and
above a preacher addressing a full congregation. This was the work of Nicholas
Stone, who (including a little monument to Mr. Law, one of Mr. Sutton's
executors) had four hundred pounds for his performance Mr. Walpole's Anecdotes,
ii. 25.
.

GEORGE VILLIERS, the second of that name, duke of Buckingham, full-length, in
a long wig, and robes of the garter.

THE earl of Shaftsbury, in his chancellor's robes, sitting.

CHARLES TALBOT, first earl, and afterward duke of Shrewsbury, a full-length,
in robes of the garter, with a white rod, as lord treasurer, in 1714, delivered
to him by the queen, with her dying hand. A nobleman of fine abilities, and
fine address, wavering and unsettled: a strong revolutionist; yet, in a little
time, seduced into a plan of dethroning the very prince whom he had invited
over. He died neglected by all parties; permanent only in the protestant
religion, to which he was an early convert by the arguments of our great
Tillotson. He died in February 1718, giving, almost with his last breath,
assurance of his adherence to the church of England.

THE duke of Monmouth, in a long black wig, dressed, if I remember right, like
the former.

THE munificent Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury, is represented here,
sitting. He did honor to his promotion by his patron Charles II. whom he
attended in his exile. He was equally conspicuous for his charity and his
piety. He expended above sixty-six thousand pounds in public and private
benefactions, in relieving the miserable distressed in the time of the
pestilence, and in redeeming Christian slaves. His theater at Oxford is a
magnificent proof of his respect to the university in which he had most
honorably presided, as warden of the College of All Souls.

HERE is a three-quarters piece of Doctor Thomas Burnet, master of this house,
highly celebrated for his learning, and equally so for the spirit with which he
resisted the obtrusion of a Roman catholic into the office by James II. He was
the author of the famous Sacred Theory of the Earth, a beautiful and eloquent
philosophical romance: and of the Archaelogia Philosophica. This last subjected
him to such censure, for the skeptical opinions it contained, as to prevent his
farther preferment. He died in 1715. He is represented as a thin man, of a good
countenance, in a black gown, and short hair.

THE hero William earl Craven is the last; a full-length, in armor, with a
truncheon; and a distant view of a camp.

THESE noblemen had all been governors of this great charity.

IMMEDIATELY beyond the Charter House, PRIORY OF ST. JOHN OF JERUSALEM.
stood the priory of St. John of Jerusalem, of the warlike order of the knights
hospitalers. After the taking of Jerusalem from the Saracens, there was a vast
concourse of pilgrims to the holy sepulcher. A pious man of the name of
Gerardus, associating with other persons of his religious turn, assumed a black
garment, with a white cross on it, with eight spikes; and undertook the care of
an hospital, before founded at Jerusalem, for the use of the pilgrims; and also
to protect them from insults on the road, either in coming or returning.
Godfrey of Bologne first instituted the order; and, in reward of the valor of
Gerardus, at the battle of Ascalon, endowed the knights with great estates, to
enable them to support the end of their order: the kings of France were the
sovereigns. After the loss of Jerusalem, they retired from place to place; but,
having taken Rhodes, fixed there, and were then styled knights of Rhodes. But,
in 1522, on the loss of that island, they retreated to Malta, and were
afterward known by the name of knights of Malta. The order, before the
separation of England from the church of Rome, consisted of eight nations. The
world is filled with their prodigious valor.

JORDAN BRISET, and M^riel his wife, persons of rank, founded this house in the
year 1100, and it received consecration from Heraclius, patriarch of Jerusalem.
This order at first styled itself servant to the poor servants of the hospital
at Jerusalem; but their vast endowments infected them with an uncommon degree
of pride. The whole order had, in different parts of Christendom, nineteen
thousand manors. In 1323, the revenues of the English knights templars were
bestowed on them. This gave them such importance, that the prior was ranked as
first baron of England, and lived in the highest state. Their luxury gave
offense to the rebels of Kent and Essex, in 1381. These levellers burnt their
house to the ground; but it soon rose with double splendour. The first prior was
Garnerius de Neapoli; the last, Sir William Weston, who, on the suppression by
Henry VIII. had a pension of a thousand a year; but died on Ascension-day,
1540, the very day that the house was suppressed Newcour^t, i. 668.
, entirely of a broken heart. His monument is preserved by a drawing in the
collection of Doctor C^mbes. His figure lay recumbent, beneath rich gothic
arches. It had a long beard, and is represented greatly emaciated. Its revenue
at that time, according to Dugdale, was L. 2,385.12 s. 8 d.

St John's Gate 193


THE house and church remained entire during the reign of Henry, ST. JAMES's
CLERKENWELL.
for he chose to keep in them his tents and toils for the chase. In that of his
son, the church, which for the beauty of its tower (which was graven, gilt, and
enameled) was blown up with gunpowder, by order of the protector Somerset, and
the stones carried toward the building his palace in the Strand. In the next
reign, apart of the choir which remained, and some side-chapels, were repaired
by cardinal Pole, and Sir Thomas Tresham was appointed lord prior Mr. Brook,
Somerset Herald.
: but the restoration was short-lived, being again suppressed by Elizabeth.

THE buildings covered a great extent of ground: and are now occupied by St.
John's-square. The magnificent gateway still remains; James I. made a grant of
it to Sir Roger Wilbraham, who made it his habitation.

AYLESBURY-HOUSE and gardens were other parts of the possessions of those
knights. They were granted to the Bruces, earls of Aylesbury; who made the
house their residence. Earl Robert, deputy earl-marshal, dates numbers of his
letters, in 1671, from Aylesbury-house, Clerkenwell. Aylesbury-street now
covers the site of the house and gardens.

THE same Jordan Briset, BENEDICTINE NUNS.
not satisfied with the former great endowment, gave to one Robert, a priest,
fourteen acres of land almost adjoining to the first, to build on them a
religious house. He accordingly founded one to the honor of God and the
assumption of our lady, which he filled with Black Nuns of the order of St.
Benedict. The first prioress was Christina; the last, Isabella Sackville, of
the family of the present duke of Dorset. She appointed pointed her cousin,
lord Buckhurst, executor of her will, made February 19th 1569, if his lordship
would undertake the trouble. She was buried in the conventual church; a small
brass plate informs us she died in the reign of queen Elizabeth.

SIR Thomas Chaloner, tutor to prince Henry, built a fine house in the close of
the priory, and on it inscribed these apt verses, Casta fides superest, velatae
tecta sorores
Ista relegatae deseruere licet:
Nam venerandus Hymen hic vota jugalia servat,
Vestalemque forum mente fovere studet Fuller's Church History, book vi. 278.
.


THE church was made parochial. Part of the cloisters remain, at lest till very
lately, as did part of the nun's hall. In very ancient records it was styled,
PARISH CLERKS OUR ANCIENT ACTORS.
Ecclesia Beatae Mariae de font Clericorum, from a well near it, at which the
parish-clerks of London were accustomed to meet annually to perform their
mysteries, or sacred dramatical plays. In 1391, they performed before the king
and queen, and whole court, three days successively. These amusements, with
much more substantial peace offerings, were presented to Richard, to divert his
resentment against the good citizens, for a riot of no very great moment
against the bishop of Salisbury Holinshed, 478.
. And in 1409, they performed the creation of the world, which lasted eight
days; and most of the nobility and gentry of England honored them with their
presence. -- But to return to the church. Besides the venerable prioress, here
was interred the lord prior of the knights hospitalers abovementioned, Sir
William Weston, who lies under a tomb, beneath an arch of neat gothic work. The
brass is lost, but there is still his effigies represented in his shroud,
emaciated by death; but admirably cut in stone. Weever preserves part of his
epitaph; but it gives us nothing historical Funeral Monuments, 430.
. That great collector of funeral monuments and inscriptions lies here himself.
He died in 1634 Fuller's Worthies, 117.
, aged 56, and left his own quaint epitaph: Lankashire gave me birth, and
Cambridge education,
Middlesex gave me death, and this church my humation;
And CHRIST to me has given,
A place with him in heaven.


I SHALL conclude, with having observed here the plain monument of Gilbert
Burnet, bishop of Salisbury. His literary merits and demerits have been so
fully discussed, that I rather choose to refer the readers to the writers who
have undertaken the task. Let his excellent discharge of his episcopal
function, expiate the errors, which his enemies, of each party, so liberally
impute to him.

NOW I am on the outside of the church again, let me, in this revival of
archery, direct the attention of the brethren and sisters of the bow to the
epitaph of Sir William Wood, a celebrated archer, who died in 1691, aet. 82.
May their longevity equal his! but when they have made their last shot, I hope
that the Royal British BOWMEN have provided an abler bard, to celebrate their
skill, than fell to the lot of poor William Wood Stow, ii. book iv. 67.
.

CLOSE to Clerkenwell-green stands Albemarle, or Newcastle-house; the property
and residence of the mad duchess, and widow of the second duke of Albemarle,
and last surviving daughter and coheiress of Cavendish duke of Newcastle, who
died here in 1734. At p. 164 some account is given of this lady. The house is
entire, and at present occupied by a cabinet-maker. In the garden is the entire
side of the cloister of the nunnery, and part of the wall, and a door belonging
to the nuns hall. Scattered over the ground are the remains of the ancient
monuments of Sir Richard Weston, and others, shamefully ruined, being flung
here during the rebuilding of the church.

OPPOSITE to this house is another, very large, ascended to by a long flight of
steps. It is now divided into three houses. It is called Oliver Cromwell's; and
tradition says, it was his place of conference with Ireton, Bradshaw, and
others. If it had been his residence, it probably was usurped from some of the
loyalists, and made his mansion, before he attained his fullness of power, and
lived in regal state at Whitehall.

NEW RIVER HEAD.
In the fields, at a small distance from Clerkenwell, is the New River Head, the
great repository which supplies the largest portion of our capital with water.
To give a greater extent of service, of late years another reservoir has been
made on the heights, at a little distance to the north of the former. This is
supplied with water from the first by means of an engine, which is worked by
horses, forcing the water up the ascent; from hence it streams down to places
which the other had not the power of benefiting. These reservoirs may be called
the HEART of the work. The element, essentially useful as the vital fluid, at
first rushes through veins of vast diameter; divides into lesser; and again
into thousands of ramifications, which support the life of this most populous
city.

NO one ought to be ignorant that this unspeakable benefit is owing to a
WELSHMAN! Sir HUGH MIDDELTON, of Denbigh; who, on September 20th, 1608, began,
and on September 29th, 1613, completed the great work. He brought the water
from Amwell, in Hertfordshire, a distance of twenty, but, from the necessity of
making a detour to avoid hills and valleys, it was increased to thirty-eight
miles three-quarters and sixteen poles. Yet it was impossible to escape
difficulties. His daring spirit penetrated the hills in several places: and
carried the river over two valleys. Over one it extended six hundred and sixty
feet in length, and thirty in height; and over another, four hundred and
sixty-two feet in length. The original source of this river was, by the vast
increase of London, found inadequate to its wants. The New River company found
it necessary to have recourse to another supply. They applied to parliament for
powers to obtain it from the river Lee, the property of the city. London
opposed the benefit intended its inhabitants; but in vain, parliament wisely
determined against their objections: so the blessing was forced upon them! and
the river Lee supplies the greater part of the wants of the city. Sir HUGH
MIDDELTON was ruined by the execution of his project. So little was the benefit
understood, that, for above thirty years, the seventy-two shares, it was
divided into, shared only five pounds apiece. Each of these shares was sold
originally for a hundred pounds. Within this twelvemonth they were sold at nine
thousand pounds a share; and lately at ten thousand: and are increasing,
because their profits increase, on which their dividends are grounded. Half of
the seventy-two shares are called king's shares, and are in less estimation
than the others, because subject to a grant of five hundred pounds a year, made
so long ago as the reign of James I. when the water was first brought to
London, or soon after.

I NOW descend to the Temple, and resume my journey along Fleet Street, as far
as the southern extremity of the walls of London, the ancient precinct; to
follow them to their opposite end near the Tower; to describe their neighboring
suburbs, and the parts of the city bordering on their interior sides. These,
with the city itself, shall form the final consideration, together with the
suburbs which point to Blackwall, and form a street of amazing extent.

ST. DUNSTAN'S CHURCH.
JUST beyond the entrance into Chancery Lane, is St. Dunstan's church. The saint
to whom it was dedicated was a person of great ingenuity; and excelled in
painting, engraving, and music. From the following lines it appears that he was
the inventor of the Aeolian harp: St. Dunstan's harp fast by the wall,
Upon a pin did hang a,
The harp itself, with ly and all,
Untouched by hand did twang a New View of London, i. 213.
.
For this he was represented to king Athelstan as a conjuror. He was an
excellent workman in brass and iron. It was when thus employed at his forge,
that he seized the devil by the nose with the red-hot tongs, till he roared
again. The demon had visited him in a female form, and suffered for intruding
on this woman-hating saint.

HIS church is probably of very ancient foundation: yet the first mention of it
is in 1237, when the abbot and convent of Westminster bestowed it on Henry III;
who bestowed the profits on the Domus Conversorum, or the house for converted
Jews. The two figures of savages on the outside of the clock, striking the
quarters with their clubs, were set up in 1671, and are much admired by the
gaping populace.

NEXT to the Temple, is another Serjeant's-Inn, destined, originally, for the
same purpose as that in Chancery Lane. And nearer to the Thames, a little east
of the King's Bench Walks, THE WHITE FRIARS.
stood the church and convent of Carmelites, or White Friars; founded in 1241,
by Sir Richard Gray, ancestor of the lord Greys of Codnor. Edward I. bestowed
on them more ground, that they might enlarge their buildings. The order
originated from the hermits of Mount Carmel, who inhabited the mountain which
Elias and Eliseus inhabited. On the dissolution its revenues were L. 63. 2 s. 4
d. Part of the house was granted by Henry to Richard Moresque; and the
chapter house, and other parts, to his physician William Butts, immortalized by
Shakespeare. Edward VI. bestowed the house inhabited by Doctor Butts, together
with the church, to the bishop of Worcester, and his successors. It was
afterward demolished, with all its tombs, and several houses, inhabited in the
reign of Edward VI. by people of fashion. That church was built by Sir Robert
Knolles, a great warrior in the time of Edward III. and Richard II; who was
honorably interred here in 1407. John Mowbray, earl of Nottingham, in 1382, in
his youthful years. Elizabeth wife of Henry earl of Kent, who had wasted his
substance by gaming. That noble family had for some time a house in the White
Friars. John lord Gray, son to Reginald lord Gray, of Wilton, in 1418: and
numbers of others of the common gentry.

BOLT-COURT.
I MUST by no means omit Bolt-court, the long residence of Doctor SAMUEL
JOHNSON, a man of the strongest natural abilities, great learning, a most
retentive memory, of the deepest and most unaffected piety and morality,
mingled with those numerous weaknesses and prejudices which his friends have
kindly taken care to draw from their dread abode. I brought on myself his
transient anger, by observing, that in his tour in Scotland he once had long
and woeful experience of oats being the food of men in Scotland, as they were
of horses in England. It was a national reflection unworthy of him, and I shot
my bolt. In return he gave me a tender hug See Doctor JOHNSON's Journey to the
Western Islands, p. 296 -- See his Dictionary, article Oats -- and my Voyage to
the Hebrides, first edition.
. Con amore, he also said of me. The dog is a Whig Mr. Boswel's Journal, 268.
. I admired the virtues of lord Russel, and pitied his fall. I should have been
a Whig at the Revolution. There have been periods since, in which I should have
been, what I now am, a moderate Tory; a supporter, as far as my little
influence extends, of a well-poised balance between the crown and people: but,
should the scale preponderate against the Salus populi, that moment may it be
said, The dog's a Whig!

SALISBURY-COURT.
FARTHER to the west of White Friars, is Salisbury-court, once the inn or city
mansion of the bishops of Salisbury; afterward of the Sackvilles: held at
first by a long lease from the sea, and then changed by bishop Jewel, for a
valuable consideration from that great family. It was successively called
Sackville-house, and Dorset-house. The great lord Buckhurst, created by James
I. earl of Dorset, wrote here his Porrex and Ferrex, a tragedy, DORSET-HOUSE.
which was performed at Whitehall, before queen Elizabeth. He was equally great
as a statesman and author. Here also died two of his successors: the last was
the gallant earl (of whom lord Clarendon gives so great a character) who
retired here on the murder of his royal master, and never after quitted the
place.

THE house being pulled down, THEATER.
was succeeded by other buildings, among which was a magnificent theater, built
after the Restoration, by Sir Christopher Wren; in which the company of
comedians, called the duke of York's servants, performed under the patentee,
Sir William Davenant. Here Betterton, and the best actors of the time,
entertained the public, till its taste grew so depraved that the new manager,
Doctor Davenant, was obliged to call in aid, music and rich scenery, to support
his house.

THE church of St. Bride's, with its fine steeple, built by the same great
architect, but lost in the various houses of the street, ST. BRIDE'S CHURCH.
stands farther on, on the south side. It was dedicated to St. Bridget; whether
she was Irish, or whether she was Scotch; whether she was maiden, or whether
she was wife, I will not dare to determine the contest. Her church was
originally small; but, by the piety of William Viner, warden of the Fleet about
the year 1480, was enlarged with a body and side-ailes, and ornamented with
grapes and vine-leaves, in allusion to his name. It was destroyed by the great
fire, and rebuilt soon after in its present form.

NOT far from this church lived the famous printer, Wynkyn de Word, at his inn
or house, the Faulcon; but I find he enprynted his Fruit of Times, in 1515, at
the sign of the son, in Fleet Street.

BRIDEWELL.
NOT far from the White Friars, near the west side of Fleet-ditch, was a well,
dedicated to one of the St. Brides, or Bridgets. This gave name to the
parish church, and the ancient palace of Bridewell, which was honored with the
residence of several of our monarchs, even as early as king John. It was formed
partly out of the remains of an ancient castle, ARX PALATINA.
the western Arx Palatina of the city, which stood near the little river Fleet,
near to the Thames. In 1087, William the Conqueror gave many of the choicest
materials toward the rebuilding of St. Paul's cathedral, which had been
destroyed by fire. And Henry I. gave as many of the stones, from the walls of
the castle-yard, as served to enclose and form the gates, and precinct of the
church. Notwithstanding this, the dwelling remained, and became the residence
of several of our monarchs Stow's Survaie, 116. Dugdale's St. Paul's, 6.
. To this palace that arbitrary prince convened all the abbots, and other heads
of religious houses, English and foreign, and squeezed out of them a hundred
thousand pounds; in those days an enormous sum. From the Cistercians, who would
not own his supremacy, not less than thirty-three thousand. Henry VIII. rebuilt
the palace, in a most magnificent manner, for the reception of the emperor
Charles V. who visited England in 1522. After all the expense, the emperor
lodged in Black Friars, and his suite in the new palace; and a gallery of
communication was flung over the ditch, and a passage cut through the city wall
into the emperor's apartments. The king often lodged here, particularly in
1529, when the question of his marriage with queen Catherine was agitated at
Black Friars. It fell afterward into decay, and was begged by the pious
prelate Ridley, from Edward VI. to be converted to some charitable purpose.
HOUSE OF CORRECTION.
That of a house of correction was determined on, for vagabonds of each sex and
all denominations. The first time I visited the place, there was not a single
male prisoner, and about twenty female. They were confined on a ground-floor,
and employed in beating of hemp. When the door was opened, by the keeper, they
ran toward it like so many hounds in kennel; and presented a most moving
sight: about twenty young creatures, the eldest not exceeding sixteen, many of
them with angelic faces, divested of every angelic passion; and featured with
impudence, impenitency, and profligacy; and clothed in the silken tatters of
squalid finery. A magisterial! a national opprobrium!!! -- What a
disadvantageous contrast to the Spinhuis, in Amsterdam, where the confined sit
under the eye of a matron spinning or sewing, in plain and neat dresses,
provided by the public. No trace of their former lives appears in their
countenances; a thorough reformation seems to have been effected, equally to
the emolument and honor of the republic. This is also the place of confinement
for disobedient and idle apprentices. They are kept separate, in airy cells;
and have an allotted task to be performed in a certain time. They, the men and
women, are employed in beating hemp, picking oakum, and packing of goods, and
are said to earn their maintenance.

BUT Bridewell is not only a prison for the dissolute, A HOUSE OF INDUSTRY.
but a hospital for the education of the industrious youth. Here twenty Arts
masters (as they are styled) consisting of decayed tradesmen, such as
shoemakers, tailors, flax-dressers, and weavers, have houses, and receive
apprentices, who are instructed in several trades; the masters receiving the
profit of their labors. After the boys have served their time with credit, they
are paid ten pounds to begin the world with; and are entitled to the freedom
of the city. They are dressed in blue, with a white hat. The procession of
these, and the children of Christ's Hospital, on Easter Monday and Tuesday, to
St. Bride's church, affords to the humane the most pleasing spectacle, as it
excites the reflection of the multitudes thus rescued from want, profligacy,
and perdition. The number of vagrants, and other indigent and miserable people,
received into this house the last year, was seven hundred and sixteen; many of
whom had physic, and other relief, as their necessities required, at the
expense of the hospital.

COURT OF JUSTICE.
SOME of the original building yet remains; as does the magnificent flight of
ancient stairs, which leads to the present court of justice, which is a
handsome apartment. Contiguous to it is the room of punishment; but in our mild
country, no other instrument is to be seen in it but a large whipping stocks.
This is said to have been the place in which the sentence of divorce was
pronounced against the worthy princess, which had been concluded on in the
opposite monastery.

HALL. FINE PICTURE BY HOLBEIN.
THE hall opens into the court-room. Over the chimney is the celebrated portrait
of Edward VI. by Holbein, representing that monarch bestowing the charter of
Bridewell, to Sir George Barnes, the lord mayor: by him is William earl of
Pembroke, a great favorite and distinguished character; and Thomas Goodrich,
bishop of Ely, and lord chancellor of England: and in a corner is the head of
the celebrated painter. There are doubts whether this picture was completed by
Holbein; for his death, and that of the king, very soon followed the solemnity
it records.

SIR William Withers, lord mayor of London, is painted, represented on
horseback. He was president in 1741, and bestowed on this hospital the iron
gates and marble pavement.

SIR William Turner, in long hair, furred robe, and gold chain; the face very
fine. This gentleman was lord mayor in 1669; a native of Kirk Leedham, in
Yorkshire, and a most liberal benefactor to his native place. He was painted by
Mr. Beale, for Mr. Knollys, who presented it to the governors of Bridewell.

ANOTHER portrait, of Sir Robert Geoffry, with long wig, and furred robes,
dated 1593. Two very fine portraits, of Charles II. sitting, and James II.
standing, by Lely. Finally, a picture of Slingsby Bethel, esquire lord mayor in
1756; the last work of the painter Hudson.

THE creek, called Fleet-ditch, FLEET-DITCH.
had its entrance from the Thames immediately below Bridewell; and reached as
far as Holborn-bridge, at the foot of Holborn-hill; and received into it the
little river Fleet, Turnmill brook, and another called Oldbourn, which gave
name to that vast street. The tide flowed up as high as Holborn-bridge, and
brought up barges of considerable burden. Over it were four stone bridges, and
on the sides extensive quays and warehouses. It was of such utility, that it
was scoured and kept open at vast expense; and, not later than 1606, near
twenty-eight thousand pounds were expended for that purpose.

IN the performing of this work, at the depth of fifteen feet, were found
several Roman utensils; and a little deeper, a great quantity of Roman coins,
in silver, copper, brass, and other metals, but none in gold. At Holborn-bridge
were found two brazen Lares, about four inches long; one a Bacchus, the other a
Ceres. It is a probable conjecture that these were thrown in by the affrighted
Romans, at the approach of the enraged Boadicia, who soon took ample revenge on
her insulting conquerors. Here were also found numbers of Saxon antiquities,
spurs, weapons, keys, seals, etc.; also medals, crosses, and crucifixes, which
might likewise have been flung in on occasion of some alarm.

THIS canal was afterward neglected, and became a nuisance; was filled up, and
a sewer formed beneath to convey the water to the river. The fine market, which
extends the whole length of the old ditch, rose in its place in 1733; in which
year an act was passed to empower the lord mayor and citizens to fill up the
ditch at their own expense, and to vest the see-simple of the ground in them
and their successors for ever. I recollect the present noble approach to
Blackfriars-bridge, the well built opening of CHATHAM-PLACE, a muddy and
genuine ditch. This had been the mouth of the creek, which, as Stow informs us,
in 1307 was of depth and width sufficient that ten or twelve ships navies at
once, with merchandises, were wont to come to the aforesaid bridge of Fleet
Survay of London, p. 15.
. It must be recollected, that at this period there were drawbridges upon
London Bridge, through which ships of a certain size might pass, and discharge
their cargoes in the mouth of the Fleet.

THIS end of Blackfriars-bridge now fills the filthy mouth of Fleet-ditch.
BLACKFRIARS-BRIDGE.
This elegant structure was built after the design of Mr. Robert Mylne. It
consists of nine arches, the center of which is a hundred feet wide. The whole
length nine hundred and ninety-five feet; the breadth of the carriage-way
twenty-eight feet; of the two footways seven each. Over each pier is a recess,
an apology for the beautiful pairs of ionic pillars which support them. The
effect of this singular application of columns is beautiful from the river. The
equinoctial tides rise here to the height of eighteen or twenty feet. -- The
first stone of this bridge was laid on October 30th, 1760; and it was completed
about the latter end of the year 1768; at the expense of L. 152, 840. 3 s. 10 d
Mr. Northouk.
. The magnificent prospect from the top is so well described in the Tour
through London Printed for J. Wallis.
(a little book that no walker of taste should be without) that I must refer my
reader to that judicious and pleasing compilation, to which I freely acknowledge
my frequent obligation.

ON the east side of Fleet-market, stands the Fleet-prison, FLEET-PRISON.
for debtors, founded at lest as early as the first of Richard I. It was also
the place of confinement for such who had incurred the displeasure of that
arbitrary court, the Star Chamber. This prison became such a scene of cruelty,
that, in the year 1729, a most benevolent set of gentlemen, prototypes of the
GOOD HOWARD, formed themselves into a committee, to search into the horrors of
the gloomy gaol.

Unpitied, and unheard, where misery moans,
Where sickness pines, where thirst and hunger burns,
And poor misfortune feels the lash of vice,
While in the land of liberty. The land
Whose every street and public meeting glow
With open freedom, little tyrants raged;
Snatched the lean morsel from the starving mouth;
Tore from cold wint'ry limbs the tattered weed;
Even robbed them of the last of comforts, sleep;
The freeborn Briton to the dungeon chained,
Or, as the lust of cruelty prevailed,
At pleasure marked him with inglorious stripes;
And crushed out lives by secret barbarous ways.
THOMSON. All these barbarities were realized. The House of Commons, the year
preceding, had taken up the enquiries See State Trials, vol. ix. page 107.
; and found that Huggins, warden of the Fleet, and Bambridge, his deputy, and
William Acton, turnkey, had exercised most shocking cruelties. Those monsters
were tried for the murder of five unhappy men, who died under the most horrid
treatment from them. Yet, notwithstanding the prosecution was recommended from
the throne, and conducted by the ablest lawyers, to the concern of all good men
these wretches escaped their merited punishment The same, pages 112, 145, 185,
203, 209, 218. -- For farther particulars respecting this prison, see Mr.
HOWARD on Prisons, octavo, 177.
.

PROFLIGATE MARRIAGES.
IN walking along the street, in my youth, on the side next to this prison, I
have often been tempted by the question, Sir, will you be pleased to walk in
and be married? Along this most lawless space was hung up the frequent sign of
a male and female hand conjoined, with, Marriages performed within, written
beneath. A dirty fellow invited you in. The parson was seen walking before his
shop; a squalid profligate figure, clad in a tattered played nightgown, with a
fiery face, and ready to couple you for a dram of gin, or roll of tobacco. Our
great chancellor, lord HARDWICK, put these demons to flight, and saved
thousands from the misery and disgrace which would be entailed by these
extemporary thoughtless unions.

I SHALL now give a general view of the Walls, CITY WALLS.
the ancient defense of the city; and of the Town-ditch, a work of considerable
labor. In my progress I shall point out whatsoever was remarkable in the
adjacent suburbs, or the parts within the city which border on the walls. There
never was any alteration made in the course of this first precinct, which was
preserved through all succeeding ages; and in every reparation or additional
strength which was thought necessary. Its direction was from the first
irregular. The Romans, as was frequently the case, consulted the necessity of
the ground Vegetius.
. It commenced at the Palatine-tower, ran in a strait line along the eminence
of Ludgate Hill, and above Fleet-ditch, as far as Newgate; then suddenly was
carried northerly to a spot a little beyond Aldersgate, and at that place ran
strait in a northern direction almost to Cripplegate; from whence it resumed a
strait eastern course as far as Bishopsgate, in which a long remnant of the
wall, still called London Wall, is to be seen. From Bishopsgate it assumes a
gentle curvature pointed to the Tower, over the site of which it originally
passed, and probably finished in a Castellum in this, as it did in the western
extremity. Another wall guarded the river, and ran the whole length of the
south side of the city, on the direction of the vast street called
Thames Street. But all this I shall particularize in my walk round the ancient
walls.

TOWN-DITCH.
I SHALL first mention another considerable addition to the strength of those
fortifications. The Town-ditch was a stupendous piece of work, began in the
reign of king John, in 1211, by the Londoners themselves, possibly as a
protection against their own monarch; who, in resentment to them, had just
removed the Exchequer to Northampton. It was two hundred feet broad, and
extended, on the outside of the walls, from Tower-ditch quite to Christ's
Hospital. Notwithstanding the multitude of hands employed, it was not finished
in less than two years. It was filled with water, as is evident from the
quantity of good fish Stow informs us was taken in it Survaie, i. p. 47.
. The citizens for some centuries were at great expense in cleansing and
keeping it open: but, after the last attempt, in 1595, the work was given over,
it became stable land, and was soon covered with buildings.

THE western wall terminated near the river with a sort, which I apprehend to
have been the castle of Montfitchet, soon to be mentioned.

BLACK FRIARS.
WITHIN the walls, opposite to Bridewell, stood the great house of Black Friars,
or Dominicans; founded by the interest and exhortations of Robert Kilwarby,
archbishop of Canterbury, about 1276; when Gregory Rocksley, and the barons of
London, presented him with the ground. Edward I. and his queen Elianor became
great benefactors; by the assistance of whom, the archbishop built the
monastery, and a large church richly ornamented. This obtained every immunity
which any religious house had. Its precinct was very large, had four gates, and
contained numbers of shops; the inhabitants of which were subject only to the
king, the superior of the house, and their own justices. It also became a
sanctuary for debtors, and even malefactors; a privilege which it preserved
even long after the suppression of religious houses.

To make way for this foundation, two lanes were pulled down, and part of the
city wall; which last was rebuilt immediately by a charter granted by Edward I.
for that purpose. CASTLE OF MONTFICHET.
The castle of Montfichet also fell a sacrifice to this house. It was built by
Gilbert de Montfichet, a follower of the Conqueror: and, growing ruinous, by
gift of the king the materials were used for the building of the church, on the
site of this ancient tower. The church became a fashionable place of interment
of people of rank; and to be buried in the habit of the order, was thought to
be a sure preservative against the attacks of the devil. Among other
illustrious personages was Hubert de Burgh, earl of Kent, and his wife
Margaret, sister to Alexander II. king of Scotland; the heart of queen Elianor;
lord Fanhope; that patron of learning John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester, beheaded
in 1470; James Touchet, earl of Audley, beheaded in 1497; Sir Thomas Brandon,
knight of the Garter; William Courteney, earl of Devonshire; and much other
great and noble dust.

IN the same church were also held several parlements. The remarkable one of
1450, in the reign of Henry VI. was adjourned from Westminster to this place;
here the weak monarch vainly endeavored to divert the storm raised by his
subjects against the favorite of his queen, William de la Pole, duke of
Suffolk; and by a poor expedient, a simulated exile, drove him to instant death.

HERE, in 1524, Henry VIII. held another, in order to oppress his subjects with
an aid of eight hundred thousand pounds, to carry on his imprudent wars. The
virtue of the commons resisted the demand, and gave him any a moderate tax.
This was called the Black parliament, as it began amongst the Black Monks, at
Westminster; and ended among the Black Friars.

HERE cardinal Campeggio, and cardinal Wolsey, sat, in 1529, as judges and
legates, on the question of divorce between Henry and the ill-fated princess
Catherine of Arragon; Henry and his queen at that time residing in the palace
of Bridewell, ready to attend the farcical citations of that court. And in this
place Wolsey himself fell from all his greatness; for here began the parliament
which gave the sentence of praemunire, the last stroke to all his prosperity.

WITH all the great events which honored this house, its revenues, at the
dissolution, were only one hundred pounds fifteen shillings and five pence.
Bishop Fisher held it in commendam; and in 1538, with fifteen brethren,
surrendered it to the king. Edward VI. afterward granted it to Sir Thomas
Cawarden.

IN the reign of queen Elizabeth, the Black Friars became a place much
inhabited by people of fashion. Among others, lord Herbert, son of William,
fourth earl of Worcester, had a house here, which queen Elizabeth, in 1600,
honored with her presence, on occasion of his nuptials with the daughter and
heiress of John lord Russel, son of Francis earl of Bedford. The queen was met
at the waterside by the bride, and carried to her house in a lectica by six
knights; her majesty dined there, and supped in the same neighborhood, with
lord Cobham; where there was a memorable mask of 8 ladies, and a strange
dawnce new invented. Their attire is this: each has a skirt of cloth of
silver; a rich wastcoat wrought with silks, and gold and silver; a mantell of
carnacion taffete, cast under the arm; and there hair loose about there
shoulders, curiously knotted and interlaced. Mrs. Fitton lead; these 8 ladys
maskets choose 8 ladies more to dawnce the measures. Mrs. Fitton went to the
queen, and woed her dawnce: her majesty (the love of Essex rankling in her
breast) asked what she was? Affection, she said: Affection! said the queen,
Affection is false. Yet her majesty rose up and dawnced Sydney Papers, ii. 203.
. At this time the queen was sixty: surely, as Mr. WALPOLE observed, it was at
that period as natural for her to be in love! -- I must not forget, that in her
passage from the bride's to lord Cobham's, she went through the house of Doctor
Puddin, and was presented by the doctor with a fan. -- The Count de Tillier,
ambassador of France, in the latter end of the reign of James I. resided here.
During his residence in England, the dreadful accident, called the Fatal
Vespers, happened near his house. A celebrated preacher of the order of the
Jesuits, father Drury, FATAL VESPERS.
gave a sermon to a large audience of British subjects, in a spacious room up
three pair of stairs. In the midst of the discourse the floor fell, and
ninety-four persons, besides the preacher, perished. It is disgusting to
reflect on the uncharitable bigotry of the times. The Protestants considered
the accident as a judgment on the Catholics, for their idolatry: the Catholics
attributed it to a plot of the Protestants, to bring destruction on their
dissenting brethren.

APOTHECARIES-HALL is within this precinct; APOTHECARIES-HALL.
a large and handsome building, in which medicines of all kinds are prepared,
and sold at a cheap rate: here also are made up the chests of medicines for the
army and navy. It was finished in 1670: but I am not acquainted with the time
of the first establishment of this useful institution: perhaps in that of James
I. there being in the hall the portrait of that monarch, and a bust of his
apothecary, Gideon Dilaune.

KING'S PRINTING HOUSE.
WITHIN this district was the King's Printing House; in which bibles, common
prayers, proclamations, and every thing respecting the public, were heretofore
printed. Here, in the time of Charles I. was made that dreadful omission, in
the seventh commandment, of, Thou SHALL commit adultery; for which archbishop
Laud very properly laid a heavy fine on the Stationers company, to whom the
printing of the sacred book is committed by patent. The SPECTATOR wittily
observes, that he fears that many young profligates, of both sexes, are
possessed of this spurious edition, and observe the commandment according to
that faulty reading.

LUDGATE.
THE first gate in this southern part of the walls is Ludgate, which stood on
the middle of Ludgate Hill. This, and every other gate in the city, are at
present pulled down, Temple Bar excepted. Ludgate was built during the wars of
the barons with king John: in 1215, they entered the city, and destroyed the
houses of the devoted Jews; and with their houses repaired the walls, and built
this gate. When it was taken down to be rebuilt, in 1586, a stone, with this
inscription in Hebrew, was found lodged in the wall. This is the ward of Rabbi
Moses, the son of the honorable Rabbi Isaac. It was in my memory a wretched
prison for debtors; it commenced what was called a free-prison, in 1373, but
soon lost that privilege. It was enlarged, and had the addition of a chapel, by
Sir Stephen Forster, on a very romantic occasion. He himself had been confined
there, and, begging at the grate, was accosted by a rich widow, who asked him
what sum would purchase his liberty. She paid it down, took him into her
service, and afterward married him. In the chapel was an inscription in honor
of him and Agnes his wife, dated 1454, the year in which he enjoyed the honor
of being lord mayor of the city.

THIS gate gave a conclusion to the rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyat. When he had,
with some loss, led his forces along the Strand and Fleet Street, in hopes of
being joined by the citizens, he found it shut against him, and strongly
manned; seized with despondency, he retreated a little down the hill, and,
flinging himself on a bench opposite to the inn called The Bell Savage, began
to repent the rashness of his enterprise and lament his folly. He was summoned
by a herald to submit; which he agreed to, requesting that it might be to a
gentleman; and accordingly yielded himself into the hard of Sir Maurice
Berkely, or Sir Clement Parton Fuller's Church History, book xvi. p. 14.
.

THE Bell Savage continues an inn to this day: BELL SAVAGE.
but the sign is disused. Stow says that it received its name from one Isabella
Savage, who had given the house to the company of Cutlers. The painter gave it
a very diverting origin, deriving it from a Bell and a Wild Man; so painted a
bell, with a savage man standing by it. The SPECTATOR alone gives the real
derivation; which is from La Belle Sauvage, a beautiful woman, described in an
old French romance as being found in a wilderness in a savage state Spectator,
vol. i. No 28.
.

OLD BAILEY.
ON the outside of Ludgate, the street called the Old Bailey runs parallel with
the walls as far as Newgate. In this street stood Sydney-house (at present
occupied by a coach-maker) once the residence of the Sydnies, till they removed
to Leicester-house Mr. Brook, Somerset Herald.
. The Sessions House, in which criminals of the county of Middlesex, and the
whole capital, are tried, is a very elegant building, erected within these few
years. The entrance into the area is narrow, to prevent a sudden ingress of
mob. Above it is the figure of Justice. Every precaution has been taken to keep
the court airy, and to prevent the effect of the effluvia arising from that
dreadful disorder the gaol-fever. The havoke it made in May, 1750, was a
melancholy admonition to those interested in every court of justice. My
respected kinsman Sir Samuel Pennant, lord mayor; baron Clark; Sir Thomas
Abney, judge of the common pleas; the under sheriff, some of the counsel, and
several of the jury, and of other persons, died of this putrid distemper.
Several of these fatal accidents have happened in this kingdom, which makes the
surprise the greater, that the neglect of the salutary precautions was
continued till the time of this awakening call. -- MR. HOWARD has given us a
view and plan of the great gaol of Newgate, as now rebuilt. Some of the defects
of the old one are remedied: but this FRIEND TO MANKIND seems still to think it
is not free from errors; and that, without great care, the prisoners are yet
liable to the fatal fever, the result of one of those errors State of Prisons,
4to edition, 213.
.

SURGEONS THEATER
BY a sort of second sight, the Surgeons Theater was built near this court of
conviction and Newgate, the concluding stage of the lives forfeited to the
justice of their country, several years before the fatal tree was removed from
Tyburn to its present site. It is a handsome building, ornamented with ionic
pilasters; and with a double flight of steps to the first floor. Beneath them
is a door for the admission of the bodies of murderers, and other felons; who,
noxious in their lives, make a sort of reparation to their fellow creatures, by
becoming useful after death.

THE new prison, which retains the name of Newgate, NEWGATE;
from the gate which, till within these few years, formed a part of it, is
immediately beyond the Sessions House: a massy building, with an extensive
front of rustic-work, with all the appearance of strength and security. Yet, in
the infamous riots of 1780, the felons confined even in the strongest holds
were released; stones of two or three tons in weight, to which the doors of
their cells were fastened, were raised by that resistless species of crow,
well-known to housebreakers by the name of the Pig's-foot. Such was the
violence of the fire, that the great iron bars of the windows were eaten
through; and the adjacent stones vitrified.

THE gate stood a little beyond this building: WHEN BUILT.
as a military way has been traced under it, there can be no doubt but there
had been one during the time the city was possessed by the Romans: but the
place had been made up, and no vestiges of it left. The gate, which supplied
its place, is supposed by Stow to have been erected between the years 1108 and
1128, when Richard Beauveyes, bishop of London, by enlarging the precincts of
St. Paul's, had obstructed the usual way under Ludgate, and made this new
outlet necessary. Mr. Howel says, that the original name was Chamberlain-gate.
It had been for ages a prison, even as long as the year 1218; and for persons
of rank, long before the Tower was used for that purpose. Robert Baldock,
chancellor to Edward III. was sent there; where, says Fabian, he ended his days
miserably Chr. vol. ii. part vii. 285.
: Sir Thomas Percie, lord Egremond, and other people of distinction, were
committed to that prison in 1457. In 1412, this gate was rebuilt by the
executors of the famous Sir Richard Whittington, out of the effects he had
allotted for works of charity: his statue, with the cat, remained in a nich to
its final demolition, on the rebuilding of the present prison. It was destroyed
in the fire of 1666, and rebuilt in its late form. It had one great arch, and
one postern for passengers: and on each side a half hexagon tower.

NEW COMPTER.
TO the north of Newgate, immediately across the street (and, with the east end
of St. Sepulchre's church, forming the entrance of Giltspur-street) is lately
built a vast pile, of a proper strength and simplicity, intended to supply the
place of one or both of the city prisons, called Compters. -- This, with the
edifices just mentioned, form all together a superb, but melancholy group of
public buildings; and are a noble improvement of this spot; which, a few years
ago, was much incumbered with a number of old houses, interrupting the free
course of the air, the view, and the intercourse of passengers.

NEWGATE-STREET.
IN Newgate-street, over the entrance into Bagnio-court, is a small sculpture in
stone of William Evans, gigantic porter to Charles I. and his diminutive
fellow servants, Jeffry Hudson, dwarf to the same monarch. It was probably by
his own consent that the latter was put into the pocket of the giant, and drawn
out by him King Charles 1 st Porter and Dwarf
M PA

THE KINGS PORT

Boar in East Cheap
IT

J668

Sculpture in ^anni^ Ally
WHEN (...) HAVE SOVGHT THE CITY ROVND
^^T STILL THIS IS THE HIGHEST GROUND
AUGUST THE 27

1688

at a masque at court, to amaze and divert the spectators Fuller's British
Worthies. Wales, p. 54.
. He had too much spirit to suffer such an insult, from even a Goliath: for
little Jeffry afterward commanded, with much reputation, a troop of horse in
his majesty's service: and, in 1644, killed Mr. Crofts, in a duel; who had
ventured to ridicule the irritable hero. Evans was seven feet and a half high.
Hudson only three feet nine inches.

THE Bagnio in this court seems the first we had in our capital: BAGNIOS.
a neat contrived building, says Strype, after the Turkish fashion, for the
purposes of sweating and hot-bathing; and much approved by the physicians of
the time. It probably was somewhat of the nature of Dominicetti's plan. At
length it became, besides, a sort of Hotel, or lodging-house, for any short
space. This, and the Hummums in Covent Garden, were the only houses of the kind
which supported a fair character; till Pero's, in St. James's-street, was set
up: since which, the convenience of Hotels, on the French model, is universally
experienced.

IN the wall of a house in Pannier-all^y, in this, or rather
Blowbladder-street, is a figure in ^one of a naked boy, sitting on something
like a pannier; and beneath is this inscription: When you have sought the city
round,
Yet still this is the highest ground.
Aug. 27, 1688. The stone has very much the appearance of an ancient sepulchral
one; and might have had the inscription cut on it to inform the public of the
elevated situation of the place.

CHURCH OF ST. SEPULCHER.
THE church of St. Sepulcher, or the holy sepulcher, beforementioned, stands at
a small distance from the site of the gate, on the north side of Snow-hill. It
was dedicated to the holy sepulcher at Jerusalem: but whether the original
church, which was of a great size, and long since demolished, was of the form
of that in Judea, is unknown. It was rebuilt in the reign of Henry VI. or
Edward IV. Popham, chancellor of Normandy, who is mentioned as having been
buried in the church of the Chartreux, was a great benefactor to this church.
The famous captain John Smith, who perhaps underwent more romantic adventures,
and deeds of arms, than any man who ever existed, rested here, in 1631, from
his turmoils. I refer to his history for his wondrous acts of chivalry; for the
kindness he experienced among the Turks, from the beauteous lady Tragebysanda!
the charitable lady Calamata! and the blessed Pokahontas! the great king of
Virginia's daughter.

A SOLEMN exhortation was formerly given to the prisoners, appointed to die at
Tyburn, in their way from Newgate. Mr. Robert Dow, merchant tailor, who died in
1612; left 26 s. 8 d. yearly for ever, that the bell-man should deliver from
the wall to the unhappy criminals, as they went by in the cart, a most pious
and aweful admonition. And also another, in the prison of Newgate, on the night
before they suffered. I give them in the note, as they are affectingly good
ADMONITION TO THE PRISONERS IN NEWGATE, ON THE NIGHT BEFORE EXECUTION. You
prisoners that are within,
Who for wickedness and sin,
after many mercies shown you, are now appointed to die tomorrow in the
forenoon; noon; give ear, and understand, that to morrow morning, the greatest
bell of St. Sepulchre's shall toll for you, in form and manner of a passing
bell, as used to be tolled for those that are at the point of death: to the end
that all godly people, hearing that bell, and knowing it is for year going to
your deaths, may be stirred up he^rtily to pray to GOD to bestow his grace and
mercy upon you, whilst you live. I beseech you, for JESUS CHRIST's sake, to
keep this night in watching and prayer, to the salvation of your own souls,
while there is yet time and place for mercy; as knowing to morrow you must
appear before the judgment seat of your Creator, there to give an account of
all things done in this life, and to suffer eternal torments for your sins
committed against him, unless, upon your hearty and unfeigned repentance, you
find mercy, through the merits, death, and passion of your only mediator and
advocate JESUS CHRIST, who now sits at the right hand of God, to make
intercession for as many of you as penitently return to him.

ADMONITION TO THE CONDEMNED CRIMINALS, AS THEY ARE ^ING BY ST. SEPULCHRE's
CHURCH-WALL TO EXECUTION. All good people, pray heartily unto God for these
poor sinners, who are now going to their death, for whom this great bell does
toll.

You that are condemned to die, repent with lamentable tears: ask mercy of the
Lord, for the salvation of your own souls, through the merits, death, and
passion of JESUS CHRIST, who now sits at the right hand of God, to make
intercession for as many of you as penitently return unto him.

LORD have mercy upon you.
CHRIST have mercy upon you.
LORD have mercy upon you.
CHRIST have mercy upon you.

.



FROM a little beyond Newgate, the walls take a north-easternly direction, as
far as Aldersgate.

I STILL pursue my journey along the northern suburbs; pass into
Aldersgate Street, near the site of its ancient gate. Aldersgate Street is open
and airy, and remarkable for the antiquity of several of its houses.
LONDON-HOUSE.
London-house, the residence of the later bishops of the diprese, is now no
more: its place is covered with the warehouses of Mr. Sedd^, the greatest and
most elegant repository of goods in the article of the cabinet manufactory, in
the world. Stow informs us it was once called Petre-house, having been the
property of the lords Petre: an ancestor of theirs, Sir William Petre, who died
in 1572, was a benefactor to the parish of St. Botclph, Aldersgate Collins's
Peerage, vii. 32.
, in which the family resided. I do not know the time when the family alienated
the place, or when it became the residence of the bishops of London; but
suspect that they occupied their palace near St. Paul's, till it was destroyed
in the great fire. London-house has long since been sold, under the powers of
an act of parliament: and the house in St. James's-square (the present
townhouse of the bishops of London) purchased for their use. The last tenant
of London-house was, I think, old Rawlinson, the nonjuring titular bishop of
London, who rented it. He died about twenty years ago; and left his antiquities
to the university of Oxford.

THANET-HOUSE.
ALMOST opposite to London-house, is Thanet-house. It was first called
Dorchester-house, having been the residence of the marquis of Dorchester
Strype's Stow, i. book iii. 121.
. In after times the town seat of the Tuftons, earls of Thanet: a magnificent
old house, built about the time of Charles I. It was hired or purchased by the
incendiary statesman lord Shaftsbury, for the purpose of living in the city, to
inflame the minds of the citizens; among whom he used to boast he could raise
ten thousand brisk boys by the holding up of his finger. He attempted to get
into the magistracy; but, being disappointed in his views, and terrified at the
apprehension of the detection of a conspiracy, he had entered into against his
prince, fled, in 1683, into Holland, where he soon died of the gout, heightened
by rage, and frustrated ambition When he was in power, he urged the Dutch war
with uncommon animosity; and always concluded his speeches with, Delenda est
Carthago! When he fled into Holland, he was so fearful of being given up, that
he solicited to be made burgess of Amsterdam, in order to secure his person.
The magistrates conferred on him that privilege, with these remarkable words; A
nostra CARTHAGINE non^um deleta, SALUTEM ACCIPE!
. This house, after undergoing various fortunes, in 1750 was converted into a
lyingin hospital; a most humane institution, supported by voluntary
contributions, which does great honor to its patrons.

IN this street was also the town house of the Nevils, WESTMORELAND AND
NORTHUMBERLAND HOUSES.
earls of Westmoreland; a magnificent pile, now frittered into various
tenements, but still keeps its name under that of Westmoreland court. The other
great northern family was lodged not far from hence, but within the walls, in a
street now called Bull-and-Mouth street; the Percies, earls of Northumberland:
but the business of those potent peers was chiefly in the camp; for they seldom
visited town but to brave the sovereign or the favorite.

LAUDERDALE-HOUSE stood on the east side of the northern end of the street. It
was the town seat of the duke of Lauderdale: LAUDERDALE-HOUSE.
but its place is now covered with the distillery belonging to Messrs Bote and
Walsh.

THE Bull-and-Mouth Inn, not far from the site of the gate, must not be passed
by, on account of the wonderful perversion of the name. It originally signifies
the mouth of Boulogne Harbor; which grew into a popular sign after the costly
capture of that place by Henry VII.

BARBICAN.
THE Barbican, which I mentioned, at page 9, as originally a Roman Specula, or
watchtower, lay a little to the north of this street. It was an appendage to
most fortified places. The Saxons gave them the title of Burgh-kenning. They
were esteemed so important, that the custody was always committed to some man
of rank. This was entrusted to the care of Robert Ufford, earl of Suffolk, by
Edward III. by the name of Base-court; which descended, by the marriage of
Cecilia, one of his daughters, to Sir John Willoughby, afterward, lord
Willoughby, of Parham. In the reign of queen Mary, it was possessed by
Catherine, widow of Charles Brandon, duke of Suffolk, in her own right baroness
Willoughby, of Ereshy; and then wife of Thomas Bertie, ancestor of the duke of
Ancaster: this lady, in her zeal against popery, had dressed a dog in a rochet
or surplice, used by bishops; and, in affront to bishop Gardener, had named a
dog after him C^llin^'s P^rage, ii. 3.
. This induced her and her husband to quit their house at the Barbican, and
retire into foreign parts, till the danger was over. The mansion was called
Willoughby-house, was of a great size, and inhabited by her son, who was called
Peregrine, because he happened to be born abroad during the flight of his
parents.

BRIDGEWATER-HOUSE.
THE earls of Bridgewater had also a house in the Barbican, called after their
title. It was burnt down in 1675, and lord Brackley, eldest son of the then
earl, and a younger brother, with their tutor, unfortunately perished in the
flames. The site is now called Bridgewater-square, or garden. It was in the
last century, at the time Newcastle was besieged, celebrated for its orchards,
productive of such quantities of fruits, says Mr. EVELYN, as never were
produced before or after that time. Mr. EVELYN attributes this to the decrease
of smoke, resulting from the scarcity of coal in the capital from that event.
He inveighs with great indignation at the increase of that species of fuel; and
at the introduction of so many manufactories, productive of smoke, which not
only deformed our noblest buildings with the sooty tinge, but also, from the
quantity of coal, brought on catarrhs, coughs, and consumptions, in a degree
unknown in Paris, and other cities, who make use of wood only. His words are
strong: The city of London, says he, resembles rather the face of mount Aetna,
the court of Vulcan Stromboli, or the suburbs of Hell, than an assembly of
rational creatures, and the imperial seat of our incomparable monarch EVELYN's
Fumifugium, 18, 19, 21, 30.
. The project of this good and able writer, of supplying London with
wood-fires, was certainly very humane: but, from the destruction of the woods
even in his days, was as little feasible as it would be at present.

GARTER-PLACE was another great house in this quarter. GARTER-PLACE.
It had been built by Sir Thomas Writhe, or Writhsley, garter king at arms, and
uncle to the first earl of Southampton Howel's Londinopolis, 305.
.

ST. ALBAN's church, in Wood-street, I mention on account of its antiquity,
having been founded in the time of king Athelstan, or about 924. Stow relates,
that Roman bricks were in his time to be seen mixed with the building Vol. i.
book iii. 76.
. Athelstan had also a house near, which gave name to Adel-street, or King
Adel-street, as it is called in old writings Newcourt, i. 236.
.

HEAD OF JAMES V.
IN this church, flung among Plebeian sculls, was the head of the unfortunate
James V. of Scotland. His body, for a long time, had remained embalmed at the
monastery at Shene. After the dissolution, it was cast among some rubbish,
where some workmen wantonly cut off the head; which was taken by Young, glazier
to queen Elizabeth, who was struck with its sweetness, arising from the
embalming materials. He kept it for some time at his house in Wood-street; but
at last gave it to the sexton, to bury among other bones in the charnel-house
Howel, 304.
. Such is often the end of ambitious greatness.

REDCROSS-STREET.
FROM the Barbican, Redcross-street, one of the ancient streets, points down
toward Cripplegate. In it the mitred abbot of Ramsey had his townhouse. It
was afterward called Drury-house, from its having been in aftertimes the
residence of Sir Drue Drury.

ST. GILES'S, CRIPPLEGATE.
ON approaching Cripplegate, is the church of St. Egidius, St. Giles. That name
always imports something of beggary: accordingly, this gate received its name
from the number of cripples and beggars, with which it was haunted formerly.
St. Giles was their patron; he was a noble Athenian, and of so great charity as
at length to give away the very coat he wore on his back, which he bestowed on
a sick beggar; who, no sooner put it on, but he was restored to health. The
same legend relates also to St. Martin. He had in this very street a
fraternity, founded by Henry V. who built here, for its use, a handsome house.
In the church rest from their labors some of my brethren; such as John Speed,
JOHN SPEED.
the famous English historian and topographer; and Robert Glover, ROBERT GLOVER.
Somerset herald, an indefatigable searcher of antiquities; and the zealous
John Fox, the famous martyrologist. JOHN FOX.


NOT far from this church, within the walls, in Monkwell-street, BARBER
SURGEONS-HALL.
stands Barber Surgeons-hall; which is esteemed one of the best works of Inigo
Jones. The theater, for the operations, is elliptical, and finely contrived.
Since the separation of the company of the surgeons from that of the barbers,
the building is in a manner deserted. Originally the chirurgic art, and that of
shaving, went, in this city, hand in hand, as they do to this day in several
parts of Europe. The barbers were first incorporated by Edward IV. in 1461;
but, prior to that, they had been formed into a body by Thomas Morestead,
surgeon to Henry IV, V, and VI, who died in 1450: and the grant had been
solicited by him, Jacques Fries, physician to Edward IV, and John Hobbes, his
physician and surgeon: at length it was incorporated by that prince, and his
brother Gloucester, in the name of St. Cosme and Damianus, brethren, physicians,
and martyrs. The company prospered for some time, till, finding that numbers
had crept in among them, less skilled in the lancet than the razor, from the
want of power of examining into the skill of the chirurgical members, they
obtained a new charter from Henry VIII. in which both professions were united.
A fine picture by Holbein, PICTURE BY HOLBEIN.
preserved in this hall, commemorates the event. Henry, in all his bluffness of
majesty, is represented giving them their new charter: among them is Doctor
Butts, immortalized by Shakespeare, in his play of Henry VIII. There are
seventeen of the company represented. I refer to the Gentleman's Magazine, for
April, 1789, for their names. I may mention what the inquisitive author has
omitted; that John Chamber, physician to Henry VIII. was in orders, and was
dean of the royal chapel and college, adjoining to Westminster Hall: and that
Thomas Vycary, was a citizen of London, and sergeant surgeon to Henry VIII.
Atkin's Memoirs of Medicine, 50,
and the three succeeding sovereigns. Aylif is another, who had been sheriff of
London, and a merchant of Blackwell-hall. I relate part of his story from his
epitaph: In surgery brought up in youth,
A knight here lies dead;
A knight, and eke a surgeon, such
As England seld has bred.
For which so sovereign gift of God,
Wherein he did excel;
King Henry VIII. called him to court,
Who loved him dearly well.
King Edward, for his service sake,
Bade him rise up a knight;
A name of praise, and ever since
He Sir John Ailife hight Strype's Stow, i. book iii. p. 67.
.


BY this charter, barbers were not to practice surgery, farther than drawing of
teeth: and surgeons were strictly prohibited from the feat or craft of barbery,
or shaving. Use was to make both perfect. But by the year 1745, it having been
discovered, that the above arts were foreign to, and independent of each other,
the barbers and the surgeons were, by act of parliament, separated, and made
distinct corporations. It was very fit that an association, which was now
become ludicrous, should be dissolved: our surgeons began at that period to
rise into great fame. True it is, that pupils then went to Paris to improve in
the art: at present, Europe looks up to our surgeons as on the summit of the
profession.

IT will be curious to turn back from these times to those of Henry VIII. to
compare the state of surgery: when at one time there were very few, as Gale
tells us, worthy to be called surgeons. His account of those employed in the
army is very humorous. "I remember," says he, when I was in the wars at Muttrel
(Montreuil) in the time of that most famous prince king Henry VIII. there was a
great rabblement, that took on them to be surgeons: some were sow-gelders, and
some horse-gelders, with tinkers, and cobblers. This noble sect did such great
cures, that they got themselves a perpetual name; for, like as Thessalus's sect
were called Thessalions, so was this noble rabblement, for their notorious
cures, called Dog-leaches; for in two dressings they did commonly make their
cures whole and found for ever; so that they neither felt heat nor cold, nor no
manner of pain after. But when the duke of Norfolk, who was then general,
understood how the people did die, and that of small wounds, he sent for me,
and certain other surgeons, commanding us to make search how these men came to
their death; whether it were by the grievousness of their wounds, or by the
lack of knowledge of the surgeons; and we, according to our commandment, made
search through all the camp; and found many of the same good fellows, which
took upon them the names of surgeons; not only the names, but the wages also.
We asking of them whether they were surgeons or no, they said they were; we
demanded with whom they were brought up, and they, with shameless faces, would
answer, either with one cunning man, or another, which was dead. Then we
demanded of them what surgery stuff they had to cure men withal; and they
would show us a pot, or a box, which they had in a budget; wherein was such
trumpery as they did use to grease horses heels withal, and laid upon scabbed
horses backs, with rewal, and such like. And others, that were cobblers and
tinkers, they used shoe-maker's wax, with the rust of old pans, and made
therewithal a noble salve, as they did term it. But in the end, this worthy
rabblement was committed to the Marshalsea, and threatened, by the duke's
grace, to be hanged for their worthy deeds, except they would declare the truth
what they were, and of what occupations; and in the end they did confess, as I
have declared to you before Atkin's Memoirs of Medicine, p. 99.
. I must not overlook another picture: DR. SCARBOROUGH.
it is of Doctor Scarborough, afterward Sir Charles, physician to Charles II.
James II. and king William. He was early appointed, by the College of
Physicians, to read anatomical lectures at this hall. He is dressed in the red
gown, hood, and cap, of a doctor in physic; and is in the attitude of speaking:
one hand on his breast, the other a little stretched out. On the left is
another figure, the demonstrating surgeon, dressed in the livery-gown of the
city of London; whose business it was to handle and show the parts of the
dissected bodies. Accordingly, he holds up the arm of a dead body, placed on a
table, partly covered with a sheet, with the sternum naked, and laid bare, and
the pectoral muscles appearing. He read these lectures with great applause
sixteen or seventeen years; and deservedly attained the character of the ablest
physician of his time, of great abilities and extensive learning INSCRIPTION
UNDER DR. SCARBOROUGH'S PICTURE. Haec tibi Scarburgi Anisius queis spiritus
intus
Corporis humani nobile versat opus.
Ille Opifex rerum tibi rerum arcana reclusit,
Et Numen verbis jussit inesse tuis.
Ille Dator rerum tibi res indulsit opimas,
Atque animum indultas qui been donet opes.
Alter erit quisquis magna haec exempla sequetur,
Alterutri vestrum nemo secundus erit.

. He died in 1693. I never saw the elegy on Mr. Cowley, imputed to him by Mr.
Granger: but the poet left one on his friend and physician, which he concludes
with this advice: Some hours at least on thy own pleasures spare,
Since the whole stock may soon exhausted be.
Bestow't not all in charity.
Let Nature and let Art do what they please,
When all is done, Life's an incurable disease.


To the north-east of this hall, near St. Alphage's church, SION COLLEGE.
opposite to the western wall, is Sion College, founded on the site of Elsing
Hospital or priory Newcourt's Repertorium, i. 347.
, by Thomas White, rector of St. Dunstan's in the west, in the reign of queen
Elizabeth; who gave three thousand pounds for the purchase and building the
college. It is governed by a president, two deans, and four assistants,
annually chosen: and all the clergy of London, and its suburbs, are fellows.
They have under their care almshouses for ten poor men, and as many women.
John Sympson, rector of St. Olave's, who superintended the building Newcourt's
Repertorium, i. 348.
, added, at his own expense, for the use of the studious part of the London
clergy, a library one hundred and twenty feet long; and amply filled with
books. The original hospital was founded by William Elsing, mercer, in 1329 (on
the site of a decayed nunnery) for the support of a hundred blind men. He
afterward changed it into a priory, and became himself the first prior; who,
with four canons regular, were to superintend the miserable objects.

GRUD-STREET.
I PASS by Cripplegate, by the south ends of Whitecross-street, and Grub-street:
the last celebrated for the (supposed) residence of authors of the less
fortunate tribe, and the trite jest of the more favored. In this same street
dwelt John Fox, abovementioned: and the very remarkable Henry Welby, esquire of
Lincolnshire, who lived in his house, in this street, forty-four years, without
ever being seen by any human being. He was to the hour of his death, (October
29th, 1636) possessed of a large estate; but an attempt being made on his life,
by his ungrateful younger brother, he took the frantic resolution, thus to
seclude himself from the world. He passed his days in most exemplary charity.
His management, in his strange retreat, is too long to relate: the curious
reader will find the whole in the 369th page of the Phoenix Britannicus.

THE Fletchers, Bowyers, Bowstring-makers, and of every thing relating to
archery, inhabited, in old times, this street. It is the last street, in this
part of the town, which was in being about the time of Aggas's map: all beyond
(as far as Bishopsgate-street without) were gardens, fields, or morass: the
last the original state of this part of the present London. FINSBURY, AND
MOORFIELD^.
This tract was in the manor of Finsbury, or rather Fensbury; and, in the days
of the historian Fitzstephen, was an errant fen; of which he gives the
following account, in his description of the pastimes of the citizens, in his
time; in which is given the awkward substitute of the skate. "And," says the
historian, when that vast lake, which waters the walls of the city toward the
north, is hard frozen, the youth in great numbers go to divert themselves on
the ice; some taking a small run, for an increment of velocity, place their
feet at a proper distance, and are carried sliding sideways a great way. Others
will make a large cake of ice, and, seating one of their companions upon it,
they take hold of one's hands and draw him along, when it happens, that, moving
swiftly on so slippery a plain, they all fall headlong. Others there are who
are still more expert in these amusements on the ice; they place certain bones,
the leg-bones of animals, under the soles of their feet, by tying them round
their ankles, and then, taking a pole shod with iron into their hands, they
push themselves forward by striking it against the ice, and are carried on with
a velocity equal to the flight of a bird, or a bolt discharged from a crossbow
Fitzstephen, etc. translated by an Antiquary, 51.
.

ON the north part of these fields stood the Dogge-house, DOG-HOUSE.
in which were kept the hounds for the amusement of the lord mayor. Here
resided the Common Hunt, an officer, the second in rank among those who formed
the Praetorian establishment: Master Sword Bearer alone took place of him:
Master Common Hunt followed him, and was to wait for his lordship's commands,
on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays Strype's Stow, ii. book v. p.
163. and his Survaie, p. 960.
.

IT was, in the time of Edward II. of so little value, that the whole was let
at the rent of four marks a year. It could only be passed over on causeways,
raised for the benefit of travelers. In 1414, Thomas Fauconer, mayor, opened
the postern in the wall, called Moorgate, MOORGATE.
to give the citizens a passage into the country. He also began to drain this
watery tract. In 1512, Roger Atchley, mayor, made further progress in the work
D^gda^e on embanking, 73.
. Successive attempts brought the ground into the state we see it at present:
most part of which, except the still-neglected Moorfields, is covered with
streets.

BETHLEM, OR BEDLAM.
BETWEEN Bishopsgate and Moorfields stood the hospital of St. Mary of Bethlem;
founded by Simon Fitz-mary, sheriff of London, in 1247, for a prior, canons,
brethren, and sisters, of a peculiar order; subject to the visitation of the
bishop of Bethlem. They were to be dressed in a black habit, and distinguished
by a star on their breast Steven's Suppl. ii. 274.
. In 1403 most of the houses belonging to this hospital were alienated, and
only the master left, who did not wear the habit of the order. It seems to have
been instituted for the reception and cure of lunatics: and had dependent on it
some lesser houses. Stow mentions one in St. Martin's in the Fields: but a
certain king, disliking that persons under such unhappy circumstances should be
so near the royal palace, caused them to be removed to Bethlem, without
Bishopsgate. In 1523, Stephen Gennings, merchant-taylor, with great humanity
left by will forty pounds toward the purchasing of this hospital for the
reception of lunatics. The mayor and commonalty had taken some steps to execute
his design: but in 1545 were prevented by the munificence of their monarch, who
bestowed it on the city of London, when it was converted to the humane purpose
of receiving persons laboring under this most dreadful of maladies. At first
(the medical relief excepted) their expenses were borne by their friends, or
their parishes; but this edifice being found too small, and growing ruinous, in
1675 the lord mayor and aldermen, removing the site to the present place, began
the noble hospital we now see; and, great as it is, finished it in the next
year, at the expense of seventeen thousand pounds. The front and wings extend
five hundred and forty feet; and make a magnificent appearance. It was built on
the plan of the palace of the Tuilleries, at Paris. Louis XIV. was so incensed
that his palace should be made the model for a lunatic hospital, that it was
said, he ordered a plan of the palace of our monarch at St. James's to be
taken, for offices of the vilest nature Hist. account, etc. of Bethlem
Hospital, published in 1783.
.

THE humanity of our nation, in 1734, was the cause that two large wings were
added for the reception of incurables, of which there were lately one hundred,
in that terrible state, maintained within these walls. The whole number of
distracted people, admitted in the last year, was two hundred and twenty-eight;
cured and discharged, a hundred and eighty-nine; buried, fourteen; remained
under cure two hundred and eighty.

OVER the gates are two capital figures, of raving and melancholy Madness, the
work of Caius Gabriel Cibber, the father of the admirable comedian and wit
Colley Cibber. Pope satirizes himself, when he makes these fine figures the
mere vehicle of abuse on the son, by calling them His brazen brainless
brothers. But Colley Cibber, after very long-suffering, took ample revenge, in
a short but bitter Philippic against our great poet; which touched his pride so
much as to contribute to bring him speedily to the grave.

ST LUKE's HOSPITAL.
OPPOSITE to Bethlem Hospital, on the north side of Moorfields, stood the
hospital of St. Luke, a long plain building, till of late appropriated to the
same purposes, but totally independent of the former. It was founded on the
humane consideration that Bethlem was incapable of receiving all the miserable
objects which were offered. Of late years, the patients were removed from the
old hospital, to a new one, erected under the same name, in Old-street, on the
plan of the former, extending in front three hundred and ninety-three feet.
Since the first admission of patients, on July 30th, 1751, to the same day
1787, three thousand six hundred and seventy-five have been admitted: of which
sixteen hundred and sixty-eight have been discharged cured: and twelve hundred
and two uncured. The old hospital is now pulled down, and replaced by a
handsome row of houses. By a very liberal regulation, uncured patients may be
taken in again, on the payment of five shillings a week: so that their friends
may, if they please, try a second time the force of medicine on their unhappy
relations or connections.

THE parish of St. Luke's was taken out of that of St. Giles's Cripplegate, by
an act in his late majesty's reign. I mention it merely to direct the reader's
attention to the steeple of the new church, which terminates most singularly in
a fluted obelisc.

ON the west side of Moorfields is the Artillery Ground: ARTILLERY GROUND.
a large piece of ground laid out for the purpose of proving the artillery; and
for exercising the military belonging to the city. It was originally in
Bishopsgate-street, where some land belonging to the priory of St. Mary Spittle
was used for the same purpose. William, last prior of this house, granted it,
for three ninety-nine years, to the fraternity of artillery, or the gunners of
the Tower, for the practice of great and small ordnance; and was long called
the Artillery Garden. This society was greatly patronised by Henry VIII: his
daughter Elizabeth favored it in a high degree; as became a princess whose
dominions were threatened with perpetual invasion from her potent rival. The
earl of Warwick (Ambrose Dudley) was master of the ordnance; under him, but
more particularly under William Thomas, master gunner of the queen's ship the
Victory, in 1584, the art was flung into system. Thomas proposed to the
council, that the charter granted to the Fraternity by Henry should be
confirmed, and that the earl of Warwick should be governor; and that a certain
number of able gunners should be appointed to instruct in the art, and that
none should be appointed to any of her majesty's ships or forts, but whom they
should approve. This plan was rejected: and the ground remained to the gunners
of the Tower Strype's Stow, i. book ii. p. 96, 97.
.

ARTILLERY COMPANY.
IN 1585 a new military society arose in the city; which, in those affrighted
times, finding itself grievously harrassed by continual musters and exercising
of men, found a remedy in the gallant spirit of several of the citizens. A
number (among whom were many skilful officers, who had served with credit
abroad) formed themselves into a respectable body of volunteers, exercised
themselves, and trained others to the art of war. Within two years there were
near three hundred merchants, and others, capable of training and teaching
soldiers the management of their pieces, pikes, and halbards; to march,
countermarch, and ring. They made a considerable figure at the camp at
Tilbury, in the celebrated year 1588. After that time, this useful discipline
was neglected; but in 1610 it revived, and the volunteers became so numerous as
to amount in time to six thousand men. The old place of exercise being too
small for the purpose, they removed to the New Artillery Ground. In the year
1614, there was a general muster; and the citizens, bravely furnished, under
twenty captains, made a most creditable appearance. In 1622 they began to build
on one side an armoury, which is excellently supplied. Charles II. when prince,
and his brother James duke of York, entered into this company: and on the
Restoration the duke himself took the command, and called it his own company.
The president, and other officers, consist of the leading persons in the city:
and one of the royal family is captain general. It consists of three hundred
men.

BESIDES this military force, the city has six regiments of militia, commanded
by gentlemen of the first rank in the city: these are under a lieutenancy
peculiar to London; and are exercised.

IT was this body, then known by the name of the Trained-bands, which decided
the fate of the civil war of the last century. On every occasion they behaved
with the spirit and perseverance of the most veteran troops. They were
commanded by Skippon, captain of the Artillery Garden, who had served long in
Holland; and raised himself from a common soldier to the rank of captain, and
proved himself an excellent officer. From the service he had been in, he came
over with full prejudice against church and state, so was greatly in the
confidence of his party Clarendon, ii. 380.
. He was totally illiterate; but his speeches to his soldiers had more weight
in their ears than the finest oratory. On marching to join the earl of Essex,
this was his speech: Come, my boys, my brave boys, let us pray heartily, and
fight heartily: I will run the same fortune and hazards with you. Remember the
cause is for GOD, and for the defense of yourselves, your wives, and children.
Come, my honest brave boys, pray heartily and fight heartily, and GOD will
bless you Whitelock's Memorials, 65.
.

ON the back of Bethlem hospital is a long street, LONDON WALL.
called London Wall, from being bounded on the north by a long extent of the
wall, in which are here and there a few traces of the Roman masonry.

A SMALL walk brought me to Bishopsgate-street Without. DEVONSHIRE-SQUARE.
On the east side is Devonshire-square: the earls of Devonshire had a
townhouse near the street, which was called after their name. William, the
second earl, died in it in 1628. It was originally built by Jasper Fisher, a
clerk in Chancery. Stow calls it a large and beautiful house, with gardens of
pleasure, bowling-allies, and the like. His vanity ruined him, and his house
got the name of Fisher's Folly. It had a quick succession of owners. It
belonged to Mr. Cornwallis; to Sir Roger Manners; and to Edward earl of Oxford,
lord high chamberlain Stow, book ii. 96.
, the same who is recorded to have presented to queen Elizabeth the first
perfumed gloves ever brought into England. Her majesty lodged in this house in
one of her visits to the city: probably when this gallant peer was owner. After
him it fell to the Cavendishes; but that they resided in this neighborhood long
before is to be supposed, as their ancestor, Thomas Cavendish, treasurer of the
exchequer to Henry VIII. interred his wife in St. Botolph's, the parish church:
and by will, dated April 13th, 1523, bequeaths a legacy toward its repairs
Colli^'s Noble Families, 6.
.

NEAR it was another fair house, built by one of our nobility, lord John Powlet
Stow's Survaie, 319.
; I conjecture, an ancestor of the duke of Bolton. I imagine him to have been
the second marquis of Winchester, before he came to his title.

ST. MARY SPITTLE.
ON the east side of the north end of this street stood the priory and hospital
of St. Mary Spittle; founded, in 1197, by Walter Brune, sheriff of London, and
Rosia his wife, for canons regular of the order of St. Augustine. It was noted
for its pulpit cross, at which a preacher was wont to preach a sermon
consolidated out of four others, which had been preached at St. Paul's Cross,
on Good Friday, and the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday in Easter week; and then
to give a sermon of his own. At all which sermons the mayor and aldermen were
to attend, dressed on each occasion in different colored robes. This custom
continued till the destruction of church government, in the civil wars of the
last century. At the dissolution, here were found not fewer than a hundred and
fourscore beds, well furnished for the reception of the poor See page 11 for an
account of the antiquities found in these fields.
.

THE great population of this part of the town, called Spittle-fields, was
owing to the blessed prosecutions of the Hugonots, in the reign of Louis le
Grand; who sent thousands of his industrious subjects into our kingdom, to
transfer to his bitterest enemies the arts and manufactures of his own kingdom.
They flourished in this place to a great degree: at present they suffer a
temporary depression from the giddiness of fashion, which, of late, prefers the
vegetable material of cotton, to that produced from the ancient silkworm
Weever, 427.
.

IN April 1559, queen Elizabeth visited St. Mary Spittle Strype's Stow, i. book
p. 97.
in great state; possibly to hear a sermon given from the cross. She was
attended by a thousand men in harness, with shirts of mail, and corslets, and
morice pikes Moorish pikes. -- See Mr. Grose's Ancient Armcur, 50, 51.
, and ten great pieces carried through London unto the court, with drums and
trumpets sounding, and two morice-dancings, and in a cart two white bears.

IN 1617, numbers of lords, and others of the king's most honorable privy
council (his majesty being then in Scotland) heard a sermon preached here by
the Reverend Doctor Page, of Deptford; and afterward rode with the lord mayor,
Sir John Leman, fishmonger, to his house near Billingsgate, where they were
entertained with a most splendid dinner Stow's Survaie, 323.
. In honor of Sir John, and his brother fishmongers, Anthony Monday wrote his
Chrysonaleia, or Golden Fishing.

BISHOPSGATE-STREET WITHOUT.
BISHOPSGATE-STREET WITHOUT, extends to Shoreditch, a long street, not named
from Shore, the husband of the ill-fated Jane Shore, but from its lord, Sir
John de Sordich, a person deeply skilled in the laws, and much trusted by
Edward III. and who was sent by him, in 1343, to the pope Clement VI. to
remonstrate to his holiness against his clame of presenting to English livings,
and filling them with foreigners, who never resided on their cures, and drained
the kingdom of its wealth. This, it may be easily supposed, the pope took much
amiss; insomuch that Sir John thought it best to make a speedy retreat
Holinshed, 365. Weever's Funeral Monuments, 427.
. It appears likewise that this knight was a very valiant man, and served the
king with his sword, as well as his tongue.

LONG after, Shoreditch acquired much fame from another great man, Barlo, an
inhabitant of this place, and a citizen; who acquired such honor as an archer,
by his success in a shooting-match at Windsor, before Henry VIII. that the king
named him on the spot Duke of Shoreditch. For a great series of years after
this, the captain of the archers of London retained the title. On the 17th of
September, 1583, the Duke (at the expense of the city) had a magnificent trial
of skill: he sent a summons to all his officers, and chief nobility, with all
their train of archery in and about London, to be ready to accompany him to
Smithfield. In obedience, appeared the marquis of Barlo, and the marquis of
Clerkenwell, with hunters who wound their horns: the marquises of Islington,
Hogsden, Pankridge, and Shacklewell, who marched with all their train
fantastically habited. Near a thousand had gold chains; and all were gorgeously
attired. The sum of archers were three thousand; their guards, with bills, four
thousand; besides pages and henchmen. And the duke sallied out to meet them
from Merchant Tailors hall Strype's Stow, i. book i. p. 250.
, to exhibit such a sight that was never seen before, nor ever will again:
unless a combination of the modern societies of archers should treat the
capital with the revival of this ancient and worthy pageantry.

THE building of Bishopsgate, which divides the street, BISHOPSGATE.
is attributed to Erkenwald, elected bishop of London in 675: the reparation of
it, to William, prelate at the time of the Conquest. Henry III. confirmed to
the Hans merchants certain privileges, for which they were bound to support
this gate. Accordingly, in 1479, it was elegantly rebuilt by them. In memory of
the founder, and the first repairer, there were two statues of bishops: and
besides, two others, conjectured to have been designed for Alfred, and Aeldred
earl of Mercia, to whose care that great prince had committed the gate.

NOT far without the gate stands an inn or tavern, WHITE HEART.
called the White Heart, of most ancient date, not less than 1480, which is
still perpetuated in large figures in the front: but none of the original
building appears to be left. I believe there are but very few houses in London
remaining, of greater age than the time of queen Elizabeth, or James I. The
great fire almost entirely destroyed those in the city. In Holborn, Broad St.
Giles's, and St. John's Lane, Clerkenwell, are some old houses: in Catherine
Wheel Alley, in this street, is a very old house in a ruinous state: and there
are some also about Temple Bar. It is no wonder that we have so few; till about
the year 1200 there were very few stone houses, and none tiled or slated: they
were built with wood, and thatched with straw or reeds. In the year 1189,
Richard I. ordered that they should be built with stone to a certain height,
and that they should be covered with slate or burnt tile. This order was
repeated, but it was long before it was obeyed. This is not much to be wondered
at; for, above a century afterward, such simplicity reigned, that one Peter
Spileman made fine for his lands to Edward II. to find (among other things)
litter for the king's bed, and hay for his horse Blunt's Jocular Tenures, 123,
last edition.
.

HOUND^DITCH.
I WILL continue my journey eastward from Bishopssgate. On the outside, parallel
to the walls, runs Houndsditch, now a long street, formerly a filthy ditch;
which took its name from being the place into which dead dogs, and all manner
of dirt was thrown. Into it, as worthy of no better sepulture, was thrown the
noble Edric, the murderer of his master Edmund Ironside; after having been
drawn by his heels from Baynard's-castle, and tormented to death by burning
torches. Here it was customary for pious people to walk, on purpose to relieve
the bed-ridden, who lay on a ground floor, covered with a neat cloth, and with
a pair of beads, to show to charitable passengers their helpless situation, and
that they were incapable of doing more than pray for them.

DUKE'S PLACE.
DUKE'S PLACE is a considerable place, much inhabited by the Jews: it stands on
the site of the priory of the Holy Trinity, or Christ-church; founded, in 1108,
by Matilda, wife to Henry I: PRIORY OF CHRIST-CHURCH.
the prior was always an alderman of London, and of Portsoken ward; who, if he
happened to be exceedingly pious, appointed a substitute to transact temporal
matters. Norman was the first prior; and he and his successors rode, on solemn
days, with the aldermen, but in their monastic habits. This is said to have
been the richest priory in England; and possibly for that reason was selected
to be the first which was dissolved Fuller's Church History, book vi. 306.
. Henry VIII. granted it to Sir Thomas Audley, afterward lord chancellor of
England; who inhabited the priory, and died there in 1554. By the marriage of
his daughter and sole heiress Margaret, to Thomas duke of Norfolk, it was
conveyed into the Howard family; and received the name of Duke's Place. In
1562, he rode through the city with his duchess, to his residence here,
attended by a hundred horse in his livery, with his gentlemen before him in
coats guarded with velvet, preceded by the four heralds, Clarencieux, Somerset,
Red Cross, and Blue Mantle. So respectable was the appearance of our ancient
nobility.

TWO gateways, and some parts of the ruins of this priory, may be still traced,
enveloped in more modern buildings: some of the south transept may be
discovered in certain houses; from which it appears that the architecture was
of the round arch, or Saxon style Mr. Carter has made drawings of these remains.
.

A CURIOUS investigator of antiquities has lately recovered the beautiful
little chapel of St. Michael, near Aldgate, under the house of Mr. Relph, in
Leadenhall-street Gentleman's Magazine, April 1789, 293. tab. i.
. It is supposed to have been built by prior Norman, about the year 1108, in
the gothic architecture. Its dimensions are forty-eight feet by sixteen; and is
built with square pieces of chalk. The arches are very elegant, supported by
ribs, which converge, and meet on the capitals of the pillars; which are now
nearly buried in the earth; but are supposed to be covered with sixteen feet of
soil. The whole addition of soil, since its foundation, is supposed to have
been twenty-six feet; an amazing increase, which might almost occasion one to
suspect it to have been the sub-chapel of some now-lost church.

THE church of St. James, Duke's Place, rose out of the ruins of this priory,
in the time of James I. and the mayoralty of Sir Edward Barkham.

ALDGATE.
EALDGATE, or Aldgate, which signifies Old Gate, stands in the place where the
wall forms an angle, and takes a southerly direction, and terminated in a
postern near Tower Hill. It was one of the four principal gates; the Roman road
passed under it, so one must have existed on the site in the earliest times. It
was also one of the seven that had double doors, as was evident by the hinges,
which existed in the time of Stow. Mention is made of it in the reign of Edgar,
by the name of Ealdgate. In the fierce wars between king John and his barons,
the latter entered the city through this gate, and committed great ravages
among the houses of the religious. Their chieftains repaired, or rather rebuilt
Aldgate, after the Norman manner; and made use of stone brought from Caen, and
a small brick called the Flanders tile, which probably has been often mistaken
for Roman. This gate was of great strength, and, what was peculiar to it, had a
deep well within.

IN 1471, the Bastard Falconbridge, at the head of five thousand riotous
people, attacked the city on this side, won this gate, and forced a way in for
a few of his forces; but, the portcullis being let down, they were all slain.
The valiant alderman of the ward, and the recorder, ordered it to be drawn up,
and sallying forth, defeated the Bastard with great slaughter. In 1606, this
gate was taken down and rebuilt, under the care of Martin Bond, aforementioned:
as a proof of its antiquity, many Roman coins were found among the foundations.

IMMEDIATELY without the gate, is the church of St. Botolph's, ST. BOTOLPH'S,
ALDGATE.
Aldgate. This is one of four dedicated, in London, to this favorite saint. In
it is the vault of the Darcies, of the north; and the tomb of Thomas lord
Darcie, knight of the Garter; with his figure on it, representing him asleep,
with a shroud wrapped round him; his face, breast, and arms naked. The figure
is at present deformed by fresh painting, and the inscription rendered
illegible. This nobleman, disliking the innovations in religious matters, took
a secret part in the insurrection called the Pilgrimage of grace: and, in
conjunction with the archbishop of York, was supposed to have given up to Ask,
chief of the malcontents, the castle of Pontefract, on very frivolous
pretenses. He lost his head on Tower Hill, in 1537, and was interred in this
church. He had been in high favor with the king; was entrusted by him, in 1510,
with fifteen hundred archers, and four great ships, to assist Ferdinand against
the Moors of Africa; but that monarch, having brought his designs to succeed to
his wish, dismissed lord Darcie and his forces with rich rewards Lord Herbert's
life of Henry VIII. p. 15.
.

HERE also was buried another victim to the unrelenting Henry, Sir Nichol's
Carew, his master of the horse, and knight of the Garter. This gentleman was
charged with nothing more than of being of council with Henry Courtney, marquis
of Exeter, for the imaginary plot of deposing his master, and making cardinal
Pole king in his stead: for this, on March 3d, 1538, he suffered on Tower Hill.
By the instructions of his keeper, he imbibed the principles of the reformers,
and died professing their religion.

HOUSE OF JOHN STOW.
NEAR Aldgate lived and died the able historian John Stow. He relates a cruel
execution on a gibbet, erected on the pavement before his house, on the bailiff
of Rumford, in the time of Edward VI. In that age there were most barbarous and
tyrannous punishments, by martial law, against all spreaders of rumors. The
times were turbulent, but slighter penalties than death might have sufficed.
The unhappy man, on the ladder, declared, in the presence of our historian,
That he knew not for what offense he was brought to die, "except for words by
me spoken yesternight to Sir Stephen, curate and preacher of this parish; which
were these. He asked me, What news in the country? I answered, Heavy news.
Why, quoth he? It is said, quoth I, that many men be up in Essex; but, thanks
be to God, all is in good quiet about us. And this was all, as God be my
judge." Upon these words of the prisoner, Sir Stephen, to avoid the reproach
of the people, left the city, and never was heard of since among them to my
knowledge. -- I shall have farther occasion to speak of Sir Stephen, who was a
fanatical firebrand of those days.

WHITECHAPEL.
ON the outside of the gate, begins the long street and suburbs of Whitechapel.
The church stands very distant from the entrance into the street. It was
originally a chapel of ease to Stepney, and known, as early as the year 1336,
by the name of the church of St. Mary Matfelon; which is said to signify, in
the Hebrew, Mary lately delivered of her holy child: as the township was styled
Villa Beatae Mariae de Matfelon Stow, ii. book iv. p, 44.
. It is now a very rich rectory, in the gift of Brazen-nose College, Oxford.

IN this parish some of our nobility had formerly their villas, for the sake of
the country air. Here Cromwell earl of Essex, the short-lived minister of Henry
VIII. had a house; and the famous Gondamor retired here, when disengaged from
his bubble, James I.

PARALLEL to the walls, between Aldgate and the Tower, MINORIES;
is the street called the Minories; named from certain poor ladies of the order
of St. Clare, or minoresses, who had been invited into England by Blanch queen
of Navarre, wife to Edmund earl of Lancaster; who, in 1293, founded here, for
their reception, a convent. On its suppression it was converted into a
dwelling house, and granted by the king to several great people, who inhabited
it. The bishops of Bath and Wells once had it, in lieu of their mansion in the
Strand: and in 1552, Henry Gray, duke of Suffolk, possessed it by patent from
Edward VI. On his attainder it reverted to the crown, in which it continued
till the Restoration. Soon after, a new house was built on it, called the
King's, for what reason is unknown. Charles granted it to Colonel William
Leg, who resided there, died in it in 1672, and was buried from thence, with
great funeral pomp, in the adjoining church, that of Trinity Minories: and his
descendants, of the Dartmouth family, still continue to make it the place of
their interment.

NOW A FINE STREET.
THIS street, from being as despicable as any in the city, has of late years
been most excellently rebuilt; is filled with several spacious shops; is become
a fine street; and, on one side, has its square, its circus, and its crescent.

GOODMAN'S FIELDS.
BEHIND this street is Goodman's Fields, or rather square. Stow, in his simple
manner, tells, that in his time one Trolop, and afterward Goodman, were the
farmers there; and that the fields were a farm belonging to the said nunrie;
at the which farm I myself (says he) in my youth, have fetched many a half
penny worth of milk, and never had less then 3 ale pints for a half penny in
the summer, nor less then one ale quart for a half penny in the winter,
always hot from the kine His Survaie, 224.
.

THE theater in Goodman's Fields will always be remembered by my cotemporaries,
as the stage where Garrick first showed those powers, which, for such a number
of years, astonished and charmed the public: his first appearance was on
October 19th, 1741. One Odel founded the playhouse in this square, in 1728. As
Sir John Hawkins expresses it, a halo of brothels Life of Doctor Johnson, 76.
soon incircled that, as it does all theaters: and drove away the industrious
inhabitants. This theater was rebuilt, in an expensive manner, by Henry
Giffard, in 1737; but was suppressed by the excellent act for the licensing of
places of dramatical entertainment. Yet it was supported a few years by an
evasion, during which time, Mr. Garrick entered himself of the company. He drew
an audience of nobility and gentry, whose carriages filled the whole space from
Temple Bar to Whitechapel Life of Garrick, i. 42.
.

ON the west side of this portion of the walls, HOUSE OF CROSSED FRIARS;
stood the house of the Crutched or Crossed Friars, or Fratres sanctae Crucis.
The order was instituted, or at lest reformed, about the year 1169, by Gerard,
prior of St. Mary de Morello, at Bologna. They astonished the English by
appearing among them, in 1244, and requiring from the opulent, a house to live
in, telling them they were privileged by the pope to be exempt from being
reproached by any body; and that they had from him power to excommunicate those
who were hardy enough to reprove them. Two citizens, Ralph Hosier, and William
Sabernes, were wise enough to accommodate them with a house in this place, and
became friars in it. Originally they carried in their hands an iron cross,
which they afterward changed into one of silver. They wore a cross, made of
red cloth, on their garment; which at first was gray, and in later times
altered to blue. One Adams was the first prior: Edmund Streatham, the last.
Their annual income was only L. 52. 13 s. 4 d. Henry VIII. granted their house
to Sir Thomas Wyat, GRANTED TO SIR THOMAS WYAT.
the elder, who built a handsome mansion on part of the site. This was the
gentleman whom Anthony Wood Athenae Ox. i. 56.
(not without justice) calls the delight of the muses, and of mankind. He had
the honor to be in great intimacy with the congenial peer, Henry earl of Surry.
They were the refiners of our poetry: the elegant effusions of their muses are
united in a little book published in 1585, entitled, Songs and Sonnets, by the
right honorable Henry Howard, late earl of Surry, and others. Sir Thomas died
in 1541, of a violent fever, in Dorsetshire, contracted by hard riding to
conduct to court the emperor's ambassador, who had landed at Falmouth. He was
highly celebrated by his noble friend, and by every person of genius in the age
in which he lived.

LUMLEY-HOUSE.
THIS house afterward became the residence of John lord Lumley, a celebrated
warrior in the time of Henry VIII; who distinguished himself greatly at the
battle of Floddon, by his valor, and the number of men he brought into the
field. Notwithstanding this, his zeal for the old religion engaged him in the
Pilgrimage of Grace; from which he with much dexterity extricated himself and
followers. But his only son soon after lost his head, for his concern in a
fresh insurrection. John lord Lumley, grandson of the first, was among the few
nobility of that time who had a taste for literature. He had the good fortune
to marry his sister Barbara to my illustrious countryman Humphrey Llwyd, of
Denbigh Tour in Wales, vol. ii. 31.
, and by his assistance formed a considerable library, which at present makes a
most valuable part in the British Museum.

THE NAVY OFFICE.
IN the place of this rose the Navy Office, a building of no beauty; in which
the comptroller of the navy used to reside, and all business respecting the
payment of seamen's wages, and many other naval matters, were transacted; but
this office is now removed to Somerset House. In the place of the Old Navy
Office, the India company have erected a most magnificent warehouse, a regular
oblong square, of about two hundred and fifty feet, by a hundred and sixty;
enclosing a court of a hundred and fifty, by sixty, entered by an arched
gateway. This is the great repository of the teas. I am told that the
searchers, who have frequent occasions to thrust their arms deep into the
chests, often feel numbnesses and paralytic affections?

THE friars hall was converted into a glass-house, A GLASS-HOUSE.
for the making of drinking glasses; which, with forty thousand billets of
wood, was destroyed by fire, in 1575 Stow's Survaie, 293.
. The manufacture was set up in 1557, and was the first of the kind known in
England. I may add here, that the finest flint glass was first made at the
Savoy; and the first glass plates for looking-glasses, and coach windows, in
1673, at Lambeth, under the patronage of George Villiers, duke of Buckingham.

I FIND among the list of persons interred in the church belonging to these
friars, the name of Sir Rhys Gryffydd, a Welshman, who lost his head on
Tower Hill, in 1531. His servant, John Hughes, was hanged at Tyburn the same
afternoon Holinshed.
. I cannot learn what their crime was, in a reign when very trifling matters,
and often bare suspicion, brought on a capital penalty.

NEAR this place stood another Northumberland-house, inhabited,
NORTHUMBERLAND-HOUSE.
in the reign of Henry VI. by two of the earls of Northumberland: one lost his
life in the battle of St. Albans; the other, his son, in that of Towton. Being
deserted by the Percies, the gardens were converted into bowling-allies, and
other parts, says Stow, into dicing-houses. This, I imagine, was the first of
those pernicious places of resort, for he calls it their ancient and only
patron of misrule.

IN Mark-lane, near this place, stood the magnificent house Strype, i. book ii.
41.
built by Sir William Sharrington, a chief officer of the mint,
SHARRINGTON-HOUSE.
in the reign of Edward VI. He was the instrument of the ambition of Thomas
Seymour, lord admiral: he fell with his master, was condemned and attained: and
Sharrington-house bestowed on the earl of Arundel, being thought a fit
habitation for that great peer, on account of its size and splendour. Let me
add, that Sir William was pardoned, emerged from his misfortunes, and soon
raised another considerable estate, under the favor of Seymour's rival, Dudley
duke of Northumberland Carte, i. 231.
; possibly at the price of the admiral's blood, against whom he was chief
evidence. Mr. WALPOLE has a drawing of Sir William, after Holbein.

ALL HALLOWS BARKING.
AT the bottom of this lane, in Tower-street, stands the church of All Hallows
Barking. Legend says, that Edward I. when prince of Wales, was admonished, by a
vision, to erect an image here to the glorious virgin; and, in case he visited
it five times in the year, he was to be victorious over all nations, and in
particular over Scotland and Wales. The image grew into great repute, and vast
were the pilgrimages to it, till the suppression. An indulgence of forty days
was granted to every one who performed this act of devotion Newcourt, i. 238,
765.
.

PERSONS BEHEADED BURIED THERE.
IN this church were deposited, for a time, the bodies of that accomplished
nobleman Henry Howard Collins, i. 95. Stow's Survaie, 250.
, earl of Surry, and two prelates, who ended their days by the ax on
Tower Hill. The ashes of the ill-fated Surry were, in 1614, removed to
Framlingham, in Suffolk. The pious Fisher (whose head was placed on a pole on
the bridge) and the indiscreet Laud. The first was removed to the chapel in the
Tower, to rest by the side of his friend Sir Thomas More Weever, 501.
. The remains of Laud, beheaded in 1644, lay here till 1663, when they were
removed to St. John's College, Oxford, over which he had presided Newcourt, 241.
.

IN this parish was designed a hospital for poor priests, and for lunatics of
both sexes, as early as the time of Edward III; but not taking effect, it was
granted to the hospital of St. Katherine; which was to find a chaplain to pray
for the soul of Robert Denton, who had piously intended the first foundation
The same, 243.
.

FROM Aldgate the walls ran southward to the Thames, and ended, as is generally
supposed, with a fort; on the site of which arose the present TOWER of London.
To the north of it was a postern, for the benefit of foot passengers: it was
originally a fair and strong gate, built of stone brought out of Kent, POSTERN
GATE.
and Caen in Normandy. It stood till the year 1440, when it fell down; not, as
is conjectured, from the pulling down of three hundred feet of the adjacent
wall in 1189, for the purpose of enlarging and strengthening the Tower, but
from decay; THE TOWER OF LONDON.
it being made at the same time with that fortress, which was built by the
Conqueror in his first year, and strongly garrisoned with Normans, to secure
the allegiance of his new and reluctant subjects.

THE first work seems to have been suddenly flung up in 1066, on his taking
possession of the capital: this included in it a part of the ancient wall; for,
soon after the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, a dispute arose whether he was
poisoned in the liberties of the city, or in the county of Middlesex: on
examination, part of the ancient wall was discovered; and his apartment found
to be to the west of it, and in consequence the criminals were tried within the
jurisdiction of the city. Had it been on the other side, it would have been
adjudged to have been within the county. There is another proof of this
fortress having been built upon the remains of another more ancient; for, in
1720, in digging on the south side of what is called Cesar's chapel, were
discovered some old foundations of stone, three yards broad, so strongly
cemented that it was with the utmost difficulty they were forced up.

WHITE TOWER.
THE great square tower called the White Tower, and by the Welsh, Twr Gwyn, or
Twr y Bryn-gwyn, was erected in the year 1078, when it arose under the
directions of the great military architect Gundulph, bishop of Rochester
Guillelm. Pictav. inter Script. Normann, p. 205.
; who gave this noble specimen of innovation in the art of castle-building, and
which was pursued by him in the execution of Rochester-castle, on the banks of
the Medway. Stow tells us, from Edmund de Haddenham, that during the time
Gundulph was employed in this work, he was lodged in the house of one Edmere, a
citizen of London Survai^, 73.
. This building was long dignified with the name of Cesar's tower; but that
illustrious invader probably never saw London: originally it stood by itself.
Fitzstephen gives it the name of Arx Palatina, the Palatine tower; and says,
with his usual romance, that the mortar of the foundation was tempered with the
blood of beasts. The commander had the title of Palatine bestowed on him,
being, as was the case with several of the great men of that time, who had
places of importance trusted to their care, endowed with regal powers; such,
for example, as the earl palatine, Hugh Lupus, had in the county palatinate of
Chester Lord Lyttelton's Henry II. iii. 139.
.

WITHIN this tower is a very ancient chapel, for the use of such of our kings
and queens who wished to pay their devotion here. By Stow's description (for I
never saw it) it seems coeval with the building: he described it as having a
long flight of steps to it, as being darksome, and venerable for the pillars,
which are very plain; but that it was in his time filled with our valuable old
records Strype's Stow, i. book i. p. 69.
.

IN 1092 a violent tempest did great injury to the Tower; but it was repaired
by William Rufus, and his successor. The first added another castellated
building on the south side, between it and the Thames, which was afterward
called St. Thomas's Tower. Beneath that was Traitors-gate, through which state
prisoners were brought from the river: and under another, properly enough
called The Bloody; for, till these happier ages, there was little difference
between confinement, and the scaffold, or private assassination.

Ye towers of Julius, London's lasting shame,
With many a foul and midnight murder fed.
HERE fell the meek usurper Henry VI. by the dagger of the profligate
Gloucester. Here, full of horrors, died, MURDERS WITHIN THE TOWER.
by the hands of hired ruffians, the unsteady Clarence. Here the sweet
innocents Edward V. and his brother, duke of York, perished victims to the
ambition of their remorseless uncle. And the empoisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury
makes up the sum of the known murders, the reproaches of our ancient fortress.
We have here a strait room or dungeon, called, from the misery the unhappy
occupier of this very confined place endures, the Little Ease. But this will
appear a luxurious habitation, when compared with the inventions of the age of
Louis XI. of France; with his iron cages, in which persons of rank lay for
whole years; or his Oubliettes, dungeons made in form of reversed cones,
concealed with trap-doors, down which dropped the unhappy victims of the
tyrant, brought there by Tristan l'Hermite, his companion and executioner in
ordinary. Sometimes their sides were plain, sometimes set with knives, or
sharp-edged wheels; but in either case, they were true Oubliettes: the devoted
were certain to fall into the land where all things were forgotten.

THE Tower was first enclosed by William Longchamp, bishop of Ely, and
chancellor of England, in the reign of Richard I. This haughty prelate having a
quarrel with John, third brother to Richard, under pretense of guarding against
his designs, surrounded the whole with walls embattled, and made on the outside
a vast ditch, DITCH.
into which, in after times, the water from the Thames was introduced.
Different princes added other works. The present contents, within the walls,
are twelve acres and five rods; the circuit, on the outside of the ditch, one
thousand and fifty-two feet. It was again enclosed with a mud-wall by Henry
III: this was placed at a distance from the ditch, and occasioned the taking
down of part of the city wall; which was resented by the citizens; who, pulling
down this precinct of mud, were punished by the king with a fine of a thousand
marks.

LIONS TOWER.
EDWARD IV. built the Lions tower: it was originally called the Bulwark; but
received the former name from its use. ROYAL MENAGERY.
A menagery had very long been a piece of regal state; Henry I. had his at his
manor of Woodstock, where he kept lions, leopards, lynxes, porcupines, and
several other uncommon beasts. They were afterward removed to the Tower.
Edward II. commanded the sheriffs of London, to pay the keepers of the king's
leopards six pence a day, for the sustenance of the leopards; and three
halfpence a day for the diet of the keeper, out of the fee-farm of the city. I
should have mentioned before, that Henry issued his order to the sheriffs, to
supply four pence a day for the maintenance of his white bear (urso nostro
albo), and his keeper, in the Tower of London. They were also to provide a
muzzle, and an iron chain to hold the said bear out of the water; and a long
cord to hold it during the time it was fishing in the Thames: they were besides
ordered to build a small house in the Tower for the king's elephant (elefantem
nostrum) and to make provision both for beast and keeper Madox Antiq. Excheq.
i. 376.
.

THE royal menagery is to this day exceedingly well supplied. In April 1787,
there was a leopard, of a quite unknown species, brought from Bengal. It was
wholly black, but the hair was marked, on the back, sides, and neck, with round
clusters of small spots, of a glossy and the most intense black; the tail hung
several inches beyond the length of the legs, and was very full of hair. Here
were also two tigers: one had been here some time, and its ground-color had
faded into a pale sickly sandiness; the other, young and vigorous, and almost
fresh from its native woods, was almost of an orange color; and its black
stripes, and the white parts, were most pure in their kinds Engraved and
described by M. de la Metherie, dans le Journal de Physique. J^llet, 1788. p.
45. tab. ii.
.

THE little book sold in the Tower, will give a very satisfactory account of
all its curiosities, natural and artificial. To that I refer my reader.

TOWER HILL.
FOR a considerable time, there was a dispute between the crown and the city,
about the right to the Tower Hill (the Gwynfryn of the Welsh). In the reign of
Edward IV. the king's officers erected there a gallows, and a scaffold for the
execution of offenders. The citizens complained; and Edward immediately
disavowed the act, by public proclamation. From that time the fatal apparatus
is always provided by the city. The condemned are delivered to the sheriffs by
the lieutenant, who receives from the former a receipt for their delivery; the
sheriffs then see execution done, as in other places.

THE FIRST PERSON BEHEADED ON TOWER HILL.
THE first whom I recollect to have suffered here by the more honorable death of
the ax, was in 1388, when Sir Simon de Burley, knight of the Garter, tutor of
Richard II. and the most accomplished man of his time, fell a victim to the
malice of the potent faction, which had usurped the regal authority. Queen
Anne, the good queen Anne, went on her knees to the luke of Gloucester, the
king's uncle, to implore mercy; and continued in that attitude three hours
before the inexorable tyrant.

THE FORMER ROUGH TREATMENT OF PRISONERS.
THERE was, during a very long period, a barbarous meanness, a species of insult
to the unhappy criminals, which is in our days happily changed into every
species of tenderness and humanity, consistent with public justice and
security. In revenge for the death of Sir Simon, and many others who suffered
in the same cause, the great earl of Arundel, Richard Fitzalan, was hurried
instantly from the place of trial, the palace at Westminster, to Tower Hill:
his arms and his hands were bound; and the king glutted his eyes with the
bloody scene. That great peer Thomas duke of Norfolk, who was confined here in
the last year of Henry VIII. was reduced to beg for sheets. He was to have lost
his head, but was saved by the death of the tyrant on the very day ordered for
his execution. He was kept in custody during the next short reign, but was
released on the accession of queen Mary. He mounted his horse, at the edge of
fourscore, to assist in quelling the insurrection of Sir Thomas Wyat, in 1554.
This served to fill the Tower with new subjects for the mean insults of the
times. Sir Thomas, and the rest of the prisoners, were brought into the Tower
through the Traitors-gate. The lieutenant received them, one by one, with
insults and gross abuse. When Sir Thomas appeared, gallantly dressed, the
lieutenant actually collared him: Sir Thomas gave him a fierce and reproachful
look, bravely telling him, This is no masterie now!

ONE person of rank suffered here by the more infamous way of the halter. I
should not mention Sir Gervis Elwayes, SIR GERVIS ELWAYES.
lieutenant of the Tower, who suffered here, in 1615, for his concern in the
murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, but for the great instruction which may be
gathered from his end, and his excellent dying speech. For there is something
very peculiar in his admonition to the spectators, against appealing to Heaven
by a rash vow; for, having been greatly addicted to gaming, he had said
seriously in his prayers, Lord, let me be hanged if ever I play more: and yet
he broke it a thousand times See the whole in the first xiv years of king
James's reign, p. 150.
. Of what utility would be a sensible collection of these proofs of the FINGER
OF GOD, exemplified to mankind in the detection and punishment of every species
of crime!

CHAPEL OF THE TO^.
THE church of St. Petrus ad Vincula, within the Tower, has been the
undistinguishing repository of the headless bodies of numbers, who ended their
days on the adjacent hill; or, when greatly favored, within the fortress. The
ancient church was much more splendid, it being occasionally the place at which
the kings of England performed their orisons. In Henry III.'s time here were
stalls for the king and queen; a chancel dedicated to St. Peter, and another to
St. Mary. The church was adorned with a fine cross, images of saints, and
various paintings, been and b^nis coloribus. Also several holy figures in
painted glass; all done by that early lover and patron of the arts in England,
the monarch just mentioned Str^pe's Stow, i. book i. 68. Mr. WALPOLE's
Anecdotes, i. 4.
.

EXECUTED PERSONS BURIED THERE.
TO the present church, after his execution, was finally removed the body of the
conscientious amiable prelate Fisher, bishop of Rochester; FISHER, BISHOP OF
ROCHESTER.
a victim to his opinion of the pope's supremacy, and the treachery of the
attorney general Rich, who, under pretense of consulting him, obtained his
confidence, and betrayed him. The pope rewarded his orthodoxy with a cardinal's
hat, but it did not arrive till the poor bishop's head was on a pole on
London Bridge. His headless corse was removed, to be near that of his friend,
who suffered about three weeks after, in the same cause, the great Sir Thomas
More. SIR THOMAS MORE.
But his body did not long keep company with that of his brother sufferer, nor
his head on the bridge. His affectionate daughter, Margaret Roper, procured the
one to be removed to Chelsea; and the head, accidentally blown into the Thames,
to be given to her. She kept it during life as a relic, and directed that
after her death it should be lodged in her arms and buried with her.

THE beauteous Anna Bullen, ANNA BULLEN.
on May 19th, 1536, for a fictitious charge of adultery, by a tyrant lusting
for a new object: and the profligate Catherine Howard, on a full conviction of
the same crime; rest here. George lord Rochford, the innocent brother of the
former, involved in the accusation, preceded her to the grave by two days; as
his infamous wife, a cause of their death, accompanied, unpitied, her mistress
Catherine Howard, in execution and in sepulcher. It is impossible not to
moralize on comparing the manner in which she was brought prisoner to this
fatal fortress, with the gay and splendid pageantry, which attended her and her
savage spouse from Greenwich by water to the same place, on May 29th, 1533; and
from the Tower, two days after, with still greater magnificence, to her
coronation. She rejoiced too publicly on the death of Catherine of Arragon,
whose place she most wrongfully usurped: in less than five months, she herself
fell as a criminal See a very curious account of the processions in the
Antiquarian Repertory, iii. 202.
.

THAT meteor Thomas Cromwell, earl of Essex, THOMAS CROMWELL, EARL OF ESSEX.
the great promoter of the suppression of religious houses, experienced the
common lot of the preceding. He suffered, among other charges, for being a
favorer of heretics; yet died in the firm profession of the Catholic religion.

THOMAS SEYMOUR, BARON SUDLEY.
THE turbulent Thomas Seymour, baron Sudley, and lord high admiral, in 1549 was
beheaded, and buried in this church, by a warrant from his own brother, the
protector Somerset. On January 24th, 1552, the protector himself mounted the
same scaffold, and, notwithstanding his high rank, was flung into the same
grave among the attainted herd: and his ambitious rival, the instrument of his
death, JOHN DUDLEY, DUKE OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, lost his head and was laid by his side,
on the 22d of August, 1553. So short, so vain are the dreams of power and
ambition!

ROBERT DEVEREUX, EARL O^ (...).
THE favorite earl of Essex, Robert Devereux, was reluctantly given to the block
by his fond mistress, after a long struggle between fear and affection. Mr.
Walpole observes, that it was a fashion to treat the passion of that
illustrious princess as a romance. She, it is alleged, was sixty-eight, but it
was forgotten that the earl was only thirty-four. Let their ages have been
reversed, you would never have heard of the unhappy love of Elizabeth.

DUKE OF MONMOUTH.
BENEATH the communion table reposes the handsome, restless, ungrateful son of
Charles II. the duke of Monmouth. His ambition, like that of many of those he
followed to this place, occasioned his death. He is said to have died calmly;
and to have acknowleged the guilt of rebellion: but love preserved her
influence to the last moment. He was married very young, and for interested
motives. He had made a connection of the most tender nature with lady Harriet
Wentworth, who lived with him as his wife. He could not, with all the arguments
of our best divines, be convinced of the sin of adultery; he called her the
choice of his ripened years. I have been told a tradition, that lady Harriet
had placed herself in a window, to take a last and farewell look; he was master
enough of himself to make her a graceful bow. With more certainty can I say,
that the king, on the evening of the execution, visited the widowed duchess,
to give assurance of his attention to her and her children. Consolation she did
not want, for she had been separated from him; and when, at the duke's earnest
request, she had an interview with him in the Tower, their interview was, as
Barillon expresses it, aigre de part et d' autre Dalrymple's Memoirs, ii. 168.
.

THE repentant earl of Kilmarnock, and the rough and fearless lord Balmerino,
avowing the goodness of his cause to the last, EARL OF KILMARNOCK.
were deposited here August 18th, 1746. The inscriptions on the leaden plates
of their coffins are here shown to strangers. In the following year the
infamous Simon lord Lovat was interred in the same ground, after mounting the
scaffold with the intrepidity of innocence. He certainly was in his dotage, or,
what is more probable, lost to all sense of shame for his immoral and most
abandoned life, when he could repeat to the spectators, Nam genus et proavos,
and QUAE NON FECIMUS IPSI, vix ea nostra voco.

BESIDES these headless trunks, numbers of good people lie here, who went to
their graves from their quiet beds. SIR RICHARD BLOUNT AND HIS SON.
Among them, Sir Richard Blount, and Sir Michael his son, both lieutenants of
the Tower. Sir Richard died in 1564; Sir Michael in 1592: a splendid monument
was erected to each. They are represented in armor, kneeling; Sir Richard with
his two sons, his wife, and two daughters, in the dress of the times; Sir
Michael has a long beard, is attended by three sons in cloaks, his wife, and
daughter.

SIR RICHARD CHO^MONDLY.
IN a corner, on the floor, is an ancient monument of a man recumbent, his hands
closed as in prayer, his hair lank, his chin beardless; his lady by him in a
long hood; round his neck is a collar of SS. and a rose pendent. This is to
preserve the memory of Sir Richard Cholmondly, knight, lieutenant of the Tower
in the time of Henry VIII.

TALBOT EDWARDS, KEEPER OF THE KING'S REGALIA.
I PASS over less interesting monuments, to the little stone on the floor, which
records, that Talbot Edwards, late keeper of his majesty's regalia, 30th
September, 1674, aged 80, was deposited here. Was it not a shameless reign, no
remembrance of this good and faithful servant would have been suffered to
remain. This venerable man was keeper of the regalia, when the russian Blood
made the notorious attempt on the crown, and other ornaments of majesty. Never
was a more determined villain: with a head to contrive, and heart to execute
any wickedness. Blood contrived, under the guise of a clergyman, to make
acquaintance with Mr. Edwards; insinuated himself into his favor and
confidence. After various visits, with the assistance of several other
associates, he seized on the old man, whom he had requested to show the jewels
to his friends, gagged him, and on his resisting, struck him on the head with a
mallet, and gave him several stabs. Edwards thought it prudent to counterfeit
death. Blood put the crown under his parson's gown: another put the globe in
his breeches: a third, not being able to conceal the scepter by reason of its
length, broke off the rich ruby and put it in his pocket. As soon as they were
gone, Edwards forced out the gag, and gave the alarm; they were instantly
pursued, and three of them soon taken. Blood struggled hard for his prize,
saying, when it was wrested from him, It was a gallant attempt, though
unsuccessful; it was for a CROWN.

THE curiosity of the king was excited to see a man engaged in so many
important villainies: under pretense of obtaining discoveries, his majesty made
the wretch a visit; from that moment the artful Blood dated his security: he
told the king so many plausible tales; such indifference he showed for his own
life, such anxiety for that of his majesty (for he insinuated that his comrades
would certainly revenge his death, even on his sacred majesty) that in a short
time he obtained his pardon. It was necessary to apply to the duke of Ormond
for permission, the ruffian having made the attempt on his grace's life not
long before. The duke nobly answered, If his majesty could forgive him stealing
the crown, he might easily forgive the attempt upon his life; and if such was
his majesty's pleasure, that was a sufficient reason for him, and his lordship
(the earl of Arlington, who brought the message) might spare the rest. Blood
was not only pardoned, but received into favor, had a pension of five hundred a
year, and was perpetually seen at court, enjoying the smiles of majesty, and
even successfully employing his interest, as a most respectable patron. But all
good men looked on him with horror, and considered him as a Sicarius to a
profligate set of men, to overawe any who had integrity enough to resist the
measures of a most profligate court. This miscreant died peacefully in his bed,
August 29th, 1680, fearlessly, and without any signs of penitence; totally
hardened and forsaken by Heaven.

THE innocent Talbot Edwards, so far from receiving the grateful reward of his
fidelity and sufferings, got with great difficulty a pension of two hundred a
year; and his son, who was active in taking Blood, one hundred more: but the
order for the pensions was so long delayed, and the expenses attending the cure
of the good old man's wounds so great, that he was forced to sell his order for
a hundred pounds ready money, and the son his for fifty. It is singular that
this aged man survived his injuries seven years; the attempt was made May 9th,
1671, and the inscription, contrary to the assertions of some historians, fixes
his death in 1680 See the several accounts in Kennet, iii. 283 -- Strype's
Stow, i. book i. 92 to 96 -- Brit. Biography, article Blood.
.

LAWLESS EXECUTIONS.
OTHERS have fallen, on this fatal hill, by the hands of lawless violence. In
the rebellion of Wat Tyler, his miscreant followers pursued, with unrelenting
rage, the nobility and better rank of people. ARCHBISHOP SUDBURY.
That worthy primate, Sudbury archbishop of Canterbury; Sir Robert Hales,
treasurer of England; and many others, took refuge with their youthful king in
the Tower. It was then garrisoned with six hundred armed men, and six hundred
archers; who, appalled at the mob, stood motionless. The rebels seized on the
primate; Sir Robert; John Leg, sergeant at arms; and William Appledore, the
king's confessor; all of whom they instantly beheaded on Tower Hill; the
archbishop with peculiar circumstances of cruelty, being almost hewn to pieces
by their cruel rage.

JAMES LORD SAY, AND HIS SON-IN-LAW.
IN 1450, the mob under Jack Cade, in an endarkened and savage period, forced
out of this fortress James lord Say, whom the king had committed to appease the
furious commons. They brought him to Guildhall, and from thence hurried him to
the Standard in Cheapside, where they struck off his head, tied his naked body
to a horse's tail, dragged it to Southwark, and there cut it into quarters.
They then beheaded his son-in-law, Sir James Cromer, placed the heads on poles,
and in every street made them kiss each other Fabian's Chronicle, part vi. 451.
. What a horrid parallel have we not seen in the late year, amidst the polished
and enlightened FRENCH!!! Two men of rank, M. de Foulon, and his son-in-law M.
Berthier, were devoted as victims by the barbarous populace. They were first
hung, with a studied prolongation of their sufferings: their heads were struck
off, and, by a refinement in cruelty (beyond the invention of Jack Cade) the
heart of de Foulon was torn out, and brought dancing on a pole, to salute his
unhappy son-in-law on his way to execution: nor was any insult to their mangled
trunks omitted by the furious canaille. But the acts of a mob ought never to
tarnish a national character.

WITHIN the Tower, on the green before the chapel, LORD HASTINGS.
was beheaded the accomplished lord Hastings. His fidelity to the children of
his late master Edward IV. was the cause of his death. He was dragged from the
council table, by order of their ambitious protector, Gloucester, who swore he
would have his head before he dined; and such was his haste, that the
unfortunate lord had only time to make a short shrift to a priest who casually
passed by, and his head was taken off on a log which happened to lie in the
way. So little did he expect death, that, scarcely an hour before, he was
exulting in the fate of his enemies, lord Rivers, lord Richard Gray, and Sir
Thomas Vaughan, at Pontefract; yet all four underwent the stroke of the
headsman on the very same day. Besides these, I can make a miscellaneous
recital of several who died within these walls, by natural deaths, by suicide,
or by accident.

ELIZABETH, ELIZABETH, WIFE OF HENRY VII.
wife of Henry VII. breathed her last here in childbed, in 1502.

HENRY, EIGHTH EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
HERE may be truly said to have fled indignant to the shades, the high spirit of
Henry earl of Northumberland. He was confined for the same cause as the earl of
Arundel, by the jealous Elizabeth. The B --, exclames the earl, shall not have
my estate; and on June 21st, 1585, shot himself with a pistol laden with three
bullets.

PHILIP EARL OF ARUNDEL.
PHILIP earl of Arundel, son of the duke of Norfolk, beheaded for aspiring to
the bed of Mary queen of Scots, was condemned to death for favoring that
ill-fated princess. He was indeed reprieved, but suffered to languish till his
death, in 1595: his bones were kept in an iron chest. A late great duchess of
the same family procured his scull, had it enchased in gold, and kept it to
exalt her devotion, as the relic of a martyr to religion.

ARTHUR EARL OF ESSEX.
ARTHUR earl of Essex, accomplice with lord Russel, ended here his days. Despair
seized him on his confinement, and, forsaken by Heaven, he put an end to his
existence by the razor. He was of a party charged with equal freedom in
religious as political principles. He vindicated and practiced suicide. His
death was charged on the court, but without the lest grounds. The prince who
could bring lord Russel to the block by a legal course, need never have
incurred the odium of assassination on a less important partner of the
conspiracy.

SIR JOHN PERROT.
HERE died, in September 1595, Sir John Perrot, the supposed son of Henry VIII.
by Mary wife to Thomas Perrot, esquire of Haroldstone, in the county of Pembroke.
In his great stature, and high spirit, he bore a strong resemblance to that
monarch. Young Perrot first attracted his notice by a quarrel he had with two
of the yeoman of the guard, whom he foiled in a quarrel he had at the stews in
Southwark. He was in high favor in the following reign. In that of Mary fell
into disgrace, on account of his attachment to the reformed religion. When
queen Elizabeth succeeded, he experienced the smiles of his sovereign and
sister. At length was constituted lord deputy of Ireland, where he grew very
unpopular, by reason of his haughty conduct; was recalled, unjustly accused,
and condemned of treason. His sentence was respited; but he died of a broken
heart, unable, from his lofty spirit, to brook the ill-treatment he met with
from one he thought so near an ally.

IN this prison also sunk a victim to unmerited misfortunes, LADY ARABELLA
STUART.
the innocent Arabella Stuart, daughter of Charles Stuart, earl of Lenox, and
younger brother to lord Darnley, father to James I. Her affinity to the crown
brought her under the jealousy of both Elizabeth, and that monarch. The
conspiracy in 1603, for which lord Cobham, Sir Walter Raleigh, and others, were
condemned, was supposed, among other objects, to have that of placing the crown
on the head of this unfortunate lady; on which she was confined to her own
house. She found means to be married privately to Sir William Seymour, second
son of the earl of Hertford, afterward restored to the dukedom of Somerset. On
discovery of the wedding, they were committed to the Tower, to the care of
different keepers. They artfully contrived their escape: he arrived safe at
Dunkirk; the lady was taken at sea, and conveyed back to her prison; where her
misfortunes deprived her of her senses. She was released by death, September
27th, 1615; and sound an honorable interment in Henry VIIth's chapel, near the
remains of her ill-fated relation Mary queen of Scots. Her husband lived to
succeed to the title of Somerset; and was the faithful servant and friend of
Charles I.

HENRY, NINTH EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND, AND HIS WIZARDS.
I SHALL mention two other noblemen who were confined within these walls, on
account of some particularities which attended their durance. The first is
Henry earl of Northumberland, imprisoned on the very just suspicion of being
privy to the Gunpowder treason. During the time he was in custody, he amused
himself most rationally in the company of learned men, who were permitted to
have access to him. Among others, were three who were called his Wizards:
possibly he might be fond of astronomy, or dabble in judicial astrology;
circumstances that, with the vulgar, might easily fasten on him the imputation
of dealing with the devil.

EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON, AND HIS CAT.
A VERY remarkable accident befell Henry Wriothsly, earl of Southampton, the
friend and companion of the earl of Essex, in his fatal insurrection: after he
had been confined there a small time, he was surprised by a visit from his
favorite cat, which had found its way to the Tower; and, as tradition says,
reached its master by descending the chimney of his apartment. I have seen at
Bulstrode, the summer residence of the late duchess of Portland, an original
portrait of this earl, in the place of his confinement, in a black dress and
cloak, with the faithful animal sitting by him In the same collection is
another portrait of the same nobleman, out of confinement, richly dressed, with
a rich helmet and armor lying by him.
. Perhaps this picture might have been the foundation of the tale.

LORD CHANCELLOR JEFFRIES.
THE fallen lord chancellor, the cruel instrument of despotism under James II.
died, imprisoned here, of a broken heart, aided by intemperance. He was first
interred in the church belonging to the Tower; and afterward was removed to
that of St. Mary, Aldermanbury, and deposited near the body of his rakish son,
lord Wem. In my younger days, I have heard of a hard-hearted insult on this
once great man, during his imprisonment. He received, as he thought, a present
of Colchester oysters; and expressed great satisfaction at the thought of
having some friend yet left: but, on taking off the top of the barrel, instead
of the usual contents, appeared an halter!

To conclude this melancholy list, I shall return to ancient times, GRYFFYDD,
FATHER OF OUR LAST PRINCE LLEWELYN.
to lament the sad fate of my countrymen, victims to English ambition. Here was
basely confined, by Henry III. my countryman Gryffydd, father of our last
prince Llewelyn ap Gryffydd; who, impatient of imprisonment, attempted to
escape by lowering himself from the walls: the line he was descending by broke,
and, being of a great bulk, he was dashed to pieces, and perished in a most
miserable manner Powel's History of Wales, 307 -- Wynne's History, 263.
.

IT is supposed that many of our nobility, WELSH MANUSCRIPTS DESTROYED IN THE
TOWER.
imprisoned within this fortress, had obtained leave that part of their
libraries might be sent to them, for their amusement in their solitary hours:
so that in time it became a repository of Welsh literature. These valuable
manuscripts were at length burnt by the villainy of one Scolan, to the
irreparable loss of our history, and our poetry. Gutto' r Glynn, who wrote
about the year 1450, thus relates the fact: Llyfrau Cymru a'u usfrudd,
I'r Twr Gwynn aethant ar gudd;
Ysceler oedd i S^lan,
Furw'r twrr llyfrau i'r tan.
i. e. The books of Wales, and their destroyer, were concealed in the White
Tower. Villainous was the deed of Scolan, when he threw the heaps of books into
the fire E^s's W^ poetry, 160.
.

THE (...) ^E (...).
IN the next reign, to the eternal disgrace of the great Edward, the head of the
son of Gryffydd, the last of our princes, was placed on these battlements,
insultingly crowned with ivy, for gallantly defending his hereditary dominions,
to which he had as good a right as his more fortunate conqueror had to the
crown of England. And, to fill the measure of misfortune, in a small time after
the head of prince Dafydd was sent to accompany that of his ill-sated brother.

OWE^ TUDOR.
DAFYDD LHWYD AP LLEWELYN o Vathavarn, a poet, who flourished in 1480, gives our
countryman Owen Tudor, grandfather to Henry VII. a nobler prison than I fear we
can warrant from history See R^m^'^ F^ x 6^5, 709.
. He certainly thought it derogating from the honor of W^les, to send his hero
to Newgate like a common felon. Thus he bewa^ls his unfortunate state, in a
Cowydd composed on the occasion. I shall give a translation of the parts
relative to the subject, by the same ingenious friend The Reverend RICHARD
WILLIAMS, of V^n. See Appendix, for a similar Poem, by the same Gentleman.
, to whom I lie under so many similar obligations.

TUDOR, in himself a h^st,
Highborn Owen, Ca^'s boast.
C^ flower imprisoned ^ies,
Where L^ losty towers rise.
U^st the pride, and r^sh the power,
That deemed him to yon h^le Tower.
For him our eyes with pity flow,
For him our breasts with vengeance glow.
Are Owen's feet with fetters bound?
With poetry I Will ease the wound:
Around his legs my mute shall twine,
And break them with her strains divine.
How wondrous are the powers of song,
To succor them who suffer wrong!
The next explains the cause of his imprisonment.

It Is not for plunder, fraud, or debt,
That Owen this misfortune met.
It Is not for lawless force of arms;
But for a queen's resistless charms,
Fertile Gallia's daughter fair,
That Owen's feet those fetters wear.
Worthy, virtuous, comely, tall,
CATHERINE did his heart enthrall.
Who could blame the adventurous youth?
Famed for valor, honor truth.
To him this gem of Gallia's shore
Three renowned children bore,
Warlike youths, their father's pride,
FRANCE's royal blood allied;
Grandsons to the Gallie throne;
Loyal barons of our own.
From them in future times shall spring,
Many a gallant British king See the account of Owen Tudor, in my Tour in
Wales, ii. 256.
.
A LITTLE to the south of East Smithfield, ST. CATHERINE'S HOSPITAL.
is the hospital of St. Catherine's, originally founded in 1148, by Matilda of
Boulogne, wife of king Stephen, for the repose of her son Baldwin, and her
daughter Matilda: and for the maintenance of a master, brothers and sisters,
and other poor persons. In 1273, Elinor, widow of Henry, possessed herself of
it, dissolved the old foundation, refounded it in honor of the same saint, for
a master, three brethren chaplains, three sisters, ten Bedes women, and six
poor scholars. Queen Philippa, wife of Edward III. was a great benefactress to
this hospital: and to this day it remains under queenly patronage, according to
the reservation made by the pious re-foundress Elinor. Our present gracious
queen is the twenty-ninth royal patroness.

THE mastership is a sinecure of considerable value. In this hospital is a
house for him, and all its members. The reader will find the disposition of
them, in the plan printed by Mr. Nichols, in the account of St. Katherine's
hospital, and its collegiate church; a posthumous work of that able antiquary
the late Andrew Coltee Ducarel, LL. D. He was interred in the collegiate
church, where a plain piece of marble informs us of little more than the period
of his existence.

CHURCH.
THE church is a handsome gothic building, but almost quite lost in the various
houses, which shut it up from public view. The east window is very elegant; and
in the modern improvements there is the utmost propriety preserved in the
imitation of the ancient architecture. The wooden pulpit is a curiosity: on its
eight sides are represented the ancient building, and different gates of the
hospital; beneath each compartment extend, EZRA THE SCRIBE -- STOOD UPON A --
PULPIT OF WOOD -- WHICH HE HAD -- MADE FOR THE -- PREACHIN Neh -- e. chap.
viii. 4.

UNDER one of the stalls is a very good carving of the head of queen Philippa,
and another of her spouse. They bear a resemblance to the monumental sculpture
of those great personages.

THE most remarkable monument is that of John Holland, TOMB OF JOHN HOLLAND,
DUKE OF EXETER.
duke of Exeter, who lies recumbent, with a fillet round his head, and in a
long gown, the weeds of peace. By him are placed the figure of his first wife
Anne, daughter of Edmund earl Stafford, and widow of Edmund Mortimer, earl of
March; and another of his sister Constance, first, wife to Thomas Mowbray, duke
of Norfolk; and afterward to Sir John Gray, eldest son of Reginald lord Gray,
of Ruthen. This potent peer was a great benefactor to the hospital, founded in
it a chauntry; and bequeathed to the high altar in the church, a cup of
byroll, garnished with gold, perles, and precious stones, to be put in the
sacrament, and numbers of other valuable effects. He died in peace in 1447, a
wonderful thing in his family; not fewer than four of this great house, in
little more than a century, fell by violent deaths.

BELOW St. Catherine's, on the river side, THE BERE-HOUSE.
stood the great breweries or Bere-house, as it is called in the map published
in the first volume of the Civitates Orbis. They were subject to regulations as
early as the reign of Henry VII; who, in 1492, licenses John Merchant, a
Fleming, to export fifty tons of ale called Berre Rymer, xii. 271.
. And in the same reign one Geffry Gate, probably an officer of the king's,
spoiled the brewhouses at St. Catherine's twice, either for sending too much
abroad unlicensed, or for brewing it too weak for their home customers
Maitland, ii. 1017.
. The demand for this article from foreign parts increased to a high degree; in
the reign of queen Elizabeth, five hundred tons were exported at once, as is
expressed for the queen's use, at one time; probably for the service of her
army in the low countries; three hundred and fifty barrels to Embden; three
hundred to Amsterdam; and again eight hundred to Embden. At this time there
seems to have been a free exportation, except when checked by proclamation, for
fear of enhancing the price of corn, by excess of brewing in scarce times; but
even then it was permitted by the royal license S^ype's Stow, ii. 292.
.

THOSE who wish to attempt to restore the spirit of the boisterous reign of
Henry, as far as depended on the boasted British liquor, may use the following
receipt C^mes, etc of London, printed in
: x quarters malte. ii quarters wheet. i. quarters ootos. xl lb. weight of
hoppys, to make lx barrel of seugyll beer.


IT is not in my power to trace the progress of this important article of
trade. Let me only say that it is now a national concern: for the duty on malt,
from July 5th 1785, to the same day 1786, produced a million and half of money
Vast quantities of our beer or porter are sent abroad; I do not know the sum,
but the following extract from a newspaper, will show the greatness of our
Breweries.

The following is a list of the chief porter brewers of London, and the barrels
of strong beer they have brewed, from Midsummer 1786, to Midsummer 1787. And we
make no doubt but it will give our readers much pleasure, to find such a
capital article of trade solely confined to England; and the more so, as a
large quantity of the porter makes a considerable part of ^r exports.

Barrels. Whitbread, Samuel 150,280 Calvert, Felix 131,043 Thrale, H^ster
105,559 Read, W. (Trueman's) 95,302 Calvert, John 91,150 Hammond, Peter 90,852
Godwin, Henry 66,398 Ph^llips, John 54,197 M^ax, Richard 49,651 Wigg^r, Matthew
40,741 F^set, Thomas 40,279 Dawson, Ann 39,400 Jordan, Thomas 24,193 Dickenson,
Joseph 23,659 Hare, Richard 23,251 Allen, Thomas 23,013 Rickinson, Rivers
18,640 Pearce, Richard 16,901 Coker, Thomas 16,744 Proctor, Thomas 16,584
Newberry, William 16,517 Hodgson, George 16,384 Bu^lock, Robert 16,272 Clarke,
Edward 9,855 Total of Barrels 1,176,856


, to the support of the state, from a liquor which invigorates the bodies of
its willing subjects, to defend the blessings they enjoy; while that from the
Stygian gin enervates and incapacitates. One of these Chevaliers de Malte (as
an impertinent Frenchman styled a most respectable gentleman The late Humphry
Parsons, esquire when he was hunting with Louis XV. excited the king's curiosity to
know who he was, and asking one of his attendants, received the above answer.
of the trade) has, within one year, contributed not less than fifty thousand
pounds to his own share. The sight of a great London brewhouse exhibits a
magnificense unspeakable. The vessels evince the extent of the trade. Mr. Meux,
of Liquorpond street, Gray's-inn-lane, can show twenty-four tons; containing,
in all, thirty-five thousand barrels; one alone holds four thousand five
hundred barrels of wholesome liquor; which enables the London porter-drinkers
to undergo tasks that ten gin-drinkers would sink under.

I AM now arrived at the very eastern extent of London, as it was in the age of
queen Elizabeth. A small village or two might be found in the remaining part of
the county of Middlesex, but bordered by marshes, which frequently experienced
the ravages of the river. ST^EY
This tract had been a manor in the Saxon times, called Stibben-hedde, i. e.
Stibben-heath. In later days it belonged to John de Pulteney, who had been four
times lord mayor, viz. in 1330, 1331, 1333, and 1336. The bishops of London had
here a palace, as appears from ancient records Given from our palace of
Stebonbyth, or Stebonheath, which is supposed to have filled the space now
covered with several tenements Newcourt, i. 737.
. It appears that the side next to the Thames had been embanked, to resist the
fury of the floods. From the 26th of Edward I. several inquisitions were made
to examine the state of the banks and ditches, and the tenants, who were found
negligent, were presented as delinquents Dugdale on embanking, 69.
. The church, which stands far from the river, was originally called Ecclesia
omnium Sanctorum, but was afterward styled that of St. Dunstan; for the whole
body of saints was obliged to give way to him who had the courage to take the
devil himself by the nose Lives of the Saints.
. The church is by no means distinguished by its architecture. In it were
interred the remains of the illustrious Sir Thomas Spert, comptroller of the
navy in the time of Henry VIII. and to whom this kingdom was indebted for that
salutary foundation the TRINITY-HOUSE He died September 8th, 1541.
. Here also may be found that curious epitaph mentioned by the Spectator: Here
Thomas Saffin lies interred: Ah why
Born in New England, did in London dye? etc.
This vast parish is at present divided into eight others, yet the mother
parish still remains of great extent.

THE dock and ship yard, the property of Mr. Perry, the greatest private dock
in all Europe, is at the extremity of this parish, at Blackwall, the upper part
of the eastern side of the Isle of Dogs. It may be called the eastern end of
London, being nearly a continued succession of six miles and a half of streets,
from hence to Tyburn turnpike.

THE great extent of Wapping, WAPPING.
which stretches along the river side from St. Katherine's, arose from the
opinion of the commissioners of sewers, in 1571, that nothing could secure the
manor from the depredations of the water, more effectually than the building of
houses: for they thought the tenants would not fail being attentive to the
safety of their lives and property. The plan succeeded, and in our days we see
a vast and populous town added to the ancient precincts (which had stagnated
for ages). A long narrow street, well paved, and handsomely flagged on both
sides, winding along the banks of the Thames, as far as the end of Limehouse,
an extent of near two miles; and inhabited by multitudes of seafaring men,
alternate occupants of sea and land: their floating tenements lie before them.
In fact, the whole river, from the bridge, for a vast way, is covered with a
double forest of masts, with a narrow avenue in mid-channel. These give
importance and safety to the state, and supply the mutual wants of the
universe. We send the necessaries and luxuries of our island to every part;
and, in return, receive every pabulum which should satiate the most luxurious,
wealth that ought to make avarice cry, Hold! enough, and matters for
speculation for the laudable and delicate longings of the intellectual world.

SHADWELL.
THE hamlet of Shadwell is a continuation of the buildings along the river.
Between the houses and the water, in all this long tract of street, are
frequent docks, and small building yards. The passenger is often surprised with
the sight of the prow of a ship rising over the street, and the hulls of new
ones appearing at numbers of openings. But all that filth and stench, which
Stow complains of, exists no longer. Execution Dock stills remains at Wapping,
and is in use as often as a melancholy occasion requires. The criminals are to
this day executed on a temporary gallows placed at low water mark; but the
custom of leaving the body to be overflowed by three tides, has long since been
omitted.

RADCLIFF.
THE village of Radcliff, to which Wapping now joins, is of some antiquity. From
hence the gallant Sir Hugh Willoughby, on May the 20th, 1553, took his
departure on his fatal voyage for discovering the north-east passage to China.
He sailed with great pomp by Greenwich, where the court then lay. Mutual honors
were paid on both sides. The council and courtiers appeared at the windows,
and the people covered the shores. The young king alone lost the noble and
novel sight, for he then lay on his deathbed; so that the principal object of
the parade was disappointed Hackluyt, i. 239.
.

LIMEHOUSE.
LIMEHOUSE is a continuation of the town along the riverside: it is a new
creation; and its church, one of the fifty new churches, was finished in 1724.
This may be called the end of London on the waterside; but it is continued by
means of Poplar, a chapelry in the parish of Stepney (anciently a regal manor,
so named from its abundance of poplar trees) across the upper part of the Isle
of Dogs, in a strait line to the river Lea, the division of this county from
Essex.

WAPPING, Shadwell, and Limehouse, have their respective churches; and Poplar
its chapel. The two first have nothing to attract the eye. Limehouse has its
awkward tower, a dull square rising out of another, embellished with pilasters;
heavy pinnacles rise out of the uppermost: the whole proves how unhappily Mr.
Hawksmoor, the architect of Bloomsbury church, exerted his genius in the
obsolete art of steeple-building. The church in question is one of the new
fifty. In the year 1730 it was added to the bills of mortality.

IN our walk through Limehouse, we crossed the New Cut, or Poplar canal, near
its discharge into the river. This was begun about twenty years ago; runs by
Bromley, and joins the river Lea near Bow, where barges enter by means of a
lock called Bow-lock. This canal is about a mile and a quarter in length; and
serves to bring to our capital corn, malt, and flour, from the neighborhood of
Hertford, and several other counties, which put their productions on board the
barges at that town. It is also of great use to convey to the Thames the
produce of the great distilleries near Bow; and also to the internal counties
coals, and several articles from the metropolis. This canal saves the great
circuit of passing down to Lea-mouth, and thence round the Isle of Dogs; a
navigation often impeded by contrary winds and tides, which frequently fall out
so adverse, as to occasion great delays. Yet this canal by no means annihilates
the use of the river Lea to and from its mouth; but barges go indifferently
either way, as convenience, or the circumstances abovementioned, occur.
Besides, many barges will enter the river Lea to save the navigation expenses
of the New Cut.

LIMEHOUSE dock is a little farther to the south-east, and is much used.

WE finished our walk, and dined at a small house called the Folly, on the
water's edge, almost opposite to the splendid hospital at Greenwich, where we
sat for some hours enjoying the delicious view of the river, and the moving
picture of a succession of shipping perpetually passing and repassing.

BILLS OF MORTALITY.
IT is wonderful, that in this great city there should have been no regular
Census; but that we must depend on the account of the number of inhabitants
from the uncertain calculation of the bills of mortality. I will allow them to
be delivered annually, by the only censors we have, the company of
parish-clerks, with all possible accuracy, as far as their knowledge extends:
but, as it is admitted that a number of people find their burials in
coemeteries without the bills, equal nearly to those which are annually
reported to be interred within their jurisdiction, the uncertainty of the
enumeration collected from them must be allowed. In the last year, 19,697 were
buried within the bills: if the above assertion Mr. Richardson.
is well founded, the sum must be 39,394. I refer the decision of the numbers
of inhabitants to the skilful in calculation. I have heard it averred that the
present number is a million. Maitland gives the total, in the time of his
publication (1756) to have been 725,341 Maitland, ii. 755. -- This book is
dedicated to Slingsby Bethel, esquire who was lord mayor in that year.
. The increase of London since his days gives a probability that the
enumeration is not much exaggerated.

BILLS of mortality took rise in 1592, in which began a great pestilence, which
continued till the 18th of December, 1595. During this period they were kept in
order to ascertain the number of persons who died: but when the plague ceased,
the bills were discontinued. They were resumed again in 1603. At the original
institution, there were only a hundred and nine parishes: others were gradually
added, and, by the year 1681, the number was a hundred and thirty-two: since
that time fourteen more have been added, so that the whole amounts to a hundred
and forty-six; viz. 97 within the walls. 16 without the walls. 23 out-parishes
in Middlesex and Surry. 10 in the city and liberties of Westminster To satisfy
the curiosity of those who have not opportunity of seeing a Bill of Mortality,
I have printed that of 1788, at the end of this book.
.


AMONG the multitudes who fall victims to disease, is a melancholy account of
the rural youth, which crowd here in numbers, laboring under the delusion of
preferment: some perish soon, without even attaining a service; and, urged by
want, fall under the cognizance of justice. Others get admission into shops, or
into places, where they experience hard work, hard wages, hard lodgings, and
scanty food. They soon fall ill, are neglected, or flung into an hospital when
passed all relief, where they perish. Their native villages want their innocent
labor, and the whole rustic community, I may say the whole kingdom, suffers for
the indiscrcet ambition of these unhappy youths or of their simple parents.

RADCLIFF HIGHWAY.
WE varied our road on our return, by taking that of Radcliff Highway, a broad
and very long street, ending in East Smithfield. On the north side stands
another of the new fifty churches, St. George's Middlesex; square rises out of
square, to compose the steeple; its upper story is incomprehensible, the
outside stuck around with chimney-like columns, square at the lower parts,
above making a sudden transition into the round. This church was began in 1715;
finished in 1729: and, by the eccentricity of the style, may fairly be
suspected to have had Mr. Hawksmoor for its builder.

RAG-FAIR.
AT the end of this street we found ourselves in the midst of Rag-fair, in the
fullest hour of business. The articles of commerce by no means belie the name.
There is no expressing the poverty of the goods: nor yet their cheapness. A
distinguished merchant, engaged with a purchaser, observing me to look on him
with great attention, called out to me, as his customer was going off with his
bargain, to observe that man, For, says he, I have actually clothed him for
fourteen pence.

ABBEY OF ST. MARY OF THE GRACES.
A LITTLE farther on to the east, stood the abbey of St. Mary of the Graces,
called also the New Abbey, and Eastminster, in opposition to Westminster, in
respect to its situation. It was founded by Edward III. in 1349, in the new
churchyard of the Holy Trinity, and filled with Cistertians. That churchyard
was made by John Corey, clerk, on occasion of the dreadful pestilence which
raged in that reign, so that there was not room in the common churchyards to
inter the dead. Edward was moved to his piety by a fright he was seized with in
a violent storm, in his way to France; when he vowed; if he got safe to shore,
he would found a monastery to the honor of God, and the Lady of Grace, if she
would grant him the grace of coming safe on shore Newcourt, i. 465.
. At the dissolution its revenues, according to Dugdale, amounted to L. 5,406.
0 s. 10 d. It was granted to Sir Arthur Darcie, in 1540, who pulled it entirely
down. "In place thereof," says Stow, VICTUALLING OFFICE.
is builded a large storehouse for victual, and convenient ovens are builded
for baking of biscuit to serve her majesty's ships. The present Victualling
Office succeeded the original building, and is allotted for the same purpose.

FROM hence I passed by the Tower, to the Custom-house, CUSTOM-HOUSE.
a little to the west of that fortress. On this spot is the busy concourse of
all nations, who pay their tribute toward the support of Great Britain. The
present building is of brick and stone; before which, ships of three hundred
and fifty tons can lie and discharge their cargo. There was one here, built as
early as the year 1385, by John Churchman Strype's Stow, ii. book iv. 114.
, one of the sheriffs of London; but at that period, and long after, the
customs were collected in different parts of the city, and in a very irregular
manner. About the year 1559 the loss to the revenue was first discovered, and
an act passed to compel people to land their goods in such places as were
appointed by the commissioners of the revenue; and this was the spot fixed on:
a Custom-house was erected, which, being destroyed by the great fire, was
rebuilt by Charles II. In 1718, it underwent the same fate, and was restored in
its present form. Before the Custom-house was established here, the principal
place for receiving the duties was at Billingsgate. CUSTOMS IN 979.
As early as 979, or the reign of Etheldred, a small vessel was to pay ad
Bilynggesgate one penny halfpenny as a toll; a greater, bearing sails, one
penny; a keel or hulk (Ceol vel Hulcus) four pence; a ship laden with wood, one
piece for toll; and a boat with fish, one halfpenny; or a larger, one penny
Brompton x Scriptores, i. col. 897.
. We had even now trade with France for its wines; for mention is made of ships
from Rouen, who came here and landed them, and freed them from toll, i. e.
paid their duties. IN 1268.
What they amounted to I cannot learn. But in 1268 the half year's customs, for
foreign merchandise in the city of London, came only to L. 75. 6 s. 10 d. In
1331, they amounted to L. 8,000 a year. IN 135^.
In 1354, the duty on imports was only L. 580. 6 s. 8 d.; on our exports (wool
and felts) L. 81,624. 1 s. 1 d. Well may Mr. Anderson observe Dictionary, i.
186.
the temperance and sobriety of the age, when we consider the small quantities
of wine and other luxuries used in these kingdoms.

IN 1590.
IN 1590, the latter end of the glorious reign of Elizabeth, our customs brought
in L. 50,000 a year. They had at first been farmed at L. 14,000 a year;
afterward raised to L. 42,000; and finally to the sum I mention, and still to
the same person, Sir Thomas Smith.

IN 1613, by the peaceful politics of James I. our imports brought in L.
48,250; our exports L. 61,322. 16 s. 7 d. the whole of the revenue, from the
customs, amounting this year to L. 109,572. 18 s. 4 d. in the port of London
only. Our exports from the out-ports raised L. 25,471. 9 s. 9 d.; the imports
L. 13,030. 9 s. 9 d.; the sum total was L. 148,075. 7 s. 8 d.

IN 1641, just before the beginning of our troubles, IN 1641.
the customs brought in L. 500,000 a year; the effect of a long series of
peaceful days. The effects of our civil broils appeared strongly in 1666, when
they suffered a decrease of L. 110,000. From the year 1671 to 1688, they were
at a medium L. 555,752. IN 1666, 1671.
In the year 1709, notwithstanding a fierce war raged for many years, IN 1709.
they were raised to L. 2,319,320. For want of materials, I am obliged to pass
to the annual produce of the customs, ending in April, 1789, which amounted to
L. 3,711,126.

IN Water-lane, a little to the north-west of the Custom-house, TRINITY-HOUSE.
is the Trinity-house; a society founded in 1515, at a period in which the
British navy began to assume a system. The founder was Sir Thomas Spert,
comptroller of the navy, and commander of the great ship Henry Grace de Dieu.
It is a corporation, consisting of a master, four wardens, eight assistants,
and eighteen elder brethren The whole corporation are usually called The
Thirty-one Brethren. See a full account in Strype's St^w, ii. book v. p. 286-7.
; selected from commanders in the navy and the merchants service; and now and
then a compliment is paid to one or two of our first nobility. They may be
considered as guardians of our ships, military and commercial. Their powers are
very extensive: they examine the mathematical children of Christ's Hospital;
masters of his majesty's ships; they appoint pilots for the river Thames;
settle the general rates of pilotage; erect light-houses, and sea-marks; grant
licenses to poor seamen, not free of the city, to row on the Thames; prevent
foreigners from serving on board our ships without license; punish seamen for
mutiny and desertion; hear and determine complaints of officers and men in the
merchants service, but liable to appeal to the judge of the court of admiralty;
superintend the deepening and cleansing of the river Thames, and have under
their jurisdiction the ballast-office; have powers to buy lands, and receive
donations for charitable uses; and, in consequence, relieve annually many
thousands of poor seamen, their widows, and orphans.

THIS house is unworthy of the greatness of its design. In the council-room are
some portraits of eminent men. The most remarkable is that of Sir John Leake,
with his lank gray locks, and a loose night gown, with a mien very little
indicative of his high courage, and active spirit. He was the greatest
commander of his time, and engaged in most actions of note during the reigns of
king William and queen Anne. To him was committed the desperate, but successful
attempt of breaking the boom, previous to the relief of Londonderry. He
distinguished himself greatly at the battle of La Hogue; assisted at the taking
of Gibraltar; and afterward, as commander in chief, reduced Barcelona; took
Carthagena, and brought Sardinia and Minorca to submit to Charles, rival to
Philip for the crown of Spain. He was made a lord of the admiralty, but
declined the offer of being head of the commission; at the accession of George
I. averse to the new family, he retired; but with the approving pension of L.
600 a year. He lived privately at Greenwich, where he died in 1720, and was
buried in a manner suitable to his merits, in the church at Stepney.

IT is in this house the business of the institution is carried on: but the
mother-house is at Deptford, the corporation being named, The master, wardens,
and assistants of the guild or fraternity of the most glorious and undivided
Trinity, and of St. Clement, in the parish of Deptford Strond, in the county of
Kent Strype's Maitland, ii. book v. p. 286.
.

AFTER the Custom-house, the first place of note is Billingsgate, or,
BILLINGSGATE.
to adapt the spelling to conjectures of antiquaries, who go beyond the realms
of Chaos and old night, Belin's-gate, or the gate of Belinus king of Britain,
fellow-adventurer with Brennus king of the Gauls, at the sacking of Rome, three
hundred and sixty years before the Christian era: and the BELI mawr, who
graces the pedigrees of numbers of us ancient Britons. For fear of falling on
some inglorious name, I submit to the etymology; but must confess there does
not appear any record of a gate at this place: his son Lud was more fortunate,
for Ludgate preserves his memory to every citizen, who knows the just value of
antiquity. Gate here signifies only a place where there was a concourse of
people Skinner's Etymology.
; a common quay or wharf, where there is a free going in and out to the same
Edward I. his grant of Botolph's quay.
. This was a small port for the reception of shipping, and, for a considerable
time, the most important place for the landing of almost every article of
commerce. It was not till the reign of king William that it became celebrated
as a fish-market; who, in 1699, by act of parliament made it a free port for
fish, which might be sold there every day in the week except Sunday. The object
of this has long been frustrated, and the epicure who goes (as was a frequent
practice) to Billingsgate to eat fish in perfection, will now be cruelly
disappointed.

I CANNOT give a list of the fish most acceptable in the Saxon ages; but there
is a list left of those which were brought to market in that of Edward I. who
descended even to regulate the prices, that his subjects might not be left to
the mercy of the venders.

s. d. The best plaice 0 1 A dozen of best soles 0 3 Best fresh mulvil, i. e.
molun or cod 0 3 Best hadock 0 2 Best barkey 0 4 Best mullet 0 2 Best dorac,
John Doree? 0 5 Best conger 1 0 Best turbot 0 6 Best bran, sard, and betule 0 3
Best mackrel, in Lent 0 1 And out of Lent 0 0 Best gurnard 0 1 Best fresh
merlings, i. e. whitings, four for 0 1 Best powdered ditto, 12 for 0 1 Best
pickled herrings, twenty 0 1 Best fresh ditto, before Michaelmas, six for 0 1
Ditto, after Michaelmas, twelve for 0 1 Best Thames, or Severn lamprey 0 4 Best
fresh oysters, a gallon for 0 2 Best rumb, gross and fat, at 0 4 Best sea-hog,
i. e. porpesse 6 8 Best eels, a strike, or hundred 0 2 Best lampreys, in
winter, the hundred 0 8 Ditto, at other times These, by their cheapness, must
have been the little lampreys now used for bait. 0 6 Best fresh salmon, from
Christmas to Easter, for 5 0 Ditto, after ditto 3 0 Best smelts, the hundred 0
1 Best roche, in summer 0 1 Best Lucy, or pike, at 6 8

AMONG these fish, let me observe, that the conger is, at present, never
admitted to any good table; and to speak of serving up a porpesse whole, or in
part, would set your guests a staring. Yet, such is the difference of taste,
both these fishes were in high esteem. King Richard's master cooks have left a
most excellent receipt for Congur in Sawse Form of Cury, 52.
; and as for the other great fish, it was either eaten roasted, or salted, or
in broth, or furmente with porpesse 53, 39, 56.
. The learned Doctor Caius even tells us the proper sauce, and says, that it
should be the same with that for a Dolphin Caii opuscula, 116.
; another dish unheard of in our days. From the great price the Lucy or pike
bore British Zoology, iii. 320.
, one may reasonably suspect that it was at that time an exotic fish, and
brought over at a vast expense.

I CONFESS myself unacquainted with the words Barkey, Bran, and Betule: Sard
was probably the Sardine or Pilchard: I am equally at a loss about Croplings,
and Rumb: but the pickled Balenes were certainly the Pholas Dactylus of
Linnaeus, 1110; the Balanus of Rondeletius de Testaceis, 28; and the Dattili of
the modern Italians, which are to this day eaten, and even pickled.

To this list of seafish, which were admitted in those days to table, may be
added the sturgeon, and ling; and there is twice mention, in archbishop
Nevill's great feast, of a certain fish, both roasted and baked, unknown at
present, called a Thirle-poole.

THE seal was also reckoned a fish, and, with the sturgeon and porpess, were
the only fresh fish which, by the 33d of Henry VIII. were permitted to be
bought of any stranger at sea, between England and France, Flanders, and
Zealand.

LONDON BRIDGE;
A LITTLE to the west is London Bridge. The year of its foundation is not
settled. The first mention of it is in the laws of Ethelred, which fix the
tolls of vessels coming to Billingsgate, or ad Pontem. It could not be prior to
the year 993, when Unlaf, the Dane, sailed up the river as high as Stains Saxon
Chron. 148.
, without interruption: nor yet after the year 1016, in which Ethelred died:
and the great Canute, king of Denmark, when he besieged London, was impeded in
his operations by a bridge, which even at that time must have been strongly
fortified, to oblige him to have recourse to the following vast expedient: --
He caused a prodigious ditch to be cut on the south side of the Thames, at
Rotherhithe, or Redriff, a little to the east of Southwark, which he continued
at a distance from the south end of the bridge, in form of a semicircle,
opening into the western part of the river. Through this he drew his ships, and
effectually completed the blockade of the city The same.
. But the valor of the citizens obliged him to raise the siege. Evidences of
this great work were found in the place called The Dock Head, at Redriff, where
it began. Fascines of hazels, and other brushwood, fastened down with stakes,
were discovered in digging that dock, in 1694; and in other parts of its course
have been met with, in ditching, large oaken planks, and numbers of piles
Maitland, i. 35.
.

WHEN BUILT;
THE bridge originated from the public spirit of the college of priests of St.
Mary Overie. Before, there had been a ferry, left by her parents to their only
daughter Mary; who, out of the profits, founded a nunnery and endowed it with
the profits of the boat. This house was afterward converted into the college
of priests, who not only built the bridge but kept it in repair: but it must be
understood that the first bridge was of timber, FIRST OF TIMBER.
the materials at hand, and most probably rudely put together. This account is
given by Stow, from the report of Bartholomew Linsted, alias Foul, last prior
of St. Marie Overie; but was doubted, because the work has been supposed to be
too great, and too disinterested for a college of priests, who were to give up
the certain profits of the ferry, for those resulting precariously from an
expensive undertaking. Even the existence of a religious house before the
Conquest has been suspected: but the Domesday book puts that out of doubt, by
informing us, Ipse episcopus habet unum monasterium in Sudwerche. Numbers of
useful, as well as pious works, in early days, originated from the instigation
of the churchmen, who often had the honor of being called the founders, when
the work itself was performed by their devotees. Neither is it to be supposed
that they could keep it in repair: the same zeal which impelled people to
contribute to the building, operated in the vestiture of land for its future
support; and this appears to have been done by several instances; yet the
endowments were so small, that a supplementary tax was often raised.

IN 1136, the bridge was burnt down. By the year 1163 it grew so ruinous as to
occasion its being rebuilt, under the care of one Peter, curate of St. Mary
Colechurch, a celebrated architect of those times. It was soon after determined
to build a bridge of stone, and, about the year 1176, REBUILT IN 1176 WITH
STONE.
the same Peter was employed again. It proved a work of thirty-three years: the
architect died four years before it was completed; and another clergyman,
Isenbert, master of the schools of Xainctes, was recommended to the citizens,
by king John, for the honor of finishing it; but they rejected their prince's
choice, and committed the work to three merchants of London, who completed it
in 1209. Peter was buried in a beautiful chapel, probably of his own
construction, dedicated to St. Thomas, C^P^ IN ONE OF THE PIERE.
which stood on the east side, in the ninth pier from the north end, and had an
entrance from the river, as well as the street, by a winding staircase. It was
beautifully paved with black and white marble, and in the middle was a tomb,
supposed to contain the remains of Peter the architect.

THIS great work was founded on enormous piles, driven as closely as possible
together: on their tops were laid long planks ten inches thick, strongly
bolted; and on them were placed the base of the pier, the lowermost stones of
which were bedded in pitch, to prevent the water from damaging the work: round
all were the piles which are called the Sterlings, designed for the
preservation of the foundation piles. These contracted the space between the
piers so greatly, as to occasion, at the retreat of every tide, a fall of five
feet, or a number of temporary cataracts, which, since the foundation of the
bridge, have occasioned the loss of many thousand lives. The water, at
spring-tides, rises to the height of about eighteen feet. The length of this
vast work is nine hundred and fifteen feet, the exact breadth of the river. The
number of arches was nineteen, of unequal dimensions, and greatly deformed by
the sterlings, and the houses on each side, which overhung and leaned in a most
terrific manner. In most places they hid the arches, and nothing appeared but
the rude piers. I well remember the street on London Bridge, narrow, darksome,
and dangerous to passengers from the multitude of carriages: frequent arches of
strong timber crossed the street, from the tops of the houses, to keep them
together, and from falling into the river. Nothing but use could preserve the
rest of the inmates, who soon grew deaf to the noise of the falling waters, the
clamors of watermen, or the frequent shrieks of drowning wretches. Most of the
houses were tenanted by pin or needle makers, PIN-MAKERS.
and oeconomical ladies were wont to drive from the St. James's end of the
town, to make cheap purchases. Fuller tells us, that Spanish needles were made
here first in Cheapside, by a negro, who died without communicating the art.
Elias Crowse, a German, in the reign of Elizabeth, was more liberal, and first
taught the method to the English. Fuller's definition of a needle is excellent,
quasi NE IDLE.

IN the bridge were three openings on each side, with ballustrades, to give
passengers a sight of the water and shipping. In one part had been a
drawbridge, useful either by way of defense, DRAWBRIDGE.
or for the admission of ships into the upper part of the river. This was
protected by a strong tower. It served to repulse Faucon-bridge the Bastard, in
his general assault on the city in 1471, with a set of banditti, under pretense
of rescuing the unfortunate Henry, then confined in the Tower. Sixty houses
were burnt on the bridge on the occasion Holinshed, 690.
. It also served to check, and in the end annihilate, the ill-conducted
insurrection of Sir Thomas Wiat, in the reign of queen Mary. The top of this
tower, in the sad and turbulent days of this kingdom, used to be the shambles
of human flesh, and covered with heads or quarters of unfortunate partisans.
Even so late as the year 1598, Hentzner, the German traveller, with German
accuracy, counted on it above thirty heads Fugitive Pieces, vol. ii. 243.
. The old map of the city, in 1597, represents them in a most horrible cluster.

AT the south end of the bridge one Peter Corbis, a Dutchman Stow's Survaie. --
London and its Environs, iv. 146.
, in the year 1582, invented an engine to force the water of the Thames into
leaden pipes, to supply many of the adjacent parts of the city. It has, since
that time, been so greatly improved, by the skill of the English mechanics, as
to become a most curious as well as useful piece of machinery, and to be
extremely worthy the attention of that branch of science.

DREADFUL CALAMITY BY FIRE.
I MUST not quit the bridge, without noticing an unparalleled calamity, which
happened on it within four years after it was finished. A fire began on it at
the Southwark end; multitudes of people rushed out of London to extinguish it;
while they were engaged in this charitable design, the fire seized on the
opposite end, and hemmed in the crowd. Above three thousand persons perished in
the flames, or were drowned by overloading the vessels which were hardy enough
to attempt their relief.

A BRAVE ACTION.
THE gallant action of Edmund Osborne, ancestor to the duke of Leeds, when he
was apprentice to Sir William Hewet, cloth-worker, must by no means be
forgotten. About the year 1536, when his master lived in one of these
tremendous houses, a servant-maid was playing with his only daughter in her
arms, in a window over the water, and accidentally dropped the child. Young
Osborne, who was witness to the misfortune, instantly sprung into the river,
and, beyond all expectation, brought her safe to the terrified family. Several
persons of rank paid their addresses to her, when she was marriageable; among
others, the earl of Shrewsbury: but Sir William gratefully decided in favor of
Osborne; OSBORNE, says he, saved her, and OSBORNE shall enjoy her Stow, ii.
book v. 133. -- and Collins's Peerage, i. 235.
. In her right he possessed a great fortune. He became sheriff of London in
1575; and lord mayor in 1582. I have seen the picture of his master at Kiveton,
the seat of the duke of Leeds, a half length on board; his dress is a black
gown furred, a red vest and sleeve, a gold chain, and a bonnet. He served the
office of lord mayor in 1559; and died in 1566. Strype mistakes, when he says,
that Sir William died in 1599, and was buried in the cathedral of St. Paul:
another person of the same name lies there, under the handsome monument
Engraven in Dugdale's History of St. Paul's, 66.
ascribed by our old historian to the former.

Or the multitudes who have perished in this rapid descent, the names of no
one, of any note, has reached my knowledge, except that of Mr. Temple, only son
of the great Sir William Temple. His end was dreadful, as it was premeditated.
He had, a week before, accepted, from king William, the office of Secretary of
War. On the 14th of April, 1689, he hired a boat on the Thames, and directed
the waterman to shoot the bridge; at that instant he flung himself into the
torrent, and, having filled his pockets with stones, to destroy all chance of
safety Rereshy's Memoirs, 346.
, instantly sunk. In the boat was found a note to this effect: My folly, in
undertaking what I could not perform, whereby some misfortunes have befallen
the king's service, is the cause of my putting myself to this sudden end. I
wish him success in all his undertakings, and a better servant. I hope his
father's reflection, on the occasion, was a parental apology, not his real
sentiments: That a wise man might dispose of himself, and make his life as
short as he pleased. How strongly did this great man militate against the
precepts of Christianity, and the solid arguments of a most wise and pious
heathen CICERO in his Somnium Scipionis.
!

CHURCH OF ST. MAGNUS.
VERY near to the northern end of the bridge, is the church of St. Magnus. It is
probably a church of great antiquity; yet the first mention is in 1433. It was
consumed in the great fire, but within ten years was restored in the present
handsome style. The bottom of the tower is open, so as to admit a most
convenient thoroughfare to the numerous passengers.

A LITTLE higher up, on the left hand, is Eastcheap, immortalized by
SHAKESPEARE, as the place of rendezvous of Sir John Falstaff and his merry
companions. Here stood the Boar's Head tavern; the site is now covered with
modern houses, but in the front of one is still preserved the memory of the
sign, the Boar's Head, cut in stone. Notwithstanding the house is gone, we
shall laugh at the humor of the jovial knight, his hostess, Bardolph, and
Pistol, as long as the descriptive pages of our great dramatic writer exist in
our entertained imagination. I must mention, that in the wall of another house
is a Swan cut in stone; probably, in old times, the sign of another tavern.

THE renowned Henry, prince of Wales, was not the only one of the royal family,
whose youthful blood led them into frolic and A VIEW (...) PART of LONDON as it
appeared in the GREAT FIRE of 1666.
(...) Original Painting in Painter (...) Hall.

riot. His brothers John, and Thomas, with their attendants, between two and
three o'clock, after midnight, raised such an uproar, that the mayor and
sheriffs thought proper to interfere. This the princes took as an insult on
their dignity. The magistrates were convened by the celebrated chief justice
Gascoigne; they stood on their defense, and were most honorably dismissed, it
being proved that they did no more than their duty, toward the maintenance of
the peace Stow's Survaie, 404.
.

THIS street was famous, in old times, for its convivial doings; The cooks
cried hot ribs of beef roasted, pies well baked, and other victuals The same.
: there was clattering of pewter, pots, harp, pipe, and sawtrie. Evident marks
of the jollity of this quarter.

IN Pudding-lane, at a very small distance from this church, FIRE IN 1666.
begun the ever-memorable calamity by fire, on the 2d of September, 1666. In
four days it consumed every part of this noble city within the walls, except
what lies within a line drawn from the north part of Coleman-street, and just
to the south-west of Leaden Hall, and from thence to the Tower. Its ravages
were also extended without the walls, to the west, as far as Fetter-lane, and
the Temple. As it begun in Pudding-lane, it ended in Smithfield at Pye-corner;
which might occasion the inscription with the figure of a boy, on a house in
the last place, now almost erased, which attributes the fire of LONDON to the
sin of gluttony. I leave the reader to consult the second volume of the City
Remembrancer, for the melancholy detail.

SIR Christopher Wren was coeval to this misfortune. The plans his great genius
offered to the public for rebuilding the city, with genuine taste, and a
splendour worthy of ancient Rome, were unfortunately rejected. Perhaps the times
are not greatly to be blamed; there were a thousand difficulties in respect to
the division of property; there was, in a vast commercial city, such as London,
a hurry to resume their former occupations, and a prejudice for ancient sites.
It was difficult to persuade people to relinquish, for a mere work of taste, a
spot productive of thousands, to them or their predecessors. These things
considered, it is not to be wondered that we are left to admire, on paper only,
the vast designs of our great architect. But still he was the restorer of
several of our public buildings: many of our temples arose with improved beauty
from his plans; and several other buildings, which we have had, or shall have
occasion of mentioning.

THE MONUMENT.
THAT astonishing proof of his genius, the Monument, is placed on the side of
Fish-street, very near to the spot where the calamity began; Where London's
column, pointing at the skies,
Like a tall bully lifts its head and lies.
It is a Doric column, two hundred and two feet high, fluted, and finished with
a trifling urn with flames, instead of a noble statue of the reigning king, as
the great architect proposed. On the west side of the pedestal is a bas relief,
cut by Gabriel Cibber, in admirable taste. It represents emblematically this
sad catastrophe; Charles is seen, surrounded with Liberty, Genius, and Science,
giving directions for the restoring of the city. Here the sculptor found,
luckily, one example to compliment the attention of the thoughtless monarch
toward the good of his subjects; for, during the horrors of the conflagration,
and after it was subdued, his endeavors to stop the evil, and to remedy the
effect, were truly indefatigable. The king was seriously affected by this
calamity, and many emotions of piety and devotion were excited in him. There
was, for a short time, great reason to expect the fruits of this his brief
return to Heaven: but they were quickly blasted by the uncommon wickedness of
the people about him, who, by every profane witticism on the recent calamity,
and even by suggesting that it was the blessing of God, to humble this
rebellious city, and to prepare it for his yoke, soon removed every good
thought from the royal breast Continuation of Lord Glarendon's Life, 675.
. This noble column was begun in 1671; and finished in 1677, at the expense of
L. 14,500. A melancholy period of party rage: and the inscription was
permitted. The damage sustained by the cruel element, was computed at ten
millions seven hundred and sixteen thousand pounds. But Providence, mingling
mercy with justice, suffered only the lost of a very few lives.

GREAT as this calamity was, yet it proved the providential cause of putting a
stop to one of a far more tremendous nature. The plague, which, for a series of
ages, had, with very short intervals, visited our capital in its most dreadful
forms, never appeared there again after the rebuilding of the city in a more
open and airy manner, which removed several nusanoes; which, if not the actual
origin of a plague, was assuredly one great pabulum, when it had seized our
streets. The last was in the year 1665, when in about six months, by the
smallest computation, a hundred and threescore thousand people fell by the
destroying angel.

ALMOST opposite to the place where the monument now stands, was a large stone
house, the habitation of Edward, our famous black prince, the flower of English
chivalry. In Stow's time it was altered to a common hosterie or inn, having a
black bell for the sign Survai^, 403.
.

FISHMONGERS-HALL.
AT a small distance, to the west of the bridge, is Fishmongers-hall, a very
handsome building, erected since the destruction of the old hall by the great
fire. It faces the river, and commands a fine view of the water and the bridge.
In the court-room are several pictures of the various sorts of vendible fishes.
A printed catalogue of the species and varieties, with their seasons, was
presented to me when I visited the place. At this and every other hall I met
with the utmost urbanity. As an humble historian of the fishy tribe, I trust
that I am not to be condemned to the Pygmalion prospect of these delicacies;
but, on my next visit to town, may be honored with a card, in order to form a
practical judgment of what hitherto (...) only feasted my eyes!!!

IN the great hall is a wooden statue of the brave Sir William Walworth, armed
with his rebel-killing dagger; here is also another of St. Peter: the former
was of this company; the latter with great propriety is adopted as its titular
saint. The arms of the benefactors are beautifully expressed in painted glass
on the several windows.

THIS is one of the twelve great companies: it originally was divided into
Stock-mongers, and Saltfish-mongers; the first were incorporated in 1433; a
period in which we had very considerable trade with Iceland in that very
article See Arct. Zool. Introd.
: the last not till 1509, but were united in 1536. There was once a desperate
feud between this company and the Goldsmiths, about precedence. The parties
grew so violent, that the mayor and aldermen, by their own authority, were
obliged to pronounce them rebels, and even bannifiati, or banished the city,
such of them who persisted in their contumacy Stow, ii. book v. 184.
. I fear that, in old times, the Goldsmiths were a pugnacious society; for I
read, in 1268, of a desperate battle between them and the Tailors, in which
numbers were slain. This company pays L. 500 a year to charitable uses.

THE next place I shall take notice of, to the west of this hall, COLD HARBOR.
was Cold Harbor, mentioned as a tenement as early as the reign of Edward II.
A magnificent house was, in aftertimes, built on the spot, which, from its
occupant, Sir John Poultney, four times mayor of London, was, in the style of
the times, called Poultney-Inn: POULTNEY-INN.
for the town habitations of most of the great men were called Inns.
Warwick-Inn w^ palace of the great kingmaker, and many others had the same
addition. In feudal days the town had no pleasures to attract the great; they
seldom came there but to support a cause (as now and then is the case with a
modern senator), to make or unmake a king, or lay the foundation of civil
broils. In 1397, it was the Inn of John Holland, duke of Exeter, and earl of
Huntingdon, who here gave a dinner, and doubtlessly a very magnificent one, to
his half-brother Richard II. Next year it became the inn of Edmund of Langley,
earl of Cambridge, but still retained the addition of Poultney. In 1472, Henry
Holland, duke of Exeter, lodged in it. In 1485, Richard III, granted it to
Garter king of arms, and his brother heralds. In the time of Henry VIII. it
became the lodgings of Tonstal, bishop of Durham. On his deposal it was granted
to the earl of Shrewsbury, by Edward VI; and changed its name to that of
Shrewsbury-house.

STEEL-YARD.
TO the west of this place was the Steel-yard, a most noted quay for the landing
of wheat, rye, and other grain; cables, masts, tar, flax, hemp, linen cloth,
wainscot, wax, steel, and other merchandise, imported by the Easterlings, or
Germans. Here was the Guildhalda Teutonicorum, or Guildhall of those people.
They were our masters in the art of commerce, and settled here even before the
eleventh century. For we find them here in the year 9^9, at lest in the time of
king Ethelred: for the Emperor's men, i. e. the Germans of the Steel-yard,
coming with their ships, were accounted worthy of good laws. They were not to
forestall the market from the burghers of London; and to pay toll, at
Christmas, two gray cloths, and one brown one, with ten pounds of pepper, five
pair of gloves, two vessels of vinegar; and as many at Easter. The name of this
wharf is not taken from Steel the metal, which was only a single article, but
from Stael-hoff, contracted from Stapel-hoff, or the general house of trade of
the German nation. The powerful league of the Hanse Towns, and the profits we
made of their trade (for they were for a long season the great importers of
this kingdom) procured for them great privileges. They had an alderman of
London for their judge, in case of disputes; and they were to be free from all
subsidies to the king, or his heirs; saving, says the king, to us and our
heirs, our ancient prizes, prisis juribusque consuetudinibus costumisque Rymer,
xi. 498.
. In return for these distinguishing favors, they were to keep in repair the
gate called Bishopsgate. In 1282, they were called on to perform their duty,
the gate being at that time in a ruinous state; they refused; but being
compelled by law, Gerard Marbod, their alderman, advanced the necessary sum. In
1479, it was even rebuilt in a most magnificent manner, by the merchants of the
Steel-yard. As they decreased in strength, and we grew more powerful and more
politic, we began to abridge their privileges. We found that this potent
company, by their weight, interfered with the interest of the natives, and
damped their spirit of trade. After several revocations and renewals of the
charter, the house, in 1597, was shut up, by our wise and patriotic queen, and
the German inhabitants expelled the kingdom.

AT this time it is the great repository of the imported iron, which furnishes
our metropolis with that necessary material. The quantity of bars, that fill
the yards and warehouses of this quarter, strike with astonishment the most
indifferent beholder. Next to the waterside are two eagles, with imperial
crowns round their necks, placed on two columns.

IN the hall of this company were the two famous pictures, painted in distemper
by Holbein, representing the triumphs of Riches and Poverty. They were lost,
being supposed to have been carried into Flanders, on the destruction of the
company, and from thence into France. I am to learn where they are at present,
unless in the cabinet of M. Fleischman, at Hesse-Darmstadt. The celebrated
Christian a Mechel, of Basil, has lately published two engravings of these
pictures, either from the originals, or the drawings by Zucchero; for Frid.
Zucchero, 1574, is at one corner of each print. Drawings of these pictures were
found in England, by Virtue, ascribed to Helbein; and the verses over them to
Sir Thomas More Mr. Walpole's Anecdotes, i. 83.
. It appears that Zucchero copied them at the Steel-yard The same, p. 83, 142.
, so probably those copies, in process of time, might have fallen into the
hands of M. Fleischman.

IN the triumph of Riches, Plutus is represented in a golden car, and Fortune
sitting before him, flinging money into the laps of people, holding up their
garments to receive her favors: Ventidius is wrote under one; Gadareus under
another; and Themistocles under a man kneeling beside the car: Croesus, Midas,
and Tantalus follow; Narcissus holds the horse of the first: over their heads,
in the clouds, is Nemesis. There are various allegorical figures, I shall not
attempt to explain. By the sides of the horses walk dropsical and other
diseased figures, the too frequent attendants of riches.

POVERTY appears in another car, mean and shattered, half naked, squalid, and
meagre. Behind her sits Misfortune; before her Memory, Experience, Industry,
and Hope. The car is drawn by a pair of oxen, and a pair of asses; Diligence
drives the ass; and Sclicitude, with a face of care, goads the ox. By the sides
of the car walks Labor, represented by lusty workmen with their tools, with
cheerful looks; and behind them Misery, and Beggary, in ragged weeds, and with
countenances replete with wretchedness and discontent.

NOT remote from hence formerly stood the Erber, THE ERBER.
a vast house or palace. Edward III. for it is not traced higher, granted it to
one of the noble family of the Scroopes; from them it fell to the Nevills.
Richard, the great earl of Warwick, possessed it, and lodged here his father,
the earl of Salisbury, with five hundred men, in the famous congress of barons,
in the year 1458, in which Henry VI. may be said to have been virtually
deposed. It often changed masters: Richard III. repaired it, in whose time it
was called the King's Palace. It was rebuilt by Sir Thomas Pullison, mayor, in
1584; and afterward dignified by being the residence of our illustrious
navigator Sir Francis Drake.

BEYOND the Steel-yards is Dowgate, now a place of little note. DOWGATE.
Here stood one of the Roman gates, through which was the way for passengers,
who took boat at the trajectus, or ferry, into the continuation of the military
way toward Dover. The Britons are supposed to have given it the name of Dwr or
Dwy, water; and the Saxons added the word gate, which signifies way. It became
a noted wharf, and was called the port of Downgate. In the time of Henry III.
and Edward III. customs were to be paid by ships resting there, in the same
manner as if they rode at Queenhithe.

NEAR Dowgate runs concealed into the Thames the ancient Wal-brook, or river of
Wells, mentioned in a charter of the Conqueror to the college of St. Martin le
Grand. It rises to the north of Moorfields, and passed through London Wall,
between Bishopsgate and Moorgate, and ran through the city; for a long time it
was quite exposed, and had over it several bridges, which were maintained by
the priors of certain religious houses, and others. Between two and three
centuries ago it was vaulted over with brick Stow's S^rva^e, 16.
; the top paved, and formed into a street; and, for a long time past, known
only by name.

THREE CRANES
THE Three Cranes, in the Vintry, was the next wharf, which, in old times, by
royal order, was allotted for the landing of wines, as the name imports. The
Cranes were the three machines used for the landing of the wines, such as we
use to this day. In the adjacent lane was the Painted Tavern, famous as early
as the time of Richard II. (...) VINTRIE.
In this neighborhood was the great house called the Vintrie, with vast
wine-vaults beneath. Here, in 1314, resided Sir John Gisors, lord mayor, and
constable of the Tower. But the memorable feasting of another owner, Sir Henry
Picard, vintner, lord mayor in 1356, must not be forgotten, who, in one day,
did sumptuously feast Edward king of England, John king of France, the king of
Cipres (then arrived in England,) David king of Scots, Edward prince of Wales,
with many noblemen, and other: and after, the said Henry Picard kept his hall
against all comers whosoever, that were willing to play at dice and hazard. In
like manner the lady Margaret, his wife, did also keep her chamber to the same
intent. The king of Cipres, playing with Henry Picard, in his hall, did win
of him fifty marks; but Henry, being very skillful in that art, altering his
hand, did after win of the same king the same fifty marks, and fifty marks
more; which when the same king began to take in ill part, although he
dissembled the same, Henry said unto him, My lord and king, be not agreeued, I
court not your gold, but your play, for I have not bidd you hither that I might
grieve, but that amongst other things I might your play; and gave him his money
again, plentifully bestowing of his own amongst the retinue: besides, he gave
many rich gifts to the king, and other nobles and knights, which dined with
him, to the great glory of the citizens of London in those days Stow's Annals,
263.
.

VINTNERS-HALL faces Thames street. VINTNERS-HALL.
It is distinguished by the figure of Bacchus striding his tun, placed on the
columns of the gate. In the great hall is a good picture of St. Martin, on a
white horse, dividing his cloak with our Savior, who appeared to him in the
year 337, in the character of a beggar.

Hic CHRISTO chlamydem Martinus dimidiavit;
Ut faciamus idem nobis exemplificavit.
There is, besides, a statue of that saint in the same room; and another
picture of him above stairs. Why this saint was selected as patron of the
company I know not, except they imagined that the saint, actuated by good wine,
had been inspired with good thoughts; which, according to the argument of James
Howel, producing good works, brought a man to Heaven. And, to show the moral in
a contrary effect, here is a picture of Lot and his incestuous daughters,
exemplifying the danger of the abuse of the best things.

THIS hall was built on ground given by Sir John Stodie, vintner, lord mayor in
1357. It was called the manor of the Vintre. The Vintners, or Vintonners, were
incorporated in the reign of Edward III. They were originally divided into
Vinetarii et Tabernarii; Vintners who imported the wine, and Taverners who kept
taverns, and retailed it for the former. The company flourished so much, that,
from its institution till the year 1711, it produced not fewer than fourteen
lord mayors, many of which were the keepers of taverns. Yet, in the time of
Edward III. the Gascoigne wines were not sold at the rate of above 4 d. a
gallon; nor the Rhenish above 6 d. In 1379, red wine was 4 d. a gallon; and a
little after, the price of a tun L. 4. As late as the year 1552, the Gu^nne and
Gascoigne wines were sold at 8 d. a gallon; and no wines were to exceed the
price of 12 d. To restrain luxury, it was at the same time enacted, that no
person, except those who could expend 100 marks annually, or was worth 1000
marks, or was the son of a duke, marquess, earl, viscount, or baron of the
realm, should keep in his house any vessel of wine, for his family use,
exceeding ten gallons, under penalty of ten pounds.

OUR great wine trade was at first with Bourdeaux, and the neighboring
provinces; it commenced as early as the Conquest, perhaps sooner Cambden, i.
672.
. But it became very considerable in the reign of Henry II. by reason of his
marriage with Elianor, daughter of the duke of Aquitaine; our conquest of that,
and other great wine-provinces of France, increased the trade to a high degree,
and made great fortunes among the adventurers of this company. In aftertimes,
when sweet wines came into fashion, we had considerable intercourse with the
Canary islands.

SIR RICHARD WHITTINGTON.
I MUST not be silent about the celebrated Sir Richard Whittington, three times
lord mayor of London, in 1397, 1406, and 1419. I shall leave the history of his
cat to the friend of my younger days, Punch, and his dramatical troop. But will
not omit saying, that his good fortune was not without parallel, for it is
recorded, how Alphonso, a Portuguese, being wrecked on the coast of Guinney,
and being presented by the king thereof with his weight in gold for a Cat, to
kill their mice, and an ointment to kill their flies, which he improved, within
five years, to L. 6000 on the place, and returning to Portugal, after 15 years
traffic, becoming the third man in the kingdom A description of Guinea, 4to.
1665, p. 87.
.

OUR munificent citizen founded, near this place, Whittington College, in the
church of St. Michael Royal, rebuilt by him, and finished by his executors in
1424. The college was dedicated to die Holy Ghost, and the Virgin Mary, and had
in it an establishment of a master and four fellows, clerks, choristers, etc.;
and near it an almshouse for thirteen poor people. The college was suppressed
at the reformation, but the almshouses still exist Tanner's Monasticon.
.

THIS great man was thrice buried: once by his executors, under a magnificent
monument, in the church which he had built; but by the sacrilege of Thomas
Mountein, rector, in the reign of Edward VI. who expected great riches in his
tomb, it was broke open, and the body spoiled of its leaden sheet, and then
committed again to its place Stow's Survaie, 443.
. In the next reign the body was again taken up, to renew a decent covering,
and deposited the third time. His epitaph began thus: Ut fragrans nardus, fama
suit iste Ricardus,
Albificans villam qui just rexerat illam,
Flos mercatorum, sundator Presbyterorum, etc See Stow, i. book iii. p. 5. --
Albificans, alluding to his name.
.


TOWER ROYAL.
THE Tower Royal, which stood in a street of the same name, a little beyond this
church, must not pass unnoticed. It was supposed to have been founded by Henry
I; and, according to Stow, it was the residence of king Stephen. Whether it was
destroyed by any accident does not appear: but in the reign of Edward I. it was
no more than a simple tenement, held by one Simon Beawmes. In that of Edward
III. it acquired the title of Royal, and the Inn Royal, as having been the
residence of the king: under that name he bestowed it on the college of St.
Stephen, Westminster; but it reverted to the crown, and in the time of Richard
II. was called the Queen's Wardrobe Stow's Survaie, 445.
. It must have been a place of great strength; for, when the rebels, under Wat
Tyler, had made themselves masters of THE TOWER, and forced from thence the
archbishop of Canterbury, and every other victim to their barbarity, this place
remained secure. Hither the princess Joan, the royal mother, retired during the
time the rebels were committing every excess in all parts of the town; and here
the youthful monarch found her, after he had, by his wonderful calmness and
prudence, put an end to this pestilential insurrection The same.
.

IN this tower Richard, in 1386, lodged, when his royal guest Leon III. king of
Armenia, or, as Holinshed H^s^d, 448.
calls him, Lion king of Armony (Armenia) who had been expelled his kingdom by
the Turks, took refuge in England. Richard treated him with the utmost
munificence, loaded him with gifts, and settled on the unfortunate prince a
thousand pounds a year for life. After two months stay, he returned into
France, where he also met with a reception suitable to his rank Froissart, ii.
c. 41.
; and dying at Paris, in 1393, was interred in the Celestins, where his tomb is
to be seen to this day Monfaucon, Mon. Franc. iii. 92.
.

JOHN duke of Norfolk, the faithful adherent of the usurper Richard III. had a
grant of this tower from his master, and made it his residence Mr. Brook.
.

NEAR the waterside, a little to the west of Vintners-hall, stood Worcester
Place, the house of the accomplished John Tiptoft, WORCESTER PLACE.
earl of Worcester, lord high treasurer of England. All his love for the
sciences could not soften in him the ferocious temper of the unhappy times he
lived in. While he was in Ireland, he cruelly destroyed two infants of the
Desmond family. And, in 1470, sitting in judgment on twenty gentlemen and
yeomen, taken at sea near Southampton, he caused them to be hanged and
beheaded, then hung by their legs, and their heads stuck on a stake driven into
their fundaments. He had deserted the cause of Henry, and was beheaded by order
of the great earl of Warwick, who had just before thought proper to quit that
of Edward.

THE next place of antiquity, on the banks of the Thames, QUEEN-HITHE.
is Queen-hithe, or harbor: its original name was Edred's-hithe, and possibly
existed in the time of the Saxons. This was one of the places for large boats,
and even ships, to discharge their lading; for there was a drawbridge in one
part of London Bridge, which was pulled up, occasionally, to admit the passage
of large vessels; express care being taken to land corn, fish, and provisions,
in different places, for the convenience of the inhabitants; and other hithes
were appointed for the landing of different merchandise, in order that business
might be carried on with regularity. When this hithe fell into the hands of
king Stephen, he bestowed it on William de Ypres, who, in his piety, again gave
it to the convent of the Holy Trinity, within Aldgate. It again fell to the
crown, in the time of Henry III. and then acquired its present name, being
called Ripa Reginae, the Queen's Wharf. That monarch compelled the ships of the
cinque ports to bring their corn here, and to no other place. It probably was
part of her majesty's pin-money, by the attention paid to her interest in the
affiair.

BEAUMONT-INN.
I CANNOT ascertain the place, but in Thames street, somewhere to the north-east
of St. Paul's wharf, stood Beaumont-Inn, or house, the residence of the noble
family of that name. Edward IV. in 1465, presented it to his favorite, the lord
Hastings. On the advancement of his grandson to the earldom of Huntingdon, it
was named after the title of the noble possessors.

PAINTER-^INERS HALL.
OPPOSITE to Queen-hithe, on the south side of Thames Street, is Little Trinity
Lane, where the company of Painter-stainers have their hall. These artists
formed themselves into a fraternity as early as the reign of Edward III. and
also erected themselves into a company; but were not incorporated. They styled
themselves Painter-stainers; the chief work being the staining or painting of
glass, illuminating missals, or painting of portatif or other altars, and now
and then a portrait; witness that of Richard II. and the portraits of the great
John Talbot and his wife, preserved at Castle Ashby Journey to London.
. In the year 1575, they found that plaisterers, and all sorts of unskilful
persons, intermeddled in their business, and brought their art into disrepute
by the badness and slightness of their work. They determined (as the surgeons
in later days) to keep their mystery pure from all pretenders. They were
incorporated in 1576, had their master, warden, and common seal: George Gower
was queen Elizabeth's sergeant painter Strype's Stow, ii. book v. p. 214.
; but, as I do not find his name in Mr. Walpole's, Anecdotes, I suspect his art
was confined to the humbler part. This corporation extended only to such
artists who practiced within the city. As art is unconfined, numbers arose in
different parts, and settled in West-minster, the seat of the court. They for a
long time remained totally unconnected even with each other. About the year
1576, they solicited and received the royal patronage, and were incorporated
under the title of master, wardens, and commonalty of Painter-stainers. The
majority are independent of any other body corporate; but several among them
are regular freemen of the city under the ancient company.

THE next remarkable place is Baynard Castle, BAYNARD CASTLE.
one of the two castles built on the west end of the town, "with walls and
ramparts," mentioned by Fitzstephens. It took its name from its founder, a
nobleman and follower of the Conqueror, and who died in the reign of William
Rufus. It was forfeited to the crown in 1111, by one of his descendants. Henry
I. bestowed it on Robert Fitz-Richard, fifth son of Richard de Tonebrugge, son
of Gilbert earl of Clare Dugdale's Baron. i. 218.
. To this family did appertain, in right of the castle, the office of
castilian, and banner-bearer of the city of London. There is a curious
declaration of their rights, in the person of Robert Fitzwalter, one of his
descendants, expressing his duty in time of war, made in all the fullness of
chivalry, in 1303, before John Blondon, then lord mayor. It is there recited,
that, RIGHTS OF ROBERT FITZ^A^TE^, C^IAN AND STANDARD-^RER OF LONDON IN TIME OF
WAR.
The said Robert, and his heirs, ought to be, and are chief bannerers of
London, in see for the chastilarie, which he and his ancestors had by Castle
Baynard, in the said city. In time of war, the said Robert, and his heyers,
ought to serve the city in manner as follows: that is,

THE said Robert ought to come, he being the twentieth man of arms, on
horseback, covered with cloth, or armor, unto the great west door of Saint
Paul, with his banner displayed before him of his arms. And when he is come
to the said door, mounted and apparelled as before is said, the mayor, with
his aldermen and sheriffs, armed in their arms, shall come out of the said
church of Saint Paul unto the said door, with a banner in his hand, all on
foot: which banner shall be gules, BANNER OF ST. PAUL.
the image of Saint Paul, gold; the face, hands, feet, and sword of silver:
and as soon as the said Robert shall see the mayor, aldermen, and sheriffs
come on foot out of the church, armed with such a banner, he shall alight from
his horse, and salute the mayor, and say to him, Sir mayor, I am come to do my
service, which I owe to the city. And the mayor and aldermen shall answer. We
give to you, as to our bannerer of see in this city, this banner of this city
to bear and govern, to the honor and profit of the city, to our power. And
the said Robert, and his heyers, shall receive the banner in his hands, and
shall go on foot out of the gate, with the banner in his hands; and the mayor,
aldermen, and sheriffs shall follow to the door, and shall bring a horse to
the said Robert, worth twenty pound, which horse shall be saddled with a saddle
of the arms of the said Robert, and shall be covered with sindals of the said
arms. Also, they shall present to him twenty pounds starling money, and
deliver it to the chamberlain of the said Robert, for his expenses that day.
Then the said Robert shall mount upon the horse, which the mayor presented to
him, with the banner in his hand, and as soon as he is up, he shall say to the
mayor, that he cause a marshall to be chosen for the host, one of the city;
which marshall being chosen, the said Robert shall command the mayor and
burgesses of the city to warn the commoners to assemble together; and they
shall all go under the banner of Saint Paul: and the said Robert shall bear
it himself unto Aldgate; and there the said Robert and mayor shall deliver the
said banner of Saint Paul from thence, to whom they shall assent or think good.
And if they must make any issue forth of the city, then the said Robert ought
to choose two forth of every ward, the most sage personages, to foresee to the
safe keeping of the city after they be gone forth. And this counsel shall be
taken in the priorie of the Trinity, near unto Aldgate; and again before
every town or castle, which the host of London shall besiege; if the siege
continue a whole year, the said Robert shall have for every siege, of the
communalty of London, a 100 shillings for his travail and no more.

THESE be the rights that the said Robert has in the time of war. Rights
belonging to Robert Fitzwalter, IN TIME OF PEACE.
and to his heirs, in the city of Land. in the time of peace, are these; that
is to say, The said Robert has a soken or ward in the city, that is, a wall
of the canonrie of Saint Paul, as a man goes down the street, before the
brewhouse of Saint Paul, unto the Thames, and so to the side of the mill, which
is in the water that comes down from the Fleet-bridge, and goes so by London
walls, betwixt the Friars preachers and Ludgate, and so returns back by the
house of the said Friars, unto the said wall of the said canonrie of Saint
Paul, that is, all the parish of Saint Andrew, which is in the gift of his
ancestors, by the said signiority: and so the said Robert has, appendant unto
the said soken, all these things underwritten: That he ought to have a
sokemanrie, or the same ward; and if any of the sokemanry be impleaded in the
Guild Hall, of any thing that touches not the body of the mayor that for the
time is, or that touches the body of no sheriff, it is not lawful for the
sokeman of the sokemanry of the said Robert; and the mayor, and his citizens of
London, ought to grant him to have a court, and in his court he ought to bring
his judgments, as it is assented and agreed upon in the Guild hall, that shall
be given them.

IF any therefore be taken in his sokemanrie, he ought to have his stocks and
imprisonment in his soken, and he shall be brought from thence to Guild Hall,
before the mayor, and there they shall provide him his judgment that ought to
be given of him: but his judgment shall not be published till he come into the
court of the said Robert, and in his liberty. And the judgment shall be such,
that if he have deserved death by treason, he to be tied to a post in the
Thames at a good wharf, where boats are fastened, two ebbings and two flowings
of the water. And if he be condemned for a common thief, he ought to be led to
the Elmes, and there suffer his judgment as other thieves. And so the said
Robert and his heirs has honor, that he holds a great franches within the
city, that the mayor of the city, and citizens, are bound to do him of right;
that is to say, that when the mayor will hold a great counsel, he ought to
call the said Robert and his heirs, to be with him in counsel of the city;
and the said Robert ought to be sworn, to be of counsel with the city
against all people, saving the king and his heirs. And when the said Robert
comes to the hustings, in the Guild Hall of the city, the mayor or his
lieutenant ought to rise against him, and set him down near unto him; and so
long as he is in the Guild Hall, all the judgments ought to be given by his
mouth, according to the record of the recorders of the said Guild Hall. And so
many waifes as come, so long as he is there he ought to give them to the
bayliffes of the town, or to whom he will, by the counsel of the mayor of the
city.

IN 1428, the old castle was burnt: B^ CASTLE BURNI AND R^.
it probably at that time had changed masters, for it was rebuilt by Humphrey
duke of Gloucester. On his death it was granted, by Henry VI. to Richard duke
of York. In the important convention of the great men of the kingdom, in 1458,
the prelude to the bloody civil broils, Richard lodged here with his train of
four hundred men; and all his noble partisans had their warlike suite. Let me
say, that the king-making earl came attended with six hundred men, all in red
jackets embroidered, with ragged staves, before and behind, and were lodged in
Warwick Lane; in whose house there was often the scene of boundless
hospitality, the instrument of his furious spirit and boundless ambition.

THIS mighty peer, in all his castles, was supposed to feed annually thirty
thousand men. But Baynard Castle was the scene of a still more important action
in 1460; the youthful Edward assumed the name and dignity of king, confirmed by
a number of persons of rank assembled in this place, after it had been
conferred on him by a mixed and tumultuary multitude.

THE usurper Richard in the very same castle took on him the title of king.
Here he was waited on by his creature Buckingham, the mayor, and such part of
the citizens who had been prepared for the purpose of forcing the crown on the
seemingly reluctant hypocrite. SHAKESPEARE has made an admirable scene cut of
this part of our history Richard III. act iii. sc. vii.
. His successor repaired, or perhaps rebuilt Baynard Castle, and, as if
foreseeing a long series of peaceful years, changed its form into that of a
palace for quiet times. According to the view I have seen, it included a square
court, with an octagonal tower in the center, and two in the front; between
which were several square projections from top to bottom, with the windows in
pairs one above the other; beneath was a bridge and stairs to the river
Hol^shed, 793.
.

HENRY often resided here, and from hence made several of his solemn
processions. Here, in 1505, he lodged Philip of Austria, the matrimonial king
of Castile, tempest-driven into his dominions, and showed him the pomp and
glory of his capital The same.
.

THIS castle was the residence of Sir William Sydney, who died chamberlain and
steward to Edward VI. And in this place Mary, the gloomy queen of the gloomy
namesake of the former, had her right to the throne resolved on; and from hence
her partisans sallied forth to proclaim her lawful title. At this time it was
the property and residence of William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, a particular
favorer of the rightful heir. Her successor, Elizabeth, did him the honor of
taking a supper with his lordship: after supper, her majesty went on the water
to show herself to her subjects; her barge was instantly surrounded by hundreds
of boats; loud acclamations delivered from the heart, music, and fireworks
testified the happiness they felt at the sight of this mother of her people.
Early hours were then the fashion, for, notwithstanding this scene was
exhibited on the 25th of April, she retired to her palace at 10 o'clock
Strype's Annals.
.

To the west of this stood the other of Fitzstephen's castles, TOWER OF
MONTFICHET.
the tower of Montfichet, founded by Gilbert de Montfichet, a native of Rome,
but related to the Conqueror: he brought with him a strong force, and fought
gallantly in his cause, in the field of Hastings Dagdale's Baron, i. 438.
. By him was founded this tower: its date was short, for it was demolished by
king John in 1213, after banishing Richard, successor to Gilbert, the actual
owner Stow's Survaie, 114.
. The materials were applied, in 1276 (as before related) to the building of
the monastery of the Black Friars.

A LITTLE farther is Puddle Dock, and Puddle Dock Hill, PUDDLE DOCK.
remarkable only for having in the latter the western termination of the long
street called Thames Street, THAMES STREET.
which extends eastward as far as the Tower, a mile in length. In early times,
the southern side was guarded by a wall, close to the river, strengthened with
towers. These are mentioned by Fitzstephens as having been ruined and
undermined by the river. Lord Lyttelton justly observes, that after the
building of the Tower and the bridge, there was no necessity of restoring these
fortifications; as it was impossible (at lest after the bridge was flung across
the Thames) for any fleet to annoy the city. It originally stood farther from
the river than the present buildings and wharss, a considerable space between
the street and the water having been gained in a long series of ages.

NOT far from Puddle Dock, in old times, stood an ancient house of stone and
timber, built by the lords of Berkely, a potent race of barons. In the reign of
Henry VI. it was the residence of the great Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick
Stow's Survaie, 641.
, who seems to have made himself master of this by violence, among other
estates of the Berkelles, to which he made pretensions on the death of Thomas
fourth lord Berkeley Dagdale's Baron. i. 362.
.

FROM hence I turn north till I gain the site of Ludgate. On the left all is
piety; Credo-lane, Ave Maria! lane, Amen Corner, and Paternoster Row, indicate
the sanctity of the motley inhabitants. Before us rises the magnificent
structure of St. Paul's, and its confined churchyard. Before I mention that
noble temple, I pursue the left hand way to Warwick Lane; Where stands a dome
majestic to the sight,
And sumptuous arches bear its oval height;
A golden globe, placed high with artful skill,
Seems to the distant sight a gilded pill.
In prose, the College of Physicians; COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS
a society founded originally by Doctor Linacre, the first who rescued the
medical art from the hands of illiterate monks and empirics. He studied in
Italy: and became physician to Henry VII. and VIII. Edward VI. and the princess
Mary. He died in 1524 See my friend Doctor Atkin's Biographical Memoirs of
Medicine, octavo, 1^70, which a mis-judging period discouraged him from
completing.
. The college was first in Knight-Rider-street; afterward it was removed to
Amen Corner; and finally fixed here. The present building was the work of Sir
Christopher Wren. On the top of the dome is a gilt ball, which the witty Garth
calls the gilded pill. On the summit of the center is the bird of Aesculapius,
the admonishing cock.

ON one side of the court is a statue of Charles II: on the opposite, that of
the notorious Sir John Cutler. I was greatly at a loss to learn how so much
respect was shown to a character so stigmatized for avarice. I think myself
much indebted to Doctor WARREN for the extraordinary history. It appears, by
the annals of the college, that in the year 1674, a considerable sum of money
had been subscribed by the fellows, for the erection of a new college, the old
one having been consumed in the great fire, eight years before. It also
appears, that Sir John Cutler, a near relation of Doctor Whistler, the
president, was desirous of becoming a benefactor. A committee was appointed to
wait upon Sir John, to thank him for his kind intentions. He accepted their
thanks, renewed his promise, and specified the part of the building of which he
intended to bear the expense. In the year 1680, statues in honor of the king,
and Sir John, were voted by the college: and nine years afterward, the college
being then completed, it was resolved to borrow money of Sir John Cutler, to
discharge the college debt, but the sum is not specified. It appears, however,
that in 1699, Sir John's executors made a demand on the college of L. 7000;
which sum was supposed to include the money actually lent, the money pretended
to be given, but set down as a debt in Sir John's books, and the interest on
both. Lord Radnor, however, and Mr. Boulter, Sir John Cutler's executors, were
prevaled on to accept L. 2000 from the college, and actually remitted the other
five. So that Sir John's promise, which he never performed, obtained him the
statue, and the liberality of his executors has kept it in its place ever
since. But the college wisely have obliterated the inscription, which, in the
warmth of its gratitude, it had placed beneath the figure.

OMNIS CUTLER^ CEDAT LABOR AMPHITHEATRO. ^ORTRAITE.
IN the great room are several portraits of gentlemen of the faculty. Among them
Sir Theodore Mayerne, a native of Geneva, physician to James and Charles I. The
great Sydenham, to whom thousands owe their lives, by his daring attempt (too
long neglected) of the cool regimen in the smallpox. Harvey, who first
discovered the circulation of the blood. And the learned and pious Sir Thomas
Brown, who said that the discovery of that great man's, was preferable to the
discovery of the New World.

SIR Edmund King, the famous transfuser of blood from one animal into another;
a discovery, if pursued, of infinite consequence, in a moral, as well as a
physical light.

A VERY good portrait of the anatomist Ve^lius, on board, by ^n Calker, a
painter from the duchy of Cloves, who died in 1^^6. This celebrated character
had filled the professor's chair at Venice; after that, was for some time
physician to Charles V. Disgusted with the manners of a court, he determined on
a voyage to the Holy Land. The republic of Venice sent to him to fill the
professorship of medicine at Padua, vacant by the death of Fallopius. On his
return, in 1564, he was shipwrecked on the isle of Zanta, where he perished by
hunger.

Doctor Goodal, the Stentor of Garth's dispensary; and Doctor Millington, whom
the witty author compliments with the following lines, and, from what I
understand, with great justice; Machaon, whose experience we adore,
Great as your matchless merit is your power:
At your approach the baffled tyrant Death
Breaks his keen shafts, and grinds his clashing teeth.


THE portrait of Doctor Friend, the historian of physic, and the most able in
his profession, and the most elegant writer of his time, must not be omitted.
The fine busts of Harvey, Sydenham, and Mead, the physician of our own days,
merit attention: and with them I close the distinguished list.

THE library was furnished with books by Sir Theodore Mayerne. And it received
a considerable addition from the marquis of Dorchester.

WARWICK LANE took its name from its having in it the inn or house of Richard
Nevil, the great earl of Warwick, whose popularity and manner of living merits
recital. Stow mentions his coming to London, in the famous convention of 1458,
with 600 men, all in red jackets imbrodered, with ragged staves, before and
behind, and was lodged in Warwicke-lane: in whose house there was often six
oxen eaten at a breakfast, and every tavern was full of his meat, for he
that had any acquaintance in that house, might have there so much of sodden and
roast meat, as he could prick and carry upon a long dagger Stow's Survaie, 130.
.

THE memory of this king-making earl is still preserved by a fine stone statue,
placed in the front of a house in this lane, within two or three doors of the
south side of Newgate-street.

ANCIENT HOUSE (...) D^S (...) BRETAGNY.
NOT far from hence, near Ave Maria-lane, stood a great house of stone and wood,
belonging, in old times, to John duke of Bretagny, and earl of Richmond,
cotemporary with Edward II. and III; after him (...) was possessed by the earls
of Pembroke, in the time of Richard II. and Henry VI; and, in the time of queen
Elizabeth, (...) ^S H^.
by Henry lord Abergavenny. To finish the anti-climax, it was finally possessed
by the Company of Stationers, who rebuilt it of wood, and made it their hall.
It was destroyed by the great fire; and was succeeded by the present plain
building. The preceding owners might boast of their nobility; their successors
of their wealth; for in that sad calamity, lord Clarendon estimated that the
loss of the company did not amount to less than two hundred thousand pounds.

(...) P^UL^ CATHEDRAL.
THE cathedral of St. Paul more than fills the space of Ludgatehill. The best
authority we have for the origin of this church, is from its great restorer Sir
CHRISTOPHER WREN. His opinion, that there had been a church on this spot, built
by the Christians in the time of the Romans, was confirmed: when he searched
for the foundations for his own design, he met with those of the original
presbyterium, or semicircular chancel of the old church. They consisted only of
Kentish rubble-stone, artfully worked, and consolidated with exceeding hard
mortar, in the Roman manner, much excelling the superstructure Parentalia, 266.
. He explodes the notion of there having been here a temple of Diana, and the
discovery of the horns of animals used in the sacrifices to that goddess, on
which the opinion had been founded, no such having been discovered in all his
searches The same, 272.
. What was found, is mentioned in the 9th page of this book.

THE first church is supposed to have been destroyed in the Dioclesian
persecution, and to have been rebuilt in the reign of Constantine. This was
again demolished by the pagan Saxons; and restored, in 603, by Sebert, a petty
prince, ruling in these parts under Ethelbert king of Kent, the first Christian
monarch of the Saxon race; who, at the instance of St. Augustine, appointed
Melitus the first bishop of London. Erkenwald, the son of king Offa, fourth in
succession from Melitus, ornamented his cathedral very highly, and improved the
revenues with his own patrimony. He was most deservedly canonized; for the very
litter in which he was carried in his last illness, continued many centuries to
cure fevers by the touch; and the very chips, carried to the sick, restored
them to health.

WHEN the city, of London was destroyed by fire, in 1086, this church was
burnt; the bishop Mauritius began to rebuild it, and laid the foundations,
which remained till its second destruction, from the same cause, in the last
century. Notwithstanding Mauritius lived twenty years after he had begun this
pious work, and bishop Beauvages enjoyed the sea twenty more, yet, such was the
grandeur of the design, that it remained unfinished. The first had the ruins of
the Palatine tower bestowed on him, as materials for the building: and Henry I.
bestowed on Beauvages part of the ditch belonging to the Tower, which, with
purchases made by himself, enabled him to enclose the whole with a wall. The
same monarch granted besides, that every ship, which brought stone for the
church, should be exempted from toll; he gave him also all the great fish taken
in his precincts, except the tongues; and lastly, he secured to him and his
successor, the delicious tithes of all his venison in the county of Essex.

THE steeple was finished in 1221. The noble subterraneous church of St. Faith,
Ecclesia Sanctae Fidis in cryptis, was begun in 1257. It was supported by three
rows of massy clustered pillars, with ribs diverging from them to support the
solemn roof. This was the parish church. This undercroft, as these sort of
buildings were called, had in it several chauntries and monuments. Henry Lacie,
earl of Lincoln, who died in 1312, made what was called the New Work, at the
east end, in which was the chapel of our Lady, and that of St. Dunstan.

CHAPTER HOUSE.
THE Chapter House was adjoining to the south transept, was circular, and
supported by four central pillars, and of more elegant gothic than the rest of
the building. This projected into a most beautiful cloister, two stories high.
On the walls was painted the Machabre, or dance of death, a common subject on
the walls of cloisters or religious places. This was a single piece, a long
train of all orders of men, from the pope to the lowest of human beings; each
figure has as his partner, Death; the first shaking his remembering hourglass
Dugdale's Monast. i. 367; in which both print and verses are preserved. -- See
Dugdale's St. Paul, 134, and Stow's Survaie, 616.
. Our old poet Lydgate, who flourished in the year 1430, translated a poem on
the subject, from the French verses which attended a painting of the same kind
about St. Innocent's cloister, at Paris. The original verses were made by
Machaber, a German, in his own language. This shows the antiquity of the
subject, and the origin of the hint from which Holbein composed his famous
painting at Basil.

THIS cloister, the dance, and innumerable fine monuments (for here were
crowded by far the most superb) fell victims to the sacrilege of the protector
Somerset, who demolished the whole, and carried the materials to his palace
then erecting in the Strand.

FARTHER to the west, adjoining to this south side, was the parish church of
St. Gregory. Over it was one of the towers which ornamented the western front.
It was called the Lollards Tower, and was the bishop's prison for the
heterodox, in which was committed many a midnight murder. That of Richard Hunn,
in 1514, was one most foul; he was committed there; he was hanged there by the
contrivance of the chancellor of the diocese, Horsey; he was scandalized with
suicide; his corpse was ignominiously buried. The murder came out; the
coroner's inquest sat on the ashes, and they brought in a verdict of wilful
murder against Horsey and his accomplices. The bishop, Fitzjames, defended
them. The king interfered, and ordered the murderers to make restitution to the
children of the deceased, to the amount of fifteen hundred pounds. Yet the
perpetrators of this villainy escaped with a pardon, notwithstanding the king,
in his order, speaks to them as having committed what himself styles the cruel
murder Fox's Martyrs, ii. 8 to 14.
.

THE last person confined here was Peter Burchet of the Temple, who, in 1573,
desperately wounded our famous seaman Sir Richard Hawkins, in the open street,
whom he had mistaken for Sir Christopher Hatton. He was committed to this
prison, and afterward removed to the Tower; he there barbarously murdered
Stow, 690. -- Kennet, ii. 449.
one of his keepers; he was tried, convicted, had his right hand struck off,
and then hanged. He was found to be a violent enthusiast, who thought it lawful
to kill such who opposed the truth of the gospel.

THE style of the ancient cathedral was a most beautiful gothic; over the east
end was a most elegant circular window; alterations were made in the ends of
the two transepts, so that their form is not delivered down to us in the
ancient plans; from the central tower rose a lofty and most graceful spire.

DIMENSIONS OF THE CHURCH.
THE dimensions of this noble temple, as taken in 1309, were these: the length
six hundred and ninety feet; the breadth a hundred and twenty; the height of
the roof of the west part, from the floor, one hundred and two; of the east
part, a hundred and eighty-eight; of the tower, two hundred and sixty; of the
spire, which was made of wood covered with lead, two hundred and seventy-four.
The whole space the church occupied was three acres and a half, one rood and a
half, and six perches Dugdale, 17.
.

WE may be astonished at this amazing building, and naturally enquire what fund
could supply money to support so vast an expense. But monarchs resigned their
revenues resulting from the customs due for the materials, which were brought
to the adjacent wharfs; they furnished wood from the royal forests: prelates
gave up much of their revenues; and, what was more than all, by the pious bait
of indulgences, and remissions of penance, brought in, from the good people of
this realm, most amazing sums. Pope Innocent III. in 1252, gave a release of
sixty days penance: the archbishop of Cologne gave, a few years before, a
relaxation of fifty days: Boniface, archbishop of Canterbury, forty days. In
brief, there was not a prelate who did not, in this manner, excite his flock to
contribute liberally to this great and pious design.

THE nave was supported by clustered pillars and round arches, the style
preserved by the Normans, after the conquered Saxons. The galleries and windows
of the transepts were also finished with rounded arches. The skreen to the
choir, and the chapel of our Lady, were gothic. The skreen remarkably elegant,
ornamented with statues on each side of the door, at the expense of Sir Paul
Pindar See Dugdale's St. Paul, p. 143. plates marked 145-6 7-8.
. We are obliged to the industry of Hollar, for preserving this knowledge of its
ancient state. His great employer Sir William Dugdale, and that eminent artist,
were fortunately coeval. The pen of the one, and the burine of the other, were
in full vigor, before the ravages of the great fire, on multitudes of the
choice antiquities of our capital. To the same distinguished characters we owe
our acquaintance with the tombs: but we are not to expect in this church the
number, nor the elegance, of those of Westminster. St. Peter, the porter of
heaven, had far the preference to the tutelar saint of this cathedral. Few
crowned heads crowded here, ETHELRED AND SEBBA. Dagda^e, 94.
except Ethelred and Sebba, founders of the church; and of Saxon race, none
were found within these walls.

BUT if they were deprived of that boast, they had the honor of receiving the
remains of JOHN OF GAUNT.
Old John of Gaunt, time-honored Lancaster! the brother, father, and uncle of
kings. He died in 1399; and had a most magnificent tomb erected over him,
ruined by the fanatical soldiery of the last century. He, and his first wife
Blanch, lay recumbent beneath a rich canopy of tabernacle work; his crest upon
his abacoc, or cap of state; his shield, and his mighty spear, were hung on his
monument as so many trophies.

SHRINE OF ST. ERKENWALD. Dugdale, 114.
IN point of time, as well as sanctity, the rich gothic shrine of St. Erkenwald
should have preceded; which rested on his plain altar tomb. No wonder if, on
account of the miracles before mentioned, this shrine was a great resort of
pious devotees. It was enriched with gold, silver, and precious stones, by the
dean and chapter, who, in 1339, employed three goldsmiths to work on it a whole
year; the wages of the most expert was only eight shillings a week, the other
two five shillings. Of the gifts from devotees, that of Richard de Preston, of
London, grocer, was most valuable, being his best sapphire stones, there to
remain for curing of infirmities in the eyes Dugdale, 23. -- See Boethius de
Lapid. et Gem. 184; who treats of the virtues of the sapphyr.
.

THE shrine of Roger Niger, SHRINE OF ROGER NIGER. Dugdale, 86.
bishop of London in the thirteenth century, was also in high repute. A visit
to his shrine was frequently enjoined to the indulgences given for the
rebuilding of this church.

HENRY LACIE, the great earl of Lincoln, EARL OF LINCOLN. Dugdale, 84.
an eminent warrior under Edward I. particularly in the Welsh wars, was buried
in that part of the church of his own building, called the New Work. He died at
his house in town, called Lincoln's End. He is armed in mail; his body covered
with a short gown; his legs crossed, for he had either the merit of visiting
the Holy Land, or (which would entitle him to a right to that attitude) made a
vow to perform that expiatory privilege.

SIR John Beauchamp, a younger son of Guy earl of Warwick, SIR JOHN BEAUCHAMP.
Dugdale, 52.
in 1360 was interred here. His figure lay armed, and recumbent. He was one of
the founders of the order of the Garter; and distinguished himself, in the
martial reign of Edward III. by numbers of gallant actions by sea and by land.

THAT accomplished knight, the ill-fated Sir Simon de Burley, SIR SIMON DE
BURLEY. Dugdale, 104.
lay here in complete armor, under a most elegant gothic arch. I have
mentioned his sad story at p. 260. so will not repeat the subject. Here was
deposited, in 1468, (severed from her husband the great John Talbot, who was
interred at Whichurch, in Shropshire) Margaret countess of Shrewsbury. A
monument was designed by the friendship of one John Wenlok, at the expense of a
hundred pounds; but, from some unknown cause, the inscription only was executed.

WILLIAM earl of Pembroke, WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROKE. Dugdale, 88.
an active character in the reigns of Henry VIII. Mary, Edward VI. and
Elizabeth, with his first countess Anne Dugdale's Baron, ii. 259.
, sister to Catherine Parre, queen to Henry VIII. who dying at Baynard Castle,
in 1551, was interred here with vast solemnity. The portraits of Anne and her
lord, in painted glass, are still extant in the chapel at Wilton, and ought to
be engraved Mr. WALPOLE.
. The earl followed her in 1569. They lay beneath a magnificent canopy divided
into two arches; at their head, kneeling, is their daughter Anne lady Talbot;
at their feet, in the same attitude, their sons Henry earl of Pembroke, and Sir
Edward Herbert, of Pool, i. e. Powis Castle, ancestor of the earls of Powis.

DEAN COLET. Dugdale, 64.
AT the expense of the Mercers Company was erected a monument to the memory of
John Colet, the learned dean of St. Paul's, the intimate of Erasmus, and all
the eminent scholars of the time. This compliment was paid him by the Mercers,
because his father had been of their company, and twice lord mayor. He was, in
the beginning of life, luxurious, high-spirited, and subject to excess in
mirth; and used a freedom of speech which he afterward corrected. He thought
too much for the clergy of his days; and often exposed the corruptions of the
church. This subjected him to persecution, but he escaped unhurt. At length he
determined to retire from the world; which he quitted for a better in 1519. He
dedicated his great fortune to the founding of the school of St. Paul's, in
honor of Christ Jesu in pueritia, for a hundred and fifty-three scholars. A
handsome house is built for this purpose, under the care of the Mercers
Company. His monument had his bust in terra cotta, dressed in a gown and square
cap; and beneath it, a skeleton laid on a mat rolled up under its head.

THAT great and honest man, Sir Nicholas Bacon, SIR NICHOLAS BACON. Dugdale, 71.
lay here recumbent, and, notwithstanding he was a gownsman, was singularly
clad in complete armor: beneath him are his two wives, in gowns and short
ruffs.

SIR PHILIP SYDNEY, the delight of the age, SIR PHILIP SYDNEY. Dugdale, 111.
the most heroic and virtuous character of his time, had no more than a board
with a most wretched inscription of eight verses, to record a same which
nothing can injure. His remains were brought here on Jan. 16, 1586, with the
utmost magnificence. There was a general mourning for him, and it was accounted
indecent, for many months, for any gentleman to appear at court, or in the
city, in gay apparel Memoirs of the Sydnies, p. 109.
. The partiality of an individual may mistake the qualities of a friend; but
the testimony of a whole nation puts his merits beyond dispute.

THE memory of the great Walsingham also rests on his own deserts. He died so
poor, WALSINGHAM. Dugdale, 101.
that his friends were obliged to steal his remains into their grave, for fear
least they should be arrested. By accident was left an old book of legends,
which I purchased; an ancient manuscript-list of statesmen in the reign of
Elizabeth, consigned by the writer to the pains of hell, for their zeal against
the Catholics. The 1st, Leicester, all in fire, died 1588: 2d, Walsingham, the
Secretary, also in fire and flames. He died, Ap. 6, 1590. No wonder, since he
could contrive to get the pope's pocket picked, when his holiness was asleep,
of the keys of a cabinet, by which he made himself master of an original letter
of the first importance, which proved the saving of our island from the
machinations of its enemies.

OWEN THE EPIGRAMMATIST. Dugdale.
AS a Welshman, I must not pass over the quibbling epitaph of the quibbling
epigrammatist, my countryman John Owen, born at Llanarmon, in Caernarvonshire,
educated at Winchester, and elected fellow of New College Athenae Ox^n. i. 470.
. He lived under the patronage of archbishop Williams, and died in 1623.

Parva tibi statua, quia parva statura, supellex
Parva, volat parvus per ora liber.
Sed non parvus honos, non parva est gloria, quippe
Ingenio haud quicquam est majus in orb tuo.
Parva domus texit, templum sed grande, poetae
Tum vere vitam, quum moriuntur, agunt.
DOCTOR DONE. Dugdale, 62.
I WILL conclude with the melancholy corse of Doctor Done, the wit of his time,
standing in a nich, and wrapped in a shroud gathered about his head; with his
feet resting on an urn. Not long before his death, he dressed himself in that
funebrial habit, placed his feet on an urn fixed on a board exactly of his own
height, and, shutting his eyes, like a departed person, was drawn in that
attitude by a skilful painter. This gloomy piece he kept in his room till the
day of his death, on March 31, 1631; after which it served as a pattern for his
tomb.

THE HIGH ALTAR.
IT will be endless to enumerate the altars of this vast temple, numerous as
those of the Pantheon. I content myself with the mention of the High Altar,
which dazzled with gems and gold, the gifts of its numerous votaries. John,
king of France, when prisoner in England, first paying his respects to St.
Erkenwald's shrine, offered four basins of gold: and the gifts at the obsequies
of princes, foreign and British, were of immense value. On the day of the
conversion of the tutelar saint, the charities were prodigious, first to the
souls, when an indulgence of forty days pardon was given, vere poenitentibus,
contritis et confessis; and, by order of Henry III. fifteen hundred tapers were
placed in the church, and fifteen thousand poor people fed in the churchyard.

BUT the most singular offering was that of a fat do in winter, SINGULAR
OFFERING.
and a buck in summer, made at the high altar, on the day of the commemoration
of the saint, by Sir William de Baude and his family, and then to be
distributed among the canons resident. This was in lieu of twenty-two acres of
land in Essex, which did belong to the canons of this church. Till queen
Elizabeth's days, the do or buck was received solemnly, at the steps of the
high altar, by the dean and chapter, attired in their sacred vestments, and
crowned with garlands of roses. They sent the body of the bucke to baking, and
had the head, fixed on a pole, borne before the cross in the procession,
until they issued out of the west door, where the keeper that brought it
blowed the death of the bucke, and then the horners, that were about the
city, presently answered him in like manner; for which pains they had each
man, of the deane and chapter, four pence in money, and their dinner; and the
keeper that brought it was allowed, during his abode there, for his service,
meat, drink, and lodging, and five shillings in money at his going away,
together with a loaf of bread having the picture of St. Paul upon it Warton's
Hist. of Poetry, ii. 390.
.

MYSTERIES.
THE boys of St. Paul's were famous for acting of the mysteries or holy plays,
and even regular dramas. They often had the honor of performing before our
monarchs. Their preparations were expensive; so that they petitioned Richard
II. to prohibit some ignorant and unexperienced persons from acting the History
of the Old Testament, to the great prejudice of the clergy of the church. BOY
BISHOP.
They had their barne-bishop, or child-bishop, who assumed the state and attire
of a prelate. Ludicrous as this holy counterfeit was, dean Colet expressly
orders that his scholars shall, every Childermas day, come to Paulis church,
and hear the child byshop's sermon, and after be at the high mass, and each
of them offer a penny to the child bishop; and with them, the masters and
surveyors of the scole Stow's Survaie, 641.
. This character was very common in many of the churches in France, under the
name of L'eveque des foux, or Archeveque des foux. They were dressed in the
pontifical habits, and sung such indecent songs, danced and committed such
horrible profanations, even before the altar, that at length they were
suppressed by an arret of parliament Memoires de la fete des foux, pp. 5, 8, 10.
, at the request of the dean and chapter of Rheims.

THE holiness of this place did not prevent thieves and profligates of all
denominations lurking within the precincts, and committing, under favor of the
night, murders and every sort of crime. CHURCH, AND BUILDINGS BELONGING TO IT,
ENCLOSED WITH A WALL.
Edward I. gave the dean and canons permission to enclose the whole within a
wall; and to have gates to be shut every night, to exclude all disorderly
people. Within these walls, on the north-west side, was the bishop's palace.
Froissart tells us, that after the great tournament in Smithfield, BISHOP'S
PALACE.
king Edward III. and his queen lodged here (I think on occasion of their
nuptials); There was goodly daunsyng in the queen's lodging, in presence of the
king and his uncles, and other barons of England, and ladies, and damoyselles,
till it was day, which was time for every person to draw to their lodgings,
except the king and queen, who lay there in the byshoppe's palayce, for there
theye lay all the feasts and justes during Froissart, Eng. transt. ii. civ.
.

IT was a building of vast extent, and frequently lodged our kings on different
occasions. The poor prince Edward V. was brought here, as he supposed to take
possession of the crown; and, in 1501, the unhappy Catherine of Arragon was
conducted to this palace to meet her young lover, prince Arthur; and on Nov.
14, was publicly married to him at St. Paul's; they returned to the palace,
where they were entertained with a splendid nuptial feast, and resided here a
few days, till they were visited by the king and queen, who took the royal pair
with them by water from Baynard Castle to Westminster Holinshed, 789.
.

IN 1526, Anne de Montmorenci, and others, ambassadors from Francis I. were
magnificently lodged and entertained at this palace. They were sent over to
ratify the important treaties between the two monarchs, and to compliment Henry
with the order of St. Michael See the same, p. 898.
. And in 1546, the French ambassador Claude Annebau, admiral of France, was
splendidly lodged in the same place Maitland, ii. 880.
. He was a favorite of Francis I. and sent over to make peace between Charles
V. his master, and Henry.

IN the reign of Edward VI. the queen dowager of Scotland was here entertained.
The dean's house, and the houses of the prebendaries and residentiaries, were
on the opposite side; and, in those days of plain living, kept great households
and liberal hospitality The same.
.

PAUL'S CROSS.
BEFORE this cathedral was the famous Paul's Cross, a pulpit formed of wood,
mounted upon steps of stone, and covered with lead, in which the most eminent
divines were appointed to preach every Sunday in the forenoon. To this place,
the court, the mayor, and aldermen, and principal citizens, used to resort. The
greatest part of the congregation sat in the open air; the king and his train
had covered galleries; and the better sort of people, if I may judge from the
old prints, were also protected from the injury of the weather; but the far
greater part stood exposed in the open air: for which reason the preacher went,
in very bad weather, THE SHROWDS.
to a place called the Shrowds; a covered space on the side of the church, to
protect the congregation in inclement seasons. Considerable contributions were
raised among the nobility and citizens, to support such preachers as were (as
was often the case) called to town from either of the universities. In
particular, the lord mayor and aldermen ordered that every preacher, who came
from a distance, should be freely accommodated, during five days, with sweet
and convenient lodgings, fire, candle, and all necessaries. And notice was
given by the bishop of London, to the preacher appointed by him, of the place
he was to repair to.

THE origin of the custom of preaching at crosses, was probably accidental. The
sanctity of this species of pillar often caused a great resort of people, to
pay their devotion to the great object of their erection. A preacher, seeing a
large concourse, might be seized by a sudden impulse, ascend the steps, and
deliver out his pious advice from a station so fit to inspire attention, and so
conveniently formed for the purpose. The example might be followed, till the
practice became established by custom.

IT certainly at first was a common cross, and coeval with the church. When it
was first covered, and converted into a pulpit-cross, we are not informed. We
are given to understand that it was overthrown by an earthquake in 1382, and
that William Courtney, then archbishop of Canterbury, collected great sums for
the rebuilding; which, says dean Nowel, in a sermon he preached at this cross,
he applied to his own use. Courtney was a most munificent prelate, and not
likely to abuse the charity of his flock; yet it was not rebuilt till the time
of Thomas Kemp, elected bishop of London in 1449, who finished it in the form,
says Godwin, in which we see it at present Praesul. Angl. 248. -- Godwin
published his book in 1616.
; and so it stood till it was demolished, in 1643, by order of parliament,
executed by the willing hands of Isaac Pennington, the fanatical lord mayor of
that year, who died in the Tower, a convicted regicide.

WE hear of this being in use as early as the year 1259. It was used not only
for the instruction of mankind, by the doctrine of the preacher, but for every
purpose political or ecclesiastical: for giving force to oaths, for promulging
of laws, or rather the royal pleasure, for the emission of papal bulls, for
anathematizing sinners, for benedictions, for exposing of penitents under
censure of the church, for recantations, for the private ends of the ambitious,
and for the defaming of those who had incurred the displeasure of crowned heads.

IN 1259, Henry III. commanded the lord mayor to swear, before the aldermen,
every person of twelve years and upwards, to be true to him and his heirs.

IN 1262, the same monarch caused the bull of Urban IV. to be here made public,
as an absolution of him and his adherents, who had sworn to observe the Oxford
provisions, made in the violent meeting at that city in 1258, called the mad
parliament.

HERE, in 1299, Ralph de Baldoc, dean of St. Paul's, cursed all those who had
searched, in the church of St. Martin in the Fields, for a hoard of gold, etc.

THE PENANCE OF JANE SHORE.
BEFORE this cross, in 1483, was brought, divested of all her splendour, Jane
Shore, the charitable, the merry concubine of Edward IV. and, after his death,
of his favorite, the unfortunate Lord Hastings. After the loss of her
protectors, she fell a victim to the malice of crook-backed Richard. He was
disappointed (by her excellent defense) of convicting her of witchcraft, and
confederating with her lover to destroy him. He then attacked her on the weak
side of frailty. This was undeniable. He consigned her to the severity of the
church: she was carried to the bishop's palace, clothed in a white sheet, with
a taper in her hand, and from thence conducted to the cathedral, and the cross,
before which she made a confession of her only fault. Every other virtue
bloomed in this ill-fated fair with the fullest vigor. She could not resist
the solicitations of a youthful monarch, the handsomest man of his time. On his
death she was reduced to necessity, scorned by the world, and cast off by her
husband, with whom she was paired in her childish years, and forced to fling
herself into the arms of Hastings. "In her penance she went," says Holinshed,
in countenance and pase demure, so womanly, that, albeit she were out of all
araie, save her kirtle only, yet went she so fair and lovelie, namely, while
the woondering of the people cast a comely rud in her cheeks, (of which she
before had most miss) that her great shame wan her much praise among those
that were more amorous of her body than curious of her soul. And many good
folks that hated her living, (and glad were to see sin corrected) yet pitied
they more her penance, than rejoised therein, when they considered that the
Protector procured it more of a corrupt intent, than any virtuous affection
Holinshed, 724.
.

ROW has flung this part of her sad story into the following poetical dress;
but it is far from depreciating the moving simplicity of the old historian.

Submissive, sad, and lowly was her look;
A burning taper in her hand she bore,
And on her shoulders carelessly confused,
With loose neglect, her lovely tresses hung;
Upon her cheek a faintish flush was spread;
Feeble she seemed, and sorely smit with pain,
While, barefoot as she trod the flinty pavement.
Her footsteps all along were marked with blood.
Yet silent still she passed, and unrepining;
Her streaming eyes bent ever on the earth,
Except when, in some bitter pang of sorrow,
To Heaven she seemed in fervent zeal to raise,
And beg that mercy man denied her here.
THE poet has adopted the fable of her being denied all sustenance, and of her
perishing with hunger; but that was not fact. She lived to a great age, but in
great distress and miserable poverty; deserted even by those to whom she had,
during prosperity, done the most essential services. She dragged a wretched
life, even to the time of Sir Thomas More, who introduces her story into his
life of Edward V. The beauty of her person is spoken of in high terms: Proper
she was, and fair: nothing in her body that you would have changed; but you
would have wished her somewhat higher. Thus say they that knew her in her
youth. -- Now is she old, lean, withered, and dried up; nothing left but
rivelled skin and hard bone; and yet, being even such, who so well advise her
visage, might guess and devise, which parts how filled would make it a fair
face Hol^shed, 724.
.

THE late ingenious the Reverend Mr. Michael Tyson, made me a present of an
etching of this unfortunate fair, done by himself from the original in the
provost's lodgings, in King's college, Cambridge. Her hair is curled in short
curls high above her neck, and mixed with chains of jewels set in a lozenge
form: her neck and body, as far beneath her arms, are naked; the first has two
strings of pearls hanging loose round it: over her shoulders is a rich chain of
jewels set in circles, and pendant from the middle, which hangs down her
breast, is a rich lozenge of jewels, and to each link is affixed one or more
pearls. In her countenance is no appearance of charms; she must have attracted
the hearts of her lovers by her intellectual beauties.

UNDER her cruel persecutor, PROSTITUTE PREACH^S.
this pulpit-cross became the seat of prostituted eloquence. The usurper made
use of Doctor Shaw, brother to his creature the lord mayor, and friar Pinke, an
Augustine, (both, says Stow, doctors of divinity, both great preachers, both of
more learning than virtue) as his engines. They addressed the people, and
inferred the bastardy of his brother's children, and enlarged on the great
qualities of their ambitious employers. But Pinke lost his voice in the middle
of his sermon, and was forced to descend: and Shaw was afterward struck with
such remorse, finding himself despised by all the world, that he soon after
died of a broken heart See Fabian, 515. Holinshed, 725. Stow's Annals, 451.
.

ROYAL contracts of marriage were notified to the people from this place. Thus
that between Margaret, ROYAL CONTRACTS OF MARRIAGE.
daughter of Henry VII. and James the IVth of Scotland, was here declared in
1501; Te Deum was sung, twelve bonfires set a blazing, and twelve hogsheads of
Gascoigne wine given to the populace Stow's Annals, 483.
.

BUT the most famous preachments ever made here, PAPAL BULLS PREACHED DOWN.
were those done by order of Henry VIII; who compelled the bishop of London to
send up to Paul's Cross, from Sunday to Sunday, preachers to preach down the
pope's authority; to show to the people that he was no more than the simple
bishop of Rome, and that his usurpations were only the effect of the negligence
of the princes of this realm Weever's Funeral Monuments, 91, 92.
. And thus his holiness's bulls were fairly baited out of the kingdom by his
own dogs.

PENITENCE OF HENRY VIII.
FROM this pulpit was proclaimed to the people, by Henry Holbetch, bishop of
Rochester, the deathbed remorse of the same tyrant; who, finding the stroke
inevitable, he ordered the church of the Gray Friars, which he had converted
into a storehouse, to be cleared of the goods, and opened for divine service,
and presented by patent to the city, for the relieving of the poor Stowe's
^urvaie, 591.
.

RECANTATIONS.
MANY are the examples of persons bearing the faggot, and of making public
recantation of their faith, of both religions, at this place. The Reformers
bore that badge as a mark of their escape: the Catholics were excused from the
burning, therefore were excused from the burden. The last who appeared, was a
seminary priest, who, in 1593, made his recantation. In 1537, Sir Thomas
Newman, priest, bore the faggot here on a singular occasion, for singing mass
with good ale. To this place Henry Gray, duke of Suffolk, sent his chaplain,
Harding, to dissuade the people from revolting from their allegiance to queen
Mary Fox's Martyrs
: yet, actuated by weakness and ambition, concurred in setting up his unhappy
daughter, Jane Gray, in opposition to his rightful sovereign.

WE are told in Strype's Memorials, III. 21, that queen Mary made use of the
same arts in the same place, and appointed several of her best divines to
preach the old religion, and her design of restoring the ancient worship: but
so averse were the people, that the attempt was attended with great tumults.
These she allayed by the temporary expedients of fire and faggot.

THE reign of queen Elizabeth was wisely ushered in by the appointment of good
and able men to preach from this Cross the doctrine of the Reformation, and
rejection of the Papal power Strype's Annals, i. 133.
; THE REFORMATION PREACHED FROM HENCE.
in which politics were naturally intermixed. This began April the 9th, 1559,
with doctor Bill, the queen's almoner; he was followed by Grindal, Horn, Jewel,
Sandys, and many others, who soon after enjoyed the highest dignities in our
church.

THE same heroine, giving way to a most ungenerous passion, ESSEX CALUMNIATED.
caused from this pulpit the memory of her once-beloved Essex to be blackened;
to suffer the indignity of a sermon at Paul's Cross, set out in command. Some
sparks of indignation remaining in the queen, that were unquenched even by his
blood Wotton's Remains, edit. 3d. p. 193.
.

IT was more worthily employed, DEFEAT OF THE ARMADA ANNOUNCED.
when her majesty caused from thence a sermon of thanksgiving to Providence, in
1588, for the signal deliverance her subjects received from the invincible
armada of Philip II.

AFTER the battle of St. Quintin, her predecessor, queen Mary, BATTLE OF ST.
QUINTIN.
caused doctor Harpsfield to preach a sermon, and from this Cross to give the
people information of the victory gained by the general of her husband, Philip
of Spain, over the French, and of the succeeding capture of St. Quintin; before
which that monarch, the only time in his life, appeared clad in armor.

IN 1596, LEVIES INCITED.
while the lord mayor and aldermen were attending a sermon at this place, they
received an order from the queen, to levy a thousand able-bodied men. They
quitted their devotions, and performed their commission before eight at night,
and had them ready armed for their march before morning. The service they were
designed for was to assist the French in raising the siege of Calais, then
besieged by the Spaniards; but the place being taken by the time they reached
Dover, they returned to the city, after a week's absence. From the usual policy
of Elizabeth, it is possible the sermon and order were both preconcerted; the
moment of devotion being the aptest to inspire zeal, and promote an
enthusiastic ardor in the people to fly to a standard raised against a nation
so detested, and so inimical to our religion and liberties, as the Spaniards.

JAMES I. HEARS A SERMON AT THE CROSS.
THE last sermon which was preached at this place, was before James I. who came
in great state on horseback from Whitehall, on Midlent Sunday, 1620: he was
received at Temple Bar by the lord mayor and aldermen, who presented him with a
purse of gold. At St. Paul's he was received by the clergy in their richest
vestments. Divine service was performed, attended with organs, cornets, and
sagbots; after which his majesty went to a prepared place, and heard a sermon
at the Cross, preached by John King, bishop of London. The object of the sermon
was the repairing of the cathedral. The king and the principal persons retired
from the Cross to the bishop's palace, to consult on the matter, and, after a
magnificent banquet, the court returned to Whitehall Stow's Annals, 1033. Hist.
London, I. book iii. 151.
.

SPIRE OF THE CHURCH BURNT.
I WILL not mention the different misfortunes this cathedral experienced, except
the last, previous to its final destruction by the great fire. In 1561, the
noble spire was totally burnt by lightning, and never restored. This
circumstance shows the date of 1560, to Aggas's famous survey of London, to
have been erroneous: he having given the church without the spire; which he
never could have omitted, had it existed at that time.

IN consequence of the resolutions taken in 1620, by James I. to repair the
cathedral, the celebrated Inigo Jones was appointed to the work. But it was not
attempted till the year 1633, when Laud laid the first stone, and Inigo the
fourth. That great architect begun with a most notorious impropriety, giving to
the west end a portico of the Corinthian order (beautiful indeed) to this
ancient gothic pile Parentalia, 273.
; and to the ends of the two transepts gothic fronts in a most horrible style.
The great fire made way for the restoring of this magnificent pile by Sir
CHRISTOPHER WREN, an architect worthy of so great a design. I will not attempt
to describe so well-known a building; the description is well done in several
books easy to be had London and its Environs described, in six vols. 8vo. 1761
-- Stranger's Guide through London, duod. 1786 -- Besides the larger works,
such as, Wren's Parentalia -- Maitland's London -- Strype's edition of Stow,
etc.
. Sir Christopher made a model in wood of his first conception for rebuilding
this church, in the Roman style. He had in it an eye to the loss of the
Pulpit-cross, and had supplied its place by a magnificent auditory within, for
the reception of a large congregation. This was approved by men of excellent
judgment, but laid aside under the notion it had not sufficiently a temple-like
form. A second was made, selected out of various sketches he had drawn; on this
design Sir Christopher set a high value: but this also was rejected Parentalia,
282.
. The third, which produced the present noble pile, was approved and executed.
A singular accident happened at the beginning: while the great architect was
setting out the dimensions of the dome, he ordered a common laborer to bring
him a flat stone, to be laid as a direction to the masons; he brought a
fragment of a gravestone, on which was the word RESURGAM. This was not lost on
Sir Christopher; he caught the idea of the Phoenix, which he placed on the
south Portico, with that word cut beneath.

THE first stone was laid on June 21, 1675; and the building was completed by
him in 1710 The same, 292.
; but the whole decorations were not finished till 1723 Maitland, ii.
. It was a most singular circumstance, that, notwithstanding it was thirty-five
years in building, it was begun and finished by one architect, and under one
prelate, Henry Compton, bishop of London. The church of St. Peter's was a
hundred and thirty-five years in building, in the reigns of nineteen popes, and
went through the hands of twelve architects. It is not, as often mistaken,
built after the model of that famous temple: it is the entire conception of our
great countryman; and has been preferred in some respects, by a judicious
writer, to even the Roman Basilica. Its dimensions are less. The comparative
view is given in the Parentalia, and copied in London and its Environs. -- I
will only mention the great outlines: -- the height of St. Peter's, to the top
of the cross, is four hundred and thirty-seven feet and a half; that of St.
Paul's, three hundred and forty feet: so that, from its situation, it is lofty
enough to be seen from the sea. The length of the first, is seven hundred and
twenty-nine feet; of the latter, five hundred. The greatest breadth of St.
Peter's is three hundred and sixty-four; of St. Paul's, one hundred and eighty.

IN the reigns of James I. and Charles I. the body of this cathedral was the
common resort of the politicians, the news-mongers, and idle in general. It was
called Paul's walk, and the frequenters known by the name of Paul's walkers. It
is mentioned in the old plays, and other books of the times. The following
droll description may possibly give some amusement to the reader:

IT is the land's epitome, or you may call it the lesser i will of Great
Britain. It is more than this, the whole world's map, which you may here
discern in it is perfect'st motion, justling and turning. It is a heap of
stones and men, with a vast confusion of languages; and, were the steeple not
sanctified, nothing liker Babel. The noise in it is like that of bees, a
strange humming or buzze, mixed of walking, tongues, and feet. It is a kind of
still roar, or loud whisper. It is the great exchange of all discourse, and no
business whatsoever but is here stirring and a foot. It is the synod of all
pates politic, joynted and laid together in the most serious posture; and
they are not half so busy at the parliament. It is the anticke of tails to
tails, and backs to backs; and for vizards, you need go no further than
faces. It is the market of young lecturers, whom you may cheapen here at all
rates and sizes. It is the general mint of all famous lies, which are here,
like the legends popery first coined and stamped in the church. All inventions
are emptyed here, and not few pockets. The best sign of a temple in it is,
that it is the thieves sanctuary, which rob more safely in the crowd then a
wilderness, whilst every searcher is a bush to hide them. It is the other
expense of the day, after plays, tavern, and a baudy house, and men have
still some oaths left to swear here. It is the eare's brothell, and satisfies
their lust and ytch. The visitants are all men, without exceptions; but the
principal inhabitants and possessors are stale knights, and captains out of
service; men of long rapiers and breeches, which after all turn merchants
here, and traffic for news. Some make it a preface to their dinner, and
travel for a stomach: but thriftier men make it their ordinary, and board
here very cheap. Of all such places it is least haunted with hobgoblins, for
if a ghost would walk, move he could not Microcosmographie, 1628.
.

STATUE OF QUEEN ANNE.
THE statue of queen Anne, of white marble, with the figures of Britain, France,
Ireland, and America at the base, is placed before the western front. This rose
from the chizzel of Francis Bird, as did the conversion of St. Paul in the
pediment, and the has-reliefs under the portico Anecdotes of Painting, iii. 150.
. Let the fine irony of Sir Samuel Garth, whose spirit lay dormant till it rose
in later days wrapped in the sheets of the eloquent Junius, conclude all I have
said of this majestic pile.

Near the vast bulk of that stupendous frame
Known by the Gentiles great Apostle's name,
With grace divine, great Anna's seen to rise,
An awful form that glads a nation's eyes:
Beneath her feet four mighty realms appear,
And with due reverence pay their homage there.
Britain and Ireland seem to own her grace,
And even wild India wears a smiling face.
But France alone with downcast eyes is seen,
The sad attendant of so good a queen:
Ungrateful country! to forget so soon
All that great Anna for thy sake has done:
When sworn the kind defender of thy cause,
Spite of her dear religion, spite of laws;
For thee she sheathed the terrors of her sword,
For thee she broke her general -- and her word:
For thee her mind in doubtful terms she told.
And learned to speak like oracles of old.
For thee, for thee alone, what could she more?
She lost the honor she had gained before;
Lost all the trophies, which her arms had won,
(Such Caesar never knew, nor Philip's son)
Resigned the glories of a ten years reign,
And such as none but Marlborough's arm could gain.
For thee in annals she is content to shine,
Like other monarchs of the Stuart line.
IN digging the foundation for the rebuilding of this cathedral, it was
discovered, beneath the graves mentioned at p. 9, that the foundation of the
old church rested on a layer of hard and close pot earth. Curiosity led Sir
Christopher Wren to search farther. He found that on the north side it was six
feet thick, that it grew thinner toward the south, and on the decline of the
hill was scarcely four. On advancing farther, he met with nothing but loose
sand; at length he came to water and sand mixed with periwinkles, and other
sea-shells; and, by boring, came at last to the beach, and under that the
natural hard clay: which evinced that the sea had once occupied the space on
which St. Paul's now stands. This sand had been one of those sand-hills
frequent on many coasts, not only on those of Holland and Flanders, but on our
own. It was the opinion of our great architect, that all the space between
Camberwell hill and the hills of Essex had been a vast bay, at low water a
sandy plain. All which appears in some distant age to have been embanked,
possibly by the Romans Parentalia, p. 285.
, who were greatly employed in that useful work, paludibus emuniendis.

TO the south of this cathedral are the college of Civilians, or Doctors
commons, the court of arches, the court of delegates, and several others, the
great satellites of the church. The court of arches took its name, curia de
arcubus, from having been once kept in Bow church, Cheapside. With the downfall
of the church of Rome their powers decreased, and continued decreasing as the
rights of mankind became better understood.

HERALDS COLLEGE.
ON Bennet-hill, adjacent to these courts, is the College of Heralds, a
foundation of great antiquity, in which the records are kept of all the old
blood of the kingdom. In the warlike times of our Henry's and our Edwards, the
heralds were in full employ, and often sent upon most dangerous services; to
hurl defiance into the teeth of irritated enemies, or to bring to their duty
profligate rebels. Sometimes it has cost them their nose and ears, and
sometimes their heads. At present they rest safe from all harms: are often of
great use in proving consanguinity, and helping people to supply legal clames
to estates; and often are of infinite use to our numerous children of fortune,
by furnishing them with a quantum sufficit of good blood, and enabling them to
strut in the motley procession of gentility.

THE house they occupy was built on the site of Derby-house, a palace of the
great family of the Stanlies. It was built by the first earl, father-in-law to
Henry VII. who in it lived and died, as did his son George, the intended victim
to the rage of Richard III. before the battle of Bosworth. Edward earl of
Derby, that prodigy of charity and hospitality Stow's Survaie, 138,
, exchanged it with Edward VI. for certain lands adjoining to his park at
Knowsley, in Lancashire. Queen Mary presented it to Dethick, Garter king of
arms, and his brother heralds, to live in, and discharge the business of their
office Collins's Peerage, ii. 53. -- Stow, 694.
. This house was destroyed in the great fire, but soon rebuilt. It is inhabited
by several of the heralds. J.C. Brook, Esquire Somerset, must permit me to
acknowledge his frequent services and liberal communications.

IN this neighborhood, to the west, stood the royal wardrobe, kept in a house
built by Sir John Beauchamp, who made it his residence. It was sold to Edward
III. and became the lodging Richard III. in his second year.

KNIGHT-RIDER STREET.
CROSS Bennet-hill passes Knight-rider Street, so named from the gallant train
of knights who were wont to pass this way, in the days of chivalry, from the
Tower Royal to the gay tournaments at Smithfield. From hence I pass to the
King's Exchange, or the Old Change, a street parallel to the east side of St.
Paul's church yard, which cross the Roman road, or Watling-street, and
terminates close to the west end of Cheapside. This was the seat of the King's
Exchanger, who delivered out to the other exchangers, through the kingdom,
their coining irons, and received them again when worn out, with an account of
the sums coined: neither was any body to make change of plate, or other mass of
silver, unless at this place Stow's Survaie, 609, 610.
.

IN this street stood the College of Physicians, till it was destroyed by the
great fire: it was founded by the ornament of his age, Doctor Linacre, the
greatest and most general scholar of the time. He lived in this street, and
left his house to the public, for the use of his institution. He was appointed
by Henry VII. physician to prince Arthur, and also his tutor. He was besides
physician to that monarch, and Henry VIII; and died in 1524, an honor to our
country. He had traveled much, and was particularly respected by the reigning
duke of Tuscany, (the politest scholar of his days), and other foreigners; and
met with at home a return suitable to his merit.

CHEAPSIDE.
CHEAPSIDE received its name from Chepe, a market, as being originally the great
street of splendid shops. In the year 1246 it was an open field, called
Crown-field, from an hosterie, or inn, with the sign of a crown, at the east
end. "At the same period," adds Stow, at p. 187 of his Chronicle, nor two
hundred years after, was any street in London paved, except Thames Street, and
from Ludgate Hill to Charing Cross. The goldsmiths shops were particularly
superb, "consisting," says Stow, of a most beautiful frame of fair houses and
shops than be within the walls of London or elsewhere in England, commonly
called Goldsmiths-Row; builded by Thomas Wood, goldsmith, and one of the
sheriffs of London in 1491. It contained ten fair dwelling houses, and
fourteen shops, all in one frame, uniformely builded four stories high,
beautified toward the street with the goldsmithes arms, and likeness of
woodmen, in memory of his name, riding on monstrous beasts, all richly painted
and gilt Stow's Survaie, 660.
.

IN Foster Lane, which opens into the west end of this street, GOLDSMITHS HALL.
stands the hall of this opulent company. In the court-room is a fine portrait
of Sir Hugh Myddelton, with a shell by him, out of which he may be supposed to
have poured the useful element to the thirsting metropolis. The words Fontes
Fodinae are painted on the picture, to imply his double attentions. The wealth
he got in the mines was totally exhausted in the execution of his project, of
which the metropolis, to this moment, receives increasing benefit. Sir Hugh
left a share in the New River to this company, for the benefit of the decayed
members; which, even in 1704, amounted to L. 134.

HERE is a good portrait of Sir Martin Bows, lord mayor in 1545, with his
chain and robes of office. The date of his picture is 1566.

ST. Dunstan appears here in canvas, in a rich robe, and with his crosier. The
unfortunate devil is not forgotten, roaring between the pincers of the saint;
with the heavenly host above, applauding the deed. It seems by this that St.
Dunstan amused himself in works of gold as well as iron: so that it is no
wonder to see the evil spirit in a place where the irritamenta malorum so much
abound.

QUEEN Elizabeth presented this company with a silver cup, out of which annual
libations are made to her memory. She was particularly kind to the citizens,
and borrowed money of them on all occasions. The goldsmiths must of course
enjoy a distinguished place in her esteem.

THIS company appeared as a fraternity as early as 1180, being then amerced for
being adulterine, or for setting up without the king's license. In the reign of
Edward III. they obtained a patent, and were incorporated for the sum of ten
marks. Richard II. confirmed the same, in consideration of the sum of twenty
marks. They increased in wealth, and have left evident marks of charity, by
having above a thousand pounds a year to dispose of for benevolent purposes.
They became in time the bankers of the capital. The Lombards were the first and
the greatest, and most of the money contracts in old times passed through their
hands. Many of our monarchs were obliged to them for money. They did not seem
to like trusting Henry IV. on his bond, so took the customs in pawn for their
loan.

THE business of goldsmiths was confined to the buying and selling of plate,
and foreign coins of gold and silver, melting them, and coining others at the
mint. The banking was accidental, and foreign to their institution.

REGULAR banking by private people resulted, in 1643, from the calamity of the
time, when the seditious spirit was incited by the arts of the parlementary
leaders. The merchants and tradesmen, who before trusted their cash to their
servants and apprentices, found that no longer safe; neither did they dare to
leave it in the mint at the Tower, by reason of the distresses of majesty
itself, which before was a place of public deposit. In the year 1645, they
began to place it in the hands of goldsmiths, when they first began publicly to
exercise both professions. Even in my days were several very eminent bankers,
who kept the goldsmiths shop: but they were more frequently separated. The
first regular banker was Mr. Francis Child, goldsmith, who began business soon
after the Restoration. He was the father of the profession, a person of large
fortune and most respectable character. He married, between the years 1665 and
1675, Martha, only daughter of Robert Blanchard, citizen and goldsmith, by whom
he had twelve children. Mr. Child was afterward knighted. He lived in
Fleet Street, where the shop still continues For these particulars I am obliged
to the civility of Mr. Dent, partner in this great shop.
, in a state of the highest respectability. Mr. Granger Vol. iii. 410.
mentions Mr. Child as successor to the shop of alderman Backwel, a banker in
the time of Charles II. noted for his integrity, abilities, and industry; who
was ruined by the shutting up of the exchequer in 1672. His books were placed
in the hands of Mr. Child, and still remain in the family.

THE next ancient shop was that possessed at present by Messrs. Snow and Den,
a few doors to the west of Mr. Child's; who were goldsmiths of consequence in
the latter part of the same reign. To the west of Temple Bar, the only one was
that of Messrs Middleton and Campbel, goldsmiths, who flourished in 1692, and
is now continued, with great credit, by Mr. Coutts. From thence to the
extremity of the western end of the town, there was none till the year 1756,
when the respectable name of Backwel Of the same family with the great Mr.
Backwel. He favored me with a beautiful print of his worthy relation, which had
been engraven in Holland, after his flight from his profligate country.
rose again, conjoined to those of Darel, Heart, and Croft, who with great
reputation opened their shop in Pall Mall.

ST. MARTIN'S LE GRAND.
FOSTER LANE bounds on the east that remarkable place, St. Martin's Le Grand:
imperium in imperio: surrounded by the city, yet subject, near three centuries,
to the governing powers of Westminster Abbey. A large and fair college was
founded, A. D. 700, by Wythred king of Kent; and rebuilt and chiefly endowed by
two noble Saxon brothers, Ingelric and Edward, about the year 1056. William the
Conqueror confirmed it in 1068, and even made it independent of every other
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, from the regal and even the papal Newcourt's
Repertertum, i. 424, etc.
. It was governed by a dean, and had a number of secular canons. Succeeding
monarchs confirmed all its privileges. It had Sak, Sok, Tol, and all the long
list of Saxon indulgences, enumerated by the accurate Strype Strype's Stow, i.
book iii. 107.
. It had also from the beginning the dreadful privilege of sanctuary, which was
the cause of its being the resort of every species of profligates, from the
murderer to the pick-pocket; and was most tenaciously vindicated by its holy
rulers. In 1439 soldier, who for some crime was conducted from Newgate toward
Guild Hall, was rescued by five fellows who rushed out of Panyer-alley, and who
fled with him into the adjacent sanctuary. The sheriffs of that year, Philip
Malpas and Robert Marshall, entered the church, and seizing on the soldier and
other ruffians, carried them chained to Newgate Strype's Stow, i. book iii. 103.
. The dean and chapter complained of this breach of privilege: the cause was
heard, and the sheriffs were obliged to deliver the men into the sanctuary. But
in 1457 the king thought proper to regulate these privileges, and to
distinguish how far they might be protected; and that the dean and chapter
should take care that none of the villainous refugees should become further
noxious to their fellow creatures The same, p.
.

A MAGNIFICENT church was erected within this jurisdiction, which was continued
till the college was surrendered, in 1548, when it was pulled down, and a great
tavern erected in the place. St. Martin's Le Grand was then, and still
continues under the government of the dean of Westminster. It was granted to
that monastery by Henry VII. It still continues independent of the city:
numbers of mechanics, (particularly tailors and shoemakers), set up there, and
exercise their trades within its limits, and have vote for the members of the
borough of Westminster. The dean and chapter have a court here, and a prison:
and, I think, all processes to be executed within this liberty, are to be
directed, by the sheriffs of London, to the constable of the dean and chapter
of Westminster.

THIS church, with those of Bow, St. Giles's Cripplegate, and Barkin, had its
Curfew bell long after the servile injunction laid on the Londoners had ceased.
These were sounded to give notice to the inhabitants of those districts to keep
within, and not to wander in the streets: which were infested by a set of
ruffians, who made a practice of insulting, wounding, robbing, and murdering
the people, whom they happened to meet abroad during night Strype's Stow, i.
book iii. 106.
.

CHEAPSIDE.
THE view we have of Cheapside, as it appeared just before the great fire, shows
that it was spacious and beautiful. The cross and conduit are to be seen; and
the long row of shops, which projected from the houses, reached to the bottom
of the first floors, and were lighted by windows in the roofs. This shows the
ancient forms of building our more magnificent streets. On the south side
stands the church of St. Mary le Bow, or de arcubus, because it originally was
built upon arches. It perished in 1666, and was rebuilt after a design of Sir
Christopher Wren's. I cannot express myself better than in the words of an
ingenious writer, who calls it "a delightful absurdity Critical Review, etc. 39.
." In this church was interred Sir John Coventry, mercer, lord mayor in 1425,
and ancestor and founder of the family of the earl of Coventry. I beg leave
here to remind several other noble peers of their industrious and honest
forefathers.

JOHN COVENTRY, son of William Coventry, of the city of that name, was an
opulent mercer of the city of London, and mayor in 1425; a most spirited
magistrate, who dared to interfere in the dreadful quarrel between Humphrey
duke of Gloucester and the insolent cardinal Beaufort, which he successfully
quelled, from his loins is descended the present earl of Coventry.

SIR STEPHEN BROWN, son of John Brown of Newcastle, mayor in 1438, and again in
1448, was a grocer; and gave to us another peer, in the person of Sir Anthony
Brown, created viscount Mountague by Philip and Mary, in 1554.

THE Legs rose to be earls of Dartmouth. The first who was nobilitated was
that loyal and gallant sea officer George Leg, created baron of Dartmouth in
1682. He was descended from an ancestor of one of the abovementioned names,
who filled the praetorian chair of London in the years 1347 and 1354, having,
by his industry in the trade of a skinner, attained to great wealth.

SIR GEFFRY BULLEN, mayor in 1458, was grandfather to Thomas earl of Wiltshire,
father of Anna Bullen, and grandfather to queen Elizabeth; the highest
genealogical honor the city ever possessed.

SIR BAPTIST HICKS was a great mercer at the accession of James I. and made a
vast fortune by supplying the court with silks. He was first knighted,
afterward created viscount Cambden. It is said he left his two daughters a
hundred thousand pounds apiece. He built a large house in St. John's-street,
for the justices of Middlesex to hold their sessions, which (till its
demolition, a very few years ago, upon the erection of a new sessions house on
Clerkenwell Green) retained the name of Hicks's Hall.

THE Capels, earls of Essex, are descended from Sir William Capel, draper,
mayor in 1503. He first set up a cage in every ward, for the punishment of idle
people.

MICHAEL DORMER, mercer, mayor in 1542, produced the future lord Dormers.

EDWARD OSBORN, by his fortunate leap, as before related, when apprentice to
Sir William Hewet, attained in consequence great wealth and honors. He was
mayor in 1583; and from his loins sprung the dukes of Leeds.

FROM Sir William Craven, merchant-taylor, mayor in 1611, sprung the gallant
earl Craven, who was his eldest son, and was greatly distinguished by his
actions in the service of the unfortunate Elector Palatine, by his attachment
to the dowager, and his marriage with that illustrious princess.

LORD Viscount Dudley and Ward is descended from William Ward, a wealthy
goldsmith in London, and jeweller to Henrietta Maria, queen to Charles I. His
son, Humble Ward, married Frances, granddaughter of Edward Sutton, lord
Dudley, on the death of her grandfather baroness of Dudley; and he himself
created, in 1643, lord Ward, of Birmingham.

THE old church of Bow was founded in the time of William the Conqueror; we
have before given the origin of the name, which was from the arches of the
foundation, not of the steeple, which was rebuilt with arches, or in a crown
fashion, but not till long after the year 1512 Newcourt's Repertorium, i. 437.
. STORY OF FITZ-OSBERT.
In this tower, in 1196, one William Fitz-Osbert, alias Long Beard, a seditious
fellow of uncommon eloquence, but of the lowest rank, set up as advocate for
the poorer citizens against the oppressions of the rich. He took opportunity of
beginning a tumult by inflaming their minds against a certain tax, raised
entirely for the necessities of the state. Many lives were lost on the
occasion, at St. Paul's. Hubert, the great justiciary, summoned Long Beard to
appear before him; but found him so well supported, that he thought it prudent
to forbear punishment. This served but to increase his insolence. He grew so
outrageous, that the citizens were resolved to bring him to justice: a resolute
band made the attempt, when he and a few desperate fellows fled to the tower of
Bow steeple, which they fortified. The besiegers, seeing the mob assemble from
all parts to his rescue, made a fire at the bottom, which forced him and his
companions to sally out; but they were taken, and the next day he and eight
more were dragged by their heels to the Elms at Smithfield, and there hanged.
It was said, that finding himself deserted by Heaven, he at the gallows forsook
Mary's Son (as he called our SAVIOR), and called upon the Devil to help and
deliver him. Yet, notwithstanding this, a cunning priest, a relation of his,
stole his body, and pretended many miracles were wrought at the place of
execution; and many persons passed the night on the spot which deprived them of
a martyr, who died supporting the majesty of the people, as Thomas Becket did
that of the pope.

IN the middle of the street, a little to the west of the church, THE C^S.
stood the cross and the conduit. The first was one of the affectionate tokens
of Edward I. toward his queen Elinor, built where her body rested in its way
to interment, in 1290. It had originally the statue of the queen, and in all
respects resembling that at Northampton; at length, falling to decay, it was
rebuilt, in 1441, by John Hutherby, mayor of the city, at the expense of
several of the citizens. It was ornamented with various images, such as that of
the Resurrection, of the Virgin, of Edward the Confessor, and the like. At
every public entry it was new gilt, for the magnificent processions took this
road. After the Reformation, the images gave much offense; the goddess Diana
was substituted instead of the Virgin, after the symbols of superstition had
been frequently mutilated. Queen Elizabeth disapproved of those attacks on the
remnants of the old religion, and offered a large reward for the discovery of
the offenders. She thought that a plain cross, the mark of the religion of the
country, ought not to be the occasion of any scandal; so directed that one
should be placed on the summit, and gilt Stow's Survaie, 485.
. Superstition is certain, in course of time, to take the other extreme. In the
year 1643, the parliament voted the taking down of all crosses, and the
demolishing of all popish paintings, etc. The destruction of this cross was
committed to Sir Robert Harlow; who went on the service with true zeal,
attended by a troop of horse and two companies of foot, and executed his orders
most effectually. The same most pious and religious noble knight did also
attack and demolish "the abominable and most blasphemous crucifix" in Christ's
hospital, and broke it into a thousand pieces Vicar's Parliamentary Chron.
1646, p. 290.
. In short, such was the rage of the times against the sign of our religion,
that it was not suffered in shop-books, or even in the primers of children
Gray's Hudibras, ii. 233, note. -- Consult also the note to L'Hist. de l'Entree
de la Reyne Mere, printed for W. Bowyer, p. 28.
; and as to the cross used in baptism, it became the abomination of
abominations.

And some against all idolizing,
The Cross in shop-books, and baptizing.
THE Nag's-head tavern, almost opposite to the cross, was the fictitious scene
of consecration of the Protestant bishops, at the accession of queen Elizabeth,
in 1559. It was pretended by the adversaries of our religion, that a certain
number of ecclesiastics, in hurry to take possession of the vacant sees,
assembled here, where they were to undergo the ceremony from Anthony Kitchen,
alias Dustan, bishop of Llandaff, a sort of occasional conformist, who had
taken the oaths of supremacy to Elizabeth. Bonner, bishop of London, (then
confined in the Tower) hearing of it, sent his chaplain to Kitchen, threatening
him with excommunication, in case he proceeded. On this the prelate refused to
perform the ceremony: on which, say the Catholics, Parker and the other
candidates, rather than defer possession of their dioceses, determined to
consecrate one another; which, says the story, they did without any sort of
scruple, and Icorey began with Parker, who instantly rose archbishop of
Canterbury. The refutation of this tale may be read in Strype's Life of
archbishop Parker, at p. 57, which makes it needless for me to enter on the
attempt. A view of the tavern, and its sign, is preserved in a print in the
Enter de la Reyne Mere du Roy, or of Mary de Medicis, when she visited our
unfortunate monarch, Charles I. and her daughter, his fair spouse.

IN Laurence-lane, not far from hence, was another public-house of much
antiquity, and which is still in great business as a carriers inn; the Blossoms
Inn, so named from the rich border of flowers which adorned the original sign,
that of St. Laurence. These were the effects of his martyrdom, "for (says the
legend) flowers sprung up on the spot of his cruel martyrdom."

IN this street, between the cross and Sopers-lane, were held most splendid
tournaments in the year 1331; they began Sept. 21, and lasted three days. A
scaffold was erected for queen Philippa and her gay troop of ladies, all most
richly attired, to behold the knights collected from all quarters to show their
skill in deeds of arms. The upper part of the scaffold, on which the ladies
were seated, "brake in sunder, and," as Stow says, whereby they were (with some
shame) forced to fall down; and many knights and others, which stood beneath,
much hurt. The carpenters were saved from punishment, by the intercession of
the queen; but, to prevent such accidents in future, the king ordered a
building of stone to be erected, near the church of St. Mary le Bow, for
himself, the queen, and "other states," to see the gallant spectacles in safety
Stow's Survaie, 485.
. This was used long after for the same purpose, even till the year 1410, when
Henry IV. granted it to certain mercers, who converted it into shops,
warehouses, and other requisites of their trade The same, 467.
.

CONDUIT.
A LITTLE to the east of the cross stood the conduit, which served as the mother
or chief aqueduct, which was to serve the lesser conduits with water, brought
by pipes from Paddington. This stood on the site of the old conduit, founded in
1285, castellated with stone, and cisterned in lead, as old Stow tells us; and
again rebuilt in 1479, by Thomas Ilan, one of the sheriffs. On some very
festive occasions these conduits have been made to run with claret. Such was
the case at the coronation of Anna Bullen; who was received at the lesser
conduit by Pallas, Juno, and Venus. Mercury, in the name of the goddesses,
presented to her a ball of gold divided into three parts, signifying three
gifts bestowed on her by the deities, WISDOM, RICHES, and FELICITY. But, alas!
beneath them lurked speedy disgrace, imprisonment, the block, and axe.

THE STANDARD.
I CANNOT well fix the place where the old Standard in Cheap stood. The time of
its foundation is unknown. It appears to have been very ruinous in 1442, at
which time Henry VI. granted a license for the repairing of it, together with a
conduit in the same. This was a place at which executions, and other acts of
justice, were in old times frequently performed. Here, in 1293, EXECUTIONS AT
THE STANDARD.
three men had their heads cut off, for rescuing a prisoner arrested by a city
officer. In 1351, two fishmongers were beheaded at the standard, but their
crime has not reached us. In 1461, John Davy had his hand struck off, for
striking a man before the judges at Westminster; and in 1399, Henry IV. caused
the blank charters, made by Richard II. to be burned here, as we do libels in
our times.

BUT these were legal acts. Many sad instances of barbarous executions were
done in the fury of popular commotions. Richard Lions, an eminent goldsmith,
and late sheriff of the city, was in 1381 (with several others) cruelly
beheaded here by order of Wat Tyler. Lions was interred in the church of St.
James, Garlic-hith, and on his tomb (now lost) was his figure in a long
flowered gown, a large purse hanging in a belt from his shoulders, his hair
short, his beard forked, a plain hood falling back and covering his shoulders.
At the same time numbers of foreign merchants, especially Flemings, were
dragged from the churches, and, the Shibboleth Judges, chap. xii. ver. 6.
of Bread and Cheese being put to them (which they pronouncing Brot and Cawse)
they were instantly put to death. In 1450, lord Say, high treasurer of England,
lost his head at the Standard, by the brutality of John Cade. Shakespeare
admirably describes the tragic scene Henry VI. part ii.
.

WHETHER Walter Stapleton, bishop of Exeter, suffered by the popular fury Page
of this Work.
on this spot, is rather uncertain; some imagine that he was beheaded at a
cross before the north door of St. Paul's Stow's Survaie, 48^.
; to which church he was flying for refuge, and unfortunately seized by the mob
before he had taken sanctuary.

THROUGH this street, and probably to this cross, in 1439, walked barefooted,
with a tap^r in her hand, Elinor Cobham, wise to Humphrey duke of Gloucester,
charged with the crime of sorcery, with intending the death of the king by
melting an image of wax, with which his body was to sympathize.

Limus ut hic durescit, et haec ut cera liquescit In Virgil's time applied to
melt the hearts of the cruel fair; afterward, to waste the body of any hated
person.
. A more serious fate attended her pretended accomplices; a woman was burnt,
and three men, among whom was her chaplain, were hanged.

GUILDHALL.
THE Guildhall of this vast city stands at the end of a street running northward
from Cheapside. Before the year 1411, the court-hall, or Bury, as it was
called, was held at Aldermans bury, so denominated from their meeting there.
Stow remembered its ruins, and says, that in his days it was used as
Carpenters-hall. It was succeeded by a new one, begun in 1411, and finished in
twenty years, by voluntary contributions, by sums raised for pardons of
offenses, and by fines. Its gothic front terminates the end of King Street. Its
length is a hundred and fifty-three feet; its breadth forty-eight; its height
fifty-five; so that it is capable of holding thousands of people. Elections,
and every species of city business, is transacted here.

WITHIN are portraits of numbers of our judges, who frequently try causes under
this roof. I must direct the reader's attention to twelve of that order of
peculiar merit: these are the portraits of the able and virtuous Sir MATTHEW
HALE, and his eleven cotemporary judges; who, after the dreadful calamity of
1^66, regulated the rebuilding of the city of London by such wise rules, as to
prevent the endless train of vexatious lawsuits which might ensue; and been
little less chargeable than the fire itself had been. This was principally
owing to Sir Matthew Hale, who conducted the business; and sat with his
brethren in Clifford's Inn, to compose all differences between landlord and
tenant. These portraits were painted by Michael Wright, a good painter in the
time of Charles II. and James II. and who died in the year 1700. It was
designed that Sir Peter Lely should draw these pictures, but he fastidiously
refused to wait on the judges at their chambers. Wright received sixty pounds
apiece for his work Anecdotes of Painting, iii. 40.
. In the year 1779, they were found to be in so bad a condition, as to make it
an even question with the committee of city lands, whether they should be
continued in their places, or committed to the flames. To the eternal honor of
alderman Townsend, his vote decided in favor of their preservation London's
Gratitude, etc. 19.
. He recommended Mr. Roma, (now unhappily snatched from us by death), who, by
his great skill in repairing pictures, rescued them from the rage of time: so
that they may remain another century, a proof of the gratitude of our capital.
These were proofs of a sense of real merit: but in how many places do we meet
instances of a temporary idolatry, the phrenzy of the day! Statues and
portraits appear, to the astonishment of posterity, purged from the prejudices
of the time.

The things themselves are neither scarce nor rare;
The wonder's, how the devil they got there!
FACING the entrance are two tremendous figures, by some named Gog and Magog;
by Stow, an ancient Briton and Saxon. I leave to others the important decision.
At the bottom of the room is a marble group, of good workmanship, (with London
and Commerce whimpering like two marred children), executed soon after the year
1770, by Mr. BACON. The principal figure was also a giant, in his day, the
raw-head and bloody-bones to the good folks at St. James's; which, while
remonstrances were in fashion, annually haunted the court in terrific forms.
The eloquence dashed in the face of majesty, alas! proved in vain. The spectre
was there condemned to silence; but his patriotism may be read by his admiring
fellow-citizens, as long as the melancholy marble can retain the tale of the
affrighted times.

GREAT FEASTS.
THE first time that this hall was used on festive occasions, was by Sir John
Shaw, goldsmith, knighted in the field of Bosworth. After building the
essentials of good kitchens and other offices, in the year 1500 he gave here
the mayor's feast, which before had usually been done in Grocers-hall. None of
their bills of fare have reached me, but doubtlessly they were very
magnificent. They at length grew to such excess, that, in the time of Philip
and Mary, a sumptuary law was made to restrain the expense both of provisions
and liveries: but I suspect, as it lessened the honor of the city, it was not
long observed; for in 1554, the city thought proper to renew the order of
council, by way of reminding their fellow-citizens of their relapse into
luxury. Among the great feasts given here on public occasions, may be reckoned
that given in 1612, on occasion of the unhappy marriage of the prince Palatine
with Elizabeth, daughter of James I; who, in defiance of the remonstrances of
his better-judging father-in-law, rushed on the usurpation of the dominion of
another monarch, and brought great misery on himself and his amiable spouse.
The next was in 1641, when Charles I. returned from his imprudent,
inefficacious journey into Scotland. In the midst of the most factious and
turbulent times, when every engine was set to work to annihilate the regal
power, the city, under its lord mayor, Sir William Acton, made a feast
unparalleled in history for its magnificence. All external respect was paid to
his majesty; the last he ever experienced in the inflamed city. Of the
entertainment we know no more, than that it consisted of five hundred dishes.
But of that which was given in our happier days, to his present majesty, in the
mayoralty of Sir Samuel Fludyer, the bill of fare is given us. This I print;
and, as a parallel to it, that of another royal feast, given in 1487 at
Whitehall, on occasion of the coronation of Elizabeth, queen of Henry VII, whom
he treats with characteristical economy, notwithstanding a kingdom was her
dower The whole account is given in Maitland, i. 341 to 344.
.

The KING'S TABLE, GEORGE III. 1761.
FIRST SERVICE. L. s. d. 12 Dishes of Olio, Turtle, Pottages, and Soups 24 2 0
12 Ditto of F^sh, viz. John Dories, red Mullets, etc. 24 2 0 7 Ditto roast
Venison 10 0 0 3 Westphalia Hams consume, and richly ornamented 6 6 0 2 Dishes
of Pullets a la Royale 2 2 0 2 Dishes of Tongues Espagniole 3 3 0 6 Ditto
Chickens a la Reine 6 6 0 1 Ditto Tondron Devaux a la Dauzie 2 2 0 1 Harrico 1
1 0 1 Dish Popiets of Veale Glass 1 4 0 2 Dishes Fillets of Lamb, a la Comte 2
2 0 2 Ditto Comports of Squabs 2 2 0 2 Ditto Fillets of Beef Marinate 3 0 0 2
Ditto of Mutton a la Memorance 2 2 0 32 Ditto fine Vegetables 16 16 0 SECOND
SERVICE. 6 Dishes fine Ortolans 25 4 0 10 Ditto Quails 15 0 0 10 Ditto Notts 30
0 0 1 Ditto Wheat Ears 1 1 0 1 Goodevau Patte 1 10 0 1 Perr^goe Pie 1 10 0 1
Dish Pea-chicks 1 1 0 4 Dishes Woodcocks 4 4 0 2 Dishes Pheasants 3 3 0 4 Ditto
Teal 3 3 0 4 Ditto Snipes 3 3 0 2 Ditto Partridges 2 2 0 2 Ditto Pattys Royal 3
0 0 THIRD SERVICE. 1 Ragout Royal 1 1 0 8 Dishes of fine green Morells 8 8 0 10
Ditto fine green Peace 10 10 0 3 Ditto Asparagus Heads 2 2 0 3 Ditto fine fat
Livers 1 11 6 3 Ditto fine Combs 1 11 6 5 Ditto green Truffles 5 5 0 5 Ditto
Artichoaks, a la Provinciale 2 12 6 5 Ditto Mushrooms au Blank 2 12 6 1 Dish
Cardons, a la Bejamel 0 10 6 1 Ditto Knots of Eggs 0 10 6 1 Ditto Ducks Tongues
0 10 6 3 Ditto of Peths 1 11 6 1 Dish of Truffles in Oil 0 10 6 4 Dishes of
Pallets 2 2 0 2 Ditto Ragout Mill 2 2 0 FOURTH SERVICE. 2 Curious ornamented
Cakes 2 12 0 12 Dishes of Blomanges, representing different Figures 12 12 0 12
Ditto clear Marbrays 14 8 0 16 Ditto fine cut Pastry 16 16 0 2 Ditto mill
Fuelles 1 10 6 THE CENTER OR THE TABLE. 1 Grand Pyramid of Demies of Shellfish
of various Sorts 2 2 0 32 Cold Things of Sorts, viz. Temples, Shapes,
Landscapes in Jellies, savory Cakes, and Almond Goths 33 12 0 2 Grand Epergnes
filled with fine Pickles, and garnished round with Plates of Sorts, as Laspicks
Rolards, etc. 6 6 0 Total of the KING'S Table L. 374 1 0

THE whole of this day's entertainment cost the city L. 6,898. 5 s. 4 d. A
committee had been appointed out of the body of aldermen, who most deservedly
received the thanks of the lord mayor and whole body corporate, for the skilful
discharge of this important trust. The feast consisted of four hundred and
fourteen dishes, besides the desert; and the hospitality of the city, and the
elegance of the entertainment, might vie with any that had ever preceded.

NUPTIAL TABLE. HENRY VII Leland's Collectanea, iv. 216.
.
FIRST COURSE.
A Warner byfor the Course Sheldes of Brawne in Armor Frumetye with Venison
Bruet rich Heart powdered grant Chars Fesaunt intram de Royal Swan with
Chawdron Capons of high Go Lampervey in Galantine Crane with Cretney Pik in
Latymer Sauce Heronusew with his Sique Carpe in Foil Kid reversed Perch in
Jeloye depte Conys of high Greece Moten Royal richely garnyshed Valance baked
Custarde Royal Tarte Poleyn Leyse Damask Frutt Synoper Frutt Formage A
Soteltie, with writing of Balads.
SECOND COURSE.
A Warner byfor the Course Joly Ypocras Mamane with Lozengs of Gold Pekok in
Hakell Bittowre Fesawnte Brows Egrets in Beorwetye Cokks Patrieche Sturgyn
fresh Fenell Plovers Rabett Sowker Seyle in Fenyn entirely served richely Red
Shankks Snytes Quayles Larkes ingraylede Creves de Endence Venesone in Paste
Royal Quince Baked March Pain Royal A cold bake Mete flourishede Lethe
Ciprus Lethe Rube Fruter Augeo Fruter Mouniteyne Castells of Jely in Temple
wise made A Soteltie.
THESE Sotelties, or Subtilities as they were called, were the ornamental part
of the desert, and were extremely different from those in present use. In the
inthronization feast of archbishop Wareham, on March 9th, 1504, the first
course was preceded by a warner A warner was the first soteltie, and which
preceded or gave warning of the courses. See Leland's Collect. vi. 21.
, conveyed upon a round boorde of viii panes, with viii towers embatteled and
made with flowers, standing on every tower a bedil in his habit, with his
staff: and in the same boorde, first the king syttinge in his parliament, with
his lords about him in their robes; and Saint Wylliam, like an archishop,
sytting on the right hand of the king: then the chaunceler of Oxforde, with
other doctors about him, presented the said lord Wylliam, kneelyng, in a
doctor's habit, unto the king, with his commend of virtue and cunning, etc.
etc. And on the third boorde of the same warner, the Holy Ghost appeared with
bright beams proceedyng from him of the gifts of grace toward the said
lord of the feast. This is a specimen of the ancient sotelties. This was a
Lenten feast of the most luxurious kind. Many of the sotelties were suited to
the occasion, and of the legendary nature; others historical; but all, without
doubt, contrived "with great cunning."

TO these scenes of luxury and gluttony, let me oppose the simple fare at a
feast of the Wax-chandlers, on Oct. 28th, 1478. These were a flourishing
company in the days of old, when gratitude to saints called so frequently for
lights. How many thousands of wax candles were consumed on those occasions, and
what quantities the expiatory offerings of private persons, none can enumerate.
Candle-mass day wasted its thousands, and those all blessed by the priests, and
adjured in solemn terms. I adjure thee, O waxen creature, that thou repel the
devil and his sprights, etc. etc Rev. Mr. Brand's edit. of Bourne's
Antiquitates Vulgares, p. 222.
. Certainly this company, which was incorporated in 1484, might have afforded a
more delicate feast than L. s. d. Two loins of Mutton, and two loins of Veal 0
1 4 A loin of Beef 0 0 4 A Leg of Mutton 0 0 2 A Pig 0 0 4 A Capon 0 0 6 A
Coney 0 0 2 One dozen of Pigeons 0 0 7 A hundred Eggs 0 0 8 A Goose 0 0 6 A
Gallon of Red Wine 0 0 8 A Kilderkin of Ale 0 0 8 L. 0 7 0

GUILDHALL CHAPEL.
ADJACENT to Guildhall, is Guildhall chapel, or college, a gothic building,
founded by Peter Fanlore, Adam Francis, and Henry Frowick, citizens, about the
year 1299. The establishment was a warden, seven priests, three clerks, and
four choristers. Edward VI. granted it to the mayor and commonalty of the city
of London Tanner and Newcourt, i. 363.
. Here used to be service once a week, and also at the election of the mayor,
and before the mayor's feast, to deprecate indigestions, and all plethoric
evils Newcourt, i. 364.
. At present divine service is discontinued here, the chapel being used as a
justice room.

ADJOINING to it once stood a fair library, LIBRARY.
furnished with books belonging to Guildhall, built by the executors of the
famous Whittington. Stow says that the protector Somerset sent to borrow some
of the books, with a promise of restoring them; three Curries were laden with
them, but they never more were returned Stow's Survaie, 493.
.

IMMEDIATELY beyond the chapel stands Blackwall's hall, or, BLACKWALL'S HALL.
more properly, Bakewell, from its having in later years been inhabited by a
person of that name. It was originally called Basing's haugh, or hall, from a
family of that name; the coats of arms of which were to be seen cut in stone,
or painted, in the ancient building. It was on vaults of stone brought from
Caen in Normandy; the time is uncertain, but certainly after the Conquest. The
family were of great antiquity. Solomon Basing was mayor in 1216; and another
of the name sheriff in 1308. In 1397 the house was purchased by the mayor and
commonalty for fifty pounds, and from that time has been used as the market of
woollen cloth. It grew so ruinous in the time of queen Elizabeth, that it was
pulled down, and rebuilt at the expense of twenty-five hundred pounds; much of
it at the expense of Richard May, merchant-taylor. It consists at present of
two large courts, with warehouses in all parts for the lodging of the cloth;
but is very little used. Formerly there were proclamations issued to compel
people to bring their goods into this hall, to prevent deceit in the
manufactures, which might bring on us discredit in foreign markets, and also be
the means of defrauding the poor children of Christ hospital of part of the
revenue which arose from the hallage of this great magazine.

HOSPITAL OF ST. THOMAS OF ACON;
ON the north side of Cheapside stood the hospital of St. Thomas of Acon,
founded by Thomas Fitz-Theobald de Helles and his wife Agnes, sister to the
turbulent Thomas Becket, who was born in the house of his father Gilbert,
situated on this spot. The mother of our meek saint was a fair Saracen, whom
his father had married in the Holy Land. On the site of his house rose the
hospital, built within twenty years after the murder of Thomas; yet such was
the repute of his sanctity, that it was dedicated to him, in conjunction with
the blessed Virgin, without waiting for his canonization. The hospital
consisted of a master and several brethren, professing the rule of St. Austin.
The church, cloisters, etc. were granted by Henry VIII. to the Mercers company,
who had the gift of the mastership Tanner.
.

NOW MERCER^ HALL.
IN the old church were numbers of monuments; among others, one to James Butler
earl of Ormond, and Joan his wife, living in the beginning of the reign of
Henry VI. This whole pile was destroyed in the great fire, but was very
handsomely rebuilt by the Mercers company, who have their hall here. In the
portico to the chapel is a full-length figure recumbent of Richard Fishbourn,
dressed in a furred gown and a ruff; he died in 1623, and, being a great
benefactor to the place, received the honor of this monument.

THIS company is the first of the twelve, or such who are honored with the
privilege of the lord mayor's being elected out of one of them. The name by no
means implied originally a dealer in silks: for mercery included all sorts of
small wares, toys, and haberdashery Anderson's Dict. i. 145.
. But, as numbers of this opulent company were merchants, and imported great
quantities of rich silks from Italy, the name became applied to the company,
and all dealers in silk. Several of the portraits in the great room of this
hall are of Italian merchants. Not fewer than sixty-two mayors were of this
company, between the years 1214 and 1762; among which it reckons Sir John
Coventry, Sir Richard Whittington, and Sir Richard and Sir John Gresham. We are
obliged to the exact Strype for the list. In that by Maitland, the company each
mayor was of, is omitted.

IMMEDIATELY to the east is the narrow street, the Old Jewry, THE OLD JEWRY.
which took its name from the great synagogue which stood there till the
unhappy race were expelled the kingdom, in 1291. Their persecutions, under some
of the preceding monarchs, nearly equalled those of the Christians under the
Roman emperors: yet the love of gain retained them in our country in defiance
of all their sufferings. A new order of friars, called Fratres de Sacca, or de
penitentia, got possession of the Jewish temple: but did not hold it long.
Robert Fitzwalter, the great banner-bearer of the city, requested, in 1305,
that the friars might assign it to him. It seems it joined to his own house,
which stood near the site of the present Grocers hall. In 1439, it was occupied
by Robert Lorge, mayor, who kept his mayoralty in this house; Sir Hugh Clapton
did the same in 1492; and after these tenants it was degraded into a tavern,
distinguished by the sign of the Windmill.

GROCERS HALL.
THE chapel, or church, was bought by the Grocers company, in 1411, from
Fitzwalter, for three hundred and twenty marks Survaie, 476, 499.
; who here laid the foundation of the present hall, a noble room, with a
gothic front, and bow window. Here, to my great surprise, O. SIR JOHN CUTLER.
I met again with Sir John Cutler, knight, and grocer, in marble and on canvas.
In the first he is represented standing, in a flowing wig waved rather than
curled, a laced cravat, and a furred gown with the folds not ungraceful: in
all, except where the dress is inimical to the sculptor's art, it may be called
a good performance. By his portrait we may learn that this worthy wore a black
wig, and was a good-looking man. He died in 1693. His kinsman and executor
Edmund Boulter, Esquire expended L. 7,666 on his funeral expenses Strype's Stow, i.
book i. p. 289.
. I am to learn how his statue and portrait came here. He is spoken of as a
benefactor, and that he built the parlour, and over it an entertaining room.
The anecdote of his bounty to the College of Physicians, may lead one to
suppose that the Grocers did not meet with more liberal treatment. If not, the
character given of him by Mr. Pope, may rest unimpeached: Thy life more
wretched, Cutler, was confessed,
Arise and tell me was thy death more blessed?
Cut^er saw tenants break, and houses fall;
For very want he could not build a wall.
His only daughter in a stranger's power He had two daughters; one married to
Sir William Portman, bart. the other to John Robartes, earl of Radnor; both
married without his consent. The first died before him. J. C. Brook, esquire
Somerset-herald. -- The same authority tells me he had his grant of arms just
before his death, wherein he is styled, "of the city of Westminster."
;
For very want he could not pay a dower.
A few gray hairs his reverend temples crowned.
'Twas very want that sold them for ten pound.
What even denied a cordial at his end,
Banished the doctor, and expelled the friend?
What but a want, which you perhaps think mad,
Yet numbers feel, the want of what he had!


THIS company follows the Mercers; they were originally called Pepperers, from
their dealing so greatly in pepper: but in 1345 they were incorporated by the
name of Grocers, either because they fold things by, or dealt in grossi or figs
Survaie, 4^7.
. But from the beginning they trafficked in all the good things which the trade
does to this day.

I FORGOT Bucklesbury, BUCKLESBURY.
a street which opens on the south side of Cheapside, a little to the west of
the Grocers hall. It took its name from one Buckle, who had in it a large
manour-house of stone. This man lost his life in a strange way. Near his house
stood an old tower built by Edward I. called the Cornets tower, possibly a
watch tower, from the summit of which signals might have been given by the
blowing of a horn. This, Buckle intended to pull down, and to have built a
handsome house of wood; or, according to the expression of the times, a goodly
frame of timber: but in greedily demolishing this tower, a stone fell on him,
and crushed him to death; and another, who married his widow, set up the
new-prepared frame of timber, and finished the work. This street, in Stow's
time, was the residence of grocers and apothecaries Survaie, 477.
.

THE MANSION HOUSE.
ON the same side of the way is the Mansion House, "damned, I may say, to
everlasting fame Critical Review, etc. 36, 37.
." The sight is relieved amply by another building behind it, St. Stephen's,
Walbrook, a small church, the chef d'aeuvre of Sir Christopher Wren, of most
exquisite beauty. Perhaps Italy itself, (says a judicious writer) can produce
no modern building that can vie with this in taste and proportion: there is not
a beauty, which the plan would admit of, that is not to be found here in the
greatest perfection; and foreigners, very justly, call our taste in question,
for understanding the graces no better, and allowing it no higher degree of
fame Ibid. 37.
.

OVER the altar is a beautiful picture of the martyrdom of St. Stephen, by Mr.
West. The character of the saint is finely expressed in his angelic
countenance, resigned to his fate, and full of sure and certain hope. I looked
to no purpose for the statue erected, DIVAe MAC-AULAe, by her doting admirer,
a former rector; which a successor of his has most profanely pulled down.

STOCKS-MARKET.
THE Mansion House, and many adjacent buildings, stand on the site of
Stocks-market; which took its name from a pair of SIR RICHARD CLOUGH, K^^
portrait of Sir Richard Clough stocks for the punishment of offenders, erected
in an open place near this spot, as early as the year 1281. This was the great
market of the city during many centuries. In it stood the famous equestrian
statue, erected in honor of Charles II, by his most loyal subject Sir Robert
Viner, lord mayor. Fortunately his lordship discovered at a founder's, one of
John Sobieski, king of Poland, trampling on a Turk; the good knight christened
the Polish monarch by the name of Charles, and bestowed on the turbaned Turk
that of Oliver Cromwell; and thus, new named, it arose on this spot in honor of
his convivial monarch.

THE opening before the Mansion House divides into three important streets:
Cornhill in the center; the Bank of England, the old Threadneedle-street, on
the north; and Lombard Street on the south. I shall pursue these as far as the
spots which I have passed over, and give the remaining things worthy of notice.
I shall take the middle way.

THE Royal Exchange, that concourse of all the nations of the world, arises
before us with the full majesty of commerce. ROYAL EXCHANGE.
Whether we consider the grandeur of the edifice, or the vast concerns carried
on within its walls, we are equally struck with its importance. But we are more
astonished when we find that this expensive princely pile was the effect of the
munificence of a private citizen, SIR THOMAS GRESHAM. Let the pride of my
country not be suppressed, when I have opportunity of saying, that the original
hint was given to him by a Welshman; by Richard Clough, afterward knighted,
originally his servant, and in the year 1561, by his merit and industry,
advanced by Sir Thomas to be his correspondent and agent in the then emporium
of the world, Antwerp. Clough wrote to his master, to blame the city of London
for neglecting so necessary a thing; bluntly telling, that they studied nothing
else but their own private profit; that they were content to walk about in the
rain, more like pedlars than merchants; and that there was no kind of people
but had their place to transact business in, in other countries. Thus
stimulated, Sir Thomas purchased some tenements on the site of the Royal
Exchange; and, on June 7, 1566, laid the foundation, and in November, 1567,
completed what was then called the Bourse. In 1570, queen Elizabeth went in
great state from her palace at Somerset House, to make Sir Thomas a visit at
his own house. After dinner she went to the Bourse, visited every part, and
then, by sound of trumpet, dignified it with the title of the Royal Exchange.
All the upper part was filled then, and even to this century, with shops; on
this occasion they were filled with the richest productions of the universe, to
show her majesty the prosperity of the commercial parts of her dominions. I
cannot learn what the expense of this noble design was, only that the annual
product of the rents to his widow was L. 751. 5 s. I am equally unacquainted
with the form of the original building, which perished in the great fire. It
was rebuilt, in its present magnificent form, by the city and the company of
mercers Strype's Stow, i. book ii. p. 137.
, at the expense of eighty thousand pounds; which, for a considerable time,
involved the undertakers in a large debt. It was completed in 1669; on Sept.
28, of that year, it was opened by the lord mayor, Sir William Turner, who
congratulated the merchants on the occasion. The following inscription does
grateful honor to the original founder: HOC GRESHAMII Peristyllium,
Gentium commercium sacrum,
Flammis extinctum 1666,
Augustius e cinere resurrexit 1669,
W^ll^ Turnero, milite, praetore.


THE statue of Sir Thomas Gresham is in one corner, in the dress of the times.
Another, of that worthy citizen Sir John Barnard, graces another part. The rest
are kings, which (as far as king Charles), with that of Sir Thomas, were
chiefly executed by Gabriel Cibber; that of Charles II. in the center, by
Gibbons Anecdotes of Painting, iii. 136.
. And above stairs are the statues of Charles I. and II, and another of the
illustrious founder, by John Buchnell, an artist of inferior merit, in the
reign of William III. On the top of the tower, in front of the exchange, is a
Grasshopper, the crest of Sir Thomas Gresham. The allusion to that, and the
Dragon on Bow steeple, makes a line in that inexcusable performance of Dean
Swift's, a profane imitation of the style of the BIBLE Wonderful Prophecy, etc.
, which dullness itself could execute, and which nothing but the most
indefensible wantonness could have produced from a person of his profession,
and of his all-acknowleged wit.

I MUST direct the reader's attention to the beautiful gothic tower of St.
Michael's, on the south side of Cornhill. At each corner is an angulated turret
as high as the belfry, where they become fluted, and the capital ornamented
with sculptures of heman faces; from them they spire into very elegant
pinnacles. The body of this church was burnt in the great fire. It was begun to
be built in 1421 Stow's Survaie, i. 369.
; but the church was of far greater antiquity. It appears to have existed in
1133. This church had its pulpit-cross, like that of St. Paul's, built by Sir
John Rudstone, mayor in 1528, who was interred in a vault beneath in 1531. It
may be added, that Robert Fabian, alderman, the celebrated historian, was
buried in this church in 1511, after passing the dignity of sheriff.

THE king had a royal residence in this street, which was afterward converted
into a noted tavern, called the Pope's head. It was a vast house, and, in the
time of Stow, distinguished by the arms of England, at that time three leopards
passant, guardant, and two angels the supporters, cut on stone The Same, 374.
.

LEADENHALL.
AT the end of Cornhill is, as it were, a continuation of the street, by the
name of that of Leadenhall. It takes its name from a large plain building,
inhabited about the year 1309, by Sir Hugh Nevil, knight; in 1384 belonging to
Humphry Bohun, earl of Hereford. In 1408 it became the property of the
munificent Whittington, who presented it to the mayor and commonalty of London.
In 1419, PUBLIC GRANARY.
Sir Simon Air, citizen and drape^, erected here a public granary, built with
stone in its present form. This was to be what the French call a Grenier
d'abondance, to be always filled with corn, and designed as a preservative
against famine. The intent was happily answered in distressful seasons. This
and other o^ the city granaries seem at first to have been under the care of
the mayors; but in Henry VIII's time, regular surveyors were appointed. He also
built a chapel within the square; this he intended to apply to the uses of a
foundation for a warden, six secular priests, six clerks, and two choristers,
and besides, three schoolmasters. For this purpose he left three thousand marks
to the Drapers company to fulfill his intent. This was never executed: but in
1466 a fraternity of sixty priests, some of whom were to perform divine service
every market day, to such who frequented the market, was founded by three
priests, William Rouse, John Risby, and Thomas Ashby Tanner.
.

LEADENHALL-STREET had the good fortune to escape tolerably well in the great
fire. The house was used for many other purposes; for the keeping the artillery
and other arms of the city. Preparations for any triumph or pageantry in the
city were made here. From its strength it was considered as the chief fortress
within the city, in case of popular tumults; and also as the place from which
doles, largesses, or pious alms, were to be distributed. Here, in 1546, while
Henry VIII. lay putrefying in state, Heath, bishop of Winchester, his almoner,
and others his ministers, distributed great sums of money, during twelve days,
to the poor of the city. The same was done at Westminster Strype's Stow, i.
book ii. p. 84.86.
; but I greatly fear his majesty was past ransom! The market here was of great
antiquity: considerable as it is at present, it is far inferior to what it has
been, by reason of the numbers of other markets which have been established.
Still it is the wonder of foreigners, who do not duly consider the carnivorous
nation to which it belongs.

THE slaughter made of the horned cattle, for the support of the metropolis, is
evinced by the multitudes of tanned hides exposed to sale in the great court of
Leadenhall, which is the present market for that article.

INDIA-HOUSE.
THE India-house stands a little farther to the east, but is not worthy of the
lords of Indostan. This was built in 1726, on the spot once occupied by Sir
William Craven, mayor in 1610; a man of most extensive charity. His house was
very large, the apartments capacious, and fit for any public concern Strype's
Stow, i. book ii. 88.
.

IN the church of St. Catherine Cree, in this street, is supposed to have been
interred the celebrated Holbein, who died of the plague in 1554, at the duke of
Norfolk's, in the priory of Christ-church, near Aldgate. I must also mention it
on another account, for its being the stage on which the imprudent,
well-meaning Laud acted a most superstitious part in its consecration, on
January 16, 1630-31. His whole conduct tended to add new force to the
discontents and rage of the times: he attempted innovations in the ceremonies
of the church, at a season he ought at lest to have left them in the state he
found them: instead of that, he pushed things to extremities, by that, and by
his fierce persecutions of his opponents; from which he never desisted till he
brought destruction on himself, and highly contributed to that of his royal
master.

PRYNNE, whom every one must allow to have had sufficient cause of resentment
against the archbishop, gives the relation with much acrimony, and much
profane humor In his Canterbury's Doom, Book ii. p. 113.
:

(As first), When the bishop approached near the communion table, he bowed with
his nose very near the ground some six or seven times; then he came to one of
the corners of the table, and there bowed himself three times; then to the
second, third, and fourth corners, bowing at each corner three times; but when
he came to the side of the table where the bread and wine was, he bowed himself
seven times; and then, after the reading many prayers by himself and his two
fat chaplins, (which were with him, and all this while were upon their knees by
him, in their sirplisses, hoods, and tippits), he himself came near the bread,
which was cut and laid in a fine napkin, and then he gently lifted up one of
the corners of the said napkin, and peeping into it till he saw the bread,
(like a boy that peeped into a bird's nest in a bush), and presently clapped it
down again, and flew back a step or two, and then bowed very low three times
toward it and the table. When he beheld the bread, then he came near and
opened the napkin again, and bowed as before; then he laid his hand upon the
gilt cup, which was full of wine, with a cover upon it; so soon as he had
pulled the cupp a little nearer to him, he let the cupp go, flew back, and
bowed again three times toward it; then he came near again, and lifting up
the cover of the cupp, peeped into it; and seeing the wine, he let fall the
cover on it again, and flew nimbly back, and bowed as before. After these,
and many other apish, anticke gestures, he himself received, and then gave the
sacrament to some principal men only, they devoutly kneeling near the table;
after which, more prayers being said, this scene and interlude ended.

To the west of St. Catherine Cree, in the same street, stands the church of
St. Andrew Undershaft, from the unfortunate shaft, or maypole, which on May
1st, 1517, gave rise to the insurrection of the apprentices, and the plundering
of the foreigners in the city, whence it got the name of Evil May Day Herbert's
Henry VIII. 67. -- Stow's Survaie, 153.
. From that time it was hung on a range of hooks over the doors of a long row
of neighboring houses. In the third of Edward VI, when the plague of
fanaticism began to scandalize the promoters of the Reformed religion, an
ignorant wretch, called Sir Stephen, curate of St. Catherine Cree, began to
preach against this maypole, (notwithstanding it had hung in peace ever since
the Evil May Day), as an idol, by naming the church St. Andrew, with the
addition of Shaft. This inflamed his audience so greatly, that, after eating a
hearty dinner to strengthen themselves, every owner of such house over which
the shaft hung, with assistance of others, fawed off as much of it as hung over
his premises: each took his share, and committed to the flames the tremendous
idol. This Sir Stephen, scorning the use of the sober pulpit, sometimes mounted
on a tomb, with his back to the altar, to pour out his nonsensical rhapsodies;
at other times, he climbed into a lofty elm in the churchyard, and, bestriding
a bough, delivered out his cant with double effect, merely by reason of the
novelty of the situation Stow's Survaie, 282, 283.
.

IN the church of St. Andrew Undershaft was interred the faithful and able
historian of the city, John Stow. He died in 1605, aged 80; and, to the shame
of his time, in much poverty. His monument is still in being, a well-executed
figure, sitting at a desk, in a furred gown, and writing. The figure is said to
be made of terra cotta, or burnt earth, painted; a common practice in those
days: possibly somewhat similar to the artificial stone of our time.

IN Lime-street, the northern end of which opens into that of Leadenha^, stood
the house and chapel of the lord Nevil; and after him, of the accomplished Sir
Simon de Burley, SIR SIMON DE BURLEY'S HOUSE.
and of his brother Sir John. In the time of Stow, it was partly taken down,
and new fronted with timber, by Hugh Offley, alderman. Finally, not far from
hence, toward the end of the adjacent street of St. Mary-Ax, stood the mansion
of Richard Vere, earl of Oxford, HOUSE OF RICHARD EARL OF OXFORD.
who inhabited it in the beginning of the reign of Henry V; and, drawn from
thence in his old age to attend his valiant master to the French wars, died in
France in 1415 Survaie, 312. -- Collins's Coll. Noble Families, 247 -- 8.
.

THE second street which opens into Cheapside, or rather the Poultry, is
Threadneedle, or more properly Three-needle Street. BANK OF ENGLAND.
That noble building, the Bank of England, fills one side of the space. The
center, and the building behind, were founded in the year 1733; the architect,
George Sampson. Before that time the business was carried on in Grocers Hall.
The front is a sort of vestibule; the base rustic, the ornamental columns
above, Ionic. Within is a court leading to a second elegant building, which
contains a hall and offices, where the debt of above two hundred and fifty
millions is punctually discharged. Of late years two wings of uncommon
elegance, designed by Sir Robert Tailor, have been added, at the expense of a
few houses, and of the church of St. Christopher's le Stocks. The demolition of
the last occasioned as much injury to the memorials of the dead, and
disturbance of their poor ashes, as ever the impiety of the fanatics did in the
last century. Much of my kindred dust Strype's Annals, ii. 517.
was violated; among others, those of the Houblon family, sprung from Peter
Houblon, of a respectable house at Lisle in Flanders, driven to seek refuge in
England from the rage of persecution under the Duc d'Alva, in the reign of
queen Elizabeth. About the same time fled to our sanctuary John Houblon and
Guillaume Lethieulier. The first is found to have lent, i. e. given, to her
Majesty, in the perilous year 1588, a hundred pounds The loan from the city was
only L. 4,900.
. His son James flourished in wealth and reputation, and was eminent for his
plainness and piety. He was buried in the church of St. Mary Woolnoth; but,
wanting a monument, the following epitaph was composed for him by Samuel Pepys,
esquire secretary to the admiralty in the reigns of Charles II. and James II:
JACOBUS HOUBLON,
LONDINAS PETRI filius,
Ob fidem Flandria exulantis:
Ex C. Nepotibus habuit LXX superstites:
Filios V. videns mercatores florentissimos;
Ipse LONDINENSIS Bursae Pater;
Piissime obiit Nonagenarius,
Ao D. MDCLXXXII.


HIS sons, Sir John Houblon, and Sir James Houblon, knights, and aldermen, rose
to great wealth. From the last sprung the respectable family of the Houblons of
Hallingbury, in Essex. Sir James represented his native city. Sir John, my
great grandfather by my mother's side, left six daughters: Arrabella, the
eldest, married to Richard Mytton, esquire of Halston, my maternal grandfather; the
second to Mr. Denny, a respectable merchant in the city; the four younger died
unmarried. Sir John Houblon was of the Grocers company, was elected alderman of
Cornhill ward, September 17th, 1689; and lord mayor, September 29th, 1695. He
was interred in this church January 18th, 1711-12. He was at the same time lord
mayor of London, a lord of the admiralty, and the first governor of the bank of
England. His mansion stood on the site of the house; the noblest monument he
could have.

IT would be injustice not to give the name of the projector of that national
glory the Bank of England. It was the happy thought of Mr. James Paterson, of
the kingdom of Scotland. This Palladium of our country was, in 1780, saved from
the fury of an infamous mob by the virtue of its citizens, who formed suddenly
a volunteer company, and overawed the miscreants; while the chief magistrate
skulked trembling in his Mansion House, and left his important charge to its
fate. I cannot wonder at the timidity of a peaceful magistrate, when the
principle of self-preservation appeared so strong in the ministry of the day.
It was the spirit of majesty itself that first dictated the means of putting a
stop to the outrages; which, if exerted at first by its servants, would have
been true mercy!

AT the extremity of Threadneedle-street, MERCHANT-TAYLORS HALL
appears the origin of its name, in Merchant-Taylors hall; at the period in
which they were called Tailors, and Linen-armourers, under which title they
were incorporated in the year 1480; and by Henry VII. by that of the men of the
art and mystery of Merchant-taylors, of the fraternity of St. John the Baptist.
They were seventh in the rank of the great companies. Multitudes of eminent men
were emulous of being admitted into it: seven kings, one queen, seventeen
princes and dukes, two dutchesses, one archbishop, one and thirty earls, five
countesses, one viscount, twenty-four bishops, sixty-six barons, two ladies,
seven abbots, seven priors, and one sub-prior, besides squires innumerable,
graced the long roll of freemen of this company Strype's Stow, i.
.

AMONG the portraits in this hall, is that of William Warham, archbishop of
Canterbury, and lord high chancellor of England. He went through the various
offices, now allotted to laymen, with great abilities; was appointed master of
the rolls in 1486; keeper of the great seal in 1502; and lord chancellor in
1503; and in the following year was advanced to the sea of Canterbury. He was
in high favor with Henry VII; but on the accession of Henry VIII. was soon
supplanted by Wolsey, and experienced his greatest insolence. The good primate
enjoyed his dignity near twenty-eight years, with great munificence and honor;
and died in 1532 Illustrious Heads, i. p. and tab. vii.
.

NEXT is the portrait of Richard Fox, bishop of Winchester, an able statesman,
greatly employed by Henry VII. at home and abroad; and continued for some time
favored by his son. He first introduced Wolsey to court: but soon experienced
his ingratitude. Unable to bear his insolence, he, like Warham, retired from
business. In his old age, when struck with blindness, the cardinal meanly hoped
to prevale on him to resign his bishopric, to which the good prelate returned
a spirited reply. He lived to a great age, and died in 1528, after worthily
governing the sea twenty-seven years.

FOR the many good deeds of Sir Thomas Row, merchant-taylor, his portrait must
not be passed by. He is dressed in a bonnet, ruff, and red gown. He first
established a substantial standing watch in the city, when he was lord mayor,
in 1569. He built a convenient room, near St. Paul's Cross, for a certain
number of the auditors to hear the preacher at their ease. He enclosed a piece
of ground near Bethlem, for the burial place of such parishes that wanted
churchyards: besides numberless acts of charity, which rendered his memory
sweet to posterity. He was buried in Hackney, September 2d, 1570; and has an
epitaph in verse, quite in the simple style of the times The epitaph calls him
a Merchant-venturer. -- Strype's Stow, ii. app. 127. -- See more in vol. i.
book i. 237, 264 -- vol. ii. book v. 135 -- and Stow's Survaie, 319.
.

THE portrait of the illustrious Sir Thomas White, honors this hall, dressed in
a red gown. He was of this fraternity, but possibly not of the profession; for
numbers of opulent merchants listed under the banners of the company. It was
far from being confined to the trade. No one of his time rivalled him in love
of literature, charity, and true piety. In the glorious roll of charities,
belonging to this company, he appears with distinguished credit. I refer to
that for his good deeds, and those of his brethren Strype's Stow, i. book i.
263. -- ii. b. v. 62, 63.
. Sir Thomas bought the Benedictine College at Oxford, then called
Glocester-ball Tanner's Monast. Oxford.
, and founded it by that name. It has since been advanced into a college, by
the name of Worcester. He was the sole founder of St. John's College Wood's
Hist. Oxford, lib. ii. 302.
, on whom he bestowed his hall. He was discontented till he could find a place
with two elms growing together, near which he might found this seat of
learning. He met with his wish, and accomplished the great design. Within my
memory, majestic elms graced the street before this college, and the
neighboring. The scene was truly academic, walks worthy of the contemplative
schools of ancient days. But alas! in the midst of numberless modern
elegancies, in this single instance, Some Demon whispered, OXFORD, have a
taste; And by the magic line, every venerable tree fell prostrate. I refer, as
above, to the list of the noble charities of this good man. He was born at
Woodoakes, in Hertfordshire; entered on the reward of his excellent deeds in
1566, aged 72; and met with an honorable tomb within the walls of his great
foundation The same, 314.
.

I NOW descend to emperors, and other lesser characters. A portrait of Charles
V. is found here; another of a lord Willougby, with a white rod; and a picture
of Henry VII. presenting them with the letters patent of their incorporation;
the painter Clarkson; who the artist was, or when he lived, I am ignorant.

DISTINGUISHED TAILORS.
LET me enumerate the men of valor, and of literature, who have practiced the
original profession of this company. SIR JOHN HAWKWOOD.
Sir John Hawkwood, usually styled Joannes Acutus, from the sharpness of his
sword, or his needle, leads the van. The arch Fuller says, he turned his needle
into a sword, and his thimble into a shield. He was an apprentice to a tailor
in this city; was pressed for a soldier, and by his spirit rose to the highest
commands in foreign parts. He signalized himself particularly in the command of
the army of Galaeacca, or Galeazzo, duke of Milan; married the daughter of
Barnabas, the duke's brother; died full of years and glory, at Florence, in
1394; where his figure, on horseback, painted al fresco on the walls of the
cathedral, by the celebrated Paolo Uccelli, is still to be seen: beneath is
this inscription, JOHANNES ACUTUS, eques Britannicus, aetatis suae cautissimus
et rei militiaris peritissimus, habitus est. PAULI UCCELLI OPUS Misson's
Travels, iii. 286, 302.
. -- It is engraven among the works of the Society of Antiquaries, with the
date of 1436, which probably refers to the death of the artist; and was a
posthumous addition.

SIR Ralph Blackwall was said to be his fellow-apprentice, SIR RALPH BLACKWALL.
and to have been knighted for his valor by Edward III. But he followed his
trade, married his master's daughter, and, as we have said before, founded the
hall which bears his name See Crainger, i. 59, 61, for both these articles.
.

GENERAL Elliot's regiment of light horse, raised in our days, was formed out
of the choice spirits of the trade, and performed prodigies of valor, worthy
of their predecessor in arms, the great Johannes Acutus.

JOHN SPEED was a Cheshire tailor, and free of this company. JOHN SPEED.
His merit as a British historian and antiquary is indisputable. The plans he
has left us (now invaluable) of our ancient castles, and of our cities, show
equal skill and industry. Nor must we be silent of his geographical labors,
which, considering the confined knowledge of the times, are far from being
despicable.

JOHN STOW.
THE famous London antiquary John Stow, born in London about the year 1525,
ought to have the lead among those of our capital: he likewise was a tailor.
There is not one who has followed him with equal steps, or who is not obliged
to his black letter labors. In his industrious and long life (for he lived till
the year 1605) he made vast collections, as well for the history and topography
of his native city, as for the history of England. Numbers of facts, in the
interesting period in which he lived, he speaks of from his own knowledge; or of
earlier matters, from books long since lost. Multitudes of the houses of our
ancient nobility, existing in his time, are mentioned by him, and many of them
in the most despicable parts of the town.

BENJAMIN ROBINS.
THE late Benjamin Robins was the son of a tailor at Bath. He united the powers
of the sword and the pen. His knowledge in tactics was equal to that of any
person of his age: and by his compilation of lord Anson's voyage, he proved
himself not inferior in elegance of style.

ROBERT HILL.
ROBERT HILL, tailor of Buckingham, was the first Hebraean of his time: a
knowledge acquired in the most pressing poverty; and the cares of his
profession, to maintain (for a most excellent man he was) his large family. The
Reverend Mr. Spence did not think it beneath him to write his life, and point
him out to the public as a meritorious object of charity; and to form a
parallel between him and the celebrated Magliabecchi, librarian to the great
duke of Tuscany This little tract was written in 1757; and is reprinted among
the Fugitive Pieces, in the 2d volume. Hill was born in 1699.
.

IT was one of this meek profession, actuated by the religion of meekness, who
first suggested the pious project of abolishing the slave trade. Thomas
Woolman, a quaker, and tailor, of New Jersey, was first struck with the
thought, that engaging in the traffic of the human species was incompatible
with the spirit of the Christian religion. He published many tracts against
this unhappy species of commerce: he argued against it in public and private:
he made long journies for the sake of talking to individuals on the subject;
and was careful, himself, not to countenance slavery, by the use of those
conveniences which were provided by the labor of slaves. In the course of a
visit to England, he went to York, in the same year sickened of the smallpox,
and died October 7th, in sure and certain hopes of that reward which Heaven
will bestow on the sincere philanthropist.

In this street also stands the South Sea house, SOUTH SEA HOUSE.
the place in which the company did business, when it had any to transact. It
was first established in 1711, for the purpose of an exclusive trade to the
South-Seas; and for the supplying Spanish America with negroes. In the year
1720, by the villainy of the directors, it became the most notorious bubble
ever heard of in any kingdom. Imaginary fortunes of millions were grasped at: a
luxury introduced as great as if these schemes had been realized. At length the
deception was discovered, and the iniquitous contrivers detected and brought to
punishment; many with infamy, by being expelled the house Proceedings of the
House of Commons, etc. vi. 231, 236.
, others suffered in their purses Proceedings of the House of Commons, etc. vi.
251.
, but none in a manner adequate to their crimes, which brought utter ruin on
thousands.

AMONG the multitude of bubbles, which knaves, encouraged by the folly of the
times, were encouraged to set up, were the following most laughable: Insurance
against Divorces.
A scheme to learn men to cast nativities.
Making Deal-boards of Saw-dust.
Making Butter from Beech trees.
A flying Engine, (now exemplified in Balloons.)
A sweet way of emptying Necessaries.


DRAPERS HALL.
I RETURN through Threadneedle-street into the Broad street. In
Throgmorton-street, near its junction with Broad-street, stands Drapers Hall.
Thomas Cromwell, earl of Essex, built a magnificent house on its site: he showed
very little scruples in invading the rights of his neighbors to enlarge his
domain. Stow mentions his own father as a sufferer; for the earl arbitrarily
loosened from its place a house which stood in Stow's garden, placed it on
rollers, and had it carried twenty-two feet farther off, without giving the
least notice: and no one dared to complain Survaie, 342,
. The manner of removing this house, shows what miserable tenements a certain
rank of people had, which could, like the houses in Moscow, be so easily
conveyed from place to place. After Cromwell's fall, the house and gardens were
bought by the Drapers company. The house was destroyed in the great fire, but
rebuilt, for the use of their company, in a magnificent manner. This was the
farthest limits of the fire northward, as Allhallows church, in
Fenchurch-street, was to the east.

IN the hall, a very elegant room, is a portrait of the first mayor, PORTRAITS.
of London, Fitz-alwin, a half length. I need not say a fictitious likeness. In
his days, I doubt whether the artists equalled in any degree the worst of our
modern sign-painters.

AT one end of the room is a large picture of Mary Stuart, with her hand upon
her son James I. a little boy in a rich vest; her dress is black, her hair
light-colored. I never saw her but in dark hair; perhaps she varied her locks.
This could not be drawn from the life: for she never saw her son after he was a
year old. These portraits are engraven by Bartolozzi.

PORTRAITS of Sir Joseph Sheldon, mayor in 1677, and of Sir Robert Clayton,
mayor in 1680. Sir Robert was well deserving of this public proof of esteem: a
great benefactor to Christ-church hospital, and again to that of St. Thomas in
Southwark. He is finely painted, seated in a chair.

THE Drapers were incorporated in 1430. The art of weaving woollen cloth was
only introduced in 1360, by the Dutch and Flemings: but, as it was long
permitted to export our wool, and receive it again manufactured into cloth, the
cloth trade made little progress in England till the reign of queen Elizabeth
Anderson, i. 406.
, who may be said to have been the foundress of the wealthy loom, as of many
other good things in this kingdom.

ON the west side of the adjacent Broad-street stood the house of the
Augustines, AUGUSTINES.
founded in 1253 by Humphry Bohun earl of Hereford, for friars heremites of
that order. The church falling into ruin, was rebuilt by Humphry, one of his
descendants, earl of Hereford, who was buried here in 1361. Numbers of persons
of rank were also interred here, from the opinion of the peculiar sanctity
those mendicants filled this earth with. Here lay Edmund Guy de Meric, earl of
St. Paul. This nobleman was sent over by Charles VI. of France, on a
complimentary visit to Richard II. and his queen. He insinuated himself so
gready into the king's favor, as to become a chief confident: insomuch that, by
the advice of St. Paul, he was guilty of that violent action, the murder of his
factious uncle, the duke of Gloucester Kennet, i. 275.
. Lucie, wife of Edmund Holland, lord admiral, and one of the heirs and
daughter of Barnaby lord of Milan. She left great legacies to the church, in
particular to the canons of our lady de la Scala, at Milan.

RICHARD FITZALAN, the great earl of Arundel, beheaded in 1397 at Tower Hill.
John Vere, earl of Oxford, a strong friend to the house of Lancaster, beheaded
by the cruel Edward, in 1463, at the same place, with his son and several
others. Numbers also of the barons who fell in Barnet-field, found here a place
of interment. Edward Stafford, duke of Buckingham, victim, in 1521, to the
pride of cardinal Wolsey, chose this holy ground; as did multitudes of others,
recorded in the Survaie of John Stow P. 339.
.

IN the successful cruizes made by the English, in the year 1545, about three
hundred French ships were taken; Henry converted the conventual churches into
so many warehouses for the cargoes. This and the Black-friars he filled with
herrings and other fish, and the Grey-friars were filled with wine Holinshed,
968.
.

AT the dissolution, great part of the house, cloisters, WINCHESTER-HOUSE.
and gardens were granted to William lord St. John, afterward marquis of
Winchester, and lord treasurer. On the site he built Winchester-place, a
magnificent house, where Winchester-street now stands. The west end of the
church was in 1551 granted to John a Lasco for the use of the Germans, and
other fugitive Protestants, and afterward to the Dutch as a preaching-place.
Part also was converted into a glass-house for Venice glass, in which Venetians
were employed in every branch of this manufacture. They were patronized by the
duke of Buckingham. Howel, the celebrated author of the Letters, was steward to
the manufacture, but was obliged to quit his office, not being able to endure
the heat. He had been at Venice in 1621 Howel's Letters, 56.
, probably to pry into the secrets of the art, and to engage workmen. This
place was afterward converted into Pinners-hall, or the hall of the company of
Pin-makers.

THE other part the marquis reserved for the purpose of stowing corn, coal, and
other things. His son sold the noble monuments of the dead, the paving-stones,
and many other materials, which had cost thousands, for a hundred pounds, and
converted the building into stables for his horses Kennet, i. 336, 337.
. The steeple was standing in the year 1600. It was so beautiful, that the
mayor and several respectable citizens petitioned the marquis that it might not
be pulled down; but their petition was rejected, and this fine ornament of the
city demolished Strype's Stow, i. book ii. p. 114.
.

BEHIND this church, close to London wall, stood the Papey, a fraternity of St.
Charilibis and St. John the evangelist, for Papeys, or poor infirm priests,
founded in 1430 by certain chauntry priests. It was a numerous society,
designed to relieve any of its members, who by lameness or illness were reduced
to distress or poverty, whether they were brothers or sisters. The church of
St. Augustine Papey belonged to this fraternity. These priests, the brotherhood
of threescore priests of Leaden Hall, and the company of parish clerks, who
were skilled in singing diriges and funeral office, were accustomed to attend
the solemn burials of the rich or great. These are frequently represented on
the sides of ancient tombs, and were called pleureurs, weepers, and mourners.
This house became, after the suppression, the habitation of Sir Francis
Walsingham.

IN Winchester-street stood also a great house, called the Spanish
ambassador's, which was occupied by Sir James Houblon, knight and alderman: and
at the same period it was the residence of several of our most eminent
merchants.

SIR THOMAS GRESHAM'S HOUSE.
TO the east side of the same street, stood the house of our first of merchants,
Sir Thomas Gresham; originally built with brick and timber, and fronting to
Bishopsgate-street. By his will he appointed four lecturers in divinity,
astronomy, music, and geometry, and three readers in civil law, physic, and
rhetoric, each with a salary of fifty pounds a year, payable out of the rent
issuing out of the Royal Exchange. This house was the place where the
professors had their apartments, and where the lectures were to be read; which
were begun in 1597, but they are now quite deserted. This arose in a great
degree from the institution of the ROYAL SOCIETY: the meetings of which were
for a considerable time held here.

THE origin of that respectable body was from the meeting of a few illustrious
persons at the lodgings of doctor Wilkins, ORIGIN OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
afterward bishop of Chester, and others worthy of record, doctor Seth Ward,
afterward bishop of Salisbury, Mr. BOIL, Sir William Petty, and the doctors
Wallis, Goddard, Willis, and Bathurst, Sir Christopher Wren, and a few more. In
1658, they assembled in Gresham college, by permission of the professors of the
foundation of Sir Thomas Gresham; and on the Restoration were incorporated by
royal charter. A most instructive and well-founded Museum was established here
in 1677, by Henry Colwall, ITS MUSEUM.
consisting of natural and artificial curiosities, collected with great expense
and judgment. The society had a benefit never known at any other time, the
assistance of the great Mr. BOIL, the most accomplished, most learned, and
most religious virtuoso, who pointed out the proper objects of their
collection, and gave them the most finished instructions These were collected
and published in 1692. This little book is a most necessary companion for all
travelers and voyagers.
for procuring them from every quarter of the globe. At that period there were,
in both the Indies, persons capable of understanding, and pursuing with
success, the plan laid down for them at home. It was the good fortune of the
Museum to have, co-existent with its formation, a philosopher for its Curator,
fully qualified to describe its various articles. Doctor Nehemiah Grew not only
performed that part, but illustrated every one, in cases where the subject
admitted, with the most learned and pertinent remarks. He published his Museum
Regalis Societatis in 1681, and dedicated it to the founder, Mr. Colwall, at
the expense of whom the plates were engraven. It is a work equal to the Museum
Wormianum, and any other admired foreign performance of that age. Its defects
arise only from the want of system, the misfortune of the time; for our RAY had
not then cleared the rich ore of Natural History from the surrounding rubbish.
About the year 1711, the Society removed from hence to Crane-court in
Fleet Street. For numbers of years the Museum was neglected. My respected
friend, the honorable Daines Barrington, with most disinterested zeal,
undertook the restoring it, as far as the ravages of time would permit. This he
did in the most effectual manner; and enriched it with a number of new
specimens, especially from our late colonies: it being his design to have
formed it into a repository of every thing relative to the natural history of
Great Britain and its dependencies: a most noble plan, and worthy of being
carried into full execution. By singular chance, Gresham college escaped the
flames in 1666; but I believe very little of the original house remains: it
having been mostly rebuilt in 1601, possibly after the original design; the
arcades being adapted for the reception of the numbers of commercial and other
followers of so universal a merchant as Sir Thomas Gresham.

EXCISE-OFFICE.
THIS college has been pulled down within my memory; and the Excise-office, a
building of most magnificent simplicity, has rose in its place. The payment
into this office, from the 5th of January, 1786, to the 5th of January, 1787,
was not less than five millions, five hundred and thirty-one thousand, one
hundred and fourteen pounds, six shillings, and ten pence halfpenny. Happy for
us that our wealth keeps pace with our luxury!

THE house known by the name of Crosbie-house, CROSBIE-HOUSE.
stood on the opposite side of Bishopsgate-street, and was another magnificent
structure, built by Sir John Crosbie, sheriff in 1470, on ground leased to him
by Alice Ashfield, prioress of St. Helen's. In this house Richard duke of
Gloucester lodged Fabian, book vii. 514.
after he had conveyed his nephews to the Tower, and was meditating the
destruction of the poor innocents. The hall, miscalled Richard III's chapel, is
still very entire; a beautiful gothic building, with a bow-window on one side;
the roof is timber, and much to be admired. At present, this magnificent room
is occupied by a packer.

HENRY VIII. made a grant of it to Anthonio Bonvica, a rich Italian merchant
Stow, ii. book ii. 106.
. Henry was a great favorer of the merchants of this nation, for the sake of
the magnificent silks, velvets, tissues of gold, jewels, and other luxuries,
(as he expresses it) for the pleasure of us, and of our dearest wyeff, the
queen Rymer's Foed. xv. 105.
. In the reign of Elizabeth, it seems appropriated to foreign ambassadors: here
was lodged the ambassador of France, and again the ambassador of Denmark Stow's
Survaie, 332.
. The site of this house is still known by the name of Crosbie-square.

THE house of that great merchant Sir Paul Pindar stands in this street: it is
easily known by the bow, and vast extent of windows along the front. Sir Paul
was early distinguished by that frequent cause of promotion, the knowledge of
languages. He was put apprentice to an Italian master, traveled much, and was
appointed ambassador to the Grand Seignor by James I; in which office he gained
great credit by extending the English commerce in the Turkish dominions. He
brought over with him a diamond valued at L. 30,000; the king wished to buy it
on credit, but this the sensible merchant declined: but favored his majesty
with the loan on gala days: his unfortunate son became the purchaser. Sir Paul
was appointed farmer of the customs by James; and frequently supplied that
monarch's wants, as well as those of his successor. He was esteemed at one time
worth L. 236,000, exclusive of bad debts, in the year 1639. His charities were
very great: he expended nineteen thousand pounds in the repairs of St. Paul's
cathedral Whitelock, p. 17.
. He was ruined by his connections with his unfortunate monarch; and, if I
remember right, underwent imprisonment for debt. It is said that Charles owed
him, and the rest of the old commissioners of the customs, L. 300,000; for the
security of which, in 1649, they offered the parliament L.100,000; but the
proposal was rejected Whitelock, p. 410. -- In the Gentleman's Magazine for
June 1787, is an ample account of Sir Paul Pindar; and in the European for
April 1787, his character, with a view of his house.
. He died August 22, 1650, aged 84. He left his affairs in such a perplexed
state, that his executor, William Toomes, unable to bear the disappointment,
destroyed himself; and most deservedly underwent the ignominy of the, now,
almost obsolete verdict of Felo de se.

HELENA, the mother of Constantine the Great, PRIORY OF ST. HELEN'S; OR ST.
HELEN'S THE LESS.
and a canonized saint, had, a little to the east of Crosbie-square, a church
dedicated to her in very early times. In 1210, a priory of Benedictine nuns was
founded by a goldsmith, William Fitz-William, dedicated to the Holy Cross, and
its inventress Helena, the piissima et venerabilis AUGUSTA. Its revenues,
according to Dugdale, were L. 314. 2 s. 6 d. Henry granted the site to Mr.
Richard Cromwell, alias Williams; and on the nuns hall was built the
Leather-sellers Hall. This company was incorporated in the reign of Richard II.
They flourished greatly, in particular, in the time of queen Elizabeth, when
they had considerable commerce in skins from Barbary and Russia, and made great
profits from the exportation of the manufactured leather.

NORTH-EAST of Threadneedle-street, CHURCH OF ST. HELEN'S THE GREAT.
stands the ancient church known by the name of St. Helen's the Great; in it
are numbers of curious tombs: they fortunately escaped the ravages of the great
fire. That of the great benefactor to the city, Sir Thomas Gresham, TOMB OF SIR
T. GRESHAM.
claims the first notice: it is altar-fashioned, with a black slab on the top;
the sides fluted, and of colored marble. So great a name wanted not the
proclamation of an epitaph, so it is entirely without inscription.

A most magnificent tomb of Sir William Pickering, SIR WILLIAM PICKERING.
who died in London, at Pickering-house, in 1574, aged 58. He lies recumbent,
in rich gilt and painted armor, small ruff, short hair, trunk breeches; the
mat he rests on is finely cut. He had served four princes: Henry VIII, in the
field; Edward VI, as ambassador to France; queen Mary, in Germany; and finally,
queen Elizabeth. Elizabeth, (says his epitaph) principi omnium illustrissimae
summis officiis devotissimus. He is said to have aspired at the possession of
her person Kennet's Hist. ii. 383.
.

WILLIAM BOND.
A TOMB of William Bond, who died in 1576, a merchant adventurer, and the most
famous of his age for voyages by land and sea. He, his wife, and seven
children, are represented kneeling. The lady is distinguished by her vast
sleeves.

THEIR son Martin took a military turn: he was captain in the camp at Tilbury,
in 1588, and chief captain in the train-bands till his death. He is represented
in armor, in his tent; soldiers are seen on the outside, and his servant
waiting with his horse.

SIR JULIUS CAESAR.
I OMIT many splendid monuments, which record that the possessors were good men
and good citizens. That of Sir Julius Adelmar Caesar, who died a superannuated
master of the Rolls in 1636, is very singular. His epitaph is cut on a black
slab in form of a piece of parchment with a seal appendant, by which he gives
his bond to Heaven, to resign his life willingly whenever it should please GOD
to call him. In cujus rei testimonium manum meam et sigillum apposui.

RICHARD BANCROFT.
IN a plain square mausoleum is lodged the embalmed corpse of Richard Bancroft,
placed in a chest with a lid fastened only with hinges, and over the face is a
glass pane. This Bancroft is said to have been one of the lord mayor's
officers, and a very rapacious person. To make atonement for his past life, he
left his ill-gotten riches in trust to found and maintain an almshouse and Hall
in Crosbie Place
school, and to keep the monument in repair. He left twenty shillings to the
minister to preach annually a commemoration-sermon Northouk's Hist. of London,
557.
. The almsmen and scholars attended, and his body was brought out for public
inspection. But I think that this custom, as well as the sermon, have been of
late years laid aside.

HERE is also another tomb, seemingly belonging to some persons of rank: it is
of an altar form; on it lie recumbent two alabaster figures, one of a beardless
man, with his hair cut short and round; over his shoulders is a robe, a fine
collar round his neck, his body armed, and a griffin at his feet. By him lies
his lady.

I NOW visit the third street which branches from the Poultry, LOMBARD STREET.
that which took its name from the Lombards, the great money changers and
usurers of early times. They came out of Italy into our kingdom before the year
1274 Anderson, i. 406.
; at length their extortions became so great, that Edward III. seized on their
estates; perhaps the necessity of furnishing him with money for his Flemish
expedition, might have urged him to this step. They seem quickly to have
repaired their loss; for complaint was soon after made against them, for
persisting in their practices. They were so opulent in the days of Henry VI. as
to be able to furnish him with money, but they took care to get the customs
mortgaged to them by way of security The same, 231.
. In this street they continued till the reign of queen Elizabeth; and to this
day it is filled with the shops of numbers of eminent bankers.

THE shop of the great Sir Thomas Gresham stood in this street; it is now held
by Messrs Martin, bankers, who are still in possession of the original sign of
that illustrious person, the Grasshopper. Was it mine, that honorable memorial
of so great a predecessor should certainly receive the most ostentatious
situation I could find.

POST OFFICE.
THE Post Office, which gives wings to the extension of commerce, stands in
Lombard Street. The office of chief postmaster was erected in 1551 The
Asterisks mark my authority as from Mr. Anderson; the rest are more doubtful,
except from the words net income, in the next page.
, but we are not told how this branch of business was managed; however it was
not regularly established till the year 1644, when Mr. Edmund Prideaux, the
inland postmaster, was supposed to collect about five thousand pounds a year.

IN 1654, the parliament farmed the post office to a Mr. Manly, for L. 100,000.
This farm included the postage of England, Scotland, and Ireland The Asterisks
mark my authority as from Mr. Anderson; the rest are more doubtful, except from
the words net income, in the next page.
.

ON the Restoration, a general Post Office was established in London, to be
under the direction of a postmaster to be appointed by the king; and with
powers to appoint post-houses in such parts of the country which were
unprovided, both on the post and by-roads.

IN 1663, when peace and a settled government was restored, they were farmed to
Daniel O'Neil, Esquire for L. 21,500 The Asterisks mark my authority as from Mr.
Anderson; the rest are more doubtful, except from the words net income, in the
next page.
.

IN 1674, they were raised to L. 43,000; and in 1685, the gross was estimated
at L. 65,000 The Asterisks mark my authority as from Mr. Anderson; the rest are
more doubtful, except from the words net income, in the next page.
.

AT the Revolution, the post amounted to L. 76,319.

IN 1699, to L. 90,504 The Asterisks mark my authority as from Mr. Anderson;
the rest are more doubtful, except from the words net income, in the next page.
.

IN 1710, to L. 111,461. In 1715, the gross of the inland post came to L.
145,227.

L. s. d. In 1722, the gross amount was 201, 804 1 8 Deduct for franked covers
33,397 12 3 -- for expense in management 70,396 1 5 Net produce, Michaelmas
1722, 98,010 8 0

IN 1744, to L. 198,226; but the total of the inland and foreign offices was,
in that year, L. 235,490.

THE privilege of franking was first clamed by the commons in 1660, and allowed
to both houses by the crown in the following year. The abuse must have been
very great, it being asserted, that in 1763, the loss by that privilege
amounted to L. 170,700. I have seen in some private notes, that the gross of
the year's revenue was L. 432,048; and from better authority, that the net
income of 1763, the year previous to the first regulation of franking, was L.
97,833; which, in 1764, increased to L. 116,182.

IN the year ending in August, 1784, the net revenue amounted to L. 159,625.
The act for the second regulation took place in that month; in the following
year it increased to L. 196,513, and in the succeeding, to L. 261,409; and in
the last (1788) by reason of our national prosperity, to L. 280,000.

BEFORE the great fire, on the site of the present office stood a
much-frequented tavern. When it was destroyed by that calamity, the convivial
Sir Robert Viner replaced it with a large house for his own habitation. Sir
Robert, during his mayoralty, in 1675, was honored with the presence of his
monarch, Charles II; his majesty was for retiring, after staying the usual
time, but Sir Robert, filled with good liquor and loyalty, laid hold of the
king, and swore, Sir, you shall take the other bottle. The airy monarch looked
kindly at him over the shoulder, and with a smile, and graceful air, repeated
this line of the old song: "He that is drunk is as great as a king," and
immediately turned back, and complied with his landlord Spectator, No 461.
.

IN the same street, toward Birchin Lane, stood the house of William de la
Pole Stow's Survaie, 384.
, created in France, by Edward III. knight-banneret, with allowance out of the
customs of Hull for the support of his dignity Vincent's Discovery, etc. 500.
. He was a great merchant, and, being very opulent, used to supply the king's
pecuniary wants. He was at the same time the King's merchant; an office that
gave him the lucrative privilege of supplying his master with different sorts
of merchandise, and also with money. The office seems to have been continued to
later days, under another name: Henry VIII. had his King's factor, and Sir
Thomas Gresham bore the title of the Queen's. Richard (William's elder brother,
a merchant at Hull) had the same employ under Edward III, who calls him
dilectus mercator Ricardus de la Pole Pincerna noster The same.
.

FROM William sprung a numerous race of nobility, distinguished by their
ambition and unfortunate ends. His son Michael was created earl of Suffolk, yet
continued in his office of King's merchant, and lived in his father's house
Stow's Survaie, 384.
. He at length became lord high chancellor; but, being accused of embezzling
the public money, and diverse other crimes, was banished the kingdom, and died
at Paris in 1389, of a broken heart. His son Michael was restored, and died of
a flux at the siege of Harfleur, in Sept. 1415; and in the very following
month, his son and successor, another Michael, fell in the battle of Agincourt.
His brother William succeeded, and was afterward created marquis, and then
duke of Suffolk. He was the favorite of the spirited Margaret of Anjou. He was
of distinguished abilities, but by his insolence enraged the nobility so
greatly, that on an accusation of his being the cause of the loss of France,
they banished him the kingdom. On his passage to Calais, he was seized by a
vessel sent expressly to intercept him, and was brought into Dover, beheaded by
the captain of the ship in the cock-boat, without ceremony, and his body flung
upon the sands, where it was found by his chaplain, and buried at Wingfield in
Suffolk. The nobility dreaded his return, therefore took this method to free
themselves from so formidable an enemy See the curious particulars in Sir John
Fenn's, i. 39, 48, truly stated. See also Shakespeare's Henry VI, part ii. act
iv. scene 1. and the account of the prophecy in act in i. scene 4.
. John, his son, succeeded him. Finally, his son Edmund, who was condemned for
a murder in the time of Henry VII, received his pardon: but in the following
reign was, in 1513, executed for treason; but his chief crime with that tyrant
seems his relation to the house of York, his mother being sister to Edward IV.
The venerable Margaret countess of Salisbury was barbarously brought to the
block for the same reason; her son, cardinal Pole, would not have been spared,
could Henry have got him into his power. Henry Pole, lord Montacute, suffered
for corresponding with him: and thus ended this ill-fated race.

DENMARK-HOUSE.
In Fenchurch-street, a continuation of the former, stood Denmark-house. In it
was lodged the ambassador sent, in 1557, as Holinshed expresses it, from the
emperor of Cathaie, Muscovia, and Russeland. This was in consequence of the new
discovery of the White Sea by Chancellor: for till that time Russia was quite
impervious by any other way. The merchants were well acquainted with the
importance of the new commerce: they met him at Tottenham with all the splendour
that was likely to make an impression on the mind of a Barbarian. They were
dressed in velvet coats, and rich chains of gold, and bore all his expenses.
Lord Montacute, with the queen's pensioners, met him at Islington; and the lord
mayor and aldermen, in scarlet robes, received him at Smithfield, and from
thence rode with him to this house, then "Master Dimmock's, in Fenchurch
Street Holinshed, 1132.
." Our Russian company was formed three years previous to the arrival of this
ambassador, but its commerce was carried on with redoubled success after the
Russians were thus made acquainted with our wealth and power.

HUDSON'S-BAY HOUSE.
IN this street is the Hudson's-bay House, the vast repository of the northern
furs of America, which are lodged here till they are sold, and exported to
various parts of the world, even to the distant China. In this hall is a vast
pair of horns of the Moose Deer, weighing fifty-six pounds; and in another
room, the picture of an Elk, the European Morse, killed in the presence of
Charles XI. of Sweden, which weighed twelve hundred and twenty-nine pounds.

I SHOULD speak with the prejudices of a true Englishman, was I to dignify the
Thames with the title of the chief of rivers. I must qualify my patriotism with
its just clame to that of first of island-rivers. But in respect to our rival
kingdom, it must yield the palm to the Garonne, only we must not make
comparison of length of course. The contracted space of our island must limit
that species of grandeur; but there are none, in any part of Europe, which can
boast of more utility in bringing farther from the ocean the largest commercial
ships; nor are there any which can bring the riches of the universe to their
very capital. The ships of the Seine discharge themselves at Havre; those of
the Loire reach no farther than Port-Lannai, far below its emporium Nantes; and
the Garonne conveys no farther than Pouillac the full-loaden ships: there they
are obliged to be eased of part of their cargoes, before they can reach the
opulent Bourdeaux.

THE Thames rises beneath Sufferton-hill, just within the borders of
Glocestershire, a little to the south-west of Cirencester, which it instantly
quits, and enters for a short space into the county of Wilts, bends a little
into it, and reenters its parent province near Lechlade, where (by means of
locks) it first becomes navigable, and, as is said, for barges of seventy tons.
It here leaves Glocestershire, and becomes the whole southern boundary of
Oxfordshire, or the northern of Berkshire, and from thence is the southe^n
limit of Buckinghamshire. At Great Marlow, in that county, is the last lock;
from thence to the sea it requires no farther an to aid its navigation. At a
small distance from Windsor it divides Middlesex from Surry; just above
Kingston it feels the last feeble efforts of a tide; TIDE.
from thence is a most important increase: just below London Bridge, eighteen
feet; and at Deptford, twenty. The preceding, brings ships of three hundred and
fifty tons, drawing sixteen feet water, to the custom-house; the last, those of
a thousand tons, even the largest, drawing twenty-three feet, which import the
treasures of India. This noble river continues fresh as low as Woolwich, WHERE
BRACKISH.
and even there is brackish only at spring-tides. Thus at our capital it is
perfectly pure, salubrious, and subservient to vast articles of commerce, with
which that stupendous city abounds.

(...) LENGTH.
THE whole course of the Thames, to its mouth, is considerably above two hundred
miles. I contract its length very considerably, in comparison of the usual
estimation, ITS PROPER MOUTH.
for I limit its mouth to the spot between the west end of the isle of Grain,
in Kent, and the eastern part of that of Canvey in Essex. From those plates to
the Naze in the latter county, and the North Foreland in that of Kent (which
have hitherto been considered as its entrance) it ceases to flow in a single
channel; it becomes a vast estuary filled with sandbanks, many of which appear
above water at the recess of the tides.

THE whole course of the river is through a country which furnishes every idea
of opulence, fertility, and rural elegance: meadows rich in hay, or covered
with numerous herds; gentle risings, and hanging woods; embellished with
palaces, magnificent seats, or beautiful villas, a few the hereditary mansions
of our ancient gentry, but the greater part property transferred, by the
effects of vice and dissipation, to the owners of honest wealth, acquired by
commerce, or industrious professions, or the dear purchase of cankering rapine.
Its course furnishes few sublime scenes, excepting the high chalky cliffs near
Henley; all its banks are replete with native softness, improved by art and the
fullest cultivation.

I DO not recollect that it flows in any part over a rocky channel; its bottom
is either gravelly or clayey, according to the nature of the soil through which
it meanders. This gives growth to the abundance of weeds with which it is in
many parts filled; and these prove the safety of multitudes of fishes, FISH.
and preserve them from being extirpated by the unbridled ravages of the
poachers. The Thames has, between its source and Woolwich, every species found
in the British rivers, except the BURBOT, the LOCHE, the COBITIS TAENIA, or
SPINY LOCHE, of late years discovered in the river Trent, and the small species
of SALMON, the SAMLET. The SALMON, and the SHAD, are fishes of passage; the
first appears in the river about the middle of February, is in great
estimation, and sells at a vast price; their capture is prohibited from the
24th of August to the 11th of November. The SHAD arrives the latter end of May,
or beginning of June, and is a very coarse fish; it sometimes grows to the
weight of eight pounds, but the usual size is from four to five. This is the
fish which Du Hamel describes as the true Alose of the French Du Hamel, ii.
316. tab. i. fig. 1.
; but the fishermen of the Thames have another they call Allis, much lesser
than the former, with a row of spots from the gills along the sides, just
beneath the back, more or less in number: this the French call Le Feinte Du
Hamel, ii. 321, tab. i. fig. 5 -- Bloche, ii. tab. xxx. gives the figure of the
Feinte; but is of opinion that the spots vanish with age. For my part, I have
not had opportunities of frequent examination of these fishes, but I incline to
think they are different, as the Feintes appear in spawn at the length of
sixteen inches, which is their largest size.
. I suspect that the name Allis is misapplied to this species, and that it
ought to be applied to the great or common Shad, being an evident corruption
from the French name Alose; is the same with that of the Severn, but is rarely
taken here: but neither of them are admitted to good tables.

L^E^ LAMPREY, ITS ^T USE.
THE lesser Lamprey, the Petromyzon fluviatilis of LINNAEUS, is a small fish of
great and national importance, and is taken in amazing quantities between
Battersea Reach and Taplow Mills (a space of about fifty miles) and sold to the
Dutch for the Cod and other fisheries; 450,000 have been sold in one season for
that purpose; the price has been forty shillings the thousand: this year the
Dutch have given three pounds, and the English from five to eight pounds; the
former having prudently contracted for three years at a certain price. Formerly
the Thames has furnished from a million to twelve hundred thousand annually. --
An attempt was lately made in parliament to fling the Turbot fishery entirely
into British hands, OF THE TURBOT FISHERY.
by laying ten shillings a ton duty on every foreign vessel importing Turbots
into Great Britain: but the plan was found to be derived from selfish motives,
and even on national injustice: the far greater quantity of Turbots being
discovered to be taken on the coasts of Holland and Flanders See Supplement to
the Arctic Z^ology.
.

THE fish of the Thames which come as low as London, and beyond it as far as
the water is fresh, are the Barbel, (which is never seen below the bridge) a
few Roach, and Dace, Bleak in great plenty, and Eels extend far down the river;
small Flounders are found as far as Fulham, brought up by the tides, and
continue stationary.

I WILL conclude this account with the fine lines written by Sir John Denham on
this our celebrated river; and in a manner worthy of the greatness of the
subject: MY eye descending from the hill surveys
Where THAMES among the wanton valleys strays;
THAMES, the most loved of all the ocean's sons
By his old fire, to his embraces runs,
Hasting to pay his tribute to the sea,
Like mortal life to meet eternity,
Though with those streams he no resemblance hold,
Whose foam is amber, and their gravel gold.
His genuine and less guilty wealth to explore,
Search not his bottom, but survey his shore;
Over which he kindly spreads his spacious wing,
And hatches plenty for the ensuing spring;
Nor then destroys it with too fond a stay,
Like mothers which their infants overlay;
Nor with a sudden and impetuous wave,
Like profuse kings, resumes the wealth he gave:
No unexpected inundations spoil
The mower's hopes, nor mock the plowman's toil;
But godlike his unwearied bounty flows,
First loves to do, then loves the good he does.
Nor are his blessings to his banks confined,
But free and common as the sea or wind,
When he to boast or to disperse his stores,
Full of the tributes of his grateful shores,
Visits the world, and in his flying towers
Brings home to us, and makes both Indies ours;
Finds wealth where it is, bestows it where it wants,
Cities in deserts, woods in cities plants:
So that to us nothing, no place is strange,
While his fair bosom is the world's exchange.
O could I flow like thee, and make thy stream
My great example, as it is my theme!
Though deep, yet clear; though gentle, yet not dull;
Strong, without rage; without overflowing, full.
Heaven her Eridanus no more shall boast,
Whose fame in thine, like lesser currents, lost.


APPENDIX.
PAGE 165.
BEDFORD-ROW, in this neighborhood, BEDFORD-ROW.
took its name from the uses to which those lands, and others adjacent, were
bequeathed by Sir William Harpur, son of William Harpur, of Bedford; viz. to
found a free and perpetual school, in that his native place; for portioning
poor maidens; for supporting poor children; and for maintaining the poor with
the surplus; all of them inhabitants of the said town. Part of the lands were
of his own inheritance; part belonging to the Chartreux, at that time lately
dissolved. Some of the lands were lost, others granted to Sir Thomas Fisher,
baronet, for other lands belonging to him; the remainder granted, in the year
1668, upon lease, by the corporation of Bedford, trustees to the charity, for
the purposes of building, for the term of forty-one years, at the yearly rent
of ninety-nine years: and in 1684, the reversion to Nicholas Barbon, D. D. for
the further term of fifty-one years, at the rent of a hundred and fifty, on the
expiration of the first lease. Bedford-street, Bedford-row and court,
Princes-street, Theobald's-row, North-street, East-street,
Lamb's-conduit-street, Queen Street, Eagle-street, Boswel-court, and several
other streets, rose in consequence, by which the rents were most considerably
increased. A suit arose, about the year 1725, between the warden and fellows of
New College, and the corporation of Bedford, concerning the right of appointing
the masters to the school, and their salaries. The same was decided, in 1725,
in favor of the college; and that the corporation was to pay the head master
thirty pounds a year, and the usher twenty; and the other charities to be paid
proportionably to the revenues of the estate.

ON the expiration of the two leases, in 1760, the annual revenues arising from
the rents were found to amount to L. 2,336. 17 s. and the houses at will to L.
273. And it was found that improvements might be made which would increase the
revenue so far as to make the whole amount to L. 3,000 a year. In fact, in
1788, they did amount to L. 2,917. 17 s.

AMONG other regulations, in consequence of the increased revenue, by an act
made about the year 1762, new houses were directed to be built for the
schoolmaster, usher, and writing-master. The head-master's salary to be
augmented to L. 200 per ann.; the usher's to L. 100; the writing-master's to L.
60. Toward the portioning of the poor maidens L. 800 was to be annually given;
L. 600 to be annually given toward apprenticing poor children. And I might add
several other particulars, which I omit, as not relative to the city, the
subject of these sheets.

PAGE 274.
PARAPHRASE of the 137th PSALM: alluding to the captivity and ill-treatment of
the Welsh Bards by king Edward I. Vide E. Evans.

SAD near the willowy Thames we stood,
And cursed the inhospitable flood.
Tears, such as Patriots weep, 'gan flow,
The silent eloquence of woe,
When Cambria rushed into our mind,
And pity with just vengeance joined;
Vengeance, to injured Cambria due,
And pity, O ye Bards! to you.
Silent, neglected, and unstrung,
Our harps upon the willows hung,
That "softly sweet, in Cambrian measures,
"Used to sooth our souls to pleasures;"
When lo! the insulting so appears,
And bids us dry our useless tears.
"Resume your harps" (the Saxons cry)
"And change your grief to songs of joy;
"Such as old Taliessin sang,
"What time your native mountains rang
"With his rude strains, and all around
"Seas, rivers, woods, returned the sound."
What! shall the Saxons hear us sing?
With Cambrian strains your valleys ring?
No -- let old Conwy cease to flow!
Back to her source Sabrina go!
Let huge Plin^mmon hide his head!
Or let the tyrant strike me dead,
If I attempt to sing a song,
Unmindful of my country's wrong! --
What! shall an haughty king command
A Cambrian hymn, in a strange land?
May my right hand first withered be,
Or ever I touch a string for thee,
Proud monarch! nay, may instant death
Arrest my tongue, and stop my breath,
If I attempt to sing a song,
Unmindful of my country's wrong!
Thou God of vengeance! do thou sleep,
When thy insulted Druids weep,
The victors' jest, the Saxons' scorn,
Unheard, unpitied, and forlorn?
Bare thy red arm, thou God of ire,
And set their boasted TOWER, on fire! --
Remember our inhuman foes,
When the first Edward furious rose,
And, like a whirlwind's rapid sway,
Swept armies, cities, bards away!
High on a rock, over Conwy's flood,
The last surviving poet stood,
And cursed the tyrant as he passed,
With cruel pomp, and murderous haste.
What now avail our tuneful strains,
'Midst savage taunts and biting chains?
Say, will the lark, imprisoned, sing
So sweet, as when on towering wing
He wakes the songsters of the sky,
And tunes his notes to liberty?
Ah no! the Cambrian lyre no more
Shall sweetly sound on Arvon's shore:
No more the SILVER HARP be won,
Ye Muses, by your favorite son;
(Or I, even I, by glory fired,
Had to the honored prize aspired.)
No more shall Mona's oaks be spared,
Nor Druids' circle be revered;
On Conwy's banks, and Menai's streams,
The solitary bittern screams;
Where Lewellyn kept his court,
Wolves and ill-omen'd birds resort:
There often, at midnight's silent hour,
Near yon ivy-mantled tower,
By the glow-worm's yellow fire,
Tuning his romantic lyre,
Gray's pale spectre seems to sing --
"RUIN SEIZE THEE, RUTHLESS KING!"
A GENERAL BILL of all the CHRISTNINGS and BURIALS from December 11, 1787, to
December 16, 1738. According to the Report made to the KING's Most Excellent
Majesty, by the Company of Parish Clerks of LONDON, etc.
St ALBAN in Wood-street Bur. 15 Alhallows Barkin Bur. 35 Alhallows in
Bread-street Bur. 9 Alhallows the Great Bur. 39 Alhallows in Honey-lane
Alhallows the Less Bur. 7 Alhallows in Lombard street Bur. 9 Alhallows Staining
Bur. 11 Alhallows on London Wall Bur. 23 St Alphage near Sion College Bur. 17
St Andrew Hubbard St Andrew Undershaft Bur. 13 St Andrew by the Wardrobe Bur.
23 St Ann within Aldersgate Bur. 33 St Ann in Black Friars Bur. 66 St Anthony,
vulgarly Antholin Bur. 8 St Augustine, vulgarly Austin Bur. 13 St Bartholomew by
Exchange Bur. 6 St Benedict, vulgarly Bennet Fink Bur. 11 St Bennet Gracechurch
Bur. 9 St Bennet at Paul's Wharf Bur. 35 St Bennet Sherehog St Botolph at
Billingsgate Bur. 5 Christ Church Parish Bur. 115 St Christopher's Parish St
Clement near Eastcheap Bur. 9 St Dionis Backchurch Bur. 15 St Dunstan in the
East Bur. 46 St Edmund the King Bur. 10 St Ethelburga's Parish Bur. 13 St Faith
under St. Paul's Bur. 31 St Gabriel in Fenchurch-street Bur. 10 St George in
Botolph-lane Bur. 7 St Gregory by St Paul's Bur. 56 St Helen near Bishopsgate
Bur. 9 St James in Duke's Place Bur. 7 St James at Garlickhith Bur. 8 St John
Baptist by Dowgate Bur. 15 St John the Evangelist St John Zachary Bur. 6 St
Katherine Coleman Bur. 21 St Katherine Creechurch Bur. 34 St Laurence Jewry
Bur. 19 St Laurence Pountney Bur. 11 St Leonard in Eastcheap Bur. 2 St Leonard
in Foster-lane St Magnus by London Bridge Bur. 5 St Margaret in Lothbury Bur.
22 St Margaret Moses St Margaret in New Fish-street Bur. 6 St Margaret Pattens
Bur. 1 St Martin in Ironmonger-lane Bur. 1 St Martin within Ludgate Bur. 11 St
Martin Orgars Bur. 6 St Martin Outwich Bur. 6 St Martin Vintrey Bur. 28 St Mary
Abchurch Bur. 12 St Mary Aldermanbury Bur. 24 St Mary Aldermary Bur. 5 St Mary
Le Bow in Cheapside Bur. 19 St Mary Bothaw at Dowgate Bur. 2 St Mary Colechurch
Bur. 1 St Mary Hill near Billingsgate Bur. 30 St Mary Magdalen in Milk-street
St Mary Magdalen Old Fish-street Bur. 27 St Mary Mounthaw Bur. 14 St Mary
Somerset Bur. 19 St Mary Staining St Mary Woolchurch St Mary Woolnoth Bur. 18
St Matthew in Friday-street Bur. 1 St Michael Bassishaw Bur. 11 St Michael in
Cornhill Bur. 9 St Michael in Crooked-lane Bur. 22 St Michael at Queenhith Bur.
31 St Michael Le Quern Bur. 1 St Michael Royal Bur. 6 St Michael in Wood-street
St Mildred in Bread-street Bur. 2 St Mildred in the Poultry Bur. 10 St Nicholas
Acons Bur. 1 St Nicholas Coleabby Bur. 6 St Nicholas Olave Bur. 8 St Olave in
Hart-street Bur. 38 St Olave in the Old Jewry Bur. 5 St Olave in Silver-street
Bur. 18 St Pancras in Pancras-lane St. Peter in Cheapside Bur. 10 St Peter in
Cornhill Bur. 16 St Peter near Paul's Wharf Bur. 12 St Peter Poor in
Broad-street Bur. 8 St Stephen in Coleman-street Bur. 50 St Stephen in Walbrook
Bur. 14 St Swithin at London Stone Bur. 7 St Thomas the Apostle Bur. 4 Trinity
Parish Bur. 8 St Vedast, alias Foster Bur. 10
Christened in the 97 Parishes within the Walls, 1148. -- Buried, 1446.

St Andrew in Holborn Bur. 760 St Bartholomew the Great Bur. 40 St Bartholomew
the Less Bur. 11 St Botolph by Aldersgate Bur. 156 St Botolph by Aldgate Bur.
358 St Botolph without Bishopsgate Bur. 306 St Bridget, vulgarly St Brides Bur.
175 St Dunstan in the West Bur. 104 St George in Southwark Bur. 298 St Giles by
Cripplegate Bur. 230 St John in Southwark Bur. 355 St Olave in Southwark Bur.
320 St Savior in Southwark Bur. 439 St Sepulchre's Parish Bur. 332 St Thomas
in Southwark Bur. 140 Trinity in the Minories Bur. 16
Christened in the 16 Parishes without the Walls, 4791. -- Buried, 4040.

St Ann in Middlesex Bur. 163 Christ Church in Surry Bur. 212 Christ Church in
Middlesex Bur. 549 St D^ndan at Stepney Bur. 406 St George in Bloomsbury Bur.
222 St George in Middlesex Bur. 550 St George by Queen's square Bur. 217 St
Giles in the Fields Bur. 1180 St James at Clerkenwell Bur. 778 St John at
Clerkenwell Bur. 56 St John at Hackney Bur. 233 St John at Wapping Bur. 127 St
Katherine near the Tower Bur. 148 St Leonard in Shoreditch Bur. 750 St Luke in
Middlesex Bur. 509 St Mary at Islington Bur. 220 St Mary at Lambeth Bur. 680 St
Mary Magdalen Bermondsey Bur. 525 St Mary at Newington Bur. 366 St Mary at
Rotherhith Bur. 216 St Mary at Whitechapel Bur. 748 St Matthew at Bethnal Green
Bur. 149 St Paul at Shadwell Bur. 407
Christened in the 23 Out-Parishes in Middlesex and Surry, 8980. -- Buried, 9411.

St Ann in Westminster Bur. 448 St Clement Danes Bur. 326 St George by
Hanov^r-square Bur. 1128 St James in Westminster Bur. 838 St John Evangelist in
Westminster Bur. 152 St Margaret in Westminster Bur. 766 St Martin in the
Fields Bur. 858 St Mary Le Strand Bur. 98 The Precinct of the Savoy Bur. 69 St
Paul in Covent Garden Bur. 117
Christened in the 10 Parishes in the City and Liberties of Westminster, 4640.
-- Buried, 4800.

The DISEASES and CASUALTIES this YEAR.
ABORTIVE and Stilborn 713 Abscess 11 Aged 1424 Ague 7 Apoplexy and Suddenly
229 Asthma and Phthisick 488 Bedridden 6 Bleeding 5 Bloody Flux 1 Bursten and
Rupture 12 Cancer 76 Canker Chicken Pox 2 Childbed 197 Cold 6 Colic, Gripes,
and Twisting of the Guts 14 Consumption 5086 Convulsions 4485 Cough, and
Hooping Cough 298 Diabetes Dropsy 1021 Evil 11 Fever, Malignant Fever, Scarlet
Fever, Spotted Fever, and Purples 2769 Fistula 2 Flux 14 French Pox 45 Gout 58
Gravel, Stone, and Strangury 59 Grief 5 Headache Headmouldshot, Horshoehead,
and Water in the Head 44 Jaundies 53 Imposthume 1 Inflammation 229 Itch Leprosy
Lethargy 2 Livergrown 5 Lunatic 46 Measles 55 Miscarriage Mortification 218
Palsy 62 Pleurisy 23 Quinsy 1 Rash 3 Rheumatism Rising of the Lights Scald Head
Scurvy 10 Small Pox 1101 Sore Throat 13 Sores and Ulcers 18 St Anthony's Fire 2
Stoppage in the Stomach 9 Surfeit 3 Swelling Teeth 446 Thrush 34 Tympany 1
Vomiting and Looseness Worms 7
BROKEN Limbs 3 Bruised Burnt 13 Drowned 119 Excessive Drinking 9 Executed
There have been Executed in Middlesex and Surry, 35; of which number (7 only)
have been reported as such within the Bills of Mortality.
7 Found Dead 12 Fractured 1 Frighted Killed by Falls and several other
Accidents 67 Killed themselves 13 Licked by a mad Dog 1 Murdered 2 Overlaid 3
Poisoned 2 Scalded 5 Smothered 1 Starved 5 Suffocated 3 Total 266
Christened Males 9892 Females 9667
In all 19,559 Buried Males 9962 Females 9735
In all 19,697
Whereof have died, Under Two Years of Age 6138 Between Two and Five 1522 Five
and Ten 667 Ten and Twenty 866 Twenty and Thirty 1552 Thirty and Forty 2015
Forty and Fifty 2086 Fifty and Sixty School Sixty and Seventy 1481 Seventy and
Eighty 1145 Eighty and Ninety 460 Ninety and a Hundred 55 A Hundred 7 A Hundred
and One 2 A Hundred and Two 1 A Hundred and Three A Hundred and Four A Hundred
and Five A Hundred and Six 1 A Hundred and Thirteen 1


Increased in the Burials this Year, 348.

It is the opinion of Mr. Richardson, who has served the Parish Offices, that
there are near as many buried from London, at different Burial Grounds, without
as within the above Bills, unnoticed here. -- Burying Grounds without the
Bills, close to or in London: -- Bunhill Fields -- Lady Huntingdon's, Spa
Fields -- Tottenham-court Road. -- Many more such, besides Marylebone and
Pancras.

INDEX.
A.
ACON, St. Thomas of, Hospital Page 384 Acutus, Sir John, or Sharp 403 Addison,
his fine Thoughts on the Tombs in Westminster Abbey 76 Adelphi 133 Admiralty
Office 103 Albemarle, or Newcastle House 196 Aldermanbury 194, 197 Aldersgate
220 Aldgate 246 All Hallows, Barking 254 Almonry, the 81 Andrew's St. Holborn
172 Andrew's St. Undershaft 396 Antiquities 9, 206, 355 Apothecaries Hall 213
Archery, ancient 242 Arlington House 122 Artillery Company 238 Ground, the Old
237 New 238
Arundel Collection 32, 122 Palace 143
Arx Palatina, the West 22 the East 236
Asylum, a most laudable Charity 35 Auto de Fees held in Smithfield 173
B.
Bagnios 219 Bailey, Old 216 Bank of England 397 Bankers, their origin 361 an
account of 361
Banqueting House 98 Barber Surgeons Hall 227 Barbican, the 224 Bartholomew,
St. the greater 177 Bath's Inn, afterward Seymour Place 142 Baynard Castle 317
Bear Garden 41 Beaufort Buildings 135 Beaufoy's Wine Brewery 30 Beaumont Inn
316 Becket, Thomas, where born 384 Bedford House 164 in the Strand 135
Bedford Row 429 Bell Savage Inn 215 Berehouse 277 Berkley House 117 Berkshire
House 121 Bermondsey Abbey 53 Bethlem, or Bedlam 234 Billingsgate 291
Bishopsgate 243 Bishopsgate-street 242 Blackfriers 210 Blackwall Hall 383
Blood, his enormities 124, 266 Bloomsbury Square 164 Botolph's, St. Aldgate 247
Bowl, St. Giles's, what 161 Boy-Bishop 340 Bretagne, dukes of, their house 328
Breweries 278 Bride's, St. Church 201 Bridewell 202 fine Picture by Holbein 204
Bridge, London 294 Blackfriers 207
Bridge, Westminster 80, 90, 321 Bridgewater House 224 British Town,
establishment of 1 Brook House, lord Brook murdered there 168 Buckingham House
123 Bucklesbury 387 Bull and Mouth Inn 224 Burials, shameful and most
dangerous, exemplined 162 Burleigh House, or Exeter House 139 Burley, Sir S^mon
de, his house 397 Busby, Doctor, his Tomb ^^
C.
Cabinet of Charles I. 100 Cartaret, Philip, beautiful epitaph on 75 Ca^e's,
St. Hospital 275 Catherine ^een, St. Church 394 Cavalini, fine proofs of his
skill in Westminster Abbey 62 Caesar, Sir Julius, his singular epitaph 416
Charcery Lane 155 Channel Row 91 Chapter House and Crypt, in Westminster 78, 79
Charing Cross 104 Charles I. fine equestrian statue of 105 bust, by Bernini 88
V. lodged in Bridewell 202
Charter House 186 Portraits there 189 Chancer's Inn 57 Cheapside 358, 364
Standard, executions at 370 Cross, demolition of 367, 368
Christ-church Priory 245 Hospital, once the Grey-friers 179 remarkable
Portra^s in it 184
Cibber, Gabriel, his fine Statues at Bethlem 236 Clarendon House 123 Clements
Inn 146 St Danes 146
Clerkenwell, St. James's 193 Cleveland, or Berkshire House 121 Clifford's Inn
1^5 Clough, Sir Richard, the original cause of the Royal Exchange 389 Cobham,
Sir John Oldcastle, his cruel end 161 Coffins, stone, modern 166 Cold Harbor
305 College of Physicians 325 Common Hunt 234 Compter, the new 218 Conduits
115, 163 Cranes, the Three 310 Craven House, once Drury 145 Cro^bie House 413
Crown, attempt on, by Blood 266 Crutched friars 251 C^per's Garden 32
Custom-house 287 Customs in different periods 288 Cu^er, Sir John, his two
Statues 325, 386 deceives the College of Physicians 325

D.
Danes, St. Clement's 147 Denham, Sir John, his verses on the Thames 427
Denmark House 422 Devil ^avern, Ben Jonson's house 155 Devonshire House 117
Sq^a 239
Distilleries, g^ 33 Dixie, Sir Wo^, his portrait 185 Doghouse, the 233 Dorset
House 201 Theater ibid.
Dowgate 9, 309 Drapers Hall 406 Drury House 144 Duel, trials by 174 Duke's
Place 244 Dunstan's, St. Church 198 Durham Place 131
E.
Edward I. his Tomb broke open 67 the Black Prince, his house 304
Ely House 170 English Wines 30 Equestrian Theaters 36 E^ber, the 309 Essex
House, the house of the ill-fated favorite 147 Exchange, New 133 Exeter 138
the King's, or old 358 Royal 389
Excise Office 412 Execution Dock 282 Exeter, or Burleigh House 138 House 147

F.
Falstaff's Tavern in Eastcheap 300 Faux, Guy, an inhabitant of Lambeth 29
Finsbury Fields 233 Fire, great, in 1666 302 Fish of London market in Edward
I's time 292 the Thames 425 Fishmongers Hall 304 Fitz-Osbert, his story 466
Fitzwalter, banner-bearer and castillon of London 317 Fleet Prison 207 Ditch
205 Street 198
Flemings, cruel massacre of 371 Fortification of London in 1642 121 Friars,
the White 199 the Black 210 Crossed 251
Furnival's Inn 168
G.
Gaming house, the 114 Garter place 225 Garth, Sir Samuel, his lines on queen
Anne's Statue 354 George, St. Bloomsbury, its absurd steeple 165 Fields 33
Hospital 120
Gibbons, his fine font at St. James's 126 Giles St. Cripplegate 226 in the
Fields 161
Globe, Shakespeare's Theater 57 Gloucester, Elinor duchess of, her penance 372
Godfrey, Sir Edmondbury, his story 140 Goldsmiths Hall 359 originally Bankers
360
Goodman's Fields 250 Gower, the poet, his tomb 45 Granary, public 392
Grasshopper on the Royal Exchange 391 Sir Thomas Gresham's sign 418
Gray's-inn 166 Gresham College 410 Sir Thomas, his great merit 389 his shop 418
Grocers Hall 386 Grub-street 232 Gryffydd, a Welsh prince, killed in
attempting to escape from the Tower 273 Guildhall 372 portraits of Judges in
373 great feasts 374 to 381
Gunpowder plot, scene of 87 Guy Faux 29 his Cellar 87
Guy's Hospital 53 Gwynne, Nell, her luxurious apartment 101
H.
Hanover-square 116 Hatton Garden, and Palace 169 John of Gaunt dies there
ibid. great feasts there 170
Hawkwood Sir John, a hero, originally a Tailor 403 Hayhill, Sir Thomas Wyat's
remains hung there 116 Haymarket, and Hedge-lane 112 Helen's St. the Less, a
Priory 415 the Greater, monuments in ibid.
Heralds College 356 Horsey, chancellor of London diocese, his barbarous murder
of Richard Hunn 331 Houblon family 398 Sir John 399 first governor of the Bank
ibid. James, his epitaph 398
Houndsditch 244 Hudson's Bay house 422 Hungerford stairs 129
I. J.
James II. his fine statue by Gibbons 103 James's, St. Church 126 fine Font, by
Gibbon ibid. Palace 106 portraits in 109 Clerkenwell 193
Jermyn-house 125 Jerusalem Chamber, Henry IV. dies in it 79 Jewry, Old 384
India-house 394 Inns or Taverns, ancient 243, 300, 310 John, Priory of St. John
of Jerusalem 191 Sir William Weston last prior 192 St. Church, Westminster 59
Johnson, doctor Samuel 200
K.
King's Bench Prison 38 Kings and Queens, tombs of in Westminster Abbey 62 to 75
Knightrider-street 358
L.
Lambeth Palace 17 Library 20 Portraits 22 Church 24
Land archbishop, instance of his superstition 395 Lauderdale house 223
Leadenhall 392 Leathern Artillery 26 Lee, Sir Henry, the aged champion of queen
Elizabeth 96 Leicester-house 112 Lever, Sir Ashton, his matchless Museum 133
Limehouse 282 Linacre, institutes the College of Physicians 358 Lincoln's End
158 Fields 159
Lindesay-house 160 Look Hospital 56 Lollards Tower, at Lambeth 19 in St.
Paul's 330
Lombard Street 417 London 3 only a Praefecture 5 name whence derived 16
imports 5 when first mentioned 6 destroyed by the Britons 6, 7 enlarged by the
Romans ibid. long an open Town ibid. when walled 7 Antiquities 9, 10, 11 House
222 Bridge 240 Wall 239
Long Acre 161 Lords, house of 85 of Commons 88
Ludgate 214 Luke's, St. Hospital 236 Lumley-house 252
M.
Machabre, or dance of death 330 Magdalen Hospital 35 Magnus, St. church 300
Mansion House 388 Margaret's, Westminster, fine window in 81 Marlborough-house
111 Marriages in the Fleet 208 Marshalsea Prison 40 Martin, St. in the Fields
129 Le Grand, its peculiar privileges 362
Mary, St. Overies, Southwark 44 Rounceval 105 Le Strand 139 Spittle 240
Marybone Gardens 123 May Day, evil 396 May Fair 115 Mayor of London, the first
15 May Pole in the Strand 144 Mercers-hall 384 Merchant-Taylors-hall 399 Meuse,
the 106 Michael's, St. its fine Tower 391 Mill-bank 58 Milliner, the White 134
Minories 249 Mint, the 38 Mobs, barbarity of ancient English, and modern
French, paralleled 268 Montague-house 164 Montfichet, Castle of 211 Tower of 323
Monument, the 302 Moor-gate 234 Fields 233 Mortality, bills of 284 Museum,
British 164 Myddleton, Sir Hugh, his portrait 359 forms the New River 197

N.
Nag's-head, scandalous story of 368 Navy Office, old 253 Newcastle-house 160
another in Clerkenwell 196
Newgate 217 Street 218
New River head 197 Nobility, sprung from honest trade 364 Norman Conquest 13
Norris, lord, fine figure on his tomb 65 Northumberland-house 128 in Crutched
Friars 253 in Aldersgate Street 222

O.
Old Bailey 216 Old Jewry 384 Old Temple 166 Osborne, ancestor of the duke of
Leeds, his heroism 298
P.
Paget-house 147 Painter-stainers hall 316 Palace at Westminster 82 St. James's
106 Whitehall 9 Scotland-yard 104
Pall Mall 111 Pannier Alley 219 Papey, the 410 Paris Garden 40 Parish Clerks,
ancient actors 194 Paul's, St. Cathedral 328 burnt in 1086 329 again in the
great fire 351 Chapter House 330 Lollards Tower ibid. ancient Tombs and Shrines
334 singular offering 339 Bishop's Palace at 341 dimensions of St. Paul's and
St. Peter's at Rome 352 singular offering of a Do 339
Paul's cross, its various uses 342 to 350 Paul's walkers, what 353
Peccadilla-hall 114 Pennant, William, goldsmith 176 Pest-houses 114 Physicians,
College of 325 portraits in 326 once in Knightriders-street 358
Pindar, Sir Paul, his great wealth and misfortunes 414 Plague, when it ceased
in this kingdom 303 Pleureurs, what 64, 410 Pole, de la, an unfortunate race
420 Poplar Cut 283 Post Office, its periodical revenue 418 Poultney-Inn 305
Powis-house 165 Pretender, his birth 108 Printing House, the King's 214 Puddle
Dock 323
Q.
Queenhithe 315
R.
Radcliff 282 Highway 286
Rag-fair 286 Requests, Court of 86 Richard II. original portrait of 70 Ring,
the 120 River, New 197 Rolls, the 155 monuments in the Chapel 156
Rotherhithe 56 Rouncevaux, St. Mary 105 Royal Exchange 389 Society, its
institution 411
Russel lord, his execution 160
S.
Sacheverel, doctor, battle between him and Whiston 173 Saint Savior's Dock,
Southwark 55 Saint Stephen's chapel, beautiful remains of 89 Salisbury Court
200 Sanctuary in Westminster 80 Savoy Hospital, the 135 Scarborough, Sir
Charles, his portrait 230 Scotland, kings of, their pal^ce 104 Sepulchre's, St.
pious admonitions to condemned criminals in their way to death 220 St. Church
220
Sergeants Inn 155 Seymour, lord high admiral, his practices on the princess
Elizabeth 142 Seymour Place 132 Shadwell 282 Shaftsbury house 222
Sharrington-house 253 Shaw, doctor, preaches at Paul's cross 347 Shoreditch 242
duke of ibid.
Shore, Jane, her story 343 Ston Co^lege 231 Skating, ancient method of 133
Smithfield 173 Tournaments there 174
Society, Royal, its origin 411 Soho square, origin of the name 117
Somerset House 139 Soredich, Sir John de 242 Southampton-house 167 South Sea
house 405 Southwark 36 Specula, Roman 9 Speed, John, the historian 403
Spittle-fields 241 Spittle, St. Mary 240 Sp^eaders of rumors, unjust execution
of one 248 Stafford, lord, infamously condemned 122 Stationers' Hall 328
Steel-yard 307 Steel-yard, two remarkable paintings there by Holbein 307
Stephen's, St. Walbrooke 388 Stephen, Sir, a wretched fanatical priest 248, 396
Stepney 280 Stews 43 Stocks Market 388 Stone, artificial 30 Stow, John, h^
house 2^^ mon^n^t ^^^ Strand, its ancient state 126 Surgeons, Barber-surgeons
226 Surgeons Theater 216 Surgery, its state in the reign of Henry VIII. 229
Stuart, lady Arabella, her story 271 Surry, County 17 Sutton, Mr. his vast
charities 188
T.
Tabard, Chaucer's Inn 57 Tart Hall 122 Tailors of distinguished characters 402
Temple, the 146 Monuments in its round Church 150 Hall, great Christmas feasts
there 153 Gate, involuntary work of Sir Amius Powlet ibid. Garden, scene of the
white and red rose 154 Old 166
Temple Bar 146 Temple, Mr. son of Sir W. Temple, his suicide 300 Thames,
river, its course 423 its Fish 425
Thames Street 323 Thanet House 222 Thavies Inn 168 Thomas, St. Hospital 50
Threadneedle-street 397 Thynne, Mr. his murder 125 Tilt Yard 94 Tombs in
Westminster Abbey 62 in St. Paul's 334
Tons, ^ast 31 Torregiano Pietro, his work in England 73, 157 Tortoise at
Lambeth, its vast longevity 23 Tower, the 255 murders within 257 Chapel of,
persons buried in 262 lawless executions in 268 natural deaths in 269 the White
256 Lions 258
Tower Hill, persons beheaded on 260 Tower Royal 314 Town Ditch 210
Tradescants, their Tomb 28 Museum 27
Train-bands 238 Trinity House 289 Tudor, Owen, confined in Newgate 274 Tyburn
163
V.
Vauxhall 29 Vespers, fatal 213 Victualling Office 286 Viner, Sir Robert, his
house 419 his conviviality with Charles II. 420
Vintners Hall 311 Vintrie, the 310
W.
Walbrook 309 Walls, city, course of 209 Wapping 281 Waxchandlers, their frugal
feast 382 Welby, Henry, his singular life 232 Wells, river of 309 Welsh MSS.
destroyed in the 173 Tower 174 confined in the Tower, verses on 431
Westminster 58 Bridge 90 Palace 82 Hall ibid. Abbey 59 Lying-in Hospital 35
Westmoreland House 223 Whitechapel 248 Whitehall palace, and fine gates 92, 93
Whittington, Sir Richard, his good deeds 182, 313 story of his cat paralleled
313
Wimbleden House 138 Winchester House, Southwark 48 Broad-street 409
Wines, English, Messrs. Beaufoy's manufacture 30 Woolstaple at Westminster 90
Worcester Place, the house of John Tiptoft 315 House in the Strand 135
Wyat, Sir Thomas, where taken 215
Y.
York House 130 Stairs 131

FINIS.

