POEMS. BY ROBERT LLOYD, A.M.

POEMS. BY ROBERT LLOYD, A.M.

delere licebit
Quod non edideris, nescit vox missa reverti.
HOR. LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, By DRYDEN LEACH; And Sold by T. DAVIES,
in Russel Street, Covent Garden. MDCCLXII.

THIS VOLUME OF POEMS IS INSCRIBED TO WILLIAM FITZHERBERT, Esquire. As a Faithful
Testimony of The AUTHOR'S Gratitude and Esteem,

By his most Obedient, And Obliged Humble Servant, ROBERT LLOYD.

A.
Lord Abergavenny. Lady Abergavenny. Lord Aberdour. John Ambler, Esquire. Abraham
Ackworth, Esquire. John Aubrey, Esquire. Gent. Comm. of Christ Church, Oxon 2 Books.
Sir Edward Astley. Ambrose Awdry, Esquire. General Armiger. Mark Akenside, M. D.
Michael Adolphus, Esquire. Ralph Allen, Esquire. William Ashurst, Esquire. Thomas Anguish,
Esquire. Honorable John Archer, Esquire. John Ansell, Esquire. Fellow of Trinity Hall,
Cambridge. Francis Atterbury, Esquire. 10 Books. Rev. Mr. Atwood. Mr. Agar, Student
of Christ Church, Oxon. Rev. Mr. Alt. Rev. Mr. Arrow. Rev. Mr. Andrews. Mr.
Buckeridge Ball Ackworth. Charles Archdeacon, Esquire. Student of Christ Church,
Oxon. Mr. Rupert Atkinson. Mr. George Anderson. Rev. Mr. Abbs, Fellow of
Trinity Hall, Cambridge. Mr. Affleck, Fellow of Trinity Hall. Edward Andrews,
Esquire. Mr. James Arrow.
B.
Duke of Beaufort. Earl of Bath. 10 Books. Lord Blessington. Lord Beauchamp.
Lord Bolingbroke. Sir Walter Blacket. Honorable Aubrey Beauclerck, Esquire.
Honorable Smith Barry, Esquire. Honorable Arthur Barry, Esquire. Bishop of Bristol.
Lord Barrington. James Bland, Esquire. of Harworth, Durham. Robert Bernard, Esquire.
Gent. Comm. Christ Church, Oxon. Rev. Mr. Ballard, Prebendary of Westminster.
John Thomas Batt, Esquire. John Smith Budgen, Esquire. Gent. Comm. Trin. Coll. Oxon.
Henry Theodore Broadhead, Esquire. Gent. Comm. Trin. Coll. Oxon. Thomas Charles
Bigg, Esquire. Gent. Comm. Christ Church, Oxon. Honorable Mr. Brown. Lewis Bagot,
Esquire. Student of Christ Church, Oxon. Sir William Bunbury. Levett Blackburn,
Esquire. William Beckford, Esquire. Honorable Mr. Boil. Samuel Blackwell, Esquire.
Charles Boon, Esquire. Peter Burrell, Esquire. Nicholas Bonfoy, Esquire. -- Bowyer, Esquire.
General Brown. George Barnes, Esquire. Edward Bearcrost, Esquire. John Burland, Esquire.
Hugh Barker Bell, Esquire. Joshua Berkley, Esquire. John Burke, Esquire. Mr. Blake, Fellow
Comm. of Trin. Hall, Cambridge. Mr. Blake, Fellow Comm. of Trinity Coll.
Cambridge. Rev. Mr. Backhouse, A. M. Fellow of Christ College, Cambridge.
Lieutenant Robert Bensley. Lieutenant John Bensley. Lieutenant William Bensley.
Mr. Bensley. Mrs. Bensley. Mr. Beard. Captain John Brown. Mr. Burton. Rev. Mr.
Buckner of Chichester. Rev. Mr. Boot. George Blunt, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Buttler.
Rev. Mr. Bland. William Blanchard, M. D. Timothy Buck, M. D. William Bund, Esquire.
Mr. Bladen. Mr. Boydens. Rev. Mr. Bagot. Rev. Mr. Backhouse, Chancellor of
Bristol. Doctor Barry. Mr. Bunbury. Mr. Henry St. John Ball. Mr. George
Bernard. Rev. Mr. Beaver. Rev. Mr. Brougham. Mr. William Bingham, Student of
Christ Church, Oxon. Rev. Mr. Berners. Mr. Burgess, Apothecary. Mrs. Burgess.
Mr. Buller, Gent. Comm. Baliol Coll. Oxon. Rev. Mr. Sackville Spencer Bale.
Rev. Doctor Brown. Mr. Bedingfield. Charles Bertie, Esquire. Ralph Berringer, Esquire.
C.
Duke of Cleveland. Lord Frederick Cavendish. Lord George Cavendish. Lord John
Cavendish. Earl of Cork. Lord Clanbrasil. Lord Carysfort. Hon. Mrs.
Cholmondeley. Honorable Mrs. Chudleigh. Lady Mary Carr. Earl of Cholmondeley.
General Cholmondeley. Marquis of Carmarthen. Marquis of Carnarvon. General
Conway. Richard Owen Cambridge, Esquire. John Calcrost, Esquire. Richard Cox, Esquire.
Samuel Cox, Esquire. Charles Chester, Esquire. John Crewe, Esquire. Honorable Mr.
Chichester. William Chigwell, Esquire. Thomas Connoly, Esquire. Richard Cox, Esquire.
Student of Christ Church, Oxon. William Craven, Esquire. Thomas Cussans, Esquire. 20
Books. Mr. Thomas Churchill. Mr. Collins. Mr. Channing. Mr. Thomas Cumming. Mr.
Commyn. Mr. John Clever, Student of Christ Church, Oxon. Mr. William Courtenay,
Fellow of All Souls. Mr. Henry Courtenay, Student of Christ Church. Mr. William
Conybeare, Student of Christ Church. Mr. Richard Cade. Mr. Carver, Commoner of
Oriel. Rev. Mr. Clarke, High Wycombe. -- Clarke, Esquire. Gent. Com. of Exeter. Mr.
Crewe, of Muxon. John Crewe, Esquire. Gent. Com. of Christ Church, Oxon. Rev. Mr.
Cooper. Mr. Chelsum, Usher of Westminster School. William Codrington, Esquire.
James Clutterbuck, Esquire. Mrs. Clarke. John Conyers, Esquire. Thomas Cholmondeley,
Esquire. Thomas Cudden, Esquire. Thomas Carter, Esquire. Archibald Cochran, Esquire. Henry
Boult Clay, Esquire. William Cowper, Esquire. George Chad, Esquire. John Gilbert Cooper,
Esquire. jun. Honorable Mr. Craven. Rev. Dean Coote. Mr. Coote, Bookseller. Mr.
John Churchill, Apothecary. William Cane, Esquire. Fell. Com. Trin. Coll.
Cambridge. Rev. Mr. Cheer. Rev. Mr. Champness. George Colman, Esquire. Rev. Mr.
Churchill.
D.
Duke of Devonshire. Earl of Darlington. Earl of Delawar. Lord Delamer. Lady
Dowager Darlington. Sir Edward Dering. Sir Francis Blake Delaval. Sir John
Delaval. Sir John Dyke. Hon. and Rev. Mr. Digby. Edward Dering, Esquire. Nathan
Draper, Esquire. James Dupre, Esquire. Nehemiah Dowland, Esquire. Thomas Lee Dummer, Esquire.
Mr. Dalzell, Gent. Comm. of Christ Church, Oxon. Mr. Dade, St. John's College,
Cambridge. Mr. Dean, M. A. Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. Mr. De
Salis, Gent. Comm. Queen's College, Oxon. Mr. David, Trin. Coll. Cambridge.
Rev. Mr. Duval. Mr. Davies, Surgeon. Rev. Mr. Dyer. Thomas Davenport, Esquire.
Captain Dering. Rev. Dr. Douglas. Mr. Dalby. Mr. R. Dodsley. -- Dyer, Esquire.
Gent. Comm. St. Mary Hall, Oxon. Mr. Charles Vere Dashwood. Mr. William Dyer.
Charles Desborow, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Davis, M. A. of Seven Oaks, Kent. Ambrose
Dickens, Esquire. William Dickenson, Esquire. Marsh Dickinson, Esquire. Mr. William Dick.
Earl of Donnegal. Lord Dungarvan.
E.
Earl of Egremont. Earl of Essex. General Ellison. Sir Henry Evelyn. Henry
Ellison, Esquire. Sir Harry Echlin. Lady Echlin. James Eckerfall, Esquire. Mr. William
Ellis. Mr. Elliot. Miss Elliot. Rev. Mr. Eddores. Mrs. Eddores. John Edwards,
Esquire. Gent. Com. of Jesus, Oxon. Mr. Emmett, Gent. Comm. of Oriel. Thomas
Ellison, Esquire. Mr. Edward Emily, Trin Coll. Cambridge. Charles Emily, Esquire. Mr.
G. B. Edwards. Mr. William Ellis. Mr. Ellison, Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Mr.
Ekins, Eton.
F.
Henry Fox, Esquire. Charles Frederick, Esquire., Honorable and Reverend Mr.
Fitzpatrick. Rev. Mr. Fountain. Mr. Fountain, Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Mr.
Forest. Charles F. Palmer, Esquire. Mr. Charles Fuller, Trin. Coll. Cambridge.
Philip Fonnereau, Esquire. Trin. Hall. Rev. Mr. Fraigneau. Mrs. Forth. Mrs.
Fountain. Rev. Mr. Henry Foulkes. Mr. Frankland, Apothecary. Mr. Bernard Ford,
A. B. Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Paul Field, Esquire. -- Fitz-Thomas, Esquire. Rev. Mr.
Foley, Oriel College, Oxon. Robert Friend, Esquire. Student of Christ Church, Oxon.
Charles Frederick, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Fowler. Rev. Mr. Joseph Fox. Mr. John Feary.
John Fuller, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Fullerton. Mr. Foot. Captain Freemantle. --
Fitzpatrick, Esquire.
G.
Bishop of Gloucester. Earl of Guilford. Lord Gage. Lady Gage. David Garrick,
Esquire. George Garrick, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Gibbard. Mr. Gordon, Fellow Comm. Trin.
Coll. Cambridge. John Douce Garthwaite, Esquire. Fellow Comm. Trin. Coll.
Cambridge. Sam. Grant, Esquire. Gent. Comm. Trin. Coll. Oxon. Joseph Gape, Esquire. Mr.
Groves, Gent. Comm. Trin. Coll. Oxon. Mr. Goring, Gent. Comm. Magdalen College,
Oxon. Geo. Glynn, Esquire. Gent. Com. Oriel. Rev. Mr. Gwynn, M. A. Fellow of Brazen
Nose. Rev. Mr. Greet. Sam. Gumley, Esquire. Richard Gorges, Esquire. Honorable George
Grimston, Esquire. Mr. Grant, Leicester Fields. Mr. Gataker. Doctor Garnier. 10
Books. Doctor Gisborn. George Garnier, Esquire. Mr. Robert Graham. Charles Garth,
Esquire. Mr. Benj. Goodison. Mr. Griffiths, Bookseller.
H.
Earl of Hallifax. Earl of Hertford. Lady Hertford. Mrs. Herbert. 2 Books.
General Hodgson. Honorable Mr. Henley. William Hogarth, Esquire. Mr. Hudson. Mr.
Havard. John Hawkins, Esquire. Mr. Hannay. Mr. Hannam. Mr. Hodgkinson. Mr. Hardham.
6 Books. Philip Hubert, Esquire. Doctor Hay. Richard Hopkins, Esquire. Thomas Harrison,
Esquire. Rev. Mr. Hill. John Hall, Esquire. Joseph Hill, Esquire. Mr. Heacock. Mr.
Holbourn. Mr. Hardinge, Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Mr. Holgate, St. John's,
Cambridge. Mr. Heaton, A. B. Caius College, Cambridge. Mr. Leighton, Beaumont
Hall. Mr. Alexander Harpur. Mr. Hoare, jun. Mr. Hawkins, Apothecary. John
Hatsell, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Hallam, Eton. Mrs. Heart. Mr. Hitchcock. Mr. Humphreys,
Surgeon. Mr. Hodgkin. Rev. Mr. Hodgkin. Mr. Holland. Mr. Halifax. Rev. Mr.
Hume. Philip Hall, Esquire. Christopher Horton, Esquire. Nic. Heath, Esquire. Gent. Com.
University Coll. Oxon. Mr. Homes, Christ Church, Oxon. John Harris, M. D. Rev.
Mr. Hinchliffe. Mr. Henry Hawley. Eliab Harvey, Esquire.
I.
Mr. Samuel Johnson. Ralph Izard, Esquire. Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Mr. Ibbetson.
George Jackson, Esquire. Miss B. Jackson. Miss Jackson. Mr. Ironside, St. John's,
Cambridge. Rev. Mr. Jones, at Shipstown, Worcestershire. Mr. Justamond,
Apothecary. Charles Joye, Esquire. Peter Joye, Esquire. William Ing, Esquire.
Hertfordshire. Rev. Mr. Jones. Rev. Mr. Jones, Christ Church, Oxon. William
James, Esquire. Mr. Jelfe. Rev. Mr. Justamond. Elijah Impey, Esquire. -- Jackson, Esquire.;
Rev. Mr. Juson.
K.
Duke of Kingston. His Excellency Baron Kniphausen. Sir Wyndham Knatchbull.
Hon. and Rev. Mr. Keppel. Mr. Anthony Kemp. John Kenrick, Esquire. Mr. John Kent,
Durham. William Kempe, Esquire. William Kent, Esquire. Rev. Mr. King. Rev. Mr.
Kettleby, Fellow of St. John's, Oxon. Rev. Mr. Kyte, Usher of Westminster
School. Miss Elizabeth Keen. Mr. King. -- Kenrick, Esquire.
L.
Duke of Leeds. Duchess of Leeds. Lord Leigh. Lady Littleton. Lord Luxborough.
Rev. Mr. Lockman, Canon of Windfor. Francis Lascelles, Esquire. John Laws, Esquire. Mr.
Stephen Caesar Le Maitre. James Lacey, Esquire. Charles Lloyd, Esquire. Mrs. Laws.
Miss Miss Laws. Herbert Lloyd, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Lort, Greek Professor, Cambridge.
Sir James Lake. Mr. Richard Lyster. Ed. Tailor Ludford, Esquire. Gent. Com. Trin.
Coll. Mr. Lidderdale. Mr. Love, Apothecary. Robert Lawley, Esquire. Rev. Mr.
Larkham. Warren Lisle, Esquire. Henry Leheup, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Lewis. Rev. Mr. Lock,
Usher of Westminster School. Mr. Living. Francis Lawson, Esquire. John Leg, Esquire.
M.
Lord Viscount Middleton. Lady Mead. Lady Anne Monson. Mrs. Montague. Lord
Greville Montague. Ed. Wortley Montague. Sir Ralph Milbanke. Lady Milbanke.
Lord Masham. Countess of Middlesex. Sir George Metham. Sir Roger Mostyn. Lord
Malpas. Francis Maseres, Esquire. Frederick Mountain, Esquire. Charles Mills, Esquire.
Peter Matthew Mills, Esquire. Fell. Com. Christ Coll. Cambridge. Christopher
Maling, Esquire. Fell. Com. St. John's. Mr. Merril, Bookseller. Samuel Moody, Esquire.
Miss Frances Morgan. Rev. Mr. Morgan, Stud. of Christ Church, Oxon. James
Martyn, Esquire. Mr. Mosely, Fellow Comm. St. John's, Cambridge. Mr. Maurice,
Fellow Comm. Trin. College. John Maddocks, Esquire. Rev. M. Thomas Mostyn. John
Lawray Morrat, Esquire. Frederick Montague, Esquire. John Monk, Esquire. Mr. Metcalf.
William Mellish, Esquire. Robert Marsham, Esquire. John Musgrave, Esquire. Doctor Monsey.
Dr. Musgrave, Provost of Oriel. Honorable Mr. Mordaunt. Mr. Maskall. John
Mackensie, Esquire. Colonel De La Meloniere. Mr. Murphy. Sir James Macdonald, Bart.
of Christ Church, Oxon. Mr. Moysey, of Christ Church. Mr. Mostyn, of Christ
Church. Mr. Mytton. Rev. Mr. Marsden. Mr. Musgrave, of Oriel. John Mercot, Esquire.
Joseph Mawbey, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Morel. Francis Macklay, Esquire. Thomas Master, Esquire.
jun. Mr. Paul Henry Maty. Herbert Mackworth, Esquire. Mr. Mechel. Mr. James
Macpherson.
N.
Duke of Newcastle. Lord Newnham. Lord Newbottle. Mr. Nassau. James Nelthrop,
Esquire. Mr. Henry Newcombe. Robert Neale, Esquire. Hon. Mr. Brownlow North, Gent.
Comm. Trin. Coll. Mr. Norris, Christ Church, Oxon. Mrs. Noel. Mr. John Nelson.
Reverend Mr. Nelson, George Newnham, Esquire. George Nares, Esquire. King's Sergeant.
Mr. Newberry, Bookseller. Mr. Nugent.
O.
Earl of Oxford. Earl of of Upper Ossory. Mrs. Onslow. Lord Francis Osborn.
Capt. OHara. George Onslow, Esquire. William Oliver, Esquire. John Ord, Esquire. Francis
Otway, Esquire. Francis Otway, Esquire. jun. Mr. Oats, Apothecary. John Owen, Esquire. of
Oriel. William Okeden, Esquire. A. M. Trin. College. Mr. Obrien.
P.
Duke of Portland. Earl of Pomfret. Lord Viscount Palmerston. Lord Plymouth.
Miss Pulteney. General Pulteney. Thomas Penn, Esquire. Richard Penn, Esquire. Mr.
Pawlet. Rev. Mr. Penneck. Mr. Pinckstone, Surgeon. Rev. Mr. Pugh, of Aylesbury.
John Lewis Petit, Esquire. Francis Pigot, Esquire. Mr. Pearce. Mr. Pinnock, Trin. Hall,
Cambridge. Rev. Mr. Porter. Mr. Pujolas. Mr. Powell. Rev. Mr. Powell, Fell.
Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Joseph Pratt, Esquire. Mr. Dominick Pile, Surgeon. Mr.
Perry, Student of Christ Church, Oxon. Mr. Edward Popham, A. B. Fell. of Oriel.
Mr. George Philipps. Rev. Gilbert Parker, D. D. Fell, of Trin. Coll. Oxon. Mr.
Pamy, of Christ Church, Oxon, Student. Rev. Mr. Parsons, Student of Christ
Church. Mr. Pearson, Student of Christ Church. Mr. Partridge, Apothecary. Mr.
John Carteret Pilkington. Mr. Poole, of Oriel. Sir Mark Parsons, Bart. Rev. Mr.
Price. Henry Poole, Esquire. George Pit, Esquire. Mrs. Pit. James Plunket, Esquire. John
Paterson, Esquire. Robert Prat, Esquire. Richard Perryn, Esquire. Granado Pagot, Esquire.
Chist. F. Palmer, Esquire. Chase Price, Esquire. 2 Books.
Q.
Robert Quarme, Esquire. George Quarme, Esquire.
R.
Duke of Richmond. Lord Rochford. Lady Rochford. Lord Royston. Colonel
Robinson. Sir John Russel. Mr. Rickets. Mr. Ravand. Miss Rolt. Miss Rawlins.
Mr. Reynolds, Painter. Rev. Mr. Rogers. Rev. Mr. Robinson. John Ranby, Esquire.
John Ranby, Esquire. jun. John Roberts. Mr. Roubilliac, Statuary. Thomas Ryder,
Esquire. Clotworthy Rowley, Esquire. Richard Ripley, Esquire. Thomas Ripley, Esquire. William
Reeve, A. M. Mr. Ruther, Fellow Comm. Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Mr. Robinson,
Queen's Coll. Mr. Robinson, A. M. Fell. of Trin. College. Mr. Richmond, Trin.
Coll. Rev. Mr. Roberts. Doctor Reeves. David Ross, Esquire.
S.
Lord Strafford. Lord Robert Sutton. John Skinner, Esquire. Sir Charles Sheffield.
Honorable John Shelly, Esquire. H. Shelly, Esquire. Mrs. Speed. Thomas Stanton, Esquire.
George Stephens, Esquire. Mr. John Stephens, Doctors Commons. Rev. Mr. Sawbridge.
Mr. Sheridan. Mr. Shruder. John Stanison, Esquire. Thomas Spring, Esquire. Robert
Shafto, Esquire. Matthew Skinner, Esquire. Rev. Mr. Smallridge. 2 Books. Harding
Strachey, Esquire. Richard Sutton, Esquire. William Selwyn, Esquire. Hans Stanley, Esquire.
Rev. Mr. Lawrence Stern. John Hall Stephenson, Esquire. William Sharp, Esquire. Mr.
Shackleton, Painter. Doctor Schomberg. Doctor Smallbroke. Miss Skinner. J. C.
Sole, Esquire. of Bobbing, Kent. Rev. Mr. Strachey, Usher of Westminster School.
Richard Sympson, Esquire. Lincoln's End. Mr. Southwell. Rev. Mr. Sellon. Thomas
Salter, Esquire. Mr. Salter, Gray's-Inn. Mr. John Scawen. Rev. Mr. Skinner, Student
of Christ Church, Oxon. Rev. Mr. Smallwell, Student of Christ Church, Oxon. Sir
John Russel. Rev. Mr. Smith, Fell, of Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Sampson Stawell,
Esquire. Rev. Mr. Slade. Thomas Salter, Esquire. L. Sparrowhawke, Esquire. John Scott, Esquire.
Rev. Mr. Skinner, Public Orator of the University of Cambridge.
T.
Earl of Tilney. Hon. George Townshend, Vice Admiral. Honorable Horatio
Townshend, Esquire. Charles Townshend, Esquire. General Townshend. Honorable Thomas
Townshend, Esquire. Thomas Townshend, Esquire. jun. Noah Thomas, M. D. Henry Tuckfield,
Esquire. Henry Thompkins, Esquire. Aylesbury. Robert Cotton Tresusis, Esquire. Dr. Tailor.
4 Books. Sir H. Twisdale. Leonard Thompson, Esquire. 2 Books. Dr. Tailor,
Prebendary of Westminster. Mr. George Towers. Rev. Mr. Trebeck. Rev. Mr. Tapps,
Norwich. Rev. Mr. Tillard. Samuel Thompson, Esquire. Student of Christ Church,
Oxon. Edmond Thomas, Esquire. Gent. Com. Queen's. Col. George Tash. Capt. Thornton.
Edward Thurlow, Esquire. King's Council. Rev. Mr. Townly, Master of Merchant
Taylor's School. Mr. Tombs, L. L. B. Trinity College, Cambridge. Mr. Twisden,
Trinity College. Mr. Tempest, Fell. Com. Emanuel. Mr. Tighe, jun. Bonnell
Thornton, Esquire.
V.
Hon. Mrs. Vane. Francis Venables Vernon, Esquire. Robert Vansittart, Esquire. --
Vernon, jun. Esquire. Benjamin Victor, Esquire. Thomas Vaughan, Esquire. Dr. Verdon. George
Vernon, Esquire. Mr. Avery Vokins. Mr. Ed. Vardy. -- Upton, Esquire.
W.
Lord Wenman. Lady Viscountess Wenman, 6 Books. Miss Wenman. Honorable T. F.
Wenman. Rev. Mr. Joseph Warton, second Master of Winchester School. Rev. Mr.
Thomas Warton, Poetry Professor of Oxford. Lord George West. William Wall, D.
C. L. Student of Christ Church, Oxford. William Withers, Esquire. Mrs. Withers.
Richard Wood, Esquire. Mr. Williams Win. Mr. Philip Wodehouse. Mr. Thomas
Wodehouse. Michael Wodhull, Esquire.; Mr. Wilbraham. Mr. James Wickliffe, Petworth,
Suffex. George Wogan, D.D. Mrs. Williams. Honorable George Warren. John
Richmond Webb, Esquire. Honorable Robert Walpole. Thomas Whately, Esquire. --
Williamson, Esquire. Sir Edward Walpole. Colonel Wyndham. Colonel George Wade. Col.
Wynyard. John Wilkes, Esquire. Mr. Wilson, Painter. Mr. Wegg. Alexander Wedderburn,
Esquire. Stephen Wright, Esquire. Mr. Witchal. Daniel Wrey, Esquire. Miss Ward. William
Whitehead, Esquire.; Poet Laureat. Ed. Win, Esquire. Elbro. Woodcock, Esquire. Rev. Mr.
Wroughton. Paul Whitehead, Esquire.
Y.
Archbishop of York. Mr. Young. Honorable Mr. York. Mr. Yates. Dr. Yarborough,
Principal of Brazen Nose College, Oxford.
POEMS.
THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY.
MY works are advertised for sale,
And censures fly as thick as hail;
While my poor scheme of publication
Supplies the dearth of conversation.
What will the World say? -- That Is your cry.
Who is this World? and what am I?
Once, but thank heaven, those days are over,
And persecution reigns no more,
One man, one hardy man alone,
Usurped the critic's vacant throne,
And thence with neither taste or wit,
By powerful catcall from the pit,
Knocked sarce, and play, and actor down.
Who passed the sentence then? -- the Town.
So now each upstart puny elf
Talks of the world, and means himself.
Yet in the circle there are those
Who hurt even more than open foes:
Whose friendship serves the talking turn,
Just simmers to a kind concern,
And with a wondrous soft expression
Expatiates upon indiscretion;
Flies from the Poems to the Man,
And gratifies the favorite plan
To pull down other's reputation,
And build their own on that foundation.
The Scholar grave, of taste discerning,
Who lives on credit for his learning,
And has no better claim to wit
Than carping at what others writ,
With pitying kindness, friendly fear,
Whispers conjectures in your ear.
"I Am sorry -- and he is much to blame --
"He might have published -- but his name!
"The thing might please a few, no doubt,
"As handed privately about --
"It might amuse a friend or two,
"Some partial friend, like me or you;
"But when it comes to press and print
"You Will find, I fear, but little in it.
"He stands upon a dangerous brink
"Who totters over the sea of ink,
"Where reputation runs aground,
"The author cast away, and drowned,
"And then -- 'twas wilful and absurd,
"(So well approved, so well preferred,)
"Abruptly thus a place to quit,
"A place which most his genius hit,
"The theater for Latin wit!
"With critics round him chaste and terse,
"To give a plaudit to his verse!"
Latin, I grant, shows college breeding,
And some school-common-place of reading.
But has in Moderns small pretension
To real wit or strong invention.
The excellence you critics praise
Hangs on a curious choice of phrase;
Which picked and chosen here and there,
From prose or verse, no matter where,
Jumbled together in a dish,
Like Spanish olio, fowl, flesh, fish,
You set the classic hodge-podge on
For pedant wits to feed upon.
Your wou'd-be Genii vainly seek
Fame from their Latin verse, or Greek;
Who would for that be most admired
Which blockheads may, and have acquired.
A mere mechanical connection
Of favorite words, -- a bare collection
Of phrases, -- where the labored cento
Presents you with a dull memento,
How Virgil, Horace, Ovid join,
And club together half a line.
These only strain their motley wits
In gathering patches, shreds, and bits,
To wrap their barren fancies in,
And make a classic Harlequin.
-- Were I at once empowered to show
My utmost vengeance on my foe,
To punish with extremest rigor,
I could inflict no penance bigger
Than using him as learning's tool,
To make him Usher of a school.
For, not to dwell upon the toil
Of working on a barren soil,
And laboring with incessant pains
To cultivate a blockhead's brains,
The duties there but ill befit
The love of letters, arts, or wit.
For whosoe'er, though slightly, sips
Their grateful flavor with his lips,
Will find it leave a smatch behind,
Shall sink so deeply in the mind,
It never thence can be eras'd --
But, rising up, you call it Taste.
'Twere foolish for a drudge to choose
A gusto, which he cannot use.
Better discard the idle whim,
What Is He to Taste? or Taste to Him?
For me, it hurts me to the soul
To brook confinement or control;
Still to be pinioned down to teach
The syntax, and the parts of speech;
Or, what perhaps is drudging worse,
The links, and joints, and rules of verse;
To deal out authors by retail,
Like penny pots of Oxford ale;
-- Oh! it is a service irksome more
Than tugging at the slavish oar.
Yet such his task, a dismal truth,
Who watches over the bent of youth;
And while, a paltry stipend earning,
He sows the richest seeds of learning,
And tills their minds with proper care,
And sees them their due produce bear,
No joys, alas! his toil beguile,
His own lies fallow all the while.
"Yet still he is in the road, you say,
"Of learning." -- Why, perhaps, he may.
But turns like horses in a mill,
Nor getting on, nor standing still:
For little way his learning reaches,
Who reads no more than what he teaches.
"Yet you can send adventurous youth,
"In search of letters, taste, and truth,
"Who ride the highway road to knowledge
"Through the plain turnpikes of a college."
True. -- Like way-posts, we serve to show
The road which travelers should go;
Who jog along in easy pace,
Secure of coming to the place,
Yet find, return whenever they will,
The Post, and its direction still:
Which stands an useful unthank'd guide,
To many a passenger beside.
It Is hard to carve for others meat,
And not have time one's self to eat.
Though, be it always understood,
Our appetites are full as good.
"But there have been, and proofs appear,
"Who bore this load from year to year;
"Whose claim to letters, parts, and wit,
"The world has never disputed yet.
"Whether the flowing mirth prevail
"In Wesley's song or humorous tale;
"Or happier Bourne's expression please
"With graceful turns of classic ease;
"Or Oxford's well-read poet sings
"Pathetic to the ear of kings:
"These have indulged the muse's flight,
"Nor lost their time or credit by it;
"Nor suffered fancy's dreams to prey
"On the due business of the day.
"Verse was to them a recreation
"Used but by way of relaxation."
Your instances are fair and true,
And genius I respect with you.
I envy none their honest praise;
I seek to blast no scholar's bays:
Still let the graceful foliage spread
Its greenest honors round their head,
Blessed, if the Muses' hand entwine
A sprig at least to circle mine!
Come, -- I admit, you tax me right.
Prudence, it is true, was out of sight,
And you may whisper all you meet,
The man was vague and indiscreet.
Yet tell me, while you censure me,
Are you from error found and free?
Say, does your breast no bias hide,
Whose influence draws the mind aside?
All have their hobbyhorse, you see,
From Tristram down to you and me.
Ambition, splendor, may be thine;
Ease, indolence, perhaps, are mine.
Though prudence, and our nature's pride
May wish our weaknesses to hide,
And set their hedges up before 'em,
Some sprouts will branch, and straggle over 'em.
Strive, fight against her how you will,
Nature will be the mistress still,
And though you curb with double rein,
She Will run away with us again.
But let a man of parts be wrong,
It Is triumph to the leaden throng.
The fools shall cackle out reproof,
The very ass shall raise his hoof;
And he who holds in his possession,
The single virtue of discretion,
Who knows no overflow of spirit,
Whose want of passions is his merit,
Whom wit and taste and judgment flies,
Shall shake his noddle, and seem wise.
PART OF HOMER'S HYMN TO APOLLO. Translated from the Greek.
GOD of the Bow! Apollo, thee I sing;
Thee, as thou draw'st amain the sounding string,
The immortal powers revere with homage low,
And every godhead trembles at thy bow.
All but Latona: She with mighty Jove
Eyes thee with all a tender parent's love;
Closes thy quiver, thy tough bow unbends,
And high amid the ethereal dome suspends,
Then smiling leads thee, her all-glorious son,
To share the mighty Thunderer's awful throne.
Goblets of nectar thy glad fire prepares,
And thee, his fairest, noblest son declares;
While every god sits rapt, Latona's breast
Beats with superior joy, and hails her son confessed.
Thrice blessed Latona! from thee, Goddess, sprung
Diana chaste, and Phoebus ever-young:
Delos and ortygia are mentioned as different Islands in the original.
Her in Ortygia's isle, and Him you bore
At Cynthius' hill on Delos' sea-girt shore,
Where the tall palm uprears its lovely head,
And clear Inopus laves the slow'ry mead.
O Phoebus, where shall I begin thy praise?
Well can thou rule the poet's artless lays.
Often on the craggy rock, or mountain hoar,
By riverside, or on the sea's hoarse shore,
Wandering well-pleased, with music's magic sound,
And airs divine, thou charm'st the region round.
Say, shall I sing how first on Delos' shore
Thee, glorious progeny, Latona bore Here several verses, containing nothing
but a mere list of the names of Islands, are omitted.
?
How first, from other isles, beset with grief,
In vain thy tortured mother sought relief.
Each to her outcast woe denied abode,
Nor durst one isle receive the future god.
At length to Delos came the laboring fair,
And suppliant thus besought her needful care.
Delos! receive Apollo, and O! raise
A glorious temple to record his praise!
Then shall He govern thee with gentle sway,
And only Phoebus shall thine isle obey.
What though no flocks, nor herds, nor juicy vine,
Nor plants of thousand natures shall be thine,
Swift to the temple of the Bowyer-king Bowyer-king and Bowyer-god are
expressions frequently used by Dryden, in his version of the first Iliad, to
signify Apollo.
,
Oblations rich shall every nation bring;
For ever from thy altars shall arise
The fragrant incense of burnt-sacrifice.
No longer then regret thy barren soil,
Receive the God, and live by other's toil!
She spoke: with inward rapture Delos smiled,
And soothed the suppliant power with answer mild.
Latona! mighty Caeus' daughter fair,
Full willingly would Delos ease thy care,
Full willingly behold her barren earth
Witness the glories of Apollo's birth:
The mighty God would raise my lowly name,
And consecrate his native isle to fame.
One fear alone distracts my beating heart;
That fear, O Goddess, list while I impart.
Second to none amid the ethereal skies,
Apollo soon all terrible shall rise:
All nations shall adore the mighty God,
And kings and kingdoms tremble at his nod.
Happily (for ah! dire fears my soul infest,
And fill with horror my tumultuous breast)
Soon as the glorious Godhead shall be born,
My desert region will he view with scorn,
Indignant spurn me, curse my barren soil,
And plunge into the waves my hated isle.
Triumphant then to happier climes remove,
There fix his shrine, plant there his sacred grove.
Whelmed in the briny main shall Delos lay,
To all the finny brood a wretched prey.
But, O Latona! if, to quell my fear,
You Will deign a solemn sacred oath to swear,
That here the God his glorious seat shall hold,
And here his sapient oracles unfold,
Your sacred burden here, Latona, lay,
Here view the Godhead bursting into day.
Thus Delos prayed, nor was her prayer denied,
But soon with solemn vows thus ratified:
Witness O heaven and earth! O Stygian lake!
Dire adjuration, that no God may break!
In Delos shall Apollo's shrine be reared,
Delos, his best beloved, most honored, most revered.
Thus vowed Latona: Delos hailed her earth
Blessed in the glories of Apollo's birth.
Nine hapless days and nights, with writhing throes,
And all the anguish of a mother's woes,
Latona tortured lay; in sorrowing mood,
Around her many a sister-goddess stood,
Alost in heaven imperial Juno sat,
And viewed relentless her unhappy fate.
Lucina too; the kind assuaging power
That tends the laboring mother's childbed hour,
And mitigates her woes, in golden clouds
High on Olympus' top the Goddess shrouds.
Her large full eyes with indignation roll,
And livid envy seized her haughty soul,
That from Latona's loins was doomed to spring
So great a son, the mighty Bowyer-king.
The milder powers, that near the laboring fair
Viewed all her pangs with unavailing care,
Fair Iris sent, the many colored maid,
To gain with goodly gifts Lucina's aid.
But charged her heed, lest Juno should prevent
With prohibition dire their kind intent.
Fleet as the winged winds, the flying fair
With nimble pinion cut the liquid air.
Olympus gained, apart she called the maid,
Then sought with many a prayer her needful aid,
And moved her soul: when soon with dove-like pace
Swiftly they measured back the viewless airy space.
Soon as to Delos' isle Lucina came
The pangs of travail seized Latona's frame.
Her twining arms she threw the palm around,
And pressed with deep-indented knee the ground:
Then into day sprung forth the jolly boy,
Earth smiled beneath, and heaven rang with joy.
The Sister Powers that round Latona stood
With chaste ablutions cleans'd the infant-god.
His lovely limbs in mantle white they bound,
And gently drew a golden swathe around.
He hung not helpless at his mother's breast,
But Themis fed him with an heavenly feast.
Pleased while Latona views the heavenly boy,
And fondly glows with all a mother's joy,
The lusty babe, strong with ambrosial food,
In vain their bonds or golden swathes withstood,
Bonds, swathes, and ligaments with ease he broke,
And thus the wondering Deities bespoke;
"The lyre, and sounding bow, and to declare
"The Thund'rer's counsels, be Apollo's care!"
He spoke; and onwards all majestic strode;
The Queens of Heaven awe-struck viewed the God.
Delos beheld him with a tender smile,
And hailed, enriched with gold, her happy isle;
Her happy isle, Apollo's native seat,
His sacred haunt, his best-belov'd retreat.
Graced with Apollo, Delos glorious shines,
As the tall mountain crowned with stately pines.
Now stony Cynthus would the God ascend,
And now his course to various islands bend.
Full many a fane, and rock, and shady grove,
River, and mountain, did Apollo love;
But chiefly Delos: The Ionians there,
With their chaste wives and prattling babes, repair.
There gladly celebrate Apollo's name
With many a solemn rite and sacred game;
The jolly dance, and holy hymn prepare,
And with the Caestus urge the manly war.
If, when their sacred feast the Ionians hold,
Their gallant sports a stranger should behold,
View the strong nerves the brawny chiefs that brace,
Or eye the softer charms of female grace,
Then mark their riches of a thousand kinds,
And their tall ships born swift before the winds,
So goodly to the sight would all appear,
The fair assembly Gods he would declare.
There too the Delian Virgins, beauteous choir,
Apollo's handmaids, wake the living lyre;
To Phoebus first they consecrate the lays,
Latona then and chaste Diana praise,
Then heroes old, and matrons chaste rehearse,
And sooth the raptured heart with sacred verse.
Each voice, the Delian maids, each human sound
With aptest imitation sweet resound:
Their tongues so justly tune with accents new,
That none the false distinguish from the true.
Latona! Phoebus! Dian, lovely fair!
Blessed Delian nymphs, Apollo's chiefest care,
All hail! and O with praise your poet crown,
Nor all his labors in oblivion drown!
If happily some poor pilgrim shall enquire,
"O, virgins, who most skilful smites the lyre?
"Whose lofty verse in sweetest descant rolls,
"And charms to ecstasy the hearers souls?
O answer, a blind bard in Chios dwells,
In all the arts of verse who far excells.
Then over the earth shall spread my glorious fame,
And distant Nations shall record my name.
But Phoebus never will I cease to sing,
Latona's noble son, the mighty Bowyer-king.
Thee Lycia and Maeonia, thee, great Power,
The blessed Miletus' habitants adore;
But thy loved haunt is sea-girt Delos' shore.
Now Pytho's stony soil Apollo treads,
And all around ambrosial fragrance sheds,
Then strikes with matchless art the golden strings,
And every hill with heavenly music rings.
Olympus now and the divine abodes
Glorious he seeks, and mixes with the Gods.
Each heavenly bosom pants with fond desire
To hear the lofty verse and golden lyre.
Drawn by the magic sound, the Virgin-Nine
With warblings sweet the sacred minstrel join:
Now with glad heart, loud voice, and jocund lays
Full sweetly carol bounteous heaven's praise;
And now in dirges sad, and numbers slow
Relate the piteous tale of human woe;
Woe, by the Gods on wretched mortals cast,
Who vainly shun affliction's wintry blast,
And all in vain attempt with fond delay
Death's certain shaft to ward, or chase old age away.
The Graces there, and smiling Hours are seen,
And Cytherea, laughter-loving queen,
And Harmony, and Hebe, lovely band,
To sprightliest measures dancing hand in hand.
There, of no common port or vulgar mien,
With heavenly radiance, shines the Huntress-Queen,
Warbles responsive to the golden lyre,
Tunes her glad notes, and joins the virgin choir.
There Mars and Mercury with awkward play,
And uncouth gambols, waste the live-long day.
There as Apollo moves with graceful pace
A thousand glories play around his face;
In splendour dressed he joins the festive band,
And sweeps the golden lyre with magic hand.
Mean while, Latona and imperial Jove
Eye the bright Godhead with parental love;
And, as the Deities around him play,
Well pleased his goodly mien and awful port survey The translator, when he
begun this piece, had some thoughts of giving a complete English version of all
Homer's Hymns, being the only parts of his works never yet translated; but (to
say nothing of his opinion of this specimen of his translation) fearing that
this species of poetry, though it has its beauties, and does not want admirers
among the learned, would appear far less agreeable to the mere English reader,
he desisted. They, who would form the justest idea of this sort of composition
among the ancients, may be better informed, by perusing Dr. Akenside's most
classical Hymn to the Naiads, than from any translation of Homer or Callimachus.
.
TO * * * * About to publish a volume of Miscellanies. Written in the year 1755.
SINCE now, all scruples cast away,
Your works are rising into day,
Forgive, though I presume to send
This honest counsel of a friend.
Let not your verse, as verse now goes,
Be a strange kind of measured prose;
Nor let your prose, which sure is worse,
Want naught but measure to be verse.
Write from your own imagination,
Nor curb your Muse by Imitation:
For copies show, however expressed,
A barren genius at the best.
-- But Imitation's all the mode --
Yet where one hits, ten miss the road.
The mimic bard with pleasure sees
Mat. Prior's unaffected ease:
Assumes his style, affects a story,
Sets every circumstance before ye,
The day, the hour, the name, the dwelling,
And mars a curious tale in telling:
Observes how easy Prior flows,
Then runs his numbers down to prose.
Others have sought the filthy stews
To find a dirty slip-shod Muse.
Their groping genius, while it rakes
The bogs, the common-few'rs, and jakes,
Ordure and filth in rhyme exposes,
Disgustful to our eyes and noses;
With many a dash -- that must offend us,
And much* * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * Hiatus non deflendus.
O Swift! how would thou blush to see,
Such are the bards who copy Thee?
This Milton for his plan will choose:
Wherein resembling Milton's Muse?
Milton, like thunder, rolls along
In all the majesty of song;
While his low mimics meanly creep,
Not quite awake, nor quite asleep:
Or, if their thunder chance to roll,
It Is thunder of the mustard bowl.
The stiff expression, phrases strange,
The epithet's preposterous change,
Forced numbers, rough and unpolite,
Such as the judging ear affright,
Stop in mid verse. Ye mimics vile!
Is It thus ye copy Milton's style?
His faults religiously you trace,
But borrow not a single grace.
How few, (say, whence can it proceed?)
Who copy Milton, ever succeed!
But all their labors are in vain:
And wherefore so? -- The reason's plain.
Take it for granted, it is by those
Milton's the model mostly chose,
Who cannot write verse, and will not write prose.
Others, who aim at fancy, choose
To woo the gentle Spenser's Muse.
This poet fixes for his theme
An allegory, or a dream;
Fiction and truth together joins
Through a long waste of flimsy lines;
Fondly believes his fancy glows,
And image upon image grows;
Thinks his strong Muse takes wondrous flights,
Whenever she sings of peerless wights,
Of dens, of palfreys, spells and knights:
'Till allegory, Spenser's veil
TO instruct and please in moral tale,
With him's no veil the truth to shroud,
But one impenetrable cloud.
Others, more daring, fix their hope
On rivaling the fame of Pope.
Satyr's the word, against the times --
These catch the cadence of his rhymes,
And borne from earth by Pope's strong wings,
Their Muse aspires, and boldly flings
Her dirt up in the face of kings.
In these the spleen of Pope we find;
But where the greatness of his mind?
His numbers are their whole pretense,
Mere strangers to his manly sense.
Some few, the sav'rites of the Muse,
Whom with her kindest eye she views;
Round whom Apollo's brightest rays
Shine forth with undiminish'd blaze;
Some few, my friend, have sweetly trod
In Imitation's dangerous road.
Long as Tobacco's mild perfume
Shall scent each happy curate's room,
Often as in elbow-chair he smokes,
And quaffs his ale, and cracks his jokes,
So long, O Isaac Hawkins Brown, Esquire. author of a piece called the Pipe of
Tobacco, a most excellent imitation of six different authors.
Brown, shall last thy praise,
Crowned with Tobacco-leaf for bays;
And whosoe'er thy verse shall see,
Shall fill another Pipe to thee.
EPISTLE to J. B. Esquire. 1757.
AGAIN I urge my old objection,
That modern rules obstruct perfection,
And the severity of Taste
Has laid the walk of genius waste.
Fancy's a flight we deal no more in,
Our authors creep instead of soaring,
And all the brave imagination
Is dwindled into declamation.
But still you cry in sober sadness,
"There is discretion even in madness."
A pithy sentence, which wants credit!
Because I find a poet said it:
Their verdict makes but small impression,
Who are known liars by profession.
Rise what exalted flights it will,
True genius will be genius still;
And say, that horse would you prefer,
Which wants a bridle or a spur?
The mettled steed may lose his tricks;
The jade grows callous to your kicks.
Had Shakespeare crept by modern rules,
We'd lost his Witches, Fairies, Fools:
Instead of all that wild creation,
He Would formed a regular plantation,
A garden trim, and all enclosed,
In nicest symmetry disposed,
The hedges cut in proper order,
Nor even a branch beyond the border:
Now like a forest he appears,
The growth of twice three hundred years,
Where many a tree aspiring shrouds
Its airy summit in the clouds,
While round its root still love to twine
The ivy or wild eglantine.
But Shakespeare's all-creative fancy
"Made others love extravagancy,
"While cloud-capt nonsense was their aim,
"Like Hurlothrumbo's mad lord Flame."
True -- who can stop dull imitators?
Those younger brothers of translators,
Those insects, which from genius rise,
And buzz about, in swarms, like flies?
Fashion, that sets the modes of dress,
Sheds too her influence over the press:
As formerly the sons of rhyme
Sought Shakespeare's fancy and sublime,
By cool correctness now they hope
To emulate the praise of Pope.
But Pope and Shakespeare both disclaim
These low retainers to their fame.
What task can dullness ever affect
So easy, as to write correct?
Poets, it is said, are sure to split
By too much or too little wit;
So, to avoid the extremes of either,
They miss their mark and follow neither;
They so exactly poise the scale
That neither measure will prevail,
And mediocrity the Muse
Did never in her sons excuse.
It Is true, their tawdry works are graced
With all the charms of modern taste,
And every senseless line is dressed
In quaint expression's tinsel vest.
Say did you never chance to meet
A monsieur-barber in the street,
Whose ruffle, as it lank depends,
And dangles over his fingers' ends,
His olive-tan'd complexion graces
With little dabs of Dresden laces,
While for the body Monsieur Puff,
Would think even dowlas fine enough?
So fares it with our men of rhymes,
Sweet tinklers of poetic chimes.
For lace, and fringe, and tawdry clothes,
Sure never yet were greater beaux;
But fairly strip them to the shirt,
They Are all made up of rags and dirt.
And shall these wretches bards commence
Without or spirit, taste, or sense?
And when they bring no other treasure,
Shall I admire them for their measure?
Or do I scorn the critic's rules
Because I will not learn of fools?
Although Longinus' full-mouthed prose
With all the force of genius glows;
Though Dionysius' learned taste
Is ever manly, just, and chaste,
Who, like a skilful wise physician,
Diffects each part of composition,
And shows how beauty strikes the soul
From a just compact of the whole;
Though judgment, in Quintilian's page,
Holds forth her lamp for every age;
Yet Hypercritics I disdain,
A race of blockheads dull and vain,
And laugh at all those empty fools,
Who cramp a genius with dull rules,
And what their narrow science mocks
Damn with the name of Het'rodox.
These butchers of a poet's fame
While they usurp the critic's name,
Cry -- "This is taste -- that is my opinion."
And poets dread their mock dominion.
So have you seen with dire affright,
The petty monarch of the night,
Seated aloft in elbow chair,
Command the prisoners to appear,
Harangue an hour on watchmen's praise,
And on the dire effect of frays;
Then cry, "You Will suffer for your daring,
"And d -- n you, you shall pay for swearing."
Then turning tell the astonished ring,
I sit to represent the KING.
The HARE and TORTOISE, 1757. A FABLE.
GENIUS, blessed term, of meaning wide,
For sure no term so misapplied,
How many bear thy sacred name,
That never felt a real flame!
Proud of the specious appellation,
Thus fools have christened inclination.
But yet suppose a genius true,
Exempli gratia, me or you:
Whatever he tries with due attention,
Rarely escapes his apprehension;
Surmounting every opposition,
You Would swear he learnt by intuition.
Should he rely alone on parts,
And study therefore but by starts?
Sure of success whenever he tries,
Should he forego the means to rise?
Suppose your watch a Graham make,
Gold, if you will, for value sake;
Its springs within in order due,
No watch, when going, goes so true;
If never wound up with proper care,
What service is it in the wear?
Some genial spark of Phoebus' rays,
Perhaps within your bosom plays:
O how the purer rays aspire,
If Application fans the fire!
Without it Genius vainly tries,
However sometimes it seems to rise:
Nay Application will prevail,
When braggart parts and Genius fail:
And now to lay my proof before ye,
I here present you with a story.
In days of yore, when time was young,
When birds conversed as well as sung,
When use of speech was not confined,
Merely to brutes of human kind,
A forward Hare, of swiftness vain,
The Genius of the neighboring plain,
Would often deride the drudging crowd:
For Geniuses are ever proud.
He Would boast, his flight 'twere vain to follow,
For dog and horse he would beat them hollow,
Nay, if he put forth all his strength,
Outstrip his brethren half a length.
A Tortoise heard his vain oration,
And vented thus his indignation.
Oh Puss, it bodes thee dire disgrace,
When I defy thee to the race.
Come, it is a match, nay, no denial,
I lay my shell upon the trial.
'Twas done and done, all fair, a bet,
Judges prepared, and distance set.
The scamp'ring Hare outstript the wind,
The creeping Tortoise lagg'd behind.
And scarce had passed a single pole,
When Puss had almost reached the goal.
Friend Tortoise, quoth the jeering Hare,
Your burthen's more than you can bear,
To help your speed, it were as well
That I should ease you of your shell:
Jog on a little faster pr'ythee,
I Will take a nap, and then be with thee.
So said, so done, and safely sure,
For say, what conquest more secure?
Whenever he waked (that is all that is in it)
He could overtake him in a minute.
The Tortoise heard his taunting jeer,
But still resolved to persevere,
Still drawl'd along, as who should say,
I Will win, like Fabius, by delay;
On to the goal securely crept,
While Puss unknowing soundly slept.
The bets were won, the Hare awake,
When thus the victor Tortoise spoke.
Puss, though I own thy quicker parts,
Things are not always done by starts.
You may deride my awkward pace,
But slow and steady wins the race.
The SATYR and PEDLAR, 1757.
WORDS are, so Wollaston defines,
Of our ideas merely signs,
Which have a power at will to vary,
As being vague and arbitrary.
Now damned for instance -- all agree,
Damn'd's the superlative degree;
Means that alone, and nothing more,
However taken heretofore;
Damned is a word cannot stand alone,
Which has no meaning of its own,
But signifies or bad or good
Just as its neighbor's understood.
Examples we may find enough,
Damned high, damned low, damned fine, damned stuff.
So fares it too with its relation,
I mean its substantive, damnation.
The wit with metaphors makes bold,
And tells you he is damnation cold;
Perhaps, that metaphor forgot,
The self-same wit's damnation hot.
And here a fable I remember --
Once in the middle of December,
When every mead in snow is lost,
And every river bound with frost,
When families get all together,
And feelingly talk over the weather;
When -- pox on the descriptive rhyme --
In short it was the winter time.
It was a Pedlar's happy lot,
To fall into a Satyr's cot:
Shivering with cold, and almost froze,
With pearly drop upon his nose,
His fingers' ends all pinched to death,
He blew upon them with his breath.
"Friend, quoth the Satyr, what intends
"That blowing on thy fingers ends?
"It is to warm them thus I blow,
"For they are froze as cold as snow.
"And so inclement has it been
"I Am like a cake of ice within."
Come, quoth the Satyr, comfort, man!
I Will cheer thy inside, if I can;
You're welcome in my homely cottage
To a warm fire, and mess of pottage.
This said, the Satyr, nothing loath,
A bowl prepared of sav'ry broth,
Which with delight the Pedlar viewed,
As smoking on the board it stood.
But, though the very steam arose
With grateful odor to his nose,
One single sip he ventured not,
The gruel was so wondrous hot.
What can be done? -- with gentle puff
He blows it, 'till its cool enough.
Why how now, Pedlar, what is the matter?
Still at thy blowing! quoth the Satyr.
I blow to cool it, cries the Clown,
That I may get the liquor down:
For though I grant, you have made it well,
You Have boiled it, fir, as hot as hell.
Then raising high his cloven stump.
The Satyr smote him on the rump.
"Begone, thou double knave, or fool,
"With the same breath to warm and cool:
"Friendship with such I never hold
"Who Are so damned hot, and so damned cold.
The CIT'S COUNTRY BOX, 1757.
Vos sapere and solos aio been vivere, quorum,
Conspicitur nitidis fundata pecunia villis.
HOR.
THE wealthy Cit, grown old in trade,
Now wishes for the rural shade,
And buckles to his one-horse chair,
Old Dobbin, or the foundered mare;
While wedged in closely by his side,
Sits Madam, his unwieldy bride,
With Jacky on a stool before 'em,
And out they jog in due decorum.
Scarce past the turnpike half a mile,
How all the country seems to smile!
And as they slowly jog together,
The Cit commends the road and weather;
While Madam doats upon the trees,
And longs for every house she sees,
Admires its views, its situation,
And thus she opens her oration.
What signify the loads of wealthy,
Without that richest jewel, health?
Excuse the fondness of a wife,
Who doats upon your precious life!
Such easeless toil, such constant care,
Is more than human strength can bear.
One may observe it in your face --
Indeed, my dear, you break apace:
And nothing can your health repair,
But exercise, and country air.
Sir Traffic has a house, you know,
About a mile from Cheney-Row:
He Is a good man, indeed it is true,
But not so warm, my dear, as you:
And folks are always apt to sneer --
One would not be outdone, my dear!
Sir Traffic's name so well applied
Awaked his brother merchant's pride;
And Thrifty, who had all his life
Paid utmost deference to his wife,
Confessed her arguments had reason,
And by the approaching summer season,
Draws a few hundreds from the stocks,
And purchases his Country Box.
Some three or four mile out of town,
(An hour's ride will bring you down,)
He fixes on his choice abode,
Not half a furlong from the road:
And so convenient does it lay,
The stages pass it every day:
And then so snug, so mighty pretty,
To have an house so near the city!
Take but your places at the Boar
You're set down at the very door.
Well then, suppose them fixed at last,
White-washing, painting, scrubbing past,
Hugging themselves in ease and clover,
With all the fuss of moving over;
Lo, a new heap of whims are bred!
And wanton in my lady's head.
Well to be sure, it must be owned,
It is a charming spot of ground;
So sweet a distance for a ride,
And all about so countrified!
'Twould come to but a trifling price
To make it quite a paradise;
I cannot bear those nasty rails,
Those ugly broken moldy pales:
Suppose, my dear, instead of these,
We build a railing, all Chinese.
Although one hates to be exposed,
It Is dismal to be thus enclosed;
One hardly any object sees --
I wish you would fell those odious trees.
Objects continual passing by
Were something to amuse the eye,
But to be pent within the walls --
One might as well be at St. Paul's.
Our house beholders would adore,
Was there a level lawn before,
Nothing its views to incommode,
But quite laid open to the road;
While every trav'ler in amaze,
Should on our little mansion gaze,
And pointing to the choice retreat,
Cry, that is Sir Thrifty's Country Seat.
No doubt her arguments prevail,
For Madam's TASTE can never fail.
Blessed age! when all men may procure,
The title of a Connoisseur;
When noble and ignoble herd,
Are governed by a single word;
Though, like the royal German dames,
It bears an hundred Christian names;
As Genius, Fancy, Judgment, Gout,
Whim, Caprice, Je-ne-scai-quoi, Virtu:
Which appellations all describe
TASTE, and the modern tasteful tribe.
Now bricklay'rs, carpenters, and joiners,
With Chinese artists, and designers,
Produce their schemes of alteration,
To work this wondrous reformation.
The useful dome, which secret stood,
Embosom'd in the yew-tree's wood,
The trav'ler with amazement sees
A temple, Gothic, or Chinese,
With many a bell, and tawdry rag on,
And crested with a sprawling dragon;
A wooden arch is bent astride
A ditch of water, four foot wide,
With angles, curves, and zigzag lines,
From Halfpenny's exact designs.
In front, a level lawn is seen,
Without a shrub upon the green,
Where Taste would want its first great law,
But for the skulking, sly ha-ha,
By whose miraculous assistance,
You gain a prospect two fields distance.
And now from Hyde-Park Corner come
The Gods of Athens, and of Rome.
Here squabby Cupids take their places,
With Venus, and the clumsy Graces:
Apollo there, with aim so clever,
Stretches his leaden bow for ever;
And there, without the power to fly,
Stands fixed a tip-toe Mercury.
The Villa thus completely graced,
All own, that Thrifty has a Taste;
And Madam's female friends, and cousins,
With common-council-men, by dozens,
Flock every Sunday to the Seat,
To stare about them, and to eat.
From CATULLUS.
CHLOE, that dear bewitching prude,
Still calls me saucy, pert, and rude,
And sometimes almost strikes me;
And yet, I swear, I cannot tell how,
Spite of the knitting of her brow,
I Am very sure she likes me.
Ask you me, why I fancy thus?
Why, I have called her jilt, and puss,
And thought myself above her;
And yet I feel it, to my cost,
That when I rail against her most,
I Am very sure I love her.
SHAKESPEARE: An EPISTLE to Mr. GARRICK.
THANKS to much industry and pains,
Much twisting of the wit and brains,
Translation has unlocked the store,
And spread abroad the Grecian lore,
While Sophocles his scenes are grown
Even as familiar as our own.
No more shall Taste presume to speak
From its enclosures in the Greek;
But, all its fences broken down,
Lie at the mercy of the town.
Critic, I hear thy torrent rage,
"'It Is blasphemy against that stage,
"Which Aeschylus his warmth designed,
"Euripides his taste refined,
"And Sophocles his last direction,
"Stamped with the signet of perfection."
Perfection! it is but a word ideal,
That bears about it nothing real:
For excellence was never hit
In the first essays of man's wit.
Shall ancient worth, or ancient fame
Preclude the Moderns from their claim?
Must they be blockheads, dolts, and fools,
Who write not up to Grecian rules?
Who tread in buskins or in socks.
Must they be damned as Heterodox,
Nor merit of good works prevail.
Except within the classic pale?
It Is stuff that bears the name of knowledge,
Not current half a mile from college;
Where half their lectures yield no more
(Besure I speak of times of yore)
Than just a niggard light, to mark
How much we all are in the dark.
As rushlights, in a spacious room,
Just burn enough to form a gloom.
When Shakespeare leads the mind a dance,
From France to England, hence to France,
Talk not to me of time and place;
I own I Am happy in the chase.
Whether the drama's here or there,
It Is nature, Shakespeare, every where.
The poet's fancy can create,
Contract, enlarge, annihilate,
Bring past and present close together,
In spite of distance, seas, or weather;
And shut up in a single action,
What cost whole years in its transaction.
So, ladies at a play, or rout,
Can flirt the universe about,
Whose geographical account
Is drawn and pictured on the mount.
Yet, when they please, contract the plan,
And shut the world up in a fan.
True Genius, like Armida's wand,
Can raise the spring from barren land.
While all the art of Imitation,
Is pilf'ring from the first creation;
Transplanting flowers, with useless toil,
Which wither in a foreign soil.
As conscience often sets us right
By its interior active light,
Without the assistance of the laws
To combat in the moral cause;
So Genius, of itself discerning,
Without the mystic rules of learning,
Can, from its present intuition,
Strike at the truth of composition.
Yet those who breathe the classic vein,
Enlisted in the mimic train,
Who ride their steed with double bit,
Never run away with by their wit,
Delighted with the pomp of rules,
The specious pedantry of schools,
(Which rules, like crutches, never became
Of any use but to the lame)
Pursue the method set before 'em;
Talk much of order, and decorum,
Of probability of fiction,
Of manners, ornament, and diction,
And with a jargon of hard names,
(A privilege which dullness claims,
And merely used by way of fence,
To keep out plain and common sense)
Extol the wit of ancient days,
The simple fabric of their plays;
Then from the fable, all so chaste,
Tricked up in antient-modern taste,
So mighty gentle all the while,
In such a sweet descriptive style,
While Chorus marks the servile mode
With fine reflection, in an ode,
Present you with a perfect piece,
Formed on the model of old Greece.
Come, pr'ythee Critic, set before us,
The use and office of a chorus.
What! silent! why then, I Will produce
Its services from ancient use.
It Is to be ever on the stage,
Attendants upon grief or rage,
To be an arrant go-between,
Chief-mourner at each dismal scene;
Showing its sorrow, or delight,
By shifting dances, left and right,
Not much unlike our modern notions,
Adagio or Allegro motions;
To watch upon the deep distress,
And plaints of royal wretchedness;
And when, with tears, and execration,
They Have poured out all their lamentation,
And wept whole cataracts from their eyes,
To call on rivers for supplies,
And with their Hais, and He Is, and Hoes,
To make a symphony of woes.
Doutless the Ancients want the art
To strike at once upon the heart:
Or why their prologues of a mile
In simple -- call it -- humble style,
In unimpassion'd phrase to say
"'Fore the beginning of this play,
"I, hapless Polydore, was found
"By fishermen, or others, drowned!"
Or, "I, a gentleman, did wed,
"The lady I would never bed,
"Great Agamemnon's royal daughter,
"Who Is coming hither to draw water."
Or need the Chorus to reveal
Reflections, which the audience feel;
And jog them, left attention sink,
To tell them how and what to think?
Oh, where is the Bard, who at one view
Could look the whole creation through,
Who traversed all the human heart,
Without recourse to Grecian art?
He scorned the modes of imitation,
Of altering, pilfering, and translation,
Nor painted horror, grief, or rage,
From models of a former age;
The bright original he took,
And tore the leaf from nature's book.
It Is Shakespeare, thus, who stands alone --
-- But why repeat what You have shown?
How true, how perfect, and how well,
The feelings of our hearts must tell.
EPISTLE to J -- B -- Esquire. 1757.
HAS my good dame a wicked child?
It takes the gentler name of wild.
If chests he breaks, if locks he picks,
It Is nothing more than youthful tricks.
The mother's fondness stamps it merit,
For vices are a sign of spirit.
Say, do the neighbors think the same,
With the good old indulgent dame?
"Cries gossip Prate, I hear with grief
"My neighbor's son's an arrant thief.
"Nay, could you think it, I am told,
"He stole five guineas, all in gold.
"You know the youth was always wild --
"He got his father's maid with child;
"And robbed his master, to defray
"The money he had lost at play.
"All means to save him now must fail.
"What can it end in? -- In a jail."
However the dame doats over her youth,
My gossip says the very truth.
But as his vices love would hide,
Or torture them to virtue's side,
So friendship's glass deceives the eye,
(A glass too apt to magnify)
And makes you think at least you see
Some spark of genius, even in me:
You say I should get fame. I doubt it:
Perhaps I am as well without it.
For what is the worth of empty praise?
What poet ever dined on bays?
For though the Laurel, rarest wonder!
May screen us from the stroke of thunder,
This mind I ever was, and am in,
It is no antidote to famine.
And poet's live on slender fare,
Who, like Chameleons, feed on air,
And starve, to gain an empty breath,
Which only serves them after death.
Grant I succeed, like Horace rise,
And strike my head against the skies,
Common experience daily shows,
That poets have a world of foes;
And we shall find in every town
Gossips enough to cry them down;
Who meet in pious conversation
TO anatomize a reputation,
With flippant tongue, and empty head,
Who talk of things they never read.
Their idle censures I despise:
Their niggard praises will not suffice.
Tempt me no more then to the crime
Of dabbling in the font of rhyme.
My Muse has answered all her end,
If her productions please a friend.
The world is burdened with her store,
Why need I add one scribbler more?
ODE Spoken on a public Occasion at Westminster-school.
NOR at Apollo's vaunted shrine,
Nor to the fabled Sisters Nine,
Offers the youth his ineffectual vow.
Far be their rites! -- Such worship fits not now;
When at Eliza's sacred name
Each breast receives the present flame:
While eager genius plumes her infant wings,
And with bold impulse strikes the accordant strings,
Reflecting on the crowded line
Of mitred sages, bards divine,
Of patriots, active in their country's cause,
Who plan her councils, or direct her laws.
Oh Memory! how thou love to stray,
Delighted, over the flowery way
Of childhood's greener years! when simple youth
Poured the pure dictates of ingenuous truth!
It Is then the souls congenial meet,
Inspired with friendships genuine heat,
Ever interest, frantic zeal, or jealous art,
Have taught the language foreign to the heart.
'Twas here, in many an early strain
Dryden first tried his classic vein,
Spurred his strong genius to the distant goal,
In wild effussions of his manly soul;
When Busby's skill, and judgment sage,
Repressed the poet's frantic rage,
Cropped his luxuriance bold, and blended taught
The flow of numbers with the strength of thought.
Nor, Cowley, be thy Muse forgot! which strays
In wit's ambiguous flowery maze,
With many a pointed turn and studied art:
Though affectation blot thy rhyme,
Thy mind was lofty and sublime,
And manly honor dignified thy heart:
Though fond of wit, yet firm to virtue's plan,
The Poet's trifles never disgraced the Man.
Well might thy morals sweet engage
The attention of the Mitred Sage,
Smit with the plain simplicity of truth.
For not ambition's giddy strife,
The gilded toys of public life,
Which snare the gay unstable youth,
Could lure Thee from the sober charms,
Which lapt thee in retirements' arms,
Whence Thou, untainted with the pride of state,
Coud'st smile with pity on the bustling Great.
Such were Eliza's sons. Her soft'ring care
Here bad free genius tune his grateful song;
Which else had wasted in the defart air,
Or drooped unnotic'd 'mid the vulgar throng.
-- Never may her youth degenerate shame
The glories of Eliza's name!
But with the poet's frenzy bold,
Such as inspired her bards of old,
Pluck the green laurel from the hand of fame!
The ACTOR. ADDRESSED TO BONNELL THORNTON, Esquire.
ACTING, dear Thornton, its perfection draws
From no observance of mechanic laws:
No settled maxims of a favorite stage,
No rules delivered down from age to age,
Let players nicely mark them as they will,
Can ever entail hereditary skill.
If, amongst the humble hearers of the pit,
Some curious vet'ran critic chance to sit,
Is he pleased more because 'twas acted so
By Booth and Cibber thirty years ago?
The mind recals an object held more dear,
And hates the copy, that it comes so near.
Why loved we Wilks's air, Booth's nervous tone?
In them 'twas natural, 'twas all their own.
A Garrick's genius must our wonder raise,
But gives his mimic no reflected praise.
Thrice happy Genius, whose unrivaled name,
Shall live for ever in the voice of Fame!
It Is thine to lead, with more than magic skill,
The train of captive passions at thy will;
To bid the bursting tear spontaneous flow
In the sweet sense of sympathetic woe:
Through every vein I feel a chilness creep,
When horrors such as thine have murdered sleep;
And at the old man's look and frantic stare
It Is Lear alarms me, for I see him there.
Nor yet confined to tragic walks alone,
The Comic Muse too claims thee for her own.
With each delightful requisite to please,
Taste, Spirit, Judgment, Elegance, and Ease,
Familiar nature forms thy only rule,
From Ranger's rake to Drugger's vacant fool.
With powers so pliant, and so various blessed,
That what we see the last, we like the best.
Not idly pleased, at judgment's dear expense,
But burst outrageous with the laugh of sense.
Perfection's top, with weary toil and pain,
It Is genius only that can hope to gain.
The Play'r's profession (though I hate the phrase,
It Is so mechanic in these modern days)
Lies not in trick, or attitude, or start,
Nature's true knowledge is his only art.
The strong-felt passion bolts into the face,
The mind untouched, what is it but grimace?
To this one standard make your just appeal,
Here lies the golden secret; learn to FEEL.
Or fool, or monarch, happy, or distressed,
No actor pleases that is not possessed.
Once on the stage, in Rome's declining days,
When Christians were the subject of their plays,
Ever persecution dropped her iron rod,
And men still waged an impious war with God,
An actor flourished of no vulgar fame.
Nature's disciple, and Genest his name.
A noble object for his skill he chose,
A martyr dying 'midst insulting foes.
Resigned with patience to religion's laws,
Yet braving monarchs in his Savior's cause.
Filled with the idea of the secret part,
He felt a zeal beyond the reach of art,
While look and voice, and gesture, all expressed
A kindred ardour in the player's breast;
Till as the flame through all his bosom ran,
He lost the Actor, and commenced the Man:
Professed the faith, his pagan gods denied,
And what he acted then, he after died.
The Player's province they but vainly try,
Who want these powers, Deportment, Voice, and Eye.
The Critic Sight it is only Grace can please,
No figure charms us if it has not Ease.
There are, who think the stature all in all;
Nor like the hero, if he is not tall.
The feeling sense all other want supplies,
I rate no actor's merit from his size.
Superior height requires superior grace,
And what is a giant with a vacant face?
Theatric monarchs, in their tragic gait,
Affect to mark the solemn pace of state.
One foot put forward in position strong,
The other, like its vassal, dragged along.
So grave each motion, so exact and slow,
Like wooden monarchs at a puppet-show.
The mien delights us that has native grace,
But affectation ill supplies its place.
Unskilful actors, like your mimic apes,
Will writhe their bodies in a thousand shapes;
However foreign from the poet's art,
No tragic hero but admires a start.
What though unfeeling of the nervous line,
Who but allows his attitude is fine?
While a whole minute equipois'd he stands,
Till praise dismiss him with her echoing hands!
Resolved, though nature hate the tedious pause,
By perseverance to extort applause.
When Romeo sorrowing at his Juliet's doom,
With eager madness bursts the canvas tomb,
The sudden whirl, stretched leg, and listed staff,
Which please the vulgar, make the critic laugh.
To paint the passion's force, and mark it well,
The proper action nature's self will tell:
No pleasing powers distortions ever express,
And nicer judgment always loathes excess.
In sock or buskin, who o'erleaps the bounds,
Disgusts our reason, and the taste confounds.
Of all the evils which the stage molest,
I hate your fool who overacts his jest:
Who murders what the poet finely writ,
And, like a bungler, haggles all his wit,
With shrug, and grin, and gesture out of place,
And writes a foolish comment with his face.
Old Johnson once, though Cibber's perter vein
But meanly groupes him with a numerous train,
With steady face, and sober hum'rous mien,
Filled the strong outlines of the comic scene.
What was writ down, with decent utt'rance spoke,
Betrayed no symptom of the conscious joke;
The very man in look, in voice, in air,
And though upon the stage, appeared no Play'r.
The word and action should conjointly suit,
But acting words is labor too minute.
Grimace will ever lead the judgment wrong;
While sober humor marks the impression strong.
Her proper traits the fixed attention hit,
And bring me closer to the poet's wit;
With her delighted over each scene I go,
Well-pleased, and not ashamed of being so.
But let the generous Actor still forbear
To copy features with a Mimic's care!
It Is a poor skill, which every fool can reach,
A vile stage-custom, honored in the breach.
Worse as more close, the disingenuous art
But shows the wanton looseness of the heart.
When I behold a wretch, of talents mean,
Drag private foibles on the public scene,
Forsaking nature's fair and open road
To mark some whim, some strange peculiar mode,
Fired with disgust I loath his servile plan,
Despise the mimic, and abhor the man.
Go to the lame, to hospitals repair,
And hunt for humor in distortions there!
Fill up the measure of the motley whim
With shrug, wink, snuffle, and convulsive limb;
Then shame at once, to please a trifling age,
Good sense, good manners, virtue, and the stage!
It Is not enough the Voice be found and clear,
It Is modulation that must charm the ear.
When desperate heroines grieve with tedious moan,
And whine their sorrows in a see-saw tone,
The same soft sounds of unimpassioned woes
Can only make the yawning hearers doze.
The voice all modes of passion can express,
That marks the proper word with proper stress,
But none emphatic can that actor call,
Who lays an equal emphasis on all.
Some over the tongue the labored measures roll
Slow and delib'rate as the parting toll,
Point every stop, mark every pause so strong,
Their words, like stage-processions, stalk along.
All affectation but creates disgust,
And even in speaking we may seem too just.
Nor proper, Thornton, can those sounds appear
Which bring not numbers to thy nicer ear:
In vain for them the pleasing measure flows,
Whose recitation runs it all to prose;
Repeating what the poet sets not down,
The verb disjointing from its friendly noun,
While pause, and break, and repetition join
To make a discord in each tuneful line.
Some placid natures fill the allotted scene
With lifeless drone, insipid and serene;
While others thunder every couplet over,
And almost crack your ears with rant and roar.
More nature (...) and finer strokes are shown,
In the low whisper than tempestuous tone.
And Hamlet's hollow voice and fixed amaze,
More powerful terror to the mind conveys,
Than he, who swol'n with big impetuous rage,
Bullies the bulky phantom off the stage.
He, who in earnest studies over his part,
Will find true nature cling about his heart.
The modes of grief are not included all
In the white handkerchief and mournful drawl;
A single look more marks the internal woe,
Than all the windings of the lengthened Oh.
Up to the Face the quick sensation flies,
And darts its meaning from the speaking Eyes;
Love, transport, madness, anger, scorn, despair,
And all the passions, all the soul is there.
In vain Ophelia gives her flowrets round,
And with her straws fantastic strews the ground,
In vain now sings, now heaves the desperate sigh,
If phrenzy sit not in the troubled eye.
In Cibber's look commanding sorrows speak,
And call the tear fast trick'ling down my cheek.
There is a fault which stirs the critic's rage;
A want of due attention on the stage.
I have seen actors, and admired ones too,
Whose tongues wound up set forward from their cue;
In their own speech who whine, or roar away,
Yet seem unmoved at what the rest may say;
Whose eyes and thoughts on different objects roam,
Until the prompter's voice recall them home.
Divest yourself of hearers, if you can,
And strive to speak, and be the very man.
Why should the well-bred actor wish to know
Who sits above tonight, or who below?
So, 'mid the harmonious tones of grief or rage,
Italian squallers often disgrace the stage;
When, with a simp'ring leer, and bow profound,
The squeaking Cyrus greets the boxes round;
Or proud Mandane, of imperial race,
Familiar drops a curt'sie to her grace.
To suit the dress demands the actor's art,
Yet there are those who over-dress the part.
To some prescriptive right gives settled things,
Black wigs to murd'rers, feathered hats to kings.
But Michael Cassio might be drunk enough,
Though all his features were not grim'd with snuff.
Why should Pol Peachum shine in satin clothes?
Why every devil dance in scarlet hose?
But in stage-customs what offends me most
Is the slip-door, and slowly-rising ghost.
Tell me, nor count the question too severe,
Why need the dismal powdered forms appear?
When chilling horrors shake the affrighted king,
And guilt torments him with her scorpion sting;
When keenest feelings at his bosom pull,
And fancy tells him that the seat is full;
Why need the ghost usurp the monarch's place,
To frighten children with his mealy face?
The king alone should form the phantom there,
And talk and tremble at the vacant chair.
If Belvidera her loved loss deplore,
Why for twin specter bursts the yawning floor?
When with disordered starts, and horrid cries,
She paints the murdered forms before her eyes,
And still pursues them with a frantic stare,
It Is pregnant madness brings the visions there.
More instant horror would enforce the scene,
If all her shudd'rings were at shapes unseen.
Poet and Actor thus, with blended skill,
Mould all our passions to their instant will;
It Is thus, when feeling Garrick treads the stage,
(The speaking comment of his Shakespeare's page)
Often as I drink the words with greedy ears,
I shake with horror, or dissolve with tears.
O, never may folly seize the throne of taste,
Nor dullness lay the realms of genius waste!
No bouncing crackers ape the thund'rer's fire,
No tumbler float upon the bending wire!
More natural uses to the stage belong,
Than tumblers, monsters, pantomime, or song.
For other purpose was that spot designed:
To purge the passions, and reform the mind,
To give to nature all the force of art,
And while it charms the ear to mend the heart.
Thornton, to thee, I dare with truth commend,
The decent stage as virtue's natural friend.
Though often debased with scenes profane and loose,
No reason weighs against it is proper use.
Though the lewd priest his sacred function shame,
Religion's perfect law is still the same.
Shall They, who trace the passions from their rise,
Show scorn her features, her own image vice?
Who teach the mind it is proper force to scan,
And hold the faithful mirror up to man,
Shall their profession ever provoke disdain,
Who stand the foremost in the mortal train,
Who lend reflection all the grace of art,
And strike the precept home upon the heart?
Yet, hapless Artist! though thy skill can raise
The bursting peal of universal praise,
Though at thy beck Applause delighted stands,
And lists, Briareus' like, her hundred hands,
Know, fame awards thee but a partial breath!
Not all thy talents brave the stroke of death.
Poets to ages yet unborn appeal,
And latest times the Eternal Nature feel.
Though blended here the praise of bard and play'r,
While more than half becomes the Actor's share,
Relentless death untwists the mingled fame,
And sinks the player in the poet's name.
The pliant muscles of the various face,
The mien that gave each sentence strength and grace,
The tuneful voice, the eye that spoke the mind,
Are gone, nor leave a single trace behind.
To GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire. A FAMILIAR EPISTLE.
Written Jan. 1, 1761. From Tiffington in Derbyshire.
FRIENDSHIP with most is dead and cool,
A dull, inactive, stagnant pool;
Yours like the lively current flows,
And shares the pleasure it bestows.
If there is ought, whose lenient power
Can sooth affliction's painful hour,
Sweeten the bitter cup of care,
And snatch the wretched from despair,
Superior to the sense of woes,
From friendship's source the balsam flows.
Rich then am I, possessed of thine,
Who know that happy balsam mine.
In youth, from nature's genuine heat,
The souls congenial spring to meet,
And emulation's infant strife,
Cements the man in future life.
Often too the mind well-pleased surveys
Its progress from its childish days;
Sees how the current upwards ran,
And reads the child over in the man.
For men, in reason's sober eyes,
Are children, but of larger size,
Have still their idle hopes and fears,
And Hobbyhorse of riper years.
Whether a blessing, or a curse,
My rattle is the love of verse.
Some fancied parts, and emulation,
Which still aspires to reputation,
Bad infant fancy plume her flight,
And held the laurel full to sight.
For vanity, the poet's sin,
Had taken possession all within:
And he whose brain is verse-possest,
Is in himself as highly blessed,
As he, whose lines and circles vie
With heavens direction of the sky.
However the river rolls its tides,
The cork upon the surface rides.
And on Ink's Ocean, lightly buoyed,
That cork of vanity is Lloyd.
Let me too use the common claim
And souse at once upon my name,
Which some have done with greater stress,
Who know me, and who love me less.
Poets are very harmless things,
Unless you teaze one till he stings;
And when affronts are plainly meant,
We Are bound in honor to resent:
And what tribunal will deny
An injured person to reply?
In these familiar emanations,
Which are but writing conversations,
Where thought appears in dishabille,
And fancy does just what she will,
The sourest critic would excuse
The vagrant sallies of the Muse:
Which lady, for Apollo's blessing
Has still attended our caressing,
As many children round her sees
As maggots in a Cheshire cheese,
Which I maintain at vast expense,
Of pen and paper, time and sense:
And surely 'twas no small miscarriage
When first I entered into marriage.
The poet's title which I bear,
With some strange castles in the air,
Was all my portion with the fair.
However narrowly I look,
In Phoebus's valorum book,
I cannot from enquiry find
Poets had much to leave behind.
They had a copyhold estate
In lands, which they themselves create,
A foolish title to a fountain,
A right of common in a mountain,
And yet they lived amongst the great,
More than their brethren do of late;
Invited out at feasts to dine,
Eat as they pleased, and drank their wine;
Nor is it any where set down
They tipped the servants half a crown,
But passed amid the waiting throng
And paid the porter with a song;
As once, a wag in modern days,
When all are in these bribing ways,
His shillings to dispense unable,
Scraped half the fruit from off the table,
And walking gravely through the crowd,
Which stood obsequiously, and bowed,
To keep the fashion up of tipping,
Dropped in each hand a golden pippin.
But there is a difference indeed
'Twixt ancient bards and modern breed.
Though poet known, in Roman days,
Fearless he walked the public ways,
Nor ever knew that sacred name
Contemptuous smile, or painful shame:
While with a foolish face of praise;
The folks would stop to gape and gaze,
And half untold the story leave,
Pulling their neighbor by the sleeve,
While the index of the finger shows,
-- There -- yonder is Horace -- there he goes.
This finger, I allow it true,
Points at us modern poets too;
But it is by way of wit and joke,
To laugh, or as the phrase is, smoke.
Yet, there are those, who are fond of wit,
Although they never used it yet,
Who wits and witlings entertain
Of Taste, Virtu, and Judgment vain,
And dinner, grace, and grace-cup done,
Expect a wondrous deal of fun:
Yes -- He at bottom -- don't you know him?
"That Is He that wrote the last new poem.
"His Humour's exquisitely high,
"You Will hear him open by and by."
The man in print and conversation
Have often very small relation;
And he, whose humor hits the town,
When copied fairly, and set down,
In public company may pass,
For little better than an ass.
Perhaps the fault is on his side,
Springs it from modesty, or pride,
Those qualities ashamed to own,
For which he is happy to be known;
Or that his nature's strange and shy,
And diffident, he knows not why;
Or from a prudent kind of fear,
As, knowing that the world's severe,
He would not suffer to escape
Familiar wit in easy shape:
Left gaping fools, and vile repeaters,
Should catch her up, and spoil her features,
And, for the child's unlucky maim,
The faultless parent come to shame.
Well, but methinks I hear you say,
Write then, my friend! -- Write what? -- a Play.
"The theaters are open yet,
"The market for all sterling wit;
"Try the strong efforts of your pen,
"And draw the characters of men;
"Or bid the bursting tear to flow,
"Obedient to the fabled woe:
"With Tragedy's severest art,
"Anatomize the human heart,
"And, that you may be understood,
"Bid nature speak, as nature should."
That talent, George, though yet untried,
Perhaps my genius has denied;
While you, my friend, are sure to please
With all the powers of comic ease.
Authors, like maids at fifteen years,
Are full of wishes, full of fears.
One might by pleasant thoughts be led
To lose a trifling maidenhead;
But it is a terrible vexation
To give up with it reputation.
And he, who has with Plays to do,
Has got the devil to go through.
Critics have reason for their rules,
I dread the censure of your fools.
For tell me, and consult your pride,
(Set Garrick for a while aside)
How could you, George, with patience bear,
The critic prosing in the play'r?
Some of that calling have I known,
Who hold no judgment like their own;
And yet their reasons fairly scan,
And separate the wheat and bran,
You Would be amazed indeed to find,
What little wheat is left behind.
For, after all their mighty rout,
Of chatt'ring round and round about;
It Is but a kind of clock-work talking,
Like crossing on the stage, and walking,
The form of this tribunal past,
The play received, the parts all cast,
Each actor has his own objections,
Each character, new imperfections:
The man's is drawn too course and rough,
The lady's has not smut enough.
It want's a touch of Cibber's ease,
A higher kind of talk to please;
Such as your titled folks would choose,
And Lords and Ladyship's might use.
Which style, whoever would succeed in,
Must have small wit, and much good breeding,
If this is dialogue -- ma foi,
Sweet Sir, say I, pardonnez moi!
As long as life and business lasts,
The actors have their several casts,
A walk where each his talents shows,
Queens, Nurses, Tyrants, Lovers, Beaux;
Suppose you have found a girl of merit,
Who'd show your part in all its spirit,
Take the whole meaning in the scope,
Some little lively thing, like Pope,
You rob some others of a feather,
They Have worn for thirty years together.
But grant the cast is as you like,
To actors which you think will strike.
Tomorrow then -- (but as you know
I Have never a Comedy to show,
Let me a while in conversation,
Make free with yours for application)
The arrow's flight cannot be prevented --
Tomorrow then, will be presented
The JEALOUS WIFE! Tomorrow? Right.
How do you sleep, my friend, tonight?
Have you no pit-pat hopes and fears,
Roast-beef, and catcalls in your ears?
Mabb's wheels across your temples creep,
You toss and tumble in your sleep,
And cry aloud, with rage and spleen,
"That fellow murders all my scene."
Tomorrow comes. I know your merit,
And see the piece's fire and spirit;
Yet friendship's zeal is ever hearty,
And dreads the efforts of a party.
The coach below, the clock gone five,
Now to the theater we drive:
Peeping the curtain's eyelet through,
Behold the house in dreadful view!
Observe how close the critics sit,
And not one bonnet in the pit.
With horror hear the galleries ring,
Nosy! Black Joke! God save the King!
Sticks clatter, catcalls scream, Encore!
Cocks crow, pit hisses, galleries roar:
Even cha' some oranges is found
This night to have a dreadful sound:
'Till, decent sables on his back,
(Your prologuizers all wear black)
The prologue comes; and, if its mine,
Its very good, and very fine.
If not, I take a pinch of snuff,
And wonder where you got such stuff.
That done, a-gape the critics sit,
Expectant of the comic wit.
The fiddlers play again pell-mell,
-- But hist! -- the prompter rings his bell.
-- Down there! hats off! -- the curtain draws! --
What follows is -- the just applause.
PROLOGUE To the JEALOUS WIFE.
Spoken by Mr. GARRICK.
THE JEALOUS WIFE! a Comedy! poor man!
A charming subject! but a wretched plan.
His skittish wit, o'erleaping the due bound,
Commits flat trespass upon tragic ground.
Quarrels, upbraidings, jealousies, and spleen,
Grow too familiar in the comic scene.
Tinge but the language with heroic chime,
It Is Passion, Pathos, Character, Sublime!
What round big words had swelled the pompous scene,
A king the husband, and the wife a queen!
Then might Distraction rend her graceful hair,
See sightless forms, and scream, and gape, and stare.
Drawcansir death had raged without control,
Here the drawn dagger, there the poisoned bowl.
What eyes had streamed at all the whining woe!
What hands had thundered at each Hah! and Oh!
But peace! the gentle prologue custom sends,
Like drum and sergeant, to beat up for friends.
At vice and folly, each a lawful game,
Our author flies, but with no partial aim.
He read the manners, open as they lie
In nature's volume to the general eye.
Books too he read, nor blushed to use their store. --
He does but what his betters did before.
Shakespeare has done it, and the Grecian stage
Caught truth of character from Homer's page.
If in his scenes an honest skill is shown,
And borrowing, little, much appears his own;
If what a master's happy pencil drew
He brings more forward, in dramatic view;
To your decision he submits his cause,
Secure of candor, anxious for applause.
But if all rude, his artless scenes deface
The simple beauties which he meant to grace;
If, an invader upon others land,
He spoil and plunder with a robber's hand,
Do justice on him! -- As on fools before,
And give to Blockheads past one Blockhead more.
The Nightingale, the Owl, and the Cuckoo. A FABLE.
Addressed to DAVID GARRICK, Esquire. On the report of his retiring from the stage,
Dec. 1760.
CRITICS, who like the scarecrows stand
Upon the poet's common land,
And with severity of sense,
Drive all imagination thence,
Say that in truth lies all sublime,
Whether you write in prose or rhyme.
And yet the truth may lose its grace,
If blurted to a person's face;
Especially, if what you speak
Should crimson over the glowing cheek:
For when you throw that slaver over him,
And tumble out your praise before him,
However just the application,
It looks a-squint at adulation.
I would be honest and sincere,
But not a flatterer, or severe.
Need I be surly, rough, uncouth,
That folks may think I love the Truth?
And She, good dame, with Beauty's Queen,
Was not at all times naked seen:
For every boy, with Prior, knows,
By accident she lost her clothes,
When Falsehood stole them to disguise
Her misbegotten brood of lies.
Why should the prudish Goddess dwell
Down at the bottom of a well,
But that she is in piteous fright,
Lest, rising up to mortal sight,
The modest world should fleer and flout her,
With not a rag of clothes about her?
Yet she might wear a proper dress
And keep her essence ne'ertheless.
So Delia's bosom still will rise,
And fascinate her lover's eyes,
Though round her ivory neck she draws,
The decent shade of specious gauze.
I hear it buzzed about the table,
What can this lead to? -- Sirs,
A FABLE.

When Birds allowed the Eagle's sway,
Ever Eagles turned to fowls of prey,
His Royal Majesty of Air
Took Music underneath his care;
And, for his queen and court's delight,
Commanded Concerts every night.
Here every Bird of Parts might enter,
The Nightingale was made Praecentor;
Under whose care and just direction,
Merit was sure to meet protection.
The Lark, the Blackbird, and the Robin
This concert always bore a bob in:
The best performers all were in it,
The Thrush, Canary-bird, and Linnet.
But Birds, alas! are apt to aim
At things, to which they have smallest claim.
The staring Owl, with hideous hoot,
Offered his service for a flute.
The Cuckoo needs would join the band;
"The Thrush is but a paultry hand:
"And I can best supply that place,
"For I Have a shake, a swell, a grace."
The Manager their suit preferred:
Both tuned their pipes, and both were heard;
Yet each their several praises missed,
For both were heard, and both were hissed.
The Cuckoo hence, with rancour stirred,
(A kind of periodic bird,
Of nasty hue, and body scabby,
No would-be play-wright half so shabby)
Reviles, abuses, and defames,
Screams from a branch, and calls hard names,
And strikes at Nightingale or Lark,
Like Lisbon russians, in the dark.
The Owl harangues the gaping throng
On Powers, and excellence of song.
"The Blackbird's note has lost its force;
"The Nightingale is downright hoarse;
"The Linnet's harsh; the Robin shrill;
" -- The Sparrow has prodigious skill!"
At length they had what they desired:
The skillful Nightingale retired.
When Folly came, with wild Uproar,
And Harmony was heard no more.
TWO ODES I take the liberty of inserting the two following Odes, though I
cannot, with strict propriety, print them as my own composition. The truth is,
they were written in concert with a friend, to whose labors I am always happy
to add my own: I mean the Author of the Jealous Wife.
.
PHONANTA SYNETOISIN ES
DE TO PAN, EPNEON
ATIEI.
PINDAR, Olymp. II.
ODE I.
I. 1.
DAUGHTER of Chaos and old Night,
Cimmerian Muse, all hail!
That wrapped in never-twinkling gloom can write,
And shadowest meaning with thy dusky veil!
What Poet sings, and strikes the strings?
It was the mighty Theban spoke.
He from the ever-living Lyre
With magic hand elicits fire.
Heard ye the din of Modern Rhimers bray?
It was cool M -- n: or warm G -- y,
Involved in tenfold smoke.
I. 2.
The shallow Fop in antic vest,
Tired of the beaten road,
Proud to be singularly dressed,
Changes, with every changing moon, the mode,
Say, shall not then the heaven-born Muses too
Variety pursue?
Shall not applauding critics hail the vogue?
Whether the Muse the style of Cambria's sons,
Or the rude gabble of the Huns,
Or the broader dialect
Of Caledonia she affect,
Or take, Hibernia, thy still ranker brogue?
I. 3.
On this terrestial ball
The tyrant, Fashion, governs all.
She, fickle Goddess, whom, in days of yore,
The Idiot Moria, on the banks of Seine,
Unto an antic fool, hight Andrew, bore.
Long she paid him with disdain,
And long his pangs in silence he concealed:
At length, in happy hour, his lovesick pain
On thy blessed Calends, April, he revealed.
From their embraces sprung,
Ever changing, ever ranging,
Fashion, Goddess ever young.
II. 1.
Perched on the dubious height, She loves to ride,
Upon a weathercock, astride.
Each blast that blows, around she goes,
While nodding over her crest,
Emblem of her magic power,
The light Cameleon stands confessed,
Changing it is hues a thousand times an hour.
And in a vest is she arrayed,
Of many a dancing moon-beam made,
Nor zoneless is her waist:
But fair and beautiful, I ween,
As the cestos-cinctur'd Queen,
Is with the Rainbow's shadowy girdle braced.
II. 2.
She bids pursue the favorite road
Of lofty cloud-capt Ode.
Meantime each Bard, with eager speed,
Vaults on the Pegasean Steed:
Yet not that Pegasus, of yore
Which the illustrious Pindar bore,
But one of nobler breed.
High blood and youth his lusty veins inspire.
From Tottipontimoy He came,
Who knows not, Tottipontimoy, thy name?
The bloody-shoulder'd Arab was his Sire.
The Author is either mistaken in this place, or has else indulged himself in a
very unwarrantable poetical license. Whitenose was not the Sire, but a Son of
the Godolphin Arabian. See my Calendar. HEBER.
His White-nose. He on sam'd Doncastria's plains
Resigned his fated breath:
In vain for life the struggling courser strains.
Ah! who can run the race with death?
The tyrant's speed, or man or steed,
Strives all in vain to fly.
He leads the chase, he wins the race,
We stumble, fall, and die.
II. 3.
Third from Whitenose springs
Pegasus with eagle wings:
Light over the plain, as dancing cork,
With many a bound he beats the ground,
While all the Turf with acclamation rings.
He won Northampton, Lincoln, Oxford, York:
He too Newmarket won.
There Granta's Son
Seized on the Steed;
And thence him led, (so fate decreed)
To where old Came, renowned in poet's song,
With his dark and inky waves,
Either bank in silence laves,
Winding flow his sluggish streams along.
III. 1.
What stripling neat, of visage sweet,
In trimmest guise arrayed,
First the neighing Steed assayed?
His hand a taper switch adorns, his heel
Sparkles refulgent with elastick steel:
The whiles he wins his whiffling way,
Prancing, ambling, round and round,
By hill, and dale, and mead, and greenswerd gay:
Till sated with the pleasing ride,
From the lofty Steed dismounting,
He lies along, enwrapt in conscious pride,
By gurgling rill or crystal fountain.
III. 2.
Lo! next, a Bard, secure of praise,
His self-complacent countenance displays.
His broad Mustachios, tinged with golden die,
Flame, like a meteor, to the troubled air:
Proud his demeanor, and his eagle eye,
O'er-hung with lavish lid, yet shone with glorious glare.
The grizzle grace
Of bushy peruke shadowed over his face.
In large wide boots, whose ponderous weight
Would sink each wight of modern date,
He rides, well pleased. So large a pair
Not Garagantua's self might wear:
Not He, of nature fierce and cruel,
Who, if we trust to ancient Ballad,
Devoured Three Pilgrims in a Sallad;
Nor He of fame germane, hight Pantagruel.
III. 3.
Accoutred thus, the adventrous Youth
Seeks not the level lawn, or velvet mead,
Fast by whose side clear streams meandring creep;
But urges on amain the fiery Steed
Up Snowdon's shaggy side, or Cambrian rock uncouth:
Where the venerable herd
Of Goats, with long and sapient beard,
And wanton Kidlings their blithe revels keep.
Now up the mountain see him strain!
Now down the vale he is tossed,
Now flashes on the sight again,
Now in the Palpable Obscure quite lost.
IV. 1.
Man's feeble race eternal dangers wait,
With high or low, all, all, is woe,
Disease, mischance, pale fear, and dubious fate.
But, over every peril bounding,
Ambition views not all the ills surrounding,
And, tiptoe on the mountain's steep,
Reflects not on the yawning deep.
IV. 2.
See, see, he soars! With mighty wings outspread,
And long resounding mane,
The Courser quits the plain.
Alost in air, see, see him bear
The Bard, who shrouds
His Lyrick Glory in the clouds,
Too fond to strike the stars with lofty head!
He topples headlong from the giddy height,
Deep in the Cambrian Gulf immerg'd in endless night.
IV. 3.
O Steed Divine! what daring spirit
Rides thee now? though he inherit
Nor the pride, nor self-opinion,
Which elate the mighty Pair,
Each of Taste the favorite minion,
Prancing through the desert air;
By help mechanic of Equestrian Block,
Yet shall he mount, with classick housings graced,
And, all unheedful of the Critic Mock,
Drive his light Courser over the bounds of Taste.


ODE to OBLIVION.
I.
According to Lillaeus, who bestows the Parental Function on Oblivion. Verba
OBLIVISCENDI regunt GENITIVUM. Lib. xiii. Cap. 8. There is a similar passage in
Busbaeus.
PARENT OF EASE! OBLIVION old,
Who love thy dewlling place to hold.
Where sceptered Pluto keeps his dreary sway,
Whose sullen pride the shivering ghosts obey!
Thou, who delightest still to dwell
By some hoar and moss-grown cell,
At whose dank foot Cocytus joys to roll,
Or Styx' black streams, which even Jove control!
Or if it suit thy better will
To choose the tinkling weeping rill,
Hard by whose side the seeded poppy red
Heaves high in air his sweetly curling head,
While, creeping in meanders slow,
Lethe's drowzy waters flow,
And hollow blasts, which never cease to sigh,
Hum to each care-struck mind their lulla-lulla-by!
A prey no longer let me be
To that gossip, MEMORY,
Who waves her banners trim, and proudly flies
To spread abroad her bribble-brabble lies.
With Thee, OBLIVION, let me go,
For MEMORY'S a friend to woe;
With thee, FORGETFULNESS, fair silent Queen,
The solemn stole of grief is never seen.
II.
All, all is thine. Thy powerful sway
The thronged poetic hosts obey.
Though in the van of MEMORY proud to appear,
At thy command they darken in the rear.
What though the modern Tragic strain
For nine whole days protract thy reign,
Yet through the Nine, like whelps of currish kind,
Scarcely it lives, weak, impotent, and blind.
Sacred to Thee the Crambo Rhyme,
The motley forms of Pantomime:
For Thee from Eunuch's throat still loves to flow
The soothing sadness of his warbled woe:
Each day to Thee falls Pamphlet clean:
Each month a newborn Magazine:
Hear then, O GODDESS, hear thy vot'ry's prayer!
And, if Thou deign'st to take one moment's care,
Attend Thy Bard! who duly pays
The tribute of his votive lays;
Whose Muse still offers at thy sacred shrine; --
Thy Bard, who calls THEE His, and makes Him THINE.
O, sweet FORGETFULLNESS, supreme
Rule supine over every theme,
Over each sad subject, over each soothing strain,
Of mine, O GODDESS, stretch thine awful reign!
Nor let MEMORY steal one note,
Which this rude hand to Thee has wrote!
So shall thou save me from the Poet's shame,
Though on the lettered Rubric DODSLEY post my Name.
III.
O come! with opiate poppies crowned,
Shedding slumbers soft around!
O come! FAT GODDESS, drunk with Laureat's Sack! --
See, where she sits on the benumbed Torpedo's back!
Me, in thy dull Elysium lapt, O bless
With thy calm Forgetfulness!
And gently lull my senses all the while
With placid poems in the sinking style!
Whether the Herring-Poet sing,
Great Laureat of the Fishes' King,
Or Lycophron prophetic rave his fill,
Wrapped in the darker strains of Johnny --;
Or, if HE sing, whose verse affords
A bevy of the choicest words,
Who meets his Lady Muse by moss-grown cell,
Adorned with epithet and tinkling bell:
These, GODDESS, let me still forget,
With all the dearth of Modern Wit!
So may Thou gently over my youthful breast
Spread, with thy welcome hand, OBLIVION'S friendly vest.
THE LAW-STUDENT.

An EPISTLE, Addressed to the Author of The JEALOUS WIFE; With a Preface by BEN
JONSON.

POETASTER. ACT I.
SCENE I.
OVID, LUSCUS. Ovid. "THEN, when this body falls in funeral fire,
"My name shall live, and my best part aspire.

It shall go so.

Lusc. Young master, master Ovid, do you hear? Gods a'me! away with your songs,
and sonnets; and on with your gown and cap quickly: here, here, your father
will be a man of this room presently. Come, nay, nay, nay, nay, be brief. These
verses too, a poison on 'em, I cannot abide 'em, they make me ready to cast, by
the banks of Helicon. Nay, look, what a rascally untoward thing this poetry is;
I could tear 'em now.


Ovid. Give me, how near's my father?


Lusc. Heart a' man: get a law-book in your hand, I will not answer you else.
Why so now there is some formality in you. By Jove, and three or four of the
gods more, I am right of mine old master's humor for that; this villainous
poetry will undo you by the welkin.


Ovid. What have thou buskins on, Luscus, that thou swear'st so tragically and
high?


Lusc. No, but I have boots on, sir, and so has your father too by this time;
for he called for 'em, e're I came from the lodging.


Ovid. Why? was he no readier?


Lusc. O no; and there was the mad skeldring captain, with the velvet arms,
ready to lay hold on him as he comes down: he that presses every man he meets,
with an oath to lend him money, and cries, (Thou must do it old boy, as thou art
a man, a man of worship.)


Ovid. Who? Pantilius Tucca?


Lusc. I, he; and I met little master Lupus, the tribune, going thither too.


Ovid. Nay, an' he be under their arrest, I may (with safety enough) read over
my elegy before he come.


Lusc. Gods a' me? what'll you do? Why young master, you are not Castalian mad,
lunatic, frantic, desperate? ha!


Ovid. What ail'st thou, Luscus?


Lusc. God be with you, sir, I Will leave you to your poetical fancies, and
furies. I Will not be guilty, I.


Ovid. Be not, good ignorance: I Am glad thou art gone: For thus alone, our ear
shall better judge The hasty errors of our morning muse.


[Reads an elegy ending with My name shall live, and my best part aspire. SCENE
II.
Ovid senior, Ovid junior, Luscus, Tucca, Lupus, Pyrgus.

Ovid se. Your name shall live indeed, sir; you say true: but how infamously,
how scorned and contemned in the eyes and ears of the best and gravest Romans,
that you think not on: you never so much as dream of that. Are these the fruits
of all my travail and expenses? Is this the scope and aim of thy studies? Are
these the hopeful courses, wherewith I have so long flattered my expectation
from thee? Verses? Poetry? Ovid, whom I thought to see the pleader, become Ovid
the play-maker?


Ovid ju. No, sir.


Ovid se. Yes, sir; I hear of a tragedy of yours coming forth for the common
players there, called Medea. By my houshold-gods, if I come to the acting of
it, I Will add one tragic part more than is yet expected to it; believe me when I
promise it. What? shall I have my son a stager now? an enghle for players? a
gull? a rook? a shot-clog? to make suppers, and be laughed at? Publius, I will
set thee on the funeral pile first.


Ovid ju. Sir, I beseech you to have patience.


Lup. Indeed, Marcus Ovid, these players are an idle generation, and do much
harm in a state, corrupt young gentry very much, I know it: I have not been a
tribune thus long and observed nothing; besides, they will rob us, us, that are
magistrates, of our respect, bring us upon their stages, and make us ridiculous
to the plebeians; they will play you or me, the wisest men they can come by
still, only to bring us in contempt with the vulgar, and make us cheap.


Tuc. Thou Art in the right, my venerable cropshin, they will indeed, the tongue
of the oracle never twang'd truer. Your courtier cannot kiss his misstress's
slippers in quiet for 'em; nor your white innocent gallant pawn his revelling
suit to make his punk a supper. An honest decayed commander cannot skelder,
cheat, nor be seen in a bawdy house, but he shall be strait in one of their
wormwood comedies. They are grown licentious, the rogues; libertines, flat
libertines. They forget they are in the statute, the rascals; they are blazoned
there; there they are tricked, they and their pedigrees; they need no other
heralds, I wiss.


Ovid se. Methinks, if nothing else, yet this alone, the very reading of the
public edicts, should fright thee from commerce with them, and give thee
distaste enough of their actions. But this betrays what a student you are, this
argues your proficiency in the Law.


Ovid ju. They wrong me, sir, and do abuse you more, That blow your ears with
these untrue reports. I am not known unto the open stage, Nor do I traffic in
their theaters. Indeed, I do acknowledge, at request Of some mere friends, and
honorable Romans, I have begun a poem of that nature.


Ovid se. You have, sir, a poem? and where is it? That Is the Law you study.


Ovid ju. Cornelius Gallus borrowed it to read.


Ovid se. Cornelius Gallus; There Is another gallant too has drunk of the same
poison, and Tibullus and Propertius. But these are gentlemen of means and
revenues now. Thou art a younger brother, and have nothing but thy bare
exhibition; which I protest shall be bare indeed, if thou forsake not these
unprofitable by-courses, and that timely too. Name me a professed poet, that his
poetry did ever afford him so much as a competency. I, your god of poets there
(whom all of you admire and reverence so much) Homer, he whose worm-eaten
statue must not be spewed against, but with hallowed lips and grovelling
adoration, what was he? what was he?


Tuc. Marry, I Will tell thee, old swaggerer; he was a poor, blind, rhyming
rascal, that lived obscurely up and down in booths and tap-houses, and scarce
ever made a good meal in his sleep, the whoreson hungry beggar.


Ovid se. He says well: Nay, I know this nettles you now; but answer me, is it
not true? You Will tell me his name shall live; and that (now being dead) his
works have eternis'd him, and made him divine; but could this divinity feed him
while he lived? could his name feast him?


Tuc. Or purchase him a senator's revenue? could it?


Ovid se. I, or give him place in the commonwealth? worship, or attendants?
make him be carried in his litter?


Tuc. Thou speak sentences, old Bias.


Lup. All this the Law will do, young sir, if you will follow it.


Ovid se. If he be mine, he shall follow and observe what I will apt him to, or
I profess here openly and utterly to disclaim him.


Ovid ju. Sir, let me crave you will forego these moods: I will be any thing,
or study any thing; I Will prove the unfashion'd body of the Law Pure elegance,
and make her rugged'st strains Run smoothly as Propertius' elegies.


Ovid se. Propertius' elegies? good!


Lup. Nay, you take him too quickly, Marcus.


Ovid se. Why, he cannot speak, he cannot think out of poetry; he is bewitched
with it.


Lup. Come, do not mis-prise him.


Ovid se. Mis-prize? I marry, I would have him use some such words now; they
have some touch, some taste of the Law. He should make himself a style out of
these, and let his Propertius' elegies go by.


Lup. Indeed, young Publius, he that will now hit the mark, must shoot through
the Law; we have no other planet reigns, and in that sphere you may sit and
sing with angels. Why, the Law makes a man happy, without respecting any other
merit; a simple scholar, or none at all, may be a lawyer.


Tuc. He tells thee true, my noble Neophyte; my little grammaticaster, he does:
it shall never put thee to thy mathematics, metaphysics, philosophy, and I
know not what supposed sufficiencies; if thou can but have the patience to
plod enough, talk, and make a noise enough, be impudent enough, and it is enough.


Lup. Three books will furnish you.


Tuc. And the less art the better besides, when it shall be in the power of thy
chevril conscience to do right or wrong at thy pleasure, my pretty Alcibiades.


Lup. I, and to have better men than himself, by many thousand degrees, to
observe him, and stand bare.


Tuc. True, and he to carry himself proud and stately, and have the law on his
side for it, old boy.


Ovid se. Well, the day grows old, gentlemen, and I must leave you. Publius, if
thou will have my favor, abandon these idle fruitless studies that so bewitch
witch thee. Send Janus home his back-face again, and look only forward to the
law: intend that. I will allow thee what shall suit thee in the rank of
gentlemen, and maintain thy society with the best; and under these conditions I
leave thee. My blessings light upon thee, if thou respect them; if not, mine
eyes may drop for thee, but thine own heart will ache for itself; and so farewell.


The LAW-STUDENT. To GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire.
Quid tibi cum Cirrha? quid cum Permessidos unda?
Romanum propius divitiusque Forum est.
Mart.

NOW Christ-Church left, and fixed at Lincoln's Inn,
The important studies of the Law begin.
Now groan the shelves beneath the unusual charge
Of Records, Statutes, and Reports at large.
Each Classic Author seeks his peaceful nook,
And modest Virgil yields his place to Coke.
No more, ye Bards, for vain precedence hope,
But even Jacob take the lead of Pope!
While the pil'd shelves sink down on one another,
And each huge folio has its cumb'rous brother,
While, armed with these, the Student views with awe
His rooms become the magazine of Law,
Say whence so few succeed? where thousands aim,
So few ever reach the promised goal of fame?
Say, why Caecilius quits the gainful trade
For regimentals, sword, and smart cockade?
Or Sextus why his first profession leaves
For narrower band, plain shirt, and pudding sleeves?
The depth of Law asks study, thought, and care;
Shall we seek these in rich Alonzo's heir?
Such diligence, alas! is seldom found
In the brisk heir to forty thousand pound.
Wealth, that excuses folly, sloth creates,
Few, who can spend, ever learn to get estates.
What is to him dry case, or dull report,
Who studies fashions at the Inns of Court;
And proves that thing of emptiness and show,
That mungrel, half-form'd thing, a Temple-Beau?
Observe him daily sauntring up and down,
In purple slippers, and in silken gown;
Last night's debauch, his morning conversation;
The coming, all his evening preparation.
By Law let others toil to gain renown!
Florio's a gentleman, a man of the town.
He nor courts, clients, or the law regarding,
Hurries from Nando's down to Covent Garden.
Yet he is a Scholar; -- mark him in the Pit
With critic catcall sound the stops of wit!
Supreme at George's he harangues the throng,
Censor of style from tragedy to song:
Him every witling views with secret awe,
Deep in the Drama, shallow in the Law,
Others there are, who, indolent and vain,
Contemn the science, they can never attain:
Who write, and read, but all by fits and starts,
And varnish folly with the name of Parts;
Trust on to Genius, for they scorn to pore,
Till even that little Genius is no more.
Knowledge in Law care only can attain,
Where honor's purchased at the price of pain.
If, loit'ring, up the ascent you cease to climb,
No starts of labor can redeem the time.
Industrious study wins by flow degrees,
True sons of Coke can never be sons of ease.
There are, whom Love of Poetry has smit,
Who, blind to interest, arrant dupes to wit,
Have wandered devious in the pleasing road,
With Attic flowers and Classic wreaths bestrew'd:
Wedded to verse, embraced the Muse for life,
And taken, like modern bucks, their whores to wife.
Wherever the Muse usurps despotic sway,
All other studies must of force give way.
Interest in vain puts in her prudent claim,
Nonsuited by the powerful plea of fame.
As well you might weigh lead against a feather,
As ever jumble wit and law together.
On Littleton Coke gravely thus remarks,
(Remember this, ye rhyming Temple Sparks!)
"In all our author's tenures, be it noted,
"This is the fourth time any verse is quoted."
Which, against the Muse and verse, may well imply
What lawyers call a noli prosequi.
Quit then, dear George, O quit the barren field,
Which neither profit nor reward can yield!
What though the sprightly scene, well-acted, draws
From unpack'd Englishmen unbrib'd applause,
Some Monthly Grub, some Dennis of the age,
In print cries shame on the degen'erate stage See the very curious and very
similar criticisms on the comedy of the Jealous Wife, in the two Reviews,
together with the most malicious and insolent attack on that writer, and the
author of this Collection in the Critical Review for March; an injury poorly
repaired by a lame apology in the Review for the succeeding Month, containing
fresh insults on one of the injured parties.
.
If happily Churchill strive, with generous aim,
To fan the sparks of genius to a flame;
If all UNASKED, UNKNOWING, AND UNKNOWN,
By noting thy desert, he prove his own;
Envy shall strait to Hamilton's repair,
And vent her spleen, and gall, and venom there,
Thee, and thy works, and all thy friends decry,
And boldly print and publish a rank lie,
Swear your own hand the flattering likeness drew,
Swear your own breath fame's partial trumpet blew.
Well I remember often your friends have said,
(Friends, whom the surest maxims ever led)
Turn parson, Colman, that is the way to thrive;
Your parsons are the happiest men alive.
Judges, there are but twelve, and never more,
But Stalls untold, and Bishops, twenty-four.
Of pride and claret, sloth and ven'son full,
Yon prelate mark, right reverend and dull!
He never, good man, need pensive vigils keep
To preach his audience once a week to sleep;
On rich preferments battens at his ease,
Nor sweats for tithes, as lawyers toil for fees.
Thus they advised. I know thee better far;
And cry, stick close, dear Colman, to the Bar!
If genius warm thee, where can genius call
For nobler action than in yonder hall?
It Is not enough each morn, on Term's approach,
To club your legal threepence for a coach;
Then at the Hall to take your silent stand,
With ink-horn and long note-book in your hand,
Marking grave sergeants cite each wise report,
And noting down sage dictums from the court,
With overwhelming brow, and law-learn'd face,
The index of your book of commonplace.
These are mere drudges, that can only plod,
And tread the path their dull forefathers trod,
Doomed through law's maze, without a clue, to range,
From second Vernon down to second Strange,
Do Thou uplift thine eyes to happier wits!
Dullness no longer on the woolpack sits;
No longer on the drawling dronish herd
Are the first honors of the law conferred;
But they, whose fame reward's due tribute draws,
Whose active merit challenges applause,
Like glorious beacons, are set high to view,
To mark the paths which genius should pursue.
O for thy spirit, MANSFIELD! at thy name
What bosom glows not with an active flame?
Alone from Jargon born to rescue Law,
From precedent, grave hum, and formal saw!
To strip chican'ry of its vain pretense,
And marry Common Law to Common Sense!
PRAT! on thy lips persuasion ever hung!
English falls, pure as Manna, from thy tongue:
On thy voice truth may rest, and on thy plea
Unerring HENLEY found the just decree.
HENLEY! than whom, to HARDWICK's well-rais'd fame,
No worthier second Royal GEORGE could name:
No lawyer of prerogative; no tool
Fashioned in black corruption's pliant school;
Formed 'twixt the People and the Crown to stand,
And hold the scales of right with even hand!
True to our hopes, and equal to his birth,
See, see in YORK the force of lineal worth!
But why their several merits need I tell?
Why on each honored sage's praises dwell?
WILMOT how well his place, or FOSTER fills?
Or shrewd sense beaming from the eye of WILLS?
Such, while thou see the public care engage,
Their fame increasing with increasing age,
Raised by true genius, bred in Phoebus' school,
Whose warmth of soul sound judgment knew to cool
-- With such illustrious proofs before your eyes,
Think not, my friend, youv'e too much wit to rise:
Think of the bench, the coif, long robe, and fee,
And leave the Press to ********* *** ** **.
The First Book of the HENRIADE. Translated from the French of M. De Voltaire.
THY chieftain, France, of tried illustrious worth,
By right of conquest king, by right of birth,
I sing. Who, tutored in misfortune's school,
There learnt the noblest science, how to Rule;
Bad Faction's furious discord cease to rave,
Valiant to conquer, merciful to save;
Baffled the daring League's rebellious schemes,
MAYENNE's proud hopes, and Spain's ambitious dreams:
With civil prudence blessed, with martial fire,
A nation's conqueror, and a nation's fire.
Truth, heavenly maid, from the Empyraean height
Descend, and with thy strong and purest light
My verse illume! and O, let mortals hear
Thy sacred word, and awfully revere!
Be thou my guide! thy sage experience brings
Unerring maxims to the ear of kings.
It Is thine, blessed maid, and only thine, to show
What most befits the regal power to know.
Purge thou the film from off a nation's eyes,
And show what ills from civil discord rise!
Nor spare with decent boldness to disclose
The prince's errors, and the people's woes:
And O! if fable ever, in times of yore,
Mixed her soft accents with thy sterner lore,
If ever her hand adorned thy towering head,
And over thy front her milder graces spread;
If ever her shades, which lovingly unite,
Bad thy fair form spring stronger into light,
With me, permit her all thy steps to trace,
Not to conceal thy beauties, but to grace!
Still VALOIS reigned, and sunk in pleasure's bower,
Over a mad state held loose the reigns of power:
The trampled Law had lost its ancient force,
And Right confounded, missed her even course.
'Twas thus when VALOIS France's scepter bore,
Sceptered indeed, but now a king no more;
Not glory's minion now, the voice of fame
Swelled the loud trumpet to the hero's name;
His laurels withered, and all blasted now,
Which conquest hung upon his infant brow;
Whose progress Europe marked with conscious fear,
Whose loss provoked his country's common tear,
When, the long train of all his virtues known,
The North admiring called him to the throne.
In second rank, the light which strikes the eyes,
Raised to the first, grows dim, and feebly dies.
From war's stern soldier, active, firm, and brave,
He sunk a monarch, pleasure's abject slave.
Lulled with soft ease, forgetful all of state,
His weakness tottered with a kingdom's weight;
While lost in sloth, and dead to glorious fame,
The sons of riot governed in his name.
QUELUS, St. MAIGRIN, death-cemented pair,
JOYEUSE the gay, and D' ESPERNON the fair,
The careless king in pleasure plunged with these,
In lust intemperate, and lethargic ease.
Mean time, the GUISES, fortunate and brave,
Caught the fair moment which his weakness gave.
Then rose the fatal League in evil hour,
That dreadful rival of his waning power.
The people blind, their sacred Monarch braved,
Led by those Tyrants, who their rights enslaved.
His friends forsook him, helpless and alone,
His servants chased him from his royal throne;
Revolted Paris, deaf to kingly awe,
Within her gates the crouding stranger saw.
Through all the city burst rebellion's flame;
And all was lost, when virtuous BOURBON came;
Came, full of warlike ardour, to restore
That light his prince, deluded, had no more.
His active presence breathed an instant flame;
No longer now the sluggish sons of shame,
Onward they press, where glory calls, to arms,
And spring to War from Pleasure's silken charms:
To Paris gates both kings advance amain,
Rome felt the alarm, and trembled haughty Spain:
While Europe, watching where the tempest falls,
With anxious eyes beheld the unhappy walls.
Within was DISCORD, with her hell-born train,
Stirring to war the League, and haughty MAIN,
The people, and the church: and from on high
Called out to Spain, rebellion's prompt ally.
DISCORD, dread monster, deaf to human woe,
To her own subjects an avengeful foe,
Bloody, impetuous, eager to destroy,
In man's misfortune founds her hateful joy;
To neither party ought of mercy shown,
Well-pleased she stabs the dagger in her own;
Dwells a fierce tyrant in the breast she fires,
And smiles to punish what herself inspires.
West of the city, near those borders gay,
Where Seine obliquely winds her sloping way,
(Scenes now, where pleasure's soft retreats are found,
Where triumphs art, and nature smiles around,
Then, by the will of fate, the bloody stage
For war's stern combat and relentless rage)
The unhappy VALOIS bad his troops advance,
There rushed at once the generous strength of France.
A thousand heroes, eager for the fight,
By sects divided, from revenge unite.
These virtuous BOURBON leads, their chosen guide,
Their cause confederate, and their hearts allied.
It seemed the army felt one common flame,
Their zeal, religion, cause, and chief the sameame.
The sacred Louis, fire of BOURBON's race,
From azure skies, beside the throne of grace,
With holy joy beheld his future heir,
And eyed the Hero with paternal care;
With such as prophets feel, a blessed presage,
He saw the virtues of his ripening age:
Saw Glory round him all her laurels deal,
Yet wail'd his errors, though he loved his zeal;
With eye prophetic he beheld even now,
The crown of France adorn his royal brow;
He knew the wreath was destined which they gave,
More willed the Saint, the light which shines to save.
Still HENRY's steps moved onward to the throne,
By secret ways, even to himself unknown.
His help from Heaven the Holy Prophet sent,
But hid the arm his wise indulgence lent;
Left sure of conquest, he had slack'd his flame,
Nor grappl'd danger for the meed of fame.
Already MARS had donn'd his coat of mail,
And doubtful Conquest held her even scale;
Carnage with blood had marked his purple way,
And slaughtered heaps in wild confusion lay,
When VALOIS thus his part'ner king addressed,
The sigh deep-heaving from his anxious breast.
"You see what fate, what humbling fate is mine,
"Nor yet alone, -- the injury is thine.
"The dauntless League, by hardy Chieftains led,
"Which hisses faction with her Hydra head,
"Boldly consederate by a desperate oath,
"Aims not at me alone, but strikes at both.
"Though I long since the regal circle wear,
"Though thou by rank succeed my rightful heir,
"Paris disowns us, nor will homage bring
"To me their present, you their future king.
"Thine, well they know the next illustrious claim,
"From law, from birth, and deeds of loudest fame;
"Yet from that throne's hereditary right
"Where I but totter, would exclude thee quite.
"Religion hurls her furious bolts on thee,
"And holy councils join her firm decree:
"ROME, though she raise no soldier's martial band,
"Yet kindles war through every awe-struck land;
"Beneath her banners bids each host repair,
"And trusts her thunder to the Spaniard's care,
"Far from my hopes each summer friend is flown,
"No subjects hail me on my sacred throne;
"No kindred now the kind affection shows,
"All fly, their king, abandon, or oppose:
"Rich in my spoils, with greedy treacherous haste,
"While the base Spaniard lays my country waste.
"Midst foes like these, abandoned, and betrayed,
"France in her turn shall seek a foreign aid:
"Shall Britain's court by secret methods try,
"And win ELIZA for a firm ally.
"Of old I know between each powerful state,
"Subsists a jealous and immortal hate;
"That London lifts its towering front on high,
"And looks on Paris with a rival eye;
"But I, the monarch of each pageant throne,
"Have now no subjects, and no country own:
"Vengeance alone my stern resolves avow,
"Who gives me that, to me is Frenchman now.
"The snail-pac'd agents, whose deliberate way,
"Creeps on in trammels of prescribed delay,
"Such fit not now; it is You, great Prince, alone
"Must haste a suppliant to ELIZA's throne.
"Your voice alone shall needful succors bring,
"And arm Britannia for an injured king.
"To Albion hence, and let thy happier name
"Plead the king's cause, and raise their generous flame!
"My foes' defeat upon thy arm depends,
"But from thy virtues I must hope for friends."
Thus spoke the king, while HENRY's looks confessed
The jealous ardour which inflamed his breast,
Left others' arms might urge their glorious claim,
And ravish from him half the meed of fame.
With deep regret the Hero numbered over
The wreaths of glory he had won before;
When, without succors, without skill's intrigue,
Himself with CONDE shook the trembling League.
When those command, who hold the regal sway,
It is a subject's virtue to obey.
Resolved to follow what the King commands,
The blows, suspended, fell not from his hands;
He rein'd the ardour of his noble mind,
And parting left the gathered wreaths behind.
The astonished army felt a deep concern,
Fate seemed depending on the Chief's return.
His absence still unknown, the pent-up foe
In dire expectance dread the sudden blow;
While VALOIS' troops still feel their hero's flame,
And virtue triumphs in her HENRY'S name.
Of all his favorites, none their chief attend,
Save MORNAY brave, his soul's familiar friend.
MORNAY of steady faith, and manners plain,
And truth, untainted with the flatt'rers strain;
Rich in desert, of valor rarely tried;
A virtuous champion, though on error's side;
With signal prudence blessed, with patriot zeal
Firm to his church, and to the public weal;
Censor of courtiers, but by courts beloved,
Rome's fierce assailant, and by Rome approved;
Across two rocks, where with tremendous roar,
The foaming ocean lashes either shore,
To Dieppe's strong port the Hero's steps repair,
The ready sailors ply their busy care.
The towering ships, old ocean's lordly kings,
Aloft in air display their canvas wings;
Not swelled by Boreas now, the glassy seas
Flowed calmly on, with Zephyr's gentle breeze.
Now, anchor weighed, they quit the friendly shore,
And land receding greets their eyes no more.
Jocund they sailed, and Albion's chalky height
At distance rose full fairly to the sight.
When rumbling thunders rend the affrighted pole,
Loud roar the winds, and seas tempestuous roll:
The livid lightnings cleave the darkened air,
And all around reigns horror and despair.
No partial fear the Hero's bosom knows,
Which only trembled for his country's woes.
It seemed his looks, toward her in silence bent,
Accused the winds, which crossed his great intent.
So CAESAR, striving for a conquered world,
Near Epire's banks, with adverse tempests hurled,
Trusting, undaunted, and securely brave,
Rome's and the world's fate to the swelling wave.
Though leagued with POMPEY NEPTURE'S self engage,
Opposed his fortune to dull Ocean's rage.
Mean time, that GOD, whose power the tempest binds,
Who rides triumphant on the wings of winds,
That GOD, whose wisdom, which presides over all,
Can raise, protect, or crush this earthly ball,
From his bright throne, beyond the starry skics,
Beheld the Hero with considering eyes.
GOD was his guide, and 'mid the tempest's roar
The tossing vessel reached the neighboring shore;
Where Jerfey rises from the ocean's bed,
There, heaven-conducted, was the Hero led.
At a small distance from the shore, there stood
The growth of many years, a shadowy wood.
A neighboring rock the calm retirement saves
From the rude blasts, and hoarse-resounding waves.
A grotto stands behind, whose structure knows
The simple grace, which nature's hand bestows.
Here far from court removed, a holy Sage
Spent the mild evening of declining age.
While free from worldly toils, and worldly woe,
His only study was himself to know:
Here mused, regretting on his misspent days,
Or lost in love, or pleasure's flowery maze.
No gusts of folly swell the dangerous tide,
While all his passions to a calm subside;
The bubble life he held an empty dream,
His food the simple herb, his drink the stream;
Tranquil and calm he drew his aged breath,
And looked with patience t'ward the port of death,
When the pure soul to blissful realms shall soar,
And join with GOD himself to part no more.
The GOD he worshipped eyed the zealous Sage,
And blessed with wisdom's lore his silvered age:
Gave him the skill of prophecy to know,
And from fate's volume read events below.
The Sage with conscious joy the Prince addressed,
And spread the table for his royal guest;
The prompt repast, which simple nature suits,
The stream's fresh water, and the forest's roots,
Not unaccustomed to the homely fare,
The Warrior sat; for often from busy care,
From courts retired, and pomp's fastidious pride,
The Hero dared to throw the king aside:
And in the rustic cot well-pleased partook
Of labor's mean repast, and cheerful look;
Found in himself the joys to kings unknown
And self deposed forgot the lordly throne.
The world's contention to their minds supplies
Much converse, wholesome to the good and wise.
Much did they talk of woes in human life,
Of Christian kingdoms torn with jarring strife.
The zeal of MORNAY, like a stubborn fort,
Attached to Calvin stood his firm support.
HENRY, still doubting, sought the indulgent skies,
That lights' clear ray might burst upon his eyes,
"Must then, said he, the truth be always found,
"To mortals weak with mists encompas'd round?
"Must I still err, my way in darkness trod,
"Nor know the path which leads me to my GOD?
"If all alike he willed us to obey,
"The GOD who willed it, had prescribed the way.
"Let us not vainly GOD'S designs explore!
"(The Sage replied) be humble, and adore!
"Arraign not madly heaven's unerring laws
"For faults, where mortals are themselves the cause.
"These aged eyes beheld in days of yore,
"When Calvin's doctrine reached the Gallic shore,
"Then, though with blood it now distains the earth,
"Creeping in shade and humble in the birth,
"I saw it banished by religion's laws,
"Without one friend to combat in the cause.
"Through ways oblique I saw the phantom tread,
"Slow winding, and ashamed to rear her head,
"'Till, at the last, upheld by powerful arms,
"'Midst cannon's thunder, and 'mid war's alarms,
"Burst forth the Monster in the glare of light,
"With towering front, full dreadful to the sight;
"To scoul at mortals from her tyrant seat,
"And spurn our altars at her impious feet.
"Far then from courts, beneath this peaceful cot,
"I wail'd Religion's and my Country's lot;
"Yet here, to comfort my declining days,
"Some dawn of hope presents its cheerful rays.
"So new a worship cannot long survive,
"Which man's caprice alone has kept alive.
"With that it rose, with that shall die away,
"Man's works and Man are bubbles of a day.
"The GOD, who reigns for ever and the same,
"At pleasure blasts a world's presumptuous aim.
"Vain is our malice, vain our strength displayed,
"To sap the city his right hand has made;
"Himself has fixed the strong foundations low,
"Which brave the wreck of time, and hell's "inveterate blow:
"The Lord of Lords shall bless thy purged sight
"With bright effulgence of diviner light;
"On thee, Great Prince, his mercies he will bestow,
"And shed that Truth thy bosom pants to know.
"THAT GOD has chose thee, and his hand alone
"Safe through the war shall lead thee to a throne.
"Conquest already (for his voice is fate,)
"For thee bids Glory open her golden gate.
"If on thy sight the Truth unnotic'd falls,
"Hope not admission in thy Paris' walls.
"Though splendid Ease invite thee to her arms,
"O shun, Great Prince, the Syren's poisoned charms!
"Over thy strong passions hold a glorious reign,
"Fly love's soft lap, break pleasure's silken chain!
"And when, with efforts strong, all foes overthrown,
"A League's great conqueror, and what is more Your "Own,
"When, with united hearts, and triumph's voice,
"Thy people hail thee with one common choice,
"From a dread siege, to fame for ever known,
"To mount with glory thy paternal throne,
"That time, Affliction shall lay by her rod,
"And thy glad eyes shall seek thy father's GOD:
"Then shall thou see from whence thy arms prevail.
"Go, Prince -- WHO TRUSTS IN GOD -- can never "fail."
Each word the Sage's holy lips impart,
Falls, like a flame, on HENRY'S generous heart.
The Hero stood transported in his mind
To times, when GOD held converse with mankind,
When simple virtue taught her heaven-born lore,
And Truth commanding bid even kings adore.
His eager arms the reverend Sage embrace,
And the warm tear fast trickled down his face.
Untouched, yet lost awhile in deep surprise,
Stood MORNAY brave; for still on MORNAY'S eyes
Hung error's mist, and GOD'S high will concealed
The gifts from him to HENRY'S breast revealed.
His wisdom idly would the world prefer,
Whose lot, though rich in virtues, was to err.
While the wrapped Sage fulfilling GOD'S beheft,
Spoke inspiration to the Prince's breast,
Hushed were the winds, within their caverns bound,
Smooth flowed the seas, and nature smiled around.
The Sage his guide, the Hero sought his way
Where the tall vessels safe at anchor lay:
The ready sailors quit the friendly strand,
Hoist the glad sails, and make for Albion's land.
While over her coast his eyes admiring range,
He praised in silence Britain's happier change:
Where laws abused by foul intestine foes,
Had erst entailed a heap of dreadful woes
On prince and people; on that bloody stage,
Where slaughtered heroes bled for civil rage;
On that bright throne, from whence descended springs,
The illustrious lineage of a hundred kings,
Like HENRY, long in adverse fortune schooled,
Over willing English hearts a WOMAN ruled:
And, rich in manly courage, female grace,
Closed the long luster of her crowded race.
ELIZA then, in Britain's happiest hour,
Held the just balance of contending power;
Made English subjects bow the willing knee,
Who will not serve, and are not happy free.
Beneath her sacred reign the nation knows
No sad remembrance of its former woes;
Their flocks securely grazed the fertile plain,
Their garners bursting with their golden grain.
The stately ships, their swelling sails unfurled,
Brought wealth and homage from the distant world:
All Europe watched Britannia's bold decree,
Dreaded by land, and monarch of the sea.
Wide over the waves his fleet exulting rode,
And fortune triumphed over Ocean's GOD.
Proud London now, no more of barbarous fame,
To arms and commerce urged her blended claim,
Her powers, in union leagued, together sat,
King, Lords, and Commons, in their threefold state.
Though separate each their several interest draw.
Yet all united form the steadfast law.
All three, one body's members, firm and fit,
Make but one power in strong conjunction knit;
Power to itself of danger often found,
But spreading terror to its neighbors round.
Blessed, when the people duty's homage show,
And pay their king the tribute which they owe!
More blessed, when kings for milder virtues known,
Protect their people's freedom from the throne!
"Ah when, cried BOURBON, shall our discord cease,
"Our glory, Albion, rise, like thine, in peace?
"Blush, blush, ye kings, ye lords of jarring states,
"A Woman bids, and War has closed its gates:
"YOUR countries bleed with factious rage oppressed,
"While SHE reigns happy over a people blessed."
Mean time the Hero reached the sea-girt isle,
Where freedom bids eternal plenty smile;
Not far from William's Tower at distance seen,
Stood the famed palace of the Virgin Queen.
Hither, the faithful MORNAY at his side,
Without the noise and pageant pomp of pride,
The toys of grandeur which the vain pursue,
But glare unheeded to the Hero's view.
Tue Prince arrived: With bold and manly sense
He spoke, his frankness, all his eloquence;
Told his sad tale, and bowed his lofty heart,
For France's woes, to act submission's part;
For needful aids the British Queen addressed,
While in the suppliant shone the king confessed.
"Come thou, replied the Queen, with orange surprise,
"Come thou from VALOIS for die wished allies?
"Ask'st thou protection for a tyrant foe,
"Whose deadly hate worked all thy fortune's woe?
"Far as the golden sun begins to rise,
"To where he drives adown the western skies,
"His strise and Thine to all the world is known:
"Stand'st thou for Him a friend at Britain's throne?
"And is that hand, which VALOIS often has feared,
"Armed in his cause, and for his vengeance reared?"
When thus the Prince: A monarch's adverse fate
"Wipes all remembrance out of former hate.
"VALOIS was their a slave, his passion's slave,
"But now himself, a monarch firm and brave;
"He bursts at once the ignominious chain,
"Resumes the Hero, and asserts his reign.
"Blessed, if of nature more assured and free,
"He Would sought no aid but from himself and me!
"But, led by fraud, and arts, all insincere,
"He was my foe from weakness and from fear.
"His faults die with me, when his woes I view,
"I Have gained the conquest -- grant me vengeance, "You!
"For know the work is thine, Illustrious Dame,
"To deck thy Albion's brows with worthiest fame.
"Let thy protection spread her ready wings,
"And fight with me the injured cause of Kings!"
ELIZA then, for much she wished to know,
The various turns of France's long-felt woe,
Whence rising first the civil discord came,
And Paris kindled to rebellion's flame --
"To me, Great Prince, thy griefs are not unknown,
"Though brought imperfect, and by Fame alone;
"Whose rapid wing too indiscreetly flies,
"And spreads abroad her indigested lies.
"Deaf to her tales, from thee, Illustrious Youth,
"From thee alone ELIZA seeks the truth.
"Tell me, for you have witnessed all the woe,
"VALOIS' brave friend, or VALOIS' conquering foe,
"Say, whence this friendship, this alliance grew,
"Which knits the happy bond 'twixt him and you;
"Explain this wondrous change, it is you alone
"Can paint the virtues which yourself has shown.
"Teach me thy woes, for know thy story brings
"A moral lesson to the pride of kings."
"And must my memory then, Illustrious Queen,
"Recall the horrors of each dreadful scene?
"O had it pleased the Almighty Power (which "knows,
"How my heart bleeds over all my country's woes)
"Oblivion then had shatch'd them from the light,
"And hid them buried in eternal night.
"Nearest of blood, must I aloud proclaim,
"The princes' madness, and expose their shame?
"Reflection shakes my mind with wild dismay --
"But it is ELIZA'S will, and I obey.
"Others, in speaking, from their smooth address
"Might make their weakness or their crimes seem "less:
"The flowery art was never made for me,
"I speak a soldier's language, plain and free."
FAMILIAR EPISTLE To -- Apothecary.
WHEN once a man so far is gone
To wet his lips at Helicon,
Not all the hellebore, which you
Buy in, the Lord knows what to do,
His head can settle, or restore
His reason as it was before.
Talk about physic, what you will,
And magnify the doctor's skill,
Mention the names of all the college,
Thole shining miracles of knowledge,
Or more to justify your praise,
Call in the learned of former days,
Let Mead, Friend, Boorehave, Ratcliffe join,
Their mighty-knowing heads to thine,
Consult together, and survey
The whole Materia Medica,
The various powers of medicine state,
And find out virtues, or create,
Try all old ways, if they will not do
Experimentally try new;
And when all is ended, rest assured,
Poetic madness cannot be cured.
When haughty Caelia's vain desires
Inflame her brain, and fancy fires,
When on her bed she sits elate
And takes it for a throne of state,
And with a scepter made of straw
Keeps the subjected world in awe;
Or when Clarissa, hapless fair,
With downcast eye, and pensive air
Treads her lone cell, and now complains
Of broken vows, and perjured swains,
Now blames her own too easy heart,
Which took the base deluder's part;
Or when the poet's rolling eye
Proclaims his hour of phrenzy nigh,
When on imaginary horse
From pole to pole he takes his course,
Or, of fantastic trophies proud,
Bestrides some easy-pacing cloud,
Or wildly running through the streets,
Pours couplets out to all he meets;
Can Addington, with all his care,
The shattered seat of sense repair?
When Madness (now my worthy friend,
I must insist that you will attend,
For of distinctions fond I Am grown,
And so will make one of my own,
A nice distinction, not a jot
It matters whether true or not,
For he proceeds on surest grounds
Who, when he cannot convince, confounds,
And to the credit of his brain,
Puzzles the cause he cannot maintain)
When Madness, of all sorts and sizes,
From bodily disease arises,
Whether the blood half froze remains,
And scarce moves laboring through the veins,
Or, over-hot with sanguine pride,
Impetuous rolls her rapid tide,
If the mind is no more affected,
Than as with body it is connected,
Physic may then of service prove,
Abate the grief, perhaps remove;
But if the body and the brain
Only, t'oblige the mind, complain,
And the distemper's in the heart,
It is beyond the reach of art.
But to distinguish farther still --
Read it or not, just as you will,
Or, if you read, commend or blame,
To me, old boy, it is all the same;
Say, if you please, perhaps say true,
This nothing is to me or you,
Or say, what observation says
Of many great men now-adays,
Of most indeed, that I am one
Of great distinction, judgment none.
But once more to return, for this
You Will read in a parenthesis,
Though I had left you in the dark
By leaving out the usual mark.
All kinds of Madness, we shall find,
Even those which spring out of the mind,
More readily a cure admit,
Than that which flows from Love of Wit.
In other phrenzies pain's endured,
The patient wishes to be cured,
If ever some lucid interval.
The scattered rays of sense recall;
Whereas the poet's highest pleasure,
And frequently his only treasure,
In Madness lies; his joys still vary,
Joys real or imaginary,
As his head turns, and he is most blessed,
When most with Madness he is possessed.
Phoebus himself, that we may quote
Example of undoubted note,
Phoebus, who well is known to be
Of Physic, God, and Poetry,
When first he found by symptoms sure
His brain affected, thought of cure;
Tried every way, but tried in vain,
To settle his distracted brain.
Convinced at length, that naught would do,
The useless drugs aside he threw,
And smiling to the listening crowd
This maxim he declared aloud
(A maxim since most sacred had)
No Poet's WISE who is not MAD.
A TALE
VENUS, of laughter queen and love,
The greatest demirep above,
Who scorned restriction, hated custom,
Knew her own sex too well to trust 'em,
Proceeded on the noble plan,
At any rate, to have her man;
Looked on decorum, as mere trash,
And lived like *** and ***,
From Paphos, where they her revere
As much as we do Caelia here,
Or from Cythera, where her altars
Are decked with daggers, true-love halters,
Garters yclept, and other trophies,
Which prove that man in love an oaf is,
According to appointment came
To see CAECILIA, tuneful dame,
Whose praise by Dryden's Ode is grown
Bright and immortal as his own,
And who has been for many years
The chief directress of the spheres.
Thomas, who rode behind the car,
And for a flambeau held a star,
Who, in the honest way of trade,
Has forged more horns, and cuckold's made,
Than Vulcan and his brawny dolts
Ever for Jove forged thunderbolts,
Slipped gently down, and ran before 'em,
Ringing the bell with due decorum.
But, truth to say, I cannot tell
Whether it Knocker was or Bell,
(This for virtue an anecdote is,)
Which used to give CAECILIA notice,
When any lady of the sky
Was come to bear her company.
But this I Am sure, be which it will,
Thomas performed his part with skill.
Methinks I hear the reader cry --
His part with skill? why, You or I,
Or any body else, as well
As Thomas, sure, could ring a bell,
Nor did I ever hear before
Of skill in knocking at a door.
Poor low-liv'd creature! I suppose,
Nay, and am sure, you're one of those
Who, at what door soever they be,
Will always knock in the same key.
Thinking that Bell and Knocker too
Were found out nothing else to do,
But to inform the house, no doubt,
That there was somebody without,
Who, if they might such favor win,
Would rather choose to be within.
But had our servants no more sense,
Lord! what must be the consequence?
Error would error still pursue,
And strife and anarchy ensue,
Punctilio from her altar hurled,
Whence she declares unto the world
Whatever by fancy is decreed,
Through all her niceties must bleed.
For if there was not to be found
Some wholesome difference of sound,
But the same rap foretold the approach
Of him who walked, or rode in coach,
A poor relation now and then,
Might to my lord admittance gain,
When his good lordship hoped to see
Some rascal of his own degree;
And, what is more unhappy still,
The stupid wretch, who brings a bill,
Might pass through all the motley tribe,
As free as one, who brings a bribe.
My lady too might pique her grace
Which carriage stiff, and formal face,
Which, she deceived, had taken care
For some inferior to prepare.
Or might some wretch from Lombard Street
With greater ease and freedom meet,
Than sense of honor will admit
Between my lady and a cit.
Those evils wisely to prevent,
And root out care and discontent,
Every gay smart, who rides behind,
With rose and bag in taste refined,
Must music fully understand,
Have a nice ear and skilful hand;
At every turn be always found
A perfect connoissour in sound;
Through all the gamut skilful fly
Varying his notes, now low, now high,
According as he shifts his place;
Now hoarsely grumbling in the base,
Now turning tenor, and again
To treble railing his shrill strain;
So to declare, wherever he be,
His master's fortune and degree,
By the distinguishing address
Which he will upon the door express.
Thomas, whom I have named before
As ringing at CAECILIA'S door,
Was perfect master of this art,
And versed alike in every part:
So that Caecilia knew, before
Her footman came unto the door,
And in due form had told her so,
That Madam VENUS was below.
The doors immediate open flew,
The GODDESS, without more ado,
Displaying beauty's thousand airs,
Skim'd through the hall, and trip'd up stairs.
CAECILIA met her with a smile
Of great delight, when all the while
If her false heart could have been seen,
She wished she had at Cyprus been.
But ladies, skilled in forms and arts,
Don't in their faces wear their hearts,
And those above, like those below,
Deal frequently in outside show,
And always, to keep up parade,
Have a smile by them ready-made.
The forms, which ladies when they meet
Must for good-manners' sake repeat,
As humble servant, how do you do,
And in return, pray how are you?
Enriched at every proper space
With due integuments of lace,
As Madam, Grace, and Goddeship,
Which we for brevity shall skip,
Happily past, in elbow-chair
At length our ladies seated are.
Indiff'rent subjects first they chusc.
And talk of weather and the news.
That done, they sit upon the state,
And snarl at the decrees of fate,
Invectives against Jove are hurled,
And They alone should rule the world.
Dull politics at length they quit,
And by ill nature show their wit;
For hand in hand, too well we know,
These intimates are said to go,
So that where either does preside
T'other's existence is implied.
The man of wit, so men decree,
Must without doubt ill-natured be;
And the ill-natured scarce forgets
To rank himself among the wits.
Malicious VENUS, who by rote
Had every little anecdote,
And most minutely could advance
Each interesting circumstance,
Which unto all intrigues related,
Since Jupiter the world created,
Displayed her eloquence with pride,
Hinted, observed, enlarged, applied,
And not the reader to detain
With things impertinent and vain,
She did, as ladies do on earth
Who cannot bear a rival's worth,
In such a way each tale rehearse
As good made bad, and bad made worse.
CAECILIA too, with saint-like air,
But lately come from evening prayer,
Who knew her duty, as a saint,
Always to pray, and not to faint,
And, rain or shine, her church never mist,
Prude, devotee, and methodist,
With equal zeal the cause promoted,
Misconstru'd things, and words misquoted,
Misrepresented, misapplied,
And, inspiration being her guide,
The very heart of man dissected,
And to his principles objected.
Thus, amongst us, the sanctified,
In all the spirituals of pride,
Whose honest consciences never rested,
Till, of carnalities diverted,
They knew and felt themselves t'inherit
A double portion of the spirit:
Who from one church to the other roam,
Whilst their poor children starve at home,
Consid'ring they may claim the care
Of Providence, who sent them there,
And therefore certainly is tied
To see their every want supplied;
Who unto preachers give away,
That which their creditors should pay,
And hold that chosen vessels must
Be generous before they are just,
And that their charity this way
Shall bind over heaven their debts to pay,
And serve their temp'ral turn, no doubt,
Better than if they would put it out,
Whilst naught hereafter can prevent,
Their sure reward of cent. per cent.
Who honest labor scorn, and say
None need to work who love to pray,
For heaven will satisfy their cravings,
By sending of Elijah's ravens,
Or rain down, when their spirits fail,
A dish of manna, or a quail;
Who from Moorfields to Tottenham Court
In furious fits of zeal resort,
Praise what they do not understand,
Turn up the eye, stretch out the hand,
Melt into tears, whilst -- blows
The twang of nonsense through his nose,
Or -- deals in speculation,
Or -- hums his congregation,
Or -- talks with the lord of hosts,
-- with pillars and with posts;
Who strictly watch, lest Satan should,
Roaring like lion for his food,
Ensnare their feet his fatal trap in,
And their poor souls be taken napping;
Who strictly fast, because they find,
The flesh still wars against the mind,
And flesh of saints, like sinner's, must
Be mortified, to keep down lust;
Who, four times in the year at least,
Join feast of love to love of feast,
Which, though the profligate and vain
In terms of blasphemy profane,
Yet all the ceremony here is
Pure as the mysteries of Ceres;
Who, God's elect, with triumph feel
Within themselves salvation's seal,
And will not, must not, dare not doubt,
That heaven itself cannot blot it out;
After they have done their holy labors,
Return to scandalize their neighbors,
And think they cannot serve heaven so well,
As with its creatures filling hell,
So that, inflamed with holy pride,
They save themselves, damn all beside.
For persons, who pretend to feel
The glowings of uncommon zeal,
Who others scorn, and seem to be
Righteous in very great degree,
Do, 'bove all others, take delight
To vent their spleen in tales of spite,
And think they raise their own renown
By pulling of a neighbor's down;
Still lying on with most success,
Because they charity profess,
And make the outside of religion,
Like Mahomet's inspiring pigeon,
To all their forgeries gain credit,
It Is enough sure that -- said it.
But what can all this rambling mean?
Was ever such a hodge-podge seen?
VENUS, CAECILIA, Saints, and Whores,
Thomas, Virtue, Bells, Knockers, Doors,
Lords, Rogues, Relations, Ladies, Cits,
Stars, Flambeaus, Thunderbolts, Horns, Wits,
Vulcan, and Cuckold-maker, Scandal,
Music, and Footmen, Ear of Handel,
Weather, News, Envy, Politics,
Intrigues, and Women's Thousand Tricks,
Prudes, Methodists, and Devotees,
Fastings, Feasts, Prayers, and Charities,
Ceres, with her mysterious train,
--, --, --, and --,
Flesh, Spirit, Love, Hate, and Religion,
A Quail, a Raven, and a Pigeon,
All jumbled up in one large dish,
Red-Herring, Bread, Fowl, Flesh, and Fish.
Where Is the connection, where is the plan?
The devil sure is in the man.
All in an instant we are hurled
From place to place all round the world,
Yet find no reason for it -- mum
There, my good critic, lies the hum --
Well, but methinks, it would avail
To know the end of this -- A TALE.
An EPISTLE to C. CHURCHILL, AUTHOR of the ROSCIAD.
IF at a Tavern, where you would wish to dine,
They cheat your palate with adulterate wine,
Would you, resolve me, critics, for you can,
Send for the master up, or chide the man?
The man no doubt a knavish business drives,
But tell me what is the master who connives?
Hence you will infer, and sure the doctrine's true,
Which says, no quarter to a foul Review.
It matters not who vends the nauseous slop,
Master or prentice; we detest the shop.
Critics of old, a manly liberal race,
Approved or censured with an open face:
Boldly persu'd the free decisive task,
Nor stabbed, concealed beneath a ruffian's mask.
To works not men, with honest warmth, severe,
The impartial judges laughed at hope or fear:
Theirs was the noble skill, with generous aim,
To san true genius to an active flame;
To bring forth merit in its strongest light,
Or damn, the blockhead to his native night.
But, as all states are subject to decay,
The state of letters too will melt away.
Smit with the harlot charms of trilling sound,
Softness now wantons even on Roman ground;
Where Thebans, Spartans, sought their honored graves,
Behold a weak enervate race of slaves.
In classic lore, deep science, language dead,
Though modern witlings are but scantly read,
Prosessors The author takes this opportunity, notwithstanding all insinuations
to the contrary, to declare, that he has no particular aim at a gentleman,
whose abilities he sufficiently acknowledges.
fail not, who will loudly bawl
In praise of either, with the want of all.
Hailed mighty critics to this present hour.
-- The tribune's name survived the tribune's power.
Now Quack and Critic differ but in name,
Empirics frontless both, they mean the same;
This raw in Physic, that in Letters fresh,
Both spring, like warts, excrescence from the flesh.
Half formed, half bred in printers' hireling schools,
For all professions have their rogues and fools,
Though the pert witling, or the coward knave,
Casts no reflection on the wise or brave.
Yet, in these leaden times, this idle age,
When, blind with dullness, or as blind with rage,
Author against author rails with venom cursed,
And happy He who calls out blockhead first,
From the low earth aspiring genius springs,
And sails triumphant, born on eagle wings.
No toothless spleen, no venomed critic's aim,
Shall rob thee, Churchill, of thy proper fame;
While hitch'd for ever in thy nervous rhyme,
Fool lives, and shines out fool to latest time.
Pity perhaps might wish a harmless fool
To escape the observance of the critic school;
But if low malice, leagued with folly, rise,
Armed with invectives, and hedged round with lies;
Should wakeful dullness, if she ever wake,
Write sleepy nonsense but for writing sake,
And, stung with rage, and piously severe,
Wish bitter comforts to your dying ear;
If some small wit, some fix-lin'd verseman, rakes
For quaint reflections in the putrid jakes,
Talents usurped demand a censor's rage,
A dunce is dunce proscribed in every age.
Courtier, physician, lawyer, parson, cit,
All, all are objects of theatric wit.
Are ye then, Actors, privileged alone,
To make that weapon, ridicule, your own?
Professions bleed not from his just attack,
Who laughs at pedant, coxcomb, knave, or quack;
Fools on and off the stage are fools the same,
And every dunce is satire's lawful game.
Freely you thought, where thought has free'st room,
Why then apologize? for what? to whom?
Though Gray's-Inn wits with author squires unite,
And self-made giants club their labored mite,
Though pointless satire make its weak escape,
In the dull babble of a mimic ape,
Boldly pursue where genius points the way,
Nor heed what monthly puny critics say.
Firm in thyself with calm indifference smile,
When the wise Vet'ran knows you by your style,
With critic scales weighs out the partial wit,
What I, or You, or He, or no one writ;
Denying thee thy just and proper worth,
But to give falshood's spurious issue birth;
And all self-willed with lawless hand to raise
Malicious slander on the base of praise.
Disgrace eternal wait the wretch's name
Who lives on credit of a borrowed fame;
Who wears the trappings of another's wit,
Or fathers bantlings which he could not get!
But shrewd Suspicion with her squinting eye,
To truth declared, prefers a whispered lie.
With greedy mind the proffered tale believes,
Relates her wishes, and with joy deceives.
The World, a pompous name, by custom due
To the small circle of a talking few,
With heartfelt glee the injurious tale repeats,
And sends the whisper buzzing through the streets.
The prude demure, with sober saint-like air,
Pities her neighbor for she is wondrous fair.
And when temptations lie before our feet,
Beauty is frail, and females indiscreet.
She hopes the nymph will every danger shun,
Yet prays devoutly -- that the deed were done.
Mean time sits watching for the daily lie,
As spiders lurk to catch a simple fly.
Yet is not scandal to one sex consigned,
Though men would fix it on the weaker kind.
Yes, this great lord, creation's master, man,
Will vent his malice where the blockhead can,
Imputing crimes, of which even thought is free,
For instance now, your Rosciad all to me.
If partial friendship, in thy sterling lays,
Grows all too wanton in another's praise,
Critics, who judge by ways themselves have known,
Shall swear the praise, the poem is my own;
For it is the method in these learned days
For wits to scribble first, and after praise.
Critics and Co. thus vend their wretched stuff,
And help out nonsense by a monthly puff,
Exalt to giant's forms weak puny elves,
And descant sweetly on their own dear selves;
For works per month by learning's midwives paid,
Demand a puffing in the way of trade.
Reserved and cautious, with no partial aim
My Muse ever sought to blast another's fame.
With willing hand could twine a rival's bays,
From candor silent where she could not praise.
But if vile rancour, from (no matter who)
Actor, or mimic, printer, or Review,
Lies, often overthrown, with ceaseless venom spread
Still hiss out scandal from their Hydra head,
If the dull malice boldly walk the town,
Patience herself would wrinkle to a frown.
Come then with justice draw the ready pen,
Give me the works, I would not know the men.
All in their turns might make reprisals too,
Had all the patience but to read them through.
Come, to the utmost, probe the desperate wound,
Nor spare the knife wherever infection's found!
But Prudence, Churchill, or her sister, Fear,
Whispers forbearance to my fright'ned ear.
Oh! then with me forsake the thorny road,
Left we should flounder in some Fleet-Ditch Ode,
And sunk for ever in the lazy flood
Weep with the Naiads heavy drops of Mud.
Hail mighty Ode! which like a picture frame,
Holds any portrait, and with any name;
Or, like your nitches, planted thick and thin,
Will serve to cram the random hero in.
Hail mighty Bard too -- whatsoever thy name,
-- or Durfy, for it is all the same.
To brother bards shall equal praise belong,
For wit, for genius, comedy and song?
No costive Muse is thine, which freely rakes
With ease familiar in the well-known jakes,
Happy in skill to souse through foul and fair,
And toss the dung out with a lordly air.
So have I seen, amidst the grinning throng,
The sledge procession slowly dragged along,
Where the mock female shrew and hen-peck'd male
Scoop'd rich contents from either copious pail,
Called bursts of laughter from the roaring rout,
And dashed and splash'd the filthy grains about,
Quit then, my friend, the Muses' loved abode,
Alas! they lead not to preferment's road.
Be solemn, sad, put on the priestly frown,
Be dull! it is sacred, and becomes the gown,
Leave wit to others, do a Christian deed,
Your foes shall thank you, for they know their need.
Broad is the path by learning's sons possessed,
A thousand modern wits might walk abreast,
Did not each poet mourn his luckless doom,
Jostled by pedants out of elbow room.
I, who nor court their love, nor fear their hate,
Must mourn in silence over the Muse's fate.
No right of common now on Pindus' hill,
While all our tenures are by critic's will.
Where, watchful guardians of the lady muse,
Dwell monstrous giants, dreadful tall REVIEWS,
Who, as we read in famed romance of yore,
Sound but a horn, press forward to the door.
But let some chief, some bold adventurous knight,
Provoke these champions to an equal fight,
Strait into air to spaceless nothing fall
The castle, lions, giants, dwarf and all.
Ill it befits with undiscerning rage,
To censure Giants in this polished age.
No lack of genius stains those happy times,
No want of learning, and no dearth of rhymes.
The see-saw Muse that flows by measured laws,
In tuneful numbers, and affected pause,
With sound alone, sound's happy virtue fraught,
Which hates the trouble and expense of thought,
Once, every moon throughout the circling year,
With even cadence charms the critic ear.
While, dire promoter of poetic sin,
A Magazine must hand the lady in.
How Moderns write, how nervous, strong and well,
The ANTI-ROSCIAD'S decent Muse does tell:
Who, while she strives to cleanse each actor hurt,
Daubs with her praise, and rubs him into dirt.
Sure never yet was happy era known
So gay, so wise, so tasteful as our own.
Our curious histories rise at once COMPLETE,
Yet still continued, as they are paid, per sheet.
See every science which the world would know,
Your Magazines shall every month bestow,
Whose very titles fill the mind with awe,
Imperial, Christian, Royal, British, Law;
Their rich contents will every reader fit,
Statesman, Divine, Philosopher and Wit;
Compendious schemes I which teach all things at once,
And make a pedant coxcomb of a dunce.
But let not anger with such frenzy grow,
Drawcansir like, to strike down friend and foe.
To real worth be homage duly paid,
But no allowance to the paltry trade.
My friends I name not (though I boast a few,
To me an honor, and to letters too)
Fain would I praise, but, when such Things oppose,
My praise of course must make them -- 's foes.
If manly JOHNSON, with satyric rage,
Lash the dull follies of a trifling age,
If his strong Muse with genuine strength aspire,
Glows not the reader with the poet's fire?
HIS the true fire, where creep the witling fry
To warm themselves, and light their rushlights by.
What Muse like GRAY'S shall pleasing pensive flow
Attemper'd sweetly to the rustic woe?
Or who like him shall sweep the Theban lyre,
And, as his master, pour forth thoughts of fire?
Even now to guard afflicted learning's cause,
To judge by reason's rules, and nature's laws,
Boast we true critics in their proper right,
While LOWTH and Learning, Hurd and Taste unite.
Hail sacred names! -- Oh guard the Muse's page,
Save your loved mistress from a ruffian's rage;
See how she gasps and struggles hard for life,
Her wounds all bleeding from the butcher's knife:
Critics, like surgeons, blessed with curious art,
Should mark each passage to the human heart,
But not, unskilful, yet with lordly air,
Read surgeon's lectures while they scalp and tear.
To names like these I pay the hearty vow,
Proud of their worth, and not ashamed to bow.
To these inscribe my rude, but honest lays,
And feel the pleasures of my conscious praise.
Not that I mean to court each lettered name,
And poorly glimmer from reflected fame,
But that the Muse, who owns no servile fear,
Is proud to pay her willing tribute here.
PROLOGUE, Intended to have been spoken at Drury Lane theater, on His Majesty's
Birthday, 1761.
GENIUS, neglected, mourns his withered bays;
But soars to heaven from virtue's generous praise.
When Kings themselves the proper judges sit
Over the blessed realms of science, arts and wit,
Each eager breast beats high for glorious fame,
And emulation glows with active flame.
Thus, with Augustus rose imperial Rome,
For arms renowned abroad, for arts at home,
Thus, when Eliza filled Britannia's throne.
What arts, what learning was not then our own?
Then sinew'd Genius, strong and nervous rose,
In Spenser's numbers, and in Raleigh's prose;
On Bacon's lips then every science hung,
And Nature spoke from her own Shakespeare's tongue.
Her patriot smiles fell, like refreshing dews,
To wake to life each pleasing useful Muse,
While every virtue which the Queen professed,
Beamed on her subjects, but to make them blessed.
O glorious times! -- O theme of praise divine!
-- Be happy, Briton, then -- such times are thine.
Behold even now strong science imps her wing,
And arts revive beneath a Patriot King.
The Muses too burst forth with double light,
To shed their luster in a Monarch's sight.
His cheering smiles alike to all extend --
Perhaps this spot may boast a Royal Friend.
And when a Prince, with early judgment graced,
Himself shall marshal out the way to taste,
Caught with the flame perhaps even here may rise
Some powerful genius of uncommon size,
And, pleased with nature, nature's depths explore,
And be what our great Shakespeare was before.
GENIUS, ENVY, and TIME, A FABLE; Addressed to WILLIAM HOGARTH, Esquire.
IN all professionary skill,
There never was, nor ever will
Be excellence, or exhibition,
But fools are up in opposition;
Each lettered, grave, pedantic dunce
Wakes from his lethargy at once,
Shrugs, shakes his head, and rubs his eyes,
And, being dull, looks wondrous wife,
With solemn phiz, and critic scowl,
The wisdom of his brother owl.
MODERNS! He hates the very name;
Your Ancients have prescriptive claim: --
But let a century be past,
And We have taste and wit at last;
For at that period Moderns too
Just turn the corner of Virtu.
But merit now has little claim
To any meed of present fame,
For it is not worth that gets you friends,
It Is excellence that most offends.
If, Proteus-like, a GARRICK'S art,
Shows taste and skill in every part;
If, ever just to nature's plan,
He is in all the very man,
Even here shall envy take her aim,
-- write, and -- blame.
The JEALOUS WIFE, though chastely writ,
With no parade of frippery wit,
Shall set a scribbling, all at once,
Both giant wit, and pigmy dunce;
While Critical Reviewers write,
Who show their teeth before they bite,
And sacrifice each reputation,
From wanton false imagination.
These observations, rather stale,
May borrow spirit from a tale.
GENIUS, a bustling lad of parts,
Who all things did by fits and starts,
Nothing above him or below him,
Who'd make a riot, or a poem,
From excentricity of thought,
Not always do the thing he ought;
But, was it once his own election,
Would bring all matters to perfection;
Would act, design, engrave, write, paint,
But neither from the least constraint,
Who hated all pedantic schools,
And scorned the gloss of knowing fools,
That hold perfection all in all,
Yet treat it as mechanical,
And give the fame sufficient rule
To make a poem, as a stool --
From the first springtime of his youth,
Was downright worshipper of truth;
And, with a free and liberal spirit,
His courtship paid to lady MERIT.
ENVY, a squint-eyed, mere old maid,
Well known among the scribbling trade;
A hag, so very, very thin,
Her bones peeped through her bladder-skin;
Who could not for her soul abide
That folks should praise, where she must chide,
Followed the Youth wherever he went,
To mar each good and brave intent;
Would lies, and plots, and mischief hatch,
To ruin HIM and spoil the match.
Honor she held at bold defiance,
Talked much of Faction, Gang, Alliance,
As if the real sons of taste
Had clubb'd to lay a DESERT waste.
In short, wherever GENIUS came,
You Would find this Antiquated Dame;
Whatever he did, wherever he went,
She followed only to torment;
Called MERIT by a thousand names,
Which decency or truth disclaims,
While all her business, toil, and care,
Was to depreciate, lie, compare,
To pull the Modest Maiden down,
And blast her fame to all the town.
The Youth, inflamed with conscious pride,
To Prince POSTERITY applied,
Who gave his answer thus in rhyme,
By his chief minister, Old TIME.
"Repine not at what pedants say,
"We'll bring thee forward on the way;
"If withered ENVY strive to hurt
"With lies, with impudence and dirt,
"You only pay a common tax
"Which fool, and knave, and dunce exacts.
"Be this thy comfort, this thy joy,
"Thy strength is in it is prime, my boy,
"And every year thy vigor grows
"Impairs the credit of thy foes.
"ENVY shall sink, and be no more
"Than what her NAIADS were before;
"Mere excremental maggots, bred
"In poet's topsy-turvy head,
"Born like a momentary fly,
"To flutter, buzz about, and die.
"Yet, GENIUS, mark what I presage,
"Who look through every distant age:
"MERIT shall bless thee with her charms,
"FAME list thy offspring in her arms,
"And stamp eternity of grace
"On all thy numerous various race.
"ROUBILLIAC, WILTON, names as high
"As Phidias of antiquity,
"Shall strength, expression, manner give,
"And make even marble breathe and live;
"While SIGISMUNDA'S deep distress,
"Which looks the soul of wretchedness,
"When I, with flow and softening pen,
"Have gone over all the tints again,
"Shall urge a bold and proper claim
"To level half the ancient fame;
"While future ages yet unknown
"With critic air shall proudly own
"Thy HOGARTH first of every clime,
"For humor keen, or strong sublime,
"And hail him from his fire and spirit,
"The child of GENIUS and of MERIT."
The PROGRESS of ENVY. It was not originally intended to insert the above poem,
occasioned by LAUDER'S attack on the character of MILTON, in this collection;
and it is now done merely to oblige several subscribers, who have particularly
desired it.
. Written in the year 1751.
I.
AH me! unhappy state of mortal wight,
Since Envy's sure attendant upon fame,
Ne does she rest from rancorous despite,
Until she works him mickle woe and shame;
Unhappy he whom ENVY thus does spoil,
Ne does she check her ever restless hate,
Until she does his reputation foil:
Ah! luckless imp is he, whose worth elate,
Forces him pay this heavy tax for being great.
II.
There stood an ancient mount, yclept Parnass,
(The fair domain of sacred poesy)
Which, with fresh odours ever-blooming, was
Besprinkled with the dew of Castaly;
Which now in soothing murmurs, whispering glides,
Wat'ring with genial waves the fragrant soil,
Now rolls adown the mountain's steepy sides,
Teaching the vales full beauteously to smile,
Dame NATURE'S handiwork, notform'd by laboring toil.
III.
The MUSES fair, these peaceful shades among,
With skilful fingers sweep the trembling strings;
The air in silence listens to the song,
And TIME forgets to ply his lazy wings;
Pale-visag'd CARE, with foul unhallowed feet,
Attempts the summit of the hill to gain,
Ne can the hag arrive the blissful seat;
Her unavailing strength is spent in vain,
CONTENT sits on the top, and mocks her empty pain.
IV.
Often PHOEBUS self left his divine abode,
And here enshrouded in a shady bower,
Regardless of his state, laid by the God,
And owned sweet music's more alluring power.
On either side was placed a peerless wight,
Whose merit long had filled the trump of FAME;
This, FANCY'S darling child, was SPENSER hight,
Who pip'd full pleasing on the banks of Tame;
That no less sam'd than He, and MILTON was his name.
V.
In these cool bowers they live supinely calm;
Now harmless talk, now emulously sing;
While VIRTUE, pouring round her sacred balm,
Makes happiness eternal as the spring.
Alternately they sung; now SPENSER 'gan,
Of jousts and tournaments, and champions strong;
Now MILTON sung of disobedient man,
And Eden lost: The bards around them throng,
Drawn by the wondrous magic of their princes' song.
VI.
Not far from these, Dan CHAUCER, ancient wight,
A lofty seat on Mount Parnassus held,
Who long had been the Muses' chief delight;
His reverend locks were silvered over with eld;
Grave was his visage, and his habit plain;
And while he sung, fair nature he displayed,
In verse albeit uncouth, and simple strain;
Ne mote he well be seen, so thick the shade,
Which elms and aged oaks had all around him made.
VII.
Next SHAKESPEARE sat, irregularly great,
And in his hand a magic rod did hold,
Which visionary beings did create,
And turn the foulest dross to purest gold:
Whatever spirits rove in earth or air,
Or bad or good, obey his dread command;
To his behests these willingly repair,
Those awed by terrors of his magic wand,
The which not all their powers united might withstand.
VIII.
Beside the bard there stood a beauteous maid,
Whose glittering appearance dimmed the eyes;
Her thin-wrought vesture various tints displayed,
FANCY her name, ysprong of race divine;
Her mantle Wimpled. A word used by Spenser for hung down. The line enclosed
within Commas is one of Fairfax's in his translation of Tasso.
wimpled low, her silken hair,
Which loose adown her well-turn'd shoulders strayed,
'She made a net to catch the wanton air,'
Whose lovesick breezes all around her played,
And seemed in whispers soft to court the heavenly maid.
IX.
And ever and anon she waved in air
A scepter, fraught with all-creative power:
She waved it round: Eftsoons there did appear
Spirits and witches, forms unknown before:
Again she lifts her wonder-working wand;
Eftsoons upon the flowery plain were seen.
The gay inhabitants of fairie land,
And blithe attendants upon MAB their queen
In mystic circles danced along the enchanted green.
X.
On the other side stood NATURC, goddess fair;
A matron seemed she, and of manners staid;
Beauteous her form, majestic was her air,
In loose attire of purest white arrayed:
A potent rod she bore, whole power was such,
(As from her darling's works may well be shown)
That often with its soul-enchanting touch,
She raised or joy, or cause the deep-felt groan,
And each man's passions made subservient to her own.
XI.
But lo! thick fogs from out the earth arise,
And murky mists the buxom air invade,
Which with contagion dire infect the skies,
And all around their baleful influence shed;
The infected sky, which whilom was so fair,
With thick Cimmerian darkness is overspread;
The sun, which whilom shone without compare,
Muffles in pitchy veil his radiant head,
And fore the time sore-grieving seeks his watery bed.
XII.
ENVY, the daughter of fell Acheron,
(The flood of deadly hate and gloomy night)
Had left precipitate her Stygian throne,
And through the frighted heavens winged her flight:
With careful eye each realm she did explore,
Ne mote she ought of happiness observe;
For happiness, alas! was now no more,
Since every one from virtue's paths did swerve,
And trample on religion base designs to serve.
XIII.
At length, on blessed Parnassus seated high,
Their temple circled with a laurel crown,
SPENSER and MILTON met her scowling eye,
And turned her horrid grin into a frown.
Full fast unto her Sister did she post,
There to unload the venom of her breast,
To tell how all her happiness was crossed,
Since others were of happiness possessed:
Did never gloomy hell send forth like ugly pest.
XIV.
Within the covert of a gloomy wood,
Where funeral cypress star-proof branches spread,
O'ergrown with tangling briers a cavern stood;
Fit place for melancholy Dreary-head. Gloominess.
dreary-head.
Here a deformed monster joy'd to won,
Which on fell rancour ever was ybent,
All from the rising to the setting sun,
Her heart pursued spite with black intent,
Ne could her iron mind at human woes relent,
XV.
In flowing sable stole she was yclad,
Which with her countenance did well accord;
Forth from her mouth, like one through grief gone mad,
A frothy sea of nauseous foam was ponr'd;
A ghastly grin and eyes asquint, display
The rancour which her hellish thoughts contain,
And how, when man is blessed, she pines away,
Burning to turn his happiness to pain;
MALICE the monster's name, a foe to God and man.
XVI.
Along the floor black loathsome toads still crawl,
Their gullets swelled with poison's mortal bane,
Which ever and anon they spit at all
Whom hapless fortune leads too near her den;
Around her waist, in place of silken zone,
A life-devouring viper reared his head,
Who no distinction made 'twixt friend and foen,
But death on every side fierce brandished,
Fly, reckless mortals, fly, in vain is Hardy-head. Courage.
hardy-head.
XVII.
Impatient ENVY, through the aetherial waste,
With inward venom fraught, and deadly spite,
Unto this cavern steered her panting haste,
Enshrouded in a darksome veil of night.
Her inmost heart burnt with impetuous ire,
And fell destruction sparkled in her look,
Her ferret eyes flashed with revengeful fire,
A while contending passions utt'rance choke,
At length the fiend in furious tone her silence broke.
XVIII.
Sister, arise! see how our power decays,
No more our empire Thou and I can boast,
Since mortal man now gains immortal praise,
Since man is blessed, and Thou and I are lost:
See in what state Parnassus' Hill appears;
See PHOEBUS' self two happy bards atween;
See how the God their song attentive hears;
This SPENSER hight, that MILTON, well I ween!
Who can behold unmoved sike heart-tormenting scene?
XIX.
Sister, arise! ne let our courage droop,
Perforce we will compel these mortals own,
That mortal force unto our force shall stoop;
ENVY and MALICE then shall reign alone:
Thou best has known to file thy tongue with lies,
And to deceive mankind with specious bait:
Like TRUTH accoutred, spreadest forgeries,
The fountain of contention and of hate:
Arise, unite with me, and be as whilom great!
XX.
The Fiend obeyed, and with impatient voice --
"Tremble, ye bards, within that blissful feat;
"MALICE and ENVY shall o'erthrow your joys,
"Nor PHOEBUS self shall our designs defeat.
"Shall We, who under friendship's seigned veil,
"Prompted the bold archangel to rebel;
"Shall we, Who under show of sacred zeal,
"Plunged half the powers of heaven in lowest hell --
"Such vile disgrace of us no mortal man shall tell.
XXI.
And now, more hideous rendered to the sight,
By reason of her raging cruelty,
She burnt to go, equipt in dreadful plight,
And find fit engine for her forgery.
Her eyes inflamed did cast their rays askance,
While hellish imps prepare the monster's car,
In which she might cut through the wide expanse,
And find out nations that extended far,
When all was pitchy dark, ne twinkled one bright star.
XXII.
Black was her chariot, drawn by dragons dire,
And each fell serpent had a double tongue,
Which ever and anon spit flaming fire,
The regions of the tainted air among;
A lofty seat the sister-monsters bore,
In deadly machinations close combined,
Dull FOLLY drove with terrible uproar,
And cruel DISCORD followed fast behind;
God help the man against whomsuch caitiff foes are joined.
XXIII.
Aloft in air the rattling chariot flies,
While thunder harshly grates upon its wheels;
Black pointed spires of smoke around them rise,
The air depressed unusual burden feels;
Detested sight! in terrible array,
They spur their fiery dragons on amain,
Ne mote their anger suffer cold delay,
Until the wished for region they obtain,
And land their dingy car on Caledonian plain.
XXIV.
Here, eldest son of MALICE, long had dwelt
A wretch of all the joys of life forlorn;
His fame on double falsities was built:
(Ah! worthless son, of worthless parent born!)
Under the show of semblance fair, he veiled
The black intentions of his hellish breast;
And by these guileful means he more prevailed
Than had he open enmity professed: [drest,
The wolf more safely wounds when in sheep's clothing
XXV.
Him then themselves at ween they joyful place,
(Sure sign of woe when such are pleased, alas!)
Then measure back the air with swifter pace,
Until they reach the foot of Mount Parnass.
Hither in evil hour the monsters came,
And with their new companion did alight,
Who long had lost all sense of virtuous shame,
Beholding worth with poisonous despite;
On his success depends their impious delight.
XXVI.
Long burnt He sore the summit to obtain,
And spread his venom over the blissful seat;
Long burnt He sore, but still He burnt in vain;
Mote none come there, who come with impious feet.
At lenth, at unawares, he out does spit
That spite which else had to himself been bane;
The venom on the breast of MILTON lit,
And spread benumbing death through every vein;
The Bard of life bereft fell senseless on the plain.
XXVII.
As at the banquet of Thyestes old,
The sun is faid to have shut his radiant eye,
So did he now through grief his beams withold.
And darkness to be felt overwhelmed the sky;
Forth issued from their dismal dirk abodes
The birds attendant upon hideous night,
Shriek-owls and ravens, whose fell croaking bodes
Approaching death to miserable wight:
Did never mind of man behold sike dreadful sight?
XXVIII.
APOLLO wails his darling, done to die
By foul attempt of ENVY'S fatal bane;
The MUSES sprinkle him with dew of Castaly,
And crown his death with many a living strain;
Hoary PARNASSUS beats his aged breast,
Aged, yet never before did sorrow know;
The flowers drooping their despair attest,
The aggrieved rivers querulously flow;
All nature sudden groaned with sympathetic woe.
XXIX.
But, lo! the sky a gayer livery wears,
The melting clouds begin to fade apace,
And now the cloak of darkness disappears,
(May darkness ever thus to light give place!)
Erst grieved APOLLO jocund looks resumes,
The NINE renew their whilom cheerful song,
No grief PARNASSUS' aged breast consumes,
Forth from the teeming earth new flowers sprung,
The plenteous rivers flowed full peacefully along.
XXX.
The stricken Bard fresh vital heat renews,
Whose blood, erst stagnate, rushes through his veins;
Life through each pore her spirit does infuse,
And FAME by MALICE unextinguish'd reigns:
And see, a Form breaks forth, all heavenly bright,
Upheld by one of mortal progeny,
A Female Form, yclad in snowy white,
Ne half so fair at distance seen as nigh;
DOUGLAS and TRUTH appear, ENVY and LAUDER die.
POEMATA.
PROLOGUS, 1757.
EST Schola Rhetorices, celebrat quam crebra juventus,
Et tumido inflatos ejicit ore sonos.
Qua quisque assumit tragicas novus histrio parts.
Nee loquitur, verbum quin sapit omne, pathos.
Ingenia hic crescunt, mox suecessura theatris,
Regis, amatoris, prompta subire vices.
Multus ibi furiis Macbetha agitatus iniquis,
Elusa telum prendit inane manu.
Multus ibi, infuscat cui vultus suber adustum,
Immodicis saevit raucus Othello minis.
Omnia queis tragicis opus est, hic arma parantur;
Auribus insidiae sunt, oculisque suae:
Conatus manuumque, pedumque, orisque rotundi,
Certatim et vultus vis, laterumque labor.
Quam sibi, dum gestu stat fixus quisque silenti,
Quam placet a speculo forma reflexa sui!
Hae studeant, cordi quibus ars et pompa theatri!
Non tamen est NOBIS inde petendus honor.
Ingenua ut pubes vultum sibi sumat apertum,
Et sensim assuescat fortius ore loqui;
Ne dubiis tandem verba eluctantia labris
Occludat timidus praepediatque pudor,
Ingredimur scenam; nec clam Vos, Docta Corona,
Commoda ab hoc tenui quanta labor fluant.
Hinc SAPERE ET FARI discit generosa juventus,
Dum pavida accendit pectora laudis amor.
Freti his, majorem mox ingrediemur arenam;
His stabilita vigent Curia, Rostra, Forum.
PROLOGUS, 1758.
HIC nihil ad populum -- non pompa hic vana theatri,
Qualem ore attonito plebs inhiare solet:
Non scena hic splendet magica variabilis art,
Et sumit formas prodigiosa novas.
Non hic, librato subvecthis fune per auras,
Mercurius celeres itque reditque vias.
Nee freta caerulea turgent undosa papyro,
Nee resinato fulgurat igne polus.
Janua nec caecos aperit furtiva recessus,
Unde minutatim proferat umbra caput.
Quin valiant levia haec vulgi crepitacula! jactant
Et proprium, et simplex, nostra theatra decus.
-- Heus! nemon audit? -- fac sursum aulea trahantur!
-- En! qualis qualis sit, NOVA SCENA patet.
En Illae, quas Vos semper coluistis, Athenae,
Gratia quas voluit, quas sibi Musa domum.
Hie sese ostendunt prisci monumenta laboris,
Queis usa est modulis Vitruviana Manus;
Hic stat Ventorum, Thesei hic venerabile Fanum,
Hie arce in summa, Casta Minerva, tuum.
Omnia jam votis respondent. Attica jam sunt
Omnia. Personse, Fabula, Scena, Sales.
Quoque etiam magis hae nostrae laetentur Athenae,
Cecropidas jactant Vos, recoluntque suos.
PROLOGUS in ADELPHOS, 1759.
CUM Patres Populumque dolor communis haberet,
Fleret et Aemilium Maxima Roma suum,
Funebres inter ludos, his dicitur ipsis
Scenis extinctum condecorasse ducem.
Ecquis adest, scenam nocte hac qui spectet eandem,
Nec nobis luctum sentiet esse parem?
Utcunque arrisit pulchris victoria caeptis,
Qua Sol extremas visit uterque plagas,
Successus etiam medio de font Britannis
Surgit amari aliquid, legitumusque dolor.
Si famae generosa fitis, si bellica virtus,
Ingenium felix, intemerata fides,
Difficiles laurus, ipsoque in flore juventae
Heu! nimium lethi praecipitata dies,
Si quid habent pulchrum haec, vel si quid amabile, jure
Esto tua haee, WOLFI, laus, propriumque decus.
Nec moriere omnis. -- Quin usque corona vigebit,
Unanimis Britonum quam tibi nectit amor.
Regia quin pietas marmor tibi nobile ponet,
Quod tua perpetuis praedicet acta notis.
Confluet hue studio visendi martia pubes,
Sentiet et flamma corda calere pari;
Dumque legit mediis cecidisse heroa triumphis,
Dicet, SIC DETUR VINCERE, SIC MORIAR,
EPILOGUS in ADELPHOS, 1759. SYRUS loquitur.
QUANTA intus turba est! quanto molimine sudat,
Accinctus cultro et forcipe, quisque coquus!
Monstrum inform maris -- TESTUDO -- in prandia fertur,
Quae, varia, et simplex, omnia sola sapit.
Pullina esca placet? -- vitulina? -- suilla? -- bovina?
Praesto est. Haec quadrupes singula piscis habet.
De gente Aethiopum conducitur Archimagirus,
Qui secet, et coquat, et concoquat, art nova.
Qui docte contundat aromata; misceat apt
Thus, apium, thyma, sal, cinnama, cepe, piper.
Qui jecur et pulmonem in frusta minutula scindat,
Curetque ut penitus sint saturata mero.
Multo ut ventriculus pulchre flavescat ab ovo;
Ut tremulus, circum viscera, vernet adeps.
His rite instructis conchae sint fercula! nam Tu,
TESTUDO! et patinis sufficis, atque cibo.
Quam cuperem in lauds utriusque excurrere conchae!
Sed vereor Calipash dicere -- vel Calipee.
Vos etiam ad caenam mecum appellare juvaret,
Vellem et relliquias participate dapum.
At sunt conviva? tain multi, tamque gulosi,
Restabit, metuo, nil nisi concha mihi.
Recte statuit BAXTERUS de Somniorum Phaenomenis.
CUM nox tellurem fuscis amplectitur alis,
Mabba atomos jungit celercs, et vecta per auras
Inchoat assuetos simulatrix regia ludos.
Huic auriga culex tortura quatit usque flagellum,
Acceleratque fugam tardis; retinacula currus
Erucae sunt texta levis, radiique rotarum
Cruscula areneoli; currus, quern dente sciurus
Finxerat e coryli frudlu, primaeva vetustas
Hunc Mabbae artificem memorat: sub nodle silenti
Hoc instructa modo egreditur, neque cernitur ulli.
Nonnunquam leviter cerebrum perstringit Amantis;
Somniat ille faces jaculari et vulnera ocellos,
Malarum labrique rosas, perfusaque collo
Lilia: mox Medici digitos titillat, avarus
Mercedis dextram qui pandit, et acriter aurum
Ter captat; ter vana manus eludit imago.
Nunc quoque sopitae demulcet labra Puellae;
Somniat illa procum, pulvinoque oscula libans
Absens absentem teneris amplectitur ulnis;
Vae tibi, si Lemurum videat Regina colorem
Mentitum fuco, vultusque ex art nitentes!
Praecipites aget ira manus, lacerabit acuto
Ungue genas, simul amissa dulcedine somni,
Osculaque, et tenues vanescit amator in auras.
Ampla Sacerdotis nonnunquam transvolat ora;
Continuo rostrum conscendens Hic thema trinas
Dividit in parts, exponendoque laborat,
Vel vigilem credas, adeo dormitat. Ad aures
Militis hinc migrat; turbatur imagine belli
Fortis eques, gemitusque audit, strepitusque, tubasque,
Exilit, et paulum trepidans, insomnia diris
Devovet, in lecto prolabitur -- obdormiscit.
Nunc Rabulam palma mulcet, qui litibus aptus,
Defensoris agit causam, actorisque peritus,
Innectensque moras ad finem deeipit ambos.
Sin casu visat facilis regina Poetam,
Hunc sibi plaudentem deludit amabilis error,
Et riguos fontes, et amaenos somniat hortos;
Cum vero vigil ille domum exploraverit omnem,
Viderit et tristis quam sit sibi curta supellex,
Quam vellet semper dormire! -- Volubilis inde
Judicis invehitur trans nasum, et naribus illi
Emunclo subolet causa. Interdum Dea fesso
Blanditur Servo, qui liberate vagatur,
Exultans redit ad patriam carosque penates,
Et gremio uxoris longis amplexibus haeret.
Deinde rota strepitante fremit per colla Tyranni;
Umbrarum ante oculos surgit chorus, improbus orco
Quas dedit insontes; furiis agitatur acerbis
Conscia men's, lectoque quies simul exulat. Inde
Si currus flectat, placidissima munera somni
Qua carpit Sceleris Purus; non territus ille
Spectrorum est caetu, et furiarum ultricibus iris,
Sed molli potitur require, aut si somniat, umbrae
Delectant oculos gratae; praedulcis imago
Virtutis reficit mentem, et tellure relicta
Radit iter liquidum caeli, fruiturque deorum
Colloquio felix. O Tu! quicunque beatum
Te velis, et tuto tranquillum carpere somnum;
I, pete, quo virtus ducit! ne vindice curru
Mabba ferox instet, vexentque cubilia curae.
I, pete, quo virtus ducet! te numine molli
Mabba teget, radetque levi tua pectora curru.
In Comitiis Posteribus, Apr. 5, 1753.
Carmina ad Nobilissum THOMAM HOLLES DUCEM DE NEWCASTLE inscripta, cum
Academiam Cantabrigiensem Bibliothecae Restituendae causa inviseret. Pride.
Kalend. Maias, 1755.

DE REGE.
AUGUSTUS, Artium usque fautor optimus,
Hic moenia haud inauspicato numine
Condi imperavit consecrata literis,
Eo nitore and partium elegantia,
Ut invidenda sint vel illis Aedibus
Quae saeculorum voce comprobantium
Prae caeteris superbiunt, justissima
Romae recentis and vetustae gloria.
Nec his supellex digna deerit moenibus,
Et Vaticanae, Bodleanaeque aemula;
Id Ille abunde caverat, novissimus
Dedit volenti jura qui Britanniae.
Brunsvichianis scilicet sanctissimum est
Legesque tutari and sovere Literas.
AD CANCELLARIUM.
OTu, qui doctas Cami feliciter arts
Protegis, Aonii duxque decusque chori,
Quod Domus incipiat tarn laeto haec omine condi,
Quae nee Bodleio cedat, id omne tuum est.
Munera dant numerosa manus procerumque patrumque,
Exemplo and monitis exstimulata tuis.
Perge fovere Arts, nec vanum urgere laborem:
Tam pulchrum pulchre Musa rependet opus.
Haec moles quanquam ipsa ruet; monumenta, Camenae
Quae condent, nullo sunt ruitura die.
AN ELEGY, Written in a Country Churchyard. By Mr. GRAY.
THE curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd wind slowly over the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his drony flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient, solitary reign.
CARMEN ELEGIACUM, In CIMAETERIO RUSTICO compositum.
AUdistin! quam lenta sonans campana per agros,
Aerato occiduam nuntiat ore diem.
Armenta impellunt crebris mugitibus auras,
Lassatusque domum rusticus urget iter.
Solus ego in tenebris moror, and vestigia solus
Compono tacita nocte, vacoque mihi.
Omnia pallescunt jam decedentia visu,
Et terra and coelum, qua patet, omne silet.
Cuncta silent, nisi musca suam sub vespere sero
Raucisonans pigram qua rotat orb fugam;
Cuncta silent, nisi qua faciles campanula somnos
Allicit, and lento murmr mulcet oves.
Quaque hedera antiquas socia complectitur umbra
Turres, feralis lugubre cantat avis;
Et strepit ad lunam, si quis sub nocte vagetur
Imperium violans, Cynthia Diva, tuum.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the ecchoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care:
No children run to lisp their fire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
CARMEN ELEGIACUM, In CIMAETERIO RUSTICO compositum.
AUdistin! quam lenta sonans campana per agros,
Aerato occiduam nuntiat ore diem.
Armenta impellunt crebris mugitibus auras,
Lassatusque domum rusticus urget iter.
Solus ego in tenebris moror, and vestigia folus
Compono tacita nocte, vacoque mihi.
Omnia pallescunt jam decedentia visu,
Et terra and coelum, qua patet, omne silet.
Cuncta silent, nisi musca suam sub vespere sero
Raucisonans pigram qua rotat orb sugam;
Cuncta silent, nisi qua faciles campanula somnos
Allicit, and lento murmr mulcet oves.
Quaque hedera antiquas socia complectitur umbra
Turres, feralis lugubre cantat avis;
Et strepit ad lunam, si quis sub nocte vagetur
Imperium violans, Cynthia Diva, tuum.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-trees shade,
Where heaves the turs in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care:
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Has propter veteres ulmos, taxique sub umbra
Qua putris multo cespite turget humus,
Dormit, in aeternum dormit gens prisca colonum,
Quisque fua angusta conditus usque domo.
Hos nec mane novum, Zephyrique fragrantior aura,
Nec gallus vigili qui vocat ore diem,
Nec circumvolitans quae stridula garrit hirundo
Stramineumque alta sub trabe figit opus,
Undique nec cornu vox ingeminata sonantis
Aeterno elicient hos, repetentque toro.
Amplius his nunquam conjux been fida marito
Ingeret ardenti grandia ligna foco;
Nec reditum expectans domini sub vespere sero
Excoquet agrestes officiosa dapes;
Nec curret raptim genitoris ad oscula proles,
Nec reducem agnoscent aemula turba patrem.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke!
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour.
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
If Memory over their tomb no trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn isle and fretted vault
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Quam saepe Hi rastris glebam fregere seracem!
Saepe horum cecidit falce resecta seges.
Quam laeti egerunt stridentia plaustra per agros,
Et stimulis tardos increpuere boves!
Horum sylva vetus quam concidit icta bipenni,
Quaque ruit late vi tremesecit humum!
Ne tamen Ambitio risu male laeta maligno
Sortemve, aut lusus, aut rude temnat opus!
Nec front excipiat ventosa Superbia torva
Pauperis annals, historiasque breves!
Et generis jactatus honos, dominatio regum,
Quicquid opes, quicquid forma dedere boni,
Supremam simul hanc expectant omnia noctem:
Scilicet ad lethum ducit honoris iter.
Nolite hos humiles culpae insimulare, Superbi,
Quod domini ostendant nulla trophaea decus,
Qua canit amissum longo ordine turba patronum,
Clarosque ingeminant claustra profunda sonos.
Can storied urn or animated bust
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flattery sooth the dull cold ear of Death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire:
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of time, did never unroll;
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen.
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
An vanis inscripta notis angustior urna,
Phidiacumve loquens nobile marmor opus,
An revocent animam fatali a sede fugacem?
Detque iterum vita posse priore frui?
Possit adulantum fermo penetrare sepulchrum?
Evocet aut manes laus et inanis honor?
Forsan in hoc, olim divino femine praegnans
Ingenii, hoc aliquis cespite dormit adhuc.
Neglecto hoc forsan jaceat sub cespite, sceptra
Cujus tractarint imperiosa manus.
Vel quales ipso forsan vel Apolline dignae
Pulsarint docto pollice fila lyrae.
Doctrinae horum oculis antiqua volumina priscae
Nunquam divitias explicuere suas.
Horum autem ingenium torpescere fecit egestas
Aspera, and angustae sors inimica domi.
Multa sub oceano pellucida gemma latescit,
Et rudis ignotum fert and inane decus.
Plurima neglectos fragrans rosa pandit odores,
Ponit et occiduo pendula sole caput.
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest,
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
Their lot forbad: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbad to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,
Aemulus Hamdeni hic aliquis requiescat agrestis,
Quem patriae indignans exstimulavit amor;
Ausus hic exiguo est villae oppugnare tyranno,
Asserere et forti jura paterna manu.
Aut mutus forsan, fatoque inglorius, alter
Hac vel Miltono par requiescat humo.
Dormiat aut aliquis Cromuelli hic aemulus audax,
Qui patriam poterit vel jugulasse suam.
Eloquio arrectum prompto mulcere senatum,
Exilii immoto pectore far minas,
Divitias larga in patriam diffundere dextra,
Historiam ex populi colligere ore suam,
Illorum vetuit sors improba, -- nec tamen arcto
Tantum ad virtutem limite clausit iter,
Verum etiam and vitia ulterius transire vetabat,
Nec dedit his magnum posse patrare scelus.
Hos vetuit temere per stragem invadere regnum,
Excipere et surda supplicis aure preces.
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of luxury and pride
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhimes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered Muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
Sentire ingenuum nec dedidicere ruborem,
Conscia suffusus quo notat ora pudor.
Luxuria hi nunquam sese immersere superba,
Nec Musae his lauds prostituere suas.
At placide illorum, procul a certamine turbae
Spectabant propriam sobria vota domum;
Quisque sibi vivens, and sponte inglorius exul,
Dum tacito elabens vita tenore fluit.
Haec tamen a damno qui servet tutius ossa,
En tumulus fragilem praebet amicus opem!
Et vera agresti eliciunt suspiria cord
Incultae effigies, indocilesque modi.
Atque locum supplent elegorum nomen and anni
Quae forma inscribit rustica Musa rudi:
Multa etiam sacri diffundit commata textus,
Queis meditans discat vulgus agreste mori.
For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
Even in our ashes live their wonted fires.
For thee, who, mindful of the unhonour'd dead,
Do in these lines their artless tale relate;
If chance, by lonely contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate,
Happily some hoary-headed swain may say,
"Often have we see him at the peep of dawn
"Brushing with hasty steps the dews away
"To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
Heu, quis enim dubia hac dulcique excedere vita
Jussus, et aeternas jam subiturus aquas,
Descendit nigram ad noctem, cupidusque supremo
Non saltem occiduam respicit ore diem?
Decedens alicui saltem men's fidit amico
In cujus blando pectore ponit opem,
Fletum aliquem exposcunt jam deficientia morte
Lumina, amicorum qui riget imbre genas.
Quin etiam ex tumulo, veteris non inscia flammae,
Natura exclamat fida, memorque sui.
At tibi, qui tenui hoc deducis carmine sortem,
Et defunctorum rustica fata gemis,
Huc olim intentus si quis vestigia flectat
Et fuerit qualis sors tua forte roget,
Huic aliquis forsan senior respondeat ultro,
Cui niveis albent tempora sparsa comis,
Vidimus hunc quam saepe micantes roribus herbas
Verrentem rapido, mane rubente, gradu.
Ad roseum solis properabat saepius ortum,
Summaque tendebat per juga laetus iter.
"There at the foot of younder nodding beech
"That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
"His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
"And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
"Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
"Mutt'ring his wayward fancies he would rove;
"Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
"Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
"One morn I missed him on the custom'd hill,
"Along the heath and near his favorite tree:
"Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
"Nor up the lawn, nor at the woods was he.
"The next with dirges due, in sad array,
"Slow through the churchyard path we saw him born,
"Approach and read (for thou can read) the lay,
"Engraved on the stone beneath yon aged thorn.
Saepe sub hac fago, radices undique circum
Quae vary antiquas implicat alta suas,
Stratus humi meditans medio procumberet aestu,
Lustraretque inhians flebile murmur aquae.
Saepius hanc sylvam propter, viridesque recessus
Urgeret meditans plurima, lentus iter,
Intentam hic multa oblectaret imagine mentem,
Musarumque frequens sollicitaret opem,
Jam veluti demens, tacitis erraret in agris,
Aut cujus stimulat corda repulsus amor.
Mane aderat nuper, tamen hunc nec viderat arbos,
Nec juga, nec saliens sons, tacitumve nemus;
Altera lux oritur; nec aperta hic valle videtur,
Nec tamen ad fagum, nec prope fontis aquam.
Tertia successit -- lentoque exangue cadaver
Ecce sepulcrali est pompa secuta gradu.
Tu lege, namque potes, caelatum in marmore carmen,
Quod juxta has vepres exhibet iste lapis.
THE EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to fortune and to fame unknown,
Fair science frowned not on his humble birth,
And melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere,
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to misery all he had, a tear,
He gained from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
EPITAPHIUM.
CUI nunquam favit fama aut fortuna secunda,
Congesto hoc juvenem cespite servat humus.
Huic tamen arrisit jucunda Scientia vultu,
Selegitque, habitans pectora, Cura sibi.
Largus opum fuit, and sincero pectore fretus,
Accepit pretium par, tribuente Deo.
Indoluit miserans inopi, lacrymasque profudit.
-- Scilicet id, miseris quod daret, omne fuit.
A coelo interea fidum acquisivit amicum,
Scilicet id, cuperet quod magis, omne fuit.
Ne merita ulterius defuncti exquirere pergas,
Nec vitia ex sacra sede refer petas.
Utraque ibi trepida pariter spe condita restant,
In gremio Patris scilicet atque Dei.
SONG, by a Person of Quality From Pope's Works.
.
Fluttering spread thy purple pinions,
Gentle Cupid, over my heart;
I a slave in thy dominions;
Nature must give way to art.
Mild Arcadians, ever blooming,
Nightly nodding over your flocks,
See my weary days consuming,
All beneath yon flowery rocks.
Thus the Cyprian goddess weeping,
Mourned Adonis, darling youth:
Him the Boar in silence creeping,
Gored with unrelenting tooth.
Cynthia, tune harmonious numbers;
Fair Discretion, string the lyre;
Sooth my ever-waking slumbers:
Bright Apollo, lend thy choir!
CARMEN ELEGANS.
TUQUE adeo roseas expande volatilis alas,
Et leviter pectus tange, Cupido, meum.
Imperiis, pulchelle, tuis ego servulus ultro;
Naturam ars victrix scilicet usque domat.
Arcades, aeterno viridantes flore juventae,
Nocte innutantes qualibet inter oves,
Aspicite, ut sensim languens juvenilior aetas,
Haec juxta, haec, inquam, florea saxa perit!
Ante omnes carum sic flevit Adonida Cypris,
Deceptusque Deam tristius ussit Amor;
Hunc, tacit adrepens per densa silentia noctis
Incautum saevo dente momordit Aper.
Stringe lyram interea pulchre Prudentia ludens,
Harmoniaeque graves, Cynthia, funde modos!
Doctae ambae vigiles curas sopire canendo,
Tuque tuum imperti, Praeses Apollo, chorum!
Gloomy Pluto, king of terrors,
Armed in adamantine chains,
Lead me to the crystal mirrors,
Wat'ring soft Elysian plains.
Mournful cypress, verdant willow,
Gilding my Aurelia's brows,
Morpheus hovering over my pillow,
Hear me pay my dying vows.
Melancholy, smooth Maeander,
Swiftly purling in a round,
On thy margin lovers wander,
With thy flowery chaplets crowned.
Thus when Philomela drooping,
Softly seeks her silent mate,
See the bird of Juno stooping;
Melody resigns to fate.
Tuque adamanteis, Pluton, armate catenis,
O Tu Terrorum Rex, metuende Deus,
Due me, qua passim chrystallina flumina currunt,
Elysiique lavat lucida lympha nemus.
Vos etiam maesti falices, tristesque cupressi,
Aureliae aeternum serta dicata meae;
Audi etiam, Morpheu, divum placidissime Morpheu,
Ut queror, ut penitus maceror igne novo.
Triste fluens, sed lene fluens, Maeander, amaeno
Murmr qui cursum flexilis orb rotas!
Margin saepe etiam quam plurimus erat amator,
Cui tua submittunt florea dona decus.
Sic quando sensim, languens Philomela, silentem
Mollior aggreditur, nec sine voce, procum;
Aspice, de coelo interea Junonius ales
Descendens, fato cedit inane Melos.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Managers of Drury Lane Theater, thinking themselves bound to join the rest
of the nation, in public congratulations of their Majesty's, on their
auspicious nuptials; the following little piece was written merely with a view
of manifesting such their loyalty and gratitude, to the best of monarchs, and
most candid encourager of theatrical exhibitions. The reader, as well as the
spectator, will easily discover that, the author has paid but little attention
to the nature of dramatic composition, in the conduct of this piece; and
indeed, in the representation, the labors of the poet and the composer
appeared very inferior to the elegant taste of the managers in the decoration.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE
DAMAETAS, DAMON, PRIEST, SYLVIA, PHOEBE, DELIA.
ARCADIA. A DRAMATIC PASTORAL.
SCENE I. A view of the country.
Shepherds and Shepherdesses. CHORUS. SHepherds, buxom, blithe and free,
Now Is the time for jollity.

SYLVIA. AIR. Hither haste, and bring along
Merry tale and jocund song.
To the pipe and tabor beat
Frolic measures with your feet.
Every gift of time employ;
Make the most of proffered joy.
Pleasure hates the scanty rules
Portion'd out by dreaming fools.

CHORUS. Shepherds, buxom, blithe and free,
Now Is the time for jollity.

[A dance of Shepherds, etc. SYLVIA. RECITATIVE. Rejoice, ye happy swains,
rejoice;
It is the heart that prompts the voice.
Be sorrow banished far away;
Thyrsis shall make it holy day.
Who at his name can joy suppress?
Arcadian-born to rule and bless.

DAMON. And hark! from rock to rock the sound
Of winding horn, and deep-mouch'd hound,
Breaking with rapture on the ear,
Proclaims the blithsome Phoebe near:
See where she hastes with eager pace,
To speak the joys that paint her face.

SCENE II. Opens to a prospect of rocks.
Huntsmen, Huntresses, etc. coming down from them. PHOEBE. Hither I speed with
honest glee,
Such as befits the mind that is free;
Your cheerful troop, blithe youth, to join,
And mix my social joys with thine.
Now may each nymph, and frolic swain,
Over mountain steep, or level plain,
Court buxom health, while jocund horn
Bids echo wake the sluggard morn.
AIR. When the morning peeps forth, and the zephyr's cool gale,
Carries fragrance and health over mountain and dale;
Up, ye nymphs, and ye swains, and together we'll rove,
Up hill, down the valley, by thicket or grove:
Then follow with me, where the welkin resounds
With the notes of the horns, and the cry of the hounds.
Let the wretched be slaves to ambition and wealth;
All the blessing we ask is the blessing of health.
So shall innocence' self give a warrant to joys
No envy disturbs, no dependence destroys.
Then follow with me, where the welkin resounds
With the notes of the horn, and the cry of the hounds.
Over hill, dale, and woodland, with rapture we roam;
Yet returning, still find the dear pleasures at home;
Where the cheerful good humor gives honesty grace,
And the heart speaks content in the smiles of the face.
Then follow with me, where the welkin resounds
With the notes of the horn, and the cry of the hounds.

DAMAETAS. RECITATIVE. Small care, my friends, your youth annoys,
Which only looks to present joys.

SYLVIA. Though the white locks of silvered age,
And long experience hail thee sage;
Ill suits it in this joy, to wear
A brow so over-hung with care.
Better with us thy voice to raise,
And join a whole Arcadia's praise.

DAMAETAS. With you I joy that Thirsis reigns
The guardian over his native plains:
But praise is scanty to reveal
The speaking blessings all must feel.

DAMON. True, all must feel -- but thankless too?
Nor give to virtue, virtue's due?
My grateful heart shall ever show
The debt I need not blush to owe.

AIR. That I go where I list, that I sing what I please;
That my labor's the price of contentment and ease,
That no care from abroad my retirement annoys,
That at home I can taste the true family joys,
That my kids wanton safely over meadows and rocks,
That my sheep graze secure from the robber or fox;
These are blessings I share with the rest of the swains,
For it is Thyrsis who gave them, and Thyrsis maintains.

DAMAETAS. RECITATIVE. Perish my voice, if ever I blame
Thy duty to our guardian's name!
His active talents I revere,
But eye them with a jealous fear.
Intent to form our bliss alone,
The generous youth forgets his own;
Nor ever his busy mind employs
To find a partner of his joys.
So might his happy offspring own
The virtues which their sire has shown.

AIR. With joy the parent loves to trace
Resemblance in his children's face:
And as he forms their docil youth
To walk the steady paths of truth,
Observes them shooting into men,
And lives in them life over again.
While active sons, with eager flame,
Catch virtue at their father's name;
When full of glory, full of age,
The parent quits this busy stage,
What in the sons we most admire,
Calls to new life the honored fire.

SYLVIA. RECITATIVE. O prudent Sage forgive the zeal
Of thoughtless youth. With thee I feel,
The glories now Arcadia shares
May but embitter future cares.
Oh mighty Pan! attend Arcadia's voice,
Inspire, direct, and sanctify his choice.
AIR. So may all thy sylvan train,
Dryad, nymph, and rustic faun,
To the pipe and merry strain,
Trip it over the russet lawn!
May no thorn or bearded grass
Hurt their footsteps as they pass,
Whilst in gambols round and round
They sport it over the shaven ground!
Though thy Syrinx, like a dream,
Flying at the face of day,
Vanished in the limpid stream,
Bearing all thy hopes away,
If again thy heart should burn,
In caressing,
Blessed, and blessing,
May thou find a wished return.

CHORUS. O mighty Pan! attend Arcadia's voice,
Inspire, direct, and sanctify his choice.

[A dance of huntsmen and huntresses. DAMAETAS. RECITATIVE. Peace, shepherds,
peace, with jocund air,
Which speaks a heart unknown to care,
Young Delia hastes. The glad surprise
Of rapture flashing from her eyes.

Enter DELIA. DELIA. AIR. Shepherds, shepherds, come away;
Sadness were a sin today.
Let the pipe's merry notes aid the skill of the voice;
For our wishes are crowned, and our hearts shall rejoice.
Rejoice, and be glad;
For sure he is mad
Who, where mirth and good humor, and harmony's found,
Never catches the smile, nor lets pleasure go round.
Let the stupid be grave,
It Is the vice of the slave;
But can never agree
With a maiden like me,
Who is born in a country that is happy and free.

DAMAETAS. RECITATIVE. What means this rapture, Delia? Show
The event our bosoms burn to know.

DELIA. Now as I trod yon verdant side,
Where Ladon rolls its silver tide,
All gayly decked in gorgeous state,
Sailed a proud barge of richest freight:
Where sat a nymph, more fresh and fair
Than blossoms which the morning air
Steals persume from; the modest grace
Of maiden blush bespread her face.
Hither it made, and on this strand
Poured its rich freight for shepherds' land.
Ladon, for this, smooth flow thy tide!
The precious freight was Thyrsis' bride.

DAMAETAS. RECITATIVE. Stop, shepherds, if aright I hear,
The sounds of joy proclaim them near:
Lets meet them, friends, I Will lead the way;
Joy makes me young again today.

SCENE III. A view of the sea, with a vessel at a distance.
Here follows a PASTORAL PROCESSION to the wedding of THYRSIS. PRIEST.
RECITATIVE. Mighty Pan! with tender care,
View this swain and virgin fair;
May they ever thus impart
Just return of heart for heart.
May the pledges of their bliss
Climb their knees to share the kiss.
May their steady blooming youth,
While they tread the paths of truth,
Virtues catch from either side,
From the bridegroom and the bride.

CHORUS. May their steady blooming youth,
While they tread the paths of truth,
Virtues catch from either side,
From the bridegroom and the bride.

FINIS.

