Antiquitates Vulgares; OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE Common People.

GIVING An Account of several of their OPINIONS and CEREMONIES.

WITH Proper REFLECTIONS upon each of them; showing which may be retained, and
which ought to be laid aside.

By HENRY BOURNE, M. A. Curate of the Parochial Chapel of All Saints in
Newcastle upon Tyne.

NEWCASTLE, Printed by J. WHITE for the AUTHOR.

MDCCXXV.

TO THE Right Worshipful and Worshipful WILLIAM CARR, Esquire Mayor. John Isaacson,
Esquire Recorder. Aldermen. Sir William Blackett, Bar. William Ellison, Esquire Mat.
Featherstonhaugh, Esquire Henry Reay, Esquire Richard Ridley, Esquire Edward Johnson, Esquire
Francis Rudston, Esquire Nicholas Fenwick, Esquire Francis Johnson, Esquire Nathaniel
Clayton, Esquire

To James Muncaster, Esquire Sheriff, and to the Rest of the Common Council of the
Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne,
GENTLEMEN,
I Know none so justly entitled to the Effects and Produce of Study, as those
who are the Promoters and Patrons of Learning. They undoubtedly of all Others,
have the best of Claims to a Work of this Nature, whose Generosity and
Benevolence have been conspicuous, in so promoting the Welfare of their
Country, and the Good of Mankind.

AND such, Gentlemen, are you, the Incouragers of Learning, and the Rewarders
of Merit; there are Numbers to witness the one, and your Clergy may witness the
other.

FOR not to mention you in your private Capacities, as Promoters of Common
Learning, as the Helpers and Supporters of Schools of CHARITY, one great
Blessing of your Community: You in your public Stations uphold a nobler
Literature, and assist a more generous Education: You not only lay the
Ground-works here, but you help to the Top of Arts and Sciences, in the greater
Schools of Learning.

NOR is it less certain, that you have always been eminent, and that not only
in your own Country, but in distant Parts, for the Support of an Orthodox and
Learned Clergy: Your Fame for maintaining them, and your Regard to merit in
choosing them, being every where spoken of.

JUSTLY therefore are you entitled to Performances of this Nature, but in a
more especial Manner to this in particular; it being the Genuine Offspring of
your Generosity. As I am sensible that you have blessed me with the most
inestimable Favors, so I am bound in Duty, and by all the Ties of Gratitude,
to lay the First Fruits of my Labors, at your Feet; hoping that as you have
been very instrumental in occasioning them, so you will receive them under your
Care and Protection.

AND this I also hope for, not as they are a Work of Merit, or worthy of being
dedicated to such Patrons: For I am justly sensible of the Meanness of their
Desert, and their Unworthiness of that Honor; but as they are an Indication of
the sincerest Thankfulness and Gratitude of,

GENTLEMEN, Your most obliged Most obedient And most humble Servant HENRY
BOURNE.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Sheets are a few of that vast Number of Ceremonies and Opinions,
which are held by the Common People; such as they solely or generally observe.
For though some of them have been of National and others perhaps of universal
Observance, yet at present they would have little or no Being, if not observed
among the Vulgar.

I would not be thought a Reviver of old Rites and Ceremonies to the Burdening
of the People, nor an Abolisher of innocent Customs, which are their Pleasures
and Recreations: I aim at nothing, but a Regulation of those which are in Being
amongst them, which they themselves are far from thinking burdensome, and
abolishing such only as are sinful and wicked.

Some of the Customs they hold, have been originally good, though at present they
retain little of their primitive Purity; the true Meaning and Design of them,
being either lost, or very much in the Dark through Folly and Superstition. To
wipe off therefore the Dust they have contracted, to clear them of
Superstition, and make known their End and Design, may turn to some Account,
and be of Advantage; whereas observing them in the present Way, is not only of
no Advantage, but of very great Detriment.

Others they hold, are really sinful, notwithstanding in outward Appearance
they seem very harmless, being a Scandal to Religion, and an encouraging of
Wickedness. And therefore to aim at abolishing these, will I hope be no Crime,
though they be the Diversions of the People.

As to the Opinions they hold, they are almost all superstitious, being
generally either the Produce of Heathenism; or the Inventions of indolent
Monks, who having nothing else to do, were the Forgers of many silly and wicked
Opinions, to keep the World in Awe and Ignorance. And indeed the ignorant Part
of the World, is still so awed, that they follow the idle Traditions of the
one, more than the Word of GOD; and have more Dependence upon the lucky Omens
of the other than his Providence, more Dread of their unlucky ones, than his
Wrath and Punishment.

The regulating therefore of these Opinions and Customs, is what I proposed by
the following Compositions, whatever has been suggested to the contrary: And as
to the Menaces of some, and the Censures of others, I neither fear nor regard
them. I shall be always ready to own any Mistake, and in what I justly may, to
vindicate my self.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Soul-Bell, its Antiquity; the Reason of its Institution; the
Benefits and Advantage of it; an Exhortation to the Use of it according to its
first Institution. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of Watching with the Dead. 15 CHAP. III. Of
following the Corpse to the Grave; what it is an Emblem of: Of carrying Greens
in our Hand; what it may signify; what Use it may be of: Of Psalmody, its
Antiquity, the Advantage of it. 17 CHAP. IV. Of Garlands in Country Churches:
Of strawing Flowers on the Grave; the Antiquity of these Customs, the Innocence
of them. 25 CHAP. V. Of Bowing toward the Altar at the first coming into the
Church; a Custom generally observed by ignorant People; its Meaning, and
Antiquity. 29 CHAP. VI. Of the Time of Cock-crow: Whether evil Spirits wander
about in the Time of Night; and whether they fly away at the Time of Cock-crow:
Reflections upon this encouraging us to have Faith and Trust in GOD. 27 CHAP.
VII. Of Churchyards; why the Vulgar are generally afraid of passing through
them at Night: The Original of this Fear; that there is nothing in them now,
more than in other Places to be afraid of. 59 CHAP. VIII. Of visiting Wells and
Fountains: The Original of this Custom: The naming of them of great Antiquity:
The worship paid them by the Papists, was gross Idolatry. 65 CHAP. IX. Of
Omens: Their Original: The Observation of them sinful. 70 CHAP. X. Of the
Country Conversation in a Winter's Evening: Their Opinions of Spirits and
Apparitions: Of the Devil's appearing with a Cloven Foot: Of Faires and
Hobgoblins: Of the walking Places of Spirits; And of haunted Houses. 76 CHAP.
XI. The Form of Exorcising an haunted House. 91 CHAP. XII. Of Saturday
Afternoon; how observed of old, by the Ancient Christians, the Church of
Scotland, and the old Church of England: What end we should observe it for: An
Exhortation to the Observation of it. 115 CHAP. XIII. Of the Yule-Clog and
Christmass-Candle; what they may signify; their Antiquity; the like Customs in
other Places. 126 CHAP. XIV. Of adorning the Windows at Christmas with Laurel:
What the Laurel is an Emblem of: An Objection against this Custom taken of. 136
CHAP. XV. Of the Christmass-Carol, an ancient Custom: The common Observation of
it, very unbecoming. 139 CHAP. XVI. Of New Year's Days Ceremonies: The
New Year's Gift an harmless Custom: Wishing a good New-Year, no way sinful:
Mumming a Custom, which ought to be laid aside. 142 CHAP. XVII. Of the
Twelfth-Day; how observed: The Wickedness of observing the Twelve Days after
the common Manner. 151 CHAP. XVIII. Of St. Paul's-Day: The Observation of the
Weather, a Custom of the Heathens, and handed down by the Monks: The Apostle
St. Paul, himself is against such Observations: The Opinion of St. Austin upon
them. 159 CHAP. XIX. Of Candlemass-Day; why it is so called: The Blasphemy of
the Church of Rome in consecrating Wax-Candles. 170 CHAP. XX. Of Valentine-Day;
its Ceremonies: What the Council of Trullus thought of such Customs; that they
had better be omitted. 174 CHAP. XXI. Of Shrove-tide; what it signifies: The
Custom of the Papists at this Season: That our present Customs are very
unbecoming. 178 CHAP. XXII. Of Palm Sunday; why so called: How observed in the
Popish Times: What it is truly to carry Palms in our Hands on that Day. 183
CHAP. XXIII. Of rising early on Easter Day: What is meant by the Sun-dancing
that Morn: The Antiquity of rising early on this Day: The End and Design of it:
The great Advantages of it. 188 CHAP. XXIV. Of Easter Holy Days; a Time of
Relaxation from Labor: How observed in the dark Ages of Popery: That our
Customs at this Time, are sprung from theirs. 196 CHAP. XXV. Of May Day; the
Custom of going to the Woods the Night before: This the Practice of other
Nations: The Original of it: The Unlawfulness. 200 CHAP. XXVI. Of Parochial
Perambulations; their Antiquity; the Benefit and Advantage of them. 203 CHAP.
XXVII. Of Midsummer-Eve: Of kindling Fires, their Original: That this Custom
formerly was Superstitious; but now may be used with Innocence. 210 CHAP.
XXVIII. Of the Feast of Sheep-sheering, an ancient Custom. 216 CHAP. XXIX. Of
Michaelmass: Guardian Angels the Discourse of the Country People at this Time:
That it seems rather true, that we are protected by a Number of Angels, than by
one particular Genius. 219 CHAP. XXX. Of the Country Wake: How observed
formerly: A Custom of the Heathens, and regulated by Gregory the Great. 225
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Harvest-Supper: A Custom of the Heathens, taken from the
Jewish Feast of Tabernacles. 229
THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE Common People.
CHAP. I. Of the Soul-Bell, its Antiquity, the Reason of its Institution, the
Benefit and Advantage of it, an Exhortation to the Use of it according to its
first Institution.
THE Ceremony of Tolling the Bell at the Time of Death, seems to be as ancient
as the having of Bells themselves; we are told, Bingham's Orig. Eccl. Lib. 3.
it was about the seventh Century when Bells were first in the Church, and that
venerable Bede is the first that mentions them. If this be true, then it is as
true, that the Tolling of the Bell was instituted about that Time; for where
our Countryman mentions the Word Campana, or Bell, there it also is, that we
find a Bell made use of for the Dead: Haec, tunc in dormitorio sororum pausans,
exaudivit subito in aere notum campanae sonum, quo ad orationes excitari vel
convocati solebant, cum quis eorum de seculo ^uisset evocatus. Bed. Eccl. Hist.
Lib. 4. Cap. 23.
For at the Death of the Abbess St. Hilda, he tells us that one of the Sisters
of a distant Monastery, as she was sleeping, thought she heard the well known
Sound of that Bell, which called them to Prayers, when any of them had departed
this Life. But be that as it will, it is evident, that the Bell was tolled upon
this Occasion about Bede's Time, and consequently that the Ceremony is as
ancient, as his Days.

THE Reason why this Custom was instituted, was not, as some seem to imagine,
for no other End than to acquaint the Neighborhood, that such a Person was
dead; but chiefly, that whoever heard the Noise of the Bell, should put up
their Prayers for the Soul: Thus the Father abovementioned tells us again,
Quod cum illa audisset, suscitavit cunctas sorores and in ecclesiam convocatas,
orationibus and psalmis pro anima matris operam dare monuit. ibid.
That she who presided in this Monastery, had no sooner heard this, than she
raised all the Sisters, and called them into the Church, where she exhorted
them to pray fervently, and sing a Requiem for the Soul of their Mother.
Cassalion also upon this Place of Bid, says, That Et talis ritus etiam de
praesenti servatur in Anglia, ut cum quis decessit, statim campana propriae
illius Parochiae speciali quodam modo sonat per aliquod temporis spatium. --
Quamvis Angli negent modo orationes and suffragia defunctis proficua; non aliam
tamen in hoc ab illis rationem potui percipere, quam quod talis sonus sit ritus
antiquae ecclesiae Anglicanae, Cassali de vet Sac. Christ. Rit. P. 241.
the same Custom is still observed in England, that as soon as any has
departed this Life, the Bell belonging to the Parish he lived in, was
immediately tolled, and for some Time. -- And though (says he) the English now
deny, that Prayers are of any Service to the Dead; yet I could meet with no
other Account of this Ceremony, than that it was a Custom of the old Church of
England.

AND for this Reason it is, that this Custom was first observed, and should be
still retained among us, viz. That the Prayers of the Faithful may be assisting
to the Soul; and certainly it might be more profitably retained, were it so
ordered, that the Bell should be tolled before the Person's Departure, as was
undoubtedly designed when this Ceremony was continued, that good Men might give
him their Prayers. Was this always so observed, there might be some Moses
amongst the Number of the Faithful, whose Prayers could prevail upon GOD, to
beat back the Amalekites of Darkness; some whose Faith might remove a Mountain
of Sins, and some whose Tears procure a Multitude of Mercies. O the Comfort of
the Forgivenness of Sins! Of being guided safely through the Shadow of Death!
Of arriving securely at the Heavenly Country! What is it that Prayer cannot
obtain?

BUT though the Wickedness and Impenitency of the dying Person be such, as that
the Prayers of the Faithful will not be sufficient to avert the Wrath and
Punishment of a justly incensed GOD; yet as this can be only known to GOD, it
will not discharge Men from recommending him to the Divine Mercy, in the most
passionate and affectionate Manner. They thereby express the most laudable
Zeal, the most disinterested Charity; and whilst they are so sollicitous for
the Happiness and Welfare of other Men's Souls, they cannot but be thereby
influenced to have the greatest Concern for their own, and be both encouraged
and directed to proceed with an holy Emulation from Strength to Strength, and
endeavor as the Heb. vi. 1.
Apostle advises, to go on to Perfection.

BUT, alas! we are fallen into Times of such Irreligion and Prejudice, such
Contempt of Antiquity, and such too great Reformation, that what with Indolence
on one Hand, and Ignorance on the other; what with no Zeal on this Side, and
too Among the many Objections of the Brownists, it is laid to the Charge of the
Church of England, That though we deny the Doctrine of Purgatory, and teach the
contrary; yet how well our Practice suits with it, may be considered in our
Ringing of hallowed Bells for the Soul. Bish. Hall. cont. Brown.
false a one on that; we either neglect the most decent Ceremonies of Religion,
or we think it is Religion to have no Ceremonies at all. No Wonder then, that,
in the Midst of such a crooked and perverse Generation, when the most of Men
are negligent of themselves, they are also negligent of others: No Wonder, that
when there is such a general Contempt of Religion, and Men are careless of
their own Souls, they are not careful for the Souls of their Friends.

BUT it is called In a Vestry-Book belonging to the Chapel of All Saints in
Newcastle upon Tyne, it is observeable, That the Tolling of the Bell is not
mentioned in the Parish Accounts, from the Year 1643, till 1655, when we find
it ordered to be tolled again. At a Vestry holden January 21st 1655. Whereas
for some Years past, the collecting of the Duty for Bell and Tolling, has been
forborne and laid aside, which has much lessened the Revenue of the Church, by
which, and such like Means, it is brought into Dilapidations; and having now
taken the same into serious Consideration, and fully debated the Objections
made by some against the same, and having had the Judgment of our Ministers
concerning any Superstition that might be in it; which being made clear, it is
this Day ordered, That from henceforth, the Church Officer appointed thereunto,
do collect the same, and bring the Money unto the Churchwardens, and that
those who desire to have the Use of the Bells, may freely have them as
formerly, paying the accustomed Fees. It is certain they laid it aside, because
they thought it superstitious, and it is probable, if they had not wanted
Money, they had not seen the contrary.
Popish and Superstitious; for what true Reason, I know not. Did we indeed
imagine with the Papists, that there is any We call them Soul-Bells, for that
they signify the Departure of the Soul, not for that they help the Passage of
the Soul. Bish. Hall cont. Brown. P. 568.
Virtue or extraordinary Power in a Bell, that it is Item ut Daemones tinnitu
campanarum, Christianos ad preces concitantium, terreantur. Formula vero
baptizandi seu benedicendi campanas antiqua est. Durant. Lib. C. 22. S. 6.
hallowed by Baptism, and drives away the Spirits of Darkness, then it might
justly be called Superstition, and therefore justly abolished. But when we
retain the Custom, only to procure the Prayers of the Faithful for a departing
Soul, it would surely be of Advantage to observe it, if the Prayers of a
righteous Man avail any Thing at all; which, if we may believe an inspired
Apostle, are of very great Efficacy and Validity.

ART thou then attending a Friend in his last Moments? Art thou careful for his
Soul, and sollicitous for his Salvation? Do thou wish him safe through the
Valley of Death to the everlasting Hills? Would thou have the good Angels
protect him, and be his Shield against the Powers of Darkness? In short,
would thou have him crowned with the Joys of Paradise? Be assured then, that
the Prayers of good Men will very much contribute to the gaining of these
Things. But how shall they then pray for him, if they know not of his
Departure? And how can they know that, without the Tolling of the Bell? Do thou
therefore put in Practice this decent and profitable Custom, not as our Age
generally does, after the Death of thy Friend, but before it; before he leave
the World, when the Prayers of good Men can assist him, and facilitate his
Journey into the other Life.

OR art thou working in the Field, or grinding at the Mill? Remember then, when
thou hear the Sound of the Bell for one departing, that thou put up thy
Prayers for him. Be thy Business what it will, it will always permit thee to
say at least, LORD, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace: Or to use the
Words of St. Oswald, when he and his Soldiers were ready to be slain, LORD,
have Mercy on the Soul of thy Oravit ad dominum pro animabus exercitus sui.
Unde dicunt in proverbio, Deus miserere animabus, dixit Oswaldus cadens in
terram, Bed. Eccl. L. 3. C. 12. It is used (says Bid) even to a Proverb, That
he died praying; for when the Enemy had surrounded him, and he saw himself
about to be slain, he prayed unto the LORD for the Souls of his Army. Hence it
is that the Proverb comes, LORD, have Mercy upon the Soul, as St. Oswald said
when he fell to the Earth. Which Proverb, in all Probability, has been the
Original of this present National Saying, When the Bell begins to toll,
LORD, have Mercy on the Soul.

Servant. It will not be long, till thou thy self shall have Occasion for such
Prayers, till thou come to die, and enter on thy Journey to the other State: If
then thou have been merciful, thou shall obtain Mercy; if by thy Prayers thou
have assisted the Souls of thy Brethren, thou shall either be remembered in the
Prayers of good Men, or surely these thy Prayers for others will be of Service
to thy self also, at that dreadful Hour.

BUT now it may be objected, That as the Bell is seldom tolled till after the
Person's Departure, it is to no Purpose to pray for the Soul; nay to pray for
it, would be praying for the Dead: And since that is repugnant to the Doctrine
of our Church, our Prayers at that Time had much better be omitted.

INDEED it is too true, this Custom is not so common as it should be; but
however, it is so much observed, as will be able to vindicate the putting up of
constant Prayers. I know several Religious Families in this Place, and I hope
it is so in other Places too, who always observe it, whenever the melancholy
Season offers; and therefore it will at least sometimes happen, when we put up
our Prayers constantly at the Tolling of the Bell, that we shall pray for a
Soul departing. And though it be granted, that it will oftener happen otherwise,
as the regular Custom is so little followed; yet that can be no harmful praying
for the Dead. We believe that the Soul is but departing, and it is charitably
done to offer up our Prayers: And therefore when it proves otherwise, our Psalm.
xxxiv. 14.
Prayer shall turn into our own Bosom; and like as that Peace, which the
Disciples wished to an unworthy House, returned to the Disciples again; so,
though our Prayers at that Time may be of no Service to the Soul, yet they will
be of no Disservice to us. They will return to us again, but it will be no
Fault to have misplaced them.

PRAYERS upon this OCCASION from Bishop TAILOR.
I.
O HOLY and most Gracious JESU, we humbly recommend the Soul of thy Servant
into thy Hands, thy most merciful Hands: Let thy blessed Angels stand in
Ministry about thy Servant, and defend him from the Violence and Malice of all
his ghostly Enemies: And drive far from him all the Spirits of Darkness. Amen.

II.
LORD, receive the Soul of this thy Servant: Enter not into Judgment with him:
Spare him whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious Blood: And deliver
him, for whose Sake thou did suffer Death, from all Evil and Mischief, from
the Crafts and Assaults of the Devil, from the Fear of Death, and from
everlasting Death. Amen.

III.
LORD, impute not unto him the Follies of his Youth; nor any of the Errors, and
Miscarriages of his Life: But strengthen him in his Agony, and carry him safely
through his last Distress. Let not his Faith waver, nor his Hope fail, nor his
Charity be disordered: Let him die in Peace, and rest in Hope, and rise in
Glory. Amen.

IV.
LORD, we know and believe assuredly, that whatsoever is under thy Custody,
cannot be taken out of thy Hands, nor by all the Violences of Hell robbed of
thy Protection: Preserve the Work of thy Hands, rescue him from all Evil, and
let his Portion be with the Patriarchs and Prophets, with the Apostles and
Martyrs, and all thy holy Saints, in the Arms of CHRIST, in the Bosom of
Felicity, and in the Kingdom of GOD for ever. Amen.

V.
O SAVIOR of the World, who by thy Cross, and precious Blood have redeemed us,
save, and help this thy departing Servant, we beseech thee, O LORD. Amen.

VI.
O Almighty LORD, who art a most strong Tower to all them that put their Trust
in thee; to whom all Things in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth, do bow
and obey; be now and evermore his Defense; and make him to know and feel, by a
powerful Sense of thy Goodness, that there is no other Name under Heaven given
to Man, in whom and through whom we may receive Health and Salvation, but only
the Name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

VII.
O LORD, unto thy gracious Mercy and Protection we commit him. O GOD the Father
bless him and keep him. O GOD the Son make thy Face to shine upon him, and be
gracious unto him. O GOD the Holy Ghost, lift up thy Countenance upon him, and
give him thy Peace, both now and evermore. Amen.

CHAP. II. Of Watching with the Dead.
WATCHING with the Corpse was an ancient Custom of the Church, and every where
practiced. They were wont to sit by it, from the Time of its Death till its
Exportation to the Grave, either in the House it died in, or in the Church it
self. Agreeable to this, we read in St. Austin, That as they watched his Mother
Monica, Psalterium arripuit Euodius, and cantare caepit psalmum, cui
respondebamus omnes domus: Miserecordiam and judicium cantabo tibi Domine. Aug.
Lib. 9. Confess. C. 12.
Euodius took the Psalter, and began to sing a Psalm, which the whole Family
answered with that of the Psalmist David, I will sing of Mercy and Judgment,
unto thee, O LORD, will I sing. And we are told, Ad ecclesiam antelucana hora
qua defunctus est, corpus ipsius portatum est: ibique eadem fuit nocte, quam
vigilavimus in pascha. Greg. Turon. de Gloria, Confess. C. 104.
That at the Death of St. Ambrose, his Body was carried into the Church before
Day, the same Hour he died. It was the Night before Easter, and they watched
with him there.

HOW unlike to this ancient Custom of Watching is the modern one, of locking up
the Corpse in a Room, and leaving it there alone? How unlike to this decent
Manner of Watching, is that Watching of the Vulgar, which is a Scene of Sport
and Drinking and Lewdness? Watching at that Time with a dear Friend, is the
last Kindness and Respect we can show him; and how unfriendly is it, to change
it into Negligence and too great Resignation? How unchristian, instead of a
becoming Sorrow and decent Gravity, to put on an unbecoming Joy and undecent
Pastime.

CHAP. III. Of following the Corpse to the Grave, what it is an Emblem of: Of
carrying Greens in our Hand, what it signifies, what Use it may be of: Of
Psalmody, its Antiquity, the Advantage and Use of it.
IT has been observed among all Nations, both in the Heathen and the Christian
World, as a becoming and profitable Ceremony, to follow the Corpse to the Grave.
The Heathens observed it, Praecedenti pompa funebri, vivi sequuntur, tanquam
handmulto post morituri. Al. ab. Alex. Lib. 3. P. 67. ^^t Pol. Vir. Lib. 6. C.
10. P. 405.
because it presented to them, what would shortly follow, how they themselves
should be so carried out, and laid down in the Grave. The going of the Corpse
before, showed that their Friend was gone before them to the State of Death;
and their following after, was as much as to say, that they must also in a
short Time follow him thither. For this Reason the Christian also observes the
Custom, and may, if he pleases, as he follows the Body to the Grave, entertain
himself with a pious Meditation upon it, in such like Thoughts as these of the
Psalmist. Psalm. xc. --
Thou art GOD from Everlasting, and World without End; Thou turnest Man to
Destruction; again, Thou say, Come again ye Children of Men. For a thousand
Years in thy Sight are but as Yesterday, seeing that is past as a Watch in the
Night. As soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a Sleep, and fade away
suddenly like the Grass. In the Morning it is green and grows up, but in the
Evening it is cut down, dried up and withered. Do thou therefore, O LORD, Psalm.
xxxix.
let me know my End, and the Number of my Days, that I may be certified how
long I have to live. Behold thou have made my Days, as it were a Span long, and
mine Age is nothing in respect of Thee; and verily every Man living is
altogether Vanity. And now, LORD, what is my Hope? Truly my Hope is even in
Thee. Deliver me from all mine Offenses, and O spare me a little that I may
recover my Strength, before I go hence and be no more seen. Such Thoughts as
these of our Friend's, and of our own Mortality, would excite us to prepare for
our own Change.

AND as this Form of Procession is an Emblem of our dying shortly after our
Friend, so the carrying of Ivy, or Laurel, or Rosemary, or some of those
Ever-Greens, is an Emblem of the Soul's Immortality. It is as much as to say,
That though the Body be dead, yet the Soul is Ever-Green and always in Life: It
is not like the Body, and those other Greens which die and revive again at
their proper Seasons, no Autumn nor Winter can make a Change in it, but it is
unalterably the same, perpetually in Life, and never dying.

THE Romans, and other Heathens upon this Occasion, made Use of Cypress, which
being once cut, will never flourish nor grow any more, as an Emblem of their
dying for ever, and being no more in Life. But instead of that, the ancient
Christians used the Things before mentioned; they Hadera quoque vel laurus and
hujusmodi, quae semper servant virorem, in sarchophago corpori substernuntur,
ad significandum quod qui moriuntur in Christo, vivere nec desinunt. Nam licet
mundo moriantur secundum corpus, tamen secundum animam vivunt and reviviscunt
Deo. Durand. Rit. Lib. 7. C. 35. de Offic. Mort.
laid them under the Corpse in the Grave, to signify, that they who die in
CHRIST, do not cease to live. For though, as to the Body they die to the World;
yet, as to their Souls, they live to GOD.

AND as the carrying of these Ever-Greens is an Emblem of the Soul's
Immortality, so it is also of the Resurrection of the Body: For as these Herbs
are not entirely plucked up, but only cut down, and will, at the returning
Season, revive and spring up again; so the Body, like them, is but cut down for
a while, and will rise and shoot up again at the Resurrection. For, as the
Prophet Isaiah says, (...). lxiii. 14.
Our Bones shall flourish like an Herb.

IT was customary Greg. C. 26. --
among the ancient Jews, as they returned from the Grave, to pluck up the Grass
two or three Times, and then throw it behind them, saying these Words of the
Psalmist, They shall flourish out of the City like Grass upon the Earth: Which
they did, to show, that the Body, though dead, should spring up again as the
Grass. Thus by these two ancient Ceremonies, we have placed before our Eyes,
our Mortality and Immortality; the one speaks the Death of the Body, the other
the Life of the Soul, nay, and the Life of the Body too; for like that Herb we
carry, it is not quite plucked up, but shall one Day be alive again. When it
has laid in the Earth the Winter Season, the Continuance of this World, and
the Warmth and Influence of the Spring is come, the joyful Spring of the
Resurrection, it shall be enlivened, and shoot up, and eternally flourish.
Greg. C. 26. --
For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on
Immortality. O Death, where is thy Sting! O Grave, where is thy Victory! Thanks
be to GOD, who gives us the Victory through our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Cor. i. 15.


THERE is another Custom used in some Places, at the Procession of Funerals,
which pays a due Honor to the Dead, and gives Comfort and Consolation to the
Living; and that is, the carrying out the Dead with Psalmody. This was an
ancient Custom of the Church. For in some of the earliest Ages, they carried
out their Dead to the Grave with singing of Psalms and Hymns. Thus Socrates
tells us, That when the Body of Babylas the Martyr was removed by the Order of
Julian the Apostate, the Christians Hoi kata, etc. Soc. Lib. 3. C. 17. --
with their Women and Children, rejoiced and sung Psalms all the Way, as they
bore the Corpse from Dauphne to Antioch: Thus was Epitaphlum (...) Hierom. Ep.
27. --
Paula buried at Bethlehem; thus did St. Anthony bury Paul the Hermit; and
thus were the Generality of Men buried after the three first Centuries, when
Persecution ceased. In Imitation of this, it is still customary in several
Parts of this Nation, to carry out the Dead with singing of Psalms and Hymns of
Triumph; to show that they have ended their spiritual Warfare, that they have
finished their Course with Ibid. in Vit. Paul.
Joy, and are become Conquerors; which surely is a Matter of no little
Consolation for the loosing of our Friend. And how becoming is it to pay such
Honor to the Body! How is it imitating the blessed Angels, who rejoiced at
Meeting of the Soul, and carrying it to Heaven. For as they rejoice at her
Conversion on Earth, so most certainly they rejoice at her going to Heaven. And
as they rejoice at the carrying of the Soul thither, so we, in Imitation of
them, at the carrying out the Body to the Grave. They rejoice that the Soul
has got out of a World of Sin, we that the Body out of a World of Trouble;
they that the Soul can sin no more, we that the Body can no more suffer; they
that the Soul enjoys Glory and Happiness, we that the Body rests from its
Labors.

WHEN therefore we attend the Corpse of a Neighbor or Relation, and this decent
Ceremony is performed, let it also have a Share of our Thoughts, and excite in
us Joy and Comfort, and Thanksgiving and Praise. And when these Customs are so
observed, they will be of great Advantage to us, making us still fitter for the
Heavenly Life. And surely a Thing of this Good and Profit, is much to be
preferred to what has in it nothing but Undecency and Irreverence; such is our
laughing and jesting, and telling of News, when we accompany a Neighbor to the
Grave. There is indeed a Mean to be observed, as in all other Things, so in
this; we must neither be too sad, nor too merry; we must not be so merry as to
throw off all the Signs of Affection and Love, all the Tokens of Esteem and
Humanity; nor must we 1 Thessalonians. i. 4, 13. --
sorrow even as others, which have no Hope. But we must Jam. v. 15.
be so merry as to be able to sing Psalms, and so afflicted as to be excited to
pray.

CHAP. IV. Of Garlands in Country Churches: Of strawing Flowers on the Grave;
the Antiquity of these Customs, the Innocence of them.
IN some Country Churches it is customary, to hang a Garland of Flowers over the
Seats of deceased Virgins, as a Token of Esteem and Love, and an Emblem of
their Reward in the Heavenly Church.

THIS Custom perhaps may be looked upon, as sprung from that ancient Custom of
the Heathens, of crowning their Corpse with Garlands in Token of Victory. But
Mr. Bingham tells us, That we find not this Custom used by the Ancients in
their Funeral-Rites. For as he observes, the Heathen in Minutius, makes it one
Topic of Accusation against them, Min. P. 35. Coronas etiam sepulchris
denegatis, Bing. Vol. 10. P. 68.
That they did not crown their Sepulchers.

BUT if they did not crown them after the Manner of the Heathens, they had a
Custom of using Crowns of Flowers, if we may believe Cassalion, who tells us,
Fuit quoque mos ad capita virginum apponendi florum coronas, etc. Cass. de Vet.
Sacr. Christ. P. 334.
It was a Custom of the ancient Christians to place Crowns of Flowers, at the
Heads of deceased Virgins; for which he quotes Damascen, Gregory Nyssen, St.
Jerome and St. Austin. And this has probably been the Original of this Custom
among the Vulgar.

THAT other Custom of strawing Flowers upon the Graves of their departed
Friends, is also derived from a Custom of the ancient Church. For it was usual
in those Times for the common Sort of People, to straw the Graves of their
Friends, with various Flowers. Of this there are two notable Instances taken
Notice of by Cassalion, and several other Ritualists. The one is that of St.
Ambrose, in his Funeral Oration on the Death of Valentinian, Nec ego floribus
tumulum ejus aspergam, sed spiritum ejus Christi odore perfundam; spargant alii
plenis lilia calathis: Nobis lilium est Christus: Hoc reliquias ejus sacrabo.
Ambros. Orat. Funebri. de obitu Valentin.
I will not sprinkle his Grave with Flowers, but pour on his Spirit the Odor
of CHRIST. Let others scatter Baskets of Flowers: CHRIST is our Lilly, and with
this will I consecrate his Relics.

THE other is that of St. Jerome, in his Epistle to Pammachius upon the Death of
his Wife. Caeteri mariti super tumulos conjugum spargunt violas, rosas, lilia,
floresque purpureos, and dolorem pectoris his officiis consolantur; Pammachius
noster sanctam favillam ossaque veneranda eleemosynae balsamis rigat. Hieron.
Epist. ad Pammachium de obitu Uxoris.
Whilst other Husbands strawed Violets, and Roses, and Lillies, and purple
Flowers, upon the Graves of their Wives, and comforted themselves with such
like Offices, Pammachius bedewed her Ashes and venerable Bones, with the Balsom
of Alms.

NOW these Instances, though they justly commend these other Actions, and wisely
prefer them to the Ceremonies of adorning Graves with Flowers: Yet they no Way
decry these ancient Customs. These lower Marks of Esteem and Honor, which the
Vulgar paid to the Remains of their Friends, were in themselves harmless and
innocent, and had no Censure; and as they were so, so should the present
Customs be without any, being full as harmless and innocent as the other.

CHAP. V. Of Bowing toward the Altar at the first coming into the Church; a
Custom generally observed by ignorant People; its Meaning and Antiquity.
WE may observe the Generality of old People among the Commonalty, as they
enter into the Church, to turn their Faces toward the Altar, and bow or kneel
that Way. This, no Doubt, is the Remains of that ancient Custom of the Church,
of worshipping toward the East. For in the ancient Church they worshipped that
Way upon several Accounts. First, That by so worshipping, they might lift up
their Minds to GOD, who is called the Light and the Creator of Light. And
therefore St. Austin says, Cum ad orationem stamus, ad orientem covertimur,
unde caelum surgit, etc. Ut admoneatur animus ad naturam excellentiorem se
convertere, id est, ad Dominum. Aug. de Sermon. Domini. in Mont. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
When we pray standing, we turn our Faces to the East, from whence the Day
springs, that we might be reminded of turning to a more excellent Nature,
namely, The LORD. Secondly, That forasmuch as Man was driven out of Paradise,
which is toward the East, he ought to look that Way, which is an Emblem of his
Desire to return thither. St. Damascen therefore tells us, That St. Damasc.
Lib. 4. C. 13. Orthod. Fid.
because the Scripture says, That GOD planted Paradise in Eden toward the
East, where he placed the Man which he had formed, whom he punished with
Banishment upon his Transgression, and made him dwell over against Paradise, in
the Western Part; we therefore pray, (says he) being in Quest of our ancient
Country; and as it were panting after it, do worship GOD that Way. Thirdly, It
was used when any were baptized. They first turned their Faces to the West, and
so renounced the Devil; and then to the East, and made their Covenant with
CHRIST. Lastly, They prayed that Way, believing that our SAVIOR would come to
Judgment from that Quarter of the Heavens. For as the Lightning comes out of
the East, and shines unto the West, so shall the Coming of the Son of Man be;
and he is to come in like Manner as he ascended. And that he ascended up
Eastward from Mount Olivet, St. Damasc. Lib. 4. C. 13. Orthod. Fid.
Damascen assures us. For (says he) when he ascended into Heaven, he was taken
up Eastward, and his Disciples worshipped him that Way. And therefore chiefly
it was, that in the ancient Church they prayed with their Faces to the East;
and that many of our own Church at this Day, turn their Faces to that Quarter
of the World, at the Repetition of the Creed.

WHAT may more confirm this, and speak it to have been the universal Opinion of
the Church, is the ancient Custom of burying the Corpse, with the Feet to the
East, and the Head to the West; which Custom is continued to this Day in the
whole Church of England: This was observed for the same Reason, That, at the
Coming of CHRIST to Judgment from the oriental Part of Heaven, our Bodies might
be found in a praying Posture, with their Faces toward the East.

OUR learned Countryman Gregory tells us, That the holy Men of Jerusalem hold a
Tradition generally received from their Ancients, that our SAVIOR himself was
buried, with his Face and Feet toward the East. It is affirmed by the
Geographers of the holy Land. And Bid says, Introeuntes ab orient in domum
illam rotundam quae in petra excisa est, viderunt angelum sedentem ad
meridianam partem loci illius, ubi positum fuerat corpus Jesu; hoc enim erat in
dextris, quod nimirum, corpus, quod supinum jacens caput habebat ad occasum,
dexteram necesse est habere ad austrum. Bed. in Dic. Sanct. Paschae, Tom. 7.
That as the Holy Women entered at the Eastern Part into the Round-House, which
is hewn out in the Rock, they saw the Angel sitting at the South Part of the
Place, where the Body of JESUS had lain, that is, at his Right Hand; for
undoubtedly his Body having its Face upwards and its Head to the West, must
have its Right Hand to the South. Cassalion says, Adeo tenaces fuere prisci
illi fideles in hoc ritu respiciendi in orientem, ut non folum ipsi viventes,
hoc in eorum precibus exact servarent, verum etiam mortui eorum corpora supina
in sepulchris facie orientem respicerent. Cass. de Vet. Rit. Christ. P. 30.
The Faithful of old were so observing of this Ceremony of looking toward the
East, that they not only strictly observed it in their Prayers when living; but
even when they were dead, their Bodies were placed with their Faces upwards in
the Sepulcher, looking toward the East.

THE learned Dr. Comber in his Discourse of the solemn Interment, has these
Words upon "this Subject, We may note the Positure and Position of the Corpse,
which among the Christians has always been to turn the Feet to the East, with
the Head to the West; that so they may be ready to meet the LORD, whom the
Ancients did believe should appear in the oriental Part of Heaven. Durand. Rat.
Lib. 7. Cap. 33. Or as our ingenious Mr. Gregory believes, That they might be
in the Posture of Prayer, with their Faces to the East, as soon as they were
raised. There are some ancient Authors tell us, That the old Inhabitants of
Attica buried thus before the Days of Solon, who, as they report, convinced the
Athenians, that the Island of Salamis did of Right belong to them, by showing
them dead Bodies looking that Way, and Sepulchers turned toward the East, as
they use to bury. Diog. Laert. Vit. Solon, etc. And the Scholiast upon
Thucidides says, It was the Manner of all the Greeks to bury their Dead thus:
Though a learned modern Writer supposes these Authors mistaken, and cites
Plutarch and Elian to prove, that the Athenians turned their Dead toward the
West. However it is certain, that all Nations had one certain Way of placing
the Corpse, from which they would not vary; and we Christians have so great
Antiquity for our Custom, that we ought not out of Singularity to alter it.

NO Doubt but this learned Man had great Reason for this Conclusion, as well
knowing that this ancient Rite, was struck at by the whole Herd of Sectaries,
as a silly Fancy and an idle Dream: Who never would observe it, were it not
that they are sometimes obliged; but would with those who are not obliged, act
the very Reverse, and bury North and South. I wish there were no powerfuller
Enemies to it, than them now a Days; but, as a Man's Enemies are too often
those of his own Household; so, it is to be lamented, that some who pretend to be
of our own Church, are upon all Occasions secret Advocates against this
Ceremony. When therefore there is such Opposition without, and such Treachery
within, it is high Time to be on the Guard against our Enemies; least a Ceremony
so venerable for its Antiquity, and so useful in its Observation, be laid
aside: Was it but for this one Thing, that it speaks the Hope of the whole
Christian Church, since the earliest Times of Christianity, about the
Resurrection of the same Body. It is too true, that there are some at this Time
of the Day, as well as were in the Days of the Apostle, who think it a Thing
incredible that GOD should raise the Dead; some really disbelieving the
Resurrection of any Body, and others that of the same Body. But as long as this
Ceremony is in Being, it will always be a ready Proof, that the whole Christian
Church, did not only believe the Resurrection of the Body, but of that very
Body, which was laid down in the Grave. For they observed it, that they might
be ready with their Faces to meet their SAVIOR at his coming to Judgment,
which certainly implies that they believed that very Body should rise again.

CHAP. VI. Of the Time of Cock-crow: Whether evil Spirits wander about in the
Time of Night; and whether they fly away at the Time of Cock-crow. Reflections
upon this, encouraging us to have Faith and Trust in GOD.
IT is a received Tradition among the Vulgar, That at the Time of Cock-crowing,
the Midnight Spirits forsake these lower Regions, and go to their proper
Places. They wander, say they, about the World, from the dead Hour of Night,
when all Things are buried in Sleep and Darkness, till the Time of
Cock-crowing, and then they depart. Hence it is, that in Country-Places, where
the Way of Life requires more early Labor, they always go cheerfully to Work
at that Time; whereas if they are called abroad sooner, they are apt to imagine
every Thing they see or hear, to be a wandering Ghost. Shakespeare has given us
an excellent Account of this vulgar Notion, in his Tragedy of Hamlet.

Ber. It was about to speak, when the Cock crew.


Hor. And then it started like a guilty Thing
Upon a dreadful Summons. I have heard,
The Cock that is the Trumpet to the Day,
Does with his lofty and shrill sounding Throat
Awake the God of Day: And at his Warning
Whether in Sea, or Fire, in Earth or Air,
The extravagant and erring Spirit hyes
To its Confine, and of the Truth herein,
This present Object made Probation.

Mar. It faded at the Crowing of the Cock.
Some say that ever against that Season comes,
Wherein our Savior's Birth is celebrated,
The Bird of Dawning sings all Night long.
And then, they say, No Spirit does walk abroad,
The Nights are wholesome, then no Planet strikes,
No Fairy takes, no Witch has Power to harm,
So gracious and so hallowed is that Time.

NOW to show what Truth there is in this vulgar Opinion, I shall consider,
First, What Truth there is in the Roaming of Spirits in the Night. And,
Secondly, Whether they are obliged to go away at Cock-crow.

I believe none who assent to the Truth of Divine Revelation, deny that there
are good and evil Angels attending upon Men; the one to guard and protect them,
and the other to harm and work their Ruin; that the one are those Heb. i. 14.
--
ministering Spirits, which are sent out to minister to the Heirs of Salvation;
the other the roaring Lion, and his Instruments, Job ii. 2. --
who wander to and fro in the Earth; these Mat. xii. 43.
unclean Spirits who wander through dry Places, seeking Rest and finding none.

NOR, I believe, will it be questioned, that there have been Apparitions of
good and evil Spirits, and that many, with our SAVIOR'S Disciples, have been
affrighted and cried out, not only with supposing they had seen, but really
with seeing a Spirit. Of this the Testimony of all Ages, and Scripture it self
are a sufficient Demonstration.

WHAT then could these have ordinarily been, but the Appearances of some of
those Angels of Light, or Darkness? For I am far from thinking that either the
Ghosts of the Damned or the Happy, either the Soul of a Dives or a Lazarus,
returns here any more. For as St. Athanasius observes, Hai ^n tois n^ois, etc
Athan. Tom. 2. P. 34.
These Visions and Shades of the Saints, which appear in the Temples and at the
Tombs, are not the Souls of the Saints themselves, but the good Angels
appearing in their Shapes. Not that GOD could not remand the Ghost of Samuel,
and order it again to visit the Earth, as he made Moses and Elias to appear at
our SAVIOR'S Transfiguration; but that a Thing of this Nature was very
uncommon, and seldom happened.

TAKING it therefore for granted, that there have been Apparitions of Angels, I
believe it will also be owned, that these Apparitions have frequently happened
in the Night. And truly, was there no direct Proof of this, yet the Notion of
their appearing in the Night, being as it were linked and chained to our Idea
of an Apparition, would almost persuade us, that the Night is the most proper
Time for such Appearances. Whether it is, that the Fables of Nurses, Lock,
Human Underst.
as an ingenious Author imagines, have so associated the Idea of Spirit to the
Night, that the one never appears without the other; or whether there is
something in the Presence of Night, some Awfulness and Horror, which naturally
dispose the Mind of Man to these Reflections. I am indeed very inclinable to
believe, that these Legendary Stories of Nurses and old Women, are the Occasion
of much greater Fears, than People without them, would generally have of these
Things; but I cannot help thinking, that the Presence of Night, would naturally
lead a Man to some Reflection of Spirits, without any such Cause as that
learned Author mentions. There are some particular Times, which will naturally
raise some particular Thoughts: Thus on a bright sunny Day we are naturally
disposed to Mirth and Gaiety; when the Day over-casts, or the Weather is hazy,
we then turn indolent and dull, and sooth our selves in Melancholy; if it
Thunder and Lighten, we think of the Day of Judgment and sudden Death: And thus
also the Night, as it inclines us to grave and serious Thoughts, raises in us
Horror and Dismay, and makes us afraid, even when our Judgment tells us there
is no Fear; so it may of it self be looked upon as a natural Cause of such
Reflections.

BUT however this be, we must necessarily own, that Spirits have frequently
appeared in the Night, or we must give the Lie to the Traditions of all Ages,
to Historians profane and sacred, and the wisest and best in the Generations
of Men.

IN the Heathen World there are many Instances, of which I shall only mention
this one out of Plutarch: In Vit. Mar. Brut. Trans. Duke.
One Night, before Brutus passed out of Asia, he was very late all alone in his
Tent, with a dim Light burning by him, all the Rest of the Army being hushed and
silent; and musing with himself, and very thoughtful, as he turned his Eye to
the Door, he saw a strange and terrible Appearance, of a prodigious and
frightful Body coming toward him without speaking. Brutus boldly asked him,
What art thou? Man, or God? Or upon what Business do thou come to us? The
Spirit answered, I am thy Evil Genius, thou shall see me at Philippi; to which
Brutus not at all disturbed, replied, Then I will see thee there.

IN the sacred Writings we have Job Job --
terrified with Visions of the Night, when deep Sleep falls upon Men, Fear
came upon him and Trembling, which made all his Bones to shake; then a Spirit
passed by before his Face, and the Hair of his Flesh stood up. In the Night
Genesis xxxii. --
Jacob wrestled with the Angel; in the Night an Angel delivered Acts xii.
Peter out of Prison, etc.

BUT though it be true from Scripture, that there have been nightly Apparitions,
yet these are chiefly of good Angels; whereas this Opinion principally means,
the Appearances of evil Spirits. It must be owned indeed, that the Appearances
of evil Spirits, if literally, are yet but very seldom mentioned in the Night
in Scripture; but however, that they wander and appear at Night, is very
deducible from, if not literally mentioned in it. Their's is the Land of
Darkness, and the Shadow of Death: They are reserved under Chains of Darkness
to the Judgment of the great Day; and we know that every one that does Evil
naturally hates the Light: They therefore love Darkness rather than Light,
because their Deeds are Evil. The Night therefore, in a more especial Manner,
seems to be their Hour, and the Power of Darkness.

THIS was the Opinion of the Jews, as may be learned from the Fear of the
Apostles, when they saw our Savior about the fourth Watch of the Night, coming
to them upon the Waters: Mat. xiv. 25.
They were affrighted and cried out, supposing they had seen a Spirit. Doctor
Whitby upon this Place, says, That the Jews had then an Opinion of hurtful
Spirits walking in the Night, is evident from the seventy, who rendered, from
the Pestilence walking in Darkness; Apo pragmatos diaporeuomenou en skotei.
From the Fear of the Devils that walk in the Night.

AND that this was also the Opinion of the ancient Christians, is evident, not
only from their dividing the Night into four Watches, the Evening, Midnight,
Cock-crowing, and the Morning; which were the Military Divisions of the Night,
and which Si quidem and in Nocte Stationes, and Vigiliae Militares in quatuor
parts divisae ternis horarum spatiis secernuntur. Isidore, Lib. 1. de Eccle.
Offici. Cap. 19.
they observed to guard their Souls from the silent Incursions of evil Spirits,
as the others did those of the Enemy; but also from their many Relations of
such Appearances. Cassian in giving an Account of the Watching of the Ancient
Monks, and their being assaulted with Midnight Spirits, tells us, That at the
Beginning of the Monkish Life, Tanta namque erat eorum feritas, ut vix pauci --
Tolerare habitationem solitudinis possent. -- Ita eorum atrocitas grassabatur,
and frequentes ac visibiles sentiebantur aggressus, ut non auderent omnes
pariter noctibus obdormire, sed vicissim aliis degustantibus somnum, alii
vigilias celebrantes, Psalmis and Orationibus, seu Lectionibus in haerebant.
Cassian. Coll. 7. Cap. 23.
the Rage of the Midnight Spirits was so great, that but few, and these too Men
of Age and unshaken Resolution, were able to endure the Life in the Desert. For
such was their Fierceness, that where Eight or Ten had been together in a
Monastery, they would have made frequent and visible Incursions: Insomuch, that
they never all slept at the same Time, but took it by turns; some watching the
Rest, and exercising themselves in singing Psalms, in Praying and Reading. And
St. Athanasius in his Life of Anthony the Hermit, tells, Of many Conflicts that
good Man had in the Night with the Powers of Darkness, whilst they endeavored
to batter him from the strong Holds of his Faith. And what can our Church
chiefly mean in the Collect for Aid against Perils; but that GOD would send us
Protection from all the Spirits of Darkness, these Midnight Wanderers of the
World: And for this Reason, every good Man, when he lies down to sleep at
Night, desires the great Keeper of Israel, who never slumbereth nor sleeps,
to send his Holy Angels to pitch their Tents round about him, and banish from
him the Spirits of the Night.

SO far then this Tradition is just and good, that there are Midnight Spirits
who wander about the World, going too and fro in the Earth, seeking whom they
may devour. Let us now in the next Place enquire, what Truth there is in the
other Part of it; namely, That they always fly away at Cock-crow.

THIS Opinion, whatever Truth there may be in it, is certainly very Ancient. We
have it mentioned by the Christian Poet Prudentius, who flourished in the
Beginning of the fourth Century, as a Tradition of Common Belief: His Words are
these, Ferunt Vagantes Daemones
Laetos Tenebris Noctium,
Gallo canente exterritos,
Sparsim timere and cedere.
Invisa nam Vicinitas
Lucis, salutis, numinis,
Rupto Tenebrarum situ,
Noctis Fugat satellites,
Hoc esse signum praescii
Norunt repromissae spei,
Qua Nos soporis Liberi
Speramus adventum Dei.
They say the wandering Powers, that Love
The silent Darkness of the Night,
At Cock-crowing give over to rove,
And all in Fear do take their Flight.
The approaching salutary Morn,
The approach Divine of hated Day,
Makes Darkness to its Place return,
And drives the Midnight Ghosts away.
They know that this an Emblem is,
Of what preceeds our lasting Bliss,
That Morn, when Graves give up their Dead,
In certain hope to meet their GOD.


CASSIAN also, who lived in the same Century, giving an Account of a Multitude
of Devils who had been Abroad in the Night, says, Aurora itaque superveniente,
cum omnis haec ab oculis evanisset Daemonum multitudo. Cass. Coll. 8. C. 16.
That as soon as the Morn approached, they all vanished and fled away. By this
we see, that this was a current Opinion at this Time of Day; but what Reason
they had for it, except some Relations of the disappearing of Evil Spirits at
that Hour, I never yet have met with: But there have been produced at that Time
of Night, Things of very memorable Worth, which might perhaps raise the pious
Credulity of some Men to imagine, that there was something more in it, than in
other Times. It was about the Time of Cock-crowing when our Savior was born,
and the Angels sung the first Christmas-Carol to the poor Shepherds, in the
Fields of Bethlehem. Now it may be presumed, that as the Savior of the World
was then born, and the Heavenly Host had then descended to proclaim* the News,
that the Angels of Darkness would be terrified and confounded, and immediately
fly away: And perhaps this Consideration has partly been the Foundation of this
Opinion; for as this may easily be supposed, so perhaps it has been imagined,
that the Spirits of Darkness, having always in Memory that fatal Hour, are
startled and frighted away as the Cock proclaims it.

IT was also about this Time when he rose from the Dead. And when the great Sun
of Righteousness was risen upon the World, no wonder that all the Clouds of
Darkness and Wickedness were dispelled; no wonder that the conquered Powers of
Hell were not able to show their Heads: And this perhaps has been another
Reason of their imagining that Spirits go away at that time.

A third Reason is, that Passage in the Book of Genesis, where Jacob wrestled
with the Angel for a Blessing; where the Angel says unto him, Genesis xxxii.
Let me go, for the Day breaks.

BUT indeed this Tradition seems more, especially to have risen from some
particular Circumstances attending the Time of Cock-crowing; and which, as
Prudentius seems to say above, are an Emblem of the Approach of the Day of the
Resurrection. For when we leave the World, we lie down in our Graves, and Rest
from our Labors; Sleep and Darkness lay hold upon us, and there we abide till
the last Day appear, when the Voice of the Archangel shall awake us, that we
may meet the LORD of Light and Day. And when we leave the common Business and
Care of Life, we lie down in our Beds, as in a Grave, buried as it were in
Sleep and Darkness, till the Cock crow, the welcome Messenger of the News of
Day.

THE Circumstances therefore of the Time of Cock-crowing, being so natural a
Figure and Representation of the Morning of the Resurrection; the Night so
shadowing out the Night of the Grave; the third Watch, being as some suppose,
the Time our Savior will come to Judgment at; the Noise of the Cock awakening
sleepy Man, and telling him as it were, the Night is far spent, the Day is at
Hand; representing so naturally the Voice of the Archangel awakening the Dead,
and calling up the Righteous to everlasting Day; so naturally does the Time of
Cock-crowing shadow out these Things, that probably some good well-meaning Men,
have been brought to believe, that the very Devils themselves, when the Cock
Crew, and reminded them of them, did fear and tremble, and shun the Light.

NOW in Answer to the first of these Conjectures: It Is very likely the Evil
Spirits did fly away in the Morning of the Nativity, and because of our
Savior's Birth and that Company of the Heavenly Host, might be afraid and
retire into thick Darkness; yet it will not hence follow, that it always
happens so at the Time of Cock-crowing: For if they did fly away that Morning,
the Circumstances of our Savior's Birth, the heavenly Glory of the Angelick
Quire, their Music and their Presence were the Occasion of it: And why only
the bare Remembrance of what happened at that Time, should always at the Time
of Cock-crowing drive them away, rather than when they remember it at another,
no Reason seems to be given.

AS to the second Conjecture, namely, That it was the Time of our Savior's
Rising from the Dead, I answer in the same Manner, That though it be allowed,
that the Evil Spirits might have returned to the Land of Darkness, upon our
Savior's Rising from the Dead; yet why it should Occasion them always to do so
at that Time, no Reason can be given.

AS to the third Conjecture, it is easy to observe, That this was a good Angel,
whereas they that shun the Light, are bad ones: This was the Angel of the
Covenant, the Creator of Light, and the Lord of the Day: We may therefore as
well imagine, that it was not in his Power, to get out of the Arms of Jacob,
without saying, Let me go; as to suppose he was obliged to go, because he said
the Day breaks. The meaning of which Words, According to Willet, is not that
the Angel was gone to the blessed Company of the Angels, to sing their Morning
Hymn to GOD, as the Hebrews imagine: For the Angels, not only in the Morning,
but at other Times, are exercised in praising GOD. But the Angel thus speaks
according to the Custom of Men, having now taken the Form and Shape of a Man,
as though he had have to other Business, and leaving Jacob also to his Affairs.

THE last Conjecture of the Rise of this Tradition, seems to carry greater
probability than the Others: For as these Things are a Representation of the
Circumstances of the Morning of the Resurrection, so they must sure enough
bring that last Day into Remembrance; and they never can do so, but as surely
they must create Terror and Confusion in all the Devils and Ghosts of the
Night: Whilst they assure them they shall never any more enjoy the Realms of
Bliss, but be hurried into that Matthew. xxv. 41.
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But that these Things
are the Occasion of their Flying away at the Approach of Day, is not to be
supposed. On the contrary, the Devil and his Angels ramble over the World in
Daylight, and are midday Devils, as well as midnight ones: For the Devil is
incessant in his Temptations, and therefore he is abroad in the Day as well as
the Night, though perhaps has seldom appeared but in Darkness. Thus St. Austin,
in one of his Meditations, Et ideo Deus meus ad te clamamus, libera nos ab
adversario nostro quotidiano, qui sive dormiamus, sive vigilemus, -- die ac
nocte fraudibus and artibus, nunc palam nunc occulte sagittas venenatas contra
nos dirigens, ut interficiat animas nostras. Aug. Sol. Cap. 16.
We implore thee, O GOD! that thou would deliver us from our daily Enemy,
who by his Wiles and Cunning is always watching us, Day and Night, Sleeping and
Waking; and both openly and in secret, shooting at us his poisoned Arrows, that
he may destroy our Souls.

AND now, what, though this be true, as it most certainly seems to be so, that at
the cheerful Hour of Cock-crowing, the wandering Ghosts are not driven away,
but still continue going too and fro? What, though then their Power be still the
same, and their Intentions as fully bent to do Evil? Consider but that GOD'S
Care and Providence govern the World, and there will be found as much Safety
for us, in the midst of Evil Spirits, as if they absented at that Time. The
Almighty Power of GOD, is the same then, as at other Times; nothing but that,
preserved us continually, and that, will always be able to preserve us. However
great may be the Malice of Devils; however desirous of working our Ruin; though
they watch all Opportunities, and are unwearied in tempting us; yet the loving
Kindness of the LORD endures for Ever, and his Mercy is over all his Works: He
will not suffer our Foot to be moved; he that keeps us will not sleep: We
shall not be afraid of the Sun by Day, nor the Moon by Night: For the
Pestilence that walks in Darkness, nor for the Sickness that destroys in
the Noonday.

ARE we then afraid of Darkness and the presence of Night? Let us remember the
Creator of them, and have but Faith in him, and we shall find our Night turned
into Day. In his Light shall we see Light: We shall be as secure as if there
was no Darkness about us, as well knowing, that that GOD which protects us,
sees through the thickest Mediums, and the darkest Night: For with him the
Darkness is no Darkness, but the Night is as clear as the Day; the Darkness and
Light to him are both alike. Or are we afraid of that old Serpent the Devil,
that nightly Rambler of the World, who is a Lover of Night and Darkness? Let us
trust in GOD, and no harm shall happen to us. If we will but fear no Evil, his
Rod and his Staff shall Comfort us, though we walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death: For GOD has reserved the Devil and his Angels in everlasting
Chains, under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day. Though therefore he
is permitted to wander the World, yet he is so chained up, that without GOD'S
particular Order or Permission, he is not allowed to touch the Sons of Men; and
he is so reserved and kept in Darkness, that it is not in his Power even barely
to appear and be visible to them, without the Permission of GOD: So little
Reason has every good Man to fear the Spite and Malice of all the Devils in
Hell.

WHEN then the Night pours out her Terrors, covers all Things with Darkness,
and strikes thee with Horror; Lift but up thy Eyes to the Hills, from whence
comes thy Help, and thou shall clearly see, that our Lord GOD is a Light and
Defense to thee. -- Quia filiis lucis and in noctibus dies est. Quando enim
sine lumine est, cui lumen in cord est? Aut quando sol ei and dies non est,
cui sol and dies Christus est? Cyprian. de Orat. Dom.
For to those who are the Children of the Light, the Day shines in the Night:
They are never without Light, whose Hearts are illuminated; never without
Sunshine, whose Sun is CHRIST. In short then, if thou fear Darkness, look up
to CHRIST, and thou have eternal Day; if the Angels of Darkness, look but up
with the Eye of Faith, and thou shall see the Mountains full of Chariots and
Horses of Fire: Thou shall see, as did the Servant of the Prophet Elisha, That
they who be with us, are more than they who are against us. No Matter then
whether the Spirits of the Night go away, or only tremble at the Time of
Cock-crowing: For sure we are, that the Angel of the LORD tarrieth round about
them that fear him, and delivers them; nay, That GOD himself will arise and
scatter his Enemies, and make them that hate him to fly before him. And if GOD
be for us, who can be against us?

CHAP. VII. Of Churchyards; why the Vulgar are generally afraid of passing
through them at Night: The Original of this Fear: That there is nothing in them
now, more than in other Places to be afraid of.
THE most of ignorant People are afraid of going through a Churchyard at
Nightime. If they are obliged upon some hasty and urgent Affair, they fear
and tremble, till they are beyond its Bounds, but they generally avoid it, and
go further about. It would, no Question, be better if there were fewer
Path-ways through Churchyards than there are, both as it would prevent several
Abuses committed in them, and also cause the Ashes of the Dead to be in greater
quiet, and more undisturbed Peace: We should not then see Churchyards changed
into common Dunghils, nor should we tread so frequently upon the Bones of our
Friends: But when for the Convenience of Neighborhood, or other Reasons, there
are allowed public Ways, it is a very great Weakness to be afraid of passing
through them.

THE Reason of this Fear is, a Notion they have imbibed, that in Churchyards
there is a frequent walking of Spirits at the Dead-time of Night. Indeed there
is at that Time something awful and horrible every where, and it must be
confessed something more solemn in a Churchyard, than in the Generality of
other Places; but that it is then more frequented with Apparitions and Ghosts
than other Places are, is at this Time of Day entirely groundless, and without
any Reason.

THE Original of this Timorousness may be deduced from the Heathens: For they
believed that the departed Ghosts came out of their Tombs and Sepulchers, and
wandered about the Place where the Body lay buried. Thus Maerin saepe animas
imis excite sepulchris, -- Vidi -- Bucol. 8. Virg.
Virgil tells us, That Maeris could call the Ghosts out of their Sepulchers:
And Nunc animae tennes. -- Sepulchris. -- Errant. -- Ovid. Fast.
Ovid, that Ghosts came out of the Sepulchers, and wandered about: And Clemens
Alexandrinus, in his Admonitions to the Gentiles, upbraids them with the Gods
they worshipped; which, Poos oun, etc. Admonit. ad Gent. P. 37.
says he, are wont to appear at Tombs and Sepulchers, and which are nothing but
fading Specter and airy Forms. And the learned Mr. Mede observes, from a
Passage of this same ancient Father, Mede, Lib. 3. P. 633. de Cultu Demon.
That the Heathens supposed the Presence and Power of Demons (for so the
Greeks called the Souls of Men departed) at their Coffins and Sepulchers; as
though there always remained some natural Tie between the Deceased and their
Relicts. Agreeable to this, Dr. Scot, Scot, Christ. Life, P. 71. Part 1.
in his Discourse of the Christian Life, speaks of gross and sensual Souls, who
appeared often, after their Separation, in Churchyards or Charnel-Houses,
where their Bodies were laid. The Plat. Phaed. P. 348. --
Soul that is infected with a great Lust to the Body, continues so, for a great
while after Death, and suffering many Reluctances, hovers about this visible
Place, and is hardly drawn from thence by Force; by the Demon that has the
Guard and Care of it. By the visible Place, he means P. 386. ibid.
their Monuments and Sepulchers, where the shadowy Fantasms, of such Souls,
have sometimes appeared.

IT having therefore been a current Opinion of the Heathens, that Places of
Burial and Churchyards were frequently haunted with Specter and Apparitions,
it is easy to imagine, that the Opinion has been handed from them, among the
ignorant and unlearned, throughout all the Ages of Christianity to the present
Day. And indeed, though now there may be no such Things, yet that there have
been, need not be disputed; not that they were the real Souls of Men departed:
For I cannot see for what Reason it should be supposed, ( Scot. Christ. ibid.
--
however unacquainted such Souls might be with the Pleasures of Spirits) that
they are permitted to wander, to hover about, and linger after their Bodies. It
seems rather to be true, what is mentioned of such Apparitions in St.
Athanasius's Questions to Antiochius, that Athan. Tom. 2. P. 340.
these Apparitions of the Saints which appear at Tombs and Temples, are not the
Souls of the Saints themselves, but the good Angels appearing in their
Likeness. And I imagine it must be so too, with the Souls of bad Men, they
appear not themselves, but they are represented by the Evil Angels. For the
Soul upon the Departure, returns to GOD that gave it, who alots it its Station
in the World of Spirits, where it is kept till the Day of Judgment in Happiness
or Misery, when it shall receive its Compleation of the one, or the other.
However, whatever these Apparitions were, they are a certain Proof, that such
Appearances have been in such Places; and indeed, to add no more, it is the
whole Voice of Antiquity.

BUT now with us, GOD be thanked, the Scene is changed, we live not in the
Darkness of Error, but in the Light of Truth; we worship not Demons, but the
GOD of the whole Earth; and our Temples are not the Temples of Idols, but the
Temples of the Holy GOD. If among the Heathens such Delusions were permitted,
it was because GOD had forsaken them: But when he vouchsafes to have his
Residence in his Holy Temple, we are the further from Harm, the nearer we
approach it; Psalm. lxxxiv.
There the Sparrow has found her an House, and the Swallow a Nest, where she
may lay her Young; and there shall no Harm happen to good Men, but they shall
be rather protected, because they are so near their Father's House, the House
of Prayer.

CHAP. VIII. Of visiting Wells and Fountains: The Original of this Custom: The
naming of them of great Antiquity: The Worship paid them by the Papists, was
gross Idolatry.
IN the dark Ages of Popery, it was a Custom, if any Well had an awful
Situation, and was seated in some lonely melancholy Vale; if its Water was
clear and limpid, and beautifully -- Viridi si margin clauderet undas. --
Herba. -- Juven. Sat. 3.
margin'd with the tender Grass; or if it was looked upon, as having a
Medicinal Quality; to gift it to some Saint, and honor it with his Name. Hence
it is, that we have at this Day Wells and Fountains called, some St. John's,
St. Mary Magdalen's, St. Mary's Well, etc.

TO these kind of Wells, the common People are accustomed to go, on a Summer's
Evening, to refresh themselves with a Walk after the Toil of the Day, to drink
the Water of the Fountain, and enjoy the pleasing Prospect of Shade and Stream.

NOW this Custom (though at this Time of Day, very commendable, and harmless, and
innocent) seems to be the Remains of that superstitious Practice of the
Papists, of paying Adoration to Wells and Fountains: For they imagined there
was some Holiness and Sanctity in them, and so worshipped them. In the Canons
of St. Anselm, made in the Year 1102, we find this Superstitious Practice in
some Measure forbid. Johnson Consti. St. Anselm. Can. 26.
Let no one attribute Reverence or Sanctity to a dead Body, or a Fountain, or
other Things, (as sometimes is to our Knowledge) without the Bishop's
Authority, And in the 16th of the Canons made in the Reign of King Edgar, in
the Year 963, it is ordered, Johnson Consti. 960. --
That every Priest industriously advance Christianity, and extinguish
Heathenism, and forbid the Worshipping of Fountains, etc. Mr. Johnson says upon
this Canon, that the Worshipping of Wells and Fountains, was a Superstition,
which prevailed in this Nation, till the Age before the Reformation: Nay, I
cannot say, it is extinguished yet among the Papists. In the Ages of dark
Popery it was thought sufficient to forbid the Honoring of Wells and
Fountains, without the Bishop's Approbation.

THE giving of Names to Wells, is of great Antiquity: We find it a Custom in
the Days of the old Patriarchs. Abraham observed this Custom; and therefore the
Well, which he recovered from the Servants of Abimeleck, He Genesis xxi. 31.
called Beer-sheba, or the Well of the Oath, because there they swear both of
them. Thus also Isaac, when his Herdsmen had found a Well, and the Herdsmen of
Gerar had a Contest with them about the Right of it, Genesis 26.
called the Name of the Well Eseck, that is, Strife: because they strove with
him. And he dug another Well, and strove for that also, and he called the
Name of it Sitnah, that is, Hatred. And he removed from thence, and dug
another Well, and for that they strove not; and he called the Name of it,
Rehoboth, that is, Room. And he said for now the LORD has made Room for us,
and we shall be fruitful in the Land. And we read it was at Jacob's Well where
JESUS talked with the Woman of Samaria. To give Names therefore to Wells, is of
an ancient Standing; but to pay Homage and Worship to them, was never heard of
among the People of GOD, till they sunk into gross Idolatry, and became
Worshippers of Stocks and Stones: When the Creature became worshipped instead
of the Creator, then was this Custom first introduced, in the Ages of Popish
Ignorance and Idolatry.

THERE need be no Question, but as this Custom is practically Heathenish, so it
is also originally: For the Heathens were wont to worship Streams and
Fountains, and to suppose that the Nymphs, whom they imagined the Goddesses of
the Waters, presided over them. As the Papists have borrowed many of their
silly and superstitious Ceremonies from the Religion of the Heathens, so this
in particular, a sottish, stupid, and abominable Custom, they could borrow no
where else. For we had no such Custom, neither at any Time the Churches of GOD.

CHAP. IX. Of Omens: Their Original: The Observation of them sinful.
OMENS and Prognostications of Things are still in the Mouths of all, though only
observed by the Vulgar. In Country Places, especially they are in great Repute,
and are the Directors of several Actions of Life; being looked on by them as
Presages of Things future, or the Determiners of present Good or Evil: If Lepus
quoque occurrens in via, infortunatum iter praesagit and ominosum. Alex. ab
Alex. Lib. 5. C. 13. P. 685.
a Hare cross their Way it is an Omen of ill Luck: If Saepe sinistra cava
praedixit ab ilice cornix. Virg. Bucol. 1.
a Crow cry, it portends something Evil: If Maxim vero abominatus est bubo
tristis and dira avis, voce funesta and gemitu, qui formidolosa, dirasque
necessitates, and magnas moles instar^ portendit. Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 5. C. 13.
P. 680.
an Owl, which they reckon a most abominable and unlucky Bird, sends forth its
hoarse and dismal Voice, it is an Omen of the Approach of some terrible Thing;
that some dire Calamity, and some great Misfortune is near at Hand. If Salt
fall toward them, to be sure something has happened to one in the Family, or
is shortly to happen to themselves: Such also is the Chattering of a Mag-pye,
the Cry of Ravens, the Dead-watch, Crickets, etc.

THIS is a Copy of the Omens of the Heathens, Deinde anguribus and reliqui
reges usi: Et exactis regibus, nihil public fine auspiciis nec domi nec
militiae gerabatur. Cic. de Divin. Lib. 1.
who never went upon any Enterprise, nor undertook any Business of Moment,
without consulting the Augurs and Wisemen, and being guided by Omens and
Presages of Things. Hence it was that they consulted the Intrails of Beasts,
the Flights of Birds, and several other Things: And that the very Things
abovementioned, as the Authorities there declare, have been observed by them;
yea, they have observed them, even in the remotest Ages, beyond the Days of the
oldest Records. The Heathen World therefore was full of them, and without all
doubt they have been handed down to us, from these Times.

AND as it is not to be questioned, but we had them from the Heathens, so in
all probability the Heathens have taken them from the People of GOD, and built
many of their Folies and ominous Superstitions on a Custom which they alone
were indulged in. For in the earliest Ages of the World, when a Matter of any
great Consequence was depending, and the Servants of GOD would know what the
Event would be, they asked a Sign of GOD, by desiring that such a Thing might
happen, if they were to succeed, and GOD was sometimes so condescending as to
grant them their desire. Thus we read, That Sam. i. 14. iii. 20.
Jonathan accompanied only by his Armor-bearer, not fearing the Steepness of
the Rocks, nor Multitudes of Enemies, attempted the Garrison of the Philistines
and conquered, through a Token of this Nature. If they say, says he to his
Armor-bearer, Tarry until we come up, then we will stand still in our Place,
and will not go up unto them; but if they say come up unto us, then we will go
up; for the LORD has delivered them into our Hands, and this shall be a Sign
unto us. And so indeed it came to pass, GOD who had inspired Jonathan with this
Thought, directing the Tongues of the others according to his Wishes. In like
Manner, when the good old Servant of Abraham had arrived at the City of Nahor,
to find a Wife for his Master's Son; we have him desiring of GOD, that the Sign
of the Woman he should pitch upon, might be her saying, Drink, and I will give
thy Camels drink also. Genesis xxiv. 12.
And he said, O Lord GOD of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed
this Day, and show Kindness unto my Master Abraham: Behold, I stand here by the
Well of Water, and the Daughters of the Men of the City come out to draw Water.
And let it come to pass, that the Damsel to whom I shall say, let down thy
Pitcher, I pray thee, that I may Drink; And she shall say, Drink, and I will
give thy Camels drink also: Let the same be she that thou have appointed for
thy Servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou have showed Kindness unto
my Master. This happened according to his Prayer, by which he knew that the
LORD had prospered his Journey. Now this Custom we know the Philistines
imitated, when they would know whether they had been afflicted by the GOD of
Israel for keeping the Ark. Sam. i. 6, 9.
They took the Ark of the LORD, and laid it on a Cart, and sent it away. And
they said, If it goes by the Way of his own Coast to Beth-shemoth, then he
has done us this great Evil.

IN these early Ages of the World, GOD permitted such Things upon extraordinary
Occasions, to be asked by his own People. But they were only peculiar to those
Times. We have no Warrant for doing the like: It becomes not us to prescribe
Means to GOD, by which we may judge of our future Success, but to depend on his
Power and Wisdom, his Care and Providence. The Observation of Omens, such as
the falling of Salt, a Hare crossing the Way, of the Dead-Watch, of Crickets,
etc. are sinful and diabolical: They are the Inventions of the Devil, to draw
Men from a due Trust in GOD, and make them his own Vassals. For by such
Observations as these, they are the Slaves of Superstition and Sin, and have
all the While no true Dependence upon GOD, no Trust in his Providence.

CHAP. X. Of the Country Conversation in a Winter's Evening: Their Opinions of
Spirits and Apparitions; of the Devil's appearing with a cloven Foot; of
Fairies and Hobgoblins; of the walking Places of Spirits; and of haunted Houses.
NOTHING is commoner in County Places, than for a whole Family in a Winter's
Evening, to sit round the Fire, and tell Stories of Apparitions and Ghosts. And
no Question of it, but this adds to the natural Fearfulness of Men, and makes
them many Times imagine they see Things, which really are nothing but their own
Fancy. From this, and seldom any other Cause, it is, that Herds and Shepherds
have all of them seen frequent Apparitions, and are generally so well stocked
with Stories of their own Knowledge. Some of them have seen Fairies, some
Spirits in the Shapes of Cows and Dogs and Horses; and some have seen even the
Devil himself, with a cloven Foot. All which, is either Hearsay or a strong
Imagination. Not that there have not been, or may not be Apparitions; we know
that there have undoubtedly been such Things, and that there still are, upon
particular Occasions; but that almost all the Stories of Ghosts and Spirits,
are grounded on no other Bottom, than the Fears and Fancies, and weak Brains of
Men.

IN their Account of the Apparition of the Devil, they always describe him with
a cloven Foot: That is always his distinguishing Badge, whatever Shape he
appears in; whether it be in Beauty or Deformity, he never appears without it.
Such is the old Tradition they have received of his appearing, and such is
their Belief of it.

INDEED it must be confessed, that this is not so improbable and ridiculous as
many Things they hold. For though perhaps few of them have ought else for this
Opinion, but old Wives Fables, or the Picture of the Devil, which they have
always observed drawn with a cloven Foot, yet there seems to be some Truth in
it. For in the Times of frequent Apparitions, the Devil was wont to appear so,
if we may believe Antiquity; and there is also some Reason for it, considering
the Circumstances of the fallen Angels.

THE Brown 's Vulg. Err.
Author of the Vulgar Errors upon this same Subject, has these Words. The
Ground of this Opinion at first, might be his frequent appearing in the Shape
of a Goat, which answers this Description. This was the Opinion of the ancient
Christians, concerning the Apparitions of Panites, Fauns and Satyrs; and of
this Form we read of one, that appeared to Anthony in the Wilderness. The same
is also confirmed from Expositions of Holy Scripture. For whereas it is said,
Thou shall not offer unto Devils: The original Word is Seghnirim; that is,
rough and hairy Goats, because in that Shape the Devil most often appeared, as
is expounded by the Rabbis, as Tremellius has also explained, and as the Word
Ascimah, the God of Emath is by some conceived. He observes also, That the Goat
was the Emblem of the Sin Offering, and is the Emblem of sinful Men at the Day
of Judgment.

AND of this Opinion was also the learned Mr. Mede, Dis. 40.
Mede. He says, That when Spirits converse with Men, it is under some visible
Shape, and that there is a Law given them that that Shape they assumed, should
be of something which more or less resembled their Condition. For as in Nature
we see every Thing has a several and suitable Physiognomy or Figure, as a
Badge of their inward Nature, whereby it is known, as by a Habit of
Distinction, so it seems to be in the Shapes and Apparitions of Spirits. And as
in a well governed Commonwealth, every Sort and Condition is known by a
differing Habit, agreeable to his Quality; so it seems it should be in GOD'S
great Commonwealth, concerning the Shapes which Spirits take upon them. And he
that gave the Law, that a Man should not wear the Habit of a Woman, nor a Woman
the Habit of a Man, because that as he had made them diverse, so would he have
them so known by their Habits; so it seems he will not suffer a good and a bad
Spirit, a noble and ignoble one, to appear unto Man after the same Fashion.

NOW from this it will follow, that good Angels can take upon them no other
Shape, but the Shape of Man, because their glorious Excellency is resembled
only in the most excellent of all visible Creatures. The Shape of an inferior
Creature would be unsuitable, no other Shape becoming those who are called the
Sons of GOD, but his only, who was created after GOD's own Image. And yet, not
his neither as he now is, but according as he was before his Fall in his
glorious Beauty of his Integrity. Age and Deformity are the Fruits of Sin; and
the Angel in the Gospel appears like a young Man, His Matthew. xxviii.
Countenance like Lightning, and his Raiment white as Snow, as it were
resembling the Beauty of glorified Bodies, in Immutability, Sublimity and
Purity.

HENCE also it follows on the contrary, that the Devil could not appear in
humane Shape whilst Man was in his Integrity; because he was a Spirit fallen
from his first glorious Perfection, and therefore must appear in such Shape,
which might argue his Imperfection and Abasement, which was the Shape of a
Beast: Otherwise no Reason can be given, why he should not rather have appeared
to Eve in the Shape of a Woman, than of a Serpent; for so he might have gained
an Opinion with her, both of more Excellency and Knowledge. But since the Fall
of Man, the Case is altered; now we know he can take upon him the Shape of Man;
and no Wonder, since one falling Star may resemble another. And therefore he
appears it seems in the Shape of Man's Imperfection, either for Age or
Deformity, as like an old Man (for so the Witches say:) And perhaps it is not
altogether false, which is vulgarly affirmed, that the Devil appearing in
humane Shape, has always a Deformity of some uncouth Member or other; as though
he could not yet take upon him humane Shape entirely, for that Man himself is
not entirely and utterly fallen as he is.

THUS far has this great and learned Man given his Opinion of this Matter, and
that with such Strength of Reason and Argument, as leaves at least a
Probability behind it, of the Truth of this Opinion.

ANOTHER Part of this Conversation generally turns upon Fairies. These, they
tell you, have frequently been heard and seen, nay that there are some still
living who were stolen away by them, and confined seven Years. According to
the Description they give of them, who pretend to have seen them, they are in
the Shape of Men, exceeding little: They are always clad in Green, and frequent
the Woods and Fields; when they make Cakes (which is a Work they have been
often heard at) they are very noisy; and when they have done, they are full of
Mirth and Pastime. But generally they dance in Moonlight, when Mortals are
asleep, and not capable of seeing them, as may be observed on the following
Morn; their dancing Places being very distinguishable. For as they dance Hand
in Hand, and so make a Circle in their Dance, so next Day there will be seen
Rings and Circles on the Grass.

NOW in all this there is really nothing, but an old fabulous Story, which has
been handed down even to our Days from the Times of Heathenism, of a certain
Sort of Beings called Lamiae, which were esteemed so mischievous and cruel, as
to take away young Children and slay them. These, together with the Fauns, the
Gods of the Woods, seem to have formed the Notion of Fairies.

THIS Opinion, in the benighted Ages of Popery, when Hobgoblins and Sprights
were in every City and Town and Village, by every Water and in every Wood, was
very common. But when that Cloud was dispelled, and the Day sprung up, those
Spirits which wandered in the Night of Ignorance and Error, did really vanish
at the Dawn of Truth and the Light of Knowledge.

ANOTHER Tradition they hold, and which is often talked of, is, that there are
particular Places allotted to Spirits to walk in. Thence it was that formerly,
such frequent Reports were abroad of this and that particular Place being
haunted by a Spirit, and that the common People say now and then, such a Place
is dangerous to be passed through at Night, because a Spirit walks there. Nay,
they will further tell you, that some Spirits have lamented the Hardness of their
Condition, in being obliged to walk in cold and uncomfortable Places, and have
therefore desired the Person who was so hardy as to speak to them, to gift them
with a warmer Walk, by some well grown Hedge, or in some shady Vale, where they
might be sheltered from the Rain and Wind.

THE Stories, that Apparitions, have been seen oftener than once in the same
Place, have no Doubt been the Rise and Spring of the walking Places of Spirits;
but why they are said sometimes to cry out for Places that are more
comfortable, is not so certainly known. It is however highly probable, that
when the Ignorance and Superstition of the Romish Church, had filled the World
with Apparitions and Ghosts, that this also was invented among them. For they
seem to have the most Right to an Invention of this Nature, whose Brains were
so fruitful of Folly, as to invent that Fuller's Chapter Hist. Cen. 10.
Dunstan took the Devil by the Nose, with a Pair of hot Tongs till he roared
again. For if the Devil may be burnt, he may also be starved; if he took such
Pains to get his Nose out of the Pincers, without Doubt in a frosty Night, he
would wish to be as warm as possible. He that believes the one, must
necessarily believe the other. And therefore it very near amounts to a
Demonstration, who were the Authors of this Opinion, viz. The Monks. We are
sure they invented the one, and need little question but they invented the
other.

THERE is a Story in the Book of Tobit, (which they may believe that will) of
the evil Spirits flying into the utmost Parts of Egypt. Tob. vi.
For as Tobias went in unto his Wife, he remembered the Words of Raphael, and
took the Ashes of the Perfumes, and put the Heart and Liver of the Fish
thereupon, and made a Smoke therewith. The which Smell, when the evil Spirit
had smelled, he fled into the utmost Parts of Egypt, and the Angel bound him.
Now from this it is evident, that the Spirit was obliged to forsake his good
old Quarters and warm Lodgings, for inhospitable Deserts and open Air: And from
this, perhaps, some of those doting Monks, have persuaded themselves into a
Belief of these Things.

WHEN it is proved to us, that this Book of Tobit is the Word of GOD, we may
entertain more Veneration for this Vulgar Opinion; but till then, we must be
iudulg'd in wondering, how a Spirit, that is an immaterial Substance, can be
affected with our Heat or Cold, or any Power or Quality of material Beings.

THE last Topic of this Conversation I shall take Notice of, shall be the
Tales of haunted Houses. And indeed it is not to be wondered at, that this is
never omitted. For formerly almost every Place had a House of this Kind. If a
House was seated on some melancholy Place, or built in some old Romantic
Manner; or if any particular Accident had happened in it, such as Murder,
sudden Death, or the like, to be sure that House had a Mark set on it, and was
afterward esteemed the Habitation of a Ghost. In talking upon this Point, they
generally show the Occasion of the House's being haunted, the merry Pranks of
the Spirit, and how it was laid. Stories of this Kind are infinite, and there
are few Villages, which have not either had such an House in it, or near it.

AND indeed there are Men of good Learning and Knowledge, who are as far as
others from Superstition, who are inclinable to believe, that such Things have
been upon particular Emergencies; though, among the Stories that are told, they
believe not one in a thousand. They know that Spirits have frequently appeared
to Men out of Houses, and they can see no Reason why they may not have appeared
in them: They know nothing in an House more than in another Place, to prevent
an Apparition, but an equal Help to its Visibility. The Air, which a Ghost is
supposed to be wrapped in, when it becomes visible to Men, is there to be
found, and they know of nothing else that may be an Argument against it. An
Author of good Credit tells us, Cum Romae aegra valetudine oppressus forem,
jaceremque in lectulo, speciem mulieris eleganti forma mihi plane vigilanti
observatam fuisse, quam cum inspicerem, diu cogitabundus, etc. -- Cum meos
sensus vigere, and figuram illam nusquam a me dilabi, etc. Alex. ab Alex. Lib.
2. C. 9.
That when he was at Rome, he was taken with Illness, and obliged to keep his
Bed: As he lay in this Condition, he observed, as he was once awake, a Woman of
a very beautiful Person coming toward him. Upon this he was silent for some
Time, and very thoughtful, weighing all the while with himself, whether it was
not rather a deceptio visus than a real Being. But when he perceived his Senses
sound and entire, and that the Object still continued; he asked, What she was?
In Answer to which, she repeated the very Words he had spoke to her, in a
sneering and disdainful Manner. After she had taken a good View of him, she
departed.

THE Commentator upon this Place, says, Sed haec semper mera somnia esse
putavi. ibid.
He looks upon this Story, and the rest which are mentioned along with it, to
be nothing but Dreams and Fancies. And for ought that I know to the contrary,
they may be so; but however it must be confessed, this Story in particular is
well attested, being told by the Man himself, who was a great and a learned
Man, and who, if we may believe himself, seems to be as sure that he had his
Eyes open, as the Commentator can be of the contrary.

BUT whatever Truth there may be in it, it is certain that in the Church of
Rome they are persuaded of the Truth of it, to a Fault. For they are so sure of
it, that they have particular Forms of exorcising such Houses; which because
they have often been heard of, but seldom seen; and are those very Things,
which raised, in the Vulgar formerly, such an Opinion of their ignorant
Priests, as to make them be esteemed Men of the greatest Faith and Learning;
and because also the Opinion has reached even our Days, and it is common for the
present Vulgar to say, none can lay a Spirit but a Popish Priest; it shall be
the Business of the next Chapter, to give one of those Forms of exorcising an
House; not that they are envied for their Art of conjuring, but that it may be
seen, how well they deserve the Character they go under.

CHAP. XI. POSTEXER CITATIO SEPTIMA, F. VALERII POLIDORI PATAVINI. Quae ordo
dicitur Domum a Daemone perturbatam liberandi. The FORM of exorcising an
haunted HOUSE.
THE Domus quae dicitur a daemonibus vexari, singulis unius hebdomadae, etc.
House which is reported to be vexed with Spirits, shall be visited by the
Priest once every Day, for a whole Week together: And Day after Day he shall
proceed as follows.

The office for Monday.
ON Monday, when the Priest comes to the Gate of the House, let him stand near
it, whilst it continues shut, and say,

V. O GOD Psalm. lxx. --
make speed to save me.

R. O LORD make haste to help me.

V. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

R. As it was in the Beginning is now, and ever shall be, World without End.
Amen.

Psalm xxiv.
THE Psalm. xxiv.
Earth is the LORD'S and all that therein is, the Compass of the World and they
that dwell therein. For he has founded it upon the Seas. Who shall ascend into
the Hill of the LORD? Or who shall stand up in his holy Place? Even he that
has clean Hands and a pure Heart, who has not lift up his Mind to Vanity, nor
sworn to deceive his Neighbor. He shall receive the Blessing from the LORD,
and Righteousness from the GOD of his Salvation. This is the Generation of them
that seek him, even of them that seek thy Face, O Jacob. Lift up your Heads O
ye Gates, and be lift up ye everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come
in. Who is the King of Glory? It is the LORD strong and mighty, even the LORD
mighty in Battle. Lift up your Heads O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. Who is the King of
Glory? Even the LORD of Hosts he is the King of Glory.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

V. I will enter into thy House.

R. And in thy Fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.

The PRAYER.
The Collect for Trinity Sunday.
O Almighty and Everlasting GOD, who have given unto us thy Servants Grace, by
the Confession of a true Faith, to acknowledge the Glory of the eternal
Trinity, and in the Power of the Divine Majesty to worship the Unity; we
beseech thee, that thou would keep us steadfast in this Faith, and evermore
defend us from all Adversities through CHRIST our LORD. And humbly we beseech
thee, that as thou wast willing thy Gates should be opened, and thy House
cleansed, by the Labors of thy holy Priests and Levites, following the Advice
of King Hezekiah; so we humbly beseech thee, that by our Ministry, thou would
be pleased to deliver this House from the Perturbations of Devils. By the same
our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who lives and reigns with thee in the Unity
of the Holy Ghost, GOD for ever and ever. Amen.

The Office on Tuesday.
ON Tuesday, the same Things are observed, and in the same Way and Manner as on
Monday; the Versicle of the Prayer, and the Prayer it self excepted. When the
Priest comes to the End of the last Versicle, viz. As it was in the Beginning,
etc. Of the Psalm, The Earth is the LORD'S, etc. Then the Gate shall be opened,
and he shall stand on the Threshold, and say,

The LESSON. I. Sam. Chap. v.
AND the Philistines took the Ark of GOD, and brought it from Eben-ezer unto
Ashdod. When the Philistines took the Ark of GOD, they brought it into the
House of Dagon, and set it by Dagon. And when they of Ashdod arose early on the
Morrow; behold, Dagon was fallen upon his Face to the Earth, before the Ark of
the LORD; and they took Dagon, and set him in his Place again. And when they
arose early on the Morrow Mornning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his Face to
the Ground, before the Ark of the LORD: And the Head of Dagon, and both the
Palms of his Hands were cut off upon the Threshold, only the Stump of Dagon was
left to him. Therefore neither the Priests of Dagon, nor any that come into
Dagon's House, tread on the Threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this Day.

V. Let GOD be my Helper, and the House of my Refuge.

R. That I may be in Safety.

The PRAYER.
The Collect for St. Michael's Day.
O GOD, who have ordained and constituted the Services of Angels and Men in a
wonderful Order; mercifully grant, that as thy Angels always do thee Service in
Heaven, so they may succor and defend us on Earth, through CHRIST our LORD.
And be thou also mercifully present, that as Solomon began to build a House,
for the Use of thy Majesty, on Mount Moria, the Place which was shown to his
Father David, so by the Operation of thy holy Angels, this House may be freed
from the evil Spirit, and be a quiet Habitation for Men. By the same our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, etc.

The Office on Wednesday.
ON Wednesday, all Things which are ordered for Monday and Tuesday being
observed in the same Manner, except the Versicles of the Prayer and the Prayer
for Tuesday: He shall stand in the Entry of the House, and say,

The LESSON. From the History of Bell and the Dragon, Verse 10.
AND the King went with Daniel into the Temple of Bell, so Bel's Priests said,
Lo, we go out. But thou, O King, set on the Meat, and make ready the Wine, and
shut the Door fast, and seal it with thine own Signet. And to Morrow when thou
come in, if thou find not that Bell has eaten up all, we will suffer
Death, or else Daniel that speaks against us. And they little regarded it:
For under the Table they had made a privy Entrance, whereby they entered in
continually, and consumed those Things. So when they were gone forth, the King
set Meats before Bell. Now Daniel had commanded his Servants to bring Ashes, and
those they strewed throughout all the Temple, in the Presence of the King
alone: Then went they out and shut the Door, and sealed it with the King's
Signet, and so departed. Now in the Night came the Priests, with their Wives
and Children, as they were wont to do, and did eat and drink up all. In the
Morning betime the King arose, and Daniel with him. And the King said, Daniel,
are the Seals whole? And Daniel said, Yea, O King, they be whole. And as soon as
he had opened the Door, the King looked upon the Table, and cried with a loud
Voice, Great art thou, O Bell, and with thee there is no Deceit at all. Then
Daniel laughed, and told the King that he should not go in, and said, Behold
now the Pavement, and mark well whose Footsteps are these. And the King said, I
see the Footsteps of Men, Women and Children. And then the King was angry, and
took the Priests with their Wives and Children, who showed him the privy Doors
where they came in and consumed such Things as were upon the Table. Therefore
the King slew them, and delivered Bell into Daniel's Power, who destroyed him
and his Temple.

V. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House.

R. They will be always praising thee.

The PRAYER.
O GOD, by whose right Hand the holy Peter was lifted up that he perished not
in the Waters, and his Fellow Apostle Paul was thrice delivered from Shipwreck
and the Depth of the Sea, mercifully hear us, and grant that by both their
Merits, we may obtain thy eternal Glory; who live and reignest with GOD the
Father, in the Unity of the Holy Spirit, GOD for ever and ever. And we beseech
thee mercifully to look upon this House, which we know to be infested with the
Devil, that as in Jerusalem, when the Temple was finished, and Solomon had
ended his Prayer, thy Glory filled thy House before the Children of Israel; so
grant that this House may be cleansed before us, by our Ministry, and that thou
would appear in it and in us, in Glory. By thee the same our LORD JESUS
CHRIST, who with the same Father and Holy Spirit, live and reignest for ever.
Amen.

The Office on Thursday.
ON Thursday, when those Things are retained which are to be retained, as may
be seen on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, and also the Versicles and the Prayer
of Wednesday omitted, he shall visit the middle Part of the House, and say.

The LESSON. Job Chap. xl.
THE LORD said unto Job; Behold, how Behemoth which I made with thee, he eats
Grass as an Ox. Lo, now his Strength is in his Loins, and his Force is in the
Navel of his Belly. He moves his Tail like a Cedar; the Sinews of his Stones
are wrapped together. His Bones are as strong as Pieces of Brass, his Bones are
like Bars of Iron. He is the Chief of the Ways of GOD. He that made him can
make his Sword to approach with him. Surely the Mountains bring him forth Food,
where all the Beasts of the Field play. He lies under the shady Trees, in the
Covert of the Reed, and Fens. The shady Trees cover him with their Shadow; the
Willows of the Brook compass him about. Behold he drinks up a River, and
hastes not; he trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his Mouth. He takes
it with his Eyes: His Nose pierces through Snares. Job xli.
Can thou draw out Leviathan with a Hook? Or his Tongue with a Cord which
thou let down? Can thou put a Hook in his Nose? Or bore his Jaw through
with a Thorn? Will he make any Supplications unto thee? Will he speak soft
Words unto thee? Will he make a Covenant with thee? Will thou take him for a
Servant for ever? Will thou play with him as with a Bird? Or will thou bind him
for thy Maidens? Shall the Companion make a Banquet for him? Or shall they part
among the Merchants? Can thou fill his Skin with barbed Irons? Or his Head
with Fish Spears? Lay thine Hand upon him, remember the Battle no more. Behold,
the Hope of him is in vain; shall not one be cast down even at the Sight of him?

V. LORD I have loved the Glory of thy House.

R. And the Place where thine Honor dwells.

The PRAYER.
Collect for Whitsunday.
O GOD, who did teach the Hearts of thy faithful People, by the sending to
them the Light of thy Holy Spirit, grant us by the same Spirit to have a right
Judgment in all Things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy Comfort, through
CHRIST our LORD. And grant unto us thy Servants, that as thy House whilst thou
sit in thy lofty Throne, is replenished with the Odor of thy Glory, so by
thy Assistance, this House may be filled with thy Grace, to repel all the Works
of the Devil: By the same our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who lives and
reigns with thee in the Unity of the same Holy Spirit: GOD throughout all
Ages. Amen.

The Office on Friday.
ON Friday, having observed all those Things, which are used on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and omitted others as is there shown; together
with the Versicles of the Prayer, and the Prayer as on other Days; let him go
up and down the whole House, and say,

The LESSON. S. Luke iv. 38.
AND he arose out of the Synagogue, and entered into Simon's House, and Simon's
Wise's Mother was taken with a great Fever: And they besought him for her: And
he stood over her, and rebuked the Fever, and it left her. And immediately she
arose and ministered unto them. Now when the Sun was setting, all they that had
any sick with diverse Diseases, brought them unto him. And he laid his Hands on
every one of them, and healed them. And Devils also came out of many, crying
out, and saying, Thou art CHRIST the Son of GOD. And he rebuking them, suffered
them not to speak: For they knew that he was CHRIST.

V. I would rather be a Door Keeper in the House of my GOD.

R. Then to dwell in the Tents of Ungodliness.

The PRAYER.
O GOD, who by the precious Blood of thy dear Son, have been pleased to
sanctify the Ensign of the enlivening Cross, grant we beseech thee, that thou
would be pleased to protect him, who is pleased with honoring thy Holy
Cross: By the same CHRIST our LORD. And we beseech thee to grant, that thou
would be present in this House in the same merciful Manner, to overturn the
Frauds of the Devil, as thou wast mercifully present with King Solomon in the
House which he built thee: By the same our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who
live and reignest with thee in Unity of the Holy Ghost, GOD for ever and
ever. Amen.

The Office on Saturday.
ON the Sabbath, all Things being done which are ordered on Monday, Tuesday;
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, and other Things omitted, as is shown by Notes
in those Places, together with the Versicles of the Prayer and the Prayer it
self, let him search through the whole House, and say,

The LESSON. S. Mark iii. 11.
AND unclean Spirits when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried,
saying, Thou art the Son of GOD. And he straightly charged them that they should
not make him known. And he goes up into a Mountain, and calls unto him whom
he would: And they came unto him. And he ordained twelve, that they should be
with him, and that he might send them forth to preach; and to have Power to
heal Sicknesses, and to cast out Devils.

V. The Sparrow has found her an House.

R. And the Turtle a Nest where she may lay her Young.

The PRAYER.
GRANT, O LORD GOD, unto us thy Servants, that we may enjoy perpetual Peace of
Mind and Soundness of Body, and by the Intercession of the glorious and blessed
Mary, always a Virgin, be delivered from our present Sorrow, and obtain thy
everlasting Joy, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. And be thou so present with us
thy humble Servants, that as when the Priests came out of the Tabernacle, the
Cloud of thy Glory filled thy whole House; so let thy Grace illuminate this
House to us that go into it, that it may be delivered from the Workings of the
Devil, and be a Dwelling for Men, replenished with all Benediction, through the
same our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who live and reignest with thee in the
Unity of the Holy Spirit, GOD, World without End. Amen.

The Office on Sunday.
ON Sunday, after the Priest has placed himself in one of the largest and most
sumptuous Parts of the House, he shall direct this Exorcism to the Demons that
haunt it, saying,

I Exorcise you, O ye Demons, who have thus boldly presumed to invade this
Habitation of Men, and give such Disquietude to its Inhabitants, by the Tri-une
GOD, whose is the Earth, and the Fullness thereof, the round World, and they
that dwell therein; by our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who continuing what he was, made
himself Man, conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of a Virgin, and who for our
Sakes, when he had undergone many Sufferings, underwent also the Torment of the
cruel Cross, upon which he bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost, that he might
obtain for us, abundant Grace in the present Life, and in the World to come
Life everlasting. By all the Grace acquired for us; by the Grace of Faith
conferred in Baptism, of Fortitude in Confirmation, of Charity in the
Eucharist, of Justice in Penance, of Hope in extreme Unction, of Temperance in
Matrimony, and of Prudence in holy Orders, and by all holy Men and Women, the
Saints of GOD, who now inherit eternal Glory, and by all their Merits; that you
remove this your presumptuous Power from this House, and continue here no
longer, nor any more vex its Inhabitants.

Then let him exorcise the whole House by saying,
I Exorcise this House, which was built for the Use of humane Kind, by the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the omnipotent GOD, who built the House of the
whole World for Man, and put all Things in it in Subjection under his Feet; and
by CHRIST our LORD, who is the Fountain of all Grace, and the Origin of all
Virtue; by his unparalled Poverty, of which he truly said, The Foxes have
Holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not where
to lay his Head. By his Meekness, he himself saying of it, Learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly in Heart: By his Weeping, when he beheld the City Jerusalem
and wept over it, saying, If thou had known: By the Hunger and Thirst of his
Righteousness, saying, My Meat is to do the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven: By his Mercy which excited him to say, I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice: By his Purity of Heart, of which he could say, Be ye holy, for I am
holy: By the Peace which he always loved, as at the last he showed, when he
said, Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you: And by that Persecution
which he suffered for Righteousness Sake, which he himself attests, saying, If
they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: And by the Holy
Apostles, and by the Effusion of their Blood, and by all holy Men and holy
Women; that thou may be blessed, and obtain from GOD above, such Virtue by
our Ministry, that thou may become to the evil Spirits a new Hell, and a
burning Furnace of eternal Horror, so that they may flee from every Corner, and
leave thee entirely free, that thou may become a comfortable Habitation for
Men, and that GOD may ever be glorified.

After that, let him bless the House in the following Manner,
V. O LORD hear my Prayer.

R. And let my Cry come unto thee.

V. He has blessed the House of Israel.

R. He has blessed the House of Aaron.

Mac. B. 2. C. 14.
THOU, O LORD of all Things, who have Need of nothing, wast pleased that the
Temple of thine Habitation should be among us; and therefore now, O Holy LORD
of all Holiness, keep this House ever undefiled, which lately was cleansed. And
grant unto us the Abundance of thy Goodness, that this House may be blessed and
sanctified of thee by our Ministry, that the evil Angels may abdicate it, and
it may be a Protection for the Faithful, a pure Habitation for the Holy Angels,
and a Possession always worthy of thy Care, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST thy
Son, who lives and reigns with thee in the Unity of the Holy Spirit, GOD,
who shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead, and the World by Fire. Amen.

Then let the Image of our SAVIOR upon the Cross, be erected in an open Part
of the principal Room in the House; and let the Priest sprinkle the whole House
with holy Water, from Top even to the Bottom, saying,
The LESSON. St. Luke, Chap. xix.
AND JESUS entered and passed through Jericho. And behold there was a Man named
Zaccheus, which was the Chief among the Publicanes, and he was rich, and he
sought to see JESUS who he was, and he could not for the Press, because he was
little of Stature. And he ran before, and climbed up into a Sycomore Tree to
see him, for he was to pass that Way. And when JESUS came to the Place, he
looked up and saw him, and said unto him, Zaccheus make haste and come down,
for to Day I must abide at thy House. And he made haste and came down, and
received him joyfully. And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, That he
was gone to be a Guest with a Man that is a Sinner. And Zaccheus stood and said
unto the LORD, Behold, LORD, the Half of my Goods I give to the Poor: And if I
have taken any Thing of any Man, by false Accusation, I restore him fourfold.
And JESUS said unto him, This Day is Salvation come to this House, forasmuch as
he also is the Son of Abraham. For the Son of Man is come to seek and to save
that which was lost.

When all these Things are done, let Abyssum, which is a Kind of an Herb, be
procured, and after it is signed with the Sign of the Cross, let it be hung up
at the four Corners of the House. I suppose the Reason of proceeding after this
Manner Day by Day, is that the Devil may be gradually banished: And to be sure,
what is observed on the last of the Days, viz. The ordering of the Crucifix,
the holy Water, the Abyssum tied to the four Corners of the House, is to keep
the Devil out when he is out.

ST. Austin tells us a Story of one Vir -- Hesperitius -- Ubi -- Domum suam
spirituum malignorum vim noxiam perpeti comperisset, rogavit nostros, me
absente, Presbyteros, ut aliquis eorum illo pergeret, cujus orationibus
cederent; perrexit unus, obtulit ibi sacrificium corporis Christi, orans
quantum potuit, ut cessaret illa vexatio. Deo protinus miserante cessarit. Aug.
de Civit. Dei, Lib. 22. Cap. 8.
Hesperitius, whose House was troubled with evil Spirits, who came once, in his
Absence, to his Presbyters, and begged their Assistance. Upon which one of them
went along with him; and when he had offered the Sacrifice of the Body of
CHRIST, and prayed in a most fervent Manner, the House, by the Mercy of GOD,
was no longer troubled.

HERE is indeed an Account of a House being haunted, but not a Word of any such
Order in the dispossessing it. The Priest goes immediately over the Threshold
into the troubled Apartment, and expells the Spirits by his Prayers. Had such
Forms been customary in the Days of St. Austin, had the Crucifix, holy Water
and Abyssum, been used, no Question but here, or somewhere else, we should have
had some Account of it: But these Ages were unacquainted with such whimsical
Forms of exorcising; and if the Story be true, it was nothing but Prayer that
quieted the House. It Is ridiculous to suppose that the Prince of Darkness, will
yield to such feeble Instruments as Water and Herbs and Crucifixes. These
Weapons are not spiritual but carnal: Whereas, in resisting this potent Enemy,
we must put on the whole Armor of GOD, that we may be able to resist him:
Which is such a Composition, as is entirely free from the least Allay or
Mixture of any such Superstitions.

CHAP. XII. Of Saturday Afternoon; how observed of old, by the ancient
Christians, the Church of Scotland, and the old Church of England: What End we
should observe it for: An Exhortation to the Observation of it.
IT is usual, in Country Places and Villages, where the Politeness of the Age
has made no great Conquest, to observe some particular Times with some
Ceremonies, which were customary in the Days of our Forefathers: Such are the
great Festivals of Christmas, Easter, and several others, which they observe
with Rites and Customs appropriated to them.

AMONG these we find a great Deference paid to Saturday Afternoon, above the
other worky Days of the Week: Then the Labors of the Plough ceast, and
Refreshment and Ease are over all the Village.

THIS seems to be the Remains of a laudable Custom once in this Land (but now
almost buried in that general Contempt of Religion and love of the World, which
prevail so much every where) of attending the Evening Prayers on Saturday, and
laying aside the Concerns of this Life, to be fitter for the Duties of the Day
following. For Baily, Prac. Piety, P. 453.
it was an holy Custom among our Forefathers, when at the Ringing to Prayer
the Eve before the Sabbath, the Husbandman would give over his Labor in the
Field, and the Tradesman his Work in the Shop, and go to Evening Prayer in the
Church, to prepare their Souls, that their Minds might more cheerfully attend
GOD's Worship on the Sabbath Day.

AND indeed it was the Custom both of the Jewish and the Christian Church. They
neither of them entered upon the Sabbath, without some Preparation for it. Moses
Exodus xvi. --
taught the Jews to remember the Sabbath over Night; from whence in all
Probability it comes to pass, that the Eve of the Jewish Sabbath is called the
Preparation. The Preparation mentioned by the Evangelists, begun at Three a
Clock on Friday Afternoon; it was proclaimed with the Noise of Trumpets and
Horns, that they might be better put in Mind of the Sabbath's drawing on, and
of that Preparation which was requisite for it.

AMONG the primitive Christians the LORD'S Day was always ushered in, with a
Pernoctation or Vigil. They assembled in the House of GOD, and sung Psalms and
Praises to him a great Part of the Night, that they might be better prepared to
serve him on his own Day following. Mark xiv.


IN the Year of our LORD 1203, William, King of Scotland, called a Council of
the chief Men of his Kingdom, at which also was present the Pope's Legate; and
it was then determined, that Saturday after the twelfth Hour should be kept
holy; that no one should follow their Business nor Callings, but desist as on
other Holy Days: That they should be put in Mind of it by the Tolling of the
Bell, and then mind the Business of Religion as on Holy Days, be present at the
Sermon, and hear Vespers; that this should be the Practice till Monday Morning,
and whoever acted otherwise should be severely punished.

AND this, as is said before, was also the Custom of our own Country, long
before this ordered in Scotland. For in the Year 958, when In Scotia anno
salutis 1203, Gulielmus Rex primorum Regni sui concilium cogit, cui etiam
interfuit Pontificius Legatus, in quo decretum est, ut Saturni Dies abhora 12
Meridiei sacer esset, neque quisquam res profanas exerceret, quemadmodum aliis
quoque festis diebus vetitum id erat. Idque campanae pulsu populo indicaretur,
ac postea sacris rebus, ut diebus festis operam darint, concionibus
interessent, vesperas audirent, idque in diem lunae facerent, constituta
transgressoribus gravi paena. Boet. Lib. 13. de Scot. ex Hospin. P. 176.
King Edgar made his Ecclesiastical Laws, we find one made to this very
Purpose: In which it is ordered, That Dies sabbati ab ipsa diei saturni hora
pomeridiana tertia, usque in luminarii diei diluculum festus agitator, etc.
Seld. Analect. Angl. Lib. 2. Cap. 6.
the Sabbath or Sunday shall be observed from Saturday at Mr. Johnson upon this
Law, says, That the Noontide signifies Three in the Afternoon, according to
our present Account: And this Practice, I conceive, continued down to the
Reformation. In King Winfred's Time, the LORD's Day did not begin till Sunset
on the Saturday. See 654. Numb. 10. Three in the Afternoon was hora nona in the
Latin Account, and therefore called Noon. How it came afterward to signify
Midday, I can but guess. The Monks by their Rules, could not eat their Dinner,
till they had said their Noon Song, which was a Service regularly to be said at
Three a Clock; but they probably anticipated their Devotions and their Dinner,
by saying their Noon Song immediately after their Midday Song, and presently
falling on. I wish they had never been guilty of a worse Fraud than this. But
it may fairly be supposed, that when Midday became the Time of Dining and
saying Noon Song, it was for this Reason called Noon by the Monks, who were the
Masters of the Language during the dark Ages. In the Shepherds Almanac, Noon
is Midday, High-noon three a Clock. Johnson, Constable. Part 1. Ann. 958.
Noon, till the Light appear on Monday Morning.

NOW hence has come the present Custom, of spending a Part of Saturday
Afternoon without servile Labor. And that our Forefathers, when the Bell was
heard, attended the Evening Prayer, not fearing the Loss of Time, nor the
Necessities of Poverty; happy would it be for us, would we so banish the Care
of the Body for the Care of the Soul! Would we leave to converse about secular
Business, and mind then the Business of Religion; would we remember that it is
Luke xxiii. 54. --
the Preparation, and that the Sabbath draws on.

WHEN Jacob was going to worship GOD at Bethel, he ordered his Family to Genesis
xxxv. 2.
put away the strange Gods that were among them, and be clean, and change their
Garments, and arise and go to Bethel. He knew that the GOD of Purity and
Holiness was to be approached with the utmost Purity they could possibly cloth
themselves with. And would we, before we enter into the Presence of GOD on his
own Day, endeavor to purify our selves from the Filth of the World we have
contracted in the Days before; would we disperse these busy Swarms of Things,
which so attract our Minds, and prepare our selves for the following Day; we
should appear before GOD, less earthly and more heavenly, less sinful and more
holy; Our Psalm cxliv. 2. --
Prayers would be set forth in his Sight as the Incense, and the lifting up of
our Hands be an Evening Sacrifice: And like the Smell of Jacob's Garment in the
Nostrils of his Father, the Smell of our Prayers would Genesis xxvii. 27.
be like the Smell of a Field which the LORD has blessed.

AND now what is this Preparation, but the Trimming of our Lamps against we
meet the LORD on the next Day? Our Bodies should be refreshed by ceasing early
from their Labor, that they may be active and vigorous; and our Souls washed
with Sobriety and Temperance, and the private or public Prayer of the Evening.
Thus should we meet the LORD at Bethel, and obtain those Mercies we sought of
him there.

ART thou then blessed with an Affluence of Things, and has Providence placed
Thee above the careful Stations of Life? What Reason then can be sufficient for
thy Neglect of this Custom? For neither can thou plead the want of Time,
neither do thou dread the straits of Poverty.

OR art thou involved in the Cares of Business? Do thou earn thy Bread by the
Sweat of thy Face, and the Labors of thy Hands? O well is Thee! And happy
may thou be. Would thou dedicate this small Time to the Service of GOD, it
would be like the Widow's Mite, which was more than all that was thrown into
the Treasury: But perhaps, thou will say thou art under the Yoke, subject to
Servitude, and obliged to work even to the latter End of the Day. It may be so,
but yet, as GOD is every where present, so would thou Remember that it is the
Preparation, and put up an Ejaculation at thy Work, GOD would accept it, and it
would prove to thee, an equal Good with the other Preparation. Cassian Haec
officia -- per totum dici spatium jugiter cum operis adjectione, spontanea
celebrantur. Cassian, Instit. Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
tells us, That the ancient Monks, whilst they were working in the private
Cells, repeated their Religious Offices: And St. Jerome, when he is commending
the pleasing Retirement of the Village of Bethlehem, In Christi villa tuta
rusticitas est. Extra psalmos, silentium est. Quocunque te verteris, arator
stiuam retinens alleluia decantatur, sudans messor psalmis se advocat, etc.
Hierom, Ep. 18. ad Marcel.
says, That in the Village of CHRIST, there is a secure Rusticity: No Noise is
heard there, but the Singing of Psalms. Wheresoever you go, you have either the
Plough-Man singing Hallelujahs as he is holding the Plough, or the sweating
Mower pleasing himself with Hymns; or the Vine-dresser singing David's Psalms.
These without doubt were acceptable to GOD, and thine undoubtedly will be
acceptable also.

BUT if thou art not tied down by Necessity, do not say that the common
Necessaries of Life require then thy Labor: For this is not losing, but
Redeeming the Time; what thou spendest in the Care of thy Soul, is not lost in
the Care of thy Body. Never was Man poorer, for observing the Duties of
Religion. If thou lose any Thing of the Wages of the Day, to do the Service of
GOD, he will take care to supply it, thou shall be no loser.

WHY then art thou fearful, O! Thou of little Faith! Why do thou take so much
Thought for thy Life? Behold the Fowls of the Air, for they sow not, neither do
they reap, nor gather into Barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them: Art
thou not much better than they? And why take thou thought for Raiment?
Consider the Lilies of the Field, they toil not, neither do they Spin; and yet
I say unto thee, that Solomon, in all his Glory, was not arrayed like one of
these. And shall he not much more Cloth thee, O Thou of little Faith!
Therefore take no Thought for what thou shall Eat, or what thou shall Drink, or
where withal thou shall be Clothed; but seek thou first the Kingdom of GOD and
his Righteousness; prefer the Care of these, to the Care of all other Things,
and all these Things shall be added unto Thee.

LET not then the busy Cares of this Life, be any hinderance to thy Care of the
other; set apart this small Time, for the Time of Preparation, and look on it,
as an Emblem of the whole Time of Life: Which is our Day of Preparation, for
the eternal Sabbath, the everlasting Rest, the undesturbed Quiet of the other
Life.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Yule-Clog and Christmas-Candle; what they may signify;
their Antiquity; the like Customs in other Places.
IN the Primitive Church, Christmas Day was always observed as the Lord's Day
was, and was in like Manner preceeded by an Eve or Vigil. Hence it is that our
Church has ordered an Eve before it, which is observed by the Religious, as a
Day of Preparation for that great Festival.

OUR Forefathers, when the common Devotions of the Eve were over, and Night
was come on, were wont to light up Candles of an uncommon Size, which were
called Christmas-Candles, and to lay a Log of Wood upon the Fire, which they
termed a Yule-Clog, or Christmas-Block. These were to Illuminate the House, and
turn the Night into Day; which Custom, in some Measure, is still kept up in the
Northren Parts.

IT has, in all probability, been derived from the Saxons. Forbid tells us,
That this very Night was observed in this Land before, by the Heathen Saxons.
They Incipiebant autem annum ab octavo calendarum Januarii die, ubi nunc natale
domini celebramus; and ipsam noctem nunc nobis sacro-sanctam tunc gentili
vocabulo maedrenack, i. e. matrum noctem appellabant: Ob causam, ut suspicamur,
ceremoniarum, quas in ea pervigiles agebant. Beda de Rat. Temp. Cap. 13.
began, says he, their Year on the Eight of the Calends of January, which is
now our Christmas Day: And the very Night before, which is now Holy to us, was
by them called Maedrenack, or the Night of Mothers; because, as we imagine, of
those Ceremonies which were performed that Night. The Yule-Clog therefore has
probably been a Part of that Night's Ceremonies. The very Name seems to speak
it, and tells its Original to every Age.

IT seems to have been used, as an Emblem of the return of the Sun, and the
lengthening of the Days. For as December guili, eodem quo Januarius nomine
vocatur. -- Guili a conversione solis in auctum diei, nomen accipit. Beda, ibid.
both December and January were called Guili or Gehol or Geol Angl-Sax. Jol vel
Jul, Dan. Sax. And to this Day in the North Yule, You Will, signifies the solemn
Festival of Christmas, and were Words used to denote a Time of Festivity very
anciently, and before the Introduction of Christianity among the Northern
Nations. Learned Men have disputed much about this Word, some deriving it from
Julius Caesar, others from the Word Gehtheol, a Wheel, as Bede, who would
therefore have it so called, because of the Return of the Sun's annual Course,
after the Winter Solstice. But he, writing de Rat. Temp. speaks rather as an
Astronomer than an Antiquary. The best Antiquaries derive it from the Word, Ol,
Ale, which was much used in their Festivities and merry Meetings. And the I in
Iol, iul cimbr. as the Ge and Gi in Gehol, Geol, Giul, Sax, are premised only
as Intensives to add a little to the Signification, and make it more
emphatical. Ol or Ale, as has been observed, did not only signify the Liquor
they made Use of, but gave Denomination likewise to their greatest Festivals,
as that of Gehol or Yule at Midwinter; and as is yet plainly to be discerned in
that Custom of the Whitsun-Ale, at the other great Festival. Elstob. Sax. Hom.
Birth. Day-Greg. Append. P. 29.

Bishop Stilingfleet has also taken Notice of this, and says, That some think
the Name of this Feast was taken from Iola, which in the Gothic Language
signifies to make merry. But he seems not inclinable to this Opinion, and
therefore tells us, that Olaus Rudbeck thinks the former ( viz. Its being
called so from the Joy that was conceived at the Return of the Sun) more
proper, not only from Bede's Authority, but because in the old Runick Fasti, a
Wheel was used to denote that Festival. Stilling. Orig. Britan.


Yule, upon Account of the Sun's Returning, and the Increase of the Days; so, I
am apt to believe, the Log has had the Name of the Yule-Log, from its being
burnt as an Emblem of the returning Sun, and the Increase of its Light and Heat.

THIS was probably the Reason of the Custom among the Heathen Saxons; but I
cannot think the Observation of it was continued for the same Reason, after
Christianity was embraced. For Bishop Stillingfleet observes in his Origines
Britanicae, That though the ancient Saxons observed Twelve Days at that Time, and
sacrificed to the Sun, in hopes of his Returning; yet when Christianity
prevailed, all these Idolatrous Sacrifices were laid aside, and that Time of
Feasting was joined with the religious Solemnity of that Season, which in other
Parts of the World were observed by Christians. And in like Manner as these
Days of Feasting were joined with the religious Solemnities of that Season, so
the keeping up of this Custom, seems to have been done with another View, than
it was originally. If a Conjecture may be allowed, it might have been done on
Account of our Savior's Birth, which happened that Night. For as the Burning
of it before Christianity, was an Emblem of the Coming of the Sun, which they
worshipped as their God; so the continuing it after, might have been for a
Symbol of that Light, which was that Night born into the World: The Light that
shines in Darkness; the Light that lightened the Gentiles, that turned them
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto GOD.

AND indeed it will be some strengthening of the Conjecture, that Light has
been the Emblem of several Things, both in Scripture, and in the ancient
Church: For the Scripture makes use of it, and the Church in Imitation of the
Scripture, as a lively Representation of several Things. Thus Light is the
Emblem of GOD: For GOD is Light, says the Apostle St. John. John the Baptist
was a Burning and a Shining Light. And therefore in some Places it Feruntur
quoque brandae seu faces ardentes, and fiunt ignos, qui significant sanctum
Joannem, qui fuit lumen and lucerna ardens, and praecedens and praecursor verae
lucis, quae illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum. Durand. Rational.
Lib. 7. Cap. 14. Nu. 12.
is customary to carry Torches on St. John the Baptist's Eve, to represent St.
John Baptist himself, who was a Burning and a Shining Light, and a Preparer of
the Way for the True Light, that lighteneth every Man that comes into the
World. The Apostles were the Light of the World; and as our Savior was
frequently called Light, so was this his Coming into the World signified, and
pointed out by the Emblems of Light: It was then (says our Countryman Gregory)
the longest Night in all the Year; and it was the midst of that, and yet there
was Day where he was: For a glorious and betokening Light shined round about
this Holy Child. So says Tradition, and so the Masters describe the Night Piece
of the Nativity. If this be called in Question, as being only Tradition, it is
out of Dispute, that the Light which illuminated the Fields of Bethlehem, and
shone round about the Shepherds as they were watching their Flocks, was an
Emblem of that Light, which was then come into Word. What Quid est quod
apparenti angelo divinae quoque claritatis splendour eos circumdedit, quod
nunquam in tota testamenti veteris serie and reperimus, cum tam innumeris
vicibus angeli prophetis and justis apparuerunt, nusquam eos fulgore divinae
lucis homines circumdedisse legimus; nisi quod hoc privilegium recte huius
temporis dignitati servatum est? etc. Bed. Hyem. de Sanct. in Gal. Cant.
can be the meaning, says venerable Bede, that this Apparition of Angels was
surrounded with that heavenly Light, which is a Thing we never meet with in all
the old Testament? For though Angels have appeared to Prophets and holy Men, yet
we never read of their Appearing in such Glory and Splendour before. It must
surely be, because this Privilege was reserved for the Dignity of this Time.
For when the true Light of the World, was born in the World, it was very proper
that the Proclaimer of his Nativity, should appear in the Eyes of Men, in such
an heavenly Light, as was before unseen in the World. And that supernatural
Star, which was the Guide of the Eastern Magi, was a Figure of that Star, which
was risen out of Jacob; of that Light which should lighten the Gentiles. GOD,
says Bishop Tailor, sent a miraculous Star, to invite and lead them to a new
and more glorious Light, the Light of Grace and Glory.

IN Imitation of this, as Gregory tells us, the Church went on with the
Ceremony: And hence it was, that for the three or four First Centuries, the
whole Eastern Church, called the Day, which they observed for our Savior's
Nativity, the Epiphany or Manifestation of the Light. And Cassian tells us,
Intra Egypti Regionem mos iste traditione antiqua servatur, ut peracto
epiphaniorum die, etc. Cassian, Coll. 10. C. 20.
That it was a Custom in Egypt, handed down by Tradition, as soon as the
Epiphany, or Day of Light was over, etc. Hence also came that ancient Custom of
the same Church, taken Notice of by St. Jerome, of Absque martyrum reliquiis
per totas orientis ecclesias, quum legendum est evangelium, accenduntur
luminaria jam sole rutilante, non utique ad fugandas tenebras, sed ad signum
laetitiae demonstrandum, etc. Jerome, Cont. Vigil. Cap. 2.
lighting up Candles at the Reading of the Gospel, even at Noonday; and that,
not to drive away the Darkness, but to speak their Joy for the good Tidings of
the Gospel, and be an Emblem of that Light, which the Psalmist says, was a Lamp
unto his Feet, and a Light unto his Paths.

LIGHT therefore having been an Emblem of so many Things, and particularly of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, both in the sacred History, and in the Practice of the
Church; it is no way improbable, that after their Conversion, the Saxons used
it as an Emblem of him, who that Night came into the World, and was the Light
thereof. In the City of Constantinople, on the Eve of Easter, there was a
Custom practiced, much like this of ours on Christmas-Eve. For then the whole
City was illuminated with Tapers and Torches, which continued all the Night,
turning the Night into Day, till almost the Day appeared. The Reason of this
Custom, was to represent that Light which the next Day arose upon the World.
The Difference between these two Customs, is that of the Time, the Reason of
their Observation is much the same. The one illuminated the Eve of Easter, that
there might be an Emblem of the Sun of Righteousness, who the next Day arose
upon the World; the other, the Eve of Yule, to give an Emblem of that Light
which Eus. Vit. Constan. Cap. 22. Lib. 5.
was the Day spring from on High. Nay, this Eve of Yule, as Gregory tells us,
was illuminated with so many Tapors among the Ancients, as to give to the Vigil
the Name of Vigilia Luminum; and the Ancients, says he, did well to send Lights
one to another, whatever some think of the Christmas-Candle.

CHAP. XIV. Of adorning the Windows at Christmas with Laurel: What the Laurel
is an Emblem of: An Objection against this Custom taken off.
ANOTHER Custom observed at this Season, is the adorning of Windows with Bay
and Laurel. It is but seldom observed in North, but in the Southern-Parts, it
is very Common, particularly at our Universities; where it is Customary to
adorn, not only the Common Windows of the Town, and of the Colleges, but also
to bedeck the Chapels of the Colleges, with Branches of Laurel.

THE Laurel was used among the ancient Romans, as an Emblem of several Things,
and in particular, of Laurus and pacifera habetur, quam praetendi inter armatos
hosts, quietis sit indicium. Romany praecipue laetitiae victoriarumque
nuntia. Polyd. Virg. de Rer. Invent. Lib. 3. Cap. 4. P. 164.
Peace, and Joy, and Victory. And I imagine, it has been used at this Season by
Christians, as an Emblem of the same Things; as an Emblem of Joy for the
Victory gained over the Powers of Darkness, and of that Peace on Earth, that
Good Will toward Men, which the Angels sung over the Fields of Bethlehem.

IT The general Defense of the three Articles of the Church of England. D. 107.
has been made use of by the Non-Conformists, as an Argument against
Ceremonies, that the second Council of Bracara, Non liceat iniquas observantias
agere Kalendarum, and ociis vacare Gentilibus, neque lauro, neque viriditate
arborum cingere domos. Omnis enim haec observatio Paganismi est. Bracc. Can.
73. Instell.
Can. 73. forbad Christians to deck their Houses, with Bay Leaves and Green
Boughs. But the Council does not mean, that it was wrong in Christians, to
make use of these Things, but only at the same Time with the Pagans, when they
observed and solemnized their Paganish Pastime and Worship. And of this
Prohibition, they give this Reason in the same Canon; Omnis haec observatio
paganismi est. All this kind of Custom does hold of Paganism: Because the
outward Practice of Heathenish Rites, performed jointly with the Pagans
themselves, could not but imply a Consent in Paganism.

BUT at present, there is no hazard of any such Thing. It may be an Emblem of
Joy to us, without confirming any, in the Practice of Heathenism. The Time, the
Place, and the Reasons of the Ceremony, are so widely different; that, though
formerly, to have observed it, would unquestionably have been a Sin, it is now
become harmless, comely, and decent.

CHAP. XV. Of the Christmas Carol, an ancient Custom: The common Observation of
it very unbecoming.
AS soon as the Morning of the Nativity appears, it is customary among the
common People to sing a Christmas-Carol, which is a Song upon the Birth of our
Savior, and generally sung with some Such are, The New Year's Songs, and that
whose Burden is Hagmena. The Word Hagmena is the same as Hagiameene, or the
Holy Month. Angli, says Hospinnian, Halegmonath, quasi sacrum mensem vocant.
Hosp. de Orig. Eth. P. 81.
others, from the Nativity to the Twelveth-Day, the Continuance of Christmas.
It comes, they say, from Cantare, to sing, and Rola, which is an Interjection
of Joy: For in ancient Times, the Burden of the Song, when Men were Merry, was
Rola, Rola.

THIS kind of Songs is of an Ancient standing: They were sung early in the
Church it self, in memory of the Nativity, as the many HYMNS for that Season
manifestly declare: Tertullian says, Ut quisque de scripturis sanctis vel de
proprio ingenio potest, provocatur in medium Deo cantare. Tertul. Advers. Gent.
C. 39.
it was customary among the Christians, at their Feasts, to bring those, who
were able to sing, into the Midst, and make them sing a Song unto GOD; either
out of the Holy Scripture, or of their own Composing and Invention. And as this
was done at their Feasts, so no doubt it was observed at the great Feast of the
Nativity; which Song, no Question of it, was to them, what the Christmas-Carol
should be to us. In after Ages we have it also taken Notice of: For Durand
tells us, In quibusdam quoque locis. -- In natali Praelati cum suis clericis
ludant, vel in domibus episcopalibus: Ita ut etiam descendant. -- Ad cantus.
Durand. Rat. Lib. 6. C. 86. S. 9.
That on the Day of the Nativity, it was usual for the Bishops of some Churches
to sing among their Clergy, in the Episcopal House, which Song was undoubtedly
a Christmas-Carol.

THE Reason of this Custom seems to be an Imitation of the Gloria in Excelsis,
or Glory be to GOD on High, etc. which was sung by the Angels, as they hovered
over the Fields of Bethlehem, in the Morning of the Nativity. For even that
Song, as the learned Bishop Tailor observes, was a Christmas-Carol. As soon,
says he, as these blessed Choristers had sung their Christmas-Carol, and taught
the Church a Hymn, to put into her Offices for Ever, in the Anniversary of this
Festivity; the Angels, etc.

WAS this performed with that Reverence and Decency, which are due to a Song of
this Nature, in Honor of the Nativity, and Glory to our LORD, it would be very
commendable; but to sing it, as is generally done, in the midst of Rioting and
Chambering, and Wantoness, is no Honor, but Disgrace; no Glory, but an Affront
to that Holy Season, a Scandal to Religion, and a Sin against CHRIST.

CHAP. XVI. Of New-Year's-Day's Ceremonies: The New-Year's-Gift an harmless
Custom: wishing a good New-Year, no Way sinful. Mumming, a Custom which ought
to be laid aside.
AS the Vulgar are always very careful to End the old Year well, so they are
also careful of Beginning well the new one: As they End the Former with a
hearty Compotation, so they begin the Latter with the Sending of Presents,
which are termed New-Year's-Gifts, to their Friends and Acquaintances: The
Original of both which Customs, is Et sic quidem annum veterem terminamus,
novumque auspicamur, inauspicatis prorsus dirisque auspiciis. Hosp. de Orig.
Fest. Christ, P. 41.
superstitious and sinful; and was observed that the succeeding Year, might be
prosperous and successful.

BISHOP Orig. Brit. P. 343.
Stilling fleet tells us, That among the Saxons of the Northren Nations, the
Feast of the New-Year was observed with more than ordinary Jollity: Thence as
Ollaus Wormius and Scheffer observe, they reckoned their Age by so many Iola,
in the Gothic Language signifies to make merry, Stilling. ibid.
Jola's; and Snorro Sturleson describes this New Year's Feast, just as
Buchannan sets out the British Saturalia, by Feasting and sending Presents, or
New Year's Gifts, one to another.

THE Poet Naogeorgus says, Jani -- Calendis,
Atque etiam strenae charis mittuntur amicis:
Conjuiibusque viri donant, gnatisque parents,
Et domini famulis, etc.
Hosp. de Orig. Fest. Christ. P. 41.
That it was usual at that Time, for Friends to present each other with a
New Year's Gift; for the Husband the Wife; the Parents, their Children; and
Master's their Servants; which, as Hospin. ibid.
Hospinian tells us, was an ancient Custom of the Heathens, and afterward
practiced by the Christians.

AND no doubt, those Christians were highly worthy of Censure, who imagined, as
the Heathens did, that the sending of a Present then, was any way Lucky, and an
Omen of the Success of the following Year. For this was the very Thing that
made both several Holy Men, and some general Councils, take notice of, and
forbid any such Custom: because the Observance of it, out of any such Design
and View, was Superstitious and Sinful. We are told, in a Place of St. Austin,
Citatur locus ex Augustino, in quo praecipitur, ne observentur calendae
Januarii, in quibus cantilenae quaedam, and commessationes, and ad invicem dona
donentur, quasi in principio anni, boni fati augurio. Hosp. de Orig. Fest.
Christ. in Fest. Jan.
the Observation of the Calends of January is forbid, the Songs which were wont
to be sung on that Day, the Feastings, and the Presents which were then sent as
a Token and Omen of a good Year. But to send a Present at that Time, out of
Esteem, or Gratitude, or Charity, is no where forbid: On the Contrary, it is
Praise worthy. For though the In calendas Januarias antiqui patres vehementius
invehebantur, non propter istas missitationes adinvicem, and mutui amoris
pignora, sed propter diem idolis dicatum: Propter ritus quosdam profanos, and
sacrilegos in illa solennitate adhibitos. Mountacut. Orig. Eccles. Pars Prior.
P. 128.
ancient Fathers did vehemently invey against the Observation of the Calends of
January; yet it was not because of those Presents, and Tokens of mutual
Affection and Love that passed; but because the Day it self was dedicated to
Idols, and because of some profane Rites and Ceremonies they observed in
solemnizing it. If then I send a New Year's Gift to my Friend, it shall be a
Token of my Friendship; if to my Benefactor, a Token of my Gratitude; if to the
Poor, (which at this Time must never be forgot) it shall be to make their
Hearts sing for Joy, and give Praise and Adoration to the Giver of all good
Gifts.

ANOTHER old Custom at this Time, is the wishing of a good New-Year, either
when a New Year's Gift is presented, or when Friends meet, or when a New Year's
Song is sung at the Door; the Burden of which is, we wish you a happy New-Year.

THIS is also a Custom among the Modern Jews, who on the first Day of the Month
The Month Tisri, was the seventh Month according to the Jews sacred
Computation; and therefore it is commanded to be celebrated the first Day of
the seventh Month, Lev. xxiii. 24. But according to their civil Computation, it
was their first Month; so that Feast may be termed their New Year's Day. Goodw.
Antiq. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
Tisri, have a splended Reperiunt mensam dulcissimis cibis instructam: E^ cum
assederint, quivis partem de cibis illis sumit, and annus, inquit, bonus and
dulcis sit nobis omnibus. Hosp. de Fest. Orig. P. 54.
Entertainment, and wish each other a happy New-Year.

NOW the Original of this Custom is Heathenish, as appears by the Feasting and
Presents before mentioned, which were a Wish for a good Year. And it was
customary among the Heathens on the Calends of January, to go about and sing a
New Year's Song. Hospinian therefore tells us, That Discurrunt namque noctu,
tam senes quam juvene^ promiscui sexus, cantantes prae foribus divitum, quibus
faelicem annum cantando precantur and optant. Hospin. ^^ Orig. Fest. Jan.
when Night comes on, not only the Young, but also the Old of both Sexes, run
about here and there, and sing a Song at the Doors of the wealthier People, in
which they wish them a happy New-Year. This he speaks indeed of the Christians,
but he calls it an exact Copy of the Heathens Custom.

BUT however I cannot see the Harm of retaining this ancient Ceremony, so it be
not used superstitiously, nor attended with Obscenity and Lewdness. For then
there will be no more in it, than an hearty Wish for each others Welfare and
Prosperity; no more Harm, than wishing a good Day, or good Night; than in
bidding one GOD speed; or than in wishing to our Friend, what Abraham's Servant
did to himself, O Genesis xxiv. 12.
LORD GOD of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this Day.

THERE is another Custom observed at this Time, which is called among us
Mumming; which is a changing of Clothes between Men and Women; who when dressed
in each others Habits, go from one Neighbor's House to another, and partake of
their Christmas-Cheer, and make merry with them in Disguise, by dancing and
singing, and such like Merriments.

THIS Hoc prorsus fit ad imitationem ludorum sigillarium, oscillarium and
occillatorum, qui pars erat saturnaliorum, and circa mensem Januarium passim in
domibus privatim, non public, exercebantur inter familias. Hosp. de Orig. etc.
is an Imitation of the Customs of the Sigillaria, or Festival Days which were
added to the ancient The Original of the Saturnalia, as to the Time, is
unknown, Macrobius assuring us, That it was celebrated in Italy long before the
Building of Rome. The Story of Saturn, in whose Honor it was kept, every Body
is acquainted with. As to the Manner of the Solemnity, besides the Sacrifices
and other Parts of public Worship, there were several lesser Observations
worth our Notice. As first the Liberty now allowed to Servants to be free and
merry with their Masters, so often alluded to in Authors. It Is probable this
was done in Memory of the Liberty enjoyed in the Golden Age, under Saturn,
before the Names of Servant and Master were known to the World. Besides this
they sent Presents to one another, among Friends. No War was to be proclaimed,
and no Offender executed. The Schools kept a Vacation, and nothing but Mirth
and Freedom was to be met with in the City. They kept at first only one Day,
the Fourteenth of the Kalends of January; but the Number was afterward
increased to three, four, five, and some say seven Days. Kennet. Romans Antiq, P.
96.
Saturnalia, and observed by the Heathens in January; which was a going in
Disguise, not publicly, or to any indifferent Place; but privately, and to
some well known Families.

THIS kind of Custom received a deserved Blow from the Church, and was taken
Notice of in the Synod Can. Trull. 62. Bal. 435.
of Trullus; where it was decreed, that the Days called the Calends, should be
entirely stripped of their Ceremonies, and the Faithful should no longer observe
them: That the public Dancings of Women should cease, as being the Occasion of
much Harm and Ruin, and as being invented and observed in honor of their Gods,
and therefore quite averse to the Christian Life. They therefore decreed, that
no Man should be Clothed with a Woman's Garment, no Woman with a Man's.

IT were to be wished, this Custom, which is still so Common among us at this
Season of the Year, was laid aside; as it is the Occasion of much Hoc autem,
quum noctu fiat, nemini dubium esse debet, quin sub hoc praetextu, multa
obscaena and turpia perpetrantur simul. Hosp. de Orig. Fest. 41.
Uncleanness and Debauchery, and directly opposite to the Word of GOD. The
Deuteronomy. xxii.
Woman shall not wear that which partaineth unto a Man, neither shall a Man put
on a Woman's Garment; for all that do so, are Abomination unto the LORD thy GOD.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Twelfth Day; how observed: The Wickedness of observing the
Twelve Days after the common Way.
ON the Epiphany, or Manifestation of CHRIST to the Gentiles, commonly called
the Twelfth-Day, the Eastern Magi were guided by the Star, to pay their Homage
to their Savior; and because they came that Day, which is the Twelfth after
the Day of the Nativity, it is therefore called the Twelfth-Day.

The Twelfth-Day it self is one of the greatest of the Twelve, and of more
jovial Observation than the Others, for the visiting of Friends and
Christmas-Gambols. The Rites of this Day are different in diverse Places, though
the End of them is much the same in all; namely, to do honor to the Memory of
the Eastern Magi, whom they suppose to have been Kings. In In Gallia unus ex
ministris, etc. -- Idem in Germania, etc. Hospin. in Epiphan.
France, one of the Courtiers is chosen King, whom the King himself, and the
other Nobles attend at an Entertainment. In Germany, they observe the same
Thing on this Day in Academies and Cities, where the Students and Citizens
create one of themselves King, and provide a Magnificent Banquet for him, and
give him the Attendance of a King, or a stranger Guest. Now this is answerable
to that Custom of the Saturnalia, of Masters making Banquets for their
Servants, and waiting on them; and no Doubt this Custom has in Part sprung from
that.

NOT many Years ago, this was a common Christmas-Gambol in both our
Universities; and it is still usual in other Places of our Land, to give the
Name of King or Queen to that Person, whose extraordinary Luck hits upon that
Part of the divided Cake, which is honored above the others, with a Bean in it.

BUT though this be generally the greatest of the Twelve, yet the others
preceding are observed with Mirth and Jollity, generally to Excess. Was this
Feasting confined within the Bounds of Decency and Moderation, and gave more
way than it does to the Exercises and the Religious Duties of the Season, it
would have nothing in it immoral or sinful. The keeping up of Friendship, and
Love, and old Acquaintance, has nothing in it harmful; but the Misfortune is,
Men upon that Bottom, act rather like Brutes than Men, and like Heathens than
Christians; and the Preservation of Friendship and Love, is nothing else but a
Pretense for Drunkenness, and Rioting, and Wantonness And such I am afraid has
been the Observation of the Christmas-Holy-days, since the holiest Times of the
Christian Church; and the generality of Men have rather looked upon them, as a
Vide Bishop Blackall's Sermon on the Lawfulness and the right Manner of keeping
Christmas and other Christian Festivals.
Time of Eating and Drinking, and Playing, than of returning Praises and
Thanksgivings to GOD, for the greatest Benefit he ever bestowed upon the Sons
of Men.

Gregory Nazianzen, in that excellent Oration of his upon Christmas Day, says,
Let us not celebrate the Feast after an Earthly, but an Heavenly Manner; let
not our Doors be crowned; let not Dancing be encouraged; let not the
Cross-paths be adorned, the Eyes fed, nor the Ears delighted, etc. Let us not
Feast to excess, nor be Drunk with Wine, etc. From this we may clearly see,
what has been the Custom in these Days. And in all Probability it has been much
the same among us, from the Beginning of Christianity: However fabulous that
Story may be, taken Notice of by Origin. Britan. Stilling.
Bishop Stilling fleet, from Hector Boethius, That King Arthur kept with his
Nobles at York, a very profane Christmas for Christmas Day is said to be none
of the twelve Days, but one of the twenty. For if it was added, it would make
thirteen Days, which are the thirteen Days here mentioned. It is said to be one
of the twenty Days, because, as I imagine, it was reckoned among those twenty
Days in which the Church forbad Fasting. For in the Laws of Canutus, it is
ordered, Atque ab ipso natali Jesu Christi die ad octavam ab Epiphania lucem,
jejunia nemo observato, nisi quidam judicio ac voluntate fecerit sua, aut id ei
fuerit a sacerdote imperatum. Seld. Analect. Lib. 2. P. 108.
That no Man shall fast from Christmas Day, till after the Octave of the
Epiphany, except he do it out of Choice, or it be commanded him of the Priest.
Thirteen Days together, and that such Jollity and Feasting then, had its
Original from him. But however these Words, if true, may be a Testimony of the
too great Antiquity of the Abuse of this Festival; yet they will by no Means
justify Buchannan's Comment upon them. For as the learned Bishop goes on,
Buchannan is so well pleased with this notable Observation, that he sets it
down for good History, saying upon it, that the old Saturnalia were renewed,
only the Days increased, and Saturn's Name changed to Caesar's: For says he, we
call the Feast Julia. But why should the Name of Saturn be changed into
Caesar's? Was he worshipped for a GOD among the British Christians, as Saturn
was among the old Pagans? But the Name Julia imports it; by no Means. For
Buchannon does not prove, that this Name was ever used for that Festival among
the Britains; and the Saxons, who brought in both the Name and the Feast, give
another Vide Chap. Christ. Candle.
Reason for it.

BUCHANNAN seems therefore to have a great deal more Malice than Truth on his
Side. But however such Revellings, and Frolicks, and Extravagances, whether or
not derived from the old Saturnalia, as are customary at this Season, do come
very near to, if not exceed its Liberties. In particular, what commoner at this
Season, than for Men to rise early in the Morning, that they may follow strong
Drink, and continue until Night, till Wine inflame them? As if CHRIST who came
into the World to save us, and was manifested to destroy the Works of the
Devil; was to be honored with the very Works he came to destroy.

WITH some, Christmas ends with the Twelve Days, but with the Generality of
the Vulgar, not till Candlemass. Till then they continue Feasting, and are
ambitious of keeping some of their Christmass-Chear, and then are as fond of
getting quit of it. Durand tells us, Hanc Quadragessimam cum gaudio celebramus,
quia Christi incarnatio fuit gaudium angelorum and hominum. Durand. Lib. 6. C.
22.
They celebrated this Time with Joy, because the Incarnation of CHRIST was the
Occasion of Joy to Angels and Men. But the lengthening of the Time from Twelve
to Forty Days, seems to have been done out of Honor to the Virgin Mary 's
Lying-in: Under the old Law, the Time of Purification was Forty Days, which was
to Women then, what the Month is to Women now. And as during that Time, the
Friends and Relations of the Women, pay them Visits, and do them abundance of
Honor; so this Time seems to have been calculated, to do Honor to the
Virgin's Lying-in.

THERE is a Canon in the Council of Trullus, Can. 80. Trul. Bal.
against those who baked a Cake in honor of the Virgin's Lying-in, in which it
is decreed, that no such Ceremony should be observed; because it was otherwise
with her, at the Birth of our Savior, than with all other Women. She suffered
no Pollution, and therefore needed no Purification, but only in Obedience to
the Law: If then the Baking of a single Cake was faulty, how much more so many
Feasts in her Honor?

CHAP. XVIII. Of St. Paul's Day; The Observation of the Weather, a Custom of
the Heathens, and handed down by the Monks: The Apostle St. Paul himself is
against such Observations; The Opinion of St. Austin upon them.
THE Observation of the Weather which is made on this Day is altogether
ridiculous and superstitious. If it happen to be unclouded and without Rain, it
is looked upon as an Omen of the following Year's Success, if otherwise that
the Year will be unfortunate. Thus the old Verse, Clara dies Pauli, bona
tempora denotat anni,
Si fuerint venti, denarrant praelia genti,
Si nix aut pluviae, pereunt animalia quaeque.


THE Interpretation of which is very well known to be this, If St. Paul's Day
be fair and clear,
It does betide a happy Year;
If blustering Winds do blow aloft
Then Wars will trouble our Realm full often.
And if it chance to Snow or Rain,
Then will be dear all Sorts of Grain.


SUCH also is the Observation of St. Swithin's Day, which if rainy is a Token
that it will rain for forty Days successively; such is the Observation of Si
sol splendescat Maria purificante,
Major erit glacies post festum quam fuit ante.

Candlemas-Day, such is Childermas-Day, such Valentine's-Day, and some others.

HOW St. Paul's Day came to have this particular Knack of foretelling the good
or evil Fortune of the following Year, is no easy Matter to find out. The Monks
who were undoubtedly the first who made this wonderful Observation, have taken
Care it should be handed down to Posterity, but why and for what Reason this
Observation was to stand good, they have taken Care to conceal. In Church
Affairs indeed they make free with handing down Traditions from Generation to
Generation, which being approved by an infallible Judgment, are to be taken for
granted; but as far as I hear, they never pretended to an infallible Spirit, in
the Study of the Planets. One may therefore, without the Suspicion of Heresy,
or fear of the Inquisition, make a little Inquiry into this Affair, and see
whether it be true or false, whether it is built upon any Reason or no Reason,
whether still to be observed, or only laughed at as a Monkish Dream.

NOW as it is the Day of that Saint, the great Apostle St. Paul, I cannot see
there is any Thing to be built upon. He did indeed labor more abundantly than
all the Apostles; but never, that I heard, in the Science of Astrology. And why
his Day should therefore be a standing Almanac to the World, rather than the
Day of any other Saint, will be pretty hard to find out. I am sure there is a
good Number of them, have as much Right to Rain or fair Weather as St. Paul,
and if St. Andrew, St. Thomas, etc. have not as much Right to Wind or Snow, let
the Reader judge.

AS it is the Twenty fifth Day of January, one would think that could be no
Reason. For what is that Day more than another? Indeed they do give some Show
of Reason, why Rain should happen about the Time of St. Swithin, which is this.
About the Time of his Feast, which is on the Fourteenth of July, there are two
rainy Constellations, which are called Praecepe and Asellus, which arise
cosmically, and generally produce Rain. And to be sure in the Course of the
Sign Aquarius, there may be both Rain and Wind and fair Weather, but how these
can foretell the Destiny of the Year, is the Question.

AS then there is nothing in the Saint or his Day to prognosticate any such
Thing, I mean, as it is the Day of St. Paul, or the Twenty fifth of January, so
I must confess I cannot find out what may be the Ground of this particular
Observation. But however thus much is very obvious, that this Observation is an
exact Copy of that superstitious Custom among the Heathens, of observing one
Day as good, and another as bad. For among them, were lucky and unlucky Days;
some were dies atri, and some dies albi; the atri were pointed out in their
Calendar, with a black Character, the albi with a white; the former to denote
it a Day of bad Success, the latter a Day of good. Thus have the Monks in the
dark and unlearned Ages of Popery copied after the Heathens, and dreamed
themselves into the like Superstitions, esteeming one Day more successful than
another; and so according to them, it is very unlucky to begin any Work upon
Childermass-Day; and what Day soever that falls on, whether on a Monday,
Tuesday, or any other, nothing must be begun on that Day through the Year; St.
Paul's Day is the Year's Fortune Tellers, St. Mark's Day is the Prognosticator
of your Life and Death, etc. and so instead of persuading the People to lay
aside the Whims and Fancies of the Heathen World, they brought them so
effectually in, that they are still reigning in many Places to this Day.

BUT of all the Days of the Year, they could not have chosen one so little to
the Purpose. For the very Saint, whose Day is so observed, has himself
cautioned them against any such Observation: For in the Fourth Chapter of his
Epistle to the Galations, he tells them, how dangerous it was to observe Days
and Months, and Times, and Years; which is not, as some would persuade us, to
Caution us against the Observation of any Day but the Lord's Day; but only that
we should not observe the abolished Feasts of the Jews, nor the abominable
Feasts of the Gentiles, nor their superstitious Observation of fortunate and
unfortunate Days. St. Austin, upon this Place, has these Words, Non itaque
dies observemus, and annos and menses, and tempora, ne audiamus ab apostolo,
timeo vos, ne forte sine causa laboraverim in vobis. Eos enim culpat, qui
dicunt, non profisiscar, quia posterus est, aut quia luna sic fertur, vel
profisiscar, ut prospera cedant, quia ita se habet positio siderum, etc. Beda
ex Augustine. in loc.
Let us not observe Years, and Months, and Times, least we hear the Apostle
telling us, I am afraid of you, least I have shown on you labor in Vain. For
the Persons he blames, are those who say, I will not set forward on my Journey,
because it is the next Day after such a Time, or because the Moon is so; or
I Will set forward that I may have Luck, because such is just now the Position of
the Stars. I will not Traffic this Month, because such a Star presides, or I
will, because it does. I shall plant no Vines this Year, because it is
Leap-Year, etc.

THE learned Mr. Bingham, has among several others, a Quotation from the same
St. Austin on these superstitious Observations, with which I shall conclude
this Chapter. To this kind, says he, belong all Ligatures and Remedies, which
the School of Physicians reject and condemn; whether in Enchantments, or in
certain Marks, which Bingham, 16 L. C. 5. Antiq. Eccl. P. 300. Aust. de Doct.
Christ. L. 2. C. 10.
they call Characters, or in some other Things which are to be hanged and bound
about the Body, and kept in a dancing Posture; not for any Temperament of the
Body, but for certain Significations, either Ocult, or Manifest: Which by a
gentler Name, they call Physical, that they may not seem to affright Men with
the Appearance of Superstition, but do good in a natural Way: Such are
Earrings hanged upon the Tip of each Ear, and Rings made of an Ostriches Bones
for the Finger; or when you are told in a Fit of Convulsions, or Shortness of
Breath, to hold your left Thumb with your right Hand. To which may be added a
thousand vain Observations, as, if any of our Members beat; if when two Friends
are talking together, a Stone, or a Dog, or a Child, happens to come between
them, they tread the Stone to Pieces, as the Divider of their Friendship, and
this is tolerable in Comparison of beating an innocent Child that comes
between them. But it is more pleasant, that sometimes the Childrens Quarrel is
revenged by the Dogs; for many Times they are so superstitious, as to dare to
beat the Dog that comes between them, who turning again upon him that smites
him, sends him from seeking a vain Remedy, to seek a real Physician indeed.
Hence proceed likewise these other Superstitions: For a Man to tread upon his
Threshold when he passes by his own House, to return back to Bed again, if he
chance to sneeze as he is putting on his Shoes; to return into his House, if he
stumble at his Going out; if the Rats know his Clothes, to be more terrified
with the Suspicion of some future Evil, than concerned for the present Loss. He
says, Cato gave a wise and smart Answer to such an one, who came in some
Consternation to consult him, about the Rats having knawed his Stockings; that,
said he, is no great Wonder, but it would have been a Wonder indeed, if the
Stockings had knawed the Rats. St. Austin mentions this witty Answer of a wise
Heathen, to convince Christians the better of the Unreasonableness and Vanity
of all such superstitious Observations. And he concludes, that all such Arts,
whether of triffling or more noxious Superstition, are to be rejected and
avoided by Christians, as proceeding originally from some pernicious Society
between Men and Devils, and being the Compacts and Agreements of such
treacherous and deceitful Friendship. The Apostle forbids us to have Fellowship
with Devils; and that, he says, respects not only Idols, and Things offered to
Idols, but all imaginary Signs pertaining to the Worship of Idols, and also all
Remedies, and other Observations, which are not appointed publicly by GOD to
promote the Love of GOD and our Neighbor, but proceed from the private Fancies
of Men, and tend to delude the Hearts of poor deluded Mortals. For these Things
have no natural Virtue in them, but owe all their Efficacy to a presumptuous
Confederacy with Devils: And they are full of pestiferous Curiosity, tormenting
Anxiety, and deadly Slavery. They were first taken up, not for any real Power
to be discerned in them, but gained their Power by Men's observing them. And
therefore by the Devil's Art they happen differently to different Men,
according to their own Apprehensions and Presumptions. For the great Deceiver
knows, how to procure Things agreeable to every Man's Temper, and ensnare him
by his own Suspicions and Consent.

CHAP. XIX. Of Candlemass-Day; why so called; the Blasphemy of the Church of
Rome in consecrating Wax Candles.
THIS Day goes under several Denominations: It is called the Day of CHRIST's
Presentation; because on it CHRIST was presented in the Temple; it is called
the Holy Day of St. Simeon; because it was on it, that he took our SAVIOR up
in his Arms: And it is called the Purification, because then the Holy Virgin
was purified. It is generally a Day of Festivity, and more than ordinary
Observation among Women, and is therefore called the Wives-Feast-Day. The
Feasting seems to be observed in Honor of the Virgin Mary; for as on the Day
of a Woman's being church'd, there is no common Entertainment, so it seems,
that this Feasting was begun in the Times of Popery, by Way of Compliment to
the Churching-Day of the Virgin Mary.

IT has the Name of Nos Anglica, the Purification of our Lady. Vel communi
Sermon potius, Candlemas-Day: A distributione and gestatione cereorum
ardentium: Vel etiam, quod per illum diem cereorum usus in vespertinis precibus
and litaniis, per totam hyemem adhibitus, cessare solet, usque ad sanctorum
omnium festum anni insequentis. Montag. Orig. Eccl. Pars. Pri. P. 157.
Candlemass-Day, because Lights were distributed and carried about in
Procession, or because also the Use of lighted Tapers, which was observed all
Winter at Vespers and Litanies, were then wont to cease, till the next
All-Hallowmass.

THESE Lights so carried about, were blessed of the Priest, as Hospinian tells
us, who made Use of the following Prayers at their Consecration. Rogamus te per
invocationem sancti tui nominis, and per intercessionem Mariae beatae virginis
matris filii tui, etc. ut consecrare velis has candelas ad utilitatem and
commodum hominis, etc. and mox, Domine Jesu, benedicas obsecro hanc creaturam
ceream, and concede illi caelestem, -- malignus spiritus contremescat, and ita
territus aufugiat, etc. Hospin, de Fest. Purific. P. 53.
We implore thee by the Invocation of thy Holy Name, and by the Intercession of
the blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of thy Son, whose Feast we this Day
celebrate with the highest Devotion; and by the Intercession of all thy Saints,
that thou would sanctify these Candles to the Good and Profit of Men, and
the Health of his Soul and Body, whether in Earth or Sea. And again, O LORD
JESU, I beseech thee, that thou would bless this thy Creature of Wax, and
grant it thy Heavenly Benediction, by the Power of thy Holy Cross; that as it
was a Gift to Man by which the Darkness might be driven away, so now it may be
endowed with such Virtue by the Sign of the Holy Cross, that wheresoever it is
lighted and placed, the evil Spirit may tremble, and, with his Servants, be in
such Terror and Confusion as to fly away from that Habitation, and no more vex
and disturb thy Servants.

AFTER this, he adjures the Wax Candles, in Words like these. Adjuro te
creaturam ceream in nomine Domini nostri and sanctae Trinitatis, ut sis
extirpatio and depulsio diaboli and spectrorum ejus, etc. Hospin. ibid.
I adjure thee, O thou waxen Creature, in the Name of our LORD and the Holy
Trinity, that thou repel and extirpate the Devil and his Sprights, etc. And
therefore all Christians (says Eccius. Tom. 3. Hom. de Purificat.) ought to use
these Lights, with an holy Love, having a sincere Dependence, that thus they
shall be freed by the Power of the Word and this Prayer, from all the Snares
and Frauds of the Devil.

OUR Author upon this, says, That this is manifest Blasphemy and Idolatry. For
as on the one Hand, they take the Name of GOD and the Holy Trinity in vain, so
on the other they attribute to a Wax Candle, what should be ascribed to CHRIST
alone, and the quickening Power of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XX. Of Valentine-Day; its Ceremonies; what the Council of Trullus
thought of such Customs; that they had better be omitted.
IT is a Ceremony, never omitted among the Vulgar, to draw Lots, which they
Term Valentines, on the Eve before Valentine a Presbyter of the Church was
beheaded under Claudius the Emperor.
Valentine-day. The Names of a select Number of one Sex, are by an equal Number
of the other put into some Vessel; and after that, every one draws a Name,
which for the present is called their Valentine, and is also looked upon as a
good Omen of their being Man and Wife afterward.

THERE is a rural Tradition, that on this Day every Nature the Vicare of the
Almighty LORD That hot, cold, hevie, light, moist, and dry has knit, by
even number of Accord, In easy Voice, began to speak and say.

fowls take heed of my Sentence I pray, And for your own ease, in fordring of
your need, as fast as I may speak, I will me speed.

Ye know well, how on St. Valentine's Day By my Statute, and through my
governaunce Ye do chese your makes, and after fly away with hem, as I prick
you with Pleasaunce.

Chaucer.
Bird chooses its Mate. From this perhaps the youthful Part of the World has
first practiced this Custom, so common at this Season.

In the Trullan Council we have Lots and Divinations forbid, as being some of
those Things which provoked the LORD to anger against King 2 Lib. Kings, Chap.
21.
Manasses, who used Lots and Divinations, etc. upon which the Scholiast has
these Words. Can. 65. in Syn. Trull. in Bals. P. 440.
The Custom of drawing Lots was after this Manner; on the 23rd Day of June,
which is the Eve of St. John Baptist, Men and Woman were accustomed to gather
together in the Evening by the Seaside, or in some certain Houses, and there
adorn a Girl, who was her Parents first-begotten Child, after the Manner of a
Bride. Then they feasted and leaped after the Manner of Bacchanals, and danced
and shouted as they were wont to do on their Holy Days: After this they poured
into a narrow neck'd Vessel some of the Seawater, and put also into it certain
Things belonging to each of them. Then as if the Devil gifted the Girl, with
the Faculty of telling future Things; they would enquire with a loud Voice,
about the good or evil Fortune that should attend them: Upon this the Girl
would take out of the Vessel, the first Thing that came to Hand, and show it,
and give it to the Owner; who upon receiving it, was so foolish as to imagine
himself wiser, as to the good or evil Fortune that should attend him.

THIS Custom, as he tells us a little after, is altogether diabolical: And
surely it was so, being used as a Presage of what was future. Was the Custom of
the Lots now mentioned, used as among the Heathens, they would no Doubt be as
worthy of Condemnation; but as far as I know, there is but little Credit given
to them; though that little is too much, and ought to be laid aside. But if the
Custom was used without any Mixture or Allay of Superstition, as I believe it
is in some Places, yet it is often attended with great Inconveniences and
Misfortunes, with Uneasinesses to Families, with Scandal, and sometimes with
Ruin.

CHAP. XXI. Of Shrove-tide; what it signifies; the Custom of the Papists at
this Season; that our present Customs are very unbecoming.
SHROVE-TIDE signifies the Time of confessing Sins, as the Word Tide, which
signifies Time; and the Saxon Word Shrive or Shrift; which signifies
Confession, plainly show. The Reason why this Time is so denominated is,
because it was set apart by the Church of Rome for a Time of Shriving or
confessing Sins. For then People were wont to confess their Sins, and receive
the Sacrament, that they might be better prepared for the Religious Observation
of the following Season of Lent. Thus in the Constitutions of Simon of Sudbury
Archbishop of Canterbury, was made at Lambeth A. D. 1373, in the second Year of
Richard the Second, in the first Year of Urban the fifth Pope, and Clement the
seventh Antipope. This most eloquent Man, who was wise incomparably beyond the
rest of the Kingdom; sat about six Years, and at last was beheaded at London by
Command of the Rebels, Tyler and Stravo, A. D. 1381. Johnson Constable. 1378. I
have seen in a Church at Sudbury in Suffolk, a Skull, which is shown to
Strangers for the Skull of this Bishop, and probably it is the true one.
Simon Sudbury, it is ordered, That Laymen should be admonished to confess in
the very Beginning of Lent. And in Theodolphus's Capitula, it is ordered, That
on the Week next before Lent, every Man should go to his Shrift, and his Shrift
should shrive him in such a Manner, as his Deeds which he had done required:
And that he should charge all that belong to his District, that if any of them
have Discord with any, he make Peace with him; if any one will not be brought
to this, then he shall not shrive him; but then he shall inform the Bishop,
that he may convert him to what is right, if he be willing to belong to GOD:
Then all Contentions and Disputes shall cease; and if there be any one of them,
that has taken Offense at another, then shall they be reconciled, that they
may more freely say in the LORD'S Prayer, LORD, forgive us our Trespasses, etc.
And having thus purified their Minds, let them enter upon the Holy Fast Tide,
and cleanse themselves by Satisfaction against Holy Easter, etc. Johnson
994.36. Constitut.

THIS Custom of confessing to the Priest at this Time, was laid aside by our
Church at the Reformation: For Sins are to be confessed to GOD alone, and not
to the Priest, except when the Conscience cannot otherwise be quieted: Then
indeed the Grief is to be opened to the Spiritual Guide in private, Exhort. to
the Com.
That by the Ministry of GOD's Word, he may give the Benefit of Absolution,
together with ghostly Council and Advice, to the quieting of the Conscience,
and the avoiding of all Scruple and Doubtfulness. But how this other worse
Custom came to be retained, of indulging all Manner of Luxury and Intemperance,
I know nothing but that the Flesh was too powerful for the Spirit: The Duties
of Religion, how justly soever enjoined us, are tamely dispensed with, but what
will not we rather do, than give up the Pleasures of Life? Surely the Church never
designed, when she so justly took away the public Confessions of this Season,
that Rioting, and Gaming, and Drunkenness, should continue amongst us. Are
these a fit Preparation for so solemn a Season? Will they qualify us for the
Hearing of the History of our LORD'S Passion? Will they prepare us for the
Reception of his Body and Blood? And fit us to meet him in the Morning of the
Resurrection? Will they not rather speak us Heathens than Christians? And lead
us to Hell, than on the Way to Heaven? Such Customs as these may, in some
Measure, be excusable among them whose Vid. Seldon. Table Talk. C. of
Christmas.
Church has too much led them into those Things; but it is scandalous and
sinful and abominable in those, who pretend to be the Enemies of Error and
Superstition, to continue the Observation of such sinful Customs.

CHAP. XXII. Of Palm Sunday: Why so called; how observed in the Popish Times:
What it is truly to carry Palms in our Hands on this Day.
THE Sunday before Easter, which is denominated Palm Sunday, is so called,
Dicitur enim dominica in ramis palmarum, quod illo die rami palmarum in
processionibus deportentur in significationem illorum, quos filii Israel
statuerunt in via, Christo jam veniente. Belith. 531. P. 34. Cap. Durand. Lib.
6. P. 327. in Ram.
because, as the Ritualists say, on that Day, the Boughs of Palm Trees were
wont to be carried in Procession, in Imitation of those which the Children of
Israel strawed in the Way of CHRIST. For they cut down Branches from the Trees,
and strawed them in the Way; which according to the Consent of Antiquity, were
the Branches of the Palm Tree; it being very Common in that Country, and used
as an Emblem of Victory. And a Doctor of our own Church, in his Discourse upon
this Festival, says, Dr. Spark's Feasts and Fasts.
From the Story, as described by St. Luke and St. Matthew, some of the ancient
Church took Occasion, as on this Day, to go in Procession with Palms in their
Hands, and to denominate it Palm Sunday.

BUT however harmless this Custom might have been, in the Times of its first
Institution, it is certain, that in after Ages it sunk into Superstition and
gross Idolatry. Thus the Rhemists, in their Translation of the New Testament,
describe the Ceremony themselves: These Offices of Honor, done to our Savior
extraordinarily, were very acceptable. And for a Memory hereof, the Holy Church
makes a solemn Procession every Year upon this Day; specially in our Country,
when it was Catholic, with the Blessed Sacrament reverently carried, as it
were CHRIST upon the Ass, and strawing of Bushes and Flowers, bearing of Palms,
setting up Boughs, spreading and hanging up the richest Clothes, the Quire and
Queristers singing, as here the Children and the People; all done in a very
godly Ceremony, to the Honor of CHRIST, and the Memory of his Triumph upon
this Day. The like Service, and the like Duties done to him in all other solemn
Processions of the Blessed Sacrament, and otherwise, be undoubtedly no less
grateful. Dr. Fulk. in Loc. Mat.
Fulke upon this, gives this Answer: Your Palm Sunday Procession was horrible
Idolatry, and abusing of the LORDS Institution, who ordained his Supper to be
eaten and drunken, not to be carried about in Procession like a Heathenish
Idol: But it is pretty Sport, that you make the Priests that carries this
Idol, to supply the Room of the Ass, on which CHRIST did ride: Thus you turn
the Holy Mystery of CHRIST'S riding to Jerusalem, to a May Game and pagent
Play. And yet you say, such Service done to CHRIST is undoubtedly exceeding
grateful; yea, no less grateful, than that was done by his Disciples, at the
Time mentioned in the Text: Your Argument and Proof is none, but your bare
Asseverations. That which the Disciples did, had the Warrant of the Holy
Scripture; but who has regarded these Theatrical Pomps at their Hands? Or what
Word of GOD have you to assure you that he accepts such Will Worship? Who
detesteth all Worship, which is according to the Doctrines and Traditions of
Men, and not after his own Commandment.

FROM this superstitious and idolatrous Custom, without all doubt it comes to
pass, that we now and then, on a Palm Sunday, see the young People carrying
Branches of Palms in their Hands; which they seem fond of having that Day, and
which they as little regard at other Times. It is true indeed, it is a Relick
of the ancient Superstition of the Papists, but as it is now entirely stripped of
any Superstiton, and is an Emblem of the Season, and the Transactions of that
Day; so I see no harm in so innocent an Observation.

BUT how much better would it be to carry in our Hands this Day, Ramos debent
fideles portare, id est bona opera. -- Opera miserecordiae sunt, vestire nudos,
colligere hospites, errantes revocare, visitare infirmos, etc. Bed. Tom. 7. P.
369.
the Palm of good Works, the Graces of Humility, and Kindness, and Charity, to
feed the Hungry, to give drink to the Thirsty, to clothe the Naked, to
entertain the Strangers, to visit the Sick and in Prison, etc. By such Actions
as these, should we truly carry Palms in our Hands; by these we should truly
straw the Way for our LORD, and so follow his Steps to the Heavenly Jerusalem.

CHAP. XXIII Of rising early on Easter Day: What is meant by the Sun dancing
that Morn: The Antiquity of rising early on this Day; the End and Design of it:
The great Advantage of it.
IT is a common Custom among the Vulgar and uneducated Part of the World, to
rise before the Sun on Easter Day, and walk into the Fields: The Reason of
which, is to see the Sun Dance; which they have been told, from an old
Tradition, always Dances as upon that Day. We read indeed that the Sun once
Josh x.
stood still, but whether the Sun danced upon the very Day our Savior rose on,
we cannot tell: It Is very probable it did not, because the Scriptures are
silent; and that it never did so since, I think we may be well assured;
forasmuch as never any, that we have heard of, have seen any such Thing since
that Time. If therefore this Tradition has any Meaning, it must be a
Metaphorical one; that when the Morning proves clear, there is a seeming Smile
over the Face of Nature, and Earth and Heaven show Tokens of Joy. For as the
Earth and her Valleys, by standing thick with Corn, are said, to laugh and
sing; so, on Account of the Resurrection, the Heavens and the Sun may be said
to Dance for Joy; or as the Psalmist Words it, Psalm. xcvi. 11. Caeliquidem
digni laetentur, terra autem exultet. Damasc. in Dominican Pascha, P. 514.
The Heavens may rejoice, and the Earth may be glad.

THERE is then, really speaking, nothing in the Dancing of the Sun upon
Easter Day; but yet it is a very ancient and commendable Custom to be up early
at this Holy Time: And therefore Damascen, in his Paschal Hymn, sings,
Vigilemus mane profundo, and pro unguenti hymnum afferamus Domino, and Christum
videamus justitiae solemn, omnibus vitam exorientem. Ibid.
Let us watch very early in the Morning; and instead of Ointment, let us bring
an Hymn to our LORD; and let us see our CHRIST, the Sun of Righteousness, who
is the Life that rises to all Men. And indeed it is the most seasonable Time
for meditating on our LORD'S Resurrection, and it is pleasing Circumstances. For
as the Place where any notable Thing has been transacted, seldom or never fails
to raise the Idea of the Transaction; so the particular Time, when it was done,
does generally produce the same Effect. And as the Truth of the Former, was the
Occasion of many holy and religious Men going Fulk. Test. Cont. Rhem. Matthew.
Cap. 28. in Annot.
to visit the Place of the Sepulcher, and hear it, as it were, say, what the
Angel did to the Women, Come, see the Place where the LORD lay; so the Truth of
the Latter was the Reason, why devout and holy Men, did in the best Ages of the
Church, rise early in the Morning of the Resurrection. The Primitive Christians
spent the Night preceding it, in Prayers and Praises, till the Time of
Cock-crow, the supposed Hour of our Savior's rising. For as Latinorum concors
est sententia, Christum non media nocte, verum mane in aurora, canentibus vice
Gallorum angelis, devicta morte and confractis portis inferi, surrexisse.
Durant. de Rit. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
Durant tells us, it is universally assented to by the Latin Church, that after
our Savior had conquered Death, and broken the Gates of Hell, he arose from
the Dead, not at Midnight, but in the Morning, at the Time of Cock-crow; which
not the Cocks, but the Angels themselves proclaimed. And when these
Pernoctations were laid aside, it was the Custom to rise early, and spend the
Morning in such a Manner as was suitable to the Nature of the Time. The
Salutation of the Eastern Church Anestese; or, The LORD is risen, and the usual
Answer, The LORD is risen indeed; were no doubt the common Salutation of that
Morning: And if this present Custom of the Vulgar, has had at any Time any
laudable Custom for its Original, it was, no doubt, this of rising early to
contemplate the more seasonably on the Resurrection of CHRIST.

AND now, was this the End of Rising early at that Holy Time, it would be very
advantageous; but to rise with the View of the Vulgar, is foolish and
ridiculous. Would we rise before the Sun, and prevent the Dawn of Day, our
Meditations would be strong and vigorous, and almost persuade us that the real
Actions of that Morn, were presented to our View. For when at that Time, all
Things are hushed in Silence, and warped in Darkness, or but illuminated with
the friendly Moon, the Devotae Christi faminae, quae illum and vivum dilexerant
and mortuum desiderabant, per noctem ambulantes, juvante luna, venerunt ad
monumentum. Rupert de Divin. Officiis, Lib. 7. C. 18.
Guide of Mary Magdalene, and the other Women to the Sepulcher; it is easy and
natural to meditate on these Things; to see our Savior's Tomb; to see the
Angels sit as Guardians on it; and the trembling Watch fled into the City. And
now the LORD is risen indeed, and they that seek him early shall find him.
Maria Magdalena, cujus domus erat Bethaniae, -- prima ante alias una sabbati
juxta joannem, valde diluculo venisset, dum adhuc tenebrae essent ad
monumentum. Rupert. ibid.
Behold then Mary Magdalene, on the first Day of the Week, coming from her own
House at Bethany, before the other Women, very early in the Morning, when it
was as yet Dark, Abit a loco, volens consolationem quandam invenire.
Theophlact. in Loc.
to find Ease and Consolation at the Sepulcher: Behold she and the other Women
bringing the prepared Spices to Embalm their LORD; Behold Peter and John
running to the Sepulcher and returning, whilst Mary continues in Sorrow and
Tears: And as she weeps, ye may see her look into the Sepulcher; but he is not
there, he is risen. Behold then the Guardians of the Tomb, saying, John xx. 13,
etc.
Woman, why weepest thou? Nay behold the Lamb of GOD himself, with the very
same Words, wiping away the Tears from her Eyes. And JESUS said unto her,
Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seek thou? She supposing him to be the
Gardener, says unto him, Sir, If thou have born him hence, tell me where thou
have laid him, and I will take him away. JESUS said unto her, Mary. With what
Joy, now does she run to his Feet, willing and desirous, and eager to Embrace
them. But he bids her not to touch him, but go to his Brethren, and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my GOD and your GOD, Behold a
little after this, his Apparition to her and the other Women, and how he
suffers them to kiss his Feet. Taylor's Antiq. Christ. de Resurrect.
He appeared also about the same Time to Peter.

THESE and the other Accidents at our LORD'S Resurrection, would afford us a
satisfactory and comfortable Meditation; would inflame our Hearts with a
burning Love, and melt us into Tears of Joy. In our eager Wishes and warm
Desires, we should, with the Holy Women, kiss the Feet of our Savior, and be
almost Partakers of equal Happiness with them; or, sure we are, that we should
have our Savior in our Hearts, and not fail of seeing him in his Kingdom. He
whom we have so carefully sought for, will vouchsafe to be found of us; in his
Grace, at the Sepulcher, and in his Glory, in Heaven. Happy they, who so early
seek their Savior; who long after him, as the Heart does after the
Waterbrooks; who seek him among the Sol. Song ii. 17.
Lilies, until the Day break, and the Shadows flee away. Happy they, their
Conversation is now in Heaven, and their Happiness hereafter, will be the Joys
of Eternity: Where they shall no more be absent, but ever Present with the LORD.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Easter Holy Days: A Time of Relaxation from Labor: How
observed in the dark Ages of Popery: That our Customs at this Time, are sprung
from theirs.
ON the Holy Days of Easter, it is customary for Work to cease, and Servants to
be at Liberty: Which is a Resemblance of the Practice of the primitive Church,
which set apart the whole Week after Easter, for to praise and glorify GOD,
for our SAVIOR'S Resurrection: In which Servos autem and ancillas ac omnes,
qui nostro servitio sunt addicti, profecto ab omni servitutis severitate eos
hoc tempore laxare debemus. -- Ut libere and secure omnes possint ad audiendum
divinum officium convenire, and communicare. Belith. Cap. 117.
Time all servile Labor ceased, that Servants as well as others might be
present at the Devotions of the Season. But other Customs so frequently
observed at this Time, such as public Shows, Gamings, Horse-Races, etc. were
forbidden, as being foreign to the Holiness of this Season.

IN after Ages, when the Church fell into Corruption, and the Substance of
Religion decayed into the Shadow of Ceremonies, the usual Prayers and Praises
of the Season, were either much neglected, or but superficially observed. For
Belithus, a Ritualist of those Times tells us, Sunt enim nonnullae ecclesiae,
in quibus usitatum est, ut vel etiam episcopi and archiepiscopi in caenobiis
cum suis ludant subditis, ita ut etiam ad lusum pilae demittant, etc. Belith.
C. 120.
That it was customary in some Churches, for the Bishops and Archbishops
themselves to play with the inferior Clergy, even at Hand-Ball; and this also,
as Durandus witnesses, In quibusdam locis hac die. Vid. Pasch. etc. Durand.
Lib. 6. Cap. 86.
even on Easter Day it self. This was called Atque haec quidem, Libertas ideo
dicta est Decembrica, etc. Belith. ibid.
the Liberty of December, because that formerly, it was customary among the
Heathens in that Month to indulge their Servants with a certain Time of
Liberty; when they were on the Level with their Masters, and feasted and
banqueted with them.

WHY they should play at Hand-Ball at this Time rather than any other Game, I
have not been able to find out; but I suppose it will be readily granted, that
this Custom of so playing, was the Original of our present Recreations and
Diversions on Easter Holy Days, and in particular of playing at Hand-Ball for a
Vid. Seld. Table Talk of Christmas.
Tanzy-Cake, which at this Season, is generally practiced; and I would hope
practiced with Harmlessness and Innocence. For when the common Devotions of the
Day are over, there is nothing sinful in lawful Recreation. But for the
Governors of Churches to descend to such Childish Exercises, and that even on
the Great Sunday of the Year, was not only unbecoming their Gravity and
Reservedness, but was also a downright Breach of the fourth Commandment. But
these were Ages of Ignorance and Darkness, when the World was taught for the
Doctrines of GOD, the Commandments of Men.

CHAP. XXV. Of May Day; the Custom of going to the Woods the Night before; this
the Practice of other Nations: The Original of it; the Unlawfulness.
ON the Calends, or the first Day of May, commonly called May Day, the juvenile
Part of both Sexes, are wont to rise a little after Midnight, and walk to some
neighboring Wood, accompanied with Music and the blowing of Horns; where they
break down Branches from the Trees, and adorn them with Nose-gays and Crowns of
Flowers. When this is done, they return with their Booty homewards, about the
rising of the Sun, and make their Doors and Windows to Triumph in the Flowery
Spoil. The after-part of the Day, is chiefly spent in dancing round a
Tall-Poll, which is called a May-Poll; which being placed in a convenient Part
of the Village, stands there, as it were consecrated to the Goddess of Flowers,
without the least Violation offered it, in the whole Circle of the Year. And
this is not the Custom of the British Common People only, but it is the Custom
of the Generality of other Nations; particularly of the Italians, where
Polydore Virgil tells us, The Est autem consuetudinis, ut juventus promiscui
sexus Laetaebunda call. Maii exeat in agros, and cantitans inde virides reportet
arborum ramos eosque ante domorum fores ponat praesertim apud Italos, -- etc.
Poly. Virg. 302.
Youth of both Sexes were accustomed to go into the Fields, on the Calends of
May, and bring thence the Branches of Trees, singing all the way as they came,
and so place them on the Doors of their Houses.

Celebrabantur autem hae feriae atque ludi, Lactantio test cum omni lascivia
verbis and moribus pudendis, ad placandam deam, quae floribus and fructibus
praeerat. Nam per tubam convocabantur omnis generis meretrices. Unde Juvenalis.
-- Digissima prorsus
Florali Matrona Tuba
Ex in theatro denudatae, etc.
Hosp. de Orig. Eth. 159.
THIS is the Relick of an ancient Custom among the Heathen, who observed the
four last Days of April, and the first of May, in Honor of the Goddess Flora,
who was imagined the Deity presiding over the Fruit and Flowers. It was
observed with all Manner of Obscenity and Lewdness, and the undecent Sports and
Postures of naked Women, who were called together with the Noise of Trumpets,
and danced before the Spectators.

FROM this Custom of the Heathens has ours undoubtedly come; and though for that
Reason barely, it need not be laid aside; yet forasmuch as many Country People
are of Opinion, Sic nos tunc eo anni tempore, cum virent omnia, quasi per hunc
modum, fructuum ubertatem ominamur, ac been precamur. Polyd. Virg. 302.
That the Observation of this Ceremony is a good Omen, and a Procurer of the
Success of the Fruits of the Earth, which is entirely a Piece of Superstition;
and because also much Wickedness and Debauchery are committed that Night, to
the Scandle of whole Families, and the Dishonor of Religion, there is all the
Reason in the World, for laying it aside.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Parochial Perambulations: Their Antiquity, the Benefit and
Advantage of them.
IT was a general Custom formerly, and is still observed in some Country
Parishes, to go round the Bounds and Limits of the Parish, on one of the three
Days before Holy Thursday, or the Feast of our LORD's Ascension; when the
Minister, accompanied with his Churchwardens and Parishoners, were wont to
deprecate the Vengeance of GOD, beg a Blessing on the Fruits of the Earth, and
preserve the Rights and Properties of their Parish.

THE Original of this Custom is dated from the Times of the Heathens. For
Refert Plutarchus in Problem 13. Numam Popilium cum finitimis agri terminis
constituisse, and in ipsis finibus Terminum Deum, quasi finium praesidem
amicitiaeque, ac pacis custodem posuisse. Festa ei dicata quae Terminalia
nuncupantur, quorum vice nos quotannis ex vetustissima consuetudine parochiarum
terminos lustramus. Spelm. Gloss. in Verbo. Perambulat.
from the Days of Numa Popilius, they worshipped the God Terminus, whom they
looked upon to be the Guardian of Fields and Landmarks, and the Keeper up of
Friendship and Peace among Men: Upon this Account the Feast called Terminalia,
was dedicated to him; instead of which it is a very ancient Custom to surround
the Bounds of Parishes every Year: And instead of Heathenish Rites and
Sacrifices to an imaginary God, to offer Praises and Prayers to the true GOD,
the GOD of the whole Earth. The Custom was, the People accompanied the Bishop,
or some of the Clergy into the Fields, where Litanies were made, and the Mercy
of GOD implored, that he would avert the Evils of Plague and Pestilence, that
he would send them good and seasonable Weather, and give them the Fruits of the
Earth in due Season.

THE Litanies or Rogations, which were It is called Rogation-Week, because of
that Prayer and Fasting that was then used, for to supplicate GOD for his
Blessing on the Fruits of the Earth. It is also in some Places called
Cross-Week, because in ancient Times, when the Priest went into the Fields, the
Cross was carried before them. In the Northern Parts it is called Gang-Week,
from to gang, which in the North signifies to go.
then made Use of, and gave Name to the Time of Rogation-Week, were first
observed by Mamertus, Bishop of Vienna, in the Year 550, Dum civitas
Viennensium crebo terrae motu subrueretur and bestiarum desolaretur incursu,
sanctus Mamertus ejus civitatis episcopus, eas legitur pro malis, quae
praemissimus, ordinasse. Walifred. Stral. C. 28. de Reb. Ecclesiast.
on Account of the frequent Earthquakes that happened, and the Incursions of
wild Beasts, which laid in Ruins, and depopulated the City. Not that Litanies
and Rogations were not used before, but that before this Time they were not
affixed to these Days. And since that, they have been observed of the whole
Church at this Season, except the Church of Hispani autem, propter hoc quod
scriptum est, non possunt filii sponsi lugere quamdiu cum illis est sponsus,
infra quinquagessimam paschae recusantes jejunare, litanios suos post
pentecosten posuerunt. Walaf. Strab. ibid.
Spain, who chus'd rather to have them after Pentecost than before it; because
from Easter Day to the Feast of Pentecost, it was the Custom of the Church not
to Fast: For as they themselves reasoned, the Children of the Bride-chamber
cannot Fast so long as the Bridegroom is with them; and therefore they held
their Rogations after Pentecost.

WHAT now remains among us, is the Relick of this ancient and laudable Custom,
which was always observed in the old Church of England, and has been also in
some Measure since the Reformation too.

In Council. Cloveshoviae sub Cuthbert: Arch. Cant. An. 747. Cap. 16. Ut
Litaniae, i. e. Rogationes, a clero omnique populo his diebus cum magna
reverentia agantur, id est, septimo kalendarum Maiarum juxta ritum Romanae
ecclesiae, quae and litania major apud eam vocatur: Et item quoque secundum
morem priorum nostrorum tertiae dies ante ascentionem domini nostri in caelos,
cum jejunio, etc. Spelman. Gloss. 369.
the Canons of Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury, which were made at
Cloves-hoo, in the Year 747, it was ordered that Litanies, that is, Rogations,
should be observed of the Clergy, and all the People with great Reverence on
these Days, viz. the seventh of the Kalends of May, according to the Rites of
the Church of Rome, who terms this the greater Litany; and also according to
the Custom of our Forefathers, on the three Days before the Ascension of our
LORD into the Heavens, with Fasting, etc. And in the Injunctions made in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it is ordered, Injunct. 19. Eliz.
That the Curate, at certain and convenient Places, shall admonish the People
to give Thanks to GOD, in the beholding of GOD'S Benefits; for the Increase and
Abundance of his Fruits upon the Face of the Earth, with the saying of the 103
Psalm, etc. at which Time the Minister shall inculcate these or such Sentences.
Cursed be he which translateth the Bounds and Doles of his Neighbor: Or such
Orders of Prayers as shall be hereafter.

AGREEABLE to this we read, in the Life of the pious Hooker, Walt. in Vit.
Hookeri.
That he would by no Means omit the Customary Time of Procession, persuading
all, both Rich and Poor, if they desired the Preservation of Love, and their
Parish Rites and Liberties, to accompany him in his Perambulation, and most did
so; in which Perambulation, he would usually Express more pleasant Discourse,
than at other Times, and would then always Drop some loving and facetious
Observations, to be remembered against the next Year, especially by the Boys and
young People: Still inclining them, and all his present Parishioners, to
meekness and mutual Kindnesses and Love; because Love thinks not Evil, but
covers a Multitude of Infirmities.

WE may also observe, That the particular Office ordered by our Church for
Rogation-Sunday, is exactly suited to the Nature of the Season; that the three
Days following are appointed Fasts by our Church, and that one of our Church
Homilies is composed particularly, for the Parochial Perambulation. All which
shows the Custom and Intention of the Church, and that the practicing of it
would be serviceable to the Sons of Men; Would save their Lives from
Destruction, and crown them with Mercy and loving Kindness; would send them
Springs into their Rivers, and make them run among the Hills: Would bring forth
Grass for the Cattle, and green Herb for the Service of Men.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Midsummer-Eve: Of kindling Fires, their Original: That this
Custom formerly was superstitious, but now may be used with Innocence.
ON the Eve of St. John Baptist, commonly called Midsumner-Eve, it is usual in
the most of Country Places, and also here and there in Towns and Cities, for
both Old and Young to meet together, and be Merry over a large Fire, which is
made in the open Street. Over this they frequently leap and play at various
Games, such as Running, Wrestling, Dancing, etc. But this is generally the
Exercise of the younger Sort; for the old Ones, for the most Part, sit by as
Spectators, and enjoy themselves and their Bottle. And thus they spend the Time
till Midnight, and sometimes till Cock-crow.

BELITHUS tells us, Consuetum item hac vigilia ardentes deferri faculas, quod
Joannes fuerit ardens lucerna and qui domini vias praeparaverit. Belith.
Explicat. Div. Offic. C. 137. P. 556. and Durand. Cap. 14. Lib. 7.
That it was a Custom to carry lighted Torches on Midsummer-Eve, as an Emblem
of St. John Baptist, who was a burning and a shining Light, and the Preparer of
the Way of CHRIST. But if this was the Reason of this Custom formerly, as it is
probable it was, (it having been a common Thing, to shadow out Times and
Seasons by Emblems;) yet the Custom still continued among us, was originally
instituted upon another Bottom.

AND indeed the Habent hoc a gentibus, antiquitus enim dracones hoc tempore ad
libidinem propter calorem excitati, volando per aerem frequenter in puteos and
fontes spermatizabant, ex quo, etc. Hoc animadvertentes medici, ignes
frequenter and passim circa fontes fieri; and quaecunque magnum and immundum
redderint fumum ibi cremari, etc. Et quia talia hoc tempore maxim fiebant,
ideo hoc adhuc ab aliquibus observatur. Durand. L. 7. C. 14. and Belith. in
eodem Fest.
Original of this Custom is Heathenish. For in ancient Times the Dragons, being
incited to Lust through the Heat of the Season, did frequently, as they flew
through the Air, Spermatize in the Wells and Fountains. By this Means the Water
became infected, and the Air polluted; so that whoever drank the Waters, was
either tormented with a grievious Distemper, or lost his Life. As soon as the
Physicians perceived this, they ordered Fires to be made every where about the
Wells and Fountains, and those Things which occasioned the noisomest Smell, to
be burnt, knowing that thereby the Dragons would be driven away. And forasmuch
as this Custom was observed about the Time we now celebrate St. John Baptist's
Feast, it is therefore still observed among some People. And agreeable to this
it is, that Mr. Cambden tells us, that Barnwell, a Village near Cambridge, got
its Name from the Children playing about a Well on St. John Baptist's Eve.

THE Custom of kindling such Fires, was severely censured by the Church: And
therefore in the Council of Trulius, this Canon was made against it, Can. 65.
in Synod. Trull. ex Bals. P. 440.
That if any Clergyman or Layman observed the Rite of making on Fires on the
New Mood, (which some were wont to observe, and according to an old Custom, to
leap over them in a mad and foolish Manner,) he should be deposed, if the
Former, if the Latter, he should be excommunicated.

THE Scholiast upon this Canon has these Words: The New Mood was always the
first Day of the Month, and it was Customary among the Jews and Greeks, to hold
then a Feast, and pray that they might be lucky during the Continuance of the
Month. Of these it was, that GOD spoke by the Prophet: My Soul hates your
New Mons and your Sabbaths. And not only this, but they also kindled Fires
before their Shops and Houses, and leaped over them; imagining that all the
Evils which had befallen them formerly, would be burnt away, and that they
should be more successful and lucky afterward. Now about the Sitting of this
Synod, there were some of the Christians, who observed this Custom upon the
same Accounts that the Heathens did, which occasioned it is being forbid by the
Council; and that if a Clergyman was Guilty of it, he should be deposed; if a
Layman, excommunicated. He also tells us, that on St. John Baptist's-Eve, the
Vulgar were wont to make on Fires for the whole Night, and leap over them, and
draw Lots, and Divine about their good or evil Fortune.

BUT whatever Reason the Heathens had for kindling these Fires; whether as
Durandus thinks, that the lustful Dragons might be driven away, or as the
Canon, that their evil Fortune might be burnt, it is certain that the Custom
was invented and practiced by them; and because of the Superstion attending the
Observation of it, was very justly forbidden by the Council. And undoubtedly
was the Making of such Fires now, attended with any such Superstition, it would
be equally criminal to observe them. But Rogos -- quos nos Angli Bonefires
vocamus, and in publica laetitia and gaudiis adhibemus, non obstante isto
canone. Mountag. P. 130.
when they are only kindled as Tokens of Joy, to excite innocent Mirth and
Diversion, and promote Peace and good Neighborhood, they are lawful and
innocent, and deserve no Censure. And therefore when on Midsummer-Eve, St.
Peter's-Eve, and at some other Times, we make I suppose they were called
Bonefires, because that generally they were made of Bones. For as Belithus
tells us, Adversus haec ergo hujusmodi inventum est remedium, ut videlicet
rogus ex ossibus construeretur, and ita fumus hujusmodi animalia fugaret.
Belith. in Vigil. S. Joan. That to prevent the Infection before mentioned, they
were wont to make on Fires of Bones, that the Smoke might drive away the
Dragons.
Bonefires before Shops and Houses, there would be no harm in doing so; was it
not, that some continue their Diversion to too late Hours, and others are
guilty of excessive Drinking.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Feast of Sheep-shearing, an ancient Custom.
THE Feast of Sheep-sheering, is generally a Time of Mirth and Joy, and more
than ordinary Hospitality; indeed it is but little observed in these Northern
Parts, but in the Southern it is pretty common. For on the Day they begin to
sheer their Sheep, they provide a plentiful Dinner for the Sheerers, and for
their Friends who come to visit them on that Occasion; a Table also, if the
Weather permit, is spread in the open Village, for the young People and
Children.

AFTER what Manner soever this Custom reached us, it is certain it may boast of
great Antiquity. It is mentioned in the Second Book of Samuel, as a Feast of
great Magnificence, both for Grandeur of Entertainment and Greatness of
Company. No less a Person than Absalom the King's Son was the Master of this
Feast, and no less Persons were the Guests than the King's Sons, the Brethren
of Absalom; nay it was a Feast that might entertain the King himself, or surely
the King would never have been so importuned, never would have received the
Compliment so kindly. For it is said, It came to pass after two full Years, that
Absalom had Sheep-sheerers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim, and Absalom
invited all the King's Sons. And Absalom came to the King, and said, Behold,
now thy Servant has Sheep-sheerers, let the King, I beseech thee, and his
Servants, go with thy Servant. And the King said, Nay, my Son, let us not all
go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. Of this kind also was the Feast which
Nabal made for his Sheerers, when David was driven to straits in the
Wilderness, and sent his Servants to ask a Present of him. He calls the Day it
was held on, a good Day; that is, a Day of plentiful Eating and Drinking. And
therefore Nabal answered the Servants of David, shall I then take my Bread and
my Water, and my Flesh that I have killed for my Sheerers, and give it unto
Men, whom I know not whence they be? And further, it is said in the same
Chapter, that so grand and magnificent was this Feast, that he had a Feast in
his House, like the Feast of a King. We find also in the Book of Genesis, that
Laban went to sheer his Sheep, in which Time Jacob made his Escape, which Laban
heard not of till the third Day. Of such great Antiquity then is this Custom,
and though its Antiquity is not of such force as to palliate Luxury and
Profusness in these Entertainments; yet no doubt it will vindicate the
Harmlesness of a moderate Feast upon this Occasion.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Michaelmass: Guardian Angels the Discourse of Country People at
this Time: that it seems rather true, that we are protected by a Number of
Angels, than by one particular Genius.
THE Feast of this Season is celebrated in Commemoration of St. Michael, and
all the Orders of Angels. It is called, The Dedication of St. Michael, because
of a Church being dedicated to him on this Day in Mount Garganus.

AT this Season of the Year, it is a general Custom to elect the Governors of
Towns and Cities, to promote Peace among Men, and guard them against Harm from
their malicious Fellow Creatures. Whether this particular Time of the Year has
been chosen for electing them, because then is the Feast of Angels, the
Guardians and Protectors of Men, and of their Communities and Daniel, C. 10.
Provinces, is not so certain. It is certainer, that when ever it comes, it
brings into the Minds of the People, that old Opinion of Tutelar Angels, that
every Man has his Guardian Angel; that is, one particular Angel who attends him
from his Coming in, till his Going out of Life, who guides him through the
Troubles of the World, and strives as much as he can, to bring him to Heaven.

NOW that good Angels attend good Men is without Dispute. They guide them in
the Mazes of the Wilderness of Life, and bring them to their desired Homes;
they surround them in the Seas of Afflictions, and lead them to the Shores of
Peace; and as when the Israelites passed through the Red Sea, the Cloud became
Light to them, but Darkness to their Enemies, so in the troublesome Seas of
this Life, the Angels are both the Guides of good Men, and their Protectors
from Evil, from the Devil and his Angels. And therefore the Psalmist says, The
Angel of the LORD tarrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers them;
and that he will give his Angels Charge over good Men. They are also supposed
to be that Hedge, which GOD placed about Job, which the Devil so much complains
of; and sure we are, that when the Eyes of Elisha's Servant were opened, he saw
the Mountain full of Chariots and Horses of Fire round about Elisha. That
therefore good Men are guarded and protected by Angels the Scripture shows very
clearly. But that every Man has his particular Genius, seems to be founded more
upon Tradition, than any Certainty from Scripture. Thus the Egyptians believed
that every Man had three Angels attending him; the Pythagoreans, that every Man
had two; the Romans, that there was a good and an evil Genius. And hence it is
that the Roman Poet says, Quisque suos patitur manes, every Man has his evil
Genius. And if we may believe the Authority of Plutarch, the evil Genius of
Brutus appeared to him the Night before the Battle of Philippi, and told him he
was his evil Genius, and that he would meet him there.

BUT there are greater Authorities then these in Vindication of this Opinion:
Casalion observes, it may be proved from Scripture, and not only from the
Tradition of the Unicuique Deus custodem apposuit; and asserimus indubitanter
nos ex scripturis illam fidem, non gentium nugibus. Cassal. 217. P. de Vet.
Christ. Rit.
Heathens. And of this Opinion was Justin Martyr, Theodoret, St. Basil, St.
Jerome, and St. Austin.

THERE are indeed two Places in the new Testament, which have a View to this
Opinion. The first is in the 18th of St. Matthew, the 10th Verse, Take heed
that ye despise not one of these little Ones: For I say unto you, that their
Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven. Now because
this Place takes notice of the Angels of these little Ones, some have therefore
concluded that every Man has his good Angel; at least that good Men have. But
now this Conclusion does not certainly follow from these Words: For when it is
said their Angels, it does indeed certainly infer, that the Angels do protect
good Men, but not that every Man has his particular Angel. And hence therefore,
as one observes, St. Chrisostom makes use of these Words, Enteuthen delon, etc.
it is manifest that the Saints at least, if not all Men, have their Angels: But
he does not hence conclude, that every Man has one. The other Place is in the
Acts of the Apostles, where it is said, that when Peter was delivered out of
Prison, they would not believe the Maid it was he, but said, It was his Angel.
It must be owned indeed from this, that it seems the Opinion of those in the
House, that every Man had his Guardian Angel; but this is no Proof of the
Things being so: It only proves, that it was their Opinion, but not that this
Opinion is true. The Jews had such a Tradition among them, and what was here
spoken, was perhaps only according to that Tradition. Besides we read on the
contrary, that sometimes one and the same Angel has been sent to different
Persons; thus Gabriel was sent to Daniel, Zacharias, and the blessed Virgin:
Sometimes the Scripture tells us of many Angels protecting one Man; for so was
Elisha protected; and as we wrestle not only against Flesh and Blood, but
against all the Powers of Darkness, so we have many Angels to assist and defend
us. I shall not dare to determine positively against this Opinion, which has
traveled down through so many Ages, which has been held by so many wise and
learned Men, and which has such Scriptures brought to its Defense; this I shall
only say, that of the two Opinions, the Latter seems to be the more probable;
that it seems more consonant to Scripture, that we are attended by a Number of
Angels, than by a particular Tutelar Angel. But this I mention, not as
necessary to be believed. For I am persuaded there is no fault in believing
either the one or the other, as it appears more probable: For whether soever we
believe, we believe in the Protection of Angels, and that seems to be all which
the Scripture requires.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Country Wake: How observed formerly: A Custom of the
Heathens, and regulated by Gregory the Great.
IN the Southern Parts of this Nation, the most of Country Villages are wont to
observe some Sunday in a more particular Manner, than the other common Sundays
of the Year, viz. the Sunday after the Day of Dedication, i. e. the Sunday
after the Day of the Saint, to whom their Church was dedicated. Then the
Inhabitants deck themselves in their gaudiest Clothes, and have open Doors and
splendid Entertainments, for the Reception and Treating of their Relations and
Friends, who visit them on that Occasion, from each neighboring Town. The
Morning is spent for the most Part at Church, though not as that Morning was wont
to be spent, not with the Commemoration of the Saint or Martyr, nor the
grateful Remembrance of the Builder and Endower. The remaining Part of the Day,
is spent in Eating and Drinking; and so is also a Day or two afterward,
together with all Sorts of Rural Pastimes and Exercises, such as Dancing on the
Green, Wrestling, Cudgelling, etc.

AGREEABLE to this we are told, that formerly Die Dominica post Encaeniam seu
Festum Dedicationis cujusvis villae convenire solet in Aurora Magna hominum
Iuvenumque multitudo, and canora voce Holy-wakes, Holy-makes, Exclamando
Designare, etc. Spelm. Gloss. in Verb. Wak.
on the Sunday after the Encaenia, or Feast of the Dedication of the Church, it
was usual for a great Number of the Inhabitants of the Village, both Grown and
Young, to meet together about break of Day, and cry, Holy-wakes, Holy-wakes,
and after Mattens to go to Feasting and Sporting, which they continued for two
or three Days.

IN the Northren Parts, the Sunday's Feasting is almost lost, and they observe
only one other Day for the whole, which among them is called the Hopping; I
suppose from the dancing and other Exercises then used. The ancient Name, and
which is still common in the Southern Parts, is the Wake; which according to
Sir H. Spelman, are Sunt celebritates Bacchanales sub fructuum temporibus, ab
occiduiis and Borealibus Anglis pagatim Habitae. Bacchanales dixi ex nomine:
Nam Wak. Sax est temulentia. Spelm. ibid.
Bacchanal Feasts, observed about Fruit Time, and which were in Villages by
Turns, among the Northern and Western English. He calls them Bacchanals,
because, as he observes, the Saxon Word Wak, signifies Drunkenness. This Custom
our Forefathers did in all Probability borrow from their Fellow Heathens, Haec
eadem sunt quae apud Ethnicos Paganalia dicebantur, etc. Spelm. ibid.
whose Paganalia, or Country Feasts, were of the same Stamp, with this of the
Wake.

AT the Conversion of the Saxons by Austin the Monk, it was continued among the
Converts, with some Regulations, by an Order of Pope Gregory the Great, to
Mellitus the Abbot, who accompanied Austin in his Voyage. His Words are these,
Ut Die Dedicationis, vel Natalitiis Sanctorum Martyr^um, quorum illic reliquiae
ponuntur, tabernacula sibi circa easdem Ecclesias, quae ex Fanis commutatae
sunt, de ramis arborum faciant, etc. Bed. Lib. Cap. 30.
On the Day of Dedication, or the Birthday of the Holy Martyrs, whose Relics
are there placed, let the People make to themselves Booths of the Boughs of
Trees, round about those very Churches, which had been the Temples of Idols,
and in a Religious way to observe a Feast; that Beasts may no longer be
slaughtered by way of Sacrifice to the Devil, but for their own Eating, and the
Glory of GOD; and that when they are full and satisfied, they may return him
Thanks, who is the Giver of all good Things.

THIS then is the Beginning of our Country Wakes, but they continued not in
their original Purity: For the Feasting and Sporting got the ascendant of
Religion, and so this Feast of Dedication, degenerated into Drunkenness and
Luxury. At present there is nothing left but the very Refuse and Dregs of it;
Religion having not the least Share in it, which till these latter Ages always
had some. Rioting and Feasting are now all that remain, a Scandal to the Feast
in particular, and to Christianity in general.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Harvest Supper: A Custom of the Heathens, taken from the
Jewish Feast of Tabernacles.
WHEN the Fruits of the Earth are gathered in, and laid in their proper
Receptacles, it is common, in the most of Country Places, to provide a
plentiful Supper for the Harvest-Men, and the Servants of the Family; which is
called a Harvest-Supper, and in some Places a Mell-Supper, a Churn Supper, etc.
At this the Servant and his Master are alike, and every Thing is done with an
equal Freedom. They sit at the same Table, converse freely together, and spend
the remaining Part of the Night in dancing, singing, etc. without any
Difference or Distinction.

THERE Antiquitus consuetudo fuit apud Gentiles, quod hoc mense servi pastores
and ancillae quadam liberate fruerentur: Et cum Dominis suis Dominarentur, and
cum eis facerent festa, and convivia, post Collectas Messes. Durand. Rat. Lib.
6. Cap. 86.
was a Custom among the Heathens, much like this, at the gathering in of their
Harvest, when Servants were indulged with Liberty and being on the Equality
with their Masters for a certain Time.

NOW the Original of both these Customs, is Jewish: And therefore Hospinian
tells us, Et pro collectis frugibus Deo gratiae agebantur. Quem morem Ethnici
postea abiis mutuati sunt. Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Jud. Stukius Antiq. Convival.
P. 63.
That the Heathens copied after this Custom of the Jews, and at the End of
their Harvest, offered up their first Fruits to the Gods. For the Jews rejoiced
and feasted at the getting in of the Harvest.

THEOPHYLACT in talking of this Feast, is undoubtedly mistaken, when he says,
Scenopegia, quod Celebrant in Gratiarum Actionem propter convectas Fruges in
Mense Septembri. Tunc enim gratias agebant Deo, convectis omnibus fructibus,
etc. Theophylact. in 7 Cap. Joan.
That the Feast of Tabernacles was celebrated, that Thanks might be returned
for the getting in of the Fruits of the Earth. For GOD himself tells his own
People, it was instituted, Levit. 23. --
that their Generations might know, that he had made the Children of Israel to
dwell in Booths. But however, it is certainly true, that it was a Time of
returning Thanks to GOD, for the Success of the Harvest, a Time of Festivity,
and Joy and Gladness, Thus the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 16.
Thou shall observe the Feast of Tabernacles seven Days, after thou have
gathered in thy Corn and thy Wine. And thou shall rejoice in thy Feast, thou
and thy Son and thy Daughter, and thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant; and
the Levite, the Stranger, and the Fatherless and the Widow, that are within thy
Gates.

NOW as the Heathens have imitated the Jews in this Custom, so it is not
improbable that we have had it from the Heathens; there being a very great
Likeness between the Custom now, and that of the Heathens formerly. For
Macrobius tells us, That Patres Familiarum and frugibus and fructibus jam
Coactis, passim cum servis vescerentur, cum quibus patientiam Laboris ia
colendo rure toleraverant. Macrob. Saturnal. Die p^im. Cap. 10.
the Masters of Families, when they had got in their Harvest, were wont to
Feast with their Servants, who had labored with them in Tilling the Ground:
Which is exactly answerable to the Custom now amongst us. But whatever Truth
there is in this, it is certain this Custom was practiced by the Saxons, and is
at least as Ancient amongst us, as their Days. For among their Holy Days, we
find a E^stob. Append. P. 30.
Week set apart at Harvest; of which our Harvest-Home, and Mell-Supper, in the
North, are the only Remains.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ABYSSUM. Page 112 Absalom, his Feast. Page 217 Air, the Means by which a
Spirit becomes visible Page 88 Alexander ab Alexandro, his Story of an
Aparition. ib. All Saints Church in Newcastle upon Tyne, an Account of the
Ceasing and Reviving of the Tolling of the Bell, from a Vestry Book belonging
to it. Page 6 Altar, worshipping toward it. Page 29 Ambrose, St. his Corpse
watched. Page 16 Anestese, the Salutation of the Greek Church on Easter Day.
Page 191 Angels, good and evil attending upon Men. Page 39 Anthony, St. buries
Paul the Hermit, 22. The Devil appears to him in the Wilderness. Page 78
Anselmn, a Cannon of his against worshipping of Fountains. Page 66 Aparitions
at Tombs. Page 61 Arthur, King, how he observed thirteen Days at Christmas.
Page 154
B.
BABYLAS, his Body carried out with Psalmody. Page 22 Bid, his Account of the
Custom of Monasteries at the Death of any of the Brethren. Page 2 Bells, when
first in the Church. Page 1 Tolling of them for the Dead, a Custom of the old
Church of England. Page 3 Beersheba the Name of Abraham's Well. Page 67
Bethany, the Place where Mary Magdalene lived. Page 193 Bethlehem the Village
of Christ. Page 123 Blowing of Horns, when used. Page 200 Bonefires. Page 215
Bones of the Dead. Page 59 Brownists, their Charge against Tolling the Bell.
Page 5 Brutus, his evil Genius appearing to him. Page 42 Buchanan. Page 156
Burying with the Feet to the East, and the Head to the West, 31. Our Savior so
buried. Page 32
C.
CAKE, baked in Honor of the Virgin Mary. Page 158 Cake with a Bean in it,
when used. Page 153 Candles, when lighted up in the Eastern Church. Page 133
Candlemass-Day. Page 170 Cato. Page 167 Cassian, his Account of Spirits
vanishing at Daybreak. Page 48 Childermass-Day. Page 163 CHRIST born about the
Time of Cock-crow. Page 49 Christmas Candle. Page 126 Christmas Carol, what
derived from. Page 139 First sung by the Angels. Page 49 Churchyards. Page 60
Cloven Foot, the Devil appearing with it. Page 77 Cock-crow. Page 48 Collect
for Aid against Perils. Page 46 Dr. Comber, his Discourse of the ancient Manner
of burying. Page 33 Constantinople, the Custom there on Easter Eve. Page 134
Crickets, ominous. Page 71 Crow, an ominous Bird. Page 70 Crowning the Corpse, a
Custom of the Heathens. Page 25 Crucifix. Page 111 Cypress, what it is an
Emblem of. Page 19
D.
DANCING in Public, forbid. Page 149 Days, lucky and unlucky. Page 163 Dead,
how placed in the Grave. Page 33 Dead-Watch, ominous. Page 71 December, how
named of the ancient Saxons. Page 128 Dunstan, St. took the Devil by the Nose.
Page 85
E.
EAST, the Part of Heaven our Savior ascended to. Page 31 Easter Holy Days.
Page 196 Easter Sunday. Page 188 Eastern Magi. Page 152 Edgar, a Canon made in
his Time against worshipping of Fountains, 67. And upon the Observation of
Saturday Afternoon. Page 119 Egyptians, their Guardian Angels. Page 221
Epiphany. Page 133 Eseck, the Name of a Well. Page 68 Eve of St. John Baptist,
how observed. Page 131 Exorcising a haunted House, what. Page 90
F.
FAIRIES. Page 82 Faunes, how they appeared. Page 78 Flora, Goddess of Flowers.
Page 202 Flowers straw'd on Graves. Page 26 Friday, what observed on it, in
exorcising an haunted House. Page 103 Fulk, his Answer to the Papists in
Defense of their Palm Sunday Procession. Page 185
G.
GARLANDS of Flowers, when used. Page 25 Guardian Angels. Page 220 Genius evil,
appearing to Brutus. Page 42 Ghosts departed, whether they appear again. Page
40 Goat, what it is an Emblem of. Page 79 Gloria in Excelsis. Page 141 Grass,
why plucked up by the Jews. Page 21 Grave, straw'd with Flowers. Page 26
Greens-ever, why used at Funerals. Page 19 Gregory, a Tradition mentioned by
him. Page 131 Guili. Page 128
H.
HAGMENA, what it signifies. Page 139 Hall, Bish. his Opinion of the Soul-Bell.
Page 7 Hallowed Bells. ibid. Hand-Ball. Page 198 Hare crossing the Way, an ill
Omen. Page 70 Harvest-Supper. Page 229 Haunted House. Page 87 Hesperitius, his
House haunted. Page 113 Hilda, St. her Death. Page 2 High Noon, what. Page 116
Holy Water. Page 111 Hooker, Mr. his Custom at Parochial Perambulations. Page
207 Husbandmen, Observers of Saturday Afternoon. Page 116
I.
JACOB, how he prepared to go and worship GOD. Page 120 Jerusalem, a Tradition
held by the holy Men of it. Page 32 Job, his Visions of the Night. Page 43 John
Baptist's Eve, St. Page 210 Jonathan, his asking a Sign. Page 72 Julia, not the
Original of Yule, Page 158 Ivy, why used at Funerals. Page 19
L.
LAUREL, why used at Funerals. Page 19 What it is an Emblem of at Christmas.
Page 137 Laying of Spirits. Page 90 Ligatures. Page 165 Light, the Emblem of
several Things, Page 130 Lock, his Opinion of Aparitions. Page 41
M.
MAGPYE, its chattering Ominous. Page 71 Mamertus, Bishop of Vienna. Page 205
Mary Magdalene, guided by the Moon to the Sepulcher. Page 192 May-Poll. Page
201 Mede, Mr. his Opinion of the Manner of good and evil Spirits appearing Page
79 Maedrenack. Page 127 Mell-Supper. Page 229 Mid-winter. Page 128 Miserere
Animabus. Page 9 Monica, her Corpse watched. Page 15 Monks, wrought in their
Cells. Page 123 Morning Hymn, whether sung by the Angels. Page 53 Monday, what
observed on it, in exorcising an House. Page 92 Mumming. Page 147
N.
NABAL, his Feast. Page 217 New Year. Page 142 Night, before Easter. Page 16
Night, the properest Time for the appearing of evil Spirits. Page 41
Non-conformists, their Objections against Ceremonies. Page 137 Noon-Song, what.
Page 119 Noontide. ibid. Northern Parts, the Place where Psalmody is chiefly
observed. Page 22 Nurses, their Stories of bad Consequence to Children. Page 41
Nymphs, the Goddesses of Fountains. Page 69
O.
OL, what it means. Page 128 Old Year, how ended. Page 142 Olivet, Mount. Page
31 Omens, the Observation of them diabolical. Page 75 Ostriches, Bones. Page
166 Oswald, St. his Words when dying. Page 9 Owl, an ominous Bird. Page 71
P.
PALM SUNDAY. Page 183 Palms of good Works, what they are. Page 187 Panites,
how they appeared. Page 78 Paul, St. his Day. Page 159 Paul the Hermit. Page
22 Paula, buried at Bethlehem. ibid. Peace, of the Disciples. Page 10
Perambulations. Page 203 Plough-Man. Page 123 Plutarch, his Story of the evil
Genius of Brutus. Page 42 Popish Priests, famous among the Vulgar. Page 90
Power, of Prayer. Page 4 Prayers, for dying Persons. Page 11 Preparation for
the Sabbath, what it is an Emblem of Page 125 Prudentius, his Account of the
vanishing of Spirits at Cock-crow. Page 47 Psalm, sung at watching the Corpse.
Page 15 Psalmody, used at Funerals. Page 22
Q.
QUEEN Elizabeth, an Injunction of hers. Page 207
R.
RAPHAEL, the Angel. Page 86 Ravens, their Cry ominous. Page 70 Recreation
lawful, not sinful. Page 198 Reformation, too great. Page 5 Reboboth, the Name
of a Well. Page 68 Resurrection of the same Body always the Opinion of the
ancient Church. Page 35, 36 Rising early on Easter Day. Page 108 Rogation-Week,
why so called. Page 205 Romish Church filled the World with Apparitions Page 84
Rosemary, why used at Funerals. Page 19
S.
SABBATH DAY, what observed on it, in the Exorcising of an House. Page 105
Sacrifices to the Sun. Page 129 Salamis, its Inhabitants how buried. Page 34
Salt, its falling ominous. Page 70 Satyrs, how they appeared Page 78 Saturday
Afternoon, how observed. Page 116 Saturnalia, what it was. Page 148 Saxons, why
they used the Yule-Clog. Page 130 Scot, Doctor, his Opinion of Ghosts in Church
Yards. Page 63 Seghnirim, how interpreted. Page 79 Sepulcher, how visited. Page
190 Shakespeare, his Account of Spirits vanishing at Cockcrow. Page 37
Sheep-sheering, its Feast. Page 216 Shepherds, whence they have had
Apparitions. Page 77 Shrove-tide. Page 178 Shrift. ibid. Sitnah, the Name of a
Well. Page 68 St. Simeon. Page 170 Simon of Sudbury. Page 179 Sneezing when
putting on the Shoes. Page 167 Song, New Year's. Page 145 Spanish Church, why
it observed, not the Rogation Days. Page 205 Spirits, how they converse with
Men. Page 79 Star which appear to the Magi, what it was an Emblem of. Page 132
Sunday, what observed on it, in exorcising an House. Page 107 Sun-dancing on
Easter Day. Page 188 Swithin, his Day. Page 160
T.
TANZY-CAKE. Page 198 Tuesday, what was observed on it, in the exorcising of an
House. Page 92 Theophilact, a Mistake of his. Page 230 Threshold. Page 167
Thumb. Page 166 Thursday, what observed on it. Page 100 Tizri, a Month of the
Jews. Page 140 Tomb of Christ. Page 32 Tombs, Apparitions at them. Page 40
Twelfth-Day. Page 151 Twenty Days of Christmas, which. Page 155
V.
VALENTINE Day. Page 174 Vigilia Luminum. Page 135 Vine-dresser. Page 123
Vigil. Page 117
W.
WALKING Places of Spirits. Page 84 Watching with the Corpse, an ancient Custom
of the Church. Page 15 Watches, four of the Night, how employed by the
primitive Christians. Page 45 Wax-Candles. Page 172 Wednesday, what observed on
it in exorcising an House. Page 97 Wells. Page 66 Whitby, Doctor, an Opinion of
the Jews from him, about Midnight Spirits. Page 45 William King of Scots. Page
118 Windows adorned with Laurel. Page 136 Winter's Evening, how spent by the
Country People. Page 76 Wishing a good New-Year. Page 73 Wives-Feast-Day. Page
170
Y.
YULE-CLOG. Page 126 What it may be an Emblem of. ibid. Yule-Eve. Page 135
FINIS.

