VOL. IV.

A COLLECTION OF POEMS IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY SEVERAL HANDS.



LONDON: Printed by J. HUGHS, For R. and J. DODSLEY, at Tully's-Head in
Pall Mall. M.DCCLV.

An ELEGY WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCH YARD.
By Mr. GRAY.
THE Curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd wind slowly over the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his drony flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
The mopeing owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient, solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude Forefathers of the hamlet sleep,
The breezy call of incense-breathing Morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the ecchoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy houswife ply her evening care:
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not Ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour.
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye Proud, impute to These the fault,
If Memory over their Tomb no Trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn isle and fretted vault
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn or animated bust
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can Honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flattery sooth the dull cold ear of Death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page
Rich with the spoils of time did never unroll;
Chill Penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little Tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest,
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes
Their lot forbad: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes consigned;
Forbad to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhimes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered Muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply:
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to dye.
For who to dumb Forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
Even in our Ashes live their wonted Fires.
For thee, who mindful of the unhonour'd Dead
Do in these lines their artless tale relate;
If chance, by lonely Contemplation led,
Some kindred Spirit shall inquire thy fate,
Happily some hoary-headed Swain may say,
'Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn
'Brushing with hasty steps the dews away
'To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
'There at the foot of yonder nodding beech
'That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
'His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
'And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
'Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
'Mutt'ring his wayward sancies he would rove;
'Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
'Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
'One morn I missed him on the custom'd hill,
'Along the heath and near his favorite tree:
'Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
'Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he,
'The next with dirges due in sad array
'Slow through the church way path we saw him born,
'Approach and read (for thou can read) the lay,
'Grav'd on the stone beneath yon aged thorn.
The EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of Earth
A Youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown,
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty; and his soul sincere,
Heaven did a recompense as largely send:
He gave to Misery all he had, a tear,
He gained from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or araw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
HYMN to ADVERSITY.
By the Same.
DAUGHTER of Jove, relentless Power,
Thou Tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge and torturing hour
The Bad affright, afflict the Best!
Bound in thy adamantine chain
The Proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple tyrants vainly groan
With pangs unfelt before, unpitied and alone.
When first thy Sire to send on earth
Virtue, his darling Child, designed,
To thee he gave the heavenly Birth,
And bad to form her infant mind.
Stern rugged Nurse! thy rigid lore
With patience many a year she bore:
What sorrow was, thou bad'st her know,
And from her own she learned to melt at others' woe.
Scared at thy frown terrific, fly
Self-pleasing Folly's idle brood,
Wild Laughter, Noise, and thoughtless Joy,
And leave us leisure to be good.
Light they disperse, and with them go
The summer Friend, the flattering Foe;
By vain Prosperity received,
To her they vow their truth, and are again believed.
Wisdom in sable garb arrayed,
Immersed in rapturous thought profound,
And Melancholy, silent maid
With leaden eye, that loves the ground,
Still on thy solemn steps attend:
Warm Charity, the general friend,
With justice to herself severe,
And Pity, dropping soft the sadly-pleasing tear.
Oh! gently on thy Suppliant's head,
Dread Goddess, lay thy chast'ning hand!
Not in thy Gorgon terrors clad,
Nor circled with the vengeful Band
(As by the Impious thou art seen)
With thundering voice, and threatening mien,
With screaming Horror's funeral cry,
Despair, and fell Disease, and ghastly Poverty.
Thy form benign, oh Goddess, wear,
Thy milder influence impart,
Thy philosophic Train be there
To soften, not to wound my heart,
The generous spark extinct revive,
Teach me to love, and to forgive,
Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are to feel, and know myself a Man.
EDUCATION. A POEM: in TWO CANTOS.
Written in Imitation of the Style and Manner OF SPENSER's FAIRY QUEEN.
Inscribed to Lady LANGHAM, Widow of Sir John LANGHAM, Bart.
By GILBERT WEST, Esquire
Unum studium vere liberale est, quod liberum facit. Hoc sapientiae studium
est, sublime, forte, magnanimum: caetera pusilla and puerilia sunt. -- Plus
scire velle quam sit satis intemperantiae genus est. Quid, quod ista liberalium
artium consectatio molestos, vertosos, intempestivos, sibi placentes facit, and
ideo non dicentes necessaria, quia supervacua didicerunt. Sen. Ep. 88.
O Goodly DISCIPLINE! from heaven y-sprong!
Parent of Science, queen of Arts refined!
To whom the Graces, and the Nine belong:
O! bid those Graces, in fair chorus joined
With each bright Virtue that adorns the mind!
O bid the Muses, thine harmonious train,
Who by thy aid erst humaniz'd mankind,
Inspire, direct, and moralize the strain,
That does essay to teach thy treasures how to gain!
And THOU, whose pious and maternal care,
The substitute of heavenly Providence,
With tenderest love my orphan life did rear,
And train me up to manly strength and sense;
With mildest awe, and virtuous influence,
Directing my unpracticed wayward feet
To the smooth walks of Truth and Innocence;
Where Happiness heartfelt, Contentment sweet,
Philosophy divine aye hold their blessed retreat.
THOU, most beloved, most honored, most revered!
Accept this verse, to thy large merit due!
And blame me not, if by each tie endeared,
Of nature, gratitude, and friendship true,
The whiles this moral thesis I pursue,
And trace the plan of goodly Nurture, Education.
Nurture over,
I bring thy modest virtues into view;
And proudly boast that from thy precious store,
Which erst enriched my heart, I drew this sacred lore.
And thus, I ween, thus shall I best repay
The valued gifts, thy careful love bestowed;
If imitating THEE, well as I may,
I labor to diffuse the important good;
'Till this great truth by all be understood;
"That all the pious duties which we owe,
"Our parents, friends, our country and our God;
"The seeds of every virtue here below,
"From Discipline alone, and early Culture grow.
CANTO I.
ARGUMENT.
The Knight, as to Paedia is a Greek word, signifying Education.
PAEDIA's house
He his young Son conveys,
Is staid by CUSTOM; with him fights,
And his vain pride dismays.
A Gentle KNIGHT there was, whose noble deeds
Over Fairy Land by Fame were blazoned round:
For warlike enterprise, and sage Areeds, counsels.
areeds
Among the chief alike was he renowned;
Whence with the marks of highest honors crowned
By GLORIANA, in domestic peace,
That port, to which the wise are ever bound,
He anchored was, and changed the tossing seas
Of bustling busy lise, for calm sequestered ease.
II.
There in domestic virtue rich and great
As erst in public, 'mid his wide domain,
Long in primaeval patriarchal state,
The lord, the judge, the father of the plain,
He dwelt; and with him, in the golden chain
Of wedded faith y-link'd, a matron sage
Aye dwelt; sweet partner of his joy and pain,
Sweet charmer of his youth, friend of his age,
Skilled to improve his bliss, his sorrows to assuage.
III.
From this fair union, not of sordid gain,
But merit similar and mutual love,
True source of lineal virtue, sprung a train
Of youths and virgins; like the beauteous grove,
Which round the temple of Olympic Jove,
Begirt with youthful bloom the Parent tree, the sacred olive.] This tree grew
in the Altis, or sacred grove of Olympic Jupiter at Olympia, having, as the
Eleans pretenaed, been originally planted there by Hercules. It was esteemed
sacred, and from that were taken the Olympic crowns. See Pausanias. Eliac. and
the Dissertation on the Olympic Games.
parent tree,
The sacred olive; whence old Elis wove
Her verdant crowns of peaceful victory,
The Guerdons, rewards.
guerdons of bold strength, and swift activity.
IV.
So round their noble parents goodly rose
These generous scyons; they with watchful care
Still, as the swelling passions began disclose
The buds of future virtues, did prepare
With prudent culture the young shoots to rear:
And aye in this endearing pious toil
They by a P^lmer, pilgrim. The person here signified is Mr. Lock,
uncharacterized by his works.
Palmer sage instructed were,
Who from deep thought and studious search erewhile
Had learnt to mend the heart, and till the human soil.
V.
For by celestial Wisdom whilom led
Through all the apartments of the immortal mind,
He viewed the secret stores, and marked the Sted, place, station.
sted
To judgment, wit, and memory assigned;
And how sensation and reflection joined
To fill with images her darksome grotte,
Where variously disjointed or combined,
As reason, fancy, or opinion wrought,
Their various masks they played, and fed her pensive thought.
VI.
Alse, also, further.
Alse through the fields of Science had he strayed
With eager search, and sent his piercing eye
Through each learned school, each philosophic shade,
Where Truth and Virtue erst were deemed to lie;
If happily the fair vagrants he Mote, might.
mote spy,
Or hear the music of their charming lore:
But all unable there to satisfy
His curious soul, he turned him to explore
The sacred writ of Faith; to learn, believe, adore.
VII.
Thence foe professed of Falsehood and Deceit,
Those sly artificers of tyranny,
Aye, ever.
Aye holding up before uncertain feet
His faithful light, to Knowledge, Liberty,
Mankind he led, to Civil Policy,
And mild Religion's charitable law;
That framed by Mercy and Benignity
The persecuting sword forbids to draw,
And free-created souls with penal terrors awe.
VIII.
Ne, nor.
Ne with these glorious gifts elate and vain
Locked he his wisdom up in churlish pride;
But, stooping from his height, would even deign
The feeble steps of Infancy to guide.
Eternal glory Him therefore betide!
Let every generous youth his praise proclaim!
Who, wandering through the world's rude forest wide,
By him has been y-taught his course to frame
To Virtue's sweet abodes, and heav'n-aspiring Fame!
IX.
For this the FAIRY KNIGHT with anxious thought,
And fond paternal care his counsel prayed;
And him of gentlest courtesy besought
His guidance to vouchsafe and friendly aid;
The while his tender offspring he conveyed,
Through devious paths to that secure retreat;
Where sage PAEDIA, with each tuneful maid,
On a wide mount had fixed her rural seat,
'Mid flowery gardens placed, untrod by vulgar feet.
X.
And now forth-pacing with his blooming heir,
And that same virtuous Palmer them to guide,
Armed all to point, and on a courser fair
Y-mounted high, in military pride,
His little train before he slow did ride.
Him eke behind a gentle squire Ensues, follows.
ensues,
With his young lord aye marching side by side,
His counselor and guard, in goodly Thews, manners.
thews,
Who well had been brought up, and nursed by every Muse.
XI.
Thus as their pleasing journey they pursued,
With cheerful argument beguiling pain;
Ere long descending from an hill they viewed
Beneath their eyes out-stretch'd a spacious plain,
That fruitful showed, and apt for every grain,
For pastures, vines and flowers; while Nature fair
Sweet-smiling all around with countenance Fain, earnest, eager.
fain
Seemed to demand the tiller's art and care,
Her wildness to correct, her lavish waste repair.
XII.
Right good, I ween, and bounteous was the soil,
Aye wont in happy seasons to repay
With tenfold usury the peasant's toil.
But now 'twas ruin all, and wild decay;
Untilled the garden and the fallow lay,
The sheep-shorne down with barren Brakes, briars.
brakes o'ergrown;
The whiles the merry peasants sport and play,
All as the public evil were unknown,
Or every public care from every breast was flown.
XIII.
Astonished at a scene at once so fair
And so deformed; with wonder and delight
At man's neglect, and Nature's bounty rare,
In studious thought awhile the Fairy Knight,
Bent on that goodly Land, land.
land his eager sight:
Then forward rushed, impatient to descry
What towns and castles there-in were Empight, placed.
empight;
For towns him seemed, and castles he did spy,
As to the horizon round he stretched his roaming eye.
XIV.
Nor long way had they traveled, ere they came
To a wide stream, that with tumultuous roar
Emongst rude rocks its winding course did frame.
Black was the wave and sordid, covered over
With angry foam, and stained with infants' gore.
Thereto along the unlovely margin stood
A birchen grove, that waving from the shore,
Aye cast upon the tide its falling bud,
And with its bitter juice empoison'd all the flood.
XV.
Right in the center of the vale empight,
Not distant far a forked mountain rose;
In outward form presenting to the sight
That famed Parnassian hill, on whose fair brows
The Nine Aonian Sisters wont repose;
Listening to sweet Castalia's sounding stream,
Which through the plains of Cirrha murmuring flows.
But This to That compared mote justly seem
Ne fitting haunt for gods, ne worthy man's esteem.
XVI.
For this nor founded deep, nor spredden wide,
Nor high up-rais'd above the level plain,
By toiling art through tedious years applied,
From various parts compiled with studious pain,
Was Erst, formerly.
erst up-thrown; if so it mote attain,
Like that poetic mountain, to be Hight, called, named.
hight
The noble seat of Learning's goodly train.
Thereto, the more to captivate the sight,
It like a garden fair most curiously was Dight, dressed.
dight.
XVII.
In figured plots with leafy walls enclosed,
By measure and by rule it was out-lay'd;
With symmetry so regular disposed,
That plot to plot still answered, shade to shade;
Each correspondent twain alike arrayed
With like embellishments of plants and flowers,
Of statues, vases, spouting founts, that played
Through shells of Tritons their ascending showers,
And labyrinths involved and trelice-woven bowers.
XVIII.
There likewise mote be seen on every side
The yew obedient to the planter's will,
And shapely box of all their branching pride
Ungently shorn, and with preposterous skill
To various beasts and birds of sundry quill
Transformed, and human shapes of monstrous size;
Huge as that giant-race, who, hill on hill
High-heaping, sought with impious vain Emprize, enterprise, attempt.
emprize,
Despite of thundering Jove, to scale the steepy skies.
XIX.
Alse other wonders of the sportive shears
Fair Nature mis-adorning there were found;
Globes, spiral columns, pyramids and piers
With sprouting urns and budding statues crowned;
And horizontal dials on the ground
In living box by cunning artists traced;
And galleys trim, on no long voyage bound,
But by their roots there ever anchored fast,
All, used frequently by the old English poets for all-though.
All were their bellying sails out-spread to every blast.
XX.
Over all appeared the mountain's forked brows
With terrasses on terrasses up-thrown;
And all along arrang'd in ordered rows,
And visto's broad, the velvet slopes adown
The ever-verdant trees of Daphne shone.
But aliens to the clime, and brought of old
From Latian plains, and Grecian Helicon,
They shrunk and languish'd in a foreign mold,
By changeful summers starved, and pinched by winter's cold.
XXI.
Amid this verdant grove with solemn state,
On golden thrones of antique form reclined,
In mimick majesty Nine Virgins sat,
In features various, as unlike in mind:
Alse boasted they themselves of heavenly kind,
And to the sweet Parnassian Nymphs allied;
Thence round their brows the Delphick bay they twined,
And matching with high names their apish pride,
Over every learned school aye claimed they to preside.
XXII.
In antique garbs, for modern they disdained,
By Greek and Roman artists Whilom, formerly.
whilom made,
Of various woofs, and variously distained
With tints of every hue, were they arrayed;
And here and there ambitiously displayed
A purple shred of some rich robe, prepared
Erst by the Muses or the Aonian Maid,
To deck great Tullius or the Mantuan Bard;
Which over each motley vest with uncouth splendour glared.
XXIII.
And well their outward vesture did express
The bent and habit of their inward mind,
Affecting Wisdom's antiquated dress,
And usages by Time cast far behind.
Thence, to the charms of younger Science blind,
The customs, laws, the learning, arts and phrase
Of their own countries they with scorn declined;
Ne sacred Truth herself would they embrace,
Unwarranted, unknown in their forefathers' days.
XXIV.
Thus ever backward casting their survey;
To Rome's old ruins and the groves forlorn
Of elder Athens, which in prospect lay
Stretched out beneath the mountain, would they turn
Their busy search, and over the rubbish mourn.
Then gathering up with superstitious care,
Each little scrap, however foul or torn,
In grave harangues they boldly would declare,
This Ennius, Varro; This the Stagyrite did wear.
XXV.
Yet, under names of venerable sound,
Wide over the world they stretched their aweful rod;
Through all the provinces of Learning owned
For teachers of whatever is wise and good.
Alse from each region to their Drad, dreadful.
drad abode
Came youths unnumber'd, crouding all to taste
The streams of Science; which united flowed
Adown the mount, from nine rich sources cast;
And to the vale below in one rude torrent passed.
XXVI.
Over every source, protectress of the stream,
One of those Virgin Sisters did preside;
Who, dignifying with her noble name
Her proper flood, aye poured into the tide
The heady vapors of scholastic pride
Despotical and abject, bold and blind,
Fierce in debate, and forward to decide;
Vain love of praise, with adulation joined,
And disingenuous scorn, and impotence of mind.
XXVII.
Extending from the hill on every side,
In circuit vast a verdant valley spread;
Across whose uniform flat bosom glide
Ten thousand streams, in winding mazes led,
By various sluices from one common head;
A turbid mass of waters, vast, profound,
Hight of Philology the lake; and fed
By that rude torrent, which with roaring sound
Came tumbling from the hill, and flowed the level round.
XXVIII.
And every where this spacious valley over,
Fast by each stream was seen a numerous throng
Of beardless striplings to the birch-crown'd shore,
By nurses, guardians, fathers dragged along:
Who helpless, meek, and innocent of wrong,
Were torn reluctant from the tender side
Of their fond mothers, and by Faitour, doer, from fair to do, and fait deed,
commonly used by Spenser in a bad sense.
faitours strong,
By power made insolent, and hard by pride,
Were driven with furious rage, and lashed into the tide.
XXIX.
On the rude bank with trembling feet they stood,
And casting round their oft-reverted eyes,
If happily they mote 'scape the hated flood,
Filled all the plain with lamentable cries;
But far away the unheeding father flies,
Constrained his strong compunctions to repress;
While close behind, assuming the disguise
Of nurturing care, and smiling tenderness,
With secret scourges armed those griesly faitours press.
XXX.
As on the steepy margin of a brook,
When the young sun with flowery Maia rides,
With innocent dismay a bleating flock
Crowd back, affrighted at the rolling tides:
The shepherd-swain at first exhorting chides
Their Seely, simple.
seely fear; at length impatient grown,
With his rude crook he wounds their tender sides;
And all regardless of their piteous moan,
Into the dashing wave compels them furious down.
XXXI.
Thus urged by mast'ring Fear and dol'rous Teen, pain, grief.
Teen
Into the current plunged that infant crowd.
Right piteous was the spectacle, I ween,
Of tender striplings stained with tears and blood,
Perforce conflicting with the bitter flood;
And laboring to attain the distant shore,
Where holding forth the gown of manhood stood
The siren Liberty, and ever-more
Solicited their hearts with her enchanting lore.
XXXII.
Irksome and long the passage was, perplexed
With rugged rocks on which the raving tide
By sudden bursts of angry tempests vexed
Often dashed the youth, whose strength mote ill abide
With head up-lifted over the waves to ride.
Whence many wearied ere they had o'er-past
The middle stream (for they in vain have tried)
Again returned Astounded, astonished.
astounded and aghast;
Ne one regardful look would ever backward cast.
XXXIII.
Some, of a rugged, more enduring frame,
Their toilsome course with patient pain pursued;
And though with many a bruise and Muchel, much.
muchel blame,
Eft hanging on the rocks, and eft embru'd
Deep in the muddy stream, with hearts subdued
And quail'd by labor, gained the shore at last,
But in life's practick Lear, learning.
lear unskilled and rude,
Forth to that forked hill they silent paced;
Where hid in studious shades their fruitless hours they waste.
XXXIV.
Others of rich and noble lineage bred,
Though with the crowd to pass the flood constrained,
Yet over the crags with fond indulgence led
By hireling guides and in all depths sustained,
Skimm'd lightly over the tide, undipt, unstained,
Save with the sprinkling of the watery spray:
And aye their proud prerogative maintained,
Of ignorance and ease and wanton play,
Soft harbingers of vice, and praemature decay.
XXXV.
A few, alas, how few! by Heaven's high will
With subtle spirits endowed and sinews strong,
Albe, although.
Albe sore Mated, amazed, scared.
mated by the tempests shrill,
That bellowed fierce and rife the rocks among,
By their own native vigor borne along
Cut briskly through the waves; and forces new
Gathering from toil, and ardor from the throng
Of rival youths, outstript the laboring crew,
And to the true Parnasse, Parnassus.
Parnasse, and heav'n-thron'd glory flew.
XXXVI.
Dire was the tumult, and from every shore
Discordant echoes struck the deafen'd ear,
Heart-thrilling cries, with sobs and ^gults, sighs.
singults sore
Short-interrupted, the imploring tear,
And furious stripes, and angry threats severe,
Confusedly mingled with the jarring sound
Of all the various speeches that While-ear, formerly.
while-ear
On Shinar's wide-spread champain did astound
High Babel's builders vain, and their proud works confound.
XXXVII.
Much was the KNIGHT empassion'd at the scene,
But more his blooming son, whose tender breast
Empierced deep with sympathizing teen
On his pale cheek the signs of dread impressed,
And filled his eyes with tears, which sore distressed
Up to his sire he raised in mournful wise;
Who with sweet smiles paternal soon redressed
His troublous thoughts, and cleared each sad surmise;
Then turns his ready steed, and on his journey hies.
XXXVIII.
(...) far he had not marched ere he was stayed
(...) voice, that like the united sound
(...) myriads, through the valley brayed,
(...) the groves, the floods, and solid ground:
The distant hills rebellow'd all around.
"Arrest, Sir Knight, it cried, thy fond career,
"Nor with presumptuous disobedience wound
"That aweful majesty, which all revere!
"In my commands, Sir Knight, the voice of nations hear!
XXXIX.
Quick turned the KNIGHT, and saw upon the plain
Advancing toward him with impetuous gate,
And visage all inflamed with fierce disdain,
A monstrous GIANT, on whose brow elate
Shone the bright ensign of imperial state;
Albeit lawful kingdom he had none;
But laws and kingdoms wont he often create,
And oft'times over both erect his throne,
While senates, priests and kings his Sovran, for sovereign.
sovran scepter own.
XL.
CUSTOM he hight; and aye in every land
Usurped dominion with despotick sway
Over all he holds; and to his high command
Constrains even stubborn Nature to obey;
Whom dispossessing often, he does assay
To govern in her right: and with a pace
So soft and gentle does he win his way,
That she unwares is caught in his embrace,
And though deflowered and thrall'd naught seels her foul disgrace.
XLI.
For nurt'ring, even from their tenderest age,
The docile sons of men withouten pain,
By disciplines and rules to every stage
Of life accommodate, he does them train
Insensibly to wear and hug his chain.
Alse his behests or gentle or severe,
Or good or noxious, rational or vain,
He craftily persuades them to revere,
As institutions sage, and venerable lear.
XLII.
Protector therefore of that forked hill,
And mighty patron of those Sisters Nine,
Who there enthroned, with many a copious rill
Feed the full streams, that through the valley shine,
He deemed was; and aye with rites divine,
The Lacedaemonians in order to make their children hardy and endure pain with
constancy and courage, were accustomed to cause them to be scourged very
severely. And I myself (says Plutarch, in his life of Lycurgus) have seen
several of them endure whipping to death, at the foot of the altar of Diana
surnamed Orthia.
Like those, which Sparta's hardy race of yore
Were wont perform at fell Diana's shrine,
He does constrain his vassals to adore
Perforce their sacred names, and learn their sacred lore.
XLIII.
And to the FAIRY KNIGHT now drawing near,
With voice terrifick and imperious mien,
(All was he wont less dreadful to appear,
When known and practiced than at distance seen)
And kingly stretching forth his scepter sheen,
Him he commands, upon threat'ned pain
Of his displeasure high and vengeance keen,
From his rebellious purpose to refrain,
And all due honors pay to Learning's reverend train.
XLIV.
So saying and forestalling all reply,
His peremptory hand without delay,
As one who little cared to justify
His princely will, long used to boundless sway,
Upon the Fairy Youth with great dismay
In every quaking limb convulsed, he laid:
And proudly stalking over the verdant Lay, mead. trouble, misfortune, etc.
lay,
Him to those scientifick streams conveyed,
With many his young compeers therein to be Embay'd, bathed, dipped.
embay'd.
XLV.
The KNIGHT his tender son's distressful Stour, trouble, misfortune, etc.
stour
Perceiving, swift to his assistance flew:
Ne vainly stayed to deprecate that power,
Which from submission aye more haughty grew,
For that proud GIANT's force he wisely knew,
Not to be meanly dreaded, nor defied
With rash presumption; and with courage true,
Rather than step from Virtue's paths aside,
Often had he singly scorned his all dismaying pride.
XLVI.
And now, disdaining parle, his courser hot
He siercely pricked, and couched his vengeful spear;
Wherewith the GIANT he so rudely smot,
That him perforce constrained to Wend arrear, move backwards.
wend arrear.
Who, much abashed at such rebuke severe,
Yet his accustomed pride recov'ring soon,
Forthwith his massy scepter began up-rear;
For other warlike weapon he had none,
Ne other him behoved to quell his boldest Fone, foes.
fone.
XLVII.
With that enormous mace the FAIRY KNIGHT
So sore he Bet, beat;
bet, that all his armor brayed, resounded.
brayed,
To pieces well-nigh riven with the might
Of so tempestuous strokes: but He was stayed,
And ever with deliberate valor weighed
The sudden changes of the doubtful fray;
From cautious prudence often deriving aid,
When force unequal did him hard assay:
So lightly from his steed he leapt upon the lay.
XLVIII.
Then swiftly drawing forth his Trenchant, cutting.
trenchant blade,
High over his head he held his fenceful shield;
And warily fore-casting to evade
The GIANT's furious arm, about him wheeled,
With restless steps aye traversing the field.
And ever as his foe's intemperate pride,
Through rage defenseless, mote advantage yield,
With his sharp sword so often he did him Gride, cut, hack.
gride,
That his gold-sandal'd feet in crimson floods were dyed.
XLIX.
His baser parts he maimed with many a wound;
But far above his utmost reach were Pight, placed.
pight
The forts of life: ne ever to confound
With utter ruin, and abolish quite
A power so puissant by his single might
Did he presume to hope: Himself alone
From lawless force to free, in bloody fight
He stood; content to bow to CUSTOM's throne,
So REASON mote not blush his sovran rule to own.
L.
So well he warded, and so fiercely pressed
His foe, that weary wex'd he of the fray;
Yet Nould he algates, would not by any means.
nould he algates lower his haughty crest;
But masking in contempt his sore dismay,
Disdainfully released the trembling prey,
As one unworthy of his princely care:
Then proudly casting on the warlike Fay, fairy.
fay
A smile of scorn and pity, through the air
Began blow his shrilling horn; the blast was heard afar.
LI.
Eftsoons astonished at the alarming sound,
The signal of distress and hostile wrong,
Confusedly trooping from all quarters round,
Came pouring over the plain a numerous throng
Of every sex and order, old and young;
The vassals of great CUSTOM's wide domain,
Who to his lore inured by usage long,
His every summons heard with pleasure fain,
And felt his every wound with sympathetick pain.
LII.
They, when their bleeding king they did behold,
And saw an armed KNIGHT him standing near,
Attended by that Palmer sage and bold;
Whose venurous search of devious Truth while-ear
Spread through the realms of Learning horrors drear,
Y-seized were at first with terrors great;
And in their boding hearts began to fear,
Dissension factious, controversial hate,
And innovations strange in CUSTOM's peaceful state.
LIII.
But when they saw the KNIGHT his fauchion sheathe,
And climbing to his steed march thence away,
With all his hostile train, they began to breathe
With freer spirit, and with aspect gay
Soon chaced the gathering clouds of black affray.
Alse their great monarch, cheared with the view
Of myriads, who confessed his sovran sway,
His ruffled pride began to plume anew;
And on his bugle clear a strain of triumph blew.
LIVE.
There-at the multitude, that stood around,
Sent up at once a universal roar
Of boisterous joy: the sudden-bursting sound,
Like the explosion of a warlike store
Of nitrous grain, the afflicted Welkin, sky.
welkin tore.
Then turning toward the KNIGHT, with scoffings lewd,
Heart-piercing insults, and revilings sore,
Loud bursts of laughter vain, and hisses rude,
As through the throng he passed, his parting steps pursued.
LV.
Alse from that forked hill the boasted seat
Of studious Peace, and mild Philosophy,
Indignant murmurs mote be heard to threat,
Mustering their rage; eke baleful Infamy,
Roused from her den of base obscurity
By those same Maidens Nine, began to sound
Her brazen trump of black'ning obloquy;
While Satire, with dark clouds encompast round,
Sharp, secret arrows shot, and aimed his back to wound.
LVI.
But the brave FAIRY KNIGHT no whit dismayed
Held on his peaceful journey over the plain;
With curious eye observing, as he strayed
Through the wide provinces of CUSTOM's reign,
What mote afresh admonish him remain
Fast by his virtuous purpose; all around
So many objects moved his just disdain;
Him seemed that nothing serious, nothing sound
In city, village, bower, or castle mote be found.
LVII.
In village, city, castle, bower and hall,
Each sex, each age, each order and degree,
To vice and idle sport abandoned all,
Kept one perpetual general jubilee.
Ne suffered ought disturb their merry glee;
Ne sense of private loss, ne public woes,
Restraint of law, Religion's drad decree,
Intestine desolation, foreign foes,
Nor heaven's tempestuous threats, nor earth's convulsive throws.
LVIII.
But chiefly they whom Heaven's disposing hand
Had seated high on Fortune's upper stage;
And placed within their call the sacred band
That waits on Nurture and Instruction sage,
If happily their wise Hests, behests, precepts, commands.
hests mote them engage
To climb through knowledge to more noble praise;
And as they mount, enlighten every age
With the bright influence of fair Virtue's rays;
Which from the aweful heights of Grandeur brighter blaze.
LIX.
They, O perverse and base ingratitude!
Despising the great ends of Providence,
For which above their mates they were endued
With wealth, authority, and eminence,
To the low services of brutal sense
Abused the means of pleasures more refined,
Of knowledge, virtue, and beneficence;
And fettering on her throne the immortal mind,
The guidance of her realm to passions wild resigned.
LX.
Hence thoughtless, shameless, reckless, spiritless,
Naught worthy of their kind did they assay;
But or benumbed with palsied Idleness
In merely living loiter'd life away.
Or by false taste of pleasure led astray,
For-ever wandering in the sensual bowers
Of feverish Debauch, and lustful Play,
Spent on ignoble toils their active powers,
And with untimely blasts diseased their vernal hours.
LXI.
Even they, to whom kind Nature did accord
A frame more delicate, and purer mind,
Though the foul brothel and the wine-stain'd board
Of beastly Comus loathing they declined,
Yet their soft hearts to idle joys resigned;
Like painted insects, through the summer-air
With random flight aye ranging unconfined;
And tasting every flower and blossom fair,
Withouten any choice, withouten any care.
LXII.
For choice them needed none, who only sought
With vain amusements to beguile the day;
And wherefore should they take or care or thought,
Whom Nature prompts, and Fortune calls to play?
"Lords of the earth, be happy as ye may!
So learned, so taught the leaders of mankind;
The unreasoning vulgar willingly obey,
And leaving toil and poverty behind,
Ran forth by different ways the blissful boon to find.
LXIII.
Nor tedious was the search; for every where,
As nigh great CUSTOM's royal towers the KNIGHT
Passed through the adjoining hamlets, mote he hear
The merry voice of festival Delight
Saluting the return of morning bright
With matin-revels, by the midday hours
Scarce ended; and again with dewy night,
In covered theaters, or leafy bowers
Offering her evening-vows to Pleasure's joyous powers.
LXIV.
And ever on the way mote he espy
Men, women, children, a promiscuous throng
Of rich, poor; wise and simple, low and high,
By land, by water, passing aye along
With mummers, anticks, music, dance and song,
To Pleasure's numerous temples, that beside
The glistening streams, or tufted groves among,
To every idle foot stood open wide,
And every gay desire with various joys supplied.
LXV.
For there each heart with diverse charms to move,
The sly inchantress summoned all her train:
Alluring Venus, queen of vagrant love,
The boon companion Bacchus loud and vain,
And tricking Hermes, god of fraudful gain,
Who, when blind Fortune throws, directs the die,
And Phoebus tuning his soft Lydian strain
To wanton motions, and the lover's sigh,
And though-beguiling show, and masking revelry.
LXVI.
Unmeet associates there for noble youth,
Who to true honor means to aspire;
And for the works of virtue, faith, and truth
Would keep his manly faculties entire.
The which avizing well, the cautious sire
From that soft siren-land of Pleasaunce vain
With timely haste was minded to retire,
Or ere, before.
Or ere the sweet contagion mote attain
His son's unpractic'd heart, yet free from vicious stain.
LXVII.
So turning from that beaten road aside,
Through many a devious path at length he paced,
As that experienced Palmer did him guide,
'Till to a mountain hoare they come at last;
Whose high-rais'd brows with silvan honors graced,
Majestically frowned upon the plain,
And over all an aweful horror cast.
Seemed as those villas gay it did disdain,
Which spangled all the vale like Flora's painted train.
LXVIII.
The hill ascending strait, ere-while they came
To a tall grove, whose thick embow'ring shade,
Impervious to the sun's meridian flame
Even at mid-noon a dubious twilight made;
Like to that sober light, which disarray'd
Of all its gorgeous robe, with blunted beams,
Through windows dim with holy acts portrayed,
Along some cloistered abbey faintly gleams,
Abstracting the rapt thought from vain earth-musing themes.
LXIX.
Beneath this high o'er-arching canopy
Of clust'ring oaks, a silvan colonnade,
Aye listening to the native melody
Of birds sweet-ecchoing through the lonely shade,
On to the center of the grove they strayed;
Which, in a spacious circle opening round,
Within it is sheltering arms securely laid,
Disclosed to sudden view a vale profound,
With Nature's artless smiles and tranquil beauties crowned.
LXX.
There, on the basis of an ancient pile,
Whose cross surmounted spire o'erlook'd the wood,
A venerable MATRON they ere-while
Discovered have, beside a murmuring flood
Reclining in right sad and pensive mood.
Retired within her own abstracted breast,
She seemed over various woes by turns to brood;
The which her changing cheer by turns expressed,
Now glowing with disdain, with grief now Over-kest, for over-cast.
over-kest.
LXXI.
Her thus immersed in anxious thought profound
When As the Knight perceived, he nearer drew;
To weet what bitter bale did her astound,
And whence the occasion of her anguish grew.
For that right noble MATRON well he knew;
And many perils huge, and labors sore
Had for her sake endured; her vassal true,
Trained in her love, and practiced evermore
Her honor to respect, and reverence her lore.
LXXII.
O dearest drad! he cried, fair island queen!
Mother of heroes! empress of the main!
What means that stormy brow of troublous teen?
Since, since.
Since heaven-born Peace, with all her smiling train
Of sciences and arts, adorns thy reign
With wealth and knowledge, splendor and renown?
Each port how thronged! how fruitful every plain!
How blithe the country! and how gay the town!
While Liberty secures and heightens every boon!
LXXIII.
Awakened from her trance of pensive woe
By these fair flattering words, she raised her head;
And bending on the KNIGHT her frowning brow,
Mock'st thou my sorrows, Fairy's Son? she said.
Or is thy judgment by thy heart misled
To deem that certain, which thy hopes suggest?
To deem them full of life and Lustihead, strong health, vigor.
lustihead,
Whose cheeks in Hebe's vivid tints are dressed,
And with Joy's careless mien, and dimpled'smiles impressed?
LXXIV.
Thy unsuspecting heart how nobly good
I know, how sanguine in thy country's cause!
And marked thy virtue, single how it stood
The assaults of mighty CUSTOM, which o'er-awes
The faint and timorous mind, and often withdraws
From Reason's lore the ambitious and the vain,
By the sweet lure of popular applause,
Against their better knowledge, to maintain
The lawless throne of Vice, or Folly's childish reign.
LXXV.
How vast his influence! how wide his sway!
Thy self ere-while by proof did understand:
And saw, as through his realms thou took'st thy way,
How Vice and Folly had o'er-spread the land.
And can thou then, O Fairy's Son, demand
The reason of my woe? or hope to ease
The throbbings of my heart with speeches bland,
And words more apt my sorrows to increase,
The once-dear names of Wealth, and Liberty, and Peace?
LXXVI.
Peace, Wealth, and Liberty, that noblest boon,
Are blessings only to the wise and good.
To weak and vicious minds their worth unknown
And thence abused but serve to furnish food
For riot and debauch, and fire the blood
With high-spiced luxury; whence strife, debate,
Ambition, envy, Faction's vip'rous brood,
Contempt of order, manners profligate;
The symptoms of a foul, diseased and bloated state.
LXXVII.
Even Wit and Genius, with their learned train
Of Arts and Muses, though from heaven above
Descended, when their talents they profane
To varnish folly, kindle wanton love,
And aid excentrick skeptic Pride to rove
Beyond celestial Truth's attractive sphere,
This moral system's central sun, aye prove
To their fond votaries a curse severe,
And only make mankind more obstinately err.
LXXVIII.
And stand my sons herein from censure clear?
Have They considered well, and understood
The use and import of those blessings dear,
Which the great Lord of Nature has bestowed
As well to prove, as to reward the good?
Whence are these torrents then, these billowy seas
Of vice, in which, as in his proper flood,
The fell leviathan licentious plays,
And upon ship-wreck'd faith, and sinking virtue preys?
LXXIX.
To you, ye Noble, Opulent and Great!
With friendly voice I call, and honest zeal!
Upon your vital influences wait
The health and sickness of the commonweal;
The maladies you cause, yourselves must heal.
In vain to the unthinking hardened crowd
Will Truth and Reason make their just appeal;
In vain will sacred Wisdom cry aloud;
And Justice drench in vain her vengeful sword in blood.
LXXX.
With You must reformation first take place:
You are the head, the intellectual mind
Of this vast body politic; whose base,
And vulgar limbs, to drudgery consigned,
All the rich stores of Science have resigned
To You, that by the craftsman's various toil,
The sea-worn mariner, and sweating hind,
In peace and affluence maintained, the while
You, for yourselves and them, may dress the mental soil.
LXXXI.
Bethink you then, my children, of the trust
In you reposed; ne let your heaven-born mind
Consume in pleasure, or unactive rust;
But nobly rouse you to the task assigned,
The godlike task to teach and mend mankind:
Learn that ye may instruct: to virtue lead
Yourselves the way; the herd will crowd behind,
And gather precepts from each worthy deed:
"Example is a lesson, that all men can read.
LXXXII.
But if (to All or Most I do not speak)
In vain and sensual habits now grown old,
The strong Circaean charm you cannot break,
Nor reassume at will your native Mould, shape, form.
mould,
Yet envy not the state, you could not hold;
And take compassion on the rising age:
In them redeem your errors manifold;
And, by due discipline and nurture sage,
In Virtue's lore betimes your docile sons engage.
LXXXIII.
You chiefly, who like me in secret mourn
The prevalence of CUSTOM lewd and vain;
And you, who, though by the rude torrent borne
Unwillingly along you yield with pain
To his behests, and act what you disdain,
Yet nourish in your hearts the generous love
Of piety and truth, no more restrain
The manly zeal; but all your sinews move
The present to reclaim, the future race improve!
LXXXIV.
Eftsoons by your joint efforts shall be quelled
Yon haughty GIANT, who so proudly sways
A scepter by repute alone upheld;
Who where he cannot dictate strait obeys.
Accustomed to conform his flattering phrase
To numbers and high-plac'd authority,
Your party he will join, your maxims praise,
And drawing after all his menial fry,
Soon teach the general voice your act to ratify.
LXXXV.
Ne for the atchievment of this great emprize
The want of means or counsel may ye dread.
From my TWIN-DAUGHTERS' fruitful wombs shall rise
A race of lettered sages, deeply read
In Learning's various writ: by whom y-led
Through each well cultured plot, each beauteous grove,
Where antique Wisdom whilom wont to tread,
With mingled glee and profit may ye rove,
And cull each virtuous plant, each tree of knowledge prove.
LXXXVI.
Yourselves with virtue thus and knowledge fraught
Of what, in ancient days of good or great
Historians, bards, philosophers have taught;
Joined with whatever else of modern date
Maturer judgment, search more accurate
Discovered have of Nature, Man, and God,
May by new laws reform the time-worn state
Of cell-bred discipline, and smoothe the road
That leads through Learning's vale to Wisdom's bright abode.
LXXXVII.
By you invited to her secret bowers
Then shall PAEDIA reascend her throne
With vivid laurels girt and fragrant flowers;
While from their forked mount descending down
Yon supercilious pedant train shall own
Her empire paramount, ere long by Her
Y-taught a lesson in their schools unknown,
"To Learning's richest treasures to prefer
"The knowledge of the world, and man's great business there.
LXXXVIII.
On this prime science, as the final end
Of all her discipline, and nurturing care,
Her eye PAEDIA fixing aye shall bend
Her every thought and effort to prepare
Her tender pupils for the various war,
Which Vice and Folly shall upon them wage,
As on the perilous march of life they fare
With prudent lore fore-arming every age
Against Pleasure's treacherous joys, and Pain's embattled rage.
LXXXIX.
Then shall my youthful sons, to Wisdom led
By fair example and ingenuous praise,
With willing feet the paths of Duty tread;
Through the world's intricate or rugged ways
Conducted by Religion's sacred rays;
Whose soul-invigorating influence
Shall purge their minds from all impure allays
Of sordid selfishness and brutal sense,
And swell the ennobled heart with blessed benevolence.
XC.
Then also shall this emblematick pile,
By magic whilom framed to sympathize
With all the fortunes of this changeful isle,
Still, as my sons in fame and virtue rise,
Grow with their growth, and to the applauding skies
It Is radiant cross up-lift; the while, to grace
The multiplying niches, fresh supplies
Of worthies shall succeed, with equal pace
Aye following their sires in virtue's glorious race.
XCI.
Fired with the idea of her future fame
She rose majestic from her lowly sted;
While from her vivid eyes a sparkling flame
Out-beaming, with unwonted light overspread
That monumental pile; and as her head
To every front she turned, discovered round
The venerable forms of heroes dead;
Who for their various merit erst renowned,
In this bright fane of glory shrines of honor found.
XCII.
On these that royal dame her ravished eyes
Would often feast; and ever as she spied
Forth from the ground the lengthening structure rise
With new-plac'd statues decked on every side,
Her parent-breast would swell with generous pride.
And now with her in that sequestered plain,
The Knight a while constraining to abide,
She to the Fairy Youth with pleasure fain
Those sculptured chiefs did show, and their great lives explain. Great lives
explain.] I cannot forbear taking occasion from these words to make my
acknowledgments to the writers of Biographia Britannica, for the pleasure and
profit I have lately received from perusing the two first volumes of that
useful and entertaining work, of which the monumental structure above
mentioned, decorated with the statues of great and good men, is no improper
emblem. This work, which contains the lives of the most eminent persons, who
have flourished in Great Britain and Ireland, from the earliest ages, down to
the present time, appears to me, as far as it has hitherto gone, to be executed
with great spirit, accuracy, and judgment; and deserves, in my opinion, to be
encouraged by all, who have at heart the honor of their country, and that of
their particular families and friends; and who can any ways assist the
ingenious and laborious authors, to render as perfect as possible, a design so
apparently calculated to serve the public, by setting in the truest and
fullest light the characters of persons already generally, though perhaps too
indistinctly known; and reviving from obscurity and oblivion, examples of
private and retired merit, which, though less glaring and ostentatious than the
former, are not, however, of a less extensive or less beneficial influence. To
those, who may happen not to have seen this repository of British glory, I
cannot give a better idea of it, than in the following lines of Virgil: Hic
manus ob patriam pugnando vulnera passi;
Quique sacerdotes casti, dum vita manebat;
Quique pii vates and Phoebo digna locuti;
Inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per arts;
Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo.
Virg. Aen. L. 6.

The End of the FIRST CANTO.
PENSHURST.
INSCRIBED TO WILLIAM PERRY, Esquire AND The Honble Mrs. ELIZABETH PERRY.
By the late Mr. F. COVENTRY.
GENIUS of Penshurst old!
Who saw the birth of each immortal oak,
Here sacred from the stroke;
And all thy tenants of yon turrets bold,
Inspir'st to arts or arms;
Where Sir Philip Sidney.
Sidney his Arcadian landscape drew,
Genuine from thy Doric view;
And patriot Algernon Sidney.
Algernon unshaken rose
Above insulting foes;
And Saccharissa nursed her angel charms:
O suffer me with sober tread
To enter on thy holy shade;
Bid smoothly-gliding Medway stand,
And wave his sedgy tresses bland,
A stranger let him kindly greet,
And pour his urn beneath my feet.
And see where Perry opes his door,
To land me on the social floor;
Nor does the heiress of these shades deny
To bend her bright majestic eye,
Where Beauty shines, and Friendship warm,
And Honor in a female form.
With them in aged groves to walk,
And lose my thoughts in artless talk,
I shun the voice of Party loud,
I shun loose Pleasure's idle crowd,
And monkish academic cell,
Where Science only feigns to dwell,
And court, where speckled Vanity
Apes her tricks in tawdry dye,
And shifts each hour her tinsel hue,
Still furbelow'd in follies new.
Here Nature no distortion wears,
Old Truth retains his silver hairs,
And Chastity her matron step,
And purple Health her rosy lip.
Ah! on the virgin's gentle brow
How Innocence delights to glow!
Unlike the town-dame's haughty air,
The scornful eye and harlot's stare;
But bending mild the bashful front
As modest Fear is ever wont:
Shepherdesses such of old
Doric bards enamored told,
While the pleased Arcadian vale
Echoed the enchanting tale.
But chief of Virtue's lovely train,
A pensive exile on the plain,
No longer active now to wield
The Avenging sword, protecting shield,
Here thoughtful-walking Liberty
Remembers Britons once were free.
With her would Nobles old converse,
And learn her dictates to rehearse,
Ere yet they grew refined to hate
The hospitable rural seat,
The spacious hall with tenants stored;
Where Mirth and Plenty crowned the board;
Ere yet their Lares they forsook,
And lost the genuine British look,
The conscious brow of inward merit,
The rough, unbending, martial spirit,
To clink the chain of Thraldom gay,
And court-idolatry to pay;
To live in city smoaks obscure,
Where morn never wakes her breezes pure,
Where darkest midnight reigns at noon,
And fogs eternal blot the sun.
But come, the minutes flit away,
And eager Fancy longs to stray;
Come, friendly Genius! lead me round
Thy sylvan haunts and magic ground;
Point every spot of hill or dale,
And tell me, as we tread the vale,
"Here mighty Dudly once would rove,
"To plan his triumphs in the grove;
"There looser Waller, ever gay,
"With Sacchariss in dalliance lay;
"And Philip, side-long yonder spring,
"His lavish carols wont to sing."
Hark! I hear the echoes call,
Hark! the rushing waters fall;
Lead me to the green retreats,
Guide me to the Muses' seats,
Where ancient bards retirement chose,
Or ancient lovers wept their woes.
What Genius points to yonder An oak in Penshurst park, planted the day Sir
Philip Sidney was born, of which Ben Johnson speaks in the following manner:
That taller tree, which of a nut was set,
At his great birth, where all the Muses met.

oak?
What rapture does my soul provoke?
There let me hang a garland high,
There let my Muse her accents try;
Be there my earliest homage paid,
Be there my latest vigils made;
For thou wast planted in the earth
The day that shone on Sidney's birth.
That happy time, that glorious day
The Muses came in concert gay;
With harps in tune, and ready song,
The jolly Chorus tript along;
In honor of the auspicious morn,
To hail an infant genius born:
Next came the Fauns in order meet,
The Satyrs next with cloven feet,
The Dryads swift that roam the woods,
The Naiads green that swim the floods;
Sylvanus left his silent cave,
Medway came dropping from the wave;
Vertumnus led his blushing spouse,
And Ceres shook her wheaten brows,
And Mars with milder look was there,
And laughing Venus graced the rear.
They joined their hands in festive dance,
And bade the smiling babe advance;
Each gave a gift; Sylvanus last
Ordained, when all the pomp was past,
Memorial meet, a tree to grow,
Which might to future ages show,
That on select occasion rare,
A troop of Gods assembled there:
The Naiads watered well the ground,
And Flora twined a wood-bine round:
The tree sprung fast in hallowed earth,
Co-aeval with the illustrious birth.
Thus let my feet unwearied stray;
Nor satisfied with one survey,
When morn returns with doubtful light,
And Phebe pales her lamp of night,
Still let me wander forth anew,
And print my footsteps on the dew,
What time the swain with ruddy cheek
Prepares to yoke his oxen meek,
And early dressed in neat array
The milk-maid chanting shrill her lay,
Comes abroad with milking pail;
And the sound of distant flail
Gives the ear a rough good morrow,
And the lark from out his furrow
Soars upright on matin wings,
And at the gate of heaven sings.
But when the sun with fervid ray
Drives upwards to his noon of day,
And couching oxen lay them down
Beneath the beechen umbrage brown;
Then let me wander in the hall,
Round whose antique-visag'd wall
Hangs the armor Britons wore,
Rudely cast in days of yore.
Yon sword some hero's arm might wield,
Red in the ranks of Chalgrave's field,
Where ever-glorious Hampden bled,
And Freedom tears of sorrow shed.
Or in the gallery let me walk,
Where living pictures seem to talk,
Where Beauty smiles serenely fair,
And Courage frowns with martial air;
Though whiskers quaint the face disguise,
And habits odd to modern eyes.
Behold what kings in Britain reigned,
Plancagenets with blood distained,
And valiant Tudor's haughty race,
And Stuarts, England's worst disgrace.
The Norman first, with cruel frown,
Proud of his new-usurped crown,
Begins the list; and many more,
Stern heroes formed of roughest ore.
See victor Henry there advance,
Even in his look he conquers France;
And murderer Richard, justly slain
By Richmond's steel on Bosworth plain;
See the tyrant of his wives,
Prodigal of fairest lives,
And laureat Edward nursed in arts,
Minerva schooled his kingly parts:
But ah! the melancholy Jane,
A soul too tender for a queen!
She sinks beneath imperial sway,
The dear-bought scepter of a day!
And must she mount the scaffold drear?
Hard-hearted Mary, learn to spare!
Eliza next salutes the eye;
Exalt the song to Liberty,
The Muse repeats the sacred name,
Eliza fills the voice of Fame.
From thence a baser age began,
The royal ore polluted ran,
Till foreign Nassau's valiant hand
Chased holy tyrants from the land:
Downward from hence descend apace
To Brunswick's high, illustrious race;
And see the canvass speaks them brave,
An injured nation born to save,
Active in Freedom's righteous cause,
And conscious of a just applause.
But chiefly pleased, the curious eye,
With nice discernment loves to try
The labored wonders, passing thought,
Which warm Italian pencils wrought;
Fables of love, and stories old,
By Greek or Latian poets told;
How Jove committed many a rape,
How young Acteon lost his shape;
Or what celestial penmen writ,
Or what the painter's genuine wit
From Fancy's storehouse could devise;
Where Raphael claims the highest prize.
Madonas here decline the head,
With fond maternal pleasure fed,
Or lift their lucid eyes above,
Where more is seen than holy love.
There temples stand displayed within,
And pillars in long order seen,
And roofs rush forward to the sight,
And lamps affect a living light,
Or landscapes tire the trav'ling eye,
The clouds in azure volumes fly,
The distant trees distinguished rise,
And hills look little in the skies.
When day declines, and evening cool
Begins her gentle, silent rule,
Again, as Fancy points the way,
Benignant leader, let me stray:
And will thou, Genius, bring along
(So shall my Muse exalt her song)
The Lord who rules this ample scene,
His Consort too with gracious mien,
Her little offspring prattling round,
While Echo lisps their infant sound.
And let Goodnature, born to please,
Wait on our steps, and graceful Ease;
Nor Mirth be wanting as we walk,
Nor Wit to season sober talk;
Let gay Description too attend,
And Fable told with moral end,
And Satire quick that comes by stealth,
And flowing Laughter, friend to Health.
Meanwhile Attention loves to mark
The deer that crop the shaven park,
The steep-brow'd hill, or forest wild,
The sloping lawns, and zephyrs mild,
The clouds that blush with evening red,
Or meads with silver fountains fed,
The fragrance of the new-mown hay,
And blackbird chanting on the spray;
The calm farewell of parting light,
And Evening sad'ning into Night.
Nor wearied yet my roving feet,
Though Night comes on amain, retreat;
But still abroad I walk unseen
Along the star-enlighten'd green;
Superior joys my soul invite,
Lift, lift to heaven the dazzled sight;
Lo, where the moon enthroned on high,
Sits steady empress of the sky,
Enticing nations to revere,
And proudly vain of pagan fear;
Or where through clouds she travels fast,
And seems on journey bent in haste,
While thousand handmaid stars await,
Attendant on their queen of state.
It Is now that in her high control,
Ambitious of a foreign rule,
She stirs the Ocean to rebel,
And factious waters fond to swell
Guides to battle in her carr,
Against her sister Earth to war.
Thus let me muse on things sublime,
Above the flight of modern rhyme,
And call the soul of Newton down,
Where it sits high on starry throne,
Inventing laws for worlds to come,
Or teaching comets how to roam:
With him I Would learn of every star,
But sour-ey'd Pedantry be far,
And Ignorance in garb of Sense,
With terms of art to make pretense.
Hail happy soil! illustrious earth!
Which gav'st so many heroes birth;
Where never wandering poet trod,
But felt within the inspiring God!
In these transporting, solemn shades
First I salute the Aonian maids.
Ah lead me, Genius, to thy haunts,
Where Philomel at evening chants,
And as my oaten pipe resounds,
Give music to the forming sounds.
A simple shepherd, yet unknown,
Aspires to snatch an ivy crown,
On daring pinions bold to soar,
Though here thy Waller sung before,
And Johnson dipped his learned pen,
And Sidney poured his fancy-flowing strain.
To a Friend in WALES.
By the Same.
YE distant realms that hold my friend
Beneath a cold ungenial sky,
Where laboring groves with weight of vapors bend,
Or raving winds over barren mountains fly;
Restore him quick to London's social clime,
Restore him quick to friendship, love and joy;
Be swift, ye lazy steeds of Time,
Ye moments, all your speed employ.
Behold November's glooms arise,
Pale suns with fainter glory shine,
Dark gathering tempests blacken in the skies,
And shivering woods their sickly leaves resign.
Is this a time on Cambrian hills to roam,
To court disease in Winter's baleful reign,
To listen to the Atlantic foam,
While rocks repel the roaring main,
While horror fills the region vast,
Rheumatic tortures Eurus brings,
Pregnant with agues flies the northern blast,
And clouds drop quartans from their flagging wings.
Do thou explore Sabrina's fountful source,
Where huge Plinlimmon's hoary height ascends:
Then downward mark her vagrant course,
Till mixed with clouds the landscape ends?
Do thou revere the hallowed soil
Where druids old sepulchred lie;
Or up cold Snowden's craggy summits toil,
And muse on ancient savage liberty?
Ill suit such walks with bleak autumnal air,
Say, can November yield the joys of May?
When Jove deforms the blasted year,
Can Wallia boast a cheerful day?
The town expects thee. -- Hark, around,
Through every street of gay resort,
New chariots rattle with awak'ning sound,
And crowd the levees, and besiege the court.
The patriot, kindling as his wars ensue,
Now fires his soul with liberty and fame,
Marshals his threatening tropes anew,
And gives his hoarded thunders aim.
Now seats their absent lords deplore,
Neglected villas empty stand,
Capacious Gro'venor gathers all its store,
And mighty London swallows up the land.
See sportive Vanity her flights begin,
See new-blown Folly's plenteous harvests rise,
See mimick beauties dye their skin,
And harlots roll their venal eyes.
Fashions are set, and fops return,
And young coquettes in arms appear;
Dreaming of conquest, how their bosoms burn,
Tricked in the new fantastry of the year.
Fly then away, nor scorn to bear a part
In this gay scene of folly amply spread:
Follies well used refine the heart,
And pleasures clear the studious head;
By grateful interchange of mirth
The toils of study sweeter grow,
As varying seasons recommend the earth,
Nor does Apollo always bend his bow.
AN EPISTLE ADDRESSED TO Sir THOMAS HANMER,
On his EDITION of Shakespeare's Works.
By Mr. WILLIAM COLLINS.
SIR,
WHILE born to bring the Muse's happier days,
A patriot's hand protects a poet's lays:
While nursed by you she sees her myrtles bloom,
Green and unwither'd over his honored tomb:
Excuse her doubts, if yet she fears to tell
What secret transports in her bosom swell:
With conscious awe she hears the critic's fame,
And blushing hides her wreath at Shakespeare's name.
Hard was the lot those injured strains endured,
Unown'd by Science, and by years obscured:
Fair Fancy wept; and echoing sighs confessed
A fixed despair in every tuneful breast.
Not with more grief the afflicted swains appear,
When wintry winds deform the plenteous year;
When lingering frosts the ruined seats invade
Where Peace resorted, and the Graces played.
Each rising art by just gradation moves,
Toil builds on toil, and age on age improves:
The Muse alone unequal dealt her rage,
And graced with noblest pomp her earliest stage.
Preserved through time, the speaking scenes impart
Each changeful wish of Phaedra's tortured heart:
Or paint the curse, that marked the The Oedipus of Sophocles.
Theban's reign,
A bed incestuous, and a father slain.
With kind concern our pitying eyes overflow,
Trace the sad tale, and own another's woe.
To Rome removed, with wit secure to please,
The Comic sisters kept their native ease.
With jealous fear declining Greece beheld
Her own Menander's art almost excelled!
But every Muse essayed to raise in vain
Some labored rival of her Tragic strain;
Ilyssus' laurels, though transferred with toil,
Drooped their fair leaves, nor knew the unfriendly soil.
As arts expired, resistless Dullness rose;
Goths, priests, or Vandals, -- all were Learning's foes.
Till Julius II. the immediate predecessor of Leo X.
Julius first recalled each exiled maid,
And Cosmo owned them in the Etrurian shade:
Then deeply skilled in love's engaging theme,
The soft Provencial passed to Arno's stream:
With graceful ease the wanton lyre he strung,
Sweet flowed the lays -- but love was all he sung.
The gay description could not fail to move;
For, led by nature, all are friends to love.
But heaven, still various in its works, decreed
The perfect boast of time should last succeed.
The beauteous union must appear at length,
Of Tuscan fancy, and Athenian strength:
One greater Muse Eliza's reign adorn,
And even a Shakespeare to her fame be born!
Yet ah! so bright her morning's opening ray,
In vain our Britain hoped an equal day!
No second growth the western isle could bear,
At once exhausted with too rich a year.
Too nicely Johnson knew the critic's part;
Nature in him was almost lost in art.
Of softer mold the gentle Fletcher came,
The next in order, as the next in name.
With pleased attention 'midst his scenes we find
Each glowing thought, that warms the female mind;
Each melting sigh, and every tender tear,
The lover's wishes and the virgin's fear.
His Their characters are thus distinguished by Mr. Dryden.
every strain the Smiles and Graces own;
But stronger Shakespeare felt for Man alone:
Drawn by his pen, our ruder passions stand
The unrivaled picture of his early hand.
About the time of Shakespeare, the poet Hardy was in great repute in France. He
wrote, according to Fontenelle, six hundred plays. The French poets after him
applied themselves in general to the correct improvement of the stage, which
was almost totally disregarded by those of our own country, Johnson excepted.
With gradual steps, and slow, exacter France
Saw Art's fair empire over her shores advance:
By length of toil a bright perfection knew,
Correctly bold, and just in all she drew.
Till late Corneille, with The favorite author of the elder Corneille.
Lucan's spirit fired,
Breathed the free strain, as Rome and He inspired:
And classic judgment gained to sweet Racine
The temperate strength of Maro's chaster line.
But wilder far the British laurel spread,
And wreaths less artful crown our poet's head.
Yet He alone to every scene could give
The historian's truth, and bid the manners live.
Waked at his call I view, with glad surprise,
Majestic forms of mighty monarchs rise.
There Henry's trumpets spread their loud alarms,
And laureled Conquest waits her hero's arms.
Here gentler Edward claims a pitying sigh,
Scarce born to honors, and so soon to die!
Yet shall thy throne, unhappy infant, bring
No beam of comfort to the guilty king:
The Tempus erit Turno, magno cum obtaverit emptum
Intactum pallanta, etc.

time shall come, when Glo'ster's heart shall bleed
In life's last hours, with horror of the deed:
When dreary visions shall at last present
Thy vengeful image in the midnight tent:
Thy hand unseen the secret death shall bear,
Blunt the weak sword, and break the oppressive spear.
Wherever we turn, by Fancy charmed, we find
Some sweet illusion of the cheated mind.
Often, wild of wing, she calls the soul to rove
With humbler nature, in the rural grove;
Where swains contented own the quiet scene,
And twilight fairies tread the circled green:
Dressed by her hand, the Woods and Valleys smile,
And Spring diffusive decks the enchanted isle.
O more than all in powerful genius blessed,
Come, take thine empire over the willing breast!
Whatever the wounds this youthful heart shall feel,
Thy songs support me, and thy morals heal!
There every thought the poet's warmth may raise,
There native music dwells in all the lays.
O might some verse with happiest skill persuade
Expressive Picture to adopt thine aid!
What wondrous draughts might rise from every page!
What other Raphaels charm a distant age!
Methinks even now I view some free design,
Where breathing Nature lives in every line:
Chaste and subdued the modest lights decay,
Steal into shades, and mildly melt away.
-- And see, where See the tragedy of Julius Caesar.
Anthony in tears approved,
Guards the pale relics of the chief he loved:
Over the cold corse the warrior seems to bend,
Deep sunk in grief, and mourns his murdered friend!
Still as they press, he calls on all around,
Lifts the torn robe, and points the bleeding wound.
But Coriolanus. See Mr. Spence's dialogue on the Odyssey.
who is he, whose brows exalted bear
A wrath impatient, and a fiercer air?
Awake to all that injured worth can feel,
On his own Rome he turns the avenging steel.
Yet shall not War's insatiate fury fall,
(So heaven ordains it) on the destined wall.
See the fond mother 'midst the plaintive train
Hung on his knees, and prostrate on the plain!
Touched to the soul, in vain he strives to hide
The son's affection, in the Roman's pride:
Over all the man conflicting passions rise,
Rage grasps the sword. while Pity melts the eyes.
Thus, generous Critic, as thy Bard inspires,
The sister Arts shall nurse their drooping fires;
Each from his scenes her stores alternate bring,
Blend the fair tints, or wake the vocal string:
Those Sibyl-leaves, the sport of every wind,
(For poets ever were a careless kind)
By thee disposed, no farther toil demand,
But, just to Nature, own thy forming hand.
So spread over Greece, the harmonious whole unknown,
Even Homer's numbers charmed by parts alone.
Their own Ulysses scarce had wandered more,
By winds and water cast on every shore:
When raised by Fate, some former HANMER joined
Each beauteous image of the boundless mind;
And bade, like thee, his Athens ever claim
A fond alliance with the Poet's name.
A SONG FROM SHAKESPEARE'S CYMBELYNE.
Sung by GUIDERUS and ARVIRAGUS over FIDELE, supposed to be dead.
By the Same.
I.
TO fair Fidele's grassy tomb
Soft maids, and village hinds shall bring
Each opening sweet, of earliest bloom,
And rifle all the breathing Spring.
II.
No wailing ghost shall dare appear
To vex with shrieks this quiet grove:
But shepherd lads assemble here,
And melting virgins own their love.
III.
No withered witch shall here be seen,
No goblins lead their nightly crew:
The female fays shall haunt the green,
And dress thy grave with pearly dew!
IV.
The red-breast often at evening hours
Shall kindly lend his little aid:
With hoary moss, and gathered flowers,
To deck the ground where thou art laid.
V.
When howling winds, and beating rain,
In tempests shake the sylvan cell:
Or'midst the chase on every plain,
The tender thought on thee shall dwell.
VI.
Each lonely scene shall thee restore,
For thee the tear be duly shed:
Beloved, till life could charm no more;
And mourned, till Pity's self be dead.
THE MODERN FINE LADY.
-- Miseri quibus
Intentata nites.
HOR.
SKILLED in each art, that can adorn the fair,
The spritely dance, the soft Italian air,
The toss of quality, and high-bred fleer,
Now lady Harriot reached her fifteenth year.
Winged with diversions all her moments flew,
Each, as it passed, presenting something new;
Breakfasts, and auctions wear the morn away,
Each evening gives an opera, or a play;
Then Brag's eternal joys all night remain,
And kindly usher in the morn again.
For love no time has she, or inclination,
Yet must coquet it for the sake of fashion;
For this she listens to each fop that is near,
TO embroidered colonel flatters with a sneer,
And the cropped ensign nuzzles in her ear.
But with most warmth her dress and airs inspire
The ambitious bosom of the landed 'squire,
Who fain would quit plump Dolly's softer charms,
For withered lean right honorable arms;
He bows with reverence at her sacred shrine,
And treats her as if sprung from race divine,
Which she returns with insolence and scorn,
Nor deigns to smile on a plebeian born.
Ere long by friends, by cards, and lovers crossed,
Her fortune, health, and reputation lost;
Her money gone, yet not a tradesman paid,
Her fame, yet she still damned to be a maid,
Her spirits sink, her nerves are so unstrung,
She weeps, if but a handsome thief is hung:
By mercers, lacemen, mantua-makers pressed,
But most for ready cash for play distressed,
Where can she turn? -- the 'squire must all repair,
She condescends to listen to his prayer,
And marries him at length in mere despair.
But soon the endearments of a husband cloy,
Her soul, her frame incapable of joy:
She feels no transports in the bridal bed,
Of which so often sh' has heard, so much has read;
Then vexed, that she should be condemned alone
To seek in vain this philosophic stone,
To abler tutors she resolves to apply,
A prostitute from curiosity:
Hence men of every sort, and every size,
Impatient for heaven's cordial drop, she tries;
The fribbling beau, the rough unwieldy clown,
The ruddy templar newly on the town,
The Hibernian captain of gigantick make,
The brimful parson, and the exhausted rake.
But still malignant Fate her wish denies,
Cards yield superior joys, to cards she flies;
All night from rout to rout her chairmen run,
Again she plays, and is again undone.
Behold her now in Ruin's frightful jaws!
Bonds, judgments, executions open their paws;
Seize jewels, furniture, and plate, nor spare
The gilded chariot, or the tossel'd chair,
For lonely seat she^s forced to quit the town,
And Tubbs conveys the wretched exile down.
Now rumbling over the stones of Tyburn-road,
Never pressed with a more grieved or guilty load.
She bids adieu to all the well-known streets,
And envies every cinder-wench she meets:
And now the dreaded country first appears,
With sighs unfeigned the dying noise she hears
Of distant coaches fainter by degrees,
Then starts, and trembles at the sight of trees.
Silent and sullen, like some captive queen,
She Is drawn along, unwilling to be seen,
Until at length appears the ruined hall
Within the grass-green moat, and ivy'd wall,
The doleful prison where for ever she,
But not, alas! her griess, must buried be.
Her coach the curate and the tradesmen meet,
Great-coated tenants her arrival greet,
And boys with stubble bonfires light the street,
While bells her ears with tongues discordant grate,
Types of the nuptial ties they celebrate:
But no rejoycings can unbend her brow,
Nor deigns she to return one awkward bow,
But bounces in disdaining once to speak,
And wipes the trickling tear from off her cheek.
Now see her in the sad decline of life,
A peevish mistress, and a sulky wife;
Her nerves unbrac'd, her faded cheek grown pale
With many a real, many a fancied ail;
Of cards, admirers, equipage bereft,
Her insolence, and title only left;
Severely humbled to her one-horse chair,
And the low pastimes of a country fair:
Too wretched to endure one lonely day,
Too proud one friendly visit to repay,
Too indolent to read, too criminal to pray.
At length half dead, half mad, and quite confined,
Shunning, and shunned by all of human kind,
Even robbed of the last comfort of her life,
Insulting the poor curate's callous wife,
Pride, disappointed pride, now stops her breath,
And with true scorpion rage she stings herself to death.
ELEGY To Miss D -- W -- D.
In the Manner of OVID.
By the late Mr. HAMMOND.
O Say, thou dear possessor of my breast,
Where now is my boasted liberty and rest!
Where the gay moments which I once have known,
O where that heart I fondly thought my own!
From place to place I solitary roam,
Abroad uneasy, nor content at home.
I scorn the beauties common eyes adore,
The more I view them, feel thy worth the more;
Unmoved I hear them speak, or see them fair,
And only think on thee -- who art not there.
In vain would books their formal succor lend,
Nor wit, nor wisdom can relieve their friend;
Wit cannot deceive the pain I now endure,
And wisdom shows the ill without the cure.
When from thy sight I waste the tedious day,
A thousand schemes I form, and things to say;
But when thy presence gives the time I seek,
My heart's so full, I wish, but cannot speak.
And could I speak with eloquence and ease,
Till now not studious of the art to please,
Could I, at woman who so often exclaim,
Expose (nor blush) thy triumph and my shame,
Abjure those maxims I so lately prized,
And court that sex I foolishly despised,
Own thou have softened my obdurate mind,
And thou revenged the wrongs of womankind:
Lost were my words, and fruitless all my pain,
In vain to tell thee all I write in vain;
My humble sighs shall only reach thy ears,
And all my eloquence shall be my tears.
And now (for more I never must pretend)
Hear me not as thy lover, but thy friend;
Thousands will fain thy little heart ensnare,
For without danger none like thee are fair;
But wisely choose who best deserves thy flame,
So shall the choice itself become thy fame;
Nor yet despise, though void of winning art,
The plain and honest courtship of the heart:
The skilful tongue in love's persuasive lore,
Though less it feels, will please and flatter more,
And meanly learned in that guilty trade
Can long abuse a fond, unthinking maid.
And since their lips, so knowing to deceive,
Thy unexperienced youth might soon believe,
And since their tears in false submission dressed
Might thaw the icy coldness of thy breast,
O! shut thine eyes to such deceitful woe;
Caught by the beauty of thy outward show,
Like me they do not love, whatever they seem,
Like me -- with passion founded on esteem.
Answer to the foregoing Lines.
By the late Lord HERVEY.
TOO well these lines that fatal truth declare,
Which long I Have known, yet now I blush to hear.
But say, what hopes thy fond ill-fated love,
What can it hope, though mutual it should prove?
This little form is fair in vain for you,
In vain for me thy honest heart is true;
For wou'd'st thou fix dishonor on my name,
And give me up to penitence and shame;
Or gild my ruin with the name of wife,
And make me a poor virtuous wretch for life:
Cou'd'st thou submit to wear the marriage chain,
(Too sure a cure for all thy present pain)
No saffron robe for us the godhead wears,
His torch inverted, and his face in tears.
Though every softer wish were amply crowned,
Love soon would cease to smile where Fortune frowned;
Then would thy soul my fond consent deplore,
And blame what it solicited before;
Thy own exhausted would reproach my truth,
And say I had undone thy blinded youth;
That I had damped Ambition's nobler flame,
Eclipsed thy talents, and obscured thy fame;
To madrigals and odes that wit confined,
That would in senates or in courts have shined,
Gloriously active in thy country's cause,
Asserting freedom, and enacting laws.
Or say, at best, that negatively kind
You only mourned, and silently repined;
The jealous demons in my own fond breast
Would all these thoughts incessantly suggest,
And all that sense must feel, though pity had suppressed.
Yet added grief my apprehension fills
(If there can be addition to those ills)
When they shall cry, whose harsh reproof I dread,
"'It Was thy own deed, thy folly on thy head!
Age knows not to allow for thoughtless youth,
Nor pities tenderness, nor honors truth;
Holds it romantic to confess a heart,
And says those virgins act a wiser part
Who hospitals and bedlams would explore
To find the rich, and only dread the poor;
Who legal prostitutes, for interest sake,
Clodios and Timons to their bosoms take,
And, if avenging heaven permit increase,
People the world with folly and disease.
Those, titles, deeds, and rent-rolls only wed,
Whilst the best bidder mounts the venal bed,
And the grave aunt and formal sire approve
This nuptial sale, this auction of their love.
But if regard to worth or sense be shown,
That poor degenerate child her friends disown,
Who dares to deviate by a virtuous choice
From her great name's hereditary vice.
These scenes my prudence ushers to my mind,
Of all the storms and quicksands I must find,
If I embark upon this summer sea,
Where Flattery smooths, and Pleasure gilds the way.
Had our ill fate never blown thy dangerous flame
Beyond the limits of a friend's cold name,
I might upon that score thy heart receive,
And with that guiltless name my own deceive;
That commerce now in vain you recommend,
I dread the latent lover in the friend;
Of ignorance I want the poor excuse,
And know, I both must take, or both refuse.
Hear then the safe, the firm resolve I make,
Never to encourage one I must forsake.
Whilst other maids a shameless path pursue,
Neither to interest, nor to honor true,
And proud to swell the triumph of their eyes,
Exult in love from lovers they despise;
Their maxims all reversed I mean to prove,
And though I like the lover, quit the love.
EPISTLES In the Manner of OVID.
MONIMIA to PHILOCLES.
By the Same.
SINCE language never can describe my pain,
How can I hope to move when I complain?
But such is woman's frenzy in distress,
We love to plead, though hopeless of redress.
Perhaps, affecting ignorance, thou wilt say,
From whence these lines? whose message to convey?
Mock not my grief with that feigned cold demand,
Too well you know the hapless writer's hand:
But if you force me to avow my shame,
Behold it prefac'd with Monimia's name.
Lost to the world, abandoned and forlorn,
Exposed to infamy, reproach, and scorn,
To mirth and comfort lost, and all for you,
Yet lost, perhaps, to your remembrance too,
How hard my lot! what refuge can I try,
Weary of life, and yet afraid to die!
Of hope, the wretch's last resort, bereft,
By friends, by kindred, by my lover, left.
Oh! frail dependence of confiding fools!
On lovers oaths, or friendship's sacred rules
How weak in modern hearts, too late I find,
Monimia's fallen, and Philocles unkind!
To these reflections, each slow wearing day,
And each revolving night a constant prey,
Think what I suffer, nor ungentle hear
What madness dictates in my fond despair;
Grudge not this short relief, (too fast it flies)
Nor chide that weakness I myself despise.
One moment sure may be at least her due,
Who sacrificed her all of life for you.
Without a frown this farewell then receive,
For, it is the last my hapless love shall give;
Nor this I would, if reason could command,
But what restriction reins a lover's hand?
Nor prudence, shame, nor pride, nor interest sways,
The hand implicitly the heart obeys:
Too well this maxim has my conduct shown,
Too well that conduct to the world is known.
Often have I writ, and often to the flame
Condemned this after-witness of my shame;
Often in my cooler recollected thought,
Thy beauties, and my fondness half forgot,
(How short those intervals for reason's aid!)
Thus to myself in anguish have I said.
Thy vain remonstrance, foolish maid, give over,
Who act the wrong, can never that wrong deplore.
Then sanguine hopes again delusive reign,
I formed thee melting, as I tell my pain.
If not of rock thy flinty heart is made,
Nor tigers nursed thee in the desert shade,
Let me at least thy cold compassion prove,
That slender sustenance of greedy love:
Though no return my warmer wishes find,
Be to the wretch, though not the mistress, kind;
Nor whilst I court my melancholy state,
Forget 'twas love, and thee, that wrought my fate.
Without restraint habituate to range
The paths of pleasure; can I bear this change?
Doomed from the world unwilling to retire,
In bloom of life, and warm with young desire,
In lieu of roofs with regal splendour gay,
Condemned in distant wilds to drag the day;
Where beasts of prey maintain their savage court,
Or human brutes (the worst of brutes) resort.
Yes, yes, the change I could unsighing see,
For none I mourn, but what I find in thee,
There center all my woes, thy heart estranged,
I weep my lover, not my fortune, changed;
Blessed with thy presence, I could all forget,
Nor gilded palaces in huts regret,
But exiled thence, superfluous is the rest,
Each place the same, my hell is in my breast;
To pleasure dead, and living but to pain,
My only sense to suffer, and complain.
As all my wrongs distressful I repeat,
Say, can thy pulse with equal cadence beat?
Can thou know peace? is conscience mute within?
That upright delegate for secret sin;
Is nature so extinguished in thy heart,
That not one spark remains to take my part?
Not one repentant throb, one grateful sigh?
Thy breast unruffled, and unwet thy eye?
Thou cool betrayer, temperate in ill!
Thou nor remorse, nor thought humane can feel:
Nature has formed thee of the rougher kind,
And education more debased thy mind,
Born in an age when guilt and fraud prevail,
When Justice sleeps, and Interest holds the scale;
Thy loose companions a licentious crew,
Most to each other, all to us untrue,
Whom chance, or habit mix, but rarely choice,
Nor leagued in friendship, but in social vice,
Who indigent of honor, or of shame,
Glory in crimes which others blush to name;
By right or wrong disdaining to be moved,
Unprincipled, unloving, and unlov'd.
The fair who trusts their prostituted vows,
If not their falsehood, still their boasts expose;
Nor knows the wisest to elude the harm,
Even she whose prudence shuns the tinsel charm
They know to slander, though they fail to warm:
They make her languish in fictitious flame,
Affix some specious slander on her name,
And baffled by her virtue, triumph over her fame.
These are the leaders of thy blinded youth,
These vile seducers laughed thee out of truth;
Whose scurril jests all solemn ties profane,
Or Friendship's band, or Hymen's sacred chain;
Morality as weakness they upbraid,
Nor even revere Religion's hallowed head;
Alike they spurn divine and human laws,
And treat the honest like the christian cause.
Curse on that tongue whose vile pernicious art
Delights the ear but to corrupt the heart,
That takes advantage of the cheerful hour,
When weakened Virtue bends to Nature's power,
And would the goodness of the soul efface,
To substitute dishonor in her place.
With such you lose the day in false delights,
In lewd debauch you revel out the nights,
(O fatal commerce to Monimia's peace!)
Their arguments convince because they please;
Whilst sophistry for reason they admit,
And wander dazzled by the glare of wit,
Wit that on ill a specious Instre throws,
And in false colors every object shows,
That gilds the wrong, depreciating the right,
And hurts the judgment, while it feasts the sight:
So in a prism to the deluded eye
Each pictured trifle takes a rainbow dye,
With borrowed charms the shining prospect glows,
And truth reversed the faithless mirror shows,
Inverted scenes in bright confusion lie,
The lawns impending over the nether sky;
No just, no real images we meet,
But all the gaudy vision is deceit.
Often I revolve in this distracted mind
Each word, each look, that spoke my charmer kind;
But oh! how dear their memory I pay!
What pleasures past can present cares allay?
Of all I love for ever dispossessed;
Ah! what avails to think I once was blessed?
Hard disposition of unequal fate!
Mixed are our joys, and transient are their date;
Nor can reflection bring them back again,
Yet brings an after-sting to every pain.
Thy fatal letters, oh immoral youth,
Those perjured pledges of fictitious truth,
Dear as they were no second joy afford,
My cred'lous heart once leaped at every word,
My glowing bosom throbb'd with thick-heav'd sighs,
And floods of rapture gushed into my eyes:
When now repeated (for thy theft was vain,
Each treasured syllable my thoughts retain)
Far other passions rule, and different care,
My joys and grief, my transports and despair.
Why do thou mock the ties of constant love?
But half its joys the faithless ever prove,
They only taste the pleasures they receive,
When sure the noblest is in those we give.
Acceptance is the heaven which mortals know,
But it is the bliss of angels to bestow.
Oh! emulate, my love, that task divine,
Be thou that angel, and that heaven be mine.
Yet, yet relent, yet intercept my fate:
Alas! I rave, and sue for new deceit.
As soon the dead shall from the grave return,
As love extinguished with new ardor burn.
Oh! that I dared to act a Roman part,
And stab thy image in this faithful heart,
Where riveted for life secure you reign,
A cruel inmate, author of my pain:
But coward-like irresolute I wait
Time's tardy aid, nor dare to rush on fate;
Perhaps may linger on life's latest stage,
Survive thy cruelties, and fall by age:
No -- grief shall swell my sails, and speed me over
(Despair my pilot) to that quiet shore
Where I can trust, and thou betray no more.
Might I but once again behold thy charms,
Might I but breathe my last in those dear arms,
On that loved face but fix my closing eye,
Permitted where I might not live to die,
My softened fate I would accuse no more;
But fate has no such happiness in store.
It Is past, it is done -- what gleam of hope behind,
When I can never be false, nor thou be kind?
Why then this care? -- it is weak -- it is vain -- farewell --
At that last word what agonies I feel!
I faint -- I die -- remember I was true --
It Is all I ask -- eternally -- adieu! --
FLORA to POMPEY.
By the Same.
Pompey, when he was very young, fell in love with Flora, a Roman courtezan,
who was so very beautiful that the Romans had her painted to adorn the temple
of Castor and Pollux. Geminius ( Pompey's friend) afterward fell in love with
her too; but she, prepossessed with a passion for Pompey, would not listen to
Geminius. Pompey, in compassion to his friend, yielded him his mistress, which
Flora took so much to heart, that she fell dangerously ill upon it; and in that
sickness is supposed to write the following letter to Pompey.

ERE death these closing eyes for ever shade,
(That death thy cruelties have welcome made)
Receive, thou yet loved man! this one adieu,
This last farewell to happiness and you.
My eyes overflow with tears, my trembling hand
Can scarce the letters form, or pen command:
The dancing paper swims before my sight,
And scarce myself can read the words I write.
Think you behold me in this lost estate,
And think yourself the author of my fate:
How vast the change! your Flora's now become
The general pity, not the boast of Rome.
This form, a pattern to the sculptor's art,
This face, the idol once of Pompey's heart,
(Whose pictured beauties Rome thought fit to place
The sacred temples of her gods to grace)
Are charming now no more; the bloom is fled,
The lillies languid, and the roses dead.
Soon shall some hand the glorious work deface,
Where Grecian pencils tell what Flora was:
No longer my resemblance they impart,
They lost their likeness, when I lost thy heart.
Oh! that those hours could take their turn again,
When Pompey, laboring with a jealous pain,
His Flora thus bespoke: "Say, my dear love!
"Shall all these rivals unsuccessful prove?
"In vain, for ever, shall the Roman youth
"Envy my happiness, and tempt thy truth?
"Shall neither tears nor prayers thy pity move?
"Ah! give not pity, it is akin to love.
"Would Flora were not fair in such excess,
"That I might fear, though not adore her less."
Fool that I was, I sought to ease that grief,
Nor knew indiff'rence followed the relief:
Experience taught the cruel truth too late,
I never dreaded, till I found my fate.
'Twas mine to ask if Pompey's self could hear,
Unmoved, his rivals unsuccessful prayer;
To make thee swear he would not thy pity move;
Alas! such pity is no kin to love.
'Twas thou thyself (ungrateful as thou art!)
Bade me unbend the rigor of my heart:
You chid my faith, reproached my being true,
(Unnat'ral thought!) and labored to subdue
The constancy my soul maintained for you;
To other arms your mistress you condemned,
Too cool a lover, and too warm a friend.
How could thou thus my lavish heart abuse,
To ask the only thing it could refuse?
Nor yet upbraid me, Pompey, what I say,
For it is my merit that I cannot obey;
Yet this alleged against me as a fault,
Thy rage fomented, and my ruin wrought.
Just gods! what tie, what conduct can prevail
Over fickle man, when truth like mine can fail?
Urge not, to gloss thy crime, the name of friend,
We know how far those sacred laws extend;
Since other heroes have not blushed to prove
How weak all passions when opposed to love:
Nor boast the virtuous conflict of thy heart,
When generous pity took Geminius' part;
It Is all heroic fraud, and Roman art.
Such flights of honor might amuse the crowd,
But by a mistress never can be allowed;
Keep for the senate, and the grave debate,
That infamous hypocrisy of state;
There words are virtue, and your trade deceit.
No riddle is thy change, nor hard to explain;
Flora was fond, and Pompey was a man:
No longer then a specious tale pretend,
Nor plead fictitious merit to your friend:
By nature false, you followed her decree,
Nor generous are to him, but false to me.
You say you melted at Geminius' tears,
You say you felt his agonizing cares:
Gross artifice, that this from him could move,
And not from Flora, whom you say you love:
You could not bear to hear your rival sigh,
Yet bear unmoved to see your mistress die.
Inhuman hypocrite! not thus can he
My wrongs, and my distress, obdurate, see.
He, who received, condemns the gift you made,
And joins with me the giver to upbraid,
Forgetting he is obliged, and mourning I Am betrayed.
He loves too well that cruel gift to use,
Which Pompey loved too little to refuse:
Fain would he call my vagrant lord again,
But I the kind ambassador restrain;
I scorn to let another take my part,
And to myself will owe or lose thy heart.
Can nothing ever rekindle love in thee?
Can nothing ever extinguish it in me?
That I could tear thee from this injured breast!
And where you gave my person, give the rest,
At once to grant and punish thy request.
That I could place thy worthy rival there!
No second insult need my fondness fear;
He views not Flora with her Pompey's eyes,
He loves like me, he doats, despairs, and dies.
Come to my arms, thou dear, deserving youth!
Thou prodigy of man! thou man with truth!
For him, I will redouble every care,
To please, for him, these faded charms repair;
To crown his vows, and sharpen thy despair.
Oh! it is illusion all! and idle rage!
No second passion can this heart engage;
And shortly, Pompey, shall thy Flora prove,
Death may dissolve, but nothing change her love.
ARISBE to MARIUS Junior.
From FONTENELLE.
By the Same.
When Marius was expelled from Rome by Sylla's faction, and retired into
Africa, his son (who accompanied him) fell into the hands of Hiempsal king of
Numidia, who kept him prisoner. One of the mistresses of that king fell in love
with Marius junior, and was so generous to contrive and give him his liberty,
though by that means she sacrificed her love for ever. 'Twas after he had
rejoined his father, that she writ him the following letter.

I.
OF all I valued, all I loved bereft,
Say, has my heart this little comfort left?
That you the memory of its truth retain,
And think with grateful pity on my pain?
II.
Though but with life my sorrows can have end,
(For death alone can join me to my friend)
Yet think not I repent I set you free,
I mourn your absence, not your liberty.
III.
Before my Marius left Numidia's coast,
Each day I saw him; scarce an hour was lost:
Now months and years must pass, nay life shall prove
But one long absence from the man I love.
IV.
Painful reflection! poison to my mind!
Was it but mortal too, it would be kind:
But mad with grief I search the palace round,
And in that madness dream you're to be found.
V.
Would thou believe it? to those walls I fly
Where thou were captive held; there frantic cry,
These fetters sure my vagrant's flight restrained;
Alas! these fetters I myself unchain'd.
VI.
The live-long day I mourn, I loath the light,
And wait impatient each returning night:
What, though the horrid gloom augment my grief?
It Is grateful still, for I disclaim relief.
VII.
That coz'ner hope intrudes not on my woe;
One only interval my sorrows know;
When dreams, the kind reversers of my pain,
Bring back my charming fugitive again.
VIII.
Yet there is a grief surpassing all the rest;
A jealous demon whispers in my breast,
Marius was false; for liberty alone
The show of love the hypocrite put on.
IX.
Then I reflect (ah! would I could forget!)
How much your thoughts on war and Rome were set,
How little passion did that conduct prove!
Too strong thy reason, but too weak thy love.
X.
Thy sword, it is true, a father's cause demands;
But 'twas a mistress gave it to thy hands:
To love, and duty just, give each their part,
His be the arm, and mine be all thy heart.
XI.
But what avail these thoughts? fond wretch, give over!
Marius, or false, or true, is thine no more:
Since Fate has cast the lot, and we must part,
Why should I wish to think I had his heart?
XII.
Yes: let me cherish that remembrance still;
That thought alone shall soften every ill;
To tell my soul, his love, his truth was such,
All was his due, nor have I done too much.
XIII.
Deceitful comfort! let me not persuade
My cred'lous heart its fondness was repaid;
It makes my soul with double anguish mourn
Those joys, which never, never must return.
XIV.
Perhaps even you what most I wish oppose,
And in the Roman all the lover lose:
I Am a Numidian, and your soul disdains
To bear the inglorious weight of foreign chains.
XV.
Can any climate then so barbarous prove,
To stand excluded from the laws of Love?
His empire's universal, unconfined,
His proxy beauty, and his slaves mankind.
XVI.
Nor am I a Numidian but by name,
For I can interest for my love disclaim:
My virtue shows what 'twas the gods designed,
By chance on Africk's clay they stamped a Roman mind.
XVII.
Not all the heroes which your Rome can boast,
So much for fame, as I for you have lost:
Yourself I lost: oh! grateful, then confess,
My trial greater, though my glory less.
XVIII.
Yes, partial gods! inflicters of my care!
Be witness what I felt, what grief, what fear!
When full of stifled woes the night he fled,
No sigh I dared to breathe, no tear to shed.
XIX.
Whilst men of faith approved, a chosen crew,
Firm to their trust, and to their mistress true,
With care too punctual my commands obey,
And in one freight my life and thee convey.
XX.
The harder task was mine; condemned to bear
With brow serene, my agonizing care;
To mix in idle talk, to force a smile,
A king and jealous lover to beguile.
XXI.
Think in that dreadful interval of fate,
All I held dear, thy safety in debate,
Think what I suffered, whilst my heart afraid
Suggests a thousand times that all is betrayed.
XXII.
A thousand times revolving in my mind
The doubtful chance; oh! Love! said I, be kind:
Propitious to my scheme, thy vot'ry aid,
And be my fondness by success repaid.
XXIII.
Now bolder grown, with sanguine hopes elate,
My fancy represents thy smiling fate;
The guards deceived, and every danger over,
The winds already waft him from the shore.
XXIV.
These pleasing images anew impart
Life to my eyes, and gladness to my heart;
Dispel the gloomy fears that cloud my face,
And charm the little flutterer to peace.
XXV.
But now the king, or tasteless to my charms,
Or weary of an absent mistress' arms,
His own apartment seeks, and grateful rest;
That courted stranger to the careful breast.
XXVI.
Whilst I, by hopes and fears alternate swayed,
Impatient ask the slaves if I Am obeyed.
It Is done, they cried, and struck me with despair;
For what I longed to know, I died to hear.
XXVII.
Fantastic turn of a distracted mind;
I blamed the gods for having been too kind;
Cursed the success they granted to my vows,
And this assistant hand that filled my woes.
XXVIII.
Such was my frenzy in that hour of care,
And such the injustice of my bold despair;
That even those, ungrateful I upbraid,
Whose fatal diligence my will obeyed.
XXIX.
Scarce, Marius, did thyself escape my rage;
(Most loved of men!) when fears of black presage
Describe thy heart so fond of liberty,
It never gave one parting throb for me.
XXX.
At every step you should have turned your eye,
Dropped a regretful tear, and heaved a sigh;
The nature of the grace I showed was such,
You not deserved it, if it pleased too much.
XXXI.
A lover would have lingered as he fled,
And often in anguish to himself have said,
Farewell for ever! Ah! yet more he would done,
A lover never would have fled alone.
XXXII.
To force me from a hated rival's bed,
Why comes not Marius at an army's head?
Oh! did thy heart but wish to see that day,
'Twould all my past, and future woes o'erpay.
XXXIII.
But vain are all these hopes: preserve thy breast
From falsehood only, I forgive the rest:
Too happy, if no envied rival boast
Those joys Arisbe for her Marius lost.
ROXANA to PHILOCLES.
From LES LETTERS PERSANNES.
By the Same.
Roxana, one of Usbeck's wives, was found (whilst he was in Europe) in bed with
her lover, whom she had privately let into the seraglio. The guardian eunuch
who discovered them, had the man murdered on the spot, and her close guarded
till he received instructions from his master how to dispose of her. During
that interval she swallowed poison, and is supposed to write the following
letter whilst she is dying.

THINK not I write my innocence to prove,
To sue for pity, or awake thy love:
No mean defense expect, or abject prayers;
Thou know no mercy, and I know no tears:
I laugh at all thy vengeance has decreed,
Avow the fact, and glory in the deed.
Yes, tyrant! I deceived thy spies and thee;
Pleased in oppression, and in bondage free:
The rigid agents of thy cruel laws
By gold I won to aid my juster cause:
With dextrous skill eluded all thy care,
And acted more than jealousy could fear:
To wanton bowers this prisonhouse I turned,
And blessed that absence which you thought I mourned.
But short those joys allowed by niggard Fate,
Yet so refined, so exquisitely great,
That their excess compensated their date.
I die: already in each burning vein
I feel the poisonous draught, and bless the pain:
For what is life unless its joys we prove?
And where is joy deprived of what we love?
Yet, ere I die, this justice I have paid
To my dear murdered lover's injured shade:
Those sacrilegious instruments of power,
Who wrought that ruin these sad eyes deplore,
Already with their blood their crimes atone,
And for his life have sacrificed their own.
Thee, though restraint and absence may defend
From my revenge, my curses still attend:
Despair like mine, barbarian! be thy part,
Remorse afflict, and sorrow sting thy heart.
Nor think this hate commencing in my breast,
Though prudence long its latent force suppressed;
I knew those wrongs that I was forced to bear,
And cursed those chains Injustice made me wear.
For could thou hope Roxana to deceive
With idle tales, which only fools believe?
Poor abject souls in superstition bred,
In ignorance trained, by prejudice misled;
Whom hireling dervises by proxy teach
From those whose false prerogative they preach.
Did thou imagine me so weak of mind,
Because I murmured not, I never repined,
But hugged my chain, and thought my jailer kind?
That willingly those laws I ever obeyed,
Which Pride invented, and Oppression made?
And whilst self-licens'd through the world you rove,
To quicken appetite by change in love;
Each passion sated, and each wish possessed,
That Lust can urge, or Fancy can suggest;
That I should mourn thy loss with fond regret,
Weep the misfortune, and the wrong forget?
Could I believe that heaven this beauty gave,
(Thy transient pleasure, and thy lasting flave;)
Indu'd with reason, only to fulfill
The harsh commands of thy capricious will?
No, Usbeck, no, my soul difdain'd those laws;
And though I wanted power to assert my cause,
My right I knew; and still those pleasures sought,
Which Justice warranted, and Nature taught:
On Custom's senfeless precepts I refined,
I weighed what heaven, I knew what man designed,
And formed by her own rules my freeborn mind.
Thus whilst this wretched body owned thy power,
Doomed, unredress'd, its hardships to deplore;
My soul subservient to herself alone,
And Reason independent on her throne,
Contemned thy dictates, and obeyed their own.
Yet thus far to my conduct thanks are due,
At least I condescended to seem true;
Endeavored still my sentiments to hide,
Indulged thy vanity, and soothed thy pride.
Though this submission to a tyrant paid,
Whom not my duty, but my fears obeyed,
If rightly weighed, would more deserve thy blame,
Who call it Virtue, but profane her name:
For to the world I should have owned that love,
Which all impartial judges must approve:
You urged a right to tyrannize my heart,
Which he soliciting, assailed by art,
Whilst I, impatient of the name of slave,
To force refused, what I to merit gave.
Often, as thy slaves this wretched body led
To the detested pleasures of thy bed;
In those soft moments, consecrate to joy,
Which extacy and transport should employ;
Clasped in your arms, you wondered still to find
So cold my kisses, so composed my mind:
But had thy cheated eyes discerned aright,
You Would found aversion, where you sought delight.
Not that my soul incapable of love,
No charms could warm, no tenderness could move;
For him, whose love my every thought possessed,
A fiercer passion filled this constant breast,
Than truth ever felt, or falsehood ever professed.
This style unusual to thy pride appears,
For truth's a stranger to the tyrant's ears;
But what have I to manage or to dread?
Nor threats alarm, nor insults hurt the dead:
No wrongs they feel, no miseries they find;
Cares are the legacies we leave behind:
In the calm grave no Usbecks we deplore,
No tyrant husband, no oppressive power.
Alas! I faint -- Death intercepts the rest:
The venomed drug is busy in my breast:
Each nerve's unstrung: a mist obscures the day:
My senses, strength, and even my hate decay:
Though rage a while the ebbing spirits stayed,
It Is past -- they sink beneath the transient aid.
Take then, inhuman wretch! my last farewell;
Pain be thy portion here, hereafter, hell:
And when our prophet shall my fate decree,
Be any curse my punishment, but thee.
EPILOGUE designed for SOPHONISBA,
And to have been spoken by Mrs. OLDFIELD.
By the Same.
BEFORE you sign poor Sophonisba's doom,
In her behalf petitioner I come;
Not but our author knows, whatever I say,
That I could find objections to his play.
This double marriage for her country's good,
I told him never would be understood,
And that ye all would say, 'twas flesh and blood.
Had Carthage only been in madam's head,
Her champion never had been in her -- bed:
For could the idiot think a husband's name
Would make him quit his interest, friends and fame;
That he would risque a kingdom for a wife,
And act dependent in a place for life?
Yet what stern Cato shall condemn the fair,
Whilst public good she thundered in your ear,
If private interest had a little share.
You know, she acted not against the laws
Of those old-fashioned times; that in her cause
Old Syphax could no longer make a stand,
And Massinissa wooed her sword in hand.
But did she take the way to whet that sword?
Heroes fight coldly when wives give the word.
She should have kept him keen, employed her charms
Not as a bribe, but to reward his arms;
Have told him when Rome yielded she would yield,
And fent him fresh, not yawning, to the field.
She talked it well to rouse him to the fight,
But like Penelope, when out of sight,
All she had done by day, undid by night.
Is this your wily Carthaginian kind?
No English woman had been half so kind.
What from a husband's hand could she expect
But ratsbane, or that common fate, neglect?
Perhaps some languishing soft fair may say,
Poyson's so shocking -- but consider pray,
She feared the Roman, he the marriage chain;
All other means to free them both were vain.
Let none then Massinissa's conduct blame,
He first his love consulted, then his fame.
And if the fair one with too little art,
Whilst seemingly she played a patriot-part,
Was secretly the dupe of her own heart;
Forgive a fault she strove so well to hide,
Nor be compassion to her fate denied,
Who lived unhappily, and greatly died.
An Imitation of the Eleventh Ode of the First Book of HORACE.
By the Same.
FOrbear, my dear Stephen, with a fruitless desire
Into truths which are better concealed to enquire;
Perhaps many years are allowed us by Fate,
Or next winter perhaps is the last of their date:
Let the credulous fools whom astrologers cheat,
Exult or despond, as they vary deceit;
Who anticipate care, their own pleasure destroy,
And invite disappointment who build upon joy;
All ills unforeseen we the easiest endure,
What avails to foresee, unless foresight could cure?
And from ills by their art how can wretches be freed,
When that art must be false, or those ills be decreed?
From reflection and hope little comfort we find,
To possession alone let thy thoughts be confined:
To-day's all the treasure poor mortals can boast,
For tomorrow's not gained, and yesterday's lost;
Even now whilst I write, time steals on our youth,
And a moment's cut off from thy friendship and truth:
Then seize the swift blessing, enjoy the dear now,
And take, not expect, what hereafter'll bestow.
A LOVE LETTER.
By the Same.
WHAT shall I say to fix thy wavering mind,
To chase thy doubts, and force thee to be kind?
What weight of argument can turn the scale,
If intercession from a lover fail?
By what shall I conjure thee to obey
This tender summons, nor prolong thy stay?
If unabated in this constant breast
That passion burns which once thy vows professed;
If absence has not chilled the languid flame,
Its ardour and its purity the same;
Indulge those transports, and no more control
The dictates of thy fond consenting soul;
By no vain scruple be thy purpose swayed,
And only Love implicitly obeyed:
Let inclination this debate decide,
Nor be thy prudence, but thy heart thy guide:
But real prudence never can oppose
What Love suggests, and Gratitude avows:
The warm dear raptures which thy bosom move,
It Is virtue to indulge, it is wisdom to improve:
For think how few the joys allowed by Fate,
How mixed the cup, how short their longest date!
How onward still the stream of pleasure flows!
That no reflux the rapid current knows!
Not even thy charms can bribe the ruthless hand
Of rigid Time, to stay his ebbing sand;
Fair as thou art, that beauty must decay;
The night of age succeeds the brightest day:
That cheek where Nature's sweetest garden blows,
Her whitest lily, and her warmest rose;
Those eyes, those meaning ministers of Love,
Who, what thy lips can only utter, prove;
These must resign their luster, those their bloom,
And find with meaner charms one common doom:
Pass but a few short years, this change must be;
Nor one less dreadful shall thou mourn in me:
For though no chance can alienate my flame,
While thine to feed the lamp, shall burn the same,
Yet shall the stream of years abate that fire,
And cold esteem succeed to warm desire:
Then on thy breast unraptur'd shall I dwell,
Nor feel a joy beyond what I can tell:
Or say, should sickness antedate that woe,
And intercept what Time would else allow;
If Pain should pall my taste to all thy charms,
Or Death himself should tear me from thy arms;
How would thou then regret with fruitless truth,
The precious squandered hours of health and youth?
Come then, my love, nor trust the future day,
Live whilst we can, be happy whilst we may:
For what is life unless its joys we prove?
And what is happiness but mutual love?
Our time is wealth no frugal hand can store,
All our possession is the present hour,
And he who spares to use it, ever poor.
The golden now is all that we can boast;
And that (like snow) at once is grasped and lost.
Haste, wing thy passage then, no more delay,
But to these eyes their sole delight convey.
Not thus I languish'd for thy virgin charms,
When first surrendered to these eager arms,
When first admitted to that heaven, thy breast,
To mine I strained that charming foe to rest:
How leaps my conscious heart, whilst I retrace
The dear idea of that strict embrace?
When on thy bosom quite entranced I lay,
And loved unsated the short night away;
Whilst half reluctant you, and half resigned,
Amidst fears, wishes, pain and pleasure joined,
Now holding off, now growing to my breast,
By turns reproved me, and by turns caressed.
Oh! how remembrance throbs in every vein!
I pant, I sicken for that scene again;
My senses ach, I can no word command,
And the pen totters in my trembling hand.
Farewell, thou only joy on earth I know,
And all that man can taste of heaven below.
This little poem was, among several others on the same occasion, printed by
Dr. Rogers with his inaugural exercise at Padua; end afterward in the same
manner republished by him at London, together with his Harveian oration before
the college of physicians, in the year 1682; while Mr. Waller was yet living.
VERSES to Dr. GEORGE ROGERS, on his taking the Degree of Doctor in Physic at
Padua, in the Year 1664.
By Mr. WALLER.
WHEN as of old the earth's bold children strove,
With hills on hills, to scale the throne of Jove;
Pallas and Mars stood by their sov'reign's side,
And their bright arms in his defense employed:
While the wise Phoebus, Hermes, and the rest
Who joy in peace and love the Muses best,
Descending from their so distempered seat,
Our groves and meadows chose for their retreat.
There first Apollo tried the various use
Of herbs, and learned the virtue of their juice,
And framed that art, to which who can pretend
A juster title than our noble friend,
Whom the like tempest drives from his abode,
And like employment entertains abroad?
This crowns him here; and, in the bays so earned,
His country's honor is no less concerned;
Since it appears, not all the English rave,
To ruin bent: some study how to save.
And as Hippocrates did once extend
His sacred art, whole cities to amend;
So we, brave friend, suppose that thy great skill,
Thy gentle mind, and fair example, will,
At thy return, reclaim our frantic isle,
Their spirits calm; and peace again shall smile.
EDM. WALLER, Anglus.

Patavii, ^ypis Pauli Frambotti.
VIRGIL's Tomb.
NAPLES 1741.
-- Tenues ignavo Pollio chordas
Pulso; Maroneique redens in margin templi
Suae animum, and magni tumulis adcanto magistri.
Stat.
I Came, great bard, to gaze upon thy shrine,
And over thy relics wait the inspiring Nine:
For sure, I said, where Maro's ashes sleep,
The weeping Muses must their vigils keep:
Still over their fav'rite's monument they mourn,
And with poetic tropies grace his urn:
Have placed the shield and martial trumpet here;
The shepherd's pipe, and rural honors there:
Fancy had decked the consecrated ground,
And scattered never-fading roses round.
And now my bold romantic thought aspires
To hear the echo of celestial lyres;
Then catch some sound to bear delighted home,
And boast I learnt the verse at Virgil's tomb:
Or stretched beneath thy myrtle's fragrant shade,
With dreams extatic hovering over my head,
See forms august, and laureled ghosts ascend,
And with thyself, perhaps, the long procession end,
I came -- but soon the phantoms disappeared;
Far other scenes, than wanton Hope had reared;
No faery rites, no funeral pomp I found;
No trophied walls with wreaths of laurel round:
A mean unhonour'd ruin faintly showed
The spot where once thy mausoleum stood:
Hardly the form remained; a nodding dome
O'ergrown with moss is now all Virgil's tomb.
'Twas such a scene as gave a kind relief
To memory, in sweetly-pensive grief:
Gloomy, unpleasing images it wrought;
No musing, soft complacency of thought:
For Time had cankered all, and worn away
Even the last, mournful graces of decay:
Oblivion, hateful goddess, sat before,
And covered with her dusky wings the door:
No silver harps I heard, no Muse's voice,
But birds obscene in horrid notes rejoice:
Fancy recoiled, and with his tinsel train
Forsook the chearless scene; no more remain
The warm ambitions hopes of airy youth;
Severe Reflection came, and frowning Truth:
Away each glittering gay idea fled,
And bade a melancholy train succeed,
That formed, or seemed to form, a mournful call
In feeble echoes mutt'ring round the wall.
Seek not the Muses here! the affrighted maids
Have fled Parthenope's polluted shades:
Her happy shores, the seats of joy and ease,
Their favorite mansions once, no longer please:
No longer, as of old, in transport lost,
The sisters rove along the enchanted coast;
They turn with horror from each much-loved stream,
And loath the fields that were their darling theme:
The tuneful names themselves once fondly gave
To every swelling hill, and mossy cave,
So pleasing then, are only heard with sighs;
And each sad echo bids their sorrow rise.
Yet Nature smiles, as when their Virgil sung,
Nor 'midst a fairer scene his lyre was strung:
Still bloom the sweets of his elysium here,
And the same charms in every grove appear,
But ah! in vain indulgent suns prevail;
Health and delight in every balmy gale
Are wafted now in vain: small comfort bring
To weeping eyes the beauties of the spring.
To groaning slaves those fragrant meads belong,
Where Tully dictated, and Maro sung.
Long since, alas! those golden days are flown,
When here each Science wore its proper crown;
Pale Tyranny has laid their altars low,
And rent the laurel from the Muse's brow:
What wonder then 'midst such a scene to see
The Arts expire with bleeding Liberty?
Pensive and sad, each fair angelic form
Droops, like the wearied dove beneath a storm:
Far other views the poet's thought engage,
Than the warm glories of the Augustan age.
Can misery bid the imagination glow?
Or genius brighten 'midst domestic woe?
To see desponding wretches round him pine,
Horace had wept beneath the Alban vine.
Sad sits the bard amidst his country's tears,
And sighs, regardless of the wreath he wears.
Did ever Want and Famine sweetly sing?
The fettered hand uncouthly strikes the string.
Lo! stern Oppression lifts her iron rod,
And ruin waits the imperious harpy's nod:
Black Desolation, and destructive War,
Rise at the signal, and attend her car.
From the dire pomp the affrighted shepherd flies,
And leaves his flock the ravenous soldier's prize.
Where now are all the nymphs that blessed the plains?
Where, the full chorus of contented swains?
The songs of love, of liberty and peace,
Are heard no more; the dance and tabor cease:
To the soft oaten pipe, and past'ral reed,
The din of arms, and clarion's blast succeed:
Dire shapes appear in every opening glade;
And Furies howl where once the Muses strayed.
Is this the queen of realms, for arts renowned?
This captive maid, that weeps upon the ground!
Alas! how changed! -- dejected and forlorn!
The mistress of the world become the scorn!
Around stand Rapine, Horror and Despair;
And Ig'rance, dark ally of barbarous War:
She, at the usurping Vandal's dread command,
Displays her gloomy banner over the land:
Beneath its chilling shade neglected lies
Each sister Art; and unlamented dies.
Lo! Sculpture lets her useless chissel fall;
While on some ruined temple's broken wall
Sad Architecture sits; and sees with shame
Misshapen piles usurp her injured name:
Music and Verse, unhappy twins! belong
To antique Masque, and weak unmanly Song:
The gathering deluge swells on every side,
And monkish Superstition swells the tide.
By the resistless torrent overborn
Floats every virtue, from its basis torn:
Fair Learning droops, the sickening Arts decay;
And every laurel fades, and every bay.
All is confused, no traces now are seen
To show what wretched Italy has been.
Thus once Vesuvius, crowned with circling wood,
Parthenope, thy beauteous neighbor stood:
Perpetual Spring clothed the fair mountain's side;
And what is now thy terror, was thy pride.
Sudden the imprisoned flames burst forth; and laid
On smoaky heaps each shrieking Dryad's shade:
Now deep in ashes sinks the myrtle bower,
Over beds of flowers sulphurous torrents roar;
And exiled demigods their ruined seats deplore.
The LINK. A Ballad.
YE ladies that live in the city or town,
Fair Winton or Alresford so fine and so gay;
And ye neat country lasses in clean linen gown,
As neat and as blithe and as pretty as they:
Come away strait to Ovington, for you cannot think
What a charming new walk there is made on the Link.
Look how lovely the prospect, the meadows how green,
The fields and the woods, in the vale or the hill;
The trees, and the cottage that peeps out between,
The clear stream that runs bubbling in many a rill,
That will show your fair face as you stand on the brink,
And murmurs most sweetly all under the Link.
How pleasant the morning, how clear the blue sky,
How pure the fresh air, and how healthy the place!
Your heart goes a pit-a-pat light as a fly,
And the blood circles briskly, and glows in your face:
Would you paint your fair cheeks with the rose and the pink?
Throw your washes away, take a walk on the Link.
After dinner the 'squire ere the ladies retreat,
Marches off with some friends that will ply the brisk glass;
Give us liquor enough, and a good pleasant seat,
And damn your fine taste, and your finical lass:
Al fresco, my lads, we'll carouse and we'll drink,
Take your bottle each man, and away to the Link.
Not so gentle Collin, whom love holds in thrall,
To Molly he steals all in silence away;
And when naught can be heard but the rude water-fall,
And the woodbine breathes sweetest at close of the day,
He takes her soft hand, and he tips her the wink,
Come, my dear, let us take a cool walk on the Link.
But, o ye fair maidens, be sure have a care,
Nor lay yourselves open to love's cruel dart;
Of the hour and the place and the season beware,
And guard well each passage that leads to your heart;
Sly Cupid will steal in at some little chink,
If you walk in the evening too late on the Link.
Ye poets so lofty, who love to retire
From the noise of the town to the stream and the wood;
Who in epics or tragics, with mavelous fire,
Utter sounds by mere mortals not well understood;
Here mouth your loud strain, and here ply pen and ink,
Quit Parnassus and Pindus, and come to the Link.
And come you, who for thought are at little expense,
Who indite gentle pastoral, ballad, or song;
You see with smooth numbers, and not too much sense,
How the verses run easy and glibly along;
And the rhyme at the close how it falls with a clink,
So kind are the Muses that sport on the Link.
THE SQUIRE of DAMES. A POEM.
In SPENSER's STYLE.
ADVERTISEMENT.
In the seventh Canto of the Legend of Chastity, in Spenser's Fairy Queen, the
Squire of Dames tells Satyrane, that by order of his mistress Columbel (after
having served the ladies for a year) he was sent out a second time, not to
return till he could find three hundred women incapable of yielding to any
temptation. The bad success he met with in the course of three years, which is
slightly touched upon by Spenser, is the foundation of the following poem.

PROLOGUE.
I.
HARD is the heart that never knew to love,
Ne felt the pleasing anguish of desire.
Ye British maids, more fair than Venus' dove,
For you alone I tune my humble lyre;
Adopt me, nymphs, receive me in your quire,
Make me your bard; for that is all my care:
Then shall I envy not that aged fire,
Who does for court his annual song prepare:
I lever myrtle wreath than Kesar's laurel wear.
II.
Think not because I write of Columbel
I thence would blast the sex with impious tale;
Transactions vile of foreign stronds I tell,
Ne against a British female would I rail
For all the wealth that rolls on Indian grail.
Here, beauty, truth, and chastity are found;
Eleonora here, with visage pale,
Did suck the poison from her Edward's wound,
And Anna's nuptial faith shall stond for aye renowned.
III.
See the fair swans on Thamis' lovely tide,
The which do trim their pennons silver bright,
In shining ranks they down the waters ride;
Often have mine eyes devoured the gallant sight.
Then cast thy looks, with wonder and delight,
Where you sweet nymphs enjoy the evening air,
Some dance along the green, like fairies light,
Some flowerets cull to deck their flowing hair;
Then tell me, soothly, swain, which sight thou deem'st most fair.
IV.
To you, bright stars, that sparkle on our isle,
I give my life, my fortune, and my fame;
For my whole guerdon grant me but a smile,
A smile from you is all I hope or claim;
Nor age's ice my ardent zeal shall tame,
To my life's end I shall your names adore,
Not hermits' bosoms feel so pure a flame,
Warmed by approval I more high shall soar:
Receive my humble lays, my heart was yours before.
V.
Should you consent, I Will quit my shepherd's gray,
And don more graceful and more costly gear,
My crook and scrip I Will throw with scorn away,
And in a samite garment streit appear.
Farewell, ye groves, which once I held so dear;
Farewell, ye glens, I other joys pursue;
Then shall the world your matchless power revere,
And own what wonders your sweet smiles can do,
That could a simple clown into a bard transmew.
CANTO I.
ARGUMENT.
The Squire of Dames to Satyrane
His history does tell,
With all the toils he underwent
To gain his Columbel.
I.
THE Squire of Dames his tale thus 'gan to tell;
Since you command my tongue, sir Satyrane,
I now will all declare that me befell,
The cause of muchel scath and dol'rous pain,
Ne shall thy gentle eye from tears refrain.
Me Columbel commanded far to go
'Till I should full three hundred nymphs attain,
Whose hearts should aye with Virtue's lessons glow,
And to all swains but one cry out for ever, No.
II.
To find the fortilage that never will yield
Is not an easy matter, good sir Knight;
Troy town, they say, is now a grass-grown field,
That long withstood the force of Grecian might;
And castles fall though deep in earth empight;
Ne ought so strong is found but what may fail,
The sun at last shall lose his glorious light,
And vows or bribes over women may prevail;
Their hearts are made of flesh, and mortal flesh is frail.
III.
With heavy heart, and full of cark I go
And take my conge of my blooming maid,
I kissed her hond, and, louting very low,
To her behest at length myself arrayed:
The fair we love expects to be obeyed,
Although she bid us with the kestrel fly;
So forth I prick, though much by doubt dismayed,
The hard experiment resolved to try:
For she was wondrous fair, and much in love was I.
IV.
A grove I reached, where tuneful throstles sung,
The linnet here did open his little throat,
His twitting jests around the cuckoo flung,
And the proud goldfinch showed his painted coat,
And hailed us with no inharmonious note:
The robin eke here tuned his sonnet shrill,
And told the soothing ditty all by rote,
How he with leaves his pious beak did fill,
To shroud those pretty babes, whom Sib unkind would kill.
V.
And many a fair Narcissus decked the plain,
That seemed anew their persons to admire;
Here Ajax told his dolors over again,
And amorous Clytie sicken'd with desire;
Here the blown rose her odors sweet did spire;
Through the dun grove a murmuring river led
His crystal streams that wound in many a gyre;
The baleful willow all the banks bespread,
And ever to the breeze ycurl'd his hoary head.
VI.
Soon to the grove there came a lovely maid,
For maiden sure she did to me appear,
In plain check-laton was the nymph arrayed,
Her sparkling eyes stood full of many a tear,
And she bewept the absence of her dear.
Alas! should beauty be to woe allied?
Beauty, methinks, should meet with better cheer,
Content should never wander from her side;
Good luck, I pray to heaven, the face that is fair betide.
VII.
"Ah! woe is me, she cried, since Colin's fled,
"Whose gentle presence did these plains adorn,
"Soon was he ravished from the nuptial bed,
"Torn from these arms, from his dear leman torn!
"O grief! far sharper than the pointed thorn.
"I saw him ill-bestad by martial band.
"Alas the day that ever I was born!
"Where roves my Colin, on what foreign strand,
"Arraught from Laura's eyes, and his dear native land?
VIII.
"Alas! he only knew to prune the vine,
"Or through the earth to urge the biting share,
"To twist the bower with fragrant eglantine,
"Where free from heat we shunned the noontide air,
"Or to the mart to lead his fleecy care.
"And is it fit in hacqueton and mail
"The youth for war's grim terrors should prepare!
"His voice outsung the love-lorn nightingale,
"And deftly could he dance, or pipe along the dale.
IX.
"The gos-hawk fierce may pounce the trembling dove,
"The savage wolf may tear the bounding fawn,
"But sparrows mild are formed for feats of love,
"And kids dew not with blood the flowery lawn;
"Then how shall he, in whom all graces dawn,
"In the red field the cruel paynim kill?
"For scenes like these find men of hellish spawn.
" It Is his with joy the virgin's heart to fill,
"And not on foreign shore his foemen's blood to spill.
X.
"No days of bliss my sorrows shall aslake,
"For him I Will ever drop the dol'rous tear.
"Adieu the circled green, the buxom wake,
"Since Colin's gone I taste of naught but drear.
"Stretch me, ye maidens, stretch me on the bier,
"And let my gravestone these true words adorn:
"A wretched maiden lies intombed here,
"Who saw a shepherd brighter than the morn,
"Then pined her heart away, and died of love forlorn."
XI.
Much was I grieved at her piteous plaint,
And greeted to myself, O happy Squire!
At length, though late, thou have found out a saint,
Who, but for Colin, feels no warm desire.
Perdie, quoth Satyrane, I her admire;
No lozel loose shall here discovered be.
The other answered with his cheeks on fire,
Now by my hallidom you soon shall see
That words may with the heart full often ill agree.
XII.
I, naught accoy'd, came up unto the fair,
And swore to love her all my length of life;
Then offered her to gorgeous domes to bear,
Where haidegives are daunc'd to harp and fife.
She soon forgot she was another's wife,
And granted with me to desert the plain.
Are such ensamples among women rife?
If so, my Columbel I never shall gain,
But hunt around the world, and find my labors vain.
XIII.
My lips I began to royne in fell despite,
And forth I rushed from her false embrace,
Through the thick wood I wandered day and night,
Ne met I living creature face to face:
At length a rising city far I trace;
Thither in hopes my hasty steps I bend.
Perchance, thought I, true virtue may embrace
The courtly dome, and from the country wend.
Thus, where we least expect, we often find a friend.
XIV.
At e'ne the town I reached and eke a hall,
Which waxen tapers made as light as day;
Fair jovisaunce sat on the face of all,
And to the dance the sprightly minstrels play,
Each seemed as sportive as the wanton jay.
The dame, who owned the house, was passing old,
And had, it seems, that morning dealt away
To her kind grandson many bags of gold,
Who took a bonnibel to haven and to hold.
XV.
The bride was named Viola the fair,
The loaded rosiere is not half so sweet.
Aye, aye, quoth I, ensamples are but rare
To find so many charms in one discreet;
With you, fair lass, I mean not now to treat.
The springal was in wholesome lustihed,
And him by name of Pamphilus they greet;
He was to doughty chevisance ybred,
Yet often in courtly halls the active measure led.
XVI.
The ancient dame they do Avara call,
And much she hobled as she trod the ground;
Yet many angels in her crumenal,
If fair report speaks true, were always found.
Where riches flow there virtues too abound.
Her pannikel was as a badger gray,
And, as she walked the company around,
It nodded with such force, that, by my fay,
I thought it meant to fly from her old crag away.
XVII.
The lofty roof was fretted over with gold,
And all around, the walls depeinten were
With many histories of times of old,
Which brought not muchel credit to the fair.
There Leda held her swan, with shoulders bare,
And here the dame of Ephesus was found,
Lick other dames, whom my kind tongue shall spare,
And here stood Helen for her charms renowned,
Who soon her lord forsook, when she a leman found.
XVIII.
And many a beauteous dame and courtly knight
Came there the nuptials to celebrate:
Some versed to wing from bow the nimble flight,
Some the near foe with brondir'n to amate;
Me too they welcome to the hall of state;
With bell accoil they wished me to take
A round or two, and choose me out a mate:
But my fond love which nothing could aslake,
Caused me to slight them all, for Columbella's sake.
XIX.
And now to artful steps the floor rebounds,
In graceful ease the shining beavys move,
The noice like thunder at a distance sounds.
Mean time I sat beneath a proud alcove,
And told Avara gentle tales of love.
Thought I, in eld the passions are more tame,
And here by craft I may successful prove;
For she perforce must now be void of blame
As wise Ulysses' wife, Penelope by name.
XX.
Ne wants she gelt, which often the mind misleads
To actions which it otherwise would shun.
The courtier lythe, if right report areeds,
Will unawhap'd to seize his vantage run;
And so will most men underneath the sun,
Or be they patriot called, or bard, or knight,
But when they once the gilded prize have won,
They seek to clear their name with shame bedight:
Befits to scour the steel, when rust offends the sight.
XXI.
At every word I said she looked askaunce,
Then said, in unsoot whispers, Fie! Sir, fie!
And turned as though she seemed to mind the dance,
Nathless on me she cast a languid eye:
Blist by thy form, my liefest life, quoth I,
Cast your belgards upon an humble slave:
From love, a lass! in vain my heart would fly;
Then with a word thy quailing leman save,
For if you frown, perdie, you doom me to the grave.
XXII.
It hap'd by chance she saw a golden heart
With flaming diamonds around beset;
This, the whole guerdon of my tedious smart,
I, on a time, from Columbel did get.
As simple birds are caught in fowler's net,
And 'cause they see no danger none they fear,
Even so Avara her eyes here did set,
And turned round and whispered in mine ear,
Give me that di'mond heart, and be mine leman dear.
XXIII.
I started from the couch where I was pight,
And thus I her bespake with muchel rage,
Avaunt, thou faytor false, thou imp of night!
I hate myself, that I should thus engage,
On any terms, to treat with wrizled age.
So, forth I flung, and left the frowy witch
To share her bed with coachman, groom or page;
The castle too I quit, mine ire was sich,
And out I set again, though night was dark as pitch.
XXIV.
But did I here relate, Sir Satyrane,
The many weary miles I Have traveled,
What dangers I Have assoil'd, yet all in vain,
(For, by my truth, but ill my days I Have sped)
Your hair would stand upright upon your head.
Three hundred virtuous females side by side,
By me to Columbella must be led:
Can you direct me where for such to ride?
I cannot, in good sooth, the courteous knight replied.
XXV.
The Squire pursued his tale; it is now three years
Since cursed Avara's visage first I saw;
Convents I Have tried, but there the luscious freers
The fair-fac'd nuns to fornication draw;
Nor palaces are free from Cupid's law;
His darts are fiercer than the levin-brond;
Few, very few, there 'scape his mighty paw,
And those in golden palls, who proudly stond,
Had lever kiss their love's, than Keysar's royal hond.
XXVI.
Fair Jenny of the mill I strove to win,
And her benempt Pastora of the dale;
But they bilive agreed with me to sin;
One asked an owch, and one a watchet veil.
Some wish over every female to prevail;
My hope, my conquest is to be denied.
The stage I Have tried, but there my projects fail;
For there is scarce a single wedded bride
But does her husband's noul with horns of ront provide.
XXVII.
As couthful fishers at the benty brook,
By various arts assot the seely fry,
Now wriggling worms, now paste conceals the hook,
And now they hide it with a colored fly;
This takes the perch, and that the tench's eye;
So different nymphs a different charm invites,
Some yield for vantage, some for vanity,
A song this one, a dance that maid delights:
Man throws the wimble bait, and greedy woman bites.
XXVIII.
With sorrow overhent, the other day
I laid my weary limbs adown to rest,
Where a tall beech overspread the dusky way;
My noyous thoughts a dream a while suppressed.
Often weighty truths are in this garb ydress'd.
Grant that it so may happen unto me;
Then joyance once again shall sooth this breast,
My pining soul shall be from anguish free,
And I shall taste true bliss, dear Columbel, with thee.
XXIX.
Methought I saw a figure fair and tall,
And gentle smiles sat dimpling on her face,
Yet seemed of a beauty naught at all,
'Till much beholding did improve each grace;
At length she seemed too fair for human race.
Her kirtle white might vie with winter snows,
Ne could you ought of her fair bosom trace,
Naught but her face would she to sight expose,
So modest maiden wends, the frannion muchel shows.
XXX.
With visage bland, methought, she hailed me often;
"Ne fear, quoth she, a female's mild request.
"The bark by tempests that is whirled aloft,
"At length, the tempest over, enjoys rest,
"My name is Chastity, though out of quest
"With modern dames, yet thou shall still survey
"A clime where beauty is with virtue blessed.
"Good fortune speed you on your happy way;
"Go, gentle Squire of dames, and here no longer stay.
XXXI.
"To Fairy land your instant journey bend,
"There Columbel may find her will obeyed;
"There Chastity may boast of many a friend,
"She visits there each rosy-featur'd maid.
"Go on, nor be by former toils affray'd:
"Go where you oaks display their verdant pride,
"'Till, from the mountains torn and stripped of shade,
"On Neptune's billows they triumphant ride,
"Protect their happy land, and conquer all beside.
XXXII.
"Hail happy land! for arms and arts renowned,
"For blooming virgins free from loose desire;
"A Drake, a Bacon, there a birthplace found,
"And chaste Eliza time shall ever admire:
"The hero wields the sword and poet's lyre:
"This Sidney knew, who still with luster shines,
"For whom Dan Spenser waked the warbling quire,
"And many more whose names might grace his lines;
"There round the warriour's palm the lover's myrtle twines."
XXXIII.
At this I woke, and now resolve to brave
The utmost perils for my Columbel;
For, know, I mean to cross the briny wave,
Where Albion's chalky cliffs the sea repel:
And, if no mage have laid a magic spell,
Perchance my lot may be at length to find
Three hundred nymphs, who wicked love can quell;
If not, I must desert all womankind,
And, what me most amates, leave Columbel behind.
XXXIV.
The Squire of dames surceased here his say,
And forth he yode to seek the British isle,
Sir Satyrane pricked on his dapple-grey,
Ne ought foreswonk he traveled many a mile
To spend his days in hardiment and toil:
But first in courteous guise they bid farewell,
As well befits men bred in courtly soil.
Now how the Squire has sped, or ill, or well,
A future canto may, perhaps, at leisure tell.
XXXV.
For see, how Phoebus welketh in the west,
My oxen from their yoke I must untye,
The collar much has chauf'd their tender chest,
Who labors much the sweets of rest should try.
To their warm nests the daws and ravens fly
Deep in the ruined dome or dusky wood;
And beasts and birds fast locked in slumber lie,
Save the fell bat, that flutters out for food,
And the soothsaying owl, with her unlovely brood.
CANTO II.
ARGUMENT.
The Squire he lights on Bon-vivant,
Who wons in Fairy soil,
Then views in Merlin's magic glass
A sight that ends his toil.
I.
TO gain the point to which our soul aspires
We nourish toil, and reek hard labor sweet;
For this, through Greenland's frosts, or India's fires,
The hardy sailors death and dangers meet;
And the prow chieftain bolder than discreet,
In blood imbrued pursues the martial fray,
And lovers eke through life's loud tempests beat,
Led on by hope, that never-dying ray;
Hope wantons in their breast, and strews with flowers the way.
II.
And sure of all mankind the Squire of dames
Shall stand the first ensample of true love,
Who aye, untouched by any foreign flames,
Preserved his passion for his gentle dove;
Blush, modern youths, whose pulses quickly move,
Fondly you glote upon the witching fair;
Yet, when a sweet enjoyment once you prove,
You leave the nymph entangled in the snare,
Her tears flow trickling down, her singults pierce the air.
III.
Oh think of transports which ye whilom tasted,
And let the glad remembrance charm your mind,
Be not the fruits of joyment quickly wasted,
And to your heart her happy image bind:
Think what she merits who whilear was kind,
Nor by inconstancy her peace destroy;
Inconstancy, that monster fell and blind,
That vainly fond of every passing toy,
Treads down its late delight, and poisonsrapt'rous joy.
IV.
Return we now unto our gentle youth,
Whose little bark daunc'd lightly on the main,
His breast divided atween joy and ruth;
Now gay ideas wanton in his brain,
Now woe-begon his heart is rent in twain,
On his success depends his Columbel,
And now he hopes, and now desponds again;
The various turns of mind, when thoughts rebel,
Sure pen mote never describe, and none but lovers tell.
V.
Methinks I see him on the beachy strond,
Where Neptune's waves affrap the sturdy pier;
His hardy steed neighs at the sight of land,
In all adventures a most faithful feer;
And through that city he does quickly steer,
Which Ethelbert to holy Austin gave:
The kings of Kent did erst inhabit here,
Here haughty Becket sunk into the grave,
Here through the smiling meads, Stoure rolls his dimpling wave.
VI.
Long traveled he, ne ventured to assay
The nymphs he met, for much he was afraid
To bribes or prayers few women would cry nay;
At flatt'ry's tongue full often will virtue fade;
What shall he do? to win his lovely maid
He must three hundred virtuous females find,
Perdie, quoth he, my fortune be essayed,
I Will boldly try the strength of womankind:
For craven heart, they say, never won fair lady's mind.
VII.
So on he pricked, and from a rising ground
Discerned before him, in a distant vale,
A castle fair; and ancient oaks around
Did to the breeze their lofty heads avail;
A silver stream refreshed the fragrant dale;
Their ledden loud fat oxen did repeat,
And nibbling sheep displayed their fleeces pale,
The woodbine shed an odor matchless sweet,
And to their patient dams the frisking lambkins bleat.
VIII.
To that same castle our advent'rer yode,
The merry birds him welcomed on the way,
An hundred flowers aumail'd the winding road,
And all was bright, and all was passing gay,
You would have sworn it was the month of May.
Withouten drad he thunders at the gate,
Who wons within, or giant, knight or fay,
Shall never, in sooth, our imp of fame amate:
Unto the summons loud the portal opens streit.
IX.
And forth there issued the seneschal,
Of middle age he was, if right I ween,
He was in personage both plump and tall,
Ne seemed he to taste of dol'rous teen,
Ne wrinkle deep was on his forehead seen,
But jovisaunce sat basking on his brow,
At ev'ery word he spoke, he smiled at-ween,
His temples were ycrown'd with myrtle bough,
And virelays he song with matchless grace, I vow.
X.
"Whoever thou art, thrice welcome to these plains,
"Where bitter dole never shows her hateful head,
"Good-fellowship wons here, and free from pains
"Both youth and eld the paths of pleasure tread;
"Catch flying bliss, ne be by ought foresaid;
"Think that this life is but a little span;
"Then laugh, and sport, and shun all dreryhed,
"Thy rolling days in present pleasures plan,
"Come, spend thy hours in joy, thou son of mortal man.
XI.
"Know thou my name? I am l'Allegro hight,
"Let me conduct thee to our jovial hall,
"Where Bon-vivant in revels spends the night,
"Who bids a hearty welcome unto all,
"Or wear he red cross-stole, or paynim pall."
With that he lad him with a courtly air
Into a chamber decked for feast and ball;
And though no tedes or tapers glimmer'd there,
Yet all within was bright, as all without was fair.
XII.
As at the close of an hot summer's day,
When Phoebus in the west deserts the sky,
Bright streams of light along the ether play,
And though his fi'ry orb forsake our eye,
The beamy gushes gild each object nigh;
The painted meads are tinged with golden light,
And rivers roll their glittering waters by;
So in this house of joy with ease you might
Perceive celestial rays, that cherished human sight.
XIII.
The Squire of dames his jolly host salew'd,
And Bon-vivant his hond in friendship pressed;
"Come, sit thee down, and taste our choicest food;
"We entertake, quoth he, no vulgar guest.
"Endured to toil, come taste the sweets of rest,
"Doff thy hard arms, this samite garment wear,
"This better far than mail shall bind thy breast,
"This coronal shall deck thy auburn hair;
"Push the brisk goblet round, and drown intruding care.
XIV.
"For us the lark attunes his morning song,
"For us the spring depeints her every flower,
"To sooth our sleep yon fountain purls along,
"And oaks to shade us, twine into a bower,
"The pensive bard sits many a watchful hour,
"In ditty sweet, to carol forth our praise:
"While valor spends his days in dole and stour,
"We, wiser we, undying trophies raise
"To ever-blooming bliss, ne reek what wisdom says.
XV.
"With sprightly notes we make the welkin ring,
"In mazy dance we tread the checkered ground,
"To yielding nymphs transported shepherds sing,
"Ne hard misfare emongst our train is found.
"The simple swain, who looks with cark astoun'd
"Because his leman ill rewards his care,
"Oh, let him stond to all a lout renowned,
"Ne gibing scorn her twitting bords forbear;
"Are there not other nymphs less coy, and full as fair?"
XVI.
At this the Squire wex'd pale, "Ne eath it is,
"Most courteous knight, he cried, far to remove
"The thoughts of her in whom we place all bliss."
Quoth Bon-vivant, "What, then thou art in love?"
"That I am so these many singults prove,"
Returned the Squire. L'Allegro then replied,
"Thou Would better wend to yonder willow grove,
"Where shoals of lovers hanging side by side,
"Feed the vile carrion crows, and highten female pride."
XVII.
With that he brast into a scornful laugh,
And much abashed appeared our constant Squire;
The others sportful the brisk vintage quaff.
While thus the springal. "Yes, I do aspire
"To love the fairest of the female quire.
"Three hundred virtuous damsels in this isle
"I came to find." "Perdie, your odd desire,
"Quoth Bon-vivant, will ask thee muchel toil;
"And thou shall travel too full many a weary mile.
XVIII.
"'It Is not enough the conduct of the fair
"Is formed by frowning virtue's strictest leer:
"The blatant beast does here in pieces tear
"The fame of those ybred in school severe;
"His rankling tongue throughout the rolling year
"With baleful venom every thing consumes;
"Where beauty's splendour gilds our northern sphere
"He slyly creeps, and to destruction dooms
"The honor of the spring, and wisdom's early blooms.
XIX.
"The brindled lion in the lonely wood
"Hides his grim aspect from the sight of men;
"The pardelis and libbard's spotted brood
"Reside contented in sequestered den;
"Not so the blatant-beast, he lives in ken
"Of the proud city or well-peopled town;
"Thence with detested fury he will ren,
"Ne spare the prelate's lawn, or monarch's crown:
"All fares alike with him, for all he tumbleth down.
XX.
"What then avails it to be fair or wise?
"Or what avails it to be warlike knight?
"Where ever the monster casts his fi'ry eyes,
"Each grace, each virtue sickens at the sight.
"Then, goodly Squire, until the morning's light
"Quaff the thick darkness of the night away;
"And, when the morn shall rise, in arms bedight
"Proceed, and luck attend you on your way;
"Algates we wish in truth with us you would ever stay."
XXI.
The Squire agrees, but vows, when rising morn
Shall gild the glitt'rand portals of the east,
Himself he will in habergeon adorn,
And seek around the isle the blatant-beast:
Mean while in buxom mirth they spend the feast.
Ill fares the mortal man too much who knows;
Often shall he wish himself from thought releast;
The fatal knowledge in his bosom glows,
And mars his golden rest, and murders soft repose.
XXII.
Sir Chaunticleer now eyed the rising day,
And called dame Partlet from her vetchy bed;
Now wakeful Phospher spreads his gleamy ray,
And the pale moon concealed her silver head;
The cattle brouze the lawn with dew bespread,
While every bird from out the buskets flies.
Then to the field our lover issued;
But sleep had sealed l'Allegro's drousy eyes,
And Bon-vivant also in downy slumber lies.
XXIII.
Our Squire, withouten drad, pursued his way,
And looked around to spy this monster fell,
And many a well conceited roundelay
He sung in honor of his Columbel:
Mote he, perchance, destroy this spawn of hell,
How easy were the task to him assigned?
The land of Fairy does each land excel;
View there the paragons of woman kind;
View the bright virgins there, and leave thy heart behind.
XXIV.
Ah! lever should thou try the females there
Than thus unwise another course pursue;
There every nymph is innocent as fair:
Try what I here advance, you will find it true.
Hard is our fate while bliss in hopes we few,
Some deadly fiend to blast our joy appears;
Contentment sweet, alas, is known to few.
Thus for a while the sun the welkin cheers,
But soon he hides his head, and melts in dropping tears.
XXV.
Life is a scene of conteck and distress,
Ne is it longer than a winter's day;
And shall we make our few enjoyments less?
Far from my cot, thou blatant-beast away.
No husband's noul will I with horns array,
Ne shall my tongue it is venomed malice wreak
On tuneful bards, whom laurel crowns apay;
Ne will I against the comely matron speak,
Or draw one pearly drop down beauty's rosy cheek.
XXVI.
The Squire of dames rode on with muchel tine
And, as he cast askaunce his greedy look,
He saw empight beneath an ancient pine
A hoary shepherd leaning on his crook;
His falling tears increased the swelling brook;
And he did sigh as he would break his heart.
"O thou deep-read in sorrow's baleful book,
"The Squire exclaimed, areed thy burning smart;
"Our dolors grow more light when we the tale impart.',
XXVII.
To whom the swain replied, "O gentle youth,
"Yon fruitful meads my numerous herds possessed,
"My days rolled on unknown to pain or ruth,
"And one fair daughter my old age ybless'd.
"Oh, had you seen her for the wake ydress'd
"With kirtle tied with many a colored string,
"Thy tongue to all the world had then confessed
"That she was sheener than the pheasant's wing,
"And, when she raised her voice, ne lark so soot could sing.
XXVIII.
"In virtue's thews I bred the lovely maid,
"And she right well the lessons did pursue;
"Too wise she was to be by man betrayed;
"But the cursed blatant-beast her form did view,
"And round our plains did spread a tale untrue,
"That Rosabella, spurning marriage band,
"Had felt those pangs which virgin never knew,
"And that Sir Topas my poor girl trepanned;
"He, who in sable stole does in our pulpit stand.
XXIX.
"Nay, more, the hellish monster has invented,
"How a young swain on Shannon's banks yborn
"(Had not my care the deep-laid plot prevented)
"Would from my arms my Rosabel have born.
"Have I not cause to weep from rising morn
"Till Phoebus welketh in the western main,
"To see my dearling's fame thus vildly torn?
"Have I not cause to nourish endless pain?"
At this he deeply sighed, and wept full sore again.
XXX.
"Cursed be this blatant-beast, replied the Squire,
"That thus infests your sea-begirted isle;
"Show me his face, that I may wreak mine ire
"Upon this imp of hell, this monster vile."
"Away from hence not passing sure a mile,
"Might I advise you, you had better wend,"
Returned the swain, "Deep-read in magick-style
"There Merlin wons, sue him to be your friend;
"And lest you miss your way, myself will you attend."
XXXI.
Together now they seek the hermitage
Deep in the covert of a dusky glade,
Where in his dortour wons the hoary sage.
The moss-grown trees did form a gloomy shade,
Their rustling leaves a solemn music made,
And fairies nightly tripp'd the awful green,
And if the tongue of fame have truth displayed,
Full many a spectre was at midnight seen,
Torn from his earthly grave, a horrid sight! I ween.
XXXII.
Ne rose, ne vi'let glads the cheerless bower,
Ne fringed pink from earth's green bosom grew;
But hemlock dire, and every baleful flower
Might here be found, and knots of mystic rue.
Close to the cell sprung up an ancient yew,
And store of imps were on it is boughs ypight,
At his behests they from it is branches flew,
And, in a thousand various forms bedight,
Frisk'd to the moon's pale wain, and revell'd all the night.
XXXIII.
Around the cave a clustring ivy spread
In wide embrace his ever-twining arms,
Within, the walls with characters bespread
Declared the powerful force of magic charms.
Here drugs were placed destructive of all harms,
And books that deep futurity could scan:
Here stood a spell that of his rage disarms
The mountain lion 'till he yields to man;
With many secrets more, which scarce repeat I can.
XXXIV.
The Squire of dames deep enters in the cell:
What will not valiant heart for beauty dare?
His borrel fere here bids his friend farewell,
And home he wends renewing cark and care.
When, louting low with a becoming air,
The youth cried out, "O thrice renowned mage,
"Vouchsafe to cure me of my black despair;
"For thou not only art grown wise through age,
"But art of mortal man by far the wisest sage."
XXXV.
Then Merlin with a look benign replied,
(For he was bred with every courteous thew)
"I know to make fair Columbel your bride
"The blatant-beast you through the land pursue;
"The fate of empires now demands my view,
"And for a while denis my presence here;
"Soon in this cell I Will thee again salew,
"What most thou like partake withouten fear,
"Share all my cave affords, nor think I grudge my cheer.
XXXVI.
"Yet mark my counsel, open not that door,
"Lest thou repent thy follies when too late,
"Ten thousand pangs shall make thy heart full sore,
"For horror scouls behind that heben gate,
"And future ills shall thy dear peace amate;
"There stands a mirror, wrought by magic leer,
"In which are read the dark decrees of fate,
"And whom you wish to see will streit appear,
"Devoid of art's false mask, to human eyesight clear.
XXXVII.
"Ah how unlike the godlike man he seemed
"In this my glass the patriot I Have decry'd,
"By the vile rabblement a saint esteemed?
"He Is often a wretch composed of sloth and pride:
"And Kesars too, not seldom deify'd,
"With other men their vice and follies share;
"And by my mirror if the nymph be tried,
"It will without reserve the truth declare,
"Ne flatter head that is crowned, ne flatter face that is fair.
XXXVIII.
"Once more let me advise thee, gentle Squire,
"Forbear to look at this same magic glass;
"Do not too rashly into fate enquire --
"But I to foreign stronds a while must pass."
The unweeting youth cried to himself, "Alas!
"Would I could know the lot to me assigned."
"Patience, quoth Merlin, does all things surpass."
Then to his car were winged dragons joined,
With which he sails through air, and far outstrips the wind.
XXXIX.
And now the Squire surveys the lonesome cave,
His wavering mind is in a whirlwind tossed,
And now the mirror he resolves to brave,
And now he finds his boasted courage lost.
At length determined whatsoever it cost,
To see the glass, he darts into the cell;
And, lest his eyes by vild retrait be crossed,
Thrice he invokes his lovely Columbel.
As Adam fell of yore, the Squire of dames yfell.
XL.
The heben doors full widely he displayed,
And saw the lovely queen of all his heart,
Fair as the lilly in the watery glade,
Bright as the morn, and bright withouten art.
Through every vein he feels a thrillant smart:
For the dear maid lay on her bed undressed,
And, may I unreprov'd the truth impart,
She hugged a lusty stripling to her breast,
Whom she full closely clipped, and wantonly caressed.
XLI.
"O ^aytor false, o wicked imp of night!
"Exclaimed the Squire astoun'd, ah! wealaway!
"Let Erebus inpitchy stole bedight
"With foulest sprites the sons of men affray,
"And blot for ever the fair face of day.
"Ye haggard sisters, sound my passing bell;
"Oh! never believe, ye youths, what women say.
"O losel loose, o impious Columbel!"
Then like a stean to earth full heavily he fell.
XLII.
There shall we leave him, for my leaky boat
Lets in the water, and I must recure
Her much-worn hulk, that scarcely now can float,
And moored in harbor she shall ride secure;
Then if I can a pilot wise procure,
Mayhap I may again hoist forth my sail,
And other hardy voyages endure
Through shelves and shallows: now the adverse gale
Gives me some time to rest, and land with joy I hail.
GLOSSARY.
Amail, enamel Avale, bow Brond-iron, a sword Blatant beast, detraction or envy
Buskets, bushes Borrel feer, clownish companion Crumenal, purse Coronal, crown
or garland Fortilage, fort Flight, arrow Kestrel, an hawk Levin-brond,
thunderbolt Ledden, language Pannikel, crown of the head To royne, to bite, or
gnaw Recure, to repair Sib, an uncle Springal, a youth Wimble, shifting to and
fro Yode, went.
THE Vanity of Human Wishes.
THE Tenth Satire of JUVENAL,
IMITATED By SAMUEL JOHNSON.
LET Ver. 1. -- 11.
observation with extensive view,
Survey mankind, from China to Peru;
Remark each anxious toil, each eager strife,
And watch the busy scenes of crowded life;
Then say how hope and fear, desire and hate,
Overspread with snares the clouded maze of fate,
Where wavering man, betrayed by venurous pride,
To tread the dreary paths without a guide;
As treacherous phantoms in the mist delude,
Shuns fancied ills, or chases airy good.
How rarely reason guides the stubborn choice,
Rules the bold hand, or promps the suppliant voice,
How nations sink, by darling schemes oppressed,
When vengeance listens to the fool's request.
Fate wings with every wish the afflictive dart,
Each gift of nature, and each grace of art,
With fatal heat impetuous courage glows,
With fatal sweetness elocution flows,
Impeachment stops the speaker's powerful breath,
And restless fire precipitates on death.
Ver. 12. -- 22.
But scarce observed the knowing and the bold,
Fall in the general massacre of gold;
Wide-wasting pest! that rages unconfined,
And crowds with crimes the records of mankind,
For gold his sword the hireling ruffian draws,
For gold the hireling judge distorts the laws;
Wealth heaped on wealth, nor truth nor safety buys,
The dangers gather as the treasures rise.
Let history tell where rival kings command,
And dubious title shakes the madded land,
When statutes glean the refuse of the sword,
How much more safe the vassal than the lord,
Low sculks the hind beneath the rage of power,
And leaves the wealthy traitor in the Tower,
Untouched his cottage, and his slumbers sound,
Though confiscation's vulturs hover round.
The needy traveller, serene and gay,
Walks the wild heath, and sings his toil away.
Does envy seize thee? crush the upbraiding joy,
Increase his riches and his peace destroy,
New fears in dire vicissitude invade,
The rustling brake alarms, and quivering shade,
Nor light nor darkness bring his pain relief,
One shows the plunder, and one hides the thief.
Yet Ver. 23 -- 27.
still one general cry the skies assails,
And gain and grandeur load the tainted gales;
Few know the toiling statesman's fear or care,
The insidious rival and the gaping heir.
Once Ver. 28 -- 55.
more, Democritus, arise on earth,
With cheerful wisdom and instructive mirth,
See motly life in modern trappings dressed,
And feed with varied fools the eternal jest:
Thou who could laugh where want enchain'd caprice,
Toil crushed conceit, and man was of a piece;
Where wealth unlov'd without a mourner died;
And scarce a sycophant was fed by pride;
Where never was known the form of mock debate,
Or seen a new-made mayor's unwieldy state;
Where change of favorites made no change of laws,
And senates heard before they judged a cause;
How would thou shake at Britain's modish tribe,
Dart the quick taunt, and edge the piercing gibe?
Attentive truth and nature to decry,
And pierce each scene with philosophic eye.
To thee were solemn toys or empty show,
The robes of pleasure and the veils of woe:
All aid the farce, and all thy mirth maintain,
Whose joys are causeless, or whose griefs are vain.
Such was the ^corn that filled the sage's mind,
Renewed at every glance on humankind;
How just that scorn ere yet thy voice declare,
Search every state, and canvass every prayer.
Ver. 56 -- 107.
Unnumber'd suppliants crowd Preferment's gate,
Athirst for wealth, and burning to be great;
Delusive Fortune hears the incessant call,
They mount, they shine, evaporate, and fall.
On every stage the foes of peace attend,
Hate dogs their flight, and insult mocks their end.
Love ends with hope, the sinking statesman's door
Pours in the morning worshiper no more;
For growing names the weekly scribbler lies,
To growing wealth the dedicator flies,
From every room descends the painted face,
That hung the bright Palladium of the place,
And smoked in kitchens, or in auctions sold,
To better features yields the frame of gold;
For now no more we trace in every line
Heroic worth, benevolence divine:
The form distorted justifies the fall,
And detestation rids the indignant wall.
But will not Britain hear the last appeal,
Sign her foes doom, or guard her favorites zeal;
Through Freedom's sons no more remonstrance rings,
Degrading nobles and controuling kings;
Our supple tribes repress their patriot throats,
And ask no questions but the price of votes;
With weekly libels and septennial ale,
Their wish is full to riot and to rail.
In full-blown dignity, see Wolsey stand,
Law in his voice, and fortune in his hand:
To him the church, the realm, their powers consign,
Through him the rays of regal bounty shine,
Still to new heights his restless wishes tower,
Claim leads to claim, and power advances power;
Till conquest unresisted ceased to please,
And rights submitted, left him none to seize.
At length his sovereign frowns -- the train of state
Mark the keen glance, and watch the sign to hate.
Wherever he turns he meets a stranger's eye,
His suppliants scorn him, and his followers fly;
At once is lost the pride of aweful state,
The golden canopy, the glittering plate,
The regal palace, the luxurious board,
The liv'ried army, and the menial lord.
With age, with cares, with maladies oppressed,
He seeks the refuge of monastic rest.
Grief aids disease, remembered folly stings,
And his last sighs reproach the faith of kings.
Speak thou, whose thoughts at humble peace repine,
Shall Wolsey's wealth, with Wolsey's end be thine?
Or liv'st thou now, with safer pride content,
The wisest justice on the banks of Trent?
For why did Wolsey near the steeps of fate,
On weak foundations raise the enormous weight?
Why but to sink beneath misfortune's blow,
With louder ruin to the gulphs below?
What Ver. 108 -- 113.
gave great Villiers to the assassin's knife,
And fixed disease on Harley's closing life?
What murdered Wentworth, and what exiled Hyde,
By kings protected, and to kings allied?
What but their wish indulged in courts to shine,
And power too great to keep, or to resign?
When Ver. 114 -- 132.
first the college rolls receive his name,
The young enthusiast quits his ease for fame;
Through all his veins the fever of renown
Spreads from the strong contagion of the gown;
Over Bodley's dome his future labors spread,
And There is a tradition, that the study of friar Bacon, built on an arch over
the bridge, will fall, when a man greater than Bacon shall pass under it.
Bacon's mansion trembles over his head.
Are these thy views? proceed, illustrious youth,
And virtue guard thee to the throne of Truth!
Yet should thy soul indulge the generous heat,
Till captive Science yields her last retreat;
Should Reason guide thee with her brightest ray,
And pour on misty Doubt resistless day;
Should no false Kindness lure to loose delight,
Nor Praise relax, nor Difficulty fright;
Should tempting Novelty thy cell refrain,
And Sloth effuse her opiate fumes in vain;
Should Beauty blunt on fops her fatal dart,
Nor claim the triumph of a lettered heart;
Should no Disease thy torpid veins invade,
Nor Melancholy's phantoms haunt thy shade;
Yet hope not life from grief or danger free,
Nor think the doom of man reversed for thee:
Deign on the passing world to turn thine eyes,
And pause awhile from letters, to be wise;
There mark what ills the scholar's life assail,
Toil, envy, want, the patron, and the jail.
See nations slowly wise, and meanly just,
To buried merit raise the tardy bust.
If dreams yet flatter, once again attend,
Hear Lydiat's life, and Galileo's end.
Nor deem, when learning her last prize bestows
The glittering eminence exempt from foes;
See when the vulgar 'scape, despised or awed,
Rebellion's vengeful talons seize on Laud.
From meaner minds, though smaller fines content
The plundered palace or sequestered rent;
Marked out by dangerous parts he meets the shock,
And fatal Learning leads him to the block:
Around his tomb let Art and Genius weep,
But hear his death, ye blockheads, hear and sleep.
The Ver. 133 -- 146.
festal blazes, the triumphal show,
The ravished standard, and the captive foe,
The senate's thanks, the gazette's pompous tale,
With force resistless over the brave prevail.
Such bribes the rapid Greek over Asia whirled,
For such the steady Romans shook the world;
For such in distant lands the Britons shine,
And stain with blood the Danube or the Rhine;
This power has praise, that virtue scarce can warm,
Till fame supplies the universal charm.
Yet Reason frowns on War's unequal game,
Where wasted nations raise a single name,
And mortgaged states their grandsires wreaths regret,
From age to age in everlasting debt;
Wreaths which at last the dear-bought right convey
To rust on medals, or on stones decay.
On Ver. 147 -- 167.
what foundation stands the warrior's pride,
How just his hopes let Swedish Charles decide;
A frame of adamant, a soul of fire,
No dangers fright him, and no labors tire;
Over love, over fear extends his wide domain,
Unconquered lord of pleasure and of pain;
No joys to him pacific scepters yield,
War sounds the trump, he rushes to the field;
Behold surrounding kings their power combine,
And one capitulate, and one resign;
Peace courts his hand, but spreads her charms in vain;
"Think nothing gained, he cries, till naught remain,
"On Moscow's walls till Gothic standards fly,
"And all be mine beneath the polar sky."
The march begins in military state,
And nations on his eye suspended wait;
Stern Famine guards the solitary coast,
And Winter barricades the realms of Frost;
He comes, not want and cold his course delay; --
Hide, blushing Glory, hide Pultowa's day:
The vanquished hero leaves his broken bands,
And shows his miseries in distant lands;
Condemned a needy supplicant to wait,
While ladies interpose, and slaves debate.
But did not Chance at length her error mend?
Did no subverted empire mark his end?
Did rival monarchs give the fatal wound?
Or hostile millions press him to the ground?
His fall was destined to a barren strand,
A petty fortress, and a dubious hand;
He left the name, at which the world grew pale,
To point a moral, or adorn a tale.
All Ver. 168 -- 187.
times their scenes of pompous woes afford,
From Persia's tyrant to Bavaria's lord.
In gay hostility, and barbarous pride,
With half mankind embattled at his side,
Great Xerxes comes to seize the certain prey,
And starves exhausted regions in his way;
Attendant Flattery counts his myriads over,
Till counted myriads sooth his pride no more;
Fresh praise is tried till madness fires his mind,
The waves he lashes, and enchains the wind;
New powers are claimed, new powers are still bestowed,
Till rude resistance lops the spreading god;
The daring Greeks deride the martial show,
And heap their valleys with the gaudy foe;
Th'insulted sea with humbler thoughts he gains,
A single skiff to speed his flight remains;
Th'incumber'd oar scarce leaves the dreaded coast
Through purple billows and a floating host.
The bold Bavarian, in a luckless hour,
Tries the dread summits of Cesarean power,
With unexpected legions bursts away,
And sees defenseless realms receive his sway;
Short sway! fair Austria spreads her mournful charms,
The queen, the beauty, sets the world in arms;
From hill to hill the beacons rousing blaze
Spreads wide the hope of plunder and of praise;
The fierce Croatian, and the wild Hussar,
And all the sons of ravage crowd the war;
The baffled prince in honor's flattering bloom
Of hasty greatness finds the fatal doom,
His foes derision, and his subjects blame,
And steals to death from anguish and from shame.
Enlarge Ver. 188 -- 288.
my life with multitude of days,
In health, in sickness, thus the suppliant prays;
Hides from himself his state, and shuns to know,
That life protracted is protracted woe.
Time hovers over, impatient to destroy,
And shuts up all the passages of joy:
In vain their gifts the bounteous seasons pour,
The fruit autumnal, and the vernal flower,
With listless eyes the dotard views the store,
He views, and wonders that they please no more;
Now pall the tastless meats, and joyless wines,
And Luxury with sighs her slave resigns.
Approach, ye minstrels, try the soothing strain,
And yield the tuneful lenitives of pain:
No sounds alas would touch th'impervious ear,
Though dancing mountains witnessed Orpheus near;
Nor lute nor lyre his feeble powers attend,
Nor sweeter music of a virtuous friend,
But everlasting dictates crowd his tongue,
Perversely grave, or positively wrong.
The still returning tale, and lingering jest,
Perplex the fawning niece and pampered guest,
While growing hopes scarce awe the gathering sneer,
And scarce a legacy can bribe to hear;
The watchful guests still hint the last offense,
The daughter's petulance, the son's expense,
Improve his heady rage with treacherous skill,
And mould his passions till they make his will.
Unnumber'd maladies his joints invade,
Lay siege to life and press the dire blockade;
But unextinguish'd Avarice still remains,
And dreaded losses aggravate his pains;
He turns, with anxious heart and cripled hands,
His bonds of debt, and mortgages of lands;
Or views his coffers with suspicious eyes,
Unlocks his gold, and counts it till he dies.
But grant, the virtues of a temperate prime
Bless with an age exempt from scorn or crime;
An age that melts in unperceived decay,
And glides in modest Innocence away;
Whose peaceful day Benevolence endears,
Whose night congratulating Conscience cheers;
The general favorite as the general friend:
Such age there is, and who could wish its end?
Yet even on this her load Misfortune flings,
To press the weary minutes flagging wings:
New sorrow rises as the day returns,
A sister sickens, or a daughter mourns.
Now kindred Merit fills the sable bier,
Now lacerated Friendship claims a tear.
Year chases year, decay pursues decay,
Still drops some joy from withering life away;
New forms arise, and different views engage,
Superfluous lags the vet'ran on the stage,
Till pitying Nature signs the last release,
And bids afflicted worth retire to peace.
But few there are whom hours like these await,
Who set unclouded in the gulphs of fate.
From Lydia's monarch should the search descend,
By Solon cautioned to regard his end,
In life's last scene what prodigies surprise,
Fears of the brave, and follies of the wise?
From Marlb'rough's eyes the streams of dotage flow,
And Swift expires a driv'ler and a show.
The Ver. 289 -- 345.
teeming mother, anxious for her race,
Begs for each birth the fortune of a face:
Yet Vane could tell what ills from beauty spring;
And Sedley cursed the form that pleased a king.
Ye nymphs of rosy lips and radiant eyes,
Whom Pleasure keeps too busy to be wise,
Whom Joys with soft varieties invite,
By day the frolic, and the dance by night,
Who frown with vanity, who smile with art,
And ask the latest fashion of the heart,
What care, what rules your heedless charms shall save,
Each nymph your rival, and each youth your slave?
Against your fame with fondness hate combines,
The rival batters, and the lover mines.
With distant voice neglected Virtue calls,
Less heard and less, the faint remonstrance falls;
Tired with contempt, she quits the slippery reign,
And Pride and Prudence take her seat in vain.
In crowd at once, where none the pass defend,
The harmless Freedom, and the private Friend.
The guardians yield, by force superior plied;
By Interest, Prudence; and by Flattery, Pride.
Now Beauty falls betrayed, despised, distressed,
And hissing Infamy proclaims the rest.
Where Ver. 346 -- 366.
then shall Hope and Fear their objects find?
Must dull Suspense corrupt the stagnant mind?
Must helpless man, in ignorance sedate,
Roll darkling down the torrent of his fate?
Must no dislike alarm, no wishes rise,
No cries attempt the mercies of the skies?
Enquirer, cease, petitions yet remain,
Which heaven may hear, nor deem religion vain.
Still raise for good the supplicating voice,
But leave to heaven the measure and the choice.
Safe in his power, whose eyes discern afar
The secret ambush of a specious prayer.
Implore his aid, in his decisions rest,
Secure whatever he gives, he gives the best.
Yet when the sense of sacred presence fires,
And strong devotion to the skies aspires,
Pour forth thy fervours for a healthful mind,
Obedient passions, and a will resigned;
For love, which scarce collective man can fill;
For patience sovereign over transmuted ill;
For faith, that panting for a happier seat,
Counts death kind Nature's signal of retreat:
These goods for man the laws of heaven ordain,
These goods he grants, who grants the power to gain;
With these celestial wisdom calms the mind,
And makes the happiness she does not find.
THE TEARS OF OLD MAY DAY.
LED by the jocund train of vernal hours
And vernal airs, uprose the gentle May;
Blushing she rose, and blushing rose the flowers
That sprung spontaneous in her genial ray.
Her locks with heaven's ambrosial dews were bright,
And amorous zephyrs fluttered on her breast:
With every shifting gleam of morning light
The colors shifted of her rainbow vest.
Imperial ensigns graced her smiling form,
A golden key, and golden wand she bore;
This charms to peace each sullen eastern storm,
And that unlocks the Summer's copious store.
Onward in conscious majesty she came,
The grateful honors of mankind to taste;
To gather fairest wreaths of future fame,
And blend fresh triumphs with her glories past.
Vain hope! no more in choral bands unite
Her virgin vot'ries, and at early dawn,
Sacred to May and Love's mysterious rite,
Brush the light dew-drops Alluding to the country custom of gathering May-dew.
from the spangled lawn.
To her no more Augusta's The plate garlands of London.
wealthy pride
Pours the full tribute from Potosi's mine;
Nor fresh-blown garlands village maids provide,
A purer offering, at her rustic shrine.
No more the Maypole's verdant height around
To Valor's games the ambitions youth advance;
No merry bells and tabors' sprightlier sound
Wake the loud carol, and the sportive dance.
Sudden in pensive sadness drooped her head,
Faint on her cheeks the blushing crimson died --
"O! chaste victorious triumphs, whither fled?
"My maiden honors, whither gone?" she cried.
Ah! once to fame and bright dominion born,
The Earth and smiling Ocean saw me rise,
With time coeval and the star of morn,
The first, the fairest daughter of the skies.
Then, when at heaven's prolific mandate sprung
The radiant beam of new-created day,
Celestial harps, to airs of triumph strung,
Hailed the glad dawn, and angels called me MAY.
Space in her empty regions heard the sound,
And hills, and dales, and rocks, and valleys rung;
The sun exulted in his glorious round,
And shouting planets in their courses sung.
Forever then I led the constant year;
Saw Youth, and Joy, and Love's enchanting wiles;
Saw the mild Graces in my train appear,
And infant Beauty brighten in my smiles.
No Winter frowned. In sweet embrace allied,
Three sister Seasons danced the eternal green;
And Spring's retiring softness gently vy'd
With Autumn's blush, and Summer's lofty mein.
Too soon, when man profaned the blessings given,
And Vengeance armed to blot a guilty age,
With bright Astrea to my native heaven
I fled, and flying saw the Deluge rage:
Saw bursting clouds eclipse the noontide beams,
While sounding billows from the mountains rolled,
With bitter waves polluting all my streams,
My nectar'd streams, that flowed on sands of gold.
Then vanished many a sea-girt isle and grove,
Their forests floating on the watery plain:
Then, famed for arts and laws derived from Jove,
My Atalantis See Plato.
sunk beneath the main.
No longer bloomed primeval Eden's bowers,
Nor guardian dragons watched the Hesperian steep:
With all their fountains, fragrant fruits and flowers,
Torn from the continent to glut the deep.
No more to dwell in sylvan scenes I deigned,
Yet often descending to the languid earth,
With quickening powers the fainting mass sustained,
And waked her slumbering atoms into birth.
And every echo caught my raptured name,
And every virgin breathed her amorous vows,
And precious wreaths of rich immortal fame,
Show'r'd by the Muses, crowned my lofty brows.
But chief in Europe, and in Europe's pride,
My Albion's favored realms, I rose adored;
And poured my wealth, to other climes denied,
From Amalthea's horn with plenty stored.
Ah me! for now a younger rival claims
My ravished honors, and to her belong
My choral dances, and victorious games,
To her my garlands and triumphal song.
O say what yet untasted bounties flow,
What purer joys await her gentler reign?
Do lillies fairer, vi'lets sweeter blow?
And warbles Philomel a softer strain?
Do morning suns in ruddier glory rise?
Does evening fan her with serener gales?
Do clouds drop fatness from the wealthier skies,
Or wantons Plenty in her happier vales?
Ah! no: the blunted beams of dawning light
Skirt the pale orient with uncertain day;
And Cynthia, riding on the car of night,
Through clouds embattled faintly wins her way.
Pale, immature, the blighted verdure springs,
Nor mounting juices feed the swelling flower;
Mute all the groves, nor Philomela sings
When Silence listens at the midnight hour.
Nor wonder, man, that Nature's bashful face,
And opening charms her rude embraces fear:
Is she not sprung of April's wayward race,
The sickly daughter of the unripen'd year?
With showers and sunshine in her fickle eyes,
With hollow smiles proclaiming treacherous peace;
With blushes, harb'ring in their thin disguise,
The blast that riots on the Spring's increase.
Is this the fair invested with my spoil
By Europe's laws, and Senates' stern command?
Ungen'rous Europe, let me fly thy soil,
And waft my treasures to a grateful land:
Again revive on Asia's drooping shore
My Daphne's groves, or Lycia's ancient plain:
Again to Afric's sultry sands restore
Embow'ring shades, and Lybian Ammon's fane:
Or haste to northern Zembla's savage coast,
There hush to silence elemental strife;
Brood over the region of eternal Frost,
And swell her barren womb with heat and life.
Then Britain -- here she ceased. Indignant grief,
And parting pangs her fault'ring tongue suppressed:
Veiled in an amber cloud, she sought relief,
And tears, and silent anguish told the rest.
SONG for RANELAGH.
By Mr. W. WHITEHEAD.
I.
YE belles, and ye flirts, and ye pert little things,
Who trip in this frolicksome round,
Pray tell me from whence this indecency springs,
The sexes at once to confound:
What means the cocked hat, and the masculine air,
With each motion designed to perplex?
Bright eyes where intended to languish not stare,
And softness the test of your sex.
II.
The girl who on beauty depends for support,
May call every art to her aid:
The bosom displayed, and the petticoat short,
Are samples she gives of her trade.
But you, on whom Fortune indulgently smiles,
And whom Pride has preserved from the snare;
Should slily attack us, with coyness and wiles,
Not with open and insolent air.
III.
The Venus whose statue delights all mankind
Shrinks modestly back from the view,
And kindly should seem by the artist designed
To serve as a model for you.
Then learn with her beauties to copy her air,
Nor venture too much to reveal;
Our fancies will paint what you cover with care,
And double each charm you conceal.
IV.
The blushes of Morn, and the mildness of May,
Are charms which no art can procure;
Oh! be but yourselves, and our homage we pay,
And your empire is solid and sure.
But if Amazon-like you attack your gallants,
And put us in fear of our lives,
You may do very well for sisters and aunts,
But believe me you will never be wives.
The BENEDICITE Paraphrased.
By the Rev. Mr. MERRICK.
I.
YE works of God, on him alone,
In earth his footstool, heaven his throne,
Be all your praise bestowed;
Whose hand the beauteous fabric made,
Whose eye the sinish'd work surveyed,
And saw that all was good.
II.
Ye angels, that with loud acclaim
Admiring viewed the now-born frame,
And hailed the eternal King;
Again proclaim your Maker's praise,
Again your thankful voices raise,
And touch the tuneful string.
III.
Praise him, ye blessed aetherial plains,
Where, in full majesty, he deigns
To fix his awful throne:
Ye waters, that above him roll,
From orb to orb, from pole to pole,
Oh! make his praises known!
IV.
Ye thrones, dominions, virtues, powers,
Join ye your joyful songs with ours,
With us your voices raise;
From age to age extend the lay,
To heaven's eternal Monarch pay
Hymns of eternal praise.
V.
Celestial orb! -- whose powerful ray
Opes the glad eyelids of the day,
Whose influence all things own;
Praise him, whose courts effulgent shine
With light, as far excelling thine,
As thine the paler moon.
VI.
Ye glittering planets of the sky,
Whose lamps the absent sun supply,
With him the song pursue;
And let himself submissive own,
He borrows from a brighter Sun,
The light he lends to you.
VII.
Ye showers, and dews, whose moisture shed,
Calls into life the opening seed,
To him your praises yield;
Whose influence wakes the genial birth,
Drops fatness on the pregnant earth,
And crowns the laughing field.
VIII.
Ye winds, that often tempestuous sweep
The ruffled surface of the deep,
With us confess your God;
See, through the heavens, the King of kings,
Up-borne on your expanded wings,
Comes flying all abroad.
IX.
Ye floods of fire, wherever ye flow,
With just submission humbly bow
To his superior power;
Who stops the tempest on its way,
Or bids the flaming deluge stray,
And gives it strength to roar.
X.
Ye summer's heat, and winter's cold,
By turns in long succession rolled,
The drooping world to cheer;
Praise him, who gave the sun and moon,
To lead the various seasons on,
And guide the circling year.
XI.
Ye frosts, that bind the watery plain,
Ye silent showers of fleecy rain,
Pursue the heavenly theme;
Praise him who sheds the driving snow,
Forbids the hardened waves to flow,
And stops the rapid stream.
XII.
Ye days and nights, that swiftly born,
From morn to eve, from eve to morn,
Alternate glide away;
Praise him, whose never-varying light,
Absent, adds horror to the night,
But present gives the day.
XIII.
Light, -- from whose rays all beauty springs,
Darkness, -- whose wide-expanded wings
Involve the dusky globe;
Praise him, who, when the heavens he spread,
Darkness his thick pavillion made,
And light his regal robe.
XIV.
Praise him, ye lightenings, as ye fly,
Winged with his vengeance through the sky,
And red with wrath divine;
Praise him, ye clouds, that wandering stray,
Or fixed by him in close array,
Surround his awful shrine.
XV.
Exalt, O earth! thy heavenly king,
Who bids the plants, that form the spring,
With annual verdure bloom;
Whose frequent drops of kindly rain,
Prolifick swell the ripening grain,
And bless thy fertile womb.
XVI.
Ye mountains, that ambitious rise,
And heave your summits to the skies,
Revere his awful nod;
Think how ye once affrighted fled,
When Jordan sought his fountainhead,
And owned the approaching God.
XVII.
Ye trees, that fill the rural scene,
Ye flowers, that over the enameled green
In native beauty reign,
O! praise the Ruler of the skies,
Whose hand the genial sap supplies,
And clothes the smiling plain.
XVIII.
Ye secret springs, ye gentle rills,
That murmuring rise among the hills,
Or fill the humble vale;
Praise him, at whose almighty nod
The rugged rock dissolving flowed,
And formed a springing well.
XIX.
Praise him, ye floods, and seas profound,
Whose waves the spacious earth surround,
And roll from shore to shore;
Awed by his voice, ye seas, subside,
Ye floods, within your channels glide,
And tremble and adore.
XX.
Ye whales, that stir the boiling deep,
Or in its dark recesses sleep,
Remote from human eye;
Praise him, by whom ye all are fed,
Praise him, without whose heavenly aid
Ye languish, faint, and die.
XXI.
Ye birds, exalt your Maker's name,
Begin, and with the important theme
Your artless lays improve;
Wake with your songs the rising day,
Let music sound on every spray,
And fill the vocal grove.
XXII.
Praise him, ye beasts, that nightly roam
Amid the solitary gloom,
The expected prey to seize;
Ye slaves of the laborious plough,
Your stubborn necks submissive bow,
And bend your wearied knees.
XXIII.
Ye sons of men, his praise display,
Who stamped his image on your clay,
And gave it power to move;
Ye, that in Judah's confines dwell,
From age to age successive tell
The wonders of his love.
XXIV.
Let Levi's tribe the lay prolong,
'Till angels listen to the song,
And bend attentive down;
Let wonder seize the heavenly train,
Pleased, while they hear a mortal strain,
So sweet, so like their own.
XXV.
And you, your thankful voices join,
That often at Salem's sacred shrine
Before his altars kneel;
Where throned in majesty he dwells,
And from the mystic cloud reveals
The dictates of his will.
XXVI.
Ye spirits of the just and good,
That, eager for the blessed abode,
To heavenly mansions soar;
O! let your songs his praise display,
Till heaven itself shall melt away,
And time shall be no more.
XXVII.
Praise him, ye meek and humble train,
Ye saints, whom his decrees ordain
The boundless bliss to share;
O! praise him, till ye take your way
To regions of eternal day,
And reign for ever there.
XXVIII.
Let us, who now impassive stand,
Awed by the tyrant's stern command,
Amid the fiery blaze;
While thus we triumph in the flame,
Rise, and our Maker's love proclaim,
In hymns of endless praise.
AN ODE TO FANCY.
By the Same.
FANCY, whose delusions vain
Sport themselves with human brain;
Rival thou of Nature's power,
Can, from thy exhaustless store,
Bid a tide of sorrow flow,
And whelm the soul in deepest woe:
Or in the twinkling of an eye,
Raise it to mirth and jollity.
Dreams and shadows by thee stand,
Taught to run at thy command,
And along the wanton air,
Flit like empty Gossimer.
Thee, black Melancholy of yore
To the swift-wing'd Hermes bore:
From the mixture of thy line,
Different natures in thee join,
Which thou chusest to express
By the variance of thy dress.
Now like thy sire thou love to seem
Light and gay with pinions trim,
Dipped in all the dies that glow
In the bend of Iris' bow:
Now like thy mother drear and sad,
(All in mournful vestments clad,
Cypress weeds and sable stole,)
Thou rushest on the affrighted soul.
Often I feel thee coming on,
When the night has reached her noon,
And darkness partner of her reign,
Round the world has bound her chain,
Then with measured step and slow,
In the churchyard path I go,
And while my outward senses sleep,
Lost in contemplation deep,
Sudden I stop, and turn my ear,
And listening hear, or think I hear.
First a dead and sullen sound
Walks along the holy ground;
Then through the gloom alternate break
Groans, and the shrill screech-owl's shriek.
Lo! the moon has hid her head,
And the graves give up their dead:
By me pass the ghastly crowds,
Wrapped in visionary shrouds;
Maids, who died with love forlorn,
Youths, who fell by maidens' scorn.
Helpless sires and matrons old
Slain for sordid thirst of gold,
And babes who owe their shortened date;
To cruel step-dames ruthless hate;
Each their several errands go,
To haunt the wretch that wrought their woe:
From their sight the caitiff flies,
And his heart within him dies;
While a horror damp and chill
Through his frozen blood does thrill,
And his hair for very dread
Bears itself upon his head.
When the early breath of day
Has made the shadows flee away;
Still possessed by thee I rove
Bosomed in the sheltering grove,
There, with hearts and lyre new strung,
Meditate the lofty song.
And if thou my voice inspire,
And with wonted frenzy fire,
Aided by thee I build the rhyme
Such, as nor the flight of time
Nor wasting flame, nor eating shower,
Nor lightning's blast can ever devour.
Or if chance some moral page
My attentive thoughts engage,
On I walk, with silent tread,
Under the thick woven shade,
While the thrush, unheeded by,
Tunes her artless minstrelsy.
Listening to their sacred lore,
I think on ages long past over,
When Truth and Virtue hand in hand
Walked upon the smiling land.
Thence my eyes on Britain glance
And, awakened from my trance,
While my busy thoughts I rear,
Often I wipe the falling tear.
When the night again descends
And her shadowy cone extends,
Over the fields I walk alone,
By the silence of the moon.
Hark! upon my left I hear
Wild music wandering in the air;
Led by the sound I onward creep,
And through the neighboring hedge I peep;
There I spy the Fairy band
Dancing on the level land,
Now with step alternate bound,
Joined in one continued round,
Now their plighted hands unbind,
And such tangl'd mazes wind
As the quick eye can scarce pursue,
And would have puzzle that famed clue,
Which led the Athenian's unskilled feet
Through the Labyrinth of Crete.
At the near approach of day,
Sudden the music dies away,
Wasting in the sea of air,
And the phantoms disappear,
All (as the glowworm waxes dim)
Vanish like a morning dream,
And of their revels leave no trace,
Save the ring upon the grass.
When the elphin show is fled,
Home I haste me to my bed;
There, if thou with magic wand
On my temples take thy stand,
I see in mixed disorder rise
All that struck my waking eyes;
So when I stand, and round me gaze,
Where the famed Lodona strays
On the woods and thickets brown,
That its sedgy margin crown,
And watch the vagrant clouds that fly
Through the vast desert of the sky,
When adown I cast my look
On the smooth unruffl'd brook,
(While its current clear does run,
And holds its mirror to the sun,)
There I see the inverted scene
Fall, and meet the eye again.
The MONKIES, a TALE.
By the Same.
WHOEVER with curious eye has ranged
Through Ovid's tales, has seen
How Jove, incensed, to monkies changed
A tribe of worthless men.
Repentant soon the offending race
Entreat the injured power,
To give them back the human face,
And reason's aid restore.
Jove, soothed at length, his ear inclined,
And granted half their prayer;
But the other half he bade the wind
Disperse in empty air.
Scarce had the thund'rer given the nod
That shook the vaulted skies,
With haughtier air the creatures strode,
And stretched their dwindled size.
The hair in curls luxuriant now
Around their temples spread;
The tail that whilom hung below,
Now dangl'd from the head.
The head remains unchanged within,
Nor altered much the face;
It still retains its native grin,
And all its old grimace.
Thus half transformed and half the same,
Jove bade them take their place,
(Restoring them their ancient claim)
Among the human race.
Man with contempt the brute surveyed,
Nor would a name bestow;
But woman liked the motley breed,
And called the thing a Beau.
An EPITAPH.
QUAEte sub tenera rapuerunt, Paeta, juventa,
O utinam me crudelia fata vocent;
Ut linquam terras invisaque lumina solis,
Utque tuus rursum corpore sim posito.
Tu cave Laethaeo contingas ora liquore,
Et cito venturi sis memor, oro, viri
Te sequar obscurum per iter: dux ibit eunti
Fidus amor, tenebras lampade discutiens.
Thus TRANSLATED.
By the Same.
THEE, Paeta, Death's relentless hand
Cut off in earliest bloom:
Oh! had the fates for me ordained
To share an equal doom;
With joy this busy world I Would leave,
This hated light resign,
To lay me in the peaceful grave
And be for ever thine:
Do thou, if Lethe court thy lip,
To taste its stream forbear:
Still in thy soul his image keep,
Who hastes to meet thee there.
Safe over the dark and dreary shore
In quest of thee I Will roam,
Love with his lamp shall run before,
And break the circling gloom.
VERSES sent to Dean SWIFT on his Birthday, with PINE's Horace finely bound.
Written by Dr. J. SICAN.
[HORACE speaking.] YOU HAVE read, Sir, in poetic strain,
How Varus and the Mantuan swain,
Have on my birthday been invited
(But I was forced in verse to write it,)
Upon a plain repast to dine,
And taste my old Companian wine;
But I, who all punctilio's hate,
Though long familiar with the great,
Nor glory in my reputation,
Am come without an invitation.
And though I Am used to right Falernian,
I Will deign for once to taste Iernian;
But fearing that you might dispute
(Had I put on a common suit,)
My breeding and my politesse,
I visit in a birthday dress;
My coat of purest Turkey-red,
With gold embroid'ry richly spread;
To which, I Have sure as good pretensions,
As Irish lords who starve on pensions.
What though proud ministers of state
Did at your antichamber wait;
What though your Oxfords, and your St. John's,
Have at your Levee paid attendance;
And Peterborough and great Ormond,
With many chiefs who now are dormant,
Have laid aside the general's staff
And public cares, with you to laugh;
Yet I some friends as good can name,
Nor less the darling sons of fame;
For sure my Pollio and Mecaenas
Were as good statesmen, Mr. Dean, as
Either your Bolingbroke or Harley,
Though they made Lewis beg a parley:
And as for Mordaunt your loved hero,
I Will match him with my Drusus Nero.
You Will boast perhaps your favorite Pope,
But Virgil is as good I hope.
I own indeed I cannot get any
To equal Helsham and Delany;
Since, Athens brought forth Socrates,
A Grecian Isle Hippocrates;
Since, Tully lived before my time,
And Galen blessed another clime.
You Will plead perhaps to my request
To be admitted as a guest,
Your hearing's bad -- but why such fears?
I speak to eyes, and not to ears;
And for that reason, wisely took
The form you see me in, a book.
Attacked, by slow devouring moths,
By rage of barbarous Huns and Goths;
By Bentley's notes, my deadliest foes,
By Creeche's rhimes and Dunster's prose;
I found my boasted wit and fire
In their rude hands almost expire:
Yet still they but in vain assailed,
For had their violence prevailed,
And in a blast destroyed my fame,
They would have partly missed their aim;
Since all my spirit in thy page
Defies the Vandals of this age.
It Is yours to save these small remains
From future pedants muddy brains,
And fix my long-uncertain fate,
You best know how. -- Which way? -- translate.
VERSES written in a GARDEN.
By Lady M. W. M.
SEE how that pair of billing doves
With open murmurs own their loves;
And heedless of censorious eyes,
Pursue their unpolluted joys:
No fears of future want molest
The downy quiet of their nest;
No interest joined the happy pair,
Securely blessed in Nature's care,
While her dear dictates they pursue:
For constancy is nature too.
Can all the doctrine of our schools,
Our maxims, our religious rules,
Can learning to our lives ensure
Virtue so bright, or bliss so pure?
The great Creator's happy ends,
Virtue and pleasure ever blends:
In vain the church and court have tried
The united essence to divide;
Alike they find their wild mistake,
The pedant priest, and giddy rake.
An ANSWER To a LOVE-LETTER.
By the Same.
IS it to me, this sad lamenting strain?
Are heaven's choicest gifts bestowed in vain?
A plenteous fortune, and a beauteous bride,
Your love rewarded, gratified your pride:
Yet leaving her -- it is me that you pursue,
Without one single charm, but being new.
How vile is man! how I detest their ways
Of artful falsehood, and designing praise!
Tasteless, an easy happiness you slight,
Ruin your joy, and mischief your delight.
Why should poor pug (the mimic of your kind)
Wear a rough chain, and be to box confined?
Some cup, perhaps, he breaks, or tears a fan, --
While roves unpunished the destroyer, man.
Not bound by vows, and unrestrained by shame,
In sport you break the heart, and rend the fame.
Not that your art can be successful here,
The already plundered need no robber fear:
Nor sighs, nor charms, nor flatteries can move,
Too well secured against a second love.
Once, and but once, that devil charmed my mind;
To reason deaf, to observation blind;
I idly hoped (what cannot love persuade!)
My fondness equaled, and my love repaid;
Slow to distrust, and willing to believe,
Long hushed my doubts, and did myself deceive:
But, oh! too soon -- this tale would ever last;
Sleep, sleep, my wrongs, and let me think 'em past.
For you, who mourn with counterfeited grief,
And ask so boldly like a begging thief,
May soon some other nymph inflict the pain,
You know so well with cruel art to feign.
Though long you sported have with Cupid's dart,
You may see eyes, and you may feel a heart.
So the brisk wits, who stop the evening coach,
Laugh at the fear that follows their approach;
With idle mirth, and haughty scorn despise
The passenger's pale cheek, and staring eyes:
But seized by Justice, find a fright no jest,
And all the terror doubled in their breast.
In Answer to a LADY Who advised RETIREMENT.
By the Same.
YOU little know the heart that you advise;
I view this various scene with equal eyes:
In crowded courts I find myself alone,
And pay my worship to a nobler throne.
Long since the value of this world I know,
Pity the madness, and despise the show.
Well as I can my tedious part I bear,
And wait for my dismission without fear.
Seldom I mark mankind's detested ways,
Not hearing censure, nor affecting praise;
And, unconcerned, my future state I trust
To that sole Being, merciful and just.
An Address of the STATUES at STOWE, to Lord COBHAM, on his return to his
Gardens.
FROM every Muse and every art thy own,
Thy bowers our theaters, thy mind our throne;
Hail! to thy virtues manumiz'd from state;
Hail! to thy leisure to be wisely great.
Fettered by duties and to forms enslaved,
How timely have thy years a remnant saved!
To taste that freedom which thy sword maintained,
And lead in lettered ease, a life unpain'd:
So Scipio (Carthage fallen) resigned his plume,
And smiled at the forgetfulness of Rome.
O greatly blessed! whose evening sweetest shines,
And, in unclouded slowness, calm declines!
While free reflection with reverted eye,
Wan'd from hot noontide and a troubled sky,
Divides life well: the largest part, long known
Thy country's claim; the last and best thy own.
Here while detached, thy self-supported soul
Resumes dominion and escapes control;
Moves with a grandeur, monarchs wish in vain,
Above all fears, storms, dangers, hopes or pain;
A glance sometimes from thy safe summit throw,
And see the dusty world look dim below:
Through the dark throng discern huge slaves of pride
Should'ring unheeded Happiness aside;
Thwarted and pushed and laboring into name,
And dignified with all the dirt of fame:
Then with a smile superior, turn away,
And lop the exub'rance of some straggling spray;
Wind through thy mazes to serene delight,
And from the bursting bubbles shade thy sight.
Yet where thou shin'st like heaven, behind a cloud,
Moving like light, all piercing, though not loud;
The Muse shall find thee in thy blessed retreat,
And breathe this honest wish at Cobham's feet:
Fresh as thy lakes, may all thy pleasures flow!
And breezy like thy groves, thy passions blow!
Wide as thy fancy, be thy spreading praise!
And long and lovely as thy walks, thy days.
An ODE ON THE DEATH of Mr. PELHAM.
An honest man's the noblest work of God!
POPE.
LET others hail the rising sun,
I bow to that whose course is run,
Which sets in endless night;
Whose rays benignant blessed this isle,
Made peaceful Nature round us smile
With calm, but cheerful light.
No bounty past provokes my praise,
No future prospects prompt my lays,
From real grief they flow;
I catch the alarm from Britain's fears,
My sorrows fall with Britain's tears,
And join a nation's woe.
See -- as you pass the crowded street,
Despondence clouds each face you meet,
All their lost friend deplore:
You read in every pensive eye,
You hear in every broken sigh,
That Pelham is no more.
If thus each Briton be alarmed,
Whom but his distant influence warmed,
What grief their breasts must rend,
Who in his private virtues blessed,
By Nature's dearest ties possessed
The Husband, Father, Friend.
What! mute ye bards? -- no mournful verse,
No chaplets to adorn his hearse,
To crown the good and just?
Your flowers in warmer regions bloom,
You seek no pensions from the tomb,
No laurels from the dust.
When power departed with his breath,
The sons of Flattery fled from death:
Such insects swarm at noon.
Not for herself my Muse is grieved,
She never asked, nor ever received,
One ministerial boon.
Has some peculiar strange offense,
Against us armed Omnipotence,
To check the nation's pride?
Behold the appointed punishment!
At length the vengeful bolt is sent,
It fell -- when Pelham died!
Uncheck'd by shame, unawed by dread,
When Vice triumphant rears her head,
Vengeance can sleep no more;
The evil angel stalks at large,
The good submits, resigns his charge,
And quits the unhallowed shore.
The same sad morn The 6th of March, 1754, was remarkable for the publication
of the works of a late Lord, and the death of Mr. Pelham.
to church and state
(So for our sins 'twas fixed by fate)
A double stroke was given;
Black as the whirlwinds of the north,
St. J -- n's fell Genius issued forth,
And Pelham fled to heaven!
By angels watched in Eden's bowers,
Our parents passed their peaceful hours,
Nor guilt nor pain they knew;
But on the day which ushered in
The hell-born train of mortal sin,
The heavenly guards withdrew.
Look down, much honored shade, below!
Still let thy pity aid our woe;
Stretch out thy healing hand;
Resume those feelings, which on earth
Proclaimed thy patriot love and worth,
And saved a sinking land.
Search, with thy more than mortal eye,
The breasts of all thy friends: descry
What there has got possession.
See if thy unsuspecting heart,
In some for truth mistook not art,
For principle, profession.
From these, the pests of human kind,
Whom royal bounty cannot bind,
Protect our parent King:
Unmask their treach'ry to his sight,
Drag forth the vipers into light,
And crush them ere they sting.
If such his trust and honors share,
Again exert thy guardian care,
Each venomed heart disclose;
On Him, on Him, our all depends,
Oh save him from his treacherous friends,
He cannot fear his foes.
Whoever shall at the helm preside,
Still let thy prudence be his guide,
To stem the troubled wave;
But chiefly whisper in his ear,
"That GEORGE is open, just, sincere,
"And dares to scorn a knave."
No selfish views to oppress mankind,
No mad ambition fired thy mind,
To purchase fame with blood;
Thy bosom glowed with purer heat;
Convinced that to be truly great,
Is only to be good.
To hear no lawless passion's call,
To serve thy King, yet feel for all,
Such was thy glorious plan!
Wisdom with generous love took part,
Together worked thy head and heart,
The Minister and Man.
Unite, ye kindred sons of worth;
Strangle bold Faction in its birth;
Be Britain's weal your view!
For this great end let all combine,
Let virtue link each fair design,
And Pelham live in you.
VERSES Written at MONTAUBAN in FRANCE, 1750.
By the Rev. Mr. JOSEPH WARTON.
TARN, how delightful wind thy willow'd waves,
But ah! they fructify a land of slaves!
In vain thy barefoot, sunburned peasants hide,
With luscious grapes you' hill's romantic side;
No cups nectareous shall their toils repay,
The priest's, the soldier's, and the fermier's prey:
Vain glows this sun in cloudless glory dressed,
That strikes fresh vigor through the pining breast;
Give me, beneath a colder, changeful sky,
My soul's best, only pleasure, LIBERTY!
What millions perished near thy mournful flood, Alluding to the persecutions
of the protestants, and the wars of the Saracens, carried on in the Southern
provinces of France.

When the red papal tyrant cried out -- "Blood! --
Less fierce the Saracen, and quiver'd Moor,
That dashed thy infants against the stones of yore.
Be warned, ye nations round; and trembling see
Dire superstition quench humanity!
By all the chiefs in Freedom's batiles lost;
By wise and virtuous ALFRED's awful ghost;
By old GALGACUS' scythed, iron car,
That swiftly whirling through the walks of war,
Dashed Roman blood, and crushed the foreign throngs;
By holy Druids' courage-breathing songs;
By fierce BONDUCA's shield, and foaming steeds;
By the bold peers that met on Thames's meads;
By the fifth HENRY's helm, and lightning spear,
O LIBERTY, my warm petition hear;
Be ALBION still thy joy! with her remain,
Long as the surge shall lash her oak-crown'd plain!
The Revenge of AMERICA.
By the Same.
WHEN Cortez' furious legions flew
Over ravaged fields of rich Peru,
Struck with his bleeding people's woes,
Old India's awful Genius rose.
He sat on Andes' topmost stone,
And heard a thousand nations groan;
For grief his feathery crown he tore;
To see huge PLATA foam with gore;
He broke his arrows, stamped the ground,
To view his cities smoking round.
What woes, he cried, has lust of gold
Over my poor country widely rolled;
Plunderers proceed! my bowels tear,
But ye shall meet destruction there;
From the deep-vaulted mine shall rise
The insatate fiend, pale Avarice!
Whose steps shall trembling Justice fly,
Peace, Order, Law, and Amity!
I see all Europe's children cursed
With lucre's universal thirst:
The rage that sweeps my sons away,
My baneful gold shall well repay.
The Dying INDIAN.
By the Same.
THE dart of Izdabel prevails! 'twas dipped
In double poison -- I shall soon arrive
At the blessed island, where no tigers spring
On heedless hunters; where anana's bloom
Thrice in each moon; where rivers smoothly glide,
Nor thundering torrents whirl the light canoe
Down to the sea; where my forefathers feast
Daily on hearts of Spaniards! -- O my son,
I feel the venom busy in my breast,
Approach, and bring my crown, decked with the teeth
Of that bold christian who first dared deflour
The virgins of the sun; and, dire to tell!
Robbed Vitzipultzi's statue of its gems!
I marked the spot where they interred this traitor,
And once at midnight stole I to his tomb,
And tore his carcass from the earth, and left it
A prey to poisonous flies. Preserve this crown
With sacred secrecy: if ever returns
Thy much-loved mother from the desert woods
Where, as I hunted late, I hapless lost her,
Cherish her age. Tell her I never have worshipped
With those that eat their God. And when disease
Preys on her languid limbs, then kindly stab her
With thine own hands, nor suffer her to linger,
Like christian cowards, in a life of pain.
I go! great COPAC beckons me! farewell!
ODE occasioned by Reading Mr. WEST's Translation of PINDAR.
By the Same.
I. 1.
ALBION exult! thy sons a voice divine have heard,
The man of Thebes has in thy vales appeared!
Hark! with fresh rage and undiminish'd fire,
The sweet enthusiast smites the British lyre;
The sounds that echoed on Alpheus' streams,
Reach the delighted ear of listening Thames;
Lo! swift across the dusty plain
Great Theron's foaming coursers strain!
What mortal tongue ever rolled along
Such full impetuous tides of nervous song?
I. 1.
The fearful, frigid lays of cold and creeping Art,
Nor touch, nor can transport the unfeeling heart;
Pindar, our inmost bosom piercing, warms
With glory's love, and eager thirst of arms:
When Freedom speaks in his majestic strain,
The patriot-passions beat in every vein:
We long to sit with heroes old,
'Mid groves of vegetable gold,
See 2. Olym. Od.
Where Cadmus and Achilles dwell,
And still of daring deeds and dangers tell.
I. 1.
Away, enervate bards, away,
Who spin the courtly, silken lay,
Alluding to the French and Italian lyric poets.
As wreaths for some vain Louis' head,
Or mourn some soft Adonis dead:
No more your polished lyrics boast,
In British Pindar's strength overwhelmed and lost:
As well might ye compare
The glimmerings of a waxen flame,
(Emblem of verse correctly tame)
See 1. Pyth. Od.
To his own Aetna's sulphur-spouting caves,
When to heaven's vault the fiery deluge raves,
When clouds and burning rocks dart through the troubled air.
II. 1.
In roaring cataracts down Andes' channel'd steeps
Mark how enormous Orellana sweeps!
Monarch of mighty floods! supremely strong,
Foaming from cliff to cliff he whirls along,
Swollen with an hundred hills' collected snows:
Thence over nameless regions widely flows,
Round fragrant isles, and citron-groves,
Where still the naked Indian roves,
And safely builds his leafy bower,
From slavery far, and cursed Iberian power;
II. 2.
So rapid Pindar flows. -- O parent of the lyre,
Let me for ever thy sweet sons admire,
O ancient Greece! but chief the bard whose lays
The matchless tale of Troy divine emblaze;
And next Euripides, soft Pity's priest,
Who melts in useful woes the bleeding breast;
And him, who paints the incestuous king,
Whose soul amaze and horror wring;
Teach me to taste their charms refined,
The richest banquet of the enraptured mind:
II. 3.
For the blessed man, the muse's child, Hor. Od. 3. L. 4.

On whose auspicious birth she smiled,
Whose soul she formed of purer fire,
For whom she tuned a golden lyre,
Seeks not in fighting fields renown,
Nor widows' midnight shrieks, nor burning town,
The peaceful poet please;
Nor ceaseless toils for sordid gains,
Nor purple pomp, nor wide domains,
Nor heaps of wealth, nor power, nor statesman's schemes,
Nor all deceived Ambition's feverish dreams,
Lure his contented heart from the sweet vale of ease.
THE PLEASURES of MELANCHOLY.
Written in the Year 1745.
By the Rev. Mr. THOMAS WARTON.
MOTHER of musings, Contemplation sage,
Whose grotto stands upon the topmost rock
Of Teneriff; 'mid the tempestuous night,
On which, in calmest meditation held,
Thou hear'st with howling winds the beating rain
And drifting hail descend; or if the skies
Unclouded shine, and through the blue serene
Pale Cynthia rolls her silver-axled car,
Whence gazing steadfast on the spangled vault
Raptured thou sit'st, while murmurs indistinct
Of distant billows sooth thy pensive ear
With hoarse and hollow sounds; secure, self-blest,
There often thou listen'st to the wild uproar
Of fleets encount'ring, that in whispers low
Ascends the rocky summit, where thou dwell'st
Remote from man, conversing with the spheres!
O lead me, queen sublime, to solemn glooms
Congenial with my soul; to chearless shades,
To ruined seats, to twilight cells and bowers,
Where thoughtful Melancholy loves to muse,
Her favorite midnight haunts. The laughing scenes
Of purple Spring, where all the wanton train
Of Smiles and Graces seem to lead the dance
In sportive round, while from their hands they shower
Ambrosial blooms and flowers, no longer charm;
Tempe, no more I court thy balmy breeze,
Adieu green vales! ye broider'd meads, adieu!
Beneath yon' ruined abbey's moss-grown piles
Often let me sit, at twilight hour of eve,
Where through some western window the pale moon
Pours her long-levell'd rule of streaming light;
While sullen sacred silence reigns around,
Save the lone screech-owl's note, who builds his bower
Amid the mouldering caverns dark and damp,
Or the calm breeze, that rustles in the leaves
Of flaunting ivy, that with mantle green
Invests some wasted tower. Or let me tread
Its neighboring walk of pines, where mused of old
The cloistered brothers: through the gloomy void
That far extends beneath their ample arch
As on I pace, religious horror wraps
My soul in dread repose. But when the world
Is clad in Midnight's raven-colour'd robe,
'Mid hollow charnel let me watch the flame
Of taper dim, shedding a livid glare
Over the wan heaps; while airy voices talk
Along the glimmering walls; or ghostly shape
At distance seen, invites with beck'ning hand
My lonesome steps, through the far-winding vaults.
Nor undelightful is the solemn noon
Of night, when happily wakeful from my couch
I start: lo, all is motionless around!
Roars not the rushing wind; the sons of men
And every beast in mute oblivion lie;
All nature's hushed in silence and in sleep.
O then how fearful is it to reflect,
That through the still globe's aweful solitude,
No being wakes but me! 'till stealing sleep
My drooping temples bathes in opiate dews.
Nor then let dreams, of wanton folly born,
My senses lead through flowery paths of joy;
But let the sacred Genius of the night
Such mystic visions send, as Spenser saw,
When through bewild'ring Fancy's magic maze,
To the fell house of Busyrane, he led
The unshaken Britomart; or Milton knew,
When in abstracted thought he first conceived
All heaven in tumult, and the Seraphim
Come towering, armed in adamant and gold.
Let others love soft summer's evening smiles,
As, listening to the distant water-fall,
They mark the blushes of the streaky west;
I choose the pale December's foggy glooms.
Then, when the sullen shades of evening close,
Where through the room a blindly-glimm'ring gleam
The dying embers scatter, far remote
From Mirth's mad shouts, that through the illumined roof
Resound with festive echo, let me sit,
Blessed with the lowly cricket's drowsy dirge.
Then let my thought contemplative explore
This fleeting state of things, the vain delights,
The fruitless toils, that still our search elude,
As through the wilderness of life we rove.
This sober hour of silence will unmask
False Folly's smile, that like the dazzling spells
Of wily Comus cheat the unweeting eye
With blear illusion, and persuade to drink
That charmed cup, which Reason's mintage fair
Unmoulds, and stamps the monster on the man.
Eager we taste, but in the luscious draught
Forget the poisonous dregs that lurk beneath.
Few know that elegance of soul resin'd,
Whose soft sensation feels a quicker joy
From Melancholy's scenes, than the dull pride
Of tasteless splendour and magnificence
Can ever afford. Thus Eloise, whose mind
Had languish'd to the pangs of melting love,
More genuine transport found, as on some tomb
Reclined, she watched the tapers of the dead;
Or through the pillar'd isles, amid pale shrines
Of imag'd saints, and intermingled graves,
Mused a veiled votaress; than Flavia feels,
As through the mazes of the festive ball
Proud of her conquering charms, and beauty's blaze,
She floats amid the silken sons of dress,
And shines the fairest of the assembled fair.
When azure noontide chears the daedal globe,
And the blessed regent of the golden day
Rejoices in his bright meridian bower,
How often my wishes ask the night's return,
That best befriends the melancholy mind!
Hail, sacred Night! thou too shall share my song!
Sister of ebon-scepter'd Hecat, hail!
Whether in congregated clouds thou wrap'st
Thy viewless chariot, or with silver crown
Thy beaming head encirclest, ever hail!
What though beneath thy gloom the sorceress-train,
Far in obscured haunt of Lapland-moors,
With rhymes uncouth the bloody cauldron bless;
Though Murder wan, beneath thy shrouding shade
Summons her slow-ey'd vot'ries to devise
Of secret slaughter, while by one blue lamp
In hideous conf'rence sits the listening band,
And start at each low wind, or wakeful sound:
What though thy stay the pilgrim curses often,
As all benighted in Arabian wastes
He hears the wilderness around him howl
With roaming monsters, while on his hoar head
The black-descending tempest ceaseless beats;
Yet more delightsul to my pensive mind
Is thy return, than bloomy morn's approach,
Even then, in youthful pride of opening May,
When from the portals of the saffron east
She sheds fresh roses, and ambrosial dews.
Yet not ungrateful is the morn's approach,
When dropping wet she comes, and clad in clouds,
While through the damp air scowls the louring south,
Blackening the landscape's face, that grove and hill
In formless vapors undistinguished swim:
The afflicted songsters of the sadden'd groves
Hail not the sullen gloom; the waving elms
That hoar through time, and ranged in thick array,
Enclose with stately row some rural hall,
Are mute, nor echo with the clamors hoarse
Of rooks rejoicing on their airy boughs;
While to the shed the dripping poultry crowd,
A mournful train: secure the village-hind
Hangs over the crackling blaze, nor tempts the storm;
Fixed in the unfinished furrow rests the plough:
Rings not the high wood with enlivening shouts
Of early hunter: all is silence drear;
And deepest sadness wraps the face of things.
Through POPE's soft song though all the Graces breathe,
And happiest art adorn his Attic page;
Yet does my mind with sweeter transport glow,
As at the root of mossy trunk reclined,
In magic SPENSER's wildly-warbled song
I see deserted Una wander wide
Through wasteful solitudes, and lurid heaths,
Weary, forlorn; than when the Belinda. See Rape of the Lock.
fated fair,
Upon the bosom bright of silver Thames,
Launches in all the luster of brocade,
Amid the splendors of the laughing Sun.
The gay description palls upon the sense,
And coldly strikes the mind with feeble bliss.
Ye Youths of Albion's beauty-blooming isle,
Whose brows have worn the wreath of luckless love,
Is there a pleasure like the pensive mood,
Whose magic wont to sooth your softened souls?
O tell how rapturous the joy, to melt
To Melody's assuasive voice; to bend
The uncertain step along the midnight mead,
And pour your sorrows to the pitying moon,
By many a slow trill from the bird of woe
Often interrupted; in embowering woods
By darksome brook to muse, and there forget
The solemn dullness of the tedious world,
While Fancy grasps the visionary fair:
And now no more the abstracted ear attends
The water's murmuring lapse, the entranced eye
Pierces no longer through the extended rows
Of thick-rang'd trees; 'till happily from the depth
The woodman's stroke, or distant-tinkling team,
Or heifer rustling through the brake alarms
The illuded sense, and mars the golden dream.
These are delights that absence drear has made
Familiar to my soul, ever since the form
Of young Sapphira, beauteous as the Spring,
When from her vi'let-woven couch awaked
By frolic Zephyr's hand, her tender cheek
Graceful she lifts, and blushing from her bower,
Issues to cloth in gladsome-glist'ring green
The genial globe, first met my dazzled sight:
These are delights unknown to minds profane,
And which alone the pensive soul can taste.
The taper'd choir, at the late hour of prayer,
Often let me tread, while to the according voice
The many-sounding organ peals on high,
The clear slow-dittied chaunt, or varied hymn,
Till all my soul is bathed in ecstasies,
And lap'd in Paradise. Or let me sit
Far in sequestered isles of the deep dome,
There lonesome listen to the sacred sounds,
Which, as they lengthen through the Gothic vaults,
In hollow murmurs reach my ravished ear.
Nor when the lamps expiring yield to night,
And solitude returns, would I forsake
The solemn mansion, but attentive mark
The due clock swinging slow with sweepy sway,
Measuring Time's slight with momentary sound.
Nor let me fail to cultivate my mind
With the soft thrillings of the tragic muse,
Divine Melpomene, sweet Pity's nurse,
Queen of the stately step, and flowing pall.
Now let Monimia mourn with streaming eyes
Her joys incestuous, and polluted love:
Now let soft Juliet in the gaping tomb
Print the last kiss on her true Romeo's lips,
His lips yet reeking from the deadly draught.
Or Jaffeir kneel for one forgiving look.
Nor seldom let the Moor on Desdemone
Pour the misguided threats of jealous rage.
By soft degrees the manly torrent steals
From my swollen eyes; and at a brother's woe
My big heart melts in sympathizing tears.
What are the splendors of the gaudy court,
Its tinsel trappings, and its pageant pomps?
To me far happier seems the banished Lord
Amid Siberia's unrejoycing wilds
Who pines all lonesome, in the chambers hoar
Of some high castle shut, whose windows dim
In distant ken discover trackless plains,
Where Winter ever whirls his icy car;
While still repeated objects of his view,
The gloomy battlements, and ivied spires
That crown the solitary dome, arise;
While from the topmost turret the slow clock,
Far heard along the inhospitable wastes,
With sad-returning chime awakes new grief;
Even he far happier seems than is the proud,
The potent Satrap, whom he left behind
Mid Moscow's golden palaces, to drown
In ease and luxury the laughing hours.
Illustrious objects strike the gazer's mind
With feeble bliss, and but allure the sight,
Nor rouse with impulse quick the unfeeling heart.
Thus seen by shepherd from Hymettus' brow,
What daedal landscapes smile! here palmy groves,
Resounding once with Plato's voice, arise,
Amid whose umbrage green her silver head
The unfading olive lifts; here vine-clad hills
Lay forth their purple store, and sunny vales
In prospect vast their level laps expand,
Amid whose beauties glistering Athens towers.
Though through the blissful scenes Ilissus roll
His sage-inspiring flood, whose winding marge
The thick-wove laurel shades; though roseate Morn
Pour all her splendors on the empurpled scene;
Yet feels the hoary Hermit truer joys,
As from the cliff that over his cavern hangs,
He views the piles of fallen Persepolis
In deep arrangement hide the darksome plain.
Unbounded waste! the mouldering obelise
Here, like a blasted oak, ascends the clouds;
Here Parian domes their vaulted halls disclose
Horrid with thorn, where lurks the unpitying thief,
Whence flits the twilight-loving bat at eve,
And the deaf adder wreathes her spotted train,
The dwellings once of elegance and art.
Here temples rise, amid whose hallowed bounds
Spires the black pine, while through the naked street,
Once haunt of tradeful merchants, springs the grass:
Here columns heaped on prostrate columns, torn
From their firm base, increase the mouldering mass.
Far as the sight can pierce, appear the spoils
Of sunk magnificence! a blended scene
Of moles, fanes, arches, domes, and palaces,
Where, with his brother Horror, Ruin sits.
O come then, Melancholy, queen of thought!
O come with saintly look, and steadfast step,
From forth thy cave embower'd with mournful yew,
Where ever to the curfeu's solemn sound
Listening thou sitt'st, and with thy cypress bind
Thy votary's hair, and seal him for thy son.
But never let Euphrosyne beguile
With toys of wanton mirth my fixed mind,
Nor in my path her primrose-garland cast.
Though 'mid her train the dimpled Hebe bare
Her rosy bosom to the enamored view;
Though Venus, mother of the Smiles and Loves,
And Bacchus, ivy-crown'd, in citron-bow'r
With her on nectar-streaming fruitage feast:
What though it is here is to calm the lowering skies,
And at her presence mild the embattel'd clouds
Disperse in air, and over the face of heaven
New day diffusive gleam at her approach;
Yet are these joys that Melancholy gives,
Than all her witless revels happier far;
These deep-felt joys, by Contemplation taught.
Then ever, beauteous Contemplation, hail!
From thee began, auspicious maid, my song,
With thee shall end: for thou art fairer far
Than are the nymphs of Cirrha's mossy grot;
To loftier rapture thou can wake the thought,
Than all the fabling Poet's boasted powers.
Hail, queen divine! whom, as tradition tells,
Once, in his ev'ning-walk a Druid found,
Far in a hollow glade of Mona's woods;
And pitious bore with hospitable hand
To the close shelter of his oaken bower.
There soon the sage admiring marked the dawn
Of solemn musing in your pensive thought;
For when a smiling babe, you loved to lie
Often deeply listening to the rapid roar
Of wood-hung Meinai, stream of Druids old.
A SONNET; written at W -- DE in the absence of --.
By the Same.
W -- DE, thy beechen slopes with waving grain
Bordered, thine azure views of wood and lawn,
Whilom could charm, or when the joyous Dawn
Began Night's dun robe with flushing purple stain,
Or Evening drove to sold her woolly train;
Her fairest landscapes whence my Muse has drawn,
Too free with servile courtly phrase to fawn,
Too weak to try the Buskin's stately strain:
Yet now no more thy slopes of wood and corn
Nor prospects charm, since HE far-distant strays
With whom I traced their sweets each eve and morn,
From Albion far, to cull fair Gallia's bays;
In this alone they please, however forlorn,
That still they can recall those happier days.
On BATHING. A SONNET.
By the Same.
WHEN late the trees were stripped by Winter pale,
Fair HEALTH, a Dryad-maid in vesture green,
Rejoiced to rove 'mid the bleak sylvan scene,
On airy uplands caught the fragrant gale,
And ere fresh Morn the low-couch'd lark did hail
Watching the sound of earliest horn was seen.
But since gay Summer, throned in chariot sheen,
Is come to scorch each primrose-sprinkled dale,
She chooses that delightful cave beneath
The crystal treasures of meek Isis' stream;
And now all glad the temperate air to breathe,
While cooling drops distill from arches dim,
Binding her dewy locks with sedgy wreath
She sits amid the quire of Naiads trim.
To Lady H -- Y.
By Mr. de VOLTAIRE.
H -- Y would you know the passion
You have kindled in my breast,
Trifling is the inclination
That by words can be expressed.
In my silence see the lover,
True love is by silence known;
In my eyes you will best discover
All the power of your own.
On Sir ROBERT WALPOLE's Birthday, AUGUST the 26th.
By Mr. D -- TON.
ALL hail, auspicious day, whose wished return
Bids every breast with grateful ardor burn,
While pleased Britannia that great man surveys
The Prince may trust, and yet the people praise:
One bearing greatest toils with greatest ease,
One born to serve us, and yet born to please;
His soul capacious, yet his judgment clear,
His tongue is flowing, and his heart sincere:
His counsels guide, his temper chears our isle,
And smiling gives three kingdoms cause to smile.
August, how bright thy golden scenes appear,
Thou fairest daughter of the various year,
On thee the sun with all his ardor glows,
On thee in dowry all its fruits bestows,
The greatest Prince, the foremost son of fame,
To thee bequeathed the glories of his name;
Nature and Fortune thee their darling chose,
Nor could they grace thee more, till Walpole rose.
By steps to mighty things Fate makes her way,
The sun and Caesar but prepared this day.
The Lawyer's Farewell to his Muse.
Written in the Year 1744.
AS, by some tyrant's stern command,
A wretch forsakes his native land,
In foreign climes condemned to roam
An endless exile from his home;
Pensive he treads the destined way,
And dreads to go, nor dares to stay;
'Till on some neighboring mountain's brow
He stops, and turns his eyes below;
There, melting at the well-known view,
Drops a last tear, and bids adieu:
So I, thus doomed from thee to part,
Gay queen of Fancy and of Art,
Reluctant move, with doubtful mind,
Often stop, and often look behind.
Companion of my tender age,
Serenely gay, and sweetly sage,
How blithsome were we wont to rove
By verdant hill, or shady grove,
Where fervent bees, with humming voice,
Around the honey'd oak rejoice,
And aged elms with awful bend
In long cathedral walks extend!
Lulled by the lapse of gliding floods,
Cheered by the warbling of the woods,
How blessed my days, my thoughts how free,
In sweet society with thee!
Then all was joyous, all was young,
And years unheeded rolled along:
But now the pleasing dream is over,
These scenes must charm me now no more,
Lost to the fields, and torn from you, --
Farewell -- a long, a last adieu.
Me wrangling courts, and stubborn Law
To smoke, and crowds, and cities draw:
There selfish Faction rules the day,
And Price and Avarice throng the way;
Diseases taint the murky air,
And midnight conflagrations glare;
Loose Revelry and Riot bold
In frighted streets their orgies hold;
Or, when in silence all is drowned,
Fell Murder walks her lonely round;
No room for peace, no room for you,
Adieu, celestial Nymph, adieu!
Sheakspear no more, thy sylvan son,
Nor all the art of Addison,
Pope's heav'n-strung lyre, nor Waller's ease,
Nor Milton's mighty self must please:
Instead of these, a formal band
In furs and coifs around me stand;
With sounds uncouth and accents dry,
That grate the soul of harmony,
Each pedant sage unlocks his store
Of mystic, dark, discordant lore;
And points with tottering hand the ways
That lead me to the thorny maze.
There, in a winding, close retreat,
Is Justice doomed to fix her seat,
There, fenced by bulwarks of the Law,
She keeps the wondering world in awe,
And there, from vulgar sight retired,
Like eastern queens is more admired,
O let me pierce the secret shade
Where dwells the venerable maid!
There humbly mark, with rev'rent awe,
The guardian of Britannia's Law,
Unfold with joy her sacred page,
(The united boast of many an age,
Where mixed, yet uniform, appears
The wisdom of a thousand years)
In that pure spring the bottom view,
Clear, deep, and regularly true,
And other doctrines thence imbibe
Than lurk within the sordid scribe;
Observe how parts with parts unite
In one harmonious rule of right;
See countless wheels distinctly tend
By various laws to one great end;
While mighty Alfred's piercing soul
Pervades, and regulates the whole.
Then welcome business, welcome strise,
Welcome the cares, the thorns of life,
The visage wan, the pore-blind sight,
The toil by day, the lamp at night,
The tedious forms, the solemn prate,
The pert dispute, the dull debate,
The drowsy bench, the babbling Hall,
For thee, fair Justice, welcome all!
Thus though my noon of life be past,
Yet let my setting sun, at last,
Find out the still, the rural cell,
Where sage Retirement loves to dwell!
There let me taste the homefelt bliss
Of innocence, and inward peace;
Untainted by the guilty bribe;
Uncurs'd amid the harpy-tribe;
No orphan's cry to wound my ear;
My honor, and my conscience clear;
Thus may I calmly meet my end,
Thus to the grave in peace descend!
By Miss COOPER, (now Mrs. MADDEN)
in her Brother's Coke upon Littleton.
O Thou, who labour'st in this rugged mine,
May thou to gold the unpolished ore refine!
May each dark page unfold its haggard brow!
Doubt not to reap, if thou can bear to plough.
To tempt thy care, may, each revolving night,
Purses and maces swim before thy sight!
From hence in times to come, adventurous deed!
May thou essay, to look and speak like Mead.
When the black bag and rose no more shall shade
With martial air the honors of thy head;
When the full wig thy visage shall enclose,
And only leave to view thy learned nose:
Safely may thou defy beaux, wits, and scoffers;
While tenants, in fee simple, stuff thy coffers.
SOLITUDE. An ODE.
I.
O Solitude, romantic maid,
Whether by nodding towers you tread,
Or haunt the desart's trackless gloom,
Or hover over the yawning tomb,
Or climb the Andes' clifted side,
Or by the Nile's coy source abide,
Or starting from your half-year's sleep
From Hecla view the thawing deep,
Or Tadmor's marble wastes survey,
Or in yon roofless cloister stray;
You, Recluse, again I woo,
And again your steps pursue.
II.
Plumed Conceit himself surveying,
Folly with her shadow playing,
Purse-proud, elbowing Insolence,
Bloated empirick, puffed Pretense,
Noise that through a trumpet speaks,
Laughter in loud peals that breaks,
Intrusion with a fopling's face,
(Ignorant of time and place)
Sparks of fire Dissension blowing,
Ductile, court-bred Flattery, bowing,
Restraint's stiff neck, Grimace's leer,
Squint-eyed Censure's artful sneer,
Ambition's buskins steeped in blood,
Fly thy presence, Solitude.
III.
Sage Reflection bent with years,
Conscious Virtue void of fears,
Muffled Silence wood-nymph shy,
Meditation's piercing eye,
Halcyon Peace on moss reclined,
Retrospect that scanns the mind,
Rapt earth-gazing Resvery,
Blushing artless Modesty,
Health that snuffs the morning air,
Full-ey'd Truth with bosom bare,
Inspiration, Nature's child,
Seek the solitary wild.
IV.
You with the tragic Muse In the island Salamis.
retired
The wise Euripides inspired,
You taught the sadly-pleasing air
That See Plutarch in the life of Lysander.
Athens saved from ruins bare.
You gave the Cean's tears to flow,
And Simonides.
unlocked the springs of woe;
You penned what exiled Naso thought,
And poured the melancholy note.
With Petrarch over Valcluse you strayed,
When Death snatched his Laura, twenty years, and ten after her death.
long-lov'd maid;
You taught the rocks her loss to mourn
You strewn with flowers her virgin urn.
And late in Monody on the death of Mrs. Lyttelton.
Hagley you were seen,
With bloodshed eyes, and sombre mien,
Hymen his yellow vestment tore,
And Dirge a wreath of cypress wore.
But chief you own the solemn lay
That wept Narcissa young and gay,
Darkness clapped her sable wing,
While you touched the mournful string,
Anguish left the pathless wild,
Grim-fac'd Melancholy smiled,
Drowsy Midnight ceased to yawn,
The starry host put back the dawn,
Aside their harps even Seraphs flung
To hear thy sweet complaint, O Young.
V.
When all Nature's hushed asleep,
Nor Love nor Guilt their vigils keep,
Soft you leave your cavern'd den,
And wander over the works of men.
But when Phosphor brings the dawn
By her dappled coursers drawn,
Again you to the wild retreat
And the early huntsman meet,
Where as you pensive pace along,
You catch the distant shepherd's song,
Or brush from herbs the pearly dew,
Or the rising primrose view.
Devotion lends her heaven-plum'd wings.
You mount, and Nature with you sings.
But when midday fervors glow
To upland airy shades you go,
Where never sunburnt woodman came,
Nor sportsman chased the timid game;
And there beneath an oak reclined,
With drowsy waterfalls behind,
You sink to rest.
Till the tuneful bird of night
From the neighboring poplars height
Wake you with her solemn strain,
And teach pleased Echo to complain.
VI.
With you roses brighter bloom,
Sweeter every sweet perfume,
Purer every fountain flows
Stronger every wilding grows.
VII.
Let those toil for gold who please,
Or for fame renounce their ease,
What is fame? an empty bubble.
Gold? a transient, shining trouble.
Let them for their country bleed,
What was Sidney's, Raleigh's meed?
Man's not worth a moment's pain,
Base, ungrateful, fickle, vain.
Then let me, sequestered fair,
To your Sibyl grot repair,
On yon hanging cliff it stands
Scoop'd by Nature's salvage hands,
Bosomed in the gloomy shade
Of cypress not with age decayed.
Where the owl still-hooting sits,
Where the bat incessant flits,
There in loftier strains I Will sing
Whence the changing seasons spring,
Tell how storms deform the skies,
Whence the waves subside and rise,
Trace the comet's blazing tail,
Weigh the planets in a scale;
Bend, great God, before thy shrine,
The bournless macrocosm's thine.
VIII.
Save me! what is yon shrouded shade?
That wanders in the dark-brown glade.
It beckons me! -- vain fears adieu,
Mysterious ghost, I follow you.
Ah me! too well that gait I know,
My youth's first friend, my manhood's woe!
Its breast it bares! what! stained with blood?
Quick let me stanch the vital flood.
Oh spirit, whither art thou flown?
Why left me comfortless alone?
O Solitude on me bestow,
The heartfelt harmony of woe,
Such, such, as on the Ausonian shore,
Sweet See Idyll.
Dorian Moschus trill'd of yore:
No time should cancel thy desert,
More, more, than Alluding to the death of a friend.
Bion was, thou were.
IX.
O goddess of the tearful eye,
The never-ceasing stream supply.
Let us with Retirement go
To charnels, and the house of woe,
Over Friendship's hearse low-drooping mourn,
Where the sickly tapers burn,
Where Death and nun-clad Sorrow dwell,
And nightly ring the solemn knell.
The gloom dispels, the charnel smiles,
Light flashes through the vaulted isles.
Blow silky soft, thou western gale,
O goddess of the desert, hail!
She bursts from you cliff-riven cave,
Insulted by the wintry wave;
Her brow an ivy garland binds,
Her tresses wanton with the winds,
A lion's spoils, without a zone,
Around her limbs are careless thrown;
Her right hand wields a knotted mace,
Her eyes roll wild, a stride her pace;
Her left a magic mirror holds,
In which she often herself beholds.
O goddess of the desert, hail!
And softer blow, thou western gale!
Since in each scheme of life I Have failed,
And disappointment seems entailed;
Since all on earth I valued most,
My guide, my stay, my friend is lost;
You, only you, can make me blessed,
And hush the tempest in my breast.
Then gently deign to guide my feet
To your hermit-trodden seat,
Where I may live at last my own,
Where I at last may die unknown.
I spoke, she twined her magic ray,
And thus she said, or seemed to say.
Youth, you're mistaken, if you think to find
In shades a medicine for a troubled mind;
Wan Grief will haunt you wheresoe'er you go,
Sigh in the breeze, and in the streamlet flow.
There pale Inaction pines his life away,
And, satiate, curses the return of day:
There naked Frenzy laughing wild with pain,
Or bares the blade, or plunges in the main:
There Superstition broods over all her fears,
And yells of demons in the Zephyr hears.
But if a hermit you're resolved to dwell,
And bid to social life a last farewell;
It Is impious. --
God never made an independent man,
'Twould jarr the concord of his general plan:
See every part of that stupendous whole,
"Whose body Nature is, and God the soul;"
To one great end, the general good, conspire,
From matter, brute, to man, to seraph, sire.
Should man through Nature solitary roam,
His will his sovereign, every where his home,
What force would guard him from the lion's jaw?
What swiftness wing him from the panther's paw?
Or should Fate lead him to some safer shore,
Where panthers never prowl, nor lions roar;
Where liberal Nature all her charms bestows,
Suns shine, birds sing, flowers bloom, and water flows,
Fool, do thou think he would revel on the store,
Absolve the care of Heaven, nor ask for more?
Though waters flowed, flowers bloomed, and Phoebus shone,
He Would sigh, he would murmur that he was alone.
For know, the Maker on the human breast
A sense of kindred, country, man, impressed;
And social life to better, aid, adorn,
With proper faculties each mortal's born.
Though Nature's works the ruling mind declare,
And well deserve enquiry's serious care,
The God (whatever Misanthropy may say)
Shines, beams in man with most unclouded ray.
What boots it thee to fly from pole to pole?
Hang over the sun, and with the planets roll?
What boots through space's furthest bourns to roam?
If thou, O man, a stranger art at home.
Then know thyself, the human mind survey,
The use, the pleasure will the toil repay.
Hence Inspiration plans his manner'd lays,
Hence Homer's crown, and Shakespeare hence thy bays.
Hence he, the pride of Athens and the shame,
The best and wisest of mankind became.
Nor study only, practice what you know,
Your life, your knowledge, to mankind you owe.
With Plato's olive wreath the bays entwine;
Those who in study, should in practice shine.
Say, does the learned Lord of Hagley's shade,
Charm man so much by mossy fountains laid,
As when arouz'd, he stems Corruption's course,
And shakes the senate with a Tully's force?
When Freedom gasp'd beneath a Caesar's feet,
Then Public Virtue might to shades retreat;
But where she breathes, the least may useful be,
And Freedom, Britain, still belongs to thee.
Though man's ungrateful, or though Fortune frown;
Is the reward of worth a song, or crown?
Nor yet unrecompens'd are Virtue's pains,
Good Allen lives, and bounteous Brunswick reigns.
On each condition disappointments wait,
Enter the hut, and force the guarded gate.
Nor dare repine, though early Friendship bleed,
From love, the world, and all its cares he is freed.
But know, Adversity's the child of God;
Whom Heaven approves of most, most feel her rod.
When smooth old Ocean and each storm's asleep,
Then Ignorance may plough the watery deep;
But when the demons of the tempest rave,
Skill must conduct the vessel through the wave.
Sidney, what good man envies not thy blow?
Who would not wish One of the Accusers of Socrates.
Anytus for a foe?
Intrepid Virtue triumphs over Fate,
The good can never be unfortunate.
And be this maxim graven in thy mind,
The height of virtue is to serve mankind.
But when old age has silvered over thy head,
When memory fails, and all thy vigour's fled,
Then may thou seek the stillness of retreat,
Then hear aloof the human tempest beat,
Then will I greet thee to my woodland cave,
Allay the pangs of age, and smooth thy grave.
An ODE To the Right Honorable STEPHEN POYNTZ, Esquire etc. etc.
By the Honorable Sir CHARLES HAN. WILLIAMS, Knight. of the Bath.
Sensere quid men's rite, quid indoles
Nutrita faustis sub penetralibus
Posset --
Doctrina sed vim promovet insitam,
Rectique cultus pectora roborant.
Hor. Od. 4. Lib. 4.
I.
WHILST William's deeds and William's praise
Each English breast with transport raise,
Each English tongue employ;
Say, Poyntz, if thy elated heart
Assumes not a superior part,
A larger share of joy?
II.
But that thy country's high affairs
Employ thy time, demand thy cares,
You should renew your flight;
You only should this theme pursue --
Who can for William feel like you?
Or who like you can write?
III.
Then to rehearse the Hero's praise,
To paint this sunshine of his days,
The pleasing task be mine --
To think on all thy cares o'erpaid,
To view the Hero you have made,
That pleasing part be thine.
IV.
Who first should watch, and who call forth
This youthful Prince's various worth,
You had the public voice;
Wisely his royal Sire consigned
To thee, the culture of his mind,
And England blessed the choice.
V.
You taught him to be early known
By martial deeds of courage shown:
From this, near Mona's flood,
By his victorious Father led,
He fleshed his maiden sword, he shed,
And proved the illustrious blood.
VI.
Of Virtue's various charms you taught,
With happiness and glory fraught,
How her unshaken power
Is independent of success;
That no defeat can make it less,
No conquest make it more.
VII.
This, after Tournay's fatal day,
'Midst sorrow, cares, and dire dismay,
Brought calm, and sure relief;
He scrutiniz'd his noble heart,
Found Virtue had performed her part,
And peaceful slept the chief.
VIII.
From thee he early learnt to feel
The Patriot's warmth for England's weal;
(True Valor's noblest spring)
To vindicate her Church distressed;
To fight for Liberty oppressed;
To perish for his King.
IX.
Yet say, if in thy fondest scope
Of thought, you ever dared to hope
That bounteous heaven, so soon
Would pay thy toils, reward thy care,
Consenting bend to every prayer,
And all thy wishes crown.
X.
We saw a wretch, with traitorous aid,
Our King's and Church's rights invade;
And thine, fair Liberty!
We saw thy Hero fly to war,
Beat down Rebellion, break her spear,
And set the nations free.
XI.
Culloden's field, my glorious theme,
My rapture, vision, and my dream,
Gilds the young Hero's days:
Yet can there be one English heart
That does not give thee, Poyntz, thy part,
And own thy share of praise?
XII.
Nor is thy fame to thee decreed
For life's short date: when William's head,
For victories to come,
The frequent laurel shall receive:
Chaplets for thee our sons shall weave,
And hang 'em on thy tomb.
ODE on the Death of MATZEL, a favorite Bull-finch, addressed to Mr. ST -- PE,
to whom the Author had given the Reversion of it when he left Dresden.
[By the Same.]
I.
TRY not my St -- e, it is in vain
To stop your tears, to hide your pain,
Or check your honest rage;
Give sorrow and revenge their scope,
My present joy, your future hope,
Lies murdered in his cage.
II.
Matzel's no more, ye graces, loves,
Ye linnets, nightingales and doves,
Attend the untimely bier;
Let every sorrow be expressed,
Beat with your wings each mournful breast,
And drop the natural tear.
III.
In height of song, in beauty's pride,
By fell Grimalkin's claws he died --
But vengeance shall have way:
On pains and tortures ill refine;
Yet, Matzel, that one death of thine.
His nine will ill repay.
IV.
For thee, my bird, the sacred Nine,
Who loved thy tuneful notes, shall join
In thy funereal verse:
My painful task shall be to write
The eternal dirge which they indite,
And hang it on thy hearse.
V.
In vain I loved, in vain I mourn
My bird, who never to return
Is fled to happier shades,
Where Lesbia shall for him prepare
The place most charming, and most fair
Of all the Elysian glades.
VI.
There shall thy notes in cypress grove
Sooth wretched ghosts that died for love;
There shall thy plaintive strain
Lull impious Phaedra's endless grief,
To Procris yield some short relief,
And soften Dido's pain.
VII.
Till Proserpine by chance shall hear
Thy notes, and make thee all her care,
And love thee with my love;
While each attendant's soul shall praise
The matchless Matzel's tuneful lays,
And all his songs approve.
MARTIALIS EPIGRAMMA.
Lib. 6. Ep. 34. Imitated.
[By the Same.]
COME, Chloe, and give me sweet kisses,
For sweeter sure never girl gave:
But why in the midst of my blisses
Do you ask me how many I Would have?
I Am not to be stinted in pleasure,
Then prithee my charmer be kind,
For whilst I love thee above measure,
To numbers I Will never be confined.
Count the bees that on Hybla are playing,
Count the flowers that enamel its fields,
Count the flocks that on Tempe are straying,
Or the grain that rich Sicily yields;
Go number the stars in the heaven,
Count how many sands on the shore,
When so many kisses you have given
I still shall be craving for more.
To a heartfull of love let me hold thee,
To a heart which, dear Chloe, is thine;
With my arms I Will for ever infold thee,
And twist round thy limbs like a vine.
What joy can be greater than this is?
My life on thy lips shall be spent;
But the wretch that can number his kisses
With few will be ever content.
A LITTLE WISH.
GRANT me, gods, a little feat,
Modern built, and furnished neat:
Let it stand on rising ground,
For a prospect all around;
Call the mansion Cowper's Hill;
From the mount a little rill
Let meand'ring gently flow
Through the verdant vale below.
Add a little garden to it,
Planted, walled, and well laid out;
And a little bower therein,
Little bower ever green;
And a little shady grove,
Or for study, or for love;
And some little trees that bear
Pippin, cherry, plumb, and pear;
And the apricot and peach
On the wall within my reach;
And each fragrant flower that grows,
Fragrant flower for the nose;
And the rose in all its pride,
Blooming rose, for blooming bride;
Tulips too in richest show,
Tulips gay, as birth-night beau.
Let us now go in a door,
And see what to ask for more:
Grant, ye powers, a little wine,
For a guest that comes to dine,
And a stock of mild and stale,
Honest neighbors to regale,
And October strong and mellow,
Tubes and weed for hearty fellow;
These in Cestrian moulds comprest,
This of Brocas very best:
Cordials too in cupboard be,
Rum, arrack and ratifia;
Now and then a little cup
Serves to keep the spirits up.
As a sportsman, give me horses,
Some for chase, and some for courses,
And a pack of little hounds,
To drive Reynard over the downs:
Grant for these a fit estate,
Nor too little, nor too great.
But if ask again I shall,
I will ask what is all in all;
Give a little pretty spouse,
For to grace my little house;
Let her have complexion fair,
Sparkling eyes, and auburn hair,
Skin as white as neck of swan,
Smooth as down that grows thereon,
Smiling looks, and ruby lips,
Waist that tapers to her hips,
And fine arms that easy fall,
And soft hands, and fingers small,
Skilled to touch the warbling strings,
When her lays, or mine she sings:
Let her frank and pleasant be
To my friends, as well as me;
And with wit and beauty's charms,
Glad my heart and bless my arms:
Be the produce of our joys,
Little girls and little boys.
O! the sweets of such a life!
To be blessed with such a wife!
Grant but these, may I be poor,
When I ask a little more.
The Progress os DISCONTENT. A POEM.
Written at Oxford in the Year 1746.
WHEN now mature in classic knowledge,
The joyful youth is sent to college,
His father comes, a vicar plain,
At Oxford bred -- in Anna's reign,
And thus in form of humble suitor
Bowing accosts a reverend tutor.
"Sir, I Am a Glo'stershire divine,
"And this my eldest son of nine;
"My wife's ambition and my own
"Was that this child should wear a gown:
"I Will warrant that his good behavior
"Will justify your future favor;
"And for his parts, to tell the truth,
"My son's a very forward youth;
"Has Horace all by heart -- you would wonder --
"And mouth's out Homer's Greek like thunder.
"If you would examine -- and admit him,
"A scholarship would nicely fit him:
"That he succeeds it is ten to one;
"Your vote and interest, Sir!" -- It Is done.
Our pupil's hopes, though twice defeated,
Are with a scholarship completed:
A scholarship but half maintains,
And college rules are heavy chains:
In garret dark he smokes and puns,
A prey to discipline and duns;
And now intent on new designs,
Sighs for a fellowship -- and fines.
When nine full tedious winters past,
That utmost wish is crowned at last:
But the rich prize no sooner got,
Again he quarrels with his lot:
"These fellowships are pretty things,
"We live indeed like petty kings:
"But who can bear to waste his whole age
"Amid the dullness of a college,
"Debarred the common joys of life.
"And that prime bliss -- a loving wife!
"O! what is a table richly spread
"Without a woman at its head!
"Would some snug benefice but fall,
"Ye feasts, ye dinners! farewell all!
"To offices I Would bid adieu,
"Of dean, vice praes. -- of bursar too;
"Come joys, that rural quiet yields,
"Come, tithes, and house, and fruitful fields!"
Too fond of freedom and of ease
A patron's vanity to please,
Long time he watches, and by stealth,
Each frail incumbent's doubtful health;
At length -- and in his fortieth year,
A living drops -- two hundred clear!
With breast elate beyond expression,
He hurries down to take possession,
With rapture views the sweet retreat --
"What a convenient house! how neat!
"For fuel here is sufficient wood:
"Pray God the cellars may be good!
"The garden -- that must be new planned --
"Shall these old-fashioned yew-trees stand?
"Over yonder vacant plot shall rise
"The flowery shrub of thousand dies: --
"Yon wall, that feels the southern ray,
"Shall blush with ruddy fruitage gay:
"While thick beneath its aspect warm
"Over well-rang'd hives the bees shall swarm,
"From which, ever long, of golden gleam
"Metheglin's luscious juice shall stream:
"This awkward hutt, o'er-grown with ivy,
"We'll alter to a modern privy:
"Up yon green slope, of hazels trim,
"An avenue so cool and dim,
"Shall to an arbor, at the end,
"In spite of gout, entice a friend.
"My predecessor loved devotion --
"But of a garden had no notion."
Continuing this fantastic farce on,
He now commences country parson.
To make his character entire,
He weds -- a cousin of the 'squire;
Not over weighty in the purse,
But many doctors have done worse:
And though she boast no charms divine,
Yet she can carve and make birch wine.
Thus fixed, content he taps his barrel,
Exhorts his neighbors not to quarrel;
Finds his churchwardens have discerning
Both in good liquor and good learning;
With tithes his barns replete he sees,
And chuckles over his surplice-fees;
Studies to find out latent dues,
And regulates the state of pews;
Rides a sleek mare with purple housing,
To share the monthly clubs carousing;
Of Oxford pranks facetious tells,
And -- but on Sundays -- hears no bells,
Sends presents of his choicest fruit,
And prunes himself each sapless shoot,
Plants colliflow'rs, and boasts to rear
The earliest melons of the year;
Thinks alteration charming work is,
Keeps Bantam cocks, and feeds his turkies;
Builds in his copse a favorite bench,
And stores the pond with carp and tench. --
But ah! too soon his thoughtless breast
By cares domestic is oppressed;
And a third butcher's bill, and brewing,
Threaten inevitable ruin:
For children fresh expenses yet,
And Dicky now for school is fit.
"Why did I sell my college life
"(He cries) for benefice and wife?
"Return, ye days! when endless pleasure
"I found in reading, or in leisure!
"When calm around the common room
"I puffed my daily pipe's perfume!
"Rode for a stomach, and inspected,
"At annual bottlings, corks selected:
"And dined untax'd, untroubled, under
"The pourtrait of our pious founder!
"When impositions were supplied
"To light my pipe -- or sooth my pride --
"No cares were then for forward peace
"A yearly-longing wife to please;
"My thoughts no christ'ning dinners crossed,
"No children cried for buttered toast;
"And every night I went to bed,
"Without a Modus in my head!"
Oh! trifling head, and fickle heart!
Chagrin'd at whatsoever thou art;
A dupe to follies yet untried,
And sick of pleasures, scarce enjoyed!
Each prize possessed, thy transport ceases,
And in pursuit alone it pleases.
The FIRESIDE.
By Dr. COTTON.
I:
DEAR Chloe, while the busy crowd,
The vain, the wealthy, and the proud,
In Folly's maze advance;
Though singularity and pride
Be called our choice, we'll step aside,
Nor join the giddy dance.
II.
From the gay world we'll often retire
To our own family and fire,
Where love our hours employs;
No noisy neighbor enters here,
No intermeddling stranger near,
To spoil our heartfelt joys.
III.
If solid happiness we prize,
Within our breast this jewel lies;
And they are fools who roam:
The world has nothing to bestow,
From our own selves our joys must flow,
And that dear hut, our home.
IV.
Of rest was Noah's dove bereft,
When with impatient wing she left
That safe retreat, the ark;
Giving her vain excursion over,
The disappointed bird once more
Explored the sacred bark.
V.
Though fools spurn Hymen's gentle powers,
We, who improve his golden hours,
By sweet experience know,
That marriage rightly understood,
Gives to the tender and the good
A paradise below.
VI.
Our babes shall richest comforts bring,
If tutored right, they will prove a spring,
Whence pleasures ever rise:
We'll form their minds with studious care,
To all that is manly, good, and fair,
And train them for the skies.
VII.
While they our wisest hours engage,
They Will joy our youth, support our age,
And crown our hoary hairs:
They Will grow in virtue every day,
And thus our fondest loves repay,
And recompense our cares.
VIII.
No borrowed joys! they are all our own,
While to the world we live unknown,
Or by the world forgot:
Monarchs! we envy not your state,
We look with pity on the great,
And bless our humbler lot.
IX.
Our portion is not large indeed,
But then, how little do we need,
For Nature's calls are few!
In this the art of living lies,
To want no more than may suffice,
And make that little do.
X.
We'll therefore relish with content
Whatever kind Providence has sent,
Nor aim beyond our power;
For if our stock be very small,
It Is prudence to enjoy it all,
Nor lose the present hour.
XI.
To be resigned, when ills betide,
Patient, when favors are denied,
And pleased with favors given;
Dear Chloe, this is wisdom's part,
This is that incense of the heart;
Whose fragrance smells to heaven.
XII.
We'll ask no long protracted treat,
(Since winter life is seldom sweet;)
But when our feast is over,
Grateful from table we'll arise,
Nor grudge our sons with envious eyes,
The relics of our store.
XIII.
Thus hand in hand through life we'll go,
Its checkered paths of joy and woe
With cautious steps we'll tread;
Quit its vain scenes without a tear,
Without a trouble or a fear,
And mingle with the dead.
XIV.
While Conscience, like a faithful friend,
Shall through the gloomy vale attend,
And cheer our dying breath;
Shall, when all other comforts cease,
Like a kind angel whisper peace,
And smooth the bed of death.
TOMORROW.
By the Same.
Pereunt et Imputantur.
Tomorrow, did thou say!
Methought I heard Horatio say, Tomorrow.
Go to -- I will not hear of it -- Tomorrow!
It Is a sharper, who stakes his penury
Against thy plenty -- who takes thy ready cash,
And pays thee naught but wishes, hopes, and promises,
The currency of idiots. -- Injurious bankrupt,
That gulls the easy creditor! -- Tomorrow!
It is a period no where to be found,
In all the hoary registers of Time,
Unless perchance in the fool's calendar.
Wisdom disclaims the word, nor holds society
With those who own it. No, my Horatio,
It Is Fancy's child, and Folly is its father;
Wrought of such stuff as dreams are; and baseless
As the fantastic visions of the evening.
But soft, my friend -- arrest the present moments;
For be assured, they all are arrant tell-tales;
And though their flight be silent, and their path
Trackless, as the winged couriers' of the air,
They post to heaven, and there record thy folly.
Because, though station'd on the important watch,
Thou, like a sleeping, faithless sentinel,
Did let them pass unnotic'd, unimprov'd.
And know, for that thou slumber'dst on the guard,
Thou shall be made to answer at the bar
For every fugitive: and when thou thus
Shall stand impleaded at the high tribunal
Of hood-winked Justice, who shall tell thy audit!
Then stay the present instant, dear Horatio;
Imprint the marks of wisdom on its wings.
It Is of more worth than kingdoms! far more precious
Than all the crimson treasures of life's fountain.
Oh! let it not elude thy grasp, but like
The good old patriarch upon record,
Hold the fleet angel fast, until he bless thee.
On Lord COBHAM's Gardens.
By the Same.
IT puzzles much the sages' brains,
Where Eden stood of yore;
Some place it in Arabia's plains,
Some say, it is no more.
But Cobham can these tales confute,
As all the curious know;
For he has proved beyond dispute,
That paradise is STOW.
To a Child of Five Years old.
By the Same.
FAIREST flower, all flowers excelling,
Which in Eden's garden grew;
Flowers of Eve's imbower'd dwelling, Alluding to Milton's description of Eve's
bower.

Are, my Fair-one, types of you.
Mark, my Polly, how the roses
Emulate thy damask cheek;
How the bud its sweets discloses,
Buds thy opening bloom bespeak.
Lillies are, by plain direction,
Emblems of a double kind;
Emblems of thy fair complexion,
Emblems of thy fairer mind.
But, dear girl, both flowers and beauty
Blossom, fade, and die away;
Then pursue good sense and duty,
Evergreens, that never decay.
Father FRANCIS's Prayer.
Written in Lord WESTMORLAND's Hermitage.
NE gay attire, ne marble hall,
Ne arched roof, ne pictured wall;
Ne cook of France, ne dainty board,
Bestowed with pyes of perigord;
Ne power, ne such like idle fancies;
Sweet Agnes grant to father Francis;
Let me ne more myself deceive;
Ne more regret the toys I leave;
The world I quit, the proud, the vain,
Corruption's and Ambition's train;
But not the good, perdie nor fair,
Against them I make ne vow, ne prayer;
But such aye welcome to my cell,
And often, not always, with me dwell;
Then cast, sweet Saint, a circle round,
And bless from fools this holy ground;
From all the foes to worth and truth,
From wanton old, and homely youth;
The gravely dull and pertly gay,
Oh banish these; and by my fay,
Right well I ween that in this age,
Mine house shall prove an hermitage.
An Inscription on the Cell.
Beneath these moss-grown roots, this rustic cell,
Truth, Liberty, Content, sequestered dwell;
Say you, who dare our hermitage disdain,
What drawing room can boast so fair a train?
An Inscription in the Cell.
Sweet bird that sing'st on yonder spray,
Pursue unharm'd thy sylvan lay;
While I beneath this breezy shade,
In peace repose my careless head;
And joining thy enraptured song,
Instruct the world-enamour'd throng,
That the contented harmless breast
In solitude itself is blessed.
To the Right Hon. HENRY PELHAM, Esquire
THE humble Petition of the worshipful company of Poets and News-writers,

SHOWS,

THAT your honor's petitioners (dealers in rhymes,
And writers of scandal, for mending the times)
By losses in business, and England's well-doing,
Are sunk in their credit, and verging on ruin.
That these, their misfortunes, they humbly conceive,
Arise not from dullness, as some folks believe,
But from rubs in their way, that your honor has laid,
And want of materials to carry on trade.
That they always had formed high conceits of their use,
And meant their last breath should go out in abuse;
But now (and they speak it with sorrow and tears)
Since your honor has sat at the helm of affairs,
No party will join 'em, no faction invite
To heed what they say, or to read what they write;
Sedition, and Tumult, and Discord are fled,
And Slander scarce ventures to lift up her head --
In short, public business is so carried on,
That their country is saved, and the patriots undone.
To perplex 'em still more, and sure famine to bring
(Now satire has lost both its truth and its sting)
If, in spite of their natures, they bungle at praise,
Your honor regards not, and nobody pays.
YOUR Petitioners therefore most humbly entreat
(As the times will allow, and your honor thinks meet)
That measures be changed, and some cause of complaint
Be immediately furnished, to end their restraint;
Their credit thereby, and their trade to retrieve,
That again they may rail, and the nation believe.
Or else (if your wisdom shall deem it all one)
Now the parliament's rising, and business is done,
That your honor would please, at this dangerous crisis,
To take to your bosom a few private vices,
By which your petitioners, happily, might thrive,
And keep both themselves and contention alive.
In compassion, good Sir! give 'em something to say,
And your honor's petitioners ever shall pray.
An ODE Performed in the Senate House at Cambridge July 1, 1749, At the
Installation of his Grace THOMAS HOLLES Duke of NEWCASTLE, CHANCELLOR of the
University.
-- canit errantem Permessi ad flumina Gallum
Aonas in Montes ut duxerit una sororum
Utque viro Phoebi chorus assurrexerit omnis.
VIRGIL.
By Mr. MASON, Fellow of Pembroke-Hall.
Set to Music by Mr. Boyce, Composer to his Majesty.
I.
Recitative. HERE all thy active fires diffuse,
Thou genuin British Muse;
Hither descend from yonder orient sky,
Clothed in thy heav'n-wove robe of harmony.
Air I. Come, imperial queen of song;
Come with all that freeborn grace,
Which lifts thee from the servile throng;
Who meanly mimic thy majestic pace;
That glance of dignity divine,
Which speaks thee of celestial line;
Proclaims thee inmate of the sky,
Daughter of Jove and Liberty.
II.
Recitative. The elevated soul, who feels
Thy awful impulse, walks the fragrant ways
Of honest unpolluted praise:
He with impartial justice deals
The blooming chaplets of immortal lays:
He flies above ambition's low carreer;
And nobly throned in Truth's meridian sphere,
Thence, with a bold and heav'n-directed aim,
Full on fair Virtue's shrine he pours the rays of fame.
III.
Air II. Goddess! thy piercing eye explores
The radiant range of Beauty's stores,
The steep ascent of pine-clad hills,
The silver slope of falling rills,
Catches each lively-colour'd grace,
The crimson of the wood-nymph's face,
The verdure of the velvet lawn,
The purple in the eastern dawn,
Or all those tints, which ranged in vivid glow
Mark the bold sweep of the celestial bow.
IV.
Recitative. But chief she lifts her tuneful transports high,
When to her intellectual eye
The mental beauties rise in moral dignity:
The sacred zeal for Freedom's cause,
That fires the glowing Patriot's breast;
The honest pride, that plumes the Hero's crest,
When for his country's aid the steel he draws;
Or that, the calm yet active heat,
With which mild Genius warms the sages heart,
To lift fair Science to a loftier seat,
Or stretch to ampler bounds the wide domain of art.
Air I. These, the best blossoms of the virtuous mind,
She culls with taste refined;
From their ambrosial bloom
With bee-like skill she draws the rich perfume,
And blends the sweets they all convey,
In the soft balm of her mellifluous lay.
V.
Recitative. Is there a clime, where all these beauties rise
In one collected radiance to her eyes?
Is there a plain, whose genial soil inhales
Glory's invigorating gales,
Her brightest beams where Emulation spreads,
Her kindliest dews where Science sheds,
Where every stream of Genius flows,
Where every flower of Virtue glows?
Thither the Muse exulting flies,
There she loudly cries --
Chorus I. All hail; all hail,
Majestic Granta! hail thy awful name
Dear to the Muse, to Liberty, to Fame.
VI.
Recitative. You too, illustrious Train, she greets
Who first in these inspiring seats
Caught the bright beams of that aetherial fire,
Which now sublimely prompts you to aspire
To deeds of noblest note: whether to shield
You country's liberties, your country's laws;
Or in Religion's hallowed cause
To hurl the shafts of reason and to weild
Those heav'nly-temper'd arms, whose rapid force
Arrests base Falsehood in her impious course,
And drives rebellious Vice indignant from the field.
VII.
Air IV. And now she tunes her plausive song
To you her sage domestic throng;
Who here, at Learning's richest shrine,
Dispense to each ingenuous youth
The treasures of immortal truth,
And open Wisdom's golden mine.
Recitative. Each youth inspired by your persuasive art,
Clasps the dear form of virtue to his heart;
And feels in his transported soul
Enthusiastic raptures roll,
Generous as those the sons of Cecrops caught
In hoar Lycaeum's shades from Plato's fire-clad thought.
VIII.
Air V. O Granta! on thy happy plain
Still may these Attic glories reign:
Still may thou keep thy wonted state,
In unaffected grandeur great;
Recitative. Great as at this illustrious hour,
When He, whom GEORGE's well-weigh'd choice
And Albion's general voice
Have lifted to the fairest heights of power,
When He appears, and deigns to shine
The leader of thy learned line;
And bids the verdure of thy olive bough
'Mid all his civic chaplets twine,
And add fresh glories to his honored brow.
IX.
Air VI. Haste then, and amply over his head
The graceful foliage spread;
Meanwhile the Muse shall snatch the trump of Fame,
And lift her swelling accents high,
To tell the world that PELHAM's name
Is dear to Learning as to Liberty.
Full Chorus. The Muse shall snatch the trump of Fame,
And lift her swelling accents high,
To tell the world that PELHAM's name
Is dear to Learning as to Liberty.
ODE to an AEOLUS's This instrument appears to have been invented by KIRCHER:
who has given a very accurate description of it in his MUSURGIA. After having
been neglected above an hundred years, it was again accidentally discovered by
Mr. OSWALD. See Vol. 3. p. 211. of this Miscellany.
Harp.
Sent to Miss SHEPHERD.
By the Same.
YES, magic lyre! now all complete
Thy slender frame responsive rings,
While kindred notes with undulation sweet
Accordant wake from all thy vocal strings.
Go then to her, whose soft request
Bad my blessed hands thy form prepare,
Ah go, and sweetly sooth her tender breast
With many a warble wild, and artless air.
For know, full often, while over the mead
Bright June extends her fragrant reign,
The Fair shall place thee near her slum'bring head
To court the gales that cool the sultry plain;
Then shall the Sylphs, and Sylphids bright,
Mild Genii all, to whose high care
Her virgin charms are given, in circling flight
Skim sportive round thee in the fields of air.
Some, fluttering 'mid thy trembling strings,
Shall catch the rich melodious spoil,
And lightly brush thee with their purple wings
To aid the Zephyrs in their tuneful toil;
While others check each ruder gale,
Expel rough Boreas from the sky,
Nor let a breeze its heaving breath exhale
Save such as softly pant, and panting die.
Then, as thy swelling accents rise,
Fair Fancy waking at the sound,
Shall paint bright visions on her raptured eyes,
And waft her spirits to enchanted ground,
To myrtle groves, Elysian greens,
'Mid which some favorite youth shall rove,
Shall meet, shall lead her through the glittering scenes,
And all be music, extacy, and love.
ODE to HEALTH.
Non est vivere, sed valere, vita. MARTIAL.
By Mr. DUNCOMBE, Fellow of Corpus Christi Col. CAMBRIDGE.
I.
HEALTH! to thee thy vot'ry owes
All the blessings life bestows,
All the sweets the summer yields,
Melodious woods, and clover'd fields;
By thee he tastes the calm delights
Of studious days and peaceful nights:
By thee his eye each scene with rapture views;
The Muse shall sing thy gifts, for they inspire the Muse.
II.
Does increase of wealth impart
Transports to a bounteous heart?
Does the sire with smiles survey
His prattling children round him play!
Does love with mutual blushes streak
The swain's and virgin's artless cheek?
From HEALTH these blushes, smiles and transports flow;
Wealth, children, love itself, to HEALTH their relish owe.
III.
Nymph! with thee, at early Morn,
Let me brush the waving corn;
And, at Noon-tide's sultry hour,
O bear me to the wood-bine bower!
When Evening lights her glowworm, lead
To yonder dew-enamel'd mead;
And let me range at Night those glimmering groves,
Where Stillness ever sleeps, and Contemplation roves.
IV.
This my tributary lay,
Grateful at thy shrine I pay,
Who for sev'n whole years have shed
Thy balmy blessings over my head;
O! let me still enamored view
Those fragrant lips of rosy hue,
Nor think there needs the allay of sharp disease,
To quicken thy repast, and give it power to please.
V.
Now by swiftest Zephyrs drawn,
Urge thy chariot over the lawn;
In yon gloomy grotto laid,
Author of Clarissa.
PALEMON asks thy kindly aid;
If goodness can that aid engage,
O hover round the virtuous sage:
Nor let one sigh for his own sufferings rise;
Each human suffering fills his sympathizing eyes.
VI.
Venus from Aeneas' side
With successful efforts tried
To extract the envenomed dart,
That baffled wise Iapis' art,
If thus, HYGEIA, thou could prove
Propitious to the queen of love,
Now on thy favored HEBERDEN bestow
Thy choicest healing powers, for Pallas asks them now.
VII.
What though, banished from the fight,
To the hero's troubled sight
Ranks on ranks tumultuous rose
Of flying friends and conquering foes;
He only panted to obtain
A laurel Wreath for thousands slain;
On nobler views intent, the SAGE's mind
Pants to delight, instruct, and humanise mankind.
A VERNAL ODE.
Sent to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY, March 12, 1754.
[By FRANCIS FAWKES, A. M.]
I.
BRIGHT god of day, whose genial power
Revives the buried seed,
That spreads with foliage every bower,
With verdure every mead,
Bid all thy vernal breezes fly,
Diffusing mildness through the sky;
Give the soft Season to our drooping plains,
Sprinkled with rosy dews, and salutary rains.
II.
Enough has Winter's hand severe
Hurled all his terrors round,
Chilled the fair dawning of the year,
And whitened all the ground:
Give but thy vital beams to play,
The frozen scenes will melt away;
And, mixed in sprightly dance, the blooming Hours
Will 'wake the drowsy Spring, and Spring awake the flowers.
III.
Let Health, gay daughter of the skies,
On Zephyr's wings descend,
And scatter pleasures as she flies
Where Surry's downs extend;
There HERRING wooes her friendly power,
There may she all her roses shower,
To heal that shepherd all her balms employ,
So will she sooth our fears, and give a nation joy.
IV.
Ah me! that Virtue's godlike friends
So soon are claimed by Fate!
Lo! The Right Honorable Henry Pelham, Esquire died on the 6th of March 1754.
PELHAM to the grave descends,
The bulwark of the state:
When will fair Truth his equal find
Among the best of human-kind?
Long be the fatal day with mourning kept!
AUGUSTUS sighed sincere, and all the worthy wept.
V.
Thy delegate, kind heaven, restore
To health, and safely keep;
Let good AUGUSTUS sigh no more,
No more the worthy weep:
And still upon the royal head
The riches of thy blessing shed:
Established with his counselors around,
Long be his prosperous reign, and all with glory crowned.
An AUTUMNAL ODE.
By the Same.
I.
YET once more, glorious god of day,
While beams thine orb serene,
O let me warbling court thy stay
To gild the fading scene!
Thy rays invigorate the Spring,
Bright Summer to perfection bring,
The cold, inclement days of Winter cheer,
And make the Autumnal months the mildest of the year.
II.
Ere yet the russet foliage fall,
I Will climb the mountain's brow,
My friend, my Hayman, at thy call,
To view the scene below:
How sweetly pleasing to behold
Forests of vegetable gold!
How mixed the many checkered shades between
The tawny mellowing hue, and the gay vivid green!
III.
How splendid all the sky! how still!
How mild the dying gale!
How soft the whispers of the rill
That winds along the dale!
So tranquil Nature's works appear,
It seems the Sabbath of the year;
As if, the Summer's Labor past, she chose
This season's sober calm for blandishing repose.
IV.
Such is of well spent life the time,
When busy days are past,
Man verging gradual from his prime,
Meets sacred Peace at last:
His flowery Spring of pleasures over,
And Summer's full-blown pride no more,
He gains pacific Autumn, meek and bland,
And dauntless braves the stroke of Winter's palsy'd hand.
V.
For yet a while, a little while,
Involved in wint'ry gloom,
And lo! another Spring shall smile,
A Spring eternal bloom;
Then shall he shine, a glorious guest,
In the bright mansions of the blessed,
Where due rewards on Virtue are bestowed,
And reap the golden fruits of what his Autumn sowed.
A SONG.
I.
AWAY, let naught to love displeasing,
My Winifreda, move thy fear,
Let naught delay the heavenly blessing,
Nor squeamish pride, nor gloomy care.
II.
What though no grants of royal donors
With pompous titles grace our blood,
We'll shine in more substantial honors,
And to be noble we'll be good.
III.
What though from Fortune's lavish bounty
No mighty treasures we possess,
We'll find within our pittance plenty,
And be content without excess.
IV.
Still shall each kind returning season,
Sufficient for our wishes give,
For we will live a life of reason,
And that is the only life to live.
V.
Our name, whilst virtue thus we tender,
Shall sweetly found wherever it is spoke,
And all the great ones much shall wonder,
How they admire such little folk.
VI.
Through youth and age in love excelling,
We'll hand in hand together tread,
Sweet smiling Peace shall crown our dwelling,
And babes, sweet smiling babes our bed.
VII.
How should I love the pretty creatures,
Whilst round my knees they fondly clung,
To see 'em look their mother's features,
To hear 'em lisp their mother's tongue.
VIII.
And when with envy time transported
Shall think to rob us of our joys,
You Will in your girls again be courted,
And I go wooing in my boys.
The GENIUS.
An ODE, written in 1717, on occasion of the Duke of MARLBOROUGH's Apoplexy.
I.
AWFUL hero, Marlbro' rise:
Sleepy charms I come to break:
Hither turn thy languid eyes:
Lo! thy Genius calls; awake!
II.
Well survey this faithful plan,
Which records thy life's great story;
It Is a short, but crowded span,
Full of triumphs, full of glory.
III.
One by one thy deeds review:
Sieges, battles, thick appear;
Former wonders, lost in new,
Greatly fill each pompous year.
IV.
This is Blenheim's crimson field,
Wet with gore, with slaughter stained!
Here retiring squadrons yield,
And a bloodless wreath is gained!
V.
Ponder in thy godlike mind
All the wonders thou have wrought;
Tyrants, from their pride declined,
Be the subject of thy thought!
VI.
Rest thee here, while life may last:
The utmost bliss, to man allowed,
Is to trace his actions past,
And to own them great and good.
VII.
But it is gone -- a mortal born!
Swift the fading scenes remove --
Let them pass with noble scorn,
Thine are worlds, which roll above.
VIII.
Poets, prophets, heroes, kings,
Pleased, thy ripe approach foresee;
Men, who acted wondrous things,
Though they yield in fame to thee.
IX.
Foremost, in the patriot-band,
Shining with distinguished day,
See, thy friend, Godolphin stand!
See! he beckons thee away.
X.
Yonder seats and fields of light
Let thy ravished thought explore;
Wishing, panting for thy flight!
Half an angel; man no more.
TRANSLATIONS from HORACE.
By Mr. MARRIOTT, of Trinity-Hall, Cambridge.
Book I. Ode XVII. Invitation to his Mistress.
OFTEN Faunus leaves Arcadia's plain,
And to the Sabine hill retreats:
He guards my flocks from rushing rain,
From piercing winds, and scorching heats.
Where lurks the thyme, or shrubs appear,
My wanton kids securely play;
My goats no poisonous serpent fear,
Safe wandering through the woodland way.
No hostile wolf the fold invades;
Ustica's pendent rocks rebound
My song; and all the sylvan shades,
By Echo taught, return the sound.
The gods my verse propitious hear,
My head from every danger shield:
For you, overflows the bounteous year,
And Plenty's horn has heaped my field.
Responsive to the Teian string,
Within the sun-defended vale,
Here, softly warbling you shall sing
Each tender, tuneful, amorous tale.
No rival, here, shall burst the bands
That wreathe my charmer's beauteous hair,
Nor seize her weakly struggling hands;
But Love and Horace guard the fair.
Ode VI. Book II. Imitated.
BEVIL, that with your friend would roam,
Far from your England's happier home,
Should ever the Fates that friend detain
In gayer France, or graver Spain.
Know, all my wish is to retreat,
When age shall quench my youthful heat,
In Kentish shades sweet peace to find,
And leave the sons of care behind.
But should this pleasing hope be vain,
May I fair Windsor's seat attain,
Where Leddon's gentle waters glide,
And flocks adorn its flowery side.
Sweet groves, I love your silent shades,
Your russet lawns, and opening glades.
With famed Italia's plains may vie
Your fertile fields, and healthful sky.
Here, let our eve of life be spent;
Here, friend shall live with friend content:
Here, in cold earth my limbs be laid;
And here, thy generous tear be paid.
Book II. Ode XII. Translated.
THE wars of Numantia and Hannibal dire,
On land, or on ocean the fighting,
Maecenas, never suited my peaceable lyre,
In subjects much softer delighting.
You love not of centaurs embattled to hear,
Nor of giants, a tale of such wonder,
Who shook all the skies, made Jupiter fear,
Till drove by Alcides and thunder.
In prose, my good patron, much nobler you write,
As your topic than these is much better,
How Caesar with glory can govern and fight,
And lead haughty kings in his fetter.
Alone my gay Muse of Licinnia would sing,
The constant, good-natured, and pretty,
So graceful to dance with the maids in a ring,
So sparkling, so merry, and witty.
While you play with her hair, that is carelessly curled,
While this way, now that way she twitches;
Of your teazing so kindly complaining, no world
Could bribe for one lock with its riches.
Thus blessed with the nymph, how transporting the joy!
Who whimsical, wanton, amuses;
Who pleasingly forward, or prettily coy,
Often snatches the kiss she refuses.
To a LADY making a Pin Basket.
By the Same.
WHILE objects of a parent's care
With joy your fond attention share,
Madam, accept the auspicious strain;
Nor rise your beauteous work in vain.
Often be your second race surveyed,
And often a new pin basket made:
When marriage was in all its glory,
So poets, madam, tell the story,
Ere Plutus damped love's purer flame,
Or Smithfield bargains had a name,
In heaven a blooming youth and bride
At Hymen's altars were allied;
When Cupid had his Psyche won,
And, all her destined labors done,
The cruel Fates their rage relented,
And mama Venus had consented.
At Jove's command, and Hermes' call,
The train appeared to fill the hall,
And gods, and goddesses were dressed,
To do them honor, in their best.
The little rogues now passed the row,
And looked, and moved I don't know how,
And, ambling hand in hand, appear
Before the mighty thunderer.
Low at his throne they bent the knee;
He smiled the blushing pair to see,
Laid his tremendous bolt aside,
And strok'd their cheeks, and kissed the bride.
Says Juno, since our Jove's so kind,
My dears, some present I must find.
In greatest pleasures, greatest dangers,
We and the sex were never strangers;
With bounteous hand my gifts I spread
Presiding over the marriage bed.
Soon, for the months are on the wing,
To you a daughter fair I bring,
And know, from this your nuptial morn
Shall Pleasure, smiling babe, be born.
But for the babe we must prepare;
That too shall be your Juno's care.
Apollo, from his golden lyre,
Shall first assist us with the wire;
Vulcan shall make the silver pin.
The basket thus we shall begin,
Where we may put the child's array,
And get it ready by the day.
The nymphs themselves with flowers shall dress it.
Pallas shall weave, and I will bless it.
Captain CUPID.
By the Same.
ERST, in Cythera's sacred shade,
When Venus clasped the god of war,
The laughing loves around them played,
One bore the shield, and one the spear.
The little warriors Cupid led,
The shining baldric graced his breast,
The mighty helmet over his head
Noded its formidable crest.
Hence often, to win some stubborn maid,
Still does the wanton God assume
The martial air, the gay cockade,
The sword, the shoulder-knot and plume.
Phyllis had long his power defied,
Resolved her conquests to maintain;
His fruitless art each poet tried:
Each shepherd tuned his pipe in vain.
Till Cupid came, a captain bold:
Of trenches and of palisadoes
He talked; and many a tale he told
Of battles, and of ambuscadoes.
How often his godship had been drunk;
What melting maids he had undone;
How often by night had stormed a punk,
Or bravely beat a saucy dun.
He swore, drank, whor'd, sung, danced with spirit,
And over each pleasing topic ran.
Till Phyllis sighed, and owned his merit,
The Captain's sure a charming man.
Ye bards, on verse let Phoebus dote,
Ye shepherds, leave your pipes to Pan,
Nor verse nor pipe will Phyllis note.
The Captain is the charming man.
ODE on Ambition.
By the Same.
THE mariner, when first he sails,
While his bold oars the sparkling surface sweep,
With new delight, transported hails
The blue expanded skies, and level deep.
Such young Ambition's fearless aim,
Pleased with the gorgeous scene of wealth and power,
In the gay morn of early fame,
Nor thinks of evening's storm, and gloomy hour.
Life's opening views bright charms reveal,
Feed the fond wish, and fan the youthful fire.
But woes unknown those charms conceal,
And fair illusions cheat our fierce desire.
There Envy shows her sullen mien,
With changeful color, grinning smiles of hate.
There Malice stabs, with rage serene;
In deadly silence, treacherous Friendships wait.
High on a mountain's lofty brow,
'Mid clouds and storms, has Glory fixed her seat;
Rocked by the roaring winds that blow,
The lightnings blast it, and the tempests beat.
Within the sun-gilt vale beneath,
More moderate Hope with sweet Contentment dwells,
While gentler breezes round them breathe,
And softer showers refresh their peaceful cells.
To better genius ever blind,
That points to each in varied life his share,
Man quits the path by heaven designed,
To search for bliss, among the thorns of care.
Our native powers we scorn to know;
With steadfast error still the wrong pursue;
Instruct our forward ills to grow;
While sad successes but our pain renew.
In vain heaven tempers life with sweet,
With flowers the way, that leads us home, bestrews,
If dupes to passion, and deceit,
We drink the bitter, and the rugged choose.
Few can on Grandeur's stage appear,
Each lofty part with true applause sustain,
No common virtue safe can steer,
Where rocks unnumber'd lurk beneath the main.
Then happiest he, whose timely hand
To cool Discretion has the helm resigned;
Enjoys the calm, in sight of land,
From changing tides secure, and trustless wind.
ODE to FANCY.
By the Same.
I.
GILDING with brighter beams the vernal skies,
Now hastes the car of day to rise.
Youth, and Mirth, and Beauty leads
In golden reins the sprightly steeds,
With wanton Love that rolls his sparkling eyes.
Morpheus, no more
Thy poppies, cropped on Lethe's margin, shed
Around thy languid poet's head.
Thou drowsy god,
It Is time to break thy leaden rod,
And give thy slumbers over.
But come, thou woodland Nymph, along,
Mistress of the vocal song,
Fancy, ever fair and free;
Whether on the mountains straying,
Or on beds of roses playing,
Daughter of sweet Liberty.
II.
Through all the ivy-circled cave
Soft music at thy birth was heard to sound.
The graces danced thy bower around,
And gently dipped thee in the silver wave.
With blossoms fair thy cradle dressed,
And rocked their smiling babe to rest.
To kiss thy lips, the bees, a murmuring throng,
With busy wings, unnumber'd flew;
For thee, from every flower their tribute drew,
And lulled thy slumbers with an airy song.
Come, in thy heav'nly-woven vest,
That Iris' hand has tinged in every dye,
With which she paints the sky,
Flowing over thy zoneless breast.
III.
Me, sweet enchantress, deign to bear
Over the seas, and through the air;
Over the plains extended wide,
Over misty hills, and curling clouds we ride;
Now mounting high, now sinking low,
Through hail and rain, and vapors go;
Where is treasured up the snow:
Where sleeps the thunder in its cell;
Where the swift-wing'd lightenings dwell;
Or where the blustering storms are taught to blow.
Now tread the milky way;
Unnumber'd worlds that float in ether spy,
Among the glittering planets stray,
To the lunar orbit fly,
And mountains, shores, and seas descry.
Now catch the music of the spheres;
Which, since the birth of time,
Have, in according chime,
And fair proportion, rolling round,
With each diviner sound
Attentive Silence, pierced thy listening ears;
Unheard by all, but those alone
Whom to wisdom's secret throne
The muse, with heav'n-taught guidance, deigns to bring,
To trace the sacred paths with hallowed feet;
Or, Fancy, who the mystic shade,
In thy airy car, pervade,
Where Plato's raptured spirit holds its solemn seat.
IV.
But, Fancy, downward urge thy flight.
On some mountain's towering height;
With hoary frosts eternal crowned,
Rapt with dusky vapors round,
Let me fix my steadfast feet.
I feel, I feel the fanning gales;
The watery mists beneath retreat.
The noontide ray now darts its heat,
And pours its glories over the vales.
Glittering to the dancing beams,
Urging their stubborn way the rocks among,
I hear, and see a thousand streams
Foam, and roar, and rush along.
But to the plains descended,
Their sudden rage is ended.
Now lost in deep recess of darksome bowers,
Again now sparkling through the meads
Vested soft with vernal flowers,
Reflecting the majestic towers,
Its peaceful flood the roving channel leads.
There the rural cots are seen,
From whose low roof the curling smoke ascends,
And dims with blueish volumes all the green.
There some forest far extends
Its groves embrown'd with lengthened shade;
Embosom'd where some Gothic seat,
Of monarchs once retreat;
In wild magnificence arrayed,
The pride of anicent times presents,
And lifts, in contrast fair displayed,
Its sun-reflecting battlements.
V.
Near, some imperial city seems to reign,
Triumphant over the subject land;
With domes of art Vitruvian crowned.
See gleam her gilded spires around,
Her gates in awful grandeur stand.
Equal to shine in peace or war sustain;
Her mighty bulwarks threat the plain
With many a work of death, and armed mound.
Where rolls her wealthy river deep and wide,
Tall groves of crowded masts arise;
Their streamers waving to the skies.
The banks are white with swelling sails,
And distant vessels stem the tide
Circling through pendant cliffs, and watery dales.
The russet hills, the valleys green beneath,
The fallows brown, and dusky heath,
The yellow corn, empurpled vine,
In union soft their tints combine,
And, Fancy, all engage thine eye
With a sweet variety.
While clouds the fleeting clouds pursue,
In mutual shade, and mutual light,
The changing landscape meets the sight;
'Till the ken no more can view;
And heaven appears to meet the ground;
The rising lands, and azure distance drowned
Amid the gay horizon's golden bound.
VI.
Such are the scenes that often invite
To feed thee, Fancy, with delight.
All that nature can create,
Beauteous, awful, new and great,
Sweet enthusiast, is thy treasure,
Source of wonder, and of pleasure;
Every sense to transport winning,
Still unbounded and beginning.
Then, Fancy, spread thy wings again;
Unlock the caverns of the main.
Above, beneath, and all around:
Let the tumbling billows spread;
'Till the coral floor we tread,
Exploring all the wealth that decks the realms profound;
There, gather gems that long have glowed
In the vast, unknown abode,
The jasper vein'd, the sapphire blue,
The ruby bright with crimson hue,
Whatever the bed resplendent paves,
Or decks the glittering roofs on high,
Through whose translucent arch are seen the rolling waves.
Fancy, these shall clasp thy vest,
With these thy lovely brows be dressed,
In every gay, and various dye.
But hark! -- the feas begin to roar,
The whistling winds assault my ear,
The lowering storms around appear --
Fancy, bear me to the shore.
There in thy realms, bright goddess, deign,
Secure to fix thy votary's feet:
O give to follow often thy train;
Still with accustomed lay thy power to greet;
To dwell with Peace, and sport with thee,
Fancy, ever fair and free.
On the Death of a Lady's Owl.
THE Owl expires! death gave the dreadful word,
And lovely Anna weeps her favorite bird.
Ye feathered choir in willing throngs repair
And sooth the sorrows of the melting fair;
In sounds of woe the dear-departed greet,
With cyprefs strew, ye doves, the green retreat;
The fateful raven tolls the passing bell,
The solemn dirge be sung by Philomel;
Sir Chanticlear, a chief of hardy race,
Shall guard from kites and daws, the sacred place.
With your just tears a bard shall mix his own,
And thus, in artless verse, inscribe the stone.
EPITAPH.
Interred within this little space
The bird of wisdom lies;
Learn hence, how vain is every grace,
How fruitless to be wise.
Can mortal stop the arm of Death
Who never compassion knew?
He Adonis:
Venus' lover robbed of breath,
He, Anna's darling slew.
Ah happy bird, to raise those sighs
Which man could never obtain!
Ah happy bird, to cloud those eyes
That fired each kneeling swain!
Thrice blessed thy life, her joy, her bliss,
Thrice blessed thy happy doom;
She gave thee many a melting kiss,
She wept upon thy tomb.
An Address to his Elbow-chair, new clothed.
By the late WM SOMERVILE, Esquire Author of the Chase. Written toward the close
of Mr. Somervile's life.

MY dear companion, and my faithful friend!
If Orpheus taught the listening oaks to bend;
If stones and rubbish, at Amphion's call,
Danced into form, and built the Theban wall;
Why should not thou attend my humble lays,
And hear my grateful harp resound thy praise?
True, thou art spruce and fine, a very beau;
But what are trappings, and external show?
To real worth alone I make my court;
Knaves are my scorn, and coxcombs are my sport.
Once I beheld thee far less-trim and gay;
Ragged, disjointed, and to worms a prey;
The safe retreat of every lurking mouse;
Derided, shunned; the lumber of my house!
Thy robe, how changed from what it was before!
Thy velvet robe, which pleased my sires of yore!
It Is thus capricious Fortune wheels us round;
Aloft we mount -- then tumble to the ground.
Yet grateful then, my constancy I proved;
I knew thy worth; my friend in rags I loved!
I loved thee, more; nor, like a courtier, spurned
My benefactor, when the tide was turned.
With conscious shame, yet frankly, I confess,
That in my youthful days -- I loved thee less.
Where vanity, where pleasure called, I strayed;
And every wayward appetite obeyed.
But sage experience taught me how to prize
Myself; and how, this world: she bade me rise
To nobler flights, regardless of a race
Of factious emmets; pointed where to place
My bliss, and lodged me in thy soft embrace.
Here on thy yielding down I sit secure;
And, patiently, what heaven has sent, endure:
From all the futile cares of business free;
Not fond of life, but yet content to be:
Here mark the fleeting hours; regret the past;
And seriously prepare, to meet the last.
So safe on shore the pension'd sailor lies;
And all the malice of the storm defies:
With ease of body blessed, and peace of mind,
Pities the restless crew he left behind;
Whilst, in his cell, he meditates alone
On his great voyage, to the world unknown.
SONG.
By the Same.
AS over Asteria's fields I rove,
The blissful seat of peace and love,
Ten thousand beauties round me rise,
And mingle pleasure with surprise.
By nature blessed in every part,
Adorned with every grace of art,
This paradise of blooming joys
Each raptured sense, at once, employs.
II
But when I view the radiant queen,
Who formed this fair enchanting seen;
Pardon ye grots! ye crystal floods!
Ye breathing flowers! ye shady woods!
Your coolness now no more invites;
No more your murmuring stream delights;
Your sweets decay, your verdure's flown;
My soul's intent on her alone.
ODE to a Friend wounded in a Duel.
HOW long shall tyrant Custom bind
In slavish chains the human mind?
How long shall false fantastic Honor draw
The vengeful sword, with fury fell,
And ranc'rous Malice dark as hell,
In spite of Reason's rule, and Nature's eldest law?
Too many gallant youths have bled;
Too much of British blood been shed
By Briton's swords, and that foul monster's laws:
Youths that might else have nobly dared;
More glorious wounds and dangers shared
For Britain's just defense, and virtue's injured cause.
So when the fierce Cadmean youth
Sprung from the dragon's venomed tooth,
Each chief arose in shining armor dressed:
With rage inspired, the furious band
Soon found a ready foe at hand,
And plunged the pointed steel each in a brother's breast.
Has Britain then no other foes,
That thus her sons their lives expose
To private war, and feuds, and civil fray?
Does Spain insult her flag no more?
Does Lewis yet his thoughts give over
Of universal rule, and arbitrary sway?
It Is Britons' to support the law;
It Is theirs ambitious kings to awe,
And equal rights of empire to maintain.
For this our fathers, brave and stout,
At Agincourt and Cressy fought,
And heaped famed Blenheim's field with mountains of the slain.
How will the Gallic monarch smile,
To see the sons of Albion's isle
Their country's blod with ruthless weapons drain?
Themselves avenge the glorious day
When Marlb'rough swept whole hosts away,
And sent the frighted Danube purple to the main?
O say, in this inglorious strife
Thy arm had robbed thy friend of life,
What pangs, what anguish had thy bosom proved?
How had thou cursed the cruel deed,
That caused the gallant youth to bleed,
Pierced by thy guilty sword, and slain by him he loved?
How did the fair Maria blame
Thy high-bred spirit's eagar flame,
That courting danger slighted her soft love?
Far other wreaths for thee she twined;
Far other cares for thee designed;
And for the laurel crown, the myrtle chaplet wove.
If not for here is, for Britain's sake,
Forbear thy precious life to stake;
Nor taint thy honor with so foul a deed.
One day thy country may require
Thy gallant arm and martial fire:
Then may thou bravely conquer, or as bravely bleed.
ODE to NIGHT.
THE busy cares of day are done;
In yonder western cloud the sun
Now sets, in other worlds to rise,
And glad with light the nether skies.
With lingering pace the parting day retires,
And slowly leaves the mountain tops, and gilded spires.
You azure cloud, enrob'd with white,
Still shoots a gleam of fainter light:
At length descends a browner shade;
At length the glim'ring objects fade:
Till all submit to NIGHT's impartial reign,
And undistinguished darkness covers all the plain:
No more the ivy-crowned oak
Resounds beneath the wood-man's stroke.
Now silence holds her solemn sway;
Mute is each bush, and every spray:
Naught but the sound of murmuring rills is heard,
Or from the mouldering tower, NIGHT's solitary bird.
Hail sacred hour of peaceful rest!
Of power to charm the troubled breast!
By thee the captive slave obtains
Short respite from his galling pains;
Nor sighs for liberty, nor native soil;
But for a while forgets his chains, and sultry toil.
No horros have thou in thy train,
No scorpion lash, no clanking chain.
When the pale murderer round him spies
A thousand grisly forms arise,
When shrieks and groans arouse his palsy'd fear,
It Is guilt alarms his soul, and conscience wounds his ear.
The village swain whom Phillis charms,
Whose breast the tender passion warms,
Wishes for thy all-shadowing veil,
To tell the fair his lovesick tale:
Nor less impatient of the tedious day,
She longs to hear his tale, and sigh her soul away.
Often by the covert of thy shade
LEANDER wooed the THRACIAN maid;
Through foaming seas his passion bore,
Nor feared the ocean's thundering roar.
The conscious virgin from the sea-girt tower
Hung out the faithful torch to guide him to her bower.
Often at thy silent hour the sage
Pores on the fair instructive page;
Or wrapped in musings deep, his soul
Mounts active to the starry pole:
There pleased to range the realms of endless night,
Numbers the stars, or marks the comet's devious light.
Thine is the hour of converse sweet,
When sprightly wit and reason meet:
Wit, the fair blossom of the mind,
But fairer still with reason joined.
Such is the feast thy social hours afford,
When eloquence and GRANVILLE join the friendly board.
GRANVILLE, whose polished mind is fraught
With all that ROME or GREECE ever taught;
Who pleases and instructs the ear,
When he assumes the critic's chair,
Or from the STAGYRITE or PLATO draws
The arts of civil life, the spirit of the laws.
O let me often thus employ
The hour of mirth and social joy!
And glean from GRANVILLE's learned store
Fair science and true wisdom's lore.
Then will I still implore thy longer stay,
Nor change thy festive hours for sunshine and the day.
Written upon leaving a Friend's House in Wales.
By the Rev. Dr. M.
THE winds were loud, the clouds deep-hung;
And dragged their sweepy trains along
The dreary mountain's side;
When, from the hill, one look to throw
On Towy's rambling flood below,
I turned my horse -- and sighed.
But soon the gusts of sleet and hail
Flew thick across the darkened vale,
And blurred the face of day:
Forlorn and sad, I jogged along;
And though Tom cried, "You're going wrong,"
Still wandered from my way.
The scenes, which once my fancy took,
And my awed mind with wonder struck,
Passed unregarded, all!
Nor black Trecarris' steepy height,
Nor waste Trecastle gave delight;
Nor clamorous Hondy's fall.
Did the bleak day then give me pain?
The driving snow, or pelting rain,
Or sky with tempests fraught?
No! these unheeded raged around:
Naught in them so much Mine I found,
As claimed one wandering thought.
Far other cares engrossed my mind,
Cares for the joys I left behind,
In Newton is the name of a seat belonging to Sir John Price.
Newton's happy groves!
Yet not because its woods disclose
Or grots or lawns more sweet than those
Which Pan at noonday loves;
But that, beside its social hearth
Dwells every joy, which youthful mirth
Or serious age can claim:
The man too whom my soul first knew,
To virtue and to honor true;
And friendship's sacred name.
O Newton, could these pensive lays
In worthy numbers scan thy praise,
Much gratitude would say;
But that the muse, ingenuous maid,
Of flattery seems so much afraid,
She Will scarce her duty pay.
Brecknock, Oct. 16. 1749.
DENNIS to Mr. THOMSON,
Who had procured him a Benefit Night.
REflecting on thy worth, methinks I find
Thy various Seasons in their author's mind.
Spring opes her blossoms, various as thy muse,
And, like thy soft compassion, sheds her dews.
Summer's hot drought in thy expression glows,
And over each page a tawny ripeness throws.
Autumn's rich fruits the instructed reader gains,
Who tastes the meaning purpose of thy strains.
Winter -- but that no semblance takes from thee:
That hoary season yields a type of me.
Shattered by time's bleak storms I withering lay,
Leafless, and whitening in a cold decay!
Yet shall my propless ivy, pale and bent,
Bless the short sunshine which thy pity lent.
SONG. 1753.
I.
HOW easy was Colin, how blithe and how gay!
Ere he met the fair Chloris, how sprightly his lay!
So graceful her form, so accomplished her mind,
Sure pity, he thought, with such charms must be joined!
II.
Whenever she danced, or whenever she sung,
How just was her motion, how sweet was her tongue!
And when the youth told her his passionate flame,
She allowed him to fancy her heart felt the same.
III.
With ardour he pressed her to think him sincere,
But alas! she redoubled each hope and each fear;
She would not deny, nor she would not approve,
And she neither refused him, nor gave him her love.
IV.
Now cheered by complacence, now froze by disdain,
He languish'd for freedom, but languish'd in vain:
Till Thyrsis, who pitied so helpless a slave,
Eased his heart of its pain by the counsel he gave.
V.
Forsake her, said he, and reject her a while;
If she love you, she soon will return with a smile:
You can judge of her passion by absence alone,
And by absence will conquer her heart or -- your own.
VI.
This advice he pursued; but the remedy proved
Too fatal, alas! to the fair one he loved;
Which cured his own passion, but left her in vain
To sigh for a heart she could never regain.
The BULFINCH in Town.
By a Lady of Quality.
HARK to the blackbird's pleasing note:
Sweet usher of the vocal throng!
Nature directs his warbling note,
And all that hear, admire the song.
You' bull-finch, with unvary'd tone,
Of cadence harsh, and accent shrill,
Has brighter plumage to atone
For want of harmony and skill.
Yet, discontent with nature's boon,
Like man, to mimick art he flies;
On opera-pinions hoping soon
Unrivaled he shall mount the skies.
And while, to please some courtly fair,
He one dull tune with labor learns,
A well-gilt cage remote from air,
And faded plumes, is all he earns!
Go, hapless captive! still repeat
The sounds which nature never taught;
Go, listening fair! and call them sweet,
Because you know them dearly bought.
Unenvied both! go hear and sing
Your studied music over and over;
Whilst I attend the inviting spring,
In fields where birds unfettered soar.
SONG. Written in Winter 1743.
By the Same.
I.
THE sun, his gladsome beams withdrawn,
The hills all white with snow,
Leave me dejected and forlorn!
Who can describe my woe?
But not the sun's warm beams could cheer,
Nor hills, though ever so green,
Unless my Damon should appear,
To beautify the scene.
II.
The frozen brooks, and pathless vales,
Disjoin my love and me!
The pining bird his fate bewails
On yonder leafless tree!
But what to me are birds or brooks,
Or any joy that is near?
Heavy the lute, and dull the books,
While Damon is not here!
III.
The Laplander, who, half the year,
Is wrapped in shades of night,
Mourns not, like me, his winter drear;
Nor wishes more for light.
But what were light without my love,
Or objects ever so fine?
The flowery meadow, field, or grove,
If Damon be not mine?
IV.
Each moment, from my dear away,
Is a long age of pain;
Fly swift, ye hours, be calm the day,
That brings my love again!
O haste and bring him to my arms;
Nor let us ever part;
My breast shall beat no more alarms,
When I secure his heart.
Written to a near Neighbor in a tempestuous Night 1748.
By the Same.
I.
YOU bid my muse not cease to sing,
You bid my ink not cease to flow;
Then say it ever shall be spring,
And boisterous winds shall never blow:
When you such miracles can prove,
I Will sing of friendship, or of love.
II.
But now, alone, by storms oppressed,
Which harshly in my ears resound;
No cheerful voice with witty jest,
No jocund pipe to still the sound;
Untrain'd beside in verse-like art,
How shall my pen express my heart?
III.
In vain I call the harmonious nine,
In vain implore Apollo's aid;
Obdurate, they refuse a line,
While spleen and care my rest invade,
Say, shall we Morpheus next implore,
And try if dreams befriend us more?
IV.
Wisely at least he will stop my pen,
And with his poppies crown my brow:
Better by far in lonesome den
To sleep unheard of -- than to glow
With treacherous wildfire of the brain,
The intoxicated poet's bane.
Written at a Ferme Ornee near Birmingham; August 7th, 1749.
By the same.
IT IS Nature here bids pleasing scenes arise,
And wisely gives them Cynthio, to revise:
To veil each blemish; brighten every grace;
Yet still preserve the lovely Parent's face.
How well the bard obeys, each valley tells;
These lucid streams, gay meads, and lonely cells;
Where modest art in silence lurks concealed:
While Nature shines, so gracefully revealed,
That She triumphant claims the total plan;
And, with fresh pride, adopts the work of man.
The GOLDFINCHES. An Elegy.
By Mr. JAGO.
-- Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arets
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.

TO you, whose groves protect the feathered quires
Who lend their artless notes a willing ear,
To you, whom pity moves, and taste inspires,
The Doric strain belongs; O Shenstone, hear.
'Twas gentle spring, when all the tuneful race,
By nature taught, in nuptial leagues combine:
A goldfinch joy'd to meet the warm embrace,
And hearts and fortunes with her mate to join.
Through Nature's spacious walks at large they ranged,
No settled haunts, no fixed abode their aim;
As chance or fancy led, their path they changed,
Themselves, in every varied scene, the same.
Till on a day to weighty cares resigned,
With mutual choice, alternate, they agreed,
On rambling thoughts no more to turn their mind,
But settle soberly, and raise a breed.
All in a garden, on a currant-bush,
With wondrous art they built their waving seat:
In the next orchat lived a friendly thrush,
Nor distant far, a woodlark's soft retreat.
Here blessed with ease, and in each other blessed,
With early songs they waked the sprightly groves.
Till time matur'd their bliss, or crowned their hest
With infant-pledges of their faithful loves.
And now what transport glowed in either's eye!
What equal fondness dealt the allotted food!
What joy each other's likeness to descry,
And future sonnets in the chirping brood!
But ah! what earthly happiness can last?
How does the fairest purpose often fail?
A truant-school-boy's wantonness could blast
Their rising hopes, and leave them both to wail.
The most ungentle of his tribe was he;
No generous precept ever touched his heart:
With concords falfe, and hideous prosody
He scrawl'd his task, and blunder'd over his part.
On barbarous plunder bent, with savage eye
He marked where wrapped in down the younglins lay,
Then rushing seized the wretched family,
And bore them in his impious hands away.
But how shall I relate in numbers rude
The pangs for poor Chrysomitris, it seems, is the name for a goldfinch.
Chrysomitris decreed!
When from a neigh'bring spray aghast she viewed
The cruel spoiler perpetrate the deed!
So wrapped in grief some heart-struck matron stands,
While horrid flames surround her children's room!
On heaven she calls, and wrings her trembling hands,
Constrained to see, but not prevent their doom.
"O grief of griefs! with shrieking voice she cried,
"What sight is this that I have lived so see?
"O! that I had a maiden-goldfinch died,
"From love's false joys, and bitter sorrows free?
"Was it for this, alas! with weary bill,
"Was it for this, I poised the unwieldy straw?
"For this I picked the moss from yonder hill?
"Nor shunned the ponderous chat along to draw?
"Was it for this, I culled the wool with care?
"And strove with all my skill our work to crown?
"For this, with pain I bent the stubborn hair?
"And lined our cradle with the thistle's down?
"Was it for this, my freedom I resigned;
"And ceased to rove from beauteous plain to plain?
"For this I sat at home whole days confined,
"And bore the scorching heat, and pealing rain?
"Was it for this, my watchful eyes grow dim?
"The crimson roses on my cheek turn pale?
"Pale is my golden plumage, once so trim;
"And all my wonted spirits 'gin to fail.
"O plund'rer vile! O more than weezel fell!
"More treacherous than the cat with prudish face!
"More fierce than kites with whom the furies dwell!
"More pilf'ring than the cuckow's prowling race!
"For thee may plumb or goosb'ry never grow,
"No juicy current cool thy clammy throat:
"But bloody birch-twigs work thee shameful woe,
"Nor ever goldfinch cheer thee with her note."
Thus sang the mournful bird her piteous tale,
The piteous tale her mournful mate returned:
Then side by side they sought the distant vale,
And there in silent sadness inly mourned.
The BLACKBIRDS. An Elegy.
By the Same.
THE sun had chased the mountain snow,
And kindly loosed the frozen soil,
The melting streams began to flow,
And plowmen urged their annual toil.
'Twas then, amid the vocal throng
Whom nature wakes to mirth and love,
A blackbird raised his amorous song,
And thus it echoed through the grove.
O fairest of the feathered train!
For whom I sing, for whom I burn,
Attend with pity to my strain,
And grant my love a kind return.
For see the wintry storms are flown,
And gentle Zephyrs fan the air;
Let us the genial influence own,
Let us the vernal pastime share.
The raven plumes his jetty wing
To please his croaking paramour;
The larks responsive ditties fing,
And tell their passion as they soar.
But trust me, love, the raven's wing
Is not to be compared with mine;
Nor can the lark so sweetly sing
As I, who strength with sweetness join.
O! let me all thy steps attend!
I Will point new treasures to thy sight:
Whether the grove thy wish befriend,
Or hedge-rows green, or meadows bright.
I Will show my love the clearest rill
Whose streams among the pebbles stray,
These will we sip, and sip our fill,
Or on the flowery margin play.
I Will lead her to the thickest brake,
Impervious to the school-boy's eye;
For her the plastered nest I Will make,
And on her downy pinions lie.
When prompted by a mother's care
Her warmth shall form the imprisoned young,
The pleasing task I Will gladly share,
Or cheer her labors with my song.
To bring her food I Will range the fields,
And cull the best of every kind;
Whatever nature's bounty yields,
And love's assiduous care can find.
And when my lovely mate would stray
To taste the summer sweets at large,
I Will wait at home the live-long day,
And tend with care our little charge.
Then prove with me the sweets of love,
With me divide the cares of life;
No bush shall boast in all the grove
So fond a mate, so blessed a wife.
He ceased his song. The melting dame
With soft indulgence heard the strain;
She felt, she owned a mutual flame,
And hasted to relieve his pain.
He led her to the nuptial bower,
And nestled closely to her side;
The fondest bridegroom of that hour,
And she, the most delighted bride.
Next morn he waked her with a song,
"Behold, he said, the newborn day!
"The lark his matin peal has rung,
"Arise, my love, and come away."
Together through the fields they strayed,
And to the murmuring riv'let's side;
Renewed their vows, and hopp'd and played,
With honest joy, and decent pride.
When oh! with grief the muse relates
The mournful sequel of my tale;
Sent by an order from the fates
A gunner met them in the vale.
Alarmed the lover cried, My dear,
Haste, haste away, from danger fly;
Here, gunner, point thy thunder here;
O spare my love, and let me die.
At him the gunner took his aim;
His aim alas was all too true:
O! had he chose some other game!
Or shot -- as he was wont to do!
Divided pair! forgive the wrong,
While I with tears your fate rehearse;
I Will join the widow's plaintive song,
And save the lover in my verse.
The RAKE.
By a Lady in New England.
-- Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor.
Hor.
AN open heart, a generous mind,
But passion's slave, and wild as wind:
In theory, a judge of right;
Though banished from its practice quite;
So loose, so prostitute of soul,
His nobler wit becomes the tool
Of every importuning fool:
A thousand virtues misapplied;
While reason floats on passion's tide:
The ruin of the chaste and fair;
The parent's curse, the virgin's snare:
Whose false example leads astray
The young, the thoughtless, and the gay:
Yet, left alone to cooler thought,
He knows, he sees, he feels his fault;
He knows his fault, he feels, he views,
Detesting what he most pursues:
His judgment tells him, all his gains
For fleeting joys, are lasting pains:
Reason with appetite contending,
Repenting still, and still offending:
Abuser of the gifts of nature,
A wretched, self-condemning creature,
He passes over life's ill-trod stage;
And dies, in youth, the prey of age!
The scorn, the pity of the wise,
Who love, lament him -- and despise!
FLOWERS.
By ANTHONY WHISTLER, Esquire
-- Ego apis matinae
More modoque,
Grata carpentis thyma.
HOR.
I.
LET sages, with superfluous pains,
The learned page devour;
While Florio better knowledge drains
From each instructive flower.
II.
His favorite Rose his fear alarms,
All opening to the sun;
Like vain coquettes, who spread their charms,
And shine, to be undone.
III.
The Tulip, gaudy in its dress,
And made for naught but show,
In every sense, may well express
The glittering, empty beau!
IV.
The Snow-drop first but peeps to light,
And fearful shows its head;
Thus modest merit shines more bright,
By self-distrust misled.
V.
The Auric'la, which through labor rose,
Yet shines complete by art,
The force of education shows;
How much it can impart.
VI.
He marks the Sensitive's nice sit;
Nor fears he to proclaim,
If each man's darling vice were hit,
That he would act the same.
VII.
Beneath each common hedge, he views
The Violet, with care;
Hinting we should not worth refuse,
Although we find it there.
VIII.
The Tuberose that lofty springs,
Nor can support its height,
Well represents imperious kings;
Grown impotent by might.
IX.
Fragrant, though pale, the Lily blows;
To teach the female breast,
How virtue can it is sweets disclose
In all complexions dressed.
X.
To every bloom that crowns the year,
Nature some charm decrees;
Learn hence, ye nymphs, her face to wear,
Ye cannot fail to please.
SONG.
By the Same.
WHILE, Strephon, thus you teize one,
To say, what won my heart;
It cannot sure be treason,
If I the truth impart.
'Twas not your smile, though charming;
'Twas not your eyes, though bright;
'Twas not your bloom, though warming;
Nor beauty's daz'ling light.
'Twas not your dress, though shining;
Nor shape, that made me sigh:
'Twas not your tongue, combining,
For that I knew -- might lie.
No -- 'twas your generous nature;
Bold, soft; sincere, and gay:
It shone in every feature,
And stole my heart away.
The CABINET.
Or, Verses on Roman Medals. To Mr. W.
By Mr. GREAVES.
I.
LO! the rich Casket's mimic dome!
Where cells in graceful rows
The triumphs of imperial Rome
In miniature disclose.
II.
Less sacred far those tinsel shrines,
In which the sainted bones,
And relics, modern Rome confines,
Of legendary drones.
III.
In figured brass we here behold
From time's wide waste retrieved,
What patriots firm or heroes bold
In peace or war achieved.
IV.
Or silver orbs, in series fair,
With titles decked around,
Present each Caesar's face and air
With rays or laurels crowned.
V.
Ages to come shall hence be taught,
In lasting lines expressed,
How mighty Julius spoke or fought,
Or Cleopatra-dress'd.
VI.
Augustus here with placid mien,
Bids raging discord cease;
The gates of War close-barr'd are seen,
And all the world is peace.
VII.
A race of tyrants then succeeds,
Who frown with brow severe;
Yet though we shudder at their deeds,
Even Nero charms us here.
VIII.
Thus did the blooming Titus look,
Delight of human kind;
Great Hadrian thus, whose death bespoke
His firm yet gentle mind.
IX.
Aurelius too! thy stoic face
Indignant we compare
With young Faustina's wanton grace,
And meretricious air.
X.
Each passion here and virtue shines
In liveliest emblems dressed:
Less strong in Tully's ethic lines,
Or Plato's flights expressed.
XI.
With heightened grace in verdant rust,
Each work of ancient art,
The temple, column, arch or bust
Their wonted charms impart.
XI.
All-glorious Rome, through martial toil,
Beneath each zone obeyed,
Showed every province, trophy, spoil,
On current gold displayed.
XIII.
Hence prodigals, that vainly spend,
Promote the great design;
And misers aid ambition's end,
Who treasure up the coin.
XIV.
The peasant finds in every clime
The scientifick ore;
Whilst on the rich remains of time,
The learned with rapture pore.
XV.
Each sading stroke they now retrace,
Each legend dark unfold:
Then in historic order place, --
And copper vies with gold.
XVI.
Happy the sage! like you, my friend,
The evening of whose days,
Heaven grants in that fair vale to spend
Where Thames delighted strays.
XVII.
To medals there and books of taste
Those moments you consign,
Which barren minds ignobly waste
On dogs, or cards, or wine.
XVIII.
Whilst I 'mid rocks and savage woods
Enjoy these golden dreams;
Claverton near Bath. 1750.
Where Avon winds to mix her floods
With Bladud's healing streams.
PANACEA:
Or, The Grand Restorative.
By the Same.
WELCOME to Baiae's streams, ye sons of splees.
Who rove from spa to spa -- to shift the scene.
While round the steaming fount, you idly throng,
Come, learn a wholesome secret from my song.
Ye fair, whose roses feel the approaching frost,
And drops supply the place of spirits lost:
Ye 'squires, who racked with gouts, at heaven repine;
Condemned to water for excess in wine:
Ye portly cits, so corpulent and full,
Who eat and drink till appetite grows dull:s
For whets and bitters then unstring the purse,
Whilst nature more oppressed grows worse and worse:
Dupes to the craft of pill-prescribing leaches:
You nod or laugh at what the parson preaches:
Hear then a rhyming quack, -- who spurns your wealth,
And gratis gives a sure receipt for health.
No more thus vainly roam over sea and land,
When lo! a sovereign remedy at hand;
It Is Temperance -- stale cant! -- It Is Fasting then;
Heaven's antidote against the sins of men.
Foul luxury's the cause of all your pain:
To scour the obstructed glands, abstain! abstain!
Fast and take rest, ye candidates for sleep,
Who from high food tormenting vigils keep:
Fast and be fat -- thou starveling in a gown:
Ye bloated, fast -- 'twill surely bring you down.
Ye nymphs that pine over chocolate and rolls,
Hence take fresh bloom, fresh vigor to your souls.
Fast and fear not -- you will need no drop or pill:
Hunger may starve, excess is sure to kill.
The HEROINES, or Modern Memoirs.
By the Same.
IN ancient times, some hundred winters past,
When British dames, for conscience sake, were chaste,
If some frail nymph, by youthful passion swayed,
From virtue's paths unhappily had strayed;
When banished reason re-assum'd her place,
The conscious wretch bewailed her foul disgrace;
Fled from the world and passed her joyless years
In decent solitude and pious tears;
Veiled in some convent made her peace with heaven.
And almost hoped -- by Prudes to be forgiven.
Not so of modern wh -- res the illustrious train,
Renowned Constantia, P -- ton and V -- ne:
Grown old in sin, and dead to amorous joy,
No acts of penance their great souls employ.
Without a blush behold each nymph advance,
The luscious Heroine of her own romance.
Each harlot triumphs in her loss of fame,
And boldly prints and publishes her shame.
1751.
The PARTING.
By the Same.
Written some Years after Marriage.
I.
THE rising sun through all the grove
Diffused a gladsome ray:
My Lucy smiled and talked of love,
And every thing looked gay.
II.
But oh! the fatal hour was come
That forced me from my dear:
My Lucy then through grief was dumb,
Or spoke but by a tear.
III.
Now far from her and bliss I roam,
All nature wears a change:
The azure sky seems wrapped in gloom;
And every place looks strange.
IV.
Those flowery fields, this verdant scene,
Yon larks that towering sing,
With sad contrast increase my spleen
And make me loath the spring.
V.
My books that wont to sooth my mind
No longer now can please:
There only those amusement find
That have a mind at ease.
VI.
Nay life itself is tasteless grown
From Lucy whilst I stray:
Sick of the world I muse alone
And sigh the live-long day.
1748
ODE to a Young Lady,
Somewhat too sollicitous about her manner of expression.
SURVEY, my fair! that lucid stream
Adown the smiling valley stray;
Would art attempt, or fancy dream.
To regulate its winding way?
So pleased I view thy shining hair
In loose disheveled ringlets flow;
Not all thy art, not all thy care
Can there one single grace bestow.
Survey again that verdant hill,
With native plants enameled over;
Say, can the painter's utmost skill
Instruct one flower to please us more?
As vain it were, with artful dye,
To change the bloom thy cheeks disclose;
And oh may Laura, ere she try,
With fresh vermilion paint the rose.
Hark, how the wood-lark's tuneful throat
Can every studied grace excel;
Let art constrain the rambling note,
And will she, Laura, please so well?
Oh ever keep thy native ease,
By no pedantic laws confined!
For Laura's voice is formed to please,
So Laura's words be not unkind.
ODE to MEMORY. 1748.
By WILLIAM SHENSTONE, Esquire
I.
O Memory! celestial maid!
Who glean'st the flowerets cropped by time;
And, suffering not a leaf to fade,
Preserv'st the blossoms of our prime;
Bring, bring those moments to my mind
When life was new, and Lesbia kind.
II.
And bring that garland to my sight,
With which my favored crook she bound;
And bring that wreath of roses bright
Which then my festive temples crowned.
And to my raptured ear convey
The gentle things she deigned to say.
III.
And sketch with care the muse's bower,
Where Isis rolls her silver tide;
Nor yet omit one reed or flower
That shines on Cherwell's verdant side;
If so thou may those hours prolong,
When polished Lycon joined my song.
IV.
The song it 'vails not to recite --
But sure, to sooth our youthful dreams,
Those banks and streams appeared more bright
Than other banks, than other streams:
Or by thy softening pencil shown,
Assume they beauties not their own?
V.
And paint that sweetly vacant scene,
When, all beneath the poplar bough,
My spirits light, my soul serene,
I breathed in verse one cordial vow;
That nothing should my soul inspire,
But friendship warm, and love entire.
VI.
Dull to the sense of new delight,
On thee the drooping muse attends;
As some fond lover, robbed of sight,
On thy expressive power depends;
Nor would exchange thy glowing lines,
To live the lord of all that shines.
VII.
But let me chase those vows away
Which at ambition's shrine I made;
Nor ever let thy skill display
Those anxious moments, ill repaid:
Oh! from my breast that season raze,
And bring my childhood in its place.
VIII.
Bring me the bells, the rattle bring,
And bring the hobby I bestrode;
When pleased, in many a sportive ring,
Around the room I jovial rode:
Even let me bid my lyre adieu,
And bring the whistle that I blew.
IX.
Then will I muse, and pensive say,
Why did not these enjoyments last?
How sweetly wasted I the day,
While innocence allowed to waste?
Ambition's toils alike are vain,
But ah! for pleasure yield us pain.
The Princess ELIZABETH:
A Ballad alluding to a Story recorded of her, when she was a Prisoner at
Woodstock 1554.
By the Same.
WILL you hear how once repining
Great Eliza captive lay?
Each ambitious thought resigning,
Foe to riches, pomp, and sway?
While the nymphs and swains delighted
Tript around in all their pride;
Envying joys by others slighted,
Thus the royal maiden cried.
Bred on plains, or born in valleys,
Who would bid those scenes adieu?
Stranger to the arts of malice,
Who would ever courts pursue?
Malice never taught to treasure,
Censure never taught to bear:
Love is all the shepherd's pleasure;
Love is all the damsel's care.
How can they of humble station
Vainly blame the powers above?
Or accuse the dispensation
Which allows them all to love?
Love like air is widely given;
Power nor chance can these restrain;
Truest, noblest gifts of heaven!
Only purest on the plain!
Peers can no such charms discover,
All in stars and garters dressed,
As, on Sundays, does the lover
With his nosegay on his breast.
Pinks and roses in profusion,
Said to fade when Chloe's near;
Fops may use the same allusion,
But the shepherd is sincere.
Hark to yonder milk-maid singing,
Chearly over the brimming pail;
Cowslips all around her springing
Sweetly paint the golden vale.
Never yet did courtly maiden
Move so sprightly, look so fair;
Never breast with jewels laden
Pour a song so void of care.
Would indulgent heaven had granted
Me some rural damsel's part!
All the empire I had wanted
Then had been my shepherd's heart.
Then, with him, over hills and mountains,
Free from fetters, might I rove:
Fearless taste the crystal fountains;
Peaceful sleep beneath the grove.
Rusticks had been more forgiving;
Partial to my virgin bloom:
None had envied me when living;
None had triumphed over my tomb.
VERSES written toward the close of the Year 1748. to WILLIAM LYTTELTON, Esquire
By the Same.
HOW blithely passed the summer's day!
How bright was every flower!
While friends arrived, in circles gay,
To visit Damon's bower.
But now, with silent step, I range
Along some lonely shore;
And Damon's bower, alas the change!
Is gay with friends no more.
Away to crowds and cities borne
In quest of joy they steer;
Whilst I alas! am left forlorn,
To weep the parting year!
O pensive Autumn! how I grieve
Thy sorrowing face to see!
When languid suns are taking leave
Of every drooping tree.
Ah let me not, with heavy eye,
This dying scene survey!
Haste, Winter, haste; usurp the sky;
Complete my bow'r's decay.
Ill can I bear the motley cast
Yon' sickening leaves retain;
That speak at once of pleasure past,
And bode approaching pain.
At home unblest, I gaze around,
My distant scenes require;
Where all in murky vapors drowned
Are hamlet, hill, and spire.
Though Thomson, sweet descriptive bard!
Inspiring Autumn sung;
Yet how should we the months regard,
That stopped his flowing tongue?
Ah luckless months, of all the rest,
To whose hard share it fell!
For sure he was the gentlest breast
That ever sung so well.
And see, the swallows now disown
The roofs they loved before;
Each, like his tuneful genius, flown
To glad some happier shore.
The wood-nymph eyes, with pale affright,
The sportsman's frantic deed;
While hounds and horns and yells unite,
To drown the muse's reed.
Ye fields with blighted herbage brown!
Ye skies no longer blue!
Too much we feel from fortune's frown,
To bear these frowns from you.
Where is the mead's unsullied green?
The zephyr's balmy gale?
And where sweet friendship's cordial mien,
That brightened every vale?
What though the vine disclose her dies,
And boast her purple store;
Not all the vineyard's rich supplies
Can soothe our sorrows more.
He! he is gone, whose moral strain
Could wit and mirth refine;
He! he is gone, whose social vein
Surpassed the power of wine.
Fast by the streams he deigned to praise,
In yon' sequestered grove,
To him a votive urn I raise;
To him, and friendly love.
Yes there, my friend! forlorn and sad,
I grave your Thomson's name;
And there, his lyre; which fate forbad
To sound your growing fame.
There shall my plaintive song recount
Dark themes of hopeless woe;
And, faster than the dropping fount,
I Will teach mine eyes to flow.
There leaves, in spite of Autumn, green,
Shall shade the hallowed ground;
And Spring will there again be seen,
To call forth flowers around.
But no kind suns will bid me share,
Once more, His social hour;
Ah Spring! thou never can repair
This loss, to Damon's bower.
SONGS.
By the Same.
I.
IN a vale fringed with woodland, where grottos abound,
And rivulets murmur, and echoes resound,
I vowed to the Muses my time and my care;
Since neither could win me the smiles of my fair.
As freedom inspired me, I ranged and I sung;
And Daphne's dear name never fell from my tongue:
But if once a smooth accent delighted my ear,
I should wish, unawares, that my Daphne might hear.
With fairest ideas my bosom I stored;
Allusions to none but the nymph I adored:
And the more I with study my fancy refined,
The deeper impression she made on my mind.
Ah! whilst I the beauties of nature pursue,
I still must my Daphne's fair image renew:
The Graces have chosen with Daphne to rove,
And the Muses are all in alliance with Love.
II. DAPHNE's Visit.
YE birds! for whom I reared the grove,
With melting lay salute my love:
My Daphne with your notes detain:
Or I have reared my grove in vain.
Ye flowers! before her footsteps rise;
Display at once your brightest dies;
That she your opening charms may see:
Or what were all your charms to me?
Kind Zephyr! brush each fragrant flower,
And shed its odours round my bower:
Or never more, O gentle wind,
Shall I, from thee, refreshment find.
Ye streams! if ever your banks I loved,
It ever your native sounds improved,
May each soft murmur soothe my fair:
Or oh! 'twill deepen my despair.
And thou, my grot! whose lonely bounds
The melancholy pine surrounds,
May Daphne praise thy peaceful gloom;
Or thou shall prove her Damon's tomb:
III. The ROSE-BUD.
SEE, Flavia, see that budding rose,
How bright beneath the bush it glows;
How safely there it lurks concealed;
How quickly blasted, when revealed!
The sun with warm attractive rays
Tempts it to wanton in the blaze:
A blast descends from eastern skies,
And all its blushing radiance dies.
Then guard, my fair! your charms divine;
And check the fond desire to shine
Where fame's transporting rays allure,
While here more happy, more secure.
The breath of some neglected maid
Shall make you sigh you left the shade:
A breath to beauty's bloom unkind,
As, to the rose, an eastern wind.
The nymph replied, "You first, my swain,
"Confine your sonnets to the plain;
"One envious tongue alike disarms,
"You, of your wit, me, of my charms.
"What is, unheard, the tuneful thrill?
"Of what, unknown, the poet's skill?
"What, unadmir'd, a charming mien,
"Or what the rose's blush, unseen?
IV. Written in a Collection of Bacchanalian Songs.
ADIEU, ye jovial youths, who join
To plunge old Care in floods of wine;
And, as your dazzled eye balls roll,
Descern him struggling in the bowl.
Nor yet is hope so wholly flown,
Nor yet is thought so tedious grown,
But limpid stream and shady tree
Retain, as yet, some sweets for me.
And see, through yonder silent grove,
See yonder does my Daphne rove:
With pride her footsteps I pursue,
And bid your frantic joys adieu.
The sole confusion I admire,
Is that my Daphne's eyes inspire:
I scorn the madness you approve,
And value reason next to love.
V. Imitated from the FRENCH.
YES, these are the scenes where with Iris I strayed;
But short was her sway for so lovely a maid!
In the bloom of her youth to a cloister she run;
In the bloom of her graces, too fair for a nun!
Ill-grounded, no doubt, a devotion must prove
So fatal to beauty, so killing to love!
Yes, these are the meadows, the shrubs and the plains;
Once the scene of my pleasures, the scene of my pains;
How many soft moments I spent in this grove!
How fair was my nymph! and how fervent my love!
Be still though, my heart; thine emotion give over;
Remember, the season of love is no more.
With her how I strayed amid fountains and bowers,
Or loiter'd behind and collected the flowers!
Then breathless with ardor my fair-one pursued,
And to think with what kindness my garland she viewed!
But be still, my fond heart! this emotion give over;
Fain would thou forget thou must love her no more.
RURAL INSCRIPTIONS.
By the Same.
I. On a ROOT-HOUSE.
HERE in cool grot, and mossy cell,
We rural fayes and faeries dwell:
Though rarely seen by mortal eye,
When the pale moon, ascending high,
Darts through yon' limes her quivering beams,
We frisk it near these crystal streams.
Her beams, reflected from the wave,
Afford the light our revels crave;
The turf, with daisies broider'd over,
Exceeds, we wot, the Parian floor;
Nor yet for artful strains we call,
But listen to the water's fall.
Would you then taste our tranquil scene,
Be sure your bosoms be serene;
Devoid of hate, devoid of strife,
Devoid of all that poisons life;
And much it 'vails you, in their place,
To graft the love of human race.
And tread with awe these favored bowers,
Nor wound the shrubs nor bruise the flowers;
So may your path with sweets abound!
So may your couch with rest be crowned!
But harm betide the wayward swain,
Who dares our hallowed haunts profane!
OBERON.

II. In a shady Valley, near a running Water.
O! Let me haunt this peaceful shade;
Nor let ambition ever invade
The tenants of this leafy bower,
That shun her paths, and slight her power.
Hither the plaintive halcyon flies
From social meads and open skies;
Pleased, by this rill, her course to steer,
And hide her sapphire plumage here.
The trout, bedropt with crimson stains,
Forsakes the river's proud domains;
Forsakes the sun's unwelcome gleam,
To lurk within this humble stream.
And sure I hear the Naiad say,
"Flow, flow, my stream! this devious way;
"Though lovely soft thy murmurs are,
"Thy waters, lovely cool and fair!
"Flow, gentle stream! nor let the vain
"Thy small unsullied stores disdain:
"Nor let the pensive sage repine,
"Whose latent course resembles thine.
III. On a small Building in the Gothic Taste.
Oyou that has in courtly bliss!
Or toyse in fortune's giddye sphere!
Do not too rashlye deem amysse
Of him, that bydes contentid here.
Nor yet disdeigne the russet stoale,
Which over each careless lymbe he flyngs:
Nor yet deryde the beechen bowl,
In which he quaffs the Iymuid spryngs.
Forgyne him, if, at eve or dawne,
Devoyde of worldly carhe he stray:
Or, all beside some flowerye sawne,
He waste his inoffensive day.
So may he pardonne fraud and strife,
If such in courtiye haunt he see:
For faults there been in busye life,
From which these peaceful ^ennes are free.
A Pastoral BALLAD, in Four Parts.
Written 1743.
By the Same.
Arbusta humilesque myricae.
VIRG.
I. ABSENCE.
I.
YE shepherds so cheerful and gay,
Whose flocks never carelessly roam;
Should Corydon's happen to stray,
Oh! call the poor wanderers home.
Allow me to muse and to sigh,
Nor talk of the change that ye find;
None once was so watchful as I:
-- I have left my dear Phyllis behind.
II.
Now I know what it is, to have strove
With the torture of doubt and desire;
What it is, to admire and to love,
And to leave her we love and admire.
Ah lead forth my flock in the morn,
And the damps of each evening repel;
Alas! I am saint and sorlorn:
-- I have bade my dear Phyllis farewell.
III.
Since Phyllis vouchsafed me a look,
I never once dreamt of my vine;
May I lose both my pipe and my crook,
If I knew of a kid that was mine.
I prized every hour that went by,
Beyond all that had pleased me before;
But now they are past, and I sigh;
And I grieve that I prized them no more.
IV.
But why do I languish in vain?
Why wander thus pensively here?
Oh! why did I come from the plain,
Where I fed on the smiles of my dear?
They tell me, my favorite maid,
The pride of that valley, is flown;
Alas! where with her I have strayed,
I could wander with pleasure, alone.
V.
When forced the fair nymph to forego,
What anguish I felt at my heart!
Yet I thought -- but it might not be so --
'Twas with pain that she saw me depart.
She gazed, as I slowly withdrew;
My path I could hardly discern;
So sweetly she bade me adieu,
I thought that she bade me return.
VI.
The pilgrim that journeys all day
To visit some far-distant shrine,
If he bear but a relic away,
Is happy, nor heard to repine.
Thus widely removed from the fair,
Where my vows, my devotion, I owe,
Soft hope is the relic I bear,
And my solace wherever I go.
II. HOPE.
I.
MY banks they are furnished with bees,
Whose murmur invites one to sleep;
My grottos are shaded with trees,
And my hills are white-over with sheep.
I seldom have met with a loss,
Such health do my fountains bestow;
My fountains all bordered with moss,
Where the hare-bells and violets grow.
II.
Not a pine in my grove is there seen,
But with tendrils of woodbine is bound:
Not a beech's more beautiful green,
But a sweet-briar twines it around.
Not my fields, in the prime of the year,
More charms than my cattle unfold:
Not a brook that is limpid and clear,
But it glitters with fishes of gold.
III.
One would think she might like to retire
To the bower I have labored to rear;
Not a shrub that I heard her admire,
But I hasted and planted it there.
O how sudden the jessamin strove
With the lilac to render it gay!
Already it calls for my love,
To prune the wild branches away.
IV.
From the plains, from the woodlands and groves,
What strains of wild melody flow?
How the nightingales warble their loves
From thickets of roses that blow!
And when her bright form shall appear,
Each bird shall harmoniously join
In a concert so soft and so clear,
As -- she may not be fond to resign.
V.
I have found out a gift for my fair;
I have found where the wood-pigeons breed:
But let me that plunder forbear,
She will say 'twas a barbarous deed.
For he never could be true, she aver'd,
Who could rob a poor bird of its young:
And I loved her the more, when I heard
Such tenderness fall from her tongue.
VI.
I have heard her with sweetness unfold
How that pity was due to -- a dove:
That it ever attended the bold,
And she called it the sister of love.
But her words such a pleasure convey,
So much I her accents adore,
Let her speak, and whatever she say,
Methinks I should love her the more.
VII.
Can a bosom so gentle remain
Unmoved, when her Corydon sighs!
Will a nymph that is fond of the plain,
These plains, and this valley despise?
Dear regions of silence and shade!
Soft scenes of contentment and ease!
Where I could have pleasingly strayed,
If aught, in her absence, could please.
VIII.
But where does my Phyllida stray?
And where are Her grots and her bowers?
Are the groves and the valleys as gay,
And the shepherds as gentle as ours?
The groves may perhaps be as fair,
And the face of the valleys as fine;
The swains may in manners compare,
But their love is not equal to mine.
III. SOLICITUDE.
I.
WHY will you my passion reprove?
Why term it a folly to grieve?
Ere I show you the charms of my love,
She is fairer than you can believe.
With her mien she enamours the brave;
With her wit she engages the free;
With her modesty pleases the grave;
She is every way pleasing to me.
II.
O you that have been of her train,
Come and join in my amorous lays;
I could lay down my life for the swain,
That will sing but a song in her praise.
When he sings, may the nymphs of the town
Come trooping, and listen the while;
Nay on Him let not Phyllida frown:
-- But I cannot allow her to smile.
III.
For when Paridel tries in the dance
Any favor with Phyllis to find,
O how, with one trivial glance,
Might she ruin the peace of my mind!
In ringlets He dresses his hair,
And his crook is be-studded around;
And his pipe -- oh may Phyllis beware
Of a magic there is in the sound.
IV.
It Is His with mock passion to glow;
It Is His in smooth tales to unfold,
"How her face is as bright as the snow,
"And her bosom, be sure, is as cold?
"How the nightingales labor the strain,
"With the notes of his charmer to vie;
"How they vary their accents in vain,
"Repine at her triumphs, and die."
V.
To the grove or the garden he strays,
And pillages every sweet;
Then, suiting the wreath to his lays
He throws it at Phyllis's feet.
"O Phyllis, he whispers, more fair,
"More sweet than the jessamin's flower!
"What are pinks, in a morn, to compare?
"What is eglantine, after a shower?
VI.
"Then the lily no longer is white;
"Then the rose is deprived of its bloom;
"Then the violets die with despite,
"And the wood-bines give up their perfume."
Thus glide the soft numbers along,
And he fancies no shepherd his peer;
-- Yet I never should envy the song,
Were not Phyllis to lend it an ear.
VII.
Let his crook be with hyacinths bound,
So Phyllis the trophy despise;
Let his forehead with laurels be crowned,
So they shine not in Phyllis's eyes.
The language that flows from the heart
Is a stranger to Paridel's tongue;
-- Yet may she beware of his art,
Or sure I must envy the song.
IV. DISAPPOINTMENT.
I.
YE shepherds give ear to my lay,
And take no more heed of my sheep:
They have nothing to do, but to stray;
I have nothing to do, but to weep.
Yet do not my folly reprove;
She was fair -- and my passion begun;
She smiled -- and I could not but love;
She is faithless -- and I am undone.
II.
Perhaps I was void of all thought;
Perhaps it was plain to foresee,
That a nymph so complete would be sought
By a swain more engaging than me.
Ah! love every hope can inspire;
It banishes wisdom the while;
And the lip of the nymph we admire
Seems for ever adorned with a smile.
III.
She is faithless, and I am undone!
Ye that witness the woes I endure,
Let reason instruct you to shun
What it cannot instruct you to cure.
Beware how ye loiter in vain
Amid nymphs of an higher degree:
It is not for me to explain
How fair, and how fickle they be.
IV.
Alas! from the day that we met,
What hope of an end to my woes?
When I cannot endure to forget
The glance that undid my repose.
Yet time may diminish the pain:
The flower, and the shrub, and the tree,
Which I reared for her pleasure in vain,
In time may have comfort for me.
V.
The sweets of a dew-sprinkled rose,
The sound of a murmuring stream,
The peace which from solitude flows,
Henceforth shall be Corydon's theme.
High transports are shown to the sight,
But we are not to find them our own;
Fate never bestowed such delight,
As I with my Phyllis had known.
VI.
O ye woods, spread your branches apace;
To your deepest recesses I fly;
I would hide with the beasts of the chase;
I would vanish from every eye.
Yet my reed shall resound through the grove
With the same sad complaint it begun;
How she smiled, and I could not but love;
Was faithless, and I am undone!
INDEX to the Fourth Volume.
ELEGY in a Churchyard 1 Hymn to Adversity 7 Education, a Poem 9 Penshurst 50
Ode to a Friend in Wales 61 Epistle to Sir Thomas Hanmer 64 Song 71 Modern fine
Lady 73 Elegy to Miss D -- w -- d 77 Answer to ditto 79 Monimia to Philocles 82
Flora to Pompey 90 Arisbe to Marius Jun. 94 Roxana to Philocles 102 Epilogue
107 Ode XI Book 1st of Horace 109 Love Letter 110 Verses by Mr. Waller 113
Virgil's Tomb 114 The Link, a Ballad 119 The Squire of Dames 121 Vanity of
Human Wishes 156 Tears of old May Day 170 Song for Ranelagh 176 The Benedicite
177 Ode to Fancy 185 The Monkies 190 Epitaph 191 Verses to Dean Swift 193
Verses written in a Garden 196 Answer to a Love Letter 197 Answer to a Lady who
advised Retirement 199 Address of the Statues at Stow to Lord Cobham 200 Ode on
the Death of Mr. Pelham 202 Verses written at Montauban in France 1750 207 The
Revenge of America 208 The dying Indian 209 Ode on Mr. West's Translation of
Pindar 211 Pleasures of Melancholy 214 Sonnet 225 On Batbing 226 To Lady H -- v
-- y 227 On Sir R. Walpole's Birthday ibid. The Lawyer's farewell to his Muse
228 Verses written in Coke upon Littleton 232 Solitude, an Ode 233 Ode to Mr.
Poyntz 243 Ode on the Death of a favorite Bulfinch 247 Martial, Lib. VI. Ep. 34
249 A little Wish 250 Progress of Discontent 253 The Fireside 258 Tomorrow
262 On Lord Cobham's Gardens 263 To a Child of five Years old 264 Father
Francis's Prayer 265 Poets and News-writers Petition to Mr. Pelham 267 Ode at
the Installation of the Duke of Newcastle 269 Ode to an Aeolus's Harp 274 Ode
to Health 275 A Vernal Ode 278 An Autumnal Ode 280 Song 282 The Genius 283
Translations from Horace 285 To a Lady making a Pin-basket 289 Captain Cupid
291 Ode on Ambition 292 Ode to Fancy 294 On the Death of a Lady's Owl 300
Address to an elbow Chair 302 Song 304 Ode to a Friend wounded in a Duel 305
Ode to Night 307 Verses on leaving a Friend's House in Wales 310 Dennis to
Thomson 311 Song 312 The Bulfinch in Town 313 Song written in Winter 315
Written in a tempestuous Night 316 Written at a Ferme Ornee 317 The Goldfinches
318 The Blackbirds 322 The Rake 325 Flowers 327 Song 329 The Cabinet 330
Panacca 333 The Heroines 334 The Parting 335 Ode to a young Lady 337 Ode to
Memory 338 The Princess Elizabeth 340 Verses to Wm. Littelton, Esquire 343 Songs,
1. 346 2. Daphne's Visit 347 3. The Rose-bud 348 4. Written in a Collection of
Bacchanalian Songs 349 5. Imitated from the French 350
Rural Inscriptions, 1. On a Root-house 351 2. In a shady Valey, near a running
Water 352 3. On a small Building in the Gothic Taste 353
A Pastoral Ballad in four Parts, 1. Absence 354 2. Hope 356 3. Solicitude 359
4. Disappointment 361

FINIS.
DIRECTIONS to the BINDER.
The first and last leaves of this sheet are to supply the cancels in shee^
Hand K.

Place the music here.

Music for the preceding Ballad
Composed by Mr Arne.
Andante

^ Ye shephends so cheerful and gay whose flocks never carelessly ^ ^am, should
Corydon's happen to stray, Oh! callye poor Wonderers ^ home, allow me to muse
and to sigh, Nor talk of ye change yt ye ^ find, None once was so watchful as
I. Ive left my dear ^ Phillis behind, Ive left my dear Phillis behind.


