JUSTIFICATION BY CHRIST alone: (A Fountain of Life and Comfort.) DECLARING
That the whole Work of Man's Salvation was accomplished by JESUS CHRIST upon
the Cross, in that he took away and healed all his from all Sins, and presented
them to God holy, without Fault in his Sight.

By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear
their iniquities, Isa. liii. 11. Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished, that the scriptures might be fulfilled; he said it is finished,
and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost, John xix. 28.30. In the body of
his flesh through death, to make you holy and unblameable, and without fault in
his sight, Col. xxi. 22. Being justified by his blood, Romans v. 9. Thou art all
fair my love, there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.7. Written by SAMUEL
RICHARDSON, In the Year 1647.

LONDON: Printed by JOHN HEART in Popping's-Court, Fleet Street; and sold by J.
LEWIS in Bartholomew-Close, near West-Smithfield; and at the Tabernacle,
MDCCXLV.

To the Reader,
THE point here insisted on is of the greatest moment, though the least regarded,
or rightly understood. -- Many think they truly know it, when they have but
crude, carnal, indigested notions of the same; which dead faith, not purifying
their conscience, and giving true peace, they are obliged to support by past
experience, frames, feelings, or works; and when they hear those who
spiritually understand the mystery of Christ, talk of living upon Christ, and
being perfectly holy by faith only, without these things, they imagine we mean
to rest contented with such a faith as theirs; namely, that Christ has died to
ward off the wrath of God, to purchase his favor, and as an effect of that to
obtain certain inherent qualities and dispositions, etc. to make us meet for
the kingdom of heaven, was this our faith, it would be certainly requisite to
seek after this sort of sanctification, and not be at rest without we felt
something of it. But on the contrary we believe, that the bloodshed upon the
cross, was the very atonement, and that that blood has purged, put away, and
blotted out all our sins; and that then there was an everlasting righteousness
brought in: by believing which, our hearts and consciences are made as
perfectly clean, as though we had never sinned; in this consists true purity of
soul, and not in habitual qualities, and whosoever are thus made pure and perfect,
have fellowship with God, have the Holy Ghost, have constant peace, and are
delivered from the dominion of sin. They do also bear forth the fruits of
righteousness, not in order to become more holy either in the sight of God, or
in their own consciences; but because they are perfectly holy through faith,
and a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.

It Is true, we have still the vile sinful body, which continually disposes the
mind to evil, but the blood of Jesus, by purifying the conscience, makes us
free from sin, and as it were destroys the connection. I would therefore
recommend this little piece to the consideration those who desire to walk in
the highway of holiness; and remain theirs to serve in the Lord Jesus Christ,

WILLIAM CUDWORTH.

JUSTIFICATION BY CHRIST alone.
Unto him that has loved us, and washed away our sins in his own blood, Rev.
i. 5.
THese words contain the virtue, fruit, and effectualness of Christ's death,
and the benefit, privilege, and happiness of the sons of God by it.

In these words we are to consider, 1. The persons whose sins Christ washed
away, and they were all those who were given to Christ, John 17.29. 2. What is
he that washed their sins away, and that is the Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 5. 3.
How, and by what means he washed them away, and that was with his blood. It is
ascribed to his blood, because, Without blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22.
Question, Did Christ's blood, as blood, simply so considered, effect this work?
Answer, No, there is something else included in it; as appears, The blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God,
Heb. 9.14. The word was God, the word took flesh, John 1.14. Christ, who is
God, by taking flesh, united the elect by his flesh to himself, and so became
one with God, as God and Christ are one, John 17.22, 23. So that the flesh of
Christ became (in an unspeakable manner) one with the perfection of the divine
and infinite being, which was the life and substance of all, which lay hid
under, This vail, that is to say his flesh, Heb. 10.20. So that by the power of
his divine nature, he might make satisfaction in and by the human; and by
reason of this union, there was an infinite value and worth in Christ's blood;
therefore it is called, The precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.9. yea the blood
of God, Acts 20.28. So that we may not know Christ simply after the flesh, but
in the flesh, and in the spirit together, 2 Cor. 5.16. 4. The time when he
washed their sins away, which was then when he shed his blood: for in his blood
they were washed away, Christ's blood and their sins went away together. 5. The
ground and cause why he took their sin away; was his love which was in himself,
nothing in us, or done by us, could move him to die for us.

The sum of all is, that Jesus Christ by once offering the sacrifice of
himself, when he was upon the cross, he took away, put to an end, blotted out,
and utterly destroyed all the sins of his people for ever; and presented them
just, righteous, and holy, without spot before God.

This will appear to be true, if ye consider these several reasons, which are
proved by plain scriptures.

1. Because that was the time which Christ was to do this work in. Seventy
weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon the holy city, to finish the
transgressions, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision
and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. And after threescore and two weeks
shall the Messiah be cut off, but not for himself. And he shall confirm the
covenant with many. etc. Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. Which time was at an end when
Christ died, therefore it is said, The year of my redeemed is come, Isa. 63.4.
Yea, the hour is come, says Christ, John 17.1.

2. Because Christ was ordained of God to take away sins, and to present us
holy, Who verily was fore ordained to redeem us with his precious blood, 1 Pet.
1.19, 20. For he has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Who of God is made unto
us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

3. Because Christ was mighty to save. Therefore he did do this work himself
alone: Who is this that comes from Edom with died garments from Bozrah? that
is glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that
speak in righteousness, mighty to save. I have trodden the wine press alone,
and of the people there was none with me. I looked, and there was none to help,
therefore my own arm brought salvation unto me, Isa. 63. So that Christ did all
this work alone, for none else could help. Then thou spakest in a vision to thy
holy One, and said, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm. 89.19.

4. Because Christ took flesh on purpose to effect this work: Wherefore when he
came into the world, he said, sacrifices and offerings thou would not, but a
body thou have prepared for me: in burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou
had no pleasure, Heb. 10.

5. It was the will of God that Christ should by the shedding his blood,
sanctify his, by the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the
body of Jesus once for all, Heb. 10. 5, to 11.

6. Because Jesus Christ came on purpose to take away our sins. etc. Then, said
I, lo, I come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10. He was manifested to take away
our sins, and in him is no sin, 1 John 3.5. Once in the end of the world has
he appeared to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.12, 25, 26, 28.

7. Because Jesus Christ was made a curse for us, and suffered all the
punishment due to us for sin: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. Surely he has borne our griefs, and
carried our sorrows: we did esteem him stricken, and smitten of God, and
afflicted. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him: the Lord has laid on
him the iniquity of us all. He bare the sins of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors, Isa. 53.

8. Because the scriptures says he has obtained eternal redemption for us:
Having obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins* Col. 1.7. Col. 1.14. Behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. John 1.29. And that he has
healed us, By whose stripes we are healed, Isa. 53. Who his own self bare our
sins in his own body, by whose stripes we are healed, 1 Pet. 2.24.

9. Because it was the promise of God, that this work should prosper, and that
he should justify many, by bearing their sins: When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. I have
put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He shall
not fail, nor be discouraged, till he has set judgment on the earth, Isa.
42.1, 4, etc. See Isa. 55.11. My righteous servant shall justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquity, Isa. 53.11. Were these promises fulfilled concerning
Christ, or no? Surely yea. Then he has justified his.

10. Because else Christ had not answered the types under the law.

Adam was a type of Christ, who was a public person as Christ was, and as
truly the first Adam by one act, made all that were in him sinners, which was
true enough; so really and truly did Christ, the second Adam, by his own act,
viz. the sacrifice of himself, he made all that were in him righteous, and that
is as true, see Romans 5.12, to 19, and as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of One many are made righteous And as by our
natural birth we become personally sinners from our sinful root Adam; so by our
spiritual birth, or believing, we become personally righteous in our righteous
branch Christ. -- And as being conceived in sin, etc. we bear forth sinful
fruit in thought, word, and actions; so by being personally righteous in
conscience, by faith, we bear forth good fruit in thought, word, and actions.
. As by the first Adam condemnation came, so by the righteousness of one came
upon all unto justification of life. The priest was a type of Christ, who is
said to make atonement for you, to cleanse you from all your sins before the
Lord, Levit. 16.30. Christ by his death did present all his people to God
without spot, or blemish, or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. In the body of his
flesh through death, to present you holy, and unreproveable in his sight, Col.
1.22. So then I hope they are free from all sin, if the scripture says truth,
as it does.

The live goat was a type of Christ, upon whose head all the transgressions of
the children were laid, who did bear them, and carry them all away into a land
not inhabited in the wilderness, Levit. 16.21, 22. Which were shadows of things
to come, but the body is Christ, Col. 2.17.

11. Because Christ did exceed all the priests and sacrifices under the law;
for they could not make the comers thereunto perfect: But Christ, the substance
of those sacrifices, has made his perfect. If those sacrifices could have
purged them, as Christ has purged us, they should have no more conscience of
sin than we have, that is, none at all: because we are for ever fully and
freely set free, being perfected: Heb. 10.10, 11, 12, 14. The priest under the
law made many offerings, and yet by all their offerings they could never take
away one sin: but Christ by one offering has taken away all their sins for
ever; they stood daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the same sacrifice,
which could never take away sin, but this man after he had offered one
sacrifice, for ever sat down at the right hand of God. Heb. 9.9, to 15. Oh what
a difference is there betwixt them! Christ has wonderfully exceeded them;
therefore this priest, this offering is more glorious and happy; yea, and all
the elect are made happy by this perfect, effectual, glorious offering. Heb. 10.

12. Because there needs no more offerings for sin: therefore sin is quite
gone, and remitted. Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering
for sin, Heb. 10.17, 18. because there needs none. For this one of Christ is
sufficient.

13. Because there can be no more required to be done to make us just and
righteous, than Christ has done for us: he has done all that he was required
to do to take away sin, therefore he has done. Jesus knowing that all things
were accomplished, that the scriptures might be fulfilled. John 19.28, 30. 2
Cor. 5.21.

14. Because if Christ had not fully accomplished what he came to do, viz. to
make us just and righteous, he would not have ascended into heaven as he did:
This man after he had offered one sacrifice, sat down at the right hand of
God. Heb. 9. and 10.12.

15. Because the scripture says, We are justified by his blood: Which could
not be true, if he had not taken away and destroyed all our sins, and presented
us to God without spot, and made peace by the blood of his cross, now has he
reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy, and
unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight. Col. 1.20, 21, 22. For this end
Christ gave himself for his church, that he might present it to himself a
glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
might be holy without blemish, Ephesians. 5. Therefore the scriptures say, all our
sins are scattered, removed, cast behind his back: Thou have cast all my sins
behind thy back. Isa. 38.7. They are cast into the depth of the sea. Mich.
7.19. As far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed our
transgressions from us. Psalm. 103.12. This is something, but this is not all,
they are covered: Whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32.1. Yet the soul is not
satisfied, because a thing may have a being that is covered; therefore God
says they are blotted out, I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy
transgressions, and as a cloud thy sin. Isa. 44.22. This is more, for now they
are not, they have no being. But God can remember that which is not: this is
answered, for God says, I wiil not remember thy sins. Isa. 43.25. I will
remember their sins no more. Jer. 31.34. I hope now you are satisfied.

16. Because they are holy, and without spot. Therefore Christ says of his,
Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee. Song 4.7. My love, my
fair one: Song 2.10. They are without fault before the throne of God. Revel.
14.5. Now this could not have been, if Christ had not in the body of his flesh
through death made them so holy, and presented them so to God. As Col. 1.21,
23. Ephesians. 5.

17. Because Christ says that we are without sin; we may have boldness in the
day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world. 1 John 4.17. How is
Christ, I pray, sure he is without sin, for so says the scriptures: In him is
no sin. 1 John 3.5. Heb. 9.28. Thus we are now, as we are in Christ in respect
of his righteousness, which is ours though it be in him; I say, this our
perfection and happiness is in respect of our justification, and as we are in
Christ: for as we are in ourselves simply so considered (though we were never
out of Christ) in our bodies, in the flesh, we are not capable of so great
perfection in this Life; for the Apostle says, If any man says he has no
sin, he is a liar, and deceives himself. 1 John 1.8, 9. But these Scriptures
are all true: therefore we are all fair, without fault and spot, and we are so
as we are in Christ, and so we were made all this by Christ when he died. And
seeing it must be true also that we have sin, and do sin, that is, as we are in
our flesh, in our bodies, and seeing we are so notwithstanding conversion, and
faith, therefore our believing, etc. has not made us so perfect; and therefore
Christ upon his cross made us so, and so presented us to God, Col. 1.20, 22.

18. Because Christ did all that was needful to be done to make us perfect, and
present us holy. For what can be more required to the justification of a sinner
before God than to be free from all sin? Is not he that is no sinner a
righteous person? must not he that is free from all sin, of necessity appear
just to him that knows he is so? as God does: it is all one to be free from
sin, and to be perfectly righteous. 1 Cor. 5.21. 1 John 1.7. there is no medium
betwixt them: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities. So that his bearing their iniquity was that which
did justify them; and by his knowledge he knew whose sins he bore, viz. whom he
justified. Isa. 53.11.

19. Christ upon the cross did this work for us, because the scripture says,
He has washed away our sins in his own blood. Rev. 5.1. therefore they are
done away. Therefore to say that they are not done away, is to contradict God
in his word, and very dishonorable to Jesus Christ, that he should be
manifested to take away our sins, 1 John 3.5. that Christ should come to finish
the transgression, and to make an end of sins, etc. Dan. 9.24. 2 Cor. 5.21. and
yet this work is still to do. What is this but to say, Christ came not to do
it, or if he came to do it, he did not do it: for he did it not, if it be still
to do.

20. Because Christ says this work is finished, therefore it is so: for he is
the faithful and true witness; therefore we may believe it, and affirm it is
done. These words spoke Jesus, I have glorified thee on earth: I have finished
the work thou gave me to do. Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished (that the scripture might be fulfilled) says, I thirst. When
Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, it is finished: and he bowed
his head, and gave up the ghost. John 19.28.30. and 17.1. to 5. The work God
gave Christ to do was the work of our salvation, which consisted in taking and
destroying our sins, and presenting us holy, without spot to God; and this he
did by being made sin us, that so we might be made (being made sin for us) the
righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.21.

Therefore if when Christ died that was the time this was to be done, and if
Christ was ordained to do it, if Christ was mighty to save, if Christ took
flesh to do this work, if it was the will of God that he should do it, if
Christ came on purpose to do it, if our sins were laid upon Christ, and he
suffered the punishment the curse of them, if he has redeemed us; if it was
prophesied of him that he should justify many, and that his work should
prosper; if Christ did answer his types, if he has exceeded all the priests
and sacrifices under the law, if there needs no more offerings for sin, if
Christ has done all the law required, if Christ has done what he came to do,
if we are justified by his blood, if he has made us holy, and presented us
without spot, if we are free from all sin, if Christ has done all that can be
done to make us just and righteous, if Christ did wash away our sins in his own
blood, if Christ has said, It is finished; then it is done, it is done, it is
done! perfectly and completely done: and then what I have said is fully proved,
namely, that Jesus Christ by once offering the sacrifice of himself, when he
was on the cross, put an end to sin, and so destroyed all the sins of his
people for ever, and presented them just, righteous, and holy, without spot,
etc. before God. Col. 1, 13, 14, 21. Col. 2.13, 14.

Oh what a fountain of consolation is here! what marrow and fatness is here,
what sweetness is like to this, to all that believe? who now may say, once sin
was mine, then it was laid upon Christ, and now they are neither mine nor his;
because they are not at all: for by his blood he washed them all away; and now
they are all gone, blotted out, and shall be remembered no more, no more, no
more. Now Christ's righteousness is mine, as well as his, for I was made the
righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.21. And I did nothing at all to procure
these things to me: in this appears free grace; here is Christ, and Christ
alone, and nothing but Christ; all things else pass away, because they are
under the sun: Eccles. 12. they are full of mutation and change. Faith may be
obscured, and the soul greatly deserted, so as to see no light, Isa. 50.11. yet
when at the worst, they need not be comfortless, John 14.18. for still God is
their God, and their lives are hid with Christ in God. Col. 3.3. Who is the
same to day, yesterday, and for ever: Heb. 13.5. We change often, but he never
changes. Mal. 3.6. In this is our happiness, comfort, and glory: and even then
when we cannot apprehend him, yet were we in him, Ephesians. 1.4. and we are, and
ever shall be in him, and one with him, and are comprehended of him: 1 John
5.20. Because I live, says Christ, ye shall live also. John 14.19. What
doctrine in religion is more sweet and comfortable, more necessary or
profitable, yea, or more honorable to the Lord Jesus Christ? This is that
which holds forth the love of God, that sets the crown upon his head, and will
not give his glory to another: Isa. 42.8. Jer. 4.2. This will have Christ to be
our life, Col. 3.4. peace, Ephesians. 1.14. glory, Isa. 45.25. This is that that
thrust us out of ourselves, our life, our righteousness, Romans 10.3. Tit. 3.5.
to his, to live in him, (and caused us to say, O Lord, thou art our
righteousness, Ezra 9.15. The Lord our righteousness) which life is most sweet
and serviceable, because this is sure, and mo^^ spiritual. In a word, this
makes Christ all in all, Col. ^^ 11. and exalts him above all, which is his
place. Psalm. (...) 19. And surely that which is the life of our souls, that
upon which the eternal happiness of our souls depends, is not in any thing in
us, but that is Christ in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Cor. 1.30. it lies in him, that
so it may be kept safe for us. And that we might not live upon any thing within
us, faith is given that by it we may live out of ourselves in another, even the
Lord Jesus, where our life is, Col. 3.3, 4. Surely if our life and happiness
had been infused in us, we should have lived in our selves, and not upon God.
Adam had his life in him, and he lost it: therefore it is better for us, that
our life is hid in Christ in God, Col. 3.3, 4.

This is comfortable indeed, as God says; Comfort ye my people, speak
comfortably unto her, tell her that her warfare is accomplished, and her
iniquity is pardoned, etc. -- Isa. 40.1, 2.

This is good news from heaven indeed, that this great work is finished; it is
not now to do, neither for faith nor thee. Oh see that ye add not, nor detract
from it: if thou be Christ's ( i. e. if thou believe) it is thine, apply
it, take comfort in it, admire God's love, free grace, give God all the glory
of it, give none of it to faith, nor to any thing else, rejoice in God, and thy
union with him, witness to his truth, and suffer for him; serve and love, and
live and die with him and his.

Many having a notion in this day of being justified by a faith which is
sometime out of exercise. I would recommend to their consideration a few
questions of this author's, in his answers to some objections against this
doctrine. 1 Whether says in the nature and power of it unacted do justify, or
no, if yea, I desire to know how the power to believe apart from the exercise
of it, can be known to us. 2. How it may fitly be called says, when there is
no believing, as there is not without the act, seeing faith and to believe is
one thing: and whether the same light and power, etc. be not the same power by
which we obey the rest of God's commands: and if it be, how you can distinguish
it apart from its act: and if it justifies, as it is a grace unacted, can you
tell how, and when you were justified? and if it may abide in the soul one
hour, and not act, why not two, and so two seven years? and whether then this
opinion does not imply that a man may have faith in him, and be justified by
it, and yet he never believe, nor know it.

FINIS.

