A COLLECTION of POEMS.

VOL. IV.

A COLLECTION OF POEMS IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY SEVERAL HANDS.



LONDON: Printed for G. PERCH, No 12, CHEAPSIDE. M.DCC.LXX.

Isaac Tailor del et sculp.



THE VALETUDINARIAN. AN ODE.
SAID TO BE WRITTEN BY DR. MARRIOTT.
INHERITANCE of weak, but proud Mortality,
Hence, Disease and pining Pain;
With all your pale and ghastly train,
Tossings dire, heart-piercing Moans,
Sighs, and Tears, and hollow Groans,
The harbingers of Death:
Whether ye be
The spawn of bloated Luxury,
Or of the pestilential breath
Of Eurus bred: or from the eastern clime:
Hence! to your ancient seat,
Where ebbing Nilus leaves his putrid slime,
To Volga's banks retreat,
Or to the Caspian, or Bengala's bay;
From Britain's happy lands
Haste to Arabian sands,
While winds sulphurous burn, and urge your way:
But, Goddess of the dimpled cheek,
Whom the wanton Cupids seek,
Come, fair Health, to grace the song,
Bring the cheerful Muse along;
Bring laughing Youth, who looks behind;
Love on Fancy's breast reclined;
Wit, no poisoned dart who flings,
Or but retorts when Envy stings.
Come with antic Merriment,
And the placid child Content;
All with happy steps advance,
Join the song, and lead the dance.
Often, O Goddess! let thy feet
Visit this my lone retreat;
Where my oak extends its pride
Of twisted arms; and fit to ride
Sublime on Neptune's swelling wave,
Now the roaring winds does brave;
Where the vine's soft tendrils run,
And swell to meet the southern sun:
Where Contemplation, wont to stray,
Winds through the wood her easy way,
Or marks the lake, the field, or sky;
The silent Angler's steadfast eye;
The Gunner's aim: or Industry,
Who, with his loud resounding blow,
Lays the nodding forest low;
Or teaches where to wind the stream;
Or whistles to his laboring team:
The meads which suck the dews of morn;
Or uplands crowned with golden corn,
Richer than Iberia's mine:
The bleating flocks; the lowing kine;
The smoking cots, and pointed spires,
The setting sun's reflecting fires;
Woods dark waving in the dale;
Rays which gleam; and clouds which sail;
Shades and lights by turns contending;
Gradual colors softly blending;
All as Nature's pencil clear
Marks the variegated year:
These, O Goddess! these are thine;
Offspring of immortal line;
Who with mortals deign'st to dwell,
In some low and rural cell:
To haunt the brink of tinkling rills;
The flowery vales, or sloping hills;
And when the plowman turns the soil,
To cheer his song, and guide his toil.
With vest succinct in Dian's train
Often art thou seen to brush the plain,
While thy shrill horns sweet Echo rouse,
Slumbering on the mountain's brows:
Often when Winter clouds the air,
To the blazing hearth repair
Thy social feet, wherever the bowl
Of moderate Mirth unlocks the soul,
When tales of time, and ancient fear
Suspend the young astonished ear:
Or carrols quaint in long-drawn note
Swell the rustic's ample throat:
Or where high lifted steps resound,
When the peasant thumps the ground
With awkward heel; and gives a fall
To mistress of the rural ball:
Or presses with his iron hand,
And whirls her through the shouting band.
Nor art thou wont with these to sport
Alone: but where the Loves resort,
With all the young and shining train
Of Cytherea's golden reign,
More elegant, to lead is thine
The dance; which waves its easy line;
Marks the graceful, and the strong;
Where speech to which no words belong
Makes love by actions never pained,
All opposed, but naught constrained:
Movements mixing, swift, and slow,
And foot, ear, eye, together go.
Thus flushed with all thy native charms,
My Delia spreads her winning arms,
Uplisted soft, and seems to tread
On yielding air, or ocean's bed:
And, as she grants her modest hand,
Damon's happy eyes demand,
While moved by her he seems to live,
The heart, which she half seems to gives
If these delights, O Goddess! wait
Ever on thy happy state,
Best of blessings understood,
Only source of mortal good;
Hither, bright Hygeia, fly
With rosy cheek, and sparkling eye,
Such as thou do often appear
When thy Heberden is near.
Rich with Nature's genuine grace,
Come, Goddess! to my warm embrace,
Far from all I fear, or hate;
From splendid life's delusive state,
Smiles that stab, or that betray:
Gloom of heart with visage gay;
Splender cankered with distress,
Grandeur mixed with littleness,
Words of wind, and hopes of air,
Clouds which threaten dark despair,
Craft disloyal to his trust,
Here High Birth licking low the dust,
There upstart Meanness set astride
The world, too narrow for his pride.
Far from Trade's too busy seat,
Of Loss and Gain the low deceit,
Awkward Pomp, and Vanity,
Who restless drive, and mount the sky,
Proud of misused Liberty;
While sordid Cunning, Passion blind,
Ride on the gilded car behind.
From Law's grimace, and mean chicane,
Which rivets, when it seems the chain
To loose; receives the golden shower,
And offers hecatombs to Power.
From language low, which vulgars prize,
Creeping Arts which mean to rise;
Labyrinths, which ever wind
In the dark and double mind:
From Profession's learned scene;
Cant of words, which little mean:
Physic, child of Luxury;
Clok'd in shallow mystery:
False Religion's forms, which bind
The body to enslave the mind:
Disputation's rage and trouble:
Philosophic system's bubble:
From War's parade; or Eloquence
In senates, big with smooth pretense
Of public good: from Envy mean,
Who midst the liberal Arts is seen,
Corrodes the page which Genius drew,
And turns aside her sullen view,
Each work of Merit pleased to blast,
Then feeds upon herself at last.
From these, immortal Goddess! fly,
And bless thy humble votary.
Give me Reason's lasting pleasure,
Ease, but not ignoble leisure:
Far be wild Ambition's fires,
Hopeless Love, and fierce Desires.
I ask not Fortune's glittering charms,
The pride of courts, the spoils of arms;
By silver stream, and haunted grove,
O give my peaceful steps to rove:
Beneath the shade of pendent hills,
I Will listen to the falling rills,
That chafe the pebble, as they stray;
And haste, like human life, away:
Then on the flowery carpet green
I Will sit and trace the rural scene;
While by the mimic pencil drawn
The herds shall seem to crop the lawn;
The piping swain, the distant towers,
The moss-grown knotted oaks, and bowers,
As bending to the whispering breeze,
Some thatched cot rising among the trees,
In rude and artless lines designed,
Shall faintly mark the Master's mind.
Or, if soft verse delight us more,
O grant of verse the wondrous power
Strong ideas to inspire;
Words which paint, and sounds which fire;
Which calls up shades of heroes bold,
Whose virtues warmed the times of old,
Dressing the historic page
With Terror, Pity, Love, and Rage;
Or gives to Truth the tuneful art
With moral song to mend the heart:
Flow it easy, soft, and free,
From ill-conceiv'd obscurity;
Affectation's crowded plumes,
All that strains, or that assumes;
Nature may it ever pursue,
Describing, as we feel, the true:
Her magic glass while Fancy brings,
Which shows the fleeting form of things,
Each fair assemblage knows to trace
All that Nature has of Grace;
While Reason lends her sacred aid,
And in the beautiful displayed,
Sees with sound philosophy
The reflected Deity.
Thus on through Manhood, Youth, and Age,
Nor stained with guilt, nor rough with rage,
In smooth maeanders life shall glide,
And roll a clear and peaceful tide.
THE ROYAL VOYAGE.
BY THE SAME.
I.
HIGH on the bounding bark the Royal Fair
Mounts over the billows of the watery way;
Serene as Cynthia through the fields of air,
Queen of the Night extends her cloudless ray,
When all the forests tremble to the gleam,
And the transparent seas reflect the silver beam.
But see the whitening surge, the gathering clouds;
Hark! the winds whistle through the shrowds,
They bow the mast, they rend the sail,
The sea-worn mariner is pale,
And views the blackening storm, and hears the increasing gale.
But not, O Royal Maid,
Let Fear thy breast invade:
Know, happy Fair! approved by heaven,
To thee the empire of the Main is given,
In vain loud winds the deep deform,
Love shall triumphant ride the storm.
Peace! every roaring child of troubled air:
Unmoved the Queen of sea-girt Albion sings;
Her flying fingers touch the strings;
Around their Queen the trembling train repair:
Her courage lifts their own;
Her music sooths their care.
II.
Happy Queen of Albion's isle,
On whom the Loves and Graces smile:
Haste from Germania's plain, and death-devoted shore,
Soon thy weary steps shall try
A happier land, a milder sky,
Where no din of arms shall roar,
Nor winds, nor swelling seas assault thee more.
Thus, 'midst the storms which blow
Over Thracian hills of snow,
Orpheus tuned the golden lyre,
And saw the beasts of death retire.
Thus fearless of the night, and watery grave,
Leander's bosom met the wave,
While Love before him flew his way to guide,
And through the foaming tide
Gave to his nervous arm redoubled power,
While Hymen shook the torch bright on the distant tower.
Hail! happy fires of mutual love unknown,
To purchased dalliance and tumultuous joy;
True Pleasure sits on Virtue's awful throne;
There all the Loves their golden shafts employ:
Mild and unclouded the eternal flame,
Reward of virtuous Love, and Heaven's best blessing came.
III.
Swift the winged Hours shall urge their stealing way,
Nor often the waning moon shall know decay
Ere a new race shall rise of sceptered kings.
From thee, Strelisian Fair, the future hero springs.
See, the long lines of royal youths extend,
To Britain's throne new subjects bend;
Wherever her glittering standards rise,
In other seas, in other skies,
Shall spread the godlike fame of mildest victories.
Auspicious youths be born!
Arise! O haste! your native soil adorn!
Not valorous arms alone
Shall guard the regal throne;
But shining arts, and holy laws,
And ancient Freedom's well-defended cause,
Shall lift secure your praise sublime
Through all the radiant paths of time.
On Dorubernian cliffs the Muse has told,
Prophetic child of Druids old,
Whereon she sits, and hears from either pole
In every wind victorious thunders roll.
ODE ON DEATH. WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF PRUSSIA.
TRANSLATED BY THE SAME.
WHAT does the sad presaging mean?
Few days, few years, perhaps few moments urge
My footsteps to the dreary verge,
Where Fate the curtain drops to close the scene:
Then farewell! Life and Light! and thou blessed Sun serene.
Earth, over me rolls thy mighty bed;
The world recedes; I view the grave profound:
Of life I touch the utmost bound;
And rush to mix a victim with the dead,
Where Fate embraces all, and none can backward tread.
While yet I wake or sleep, there stand
Ten thousand Deaths in arms; before, behind,
They press me round; and every wind
Wafts the contagion from each distant land,
And all the Elements conspire to arm the dreadful band;
Within, without, above, below,
By turns they sink, or rend my feeble frame,
Now chill, now urge the vital flame,
Till Nature's tortured stream forgets to flow,
And Art itself but proves a still more dangerous foe.
Dust to its Dust will soon return
This mortal part, proud Tyrant of the Mind,
Nor leave of all its pomp behind,
But horrid lessons human Pride should learn,
Foul Worms, and Blood, and Stench that sill the Royal Urn.
Recede, ye base and servile train,
I cannot be the mighty thing ye say;
The wretched object of a day,
Which slatter'd Fancy would exalt in vain,
I know what I must be, and what I am disdain.
But warmed with Heaven's eternal flame,
Shall that which lives, which thinks, the Mind
Be fleeting as the empty wind?
Or say, can Death its active efforts tame,
O God, who first inspired this animated frame?
No: for the Mind above the grave
Unfettered springs, and searching Nature's stores
It knows itself, and thee adores,
Secure, O God, whose word its being gave,
That what created first has certain power to save;
While thus of Death dispels the cloud,
Can sensual joy life's narrow view confine?
True Virtue feels the hope divine
Of bliss sincere: not so the guilty crowd;
Thy arm for ever blasts the wicked and the proud.
Great God! and is eternal pain
Or joy of Heaven reserved for me in store?
Thy breath but wafts to either shore;
Scarce can the tortured mind the thought sustain;
I fly forbidden joys, the sensual, and the vain.
Yet fast to earth is Nature bound:
Back on its wonted objects turns the Mind,
And lags the slave of life behind:
While Reason's efforts are too painful found
To rend the rooted oak that loves its native ground.
Objects of every jealous eye,
Ye dreams of mortal good, that swift decay,
How do ye stop my destined way?
And force me back the paths of sense to try?
Ye point the sting of Death, and more than once I die.
Scenes of astonishment! the world how blind!
Is Death deprived of all his mighty power?
Do none expect the fatal hour?
Is there a wish to Nature's bounds confined?
Is there a scheme forgot, or toil for this resigned?
See Mortals still acquire, assume,
As if more vigilant they Death could shun,
To honors fly, to combats run,
And he whose footsteps tremble over the tomb
Builds up new plans of life, and sudden meets his doom.
Rush on, ye madding train,
A thousand rocks, a thousand storms despise,
To reach the good ye idolize:
Go, of accumulated wealth be vain:
Go, ravage other worlds, if other worlds remain
Let neither law, nor power divine,
Nor Nature's anxious Monitor within
Repress each greatly daring Sin;
Go: bid with want the plundered Orphan pine,
And with polluted hands disturb each sacred Shrine;
Proceed: but soon your views are past;
Accursed; at once ye droop, and are no more:
Who would not think, to see your store,
That all the projects your Ambition cast
Beyond the grave were stretched, and would for ever last?
Ye mighty Leaders, mighty Kings,
With flames, and blood, whose battles mark your way;
Do Monarchs hope eternal sway?
In vain each distant clime its tribute brings,
Sprung from the dust ye mix with long-forgotten things.
Himself the Victor cannot save;
If but to die is yours, how short is Glory's sum?
In vain ye fought and overcome,
Nor aught avail the spoils Ambition gave
To hang with conquered crowns the putrid Monarch's grave.
On Nature's theater displayed
All is the sport of Death; the change I fear;
New objects rise, then disappear;
Around my brows the cypress casts a shade;
I scorn the sweets of life, and all its roses fade.
Yet 'midst this sage, but painful lore,
While awful truths their sacred light reveal,
What means this latent wish I feel?
Is then my bosom's Lord itself no more?
Wretch! that I drag new chains more ponderous than before.
Rules then the mind, this Lord supreme?
Which every weak, and vain allurement draws
To Pleasure's throne, and tyrant laws.
Quick we return in life from what we seem
To what we are, and wake from calm Reflection's dream.
As wandering Fancy leads we go;
By turns we reason, or submit to sense,
And incoherent parts commence
That fill the stage of Folly, Shame, and Woe;
Nor from the hook escaped again the bait we know.
Voltaire, in this eternal round
How swift our active spirits urge their way!
By both extremes deceived we stray,
Now caught by sense, now lost in thought profound,
And in the mutual change our happiness is found.
INSCRIPTION UPON A MONUMENT.
BY THE SAME.
HOW soon with nimble wings our pleasures haste,
And clouds involve the sunshine of the day!
The wintry storms howl over the dreary waste,
And fairest things tend swiftest to decay.
In dark oblivion all our glory ends;
This morn we flourish, and the next we fade.
Time lifts his sweeping scythe: the pile descends
Where vain Ambition all her toils displayed;
The work of nations, and the pomp of power
Sink: the once lofty spire, the dome's proud state:
The dust receives them at the destined hour,
And mighty kingdoms feel the force of Fate.
Fall, vain Ambition's pile, and lofty spires,
But spare, stern Fate, the youthful and the gay;
Soft pity sure such innocence requires;
And so much beauty well might Death delay.
TO A LADY SITTING FOR HER PICTURE.
BY THE SAME.
THE weary look, desponding air,
Ill suits, my Dear, a face so fair;
Resume your smiles; again supply
The Graces caught by Fancy's eye.
While Wilson sketches out the piece,
We'll talk, to pass the time, of Greece;
Of Greece, as you have often heard,
For warriors, and for wits revered;
The seat of Learning, and the Graces,
Famed for fine arts, but finer faces;
Where Painters, Poets, not as since,
Were greater held than any Prince;
In temples, palaces carest,
None more the Ladies smiles possessed;
For they were rich as well as clever,
And riches were successful ever;
Priests, Senates, Nations, Kings desired
The works their heaven-taught art inspired,
And if a pencil chanced to drop,
An Alexander picked it up;
Beauties would run to be sketch'd over;
The haughty Prince, though much a lover,
Once for the copy, payment small,
Resigned up the original,
The fair Campaspe's matchless charms,
More conquering than the Monarch's arms,
To one Apelles; one who drew
The Queen of Love, as Wilson you.
Each lovely maid, of Greece the toast,
Such as our British isle can boast,
In all their native beauty gay,
As Hebe young, and sweet as May,
Before him sat: from one he chose
The eye which Love half seemed to close;
This lent a face divinely fair,
A mild, and yet majestic air;
That gave what art in vain would seek,
The spirits mantling in the cheek,
And lips that softness seemed to speak.
Thus, from their various charms combined,
One perfect Whole impressed his mind;
But had Apelles painted now,
He might, my Dear, have copied you,
And, as in truth, I think, was done,
He would have from the picture run,
And left the Venus but begun,
To sacrifice the pride of art
To the bright Goddess of his heart,
And given up an immortal claim,
For beauty's prize, the prize of fame.
ELEGY. ON THE DEATH OF A YOUNG LADY.
BY THE SAME.
YES, it is past; the fatal stroke is given.
Our pious sorrows own the hand of heaven.
How short our joys! encumbered life how vain!
Still vexed with evil's never-ceasing train;
While roll the hours which lead each fleeting year,
Each asks a sigh, and each demands a tear.
Over pleasing scenes the mind with rapture roves,
Grasps in idea all its hopes or loves:
Snatched from its view the pleasing scenes decay,
And the fair vision melts in shades away.
Of youth, of beauty, and of wit the boast,
O loved for ever, and too early lost,
Sweet maid, for thee now mingling with the dead,
Her sacred griefs the tuneful Muse shall shed;
The soft remembrance of thy charms to save
She plants with all her bays thy hallowed grave.
Ye too, companions of her happier days,
Heirs of her charms, and rivals of her praise,
Amid the circles of the young and gay
Your years unheeded urge their stealing way,
While mixed with pleasure's ever-smiling train,
Ye know no sorrows, and ye feel no pain;
Yet, when no more the pulse tumultuous beats,
Nor the pleased sense each flattering tale repeats,
Let calm reflection the sad moral teach,
That bliss below evades our eager reach;
That virtue only grants the real charm,
Gives wit to win, and beauty power to warm;
And though like hers, whose recent fate we mourn,
And ask your pity for a sister's urn,
Your beauties shine in all their bloom confessed,
'Mid gazing slaves contending to be blessed,
Yet think like hers may soon those beauties fade;
Like hers your glories in the dust be laid.
Time's hardy steps in silence swift advance,
Dim the bright ray that darts the fiery glance,
And Age, dread herald of Death's awful reign,
Blasts every grace, and freezes every vein.
When with a mother's joy, a mother's fear,
The thoughtful parent dropped the silent tear,
Gazed on her child, and saw new beauties rise,
Glow in her cheeks, and sparkle in her eyes,
In expectation planned each hope of life,
The sister, daughter, mother, friend, and wife;
Ah fleeting joys! how soon those hopes were over!
We doomed to mourn, and she to charm no more.
The waning moon shall fill her wasted horn,
And nature's radiance gild the orient morn,
The smiling spring with charms renewed appear,
The sleeping blossoms haste to deck the year,
But bloom no more this fair departed flower,
Nor waked by genial sun, nor vernal shower.
How vain, alas! was all thy father's art,
Vain were the sighs which swelled thy mother's heart.
Again I see thee just expiring lie,
Pale thy cold lip, half closed thy languid eye,
Thy guardian Innocence beside thee stands,
And patient Faith uplifts her holy hands,
Teach thee with smiles to meet the stroke of Death,
Calm all thy pangs, and ease thy struggling breath.
Resigned, dear maid, to earth's maternal breast,
May sister Seraphs chant thy soul to rest.
There shall the constant Amaranthus bloom,
And wings of Zephyrs shed the morn's perfume.
Over thy sad hearse, fair emblems of the dead,
By virgin hands are dying lilies shed.
The weeping Graces shall thy tomb surround;
The Loves with broken darts shall strew the ground;
In vain for thee they waked the fond desires,
Wove myrtle wreaths, and fanned their purer fires.
The youthful God, who joins the nuptial bands,
In vain expecting, near his altar stands;
Fate spread the cloud: his torch extinct, he flies,
And veils with saffron robe his streaming eyes.
Yet O, while crowned with never-fading flowers,
Thy spirit wanders through Elysian bowers,
If plaintive sounds of mortal grief below
Reach the blessed seats, and waft our tender woe,
Hear, happy shade; while thus our mortal lays
This monument of soft affection raise.
By gentle ties of kindred birth allied,
The Muse, that sports on Camus' willow'd side,
In Memory's lofty dome inscribes thy name,
And with thy beauties strives to mix her fame.
THE ACADEMIC.
WRITTEN APRIL M.DCC.LV At the time of the establishment of Classical Prizes,
and building the new Public Library
.
BY THE SAME.
I.
WHILE silent streams the moss-grown turrets lave,
Came, on thy banks with pensive steps I tread;
The dipping osiers kiss thy passing wave,
And evening shadows over the plains are spread.
From restless eye of painful Care,
To thy secluded grot I fly,
Where Fancy's sweetest forms repair,
To soothe her darling Poesy;
Reclined the lovely Visionary lies
In yonder vale and laurel-vested bower;
Where the gay turf is decked with various dies,
And breathes the mingling scents of every flower:
While holy dreams prolong her calm repose,
Her pipe is cast the whispering reeds among;
High on the boughs her waving harp is hung,
Murmuring to every wind that over it blows.
II.
Often have I seen her bathe at dewy morn
Her wanton bosom in thy silver spring,
And, while her hands her flowing locks adorn
With busy elegance, have heard her sing.
But say what long recorded theme,
Through all the lofty tale of time,
More worthy can the Goddess deem
Of sounding chords, and song sublime,
Than, whose parental hand to vigor bred
Each infant art, the Noble and the Wise;
Whose bounty gave yon' arching shades to spread.
Yon' pointed spires in holy pomp to rise?
Shall War alone loud-echoing numbers claim,
And shall the deeds of smiling Peace be drowned,
Amid the Hero's shouts and trumpet's sound?
These too shall flourish in immortal fame.
III.
When Science sled from Latium's polished coasts
And Grecian groves, her long and loved abode,
Far from the din of fierce conflicting hosts,
Through barbarous realms the weary wanderer trod;
But to what more indulgent sky,
To what more hospitable shade,
Could trembling, bleeding, fainting fly
The helpless and devoted Maid?
Time-honour'd Founders! ye the virgin wooed!
'Twas yours, with souls to native grandeur born,
To bid her radiant beauties shine renewed,
With wealth to heap, with honors to adorn.
In Granta's happier paths she wept no more;
Healed were the wounds that scarr'd her gentle breast;
Here, still she smiles with Freedom's sons to rest;
Nor mourns her Attic towers, nor Tuscan shore.
IV.
Fathers of Genius! whom the Muse adores,
For sure to you her noblest strains belong,
Beneath whose venerable roofs she pours
The grateful notes of sweetly flowing song.
The increase of swift revolving years
With conscious pride exulting view;
How all ye planned complete appears;
How all your Virtues bloom anew:
The generous zeal which erst ye felt remains,
Its bounteous beams still ardent to dispense;
While unexhausted to your learned plains
Rolls the rich stream of wide munificence.
Joy to your shades! the great career is run,
Reserved by Fate for some superior hand,
Confessed, the last, the auspicious work shall stand,
And Statesman, Monarch end what ye begun.
V.
Ye too, once Inmates of these walls renowned,
Whose spirits, mingling with the ethereal ray,
Of universal Nature traced the bound,
Or raised in majesty of thought the lay,
See your loved Arts this clime to grace,
Their rival radiance brighter shed,
While Holles smiles the wreath to place
Upon the youthful Victor's head.
Where Spencer sits among your thrones sublime,
To the soft music of his mournful lays
Listening ye weep for his ungrateful time,
And point the better hope of happier days.
If with the dead dishonour's memory dies,
Forget, much injured Name, the unworthy woe;
In strains like thine so may our accents flow,
In nobler numbers yon' fair domes arise.
VI.
When Faction's storms, or some fell Tyrant's hate
Arts joined with Freedom to one grave shall doom,
Then though these structures to the hand of Fate
Bend their proud height, like thine, imperial Rome,
Know, vainly, Time, thy rapid rage
Shall point its wide destroying aim,
Since what defies the force of age
Thus consecrates the pile to Fame;
Some future eye the ruined heap shall trace,
The name of Holles on the stone behold,
Shall point a Brunswic to a distant race,
Benign, and awful on the swelling gold.
The historic page, the poet's tuneful toil,
With these compared, their mutual aid shall raise
To build the records of eternal praise,
And deck with endless wreaths their honored soil.
VII.
Sweeter than warbled sounds that win the sense
Flows the glad music of a grateful heart,
Beyond the pomp of wordy eloquence,
Or strains too cold, high-wrought with labored art.
Though weakly sounds the jarring string;
Though vainly would the Muse explore
The heights to which with eagle wing
Alone can heaven-taught Genius soar;
Yet shall her hand ingenious strive to twine
The blooming chaplet for her Leader's brow;
While with new verdure graced, in Glory's shrine,
The ampler Palms of civic Honors grow;
When he, these favored shades appears to bless,
Whose guardian counsels guide a nation's fate,
And with superior toils for Europe's state
Mixes the thought of Granta's happiness.
VIII.
Hail seats revered! where thoughtful pleasures dwell,
And hovering Peace extends her downy wings,
Where musing Knowledge holds her humble cell,
And Truth divine unlocks her secret springs;
This verse with mild acceptance deign
To hear; this verse yourselves inspire,
Ere yet within your sacred fane
The Muse suspends her votive lyre.
Thee, Granta, thus with filial thanks I greet,
With smiles maternal thou those thanks receive,
For Learning's humble wealth, for friendship sweet,
For every calmer joy thy scenes could give.
While thus I sport upon thy peaceful strand,
The storms of life at awful distance roar;
And still I dread, still lingering on the shore,
To launch my little bark, and quit the land.
AMABELLA The subject of this poem is founded on a circumstance that happended
during the late war. -- A young lady, not meeting with the concurrence of her
relations in favor of an officer for whom she expressed her regard, was
prevailed upon, by his solicitations, to consent to a clandestine marriage;
which took place on the day he sat out to join his regiment abroad, where he
was unfortunately killed in an engagement.
.
WRITTEN BY THE DESIRE OF MRS. MONTAGU.
BY MR. JERNINGHAM.
HARMODIUS breathed the rural air, nor found
His ruddy health with length of years decrease:
By duty prompted, Amabella crowned
His silver forehead with the wreath of peace:
By partial nature framed in beauty's mould,
Adorned with every grace, unspoil'd by art,
To friendship's circle still did she unfold
The lovelier beauties of a feeling heart.
Endeared to all she met, each welcome day,
By fortune's hand, with various blessings fraught:
When, lo! her gaiety's accustomed ray
Was quenched, untimely, with the gloom of thought.
What fixed the bosom-thorn, affliction knows,
Where peace sat brooding as the gentle dove:
What blasted on her cheek the summer rose,
Or slow disease, or unsuccessful love,
Remained unknown. -- 'Twas by the many guessed,
That love to her soft vows had proved unkind:
Beyond the power of her weak frame oppressed,
Infanity o'erthrew her lovely mind.
At length recovering, yet to grief devote,
To solitude she gave the unsocial day;
Like a pale vot'ry from the world remote,
Unchear'd, unvisited of pleasure's ray.
Often did Harmodius (at her state dismayed)
Solicit from his child her secret pain:
Her vague reply still from his question strayed,
And each repeated effort proved in vain.
To speed the moments of the loitering hour,
And by their plaintive strains perchance allured,
Within a spacious myrtle-woven bower,
Two turtle doves the pensive fair secured.
" Ye little captives, would she often say,
" Though here secluded from the fields of air,
" Through yonder vernal grove forbid to stray,
" And join the kindred train that wanton there;
" Against you the gunner never lifts his arm,
" Nor over this mansion does the falcon sail;
" You live unconscious of the storm's alarm,
" The rain impetuous, and the beating hail.
" Nor here, by kind compassion unimpress'd,
" The schoolboy ever rears his impious hand,
" To fill with agony the feathered breast,
" And raze the little domes that love had planned."
Their harmless joys disease too soon effaced:
One fatal morn, her Turturella's mate
She found, with flagging wing subdued, oppressed,
And just, just sinking at the blow of fate:
While down her cheek compassion's shower distilled,
She gently raised it to her anxious breast;
But death's cold blast life's crimson current chilled,
And thus the fair her breathless bird addressed:
" Ill-fated turtle, round whose peaceful bower
" The jocund loves so lately wont to play:
" How sunk, alas! in youth's exulting hour,
" To fell disease, to death the untimely prey:
" How silent is the voice, which, void of art,
" Along the tender day was heard to coo!
" How still, how frozen is the constant heart,
" Which to its dear companion beat so true!
" That dear companion, that now widowed dove,
" To screen from every harm be mine the care;
" And, while she mourns her ne'er-reviving love,
" Her grief to me the mourner will endear:
" Like thee, a widow too, condemned to mourn:
" No more to me does life unfold its charms,
" Death; death forbids him ever to return!"
She said -- and sunk into the attendant's arms.
Her swift relapsing to her former state,
With boding fears, approached the serving train:
This scene's dread period tremblingly they wait,
Nor were their boding fears indulged in vain:
Awakening from her trance, around she threw,
Distressful fair, her much disordered eyes;
And wildering said -- "repeat that kind adieu:
" Ah no! from love to war, to death he flies.
" Did ye not hear the clash of hostile spears?
" Ah! mark ye not that breast plate stained with gore?
" What groan was that which pierced these fearful ears?
" He falls, he falls -- my warrior is no more:
" Nor was, O Heaven! his Amabella near
" To soothe his pain, and echo sigh to sigh,
" Drop on the gaping ground a balmy tear,
" Kiss his cold lip, and close his fading eye."
Of her distress the alarmed Harmodius taught,
With trembling steps approached the unconscious fair:
" Give me, he cried, with grief paternal fraught,
" Give me, O Amabel'! to soothe thy care:
" Say, what affliction has thy soul impressed?
" Reveal what storm thy bosomed calmness breaks?
" Reveal -- and thus relieve this anguish'd breast:
" The tender father to his daughter speaks."
AMABELLA. " Ah! what avails the praise the brave obtain!
" Through his white bosom rushed the hostile steel:
" 'Twas his to swell the number of the slain,
" And mine affliction's keenest point to feel."

HARMODIUS. " Her roving thought no trace of reason bears:
" To her racked mind, O Heaven! thy peace impart:
" A loving parent bathes thy cheek with tears;
" Harmodius holds thee to his breaking heart."

AMABELLA. " To thee, I grateful kneel, O generous seer!
" Who do, to one unknown, thy care extend:
" Along thy path may Peace her olives rear,
" And Heaven, in battle, shield thy dearest friend:
" For me, who droop beneath misfortune's shower,
" I had a father, -- now, alas! a foe, --
" Thou Wilt blush to hear, -- in sorrow's darkest hour,
" He leaves his child abandoned to her woe:
" But to thy heart, that is framed of softer mould,
" What can to thee, a wretch like me endear!
" The spring, the motive of thy love unfold:
" Say, say, for me why flows that friendly tear!
" Yet soft awhile, -- methinks that hoary brow --
" That plaintive voice -- Ah, bear with my distress!
" Or much remembrance is effaced, or now,
" A tender father's tear-dew'd cheek I press."

HARMODIUS. " On knees of gratitude, I bless the skies,
" That Amabella to herself restore."

AMABELLA. " Ah, wherefore do thou joy! thy daughter dies:
" Support me to yon couch -- I can no more --
" I feel, I feel the pulse of life retire!
" Ah, deign to hear thy dying child reveal,
" What, in rebellion to thy just desire,
" Locked in her breast, she dared so long conceal.
" By thee, unsanction'd, did I plight my love,
" And, all to thee unknown, a bride became."

HARMODIUS. " Harmodius will to both a father prove."

AMABELLA. " To him thy pardon thou can never proclaim:
" Three fleeting hours had scarcely called me bride,
" When he was summoned to the martial plain:
" And there, -- forgive these tears, -- in beauty's pride,
" The much-lamented valiant youth was slain.
" What though unworthy of thy care I prove,
" To thy remembrance let thy child be dear;
" Thy kind compassion let the daughter move,
" When this weak frame shall press the untimely bier."
More would she say, -- her voice began to fail,
From her faint eye life's lingering spark retired,
The ripening cherry on her lip grew pale,
She heaved a sigh, and in that sigh expired.

A SPOUSAL HYMN. ADDRESSED TO HIS MAJESTY ON HIS MARRIAGE.
BY JAMES SCOTT Author of Heaven, a vision. See vol. 2:
, M. A. FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.
AS, when diffused in solemn trance
Her dear delight the Latmian shepherd lay,
Fond Cynthia came with lightning-glance,
And over his bosom streamed her virgin ray:
So come, O gentle Muse, if ever aright
I paid my vows, if ever implored
One scanty beam of thy celestial light;
Proof to the muckworm miser's golden hoard,
Nor envious of the statesman's fair renown,
The warrior's death-bought wreath, and monarch's thorny crown.
Come, Guardian of my natal hour,
That bad'st me choose the still sequestered grove,
The pathless mead, and woodbine bower,
Where placid Cares, and pensive Pleasures rove;
Where often by moon-light's silent, solemn glade,
Pale Passion musing loves to stray,
And hand in hand, by Melancholy led,
In thoughtful loneness wears herself away;
O come, in all thy radiant charms confessed,
And fire with glowing zeal my fond, devoted breast!
I ask not flowrets fresh and gay,
From Pindus culled to please the vainly great;
No silken strain, no tinsel lay,
To cloak some public Knave from public hate:
No, Virgin, no -- Fair Freedom's vestal flame
Pervades my soul; for Her I twine
The votive wreath, for Her thy hallowed name
Invoke, O make thy choicest treasures mine;
Breathe Inspiration through each glowing line,
Thy genuine form impress, and stamp the work divine!
Then shall thou, George, the song approve,
O British-born! O Freedom's sacred heir!
O thou, whom all the Graces love,
Religion's boast, and Virtue's darling care!
Fain would the Muse attempt thy various praise,
But ah, in vain! -- through Theocr. (...).
Ida's bowers
With dubious foot the astonished woodman strays;
Where shall his work begin? -- Ye sylvan Powers
Direct the blow; here oaks aspiring rise,
There, Monarchs of the grove, tall cedars prop the skies.
Say, shall the Muse thy patriot Sire
Recall to view? Tell how with conscious state
She saw the god-like Prince retire
To glorious exile, like Timoleon great?
Glad heard the voice, "Avaunt, ye wretched Train,
" Shall I my Country's cause betray?
" Betray my soul, my God, for sordid gain?
" Perish the thought! -- Ye Slaves of gold away! --
" In venal courts though base corruption reigns,
" Know Liberty shall breathe through Kew's indignant plains."
He spoke, and lo! the reptile crew
Struck dumb with wonder fled! -- Hail, sacred source,
Whence George his patriot morals drew:
Prosper, ye heavenly Powers, their genial course!
O bid them branch into a thousand rills,
A thousand streams! -- Wherever they flow,
Whether all glift'ring down the loftier hills,
Or through the still, and humbler vales below,
Let Health pursue, no noxious weeds be found,
But flowers immortal rise fresh-breathing sweets around!
Prophetic wish! -- See Discord flies,
With all her rebel rout, her hell-born train!
See Faction falls, and Party dies,
They die fell serpents, in his dawning reign:
Thus sure presage of many a glorious deed,
Blessed omen of immortal fame,
The Son of Jove, when near his infant head
Devouring snakes in poisonous volumes came,
Grasped in his brawny arms the scaly foes,
Smiled on the danger past, and sunk to soft repose.
And now again, with careful hand,
Her goodly plants fair Science joys to rear;
And now again all blooming stand
The beauteous Progeny of Art; they fear
No killing frosts, no thick unkindly dews,
Such as from Belgian plains arise;
The genial clouds their pearly drops diffuse,
And shower increase of sweetness from the skies;
The youthful Sun, in his meridian throne,
Beams with indulgent ray his fostering influence down.
Hail, favored Isle! blessed seat of Fame!
For conquering arms, and peerless arts renowned!
Hail, mighty George! thy darling name
Often shall the Muse with honest joy refound:
Not that abstemious, prudent, just, and wise,
Thy every deed fair Virtue guides;
Nor that thy thoughts with holy ardor rise
From Earth's low base, where Vice and Passion bides,
To Heaven's bright mansions, there their sweets dispense,
Grateful as hallowed fumes from breathing frankincense.
Ay me so great, so bold a flight
Beseems not shepherd-swain, in lowly Mead
Far from Preferment's giddy height
Condemned, alas, an hireling flock to feed!
Yet will I sing how thy discerning eye
The boisterous sea of life surveys,
Where toiling fore the Sons of Merit lie,
Till called by thee their weary heads they raise:
What minute Drop, but cherished by thy care
A costly Pearl becomes of matchless Beauty rare?
Charm then your pipes, ye shepherd swains,
And bid the hills, and dales the Song repeat,
Your Patron, your Augustus reigns! --
But hark, with undulation soft, and sweet,
What melting music steals upon the ear!
Am I deceived, or does a Choir
Of winged Cupids fan the buxom air
Till Silence smiles; while from their silver lyre
Harmonious numbers flow, whose dulcet breath
Would recreate a soul beneath the pangs of death?
I did not err, a Choir of Loves
Sublime in air attune the enchanting lay;
They leave Idalia's blooming groves,
And Cypria's myrtle shades, where jocund stray
The Graces, Smiles, and Hours, where Nature's care
Profusely kind allures the sight,
And wraps the sense in bliss: ye Virgins fair
Of Britain's Isle, sweet daughters of delight,
Receive the cherub throng, to you they fly
With welcome tidings fraught, blessed harbingers of Joy.
Lo! lo she comes from the Albine shore,
Your maiden Queen, adorned with peerless charms:
Like Phoebe, when by Taurus hoar
Enamored Alpheus strove with eager arms
To grasp the Fair: ah, fond and hapless boy!
Ah, cruel wayward Dame! -- in vain
He breathed his amorous soul, for all too coy
Swift as the Roe she sought the distant plain;
Left him to pour in tears his plaintive theme,
Till changed by love and grief he melted to a stream.
See where from Ocean's pearly bed,
Whose huddling waters pass unwilling by,
She comes with easy modest tread,
'Midst echoing crowds, and rapturous shouts of joy:
'Twas thus, the life-resembling The famous Picture of Venus by Apelles.
tablet shows,
In youth and beauty fresh and gay
The Paphian Goddess from the waves arose,
While dolphins gamboll'd through the watery way,
Old Neptune smiled, the seagreen sisters sung,
And all the rooks around with Io Triumph rung.
But ah, what Daedal hand can trace
The glowing beauties of her air and mien;
The lively sweetness of her face,
And eyes where wisdom's azure beams are seen?
Her bosom fraught with honor's maiden treasure,
Unblemished faith, mild modesty,
Eternal love, unsoil'd by baser pleasure,
And constant truth, and spotless chastity,
Where thoughts, that angels might admire, are bred,
And flames of holy zeal, by pure Religion fed?
Hail, Virgin, hail, divinely blessed,
By Heaven endowed with all that is good and great!
O Flower of Virtue, in whose breast,
Imperial Reason dwells in royal state!
There, there she sits as Queen on ivory throne,
The vassal Passions round her stand,
In suppliant guise her rightful power they own,
And hear her still small voice, her soft command:
Far from the pure and unpolluted shrine
Each base affection flies, each haggard nurse of sin.
Leave then, ye Sisters, leave the The river Cephisus in Baeotia, on whose
banks the Graces were thought to reside. Pind. Olym. 14th.
Spring
Whose hallowed waters flow through Minyas' land;
Conduct to Britain's blooming King
This all-accomplish'd work of Nature's hand:
It Is yours, imperial Nymphs, whatever is sweet,
And fair and splendid to bestow;
On you attend Wealth, Wisdom, Beauty, Wit;
Nor seated on Olympus' laughing brow
Will choirs celestial move till you advance,
Nor share the ambrosial feast, nor lead the sprightly dance.
And thou, O Queen of soft desires,
Whose radiant smiles dispel the gloom of care,
And kindling friendship's purest fires,
Chase from the soul Suspicion, Doubt, and Fear,
Those griesly forms: O come, bewitching Power,
Come gently, over the bridal bed
In genial dews thy choicest pleasures shower;
Such as in Arcady's voluptuous shade
Jupiter.
Lycaeus felt, when stretched on Maia's breast
An image of himself the enraptured God impressed.
Nor thou, Lucina chaste and fair,
Nor thou, sweet Genius of the nuptial bower,
Be absent; on the royal Pair
Profuse of joy your kindly blessings pour!
O haste, ye Guardians of the sacred rites,
Whose aid prolific power supplies,
So shall Britannia bless their pure delights,
When future Georges, future Charlottes rise;
By whom reflected distant times shall find
The Mother's matchless Grace, the Father's virtuous Mind.
SONNET. FOR THE ROOT-HOUSE AT WREST.
BY THOMAS EDWARDS, ESQUIRE.
STRANGER, or guest, whome'er this hallowed grove
Shall chance receive, where sweet contentment dwells,
Bring here no heart that with ambition swells,
With avarice pines, or burns with lawless love:
Vice-tainted souls will all in vain remove
To sylvan shades, and hermits' peaceful cells,
In vain will seek retirement's lenient spells,
Or hope that bliss, which only good men prove:
If heaven-born truth, and sacred virtue's lore,
Which cheer, adorn, and dignify the mind,
Are constant inmates of thy honest breast,
If, unrepining at thy neighbor's store,
Thou count'st as thine the good of all mankind,
Then welcome share the friendly groves of Wrest.
SONNET. TO MISS H. M.
BY THE SAME.
SWEET Linnet, who from off the laurel spray
That hangs over Spenser's ever-sacred tomb,
Pour'st out such notes, as strike the Woodlark dumb,
And vie with Philomel's enchanting lay,
How shall my verse thy melody repay?
If my weak voice could reach the age to come,
Like Colin Clout's, thy name should ever bloom
Through future times, unconscious of decay:
But such frail aid thy merits not require,
Thee Polyhymnia, in the roseate bowers
Of high Parnassus, 'midst the vocal throng,
Shall glad receive, and to her tuneful fire
Present; where, crowned with amaranthine flowers,
The raptured choir shall listen to thy song.
SONNET. TO W. HEBERDEN, M. D.
BY THE SAME.
OHEBERDEN, whose salutary care
Has kindly driven me forth the crowded Town
To Turrick, and the lonely Country down,
To breathe from Chiltern Hills a purer air.
For thousand's sakes may Heaven indulgent spare
Long, long thy useful life, and blessings crown
Thy healing arts, while well-deserv'd renown,
With wealth unenvied, waits thy toil and care:
And when this grateful heart shall beat no more,
(Nor long, I ween, can last my tottering frame,
But soon, with me, this mortal coil shall end)
Do thou, if Calumny again should roar,
Cherish his memory, and protect his fame,
Whom thy true worth has made thy faithful friend.
SONNET. TO MR. J. PAICE.
BY THE SAME.
JOSEPH, the worthy Son of worthy Sire,
Who well repay'st thy pious parents care
To train thee in the ways of Virtue fair,
And early with the love of Truth inspire.
What farther can my closing eyes desire
To see, but that by wedlock thou repair
The waste of death; and raise a virtuous heir
To build our House, ever I in peace retire?
Youth is the time for Love: Then choose a Wife,
With prudence choose; it is Nature's genuine voice;
And what she truly dictates must be good;
Neglected once that prime, our remnant life
Is sour'd, or sadden'd, by an ill-timed choice,
Or lonely, dull, and friendless solitude.
SONNET. TO THE SAME.
BY THE SAME.
" WITH prudence choose a wife" -- Be thy first care
Her Virtue, not confined to time or place,
Or worn for show; but on Religion's base
Well-founded, easy, free, and debonair:
Next rose-cheek'd Modesty, beyond compare
The best cosmetic of the Virgin's face;
Neatness, which doubles every female grace;
And Temper mild, thy joys and griefs to share;
Beauty in true proportion rather choose
Than color, fit to grace thy social board,
Cheer thy chaste bed, and honest offspring rear;
With these seek Prudence well to guide thy house,
Untainted Birth, and, if thy state afford,
Do not, when such the prize, for Fortune square.
SONNET. TO --.
BY THE SAME.
" SWEET is the Love that comes with willingness:"
So sings the sweetest Bard Spense
that ever sung;
Ten thousand blessings on his tuneful tongue,
Who felt and plained true lovers' sore distress!
Sweet were the joys which once you did possess,
When on the yielding Fair one's lips you hung;
The sorer now your tender heart is wrung
With sad remembrance of her fickleness:
Yet let not grief and heart-consuming care
Prey on your soul; but let your constant mind
Bear up with strength and manly hardiness;
Your worth may move a more deserving Fair;
And she, that scornful beauty, soon may find,
Sharp are the pangs that follow faithlessness.
SONNET.
BY THE SAME.
MY gracious God, whose kind conducting hand
Has steered me through this Life's tumultuous sea,
From many a rock, and many a tempest free,
Which prudence could not shun, nor strength withstand,
And brought at length almost in sight of land,
That quiet haven where I long to be,
Only the streights of Death betwixt, which we
Are doomed to pass, ever reach the heavenly strand;
Be this short passage boisterous, rough, and rude,
Or smooth, and calm -- Father, thy Will be done --
Support me only in the troublous stour;
My sins all pardoned through my Savior's blood,
Let Faith, and Hope, and Patience still hold on
Unshaken, and Joy crown my latest hour!
SONNET. TO MATTHEW BARNARD The sexton of the parish.
.
BY THE SAME.
MATTHEW, whose skilful hand and well-worn spade
Shall soon be called to make the humble bed,
Where I at last shall rest my weary head,
And formed of dust again in dust be laid;
Near, but not in the Church of God, be made
My clay-cold cell, and near the common tread
Of passing friends; when numbered with the dead,
We Are equal all, and vain distinctions fade:
The cowslip, violet, or the pale primrose
Perhaps may chance to deck the verdant sweard;
Which twisted briar or hasle-bands entwine;
Symbols of life's soon-fading glories those --
Do thou the monumental hillock guard
From trampling cattle, and the routing swine.
ON MR. NASH's PICTURE AT FULL LENGTH BETWEEN THE BUSTS OF SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND
MR. POPE, AT BATH.
BY THE E -- OF C --.
THE old Egyptians hid their wit
In hierolyphic dress,
To give men pains in search of it,
And please themselves with guess.
Moderns, to hit the self-same path,
And exercise their parts,
Place figures in a room at Bath:
Forgive them, God of arts!
Newton, if I can judge aright,
All Wisdom does express;
His knowledge gives mankind delight,
Adds to their happiness.
Pope is the emblem of true Wit,
The sunshine of the mind;
Read over his works in search of it,
You Will endless pleasure find.
Nash represents man in the mass,
Made up of Wrong and Right;
Sometimes a K --, sometimes an A --;
Now blunt, and now polite.
The picture placed the bust between,
Adds to the thought much strength,
Wisdom, and Wit, are little seen,
But Folly's at full length.
ON THE D -- SS OF R -- D.
BY THE SAME.
WHAT do scholars, and bards, and astronomers wise,
Mean by stuffing our heads with nonsense and lies;
By telling us Venus must always appear
In a car, or a shell, or a twinkling star;
Drawn by sparrows, or swans, or dolphins, or doves,
Attended in form by the graces and loves:
That ambrosia and nectar is all she will taste,
And her passport to hearts on a belt round her waist?
Without all this bustle I saw the bright dame,
To supper last night to P -- y's she came
In a good warm sedan; no fine open car;
Two chairmen her doves, and a flambeau her star;
No nectar she drank, no ambrosia she eat;
Her cup was plain claret, a chicken her meat:
Nor wanted a cestus her bosom to grace,
For R -- d, that night, had lent her her face.
ARNO's VALE. A SONG.
BY THE DUKE OF DORSET.
WHEN here, Lucinda, first we came,
Where Arno rolls his silver stream,
How brisk the nymphs, the swains how gay,
Content inspired each rural lay;
The birds in livelier concert sung,
The grapes in thicker clusters hung;
All looked as joy could never fail,
Among the sweets of Arno's vale.
But since the good Palemon died,
The chief of shepherds, and the pride,
You read distress in every face,
And joy to sorrow now gives place:
The taste of pleasure now is over,
Thy notes, Lucinda, please no more,
The Muses droop, and tears prevail,
Adieu the sweets of Arno's vale.
BRITAIN'S ISLE.
ON THE DEATH OF FREDERIC, PRINCE OF WALES.
BY THE SAME.
WHO but remembers yesterday,
Remembers Britain happy, gay;
Each bard inspired with sprightlier lays,
Already sung Saturnian days:
Already Science, hand in hand
With Art, had Freedom's temple planned.
All wore an universal smile;
Such were the hopes of Britain's Isle.
But now, since Fate has wrapped in night
The nation's and mankind's delight;
Since Frederic now for ever sleeps,
Art droops again, and Science weeps;
Corruption (who had spread her wing,
To fly before the patriot King)
Her flight, now doubtful, stops a while --
Adieu the hopes of Britain's Isle.
ODE TO MORNING.
BY --.
THE sprightly messenger of day
To Heaven ascending tunes the lay
That wakes the blushing morn:
Cheered with the inspiring notes, I rise
And hail the power, whose glad supplies
The enlivened plains adorn.
Far hence retire, O Night! thy praise,
Majestic Queen! in nobler lays
Already has been sung:
When thine own spheres expire, thy name,
Secure from time, shall rise in fame,
Immortalized by Young.
See, while I speak Aurora sheds
Her early honors over the meads,
The springing valley's smile;
With cheerful heart the village-swain
Renews the labors of the plain,
And meets the accustomed toil.
Day's monarch comes to bless the year,
Winged Zephyrs wanton round his car,
Along the ethereal road;
Plenty and Health attend his beams,
And Truth, divinely bright, proclaims
The visit of the God.
Awed by the view, my soul reveres
The Great FIRST CAUSE that bade the spheres
In tuneful order move;
Thine is the sable-mantled Night,
Unseen Almighty! and the Light
The radiance of thy love.
Hark! the awakened grove repays
With melody the genial rays,
And Echo spreads the strain;
The streams in grateful murmurs run,
The bleating flocks salute the sun,
And music glads the plain.
While Nature thus her charms displays,
Let me enjoy the fragrant breeze
The opening flowers diffuse;
Temperance and Innocence attend,
These are your haunts, your influence lend,
Associates of the Muse!
Riot, and Guilt, and wasting Care,
And fell Revenge, and black Despair
Avoid the Morning's light;
Nor beams the sun, nor blooms the rose,
Their restless passions to compose,
Who Virtue's dictates slight.
Along the mead, and in the wood,
And on the margin of the flood
The Goddess walks confessed:
She gives the landscape power to charm,
The sun his genial heat to warm
The wife and generous breast.
Happy the man! whose tranquil mind
Sees Nature in her changes kind,
And pleased the whole surveys;
For him the morn benignly smiles,
And evening shades reward the toils
That measure out his days.
The varying year may shift the scene,
The sounding tempest lash the main,
And Heaven's own thunders roll;
Calmly he views the bursting storm,
Tempests nor thunder can deform
The morning of his soul.
TO A LADY, WITH A PAIR OF GLOVES, ON VALENTINE'S DAY.
BY VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.
BRIMFUL of anger, not of love,
The champion sends his foe one glove;
But I, who have a double share
Of softer passion, send a pair.
Nor think it, dearest Celia, cruel
That I invite you to a duel;
Ready to meet you face to face,
At any time, in any place:
Nor will I leave you in the lurch,
Though you should dare to name the church;
There come equipped with all your charms,
The ring and license are my arms;
With these I mean your power to try,
And meet my charmer though I die.
KIMBOLTON PARK.
BY THE MR. H --.
THY Park, Kimbolton! and surrounding shade,
For rural love and contemplation made,
Invite my song. Ye Sylvans! haunt your bowers!
Waft round your sweets! and open all your flowers!
And thou, who shut'st not to the suppliant's prayer,
Nor to the aid-imploring voice thine ear,
Do thou, O MANCHESTER! protect the song;
The Muse's care does to the learned belong:
Grateful alike Muse, Subject, Author, bow,
And hail the source whence all their pleasures flow.
These plains that annual pour their sweets for thee,
(Thanks to thy bounty) yield a part to me:
And Ease, fair Virtue's, and the Poet's friend,
Through your indulgence, on my steps attend.
Impervious to the sun's most potent ray
Yon lofty elms their arched heads display;
From far the traveller sees their summit rise,
Scarce half distinguished from the neighboring skies;
But often surveying as he onward goes,
Greener and fairer still the object grows;
Till underneath their shade, at ease reclined,
He leaves the labor of the day behind;
Soft breezes cool him from surrounding bowers,
And Nature bland her gay profusion pours.
So they who dauntless plow the dangerous main,
(What will not daring man attempt for gain?)
At early dawn, from top-mast-head espy
A rising vapor in the bordering sky;
Ere day's mid course, that vapor often they find
A royal navy, hovering in the wind:
Yards, sails, and streamers crowd the whispering air,
And all the glories of the deep appear.
Nor less impervious that extended shade
By reverend oaks, the growth of ages, made;
Save where wide avenues that shade divide,
And show the woodland in its utmost pride.
Here let the huntsman wind the echoing horn,
Cheer his swift steed, and wake the rosy morn;
Let dogs and men in noisy concert join,
And sportsmen call the harmony divine:
The Muse delights not, fond of pensive ease,
In dissipation, or pursuits like these.
And thou, sweet Thrush! prolong thy amorous tale,
Let thy love-burthen'd song delight the vale!
No leaden death I bring, no toils for thee,
Sing on, and soothe thy feathered progeny.
Come! peaceful Precepts! of the Samian Sage,
Unbend the bow, and curb an iron age!
Whatever laws short-sighted man may make,
Who cannot give, can have no power to take:
He, and he only, who could life bestow,
May call his blessing from the realms below.
Let shaggy bears, that prowl Moscovia's shore,
Stain their fierce claws, or dip their tongue in gore;
This does not equal human beasts of prey,
What they for hunger, we for pleasure slay:
Nor is this thirst of blood to man confined;
See S -- a savage of the fairer kind!
Pardon me, You! whose nobler tears can flow
For aught that suffers misery below;
Who shrink to rob the insect of its hour,
Or bruise its offspring in the opening flower:
Your form, your fears were by great Heaven designed
At once to charm and humanize mankind.
When Nature fair from her Creator sprung,
And wondering angels hallelujahs sung,
The sylvan scene, blessed seat! to man was given,
The richest bounty of indulgent Heaven.
To Peace then sacred be the shady grove!
Be there no murmurs heard -- but those of love:
Love, fled from noise and cities, haunts the glade,
The falling fountains, and the silent shade,
Inspires each warbling songster in the bower,
Breathes in each gale, and blossoms in each flower.
When every object thus their charms combine,
What bosom can resist the power divine?
Too feeble that, which now the Muse inspires,
And, with her own, admits still warmer fires.
Here, here I felt the soft infection rise,
Pant at the breast, and languish in the eyes,
When Mira to my humble cot was led,
Love's willing victim, to an husband's bed;
And now still feel, in smoother channels, run
Those streams, that rapid passion first begun:
Esteem, affection, friendship never decline:
Nor are her virtues less for being mine.
Let Rome her fettered monks to cells withdraw,
And force her own against great Nature's law:
Drag blooming virgins useless from mankind,
And give to lust, what was for love designed:
It Is mine to tread on Albion's blissful shore,
Where sinful celibacy binds no more.
Now sultry Phoebus, far from Thetis' bed
Darts his fierce rays resistless over my head.
Slow through you walk oft-winding let me rove,
And wander deep within the silent grove!
Or, if too potent there his beams invade,
O! let me tread those limes more cooling shade!
That shade which shall your kind protection gain,
And Brown himself provoke the axe in vain.
In milder climes, and blessed with cloudless skies,
Let slender domes on hills unshelter'd rise,
Where constant seasons glad the neighboring plains,
And Phoebus holds, not Phaeton, the reins.
But where loud waves often vex the sea-girt shore,
And sudden tempests, unexpected, roar:
Where rough December, envious of her power,
From gentle May often plucks the tender flower:
Where clearest morn to cloudy noon gives way,
And stormy eve excludes the hopeful day:
Where over the vast Atlantic vapors roll,
Or frozen sogs dark issue from the pole,
There the firm building asks the planter's aid,
" From storms a shelter, and from heat a shade."
In gardening great the improvement of the age,
Clipped yews, cut out in Magogs, quit the stage;
Half murdered hollies meet with one wound more,
And clasping ivy leaves the loaded door.
But yet the axe may drive the edge too far:
Brown not with Nature, yet with climes may war:
Use or convenience often put in their claim,
" And rise to faults good judges dare not blame;"
Nor can true taste and elegance reside
Where order and gradation are denied.
By walls immured, or lost within a wood
The cloistered mansions of our fathers stood:
They sought protection from the dog-star's heat,
And heard, though felt not, the rude tempest beat:
But damps pervaded often the gloomy hall,
And green-grown mould defaced the 'scutcheon'd wall.
Fond of extremes (and wiser sure than they!)
We drive walls, trees, damps, arms, and all away:
Yield still too far to every thing that is new,
Nor dare to keep the golden mean in view.
But see! the sun the steep of heaven descends,
And yon kind cloud her golden curtain lends:
Let me, ye Walks! your flowery maze pursue,
And on one plain the world's whole tribute view.
That tribute, Commerce, which we owe to thee,
As thou we owe to godlike Liberty.
Here spicy shrubs, the growth of Afric, bloom,
And ancient Asia breathes her sweet perfume:
Columbean wilds their later treasures yield,
And British roses crown the flowery field.
AUTHOR OF GOOD! how are thy blessings shed!
On man's, on thereby man's, much honored head!
From glowing India to the frozen pole,
Thy Providence supplies, protects the whole:
Nor are thy gifts at random thrown abroad,
Or undistinguished carelessly bestowed;
For, whilst the whole in general blessings share,
Each part partakes thy more peculiar care:
Yon spreading fig, that first from India came,
Stretched broad her leaves to cool the sunburned dame:
Soft cypress rises on the Paphian plain,
To soothe the grief of some forsaken swain:
In cold Norwegia lofty pines arise,
A kind protection from the northern skies:
And various realms this one grand truth declare,
Who feels the extremes of Nature, feels her care:
Even winter stern, and angry tempests bring
Their secret treasures to the fruitful spring;
Pour fostering stores into the weary earth,
And call more gay reviving Nature forth.
Hail! youthful season! health-restoring Power!
That chear'st the waste, and cloath'st the roseat bower,
That bid'st gay Nature all her sweets display,
And on benighted nations pour the day:
For thee the roses bloom, the violets spread,
And yellow cowslips rear their bended head:
Brisk through the thicket trips the spotted fawn,
And sportive lambs bound wanton on the lawn:
Those oaks, the future sovereigns of the sea,
Stretch wide their boughs, and clothe their heads for thee.
Bloom fresh, ye sacred Guardians of our isle!
War's rage is over, and Peace now deigns to smile:
Here stand the graceful monarchs of the wood,
Nor unprovoked attempt the swelling flood:
Remain secure as erst when Druids made
Their songs divine beneath your reverend shade:
But soon as jarring nations, faithless grown,
Enriched with trade and commerce not their own,
Shall basely strive those honors to obtain
By meanest arts, which courage sought in vain,
Then, then indignant quit the fertile shore,
And bid the deep assist your thunder's roar.
When hapless England felt a tyrant's sway,
And that fierce tyrant fell to lust a prey,
Here, filled with grief, an injured princess Catherine of Spain, during the
latter part of the time of the divorce, retired to Kimbolton Castle, where she
died (it is supposed) of grief for the cruel treatment she received from Henry
VIII.
fled
From short-lived grandeur, and divided bed:
Oppression spread her horrors over the plain,
And all thy sweets, Kimbolton! bloomed in vain.
For not the fragrant breath of rosy morn,
Nor tuneful lark on rising pinions borne,
Nor all the verdure of the blooming spiring,
Can to the broken heart lost pleasure bring.
In England then the sons of Freedom slept,
And drooping Virtue over their ashes wept:
In vain for right the royal stranger cried,
That right his slaves enjoyed her lord denied:
Yon inmost grove often heard her mournful tale,
Her sorrows spread along this silent vale;
Till Fate in pity called her to the shore,
Where lust and tyranny oppress no more.
Thrice happy change! where royal virtue grieved,
The aged and the orphan are relieved;
And thankful widows crowd the opened door,
Where weeping majesty complained before.
O Britons! (if to pagan powers ye bow)
Be smiling Liberty adored by you!
Where mad Oppression waves her iron wand,
There Truth and Justice quit the wasted land:
But where the people feel a father's sway,
(As Rome felt once, and Britain feels today)
There Justice equal with the Sovereign reigns,
And peace and plenty glads the smiling plains.
When they, who govern with the governed join,
And, without faction, all their force combine;
Not the loud cannon, nor the ocean's roar,
That beats with angry waves the sounding shore,
Can crush contending hosts, or awe them more.
Those laurels, Granby! that adorn thy brow,
Far from the muddy fount of faction grew;
Fair Union gently reared the parent tree,
That stretched so wide her boughs for Hawke and thee.
And thus united, subject of my lays!
Thy sons, Kimbolton! claimed the patriot's praise,
Who left their fields to guard the the threat'ned shore,
Ere Eliot fought and Thurot was no more.
And though no annals to their race shall tell,
What numbers vanquished by their valor fell;
The soul resolved that waited firm the foe,
And in his bosom braved the impending blow,
Or conquered for his native fields, or bled,
Though no green laurels shade his honored head.
But lo! my Muse! the humid drops descend,
And parting shepherds to the hamlets tend,
O! quit the task those beauties to display,
That fairer spring with each returning day!
So Reynolds thus, presuming on his art,
To trace those charms, my Lord! that win your heart,
Sees softer smiles whenever he lifts his eye,
That bid him throw his baffled pencil by.
RETIREMENT. AN ODE.
BY MR. BEATIE.
SHOOK from the purple wings of Even
When dews impearl the grove,
And from the darkening verge of Heaven
Beams the sweet star of Love;
Laid on a daisy-sprinkled green,
Beside a plaintive stream,
A meek-ey'd Youth of serious mien
Indulged this solemn theme.
Ye cliffs, in hoary grandeur pil'd
High over the glimmering dale!
Ye groves, along whose windings wild
Soft sighs the saddening gale!
Where often lone Melancholy strays,
By wilder'd Fancy swayed,
What time the wan moon's yellow rays
Gleam through the checkered shade!
To you, ye wastes, whose artless charms
Never drew Ambition's eye,
'Scap'd a tumultuous world's alarms,
To your retreats I fly:
Deep in your most sequestered bower
Let me my woes resign,
Where Solitude, mild modest power,
Leans on her ivy'd shrine.
How shall I woo thee, matchless Fair!
Thy heavenly smile how win!
Thy smile, that smooths the brow of Care,
And stills each storm within!
O will thou to thy favorite grove
Thine ardent votary bring,
And bless his hours, and bid them move
Serene on silent wing.
Often let Remembrance soothe his mind
With dreams of former days,
When soft on Leisure's lap reclined
He caroll'd sprightly lays.
Blessed days! when Fancy smiled at Care,
When Pleasure toy'd with Truth,
Nor Envy with malignant glare
Had harmed his simple Youth.
'Twas then, O Solitude! to thee
His early vows were paid,
From heart sincere, and warm, and free,
Devoted to the shade.
Ah! why did Fate his steps decoy
In thorny paths to roam,
Remote from all congenial joy! --
O take thy wanderer home!
Henceforth thy awful haunts be mine!
The long-abandon'd hill;
The hollow cliff, whose waving pine
O'erhangs the darksome rill;
Whence the scared owl, on pinions gray,
Breaks from the rustling boughs,
And down the lone vale sails away
To shades of deep repose.
O while to thee the woodland pours
Its wildly warbling song,
And fragrant from the waste of flowers
The zephyr breathes along;
Let no rude sound invade from far,
No vagrant foot be nigh,
No ray from Grandeur's gilded car
Flash on the startled eye.
Yet if some pilgrim, 'mid the glade,
Thy hallowed bowers explore,
O guard from harm his hoary head,
And listen to his lore!
For he of joys divine shall tell,
That wean from earthly woe,
And triumph over the mighty spell
That chains this heart below.
For me no more the path invites
Ambition loves to tread;
No more I climb those toilsome heights,
By guileful Hope misled:
Leaps my fond fluttering heart no more
To Mirth's enlivening strain;
For present pleasure soon is over,
And all the past is vain.
THE TRIUMPH OF MELANCHOLY.
BY THE SAME.
MEMORY, be still! why throng upon the thought
These scenes so deeply stained with Sorrow's die?
Is there in all thy stores no cheerful draught,
To brighten yet once more in Fancy's eye?
Yes -- from afar a landscape seems to rise,
Embellished by the lavish hand of Spring;
Thin gilded clouds float lightly over the skies,
And laughing Loves disport on fluttering wing.
How blessed the youth in yonder valley laid!
What smiles in every conscious feature play!
While to the murmurs of the breezy glade
His merry pipe attunes the rural lay.
Hail Innocence! whose bosom all serene
Feels not as yet the internal tempest roll:
O! never may Care distract that placid mien!
Never may the shades of Doubt overwhelm thy soul!
Vain wish! for lo, in gay attire concealed
Yonder she comes! the heart-enflaming fiend!
(Will no kind power the helpless stripling shield!)
Swift to her destined prey see Passion bend!
O smile accursed, to hide the worst designs!
Now with blithe eye she wooes him to be blessed;
While round her arm unseen a serpent twines --
And lo, she hurls it hissing at his breast!
And instant, lo, his dizzy eye-ball swims
Ghastly, and reddening darts a frantic glare;
Pain with strong grasp distorts his writhing limbs,
And Fear's cold hand erects his frozen hair.
Is this, O Life, is this thy boasted prime!
And does thy spring no happier prospect yield!
Why should the sunbeam pain thy glittering clime,
When the keen mildew desolates the field!
How Memory pains! Let some gay theme beguile
The musing mind, and soothe to soft delight:
Ye images of Woe, no more recoil;
Be life's past scenes wrapped in oblivious night.
Now when fierce Winter, armed with wasteful power,
Heaves the wild deep that thunders from afar:
How sweet to sit in the sequestered bower,
To hear, and but to hear, the mingling war!
Ambition here displays no gilded toy,
That tempts on desperate wing the soul to rise;
Nor Pleasure's paths to wilds of Woe decoy,
Nor Anguish lurks in Grandeur's proud disguise.
Often has Contentment cheered this lone abode
With the mild languish of her smiling eye;
Here Health in rosy bloom has often glowed,
While loose-rob'd Quiet stood enamored by.
Even the storm lulls to more profound repose;
The storm these humble walls assails in vain:
The shrub is sheltered, when the whirlwind blows,
While the oak's mighty ruin strows the plain.
Blow on, ye winds! thine, Winter, be the skies,
And toss the infuriate surge, and vales lay waste:
Nature thy temporary rage defies;
To her relief the gentler Seasons haste.
Throned in her emerald car, see Spring appear!
(As Fancy wills the landscape starts to view)
Her emerald car the youthful Zephyrs bear,
Fanning her bosom with their pinions blue.
Around the jocund Hours are fluttering seen.
And lo, her rod the rose-lip'd Power extends!
And lo, the lawns are decked in living green,
And Beauty's bright-ey'd train from Heaven descends!
Haste, happy days, and make all Nature glad --
But will all Nature joy at your return?
O can ye cheer pale Sickness' gloomy bed,
Or dry the tears that bathe the untimely urn?
Will ye one transient ray of gladness dart,
Where groans the dungeon to the captive's wail?
To ease tired Disappointment's bleeding heart,
Will all your stores of softening balm avail?
When stern Oppression, in his harpy-fangs,
From Want's weak grasp the last sad morsel bears,
Can ye allay the dying parent's pangs,
Whose infant craves relief with fruitless tears?
For ah! thy reign, Oppression, is not past.
Who from the shivering limbs the vestment rends?
Who lays the once rejoicing village waste,
Bursting the ties of lovers and of friends?
But hope not, Muse, vainglorious as thou art,
With the weak impulse of thy humble strain,
Hope not to soften Pride's obdurate heart,
When ERROLL's bright example shines in vain.
Then cease the theme. Turn, Fancy, turn thine eye,
Thy weeping eye, nor further urge thy flight;
Thy haunts, alas! no gleams of joy supply,
Or transient gleams that flash and sink in night.
Yet fain the mind its anguish would forego.
Spread then, historic Muse, thy pictured scroll;
Bid thy great scenes in all their splendour glow,
And rouse to thought sublime the exulting soul.
What mingling pomps rush on the enraptured gaze!
Lo, where the gallant navy rides the deep!
Here glittering towns their spiry turrets raise,
There bulwarks overhang the shaggy steep.
Bristling with spears, and bright with burnished shields.
The embattled legions stretch their long array;
Discord's red torch, as fierce she scours the fields,
With bloody tincture stains the face of day.
And now the hosts in silence wait the sign:
Keen are their looks whom Liberty inspires:
Quick as the Goddess darts along the line,
Each breast impatient burns with noble fires.
Her form how graceful! in her lofty mien
The smiles of Love stern Wisdom's frown control;
Her fearless eye, determined though serene,
Speaks the great purpose, and the unconquered soul.
Mark, where Ambition leads the adverse band,
Each feature fierce and haggard, as with pain!
With menace loud he cries, while from his hand
He vainly strives to wipe the crimson stain.
Lo, at his call, impetuous as the storms,
Headlong to deeds of death the hosts are driven;
Hatred to madness wrought each face deforms,
Mounts the black whirlwind, and involves the heaven.
Now, Virtue, now thy powerful succor lend,
Shield them for Liberty who dare to die --
Ah! Liberty, will none thy cause befriend!
Are those thy sons, thy generous sons that fly!
Not Virtue's self, when Heaven its aid denies,
Can brace the loosened nerves, or warm the heart;
Not Virtue's self can still the bursts of sighs,
When festers in the soul Misfortune's dart.
See, where by Terror and Despair dismayed
The scattering legions pour along the plain!
Ambition's car, in bloody spoils arrayed,
Hews its broad way, as Vengeance guides the rein.
But who is he, that, by yon lonely brook Such, according to Plutarch, was the
scene of Brutus's death.
,
With woods o'erhung, and precipices rude,
Lies all abandoned, yet with dauntless look
Sees streaming from his breast the purple flood?
Ah, Brutus! ever thine be Virtue's tear!
Lo, his dim eyes to Liberty he turns,
As scarce supported on her broken spear
Over her expiring son the Goddess mourns.
Loose to the wind her azure mantle flies,
From her dishevelled locks she rends the plume;
No luster lightens in her weeping eyes,
And on her tear-stain'd cheek no roses bloom.
Meanwhile the world, Ambition, owns thy sway,
Fame's loudest trumpet labors with thy name;
For thee, the Muse awakes her sweetest lay,
And Flattery bids for thee her altars flame.
Nor in life's lofty bustling sphere alone,
The sphere where monarchs and where heroes toil,
Sink Virtue's sons beneath Misfortune's frown,
While Guilt's thrilled bosom leaps at Pleasure's smile.
Full often where Solitude and Silence dwell,
Far, far remote amid the lowly plain,
Resounds the voice of Woe from Virtue's cell,
Such is Man's doom; and Pity weeps in vain.
Still Grief recoils -- How vainly have I strove
Thy power, O Melancholy, to withstand!
Tired, I submit; but yet, O yet remove,
Or ease the pressure of thy heavy hand!
Yet for a while let the bewildered soul
Find in society relief from woe;
O yield a while to Friendship's soft control!
Some respite, Friendship, will thou not bestow!
Come then, Philander, whose exalted mind
Looks down from far on all that charms the great;
For thou can bear, unshaken and resigned,
The brightest smiles, the blackest frowns of Fate:
Come thou, whose love unlimited, sincere,
Nor Faction cools, nor Injury destroys;
Who lend'st to Misery's moan a pitying ear,
And feel'st with ecstasy another's joys:
Who know man's frailty, with a favoring eye,
And melting heart, behold'st a brother's fall;
Who, unenslav'd by Fashion's narrow tie,
With manly freedom follow'st Nature's call.
And bring thy Delia, sweetly-smiling fair,
Whose spotless soul no rankling thoughts deform;
Her gentle accents calm each throbbing care,
And harmonize the thunder of the storm.
Though blessed with wisdom, and with wit refined,
She courts no homage, nor desires to shine;
In her each sentiment sublime is joined
To female softness and a form divine.
Come, and disperse the involving shadows drear;
Let chasten'd Mirth the social hours employ:
O catch the swift-wing'd moment while it is near,
On swiftest wing the moment flies of joy.
Even while the careless disencumber'd soul
Sinks all dissolving into Pleasure's dream,
Even then to time's tremendous verge we roll
With headlong haste along life's surgy stream.
Can Gaiety the vanished years restore,
Or on the withering limbs fresh beauty shed,
Or soothe the sad inevitable Hour,
Or Cheer the dark, dark mansions of the Dead?
Still sounds the solemn knell in Fancy's ear,
That called Eliza to the silent tomb:
With her how jocund rolled the sprightly year!
How shone the nymph in Beauty's brightest bloom!
Ah! Beauty's bloom avails not in the grave,
Youth's lofty mien, nor Age's awful grace:
Moulder alike unknown the Prince and Slave,
Whelmed in the enormous wreck of human race:
The thought-fix'd portraiture, the breathing bust,
The arch with proud memorials arrayed,
The long-lived pyramid shall sink in dust,
To dumb Oblivion's ever-desart shade.
Fancy from Joy still wanders far astray;
Ah! Melancholy, how I feel thy power!
Long have I labored to elude thy sway --
But it is enough; for I resist no more:
The traveller thus, that over the midnight waste
Through many a lonesome path is doomed to roam,
'Wilder'd and weary sits him down at last
For the long night, and distant far his home.
ELEGY. OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF A LADY.
BY THE SAME.
STILL shall unthinking Man substantial deem
The forms that fleet through life's deceitful dream!
On clouds, where Fancy's beam amusive plays,
Shall heedless Hope his towering fabric raise!
Till at Death's touch the ideal glories fly,
And real scenes rush dismal on the eye;
And, from the bowers of Beauty torn,
The startled soul awakes to think -- and mourn.
O Ye, whose hours in jocund train advance,
Whose spirits to the song of gladness dance;
Who flowery scenes in endless view survey,
Glittering in beams of visionary day!
O! yet while Fate delays the impending woe,
Be roused to thought, anticipate the blow;
Lest, like the light'ning's glance, the sudden ill
Flash to confound, and penetrate to kill:
Lest, thus encompassed with funereal gloom,
Like me ye bend over some untimely tomb,
Pour your wild ravings in night's frighted ear,
And half pronounce Heaven's sacred doom severe.
Wise! Beauteous! Good! -- O every grace combined,
That charms the eye, that captivates the mind!
Fair as the flowret opening on the morn,
Whose leaves bright drops of liquid pearl adorn!
Sweet, as the downy-pinion'd gale, that roves
To gather fragrance in Arabian groves!
Mild, as the strains, that, at the close of day
Warbling remote, along the vales decay!
Yet, why with those compared? What tints so fine,
What sweetness, mildness can be matched with thine?
Why roam abroad? since still, to Fancy's eyes,
I see, I see thy lovely form arise!
Still let me gaze, and every care beguile,
Gaze on that cheek, where all the Graces smile;
That soul-expressing eye, benignly bright,
Where Meekness beams ineffable delight;
That brow, where Wisdom sits enthroned serene,
Each feature forms, and dignifies the mien:
Still let me listen, while her words impart
The sweet effusions of the blameless heart;
Till all my soul, each tumult charmed away,
Yields, gently led, to Virtue's easy sway.
By thee inspired, O Virtue, Age is young,
And music warbles from the faultering tongue;
Thy ray creative chears the clouded brow,
And decks the faded cheek with rosy glow,
Brightens the joyless aspect, and supplies
Pure heavenly luster to the languid eyes:
Each look, each action, while it awes, invites,
And Age with every youthful grace delights.
But when Youth's living bloom reflects thy beams,
Resistless on the view the glory streams,
The ecstatic breast triumphant Virtue warms,
And Beauty dazzles with angelic charms.
Ah, whither fled! -- ye dear illusions stay!
Lo pale and silent lies the lovely clay!
How are the roses on that lip decayed,
Which Health in all the pride of bloom arrayed!
Health on her form each sprightly grace bestowed;
With active life each speaking feature glowed.
Fair was the flower, and soft the vernal sky;
Elate with hope we deemed no tempest nigh;
When lo! a whirlwind's instantaneous gust
Left all its beauties withering in the dust.
All cold the hand that soothed Woe's weary head!
All quenched the eye the pitying tear that shed!
All mute the voice whose pleasing accents stole,
Infusing balm into the rankled soul! --
O Death, why arm with cruelty thy power,
And spare the weed, yet lop the lovely flower!
Why fly thy shafts in lawless error driven!
To Virtue then no more the care of Heaven! --
But peace, bold thought! be still, my bursting heart!
We, not ELIZA, felt the fatal dart.
Escaped the dark dungeon does the slave complain,
Nor bless the hand that broke the galling chain?
Say, pines not Virtue for the lingering morn,
On this dark wild condemned to roam forlorn?
Where Reason's meteor-rays, with sickly glow,
Over the dun gloom a dreadful glimmering throw;
Disclosing dubious to the affrighted eye
O'erwhelming mountains tottering from on high,
Black billowy seas in storms perpetual tossed,
And weary ways in wildering labyrinths lost.
O happy stroke that bursts the bonds of clay,
Darts through the rending gloom the blaze of day,
And wings the soul with boundless flight to soar,
When dangers threat and fears alarm no more.
Transporting thought! here let me wipe away
The falling tear, and wake a bolder lay;
But ah! afresh the swimming eye overflows --
Nor check the tear that streams for human woes.
Lo! over her dust, in speechless anguish, bend
The hopeless Parent, Husband, Brother, Friend! --
How vain the hope of Man! -- But cease thy strain,
Nor Sorrow's dread solemnity profane;
Mixed with yon drooping mourners, over her bier
In silence shed the sympathetic tear.
ABSENCE. A PASTORAL BALLAD.
BY --.
HOW sweet to recall the sweet moments of joy!
It Is this, and this only can Absence employ,
Can ease my fond heart, and beguile my soft pain,
Till I see with delight my dear charmer again.
Ah! who ever knew such full transports as I,
While with her, the swift minutes unheeded passed by,
Alas! with the sweet recollection I burn,
Bring back your delights, ye dear moments, return!
Ah me! what delights in my bosom would rise
While with eager attention I Have hung on her eyes,
And watched the kind beams of Compassion and Love,
While she pitied my passion, and seemed to approve;
Ah me! with what raptured attention I Have hung,
To catch the sweet accents that flowed from her tongue,
When tenderness bade the dear maiden impart
The pleasing sensations that glowed in her heart.
O how does my Fair one consume the long day?
Is the Charmer quite easy while I am away?
Indeed if our thoughts like our hearts should agree,
The dear lovely maiden is thinking on me:
Ah! did she but think with such fondness as I,
How much would she grieve, and how often would she sigh!
Yet with so much fond Love may her bosom never burn,
If she fighs as I sigh, if she mourns as I mourn.
But why do I wander? why sigh thus alone?
Alas! it is the loss of my Fair that I moan.
Why thus every hour does my sorrow increase?
Alas! it is Absence that ruins my peace.
Why swells my sad bosom with fear and with grief?
Ah! naught but her presence can bring me relief.
Why thus down my cheek trickles fast the big tear?
Alas! can I help it? -- my Fair is not here.
Till I nourished this passion I all unconcerned
Saw Peace my companion wherever I turned,
Till now with my heart all at ease I could rest,
And a sigh was a stranger unknown to my breast.
What then is this Love? and why do I endure
These griefs in my mind, nor endeavor to cure?
When thus my fond heart is overwhelmed with Despair,
And I know no delight when away from my Fair?
Yet, Colin, these pains, spite of all thou have said,
By one hour of her presence are far over-paid,
These sorrows from Absence which now you deplore,
Then vanish, are lost, and are thought of no more.
Recall those rash words, and forbear to complain,
Since the next tender meeting rewards all your pain,
Let sweet Expectation then lessen your care,
Let Hope soften Absence, and keep off Despair.
Sure, sure those dear pleasures once more will return;
How long in this Absence distressed must I mourn?
How long must I wish, while my lot I deplore,
That dear angel-face! -- could I see it once more!
That dear angel-voice! -- Time, how swift did thou seem,
While I listened enchanted as Love was her theme!
O come those dear hours! and to soothe my fond pain
Love again be her theme, and I listen again!
How dull and how slow do the moments retreat!
Time was when they flew: -- now there is lead on their feet.
Ye Loiterers, be gone; why so long do ye stay?
Ye fly when I Am with her, ye creep when away.
Ah! Colin, how foolish Time's progress to blame,
His paces are equal, his motions the same;
'Twas the joy of her Presence made Time appear fleet,
It Is the pain of her Absence adds lead to his feet.
ODE TO HEALTH.
BY MRS. BROOK.
THE Lesbian lute no more can charm,
Nor my once-panting bosom warm;
No more I breathe the tender sigh;
Nor when my beauteous swain appears,
With down-cast look, and starting tears,
Confess the luster of his eye.
With Freedom blessed, at early dawn
I wander over the verdant lawn,
And hail the sweet returning Spring:
The fragrant breeze, the feathered choir,
To raise my vernal joys conspire,
While Peace and Health their treasures bring.
Come, lovely Health! divinest maid!
And lead me through the rural shade,
To thee the rural shades belong:
It Is thine to bless the simple swain;
And, while he tries the tuneful strain,
To raise the raptured Poet's song.
Behold the patient village-hind!
No cares disturb his tranquil mind;
By thee, and sweet Contentment, blessed:
All day he turns the stubborn plain,
And meets at eve his infant train,
While guiltless pleasure fills his breast.
O! ever good and bounteous! still
By fountain fresh, or murmuring rill,
Let me thy blissful presence find!
Thee, Goddess, thee my steps pursue,
When, careless of the morning dew,
I leave the lessening vales behind.
ODE.
BY THE SAME.
O Far removed from my retreat
Be Avarice and Ambition's feet!
Give me, unconscious of their power,
To taste the peaceful, social hour:
Give me, beneath the branching vine;
The woodbine sweet, or eglantine,
While evening sheds its balmy dews,
To court the chaste inspiring Muse!
Or, with the partner of my soul
To mix the heart-expanding bowl!
Yes, dear Sabina, when with thee
I hail the Goddess, Liberty;
When, joyous, through the leafy grove,
Or over the flowery mead, we rove;
When thy dear, tender bosom shares
Thy faithful Delia's joys and cares;
Nor Pomp, nor Wealth my wishes move.
Nor the more soft deceiver, Love.
ODE TO FRIENDSHIP.
BY THE SAME.
NO more fond Love shall wound my breast,
In all his smiles deceitful dressed,
I scorn his coward sway;
And now with pleasure can explore
The galling chains I felt before,
Since I am free today.
Today with Friendship I Will rejoice,
Whilst dear Lucinda's gentle voice
Shall soften every care:
O Goddess of the joy sincere!
The social sigh! the pleasing tear!
Thy noble bonds I Will wear.
When first, ill-fated, hapless hour!
My soul confessed Amintor's power,
Lucinda shared my grief;
And leaning on her faithful breast,
The fatal passion I confessed,
And found a soft relief.
My steps she often was wont to lead
Along the fair enameled mead,
To soothe my raging pain;
And often with tender converse strove
To draw the sting of hopeless Love,
And make me smile again.
O! much-loved Maid! whilst life remains
To thee I Will consecrate my strains,
For thee I Will tune my lyre;
And, echoing with my sweetest lays,
The vocal hills shall speak the praise
Of Friendship's sacred fire.
TO THE MOON.
BY MR. ROBERT LLOYD.
ALL hail! majestic Queen of Night,
Bright Cynthia! sweetest Nymph, whose presence brings
The pensive pleasures, calm delight,
While Contemplation smooths her ruffled wings,
Which Folly's vain tumultuous joys,
Or business, care, and buzz of lusty day
Have all too ruffled. -- Hence away
Stale Jest, and flippant Mirth, and Strife-engendering Noise.
When Evening dons her mantle gray,
I Will wind my solitary way,
And hie me to some lonely grove
(The haunt of Fancy and of Love)
Whose social branches, far outspread,
Possess the mind with pleasing dread.
While Cynthia quivers through the trees
That wanton with the summer breeze,
And the clear brook, or dimpled stream,
Reflects oblique her dancing beam.
How often, by thy silver light,
Have lovers tongues beguiled the Night?
When forth the happy pair have strayed,
The amorous swain and tender maid,
And as they walked the groves along,
Cheered the still eve with various song.
While every artful strain confessed
The mutual passion in their breast.
To lovers hours fly swift away,
And Night reluctant yields to Day.
Thrice happy Nymph, thrice happy Youth,
When Beauty is the meed of Truth!
Yet not the happy Loves alone,
Has thy celestial presence known.
To thee complains the Nymph forlorn
Of broken faith, and vows forsworn;
And, the dull Swain, with folded arms,
Still musing on his false one's charms,
Frames many a sonnet to her name,
(As lovers use to express their flame)
Or pining wan with thoughtful care,
In downcast silence feeds Despair;
Or when the air dead stillness keeps,
And Cynthia on the water sleeps;
Charms the dull ear of sober night,
With love-born Music's sweet delight.
Often as thy orb performs its round,
Thou listenest to the various sound
Of Shepherds hopes and Maidens fears
(Those conscious Cynthia silent hears
While Echo, which still loves to mock,
Bears them about from rock to rock).
But shift we now the pensive scene,
Where Cynthia silvers over the green.
Mark yonder spot, whose equal rim
Forms the green circle quaint and trim;
Hither the Fairies blithe advance,
And lightly trip in mazy dance;
Beating the pansie-paven ground
In frolic measures round and round;
These Cynthia's Revels gaily keep,
While lazy mortals snore asleep;
Whom often they visit in the night,
Not visible to human sight;
And as old prattling Wives relate,
Though now the fashion's out of date,
Drop sixpence in the Housewife's shoe,
And pinch the Slattern black and blue.
They fill the mind with airy schemes,
And bring the Ladies pleasant dreams.
Who knows not Mab, whose chariot glides,
And athwart men's noses rides?
While Oberon, blithe Fairy, trips,
And hovers over the ladies lips;
And when he steals ambrosial bliss,
And soft imprints the charming kiss,
In Dreams the nymph her swain pursues,
Nor thinks it is Oberon that wooes.
Ye sportive Youth, and lovely Fair,
From hence, my lesson read, beware,
While Innocence and Mirth preside,
We care not where the Fairies glide;
And Oberon will never miss
To greet his favorites with a kiss;
Nor ever more ambrosia sips,
Than when he visits -- 's lips.
When all things else in silence sleep,
The blithsome Elfs their vigils keep,
And always hover round about,
To find our worth or frailties out.
Receive with joy these Elfin sparks,
Their kisses leave no tell-tale marks,
But breathe fresh beauty over the face,
Where all is virtue, all is grace.
Not only elfin fays delight
To hail the sober Queen of Night,
But that sweet bird, whose gurgling throat
Warbles the thick melodious note,
Duly as evening shades prevail,
Renews her soothing love-lorn tale.
And as the Lover pensive goes,
Chaunts out her symphony of woes.
Which in boon Nature's wilder tone,
Beggar all sounds which Art has known.
But hist -- the melancholy bird
Among the groves no more is heard;
And Cynthia pales her silver ray
Before the approach of golden Day,
Which on yon mountain's misty height
Stands tiptoe with his gladsome light.
Now the shrill lark in ether floats,
And carols wide her liquid notes;
While Phoebus, in his lusty pride,
His flaming beams flings far and wide.
Cynthia farewell -- the pensive Muse
No more her feeble flight pursues,
But all unwilling takes her way,
And mixes with the buzz of Day:
A BALLAD.
BY THE SAME.
YE shepherds so careless and gay,
Who sport with the nymphs of the plain,
Take heed lest you frolic away,
The peace you can never regain.
Let not Folly your bosoms annoy;
And of Love, the dear mischief, beware.
You may think it is all sunshine and joy,
-- I know 'its o'ershadow'd with care.
Love's morning how blithsome it shines,
With an aspect deceitfully fair;
Its day often in sorrow declines,
And it sets in the night of despair.
Hope paints the gay scene to the sight,
While Fancy her visions bestows,
And gilds every dream with delight,
But to wake us to sensible woes.
How hard is my lot to complain
Of a nymph whom I yet must adore,
Though she love not her shepherd again,
Her Damon must love her the more.
For it was not the pride of her sex,
That treated his vows with disdain,
For it was not the pleasure to vex,
That made her delude her fond swain.
'Twas His, the fair nymph to behold,
He hoped -- and he rashly believed.
'Twas Hers to be fatally cold;
-- He loved -- and was fondly deceived.
For such is of lovers the doom,
While passions their reason beguile,
It Is warrant enough to presume,
If they catch but a look or a smile.
Yet surely my Phillis would seem
To prize me most shepherds above;
But that might be only esteem,
While I foolishly construed it love.
Yet others, like Damon, believed
The nymph might have favored her swain,
And others, like Him, were deceived,
Like Him, though they cannot complain.
Of Phyllis was always my song,
For she was my pride and my care;
And the folks, as we wandered along,
Would call us the conjugal pair.
They marked how I walked at her side,
How her hand to my bosom I pressed,
Each tender endearment I tried,
And I thought none was ever so blessed.
But now the delusion is over,
These day-dreams of pleasure are fled,
Now Her Damon is pleasing no more,
And the hopes of her shepherd are dead.
May he that my fair shall obtain,
May He, as thy Damon, be true;
Or happily thou wilt think of that swain,
Who bids thee, dear maiden, adieu.
A BALLAD.
BY THE SAME.
HARK, hark, it is a voice from the tomb,
Come, Lucy, it cries, come away,
The grave of thy Colin has room
To rest thee beside his cold clay.
I come, my dear shepherd, I come,
Ye friends and companions adieu,
I haste to my Colin's dark home,
To die on his bosom so true.
All mournful the midnight bell rung,
When Lucy, sad Lucy, arose;
And forth to the green turf she sprung,
Where Colin's pale ashes repose.
All wet with the night's chilling dew,
Her bosom embraced the cold ground,
While stormy winds over her blew,
And night-ravens croak'd all around.
How long, my loved Colin, she cried,
How long must thy Lucy complain?
How long shall the grave my love hide?
How long ere it join us again?
For thee thy fond shepherdess lived,
With thee over the world would she fly;
For thee has she sorrow'd and grieved;
For thee would she lie down and die.
Alas! what avails it how dear
Thy Lucy was once to her swain!
Her face like the lily so fair,
And eyes that gave light to the plain.
The shepherd that loved her is gone;
That face and those eyes charm no more;
And Lucy forgot, and alone,
To death shall her Colin deplore.
While thus she lay sunk in despair,
And mourned to the echoes around,
Inflamed all at once grew the air,
And thunder shook dreadful the ground.
I hear the kind call, and obey,
O! Colin receive me, she cried,
Then breathing a groan over his clay,
She hung on his tombstone and died.
LOVE-ELEGIES.
BY MR. HAMMOND.
ELEGY I.
WHILE calm you sit beneath your secret shade,
And lose in pleasing thought the summer-day,
Or tempt the wish of some unpracticed maid,
Whose heart at once inclines and fears to stray:
The sprightly vigor of my youth is fled,
Lonely and sick on Death is all my thought,
O spare, Persephone The Goddess of Death.
, this guiltless head,
Love, too much Love, is all thy suppliant's fault.
No virgin's easy faith I ever betrayed,
My tongue never boasted of a feigned embrace,
No poisons in the cup have I conveyed,
Nor veiled destruction with a friendly face:
No secret horrors gnaw this quiet breast,
This pious hand never robbed the sacred fane,
I never disturbed the Gods eternal rest
With curses loud, -- but often have prayed in vain.
No stealth of Time has thinn'd my flowing hair,
Nor Age yet bent me with his iron hand;
Ah! why so soon the tender blossom tear?
Ever Autumn yet the ripened fruit demand.
Ye Gods, whoever, in gloomy shades below,
Now slowly tread your melancholy round,
Now wandering view the paleful rivers flow,
And musing hearken to their solemn sound:
O let me still enjoy the cheerful day,
Till many years unheeded over me rolled,
Pleased in my age I trifle life away,
And tell how much we loved, ever I grew old.
But you, who now with festive garlands crowned
In chase of Pleasure the gay moments spend,
By quick enjoyment heal Love's pleasing wound,
And grieve for nothing but your absent Friend.
ELEGY II.
BY THE SAME.
NOW Delia breathes in woods the fragrant air,
Dull are the hearts that still in town remain,
Venus herself attends on Delia there,
And Cupid sports amid the sylvan train.
O with what joy my Delia to behold,
I Would press the spade, or wield the weighty prong,
Guide the slow plough-share through the stubborn mold,
And patient goad the loitering ox along:
The scorching heats I Would carelessly despise,
Nor heed the blisters on my tender hand;
The great Apollo wore the same disguise,
Like me subdued to Love's supreme command.
No healing herbs could soothe their master's pain,
The art of physic lost and useless lay,
To Peneus' stream, and Tempe's shady plain,
He drove his herds beneath the noontide ray:
Often with a bleating lamb in either arm,
His blushing Sister The Goddess Diana.
saw him pace along;
Often would his voice the silent valley charm,
Till lowing oxen broke the tender song.
Where are his triumphs? where his warlike toil?
Where by his darts the crested Python slain?
Where are his Delphi? his delightful isle?
The God himself is grown a cottage swain.
O Ceres, in your golden fields no more
With Harvest's cheerful pomp my fair detain, --
Think what for lost Proserpina The daughter of Ceres, taken from her by Pluto.
you bore,
And in a mother's anguish feel my pain.
Our wiser fathers left their fields unsown,
Their food was acorns, Love their sole employ,
They met, they liked, they stayed but till alone,
And in each valley snatched the honest joy.
No wakeful guard, no doors to stop desire,
Thrice happy times! -- but O I fondly rave,
Lead me to Delia, all her eyes inspire
I Will do, -- I Will plough or dig as Delia's slave.
ELEGY III.
BY THE SAME.
LET others boast their heaps of shining gold,
And view their fields with waving plenty crowned,
Whom neighboring foes in constant terror hold,
And trumpets break their slumbers never sound:
While calmly poor I trifle life away,
Enjoy sweet leisure by my cheerful fire,
No wanton hope my quiet shall betray,
But cheaply blessed I Will scorn each vain desire.
With timely care I Will sow my little field,
And plant my orchard with its master's hand,
Nor blush to spread the hay, the hook to wield,
Or range my sheaves along the sunny land.
If late at dusk, while carelessly I roam,
I meet a strolling kid, or bleating lamb,
Under my arm I Will bring the wanderer home,
And not a little chide its thoughtless dam.
What joy to hear the tempest howl in vain,
And clasp a fearful mistress to my breast?
Or lulled to slumber by the beating rain,
Secure and happy sink at last to rest?
Or if the sun in flaming Leo ride,
By shady rivers indolently stray,
And with my Delia, walking side by side,
Hear how they murmur, as they glide away.
What joy to wind along the cool retreat,
To stop and gaze on Delia as I go?
To mingle sweet discourse with kisses sweet,
And teach my lovely scholar all I know?
Thus pleased at heart, and not with Fancy's dream,
In silent happiness I rest unknown;
Content with what I am, not what I seem,
I live for Delia, and myself alone.
Ah, foolish man! who thus of her possessed,
Could float and wander with Ambition's wind,
And if his outward trappings spoke him blessed,
Not heed the sickness of his conscious mind.
With her I scorn the idle breath of praise,
Nor trust to happiness that is not our own,
The smile of Fortune might suspicion raise,
But here I know that I am loved alone.
Stanhope, in wisdom as in wit divine,
May rise and plead Britannia's glorious cause,
With steady rein his eager wit confine,
While manly Sense the deep attention draws:
Let Stanhope speak his listening country's wrong,
My humble voice shall please one-partial maid;
For her alone I pen my tender song,
Securely sitting in his friendly shade.
Stanhope shall come, and grace his rural friend,
Delia shall wonder at her noble guest,
With blushing awe the riper fruit commend,
And for her husband's patron cull the best.
Hers be the care of all my little train,
While I with tender indolence am blessed,
The favorite subject of her gentle reign,
By Love alone distinguished from the rest.
For her I Will yoke my oxen to the plough,
In gloomy forests tend my lonely flock,
For her a goat-herd climb the mountain's brow,
And sleep extended on the naked rock:
Ah! what avails to press the stately bed,
And far from her 'midst tasteless grandeur weep,
By marble fountains lay the pensive head,
And, while they murmur, strive in vain to sleep?
Delia alone can please, and never tire,
Exceed the paint of thought in true delight,
With her, enjoyment wakens new desire,
And equal rapture glows through every night:
Beauty and Worth alike in her contend
To charm the Fancy, and to fix the mind,
In her, my wife, my mistress, and my friend;
I taste the joys of sense and reason joined.
On her I Will gaze, when other loves are over,
And dying press her with my clay-cold hand --
Thou weep'st already, as I were no more,
Nor can that gentle breast the thought withstand.
O when I die, my latest moments spare,
Nor let thy grief with sharper torments kill,
Wound not thy cheeks, nor hurt that flowing hair,
Though I am dead, my soul shall love thee still:
O quit the room, O quit the deathful bed,
Or thou will die, so tender is thy heart,
O leave me, Delia, ever thou see me dead,
These weeping friends will do thy mournful part:
Let them, extended on the decent bier,
Convey the coarse in melancholy state,
Through all the village spread the tender tear,
While pitying maids our wondrous loves relate.
THE GENEALOGY OF CHRIST, AS IT IS REPRESENTED ON THE EAST WINDOW OF WINCHESTER
COLL. CHAPEL,
WRITTEN AT WINTON SCHOOL BY DR. LOWTH, LORD BISHOP OF OXFORD.
AT once to raise our reverence and delight,
To elevate the mind, and please the sight,
To pour in virtue at the attentive eye,
And waft the soul on wings of ecstasy;
For this the painter's art with nature vies,
And bids the visionary saint arise;
Who views the sacred forms in thought aspires,
Catches pure zeal, and as he gazes, fires;
Feels the same ardour to his breast conveyed,
Is what he sees, and emulates the shade.
Thy strokes, great Artist, so sublime appear,
They check our pleasure with an awful fear;
While, through the mortal line, the God you trace,
Author himself, and Heir of Jesse's race;
In raptures we admire thy bold design,
And, as the subject, own the hand divine.
While through thy work the rising day shall stream,
So long shall last thy honor, praise, and name.
And may thy labors to the Muse impart
Some emanation from her sister art,
To animate the verse, and bid it shine
In colors easy, bright, and strong, as Thine.
Supine on earth an awful figure lies,
While softest slumbers seem to seal his eyes;
The hoary sire Heaven's guardian care demands,
And at his feet the watchful angel stands.
The form august and large, the mien divine
Betray the Jesse.
founder of Messiah's line.
Lo! from his loins the promised stem ascends,
And high to Heaven its sacred Boughs extends:
Each limb productive of some hero springs,
And blooms luxuriant with a race of kings.
The eternal plant wide spreads its arms around,
And with the mighty Branch the mystic top is crowned.
And lo! the glories of the illustrious line
At their first dawn with ripened splendors shine,
In DAVID all expressed; the good, the great,
The king, the hero, and the man complete.
Serene he fits, and sweeps the golden lyre,
And blends the prophet's with the poet's fire.
See! with what art he strikes the vocal strings,
The God, his theme, inspiring what he sings!
Hark, -- or our ears delude us -- from his tongue
Sweet flows, or seems to flow, some heavenly song.
O! could thine art arrest the fleeting sound,
And paint the voice in magic numbers bound;
Could the warm sun, as erst when Memnon played,
Wake with his rising beam the vocal shade:
Then might he draw the attentive angels down,
Bending to hear the lay, so sweet, so like their own.
On either side the monarch's offspring shine,
And some adorn, and some disgrace their line.
Here Ammon glories; proud, incestuous lord!
This hand sustains the robe, and that the sword.
Frowning and fierce, with haughty strides he towers,
And on his horrid brow defiance low'rs.
There Absalom the ravished scepter sways,
And his stolen honor all his shame displays:
The base usurper Youth! who joins in one
The rebel subject, and the ungrateful son.
Amid the royal race, see Nathan stand:
Fervent he seems to speak, and lift his hand;
His looks the emotion of his soul disclose,
And eloquence from every gesture flows.
Such, and so stern he came, ordained to bring
The ungrateful mandate to the guilty King:
When, at his dreadful voice, a sudden smart
Shot through the trembling monarch's conscious heart;
From his own lips condemned; severe decree!
Had his God proved so stern a Judge as He.
But man with frailty is allied by birth;
Consummate purity never dwelt on earth:
Through all the soul though virtue holds the rein,
Beats at the heart, and springs at every vein:
Yet ever from the clearest source have ran
Some gross allay, some tincture of the man.
But who is he -- deep musing -- in his mind,
He seems to weigh in Reason's scales, Mankind;
Fixed Contemplation hold his steady eyes --
I know the Sage Solomon.
; the wisest of the wise.
Blessed with all man could wish, or prince obtain,
Yet his great heart pronounced those blessings vain.
And lo! bright glittering in his sacred hands,
In miniature the glorious temple stands.
Effulgent frame! stupendous to behold!
Gold the strong valves, the roof of burnished gold.
The wandering ark, in that bright dome inshrin'd,
Spreads the strong light, eternal, unconfined!
Above the unutterable glory plays
Presence divine! and the full-streaming rays
Pour through reluctant crowds intolerable blaze.
But stern Oppression rends Reboam's reign;
See the gay prince, injurious, proud, and vain!
The imperial scepter totters in his hand,
And proud Rebellion triumphs in the land.
Cursed with Corruption's ever-fruitful spring,
A beardless Senate, and a haughty King.
There Asa, good and great, the scepter bears,
Justice attends his peace, success his wars:
While Virtue was his sword, and Heaven his shield,
Without control the warrior swept the field;
Loaded with spoils, triumphant he returned,
And half her swarthy sons sad Ethiopia mourned.
But since thy flagging piety decayed,
And bartered God's defense for human aid;
See their fair laurels wither on thy brow,
Nor herbs, nor healthful arts avail thee now,
Nor is Heaven changed, apostate prince, but Thou.
No mean atonement does this lapse require;
But see the Son, you must forgive the Sire:
He, Josaphat.
the just prince -- with every virtue blessed,
He reigned, and goodness all the man possessed,
Around his throne, fair happiness and peace
Smoothed every brow, and smiled in every face.
As when along the burning waste he strayed,
Where no pure streams in bubbling mazes played,
Where drought incumbent on the thirsty ground,
Long since had breathed her scorching blasts around;
The Elisha.
prophet calls, the obedient floods repair
To the parched fields, for Josaphat was there.
The new-sprung waves, in many a gurgling vein,
Trickle luxurious through the sucking plain;
Fresh honors the reviving fields adorn,
And over the desert Plenty pours her horn.
So, from the throne his influence he sheds,
And bids the Virtues raise their languid heads:
Wherever he goes, attending Truth prevails,
Oppression flies, and Justice lifts her scales.
See, on his arm, the royal eagle stand,
Great type of conquest and supreme command;
The exulting bird distinguished triumph brings,
And greets the Monarch with expanded wings.
Fierce Moab's sons prevent the impending blow,
Rush on themselves, and sall without the foe.
The pious Hero vanquished Heaven by prayer;
His faith an army, and his vows a war.
Thee too, Ozias, fates indulgent blessed,
And thy days shone, in fairest actions dressed;
Till that rash hand; by some blind frenzy swayed,
Unclean, the sacred office durst invade.
Quick over thy limbs the surfy venom ran,
And hoary filth besprinkled all the man.
Transmissive worth adorns the pious Jotham.
Son,
The father's virtues with the father's throne.
Lo! there he stands: he who the rage subdued
Of Ammon's sons, and drenched his sword in blood,
And do thou, Ahaz, Judah's scourge, disgrace,
With thy base front, the glories of thy race?
See the vile King his iron scepter bear --
His only praise attends the pious Hezekiah.
Heir;
He, in whose soul the virtues all conspire,
The best good son, from the most wicked sire.
And lo! in Hezekiah's golden reign,
Long-exil'd Piety returns again;
Again, in genuine purity she shines,
And with her presence gilds the long-neglected shrines.
Ill-starr'd does proud Assyria's impious Sennacherib.
Lord
Bid Heaven to arms, and vaunt his dreadful sword;
His own vain threats the insulting King o'erthrow,
But breathe new Courage on the generous foe,
The avenging Angel, by divine command,
The fiery sword full-blazing in his hand,
Leant down from Heaven: amid the storm he rode,
Marched Pestilence before him; as he trod,
Pale Desolation bathed his steps in blood.
Thick wrapped in night, through the proud host he past,
Dispensing death, and drove the furious blast;
Nor bade Destruction give her revels over,
Till the gorged sword was drunk with human gore.
But what avails thee, pious Prince, in vain
Thy scepter rescued, and the Assyrian slain?
Even now the soul maintains her latest strife,
And Death's chill grasp congeals the found of life.
Yet see, kind Heaven renews thy brittle thread,
And rolls full fifteen summers over thy head;
Lo! the receding sun repeats his way,
And, like thy life, prolongs the falling day.
Though Nature her inverted course forego,
The day forget to rest, the time to flow,
Yet shall Jehovah's servants stand secure,
His mercy fixed, eternal shall endure;
On them her ever-healing rays shall shine;
More mild, and bright, and sure, O sun! than thine.
At length, the long-expected Prince behold,
The last good King; in ancient days foretold,
When Bethel's altar spoke his future fame,
Rent to its base, at good Josiah's name.
Blessed, happy prince! over whose lamented urn,
In plaintive song, all Judah's daughters mourn;
For whom sad Sion's softest Sorrow flows,
And Jeremiah pours his sweet melodious woes.
But now fallen Sion, once the fair and great,
Sits deep in dust, abandoned, desolate;
Bleeds her sad heart, and ever stream her eyes,
And anguish tears her, with convulsive sighs.
The mournful captive spreads her hands in vain,
Her hands, that rankle with the servile chain;
Till he, Zorobabcl.
Great Chief! in Heaven's appointed time.
Leads back her children to their native clime.
Fair Liberty revives with all her joys,
And bids her envied walls securely rise.
And thou, great hallowed dome, in ruin spread,
Again shall lift sublime thy sacred head.
But ah! with weeping eyes, the ancients view
A faint resemblance of the old in you.
No more the effulgent glory of thy God
Speaks awful answers from the mystic cloud:
No more thine altars blaze with fire divine,
And Heaven has left thy solitary shrine.
Yet, in thy courts, hereafter shall thou see
Presence immediate of the Deity,
The light himself revealed, the God confessed in thee.
And now at length the fated term of years
The world's desire have brought, and lo! the God appears.
The Heavenly Babe the Virgin Mother bears.
And her fond looks confess the parent's cares,
The pleasing burden on her breast she lays,
Hangs over his charms, and with a smile surveys.
The Infant smiles, to her fond bosom pressed,
And wantons, sportive, on the mother's breast.
A radiant glory speaks him all Divine,
And in the Child the beams of Godhead shine.
But now alas! far other views disclose
The blackest comprehensive scene of woes.
See where man's voluntary sacrifice
Bows his meek head, and God Eternal dies!
Fixed to the Cross, his healing arms are bound,
While copious Mercy streams from every wound.
Mark the blood-drops that life exhausting roll,
And the strong pang that rends the stubborn soul!
As all death's tortures, with severe delay,
Exult and riot in the noblest prey,
And can thou, stupid man, those sorrows see,
Nor share the anguish which He bears for Thee?
Thy sin, for which his sacred Flesh is torn,
Points every nail, and sharpens every thorn;
Can thou? -- while Nature smarts in every wound,
And each pang cleaves the sympathetic ground!
Lo! the black sun, his chariot backward driven,
Blots out the day, and perishes from Heaven:
Earth, trembling from her entrails, bear a part,
And the rent rock upbraids man's stubborn heart.
The yawning grave reveals his gloomy reign,
And the cold clay-clad dead start into life again.
And thou, O tomb, once more shall wide display
Thy satiate jaws, and give up all thy prey.
Thou, groaning earth, shall heave, absorpt in flame,
As the last pangs convulse thy laboring frame;
When the same God unshrouded thou shall see,
Wrapped in full blaze of Power and Majesty,
Ride on the clouds; whilst, as his chariot flies,
The bright effusion streams through all the skies.
Then shall the proud dissolving mountains glow,
And yielding rocks in fiery rivers flow:
The molten doluge round the globe shall roar,
And all man's arts and labor be no more.
Then shall the splendors of the enlivened glass
Sink undistinguished in the burning mass.
And O! till earth, and seas, and Heaven decay,
Never may that fair creation fade away;
May winds and storms those beauteous colors spare,
Still may they bloom, as permanent as fair,
All the vain rage of wasting time repel,
And his Tribunal see, whose Cross they paint so well.
WINTER PROSPECTS IN THE COUNTRY. AN EPISTLE TO A FRIEND IN LONDON, 1756.
BY J. S.
WHile Learning's pleasing cares my friend detain,
By Thames's banks on London's smoaky plain;
Where spacious streets their peopled length extend,
And pompous domes and lofty spires ascend:
Far different views the lonely country yields,
Deserted roads, and unfrequented fields;
Bleak scenes, where hoary Winter holds command,
And from his throne of clouds o'erlooks the land;
He frowns -- the power of Vegetation dies,
Frosts bind the earth, and Tempests rend the skies;
Or driving Snows descend, or pouring Rains,
Or chilling Vapors hover over the plains.
Sometimes awhile the hoary Tyrant sleeps,
Hid in his cave beneath the watery deeps;
The distant sun extends a chearing ray,
Bright smile the skies and soft the breezes play:
Then airy lawns the morning walk invite,
And rural landscapes charm the roving sight,
Mixed with brown stubble, leafless woods are seen,
And neat-plough'd furrows clad in scanty green;
While turbid waters edged with yellow reeds
Wind through the russet herd-forsaken meads;
And groves that Winter's fiercest rage disdain
In fair plantations deck the sheltered plain:
There painted hollies with red berries glow,
And their broad leaves the shining laurels show,
And pines and firs their varied verdure blend,
And cedars spread, and cypresses ascend.
Pleased with the scene, I range from field to field,
Till loftier lands remoter prospects yield;
And there the curious optic tube apply
Till a new world approaches on the eye;
Till where dark wood the hills slope surface shrouds;
Or the blue summit mingles with the clouds;
There fair enclosures lie of varied hue,
And trees and houses rise distinct to view.
But this too often the inclement clime denies,
Involved in misty or in watery skies;
And yet even then with books engaged, I find
A sweet employment for the exploring mind;
There fair Description shows each absent scene,
The corn-clad mountain and the daisied green;
There over distant lands my fancy roves,
Through India's cany isles and palmy groves;
Where clear streams wander through luxuriant vales,
Midst cloudless skies and ever-tepid gales,
While Spring sits smiling in her brightest bloom,
And calls around her every rich perfume.
HYMN FROM PSALM LXV.
BY THE SAME.
PRAISE to the Almighty Lord of Heaven arise,
Who fixed the mountains, and who spread the skies;
Who over his works extends paternal care,
Whose kind protection all the nations share;
From the glad climes whence morn in beauty dressed,
Forth goes rejoicing to the farthest west;
On Him alone their whole dependence lies,
And his rich mercy every want supplies.
O Thou, great Author of the extended Whole,
Revolving Seasons praise thee as they roll:
By thee Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter rise,
Thou giv'st the frowning, Thou the smiling skies;
By thy command the softening shower distills,
Till genial warmth the teeming furrow fills;
Then favoring sunshine over the clime extends,
And, blessed by thee, the verdant blade ascends:
Next Spring's gay products clothe the flowery hills,
And joy the wood, and joy the valley fills;
Then soon thy bounty swells the golden ear,
And bids the harvest crown the fruitful year:
Thus all thy works conspicuous worship raise,
And Nature's face proclaims her Maker's praise.
SONNET. APOLOGY FOR RETIREMENT, 1766.
BY THE SAME.
WHY asks my Friend what chears the passing day,
Where these lone fields my rural home enclose;
That me no scenes the pompous city shows
Lure from that rural residence away?
Now through my laurel groves I musing stray,
Now breathe the gale that over the lilac blows,
Now in my grotto's solemn cells repose,
Or down the smooth vale wind at evening gray;
Now charms the lofty Poet's tuneful lay,
Where Music fraught with fair Instruction flows;
Now Delia's converse makes the moments gay,
The nymph for love and innocence I chose:
O Friend! the man who joys like these can taste
On Vice and Folly needs no hour to waste.
SONNET.
BY THE SAME.
OF Adverse Fortune gentle Shenstone 'plain'd,
The liberal soul, the taste that Nature gave;
In narrow bounds her partial hand restrained,
But poured profusion on the titled slave:
Like his my lot, alike by me disdained*
The pomp of courts, one only boon I crave,
Over my fields fair as those Elysian feigned,
To bid the green walk wind, the green wood wave;
On the high hill to raise the higher tower,
To open wide prospects over distant plains,
Where by broad rivers, towns, and villa's rise;
Taste prompts the wish, but Fortune bounds the power,
Yet while Health chears, and Competence sustains,
These more than all Contentment bids me prize.
SONNET. TO DELIA.
BY THE SAME.
THRICE has the year its varied circuit run,
And cheerful, Delia, have the moments flown,
Since with my love for thee, my care begun
To form thy tender mind to virtue prone:
The flatteries of my sex I bade thee shun,
I bade thee shun the follies of thy own;
Fictitious manners by example won,
Alike to truth and innocence unknown:
Say, blooming Maiden, in whose gentle breast
Reigns simple Nature undisguis'd by Art,
Now amply tried by time's unerring test,
How just the dictates of this faithful heart,
That with the joys thy favoring smiles impart,
Deems all its cares repaired, itself supremely blessed.
SONNET. TO BRITANNIA.
BY THE SAME.
Renowned Britannia! loved parental land,
Regard thy welfare with a watchful eye;
Whenever the weight of Want's afflicting hand
Wakes over thy vales the Poor's persuasive cry:
When Slaves in office Freemen's rights withstand,
When Wealth enormous sets the Oppressor high,
And Bribes thy ductile Senators command;
Then mourn, for then thy Fate approaches nigh.
Not from perfidious Gaul, or haughty Spain,
Nor all the neighboring nations of the main,
Though leagued in war tremendous round thy shore,
But from thyself, thy Ruin must proceed;
Nor boast thy Power, for know it is decreed,
Thy Freedom gone, thy Power shall be no more.
ON READING MRS. MACAULAY'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
BY THE SAME.
TO Albion's Bards, the Muse of History spoke;
" Record the glories of your native land,
" How her brave sons the bonds of Slavery broke,
" And Power's fell rod tore from the Oppressor's hand,
" Give to renown the Patriot's noble deeds,
" Brand with disgrace the Tyrant's hated name;
" Though Falsehood often awhile the mind misleads,
" Impartial Time bestows impartial Fame."
She said, and soon the lofty lyre they strung,
But, artful, changed the subject and the lore,
Applause of courts and courtly slaves they sung,
But touched on Freedom's genuine notes no more.
The servile strain the Muse indignant heard,
Anxious for Truth, for Public Virtue warm,
She, Freedom's faithful advocate, appeared,
And bore on earth the fair MACAULAY's form.
WRITTEN AT THE HERMITAGE AT ALDERSBROOK, MDCCLXI.
BY MR. C --.
Whoever thou art whom chance or choice may bring
To these fair groves of venerable shade,
The group of tall elms and the silver spring,
Blame not the man who these his choice has made.
Have thou not heard, that in a venal age
Wise Scipio from the walls of Rome retired;
Content to muse on Nature's simple page In the words of Linternum, "Never less
alone than when alone," was his favorite saying.
,
And scenes the oft'ner viewed, the more admired.
Silent, like him, often let me range the wood,
At morn's inspiring hour, or twilight gray,
And frequent sit where Reddon's ancient flood
Winds through delightful meads its crystal way:
Ye Great! unenvied 'midst your grandeur shine,
Whilst days of tranquil Solitude are mine!
ADVICE TO A SHEPHERD.
BY THE SAME.
SHepherd! seek not wealth nor power,
Let the verdant woodbine bower,
And the hills, and vales, and trees,
And the lonely cottage please.
Can the gaudy gilded room
Vie with fields in vernal bloom?
Or Italian airs excel
Plaintive tuneful Philomel?
Can the futile arts of dress
Grace thy modest Shepherdess?
Happier in her humble sphere,
Than the daughters of the peer.
'Midst the city's tempting glare
Dwell Disease, and Strife, and Care:
Quit not then the farm or fold,
Nor exchange thy Peace for Gold.
ODE ON AUTUMN.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR MDCCLXI.
BY THE SAME.
ADIEU the pleasing rural scene,
Sequestered shades and meadows green,
The field thick spread with sheaves of corn,
The walk at early hour of morn.
No linnet's salutary song
Soft echoes now the sprays among:
No nightingale's more plaintive strain
Soothes the lone peasant on the plain.
The vales their cheerful green resign,
And on their stems the flowers decline:
No more we wish to pass the hour
Where elms and lilacs form a bower.
And see the swallows leave their home,
To distant, warmer climes they roam;
Where zephyrs coo^ and grateful showers
Still wake the fair autumnal flowers.
How fade the glories of the year!
They bloom awhile and disappear,
And, melancholy truth, fond man!
Thy life's a flower, thy day's a span.
Parent of All! tremendous Power!
Whom every realm and tongue adore,
Whose mandate formed earth's spacious plain,
And the immeasurable main.
Prostrate before thy throne we bow,
Author of circling seasons Thou!
O hasten happier days, and bring
One glorious, One Eternal Spring.
EPITAPH ON A PEASANT.
BY THE SAME.
THE Swain who owned yon rural cot
Now lies near this sequestered spot.
With his industrious faithful wife
He trod the path of humble life,
Nor knew the sorrows which await
The trifling revels of the great:
Here village lads at evening hour
Shall strew the lately gathered flower,
And pensive nymphs assemble here,
To shed a sympathetic tear.
O Stranger! thy sad tribute give,
Like Damon die, like Damon live!
For Virtue lasting plaudit gains,
When freed from these terrestrial plains.
PSALM CXXXVII.
BY THE SAME.
WHere the fair streams of famed Euphrates stray,
And make the vales of Babylonia gay,
On the green borders of the silver flood,
Judea's exiled mournful children stood:
A pensive band, oppressed with grief severe,
For Zion's fate they shed the frequent tear;
Their silent harps, so tuneful late, unstrung,
High on the branches of the willows hung;
When lo! their enemies demand the strains
That erst resounded sweet on Judah's plains. --
How shall these songs, Jehovah, Sovereign King!
In this strange clime thy captive people sing?
Let my right hand forget the note to play,
Let my mute tongue forget to tune the lay,
If ever my thought neglectful, faithless roves,
From thee, O Salem! and thy sacred groves:
But, mighty Lord! remember thou their seed,
Who bade thy city mourn, thy people bleed!
Shall not ever long proud Babel's turrets fall,
And in her fair streets noisome reptiles crawl;
Her haughty warriors pale and breathless lie,
Dashed on the stones her helpless infants die,
The woes we suffer be to her repaid,
And all her glory sunk in everlasting shade?
THE LATTER PART OF HABBAKUK, CHAPTER III.
BY THE SAME.
THOUGH in Judea's mead the verdant blade
Nipt by ungenial frost full sudden fade;
Though the ripe fig, pride of the garden gay,
Touched by the sun's too fervid beam decay;
Though fairer vines the raging whirlwind blast,
And olives useless on the heap are cast;
Though struck by Death the bleating firstlings fall,
Vacant the fold, untenanted the stall;
Yet still to Thee, Jehovah! Power supreme!
My guide, my only hope, and constant theme!
I lisp the feeble strain, and bow the knee,
And own incessant Strength belongs to Thee!
O let thy Love with rapture fill my breast,
And lead through life's untrodden wilds -- to Rest.
ODE TO SLEEP.
BY T -- S --, M. D.
SOFT Sleep, profoundly pleasing power,
Sweet patron of the peaceful hour,
O listen from thy calm abode,
And hither wave thy magic rod;
Extend thy silent, soothing sway,
And charm the canker Care away.
Whether thou love to glide along,
Attended by an airy throng
Of gentle dreams and smiles of joy,
Such as adorn the wanton boy;
Or to the monarch's fancy bring
Delights that better suit a king;
The glittering host, the groaning plain,
The clang of arms, and victor's train:
Or should a milder vision please,
Present the happy scenes of Peace;
Plump Autumn blushing all around,
Rich Industry with Toil embrown'd;
Content with brow serenely gay,
And genial Art's refulgent ray.
ODE TO MIRTH.
BY THE SAME.
PArent of Joy! heart-easing Mirth!
Whether of Venus or Aurora born;
Yet Goddess sure of heavenly birth,
Visit benign a son of Grief forlorn:
Thy glittering colors gay,
Around him, Mirth, display;
And over his raptured sense
Diffuse thy living influence:
So shall each hill in purer green arrayed,
And flower adorned in newborn beauty glow;
The grove shall smooth the horrors of his shade,
And streams in murmurs shall forget to flow.
Shine, Goddess, shine with unremitting ray,
And gild (a second sun) with brighter beam our day.
Labor with thee forgets his pain,
And aged Poverty can smile with thee,
If thou be nigh, Grief's hate is vain,
And weak the uplifted arm of Tyranny.
The morning opes on high
His universal eye;
And on the world does pour
His glories in a golden shower.
Lo! Darkness trembling before the hostile ray
Shrinks to the cavern deep and wood forlorn;
The brood obscene, that own her gloomy sway,
Troop in her rear, and fly the approach of morn.
Pale shivering ghosts, that dread the all-chearing light,
Quick, as the lightnings flash, glide to sepulchral night.
But whence the gladdening beam
That pours his purple stream
Over the long prospect wide?
It Is Mirth. I see her sit
In majesty of light,
With Laughter at her side.
Bright-ey'd Fancy hovering near
Wide waves her glancing wing in air;
And young Wit flings his pointed dart,
That guiltless strikes the willing heart.
Fear not now Affliction's power,
Fear not now wild Passion's rage,
Nor fear ye aught in evil hour,
Save the tardy hand of Age.
Now Mirth has heard the suppliant Poet's prayer;
No cloud, that rides the blast, shall vex the troubled air.
ODE TO A SINGING BIRD.
BY MR. RICHARDSON, OF QUEEN'S COLLEGE, OXON.
O Thou that glad'st my lonesome hours
With many a wildly warbled song,
When Melancholy round me low'rs,
And drives her sullen storms along;
When fell Adversity prepares
To lead her delegated train,
Pale Sickness, Want, Remorse, and Pain,
With all her host of carking cares --
The fiends ordained to tame the human soul,
And give the humbled heart to Sympathy's control.
Sweet soother of my misery, say,
Why do thou clap thy joyous wing?
Why do thou pour that artless lay?
How can thou, little prisoner, sing?
Have thou not cause to grieve
That man, unpitying man! has rent
From thee the boon which Nature meant
Thou should, as well as he, receive?
The power to woo thy partner in the grove,
To build where instinct points; where chance directs, to rove.
Perchance, unconscious of thy fate,
And to the woes of bondage blind,
Thou never long'st to join thy mate,
Nor wishest to be unconfined;
Then how relentless he,
And fit for every foul offense,
Who could bereave such innocence
Of life's best blessing, Liberty!
Who lured thee, guileful, to his treacherous snare,
To live a tuneful slave, and dissipate his care.
But why for thee this fond complaint?
Above thy master thou art blessed:
Art thou not free? -- Yes; calm Content,
With olive scepter, sways thy breast:
Then deign with me to live;
The falcon with insatiate maw,
With hooked bill and griping claw,
Shall never thy destiny contrive:
And every tabby foe shall mew in vain,
While pensively demure she hears thy melting strain.
Nor shall the fiend, fell Famine, dare
Thy wiry tenement assail;
These, these shall be my constant care,
The limpid fount, and temperate meal:
And when the blooming Spring
In checkered livery robes the fields
The fairest flowrets Nature yields
To thee officious will I bring;
A garland rich thy dwelling shall entwine,
And Flora's freshest gifts, thrice happy bird, be thine.
From drear Oblivion's gloomy cave
The powerful Muse shall wrest thy name,
And bid thee live beyond the grave --
This meed she knows thy merits claim;
She knows thy liberal heart
Is ever ready to dispense
The tide of bland Benevolence,
And Melody's soft aid impart;
Is ready still to prompt the magic-lay,
Which hushes all our griefs, and charms our pains away.
Erewhile when brooding over my soul
Frowned the black demons of Despair,
Did not thy voice that power control,
And often suppress the rising tear?
If Fortune should be kind,
If ever with affluence I Am blessed,
I Will often seek some friend distressed,
And when the weeping wretch I find,
Then, tuneful moralist, I Will copy thee,
And solace all his woes with social sympathy.
ELEGY ON A HUMMING-BIRD.
WRITTEN IN A FLOWER-GARDEN.
BY --.
A Humming-Bird, by Nature led,
On Nature's bounteous honey fed;
In every flower beheld a feast,
And every sip her charms increased:
Her plumage various, gaudy, bright,
Surpassed Aurora's radiant light;
Though burnished over with golden rays,
As dressed in Ariosto's lays.
O had you seen her glowing breast,
Which every tint by turns expressed,
Succeeding tints the past renewing,
You had wished to be for ever viewing.
But, sweet inconstant! she would fly
From flower to flower, and foil the eye;
Each motion giving something new,
No sooner seen than vanished too.
One morn on murmuring wing suspended,
She to those well-known pinks descended;
Here hung a moment, sipt the dew,
And elsewhere, gaily wanton, flew.
Her little crimson pinions played,
As through the enameled plain she strayed;
By every fragrant flower invited;
Which to delight her seemed delighted.
I saw her, in an evil-hour,
Approach a deep-mouth trumpet-flower,
Within whose fatal tube, O me!
With mortal dagger, lurked a be.
Deceitful weed! for ever may
Your silthy flower avoid the day,
Your nauseous odours taint the morn,
Yourself the dire Thorny Apple of Peru, called in Virginia The James-Town Weed.
Peruvian Thorn!
May you, compelled, pernicious bees!
Supply your murmuring hives from these;
By day restrain your busy flight,
Condemned to labor in the night.
Within her breast, secure of harm,
The feathered Venus raised alarm,
Enraged the little, jealous thing,
And in her neck he plunged his sting.
Say, have thou seen a courser start --
An arrow fly -- the lightning dart?
Far swifter, wrung with raging pain,
The Beauty cleft the airy plain;
Her course unsteady, high and low,
Too well explained her inward woe;
Her strength decreasing, and her speed,
Her feeble wings refusing aid,
Her tender frame with fevers burned,
Her little brain to frenzy turned,
The charm of Nature, and the pride,
In many circles, sunk and died.
Her purest nectar erst she drew
From hence, here lie her beauties too;
Where never flower the wandering eye
Has since rejoiced. (All bards will lie).
" The ways of Pleasure promise fair,
" But Mischief often concealed lies there."
A MORNING SOLILOQUY ON DEAFNESS.
BY --.
NATURE! thy genial call I hear,
Which wakes the morn and me,
And seems to strike upon my ear,
Though deaf to all but thee:
To me the hours in silence roll away;
No music greets the dawn, or mourns the close of day.
To me the sky-larks, poised aloft,
In silence seem to play,
And hail no more in warblings soft
The rising dawn of day;
For me in vain they swell their liquid throats,
Contemplative I muse, nor hear the jocund notes.
To me the shepherd pipes in vain,
In vain the milkmaid sings;
Lost are the bleatings of the plain,
The gurgling of the springs;
No more I hear the nightingale complain,
When to the moon she chaunts her sad love-labour'd strain.
And when with me Lucinda strays
Along the breezy grove,
In transport on her charms I gaze,
And think she talks of love:
Ah! cease, dear maid, to talk of love in vain,
For smiles alone to me the voice of love explain.
Pygmalion thus, when he surveyed
The work his hand had formed,
Enamored wished to see the maid
With mutual passion warmed,
And as he wooed his ear he often inclined,
Whilst yet no voice of love relieved his anxious mind.
Cease thy complaints (methinks even now
The voice of Reason cries)
Dispel the gloom that clouds thy brow,
Suppress the heaving sighs:
What Fate decrees it is folly to bewail;
Weigh then the good and ill in Wisdom's equal scale.
No more in Friendship's thin disguise
Shall Flattery soothe thine ear,
Experienced kindness makes thee wise,
To know thy friend sincere;
No more shall thou attend to Faction's cries,
The taunts of jealous Pride, or Envy's blasting lies.
No more shall now thy mind be tossed
By every breath of praise;
No more thy reason shall be lost
In controversy's maze;
Thou safe through life's sequestered vale shall go,
And learn from Nature's works her wise decrees to know.
THE HERMIT.
BY DR. GOLDSMITH.
" TURN, gentle Hermit of the dale,
" And guide my lonely way
" To where yon taper chears the vale
" With hospitable ray.
" For here, forlorn and lost I tread,
" With fainting steps and slow,
" Where wilds immeasurably spread
" Seem lengthening as I go."
" Forbear, my son," the Hermit cries,
" To tempt the dangerous gloom,
" For yonder faithless phantom flies
" To lure thee to thy doom.
" Here to the houseless child of Want
" My door is open still;
" And though my portion is but scant,
" I give it with good will:
" Then turn tonight, and freely share
" Whatever my cell bestows;
" My rushy couch, and frugal fare,
" My blessing, and repose.
" No flocks that range the valley free
" To slaughter I condemn;
" Taught by that Power that pities me,
" I learn to pity them:
" But from the mountain's grassy side
" A guiltless feast I bring;
" A scrip with herbs and fruits supplied,
" And water from the spring.
" Then, pilgrim, turn, thy cares forego;
" All earth-born cares are wrong:
" Man wants but little here below,
" Nor wants that little long."
Soft as the dew from Heaven descends,
His gentle accents fell;
The modest stranger lowly bends,
And follows to the cell.
Far in a wilderness obscure
The lonely mansion lay,
A refuge to the neighboring poor,
And strangers led astray.
No stores beneath its humble thatch
Required a master's care;
The wicket opening with a latch
Received the harmless pair.
And now when busy crowds retire
To take their evening rest,
The Hermit trimmed his little fire,
And cheered his pensive guest;
And spread his vegetable store,
And gaily pressed, and smiled,
And, skilled in legendary lore,
The lingering hours beguiled.
Around in sympathetic mirth
Its tricks the kitten tries,
The cricket chirrups in the hearth,
The crackling faggot flies.
But nothing could a charm impart,
To soothe the stranger's woe;
For grief was heavy at his heart,
And tears began to flow.
His rising cares the Hermit spied,
With answering care oppressed:
" And whence, unhappy youth," he cried,
" The sorrows of thy breast?
" From better habitations spurned,
" Reluctant do thou rove?
" Or grieve for friendship unreturn'd,
" Or unregarded love?
" Alas! the joys that fortune brings
" Are trifling, and decay;
" And those who prize the paltry thing
" More trifling still than they.
" And what is Friendship but a name,
" A charm that lulls to sleep,
" A shade that follows wealth or fame,
" And leaves the wretch to weep?
" And Love is still an emptier sound,
" The modern sair-one's jest,
" On earth unseen, or only found
" To warm the turtles nest.
" For shame, fond youth, thy sorrows hush,
" And spurn the sex," he said:
But while he spoke, a rising blush
His love-lorn guest betrayed.
Surpised he sees new beauties rise,
Swift mantling to the view,
Like colors over the morning skies,
As bright, as transient too.
The bashful look, the rising breast,
Alternate spread alarms,
The lovely stranger stands confessed
A maid in all her charms.
" And ah! forgive a stranger rude,
" A wretch forlorn," she cried,
" Whose feet unhallowed thus intrude
" Where Heaven and you reside.
" But let a maid thy pity share,
" Whom Love has taught to stray;
" Who seeks for rest, but finds despair
" Companion of her way.
" My father lived beside the Tyne,
" A wealthy Lord was he;
" And all his wealth was marked as mine;
" He had but only me.
" To win me from his tender arms
" Unnumber'd suitors came;
" Who praised me for imputed charms,
" And felt or feigned a flame.
" Each hour a mercenary crowd
" With richest proffers strove;
" Among the rest young Edwin bowed,
" But never talked of love.
" In humble simplest habit clad,
" No wealth or power had he;
" Wisdom and worth were all he had;
" But these were all to me.
" The blossom opening to the day
" The dews of heaven refined,
" Could naught of purity display
" To emulate his mind.
" The dew, the blossoms of the tree,
" With charms inconstant shine;
" Their charms were his, but woe to me,
" Their constancy was mine.
" For still I tried each fickle art,
" Importunate and vain;
" And while his passion touched my heart
" I triumphed in his pain;
" Till quite dejected with my scorn,
" He left me to my pride,
" And sought a solitude forlorn
" In secret, where he died.
" But mine the sorrow, mine the fault,
" And well my life shall pay,
" I Will seek the solitude he sought,
" And stretch me where he lay --
" And there forlorn, despairing hid,
" I Will lay me down and die;
" 'Twas so for me that Edwin did,
" And so for him will I."
" Forbid it, Heaven!" the Hermit cried,
And clasped her to his breast;
The wondering fair one turned to chide;
'Twas Edwin's self that pressed.
" Turn, Angelina, ever dear;
" My charmer, turn to see
" Thy own, thy long-lost Edwin here,
" Restored to love and thee.
" Thus let me hold thee to my heart,
" And every care resign;
" And shall we never, never part,
" My life -- my all that is mine.
" No, never, from this hour to part,
" We'll live and love so true;
" The sigh that rends thy constant heart,
" Shall break thy Edwin's too."
THE BELDAMES.
BY --.
HAIL, happy Beldames! yours those joys
Which time, nor accident destroys.
Sickness and cares your bliss dilate,
And pain but whets your lust of hate.
The flower of Youth will soon decay,
Health, Beauty, Pleasure fade away.:
Sharp sorrows sting the breast humane,
And hopes are false, and wishes vain.
But hence your joys eternal flow,
Their source exhaustless, human woe.
For you fierce War high-piles his dead,
Disease thick-strews her squalid bed;
Famine and Plagues their myriads sweep,
And Tempests lash the all-whelming deep.
The fiery meteors hear your call,
And houses blaze, and temples fall.
But far remote from Britain's eye
The vaster scenes of ruin lie:
The cities in Vulcanos lost,
The scattered realms in whirlwinds tossed,
Or, feller scourge, a Tyrant's brand
Wide-flaming over a blasted land:
Imperfect joy, the wretch unknown,
Unmarked the pang, unheard the groan.
Here mighty Horror scarce appears;
One plague perhaps in ninety years:
And Faction, long deprived of food,
Sits pining over public good;
Or feeds, with self-tormenting spleen,
In present bliss, on ills foreseen,
But here more exquisite delight
From private woes soothes ranc'rous Spite.
In pride of youth our Frederic dies,
And Anguish seals my Lonsdale's eyes:
Richmond his generous soul resigned,
And Ca'ndish, friend to human kind,
Even thoughtless Upon Mr. Pelham's death the places of public diversion were
for a time deserted.
Pleasure drooped her head,
While Britain wept over Pelham's bed.
Yet such your joys, as when the bell
First tolled unhappy S -- 's knell;
When by that hand, which thousands sed,
The best, the bravest Briton bled;
And closed a lise in virtue past
With one wrong deed, his first and last.
Whether impure and hard of soul
The Daughter mixed the deadly bowl;
Or if seducing Love betrayed
To crimes unknown the yielding maid;
Whether in weakness or in guilt,
One joy is sure, her blood is spilt:
And still to raise the transport higher,
Believe her innocent expire!
By no degree, no sex defined,
Their Virtues stamp the Beldame-kind,
Who cringe and slander, sting and fawn,
In rags, or lace, or fur, or lawn;
Whether in perriwigs or pinners,
If Whitefield's saints, or Arthur's sinners;
If now the scold at Wapping flames,
Or flaunts a Duchess at St. James';
Alike, if they revile or flatter,
(Who lie in praise, will lie in satire)
All the foul sisterhood compose,
All those, and all resembling those.
But some, in hoary Age's train,
By sixty winters chilled in vain,
With hearts that melt, and nerves that feel,
Display a breast unarmed with steel.
How few are these! and of these few
Good Heaven has seized on Montagu.
Germain yet lives, not half revealed,
Her bounties more than half concealed;
And should I add another name,
Blushing she flies pursuing Fame.
For such is Virtue's awkward pride,
Scarce more intent to give than hide.
Peace to all such in silent state,
So few scarce worth the Beldame's hate.
It Is not enough that Nature's plan
To Cares, to Death predestines Man;
That even those few, we happy call,
Bend to the general doom of all,
While bliss, a scanty portion, flows
Mixed in the stream of bitter woes:
Not one escapes the Beldame's hate,
Great leveller to one estate.
As in the Sun's meridian blaze
A cloud obscene of insects plays,
Or with envenomed sting invades
The quiet of sequestered shades,
Now swarms on filth, and now pollutes
The nectar of the fairest fruits:
So through each rank, through every stage
Wantons the ceaseless Beldame's rage.
Sublimely rapt in patriot heat,
Furious she shakes the Monarch's seat,
Now stooping spurns the lowly cell
Where calm Content, and Concord dwell,
Well pleased degraded Worth to see,
Or Felons load the groaning tree.
Yet shall the tear of Pity flow,
Yet shall her hand exalt the low;
Shall pull aspiring Merit down,
And deck the base with Honor's crown;
Intent to lower, not fond to raise,
Hatred her friendship, spite her praise.
Or when some all-respected name,
High-borne upon the tide of Fame,
In Glory's pomp resistless draws
A nation breathless in applause;
The Beldame loud exalts her voice,
And bids a gladden'd world rejoice;
Yet then dissembling Art will blend
The unwilling censure of a Friend:
Lavish in praise she pours her soul,
But one Exception damns the whole.
Behold the Fiend all pallid stand,
A pencil trembling in her hand:
See Malice mix the various dies
Of fainter truths and bolder lies.
The deepening gloom thick spreads around
And lowering shades the dusky ground.
There Sickness blights the cheek of Health,
And Beggary soils the robe of Wealth.
Here, Columns moulder in decay;
There, Virtue sets with dubious ray.
Now heavenly Beauty fades, and now
The laurel droops on Valor's brow.
Around the Demon throngs her race,
The weak, the busy, and the base;
Eager to copy, and disperse:
Hence slanderous Prose, and ribald Verse;
The heaps that crowd Suiila's board,
And swell wise Paulo's precious hoard.
There Scandal all its store unloads,
Ballads, and Epigrams, and Odes:
Stern Party whets her blunted knife,
And stabs the Husband through the Wife;
While Notes historically sage
Fill the broad margin of each Page;
Initials, dashes well supplied,
And all that fear or shame would hide;
Faithful record for future times
To harden by their fathers' crimes.
No Beldam Bard with phrenzy sir'd,
No prophetess by hell inspired,
Creative boasts so rich a vein
As swells the Beldame's teeming brain,
And mocking study, wit, and sense,
Flows in unlettered eloquence.
Thus beyond Truth's contracted line
Invention's Universe is thine.
Thine every tale that Fiction brings,
Whether she soars with painted wings,
Or plunges in the depths of night
For horrid deeds, unknown to light.
There should she mark some real blot,
Though long forgiven, though long forgot;
God's cancelled Grace her rage resumes,
The crime rejudg'd, the man she dooms;
In deeper dies she spreads the stain,
And pitying Heaven relents in vain.
Fitly, over Libya's horrid sand,
The javelin arms the Huntsman's hand.
Lo! where the mangled traveller lies,
Drawn by the false Hyaena's cries;
And dreadful stalking over the plain,
The Lion shakes his brindled main.
But why shall barbarous Rage invade
The tenant of yon peaceful shade,
While issuing with the morning's dawn,
Playful she prints the dewy lawn?
O why that hostile pomp prepare
To vex the timorous harmless hare?
As if some monster, yet untamed,
Single a host of Heroes claimed:
While Echo over the hills resounds
Horsemen, and steeds, and horns, and hounds.
Such, nor less eager in their chase,
Forth springs the clamorous Beldame race:
Harsh Chorus of discordant notes
From yelping tongues and time-crack'd throats;
Where lewder Youth outstrips the wind,
And limping Eighty lags behind:
Yet faithful to the beaten track
The slow-paced sluggard hunts the pack.
Meek Virtue to the covert flies
With panting heart and clouded eyes.
Ah! spare the gentle coward's fears
Who only answers with her tears;
And trembles at imputed sin
Though all be innocence within.
But Lions to their shaggy breast
Shall fostering press the fearless guest;
The soothed Hyaena shed a tear
Over prostrate man, with soul sincere;
The Priest with hesitating hand
Awhile suspend the uplifted brand;
Ere Pity melts the Beldame's eyes,
Glutted with human sacrifice.
With liquid fire the goblet crowned,
The livid tapers gleaming round,
While Wisdom, Valor, Beauty sleep,
The midnight hags their sabbath keep;
And recent from impure delights
Fell Hecat' leads the infernal rites.
Over her wan cheek diffusely spread
Fierce glares the bright vermillion's red.
The borrowed hair in ringlets flows
Adown her neck of art-form'd snows;
While baleful drugs in vain renew
Departing Beauty's faded hue.
Some spotless name their rage demands,
The name rebellowing through the bands;
Some holy Sage of sainted life,
A Virgin pure, a faithful Wife.
And you, who dauntless dared to brave
The ruthless foe and threatening wave,
Vainly you 'scap'd the unequal fight;
Deep yawns the gulf of deadlier spite;
There plunged -- the insatiate Beldames roar,
And the wide ruin gapes sor more.
Where trees their mantling foliage spread,
And roses bend their blooming head,
Ye, Virgins, tread with cautious feet,
And cautious pluck the tempting sweet:
There lurks the snake with speckled crest,
There broods the toad with bloated breast;
With poisons dire the reptiles filled,
From Heaven's transparent dews distilled.
-- But O! more wary trace the maze,
Where Youth in frolic pastime plays:
There dread the spight-swoln Beldame's wrath,
Glancing through Pleasure's flowery path,
And subtle drawing foul offense
From the chaste breath of innocence.
Or should the tender bosom yield
Transpierc'd through Honor's frailer shield;
O Virtue smooth thy brow austere,
Accept the penitential tear:
Raise the fallen mourner from the ground,
And pour sweet mercy over the wound;
Nor join these furies in their chase,
Nor drive her 'midst that hellish race.
Angels shall hear the suppliant's voice,
And Beldames howl, and Heaven rejoice.
Let the obdurate Stoic's pride
Climb the steep mountain's craggy side;
Where far remote from mortal ken
Virtue usurps the Tyger's den,
And scowling on the crowd below
Nor feels, nor pities human woe*
Let holy zeal, with frantic mien,
And haggard look and garb obscene,
Spurn every gift the Heavens dispense,
And pine in sullen abstinence;
Yet drink with eager ears and eyes
The tortured wretches agonies.
Hence, hell-born Fiends! nor dare belly
The Seraph with indulgent eye:
Whence Science beams eternal day,
Enlightening millions with her ray;
Whence Arts their genial influence spread
Over smiling Nature's teeming bed;
Whence Bounty with extended hand
Scatters her blessings over the land;
And Love, the universal soul,
Pervades, unites, inspires the whole.
So Virtue dwelt, celestial guest,
O Lonsdale! in thy spotless breast.
Though pure as Heaven from moral stain,
Though torn with unrelenting pain,
'Twas thine for others woes to melt,
And pardon frailties never felt.
While Youth thy gayer converse sought,
And Age instructed heard and thought.
And thou, my Friend, for such my claim,
And such my best, my dearest Fame,
Though Time with shrivel'd fingers throws
Thick over thy head unmingled snows,
Still in that eye the spark divine
Shall with unfading luster shine;
Still flow the stream of copious sense
Clear as in Attic eloquence.
So through the meadow's silver bed,
With lilies and with snow-drops spread,
Far-honour'd Thames, our Britain's pride,
Majestic rolls his crystal tide,
Where many an ancient brook distills
Its wealth in tributary rills.
And in the happy social hour
Well saved from state, and cares, and power,
Long may I come a welcome guest
To share the treasures of that breast,
Where Spleen never rankled at the heart,
Nor Malice lodged her rusty dart.
ODE TO THE RIVER EDEN.
BY DR. J. LANGHORNE.
DElightful Eden! parent stream,
Yet shall the maids of Memory say,
When, led by Fancy's fairy dream,
My young steps traced thy winding way;
How often along thy mazy shore,
Where slowly waved the willows hoar,
In pensive thought their poet strayed;
Or, dozing near thy meadow'd side,
Beheld thy dimply waters glide,
Bright through trembling shade.
Yet shall they paint those scenes again,
Where once with infant-joy he played,
And bending over thy liquid plain,
The azure worlds below surveyed:
Led by the rosy-handed hours,
When Time tript over that bank of flowers,
Which in thy crystal bosom smiled:
Though old the God, yet light and gay,
He flung his glass, his scythe away,
And seemed himself, a child.
The poplar tall, that waving near
Would whisper to thy murmurs free;
Yet rustling seems to soothe mine ear,
And trembles when I sigh for thee.
Yet seated on thy shelving brim,
Can Fancy see the Naiads trim
Burnish their green locks in the sun;
Or at the last lone hour of day,
To chase the lighty glancing jay,
In airy circles run.
But, Fancy, can thy mimic power
Again those happy moments bring?
Can thou restore that golden hour,
When young Joy waved his laughing wing?
When first in Eden's rosy vale,
My full heart poured the lover's tale,
The vow sincere, devoid of guile!
While Delia in her panting breast,
With sighs, the tender thought suppressed,
And looked as angels smile.
O Goddess of the crystal brow,
That dwell'st the golden meads among;
Whose streams still fair in memory flow,
Whose murmurs melodize my song!
O! yet those gleams of joy display,
Which brightening glowed in Fancy's ray,
When, near thy lucid urn reclined,
The Dryad, Nature, barred her breast,
And left, in naked charms impressed,
Her image on my mind.
In vain -- the maids of Memory fair
No more in golden visions play;
No friendship smooths the brow of care,
No Delia's smile approves my lay.
Yet, love and friendship lost to me,
It Is yet some joy to think of thee,
And in thy breast this moral find;
That life, though stained with sorrow's showers,
Shall flow serene, while Virtue pours
Her sunshine on the mind.
ON THE DUCHESS OF MAZARIN's RETIRING INTO A CONVENT.
BY THE SAME.
YE holy cares that haunt these lonely cells,
These scenes where salutary sadness dwells;
Ye sighs that minute the slow wasting day,
Ye pale regrets that wear my life away;
O bid these passions for the world depart,
These wild desires, and vanities of heart!
Hide every trace of vice, of follies past,
And yield to Heaven the victory at last.
To that the poor remains of life are due,
It Is Heaven that calls, and I the call pursue.
Lord of my life, my future cares are thine,
My love, my duty greet thy holy shrine:
No more my heart to vainer hopes I give,
But live for thee, whose bounty bids me live.
The power that gave these little charms their grace,
His favors bounded, and confined their space;
Spite of those charms shall time, with rude essay,
Tear from the cheek the transient rose away;
But the free Mind, ten thousand ages past,
Its maker's form, shall with its maker last.
Uncertain objects still our hopes employ;
Uncertain all that bears the name of joy!
Of all that feels the injuries of fate
Uncertain is the search, and short the date:
Yet even that boon-what thousands wish to gain?
That boon of Death, the sad resource of pain!
Once on my path all fortune's glory fell,
Her vain magnificence, and courtly swell:
Love touched my soul at least with soft desires,
And Vanity there fed her meteor fires.
This truth at last the mighty scenes let fall,
An hour of Innocence was worth them all.
Lord of my life! O let thy sacred ray
Shine over my heart, and break its clouds away!
Deluding, flattering, faithless world adieu!
Long have thou taught me GOD IS ONLY TRUE.
That God alone I trust, alone adore,
No more deluded, and misled no more.
Come, sacred hour, when wavering doubts shall cease!
Come, holy scenes of long repose and peace!
Yet shall my heart, to other interests true,
A moment balance 'twixt the world and you?
Of pensive nights, of long-reflecting days,
Be yours, at last, the triumph and the praise!
Great, gracious Master! whose unbounded sway,
Felt through ten thousand worlds, those worlds obey,
Will thou for once thy awful glories shade,
And deign to espouse the creature thou have made?
All other ties indignant I disclaim,
Dishonored those, and infamous to name!
O fatal ties, for which such tears I Have shed,
For which the pleasures of the world lay dead!
That world's soft pleasures you alone disarm;
That world without you still might have its charm.
But now those scenes of tempting hope I close,
And seek the peaceful studies of Repose;
Look on the past as time that stole away,
And beg the blessings of a happier day.
Ye gay saloons, ye golden-vested halls,
Scenes of high treats, and heart-bewitching balls!
Dress, figure, splendour, charms of play, farewell,
And all the toilet's science to excel!
Even Love, that ambush'd in this beauteous hair,
No more shall lie, like Indian archers, there.
Go, erring Love! for nobler objects given!
Go, beauteous hair, a sacrifice to Heaven!
Soon shall the veil these glowing features hide,
At once the period of their power and pride!
The hapless lover shall no more complain
Of vows unheard, or unrewarded pain;
While calmly sleep in each untortur'd breast
My secret sorrow, and his sighs professed.
Go, fiattering train! and, slaves to me no more,
With the same sighs some happier fair adore!
Your altered faith I blame not, nor bewail --
And happily yet (what woman is not frail?)
Yet, happily, might I calmer minutes prove,
If he that loved me knew no other love!
Yet were that ardor, which his breast inspired,
By charms of more than mortal beauty fired,
What nobler pride! could I to Heaven resign
The zeal, the service that I boasted mine!
O change your false desires, ye flattering train!
And love me pious, whom ye love profane!
These long adieus with lovers doomed to go,
Or prove their merit, or my weakness show;
But Heaven, to such soft frailties less severe,
May spare the tribute of a female tear,
May yield one tender moment to deplore
Those gentle hearts that I must hold no more.
THE TULIP AND MYRTLE.
BY THE SAME.
IT WAS on the border of a stream
A gaily-painted Tulip stood,
And, gilded by the morning beam,
Surveyed her beauties in the flood.
And sure, more lovely to behold,
Might nothing meet the wistful eye,
Than crimson fading into gold,
In streaks of fairest symmetry.
The beauteous flower, with pride elate,
Ah me! that Pride with Beauty dwells?
Vainly affects superior state,
And thus in empty fancy swells:
" O luster of unrivaled bloom!
" Fair painting of a hand divine,
" Superior far to mortal doom,
" The hues of Heaven alone are mine!
" Away, ye worthless, formless race!
" Ye weeds, that boast the name of flowers!
" No more my native bed disgrace,
" Unmeet for tribes so mean as yours!
" Shall the bright daughter of the sun
" Associate with the shrubs of earth?
" Ye slaves, your sovereign's presence shun!
" Respect her beauties and her birth.
" And thou, dull, sullen ever-green!
" Shall thou my shining sphere invade?
" My noonday beauties beam unseen,
" Obscured beneath thy dusky shade!"
" Deluded flower!" the Myrtle cries,
" Shall we thy moment's bloom adore?
" The meanest shrub that you despise,
" The meanest flower has merit more.
" That daisy, in its simple bloom;
" Shall last along the changing year;
" Blush on the snow of winter's gloom,
And bid the smiling spring appear.
" The violet, that, those banks beneath,
" Hides from thy scorn its modest head,
" Shall fill the air with fragrant breath,
" When thou art in thy dusty bed.
" Even I, who boast no golden shade,
" Am of no shining tints possessed,
" When low thy lucld form is laid,
" Shall bloom on many a lovely breast.
" And he, whose kind and fostering care
" To thee, to me, our beings gave,
" Shall near his breast my flowrets wear,
" And walk regardless over thy grave.
" Deluded flower! the friendly screen
" That hides thee from the noontide ray,
" And mocks thy passion to be seen,
" Prolongs thy transitory day.
" But kindly deeds with scorn repaid,
" No more by Virtue need be done:
" I now withdraw my dusky shade,
" And yield thee to thy darling sun."
Fierce on the flower the scorching beam
With all its weight of glory fell;
The flower exulting caught the gleam,
And lent its leaves a bolder swell.
Expanded by the searching fire,
The curling leaves the breast disclosed;
The mantling bloom was painted higher,
And every latent charm exposed.
But when the sun was sliding low,
And evening came with dews so cold;
The wanton beauty ceased to blow,
And sought her bending leaves to fold.
Those leaves, alas! no more will close;
Relaxed, exhausted, sickening, pale;
They left her to a parent's woes,
And fled before the rising gale.
RURAL SIMPLICITY. AN ODE.
BY THE SAME.
O Thou, whom Love and Fancy lead
To wander near this woodland hill,
If ever music soothed thy quill,
Or pity waked thy gentle reed,
Repose beneath my humble tree,
If thou love Simplicity.
Stranger, if thy lot has laid
In toilsome scenes of busy life,
Full sorely may thou see the strife
Of weary passions ill repaid,
In a garden live like me,
If thou love Simplicity.
Flowers have sprung for many a year
Over the village-maiden's grave,
That, one memorial-sprig to save,
Bore it from a sister's bier;
And homeward walking, wept over me
The true tears of Simplicity.
And soon, her cottage-window near,
With care my slender stem she placed,
And fondly thus her Grief embraced,
And cherished sad Remembrance dear;
For Love sincere and Friendship free
Are children of Simplicity.
When past was many a painful day,
Slow-pacing over the village-green
In white were all its maidens seen,
And bore my guardian friend away.
Ah, Death! what sacrifice to thee
The ruins of Simplicity!
One generous swain her heart approved,
A youth, whose fond and faithful breast.
With many an artless sigh confessed,
In Nature's language that he loved:
But, Stranger, it is no tale for thee,
Unless thou love Simplicity.
He died -- and soon her lip was cold,
And soon her rosy lip was pale,
The village wept to hear the tale
When for both the slow bell tolled --
Beneath yon flowery turf they lie,
The lovers of Simplicity.
Yet one boon have I to crave;
Stranger, if thy pity bleed,
Will thou do one tender deed,
And ^^ew my pale flowers over their grave?
So lightly lie the turf on thee,
Because thou love Simplicity!
WRITTEN ON A CHINESE TEMPLE IN MR. SCOTT'S GARDEN AT AMWELL.
BY THE SAME.
TO scenes where Taste and Genius dwell,
Unwillingly we bid farewell:
For these, of more than mortal birth,
Strangers and sojourners on earth,
Have, far from every vulgar road,
At Amwell fixed their fair abode.
WRITTEN ON ANOTHER OPEN TEMPLE UNDER THE WORDS "MIHI ET AMICIS."
BY THE SAME.
THY friends have access to a nobler part,
They claim the open Temple of thy heart,
O may no sighs from that calm region borne,
Thy shade's soft whispers turn to sounds forlorn,
Far, far be thence each monument of pain,
No paintings there of sorrows past remain!
To please by Art, by Nature's charms to please,
The first great object is a mind at ease.
LINES OCCASIONED BY LORD LYTLETON'S VERSES TO THE COUNTESS OF EGREMONT.
BY THE SAME.
SWEET Muse of Hagley, whose melodious lyre
To strains divine the British Petrarch strung,
Will thou thy long revolted bard inspire,
And wake lost memory to the lays he sung?
Ah no! no more with sighs of pensive love,
No more with sorrow fill his melting strain!
Else other woes my passive heart would prove,
My eyes would weep with Lytleton again.
But should he now, by nobler motives fired,
Unfold the riper treasures of his mind,
And tune those lays which love and grief inspired,
To Truth and Freedom may thou still be kind.
A SONNET MADE ON ISABELLA MARKHAME, WHEN I FIRST THOUGHT HER FAYER AS SHE
STOOD AT THE PRINCESS'S WINDOW IN GOODLYE ATTIRE, AND TALKEDE TO DYVERS IN THE
COURTE-YARD.
FROM A MS. OF JOHN HARRINGTON, dated 1564.
WHence comes my love, O heart, disclose,
'Twas from cheeks that shamed the rose;
From lips that spoil the rubies praise;
From eyes that mock the diamond's blaze.
Whence comes my woe, as freely own,
Ah me! 'twas from a heart like stone.
The blushynge cheek speaks modest mind,
The lips befitting words most kind;
The eye does tempte to love's desire,
And seems to say, it is Cupid's fire;
Yet all so fair, but speak my moan,
Sith naught does say the heart of stone.
Why thus, my love, so kind bespeake,
Sweet lyppe, sweet eye, sweet blushynge cheek,
Yet not a heart to save my pain,
O Venus, take thy gifts again,
Make not so fair to cause our moan,
Or make a heart that is like our own.
THE HOSPITABLE OAK.
BY --.
ERST in Arcadia's land much praised was found,
A lusty tree far rearing t'ward the skies,
Sacred to Jove, and placed on high ground,
Beneath whose shade did gladsome sheperds hie,
Met plenteous good, and often were wont to shun
Bleak winter's drizzle, summer's parching sun.
Outstretch'd in all the luxury of ease
They plucked rich misletoe of virtue rare;
Their lip was tempted by each kindly breeze,
That waved the branch to proffer acorns fair;
While out the hollowed root, with sweets inlaide,
The murmuring be her dainty hoard betrayde.
The fearless bird safe bosomed here its neste,
Its sturdie side did brave the nipping wind,
Where many a creeping ewe might gladly rest;
Warm comfort here to all and every kind;
Where hunge the leaf well sprint with honey dew,
Whence dropped their cups, the gamboling fairie knew.
But ah! in luckless day what mischief 'gan
Midst fell debate, and maddening revelrie,
When tipsie Bacchus had bewitched Pan,
For sober swain so thankless never might be;
Though passinge strange -- 'twas bruited all arounde,
This goodly tree did shadow too much ground.
With much despite they aim its overthrow,
And sorry jestes its wonted gifts deride,
How snaring birdlimes made of misletoe;
Nor trust their flocks to shelter 'neath its side;
It drops chill venom on our ewes, they cry,
And subtle serpent at its root does lie.
Eftsoons the axe does rear its deadly blow,
Arounde does echo bear each labouringe stroke;
Now to the ground its lofty head does bow,
Then angry Jove aloud in thunder spoke.
On high Olympus next mine tree I Will place,
Heaven's still unscann'd by sich ungrateful race.
TO A LOVER.
BY --.
WHY did thou raze such woeful wayle,
And waste in briny tears thine days;
Cause she, that wont to flout and rayl,
At last gave proof of woman's ways?
She did, in soothe, display the heart
That might have wroughte thee greater smarte.
Why thank her then, not weep nor moan,
Let others guard their careless heart;
And praise the day that thus made known
The faithless hold on woman's art.
Their lips can gloze and gain such root,
That gentle youth has hope of fruit.
But, ere the blossom fair does rise,
To shoot its sweetness over the taste,
Creeps disdain in canker-wise,
And chilling scorn the fruit does blaste.
There is no hope of all our toil,
There is no fruit from such a soil.
Give over thy playnt, the danger's over,
She might have poisoned all thine life;
Such wayward mind had bred thee more
Of sorrow, had she proved a wife.
Leave her to meet all hopeless meed,
And bless thyself that so art freed.
No youth shall sue such one to win,
Unmarked by all the shyning fair,
Save for her pride and scorn, such sin
As hearts of love can never bear;
Like leafless plant in blasted shade,
So lives she a barren maid,
THE HERMITE's ADDRESS TO YOUTH.
WRITTEN IN THE SPRING-GARDEN AT BATH.
BY --.
SAY, gentle youth, that tread'st untouched with care,
Where Nature has so guerdon'd Bathe's gay scene;
Fed with the song that daunceth in the air;
'Midst fairest wealth of Flora's magazine;
Has eye or ear yet found, thine steps to bless,
That gem of life y-clep'd true happiness.
With Beauty restes she not; nor wooes to light
Her hallowed taper at proud Honor's flame;
Nor Circe's cup does crown; nor comes in flighte
Upon the Icarian winge of bablinge Fame:
Not shrine of gold does this fair saint embower,
She glides from Heaven, but not in Danae's shower.
Go, Blossom, wanton in such joyous air,
But ah! -- often soon thy buxome blast is oer!
When the sleek pate shall grow far 'bove its hair,
And creepinge Age shall reap this piteous lore!
To brood over Folly, and with me confess,
" Earth's flattering dainties prove but sweet distress."
THE OLD HERMIT.

THE FEMINEAD: OR FEMALE GENIUS.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR MDCCLI.
BY JOHN DUNCOMBE, M. A.
SHall lordly man, the theme of every lay,
Usurp the Muse's tributary bay?
In kingly state on Pindus' summit sit,
Tyrant of verse, and arbiter of wit?
By Salic law the female right deny,
And view their genius with regardless eye?
Justice forbid! and every muse inspire
To sing the glories of a sister-choir!
Rise, rise, bold swain; and to the listening grove
Resound the praises of the sex you love;
Tell how, adorned with every charm, they shine,
In mind and person equally divine,
Till man, no more to female merit blind,
Admire the person, but adore the mind.
To these weak strains, O thou! the sex's friend
And constant patron, The author of those three celebrated works, Pamela,
Clarissa, and Sir Charles Grandison.
Richardson! attend:
Thou, who so often with pleased, but anxious care,
Have watched the dawning genius of the fair,
With wonted smiles wilt hear thy friend display
The various graces of the female lay;
Studious from Folly's yoke their minds to free,
And aid the generous cause espoused by thee.
Long over the world did Prejudice maintain,
By sounds like these, her undisputed reign:
" Woman! she cried, to thee, indulgent Heaven
" Has all the charms of outward beauty given:
" Be thine the boast, unrivaled, to enslave
" The great, the wise, the witty, and the brave;
" Decked with the Paphian rose's damask glow,
" And the vale-lily's vegetable snow,
" Be thine, to move majestic in the dance,
" To roll the eye, and aim the tender glance,
" Or touch the strings, and breathe the melting song,
" Content to emulate that airy throng,
" Who to the sun their painted plumes display,
" And gaily glitter on the hawthorn spray,
" Or wildly warble in the beechen grove,
" Careless of aught but music, joy, and love."
Heavens! could such artful, slavish sounds beguile
The freeborn sons of Britain's polished isle?
Could they, like famed Ulysses' dastard crew,
Attentive listen, and enamored view,
Nor drive the Siren to that dreary plain,
In loathsome pomp, where eastern tyrants reign;
Where each fair neck the yoke of slavery galls,
Closed in a proud seraglio's gloomy walls,
And taught, that levelled with the brutal kind,
Nor sense, nor souls to women are assigned.
Our British nymphs with happier omens rove,
At freedom's call, through wisdom's sacred grove,
And, as with lavish hand each sister grace
Shapes the fair form, and regulates the face,
Each sister muse, in blissful union joined,
Adorns, improves, and beautifies the mind.
Even now fond Fancy in our polished land
Assembled shows a blooming, studious band:
With various arts our reverence they engage,
Some turn the tuneful, some the moral page;
These, led by Contemplation, soar on high,
And range the Heavens with philosophic eye;
While those, surrounded by a vocal choir,
The canvas tinge, or touch the warbling lyre.
Here, like the stars' mixed radiance, they unite
To dazzle and perplex our wandering sight:
The muse each charmer singly shall survey,
And tune to each her tributary lay.
So when, in blended tints, with sweet surprise
Assembled beauties strike our ravished eyes,
Such as in Lely's melting colors shine,
Or spring, great Kneller! from a hand like thine,
On all with pleasing awe at once we gaze,
And, lost in wonder, know not which to praise,
But, singly viewed, each nymph delights us more,
Disclosing graces unperceived before.
First let the muse with generous ardor try
To chase the mist from dark opinion's eye:
Nor mean we here to blame that father's care,
Who guards from learned wives his booby heir,
Since often that heir with prudence has been known
To dread a genius that transcends his own:
The wise themselves should with discretion choose,
Since lettered nymphs their knowledge may abuse,
And husbands often experience to their cost
The prudent housewife in the scholar lost:
But those incur deserved contempt, who prize
Their own high talents, and their sex despise,
With haughty mien each social bliss defeat,
And sully all their learning with conceit:
Of such the parent justly warns his son,
And such the muse herself will bid him shun.
But lives there one, whose unassuming mind,
Though graced by nature, and by art refined,
Pleased with domestic excellence, can spare
Some hours from studious ease to social care,
And with her pen that time alone employs
Which others waste in visits, cards, and noise;
From affectation free, though deeply read,
" With wit well natured, and with books well bred?"
With such (and such there are) each happy day
Must fly improving, and improved away;
Inconstancy might fix and settle there,
And wisdom's voice approve the chosen fair.
Nor need we now from our own Britain rove,
In search of Genius, to the Lesbian grove,
Though Sappho there her tuneful lyre has strung,
And amorous griefs in sweetest accents sung,
Since here, in Charles's days, amidst a train
Of shameless bards, licentious and profane,
The chaste Mrs. Catherine Philips: she was distinguished by most of the wits
of king Charles's reign, and died young. Her pieces on friendship are
particularly admired.
Orinda rose; with purer light,
Like modest Cynthia, beaming through the night:
Fair Friendship's luster, undisguis'd by art,
Glows in her lines, and animates her heart;
Friendship, that jewel, which, though all confess
Its peerless value, yet how few possess!
For her the never-dying myrtle weaves
A verdant chaplet of her odorous leaves;
If Cowley's or Roscommon's song can give
Immortal fame, her praise shall ever live.
Who can unmoved near Anne countess of Winchelsea, a lady of great wit and
genius, wrote (among others) a poem, much admired, on the Spleen, and is
praised by Mr. Pope, etc. under the poetical name of Ardelia.
Winchelsea reveal
Thy horrors, Spleen! which all, who paint, must feel?
My praises would but wrong her sterling wit,
Since Pope himself applauds what she has writ.
But say, what matron now walks musing forth
From the bleak mountains of her native North?
While round her brows two sisters of the Nine
Poetic wreaths with philosophic twine!
Hail, Mrs. Catherine Cockburne was the wife of a clergyman, lived obscurely,
and died a few years ago in an advanced age in Northumberland; her works on
dramatic, philosophical, and sacred subjects have been lately collected by the
learned Dr. Birch, and are generally admired.
Cockburne, hail! even now from Reason's bowers
Thy Lock delighted culls the choicest flowers
To deck his great, successful champion's head,
And Clarke expects thee in the laurel shade.
Though long to dark, oblivious want a prey,
Thy aged worth passed unperceived away,
Yet Scotland now shall ever boast thy fame,
While England mourns thy undistinguished name,
And views with wonder, in a female mind,
Philosopher, divine, and poet joined!
The modest muse a veil with pity throws
Over vice's friends, and virtue's female foes;
Abashed she views the bold unblushing mien
Of modern The first of these wrote the scandalous memoirs called Atalantis,
and the other two are notorious for the indecency of their plays.
Manley, Centlivre, and Behn;
And grieves to see one nobly born disgrace
Her modest sex, and her illustrious race.
Though harmony through all their numbers flowed,
And genuine wit its every grace bestowed,
Nor genuine wit, nor harmony, excuse
The dangerous sallies of a wanton muse:
Nor can such tuneful, but immoral, lays
Expect the tribute of impartial praise:
As soon might These three ladies have endeavored to immortalize their shame
by writing their own memoirs.
Philips, Pilkington, and V --
Deserved applause for spotless virtue gain.
But hark! what The character of Mrs. Row and her writings is too well known
to be dwelt on here. It may be sufficient to say, that without any previous
illness she met at last with that sudden death for which she had always wished.
nymph, in Frome's embroidered vale,
With strains seraphic swells the vernal gale?
With what sweet sounds the bordering forest rings?
For sportive Echo catches, as she sings,
Each falling accent, studious to prolong
The warbled notes of Rowe's ecstatic song.
Old Avon pleased his reedy forehead rears,
And polished Orrery delighted hears.
See with what transport she resigns her breath,
Snatched by a sudden, but a wished for death!
Released from earth, with smiles she soars on high
Amidst her kindred spirits of the sky,
Where faith and love those endless joys bestow,
That warmed her lays, and filled her hopes below.
Nor can her noble Frances, Countess of Hertford, and afterward duchess
dowager of Somerset, Mrs. Rowe's illustrious friend, lamented her death in some
verses prefixed to her poems, and was author of the letters in her collection
signed Cleora.
friend escape unseen,
Or from the muse her modest virtues screen;
Here, sweetly blended, to our wondering eyes,
The peeress, poetess, and Christian rise:
And though the Nine her tuneful strains inspire,
We less her genius, than her heart, admire,
Pleased, 'midst the great, one truly good to see,
And proud to tell that Somerset is she.
By generous views one Anne, viscountess Irwin, and aunt to the present earl of
Carlisle: this lady, in a poetical epistle to Mr. Pope, has rescued her sex's
cause from the aspersions cast on them by that satyrist in his essay on the
characters of women.
pceress more demands
A grateful tribute from all female hands;
One, who to shield them from the worst of foes,
In their just cause dared Pope himself oppose.
Their own dark forms deceit and envy wear,
By Irwin touched with See Milton, book iv. ver. 811.
truth's celestial spear.
By her disarmed, ye witlings! now give over
Your empty sneers, and shock the sex no more.
Thus bold Camilla, when the Trojan chief
Attacked her country, flew to its relief;
Beneath her lance the bravest warriors bled,
And fear dismayed the host which great Aeneas led.
But ah! why heaves my breast this pensive sigh?
Why starts this tear unbidden from my eye?
What breast from sighs, what eye from tears refrains,
When, sweetly-mournful, hapless Mrs. Wright, sister to the famous Wesleys, has
published some pieces, which, though of a melancholy cast, are written in the
genuine spirit of poetry.
Wright complains?
And who but grieves to see her generous mind,
For nobler views and worthier guests designed,
Admit the hateful form of black despair,
Wan with the gloom of superstitious care?
In pity-moving lays, with earnest cries,
She called on Heaven to close her weary eyes,
And, long on earth by heartfelt woes oppressed,
Was borne by friendly death to welcome rest.
In nervous strains, lo! Mrs. Madan is author of a poem called the Progress of
Poetry, wherein the characters of the best Grecian, Roman, and English poets
are justly and elegantly drawn.
Madan's polished taste
Has poetry's successive progress traced,
From ancient Greece, where first she fixed her reign,
To Italy, and Britain's happier plain.
Praise well-bestow'd adorns her glowing lines,
And manly strength with female softness joins.
So female charms and manly virtues grace,
By her example formed, her blooming race,
And, framed alike to please our ears and eyes,
There new Cornelias and new Gracchi rise.
O that you now, with genius at command,
Would snatch the penc l from my artless hand,
And give your sex's portraits, bold and true,
In colors worthy of themselves and you!
Now in ecstatic visions let me rove,
By Cynthia's beams, through Brackley's glimmering grove,
Where still each night, by startled shepherds seen,
Young Mrs. Leapor, daughter to a Northamptonshire gardener, has lately
convinced the world of the force of unassisted nature, by imitating and
equalling some of our most approved poets, by the strength of her parts, and
the vivacity of her genius.
Leapor's form flies shadowy over the green.
Those envied honors nature loved to pay
The briar-bound turf, where erst her Shakespeare lay,
Now on her darling Mira she bestows;
There over the hallowed ground she fondly strows
The choicest fragrance of the breathing spring,
And bids each year her favorite linnet sing.
Let cloistered pedants, in an endless round,
Tread the dull mazes of scholastic ground;
Brackley unenvying views the glittering train
Of learning's useless trappings idly vain;
For, spite of all that vaunted learning's aid,
Their fame is rivall'd by her rural maid.
So, while in our Britannia's beechen sprays
Sweet Philomela trills her mellow lays,
We to the natives of the sultry line
Their boasted race of parrots pleased resign:
For though on citron boughs they proudly glow
With all the colors of the watery bow,
Yet through the grove harsh discord they prolong,
Though rich in gaudy plumage, poor in song.
Now bear me, Clio, to that Kentish strand,
Whose rude o'erhanging cliffs and barren sand
May challenge all the myrtle-blooming bowers
Of famed Italia, when, at evening hours,
Thy own Mrs. Eliza Carter of Deal, well known to the learned world for her
late translation of Epictetus, has translated, from the Italian, Algarotti's
dialogues on light and colors; and lately published a small collection of
elegant poems.
Eliza muses on the shore,
Serene, though billows beat, and tempests roar.
Hail, Carter, hail! your favorite name inspires
My raptured breast with sympathetic fires;
Even now I see your loved Ilyssus lead
His mazy current through the Athenian mead;
With you I pierce through academic shades,
And join in Attic bowers the Aonian maids;
Beneath the spreading plane with Plato rove,
And hear his morals echo through the grove.
Joy sparkles in the sage's looks, to find
His genius glowing in a female mind;
Newton admiring sees your searching eye
Dart through his mystic page, and range the sky;
By you his colors to your sex are shown,
And Algarotti's name to Britain known.
While, undisturbed by pride, you calmly tread
Through life's perplexing paths, by wisdom led;
And, taught by her, your grateful muse repays
Her heavenly teacher in nocturnal lays.
So when Prometheus from the Almighty Sire,
As sings the fable, stole celestial fire,
Swift through the clay the vital current ran,
In look, in form, in speech resembling man;
But in each eye a living luster glowed,
That spoke the heavenly source from whence it flowed.
" What magic powers in We could not here, with justice, withold our tribute
of praise from Mrs. Brook, author of the tragedy of Virginia.
Celia's numbers dwell,
" Which thus the unpracticed breast with ardor swell
" To emulate her praise, and tune that lyre
" Which yet no bard was able to inspire!
" With tears her suffering Virgin we attend,
" And sympathize with father, lover, friend!
" What sacred rapture in our bosom glows,
" When at the shrine she offers up her vows!
" Mild majesty and virtue's awful power
" Adorn her fall, and grace her latest hour."
Transport me now to those embroidered meads,
Where the slow Ouze his lazy current leads;
There, while the stream soft-dimpling steals along,
And from the groves the green-hair'd Dryads throng,
Clio herself, or This lady has written two beautiful odes to Cynthia and the
Spring.
Ferrar tunes a lay,
Sweet as the darkling Philomel of May.
Hasle, haste, ye Nine, and hear a sister sing
The charms of Cynthia, and the joys of spring:
See! night's pale goddess with a grateful beam
Paints her loved image in the shadowy stream,
While, round his votary, spring profusely showers
" A snow of blossoms, and a wild of flowers."
O happy nymph, though winter over thy head,
Blind to that form, the snow of age shall shed;
Though life's short spring and beauty's blossoms fade,
Still shall thy reason flourish undecay'd;
Time, though he steals the roseate bloom of youth,
Shall spare the charms of virtue and of truth,
And on thy mind new charms, new bloom bestow,
Wisdom's best friend, and only beauty's foe.
Nor shall thy much-loved Mrs. Pennington has happily imitated Mr. Philips's
Splendid Shilling, in a burlesque poem called The Copper Farthing.
Pennington remain
Unsung, unhonour'd in my votive strain.
See where the soft enchantress, wandering over
The fairy ground that Philips trod before,
Exalts her chymic wand, and swift behold
The basest metals ripen into gold:
Beneath her magic touch, with wondering eye,
We view vile copper with pure sterling vie;
Nor shall the farthing, sung by her, forbear
To claim the praises of the smiling fair;
Till chuck and marble shall no more employ
The thoughtless leisure of the truant boy.
Returning now to Thames's flowery side,
See how his waves in still attention glide!
And, hark! what songstress shakes her warbling throat?
Is it the nightingale, or This lady has written odes to Peace, Health, and the
Robin Redbreast, which are here alluded to; and she has been celebrated in a
sonnet by Mr. Edwards, author of the Canons of Criticism.
Delia's note?
The balmy zephyrs, hovering over the fair,
On their soft wings the vocal accents bear;
Through Sunbury's low vale the strains rebound,
Even neighboring Chertsey hears the cheerful sound,
And wondering sees her Cowley's laureled shade
Transported listen to the tuneful maid.
O may those nymphs, whose pleasing power she sings,
Still over their suppliant wave their fostering wings!
O long may Health and soft-ey'd Peace impart
Bloom to her cheek, and rapture to her heart!
Beneath her roof the red-breast shall prolong,
Unchill'd by frosts, his tributary song;
For her the lark shall wake the dappled morn,
And linnet twitter from the blossomed thorn.
Sing on, sweet maid! thy Spenser smiles to see
Kind Fancy shed her choicest gifts on thee,
And bids his Edwards, on the laurel spray
That shades his tomb, inscribe thy rural lay.
With lovely mien This lady has successfully applied herself to the sister arts
of drawing and poetry, and has written an ingenious allegory, wherein two
pilgrims, Fidelio and Honoria, after a fruitless search for the palace of
Happiness, are at last conducted to the house of Content.
Eugenia now appears,
The muse's pupil from her tenderest years;
Improving tasks her peaceful hours beguile,
The sister arts on all her labors smile,
And while the Nine their votary inspire,
" One dips the pencil, and one strings the lyre."
O may her life's clear current smoothly glide,
Unruffled by misfortune's boisterous tide!
So while the charmer leads her blameless days
With that content which she so well displays,
Her own Honoria we in her shall view,
And think her allegoric vision true.
Thus wandering wild among the golden grain
That fruitful floats on Bansted's airy plain,
Careless I sung, while summer's western gale
Breathed health and fragrance through the dusky vale;
When from a neighboring hawthorn, in whose shade
Concealed she lay, up-rose the Aonian maid:
Pleased had she listened; and, with smiles, she cried,
" Cease, friendly swain! be this thy praise and pride,
" That thou, of all the numerous tuneful throng,
" First in our cause have framed thy generous song.
" And ye, our sister choir! proceed to tread
" The flowery paths of fame, by science led!
" Employ by turns the needle and the pen,
" And in their favorite studies rival men!
" May all our sex your glorious track pursue,
" And keep your bright example still in view!
" These lasting beauties will in youth engage,
" And smooth the wrinkles of deelining age,
" Secure to bloom, unconscious of decay,
" When all Corinna's roses fade away.
" For even when love's short triumph shall be over,
" When youth shall please, and beauty charm no more,
" When man shall cease to slatter; when the eye
" Shall cease to sparkle, and the heart to sigh,
" In that dread hour, when parent dust shall claim
" The lifeless tribute of each kindred frame,
" Even then shall wisdom for her chosen fair
" The fragrant wreaths of virtuous fame prepare;
" Those wreaths which flourish in a happier clime.
" Beyond the reach of envy and of time;
" While here, the immortalizing muse shall save
" Your darling names from dark Oblivion's grave;
" Those names the praise and wonder shall engage
" Of every polished, wise, and virtuous age;
" To latest times our annals shall adorn,
" And save from folly thousands yet unborn."
ODE TO THE HON. JOHN YORK. IMITATED FROM HORACE, BOOK II. ODE XVI.
BY THE SAME.
FOR quiet, on Newmarket's plain,
The shivering curate prays in vain,
When wintery showers are falling,
And stumbling steed, and whistling wind,
Quite banish from his anxious mind
The duties of his calling.
With thoughts engrossed by routs and plays,
The gallant soph for quiet prays,
Confuted and confuting;
And quiet is alike desired
Even by the king's professor, tired
With wrangling and disputing.
In crowded senate, on the chair
Of our vice chancellor sits Care,
Undaunted by the Mace;
Care climbs the yatcht, when adverse gales
Detain or tear our patron's sails,
And ruffles even his Grace.
How blessed is he whose annual toil
With well-rang'd trees improves a soil
For ages yet unborn!
Such as at humble Dr. Herring, late lord archbishop of Canterbury, was some
time rector of Barley, a village near Barkway in Hertfordshire.
Barley, planned
By mitred Herring's youthful hand,
The cultured glebe adorn.
From place to place we still pursue
Content, and hope in each to view
The visionary guest;
Vainly we fly intruding care,
Not all, like you, the joys can share
Of Wimple and of Wrest.
Then let us snatch, while in our power,
The present transitory hour,
And leave to Heaven the morrow;
Youth has its griefs; a friend may die,
Or nymph deceive; for none can fly
The giant hand of sorrow.
His country's hope, and parent's pride,
In bloom of life young Blandford died:
His godlike father's eyes
Were dimmed with age and helpless tears;
And Heaven to me may grant the years
Which it to you denies.
Your rising virtues soon will claim
A portion of your brother's fame;
And catch congenial fire;
They shine in embassy and war,
They grace the senate and the bar,
And emulate their sire.
Invested with the sacred gown,
You soon, to rival their renown,
The glorious task shall join;
And while they guard Britannia's laws,
You, steady to Religion's cause,
Shall guard the laws divine.
SOLITUDE. A SONG. TO LADY COVENTRY'S MINUET.
BY DR. COTTON.
SWEET companion of the muse!
Gentle Solitude! appear,
All thy calm content infuse,
Soften anguish, banish care:
Lead me, O majestic queen!
Through the aromatic scene:
Nature's copied here by art,
Joyful we the fraud confess,
Yet so well performs her part,
It Is but Nature's better dress:
Solitude here fix my seat,
Here in Cowley's soft retreat.
Lay me in the silent mead,
Where the murmuring river flows,
Where the elm expands the shade,
And each rising beauty blows:
There I Will say, in peace of mind,
" Empty greatness fall behind."
Teach thy votary all the powers
Of each plant, and every tree,
Tell how short-lived are the flowers,
Bring the moral home to me,
Bid me fleeting life despise,
Make me humble, make me wise.
Pride within my lowly cell
Never yet up-rear'd her head,
Solitude, with thee I Will dwell!
Pride with me is long since dead:
Cold to Pleasure, deaf to Praise,
Here I wish to end my days.
TO THE MEMORY OF THE LATE DUKE OF BRIDGEWATER, MDCCXLVIII.
BY THE SAME.
PAtient to hear, and bounteous to bestow;
A mind that melted at another's woe;
Studious to act the self-approving part,
That midnight music of the honest heart;
These silent joys the illustrious youth possessed,
This cloudless sunshine of the unsullied breast:
From pride of peerage, and from folly free;
Life's early morn fair Virtue gave to thee.
The tear no longer stole from Sorrow's eye,
And Poverty rejoiced, when he was nigh;
Like Titus, knew the value of a day,
And Want went smiling from his gates away.
Titles and rank are borrowed from the throne:
These honors, Egerton, were all thy own.
THE AFRICAN PRINCE, NOW IN ENGLAND, TO ZARA AT HIS FATHER'S COURT, WRITTEN IN
THE YEAR MDCCXLIX.
BY DR. DODD.
PRINCES, my fair, unfortunately great,
Born to the pompous vassalage of state,
Whenever the public calls, are doomed to sly
Domestic bliss, and break the private tie.
Fame pays with empty breath the toils they bear,
And love's soft joys are changed for glorious care;
Yet conscious virtue, in the silent hour,
Rewards the hero with a noble dower.
For this alone I dared the roaring sea,
Yet more, for this I dared to part with thee.
But while my bosom feels the nobler flame,
Still unreprov'd, it owns thy gentler claim.
Though virtue's awful form my soul approves,
It Is thine, thine only, Zara, that it loves.
A private lot had made the claim but one,
The prince alone must love, for virtue, shun.
Ah! why distinguished from the happier crowd,
To me the bliss of millions disallowed?
Why was I singled for imperial sway,
Since love and duty point a different way?
Fixed the dread voyage, and the day decreed,
When, duty's victim, love was doomed to bleed,
Too well my memory can these scenes renew,
We met to sigh, to weep our last adieu.
That conscious palm, beneath whose towering shade
So often our vows of mutual love were made;
Where hope so often anticipated joy,
And planned of future years the best employ;
That palm was witness to the tears we shed,
When that fond hope, and all those joys were fled.
Thy trembling lips, with trembling lips, I pressed,
And held thee panting to my panting breast.
Our sorrow, grown too mighty to sustain,
Now snatched us, fainting, from the sense of pain.
Together sinking in the trance divine,
I caught thy fleeting soul, and gave thee mine!
O! blessed oblivion of tormenting care!
O! why recalled to life and to despair?
The dreadful summons came, to part -- and why?
Why not the kinder summons but to die?
To die together were to part no more,
To land in safety on some peaceful shore,
Where love's the business of immortal life,
And happy spirits only guess at strife.
" If in some distant land my prince should find
" Some nymph more fair, you cried, as Zara kind" --
Mysterious doubt! which could at once impart
Relief to mine, and anguish to thy heart.
Still let me triumph in the fear expressed,
The voice of love that whispered in thy breast;
Nor call me cruel, for my truth shall prove
'Twas but the vain anxiety of love.
Torn from thy fond embrace, the strand I gain,
Where mourning friends inflict superfluous pain;
My father there his struggling sighs suppressed,
And in dumb anguish clasped me to his breast,
Then sought, concealed the conflict of his mind,
To give the sortitude he could not find;
Each life-taught precept kindly he renewed,
" Thy country's good, said he, be still pursued!
" If, when the gracious gods my son restore,
" These eyes shall sleep in death, to wake no more;
" If then these limbs, that now in age decay,
" Shall mouldering mix with earth's parental clay;
" Round my green tomb perform the sacred rite,
" Assume my throne, and let thy yoke be light;
" From lands of freedom glorious precepts bring,
" And reign at once a father and a king."
How vainly proud, the arrogantly great
Presume to boast a monarch's godlike state!
Subject alike, the peasant and the king,
To life's dark ills, and care's corroding sting.
From guilt and fraud, that strikes in silence sure,
No shield can guard us, and no arms secure.
By these, my fair, subdued, thy prince was lost,
A naked captive on a barbarous coast.
Nurtured in ease, a thousand servants round,
My wants prevented, and my wishes crowned,
No painful labors stretched the tedious day,
On downy feet my moments danced away.
Wherever I looked, officious courtiers bowed,
Wherever I passed, a shouting people crowd;
No fears intruded on the joys I knew,
Each man my friend, my lovely mistress you.
What dreadful change! abandoned and alone,
The shouted prince is now a slave unknown;
To watch his eye, no bending courtiers wait,
No hailing crowds proclaim his regal state;
A slave condemned, with unrewarded toil,
To turn, from morn to eve, a burning soil.
Fainting beneath the sun's meridian heat,
Roused by the scourge, the taunting jest I meet:
" Thanks to thy friends, they cry, whose care recalls
" A prince to life, in whom a nation falls!"
Unwholesome scraps, my strength but half sustained,
From corners gleaned, and even by dogs disdained;
At night I mingled with a wretched crew,
Who by long use with woe familiar grew;
Of manners brutish, merciless, and rude,
They mocked my sufferings, and my pangs renewed;
In groans, not sleep, I passed the weary night,
And rose to labor with the morning light.
Yet, thus of dignity and ease beguiled,
Thus scorned and scourged, insulted and reviled,
If Heaven with thee my faithful arms had blessed,
And filled with love my intervals of rest,
Short though they were, my soul had never known
One secret wish to glitter on a throne;
The toilsome day had heard no sigh of mine,
Nor stripes, nor scorn, had urged me to repine.
A monarch, still beyond a monarch blessed,
Thy love my diadem, my throne thy breast;
My courtiers, watchful of my looks, thy eyes,
Should shine, persuade, and flatter, and advise;
Thy voice my music, and thy arms should be --
Ah! not the prison of a slave in me!
Could I with infamy content remain,
And wish thy lovely form to share my chain?
Could this bring ease? forgive the unworthy thought,
And let the love that sinned atone the fault.
Could I, a slave, and hopeless to be free,
Crawl, tamely recent from the scourge, to thee?
Thy blooming beauties could these arms embrace?
My gullty joys enslave an infant race?
No: rather blast me lightnings, whirlwind tear,
And drive these limbs in atoms through the air;
Rather than this, O! curse me still with life,
And let my Zara smile a rival's wife:
Be mine alone the accumulated woe,
Nor let me propagate my curse below.
But, from this dreadful scene, with joy I turn;
To trust in Heaven, of me let Zara learn.
The wretch, the sordid hypocrite, who sold
His charge, an unsuspecting prince, for gold,
That Justice marked, whose eyes can never sleep,
And death, commissioned, smote him on the deep.
The generous crew their port in safety gain,
And tell my mournful tale, nor tell in vain;
The king, with horror of the atrocious deed,
In haste commanded, and the slave was freed.
No more Britannia's cheek, the blush of shame,
Burns for my wrongs, her king restores her fame:
Propitious gales, to Freedom's happy shore
Waft me triumphant, and the prince restore;
Whatever is great and gay around me shine,
And all the splendour of a court is mine.
Here knowledge too, by piety refined,
Sheds a blessed radiance over my brightening mind;
From earth I travel upward to the sky,
I learn to live, to reign, yet more, to die.
O! I have tales to tell, of love divine --
Such blissful tidings! they shall soon be thine.
I long to tell thee, what, amazed, I see,
What habits, buildings, trades, and polity!
How art and nature vie to entertain
In public shows, and mix delight with pain.
O! Zara He alludes to the Play of Oroonoko, at which he was present, and so
affected as to be unable to continue, during its performance, in the house.
, here, a story like my own,
With mimic skill, in borrowed names, was shown;
An Indian chief, like me, by fraud betrayed,
And partner in his woes an Indian maid.
I cannot recall the scenes, it is pain too great,
And, if recalled, should shudder to relate.
To write the wonders here, I strive in vain;
Each word would ask a thousand to explain.
The time shall come, O! speed the lingering hour!
When Zara's charms shall lend description power;
When placed beside thee in the cool alcove,
Or through the green Savannahs as we rove,
The frequent kiss shall interrupt the tale,
And looks shall speak my sense, though language fail.
Then shall the prodigies, that round me rise,
Fill thy dear bosom with a sweet surprise;
Then all my knowledge to thy faithful heart,
With danger gained, securely I Will impart.
Methinks I see thy changing looks express
The alternate sense of pleasure and distress;
As all the windings of my fate I trace,
And wing thy fancy swift from place to place.
Yet where, alas! has flattering thoughts conveyed
The ravished lover with his darling maid?
Between us, still unmeasured oceans roll,
Which hostile barks infest, and storms control.
Be calm my bosom, since the unmeasured main,
And hostile barks, and storms, are God's domain:
He rules resistless, and his power shall guide
My life in safety over the roaring tide;
Shall bless the love that is built on virtue's base,
And spare me to evangelize my race.
Farewell! thy prince still lives, and still is free:
Farewell! hope all things, and remember me.
ZARA, AT THE COURT OF ANAMABOE, TO THE AFRICAN PRINCE WHEN IN ENGLAND.
BY THE SAME.
SHOULD I the language of my heart conceal,
Nor warmly paint the passion that I feel;
My rising wish should groundless fears confine,
And doubts ungenerous chill the glowing line;
Would not my prince, with nobler warmth, disdain
That love, as languid, which could stoop to feign?
Let guilt dissemble -- in my faithful breast
Love reigns unblam'd, and be that love confessed.
I give my bosom naked to thy view,
For, what has shame with innocence to do?
In fancy, now, I clasp thee to my heart,
Exchange my vows, and all my joys impart.
I catch new transport from thy speaking eye; --
But whence this sad involuntary sigh?
Why pants my bosom with intruding fears?
Why, from my eyes, distill unbidden tears?
Why do my hands thus tremble as I write?
Why fades thy loved idea from my sight?
O! art thou safe on Britain's happy shore,
From winds that bellow, and from seas that roar?
And has my prince -- (Oh, more than mortal pain!)
Betrayed by ruffians, felt the captive's chain?
Bound were those limbs, ordained alone to prove
The toils of empire, and the sweets of love?
Hold, hold! Barbarians of the fiercest kind!
Fear Heaven's red lightning -- it is a prince ye bind;
A prince, whom no indignities could hide,
They knew, presumptuous! and the gods defied.
Wherever he moves, let love-join'd reverence rise,
And all mankind behold with Zara's eyes!
Thy breast alone, when bounding over the waves
To Freedom's climes, from slavery and slaves;
Thy breast alone the pleasing thought could frame
Of what I felt, when thy dear letters came:
A thousand times I held them to my breast,
A thousand times my lips the paper pressed:
My full heart panted with a joy too strong,
And "Oh, my prince!" died faultering on my tongue:
Fainting I sunk, unequal to the strife,
And milder joys sustained returning life.
Hope, sweet enchantress, round my lovesick head
Delightful scenes of blessed delusion spread.
" Come, come, my prince! my charmer! haste away;
" Come, come, I cried, thy Zara blames thy stay.
" For thee, the shrubs their richest sweets retain;
" For thee, new colors wait to paint the plain;
" For thee, cool breezes linger in the grove,
" The birds expect thee in the green alcove;
" Till thy return, the rills sorget to fall,
" Till thy return, the sun, the soul of all! --
" He comes, my maids, in his meridian charms,
" He comes refulgent to his Zara's arms:
" With jocund songs proclaim my love's return;
" With jocund hearts his nuptial bed adorn.
" Bright as the sun, yet gentle as the dove,
" He comes, uniting majesty and love." --
Too soon, alas! the blessed delusion flies;
Care swells my breast, and sorrow fills my eyes.
Ah! why do thy fond words suggest a fear --
Too vast, too numerous, those already here!
Ah! why with doubts torment my bleeding breast,
Of seas which storms control, and foes insest!
My heart, in all this tedious absence, knows
No thoughts but those of seas, and storms, and foes.
Each joyless morning, with the rising sun,
Quick to the strand my feet spontaneous run:
" Where, where is my prince! what tidings have ye brought!"
Of each I met, with pleading tears I sought.
In vain I sought, some, conscious of my pain,
With horrid silence pointed to the main.
Some with a sneer the brutal thought expressed,
And plunged the dagger of a barbarous jest.
Day followed day, and still I wished the next,
New hopes still flattered, and new doubts perplexed;
Day followed day, the wished tomorrow came,
My hopes, doubts, fears, anxieties the same.
At length -- "O Power Supreme! whoever thou art,
" Thy shrine the sky, the sea, the earth, or heart;
" Since every clime, and all the unbounded main,
" And hostile barks, and storms, are thy domain,
" If faithful passion can thy bounty move,
" And goodness sure must be the friend of love,
" Safe to these arms my lovely prince restore,
" Safe to his Zara's arms, to part no more.
" O! grant to virtue thy protecting care,
" And grant thy love to love's availing prayer,
" Together then, and emulous to praise,
" A flowery altar to thy name we'll raise;
" There, first and last, on each returning day,
" To thee our vows of gratitude we'll pay."
Fool that I was, to all my comfort blind,
Why, when thou went, did Zara stay behind?
How could I fondly hope one joy to prove,
'Midst all the wild anxieties of love?
Had fate in other mold, thy Zara formed,
And my bold breast in manly friendship warmed,
How had I glowed exulting at thy side!
How all the shafts of adverse fate defied!
Or yet a woman, and not nerv'd for toil,
With thee, O! had I turned a burning soil!
In the cold prison had I lain with thee,
In love still happy, we had still been free;
Then fortune braved, had owned superior might,
And pined with envy, while we forced delight.
Why should thou bid thy love remember thee?
Thine all my thoughts have been, and still shall be.
Each night the cool Savannahs have I sought,
And breathed the fondness of enamored thought;
The curling breezes murmured as I sighed,
And hoarse, at distance, roared my so the tide:
My breast still haunted by a motly train,
Now doubts, now hopes prevailed, now joy, now pain,
Now fixed I stand, my spirit fled to thine,
Nor note the time, nor see the sun decline;
Now roused I start, and winged with fear I run,
In vain, alas! for it is myself I shun.
When kindly sleep its lenient balm supplied,
And gave that comfort waking thought denied.
Last night -- but why, ah Zara! why impart,
The fond, fond fancies of a lovesick heart?
Yet true delights on fancy's wings are brought,
And love's soft raptures realiz'd in thought --
Last night I saw, methinks I see it now --
Heaven's awful concave round thy Zara bow;
When sudden thence a flaming chariot flew,
Which earth received, and six white coursers drew.
Then -- quick transition -- did thy Zara ride,
Borne to the chariot -- wondrous -- by thy side:
All glorious both, from clime to clime we flew,
Each happy clime with sweet surprise we view.
A thousand voices sung -- "All bliss betide
" The prince of Lybia, and his faithful bride."
" It Is done, it is done," resounded through the skies.
And quick aloft the car began to rise;
Ten thousand beauties crowded on my sight,
Ten thousand glories beamed a dazzling light.
My thoughts could bear no more, the vision fled,
And wretched Zara viewed her lonely bed. --
Come, sweet interpreter, and ease my soul;
Come to my bosom, and explain the whole.
Alas! my prince -- yet hold, my struggling breast!
Sure we shall meet again, again be blessed.
" Hope all, thou say, I live, and still am free;"
O! then prevent those hopes, and haste to me.
Ease all the doubts thy Zara's bosom knows,
And kindly stop the torrent of her woes.
But, that I know too well thy generous heart,
One doubt, than all, more torment would impart:
It Is this, in Britain's happy courts to shine,
Amidst a thousand blooming maids, is thine --
But thou, a thousand blooming maids among,
Art still thyself, incapable of wrong;
No outward charm can captivate thy mind,
Thy love is friendship heightened and refined;
It Is what my soul, and not my form inspires,
And burns with spotless and immortal fires.
Thy joys, like mine, from conscious truth arise,
And, known these joys, what others can thou prize?
Be jealous doubts the curse of sordid minds;
Hence, jealous doubts, I give ye to the winds. --
Once more, O come! and snatch me to thy arms!
Come, shield my beating heart from vain alarms!
Come, let me hang enamored on thy breast,
Weep pleasing tears, and be with joy distressed!
Let me still hear, and still demand thy tale,
And, often renewed, still let my suit prevail!
Much still remains to tell and to enquire,
My hand still writes, and writing prompts desire;
My pen denies my last farewell to write,
Still, still, "return," my wishful thoughts indite:
O! hear, my prince, thy love, thy mistress call,
Think over each tender name, and hear by all.
O! pleasing intercourse of soul with soul,
Thus, while I write, I see, I clasp thee whole;
And these kind letters trembling Zara drew,
In every line shall bring her to thy view.
Return, return, in love and truth excel;
Return, I write; I cannot add -- Farewell.
HYMN TO HOPE.
BY THE SAME.
ALL hail, bright Hope! Thou, when the fatal box,
Replete with ills, was sent by angry Jove
In punishment of Japhet's Prometheus.
daring son,
When every woe of fearful name flew forth
To vex the human race, thou kindly deign'dst
To stay behind, man's gentle comforter,
Life's balm and blessing! or, without the aid
Of truth-assimilated fiction, thou
Wast given by God himself, a chearing light
To guide man's feet, driven from fair Eden's groves
Across the untrack'd wilderness of life
To Heaven's blessed mansions: where and where alone
Thy office, friendly Hope, shall sweetly cease
To full fruition yielded! But on earth,
Nay, not, perchance, even in fair Eden's groves,
Are thy assuasive consolations vain:
For what is life, or what its highest scenes
Of boasted happiness, if present bliss
Bounds the horizon of our views; nor Hope,
With eagle eye, kens aught beyond, on which
To fix the future, ardent, heart's desire,
To fill the soul, and make the rapid wish
Run over with plentitude of joy? -- Vain, vain,
To man's felicity, in youth or age,
The present draught of pleasure, though once wished
With all the eagerness of panting thirst.
Deep, deep he drinks, and longs for more! From hope
To hope he springs: he views, and still extends
His view: over cloud-capt Alps new Alps arise!
He gains the summit: still the prospect wide
Enlarges to his eye: forward he fares
Nor ceases to ascend, till high in heaven
He rides at anchor, and then Hope's no more.
But O! thou general blessing, smiling Hope!
Thy lucid ray, not only leads us on
From view to view; not only do thou cheer
With expectation sweet of future good;
But with serenity of present bliss
Thou fill'st the heart expectant! Hope can give
Habitual good humor! To the soul
A vital heat: she quickens the still parts,
Nay, even in motion keeps the springs of life!
And when most indolent, and most remiss,
Or rouzes, or preserves the mind awake.
See, too, how few -- and even those few how short --
Are actual enjoyments! But through thee,
Blessed Hope, we gain a taste, delicious taste
Of pleasures possible! Taste, not less sweet,
Perchance, than real: for kind Hope bestows
A bliss in expectation, not less full,
And fuller often than ripe fruition brings:
Fruition, haughty nymph, she never deigns
To walk with humble Hope, who, at her sight
Retires, abashed, unnotic'd, and unthank'd!
But O! blessed comforter, ingrate to thee
Let me not ever prove, should wished success
Crown my heart's hope! let me not ever forget
The dear indulgences thy soothing views
Have to my soul presented! Yet, O yet --
Thy promised consummation too, too long
Delayed, the heart in deep despondence sighs,
And sickens sad with care. O then, indulge
Thy votary's prayer, nor ever let me lose
Thy chearing aspect; never let the night
Of black despondence, with its dismal veil,
My little prospects in thick darkness wrap!
Nor yet too long delay to grant my wish
Accomplishment, if worthy! So my soul
Invigorated still shall onward press
To more and more improvement: nor grow faint
Till the big buds of Hope terrestrial burst
To blossoms full and fair in better climes!
But say, bright Hope, what numbers shall be found,
Worthy to sing thy praise: for that thy hand
Not only to the happiest life imparts
Its zest, its relish; but with tender care
Is stretched forth to assuage the wretch's woe,
To soothe the anguish of disease and pain;
And soften sad adversity's rough bed!
Thou only cheap and universal cure
Of human ills -- of human sorrow, thou
Best comforter, and often, full often, alas!
The only comforter the wretched find!
Ah! see from that unfortunate, overwhelmed
In the deep gulf of sorrow, with what speed,
What cruel speed, as from contagion, all
With one consent are flying! -- and will none,
For gentle pity's sake, remain behind
To comfort the diftrest! Yes, faithful Hope
Benevolently stays! and, flatterer kind,
Her far-foreseeing tube applies, through which
The eye, though dim with mourning, often discerns
Future and happier days, through the black gloom
Of melancholy prospects shining bright.
Ah, honest flatterer! -- yes, for once the muse
Commends, what most the worthy mind abhors,
And calls thee honest flatterer: for while all
Assiduous join to adulate the blessed,
Hope, tender Hope alone, with soft concern,
Flatters the unhappy! and when every friend
Flies from the ship-wreck'd, naked, ruined wretch;
When every woe, in dire array, crowds round,
Even then, in that sad hour, Hope still remains,
As loath to leave (divine philanthrophist!)
Her labor of disinterested love!
See -- with those anxious sailors This refers to a real event, which happened
two winters past. These mariners, when their vessel was sunk, continued two
days and nights on the mast, where they found an accidental keg of brandy,
which, under God, preserved their lives till a vessel from Margate came with
great hazard to their preservation: the person who first saw the vessel
immediately fainted away.
, see her watch
Her eye! almost exhausted on the mast,
The topmast of yon high Admiral
Just peeping from those waves! that have ingulph'd
The gallant vessel with its hapless crew,
Save those who sit, as if for bitterer fate
Reserved, long wakeful nights and anxious days
High on the topmast! fearing instant death
From each insulting wave! yet, yet, not yet
Will Hope desert them! See, she strains her eye
Far over the trackless occan: see, she looks,
With eager expectation, looks around!
Wild winds alone are heard: green waves alone,
Foaming with fury, are beheld! O Hope,
Blessed Hope! forsake them not: should thou forsake,
And from the top mast fly, they fall, they sink
Irrevocably lost! -- She will not go;
Still will she watch; nor watch in vain! she spies
A white sail, rising from the waves: it comes;
Behold! it comes, and in its bosom bears
Thrice-precious life! They faint for joy! their feet
Scarce bear them trembling to the welcome bark;
Where safely boarded -- Hope her golden wings
Plumes, and exulting shoots across the deep,
Quick as in winter's skies the radiant star!
But whither thus precipitate her flight
Urges the general comforter? Behold
Where, stretched upon the bed of sore disease,
Worn out with pain, the sick man languid lies!
She comes, blessed Hope! and lo! her kindly arm
Rears from the pillow his enfeebled head,
And lenient sooths his melancholy heart!
Now, pointing to fair Health, with roseate bloom,
Rekindling vigor in the mantling cheek:
Now, to the robe of white and crown of gold,
Reserved for Christ's true servants, in the realms
Of everlasting day! -- Thrice faithful Hope,
Thou, like the heart, liv'st first, and die last;
Nor, even in death's extremest pangs, wilt leave
The fluttering soul -- but, when earth's fears and joys
Sink into darkness all, thy beaming light
Unvelopes prospects new, and better far,
Prospects which make man, man: and cause the soul
In death to triumph, and defy the grave.
Nor ceases with the man of sorrow, stretched
On bed of sickness, Hore's indulgent aid:
The balm of comfort, see, how she presents
To the dear tender partner of his heart,
The wife, with weeping love, beside the couch
Watching solicitous, with sleepless eye!
Hope shows her the fond husband, to her arms
Once more restored: Hope to her aching heart
The valued parent represents, once more
Smiling amidst his children: and endeared,
As thus endangered, tenfold more endeared!
Look through the varied scenes of hapless life,
Hope, all-beneficent, is ever found
Wherever is found affliction! None so low
Can sink, but Hope will to their wretchedness
Descend, and point out consolation's star
Bright'ning in better skies! not even the slave,
Laden with cruel chains, deep in the mines
Of rich Potosi, toiling, though from light
Ever sequestered of all-cheering day,
Can, from her light, be hid! See, through his soul
It shoots illuminating: and affords
Bright blessing glances of his native land,
Recovered freedom, and rejoicing friends!
All hail, bright Hope! O, through the weary ways
Of this bad world, be thou the pilgrim's staff
On which my hands may lean, and find support
Against all despondency! yet, Goddess! say,
While on thy altars all of human race
Devoutly sacrifice; while to thy shrine
All mortals bend the knee; whence does it hap,
That often the mournful tongue proclaims thee false,
And dares to desecrate thy hallowed name,
Deceitful calling thee; and apt to slide
Full often from the embrace, even in the hour
Of highest expectation: often found
To promise what thou never do bestow?
" Vain mortals -- (yes, with serious solemn heed,
I mark thy words, celestial!) -- "Mortals! know,
" It Is not in Hope, it is in yourselves, deceived
" And still deceiving, that the error lies:
" Short-lived, and of a span, ye stretch your hopes,
" Proud hopes of sublunary happiness,
" Far into time, as if of time secure,
" As if on earth immortal! or those hopes
" On objects fix, incapable to bless,
" When granted to your wishes! or, more vain,
" By self-delusion blinded, fancy-led,
" Ye idly hope, where reason's self recoils:
" Thus rendering your existence, dream at best,
" Still more a dream! -- Less credulous and fond,
" Mortals, be-wise; either as mortals hope,
" Or, still more wise, hope as immortals!" Yes!
With sacred awe thy counsel I receive,
Blessed teacher: O assist me to obey
Its dictates: far above this waning moon,
Teach me to rise over momentary bliss,
Triumphant: and to soar on thy bright wings
Beyond the lessened clouds, beyond all time
Deep into vast immensity! where thou,
Though born of immortality, and proof
Of thy high parent's glory -- where, even thou,
Earth's blessing -- never, never shall be known!
Then, farewell, Hope, for ever! -- then adieu,
Sweet expectation; when each ravished sense
Lives in the plenitude of God's own joy!
But, till that hour, O deign, all-cheering Hope,
To smile before me: gild my prospects round
With thy reviving splendour: full in view
Present the vast realities, which wait
The immortal stranger, traveling from this world
To his eternal home, his rest, his haven!
So shall my heart never with impatient throbs
Pant for the uncertain, sublunary gifts
Of this e'er-changing life! So Reason's hand
With Fortitude attending, on shall lead
To the neat cottage of retired Content,
Where dwells man's truest happiness! there lodged,
Like Caesar, with a generous disdain
Present possessions nobly I Will despise,
And from them frankly part, in the full hope,
Hope, which can never deceive, nor mount too high,
Hope of possessions, future, better far:
Boundless duration: bliss immutable!
Hail then, bright Hope! of immortality
True, genuine daughter! hail, man's chiefest good,
And his best portion, while no mor than man!
Smile over the human race: and still vouchsafe
To gild, to gladden all their joys: to soothe
With gentle blandishment their woes: to fill
With just contempt of transitory life!
Still realizing to their raptured view
Heaven's high felicities! O! while strong Faith,
With steady finger, points us to our home,
Do thou invigorate our active feet
Along the rugged way: full, sull in sight
Place that home's glories: while thy sister Love
Charms us the while, the weary journey through;
And, when it ends, receive us from the arms
Of Faith and thee; to take up our abode
In realms, where GOD and LOVE are all in all.
VERSES OCCASIONED BY A PRESENT OF A MOSS ROSE-BUD, FROM MISS JACKSON OF
SOUTHGATE.
BY THE SAME.
THE slightest of favors bestowed by the fair
With rapture we take, and with transport we wear;
But a MOSS-WOVEN ROSE-BUD, Eliza, from thee,
A well-pleasing gift to a monarch would be:
-- Ah! that illness, too cruel, forbidding should stand,
And refuse me the gift from thine own lovely hand!
With joy I receive it, with pleasure will view,
Reminded of thee by its odor and hue;
" Sweet rose! let me tell thee, though charming thy bloom,
" Though thy fragrance exceeds Saba's richest perfume:
" Thy breath to Eliza's has no fragrance in it;
" And thy bloom is but dull to her cheeks blushing tint.
" Yet alas! my fair flower, that bloom will decay,
" And all thy fine beauties soon wither away;
" Though plucked by her hand, to whose touch thou must own
" Harsh and rough is the cygnet's most delicate down:
" Thou too, snowy hand; -- nay, I mean not to preach;
" But the Rose, lovely moralist! suffer to teach."
" Extol not, fond maiden, thy beauties over mine,
" They too are short-lived, and they too must decline;
" And small in conclusion, the difference appears
" In the bloom of few days, or the bloom of few years!
" But remember a virtue the Rose has to boast,
" -- Its Fragrance remains, when its Beauties are lost."
THE EQUALITY OF MANKIND.
BY MR. WODHULL.
THERE was a time when from those hapless schools,
Where Science droops, and pension'd Litchfield rules,
Inhaling faction, with the Tory race
On Right Divine, Hereditary Grace,
Much did I waver, much did I unite
The names of Patriot, and of Jacobite:
Thanks to my friendly stars those days are over,
And now, not meanly pinioned as before,
Untaught to bend the pliant knee, and join
The slaves, who flock to Grandeur's tinsel shrine,
Kindling at thy perpetual flame the brand
Of honest Satire, with officious hand
To thee, O Truth, I consecrate the blaze; --
Receive, exalt, invigorate my lays.
The studious Pilgrim, as his bare feet tread
Over holy Carmel! with religious dread,
If, sunk in mouldering rubbish, he descries
Where some old fane, or massive altar lies,
Kneeling adores it with a steadfast gaze,
And ruminates the works of mightier days,
Feasts his rapt soul on pure devotion's fires,
And slowly from the much-loved spot retires.
Led by dark Legend on from clime to clime
Amid the historic ravages of Time,
Thus the bold Muse asserts her liberal plan
To mark the genuine privilege of man,
To prove how Fiction, and how Fact agree,
That God was just, and all Mankind were free.
From Jura's mount, from those inclement skies,
(Where pale and wan Helvetia's Genius lies,
His arms reversed, his shield thrown idly by,
To note the sad decays of Liberty;)
Come, stern Philosophy, -- that garb of woe
Befits thee most, majestically slow
Thy gait, while raised aloof thy red right hand
Waves in the gale Resentment's flaming brand,
Such as, from Seine's proud banks when Rosseau fled,
Thy Vengeance hurled at mitred Beaumont's head:
Beneath thy auspices in Albion's plain,
While Justice triumphs in a George's reign,
Alone, yet scorning Caution's coward mask,
Will I encounter this adventurous task;
Though far too sanguine to conceal their rage,
My Foes already curse each opening page,
And Friends, half shrinking at so rude a test,
Glance over my title, and forswear the rest.
Back to Creation's infancy, when Earth
Few revolutions dated from its birth,
My theme invites: -- poor Exile doomed to rove
Far from the sweets of Eden's happy grove
Behold our first Progenitor; -- his race
Plunged in a lineal series of disgrace,
Become a prey from that ill-fated hour
To pain, disease, and death's remorseless power.
Some evils soon attained their utmost prime,
To perfect others was a work of time.
Perhaps in those rude ages, when no law
Kept the warm passions of mankind in awe,
Rapine was frequent; from his neighbor's fold
Some proud Oppressor, of gigantic mold,
His fleecy charge, his only treasure bore,
And left the shepherd weltering in his gore:
Yet then no dire necessity had made
Murder a system, war a needful trade;
No Frederick, foe to nature and to man,
Justice his pretext, tyranny his plan,
Born every right of nations to betray,
Over Leipzick's walls had forced his desperate way;
Coarse was their food, their sordid dwelling small,
Such was the lot of one, the lot of all:
In some deep vale their shapeless altar stood
Raised with the casual turf, or unhewn wood;
Thither, by grateful adoration taught,
On some choice festival the Rustic brought
A decent offering from his little stock,
Fruits of the ground, or firstlings of his flock:
No temple reared its fretted roof on high,
No golden censer's blaze persum'd the sky,
No vain High Priest with surly grandeur trod,
As if to shame the meanness of his God.
When, like the Titans, earth's rebellious crew
To Heaven's high bulwarks raised their hostile view,
In vain, their boastful arrogance to quell,
Their leaders were dispersed, their turret fell;
On Shinar's plains Despotic Power unfurled
Her banner, and to vex the groaning world
From shore to shore the strange contagion ran;
Fraternal concord ceased, and Monarchy began.
Thus while the storms in hollow caverns sleep,
And scarce a zephyr fans the quiet deep,
Suddenly from the rock's impending brow
A cumbrous fragment on the tide below
Comes rushing downwards; boils the vast profound,
Waves upon waves dashed on the beach resound.
Detested Hunter! Nimrod led the way,
War was his savage pastime, man his prey;
For brutal strength by trembling vassals feared
The walls of ancient Babylon he reared:
In his high dome, with crayons rude portray'd,
The warrior's dread achievements were displayed;
Here pierced with darts the expiring tiger lay,
There rushed embattled hosts in firm array;
There in his car the thickest ranks he broke,
And nations yielded to his galling yoke.
Such empire's origin: -- with horrid yell
From the black confines of his native hell
Emerg'd the Demon of tyrannic pride,
And Vice came onward with a larger stride:
Ungrateful were the task, and endless toil
To trace its progress through each distant soil
Fertile of Tyrants. Craft with Prowess joined
Soon tamed the generous fierceness of mankind.
Dominion first was gained by lawless might;
The claim of long Hereditary Right
Succeeded; when to varnish over each flaw,
And bow the world with superstitious awe,
The Priests dressed up some bugbear of their own,
Called him a King, and placed him on a throne;
Then caught the weakness of those darker times,
And dragged in Heaven to sanctify his crimes.
Search well its inmost source, and tell whence springs
This sacred claim of Israel's vaunted Kings:
When that audacious crew renounced their God,
Despised his mercies, braved his heaviest rod;
And for his Patronage too mighty grown
Set up a little Idol of their own:
Say, did their Prophet urge Readiness Right Divine? --
His incense blazed not at so vile a shrine.
Or did some ill in mystic leaves foretold,
And chronicled by gravest seers of old,
While on delusive hopes they fondly built,
Overwhelm them with involuntary guilt?
No; 'twas their baffled pride whose last resource
Dragged this perdition on their heads by sorce.
From that black period each intenser crime,
That brands with infamy its parent clime,
Assailed the palace, overspread the land,
And in their temple took its guilty stand.
The seat of Chemosh by the purple vine
Was planted, and at Moloch's brazen shrine,
As with inhuman zeal the trembling sire
Consigned his shrieking infants to the fire,
While with loud din their hideous cymbals rung,
His Worshippers obscene their uncouth orgies sung.
Belief, in various senses understood,
Is man's severest curse, or surest good.
Thus, in the meads where hallowed Jordan glides,
Enriching Palestine with copious tides,
Where springs the branching palm, where streams the oil,
Where fruitful vineyards bless the peasant's toil;
Deep in the heart of Siddim's odious vale,
Impregnating with death each tainted gale,
The black Asphaltes from its slimy bed
Sees pitchy clouds, sulphurous vapors, spread.
Let Mecca tell, big with aspiring schemes,
Seraphic trances, counterfeited dreams,
How subtle Mahomet, of servile birth,
Diffused his tenets through the astonished earth,
By fire and sword the Nations undeceived
Confessed their former errors, and believed.
In Judah's soil the tree of knowledge grew,
Whose fruit unsound, yet specious to the view,
Entrusted to the treacherous Levite's care,
Fell, ere it ripened, in that baleful air;
Relentless Cowards! with a brutal hand
Urging their fraudful progress through the land,
Over Nature's parting agonies they trod,
And slaughtered millions in the name of God,
Each right of arms infringing, nor forbore
To dip their reeking blades in infant gore;
Till mighty conscience, whose prevailing call
Opes the dread volume of her laws to all,
Bewailed them darkened by so strong a taint;
That none discerned the villain from the saint.
Far other fame the Christian doctrine gained,
From Heaven transmitted, and by Heaven maintained,
With sceptered arrogance to vex the earth,
Yet most those realms which gave his grandeur birth,
To make divided Faith and Virtue foes,
On its firm base no second David rose:
Yet from this pure and unpolluted source,
Ere long, the streams in a perverted course
Ran foul: Fanatics soon began to call
Merit a sound, Religion all in all;
Infuriate Priests the bonds of nature tore,
And Persecution drenched the world with gore.
Armed with the Cross, over Asia's ravaged lands,
See sainted Champions pour their desperate bands,
A dreaming Hermit leads them, and aloud
Preaches salvation to the frantic crowd:
Zeal whets the poniard, and with ruthless joy
They come, they sack, they ravish, they destroy.
The Muse rejecting this historic draught
With bitter truths, strict testimonies fraught,
Its civil discords, and religious strife
O'erlooks, to take a fairer view of life;
Borne on the rapid wings of Thought she flies,
Opes new creations, seeks for other skies,
Revolving all that sportive Ovid told
Of cloudless suns, of ages winged with gold,
Those ages, when in Peneus' cheerful grove
Man knew no sorrows, no disease but Love;
When Nature's self was unconstrained and young,
And Bards ranged lawless as the Gods they sung.
Ye happier times of innocence and truth,
Pleasing instructors of my thoughtless youth,
When none the image of his God belied,
No Minions crouch'd beneath a Sultan's pride,
No wealth ensnared, no poverty distressed,
No ruffians plundered, and no kings oppressed;
Though doomed to grovel in a baser age,
Will I from Memory's enchanting page
Retrace your scattered annals. -- When of old
Arcadia's peaceful shepherds uncontrolled
Their ranging flocks through boundless pastures drove,
Or tuned their pipes beneath the myrtle grove,
Their laws on brazen tablets unimprest
Were deeply engraved on each ingenuous breast,
No proud Vicegerent of Astrea reigned,
Astrea's self her own decrees maintained.
Books, useless lumber, yet in embryo slept,
No Damon raved in rhyme, no Delia wept;
Nor had, nor needed they the casuist's page,
Plain were the duties of that simpler age:
For Nature, best of mothers, pleased to teach
Virtues no modern theorist can reach;
With characters indelible, on high
Blazoned her system of Equality.
Alas! how gladly would Illusion's beam
For ever vibrate on this glittering theme:
Here let me finish; nor, my soul to wring,
From Fable's sweets proceed to Fable's sting:
I must; -- these fairy dreams have had their space,
And now the dreadful sequel claims a place.
Like the presumptuous Mariner, whose sails,
Wasted from port with soft Etesian gales,
Urge his o'erweening eagerness to brave
Without a Pilot the persidious wave,
Soon over whose bark the impetuous tempests sweep,
And bury all his fortunes in the deep:
Seduced by Fancy's charms, amidst a grove
Of pleasing errors have I dared to rove,
Till, half desponding, comfortless, aghast,
I but survey bright Freedom's form at last,
To see her perish by as sure a wound
Mid these enchantments, as on vulgar ground.
Fond Epimetheus! when thy luckless hand
Scattered Pandora's curses over the land,
Forth from the casket glittering to the view
Scepters, and crowns, delusive trumpery, flew;
Man eyed the bait, and with an idiot joy
Eagerly rushed to snatch the gilded toy:
Freedom thenceforth, and Peace, and Justice fled,
Infernal Discord reared her snaky head
From blackest Erebus, whose scorpions hurled
By dread Oppression curbed a wretched world;
Too late remorse congealed each guilty soul,
And forky lightnings flashed from pole to pole.
Wherever we search the vast instructive page
Of Fact, or Fiction, we in every age
See Saints impaled and tortured at the stake
Through fervent zeal, and for Religion's sake;
Murders and sorceries, and Men, whose heart
Never prompted one humane, one generous part,
While some vain Mortal, arbiter os ill,
Governed the rest; at whose imperious will
Millions of slaughtered Heroes bit the dust
To soothe a Tyrant's pride, a Strumpet's lust;
Till loathing both the present, and the past,
We learn this melancholy truth at last;
" On Life's rough sea by stormy passions tossed,
" Freedom and Virtue were together lost."
Shame on our vaunted reason, when we find
No creature else so senseless, and so blind;
The Brutes indeed to force superior yield,
And leave the strongest master of the field,
Yet this imperial claim to none descends,
With the possessor's strength his title ends;
Nor, if their enterprizing Leader calls,
Do they forsake their well-replenish'd stalls,
And with heroic frenzy risk their life,
Fomenting some unnecessary strife.
Unfall'n, and uncorrupted, they fulfill
Their Nature's end, their mighty Maker's will:
Stoop then, ye sons of Reason, stoop, and own
The veriest beast more worthy of a throne.
The Chain, whose two Extremities unite,
Presenting still a middle to our sight,
Where link by link in fruitless search we tend,
Yet find not a beginning, or an end,
Talk as we please, dissemble how we can,
Presents a just similitude of Man;
Who, in each state of life constrained to own
A strict dependence, useless when alone,
Cleaves, though a Monarch, to his native dung,
And venerates the soil from whence he sprung.
View first the Slave, whom his unhappy fate
In galling fetters to some foreign state
Tears from his dearest home; there basely sold
By those, who truck humanity for gold,
Abused, neglected, sinking with distress,
When all is dark, and Hope alone can bless;
Even then through Life's dim curtain he descries
Some happier regions, and serener skies,
Where Commerce never rears her impious head,
No Fiends approach, no Missionaries tread.
Next him the Peasant, whose incessant toil,
Harsly requited, tills the rugged soil,
Pressed by the barbarous insults of the great,
The foolish prodigality of state:
Yet his low couch no thorny cares molest,
His even spirits yield unbroken rest.
Those restless Beings next in order place,
Whose motley stations wear a doubtful face,
Who dragged by Fortune into Middle Life,
That vortex of malevolence and strife,
Envying the great, and scossing at the mean,
Or swol'n with pride, or wasted with chagrin,
Like Mahomet's unsettled ashes, dwell,
Midway suspended, between Heaven and Hell.
Clad with those Titles ancient Justice gave
To grace the wise, the generous, and the brave,
Over these ascend the Sycophants of Power,
Their master's tools, the minions of an hour.
Last of the Group, to close this irksome scene,
Childishly great, and eminently mean,
Behold the Monarch, whose exalted throne,
Dupes to their fear, his Eastern Vassals own;
When by the toil, which earns the Hind's hard bread,
His splendour is maintained, his lux'ry fed;
Is not a wretch like this, to either side
Of Life's perverse extremities allied?
Here to its source the line revolving tends,
Here close the points, and here the circle ends.
When lust, when rapine, when ungoverned rage
Strongly characteris'd the iron age,
Law soon became a necessary ill,
Vice edged the sword, and gave it force to kill;
Monarchs, we see, were then at first designed
A general good, a blessing unconfined:
For public welfare, not for private ends,
From sire to son the regal crown descends.
When Kings support afflicted Virtue's cause,
Curb potent Vice, and vindicate the laws,
Our high respect deservedly they share,
Not for themselves, but for the trust they bear.
As on the slippery pinnacle they stand
Of brittle grandeur, with rapacious hand
If they assume unlimited domain,
And madly govern with perverted rein
The vast Machine of Empire; to the skies
Ascend the widow's tears, the orphan's cries;
A Cato's spirit, or a Cicero's tongue
With keen resentment animates the throng;
Some Hampden hears his gasping country's groan,
And in just vengeance shakes a guilty throne.
Should inauspicious Fortune tear away
From Virtue's grasp the triumphs of a day,
Should Tyranny, by long success grown great,
Crush the defenseless victims of her hate,
Grim Superstition with an haggard eye
Points to the spoils, and rears her torch on high,
From regal conquest her own inference draws,
And blends with that of Heaven its dearer cause.
Blind to the treacherous snare, when Fate decreed
That Troy should perish by the wooden steed;
The rest stood fixed with hesitating fear,
While bold Laocoon hurled his forcesul spear
Against the monster, from whose knotty side
Resounding arms, and Grecian shrieks replied:
Stung by a snake the pious Priest expired,
While Folly gazed, and Ignorance admired;
This moral curbed the infatuated crew --
" The sacrilegious wretch Minerva slew."
When virtuous Lord Brook, see Clarendon's History.
Greville thus in civil strife
Crowned with that honest prayer his closing life;
Can we unmoved with indignation bear
To see grave Clarendon, whose style, whose air,
'Twixt tortured facts, and scripture-phrases quaint,
Shows half the royalist, and half the saint,
Stamp on his ashes with a dotard's pride,
And execrate the cause for which he died?
Ye fields of Naseby, where the thundering hand.
Of Freedom greatly prosper'd; where that band
Of hardy Patriots resolutely bore,
Through storms of horror, and through seas of gore,
Their country's charter, snatched in happiest hour
From Sacerdotal wrath, and Kingly power:
Often as your towers, on which dread Vengeance wrote
Strong characters, and blasted where she smote,
In youth's gay season fixed my roving eye,
How did I hail that scene of victory!
Even now methinks I see brave Fairfax tread
The ensanguin'd plain; -- to grace the warrior's head
From Fame's unsullied grove let Virtue bring
Those laurels green with everlasting spring:
Illustrious meed, too often profusely strewn
To deck the precincts of Ambition's throne,
To crown some proud Infringer of the laws:
But due to vengeance, due to Britain's cause.
Nor, though the Muse forlorn and helpless stray
Over thy bare coast, nor glean one fragrant bay,
Bleak Caledonia, shall thou pass unsung,
For Freedom on thy hills her arm new-strung:
When thy firm sons, who loved the public weal,
Or inly burned to see tyrannic Zeal
Against their altars lift an impious hand,
And threat the accustomed worship of the land,
From their huge cliffs descending like a flood,
Stood forth, prepared to seal their faith with blood;
At their approach while perjured Holland fled,
False to his Master's cause, his Master's bed;
And Hierarchy, that fiend, whom Scripture paints
Drunk with the blood of Martyrs and of Sai n ts,
Consigned by Fate in penal chains to dwell,
Slunk unregarded to her native hell.
Curse on the shouts of that licentious Throng,
Whose merriment (more brutal than the song
Of mad Agave, when wild Haemus over
Her Pentheus' mangled limbs the mother bore;)
Proclaims the fall of Liberty: -- ye shades
Of mighty Chiefs, from your Elysian glades
Look down benign, avert the dire presage,
Nor with two Charles's brand one sinful age.
O, my poor country! what capricious tide
Of Fortune swells the Tyrant's motley pride!
Around his brows yon servile Prelates twine
The stale and blasted wreath of Right Divine;
While Harlots, like the Coan Venus fair,
Move their light feet to each lascivious air.
Hence with your orgies! -- righteous Heaven ordains
A purer worship, less audacious strains.
When falls by William's sword (as soon it must)
This Edifice of bigotry and lust,
The Muse shall start from her inglorious trance,
And give to Satire's grasp her vengeful lance,
At Truth's historic shrine shall victims smoke,
And a fresh Stuart bleed at every stroke:
Thine too, perfidious Albemarle (whose steel,
Drawn to protect embroiled Britannia's weal,
Shrunk from thy coward arm, consigned the reins
Of power to Charles, and forged a nation's chains)
Compared with nobler villainies or old,
High deeds, on plates of adamant enrolled,
Shall meet the felon's undistinguished fate,
Sure of contempt, unworthy of our hate.
Once more emerging from this baleful reign
Of Stuart Kings, and from the Pontiff's chain,
By Boyne's swift current Freedom reared her head,
When from those banks the Papal Tyrant fled;
Then every vale with lo Paeans rung
As the glad reaper at his harvest sung,
Thee, great Nassau, benevolently brave,
Equally born to conquer, and to save,
When Glory's sounding trump to Gallia's shore,
The exulting shouts of British Freedom bore,
Dismayed she saw the kindling ardor burn,
And Seine hung trembling over her wasted urn.
Warm with the same benevolence of mind,
Friends to the native rights of human kind,
Succeeding Kings extend the generous plan,
And Brunswick perfects what Nassau began.
Thrice happy Albion! in whose favored land
Impartial Justice with a steady hand
Poises the scales of empire; where the names
Of servile tenure, and the seudal claims
Of Norman Peers in musty tomes decay,
Swept by obliterating years away.
But if in Faction's loud and empty strain
Yon frontless rabble vex a gentle reign,
In Peace itself ideal dangers find,
Provoke new wars, and challenge half mankind;
What though another Tully at their head
From breast to breast the rank contagion spread:
Say, what are we? some pension'd Patriot's tools,
Mere artless, unsuspecting, British fools.
Born in a changeful clime, beneath a sky
Whence storms descend, and hovering vapors fly,
Stung with the fever, tortured with the spleen,
Boisterously merry, churlishly serene,
By each vague blast dejected or elate,
Dupes in their love, immoderate in their hate,
With strange formality, or bearish ease,
Then most disgufiful, when they strive to please,
No happy mean the sons of Albion know,
Their wavering tempers ever ebb and flow,
Rank contraries, in nothing they agree;
Untaught to serve, unable to be free.
While parties rage, O Truth! with honest zeal
To thee, protectress of my lays, I kneel;
O deign to show me in their real light,
Stripped of that glare which cheats the dazzled sight,
The Chiefs, whose blazoned deeds and sounding worth
Usurp a sphere above the sons of earth;
Open dark Futurity's instructive womb,
Conduct me to the mansions of the tomb,
Where titles cease, where worldly pomp is over,
Mute are the Nine, and Flattery soothes no more:
So may I take a more impartial view,
Forget the rank, and give the man his due.
Yet what regards it or the world, or me,
How Fame awards her posthumous decree,
If man, unconscious of her loudest breath,
Sleep a cold tenant of the vale of death?
Let the delirious Siamois compute
How Sommonokodon his worshipped brute,
Through being's long progressive stages trod,
Began an Ox, and ended in a God.
Our fleeting souls let the weak Pythagoras.
Samian trace
In birds, in beasts, and all the finny race;
These baseless structures, fictions light and vain,
Coined in the foldings of an idle brain,
To their absurd inventors I resign,
They are not in the Church's creed, or mine.
But shall the Peasant from his turf-bound grave
Or rise no more, or wake again a Slave?
And shall the Monarch in a future state,
With the same visionary pomp elate,
Resume the trappings of his lost command,
And wield a mimic scepter in his hand?
Though gloomy Bigots paint a partial God,
Bare his red arm, and lift his scorpion rod;
Though on a text perverting Zealots dwell,
Till Scripture suits the purposes of hell;
Think for thyself; -- suppose life's voyage over;
Think for thyself, and envy Kings no more:
Resigned and calm await that awful hour,
That crisis of all sublunary power,
When wreaths of glory shall adorn the Just,
And Empire's proud Colossus sink to dust.
LOVE ELEGIES.
BY --.
ELEGY I.
IT IS night, dead night; and over the plain
Darkness extends her ebon ray,
While wide along the gloomy scene
Deep Silence holds her solemn sway:
Throughout the earth no cheerful beam
The melancholic eye surveys,
Save where the worm's fantastic gleam
The 'nighted traveller betrays:
The savage race (so Heaven decrees)
No longer through the forest rove;
All nature rests, and not a breeze
Disturbs the stillness of the grove:
All nature rests; in Sleep's soft arms
The village swain forgets his care:
Sleep, that the sting of Sorrow charms,
And heals all sadness but Despair:
Despair alone her power denies,
And, when the sun withdraws his rays,
To the wild beach distracted flies,
Or chearless through the desert strays;
Or, to the church-yard's horrors led,
While fearful echoes burst around,
On some cold stone he leans his head,
Or throws his body on the ground.
To some such drear and solemn scene,
Some friendly power direct my way,
Where pale Misfortune's haggard train,
Sad luxury! delight to stray.
Wrapped in the solitary gloom,
Retired from life's fantastic crew,
Resigned, I Will wait my final doom,
And bid the busy world adieu.
The world has now no joy for me,
Nor can life now one pleasure boast,
Since all my eyes desired to see,
My wish, my hope, my all, is lost;
Since she, so formed to please and bless,
So wise, so innocent, so fair,
Whose converse sweet made sorrow less,
And brightened all the gloom of care,
Since she is lost: -- Ye powers divine,
What have I done, or thought, or said,
O say, what horrid act of mine
Has drawn this vengeance on my head!
Why should Heaven favor Lycon's claim?
Why are my heart's best wishes crossed?
What fairer deeds adorn his name?
What nobler merit can he boast?
What higher worth in him was found
My true heart's service to outweigh?
A senseless fop! -- A dull compound
Of scarcely animated clay!
He dressed, indeed, he danced with ease,
And charmed her by repeating over
Unmeaning raptures in her praise,
That twenty fools had said before:
But I, alas! who thought all art
My passion's force would meanly prove,
Could only boast an honest heart,
And claimed no merit but my love.
Have I not sat -- Ye conscious hours
Be witness -- while my Stella sung,
From morn to eve, with all my powers
Rapt in the enchantment of her tongue!
Ye conscious hours, that saw me stand
Entranced in wonder and surprise,
In silent rapture press her hand,
With passion bursting from my eyes,
Have I not loved? -- O earth and Heaven!
Where now is all my youthful boast?
The dear exchange I hoped was given
For slighted fame and fortune lost!
Where now the joys that once were mine?
Where all my hopes of future bliss?
Must I those joys, these hopes resign?
Is all her friendship come to this?
Must then each woman faithless prove,
And each fond lover be undone?
Are vows no more! -- Almighty Love!
The sad remembrance let me shun!
It will not be -- My honest heart
The dear sad image still retains;
And, spite of reason, spite of art,
The dreadful memory remains.
Ye powers divine, whose wondrous skill
Deep in the womb of time can see,
Behold, I bend me to your will,
Nor dare arraign your high decree.
Let her be blessed with health, with ease,
With all your bounty has in store;
Let sorrow cloud my future days,
Be Stella blessed! -- I ask no more.
But lo! where, high in yonder cast,
The star of morning mounts apace!
Hence -- let me fly the unwelcome guest,
And bid the Muse's labor cease.
ELEGY II.
BY THE SAME.
WHEN, young, life's journey I began,
The glittering prospect charmed my eyes,
I saw along the extended plan
Joy after joy successive rise:
And Fame her golden trumpet blew;
And Power displayed her gorgeous charms;
And Wealth engaged my wandering view;
And Pleasure wooed me to her arms:
To each by turns my vows I paid,
As Folly led me to admire;
While Fancy magnified each shade,
And Hope increased each fond desire:
But soon I found 'twas all a dream;
And learned the fond pursuit to shun,
Where few can reach their purposed aim,
And thousands daily are undone:
And Fame, I found, was empty air;
And Wealth had Terror for her guest;
And Pleasure's path was strewn with care;
And Power was vanity at best.
Tired of the chase, I gave it over;
And, in a far sequestered shade,
To Contemplation's sober power
My youth's next services I paid.
There Health and Peace adorned the scene;
And often, indulgent to my prayer,
With mirthful eye and frolic mien,
The Muse would deign to visit there:
There would she often delighted rove
The slower-enamell'd vale along;
Or wander with me through the grove,
And listen to the woodlark's song;
Or, 'mid the forest's awful gloom,
Whilst wild amazement filled my eyes,
Recall past ages from the tomb,
And bid ideal worlds arise.
Thus in the Muse's favor blessed,
One wish alone my soul could frame,
And Heaven bestowed, to crown the rest,
A friend, and Thyrsis was his name.
For manly constancy, and truth,
And worth, unconscious of a stain,
He bloomed the flower of Britain's youth,
The boast and wonder of the plain.
Still with our years our friendship grew;
No cares did then my peace destroy;
Time brought new blessings as he flew,
And every hour was winged with joy.
But soon the blissful scene was lost,
Soon did the sad reverse appear;
Love came, like an untimely frost,
To blast the promise of my year.
I saw young Daphne's angel-form,
(Fool that I was, I blessed the smart)
And, while I gazed, nor thought of harm,
The dear infection seized my heart.
She was -- at least in Damon's eyes --
Made up of loveliness and grace,
Her heart a stranger to disguise,
Her mind as perfect as her face:
To hear her speak, to see her move,
(Unhappy I, alas! the while)
Her voice was joy, her look was love,
And Heaven was opened in her smile!
She heard me breathe my amorous prayers,
She listened to the tender strain,
She heard my sighs, she saw my tears,
And seemed at length to share my pain:
She said she loved -- and I, poor youth!
(How soon, alas, can Hope persuade!)
Thought all she said no more than truth,
And all my love was well repaid.
In joys unknown to courts or kings,
With her I sat the live-long day,
And said and looked such tender things,
As none beside could look or say!
How soon can Fortune shift the scene,
And all our earthly bliss destroy?
Care hovers round, and Grief's fell train
Still treads upon the heels of Joy.
My age's hope, my youth's best boast,
My soul's chief blessing, and my pride,
In one sad moment all were lost,
And Daphne changed, and Thyrsis died.
O who, that heard her vows ere-while,
Could dream these vows were insincere?
Or who could think, that saw her smile,
That fraud could find admittance there?
Yet she was false -- my heart will break!
Her frauds, her perjuries were such --
Some other tongue than mine must speak --
I have not power to say how much!
Ye swains, hence warned, avoid the bait,
O shun her paths, the traitress shun!
Her voice is death, her smile is fate,
Who hears, or sees her, is undone.
And, when Death's hand shall close my eye,
(For soon, I know, the day will come)
O cheer my spirit with a sigh,
And grave these lines upon my tomb!
THE EPITAPH.
Consigned to dust, beneath this stone,
In manhood's prime is Damon laid;
Joyless he lived, and died unknown
In bleak misfortune's barren shade.
Loved by the Muse, but loved in vain --
'Twas beauty drew his ruin on;
He saw young Daphne on the plain;
He loved, believed, and was undone.
His heart then sunk beneath the storm,
(Sad meed of unexampled truth)
And sorrow, like an cnvious worm,
Devoured the blossom of his youth.
Beneath this stone the youth is laid --
O greet his ashes with a tear!
May Heaven with blessings crown his shade,
And grant that peace he wanted here!
AN INSCRIPTION WRITTEN UPON ONE OF THE Two seats in Ham-walks, called Tubs,
from their form, which resembles an hogshead split in two.
TUBS IN HAM-WALKS, SEPTEMBER, 1760.
BY THE SAME.
DARK was the sky with many a cloud,
The fearful lightnings flashed around,
Low to the blast the forest bowed,
And bellowing thunders rocked the ground;
Fast fell the rains upon my head,
And weak and weary were my feet,
When lo! this hospitable shed
At length supplied a kind retreat.
That in fair memory's faithful page
The bard's escape may flourish long,
Yet shuddering from the tempest's rage,
He dedicates the votive song.
For ever sacred be the earth
From whence the tree its vigor drew!
The hour that gave the seedling birth!
The forest where the scyon grew!
Long honored may his ashes rest,
Who first the tender shoot did rear!
Blessed be his name! -- But doubly blessed
The friendly hand that placed it here!
O never may war, or wind, or wave,
This pleasurable scene deform,
But time still spare the seat, which gave
The poet shelter from the storm!
VERSES WRITTEN UPON A PEDESTAL BENEATH A ROW OF ELMS IN A MEADOW NEAR RICHMOND
FERRY, BELONGING TO RICHARD OWEN CAMBRIDGE, ESQUIRE. SEPTEMBER 1760.
BY THE SAME.
The first line of this little piece is borrowed from an Ode of Mr. Mason's,
published in Dodsley's Miscellanies.
YE green-hair'd Nymphs, whom Pan allows
To guard from harm these favored boughs;
Ye blue-ey'd Naiads of the stream,
That soothe the warm poetic dream;
Ye elves and sprights, that thronging round,
When midnight darkens all the ground,
In antic measures uncontrolled,
Your fairy sports and revels hold,
And up and down, wherever ye pass,
With many a ringlet print the grass;
If ever the bard has hailed your power
At morn's gray dawn, or evening hour;
If ever by moonlight on the plain
Your ears have caught the enraptured strain;
From every flow'ret's velvet head,
From reverend Thames's oozy bed,
From these moss'd elms, where, imprisoned deep,
Concealed from human eyes, ye sleep,
If these your haunts be worth your care,
Awake, arise, and hear my prayer!
O banish from this peaceful plain
The perjured nymph, the faithless swain,
The stubborn heart, that scorns to bow
And harsh rejects the honest vow:
The fop, who wounds the virgin's ear,
With aught that sense would blush to hear,
Or, false to honor, mean and vain,
Defames the worth he cannot stain:
The light conquet, with various art,
Who casts her net for every heart,
And smiling slatters to the chase
Alike the worthy and the base:
The dame, who, proud of virtue's praise,
Is happy if a sister strays,
And, conscious of unclouded fame,
Delighted, spreads the tale of shame:
But far, O! banished far be they,
Who hear unmoved the orphan's cry,
Who see, nor wish to wipe away
The tear that swells the widow's eye;
The unloving man, whose narrow mind
Disdains to feel for human-kind,
At others' bliss whose cheek never glows,
Whose breast never throbs with others' woes,
Whose hoarded sum of private joys
His private care alone destroys;
Ye fairies cast your spells around,
And guard from such this hallowed ground!
But welcome all, who sigh with truth,
Each constant maid and faithful youth,
Whom mutual love alone has joined,
Sweet union of the willing mind!
Hearts paired in Heaven, not meanly sold,
Law-licens'd prostitutes for gold:
And welcome thrice, and thrice again,
The chosen few, the worthy train,
Whose steady feet, untaught to stray,
Still tread where virtue marks the way;
Whose souls no thought, whose hands have known
No deed, which honor might not own;
Who, torn with pain, or stung with care,
In others' bliss can claim a part,
And, in life's brightest hour, can share
Each pang that wrings another's heart:
Ye guardian spirits, when such ye see,
Sweet peace be theirs, and welcome free!
Clear be the sky from clouds or showers!
Green be the turf, and fresh the flowers!
And that the youth, whose pious care
Lays on your shrine this honest prayer,
May, with the rest, admittance gain,
And visit often this pleasant scene,
Let all who love the Muse attend:
Who loves the Muse is Virtue's friend!
Such then alone may venture here,
Who, free from guilt, are free from fear;
Whose wide affections can embrace
The whole extent of human race;
Whom Virtue and her friends approve;
Whom Cambridge and the Muses love.
THE RECANTATION. AN ODE.
BY --.
BY Love too long deprived of rest,
(Fell tyrant of the human breast!)
His vassal long, and worn with pain,
Indignant late I spurned the chain;
In verse, in prose, I sung and swore
No charms should ever enslave me more,
Nor neck, nor hair, nor lip, nor eye,
Again should force one tender sigh.
As, taught by Heaven's informing power,
From every fruit and every flower,
That nature opens to the view,
The be extracts the nectar-dew;
A vagrant thus, and free to change,
From fair to fair I vowed to range,
And part from each without regret
As pleased and happy as I met.
Then Freedom's praise inspired my tongue,
With Freedom's praise the valleys rung,
And every night and every day
My heart thus poured the enraptured lay;
" My cares are gone, my sorrows cease,
" My breast regains its wonted peace,
" And joy and hope returning prove,
" That Reason is too strong for Love."
Such was my boast -- but, ah! how vain!
How short was Reason's vaunted reign!
The firm resolve I formed ere-while,
How weak, opposed to Clara's smile!
Changed is the strain -- The valleys round
With Freedom's praise no more refound,
But every night and every day
My full heart poured the altered lay.
Offended deity, whose power
My rebel tongue but now forswore,
Accept my penitence sincere,
My crime forgive, and grant my prayer!
Let not thy slave, condemned to mourn,
With unrequited passion burn;
With Love's soft thoughts her breast inspire,
And kindle there an equal fire!
It is not beauty's gaudy flower.
(The empty triumph of an hour)
Nor practiced wiles of female art,
That now subdue my destined heart:
O no! -- It Is Heaven, whose wondrous hand
A transcript of itself has planned,
And to each outward grace has joined
Each lovelier feature of the mind.
These charms shall last, when others fly,
When roses fade, and lilies die;
When that dear eye's declining beam
Its living fire no more shall stream:
Blessed then, and happy in my chain,
The fong of Freedom flows in vain;
Nor Reason's harsh reproof I fear,
For Reason's self is Passion here.
O dearer far than wealth or fame,
My daily thought, my nightly dream,
If yet no youth's successful art
(Sweet Hope) has touched thy gentle heart,
If yet no swain has blessed thy choice,
Indulgent hear thy Damon's voice;
From doubts, from fears his bosom free,
And bid him live -- for Love and Thee!
ODE TO HORROR.
IN THE ALLEGORIC, DESCRIPTIVE, ALLITERATIVE, EPITHETICAL, FANTASTIC,
HYPERBOLICAL, AND DIABOLICAL STYLE OF OUR MODERN ODE-WRIGHTS, AND
MONODY-MONGERS.
BY --.
O GODDESS of the gloomy scene,
Of shadowy shapes thou black-brow'd queen.
Thy tresses dark with ivy crowned,
On yonder mouldering abbey found;
Often wont from charnels damp and dim
To call the sheeted spectre grim,
While as his loose chains loudly clink,
Thou add'st a length to every link:
O thou, that love at eve to seek
The pensive-pacing pilgrim meek,
And set'st before his shuddering eyes
Strange forms, and fiends of giant-size,
As wildly works thy wizzard will,
Till fear-struck Fancy has her fill:
Dark power, whose magic might prevails
Over hermit-rocks, and fairy-vales;
O Goddess, erst by Spenser's Fairy Queen, b. 3. canto 1^.
Spenser viewed,
What time the enchanter vile embrued,
His hands in Florimel's pure heart,
Till loosed by steel-clad Britomart:
O thou that erst on Fancy's wing
Did terror-trembling Gierus. Liberat. b. 14.
Tasso bring,
To groves where kept damned Furies dire
Their blue-tipt battlements of fire:
Thou that through many a darksome pine,
Over the rugged rock recline,
Did wake the hollow-whispering breeze
With care-consumed Eloise:
O thou, with whom in chearless cell,
The midnight-clock pale prisoners tell;
O haste thee, mild Miltonic maid,
From yonder yew's sequestered shade;
More bright than all the fabled Nine,
Teach me to breathe the solemn line!
O bid my well-rang'd numbers rise
Pervious to none but Attic eyes;
O give the strain that madness moves,
Till every starting sense approves!
What felt the Gallic I do not remember that any poetical use has been made of
this story.
traveller,
When far in Arab-desert drear
He found within the catacomb,
Alive, the terrors of a tomb?
While many a mummy through the shade,
In hieroglyphic stole arrayed,
Seemed to uprear the mystic head,
And trace the gloom with ghostly tread;
Thou heardst him pour the stifled groan,
Horror! his soul was all thy own!
O mother of the fire-clad thought,
O haste thee from thy grave-like grot!
(What time the witch performed her rite)
Sprung from the embrace of Taste and Night!
O queen! that erst did thinly spread
The willowy leaves over See Isis, an Elegy.
Isis' head,
And to her meek mien did dispense
Woe's most awful negligence;
What time, in cave, with visage pale,
She told her elegiac tale:
O thou! whom wandering Warton saw,
Amazed with more than youthful awe,
As by the pale moon's glimmering gleam
He mused his melancholy theme See The Pleasures of Melancholy, a poem.
:
O curfeu-loving goddess, haste!
O waft me to some Scythian waste,
Where, in Gothic solitude,
'Mid prospects most sublimely rude,
Beneath a rough rock's gloomy chasm,
Thy sister sits, Enthusiasm:
Let me with her, in magic trance,
Hold most delirious dalliance;
Till I, thy pensive votary,
Horror, look madly wild like thee;
Until I gain true transport's shore,
And life's retiring scene is over;
Aspire to some more azure sky,
Remote from dim mortality;
At length, recline the fainting head,
In Druid-dreams dissolved and dead.
VERSES ON THE EXPECTED ARRIVAL OF QUEEN CHARLOTTE, IN AN EPISTLE TO A FRIEND,
1761.
BY --.
YES -- every hopeful son of rhyme
Will surely seize this happy time,
Vault upon Pegasus's back,
Now grown an academic hack,
And sing the beauties of a Queen,
(Whom, by the by, he has not seen)
Will swear her eyes are black as jet,
Her teeth in pearls as coral set,
Will tell us that the rose has lent
Her cheek its bloom, her lips its scent,
That Philomel breaks off her song,
And listens to her sweeter tongue;
That Venus and the Graces joined
To form this Phoenix of her kind,
And Pallas undertook to store
Her mind with Wisdom's chiefest lore;
Thus formed, Jove issues a decree
That George's consort she shall be:
Then Cupid (for what match is made
By poets without Cupid's aid?)
Picks out the swiftest of his darts,
And pierces instant both their hearts.
Your fearful Prose-men here might doubt
How best to bring this match about,
For winds and waves are ill-bred things,
And little care for Queens and Kings;
But as the Gods assembled stand,
And wait each youthful bard's command,
All fancied dangers they deride
Of boisterous winds, and swelling tide;
Neptune is called to wait upon her,
And sea-nymphs are her maids of honor;
Whilst we, instead of eastern gales,
With vows and praises fill the sails,
And when, with due poetic care
They safely land the Royal Fair,
They catch the happy simile
Of Venus rising from the sea.
Soon as she moves, the hill and vale
Responsive tell the joyful tale;
And wonder holds the enraptured throng
To see the Goddess pass along;
The bowing forests all adore her,
And flowers spontaneous spring before her,
Where you and I all day might travel,
And meet with naught but sand and gravel;
But poets have a piercing eye,
And many pretty things can spy,
Which neither you nor I can see,
But then the fault's in you and me.
The King astonished must appear,
And find that Fame has wronged his dear;
Then Hymen, like a bishop, stands,
To join the lovers' plighted hands;
Apollo and the Muses wait,
The nuptial song to celebrate.
But I, who rarely spend my time
In paying court or spinning rhyme,
Who cannot from the high abodes
Call down; at will, a troop of Gods,
Must in the plain prosaic way
The wishes of my soul convey.
May Heaven our Monarch's choice approve,
May he be blessed with mutual love,
And be as happy with his Queen
As with my Chloe I have been,
When wandering through the beechen grove,
She sweetly smiled and talked of love!
And O! that he may live to see
A son as wise and good as he;
And may his consort grace the throne
With virtues equal to his own!
Our courtly bards will needs be telling,
That she is like Venus, or like Helen;
I wish that she may prove as fair
As Egremont and Pembroke are;
For though by sages it is confessed,
That beauty's but a toy at best;
Yet it is, methinks, in married life,
A pretty douceur with a wife:
And may the minutes as they fly
Strengthen still the nuptial tie,
While hand in hand through life they go,
Till love shall into friendship grow;
For though these blessings rarely wait
On regal pomp, and tinsel'd state,
Yet happiness is virtue's lot,
Alike in palace and in cot:
It Is true, the grave affairs of state
With little folks have little weight;
Yet I confess my patriot heart
In Britain's welfare bears its part;
With transport glows at George's name,
And triumphs in its country's fame:
With hourly pleasure I can sit
And talk of Granby, Hawke, and Pit;
And whilst I praise the good and brave,
Disdain the coward and the knave.
At growth of taxes others fret,
And shudder at the nation's debt;
I never the fancied ills bemoan,
No debts disturb me, but my own.
What! though our coffers sink, our trade
Repairs the breach which war has made;
And if expenses now run high,
Our minds must with our means comply.
Thus far my politics extend,
And here my warmest wishes end,
May Merit flourish, Faction cease,
And I and Europe live in Peace!
AMINTA. AN ELEGY.
BY MR. GERRARD.
AN o'ergrown wood my wandering steps invade,
With surface mantled in untrodden snow;
Dire haunt, for none but savage monsters made,
Where frosts descend, and howling tempests blow.
Here, from the search of busy mortals strayed,
My woe-worn soul shall hug her galling chain:
For sure, no forest boasts too deep a shade,
No haunt too wild for misery to remain.
O my Aminta! dear distracting name!
Late all my comfort, all my fond delight;
Still writhes my soul beneath its torturing flame,
Still thy pale image fills my aching sight!
When shall vain memory slumber over her woes?
When to oblivion be her tale resigned?
When shall this fatal form in death repose,
Like thine, fair victim, to the dust consigned?
Again the accents faulter on my tongue;
Again to tear the conscious tear succeeds;
From sharp reflection is the dagger sprung,
And Nature, wounded to the center, bleeds.
Ye bitter skies! upon the tale descend --
Ye blasts! though rude your visits, lend an ear --
Around, ye gentler oaks, your branches bend,
And, as ye listen, drop an icy tear.
'Twas when the step with conscious pleasure roves,
Where round the shades the circling woodbines throng;
When Flora wantons over the enameled groves,
And feathered choirs indulge the amorous song.
Inspired by duteous love, I fondly strayed,
Two milk-white doves officious to ensnare:
Beneath a silent thicket as they played,
A grateful present for my softer fair.
But ah! in smiles no more they met my sight,
Their ruffled heads lay gasping on the ground:
Where (my dire emblem) a rapacious Kite
Tore their soft limbs, and strewn their plumes around.
The tear of pity stole into my eye;
While ruder passions in their turn succeed;
Forbid the victims unrevenged to die,
And doom the author of their wrongs to bleed.
With hasty step, enraged, I homewards ran,
(Curse on my speed!) the unerring tube I brought:
That fatal hour my date of woe began,
Too sharp to tell -- too horrible for thought --
Disastrous deed! -- irrevocable ill! --
How shall I tell the anguish of my Fate!
Teach me, remorseless monsters, not to feel,
Instruct me, fiends and furies, to relate!
Wrathful behind the guilty shade I stole,
I raised the tube -- the clamorous woods resound --
Too late I saw the idol of my soul,
Struck by my aim, fall shrieking to the ground!
No other bliss her soul allowed but me;
(Hapless the pair that thus indulgent prove)
She sought concealment from a shady tree,
In amorous silence to observe her love.
I ran -- but O! too soon I found it true! --
From her stained breast life's crimson streamed apace --
From her wan eyes the sparkling lustres flew --
The short-lived roses faded from her face!
Gods! -- could I bear that fond reproachful look,
That strove her peerless innocence to plead! --
But partial death awhile her tongue forsook,
To save a wretch that doomed himself to bleed.
While I distracted pressed her in my arms,
And fondly strove to imbibe her latest breath;
" O spare, rash love, she cried, thy fatal charms,
" Nor seek cold shelter in the arms of death.
" Content beneath thy erring hand I die.
" Our fates grew envious of a bliss so true;
" Then urge not thy distress when low I lie,
" But in this breath receive my last adieu!" --
No more she spoke, but drooped her lily head!
In death she sicken'd -- breathless -- haggard -- pale --
While all my inmost soul with horror bled,
And asked kind vengeance from the passing gale.
Where slept your bolts, ye lingering lightnings say?
Why riv'd ye not this self-condemned breast? --
Or why, too passive earth, did thou delay,
To stretch thy jaws, and crush me into rest? --
Low in the dust the beauteous corse I placed,
Bedewed and soft with many a falling tear;
With sable yew the rising turf I graced,
And bade the cypress mourn in silence near.
Often as bright morn's all-searching eye returns,
Full to my view the fatal spot is brought;
Through sleepless night my haunted spirit mourns,
No gloom can hide me from distracting thought.
When, spotless victim, shall my form decay?
This guilty load, say, when shall I resign?
When shall my spirit wing her chearless way,
And my cold corse lie treasured up with thine?
PETHERTON-BRIDGE. AN ELEGY Tradition holds, that the catastrophe alluded to in
this elegy happened about two centuries ago; of which the sculpture is yet to
be seen at the abovementioned bridge, near South-Petherton, Somerset.
. INSCRIBED TO THE REV. MR. BEAN, OF STOKE-SUB-HAMDON, SOMERSET.
BY THE SAME.
O Bean! whose fond connubial days
A beauteous infant-race attend;
Say, will thou once more aid my lays,
And join the patron to the friend?
But not over bright Aonian plains,
Enraptured as we used to roam:
The Muse each joyous thought restrains,
And calls her winged ideas home.
The wedded pair for children pray;
They come -- fair blessings from the skies:
What raptures gild the haleyon day!
What joys in distant azure rise!
But ah! enamored as they view
The smiling, hopeful, infant-train,
Unseen, misfortune marks his due,
Unheard, he threats the heart with pain.
Had sad disaster never ensnared
The soft, the innocent, and young,
The tender Muse had gladly spared
The little heroes of her song.
See thou the limpid current glide
Beneath yon bridge, my hapless theme,
Where brambles fringe its verdant side,
And willows tremble over the stream?
From Petherton it takes its name,
From whence two smiling infants strayed:
Led by the stream they hither came,
And on the flowery margin played.
Sweet victims! must your short-lived day
So soon extinguish in the wave;
And point the setting sun his way,
That glimmer'd over your watery grave!
As each by childish fancy led,
Cropped the broad daisies as they sprung;
Lay stretched along the verdant bed,
And sweetly plied the lisping tongue;
Lo! from the spray-deserted steep,
Where either way the twigs divide,
The one rolled headlong to the deep,
And plunged beneath the closing tide.
The other saw, and from the land,
(While nature imag'd strange distress)
Stretched over the brink his little hand,
The fruitless signal of redress.
The offered pledge, without delay,
The struggling victim rose and caught;
But ah! in vain -- their fatal way,
They both descended swift as thought.
Short was the wave-oppressing space;
Convulsed with pains too sharp to bear,
Their lives dissolved in one embrace;
Their mingled souls flew up in air.
Lo! there yon time-worn sculpture shows
The sad, the melancholy truth;
What pangs the tortured parent knows,
What snares await defenseless youth.
Here, not to sympathy unknown,
Full often the sad Muse wandering near,
Bends silent over the mossy stone,
And wets it with a willing tear.
AN EPISTLE FROM AN UNFORTUNATE GENTLEMAN TO A YOUNG LADY Occasioned by a
catastrophe well known in the West.
.
BY THE SAME.
THESE, the last lines my trembling hands can write,
These words, the last my dying lips recite,
Read, and repent that your unkindness gave
A wretched lover an untimely grave!
Sunk by despair from life's enchanting view,
Lost, ever lost to happiness and you! --
No more these eyelids shower incessant tears,
No more my spirit sinks with boding fears;
No more your frowns my suing passion meet,
No more I fall submissive at your feet:
With fruitless love this heart shall cease to burn,
Life's empty dream shall never-more return.
Think not, that laboring to subdue your hate;
My artful soul forebodes a fancied fate;
For ever yon sun descends his western way,
Cold shall I lie, a lifeless lump of clay!
Tired of my long encounters with disdain,
Peaceful my pulse, and ebbing from its pain;
Each vital movement sinking to decay,
And my spent soul just languishing away;
Ever my last breath yet hovers to depart,
I prompt my hand to pour out all my heart.
The hand, often raised compassion to implore;
The heart, that burns with slighted fires no more!
Relentless nymph! of nature's fairest frame,
Unpitying soul, and woman but in name;
Angelic bloom the coldest heart to win,
Without, allurement, but disdain within;
Regard the sounds which seal my parting breath
Ever the vain murmurs shall be hushed in death,
Let pity view what love disdained to save,
And mourn a wretch sent headlong to the grave.
Profuse of all an anxious lover's care,
To urge his suit, and win the listening fair;
Tried every purpose to relieve my woe,
My soul chides not, for innocent I go;
Save when soft pity bids my gentler mind
Shrink at your fate, and drop a tear behind.
How often and fruitless have I strove to move
Unfeeling beauty with the pangs of love;
As rose your breast with captivating grace,
And heightened charms flew blushing to your face;
Insulting charms! that gave a fiercer wound,
Fond as I lay, and prostrate on the ground.
Heavens! with what scorn you strove my suit to meet,
Frowned with your eyes, and spurned me with your feet!
To bleeding love such hard returns you gave,
As barbarous rocks that dash the pressing wave.
O could your looks have turned my hapless fate,
And frowned my short-lived passion into hate;
Then had no scattering breeze my sorrows known,
Nor vale responsive had prolonged the moan;
Then had those lips never learnt their woeful tale,
Nor death yet clothed them in eternal pale.
Often to the woods in frantic rage I slew
To cool my bosom with the falling dew;
Often in sad accents sighed each prompting ill,
And taught wild oaks to pity and to feel;
Till with despair my heart rekindled burns,
And all the anguish of my soul returns.
Then restless to the fragrant meads I hie,
Death in my face, distraction in my eye;
There as reclined along the verdant plain,
My grief renews her heart-wrung strains again,
Lo! pitying Phoebus sinks, with sorrow pale,
And mournful night descends upon the tale!
When tired, at length, my wrongs no more complain,
And sighs are stifled in obtuser pain;
When the deep fountains of my eyes are spent,
And fiercer anguish sinks to discontent;
Slow I return, and prostrate on my bed
Bid the soft pillow lull my heavy head.
But O! when downy sleep its court renews,
And shades the soul with visionary views,
Illusive dreams to fan my slumbering fire,
And wake the fever of intense desire,
Present your softer image to my sight,
All warm with smiles, and glowing with delight;
Gods! with what bliss I view thy darling charms,
And strive to clasp thee melting in my arms! --
But ah! the shade my empty grasp deceives;
And as it flits, and my fond soul bereaves,
The transient slumbers slip their airy chain,
And give me back to all my woes again:
There wrapped in floods of grief I sigh forlorn,
The constant greetings of unwelcome morn.
But should oblivion reassume her sway,
And slumbers once more steal my woes away;
When the short flights of fancy intervene,
Your much-loved image fills out every scene.
But now no more soft smiles your face adorn,
Lo! over each feature broods destructive scorn.
Suppliant in tears I urge my suit again,
Sullen you stand, and view me with disdain;
Your ears exclude the story of my smart,
Your baleful eyes dart anguish to my heart.
I wake -- glad nature hails returning day,
And the wild songsters chaunt their mattin-lay;
The sun in glory mounts the crystal sky,
And all creation is in smiles but I.
Then, sink in death, my senses! -- for in vain
You strive to quench the phrenzy of your pain;
Break, break, fond heart! -- her hate thou can not tame,
Then take this certain triumph over thy flame.
It Is done! -- the dread of future wrongs is past --
Lo! brittle passion verges to its last!
It Is done! -- vain life's illusive scenes are over --
Disdainful beauty shakes her chains no more.
Come, peaceful gloom, expand thy downy breast,
And soothe, O soothe me to eternal rest!
There hush my plaints, and gently lull my woes,
Where one still stream of dull oblivion flows.
No laboring breast there heaves with torture's throws,
No heart consumes her daily hoard of woes;
No dreams of former pain the soul invade,
Calmly she sleeps, a sad unthinking shade!
But ever from thought my struggling soul is free,
One latest tear she dedicates to thee.
She views thee on the brink of vain despair,
Beat thy big breast, and rend thy flowing hair.
Feels torturing love her sable deluge roll,
Weigh down thy senses, and o'erbear thy soul.
In vain your heart relents, in vain you weep,
No lover wakes from his eternal sleep.
Alas! I see thy frantic spirit rave,
And thy last breath expiring on my grave.
Is this the fortune of those high-priz'd charms?
Ah! spare them for some worthier lover's arms.
And may these bodings never with truth agree,
May grief and anguish be unknown to thee,
May bitter memory never recount with pain,
That ever you frowned, or I admired in vain.
No more -- my spirit is prepared to fly,
Suppressed my voice, and stiffen'd is my eye:
Death's swimming shadows intercept my view,
Vain world, and thou relentless nymph, adieu!
A SONG.
BY THE SAME.
YE scenes that engaged my gay youth,
Say, whither so fast do ye fly?
If the lesson you told me was truth,
Ah! why do ye fade from my eye?
That meadow where often I strayed,
That bank, and yon shadowy tree,
Those streams, with such fondness surveyed,
Have hid all their sweetness from me.
Yon hill that uprears his smooth head,
Where the wild-thyme its fragrance bestows,
Whose verdures have rose from my bed,
And whose breezes have sighed my repose.
What though from his summit so high.
Flock, cottage, and woodland are seen;
Yet no more I with fondness descry,
For indifference rises between.
Ah! whither, ye sweets, do ye fly?
For fancy your absence must mourn;
Ah! say, will ye fade from my eye,
And yet will ye never return?
That valley, whose mantle so gay,
Is with primrose and cowslip overspread;
No longer invites me to stray,
And rifle the sweets of their bed.
Not odious at present they look;
I discern that their colors are bright;
But their charms have my fancy forsook,
And their fragrance forgot to delight.
To my cooler attention how dear
The soothing complaint of the dove!
I have left my companions to hear
The wood-linnet warble her love.
Nor these can my footsteps retard;
Or if round me they carelessly fly,
From mine eyes they attract no regard,
And my ears their soft warblings deny.
Ah! sure it is the business of life,
That bids those endearments depart;
To involve us in cares and in strife,
That estrange and entangle the heart.
With destiny all must comply;
Yet cannot my fancy but mourn,
For the season that fades from my eye,
And the sweets that must never return.
ON THE ETERNITY OF THE SUPREME BEING.
BY CHRISTOPHER SMART, M. A.
HAIL, wondrous Being, who in power supreme
Exists from everlasting, whose great name
Deep in the human heart, and every atom
The Air, the Earth, or azure Main contains
In undecypher'd characters is wrote --
IN COMPREHENSIBLE! -- O what can words,
The weak interpreters of mortal thoughts,
Or what can thoughts (though wild of wing they rove
Through the vast concave of the aetherial round)
If to the Heaven of Heavens they would wing their way
Adventurous, like the birds of night they are lost,
And deluged in the flood of dazzling day. --
May then the youthful, uninspired Bard
Presume to hymn the Eternal; may he soar
Where Seraph, and where Cherubin on high
Resound the unceasing plaudits, and with them
In the grand Chorus mix his feeble voice?
He may -- if Thou, who from the witless babe
Ordainest honor, glory, strength, and praise,
Uplift the unpinion'd Muse, and deign'st to assist,
GREAT POET OF THE UNIVERSE, his song.
Before this earthly Planet wound her course
Round Light's perennial fountain, before Light
Herself 'gan shine, and at the inspiring word
Shot to existence in a blaze of day,
Before "the Morning-Stars together sang,
And hailed Thee Architect of countless worlds
Thou art -- all-glorious, all-beneficent,
All Wisdom and Omnipotence thou art.
But is the era of Creation fixed
At when these worlds began? Could ought retard
Goodness, that knows no bounds, from blessing ever,
Or keep the immense Artificer in sloth?
Avaunt the dust-directed crawling thought,
That Puissance immeasurably vast,
And Bounty inconceivable, could rest
Content, exhausted with one week of action --
No -- in the exertion of thy rigteous power,
Ten thousand times more active than the Sun,
Thou reigned, and with a mighty hand composed
Systems innumerable, matchless all,
All stamped with thine uncounterfeited seal.
But yet (if still to more stupendous heights
The Muse unblam'd her aching sense may strain)
Perhaps wrapped up in contemplation deep,
The best of Beings on the noble theme
Might ruminate at leisure, Scope immense
The eternal Power and Godhead to explore,
And with itself the omniscient mind replete.
This were enough to fill the boundless All,
This were a Sabbath worthy the Supreme!
Perhaps enthroned amidst a choicer few,
Of Spirits inferior, he might greatly plan
The two prime Pillars of the Universe,
Creation and Redemption -- and a while
Pause -- with the grand presentiments of glory.
Perhaps -- but all is conjecture here below,
All ignorance, and self-plum'd vanity --
O Thou, whose ways to wonder at's distrust,
Whom to describe's presumption (all we can --
And all we may --) be glorified, be praised.
A Day shall come, when all this Earth shall perish,
Nor leave behind even Chaos; it shall come
When all the armies of the elements
Shall war against themselves, and mutual rage,
To make Perdition triumph; it shall come,
When the capacious atmosphere above
Shall in sulphurous thunders groan, and die,
And vanish into void; the earth beneath
Shall sever to the center, and devour
The enormous blaze of the destructive flames.
Ye rocks, that mock the raving of the floods.
And proudly frown upon the impatient deep,
Where is your grandeur now? Ye foaming waves,
That all along the immense Atlantic roar,
In vain ye swell; will a few drops suffice
To quench the inextinguishable fire?
Ye mountains, on whose cloud-crown'd tops the cedars
Are lessened into shrubs, ^agnific piles,
That prop the painted chambers of the heavens,
And fix the earth continual; Athos, where;
Where, Tenerif's thy stateliness today?
What, Aetna, are thy flames to these? -- No more
Than the poor glowworm to the golden sun.
Nor shall the verdant valleys then remain
Safe in their meek submission; they the debt
Of nature and of justice too must pay.
Yet I must weep for you, ye rival fair,
Arno and Andalusia; but for thee
More largely and with filial tears must weep,
O Albion, O my country! Thou must join,
In vain dissever'd from the rest, must join
The terrors of the inevitable ruin.
Nor thou, illustrious monarch of the day;
Nor thou, fair queen of night; nor you, ye stars,
Though million leagues and million still remote,
Shall yet survive that day; Ye must submit,
Sharers, not bright spectators of the scene.
But though the earth shall to the center perish,
Nor leave behind even Chaos; though the air
With all the elements must pass away,
Vain as an ideot's dream; though the huge rocks,
That brandish the tall cedars on their tops,
With humbler vales must to perdition yield;
Though the gilt Sun, and silver-tressed Moon
With all her bright retinue, must be lost;
Yet Thou, Great Father of the world, surviv'st
Eternal, as thou were: Yet still survives
The soul of man immortal, perfect now,
And candidate for unexpiring joys.
He comes! He comes! the awful trump I hear;
The flaming sword's intolerable blaze
I see; He comes! the Archangel from above.
" Arise, ye tenants of the silent grave,
" Awake incorruptible and arise*
" From east to west, from the antarctic pole
" To regions hyperborean, all ye sons,
" Ye sons of Adam, and ye heirs of Heaven --
" Arise, ye tenants of the silent grave,
" Awake incorruptible and arise."
It Is then, nor sooner, that the restless mind
Shall find itself at home; and like the ark,
Fixed on the mountain-top, shall look aloft
Over the vague passage of precarious life;
And, winds and waves and rocks and tempests past,
Enjoy the everlasting calm of Heaven:
It Is then, nor sooner, that the deathless soul
Shall justly know its nature and its rise:
It Is then the human tongue new-tun'd shall give
Praises more worthy the eternal ear.
Yet what we can, we ought; -- and therefore, Thou,
Purge Thou my heart, Omnipotent and Good!
Purge Thou my heart with hyssop, lest like Cain
I offer fruitless sacrifice, and with gifts
Offend and not propitiate the Adored.
Though Gratitude were blessed with all the powers
Her bursting heart could long for, though the swift,
The fiery-wing'd Imagination soared
Beyond Ambition's wish -- yet all were vain
To speak Him as he is, who is INEFFABLE.
Yet still let reason through the eye of faith
View Him with fearful love; let truth pronounce,
And adoration on her bended knee
With heaven-directed hands confess His reign.
And let the Angelic, Archangelic band
With all the Hosts of Heaven, Cherubic forms,
And forms Seraphic, with their silver trumps
And golden lyres attend: -- "For Thou art holy,
" For Thou art One, the Eternal, who alone
" Exerts all goodness, and transcends all praise."
ON THE IMMENSITY OF THE SUPREME BEING.
BY THE SAME.
ONCE more I dare to rouse the sounding string
THE POET OF MY GOD -- Awake my glory,
Awake my lute and harp -- myself shall wake,
Soon as the stately night-exploding bird
In lively lay sings welcome to the dawn.
List ye! how nature with ten thousand tongues
Begins the grand thanksgiving, Hail, all hail,
Ye tenants of the forest and the field!
My fellow subjects of the eternal King,
I gladly join your Mattins, and with you
Confess his presence, and report his praise.
O Thou, who or the Lambkin, or the Dove,
When offered by the lowly, meek, and poor,
Prefer'st to Pride's whole hecatomb, accept
This mean Essay, nor from thy treasure-house
Of Glory' immense the Orphan's mite exclude.
What though the Almighty's regal throne be raised
High over yon azure Heaven's exalted dome
By mortal eye unkenn'd -- where East nor West
Nor South, nor blustering North has breath to blow;
Albeit He there with Angels, and with Saints
Hold conference, and to his radiant host
Even face to face stand visibly confessed:
Yet know that nor in Presence or in Power
Shines He less perfect here; it is Man's dim eye
That makes the obscurity. He is the same,
Alike in all his Universe the same.
Whether the mind along the spangled sky
Measures her pathless walk, studious to view
Thy works of vaster fabric, where the Planets
Weave their harmonious rounds, their march directing
Still faithful, still inconstant to the Sun;
Or where the Comet through space infinite
(Though whirling worlds oppose, and globes of fire)
Darts, like a javelin, to his destined goal.
Or where in Heaven above the Heaven of Heavens
Burn brighter Sans, and goodlier Planets roll
With Satellits more glorious -- Thou art there.
Or whether on the Ocean's boisterous back
Thou ride triumphant, and with out-stretch'd arm
Curb the wild winds and discipline the billows,
The suppliant Sailor finds Thee there, his chief,
His only help -- When Thou rebuk'st the storm --
It ceases -- and the vessel gently glides
Along the glassy level of the calm.
O! could I search the bosom of the sea,
Down the great depth descending; there thy works
Would also speak thy residence; and there
Would I thy servant, like the still profound,
Astonished into silence muse thy praise!
Behold! behold! the unplanted garden round
Of vegetable coral, sea-flowers gay,
And shrubs of amber from the pearl-pav'd bottom
Rise richly varied, where the finny race
In blithe security their gambols play:
While high above their heads Leviathan,
The terror and the glory of the main,
His pastime takes with transport, proud to see
The ocean's vast dominion all his own.
Hence through the genial bowels of the earth
Easy may fancy pass; till at thy mines
Gani or Raolconda she arrive,
And from the adamant's imperial blaze
Form weak ideas of her Maker's glory.
Next to Pegu or Ceylon let me rove,
Where the rich ruby (deemed by Sages old
Of Sovereign virtue) sparkles even like Sirius,
And blushes into flames. Thence will I go
To undermine the treasure-fertile womb
Of the huge Pyrenean, to detect
The Agat and the deep-intrenched gem
Of kindred Jasper -- Nature in them both
Delights to play the Mimic on herself;
And in their veins she often pourtrays the forms
Of leaning hills, of trees erect, and streams
Now stealing softly on, now thundering down
In desperate cascade with flowers and beasts
And all the living landscape of the vale:
In vain thy pencil Claudio, or Poussin,
Or thine, immortal Guido, would essay
Such skill to imitate -- it is the hand
Of God himself -- for God himself is there.
Hence with the ascending springs let me advance
Through beds of magnets, minerals, and spar,
Up to the mountain's summit, there to indulge
The ambition of the comprehensive eye,
That dares to call the Horizon all her own.
Behold the forest, and the expansive verdure
Of yonder level lawn, whose smooth-shorn sod
No object interrupts, unless the oak
His lordly head uprears, and branching arms
Extends -- Behold in regal solitude,
And pastoral magnificence he stands
So simple! and so great! the under-wood
Of meaner rank an awful distance keep.
Yet Thou art there, yet God himself is there
Even on the bush (though not as when to Moses
He shone in burning majesty revealed)
Nathless conspicuous in the Linnet's throat
Is his unbounded goodness -- Thee her Maker,
Thee her Preserver chaunts she in her song;
While all the emulative vocal tribe
The grateful lesson learn -- no other voice
Is heard, no other sound -- for in attention
Buried, even babbling Echo bolds her peace.
Now from the plains, where the unbounded prospect
Gives liberty her utmost scope to range,
Turn we to yon enclosures, where appears
Checkered variety in all her forms,
Which the vague mind attract and still suspend
With sweet perplexity. What are yon towers,
The work of laboring man and clumsy art,
Seen with the ring-dove's nest -- on that tall beech
Her pensile house the feathered Artist builds --
The rocking winds molest her not; for see,
With such due poize the wondrous fabric's hung,
That, like the compass in the bark, it keeps
True to itself, and steadfast even in storms.
Thou idiot that asserts, there is no God,
View and be dumb for ever --
Go bid Vitruvius or Palladio build
The be his mansion, or the ant her cave --
Go call Correggio, or let Titian come
To paint the hawthorn's bloom, or teach the cherry
To blush with just vermillion -- hence away --
Hence ye profane! for God himself is here.
Vain were the attempt, and impious to trace
Through all his works the Artificer Divine --
And though nor shining sun, nor twinkling star
Bedecked the crimson curtains of the sky;
Though neither vegetable, beast, nor bird
Were extant on the surface of this ball,
Nor lurking gem beneath; though the great sea
Slept in profound stagnation, and the air
Had left no thunder to pronounce its maker;
Yet man at home, within himself, might find
The Deity immense, and in that frame
So fearfully, so wonderfully made,
See and adore his providence and power --
I see, and I adore -- O God most bounteous!
O infinite of Goodness and of Glory!
The knee, that thou have shaped, shall bend to Thee,
The tongue, which thou have tuned, shall chaunt thy praise,
And, thine own image, the immortal foul,
Shall consecrate herself to Thee for ever.
ON THE OMNISCIENCE OF THE SUPREME BEING.
BY THE SAME.
ARISE, divine Urania, with new strains
To hymn thy God, and thou, immortal Fame,
Arise, and blow thy everlasting trump.
All glory to the Omniscient, and praise,
And power, and domination in the height!
And thou, cherubic Gratitude, whose voice
To pious ears sounds silverly so sweet,
Come with thy precious incense, bring thy gifts,
And with thy choicest stores the altar crown.
Thou too, my heart, whom He, and He alone
Who all things knows, can know, with love replete,
Regenerate, and pure, pour all thyself
A living sacrifice before his throne:
And may the eternal, high mysterious tree,
That in the center of the arcehd Heavens
Bears the rich fruit of Knowledge, with some branch
Stoop to my humble reach, and bless my toil!
When in my mother's womb concealed I lay
A senseless embryo, then my soul thou knew'st,
Knew'st all her future workings, every thought,
And every faint Idea yet unformed.
When up the imperceptible ascent
Of growing years, led by thy hand, I rose,
Perception's gradual light, that ever dawns
Insensibly to day, thou did vouchsafe,
And taught me by that reason thou inspir'dst,
That what of knowledge in my mind was low,
Imperfect, incorrect -- in Thee is wondrous,
Uncircumscrib'd, unsearchably profound,
And estimable solely by itself.
What is that secret power, that guides the brutes,
Which Ignorance calls instinct? It Is from Thee,
It is the operation of thine hands
Immediate, instantaneous; it is thy wisdom,
That glorious shines transparent through thy works.
Who taught the Pie, or who forewarned the Jay
To shun the deadly nightshade? though the cherry
Boasts not a glossier hue, nor does the plumb
Lure with more seeming sweets the amorous eye,
Yet will not the sagacious birds, decoyed
By fair appearance, touch the noxious fruit.
They know to touch is fatal, whence alarmed
Swift on the winnowing winds they work their way.
Go to, proud reas'ner philosophic Man,
Have thou such prudence, thou such knowledge? -- No.
Full many a race has fell into the snare
Of meretricious looks, of pleasing surface.
And often in desert isles the famished pilgrim
By forms of fruit, and luscious taste beguiled;
Like his forefather Adam, eats and dies.
For why? his wisdom on the leaden sect
Of slow experience, dully tedious, creeps,
And comes, like vengeance, after long delay.
The venerable Sage, that nightly trims
The learned lamp, to investigate the powers
Of plants medicinal, the earth, the air,
And the dark regions of the fossil world,
Grows old in following, what he never shall find;
Studious in vain! till happily, at the last
He spies a mist, then shapes it into mountains,
And baseless fabrics from conjecture builds:
While the domestic animal, that guards
At midnight hours his threshold, if oppressed
By sudden sickness, at his master's feet
Begs not that aid his services might claim,
But is his own physician, knows the case,
And from the emetic herbage works his cure.
Hark, far, from afar the The hen turkey.
feathered matron screams.
And all her brood alarms, the docile crew
Accept the signal one and all, expert
In the art of nature and unlearned deceit;
Along the sod, in counterfeited death,
Mute, motionless they lie; sull well appriz'd,
That the rapacious adversary's near.
But who informed her of the approaching danger,
Who taught the cautious mother, that the hawk
Was hatched her foe, and lived by her destruction?
Her own prophetic soul is active in her,
And more than human providence her guard.
When Philomela, ever the cold domain
Of crippled winter 'gins to advance, prepares
Her annual flight, and in some poplar shade
Takes her melodious leave, who then is her pilot?
Who points her passage through the pathless void
To realms from us remote, to us unknown?
Her science is the science of her God.
Not the magnetic index to the North
Ever ascertains her course, nor buoy, nor beacon:
She, Heaven-taught voyager, that sails in air,
Courts nor coy West nor East, but instant knows
What The Longitude.
Newton, or not sought, or sought in vain.
Illustrious name, irrefragable proof
Of man's vast genius, and the soaring soul!
Yet what were thou to him, who knew his works,
Before creation formed them, long before
He measured in the hollow of his hand
The exulting ocean, and the highest Heavens
He comprehended with a span, and weighed
The mighty mountains in his golden scales:
Who shone supreme, who was himself the light,
Ever yet Refraction learned her skill to paint,
And bend athwart the clouds her beauteous bow.
When Knowledge at her father's dread command
Resigned to Israel's king her golden key,
O! to have joined the frequent auditors
In wonder and delight, that whilom heard
Great Solomon descanting on the brutes.
O! how sublimely glorious to apply
To God's own honor, and good will to man,
That wisdom he alone of men possessed
In plenitude so rich, and scope so rare.
How did he rouse the pampered silken sons
Of bloated ease, by placing to their view
The sage industrious Ant, the wisest insect,
And best oeconomist of all the field!
Though she presumes not by the solar orb
To measure times and seasons, nor consults
Chaldean calculations, for a guide;
Yet conscious that December's on the march,
Pointing with icy hand to want and woe,
She waits his dire approach, and undismayed
Receives him as a welcome guest, prepared
Against the churlish winter's fiercest blow.
For when, as yet the favorable Sun
Gives to the genial earth the enlivening ray,
Not the poor suffering slave, that hourly toils
To rive the groaning earth for ill-sought gold,
Endures such trouble, such fatigue, as she;
While all her subterraneous avenues.
And siorm-proof cells with management most meet
And unexampled housewifry she forms:
Then to the field she hies, and on her back,
Burden immense! she bears the cumbrous corn.
Then many a weary step, and many a strain,
And many a grievous groan subdued, at length
Up the huge hill she hardly heaves it home:
Nor rests she here her providence, but nips
With subtle tooth the grain, lest from her garner
In mischievous fertility it steal,
And back to daylight vegetate its way.
Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, learn to live,
And by her wary ways reform thine own.
But, if thy deaden'd sense, and listless thought
More glaring evidence demand; behold,
Where yon pellucid populous hive presents
A yet uncopied model to the world!
There Machiavel in the reflecting glass
May read himself a fool. The Chemist there
May with astonishment invidious view
His toils outdone by each plebeian Be,
Who, at the royal mandate, on the wing
From various herbs, and from discordant flowers,
A perfect harmony of sweets compounds.
Avaunt Conceit, Ambition take thy flight
Back to the Prince of vanity and air!
O! it is a thought of energy most piercing;
Formed to make pride grow humble; formed to force
Its weight on the reluctant mind, and give her
A true but Irksome image of herself.
Woeful vicissi^^^^^ when Man, fallen Man,
Who first from Heaven, from gracious God himself
Learned knowledge of the Brutes, must know, by Brutes
Instructed and reproached, the scale of being;
By slow degrees from lowly steps ascend,
And trace Omniscience upwards to its spring!
Yet murmur not, but praise -- for though we stand
Of many a Godlike privilege a^^^re'd
By Adam's dire transgression, though no more
Is Paradise our home, but over the portal
Hangs in terrific pomp the burning blade;
Still with ten thousand beauties blooms the Earth
With pleasures populous, and with riches crowned.
Still is there scope for wonder and for love
Even to their last exertion -- showers of blessings
Far more than human virtue can deserve,
Or hope expect, or gratitude return.
Then, O ye People, O ye Sons of Men,
Whatever be the color of your lives,
Whatever portion of itself his Wisdom
Shall deign to allow, still patiently abide
And praise him more and more; nor cease to chaunt
ALL GLORY TO THE OMNISCIENT AND PRAISE,
AND POWER AND DOMINATION IN THE HEIGHT!
And thou, cherubic Gratitude, whose voice
To pious ears sounds silverly so sweet,
Come with thy precious incense, bring thy gifts,
And with thy choicest stores the altar crown.
TO THEO DOXA
ON THE POWER OF THE SUPREME BEING.
BY THE SAME.
" TREMBLE, thou Earth! the anointed poet said,
" At God's bright presence, tremble, all ye mountains,
" And all ye hillocks on the surface bound."
Then once again, ye glorious thunders roll,
The Muse with transport hears ye, once again
Convulse the solid continent, and shake,
Grand music of Omnipotence, the isles.
It Is thy terrific voice, thou God of Power,
It Is thy terrific voice; all Nature hears it
Awakened and alarmed; she feels its force,
In every spring she feels it, every wheel,
And every movement of her vast machine.
Behold! quakes Apennine, behold! recoils
Athos, and all the hoary-headed Alps
Leap from their bases at the godlike sound.
But what is this, celestial though the note,
And proclamation of the reign supreme,
Compared with such as, for a mortal ear
Too great, amaze the incorporeal worlds?
Should ocean to his congregated waves
Call in each river, cataract, and lake,
And with the watery world down an huge rock
Fall headlong in one horrible cascade,
'Twere but the echo of the parting breeze,
When Zephyr faints upon the lily's breast,
'Twere but the ceasing of some instrument,
When the last lingering undulation
Dies on the doubting ear, if named with sounds
So mighty! so stupendous! so divine!
But not alone in the aerial vault
Does he the dread theocracy maintain;
For often, enraged with his intestine thunders,
He harrows up the bowels of the earth,
And shocks the central magnet -- Cities then
Totter on their foundations, stately columns,
Magnific walls, and heaven-assaulting spires.
What though in haughty eminence erect
Stands the strong citadel, and frowns defiance
On adverse hosts, though many a bastion jut
Forth from the ramparts elevated mound,
Vain the poor providence of human art,
And mortal strength how vain! while underneath
Triumphs his mining vengeance in the uproar
Of shattered towers, riven rocks, and mountains,
With clamor inconceivable uptorn,
And hurled adown the abyss. Sulphurous pyrites
Bursting abrupt from darkness into day,
With din outrageous and destructive ire
Augment the hideous tumult, while it wounds
The afflicted ear, and terrifies the eye,
And rends the heart in twain. Twice have we felt,
Within Augusta's walls twice have we felt
Thy threatened indignation, but even Thou,
Incensed Omnipotent, art gracious ever,
Thy goodness infinite but mildly warned us
With mercy-blended wrath; O spare us still,
Nor send more dire conviction! we confess
That thou art He, the Almighty: we believe.
For at thy righteous power whole systems quake,
For at thy nod tremble ten thousand worlds.
Hark! on the winged whirlwind's rapid rage,
Which is and is not in a moment -- hark!
On the hurricane's tempestuous sweep he rides
Invincible, and oaks and pines and cedars
And forests are no more. For conflict dreadful!
The West encounters East, and Notus meets
In his caree^ the Hyperborean blast.
The lordly lions shuddering seek their dens,
And fly like timorous deer; the king of birds,
Who dared the solar ray, is weak of wing,
And faints and falls and dies; -- while He supreme
Stands steadfast in the center of the storm.
Wherefore, ye objects terrible and great,
Ye thunders, earthquakes, and ye fire-fraught wombs
Of ^ell volcanos, whirlwinds, hurricanes,
And boiling billows, hail! in chorus join
To celebrate and magnify your Maker,
Who yet in works of a minuter mould
Is not less manifest, is not less mighty.
Survey the magnet's sympathetic love,
That wooes the yielding needle; contemplate
The attractive amber's power, invisible
Even to the mental eye; or when the blow
Sent from the electric sphere assaults thy frame,
Show me the hand that dealt it! -- baffled here
By his Omnipotence, Philosophy
Slowly her thoughts inadequate revolves,
And stands, with all his circling wonders round her,
Like heavy Saturn in the etherial space
Begirt with an inexplicable ring.
If such the operations of his power,
Which at all seasons and in every place
(Ruled by established laws and current nature)
Arrest the attention; Who! O Who shall tell
His acts miraculous? when his own decrees
Repeals he, or suspends, when by the hand
Of Moses or of Joshua, or the mouths
Of his prophetic seers, such deeds he wrought,
Before the astonished Sun's all-seeing eye,
That Faith was scarce a virtue. Need I sing
The fate of Pharaoh and his numerous band
Lost in the reflux of the watery walls,
That melted to their fluid state again?
Need I recount how Sampson's warlike arm
With more than mortal nerves was strung to o'erthrow
Idolatrous Philistia? shall I tell
How David triumphed, and what Job sustained?
-- But, O supreme, unutterable mercy!
O love unequalled, mystery immense,
Which angels long to unfold! it is man's redemption
That crowns thy glory, and thy power confirms,
Confirms the great, the uncontroverted claim.
When from the Virgin's unpolluted womb
Shone forth the Sun of Righteousness revealed,
And on benighted reason poured the day;
Let there be peace (he said) and all was calm
Amongst the warring world -- calm as the sea,
When O be still, ye boisterous Winds, he cried,
And not a breath was blown, nor murmur heard.
His was a life of miracles and might,
And charity and love, ever yet he taste
The bitter draught of death, ever yet he rise
Victorious over the universal foe,
And Death and Sin and Hell in triumph lead.
His by the right of conquest is mankind,
And in sweet servitude and golden bonds
Were tied to him for ever. -- O how easy
Is his ungalling yoke, and all his burdens
It Is ecstacy to bear! Him, blessed Shepherd,
His flocks shall follow through the maze of life
And shades that tend to Dayspring from on high;
And as the radiant roses after fading
In fuller foliage and more fragrant breath
Revive in smiling spring, so shall it fare
With those that love him -- for sweet is their favor,
And all eternity shall be their spring.
Then shall the gates and everlasting doors,
At which the KING OF GLORY enters in,
Be to the Saints unbarr'd: and there, where pleasure
Boasts an undying bloom, where dubious hope
Is certainty, and grief-attended love
Is freed from passion -- there we'll celebrate,
With worthier numbers, Him, who is, and was,
And in immortal prowess King of Kings,
Shall be the Monarch of all worlds for ever.
ON THE GOODNESS OF THE SUPREME BEING.
BY THE SAME.
ORPHEUS, for See this conjecture strongly supported by Delany, in his Life of
David.
so the Gentiles called thy name,
Israel's sweet Psalmist, who alone could wake
The inanimate to motion; who alone
The joyful hillocks, the applauding rocks,
And floods with musical persuasion drew;
Thou who to hail and snow gav'st voice and sound,
And made the mute melodious! -- greater yet
Was thy divinest skill, and ruled over more
Than art and nature; for thy tuneful touch
Drove trembling Satan from the heart of Saul,
And quelled the evil Angel: -- in this breast
Some portion of thy genuine spirit breathe,
And lift me from myself, each thought impure
Banish; each low idea raise, refine,
Enlarge, and sanctify; -- so shall the muse
Above the stars aspire, and aim to praise
Her God on earth, as he is praised in heaven.
Immense Creator! whose all-powerful hand
Framed universal Being, and whose eye
Saw like thyself, that all things formed were good;
Where shall the timorous bard thy praise begin,
Where end the purest sacrifice of song,
And just thanksgiving? -- The thought-kindling light,
Thy prime production, darts upon my mind
Its vivifying beams, my heart illumines,
And fills my soul with gratitude and Thee.
Hail to the cheerful rays of ruddy morn,
That paint the streaky East, and blithsome rouse
The birds, the cattle, and mankind from rest!
Hail to the freshness of the early breeze,
And Iris dancing on the new-fall'n dew!
Without the aid of yonder golden globe
Lost were the garnet's luster, lost the lily,
The tulip and auricula's spotted pride;
Lost were the peacock's plumage, to the sight
So pleasing in its pomp and glossy glow.
O thrice-illustrious! were it not for Thee
Those pansies, that reclining from the bank,
View through the immaculate, pellucid stream
Their portraiture in the inverted heaven,
Might as well change their tripled boast, the white,
The purple, and the gold, that far outvie
The Eastern monarch's garb, even with the dock,
Even with the baneful hemlock's irksome green.
Without thy aid, without thy gladsome beams
The tribes of woodland warblers would remain
Mute on the bending branches, nor recite
The praise of him, who, ever he formed their lord,
Their voices tuned to transport, winged their flight,
And bade them call for nurture, and receive;
And lo! they call; the blackbird and the thrush,
The woodlark, and the redbreast jointly call;
He hears and feeds their feathered families,
He feeds his sweet musicians, -- nor neglects
The invoking ravens in the greenwood wide;
And though their throats coarse ruttling hurt the ear,
They mean it all for music, thanks and praise
They mean, and leave ingratitude to man, --
But not to all, -- for hark the organs blow
Their swelling notes round the cathedral's dome,
And grace the harmonious choir, celestial feast
To pious ears, and medicine of the mind;
The thrilling trebles and the manly base
Join in accordance meet, and with one voice
All to the sacred subject suit their song.
While in each breast sweet melancholy reigns
Angelically pensive, till the joy
Improves and purifies; -- the solemn scene
The Sun through storied panes surveys with awe,
And bashfully withholds each bolder beam.
Here, as her home, from morn to eve frequents
The cherub Gratitude; -- behold her eyes!
With love and gladness weepingly they shed
Ecstatic smiles; the incense, that her hands
Uprear, is sweeter than the breath of May
Caught from the nectarine's blossom, and her voice
Is more than voice can tell; to him she sings,
To him who feeds, who clothes, and who adorns,
Who made, and who preserves, whatever dwells
In air, in steadfast earth, or sickle sea.
O He is good, he is immensely good!
Who all things formed, and formed them all for man;
Who marked the climates, varied every zone,
Dispensing all his blessings for the best
In order and in beauty: -- rise, attend,
Attest, and praise, ye quarters of the world!
Bow down, ye elephants, submissive bow
To Him, who made the mite; though Asia's pride,
Ye carry armies on your tower-crown'd backs,
And grace the turban'd tyrants, bow to Him
Who is as great, as perfect, and as good
In his less striking wonders, till at length
The eye's at fault, and seeks the assisting glass.
Approach and bring from Araby the blessed,
The fragrant cassia, frankincense, and myrrh,
And meekly kneeling at the altar's foot
Lay all the tributary incense down.
Stoop, sable Africa, with reverence stoop,
And from thy brow take off the painted plume;
With golden ingots all thy camels load
TO adorn his temples, hasten with thy spear
Reverted, and thy trusty bow unstrung,
While unpursued thy lions roam and roar,
And ruined towers, rude rocks, and caverns wide
Remurmur to the glorious, surly sound.
And thou, fair Indian, whose immense domain
To counterpoise the Hemisphere extends,
Haste from the West, and with thy fruits and flowers,
Thy mines and medicines, wealthy maid, attend.
More than the plenteousness so famed to flow
By fabling bards from Amalthea's horn
Is thine; thine therefore be a portion due
Of thanks and praise: come with thy brilliant crown
And vest of furr; and from thy fragrant lap
Pomegranates and the rich Ananas, the Indian name for pine-apples.
ananas pour.
But chiefly thou, Europa, seat of Grace
And Christian excellence, his Goodness own,
Forth from ten thousand temples pour his praise;
Clad in the armor of the living God
Approach, unsheath the Spirit's flaming sword;
Faith's shield, Salvation's glory, -- compassed helm
With fortitude assume, and over your heart
Fair truth's invulnerable breast plate spread;
Then join the general chorus of all worlds,
And let the song of charity begin
In strains seraphic, and melodious prayer.
" O all-sufficient, all-beneficent,
" Thou God of Goodness and of Glory, hear!
" Thou, who to lowliest minds do condescend,
" Assuming passions to enforce thy laws,
" Adopting jealousy to prove thy love:
" Thou, who resigned humility uphold,
" Even as the slorist props the drooping rose,
" But quell tyrannic pride with peerless power,
" Even as the tempest rives the stubborn oak:
" O all-sufficient, all-beneficent,
" Thou God of Goodness and of Glory, hear!
" Bless all mankind, and bring them in the end
" To heaven, to immortality, and THEE!"
FINIS.
INDEX TO THE FOURTH VOLUME.
THE Valetudinarian, an Ode. By Dr. Marriott. Page. 1 The Royal Voyage. By the
same. 13 Ode on Death, translated from the French. By the same. 16 Inscription
upon a Monument. By the same. 21 To a Lady sitting for her Picture. By the
same. 22 Elegy on the Death of a young Lady. By the same. 24 The Academic. By
the same. 28 Amabella. By Mr. Jerningham. 34 A Spousal Hymn. By the Rev. Mr. J.
Scott. 41 Sonnets. By Thomas Edwards, Esquire 1. For the Root-House at Wrest. 49 2.
To Miss H. M. 50 3. To Dr. Heberden. 51 4. To Mr. J. Paice. 52 5. To the same.
53 6. To --. 54 7. To the Deity. 55 8. To Matthew Barnard. 56
On Mr. Nash's Picture. By the E -- of C --. 57 On the D -- ss of R -- d. By
the same. 58 Arno's Vale, a Song. By the Duke of Dorset. 59 Britain's Isle. By
the same. 60 Ode to Morning. By Page. 61 To a Lady, with a Pair of Gloves on
Valentine's Day. By Villiers, Duke of Buckingham. 64 Kimbolton Park. By the
Rev. Mr. H. 65 Retirement, an Ode. By Mr. Beattie. 74 The Triumph of
Melancholy. By the same. 77 Elegy occasioned by the Death of a Lady. By the
same. 86 Absence, a Pastoral Ballad. By --. 90 Ode to Health. By Mrs. Brook.
93 Ode. By the same. 95 Ode to Friendship. By the same. 96 To the Moon. By Mr.
Robert Lloyd. 97 A Ballad. By the same. 102 A Ballad. By the same. 104 Love
Elegies. By Mr. Hammond. Elegy the First. 106 Elegy the Second. 108 Elegy the
Third. 110
The Genealogy of Christ. By Bishop Lowth. 114 Winter Prospects in the Country.
By J. S. 124 Hymn from Psalm lxv. By the same. 126 Sonnets. By the same. 1.
Apology for Retirement. 127 2. To Retirement. 128 3. To Delia. 129 4. To
Britannia. 130
On reading Mrs. Macaulay's History of England. By the same. 131 Written at the
Hermitage at Addersbrook, 1761. By Mr. C --. 132 Advice to a Shepherd. By the
same. Page. 133 Ode on Autumn. By the same. 134 Epitaph on a Peasant. By the
same. 135 Psalm cxxxvii. By the same. 136 The latter Part of Habbakuk, Chap.
iii. By the same. 137 Ode to Sleep. By Dr. T -- S --. 138 Ode to Mirth. By the
same. 139 Ode to a Singing Bird. By Mr. Richardson. 141 Elegy on a Humming
Bird. By --. 144 A Morning Soliloquy on Deafness. By --. 147 The Hermit. By Dr.
Goldsmith. 149 The Beldames. By --. 156 Ode to the River Eden. By Dr.
Langhorne. 166 On the Duchess of Mazarin's retiring to a Convent. By the same.
169 The Tulip and Myrtle. By the same. 173 Rural Simplicity, an Ode. By the
same. 176 Written on a Chinese Temple. By the same. 179 Written on another open
Temple. By the same. Ib. Lines occasioned by Lord Lyttleton's Verses to the
Countess of Egremont. By the same. 180 A Sonnet from a MS. of J. Harrington,
dated 1564. 181 The Hospitable Oak. By --. 182 To a Lover. By --. 184 The
Hermite's Address to Youth, written in the Spring-Garden at Bath. By --. 185
The Feminead; or Female Genius. By Mr. Duncombe. 186 Ode to the Hon. John
York. By the same. 202 Solitude, a Song. By Dr. Cotton. 205 To the Memory of
the late Duke of Bridgewater, 1748. By the same. Page. 206 The African Prince.
By Dr. Dodd. 207 Zara, at the Court of Anamaboe to the African Prince when in
England. By the same. 214 Hymn to Hope. By the same. 221 Verses occasioned by a
Present of a Moss Rose-Bud from Miss Jackson of Southgate. By the same. 230 The
Equality of Mankind. By Mr. Wodhull. 231 Two Love Elegies. By --. 251 An
Inscription written on one of the Tubs in Ham-Walks 1760. By the same. 261
Verses written on a Pedestal. By the same. 263 The Recantation, an Ode. By --
266 Ode to Horror. By -- 269 Verses on the expected Arrival of Queen Charlotte,
1761. 273 Aminta, an Elegy. By the Rev. Mr. Gerrard. 277 Petherton-Bridge, an
Elegy. By the same. 282 An Epistle from an unfortunate Gentleman to a young
Lady. By the same. 285 A Song. By the same. 290 On the Eternity of the Supreme
Being. By C. Smart, M.A. 293 On the Immensity of the Supreme Being. By the
same. 299 On the Omniscience of the Supreme Being. By the same. 305 On the
Power of the Supreme Being. By the same. 312 On the Goodness of the Supreme
Being. By the same. 318

