A COLLECTION of POEMS.

THE SECOND EDITION.

VOL. II.

A COLLECTION OF POEMS IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY SEVERAL HANDS.



LONDON: Printed for G. PERCH, No. 12, CHEAPSIDE, MDCCLXX.

Isaac Tailor del. et sculp.



ORIENTAL ECLOGUES.
BY MR. WILLIAM COLLINS.
ECLOGUE I.
SELIM; OR, THE SHEPHERD'S MORAL.
SCENE, A VALLEY NEAR BAGDAT. TIME, THE MORNING. YE Persian maids, attend your
Poet's lays,
And hear how shepherds pass their golden days,
Not all are blessed, whom Fortune's hand sustains
With wealth in courts, nor all that haunt the plains;
Well may your hearts believe the truths I tell;
It Is virtue makes the bliss wherever we dwell.
Thus Selim sung, by sacred Truth inspired;
Nor praise, but such as Truth bestowed, desired:
Wise in himself, his meaning songs conveyed
Informing morals to the shepherd maid;
Or taught the swains that surest bliss to find,
What groves nor streams bestow, a virtuous mind.
When sweet and blushing, like a virgin bride,
The radiant morn resumed her orient pride,
When wanton gales along the valleys play,
Breathe on each flower, and bear their sweets away:
By Tygris' wandering waves he sat, and sung
This useful lesson for the fair and young.
Ye Persian dames, he said, to you belong,
Well may they please, the morals of my song:
No fairer maids, I trust, than you are found,
Graced with soft arts, the peopled world around!
The morn that lights you, to your loves supplies
Each gentler ray delicious to your eyes:
For you those flowers her fragrant hands bestow,
And yours the love that kings delight to know.
Yet think not these, all beauteous as they are,
The best kind blessings heaven can grant the fair!
Who trust alone in Beauty's feeble ray,
Boast but the worth The gulf of that name, famous for the pearl fishery.
Balsora's pearls display;
Drawn from the deep we own their surface bright,
But, dark within, they drink no lustrous light:
Such are the maids, and such the charms they boast,
By sense unaided, or to virtue lost.
Self-flattering sex! your hearts believe in vain
That Love shall blind, when once he fires the swain;
Or hope a lover by your faults to win,
As spots on ermin beautify the skin;
Who seeks secure to rule, be first her care
Each softer virtue that adorns the fair;
Each tender passion man delights to find
The loved perfection of a female mind!
Blessed were the days, when Wisdom held her reign,
And shepherds sought her on the silent plain;
With Truth she wedded in the secret grove,
Immortal Truth, and daughters blessed their love.
O haste, fair maids! ye Virtues come away,
Sweet Peace and Plenty lead you on your way!
The balmy shrub for you shall love our shore,
By Ind excelled or Araby no more.
Lost to our fields, for so the Fates ordain,
The dear deserters shall return again.
Come thou, whose thoughts as limpid springs are clear,
To lead the train, sweet Modesty, appear:
Here make thy court amidst our rural scene,
And shepherd-girls shall own thee for their queen.
With thee be Chastity, of all afraid,
Distrusting all, a wise suspicious maid;
But man the most -- not more the mountain do
Holds the swift salcon for her deadly foe.
Cold is her breast, like flowers that drink the dew;
A silken veil conceals her from the view.
No wild desires amidst thy train be known,
But Faith, whose heart is fixed on one alone:
Desponding Meekness, with her down-cast eyes,
And friendly Pity, full of tender sighs;
And Love the last: by these your hearts approve,
These are the virtues that must lead to love.
Thus sung the swain; and ancient legends say,
The maids of Bagdat verified the lay:
Dear to the plains, the Virtues came along,
The shepherds loved, and Selim blessed his song.
ECLOGUE II.
HASSAN; OR, THE CAMEL-DRIVER.
SCENE, THE DESERT. TIME, MIDDAY. IN silent horror over the boundless waste
The driver Hassan with his camels past:
One cruise of water on his back he bore,
And his light scrip contained a scanty store;
A fan of painted feathers in his hand,
To guard his shaded face from scorching sand.
The sultry sun had gained the middle sky,
And not a tree, and not an herb was nigh;
The beasts, with pain, their dusty way pursue,
Shrill roared the winds, and dreary was the view!
With desperate sorrow wild, the affrighted man
Thrice sighed, thrice struck his breast, and thus began:
" Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
" When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way."
Ah! little thought I of the blasting wind,
The thirst or pinching hunger that I find!
Bethink thee, Hassan, where shall thirst assuage,
When fails this cruise, his unrelenting rage?
Soon shall this scrip its precious load resign;
Then what but tears and hunger shall be thine?
Ye mute companions of my toils, that bear
In all my griefs a more than equal share!
Here, where no springs in murmurs break away,
Or moss-crown'd fountains mitigate the day,
In vain ye hope the green delights to know,
Which plains more blessed, or verdant vales bestow:
Here rocks alone, and tasteless sands are sound,
And faint and sickly winds for ever howl around.
" Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
" When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way."
Cursed be the gold and silver which persuade
Weak men to follow far-fatiguing trade!
The lilly peace outshines the silver store,
And life is dearer than the golden ore:
Yet money tempts us over the desert brown,
To every distant mart and wealthy town.
Full often we tempt the land, and often the sea;
And are we only yet repaid by thee?
Ah! why this ruin so attractive made,
Or why fond man so easily betrayed?
Why heed we not, while mad we haste along,
The gentle voice of Peace, or Pleasure's song?
Or wherefore think the flowery mountain's side,
The fountain's murmurs, and the valley's pride,
Why think we these less pleasing to behold
Than dreary deserts, if they lead to gold?
" Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
" When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way!"
O cease, my fears! -- all frantic as I go,
When thought creates unnumber'd scenes of woe.
What if the lion in his rage I meet! --
Often in the dust I view his printed feet:
And fearful! often, when Day's declining light
Yields her pale empire to the mourner Night,
By hunger roused, he scours the groaning plain,
Gaunt wolves and sullen tigers in his train;
Before them Death with shrieks directs their way,
Fills the wild yell, and leads them to their prey.
" Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
" When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way!"
At that dead hour the silent asp shall creep,
If aught of rest I find, upon my sleep:
Or some swollen serpent twist his scales around,
And wake to anguish with a burning wound.
Thrice happy they, the wise contented poor,
From lust of wealth, and dread of death secure!
They tempt no deserts, and no griefs they find;
Peace rules the day, where reason rules the mind.
" Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
" When first from Schiraz' walls I bent my way!"
O hapless youth! for she thy love has won,
The tender Zara will be most undone;
Big swelled my heart, and owned the powerful maid,
When fast she dropped her tears, as thus she said:
" Farewell the youth whom sighs could not detain,
" Whom Zara's breaking heart implored in vain!
" Yet as thou go, may every blast arise,
" Weak and unfelt as these rejected sighs!
" Safe over the wild, no perils may thou see,
" No griefs endure, nor weep, false youth, like me."
O let me safely to the fair return,
Say with a kiss, she must not, shall not, mourn;
O! let me teach my heart to lose its fears,
Recalled by Wisdom's voice, and Zara's tears.
He said, and called on heaven to bless the day,
When back to Schiraz' walls he bent his way.
ECLOGUE III.
ABRA; OR, THE GEORGIAN SULTANA.
SCENE, A FOREST. TIME, THE EVENING. IN Georgia's land, where Tefflis' towers
are seen,
In distant view along the level green,
While evening dews enrich the glittering glade,
And the tall forests cast a longer shade,
What time it is sweet over fields of rice to stray,
Or scent the breathing maize at setting day;
Amidst the maids of Zagen's peaceful grove,
Emyra sung the pleasing cares of love.
Of Abra first began the tender strain,
Who led her youth with flocks upon the plain:
At morn she came, those willing flocks to lead
Where lillies rear them in the watery mead:
From early dawn the live-long hours she told,
'Till late at silent eve she penned the fold.
Deep in the grove, beneath the secret shade,
A various wreathe of odorous flowers she made:
That these flowers are found in very great abundance in some of the provinces
of Persia; see the Modern History of the ingenious Mr. Salmon.
Gay motley'd pinks and sweet jonquils she chose,
The violet blue that on the moss-bank grows;
All-sweet to sense, the flaunting rose was there:
The finished chaplet well adorned her hair.
Great Abbas chanced that fated morn to stray,
By love conducted from the chase away:
Among the vocal vales he heard her song,
And sought the vales and echoing groves among:
At length he found, and wooed the rural maid;
She knew the monarch, and with fear obeyed.
" Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
" And every Georgian maid like Abra loved."
The royal lover bore her from the plain;
Yet still her crook and bleating flock remain:
Often as she went, she backward turned her view,
And bad that crook and bleating flock adieu.
Fair happy maid! to other scenes remove,
To richer scenes of golden power and love!
Go leave the simple pipe, and shepherd's strain;
With love delight thee, and with Abbas reign.
" Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
" And every Georgian maid like Abra loved."
Yet midst the blaze of courts she fixed her love
On the cool fountain, or the shady grove;
Still with the shepherd's innocence her mind
To the sweet vale, and flowery mead inclined;
And often as Spring renewed the plains with flowers,
Breathed his soft gales, and led the fragrant Hours,
With sure return she sought the sylvan scene,
The breezy mountains, and the forests green.
Her maids around her moved, a duteous band!
Each bore a crook all-rural in her hand:
Some simple lay, of flocks and herds, they sung;
With joy the mountain and the forest rung.
" Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
" And every Georgian maid like Abra loved!"
And often the royal lover left the care
And thorns of state, attendant on the fair;
Often to the shades and low roof'd cots retired,
Or sought the vale where first his heart was fired:
A russet mantle, like a swain, he wore,
And thought of crowns and busy courts no more.
" Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
" And every Georgian maid like Abra loved!"
Blessed was the life that royal Abbas led:
Sweet was his love, and innocent his bed.
What if in wealth the noble maid excel;
The simple shepherd girl can love as well.
Let those who rule on Persia's jewell'd throne,
Be famed for love, and gentlest love alone;
Or wreathe, like Abbas, full of fair renown,
The lover's myrtle with the warrior's crown.
O happy days! the maids around her say;
O haste, profuse of blessings, haste away!
" Be every youth like royal Abbas moved,
" And every Georgian maid like Abra loved!"
ECLOGUE IV.
AGIB AND SECANDER; OR, THE FUGITIVES.
SCENE, A MOUNTAIN IN CIRCASSIA. TIME, MIDNIGHT. IN fair Circassia, where, to
love inclined,
Each swain was blessed, for every maid was kind;
At that still hour, when awful midnight reigns,
And none, but wretches, haunt the twilight plains;
What time the moon had hung her lamp on high,
And past in radiance through the cloudless sky;
Sad over the dews, two brother shepherds sled,
Where wildering fear and desperate sorrow led:
Fast as they pressed their flight, behind them lay
Wide ravaged plains, and valleys stole away.
Along the mountain's bending sides they ran,
'Till faint and weak, Secander thus began:
SECANDER. O stay thee, Agib, for my feet deny,
No longer friendly to my life, to fly.
Friend of my heart, O turn thee and survey,
Trace our sad flight through all its length of way!
And first review that long-extended plain,
And yon wide groves, already past with pain!
Yon ragged cliff, whose dangerous path we tried!
And last this lofty mountain's weary side!

AGIB. Weak as thou art, yet hapless must thou know
The toils of flight, or some severer woe!
Still as I haste, the Tartar shouts behind,
And shrieks and sorrows load the saddening wind:
In rage of heart, with ruin in his hand,
He blasts our harvests, and deforms our land.
Yon citron grove, whence first in fear we came,
Drops its fair honors to the conquering flame:
Far fly the swains, like us, in deep despair,
And leave to russian bands their fleecy care.

SECANDER. Unhappy land, whose blessings tempt the sword,
In vain, unheard, thou call'st thy Persian lord!
In vain thou court'st him, helpless, to thine aid,
To shield the shepherd, and protect the maid!
Far off, in thoughtless indolence resigned,
Soft dreams of love and pleasure soothe his mind:
'Midst fair sultanas lost in idle joy,
No wars alarm him, and no fears annoy.

AGIB. Yet these green hills, in summer's sultry heat,
Have lent the monarch often a cool retreat.
Sweet to the sight is Zabra's flowery plain,
And once by maids and shepherds loved in vain!
No more the virgins shall delight to rove
By Sargis' banks, or Irwan's shady grove;
On Tarkie's mountain catch the cooling gale,
Or breathe the sweets of Aly's flowery vale:
Fair scenes! but, ah! no more with peace possessed.
With ease alluring, and with plenty blessed.
No more the shepherds whitening tents appear,
Nor the kind products of a bounteous year;
No more the date, with snowy blossoms crowned
But Ruin spreads her baleful fires around.

SECANDER. In vain Circassia boasts her spicy groves,
For ever famed for pure and happy loves:
In vain she boasts her fairest of the fair,
Their eyes blue languish, and their golden hair,
Those eyes in tears their fruitless grief must send;
Those hairs the Tartar's cruel hand shall rend.

AGIB. Ye Georgian swains, that piteous learn from far
Circassia's ruin, and the waste of war;
Some weightier arms than crooks and staffs prepare,
To shield your harvests, and defend your fair:
The Turk and Tartar like designs pursue,
Fixed to destroy, and steadfast to undo.
Wild as his land, in native deserts bred,
By lust incited, or by malice led,
The villain Arab, as he prowls for prey,
Often marks with blood and wasting flames the way;
Yet none so cruel as the Tartar foe,
To death inured, and nursed in scenes of woe.
He said; when loud along the vale was heard
A shriller shriek, and nearer fires appeared:
The affrighted shepherds through the dews of night,
Wide over the moonlight hills renewed their flight.

ODE ON THE DEATH OF MR. JAMES THOMSON.
BY THE SAME.
IN yonder The scene of the following stanzas is supposed to lie on the Thames
near Richmond.
grove a Druid lies
Where slowly winds the stealing wave!
The year's best sweets shall duteous rise
To deck its Poet's sylvan grave!
In yon deep bed of whispering reeds
His airy harp The harp of Aeolus, of which see a description in the Castle of
Indolence.
shall now be laid,
That he, whose heart in sorrow bleeds,
May love through life the soothing shade.
Then maids and youths shall linger here,
And while its sounds at distance swell,
Shall sadly seem in Pity's ear
To hear the woodland pilgrim's knell.
Remembrance often shall haunt the shore
When Thames in summer wreaths is dressed,
And often suspend the dashing oar
To bid his gentle spirit rest!
And often as Ease and Health retire
To breezy lawn, or forest deep,
The friend shall view yon whitening Richmond church.
spire,
And mid the varied landscape weep.
But thou, who own'st that earthy bed,
Ah! what will every dirge avail?
Or tears, which Love and Pity shed,
That mourn beneath the gliding sail!
Yet lives there one, whose heedless eye
Shall scorn thy pale shrine glimmering near!
With him, sweet Bard, may Fancy die,
And Joy desert the blooming year.
But thou, lorn stream, whose sullen tide
No sedge-crown'd Sisters now attend,
Now waft me from the green-hill's side
Whose cold turf hides the buried friend!
And see, the fairy valleys fade,
Dun Night has veiled the solemn view!
-- Yet once again, dear parted shade,
Meek Nature's child, again adieu!
The genial meads assigned to bless
Thy life, shall mourn thy early doom,
Their hinds, and shepherd-girls shall dress
With simple hands thy rural tomb.
Long, long, thy stone and pointed clay
Shall melt the musing Briton's eyes;
O! vales, and wild woods, shall he say,
In yonder grave your Druid lies!
ODE TO PITY.
BY THE SAME.
O Thou, the friend of man assigned,
With balmy hands his wounds to bind,
And charm his frantic woe:
When first Distress, with dagger keen,
Broke forth to waste his destined scene,
His wild unsated foe!
By Pella's Euripides.
bard, a magic name,
By all the griefs his thought could frame,
Receive my humble rite:
Long, Pity, let the nations view
Thy sky-worn robes of tenderest blue,
And eyes of dewy light!
But wherefore need I wander wide
To old Ilissus' distant side,
Deserted stream, and mute?
Wild Arun A river in Sussex.
too has heard thy strains,
And Echo, 'midst my native plains,
Been soothed by Pity's lute.
There first the wren thy myrtles shed
On gentlest Otway's infant head,
To him thy cell was shown;
And while he sung, the female heart,
With youth's soft notes unspoil'd by art,
Thy turtles mixed their own.
Come, Pity, come, by Fancy's aid,
Even now my thoughts, relenting maid,
Thy temple's pride design:
Its southern site, its truth complete,
Shall raise a wild enthusiast heat
In all who view the shrine.
There Picture's toils shall well relate;
How chance, or hard involving fate,
Over mortal bliss prevail:
The buskined Muse shall near her stand,
And sighing prompt her tender hand,
With each disastrous tale.
There let me often, retired by day,
In dreams of passion melt away,
Allowed with thee to dwell:
There waste the mournful lamp of night,
Till, Virgin, thou again delight
To hear a British shell!
ODE TO SIMPLICITY.
BY THE SAME.
O Thou by Nature taught,
To breathe her genuine thought,
In numbers warmly pure, and sweetly strong:
Who first on mountains wild,
In Fancy, loveliest child,
Thy babe, or Pleasure's, nursed the powers of song!
Thou, who with hermit heart
Disdain'st the wealth of Art,
And gauds, and pageant weeds, and trailing pall:
But come a decent maid,
In Attic robe arrayed,
O chaste, unboastful nymph, to thee I call!
By all the honey'd store
On Hybla's thymy shore,
By all her blooms and mingled murmurs dear;
By her, whose love-lorn woe,
In evening musings slow,
Soothed sweetly sad Electra's poet's ear:
By old Cephisus deep,
Who spread his wavy sweep
In warbled wanderings round the green retreat,
On whose enameled side,
When holy Freedom died,
No equal haunt allured thy future feet,
O sister meek of Truth,
To my admiring youth,
Thy sober aid and native charms infuse!
The flowers that sweetest breathe,
Though Beauty culled the wreath,
Still ask thy hand to range their ordered hues.
While Rome could none esteem,
But Virtue's patriot theme,
You loved her hills, and led the laureat band:
But staid to sing alone
To one distinguished throne,
And turned thy face, and fled her altered land.
No more, in hall or bower,
The passions own thy power,
Love, only love, her forceless numbers mean:
For thou have left her shrine,
Nor olive more, nor vine,
Shall gain thy feet to bless the servile scene.
Though Taste, though Genius bless
To some divine excess,
Faint's the cold work till thou inspire the whole;
What each, what all supply,
May court, may charm your eye,
Thou, only thou, can raise the meeting soul!
Of these let others ask,
To aid some mighty task,
I only seek to find thy temperate vale:
Where often my reed might sound
To maids and shepherds round,
And all thy sons, O Nature, learn my tale.
ODE TO PEACE,
BY THE SAME.
O Thou, who bad'st thy turtles bear
Swift from his grasp thy golden hair,
And sought'st thy native skies:
When War, by vultures drawn from far,
To Britain bent his iron car,
And bad his storms arise!
Tired of his rude tyrannic sway,
Our youth shall fix some festive day,
His sullen shrines to burn:
But thou, who hear'st the turning spheres,
What sounds may charm thy partial ears,
And gain thy blessed return!
O Peace, thy injured robes up-bind,
O rise, and leave not one behind
Of all thy beamy train:
The British lion, goddess sweet,
Lies stretched on earth to kiss thy feet,
And own thy holier reign.
Let others court thy transient smile,
But come to grace thy western isle,
By warlike Honor led!
And, while around her ports rejoice,
While all her sons adore thy choice,
With him for ever wed!
ODE TO MERCY.
BY THE SAME.
STROPHE.
O Thou, who sit'st a smiling bride
By Valor's armed and awsul side,
Gentlest of sky-born forms, and best adored:
Who often with songs, divine to hear,
Win'st from his fatal grasp the spear,
And hid'st in wreaths of flowers his bloodless sword!
Thou who, amidst the deathful field,
By godlike chiefs alone beheld,
Often with thy bosom bare art found,
Pleading for him the youth who sinks to ground:
See, Mercy, see, with pure and loaded hands,
Before thy shrine my country's Genius stands,
And decks thy altar still, though pierced with many a wound!
ANTISTROPHE.
When he whom even our joys provoke,
The Fiend of Nature joined his yoke,
And rushed in wrath to make our isle his prey;
Thy form, from out thy sweet abode,
O'ertook him on his blasted road,
And stopped his wheels and looked his rage away.
I see recoil his sable steeds,
That bore him swift to savage deeds,
Thy tender melting eyes they own;
O Maid, for all thy love to Britain shown,
Where Justice bars her iron tower,
To thee we build a roseate bower,
Thou, thou shall rule our queen, and share our monarch's throne!
ODE TO LIBERTY.
BY THE SAME.
STROPHE.
WHO shall awake the Spartan fife,
And call in solemn sounds to life
The youths, whose locks divinely spreading,
Like vernal hyacinths in sullen hue,
At once the breath of fear and virtue shedding,
Applauding Freedom loved of old to view?
What new Alcaeus Alluding to a beautiful fragment of Alcaeus;
fancy-blest,
Shall sing the sword in myrtles dressed,
At Wisdom's shrine awhile its flame concealing,
(What place so fit to seal a deed renowned?)
Till she her brightest lightnings round revealing,
It leaped in glory forth, and dealt her prompted wound!
O Goddess, in that feeling hour,
When most its sounds would court thy ears,
Let not my shell's misguided power
Ever draw thy sad, thy mindful tears.
No, Freedom, no, I will not tell,
How Rome, before thy weeping face,
With heaviest sound, a giant-statue, fell,
Pushed by a wild and artless race
From off its wide ambitious base,
When Time his northern sons of spoil awoke,
And all the blended work of strength and grace,
With many a rude repeated stroke,
And many a barbarous yell, to thousand fragments broke.
EPODE.
Yet even, wherever the least appeared,
The admiring world thy hand revered;
Still, 'midst the scattered states around,
Some remnants of her strength were found;
They saw, by what escaped the storm,
How wondrous rose her perfect form;
How in the great, the labored whole,
Each mighty master poured his soul!
For sunny Florence, seat of art,
Beneath her vines preserved a part,
Till they The family of the Medici.
, whom Science loved to name,
(O who could fear it i) quenched her flame.
And lo, an humbler relic laid
In jealous Pisa's olive shade!
See small Marino The little republic of San Marino.
joins the theme,
Though least, not last in thy esteem:
Strike, louder strike the ennobling strings
To those The Venetians.
, whose merchant sons were kings;
To him The Doge of Venice.
, who, decked with pearly pride,
In Adria weds his green-hair'd bride.
Hail port of glory, wealth, and pleasure,
Never let me change this Lydian measure:
Nor ever her former pride relate,
To sad Liguria's Genoa.
bleeding state.
Ah no! more pleased thy haunts I seek,
On wild Helvetia's Switzerland.
mountains bleak:
(Where, when the favored of thy choice,
The daring archer heard thy voice;
Forth from his eyrie roused in dread,
The ravening eagle northward fled.)
Or dwell in willow'd meads more near.
With those The Dutch, among whom there are very severe penalties for those who
are convicted of killing this bird. They are kept tame in almost all their
towns, and particularly at the Hague, of the arms of which they make a part.
The common people of Holland are said to entertain a superstitious sentiment,
that if the whole species of them should become extinct, they should lose their
liberties.
to whom thy stork is dear:
Those whom the rod of Alva bruised,
Whose crown a British queen Queen Elizabeth.
refused!
The magic works, thou feel'st the strains,
One holier name alone remains;
The perfect spell shall then avail,
Hail nymph, adored by Britain, hail!
ANTISTROPHE.
Beyond, the measure vast of thought,
The works, the wizzard Time has wrought!
The Gaul, it is held of antique story,
Saw Britain linked to his now adverse strand This tradition is mentioned by
several of our old historians. Some naturalists too have endeavored to support
the probability of the fact, by arguments drawn from the correspondent
disposition of the two opposite coasts. I do not remember that any poetical use
has been hitherto made of it.
,
No sea between, nor cliff sublime and hoary,
He passed with unwet feet through all our land.
To the blown Baltic then, they say,
The wild waves found another way,
Where Orcas howls, his wolfish mountains rounding;
Till all the banded West at once 'gan rise,
A wide wild storm even Nature's self confounding,
Withering her giant sons with strange uncouth surprise.
This pillar'd earth so firm and wide,
By winds and inward labors torn,
In thunders dread was pushed aside,
And down the should'ring billows born.
And see, like gems her laughing train,
The little isles on every side,
Mona There is a tradition in the isle of Man, that a mermaid becoming
enamoured of a young man of extraordinary beauty, took an opportunity of
meeting him one day as he walked on the shore, and opened her passion to him,
but was received with a coldness, occasioned by his horror and surprise at her
appearance. This however was so misconstrued by the sealady, that in revenge
for his treatment of her, she punished the whole island, by covering it with a
mist, so that all who attempted to carry on any commerce with it, either never
arrived at it, but wandered up and down the sea, or were on a sudden wrecked
upon its cliffs.
, once hid from those who search the main,
Where thousand elsin shapes abide,
And Wight who checks the westering tide,
For thee consenting heaven has each bestowed,
A fair attendant on her sovereign pride:
To thee this blessed divorce she owed,
For thou have made her vales thy loved, thy last abode!
SECOND EPODE.
Then too, it is said, an hoary pile,
'Midst the green navel of our isle,
Thy shrine in some religious wood,
O soul-enforcing goddess, stood!
There often the painted native's feet
Were wont thy form celestial meet:
Though now with hopeless toil we trace
Time's backward rolls, to find its place;
Whether the fiery-tressed Dane,
Or Roman's self o'erturn'd the fane,
Or in what heaven-left age it fell,
'Twere hard for modern song to tell.
Yet still, if Truth those beams infuse,
Which guide at once, and charm the Muse,
Beyond yon braided clouds that lie,
Paving the light-embroider'd sky:
Amidst the Bright pavillion'd plains,
The beauteous model still remains.
There happier than in islands blessed,
Or bowers by Spring or Hebe dressed,
The chiefs who fill our Albion's story,
In warlike weeds, retired in glory,
Hear their consorted Druids sing
Their triumphs to the immortal string.
How may the poet now unfold,
What never tongue or numbers told?
How learn delighted, and amazed,
What hands unknown that fabric raised!
Even now, before his favored eyes,
In Gothic pride it seems to rise!
Yet Graecia's graceful orders join,
Majestic through the mixed design;
The secret builder knew to choose,
Each sphere-found gem of richest hues:
Whatever heaven's purer mould contains,
When nearer suns emblaze its veins;
There on the walls the patriot's sight
May ever hang with fresh delight,
And, engraved with some prophetic rage,
Read Albion's same through every age.
Ye forms divine, ye laureat band,
That near her inmost altar stand!
Now sooth her, to her blisssul train
Blythe Concord's social form to gain:
Concord, whose myrtle wand can steep
Even Anger's blood-shot eyes in sleep:
Before whose breathing bosom's balm,
Rage drops his steel, and storms grow calm;
Her let our sires and matrons hoar
Welcome to Britain's ravaged shore,
Our youths, enamored of the fair,
Play with the tangles of her hair,
Till, in one loud applauding found,
The nations shout to her around,
O how supremely art thou blessed,
Thou, Lady, thou shall rule the west!
ODE TO FEAR.
BY THE SAME.
THOU, to whom the world unknown
With all its shadowy shapes is shown;
Who see appalled the unreal scene,
While Fancy lifts the veil between:
Ah Fear! ah frantic Fear!
I see, I see thee near.
I know thy hurried step, thy haggard eye!
Like thee I start, like thee disordered fly.
For lo what monsrers in thy train appear!
Danger, whose limbs of giant mold
What mortal eye can fixed behold?
Who stalks his round, an hideous form,
Howling amidst the midnight storm.
Or throws him on the ridgy steep
Of some loose hanging rock to sleep.
And with him thousand phantoms joined,
Who prompt to deeds accursed the mind:
And those, the fiends, who near allied,
Over Nature's wounds, and wrecks preside;
While Vengeance, in the lurid air,
Lifts her red arm, exposed and bare:
On whom that ravening brood of Fate,
Who lap the blood of Sorrow, wait;
Who, Fear, this ghastly train can see,
And look not madly wild, like thee?
EPODE.
In earliest Greece to thee, with partial choice,
The grief-full Muse addressed her infant tongue;
The maids and matrons, on her awful voice,
Silent and pale in wild amazement hung.
Yet he, the Bard Aeschylus.
who first invoked thy name,
Disdained in Marathon its power to feel:
For not alone he nursed the poet's flame,
But reached from Virtue's hand the patriot's steel.
But who is he whom later garlands grace,
Who left awhile over Hybla's dews to rove,
With trembling eyes thy dreary steps to trace,
Where thou and furies shared the baleful grove?
Wrapped in thy cloudy veil the incestuous Queen Jocasta.

Sighed the sad call her son and husband heard,
When once alone it broke the silent scene,
And he the wretch of Thebes no more appeared.
O Fear, I know thee by my throbbing heart,
Thy withering power inspired each mournful line,
Though gentle Pity claim her mingled part,
Yet all the thunders of the scene are thine!
ANTISTROPHE.
Thou who such weary lengths have past,
Where will thou rest, mad Nymph, at last?
Say, will thou shroud in haunted cell,
Where gloomy Rape and Murder dwell?
Or in some hallowed seat,
Against which the big waves beat?
Hear drowning seamens cries in tempests brought!
Dark Power, with shuddering meek submitted thought,
Be mine, to read the visions old,
Which thy awakening bards have told:
And, lest thou meet my blasted view,
Hold each strange tale devoutly true;
Never be I found by thee o'er-aw'd,
In that thrice-hallow'd eve abroad,
When ghosts, as cottage-maids believe,
Their pebbled beds permitted leave,
And goblins haunt from fire, or fen,
Or mine, or flood, the walks of men!
O thou, whose spirit most possessed
The sacred seat of Shakespeare's breast!
By all that from thy Prophet broke,
In thy divine emotions spoke:
Hither again thy fury deal,
Teach me but once like him to feel:
His cypress wreath my meed decree,
And I, O Fear, will dwell with thee!
ODE ON THE POETICAL CHARACTER.
BY THE SAME.
AS once, if not with light regard,
I read aright that gifted Bard,
(Him whose school above the rest
His loveliest Elsin queen has blessed)
One, only one, unrivaled fair Florimel. See Spenser, Leg. 4th.

Might hope the magic girdle wear,
At solemn turney hung on high,
The wish of each love-darting eye.
Lo! to each other nymp in turn applied,
As if, in air unseen, some hovering hand,
Some chaste and angel-friend to virgin fame,
With whispered spell had burst the starting band,
It left unblest her loathed dishonored side;
Happier, hopeless fair, if never
Her baffled hand with vain endeavor
Had touched that fatal zone to her denied!
Young Fancy thus, to me divinest name,
To whom, prepared and bathed in heaven,
The cest of amplest power is given:
To few the god like gift assignt,
To gird their blessed prophetic loins,
And gaze her visions wild, and feel unmixed her flame.
The band, as fairy legends say,
Was wove on that creating day,
When he, who called with thought to birth
Yon tented sky, this laughing earth,
And dressed with springs, and forests tall,
And poured the main engirting all,
Long by the loved enthusiast wooed,
Himself in some diviner mood,
Retiring, sat with her alone,
And placed her on his sapphire throne,
The whiles, the vaulted shrine around,
Seraphic wires were heard to sound!
Now sublimest triumph swelling,
Now on love and mercy dwelling;
And she, from out the veiling cloud,
Breathed her magic notes aloud:
And thou, thou rich-hair'd youth of morn,
And all thy subject life was born!
The dangerous passions kept aloof,
Far from the sainted growing woof:
But near it sat ecstatic Wonder,
Listening the deep applauding thunder:
And Truth, in sunny vest arrayed,
By whose the Tarsol's eyes were made:
All the shadowy tribes of Mind,
In braided dance their murmurs joined,
And all the bright uncounted Powers,
Who feed on heaven's ambrosial flowers.
Where is the Bard, whose soul can now
Its high presuming hopes avow?
Where he who thinks, with rapture blind,
This hallowed work for him designed?
High on some cliff, to heaven up-pil'd,
Of rude access, of prospect wild,
Where, tangled round the jealous steep,
Strange shades o'erbrow the valleys deep,
And holy Genii guard the rock,
Its glooms embrown, its springs unlock,
While on its rich ambitious head,
An Eden, like his own, lies spread.
I view that oak, the fancied glades among,
By which as Milton lay, his evening ear,
From many a cloud that dropped ethereal dew,
Nigh spher'd in heaven its native strains could hear:
On which that ancient trump he reached was hung;
Thither of his glory greeting,
From Waller's myrtle shades retreating,
With many a vow from Hope's aspiring tongue,
My trembling feet his guiding steps pursue;
In vain -- Such bliss to one alone,
Of all the sons of soul was known,
And Heaven, and Fancy, kindred powers,
Have now o'erturn'd the inspiring bowers,
Or curtain'd close such scene from every future view.
THE MANNERS. AN ODE.
BY THE SAME.
FArewell, for clearer ken designed,
The dim-discover'd tracts of mind:
Truths which, from action's paths retired,
My silent search in vain required!
No more my sail that deep explores,
No more I search those magic shores,
What regions part the world of soul,
Or whence thy streams, Opinion, roll:
If ever I round such fairy field,
Some Power impart the spear and shield,
At which the wizzard Passions fly,
By which the giant Follies die!
Farewell the porch, whose roof is seen,
Arched with the enlivening olive's green:
Where Science prank'd in tissu'd vest,
By Reason, Pride, and Fancy dressed,
Comes like a bride, so trim arrayed,
To wed with Doubt in Plato's shade!
Youth of the quick uncheated sight,
Thy walks, Observance, more invite!
O thou, who love that ampler range,
Where life's wide prospects round thee change,
And, with her mingling sons allied,
Throw'st the prattling page aside:
To me in converse sweet impart,
To read in man the native heart,
To learn, where Science sure is found,
From Nature as she lives around:
And gazing often her mirror true,
By turns each shifting image view!
Till meddling Art's officious lore
Reverse the lessons taught before,
Alluring from a safer rule,
To dream in her enchanted school;
Thou heaven, whatever of great we boast,
Have blessed this social science most.
Retiring hence to thoughtful cell,
As Fancy breathes her potent spell,
Not vain she finds the charmful task,
In pageant quaint, in motley mask,
Behold, before her musing eyes,
The countless Manners round her rise;
While ever varying as they pass,
To some Contempt applies her glass:
With these the white-rob'd Maids combine,
And those the laughing Satyrs join!
But who is he whom now she views,
In robe of wild contending hues?
Thou, by the Passions nursed; I greet
The comic sock that binds thy feet!
O Humor, thou whose name is known
To Britain's favored isle alone;
Me too amidst thy band admit,
There where the young-ey'd healthful Wit,
(Whose jewels in his crisped hair
Are placed each other's beams to share,
Whom no delights from thee divide)
In laughter loosed attends thy side!
By old Miletus Alluding to the Milesian tales, some of the earliest romances.
, who so long
Has ceased his love-inwoven song:
By all you taught the Tuscan maids,
In changed Italia's modern shades:
By him Cervantes.
whose knight's distinguished name
Refined a nation's lust of fame;
Whose tales even now, with echoes sweet,
Castilia's Moorish h lls repeat:
Or him Monsieur Le Sage, author of the incomparable adventures of Gii Blas de
Santillane, who died in Paris in the year 1745.
, whom Seine's blue nymphs deplore,
In watchet weeds on Gallia's shore,
Who drew the sad Sicilian maid,
By virtues in her sire betrayed:
O Nature boon, from proceed
Each forceful thought, each prompted deed;
If but from thee I hope to feel,
On all my heart imprint thy seal!
Let some retreating Cynic find
Those oft-turn'd scrolls I leave behind,
The Sports and I this hour agree,
To rove thy scene-full world with thee!
THE PASSIONS. AN ODE.
BY THE SAME.
WHEN Music, heavenly maid, was young,
While yet in early Greece she sung,
The Passions often, to hear her shell,
Thronged around her magic cell,
Exulting, trembling, raging, fainting,
Possessed beyond the Muse's painting;
By turns they felt the glowing mind
Disturbed, delighted, raised, refined.
Till once, it is said, when all were fired,
Filled with fury, rapt, inspired,
From the supporting myrtles round
They snatched her instruments of sound,
And as they often had heard apart
Sweet lessons of her sorceful art,
Each, for madness ruled the hour,
Would prove his own expressive power.
First Fear his hand, its skill to try,
Amid the chords bewildered laid,
And back recoiled he knew not why,
Even at the sound himself had made.
Next Anger rushed, his eyes on fire,
In lightnings owned his secret stings,
In one rude clash he struck the lyre,
And swept with hurried hand the strings.
With woeful measures wan Despair
Low sullen sounds his grief beguiled,
A solemn, strange, and mingled air,
'Twas sad by fits, by starts 'twas wild.
But thou, O Hope, with eyes so fair,
What was thy delighted measure?
Still it whispered promised pleasure,
And bade the lovely scenes at distance hail!
Still would her touch the strain prolong,
And from the rocks, the woods, the vale,
She called on Echo still through all the song;
And where her sweetest theme she chose,
A soft responsive voice was heard at every close,
And Hope enchanted smiled, and waved her golden hair.
And longer had she sung, -- but, with a frown,
Revenge impatient rose,
He threw his blood-stained sword in thunder down,
And, with a withering look,
The war- denouncing trumpet took,
And blew a blast so loud and dread,
Were never prophetic sounds so full of woe.
And ever and anon he beat
The doubling drum with furious heat:
And though sometimes, each dreary pause between,
Dejected Pity at his side,
Her soul-subduing voice applied,
Yet still he kept his wild unaltered mien,
While each strained ball of sight seemed bursting from his head.
Thy numbers, Jealousy, to naught were fixed,
Sad proof of thy distressful state,
Of differing themes the veering song was mixed,
And now it courted Love, now raving called on Hate.
With eyes up-rais'd, as one inspired,
Pale Melancholy sat retired,
And from her wild sequestered seat,
In notes by distance made more sweet,
Poured through the mellow horn her pensive soul:
And dashing soft from rocks around,
Bubbling runnels joined the sound;
Through glades and glooms the mingled measure stole,
Or over some haunted streams with fond delay,
Round an holy calm diffusing,
Love of peace, and lonely musing,
In hollow murmurs died away.
But O, how altered was its sprightlier tone!
When Cheerfulness, a nymph of healthiest hue,
Her bow across her shoulder flung,
Her buskins gemm'd with morning dew,
Blew an inspiring air, that dale and thicket rung,
The hunter's call to Faun and Dryad known!
The oak-crown'd Sisters, and their chaste-eyed Queen,
Satyrs and Sylvan boys were seen,
Peeping from forth their alleys green;
Brown Exercise rejoiced to hear,
And Sport leapt up, and seized his beechen spear.
Last came Joy's ecstatic trial,
He with viny crown advancing,
First to the lively pipe his hand addressed,
But soon he saw the brisk awakening viol,
Whose sweet entrancing voice he loved the best.
They would have thought, who heard the strain,
They saw in Tempe's vale her native maids,
Amidst the festal sounding shades,
To some unwearied minstrel dancing,
While, as his flying fingers kissed the strings,
Love framed with Mirth, a gay fantastic round,
Loose were her tresses seen, her zone unbound,
And he, amidst his frolic play,
As if he would the charming air repay,
Shook thousand odours from his dewy wings.
O Music, sphere-descended maid,
Friend of pleasure, wisdom's aid,
Why, Goddess, why to us denied?
Lay'st thou thy ancient lyre aside?
As in that loved Athenian bower,
You learned an all-commanding power,
Thy mimic soul, O nymph endeared,
Can well recall what then it heard.
Where is thy native simple heart,
Devote to virtue, fancy, art?
Arise, as in that elder time,
Warm, energic, chaste, sublime!
Thy wonders, in that god-like age,
Fill thy recording Sister's page --
It Is said, and I believe the tale,
Thy humblest reed could more prevail,
Had more of strength, divinder rage,
Than all which charms this laggard age,
Even all at once together found
Caecilia's mingled world of sound --
O bid our vain endeavors cease,
Revive the just designs of Greece,
Return in all thy simple state!
Confirm the tales her sons relate!
WRITTEN ON A PAPER, WHICH CONTAINED A PIECE OF BRIDE CAKE: GIVEN TO THE AUTHOR
BY A LADY.
BY THE SAME.
YE curious hands, that hid from vulgar eyes,
By search profane shall find this hallowed cake,
With Virtue's awe forbear the sacred prize,
Nor dare a theft for Love and Pity's sake!
This precious relick, formed by magic power
Beneath the shepherd's haunted pillow laid,
Was meant by Love to charm the silent hour,
The secret present of a matchless maid.
The Cyprian queen, at Hymen's fond request,
Each nice ingredient chose with happiest art;
Fears, sighs, and wishes of the enamored breast,
And pains that please are mixed in every part.
With rosy hand the spicy fruit she brought
From Paphian hills, and fair Cythera's isle;
And tempered sweet with these the melting thought,
The kiss ambrosial and the yielding smile.
Ambiguous looks, that scorn and yet relent,
Denials mild, and firm unaltered truth,
Reluctant pride, and amorous faint consent,
And meeting ardours, and exulting youth.
Sleep, wayward God! has sworn while these remain,
With flattering dreams to dry his nightly tear,
And cheerful Hope, so often invoked in vain,
With fairy songs shall sooth his pensive ear.
If bound by vows to Friendship's gentle side,
And fond of soul, thou hop'st an equal grace,
If youth or maid thy joys and griefs divide,
O much entreated, leave this fatal place.
Sweet Peace, who long has shunned my plaintive day,
Consents at length to bring me short delight,
Thy careless steps may scare her doves away,
And Grief with raven note usurp the night.
LONDON: OR, THE PROGRESS OF COMMERCE.
BY MR. GLOVER.
YE northern blasts, and The east wind.
Eurus, wont to sweep
With rudest pinions over the furrowed waves,
Awhile suspend your violence, and waft
From sandy Bremen is situated on the Weser, and Hamburg on the Elb.
Weser and the broad-mouth'd Elb
My freighted vessels to the destined shore,
Safe over the unruffled main; let every thought,
Which may disquiet, and alarm my breast,
Be absent now; that, dispossessed of care,
And free from every tumult of the mind,
With each disturbing passion hushed to peace,
I may pour all my spirit on the theme,
Which opens now before me, and demands
The loftiest strain. The eagle, when he towers
Beyond the clouds, the fleecy robes of heaven,
Disdains all objects but the golden sun,
Full on the effulgent orb directs his eye,
And sails exulting through the blaze of day;
So, while her wing attempts the boldest flight,
Rejecting each inferior theme of praise,
Thee, ornament of Europe, Albion's pride,
Fair seat of wealth and freedom, thee my Muse
Shall celebrate, O London: thee she hails.
Thou loved abode of Commerce, last retreat,
Whence she contemplates with a tranquil mind
Her various wanderings from the fated hour
That she abandoned her maternal clime;
Neptunian Commerce, whom Phoenice bore,
Illustrious nymph, that named the fertile plains
Along the sounding main extended far,
Which flowery Carmel with its sweet perfumes,
And with its cedars Libanus o'ershades:
Her from the bottom of the watery world,
As once she stood, in radiant beauties graced,
To mark the heaving tide, the piercing eye
Of Neptune viewed enamored: from the deep
The God ascending rushes to the beach,
And clasps the affrighted virgin. From that day,
Soon as the paly regent of the night
Nine times her monthly progress had renewed
Through heaven's illumined vault, Phoenice, led
By shame, once more the sea-worn margin sought:
There paced with painful steps the barren sands,
A solitary mourner, and the surge,
Which gently rolled beside her, now no more
With placid eyes beholding, thus exclaimed.
Ye fragrant shrubs and cedars, lofty shade,
Which crown my native hills, ye spreading palms,
That rise majestic on these fruitful meads,
With you, who gave the lost Phoenice birth,
And you, who bear the endearing name of friends,
Once faithful partners of my chaster hours,
Farewell! To thee, perfidious God, I come,
Bent down with pain and anguish on thy sands,
I come thy suppliant: death is all I crave;
Bid thy devouring waves inwrap my head,
And to the bottom whelm my cares and shame!
She ceased, when sudden from the enclosing deep
A crystal car emerg'd, with glittering shells,
Culled from their oozy beds by Tethys' train,
And blushing coral decked, whose ruddy glow
Mixed with the watery luster of the pearl.
A smiling band of sea-born nymphs attend,
Who from the shore with gentle hands convey
The fear-subdu'd Phoenice, and along
The lucid chariot place. As there with dread
All mute, and struggling with her painful throes
She lay, the winds by Neptune's high command
Were silent round her; not a zephyr dared
To wanton over the cedar's branching top,
Nor on the plain the stately palm was seen
To wave its graceful verdure; over the main
No undulation broke the smooth expanse,
But all was hushed and motionless around,
All but the lightly-sliding ear, impelled
Along the level azure by the strength
Of active Tritons, rivalling in speed
The rapid meteor, whose sulphurous train
Glides over the brow of darkness, and appears
The livid ruins of a falling star.
Beneath the Lybian skies, a blissful isle,
By Triton, a river and lake of ancient Lybia.
Triton's floods encircled, Nysa lay.
Here youthful Nature wantoned in delights,
And here the guardians of the bounteous horn,
While it was now the infancy of time,
Nor yet the uncultivated globe had learned
To smile, Fruitfulness.
Eucarpe, Plenty.
Dapsilea dwelt,
With all the nymphs, whose secret care had nursed
The eldest Bacchus. From the flowery shore
A turf-clad valley opens, and along
Its verdure mild the willing feet allures;
While on its sloping sides ascends the pride
Of hoary groves, high-arching over the vale
With day-rejecting gloom. The solemn shade
Half round a spacious lawn at length expands,
This whole description of the rock and grotto is taken from Diod. Siculus,
lib. 3. page 202.
Closed by a towering cliff, whose forehead glows
With azure, purple, and ten thousand dies,
From its resplendent fragments beaming round;
Nor less irradiate colors from beneath
On every side an ample grot reflects,
As down the perforated rock the sun
Pours his meridian blaze! revered abode
Of Nysa's nymphs, with every plant attired,
That wears undying green, refreshed with rills
From ever-living fountains, and enriched
With all Pomona's bloom: unfading flowers
Glow on the mead, and spicy shrubs perfume
With inexhausted sweets the cooling gale,
Which breathes incessant there; while every bird
Of tuneful note his gay or plaintive song
Blends with the warble of meandring streams,
Which over their pebbled channels murmuring lave
The fruit-invested hills, that rise around.
The gentle Nereids to this calm recess
Phoenice bear; nor Dapfilea bland,
Nor good Eucarpe, studious to obey
Great Neptune's will, their hospitable care
Refuse; nor long Lucina is invoked.
Soon as the wondrous infant sprung to day,
Earth rocked around; with all their nodding woods,
And streams reverting to their troubled source,
The mountain shook, while Lybia's neighboring god,
Mysterious Ammon, from his hollow cell
With deep-resounding accent thus to heaven,
To earth, and sea, the mighty birth proclaimed.
A newborn power behold! whom Fate has called
The Gods' imperfect labor to complete
This wide creation. She in lonely sands
Shall bid the tower-encircled city rise,
The barren sea shall people, and the wilds
Of dreary nature shall with plenty cloth;
She shall enlighten man's unlettered race,
And with endearing intercourse unite
Remotest nations, scorched by sultry suns,
Or freezing near the snow-encrusted pole:
Wherever the joyous vine disdains to grow,
The fruitful olive, or the golden ear;
Her hand divine, with interposing aid
To every climate shall the gifts supply
Of Ceres, Bacchus, and Minerva, the tutelary goddess of the Athenians, to whom
she gave the olive.
the Athenian maid:
The graces, joys, emoluments of life
From her exhaustless bounty all shall flow.
The heavenly prophet ceased. Olympus heard.
Straight from their star-bespangled thrones descend
On blooming Nysa a celestial band
The ocean's lord to honor in his child;
When over his offspring smiling thus began
The trident-ruler. Commerce be thy name:
To thee I give the empire of the main.
From where the morning breathes its eastern gale,
To the undiscovered limits of the West,
From chilling Boreas to extremest South
Thy sire's obsequious billows shall extend
Thy universal reign. Minerva next
With wisdom blessed her, Mercury with art,
Vulcan, the tutelary deity of Lemnos.
The Lemnian god with industry, and last
Majestic Phoebus, over the infant long
In contemplation pausing, thus declared
From his enraptured lip his matchless boon.
Thee with divine invention I endow,
That secret wonder, Goddess, to disclose,
By which the wise, the virtuous, and the brave,
The heaven-taught Poet and exploring Sage
Shall pass recorded to the verge of time.
Her years of childhood now were numbered over,
When to her mother's natal soil repaired
The new divinity, whose parting step
Her sacred nurses followed, ever now
To her alone inseparably joined;
Then first deserting their Nyseian shore
To spread their hoarded blessings round the world;
Who with them bore the inexhausted horn
Of ever-smiling Plenty. Thus adorned,
Attended thus, great Goddess, thou beganst
Thy all enlivening progress over the globe,
Then rude and joyless, destined to repair
The various ills, which earliest ages ru'd
From one, like thee, distinguished bu the gifts
Of heaven, Pandora, whose pernicious hand
From the dire vase released the imprisoned woes.
Thou, gracious Commerce, from his cheerless caves
In horrid rocks, and solitary woods,
The helpless wanderer man forlorn and wild
Did charm to sweet society; did cast
The deep foundations, where the future pride
Of mightiest cities rose, and over the main
Before the wondering Nereids did present
The surge-dividing keel, and stately mast,
Whose canvas wings, distending with the gale*
The bold Phoenician through Alcides' straits
To northern Albion's tin-embowel'd fields,
And often beneath the sea-obscuring brow
Of cloud-envelop'd Teneriff conveyed*
Next in sagacious thought the ethereal plains
Thou trodst, exploring each propitious star
The danger-braving mariner to guide;
Then all the latent and mysterious powers
Of number did unravel; last to crown
Thy bounties, Goddess, thy unrivaled toils
For man, still urging thy inventive mind,
Thou gav'st him Here the opinion of Sir Isaac Newton is followed, that letters
were first invented amongst the trading parts of the world.
letters; there imparting all,
Which lifts the ennobled spirit near to heaven,
Laws, learning, wisdom, nature's works revealed
By god-like Sages, all Minerva's arts,
Apollo's music, and the eternal voice
Of Virtue sounding from the historic roll,
The philosophic page, and poet's song.
Now solitude and silence from the shores
Retreat on pathless mountains to reside,
Barbarity is polished, infant arts
Bloom in the desert, and benignant peace
With hospitality begin to sooth
Unsocial rapine, and the thirst of blood;
As from his tumid urn when Nilus spreads
His genial tides abroad, the favored soil
That joins his fruitful border, first imbibes
The kindly stream; anon the bounteous God
His waves extends, embracing Egypt round,
Dwells on the teeming champain, and endows
The sleeping grain with vigor to attire
In one bright harvest all the Pharian plains:
Thus, when Pygmalion from Phoenician Tire
Had banished freedom, with disdainful steps
Indignant Commerce, turning from the walls
Herself had raised, her welcome sway enlarged
Among the nations, spreading round the globe
The fruits of all its climes; Athenian. Athens was called Cecropia from
Cecrops its first king.
Cecropian oil,
The Thracian vintage, and Panchaian gums,
Arabia's spices, and the golden grain,
Which old Osiris to his Egypt gave,
And Ceres to Sicily.
Sicania. Thou did raise
The Ionian name, O Commerce, thou the domes
Of sumptuous Corinth, and the ample round
Of Syracuse did people. -- All the wealth
Now thou assemblest from Iberia's mines,
And golden-channel'd Tagus, all the spoils
From fair Another name of Sicily, which was frequently ravaged by the
Carthaginians.
Trinacria wasted, all the powers
Of conquered Afric's tributary realms
To fix thy empire on the Lybian verge,
Thy native tract; the nymphs of Nysa hail
Thy glad return, and echoing joy resounds
Over Triton's sacred waters, but in vain:
The irreversible decrees of heaven
To far more northern regions had ordained
Thy lasting seat; in vain the imperial port
Receives the gathered riches of the world;
In vain whole climates bow beneath its rule;
Behold the toil of centuries to Rome
I^ glories yields, and mouldering leaves no trace
Of its deep-rooted greatness; thou with tears
From thy extinguished Carthage did retire,
And these thy perished honors long deplore.
What though rich Cadiz.
Gades, what though polished Rhodes,
With Alexandria, Aegypt's splendid mart,
The learned Marfeilles, a Grecian colony, the most civilized, as well as the
greatest trading city of ancient Gaul.
Massylians, and Genoa.
Ligurian towers,
What though the potent Hanseatic league,
And Venice, mistress of the Grecian isles,
With all the Aegean floods, awhile might sooth
The sad remembrance; what though, led through climes
And seas unknown, with thee the adventurous sons
Of The Portuguese discovered the Cape of Good Hope in 1487.
Tagus passed the stormy cape, which braves
The huge Atlanic; what though Antwerp grew
Beneath thy smiles, and thou propitious there
Did shower thy blessings with unsparing hands:
Still on thy grief-indented heart impressed
The great Amilcar's valor, still the deeds
Of Asdrubal and Mago, still the loss
Of thy unequal Annibal remained:
Till from the sandy mouths of echoing Rhine,
And sounding margin of the Scheld and Maese,
With sudden roar the angry voice of war
Alarmed thy languor; wonder turned thy eye.
Lo! in bright arms a bold militia stood,
Arrang'd for battle: from afar thou saw
The snowy ridge of Apennine, the fields
Of wild Calabria, and Pyrene's hills,
The Guadiana, and the Duro's banks,
And rapid Ebro gathering all their powers
To crush this daring populace. The pride
Of fiercest kings with more inflamed revenge
Never menaced freedom; nor since dauntless Greece,
And Rome's stern offspring none has ever surpassed
The bold The Dutch.
Batavian in his glorious toil
For liberty, or death. At once the thought
Of long-lamented Carthage flies thy breast,
And ardent, Goddess, thou do speed to save
The generous people. Not the vernal showers,
Distilling copious from the morning clouds,
Descend more kindly on the tender flower,
Newborn and opening on the lap of Spring,
Than on this rising state thy cheering smile,
And animating presence; while on Spain,
Prophetic thus, thy indignation broke.
Insatiate race! the shame of polished lands!
Disgrace of Europe! for inhuman deeds
And insolence renowned! what demon led
Thee first to plough the undiscovered surge,
Which lav'd an hidden world? whose malice taught
Thee first to taint with rapine, and with rage,
With more than savage thirst of blood the arts,
By me for gentlest intercourse ordained,
For mutual aids, and hospitable ties
From shore to shore? Or, that pernicious hour,
Was heaven disgusted with its wondrous works,
That to thy fell exterminating hand
The immense Peruvian empire it resigned,
And all, which lordly Montezuma, emperor of Mexico.
Montezuma swayed?
And come thou, strengthened with the shining stores
Of that gold-teeming hemisphere, to waste
The smiling fields of Europe, and extend
Thy bloody shackles over these happy seats
Of liberty? Presumptuous nation, learn,
From this dire period shall thy glories fade,
Thy slaughtered youth shall fatten Belgium's sands,
And Victory against her Albion's cliffs
Shall see the blood-empurpled ocean dash
Thy weltering hosts, and stain the chalky shore:
Even those, whom now thy impious pride would bind
In servile chains, hereafter shall support
Thy weakened throne; when heaven's afflicting hand
Of all thy power despoils thee, when alone
Of all, which ever has signalized thy name,
Thy insolence and cruelty remain.
Thus with her clouded visage, wrapped in frowns,
The Goddess threatened, and the daring train
Of her untamed militia, torn with wounds,
Despising fortune, from repeated foils
More fierce, and braving Famine's keenest rage,
At length through deluges of blood she led
To envied greatness; even while clamorous Mars
With loudest clangor bade his trumpet shake
The Belgian champain, she their standard reared
On tributary Java, and the shores
Of huge Borneo; thou; Sumatra, heard'st
Her naval thunder, Ceylon's trembling sons
Their fragrant stores of cinnamon resigned,
And odour-breathing Ternate and Tidore
Their spicy groves. And O whatever coast
The Belgians trace, wherever their power is spread,
To hoary Zembla, or to Indian suns,
Still thither be extended thy renown,
O William, pride of Orange, and adored
Thy virtues, which disdaining life, or wealth,
Or empire, whether in thy dawn of youth,
Thy glorious noon of manhood, or the night,
He was assassinated at Delf. His dying words were, Lord have mercy upon this
people. See Grot. de Bell. Belg.
The fatal night of death, no other care
Besides the public owned. And dear to fame
Be thou, harmonious Janus Douza, a famous poet, and the most learned man of
his time. He commanded in Leyden when it was so obstinately besieged by the
Spaniards in 1570. See Meursii Athen. Bat.
Douza; every Muse,
Your laurel strew around this hero's urn,
Whom fond Minerva graced with all her arts,
Alike in letters and in arms to shine,
A dauntless warrior, and a learned bard.
Him Spain's surrounding host for slaughter marked,
With massacre yet reeking from the streets
Of blood-stained Harlem: he on Leyden's to w'rs,
With Famine his companion, wan, subdued
In outward form, with patient virtue stood
Superior to despair; the heavenly Nine
His suffering soul with great examples cheered
Of memorable bards, by Mars adorned
With wreaths of fame; Orpheus, one of the Argonauts, who set sail from Iolcos,
a town in Thessalia.
Oeagrus tuneful son,
Who with melodious praise to noblest deeds
Charmed the Iolchian heroes, and himself
Their danger shared; When the Spartans were greatly distressed in the Messen
an war, they applied to the Athenians for a general, who sent them the poet
Tyrtaeua.
Tyrtaeus, who revived
With animating verse the Spartan hopes;
Brave Aeschylus, one of the most ancient tragic poets, who signalized himself
in the battles of Marathon and Salamis.
Aeschylus and Sophocles commanded his countrymen the Athenians, in several
expeditions.
Sophocles, around
Whose sacred brows the tragic ivy twined,
Mixed with the warrior's laurel; all surpassed
By Douza's valor: and the generous toil,
His and his country's labors soon received
Their high reward, when favoring Commerce raised
The invincible Batavians, till, revered
Among the mightiest on the brightest roll
Of fame they shone, by splendid wealth and power
Graced and supported; thus a genial soil
Diffusing vigor though the infant oak,
Affords it strength to flourish, till at last
Its lofty head, in verdant honors clad,
It rears amidst the proudest of the grove.
Yet here the eternal sates thy last retreat
Deny, a mightier nation they prepare
For thy reception, sufferers alike
By the unremitted insolence of power
From reign to reign, nor less than Belgium known
For bold contention often on crimson fields,
In free tongued senates often with nervous laws
To circumscribe, or conquering to depose
Their sceptred tyrants: Albion sea-embrac'd,
The joy of freedom, dread of treacherous kings,
The destined mistress of the subject main,
And arbitress of Europe, now demands
Thy presence, Goddess. It was now the time,
Ere yet perfidious Cromwell dared profane
The sacred senate, and with impious feet
Tread on the powers of magistrates and laws,
While every arm was chilled with cold amaze,
Nor one in all that dauntless train was found
To pierce the ruffian's heart; and now thy name
Was heard in thunder through the affrighted shores
Of pale Iberia, of submissive Gaul,
And Tagus, trembling to his utmost source.
O ever faithful, vigilant, and brave,
Thou bold assertor of Britannia's fame,
Unconquerable Blake: propitious heaven
At this great era, and The act of navigation.
the sage decree
Of Albion's senate, perfecting at once,
What by Queen Elizabeth was the first of our princes, who gave any
considerable encouragement to trade.
Eliza was so well begun,
So deeply founded, to this favored shore
The Goddess drew, where grateful she bestowed
The unbounded empire of her father's floods,
And chose thee, London, for her chief abode,
Pleased with the silver Thames, its gentle stream,
And smiling banks, its joy-diffusing hills,
Which clad with splendor, and with beauty graced,
O'erlook his lucid bosom; pleased with thee,
Thou nurse of arts, and thy industrious race;
Pleased with their candid manners, with their free
Sagacious converse, to enquiry led,
And zeal for knowledge; hence the opening mind
Resigns its errors, and unseals the eye
Of blind Opinion; Merit hence is heard
Amidst its blushes, dawning arts arise,
The gloomy clouds, which ignorance or fear
Spread over the paths of Virtue, are dispelled,
Servility retires, and every heart
With public cares is warmed; thy merchants hence,
Illustrious city, thou do raise to fame:
How many names of glory may thou trace
From earliest annals down to Sir John Barnard.
Barnard's times!
And, O! if like that eloquence divine,
Which forth for Commerce, for Britannia's rights,
And her insulted majesty he poured,
These humble measures flowed, then too thy walls
Might undisgrac'd resound thy poet's name,
Who now all-fearful to thy praise attunes
His lyre, and pays his grateful song to thee,
Thy votary, O Commerce! Gracious Power,
Continue still to hear my vows, and bless
My honorable industry, which courts
No other smile but thine; for thou alone
Can wealth bestow with independance crowned:
Nor yet exclude contemplative repose,
But to my dwelling grant the solemn calm
Of learned leisure, never to reject
The visitation of the tuneful Maids,
Who seldom deign to leave their sacred haunts,
And grace a mortal mansion; thou divide
With them my labors; pleasure I resign,
And, all devoted to my midnight lamp,
Even now, when Albion over the foaming breast
Of groaning Tethys spreads its threatening fleets,
I grasp the sounding shell, prepared to sing
That hero's valor, who shall best confound
His injured country's foes: even now I feel
Celestial fires descending on my breast,
Which prompt thy daring suppliant to explore,
Why, though derived from Neptune, though revered
Among the nations, by the Gods endowed,
Thou never yet from eldest times have found
One permanent abode; why often expelled
Thy favored seats, from clime to clime have borne
Thy wandering steps; why London late has seen
(Thy loved, thy last retreat) desponding Care
O'ercloud thy brow: O listen, while the Muse,
The immortal progeny of Jove, unfolds
The fatal cause. What time in Nyfa's cave
The Ethereal Train, in honor to thy sire,
Shower'd on thy birth their blended gifts, the Power
Of War was absent; hence, unblessed by Mars,
Thy sons relinquished arms, on other arts
Intent, and still to mercenary hands
The sword entrusting, vainly deemed, that wealth
Could purchase lasting safety, and protect
Unwarlike Freedom; hence the Alps in vain
Were passed, their long impenetrable snows
And dreary torrents; swollen with Roman dead,
Astonished Trebia, Trasimenus lacus, and Cannae, famous for the victories
gained by Annibal over the Romans.
Trebia overflowed its banks
In vain, and deep-dy'd Trasimenus rolled
Its crimson waters; Cannae's signal day
The rame alone of great Amilcar's son
Enlarged, while still undisciplined, dismayed,
Her head commercial Carthage bowed at last
To military Rome: the unaltered will
Of heaven in every climate has ordained,
And every age, that empire shall attend
The sword, and steel shall ever conquer gold.
Then from thy sufferings learn; the auspicious hour
Now smiles; our wary magistrates have armed
Our hands; thou, Goddess, animate our breafts
To cast inglorious indolence aside,
That once again, in bright battalions ranged,
Our thousands and ten thousands may be seen
Their country's only rampart, and the dread
Of wild Ambition. Mark the Swedish hind;
He, on his native soil should danger lour,
Soon from the entrails of the dusky mine
Would rise to arms; and other fields and chiefs
With Helsingburg Helsingburg, a small town in Schonen, celebrated for the
victory, which Count Steinboch gained over the Danes with an army, for the most
part composed of Swedish peasants, who had never seen an enemy before: it is
remarkable, that the deseated troops were as complete a body of regular forces
as any in all Europe.
and Steinboch soon would share
The admiration of the northern world:
Helvetia's hills behold, the aerial seat
Of long-supported Liberty, who thence,
Securely resting on her faithful shield,
The warrior's corselet flaming on her breast,
Looks down with scorn on spacious realms, which groan
In servitude around her, and, her sword
With dauntless skill high brandishing, defies
The Austrian eagle, and imperious Gaul:
And O could those ill-fated shades arise
Whose valiant ranks along the ensanguin'd dust
Of The London train'd-bands, and auxiliary regiments. (of whose inexperience
of danger. or any kind of service, beyond the easy practice of their postures
in the Artillery-Ground, had till then too cheap an estimation) behaved
themselves to wonder; and were, in truth, the preservation of that army that
day. For they stood as a bulwark and rampire to defend the rest; and when their
wings of horse were scattered and dispersed, kept their ground so steadily,
that though Prince Rupert himself led up the choice horse to charge them, and
endured the storm of small-shot, he could make no impression on their stand of
pikes; but was forced to wheel about. ^arend. book 7. page 347.
Newbury lay crowded, they could tell,
How their long-matchless cavalry, so often
Over hills of slain by ardent Rupert led,
Whose dreaded standard Victory had waved,
Till then triumphant, there with noblest blood
From their gored squadrons died the restive spear
Of London's firm militia, and resigned
The well-disputed field; then, Goddess, say,
Shall we be now more timid, when behold,
The blackning storm now gathers round our heads,
And England's angry Genius sounds to arms?
For thee, remember, is the banner spread;
The naval tower to vindicate thy rights
Will sweep the curling foam; the thundering bomb
Will roar, and startle in the deepest grots
Old Nereus' daughters; with combustion stored
For thee our dire volcano's of the main,
Impregnated with horror, soon will pour
Their flaming ruin round each hostile fleet:
Thou then, great Goddess, summon all thy powers,
Arm all thy sons, thy vassals, every heart
Inflame: and you, ye fear-disclaiming race,
Ye mariners of Britain, chosen train
Of Liberty and Commerce, now no more
Secret your generous valor; hear the call
Of injured Albion; to her foes present
Those daring bosoms, which alike disdain
The death-disploding cannon, and the rage
Of warring tempests, mingling in their strife
The seas and clouds: though long in silence hushed
Has slept the British thunder; though the pride
Of weak Iberia has forgot the roar;
Soon shall her ancient terrors be recalled,
When your victorious shouts affright her shores:
None now ignobly will your warmth restrain,
Nor hazard more indignant Valor's curse,
Their country's wrath, and Time's eternal scorn;
Then bid the Furies of Bellona wake,
And silver-mantled Peace with welcome steps
Anon shall visit your triumphant isle.
And that perpetual safety may possess
Our joyous fields, thou, Genius, who presid'st
Over this illustrious city, teach her sons
To wield the noble instruments of war;
And let the great example soon extend
Through every province, till Britannia sees
Her docile millions fill the martial plain.
Then, whatsoever our terrors now suggest
Of desolation and the invading sword;
Though with his massy trident Neptune heaved
A newborn isthmus from the British deep,
And to its parent continent rejoined
Our chalky shore; though Mahomet could league
His powerful crescent with the hostile Gaul,
And that new Cyrus of the conquered East,
Who now in trembling vassalage unites
The Ganges and Euphrates, could advance
With his auxiliar host; our warlike youth
With If the computation, which allots near two millions of fighting men to
this kingdom may be relied on; it is not easy to conceive, how the united force
of the whole world could assemble together, and subsist in an enemy's country
greater numbers, than they would find opposed to them here.
equal numbers, and with keener zeal
For children, parents, friends, for England fired,
Her fertile glebe, her wealthy towns, her laws,
Her liberty, her honor, should sustain
The dreadful onset, and resistless break
The immense array; thus even the lightest thought
Ever to invade Britannia's calm repose
Must die the moment, that auspicious Mars
Her sons shall bless with discipline and arms;
That exiled race, in superstition nursed,
The servile pupils of tyrannic Rome,
With distant gaze despairing shall behold
The guarded splendors of Britannia's crown;
Still from their abdicated sway estranged,
With all the attendance on despotic thrones,
Priests, ignorance, and bonds; with watchful step
Gigantic Terror, striding round our coast,
Shall shake his gorgon aegis, and the hearts
Of proudest kings appal; to other shores
Our angry fleets, when insolence and wrongs
To arms awaken our vindictive power,
Shall bear the hideous waste of ruthless war;
But liberty, security, and fame
Shall dwell for ever on our chosen plains.
MODERN VIRTUE. A SATIRE.
" LET venal annals boast a Caesar's reign,
" When Rome's great genius hugged the imperial chain,
" Freedom, gay Goddess, glads our happier isle,
" Peace smooths her brow, as Plenty decks her smile;
" In every son the inspirer lives confessed,
" And lights up all the patriot in his breast,
" Breathes the same social warmth from soul to soul,
" Till widening Nature pants but for a whole.
" Shines he in life's meridian beam displayed,
" Or gives his milder virtues to the shade;
" Glares the proud ribbon, nods the martial crest,
" Or flaunt the tatters on his motly vest;
" The godlike Briton fills his every sphere
" Without a frailty, and without a fear.
" If rich: Bright image of the Eternal Mind,
" His opening bosom takes in all mankind;
" Wherever he comes, Health triumphs over Disease,
" Hope glads Despair, and Anguish melts to ease.
" Is Knowledge his? He lends his every art,
" To rear the genius, and to mould the heart;
" Fondly pursues with Boyle's auspicious blaze
" Truth through her masks, and Nature through her maze;
" To heedless Justice gives the well-poiz'd scale,
" And raises Commerce as he guides the sail.
" Is power his orb? He lives but to defend;
" The statesman only dignifies the friend:
" Disarms Oppression, prunes Ambition's wing,
" And stifles Faction ere she darts her sting;
" Enriches every coffer but his own,
" And shields the cottage while he guards the throne;
" Sees at his nod our plundered rights restored,
" And Europe trembling when he grasps the sword."
Thus sung the Muse when Fancy vigorous ran,
And warmed the youth, ere Reason formed the man;
Life through Opinion's false perspective seen,
With mimic beauty glowed in every scene;
Dressed in an angel's visionary form,
Vice aimed to please, and Madness learned to charm:
Rebellion softened into public love,
And each enormous villain seemed a Jove.
Doubly deceived, what Lelius could I find
To chase the phantoms, or to free the mind?
No Lelius came, no Seraph lent his aid,
No pitying Genius whispered in the glade.
It chanced that Virtue heard the untutored lays,
Still madly lisping with the voice of praise;
She heard, as through the mall the Goddess strayed,
When the gay world had peopled all the shade,
Mild as the softness of a vernal sky,
Youth flushed her cheek, while caution armed her eye;
Half loose majestic flowed her azure vest,
A spotless ruby bled upon her breast,
At every step kind Nature felt her power,
Soft blew the zephyr, and soft sprung the flower;
A brighter freshness hung on every green,
And a new Eden stole upon the scene,
Awhile she paused, and with a frown surveyed
The mingling swarm of tatters and brocade.
When, as the Goddess waved the ethereal spear,
Pride dropped her smile, and Artifice her tear;
Lust threw aside Religion's borrowed grace,
A leering Satyr gloated in her face;
The prude, who fainted at the name of vice,
Now hugged the bottle, and now grasped the dice;
While tortured with the town's obscener ail,
A Saint stood melting over a luscious tale.
Here, the bribe glittered in a Courtier's hand;
There, the grave Patriot bellowed -- for a wand:
Full in his eye the enchanting object hung,
And dying Freedom gasp'd upon his tongue.
All who to Drury's deadly stews resort,
Rob at the Change, or plunder in the Court,
Stripped of their masks in wild disorder rose,
One with a halter, one without a nose;
So oddly mixed, so excellently ill,
Such motly specter of Quevedo's hell;
They Would make a Jesuit quit the absolving chair,
A brothel tremble, and a conclave stare.
So when, where Bedlam's air-dress'd visions dwell,
Tom stalks a straw-crown'd monarch in his cell;
Just as he soars tremendous to a God,
And the winged thunder only waits his nod;
Shudd'ring, he hears his keeper's surly tone,
He hears, and horror wraps his tottering throne;
Crowns drop their luster, scepters lose their awe,
Robes fly to rags, and empires sink to straw.
" Learn hence, fair Virtue cried, mistaken youth,
" What various monsters wear the guise of Truth.
" Decked with each grace, immortal Merit shows
" The cheek that reddens, and the soul that glows;
" With heaven's own image beaming in his eye,
" Man smiles a dagger, and he looks a lie."
She spoke, and lo! the long-misguided fire,
With every number, slept along the lyre.
Say then, my friend! whose virtues are my pride,
Whose candor soothes me, while thy precepts guide;
Thou whose quick eye has looked through every age,
Viewed every scene, and studied every sage;
Say, shall I praise the escutcheon's proud record,
When a lost Brutus sinks into a lord?
With fulsome sing-song after shadows run,
And still mistake a meteor for a sun?
Shall I be silent, while from day to day
Bellville in bagnios revels life away;
Flagitious drops the majesty of power
In the mad mischiefs of the midnight hour;
No flatterer left to daub, no friend to aid,
By strumpets plundered, and by wits betrayed?
Roused at the thought, keen Satire spurns her chain,
Springs with new life, and pants in every vein,
On vice, impatient, wreaks her gathering rage,
And bids the tyrant bleed through all the page.
Broods she in purple over the venal bar,
Struts in a gown, or blazes in a star?
My pen shall trace her out from slave to slave,
Nor dares Oblivion screen her in the grave.
Come then, ye self-curs'd atheists! who degrade
Truth to a sound, and scripture to a trade;
Ye bearded sycophants! who life supply
With the warm sunshine of a minion's eye:
Ye French editions of a British fool;
Abroad a cipher, and at home a fool;
Ye --
FRIEND. Are you mad? or have you lost all grace?
What, write a satire when you want a place!
Hold, hold, for God's sake, ere your friends bestow
A few stout cords; and send you to Monro Physician to Bethlem hospital.
.
Would you avoid the pedant's learned sneer?
Awe the pert fop? or sooth a doctor's ear?
Heedless of all the phantom Sisters played,
From cloud-topt Pindus to the Latian shade,
Pursue deep Science through her mazy road,
Hunt every page, and crawl from code to code;
Where musty systems solid joy dispense,
And wise smiglecius fills the void of sense;
Or proud some more important truths to learn,
Dream over the labored glossaries of Hearn:
So you may live, approved, perhaps preferred,
Your wisdom gravely measured by your beard.
But soft -- Your aim's to civilize mankind,
To wake each social virtue of the mind;
To strip from Vice the gay disguise of art,
And bare the villain lurking in the heart;
For this your grasp the falchion, spread the shield,
A pigmy Quixot in the 'listed field.
Time was, when satire delicately nice
Could rouse each virtue, and could blast each vice;
Truth learned to please from Aesop's fabling tongue,
And Rome grew virtuous when her Ennius sung.
Once lost to goodness, but now lost to shame,
We court dishonor, as we laughed at fame;
With the same raptures plunge in every crime,
Though fifty Oldhams stab in every rhyme.
A native sin each vigorous Frenchman hails,
Politely partial to his own Versailles.
There, toujours gai, he loves a looser rein;
His Miss, la Contesse, and his wine Champagne.
Britain, more generous, every vice provides,
That Europe ripens, and that Asia hides.
The enormous harvest to our ports consigned
Loads every ship, and busies every wind.
Soon a vast group of follies crowd the shore,
As soon they cloy. -- Fly hence, and fetch-us more,
Quick spread the impatient sail from pole to pole,
Ye zephyrs, waft her! and ye oceans, roll!
Strike whom you please, and write whatever you will,
Harpax will cheat, and Phillis hide spadille:
Hircus in brothels impotently toil,
And Verres murder merit with a smile:
Murder, secure of same, for vulgar eyes
Will still adore him, though the good despise;
At his rich coat and gorgeous chariot gaze,
And lose at once the assassin in the blaze.
Even Young himself, distinguished, loved, carest,
Marked by each eye, and hugged to every breast,
Sees he among this vicious race of men
One rascal mended when he grasps the pen?
Still at the levee swarms the venal tribe,
And still Corruption longs for every bribe.

AUTHOR. What then? If Vice unblushing hears the sage,
Shall Reason struggle in the check of age?
Shall Truth shut up in complaisance her heart,
Young lend a smile, and Satire drop her dart?
No, let the fiend-like heads of Hydra grow,
Rise as he strikes, and double from the blow;
One honest drudge our Hercules has found,
To sear the monster sprouting in the wound.
Come, come, my friend; throw off this rising frown,
Nor curb my passions while you loose your own.
Often have you bid proud Thraso mend his life,
Who kicked a sister, and who starved a wife;
Nay, insolently dared to tell her grace,
That virtue made a Goddess, not the face.

FRIEND. When brisker spirits through the bosom roll,
And life's mad tumuit rushes on the soul;
Each beardless Cato wings with awkward zeal
His little arrow ere he learns to feel;
Fierce as old Appius, apes the insulting air,
The uplifted eye-brow, and the lordly stare.
So I -- But now that age with smooth career
Wafts cooler notions on my sixtieth year;
Lost to each hope, each visionary joy,
Pomps that disturb, and vanities that cloy;
Heedless what wit's cashiered, what sool's carest,
Who lives an hero, or who lives a jest,
I view the world's romantic scene pass by,
And stifle all my anger in a sigh.
While thus my days steal on the wing of time,
Uustain'd by wit, and guiltless of a rhyme,
Unnumber'd ills the dreaded Satirist wait,
Stand fast, Olympus! and support him, Fate!
See! frantic Dullness panting for the war,
Grasps the keen spear, and mounts the imperial car,
Shrill clarions sound, attending Furies yell,
The lengthening echo howls through every cell;
Roused by the inspiring clang, each mighty son,
Congenial offspring of his fire, the Hun,
Slides from his garret formidably gay,
An human vulture darting on his prey.
All they whose science loads the encumbered stall,
Who wound the wainscot, and who daub the wall,
Luxurious rogues, that revel once a week
On the rich feast of visto's and ox-cheek;
From the soft lyric to the wretch who squalls
The Mint-born ballad at the end of Paul's,
Around the flag in martial pomp appear,
Curl in the van, and Osborne in the rear.
The impatient battle joins, and lo! at once
The same wild phrenzy spreads from dunce to dunce,
Fired with one soul, the shirtless legions run,
One hurls a journal, and one darts a pun,
In snip-snap prose vindictive lightnings play,
And loud hoarse thunders rattle through the lay.
Quick and more quick, the dire discordant din
Rolls through each hall, and roars from inn to inn;
Wakes the loud horrors of the wrangling school,
Where Priscian bawls, and fool re-echoes fool.
But should you all the mighty mad defeat,
Who howl in Bedlam, and who stun the Fleet,
See the pert critic tremble to engage,
Wit blunt her sting, and Envy drop her rage;
Yet can poor Innocence to mercy awe
Those deadlier pests, the harpies of the law?
Another P -- n shields each worthless lord,
Arms the dread scourge, and whets the avenging sword,
Where he, great genius! throws his lettered eye,
Truth stares a libel, Honesty a lie,
Young embryo treasons in each period shine,
And fancied poisons kill through every line.
He sure will curb you, though my precepts fail,
No stoic bullies when he smells a jail,
Conscious that Wisdom mounts her throne too late,
When doomed to warble ethics through a grate.

AUTHOR. Speak you of Claudius? Let the minion rave,
Say Pitt's a fool, and Lyttelton's a knave,
Call wit a libel, and yet never see
Swords in a brief, or poisons in a fee.
But from my soul all scandal I detest,
Truth forms my numbers, as she warms my breast,
Learns me to triumph over a pimp's disdain,
And bids me laugh when Claudius threats the chain.
What, shall I strive to dignify disgrace?
And hail a patriot lessening in a place?
Rear the proud trophy on a soldier's grave,
Who lived a coward, and who died a slave?
Shall I on Vice's pageantry attend,
Crowd to her car, and at her altars bend?
Rather, where Indian suns their rays unfold,
And ripen half Potosi into gold,
Let me beneath a Spaniard's insult pine,
Crouch to the scourge, and drudge from mine to mine.
Yet is there one, my friend! who shines confessed
With all that heaven stamps upon the breast,
Who, nobly conscious of paternal fire,
Feeds the bright blaze, and beams upon his sire.
Mine be the task to swell from day to day
The applauding paean, and the loud huzza;
To bid our sons with filial fondness warm,
Eye every grace, and copy every charm;
Explore his purpose, catch his God-like rage,
And be the Maltons of another age.
My verse, you say, will certainly offend.
Who? Not the man whom Virtue calls her friend*
Virtue, like gold, of genuine worth possessed,
Shines out more radiant when she dares the test.
Swords arm her bosom, racks her vigor raise,
And all hell's fires but give her strength to blaze.
Can truth than hurt her? wound her sacred ear?
Wake the keen pang? or rouse the impassioned tear?
It Is true, the selfish mercenary train,
Whom honors libel, and whom titles stain,
Struck with the face in Satire's mirror shown,
Perhaps may tremble, and perhaps may frown.
Thanks to their rage, my days will happier flow,
And my joys brighten when a knave's my foe.
Yet think not that the Muse, to spleen resigned,
Aims monster-like to swallow up mankind,
Bids her keen shafts with baleful vengeance fly,
Taint the pure breeze, and poison half the sky,
Or fond to spread destruction through the land,
Exults with Nero as she lights the brand;
With honest warmth she wishes to control
Each deadly weed that blossoms on the soul,
That wildly vigorous mocks at Virtue's toil,
That choaks the scion, and that robs the soil;
But sadly conscious that just heaven has made
Each grace to border on its kindred shade;
That in the gem some sullying vein will run,
And the disk darken while there shines a sun;
The melting image gains upon her heart,
And spite of justice half disarms the dart.
Oh! let me then in Fable's empire rove,
Where talks the forest, and where laughs the grove;
Attend the Goddess through her airy scene,
Her pictures borrow, and her morals glean;
From wolves and lions draw the instructive tale,
And hide the glare of reason in a veil.
Blessed be the thought. Here guiltless of offense,
Dispassion'd Truth may sneer you into sense;
On vicious men her whole artillery play,
Sublimely grave or whimsically gay;
Through the wide world in moral vision range,
Glide through the Court, and steal upon the Change;
Lust's rampant empress keenly-ey'd pursue,
Or opening in her Paphos, or the stew;
Lethargic Justice on the bench assail,
Edge the dull sword, and poise the unequal scale:
With Rabelais' jest display the officious knave,
In life's mad vortex whirling to the grave;
Point at Opinion's self-embroider'd vest,
Folly's gay plume, and Pride's enormous crest,
Each frenzy mortify, each vice confound,
And Self-conviction only feel the wound.

A MONODY TO THE MEMORY OF MRS. MARGARET WOFFINGTON She died the 28th of March,
1760.
.
BY JOHN HOOLE.
Flebilis indignos elegia solve capillos,
Ah! nimis ex vero nunc tibi nomen erit.
OVID.
THERE fled the fair, that all beholders charmed,
Whose beauty fired us, and whose spirit warmed!
In that sad sigh the unwilling breath retired;
The grace, the glory of our scene expired!
And shall she die, the Muse's rites unpaid,
No grateful lays to deck her parting shade?
While on her bier the sister Graces mourn,
And weeping Tragedy bedews her urn?
While Comedy her cheerful vein foregoes,
And learns to melt with unaccustomed woes?
Accept (O once admired) these artless lays;
Accept this mite of tributary praise.
Oh! could I paint thee with a master's hand,
And give thee all thy merits could demand;
These lines should glow with true poetic flame,
Bright as thy eyes, and faultless as thy frame!
We mourned thy absence, from our scene retired,
Each longing heart again thy charms desired.
Yet still, alas! we hoped again to view
Our wish, our pleasure, every joy in you!
Again thy looks might grace the tragic rage;
Again thy spirit fill the comic stage.
But lo! Disease hangs hovering over thy head;
Dire Danger stalks around thy frighted bed!
Those starry eyes have lost each beamy ray,
And ghastly Sickness makes the fair her prey!
Death shuts the scene! -- and all our hopes are over!
Those beauties now must glad the sight no more!
Say ye, whose features youthful luster bloom,
Whose lips exhale Arabia's soft perfume,
Must every gift in silent dust be lost,
No more the wish of man, or female boast?
Ah me! with time must every grace be fled!
She once the pride of all our stage, is dead!
Closed are those eyes that every bosom fired!
Pale are those charms that every heart inspired!
Where now the mien with majesty endu'd,
Which often surpised a ravished audience viewed?
What forms too often the tragic scene disgrace?
What tasteless airs the comic scene deface?
Though tuneful Cibber still the Muse sustains,
By nature framed to pour the moving strains,
Though from her eye each heartfelt passion breaks,
And more than music warbles when she speaks:
When shall we view again, like thine, conjoined,
A form angelic, and a piercing mind?
Alike in every mimic scene to steer,
The gay, the grave, the lively, and severe.
Thy judgment saw, thy taste each beauty caught,
No senseless parrot of the poet's thought!
Thy bosom well could heave with fancied woe,
And, from thy own, our tears were taught to flow.
Whenever we viewed the Roman's sullied same,
Thy beauty justified the hero's shame.
What heart but then must Anthony approve,
And own the world was nobly lost for love?
What ears could hear in vain thy cause implored,
When soothing arts appeased thy angry lord?
Each tender breast the rough Ventidius blamed,
And Egypt gained the sigh Octavia claimed,
Thy eloquence each hushed attention drew,
While Love usurped the tears to Virtue due.
See! Phaedra rise majestic over the scene,
What raging pangs distract the hapless Queen!
How does thy sense the poet's thought refine,
Beam through each word, and brighten every line!
What nerve, what vigor glows in every part,
While classic lays appear with classic art!
Who now can bid the proud Roxana rise,
With love and anger sparkling in her eyes?
Who now shall bid her breast in fury glow,
With all the semblance of imperial woe?
While the big passion, raging in her veins,
Would hold the master of the world in chains:
But Alexander now forsakes our coast: --
And, ah! Roxana is for ever lost!
Nor less thy power when rigid Virtue fired
The chaster bard, and purer thoughts inspired:
What kneeling form appears with steadfast eyes,
Her bosom heaving with Devotion's sighs!
It Is she! In thee we own the mournful scene,
The fair resemblance of a martyr Lady Jane Gray, Act V.
queen!
Here Guido's skill might mark thy speaking frame,
And catch from thee the painter's magic flame!
Blessed in each art! by nature formed to please,
With beauty, sense, with elegance and ease!
Whose piercing genius studied all mankind,
All Shakespeare opening to thy vigorous mind.
In every scene of comic humor known;
In sprightly sallies wit was all thy own.
Whether you seemed the cit's more humble wife;
Or shone in Townly's higher sphere of life;
Alike thy spirit knew each turn of wit;
And gave new force to all the poet writ.
Nor was thy worth to public scenes confined,
Thou knew'st the noblest feelings of the mind.
Thy ears were ever open to distress;
Thy ready hand was ever stretched to bless.
The breast humane for each unhappy felt;
Thy heart for other's sorrows prone to melt.
In vain did Envy point her scorpion sting;
In vain did Malice shake her blasting wing:
Each generous breast disdained the unpleasing tale,
And cast over every fault Oblivion's veil:
Consess'd, through every cloud, thy deeds to shine,
And owned the virtues of Compassion thine!
Saw mild Benevolence her wand disclose,
And touch thy heart at every sufferer's woes:
Saw meek-ey'd Charity thy steps attend,
And guide thy hand the wretched to befriend:
Go, ask the breast that teems with mournful sighs,
Who wiped the sorrows from Affliction's eyes:
Go, ask the wretch, in want and sickness laid,
Whose goodness brightened once Misfortune's shade.
O! snatch me hence to lone sequestered scenes,
To arching grottoes and embowering greens!
Where scarce a ray can pierce the dusky shade,
Where scarce a footstep marks the dewy glade:
Where pale-hu'd Grief her secret dwelling keeps;
Where the chill blood with lazy horror creeps:
Where awful Silence spreads her noiseless wing;
And Sorrow's harp may tune the dismal string. --
Or rather lead my steps to distant plains,
Where closing earth enfolds her last remains;
What time the moon displays her silver beam,
And groves and floods reflect the milder gleam:
When Contemplation broods with thought profound,
And fairy visions haunt the sylvan ground.
Lo! Fancy now, on airy pinions spread,
With scenes ideal hovers over my head.
I see! I see! more pleasing themes arise:
What mystic shadows flit before my eyes!
Imagination paints the sacred grove,
The place devote to poesy and love.
Here grateful poets hail the actors' name,
And pay the rightful tribute to their fame:
Around their tomb in generous sorrow mourn,
And twine the laurels over the favored urn.
Methinks I view the last sepulchral frame,
That bears inscribed her much lamented name,
See! to my view the Drama's sons displayed:
What laurell'd phantoms crowd the awful shade!
First of the choir immortal Shakespeare stands,
Whose searching eye all Nature's scene commands:
Bright in his look celestial spirit blooms,
And Genius over him waves his eagle plumes!
Next tender Southern, skilled the soul to move;
And gentle Row, who tunes the breast to love.
The witty Congreve near with sprightly mien;
And easy Farquhar with his lighter scene.
A numerous train of bards the shrine surround,
In tragic strains and comic lore renowned.
See! on the tomb yon pensive form appear,
Heave the full sigh, and drop the frequent tear:
The garments loose her throbbing bosom show;
Dispersed in air her careless tresses flow:
Round her pale brows a myrtle wreath is spread,
A gloomy cypress nods above her head.
See! while her hand a solemn lyre sustains,
Her trembling fingers wake the languid strains:
Soft to the touch the vocal strings reply,
And tune the notes to answer every sigh.
She, (child of Grief!) at human misery weeps;
At every death her dismal vigil keeps.
But chief she mourns, when Fate's relentless doom
Gives Wit and Beauty victims to the tomb,
Her lays their merits and their loss proclaim,
(A mournful task!) and Elegy her name!
Now bending over the pile she vents her moan,
And pours these sorrows over the senseless stone.
Ah! lost, for ever lost! the breath that warmed,
The wit that ravished, and the mien that charmed!
Here sleeps beneath, the fairest of the fair,
The Graces' darling, and the Muses' care!
Who once could fix a thousand gazers eyes,
Now cold and lifeless unregarded lies!
Who once the soul in bonds of love detained,
Now lies, alas! in stronger bonds restrained.
Pale Death has risled all her pleasing store,
And Nature loathes a sorm so loved before!
Is there a fair whose features point the dart,
Charm the six'd eye, and fascinate the heart?
Behold what soon disarms the childish sting,
And plucks the wanton plume from Cupid's wing!
Then boast no longer Wit's fallacious store;
The sweets of sprightly Converse boast no more:
Those lips so framed to each persuasive art,
No more shall touch the ear, and win the heart!
Let Beauty here her transient blessing weigh,
Let humbled Wit her pitying tribute pay:
Let Female Grace vouchsafe the kindly tear:
Wit, Grace, and Beauty, once were centered here!
Ye sacred Bards, who tuned the drama's lays,
Here pay your incense of distinguished praise!
She gave your scenes with every grace to shine:
She gave new feeling to the nervous line;
Her beauties well supplied each tragic lore,
And showed those charms your Muse but feigned before!
Here round her shrine your votive wreaths bestow,
Around her shrine eternal greens shall grow.
The listening groves shall learn her name to sing,
And zephyrs wast it on their downy wing;
Till every shade these doleful sounds return,
And every gale in sullen dirges mourn!
The mourner ends with sighs; her hand she rears,
And with her vesture dries the gushing tears.
Behold each Bard the soft contagion feels;
From every eye the trickling sorrow steals.
See! Nature's son lament her hapless doom,
See! Shakespeare bending over his favourite's tomb.
Each shadowy form declines his awful head,
And scatters roses on the funeral bed.
In slow procession round the shrine they move,
And chant her praises through the tuneful grove.
Farewell the glory of a wondering age,
The second Oldfield of a sinking stage!
Farewell the boast and envy of thy kind,
A female softness, and a manly mind!
Long as the Muses can record thy praise,
Thy fame shall last to far succeeding days:
While wit survives, thy name shall ever bloom,
And wreaths unfading flourish round thy tomb!
While, thus I tune the plaintive notes in vain,
For her, whose worth demands a nobler strain;
Lo! to my thought some warning Genius cries:
Attempt not, swain, beyond thy flight to rise.
Shall thy weak skill attempt to raise our woes,
Or paint a loss that every bosom knows?
It Is not thy lays can teach us tears to shed;
What eye refrains! -- for Woffington is dead!
SPRING. A PASTORAL BALLAD.
BY MR. THO. BREREWOOD.
WHEN approached by the fair dewy fingers of Spring,
Swelling buds open first, and look gay,
When the birds on the boughs by their mates sit and sing,
And are danced by the breeze on each spray:
When gently descending, the rain in soft showers,
With its moisture refreshes the ground,
And the drops, as they hang on the plants and the flowers,
Like rich gems beam a luster around:
When the wood-pigeons sit on the branches and cooe,
And the cuckoo proclaims with his voice,
That Nature marks this for the season to woo,
And for all that can love to rejoice:
In a cottage at night may I spend all my time,
In the fields and the meadows all day,
With a maiden whose charms are as yet in their prime,
Young as April, and blooming as May:
When the lark with shrill notes sings aloft in the morn,
May my fairest and I sweetly wake,
View the far distant hills which the sun beams adorn,
Then arise, and our cottage forsake.
When the sun shines so warm, that my charmer and I
May recline on the turf without fear,
Let us there all vain thoughts and ambition defy,
While we breathe the first sweets of the year.
Be this spot on a hill, and a spring from its side
Bubble out and transparently flow,
Creep gently along in meanders, and glide
Through the vale strow'd with daisies below.
While the be flies from blossom to blossom and sips,
And the violets their sweetness impart,
Let me hang on her neck, and so taste from her lips
The rich cordial that thrills to the heart.
While the dove sits lamenting the loss of its mate,
Which the fowler has caught in his snares,
May we think ourselves blessed that it is not our fate,
To endure such an absence as theirs.
May I listen to all her soft, tender, sweet notes
When she sings, and no sounds interfere,
But the warbling of birds, which in stretching their throats
Are at strife to be louder than her.
When the daisies, and cowslips, and primroses blow,
And checquer the meads, and the lawns,
May we see bounding there the swift light-footed do,
And pursue with our eye the young fawns.
When the lapwings just fledged over the turf take their run,
And the sirstlings are all at their play,
And the harmless young lambs skip about in the sun,
Let us then be as frolic as they.
When I talk of my love, should I chance to espy,
That she seems to mistrust what I say,
By a tear that is ready to fall from her eye,
With my lips let me wipe it away.
If we sit, or we walk, may I cast round my eyes,
And let no single beauty escape,
But see none to create so much love, and surprise,
As her eyes, and her face, and her shape.
Thus each day let us pass, till the buds turn to leaves;
And the meadows around us are mown,
When the lass on the sweet smelling haycock receives,
What she afterward blushes to own.
When evenings grow cool, and the flowers hang their heads
With the dew, then no longer we'll roam,
With my arm round her waist, in a path through the meads,
Let us hasten to find our way home.
When the birds are at roost, with their heads in their wings,
Each one by the side of its mate;
When a mist that arises a drowsiness brings
Upon all but the owl and the bat:
When soft rest is required, and the stars lend their light,
And all Nature lies quiet and still;
When no sound breaks the sacred repose of the night,
But, at distance, the clack of a mill:
With peace for our pillow, and free from all noise,
So that voices in whispers are known,
Let us give and receive all the nameless soft joys,
That are mused on by lovers alone.
SUMMER.
BY THE SAME.
WHERE the light cannot pierce, in a grove of all trees,
With my fair one as blooming as May,
Undisturbed by all sound, but the sighs of the breeze,
Let me pass the hot noon of the day.
When the sun less intense to the westward inclines,
For the meadows the groves we'll forsake,
And see the rays dance as inverted he shines,
On the face of some river or lake.
Where my fairest and I, on its verge as we pass,
For it is she that must still be my theme,
Our two shadows may view on the watery glass,
While the fish are at play in the stream.
May the herds cease to low, and the lambkins to bleat,
When she sings me some amorous strain;
All be silent, and hushed, unless Echo repeat
The kind words, and sweet sounds back again.
And when we return to our cottage at night,
Hand in hand as we sauntering stray,
Let the moon's silver beams through the leaves give us light,
Just direct us, and chequer our way.
Let the Nightingale warble its notes in our walk,
As thus gently and slowly we move;
And let no single thought be expressed in our talk,
But of friendship improved into love.
Thus enchanted each day with these rural delights,
And secure from Ambition's alarms,
Soft love and repose shall divide all our nights,
And each morning shall rise with new charms.
AUTUMN.
BY THE SAME.
THOUGH the seasons must alter, ah! yet let me find,
What all must confess to be rare,
A female still cheerful, and faithful and kind,
The blessings of Autumn to share.
Let one side of our cottage, a flourishing vine
Overspread with its branches, and shade;
Whose clusters appear more transparent and fine,
As its leaves are beginning to sade.
When the fruit makes the branches bend down with its load.
In our orchard surrounded with pales;
In a bed of clean straw let our apples be stowed,
For a tart that in Winter regales.
When the vapors that rise from the earth in the morn
Seem to hang on its surface like smoke,
'Till dispersed by the sun that gilds over the corn,
Within doors let us prattle and joke.
But when we see clear all the hues of the leaves,
And at work in the fields are all hands,
Some in reaping the wheat, others binding the sheaves,
Let us carelessly stroll over the lands.
How pleasing the sight of the toiling they make,
To collect what kind Nature has sent!
Heaven grant we may not of their labor partake;
But, oh! give us their happy content.
And sometimes on a bank, under shade, by a brook,
Let us silently sit at our ease,
And there gaze on the stream, till the fish on the hook
Struggles hard to procure its release.
And now when the husbandman sings harvest home,
And the corn's all got into the house;
When the long wished for time of their meeting is come,
To frolic, and feast, and carouse;
When the leaves from the trees are begun to be shed,
And are leaving the branches all bare,
Either strewn at the roots, shrivelled, withered, and dead,
Or else blown to and fro in the air;
When the ways are so miry, that bogs they might seem,
And the axle-tree's ready to break,
While the waggoner whistles in stopping his team,
And then claps the poor jades on the neck;
In the morning let us follow the cry of the hounds,
Or the fearful young covey beset;
Which though skulking in stubble, and weeds on the grounds,
Are becoming a prey to the net.
Let Us enjoy all the pleasure retirement affords,
Still amused with these innocent sports,
Nor once envy the pomp of fine ladies and lords,
With their grand entertainments in courts.
In the evening when lovers are leaning on styles,
Deep engaged in some amorous chat,
And it is very well known by his grin, and her smiles,
What they both have a mind to be at;
To our dwelling, though homely, well-pleased to repair,
Let our mutual endearments revive,
And let no single action, or look, but declare,
How contented and happy we live.
Should ideas arise that may ruffle the soul,
Let soft music the phantoms remove,
For it is harmony only has force to control,
And unite all the passions in love.
With her eyes but half open, her cap all awry,
When the lass is preparing for bed,
And the sleepy dull clown, who sits nodding just by,
Sometimes rouzes and scratches his head.
In the night when it is cloudy, and rainy, and dark,
And the laborers snore as they lie,
Not a noise to disturb us, unless a dog bark
In the farm, or the village hard by.
At the time of sweet rest, and of quiet like this,
Ere our eyes are closed up in their lids,
Let us welcome the season, and taste of that bliss,
Which the sunshine and daylight forbids.
WINTER.
BY THE SAME.
WHEN the trees are all bare, not a leaf to be seen,
And the meadows their beauty have lost;
When Nature's disrobed of her mantle of green,
And the streams are fast bound with the frost,
While the peasant inactive stands shivering with cold,
As bleak the winds northerly blow;
And the innocent flocks run for warmth to the fold,
With their fleeces besprinkled with snow.
In the yard, when the cattle are fodder'd with straw,
And they send forth their breath like a steam:
And the neat looking dairy-maid sees she must thaw
Flakes of ice that she finds in the cream.
When the sweet country-maiden, as fresh as a rose,
As she carelessly trips often slides,
And the rustics laugh loud, if by falling she shows
All the charms that her modesty hides.
When the lads and the lasses for company joined,
In a crowd round the embers are met;
Talk of fairies, and witches, that ride on the wind,
And of ghosts, till they are all in a sweat.
Heaven grant in this season it may be my lot,
With the nymph whom I love and admire;
While the icicles hang from the eves of my cot,
I may thither in safety retire:
Where in neatness and quiet -- and free from surprise,
We may live and no hardships endure;
Nor feel any turbulent passions arise,
But such as each other may cure.
THE CURE OF SAUL. A SACRED ODE.
BY DR. BROWN.
" VENGEANCE, arise from thy infernal bed;
" And pour thy tempest on his guilty head!"
Thus heaven's decree, in thunder's sound,
Shook the dark abyss profound. --
The unchain'd Furies come!
Pale Melancholy stalks from hell:
The abortive offspring of her womb,
Despair and Anguish, round her yell.
By sleepless terror Saul possessed,
Deep feels the fiend within his tortured breast.
Midnight specter round him howl:
Before his eyes
In troops they rise;
And seas of horror overwhelm his soul.
Haste! to Jesse's son repair:
He best can sweep the lyre,
Wake the solemn-sounding air,
And lead the vocal choir:
On every string soft-breathing raptures dwell,
To sooth the throbbings of the troubled breast;
Whose magic voice can bid the tides of passion swell,
Or lull the raging storm to rest.
Sunk on his couch, and loathing day,
The heaven-forsaken monarch lay:
To the sad couch the shepherd now drew near;
And, while the obedient choir stood round,
Prepared to catch the soul-commanding sound,
He dropped a generous tear. --
Thy pitying aid, O God, impart!
For lo, thy poisoned arrows drink his heart!
The mighty song from chaos rose. --
Around his throne the formless atoms sleep,
And drowzy Darkness broods upon the deep. --
Confusion, wake!
Bid the realms of Chaos shake!
Rouse him from his dread repose!
Hark! loud Discord breaks her chain:
The hostile atoms clash with deafning roar:
Her hoarse voice thunders through the drear domain;
And kindles every element to war. --
" Tumult cease!
" Sink to peace!
" Let there be light!" -- the Almighty said:
And lo, the radiant Sun,
Flaming from his orient bed,
His endless course begun.
See, the twinkling Pleiads rise:
Thy star, Orion, reddens in the skies:
While slow around the northern plain,
Arcturus wheels his nightly wane.
Thy glories, too, refulgent moon, he sung;
Thy mystic mazes, and thy changeful ray:
O fairest of the starry throng!
Thy solemn orb of light
Guides the triumphant carr of Night
Over silver clouds, and sheds a softer day!
Ye planets, and each circling constellation,
In songs harmonious tell your generation!
Oh, while yon radiant Seraph turns the spheres,
And on the steadfast pole star stands sublime;
Wheel your rounds
To heavenly sounds;
And sooth his song-enchanted ears
With your celestial chime.
In dumb surprise the listening monarch lay;
(His woe suspended by sweet Music's sway;)
And awe struck, with uplifted eye
Mused on the newborn wonders of the sky.
Lead the soothing verse along:
He feels, he feels the power of song --
Ocean hastens to his bed:
The laboring mountain rears his rock-encumber'd head:
Down his steep and shaggy side
The torrent rolls his thundering tide;
Then smooth and clear, along the fertile plain
Winds his majestic waters to the distant main.
Flocks and herds the hills adorn:
The lark, high-soaring, hails the morn.
And while along yon crimson-clouded steep
The slow sun steals into the golden deep,
Hark! the solemn Nightingale
Warbles to the woodland dale.
See, descending angels shower
Heaven's own bliss on Eden's bower:
Peace on Nature's lap reposes;
Pleasure strews her guiltless roses:
Joys divine in circles move,
Linked with Innocence and Love.
Hail, happy Love, with Innocence combined!
All hail, ye sinless parents of mankind!
They paused: -- the monarch, prostrate on his bed,
Submissive, bowed his head;
Adored the works of boundless power divine:
Then, anguish-struck, he cried (an smote his breast),
Why, why is peace the welcome guest
Of every heart but mine!
Now let the solemn numbers flow,
'Till he feel that guilt is woe.
Heavenly harp, in mournful strain
Over yon weeping bower complain:
What sounds of bitter pangs I hear!
What lamentations wound mine ear!
In vain, devoted pair, these tears ye shed:
Peace with Innocence is fled.
The messengers of Grace depart:
Death glares, and shakes the dreadful dart!
Ah, whither fly ye, by yourselves abhorred,
To shun that frowning cherub's fiery sword? --
Lo!
Hapless, hapless pair,
Goaded by despair,
Forlorn, through desert climes they go!
Wake, my lyre! can Pity sleep,
When heaven is moved, and angels weep!
Flow, ye melting numbers, flow;
Till he feel, that guilt is woe. --
The king, with pride, and shame, and anguish torn,
Shot fury from his eyes, and scorn.
The glowing youth,
Bold in truth,
(So still should Virtue guilty power engage)
With brow undaunted met his rage.
See, his cheek kindles into generous fire:
Stern, he bends him over his lyre;
And, while the doom of guilt he sings,
Shakes horror from the tortured strings.
What sounds of terror and distress
Rend yon howling wilderness!
The dreadful thunders sound;
The forked lightnings flash along the ground.
Why yawns that deep'ning gulf below? --
It Is for heaven's rebellious foe: --
Fly, ye sons of Israel, fly,
Who dwells in Korah's guilty tents must die! --
They sink! -- Have mercy, Lord! -- Their cries
In dreadful tumult rise!
Hark, from the deep their loud laments I hear!
They lessen now, and lessen on the ear!
Now, destruction's strife is over!
The countless host
For ever lost!
The gulf is closed! -- Their cries are heard no more! --
But oh, my lyre, what accents can relate
Sinful man's appointed sat!
He comes, he comes! the avenging God!
Clouds and darkness round him roll:
Tremble, earth! Ye mountains, nod!
He bows the skies, and shakes the pole.
The gloomy banners of his wrath unfurled,
He calls the floods, to drown a guilty world:
" Ruin, lift thy baleful head;
" Rouse the guilty world from sleep:
" Lead up thy billows from their cavern'd bed,
" And burst the rocks that chain thee in the deep. --
Now, the impetuous torrents rise;
The hoarse-ascending deluge roars:
Down rush the cataracts from the skies;
The swelling waves overwhelm the shores.
Just, O God, is thy decree!
Shall guilty man contend with thee!
Lo, Hate and Envy, sea-entomb'd,
And Rage with Lust in ruin sleep;
And scoffing Luxury is doomed
To glut the vast and ravenous deep! --
In vain from Fate the astonished remnant flies: --
" Shrink, ye rocks! Ye oceans, rise!" --
The tottering cliffs no more the floods control;
Sea following sea ingulphs the ball:
Over the sunk hills the watery mountains roll,
And wide Destruction swallows all:
Now fiercer let the impassioned numbers glow:
Swell the song, ye mighty choir!
Wing your dreadful darts with fire!
Hear me, monarch! -- Guilt is woe! --
Thus while the frowning shepherd poured along
The deep impetuous torrent of his song;
Saul, stung by dire despair,
Gnash'd his teeth, and tore his hair:
From his blood, by horror chilled,
A cold and agonizing sweat distilled:
Then, foaming with unutterable smart.
He aimed a dagger at his heart.
His watchful train prevent the blow;
And call each lenient balm to sooth his frantic woe:
But pleased, the shepherd now beheld
His pride by heaven's own terrors quelled:
Then bade his potent lyre control
The mighty storm that rent his soul.
Cease your cares: the body's pain
A sweet relief may find:
But gums and lenient balms are vain,
To heal the wounded mind.
Come, fair Repentance, from the skies,
O sainted maid, with upcast eyes!
Descend, in thy celestial shroud,
Vested in a weeping cloud!
Holy guide, descend, and bring
Mercy from the Eternal King!
To his soul your beams impart,
And whisper comfort to his heart! --
They come: O King, thine ear incline!
Listen to their voice divine:
Their voice shall every pang compose,
To gentle sorrow sooth thy woes;
Till each pure wish to heaven shall soar,
And Peace return, to part no more!
Behold, obedient to their great command,
The lifted dagger quits his trembling hand:
Smoothed is his brow, where sullen Care
And furrowed Horror couched with fell Despair:
No more his eyes with fury glow;
But heavenly grief succeeds to hell-born woe. --
See, the signs of grace appear:
See the soft relenting tear,
Trickling at sweet Mercy's call!
Catch it, angels, ere it fall!
And let the heart-sent offering rise,
Heaven's best-accepted sacrifice! --
Yet, yet again? -- Ah see, the pang returns!
Again with inward fire his heaving bosom burns!
Now, shepherd, wake a mightier strain;
Search the deep, heart-rending pain;
Till the large floods of sorrow roll,
And quench the tortures of his soul.
Almighty Lord, accept his pang sincere!
Let heavenly hope dispel each dark temptation!
And, while he pours the penitential tear,
O visit him with thy salvation! --
Stoop from heaven, ye raptured throng!
Sink, ye swelling tides of song!
For lo! dissolved by Music's melting power,
Celestial Sorrow rolls her plenteous shower,
Over his wan cheek the colors rise;
And beams of comfort brighten in his eyes.
Happy king, thy woes are over!
Thy God shall wound thy soul no more:
The pitying Father of mankind
Meets the pure-returning mind.
No more shall black Despair afflict his soul:
Each gentler sound, ye shepherds, now combine:
Sweetly let the numbers roll:
Sooth him into hope divine.
Now lowly let the rustic measure glide,
To quell the dark remains of self-consuming Pride;
Till Nature's home-sprung blessings he confess,
And own that calm content is happiness. --
Ye woods and lakes, ye cliffs and mountains!
Haunted grots, and living fountains!
Listen to your shepherd's lay,
Whose artless carols close the day.
Bounding kids around him throng;
The steep rock echoes back his song:
While all unseen to mortal eye,
Sliding down the evening sky,
Holy Peace, though born above,
Daughter of Innocence and Love,
Quits her throne and mansion bright,
Her crown of stars, and robe of light,
Serene, in gentle smiles arrayed,
To dwell beneath his palm tree shade.
Hail, meek angel! awful guest!
Still pour thy radiance over my breast!
Pride and Hate in courts may shine:
The shepherd's calm and blameless tent is thine! --
Softly, softly breathe your numbers;
And wrap his wearied soul in slumbers!
Gentle Sleep, becalm his breast,
And close his eyes in healing rest!
Descend, celestial visions, ye who wait,
God's ministering powers, at heaven's eternal gate!
Ye, who nightly vigils keep,
And rule the silent realms of Sleep,
Exalt the just to joys refined,
And plunge in woe the guilty mind;
Descend! -- Oh, waft him to the skies,
And open all heaven's glories to his eyes!
Beyond yon starry roof, by seraphs trod,
Where Light's unclouded fountains blaze;
Where choirs immortal hymn their God,
Intranc'd in ecstasy of ceaseless praise.
Angels, heal his anguish!
Your harps and voices join!
His grief to bliss shall languish,
When soothed by sounds divine.
Behold, with dawning joy each feature glows!
See, the blissful tear overflows! --
The fiend is fled! -- Let music's rapture rise:
Now Harmony, thy every nerve employ:
Shake the dome, and pierce the skies:
Wake him, wake him into joy. --
What power can every Passion's throne control?
What power can boast the charm divine,
To still the tempest of the soul?
Celestial Harmony, that mighty charm is thine!
She, heavenly-born, came down to visit earth,
When from God's eternal throne
The beam of all-creative Wisdom shone,
And spoke fair Order into birth.
At Wisdom's call she robed yon glittering skies,
Attun'd the spheres, and taught consenting orbs to rise.
Angels wrapped in wonder stood,
And saw that all was fair, and all was good.
'Twas then, ye sons of God, in bright array
Ye shouted over creation's day:
Then kindling into joy,
The morning stars together sung:
And thro'the vast ethereal sky
Seraphic hymns and loud hosannahs rung.
AN INSCRIPTION WRITTEN AT A FAVORITE RETIREMENT IN MAY MDCCLVIII.
BY THE SAME.
WHAT though nor glittering turret rise,
Nor Splendour gild these mild retreats?
Yet Nature here, in modest guise,
Displays her unambitious sweets:
Along each gentle swelling lawn
She strays, with rustic garlands crowned;
And wakes the flowers at early dawn,
To fling their bosomed fragrance round.
Here teach thy votary, blameless guide,
To trace thy step serene and free;
To shun the toilsome heights of Pride,
Through these calm scenes to follow thee.
His silent walk do thou adorn,
Over these green slopes, from tumult far;
Whether he greet the blushing morn,
Or welcome up you evening star:
Intent, while through these tufted bowers
Thy generous whispers charm his ear,
To hail from heaven thy kindred powers,
And meet fair Peace and Freedom here.
Yet prompt to stay his country's fall,
The stormy city's war he will join,
When thou, and Truth, and Freedom call:
For Freedom's voice, and Truth's, are thine.
AN ELEGY WRITTEN AMONG THE RUINS OF AN ABBEY.
BY MR. JERNINGHAM.
WHERE sighs the zephyr to you lonely tree,
A solemn grove its leafy mantle spread:
Where bend you mouldering turrets over the sea,
A venerable dome once reared its head.
The solemn grove, the venerable dome,
Were erst frequented by a numerous train,
Even chaste as they who Dian's mountain roam,
But not subjected to her gentle reign:
Far other Goddess did this train obey,
Far other temples, other altars raised,
Far other meaning breathed their choral lay,
Far other incense on their altars blazed:
Veiled Superstition waked her magic sound,
Bad Albion's sons sorsake the splendid court,
Forsake Amusement's variegated round,
And to her sable standard here resort:
Alas! obsequious to her stern command,
A sullen-pensive brotherhood they came,
Refused to trace the paths by Nature planned,
And razed from Glory's page their ancient name.
Nor these alone were found incloister'd here,
Here also dwelt the simple-minded swain,
Who, wrapped in sloth, dreamed out the lazy year,
While Industry sat weeping on the plain!
The many temples rising fair to view,
Which towering Superstition called her own,
With hand unerring radiant Truth o'erthrew,
And snatched the impostor from her tinsell'd throne.
On yon dust-levell'd spire the crafty maid,
With indignation brooding in her breast,
Sits gloomily. -- Her votaries all are fled,
Her lamps extinguished, and her rites suppressed:
Within her hand a vacant string she holds,
That once connected many a hallowed bead:
The blotted scroll the other hand unfolds,
Contained the maxims of her slighted creed.
Couched at her feet, behold a mouldering shrine,
(Of various relics once the dread abode)
Where runs the spider over his treacherous line,
Where lurks the beetle, and the loathso me toad:
On Darkness' wing now sails the midnight hour,
When for the grateful sound of choral prayer,
The shrieking owl from you disparted tower,
With notes of horror wakes her trembling ear.
Of human grandeur mark the fleeting day,
How frail each purpose, and each wish how vain!
The strong-built domes, the cloistered fanes decay,
And ruin hovers round the desert scene.
The path that leads to yonder shattered pile
Is now perplexed with many a sordid brier:
No crowd is seen within the sacred isle,
The Sabbath mourns its long-deserted choir.
The golden crozier blended with the dust
In horrid folds the serpent clasps around:
The powerful image, and the sainted bust,
Desam'd, unhallowed, press the weedy ground.
Not distant far, her gold encircled tower
The inviolable dame majestic reared,
On whose dread altar breathed some hidden power,
By Terror guarded, and by kings revered:
To which asylum even the assassin came,
(His hand audacious still imbrued with gore)
The boon of full impunity to claim,
While feeble Justice wept her baffled lore.
So Truth at once dissolved the mental chain,
And banished Error from the enlightened shore;
So closed at length the busy-acted scene,
The curtain dropped, and Folly's mask was over.
The gladsome Ceres raised her drooping head,
(While yellow harvests gilt the smiling plain)
Beheld a youthful band around her spread,
With sickles armed to reap the bearded grain.
The warrior then beneath the trailing vest,
The peaceful cessock, or the drowsy cowl,
No longer quenched the flame within his breast,
Or lulled the purpose of his daring soul:
But rushed undaunted to the doubtful war,
Pursued where Glory led the radiant way,
Till Neptune rising on his coral car,
Resigned his watery world to Britain's sway.
The virgin fair by venal guardians doomed,
By error prompted, or subdued by force,
No more in cloisters drear their days consumed:
Like flowerets strewn around the senseless corse.
Triumphant Hymen hailed the blissful hour,
And saw a white-rob'd social train approach,
For whom the Pleasures dressed the happy bower,
And scattered roses over the destined couch.
Still other blessings from this change appeared;
No injured family did then behold
On loitering monks its native wealth conferred,
Nor spacious altars covered with its gold.
Full many trod that crooked path to Fame,
Yet from her hand received no lasting meed,
She from her annals rends their fading name,
And gives to Infamy the worthless deed:
But Vengeance some pursued with dire disgrace,
Pursued beyond the circle of its sphere,
Even to the cementery's dark recess,
Nor spared them sleeping on the peaceful bier.
Beside the spreading of that sombrous yew,
Where yawns with hideous chasm the vaulted cave,
Presenting to the fixed astonished view
The profanation of a rifled grave:
The large-endowing Rufus lay inurn'd,
With many a sculputur'd image on his shrine,
That smit with sorrow over his ashes mourned,
The Sister-Graces, and the tuneful Nine.
Imprinted on Tradition's storied leaf
Is found (to this sepulchral spot confined)
A terror-breathing tale that wins belief,
And often repeated by the neighboring hind!
From where yon mountain shades the dreary plain,
Attracted by the scent of human blood,
A troop of wolves voracious scoured amain,
And at this charnel-vault required their food.
When, horrid to relate! they burst the tomb,
And swift descending to the deepest shade,
Up-tore the shrouded tenant from its womb,
And over the mangled corse relentless preyed.
The paly stars with dim reluctant light,
Like tapers glimmer'd on their orgies foul,
While gliding specter scream'd with wild affright,
Re-echo'd loud by their tremendous howl!
Ah! what availed the solemn-moving hearse?
The sable mantled cars, the funeral throng?
Engraved on his monument the soothing verse?
The priests, the torches, and the choral song?
Misjudging wretch! while thou with hand profuse
Thy treasures on this mansion did entail,
And pour down riches on the vowed recluse,
Thine orphan babes partook a scanty meal.
Thy widowed fair, her cheek bedewed with tears,
Approached with suppliant knee the cloister-gate,
There ost disclosed in vain her poignant cares,
Returning still to weep her hapless fate.
IL LATTE: AN ELEGY.
BY THE SAME.
YE fair, for whom the hands of Hymen weave
The nuptial wreath to deck your virgin brow,
While pleasing pains the conscious bosom heave,
And on the kindling cheeks the blushes glow:
Whose spotless soul contains the better dower,
Whose life unstained full many virtues vouch,
For whom now Venus frames the fragrant bower,
And scatters roses over the expecting couch:
To you I sing. -- Ah! ere the raptured youth
With trembling hand removes the jealous veil,
Where, long regardless of the vows of truth,
Unsocial coyness stamped the ungrateful soul,
A low the Poet round your flowing hair,
Culled from an humble vale, a wreath to twine,
To Beauty's altar with the Loves repair,
And wake the lute beside that living shrine:
That sacred shrine! where female virtue glows,
Where even the Graces all their treasures bring,
And where the lilly, tempered with the rose,
Harmonious contrast! breathes an Eden spring:
That shrine! where Nature with presaging aim,
What time her friendly aid Lucina brings,
The snowy nectar pours, delightful stream!
Where fluttering Cupids dip their purple wings:
For you who bear a Mother's sacred name,
Whose cradled offspring, in lamenting strain,
With artless eloquence asserts his claim,
The boon of Nature, but asserts in vain.
Say why, illustrious daughters of the great,
Lives not the nursling at your tender breast?
By you protected in his frail estate?
By you attended, and by you caressed?
To foreign hands, alas! can you resign
The parent's task, the mother's pleasing care?
To foreign hands the smiling babe consign?
While Nature starts, and Hymen sheds a tear.
When, 'mid the polished circle ye rejoice,
Or roving join fantastic Pleasure's train,
Unheard perchance the nursling lifts his voice,
His tears unnotic'd, and unsooth'd his pain:
Ah! what avails the coral crowned with gold?
In heedless infancy the title vain?
The colors gay the purfled scarfs unfold?
The splendid nursery, and the attendant train?
Far better had thou first beheld the light,
Beneath the rafter of some roof obscure!
There in a mother's eye to read delight,
And in her cradling arm reposed secure. --
No wonder, should Hygeia, blissful Queen!
Her wonted salutary gifts recall,
While haggard Pain applies his dagger keen,
And over the cradle Death unfolds his pall.
The flowret ravished from its native air,
And bid to flourish in a foreign vale,
Does it not often elude the planter's care,
And breathe its dying odours on the gale?
For you, ye plighted fair, when Hymen crowns
With tender offspring your unshaken love,
Behold them not with Rigour's chilling frowns,
Nor from your sight unfeelingly remove.
Unsway'd by Fashion's dull unseemly jest,
Still to the bosom let your infant cling,
There banquet often, an ever-welcome guest,
Unblam'd inebriate at that healthful spring.
With fond solicitude each pain assuage,
Explain the look, awake the ready smile,
Unfeigned attachment so shall you engage,
To crown with gratitude maternal toil:
So shall your daughters in affliction's day,
When over your form the gloom of age shall spread,
With lenient converse chase the hours away,
And soothe with Duty's hand the widowed bed:
Approach, compassionate, the voice of Grief,
And whisper patience to the closing ear;
From Comfort's chalice minister relief,
And in the potion drop a filial tear.
So shall your sons, when beauty is no more,
When fades the languid luster in your eye,
When Flattery shuns her dulcet notes to pour,
The want of beauty, and of praise, supply.
Even from the wreathe that decks the warrior's brow,
Some chosen leaves your peaceful walks shall strew.
And even the flowers on classic ground that blow,
Shall all unfold their choicest sweets for you.
When to the embattled host the trumpet blows,
While at the call fair Albion's gallant train
Dare to the field their triple-number'd foes,
And chase them speeding over the frightened plain:
The mother kindles at the glorious thought,
And to her son's renown adjoins her name;
For, at the nurturing breast, the hero caught
The love of virtue, and the love of fame.
Or in the senate when Britannia's cause
With generous themes inspires the glowing mind,
While listening Freedom grateful looks applause,
Pale Slavery drops her chain, and sculks behind:
With conscious joy the tender parent fraught,
Still to her son's renown adjoins her name;
For, at the nurturing breast, the patriot caught
The love of virtue, and the love of same.
THE TRANSFORMATION OF LYCON AND EUPHORMIUS.
BY WILLIAM MELMOTH, ESQUIRE.
DEEM not, ye plaintive crew, that suffer wrong,
Ne thou, O man! who deal'st the tort, misween
The equal gods, who heaven's sky-mansions throng,
(Though viewless to the eyne they distant sheen)
Spectators reckless of our actions been.
Turning the volumes of grave sages old,
Where ancient saws in fable may be seen,
This truth I fond in paynim tale enrolled;
Which for ensample drad my muse shall here unfold.
What time Arcadia's flowret valleys famed,
Pelasgus, first of monarchs old, obeyed,
There wonn'd a wight, and Lycon was he named,
Unawed by conscience, of no gods afraid,
Ne justice ruled his heart, ne mercy swayed.
Some held him kin to that abhorred race,
Which heaven's high towers with mad emprize assayed;
And some his cruel lynage did ytrace
From fell Erynnis joined in Pluto's dire embrace.
But he, perdy, far other tale did feign,
And claimed alliance with the Sisters nine;
And deemed himself (what deems not pride so vain?)
The peerless paragon of wit divine.
Vaunting that every foe should rue its tine.
Right doughty wight! yet, sooth, withouten smart,
All powerless fell the losel's shafts malign:
It Is Virtue's arm to wield Wit's heavenly dart,
Point its keen barb with force, and send it to the heart.
One only impe he had, Pastora hight,
Whose sweet amenaunce pleased each shepherd's eye*
Yet pleased she not base Lycon's evil spright,
Tho blame in her not Malice moten spy,
Clear, without spot, as summer's cloudless sky.
Hence poets feigned, Lycean Pan arrayed
In Lycon's form, enflamed with passion high,
Deceived her mother in the covert glade,
And from the stolen embrace ysprong the heavenly maid.
Thus fabling they: mean while the damsel fair
A shepherd youth remarked, as over the plain
She deffly paced elong so debonair:
Seemed she as one of Dian's chosen train.
Full many a fond excuse he knew to feign,
In sweet converse to while with her the day,
'Till love unwares his heedless heart did gain.
Nor dempt he, simple wight, no mortal may
The blinded god once harbored, when he list, foresay.
Now much he meditates if yet to speak,
And now resolves his passion to conceal:
But sure, quoth he, my seely heart will break,
If aye I smother what I aye must feel.
At length by hope emboldened to reveal,
The laboring secret dropped from his tongue.
Whiles frequent singults checked his faltring tale,
In modest wise her head Pastora hong:
For never maid more chaste inspired shepherd's song.
What needs me to recount in long detail
The tender parley which these lemans held:
How often he vowed his love her never should fail;
How often the stream from forth her eyne outwell'd,
Doubting if constancy yet ever dwell'd
In heart of youthful wight: suffice to know,
Each rising doubt he in her bosom quelled.
So parted they, more blithsome both, I trow:
For rankling love concealed, me seems, is deadly woe.
Eftsoons to Lycon swift the youth did fare,
(Lagg'd ever youth when Cupid urged his way?)
And straight his gentle purpose did declare,
And sooth the mount'naunce of his herds display.
Ne Lycon meant his suiten to foresay:
" Be thine, Pastora (quoth the masker sly)
" And twice two thousand sheep her dower shall pay."
Beat then the lover's heart with joyaunce high;
Ne dempt that aught his bliss could now betray,
Ne guessed that foul deceit in Lycon's bosom lay.
So forth he yode to seek his reverend sire;
(The good Euphormius shepherds him did call)
How sweet Pastora did his bosom fire,
Her worth, her promised flocks, he tolden all.
Ah! nere, my son, let Lycon thee enthrall,
(Replied the sage, in wise experience old)
" Smooth is his tongue, but full of guile withal,
" In promise faithless, and in vaunting bold:
" Ne ever lamb of his will bleat within thy fold."
With words prophetic thus Euphormius spoke:
And fact confirmed what wisdom thus foretold:
Full many a mean devise did Lycon make,
The hoped day of spousal to withold,
Framing new trains when naught mote serve his old.
Nath'less he vowed, Cyllene, cloud-topt hill,
Should sooner down the lowly delve be rolled,
Than he his plighted promise nould fulfill:
But when, perdy, or where, the caitive sayen nill.
Whiles thus the tedious suns had journey'd round,
Ne ought mote now the lovers hearts divide,
Ne trust was there, ne truth in Lycon found;
The maid with matron Juno for her guide,
The youth by Concord led, in secret hy'd
To Hymen's sacred fane: the honest deed
Each god approved, and close the bands were tied.
Certes, till happier moments should succeed,
No prying eyne they ween'd their emprize mote areed.
But prying eyne of Lycon 'twas in vain
(Right practick in disguise) to hope beware.
He traced their covert steps to Hymen's fane,
And joy'd to find them in his long-laid snare.
Algates, in semblaunt ire, he 'gan to swear,
And roaren loud as in displeasaunce high;
Then out he hurlen forth his daughter fair,
Forelore, the houseless child of Misery,
Exposed to killing cold, and pinching penury.
Ah! whither now shall sad Pastora wend,
To want abandoned and by wrongs oppressed?
Who shall the wretched out-cast's teen befriend?
Live's mercy then, if not in parent's breast?
At Jove's right hand, to Jove for ever dear,
Yes, MERCY lives, the gentle goddess blessed,
Aye at his feet she pleads the cause distressed,
To Sorrow's plaints she turns his equal ear,
And wafts to heaven's star-throne fair Virtue's silent tear.
'Twas SHE that bade Euphormius quell each thought
That well mote rise to check his generous aid.
Tho high the torts which Lycon him had wrought,
Tho few the flocks his humble pastures fed,
When as he learned Pastora's hapless sted,
His breast humane with wonted pity flows.
He opened his gates, the naked exile led
Beneath his roof: a decent drapet throws
Over her cold limbs, and sooths her undeserved woes.
Now loud-tongu'd Rumor bruited round the tale:
The astonished swains uneath could credence give,
That in Arcadia's unambitious vale
A faytor false as Lycon ever did live.
But Jove (who in high heaven does mortals prive,
And every deed in golden balance weighs)
To earth his flaming charret baden drive,
And down descends, enwrapt in peerless blaze,
To deal forth guerdon meet to good and evil ways.
Where Eurymmanthus, crowned with many a wood,
His silver stream through dasy'd vales does lead,
Stretched on the flowery marge, in reckless mood,
Proud Lycon sought by charm of jocund reed
To lull the dire remose of tortious deed.
Him Jove accosts, in reverend semblaunce dight
Of good Euphormius, and 'gan mild areed
Of compact often confirmed, of say yplight,
Of nature's tender tie, of sacred rule of right.
With lofty eyne, half loath to look so low,
Him Lycon viewed, and with swol'n surquedry
'Ganrudely treat his sacred eld: When now
Forth stood the God confessed that rules the sky,
In sudden sheen of drad divinity:
" And know, false man," the lord of thunders said,
" Not unobserved by heaven's all-persent eye
" Thy cruel deeds: nor shall be unappay'd:
" Go! be in form that best beseems thy thews, arrayed."
Whiles yet he spoke the affrayed trembling wight
Transmew'd to blatant beast, with hideous howl
Rushed headlong forth, in well-deserved plight,
Midst dragons, minotaurs, and fiends to prowl,
A wolf in form as erst a wolf in soul!
To Pholoe, forest wild, he hy'd away,
The horrid haunt of savage monsters soul.
There helpless innocence is still his prey,
Thief of the bleating fold, and shepherd's dire dismay.
Tho Jove to good Euphormius' cot did wend,
Where peaceful dwelt the man of virtue high,
Each shepherd's praise and eke each shepherd's friend,
In every act of sweet humanity.
Him Jove approaching in mild majesty,
Grected all hail! then bade him join the throng
Of glit'rand lights that gild the glowing sky.
There shepherds nightly view his orb yhong,
Where bright he shines eterne, the brightest stars among.
A TALE.
BY THE SAME.
ERE Saturn's sons were yet disgraced,
And heathen gods were all the taste,
Full often (we read) 'twas Jove's high will
To take the air on Ida's hill.
It chanced, as once with serious ken
He viewed from thence the ways of men,
He saw (and pity touched his breast)
The world by three foul fiends possessed.
Pale Discord there, and Folly vain,
With haggard Vice, upheld their reign.
Then forth he sent his summons high,
And called a senate of the sky.
Round as the winged orders pressed,
Jove thus his sacred mind expressed:
" Say, which of all this shining train
" Will Virtue's conflict hard sustain?
" For see! she drooping takes her flight,
" While not a God supports her right."
He paused -- when from amidst the sky,
Wit, Innocence, and Harmony,
With one united zeal arose,
The triple tyrants to oppose.
That instant from the realms of day,
With generous speed, they took their way;
To Britain's isle direct their car,
And entered with the evening star.
Beside the road a mansion stood,
Defended by a circling wood.
Hither, disguised, their steps they bend,
In hopes, perchance, to find a friend.
Nor vain their hope; for records say,
Worth never from thence was turned away.
They urge the traveller's common chance,
And every piteous plea advance:
The artful tale that Wit had feigned,
Admittance easy soon obtained.
The dame who owned, adorned the place;
Three blooming daughters added grace.
The first, with gentlest manners blessed
And temper sweet, each heart possessed;
Who viewed her, caught the tender flame;
And soft Amasia was her name.
In sprightly sense and polished air,
What maid with Mira might compare?
While Lucia's eyes, and Lucia's lyre,
Did unresisted love inspire.
Imagine now the table clear,
And mirth in every face appear:
The song, the tale, the jest went round,
The riddle dark, the trick profound,
Thus each admiring and admired,
The hosts and guests at length retired;
When Wit thus spoke her sister-train:
" Faith, friends, our errand is but vain --
" Quick let us measure back the sky;
" These nymphs alone may well supply
" Wit, Innocence, and Harmony."
EPISTLE TO SAPPHO A young lady of thirteen years of age.
.
BY THE SAME.
WHILE yet no amorous youths around thee bow,
Nor flattering verse conveys the faithless vow;
To graver notes will Sappho's soul attend,
And ere she hears the lover, hear the friend?
Let maids less blessed employ their meaner arts
To reign proud tyrants over unnumber'd hearts;
May Sappho learn (for nobler triumphs born)
Those little conquests of her sex to scorn.
To form thy bosom to each generous deed;
To plant thy mind with every useful seed;
Be these thy arts: nor spare the grateful toil,
Where Nature's hand has blessed the happy soil.
So shall thou know, with pleasing skill, to blend
The lovely mistress, and instructive friend:
So shall thou know, when unrelenting Time
Shall spoil those charms yet opening to their prime,
To ease the loss of Beauty's transient flower,
While reason keeps what rapture gave before.
And oh! while Wit, fair dawning, spreads its ray,
Serenely rising to a glorious day,
To hail the growing luster often be mine,
Thou early favorite of the sacred Nine!
And shall the Muse with blameless boast pretend,
In Youth's gay bloom that Sappho called me friend:
That urged by me she shunned the dangerous way,
Where heedless maids in endless error stray;
That scorning soon her sex's idler art,
Fair Praise inspired and Virtue warmed her heart;
That fond to reach the distant paths of Fame,
I taught her infant genius where to aim?
Thus when the feathered choir first tempt the sky,
And all unskilled their feeble pinions try,
The experienced sire prescribes the adventurous height,
Guides the young wing, and pleased attends the flight.
VERSES WRITTEN IN LONDON ON THE APPROACH OF SPRING.
EARLY the sun his radiant axle guides,
Sloping his steep course with the Pleiades;
On every fragant briar the flowret blooms,
And the wild woodlark chaunts his early song
In heedless carol, to the smiling Hours,
Young Maia's festive train; their wavy dance
She jocund leads, and from her horn profuse
Pours roses, violets, woodbines, eglantine,
Fair Flora's dower, what time the youthful Spring
Clasped her all-blushing in a secret bower:
Thou the mild offspring of their warm embrace,
Oh lovely May, and these thine heritage,
Which bounteous thou with an unsparing hand
Scatterest to all, though chief thou love to deck
The village Phaebe's brow, and fairer far
Is thy adorning, than the sunny glow
Of eastern ruby, ill assorted grace
That decks not but deforms the faded cheek
Of the wan courtier. -- Far more raptured greets
Fancy's sond ear, wherever she musing roves,
Thy minstrelsy untutored, than the trill
And languid descant of Italian art.
Yet fings the woodlark, and the hawthorn blooms,
Unheard the song, the fragrance unperceived
By me; though not among the sons of men
There lives, who listens with more raptured ear,
Or feels more lively, Nature's varied boon.
For though confined in the city walls
To dwell with busy Care, and with him watch
The call of Interest, is my lot affixed,
Far happier seems to me the peasant's life,
Who treads the furrow laboring, yet his mind
Vacant of thought can muse of what around
Strikes his rapt eye with beauty, or his ear
With pleasing song, than if a golden mine
Disclosed its boundless treasures, but condemned
My carking thought, to watch the gilded mischief,
And cunningly devise to increase the store.
Bereaved of every pleasure Nature gives
Each plain but heartfelt rapture, what is wealth?
In artful mazes we but toil for bliss:
True Pleasure dwells not in the arched roof,
She fings no carol to the midnight ball;
The loaded board and Bacchus' flustering draughts
In vain are tried, for ah she dwells not there!
She dwells not with such rude ill-manner'd mirth,
But seeks with her mild sister Cheerfulness
The russet plain; there prompts the virgin's song,
Breathes the brisk carol from the cottage reed,
Strikes the quick tabor glad with echoing pulse,
And animates the village holiday.
Nor then alone but when his honest labor
Calls the good swain, she early joins his step;
For the mild radiance of the opening dawn
Gives to her sight the wide-extended view
Of hill and dale, hoar forest, flowering heath,
Rich harvest, verdant meadow, where the stream
Rolls far its plenteous wave, and all around
To Pleasure's ear most grateful, thousand birds,
Lark, linnet, thrush, and thou of all the grove
The sweetest songster, witching Philomel,
Art rising to hymn out thy morning song.
Thou too at eve, when all his labor over,
He at the furrow's end unyokes the steer,
And seeks with weary step his rest at home,
Do with thy tranquil warble sooth his soul;
Best prelude to the peace his cottage gives.
There at the door his numerous offspring watch
Their sire's return, and eager run to tell
The tyding of his coming, while his dame
Plys her glad evening care, to deck the board
With food uncater'd by the baleful hand
Of Luxury, and fittest to refresh
His toil-worn spirit, and her smiling welcome
Gives its due relish to the simple fare.
What are to this the proud luxurious feasts,
The City's boast, where distant colonies
Of East and Western worlds must be explored
To strike the sickly palate's feeble sense
With faint delight? Oh what are all our joys,
Even those of monarchs, to the thousand beauties
That strike the rapt soul of the rudest hind?
Can Art's best mimicry their form express?
Can rich Loraine mix up the glowing tint
Bright as Aurora? Can he form a shade
To strike the fancy with a gloom so solemn
As every thicket, copse, or secret grove
At twilight hour affords? Can savage Rosa
With aught so wildly noble fill the mind,
As where the ancient oak in the wood's depth
Has shed his leafy honors, and around
The woodman with fell axe has lowered the pride
Of many a tall tree, he deserted stands
A barren trunk, while rude winds howl around,
And dreary torrents lash his naked limbs?
Mean time the rifting thunder dreadful roars,
The livid lightnings flash, and elements
Conjoined pour out their wrath, as if to rend
The lone, defenseless, aged, feeble oak.
Such scenes awake Imagination's powers
To sacred thought; such Rosa cannot paint;
It Is his alone to show the shattered trunk:
The winds keen howl, the thunder's aweful sound,
The dreary rain, these mock the pencil's power.
Can aught of artful music sooth the soul
To so serene a temper, as the flight
Of songsters in the grove? or can thy strain,
(Though there Enchantment strike the magic chord)
Oh matchless Purcell! with so wild a charm
Transport the mind, as when at dusk of eve
From the hoar battlement the lone owl's cry
Pierces the awful silence, and the fallen
And time-worn hollow towers convey the sound
To the near wood, where in the devious path
Retired Fancy wanders, on her ear
The faint sound murmurs, strait the distant low
Of unyok'd heifer, strait the cuckow's note
She hears, while often the roving Zephyr's tread
Rustling alarms her, and the measured step
Of the slow steer, who brushes through the thicket
To seek his food, beats duly regular.
As on he wanders, through the opening bower
He sees the pale moon rising; clouds on clouds
Pil'd mountainous awhile obstruct her beam,
Till laboring thence she lifts her silver brow,
And pours her full ray on the ivy'd steeple.
And hark its bell now tolls the minute knell,
And through the churchway path the surplic'd priest
Walks slowly forward, while the snowy pall
Covering the relics of some love lorn virgin,
Passes with aweful pace along the glade.
Wrapped harmonist! what though thy studied chord
Can sound the slow knell, echo to the note
The lone owl utters, breathe the heifer's low,
And mark the funeral step with pausing cadence,
And music can no more, where is the tower
O'er-hung with-ivy, seen by the pale moon,
Whose faint beam glimmers on the snowy pall?
Where are the rocky clouds from whence she breaks?
Yet do not these, does not the rustling breeze
And the slow-treading heifer add delight?
Do not accordant senses join to fill
The musing mind with calm and holy rapture?
And can the city by the utmost force
Of mimic art, with labored imitation
So soothe the soul, or give such mild delight?
Ye gay and sportive votaries of Joy,
Forgive the thoughtless Muse, for she has led me
To talk of pleasing horror, and the bliss
Which melancholy gives; ye cannot form
Amid the circling follies, which urge on
Your laughing hours, perhaps ye cannot form
A notion of these joys, and with a taunt
Of high contempt, despise the wild enthusiasm.
Yet on the well-trod stage have ye not seen
Your Roscius fired by the natural bard,
Immortal Shakespeare, wander the bleak heath
A poor and outcast king, nor blame the winds
Whose keen tooth seized his age, nor chide the elements
For their unkindness, while the ruffling storm
Tore the proud garments from his shivering trunk,
And the fierce lightnings fired his maddening brain?
Have you not then felt horror? Would ye not
Change your rich pomp for Edgar's naked hovel,
And be the poor king's host? -- Have ye not wished
To range with Rosaline the forest wild,
Or live beneath the shelter of some oak
With melancholy Jaques? Tell me, why then
Ye looked on wealth and greatness with a scorn?
Why but because the Muse with native strength
Poured truth on Fancy's eye; and yet the Muse
Can only boast in the most warm description
A faint resemblance, nor has she such force
To strike as Nature has. Alas! her voice
But wakes remembrance of our absent bliss;
And when she sings of incense-breathing Spring,
She wafts no odours to the longing sense,
But only prompts our sigh, that we must dwell
Confined in the full city, distant far
From every scene of rural innocence,
Whose woods, whose shades, whose storms, or funerals,
Even raise a sense of pleasure. What can then
The brighter views, what can the happy hour
That gives the blushing bride to the true arms
Of faithful Damon? Thenot pleased revives
To former youth, and gayest of the day
Provokes the village mirth, and from his soul
Enjoys the spousal of his boy, who scarce
(Overcome with rapture) can himself conduct
His festival; and but for busy Thenot,
Each due right were neglected, and the guests
Unbidden by the tabor's sprightly sound
To seek the green, and in the jocund dance
Each maiden with her youth breathe sport and joy,
Save the still happier pair: their greater bliss
Fills the whole breast, nor leaves a vacant place
For lighter mirth. Unnotic'd speaks the pipe:
They hear no sound but the endearing voice
Of mutual love: they do not mark the joy
In every face around; for their attention,
Fixed on each other, watches every glance
Diffused by the lovely languid eye.
Well may all else be unperceived; for who
Observes bright Hesper dart his pointed ray,
When riding high mild Cynthia pours serene
Her steady beam. Oh tell me, when compared
To these true raptures, what is the shadowy pomp
And artful splendor, when the golden shackles
Fetter two venal souls, by interest called
To prostitute the ever-hallow'd rites
Of holy Hymen? -- On the village plain
Naught joins but mutual love; no sordid motive
Promotes unnatural union; but the flame
That first united glows throughout their life
A steady fire, whose unabating light
Gilds Youth with rapture, and with fostering warmth
Chears drooping Age, who smiling sees his offspring
Step forth to claim the joys he celebrates
With annual hospitality, what time
The circling year brings round the happy day
That shower'd down blessings on him, when it gave
To his fond vow the willing Sylvia's charms,
Then blooming young, now hoary, but her heart
Unchanged by time; for still the same desire
To add to every joy, or fondly soothe
Each woe he feels, reigns unabated there.
His social roof receives each welcome guest,
His open heart diffuses round his pleasure,
And each plain neighbor with unfeigning tongue
Congratulates his bliss. Who would not leave
For these sincere delights, the pageant pomp,
The rich array, the courtly formal speech
Unutter'd by the heart, the birthday wish
Of venal hirelings, who for interest crowd
The glittering levee? Happier (Reason deems
Viewed in each light) the simple village life,
Than all that courtiers wish, or kings bestow.
Kings cannot give a boon of so rich price
As are thy smiles, O lovely Health! and thou
Shunning the tumult, to the rural green
Retirest. There, not built by mortal hand,
Stands on the southern slope of the fresh hill
Thy temple, from whose roof the eglantine
And vagrant woodbine hang; and at the porch
Sits thy good priestess Ease, administering
To Exercise (who up the gentle slope
By moderate footing moves) the holy cup
Of Temperance, nymph of the crystal spring
That dwells beneath thy altar; and from thence
Warbling with gentle lapse joins the full stream,
That winding wild delays its silver course
In the rich mead, whose bank the peasant often
Approaches to allay his thirst, and quaffs
The simple beverage from the limpid fount.
Bright virgin, thee of all the Powers who range
The rural plain, I woo with constant vow
Most ardent! Deign around my temples bind
Thy fragrant wreath, and deck my purpled cheek
With thy rich glow. Then undisturbed the mind
Musing pursues its holy meditation,
And rapt in trance, can trace a thousand gifts
Shower'd by the gracious hand of Nature's King
To deck the various field. The wondering eye
Roams over the fair creation; then to heaven
Unbidden soars; for the full soul impressed
With holy transport, there directs its view
From whence its blessings flow, and the rapt voice
Accordant hymns the grateful song of praise.
The rapid gusts of passion, which or pride,
Or folly, or the thousand varying forms
Of courtly affectation ever raise,
Here all subside, and the composed breast
Expands with love, and to its utmost power
Diffuses blessings to mankind, nor fears
Ingratitude should check, or pride should spurn
The offered bounties of the generous heart.
Blessed be the day, and doubly blessed the hour,
When my Fidele with unfeigned vow
Gave her fond hand, and owned her constant love:
Though since that hour already thrice the sun
From every sign has seen our growing bliss;
And though thy smile of unaffected love
Adds joy to every joy, and charms to ease
The brow of Care; though thou art all that heaven
Could give in woman, tenderness, and truth,
And all my heart ever wished, when warmest Fancy
Formed the fond future view of household bliss;
Yet happier still perhaps our lot had been,
Had thou beneath the rural thatch received
My faithful vow, and we had never heard
Of town or city life; a Marian thou,
And rustic Corin I. Then on the plain
Contented we had passed Life's little day.
While Youth with sprightly beam illum'd her hours,
They would move on with joy; and when at noon
Firm Manhood called us forth to till the soil,
And with our laboring hand direct the plough,
We would be ready, nor refuse the task,
Due tribute to the public; till at eve
Our vigor lost, when Age came creeping on,
We would unyoke our heifers, and retire
To welcome ease, our best skill then employed
At our own home; attentive there to thatch
The chinks which Time had made, and to root up
Each foul weed that deformed our little plot.
This business over, calm we should attend
The approaching hour of our eternal rest;
And when it came, borne to our peaceful grave
By the plain villager; what though no tomb
Of sculptured marble called the passing eye
To read our story, yet the cottage tear
Should on our ashes fall, and the good heart
Overflow sincerely for a neighbor lost:
Upon our bier the virgin troop would hang
Fresh-woven chaplets of the sweetest flowers:
Green turf should deck our grave; and every year
In springtime would some friendly hand with care
Bind the fresh briar around, to guard the place
From the rude insult of the careless step;
And faithful Memory to late time record,
We were the happiest pair of human kind.
WOODSTOCK. AN ELEGY.
WRITTEN IN THE YEAR MDCCLIX.
AH me! what is this mortal life? (I cried)
What changes crowd the page of flitting Time!
What dire reverse of Fate have numbers tried!
What youth, what beauty, withered in the prime!
Inexorable Destiny pursues,
And levels in the chase with rapid wing^:
Pity in vain, or Mirth, or Merit sues,
Equally vain the beggar and the king!
Ah! what is Fame, the idol of the great?
No solid Pleasure can she ever bestow;
If just to Worth, that justice comes too late:
Prompt is her malice, but her mercy slow!
Thus on the winding Isis' willowed bank,
The varying scenes of Fortune I deplore;
Wasting in fruitless sighs the evening dank,
Tears adding water to the river's store.
A gloomy mansion open to the view,
Disclosing horror heightened by the shade;
Where round the nodding walls the mournful yew
Points to the vault where Rosamond was laid:
Where with her birds of night, haggard and foul,
In sullen fellowship together dwell,
The bat ambiguous, and ill-omen'd owl,
Screaming to nighted swains a dreadful knell!
Intent I gazed, till Terror, ruling sight,
Reared a pale spectre from the yawning tomb,
A faint delusion of the murky night,
Begot and bred in Fancy's fruitful womb!
Semblance of virgin elegance and grace,
The mimic shape in every part adorned;
But wan and languid seemed the beauteous face,
Which Elen envied, and which Henry mourned,
Now gently gliding over the hallowed ground,
Close by my side the phantom made a stand,
Piercing the night-still'd air. An awful sound!
And claimed attention with uplifted hand.
" I once was blessed with Love's deluding joy,
" I also felt the worst extreme of hate!
" And can no length of time (she cried) destroy
" Remembrance of my love, and of my fate?
" O had Oblivion in her peaceful cell,
" Shrouded from every eye my mouldering dust!
" That on the chissel'd stone no verse might tell,
" My crime how great! my punishment how just!
" But Woodstock's blooming bowers still remain,
" The scenes, to me, of pleasure and of woe;
" And Godstow's walls perpetuate the stain
" My name reproaching, whilst my grave they show.
" O Woodstock, fated long to be the seat
" Of all the charms that Wit and Beauty boast,
" The hero's guerdon, and his soft retreat,
" Yielding content, in fields and senates lost.
" Thy glories now are levelled low in earth;
" No longer Beauty does thy bowers adorn;
" No more thy woods resound the voice of Mirth;
" The laurel from thy victor brow is torn!
" But thou whose bosom foreign sorrow heaves,
" Whose eyes can stream for anguish not thine own;
" Whose heart the white-rob'd fugitive receives,
" When forced by awful Rigor from her throne;
" The scourge of vice, the good man's destiny,
" The wreck of fortune, and the waste of years;
" The miseries thou mournest thou shall see,
" Sad consolation granted to thy tears."
Now on the summit of a cloud-built height
Methought I stood: and from an opening glade
With faultering ray gleam'd forth a magic light,
And round the plain in lambent circles played.
Sudden the ground with inbred motion shook,
A solemn murmur rustled through the trees;
And on the pebbled shore the surging brook
Dashed angry waves, unconscious of a breeze*
Daedalian mystery! from the parted soil,
A labyrinth 'rose to sounds of melting note;
A moment's labor mocking all the toil
Of nations old, and monarchs long forgot.
High over-arch'd in Summer's gayest weed,
Meandering alleys form the wondrous maze,
And puzzle most when best they seem to lead
The untaught foot, that in their precincts strays.
Deep in a vale impervious to all tread,
Save by a flower-hid path, a grotto stood!
And ancient oaks their foliage round it spread,
O'ershading with their tops the neighboring wood
And Nature sporting, with a lavish hand
This little spot in gay profusion graced,
With every wanton variation planned,
Luxuriant Fancy yielding but to Taste.
Here on the brink of a pellucid stream,
Circling in eddies over its moss-grown bed,
Where ever and anon a quivering beam,
Piercing the covert, on the surface played:
A Beauty lay, surpassing all the train
Of virgin Delia, or Idalia's queen;
Or what of dryads poets sweetly feign,
On Ida, or thessalian Oeta seen.
And by her side a form imperial lay,
With roses, and with myrtle garlands crowned;
The withered laurel cast in scorn away,
The pomp of war in Lydian measures drowned.
The little Loves that fluttered on the boughs,
In grateful bondage did their limbs entwine,
And strove to join them closer than their vows,
With woodbine sweet, and twisted eglantine.
But weak all bonds when those of Beauty fail;
The monarch sated left the flowery bed,
Nor grieved to see the maid his loss bewail,
Nor mingled parting tears with those she shed.
Now swift advancing to the guilty bower,
With frantic step the injured queen drew nigh;
And armed for vengeance seized the fatal hour,
When all things slept but rage and jealousy.
Each eager hand a deadly weapon filled,
A pointed dagger, and a poisoned bowl;
My ebbing blood her mad demeanor chilled,
And anguish unallay'd possessed my soul.
Ah stop, inhuman! with a faultering tongue
And inarticulate voice, as in a dream,
I cried; and strait the rattling thunder rung,
And livid lightnings in the welkin gleam!
No more the mazy grove, or bower appeared,
But all around a waste and barren plain;
The scattered trees of leaves and branches barred,
And blanched by srowning winds and beating rain.
And Murder shrieking hideous wandered there:
And ruthless Envy, and relentless Hate,
With snaky locks, and shrivelled bosoms bare,
Whilst lurking felons on their motions wait.
And soon the landscape shifting like a cloud,
To lessening distance bore the hellish crew;
Now twang in fainter sounds their yellings loud;
Now vanished quite; a milder scene I view.
Of checkered light and shade, a sober dawn,
Faint through a lingering vapor did disclose,
A hamlet seated on an open lawn,
And from each roof the pillar'd smoke arose.
For now with freqent challenge, had the cock
His rivals menacing, awaked the swain;
Now in the pen impatient bleats the flock,
And ruddy streaks the horizon distain.
The crouching dog the moon no longer bays,
But stretched supine upon the social hearth
He lies, rejoicing in the crackling blaze,
Whilst slaunting sunbeams dry the moistened earth.
Whilst to the strain of rural minstrelsy,
A band forth issuing to a neighboring hill
Welcomed the morn with decent jollity,
And all the air their youthful carrols fill.
With unskilled hands a simple crown they wove
Of vervain, and the never-sading bay;
And raised a throne within a rude alcove;
To grace the parent of the British lay:
Old Chaucer, who in rough, unequal verse,
Sung quaint allusion and sacetious tale;
And ever as his jests he would rehearse,
Loud peals of laughter echoed through the vale:
And eager gaped the rustic listening throng,
And still their joy and laughter they renew;
And warlike barons, softened by the song,
From loud alarms to mute attention drew.
But short-lived pleasure soon to sorrow changed;
For melody a sigh, for mirth a tear;
And now the swains in solemn order ranged,
Surround the bard extended on his bier.
What though succeeding poets, as their sire,
Revere his memory, and approve his wit;
Though Spenser's elegance and Dryden's fire
His name to ages far remote transmit;
His tuneless numbers hardly now survive,
As ruins of a dark and Gothic age;
And all his blithsome tales their praise derive
From Pope's immortal song, and Prior's page!
Again, quick rising through the tufted green,
Turrets and lofty battlements ascend;
Trees half obscuring columns, intervene,
And real boughs with sculptured fruitage blend.
And arched windows shine with torches clear,
Soothing the wanderer. A delusive home!
And busy crowds of ministers appear,
Decking with jocund haste a festive room.
And now of sprightly youths and damsels gay,
A wanton bevy at the board was set,
And all intent they seemed on amorous play,
For kindling glances, kindling glances met.
Their volant fingers over the chorded lyre,
With modulating touch the artists ply;
Pursuing still to animate desire,
Strains that in thrilling undulations die.
And every cheek with deep suffusion glowed,
Denoting thought inflamed, and troubled breast,
And passion in seducing sighs avowed
Mutual, yet still by decency represt.
But soon excess to madding riot led,
Ensuing meaning jest, and license bold;
Till comely Order from the banquet fled,
Ashamed the lustful orgies to behold.
A youth exalted high above the rest,
In bad pre-eminence conspicuous shone!
And blind submission to his lewd behest,
Unrivaled lewdness from them all had won.
And deeply was he skilled in wanton lore,
With sertile thought suggesting every art,
To make impurer, fires impure before,
Tainting at once the manners and the heart.
Pleasing proportion, youthful Beauty's aid,
And bland complacency and winning smile,
And wit diffusive tempting to persuade,
Maintained his power, and held him in the toil.
Ah! why should Nature in an angel dress,
To lure with seeming worth unwary eyes,
Conceal rank thoughts and gross voluptuousness,
Too apt to poison without Virtue's guise?
Pride of thy country, Wilmot, and her shame!
By every grace adorned, and Muse inspired!
Thy early fall how pitied! and thy name,
How much detested, and how much admired!
Yet must unbiased posterity admit,
For all thou wrot'st and acted'st to atone,
Thy failings were the age's, but thy wit,
Thy parts and dying penitence, thine own.
But now prevailing over the hubbub wild,
The clanging trumpet kindles great acclaim;
And all around are warlike trophies pil'd,
And crowds triumphant echo Churchill's fame.
And thronging senates in the glorious cause,
Repelled oppression, liberty maintained,
Accord with gratulant vote the loud applause;
The fairest prize by British valor gained.
Who erst implored, and soon obtained relief,
High-fated monarchs grateful homage pay,
And fulgent honors crown the matchless chief,
And verse harmonious, never to decay:
And humbled Gallia kneels with distant awe;
Her generals baffled, and her warriors slain;
No more to dictate but receive the law,
No longer to impose but wear the chain.
But venomed Faction spreading over the land,
Too soon forgets the mighty debt to owe;
And Envy stretches out her lurid hand,
The victor's meed to blast and overthrow.
And yet unfinished stands the votive dome,
By all his toil and all his danger bought:
When just resentment calls him far from home,
Revisiting the fields where late he fought.
In vain auspicious Brunswick's happy reign,
Blunting the rancorous point of party strife,
Restores the hero to his friends again;
Too late to cheer the dregs of lengthened life!
The lofty column and the voice of praise
In vain proclaim him great, and just, and brave;
Tardy repentance merit ill repays,
Unheard, unheeded, in the silent grave!
In conquest equal, and alike in fate,
Rome's mounting genius, godlike Scipio stood;
And propp'd by worth and dignity innate,
Contemned the venal censure of the crowd.
Yet once again the visionary scene,
Ductile, for sorrow social beauty yields;
A temperate sunshine and an air serene,
Fostering the upland downs and level fields.
And tepid showers bedew the frolic herd,
Bounding in gamesome measure over the lea,
With daisies crimson-tipt, and green parterr'd,
And shadowing fragrance drops from every tree.
The wide expanded prospect gently closed,
On visto'd walks leading to high arcades;
Each waving copse in symmetry disposed,
Points to the terras capt with colonnades.
And more remote the cloistered wings confine,
In architecture elegant and just,
A portall'd front where niches deep inshrine
The marble statue, and the gilded bust.
Unfolding wide the hospitable port
On ready hinges, to the searching eye
Reveals unblemished Childhood's harmless sport,
And placid parents stand delighted by.
For here unmindful of the call of State,
The smile of Favor, or the voice of Power;
In tranquil pleasure, even and sedate,
Great Churchill's heir enjoyed the wasting hour.
And beaming rapture glisten'd on his brow,
And glad dependants share their patron's joy,
No frowns their heart-bred transports disallow,
Debasing worth in Servitude's alloy.
Such charms has Innocence! such virtues Pride!
From starry height her sacred powers descend,
The garish pomp of Grandeur to deride,
And giddy Fortune's rash decrees amend.
A day he flourished in the peaceful soil,
Another saw him on the hostile strand,
Guiding the thunders of the white-cliff'd isle,
Ambition's wasteful rapine to withstand.
To match his great progenitor in war,
Elate with hope his generous bosom burns;
But inauspicious twinkled every star,
And heaven averted all his wishes spurns.
Too high request in every sphere to shine,
In peace a pattern, and a chief in blood;
The gods to each a separate path assign,
But he alone is great who is truly good.
ODE ON THE REBELLION IN THE YEAR MDCCXLV.
BY R. SCHOMBERG, M. D.
DO thou, fair Liberty, descend
To tune my harp, and guide my hand,
Thy sacred Sister with thee bring,
She too shall aid me, as I sing,
And every Briton's breast engage
With well-becoming zeal, and kindle honest rage.
Daughter of royal Brunswick's line,
Great Anna, Princess of Orange.
more than half divine,
Thou too, the happy theme inspire,
So shall I strike the golden lyre
With manly force, and raise my voice
Above a common strain, if thou approv'st my choice.
Britannia hail! hail happy isle,
Wherej oys inhabit, pleasures smile;
Great nurse of heroes, seat of charms,
Supreme in arts, and first in arms,
Queen of the seas, and distant trade,
Arise, majestic nymph, and show thy awful head.
Ambitious Caesar saw thee fair,
(What will not proud Ambition dare!)
And strait he courts thee as his own,
Fond to possess thy splendid throne.
Albion submits, though not to chains,
But ever uncontrolled the imperial virgin reigns.
The Roman eagle shrunk his head,
Before the invited Saxons fled;
Aspiring nations shook her state,
(Dread consequence of being great)
Wild Heptarchy began her reign,
Till overaw'd she yields her scepter to the Dane.
Awhile in ignorance she lay,
The pagan worlds obscured her day:
The Goths, a wild barbarian train,
And savage Vandals, sweep her plain:
Soon of herself through clouds she shone,
And brightened once again a strong meridian sun
The royal Alfred, greatly born,
Britain to govern and adorn,
His kingdom's honor, subjects' good,
This well preserved, that understood,
Courted Astraea to his throne;
Oppression sunk disarmed, nor more his people groan,
The happy prince nor rested here;
His ships to different regions steer,
And in Britannia's lap unlade
The sweet reward of gainful trade;
Far distant India's burning shore
Beheld his floating strength, and wondered at his power.
Commerce advance! by heaven designed
To polish, and enrich mankind;
Old Maja's daughter, Albion's care,
Advance, and breathe thy native air!
Here dwell, and fix thy sweet resort,
Nations shall hither flock, to pay their eager court.
Thou gave to hidden knowledge birth;
By thee, the limits of the earth
Greatly enlarged, showed worlds unknown,
The frigid and the torrid zone;
Guided and influenced by thee,
We first were taught to learn divine Astronomy.
To thee her silk rich Persia brings,
The proud magnificence of kings,
Arabia's spice and India's mine,
Peru's vast golden womb is thine;
Behold the costly pillars rise,
And swell thy lofty seats, and temples to the skies.
Seated along the Aonian spring,
No more the vocal Sisters sing:
Oxford, the seat of learning now,
Crowns with her bay Apollo's brow;
Again refreshing Science streams,
Poeonian Phoebus hence, sends forth his warmer beams.
Next Cambridge reared her awful head,
Whence Arts from Danish arms had fled;
Virgil and Homer here retired,
And pleased her studious sons inspired;
Philosophy shone heavenly bright,
The thickening clouds dispersed, and all was wondrous light.
Favored of God, here Newton saw
Errors obscuring Nature's law;
He saw, and cleared the gloomy way,
And showed mankind eternal day:
He showed, and worlds beheld with joy
Labors which distant time nor envy shall destroy.
Innately bright the diamond shines,
Though deep concealed in Indian mines;
The lapidary's nicer art
Luxuriant flames on every part;
Till then, false jewels we admire,
Behold their tinsel blaze, and artificial fire.
Priests thus with show enslaved the mind,
To show, the human eye inclined;
To papal power our princes bend,
Nor see the errors they defend,
While monkish artifices long
Dazzled implicit worlds, and led a bigot throng.
Religion trembled at their crimes,
But pleased, foresaw succeeding times;
Succeeding times when she alone
Should govern Britain's royal throne;
With undisturbed and downy rest
Baffled the sons of Rome, but all her children blessed.
Edward the happy theme began,
A glorious and immortal plan!
Skies azure-opening greet his day,
The Reformation points the way;
By Reason and by Virtue led,
Behold her beauteous form, and mark her solemn tread!
Not so imperious Mary sways,
Blind zeal again obscured her blaze.
Disgraced, Religion mournful stood,
While Persecution smiled in blood:
Heaven saw, enraged, the horrid deed,
Shortened her tyrant reign, no more her subjects bleed.
Eliza shone serenely bright,
And on her throne reflected light;
Her royal brother's will maintained:
For this, the virgin princess reigned,
Reigned most supremely wise and great,
And neighboring realms preserved, and saved her sinking state.
When Spanish sleets her coasts alarm,
Eliza raised her mighty arm,
Her people's darling, she secure,
Smiling (of easy conquest sure),
Quelled like a Jove their giant rage,
Her thunders burst aloud, nor dare the foe engage.
As when the sun darts forth his beams,
Whence trembling light refulgent streams,
And kindly gladdens for a while,
Alike adorns, and aids our toil,
A sudden cloud o'erspreads his rays,
Destroys our flattering hopes, and dims our golden days:
So when eclipsed Eliza's reign,
And heaven recalled the saint again,
Too happy to be long admired,
With her our short-lived bliss retired:
Darkness returns, the light disdains
To shine on a soul series of inglorious reigns.
Thou awful shade of Pope, inspire,
And give expression to my lyre!
Lend harmony to every line,
And teach my verse to flow like thine!
Maria's wondrous charms I Would sing,
Would thou, loved poet, dictate to the silver string.
Her William saw Britannia's grief,
And swift he flew to her relief,
With noble resolution draws
The sword vindictive in her cause;
The glorious cause demands his sword,
Religion once again, and Liberty restored.
With horror he beheld the state
Oppressed beneath the papal weight;
He kindled not War's fiercer flame,
But like a guardian angel came,
(Britannia's best and surest friend)
To save the fading honors of a groaning land.
The grand event, the bold design,
The immortal task, Nassau, were thine;
The British lion, roused by thee,
First broke his chain, and dared be free;
The royal line of great Nassau
Was sent mankind by heaven to keep the world in awe.
The dark horizon cleared again,
And shone propitious on his reign;
Fair Liberty assumed her seat,
And crushed Oppression at her feet:
Religion trumph'd, Albion smiles,
Once more the first of states, again the queen of isles.
Inspired by heaven, the wise Nassau
Her rising greatness well foresaw
Rising from royal Brunswick's care,
Brunswick by senates marked his heir;
Britons rejoicing shout applause,
By him secured our faith, our property, our laws.
But first our powerful realms obey,
Illustrious Anne, thy easy sway.
Checked by thy power, insulting Gaul
Beheld with grief his legions fall:
They fell, for Malbro' drew the sword,
Pre-eminent in arms, victorious, and adored.
Gallia beholds with treacherous eyes
Sophia's highborn offspring rise
To glory, empire, and renown,
Decked with Britannia's glittering crown:
Again she dared the isle engage,
And stir intestine war, and raise seditious rage.
The rancorous hate of France in vain
Threatens Mavortian Brunswick's reign;
Guardian of liberty and peace,
He bids rebellious Discord cease;
The injured monarch soon forgives,
And by his nod, again the offending rebel lives.
With distant conquests he extends
The throne his royal son ascends;
Imperial dignity and grace
Serenely smile upon his face:
Brunswick to martial honor bred,
Governs, by Virtue counseled, and by Glory led.
Trade, Arts, and Science, flourish here,
And bless each fair revolving year;
Gay-smiling Plenty reigns around,
And golden harvests load the ground;
So Liberty, and George, and Britons should be crowned!
While Brunswick Europe's rights maintains,
And fights her cause on Flandria's plains,
Proud Gallia, treacherously brave,
Calls coward Treason from her cave,
Though Agincourt and Blenheim tell,
How all her valor sunk, and boasting heroes fell.
Famed Dettingen still reeks with blood,
Where like a God great Brunswick stood;
Triumphant Fame on silken wing
Rode smiling on before the king;
Like Mars he shook the pointed spear,
The Gauls retreat, and all their battle shrunk with fear.
Tremendous Death and Horror stride
Close by intrepid William's side:
William, he bled, and soldiers grieved;
" Revenge (they cry) the wound received"!
Bright Venus mourned her favorite care,
And quick she bid her nymphs the healing drugs prepare.
The Cyprian goddess stood confessed,
As when Aeneas' wound she dressed:
Her weeping nymphs around her wait,
Impatient for the prince's fate;
With healing herbs, and balmy sweets,
The Dionoean queen the cannons rage defeats.
Who are these base, these dastard foes,
That dare their country's laws oppose!
Their lives and fortunes not their own,
But given in mercy from the throne:
Do they, ungrateful men, presume
To act the scheme of France, or play the part of Rome?
Discord and Horror stalk along,
With pale Rebellion in the throng;
Bellona stains the purple field,
And Mars displays his brazen shield;
William his brother-god appears,
To curb the traitorous war, and ease Britannia's fears.
He comes, the hero comes, and strait
Conscious Rebellion knows her fate;
His troops, with manly rage inspired,
Rush on, by his example fired;
His name strikes terror to the foe,
Precipitate they fly, nor wait the impending blow.
Brave Husk and Hawley strive in vain
To animate the embattled plain;
Trained up in arms, the warriors fly
From rank to rank, resolved to die,
Or conquer, in their country's cause;
But heaven to Cumberland decrees the crowned applause.
Hence worthless slaves, and wear the chain
Of punick France, and haughty Spain;
Blinded by Rome, your ruin court,
And be your very masters' sport;
Like Cain roam, of bliss bereft,
No clime, no country yours, no friendly shelter left.
Shall Gauls insult the wide domain,
When Neptune views them with disdain?
Shall they with dark invafive schemes
(The mere result of idle dreams)
Threaten Britannia's guarded shore,
Nor dread the angry god, nor fear his cannons' roar?
Proud boasters hence, and learn to know,
Our Albion dreads no foreign foe;
Her fleets but ask propitious gales,
But ask, and Conquest swells her sails;
France strikes the flag, our colors near,
Whitens her golden flowers, and shrinks with coward fear.
Britons, united by their laws,
Can never swerve from Freedom's cause;
Blessed in great George, we guard his reign,
And Gallic insolence disdain!
Well may we guard the imperial throne,
Which every Briton's voice, and Virtue made his own.
Calm as a god, behold him there,
Express his soft paternal care;
Mercy sits mourning on his face,
To see severer Law take place;
And whilst rebellious subjects die,
Sighs swell his royal breast, and tears his pitying eye.
Such Brunswick is who rules our land!
Such is the monarch we defend!
Blessing and blessed! (a mutual good,
By Britons only understood)
Late may he England's scepter wield,
Protect our laws at home, and guard us in the field!
A long illustrious race of kings
From Frederick and Augusta springs;
This Brunswick views with joyous eye,
And knows in them he never shall die;
He sees his royal offspring smile,
The grace of future worlds, and honor of their isle.
HEAVEN. A VISION.
BY MR. SCOTT.
FULL many a tedious hour, with care oppressed,
Stretched on my weary bed, I wakeful lay,
Sad troublous thoughts, like hornets, stung my breast,
And brushed the dews of balmy sleep away.
Ah! what avails, I cried, with painful toil,
By Virtue's steadfast star the bark to guide,
Far from Spenser's Faery Queen, Book II.
Acrasia's wily-wandering isle,
Where ease and pleasure the frail heart divide;
If Life's short voyage undistinguished tends
To darkness, and the land where all forgotten ends?
Shall Worth lie hid in Sorrow's baleful shade?
And no reward shall suffering Goodness find,
While Vice triumphant lifts her pampered head,
Antecedentem scelestum deseruit poena, Hor.
Nor hears the steps of Vengeance close behind? --
Then take me, Power of Beauty, to thy arms,
And lull, ah lull to peace my troubled soul!
Disclose, O God of Wine, thy purple charms,
I Will drown reflection in the mantling bowl!
Against wind, and tide, let Stoic dullness sail,
Be mine the calmest sea, and Pleasure's briskest gale.
Pensive I mused, 'till rose the blushing Morn,
And spread her saffron mantle over the skies;
When pitying Morpheus shook his opiate horn,
And slumbrous humors drowned my wearied eyes:
Yet Fancy still awake, to sooth my pain,
Sweet scenes of joy in liveliest hue portrayed;
She called forth all her bright ideal train,
And pleasing truths in mystic dreams conveyed:
Oh fail me not, thou fair enchanting Power,
At Sorrow's grim approach, and Care's distressful hour!
Born through the yielding air, methought I flew
To some more blissful clime, sequestered far
From this frail world, that just appeared to view,
Like the faint glimmering of a distant star.
Deep in the sea's encircling wave 'twas placed,
As gems in silver; hoary Ocean smiled,
Cheered with the pleasing sight; (...). Pind.
and from his breast
Sent his sweet children, breezes fresh and mild:
No clouds nor darkness veiled the cheerful scene,
Nor wintry blasts deformed the ground's eternal green.
Lo to the West a large and spacious plain,
Where meet in concert, wood, and hill, and dale;
Brighter than all that muse-led poets feign
Of Ida's grove, and Tempe's hallowed vale:
Though Peneus there revolves his (...). CALLIM. -- Amnis purior Electro. Virg.
amber stream,
And suppliant Daphne spreads her branching arms;
Still trembling lest the sun's prolific beam,
Too fiercely wanton, blast her virgin charms:
Would thou escape? Go, coy relentless maid,
Go choose some worse retreat, some less luxurious shade!
There blooming groves, gay smiling with delight,
From her fair womb spontaneous Nature brings;
Where percht on every bough, all richly dight
With painted plumes, some Nemoris siren, innoxia siren. Strada's Nightin.
harmless siren sings:
Pleased with the wild notes Zephyr flits unseen,
And on his musky wings the sound conveys;
While trickling soft, each varying pause between,
The murmuring rivulets roll their silver base;
Winds, waters, birds in seemly sort agree,
And amorous Echo blends the liquid melody.
Nor there alone was charmed one scanty sense:
The loaded trees ambrosial fruitage bear;
The Flet tamen et tepidae manant ex arbore guttae. Ovid Met.
weeping shrubs their spicy gums dispense,
Whose fragrance fresh imbalms the buxom air;
Thousands of flowers their silken webs unfold,
Amaranths, immortal amaranths arise,
These beaming bright with (...). Pind.
vegetable gold,
And these with azure, these with Tyrian dies;
There laughing sweetly red the roses glow,
While from their breathing souls celestial odours flow.
But hark, a voice soft-warbling strikes my ear!
" Behold, O man, fair Virtue's ample meed;
" Behold these radiant plains, this star-girt sphere,
" By righteous Jove her portion are decreed!
" Mould not, ah mould not then in idle cell,
" But strive these rapturous mansions to attain;
" Here all the wise, the brave, the virtuous dwell,
" Eternal (...). Ibid.
ages free from care and pain;
" Here in Elysian seats, their calm abodes,
" Live in communion blessed (...). Ibid.
, with heroes and with gods!
Eastward to this methought a different scene
Of equal beauty charmed my raptured sight:
Wide spacious lawns with swelling hills between,
And groves of bliss, and gardens of delight.
There lotes and palms their copious branches twine,
And over-arching form delicious bowers;
There gush nectareous rills of dulcet wine,
And honey'd streams revolve their milky stores;
Fresh bleeding myrrh and cassia shed perfume,
Ananas swell with sweets, and wild pomegranates bloom,
Fast by a fount Called by the Arabic writers Zenzebil, and promised by Mahomet
to all the faithful.
, whose spicy waters glide
In amorous mazes, on the velvet ground,
With blushing flowers all goodly beautified,
A smiling troop of virgins dance around;
Fairer than Delia's silver-buskin'd train,
When erst, Ladona, by thy lillied banks,
Or cool -- In Eurotae ripis
Exercet Diana choros --
Virg.
Eurota's laurel-fringed plain,
To breathing lutes they tript in seemly ranks;
And fairer, Cypris, than thy wanton quire,
That melt the soul to love, and kindle fierce desire.
Their eyes See Sale's Koran, chapter the 56th.
, like pearls within their shells concealed,
Beauteous and black; their lips with rubies vye;
On their fair cheeks, with white and red anneal'd,
What thousand dimpling smiles in ambush lie!
See, see they point to you embowering shade,
Where cool gales fan their odoriferous wings,
And Flora's freshest, softest couch is spread;
The whiles some one this lovely ditty sings!
Through all my veins what thrilling transport flew
To hear the nectar'd words, dropping like honey'd dew!
" Haste, gentle youth, for lo, the way is plain!
" Haste, gentle youth, and hear the Prophet's call!
" These are the joys that true believers gain,
" Immortal joys that never know to pall.
" Come then, ah come thy weary limbs recline
" On silken beds of roses sweetly strow'd,
" Where to thy touch compliant bows the vine,
" All faint, and laboring with the luscious load;
" Where Nymphs of Paradise their charms reveal,
" And with their amorous spoils thy greedy eyes regale!"
She ceased -- and molten with excess of joy,
Voluptuous Hope was busy in my breast:
When lo! swift-darting from the extremest sky,
With seraph-plumes, an Angel stood confessed!
A pure immortal crown adorned her head,
Of gold inwove with jewels; in her hand,
The book of life, and mercy was displayed,
With ruddy drops of dying martyrs stained;
Her eagle-eyes were quick, and passing bright,
Yet beamed serene, and mild, with heaven's celestial light.
" And O fond foolish man," she cried, "forbear
" Idly to glote on forms so light, and vain!
" What are these jocund scenes, but empty air,
" The fleeting coinage of a phrenzy'd brain? --
" Yet even in these, as 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
darkly through a glass,
" Some faint, some glimmering view the eye may gain
" Of those unmingled joys, that far surpass
" Whatever of bliss the wit of man can feign;
" Those pure delights, that flow in streams divine,
" Where thy imperial towers, O heavenly Salem, shine!
" For know, my son, that they whose worth is tried,
" As gold by fire, by great and virtuous deeds,
" Soon as the carnal fetters are untied,
" That chain the soul, and stripped these mortal weeds;
" Happily shall soar, in robes of glory clad,
" To heavenly mansions, bright abodes, prepared
" Prove. viii. 6. 24, 25. 27, etc.
Ere the foundations of the deep were laid,
" Or the firm pillars of the earth were reared;
" Ere God his golden compasses employed,
" And marked this beauteous world on chaos dark, and void.
" There shall they live, O happy, happy spirits!
" There shall they live removed from all the cares,
" And thousand ills, that feeble flesh inherits:
" No greedy Want, nor wayard Lust, that tears
" With viperous rage the breast from whence it sprung,
" Their deep-embosom'd peace shall ever torment;
" But hymning sweet, the angel troops among,
" Their undisturbed lays of pure content,
" The smiling hours immortal shall employ
" In trance of holy ease, or extacy of joy.
" Then shall their eyes, from cloudy films secure,
" With lightning-glance unmeasured space behold;
" And all the thousand stars, that pave the floor
" Of heaven, with orient pearl, or living gold;
" Then floating through the boundless deep of air,
" An azure sea, like gems of richest hue,
" Myriads of worlds thick-scatter'd shall appear,
" With all their bright inhabitants to view:
" Their active minds shall traverse, quick as thought,
" Creation's ample fields, the range 'twixt God and naught.
" And oh what streams of music sweet, and clear,
" Shall drown in deep delight their raptured souls!
" Ay me, in vain to man's unpurged ear
" Their heavenly notes each tuneful planet rolls!
" Ay me, in vain with softly-thrilling voice,
" Psalm. xix. 3, 4,
Through every land they hymn their Maker's praise,
" While choirs of young-ey'd cherubims rejoice,
" And to their golden harps mellifluous lays
" Attuning, holy, holy, holy, sing,
" O Lord, Almighty God, the saints' eternal king!
" But not in vain the tuneful planets raise
" To pure ethereal souls their voice divine;
" Nor yet in vain their great Creator's praise
" Do gladsome choirs of young-ey'd cherubs join:
" No blessed spirit but hears the sacred song,
" And wakes his lyre melodious part to bear
" In the sweet symphony; while all the throng
" Of angels, and archangels, nay, the ear
" Of God delighted listens to the strains. --
" In heaven, and heaven-born minds such rapturous concord reigns!
" But where, ah where can glowing tints be found
" To paint the charms of Heb. xii. 22.
Sion's sacred place,
" Psalm. ii. 6.
Where Christ the lamb in radiance sits enthroned,
" The Heb. i. 3.
lively image of his Father's grace?
" O flower of love! O Rev. xxii. 16.
glorious morning star!
" O Mal. iv. 2.
sun of righteousness, whose healing wings
" Brought life, and peace, and mercy from afar!
" From thee the light, thou beaming fountain, springs,
" That guides poor mortals in their weary way,
" Through black Affliction's night, to Pleasure's endless day!
" Jesus! -- and did thou leave thy bowers of joy?
" And did thou leave thy Father's dear embrace,
" Content with agonizing pangs to die
" For man's forlorn, rebellious, sinful race?
" What bliss to hear the high mysterious story;
" By all the prophets, all the apostles sung,
" And noble army of martyrs, crowned with glory;
" Where blessed, the six-wing'd seraphims among,
" They drink immortal, from thy rapturous sight,
" Conceiveless draughts of Love's ineffable delight!
" Hail saints of light! who once the patient train
" Of silent Sorrow, through the thorny road
" Of Misery toiled, and unappall'd by pain,
" With pilgrim-feet the long, long journey trod!
" O taught by them, thou man of earth, sustain
" With firm unwearied arm the dangerous fight!
" The Phil. iii. 14.
prize of thy high-calling dare to gain,
" Rev. vii. 9.
Victorious palms, and robes of spotless white;
" So in Rev. iii. 5.
the book of life thy name shall shine,
" And heaven's eternal joys and transports all be thine."
Scarce had she spoke, when that Ezekiel. i. 5.
cherubic car,
Instinct with soul, and those self-moving wheels,
That whirled the holy sage from Chebar far,
Appeared: -- my breast the rushing impulse feels!
I see, I see thy glittering turrets rise,
Celestial Salem, all of Rev. xxi. 18, 19.
lucid gold,
Inlaid with gems of thousand, thousand dies!
And lo, the everlasting gates unfold
Their Rev. xxi. 21.
doors of pearl, and over my aching sight
Full tides of glory flow, and streams of living light!
Of light surpassing far thy glimmering ray,
(More bright, more clear, more glorious, more divine)
Though dressed by thee, (...). Soph.
O golden eye of day,
In gaudy robes the sparkling diamonds shine;
Though yon fair moon to thee her luster owes,
Gilding with borrowed light the mountain's brow;
And Iris steals from thee each tint that glows
In the gay forehead of the showery bow:
Faint is thy feeble blaze, O beauteous Sun!
Such peerless beams appear from Truth's eternal throne.
See through the streets, Rev. xxi. 11,
like liquid jasper clear,
The fount of life in mazy error flows!
Through the bright Ibid.
crystal sands of gold appear,
And heaps of pearly grain; while blooming grows,
On either bank of dainty flowers profuse,
The tree of life superior over the rest,
Whose teeming branches nectar'd fruits produce:
Rev. xxii, 2.
Twelve various fruits of sweetly-vary'd taste,
From every leaf Rev. xxii. 2.
salubrious dews exhale,
And pure elixirs breathe in every balmy gale.
Lo there, diffused along the sacred brink,
Angelic choirs replete with love and joy,
Conceive their God, and from his presence drink
Beatitude past utterance! -- There they lie
On flowering beds of balsam, cassia, nard,
And myrrh, a wilderness of rich perfumes;
Embalmed they lie, like that Arabian bird,
'Midst odorous shrubs, and incense-breathing gums,
Whose life springs recent from the sun-born fire,
While clouds of spicy smoke in bluish wreaths aspire.
But spare, O spare me, heaven! -- My fainting soul
Sickens with bliss too great for mortal sense!
Come, over my limbs thy quickening waters roll,
Life-giving stream, and all thy balm dispense!
And thou, fair tree, the source of all our woes,
(That bloomed so fatal erst in Eden's glade,
Transplanted since to heaven) thy friendly boughs
Extend, and wrap me in the brownest shade!
O veil me from the Lamb's too glorious sight,
From majesty's full blaze, insufferably bright!
Trembling I waked with sweet excess of joy,
And on the wings of sleep, more swift than wind,
Away the fickle, fond delusions fly;
Yet leave their fairy-steps the trace behind:
Hear then, ye sainted myriads, from your spheres,
And gently beam your kindliest influence down;
Lift, lift my thoughts above life's grovelling cares,
To joys sublime, and Virtue's glorious crown!
O guide my virgin-soul the high abode,
To reach, the heaven of heavens, where reigns the eternal God!
ODE ON SLEEP.
BY THE SAME.
WHY, gentle God, this long delay,
Since night, and careless quiet reigns?
O hither take thy silent way,
And sooth, ah sooth my wakeful pains!
So shall my hands for thee the wreath entwine,
And strew fresh poppies at thy votive shrine.
When from the North, all wan and pale,
The sun withdraws his cheerful light,
And armed with whirlwind, frost, and hail,
The big clouds bring the half-year's night,
Quick to their caves the shivering natives tend,
And hear without the rattling storms descend.
Then stretched along the shaggy bed,
To thee, indulgent Power, they cry;
Born on thy wings, with happier speed,
The leaden-footed moments fly;
While Fancy paints Spring's visionary stores,
And calls the distant sun to wake the slumbering flowers.
Nor yet is Sleep's supreme command
Confined to these cold dreary plains,
Over sultry Lybia's boiling sand
This universal monarch reigns;
And where with heat the sable Indians glow,
While streams of light through purest ether flow.
Weary and faint the dusky slaves
From cold Potosi's mines retire,
From rugged rocks, and darkling caves,
When scarce the panting lungs respire:
To citron-shades they take their pensive way,
Where bathed in odorous winds their listless limbs they lay.
The tyrant's voice, the galling chain,
The uplifted scourge no more they fear,
Deep slumbers drown the sense of pain;
And floating through the peopled air
Ideal forms in pleasing order rise,
And bright illusions swim before their eyes.
Now Orellana's foaming tide
With pliant arms they seem to cleave;
And now the light canoe to guide
Across Muenca's glassy wave;
Or chase in jocund troops the savage prey,
Through woods impervious to the solar ray.
Some gentle youth, by love betrayed,
Recalls the joys he felt of old,
When wandering with his sable maid
Through groves of vegetable gold,
He claspt her yielding to his raptured breast,
And free from guile his honest soul expressed.
Sleep on, much injured hapless swain,
Nor wake thy cruel fate to moan,
To curse the insatiate thirst of gain,
And proud Iberia's Hernando Cortez. See the History of the Conquest of Mexico
and Peru by the Spaniards.
bloody son!
Old India's Genius wept over millions slain,
And streams of gore ran foaming to the main.
But why to tragic scenes like these,
Will thou, my restless Fancy, rove?
Bear me to climes of downy ease,
To climes that sleep and silence love:
Whether the shades of Lemnos most invite,
Or dark Cimmerian caves the still abode of night.
Fond fables all! -- The partial God
Is flown to Belgia's drowzy plains,
There waves his Lethe-sprinkled rod,
And linkt with kindred Dullness reigns;
Midst stagnant pools, the bittern's safe retreat,
Beset with oziers dank, behold his gloomy seat!
His dwelling is a straw-built shed,
Safe from the sun's too curious eye;
A yew-tree rears its blighted head,
And frogs and rooks are croaking nigh:
Through many a chink the hollow murmuring breeze
Sounds like the distant hum of swarming bees.
And more to feed his slumbers soft,
And lull him in his senseless swoon,
The hard rain beats upon the loft,
And swiftly-trickling tumbles down:
All livelier, ruder sounds are banished far,
The lute's shrill voice, and brazen throat of war.
Hence let me woo thee, God of Ease,
Ah leave thy favorite haunt awhile,
And bid the midnight hours to please,
And bid the midnight gloom to smile!
Oh come, and over my weary limbs diffuse
The slumberous weight of sweet oblivious dews!
Bring too thy soft, enchanting dreams,
Such as enamored Petrarch knew,
When stretched by Sorgia's gentle streams,
Fair Laura's form his fancy drew:
Of see he woos the soul-dissolving maid,
And grasps with eager arms the visionary shade.
At morn he sung the tender tale,
He sung his Laura's matchless charms,
And every tree, in Clausa's vale,
Attentive breathed Love's soft alarms;
Even hoary monks full many a careless bead
Have dropped, and left their aves half unsaid.
ODE ON PLEASURE.
BY THE SAME.
I. 1.
HENCE from my sight, unfeeling sage,
Hence, to thy lonely hermitage! --
There far removed from joy, and pain,
Supinely slumber life away;
Act over dull yesterday again,
And be thy morrow like today.
-- (...)
(...).
Soph.
Rest to thy bones! -- While to the gale
Happier I spread my festive wing,
And like the wandering be exhale
Fresh odours from Life's honey'd spring;
From bloom to bloom in pleasing rapture stray,
Where Mirth invites, and Pleasure points the way.
I. 2.
Hail, heaven-born virgin, fair and free,
Of language mild, of aspect gay,
Whose voice the sullen family
Of Care and Discontent obey!
By thee inspired, the simplest scenes,
The russet cots, the lowly glens,
Mountains, on whose craggy brow
Nature's lawless tenants feed,
Bushy dells, and streams, that flow
Through the violet-purpled mead,
Delight; thy breath exalts the rich perfumes,
That brooding over embalm the bean-flower field,
Beyond Sabean sweets, and all the gums
The spicy deserts of Arabia yield.
I. 3.
When the Attic bird complains
From the still, attentive grove,
Or the linnet breathes his strains,
Taught by Nature and by Love;
Do thou approve the dulcet airs,
And Harmony's soft, silken chain,
In willing bondage leads our cares,
And binds the giant-sense of Pain:
Untuned by thee, how coarse the long drawn note,
Spun from the laboring Eunuch's tortured throat!
Harsh are the sounds, though Farinelli sings;
Harsh are the sounds, though Handel wakes the strings:
Untouched by thee, see senseless Florio sits,
And stares, and gapes, and nods, and yawns by fits.
II. 1.
Oh Pleasure come! -- and far, far hence
Expel that nun, Indifference! --
Wherever she waves her ebon wand,
Drencht in the dull Lethaean deep,
Behold the marble Passions stand
Absorbed in everlasting sleep!
Then from the waste and barren mind
The Muse's fairy-phantoms fly;
They fly, nor leave a wreck behind
Of heaven-descended Poesy:
Love's thrilling tumults then are felt no more,
Quenched is the generous heat, the rapturous throbs are over!
II. 2.
'Twas thou, O nymph, that ledd'st along
The fair Dione's wanton choir,
While to thy blithest, softest song,
Ten thousand Cupids strung the lyre:
Aloft in air the cherubs played,
What time, in Cypria's myrtle-shade,
Young Adonis slumbering lay
On a bed of blushing flowers,
Called to life by early May,
And the rosy-bosomed Hours:
The Queen of love beheld her darling boy,
In amorous mood she nestled to his side,
And thus, to melt his frozen breast to joy,
Her wanton art she gayly-smiling tried.
II. 3.
From the musk-rose, wet with dew,
And the lilly's opening bell,
From fresh eglantine she drew
Sweets of aromatic smell:
Part of that honey next she took,
Which Theoer.
Cupid too adventurous stole,
When stung his throbbing hand he shook,
And felt the anguish to his soul;
His mother laughed to hear the elf complain,
Yet still she pitied, and relieved his pain;
She dressed the wound with balm of sovereign might,
And bathed him in the well of dear delight:
Ah who would fear to be so bathed in bliss,
More agonizing smart, and deeper wounds than this?
III. 1.
Her magic zone she next unbound,
And waved it in the air around:
Then culled from ever-frolic smiles,
That live in Beauty's dimpled cheek,
Such sweetness as the heart beguiles,
And turns the mighty strong to weak:
To these ambrosial dew she joined,
And over the flame of warm desire,
Fanned by soft sighs, Love's gentlest wind,
Dissolved, and made the charm entire;
Over her moist lips, that blushed with heavenly red,
The Graces' friendly hand the blessed ingredients spread.
III. 2.
Adonis waked -- he saw the fair,
And felt unusual tumults rise;
His bosom heaved with amorous care,
And humid languor veiled his eyes!
Driven by some strong impulsive power,
He sought the most sequestered bower,
Where diffused on Venus' breast,
First he felt extatic bliss,
First her balmy lips he pressed,
And devoured the new-made Kiss:
But, O my Muse, thy tattling tongue restrain,
Her sacred rites what mortal dares to tell?
She crowns the silent, leads the blabbing swain
To doubts, desires, and fears, the feverish lover's hell.
III. 3.
Change then, sweetest nymph of nine,
Change the song, and fraught with pleasures,
String anew thy silver twine,
To the softest, Lydian measures!
My Cynthia calls, whose natal hour
The assistant Graces saw, and smiled;
Then deigned this Cyprian charm to pour
With lavish bounty over the child:
Sithence wherever the Siren moves along,
In pleasing wonder chained is every tongue;
Love's soft effusion dims the aching eyes,
Love's subtlest flame through every artery flies:
Our trembling limbs the unequal pulse betray,
We gaze in transport lost -- then faint, and die away,
ODE ON DESPAIR.
BY THE SAME.
SAVE me! -- What means you grisly shade,
Her stony eye balls staring wide;
In soul, and tattered patches clad,
With dirt, and gore, and venom died?
A burning brand she whirls around,
And stamps, and raves, and tears the ground,
And madly rends her clotted hair;
While through her cankered breast are seen
Myriads of serpents bred within,
The cursed spawn of self consuming Care! --
'Twas thus, Vide Musaeum (...).
O poor enamored maid,
The Stygian fiend approached the sea-girt tower,
What time, in sad misfortune's evil hour,
The faithless lamp Love's cynosure decayed.
" And why," the ghastly phantom cries,
" Will thou, deluded Hero, wait
" Leander's wished return, forbid by Fate?
" See floating on his watery bier he lies;
" Pale are his cheeks, where Love was wont to play,
" And closed those radiant eyes, that late out-shone the day."
The woe-foreboding voice she heard,
And wishing, trembling prayed for morn --
When lo! the bleeding corse appeared,
By savage rocks all rudely torn!
Where were ye, Nymphs, O tell me where,
Daughters of Nereus, fresh and fair?
And why, sweet silver-footed Queen,
Would thou not leave thy coral cave,
And sooth the rough remorseless wave,
Ere Death had seized thy best, thy boldest swain? --
With haggard eyes, all-streaming blood,
Distracted Hero saw her lover slain,
And thrice indignant viewed the guilty main,
And thrice accused each merciless watery God.
Aye me in vain! -- For "see, she cried,
" My dear Leander's beckoning shade!
" And can thou live, O lost, O wretched maid?
" Shall envious Fate so fond a pair divide?
" Forbid it, Love!" -- Then headlong from the tower
Deep in the ruthless flood she plunged to rise no more!
With scenes of woe, O cursed Power,
How are thy greedy eyes regaled?
How did thy heart exult of yore,
When heaven's vindictive rod assailed
See the account, which is given by Thucydides, of the plague at Athens.
The Queen of arts? -- With giant-stride
Contagion stalks, and lo the bride,
The virgin-bride unpitied dies!
Claspt to his daughter's throbbing breast,
The father breathes his soul to rest,
And sorrowing sons compose the widowed mother's eyes?
Scared by the Daemon's spotted hand,
The eagle scream'd, the famished vulture fled,
The hungry wolf forsook the unburied dead,
And pale diseases shivering left the land!
What cries, and piercing shrieks resound
Through every street, at every fane?
Yet ah! they weep, they weary heaven in vain!
Death and Distraction stare on all around!
The wretched few, whom poisonous Pestilence spares,
Of moody madness die, and heart-distracting fears.
These are thy deeds, O fell Despair,
Thou tyrant of the tortured soul,
According to the table of Cebes, (...) is the Sister of (...).
Sister of pale-ey'd Grief, and Care,
At whose command impetuous roll
Passion's rough tides, and swelling high
Burst through each dear, and sacred tie,
And every pleasing thought overwhelm;
Anon the crazy bark is born,
Of winds, and waves, and rocks the scorn,
For Reason shrinks appalled, and trembling quits the helm!
O fly, thou first born child of hell,
To some far distant, dreary, doleful plain,
Where starting Fear, and agonizing Pain,
And black Remorse, and sullen Sorrows dwell:
Where armed with poison, racks, and death,
Stern Horror rears his Gorgon head;
And writhing dreadful on the iron bed,
The purple Furies grind their cankered teeth;
While percht on stubs of trees the shriek-owl sings,
And screaming deadly hoarse night-ravens flap their wings!
Thither embost with varied woe,
Misfortune's pallid slave retires --
Hark, hark, he raves! -- Thy tablet show,
Charged with damned ghosts, and sulphurous fires.
Oh mercy, heaven! -- Upstarting stands
His grisly hair; his nerveless hands
Shake; over his face the curdled blood,
From his swollen heart, with tidings flies:
" Give me another horse," he cries,
" Oh! bring the poisoned bowl, let loose Life's crimson flood!"
Sad, sacred wretch! -- Thou Power divine,
Whose god-like word from chaos dark and dread,
Bad Discord fly, and Light sweet-smiling spread
Her orient wing, control this breast of mine!
And still when gloomy thoughts prevail,
Oh short, and partial be their sway!
And beamed from thee, let Pleasure's gladsome ray
The mournful progeny of Grief dispel.
So shall the checkered scenes of Life delight,
As morning brighter peers preceded still by night.
ODE TO THE MUSE.
BY THE SAME.
I. 1.
YET once more, sweetest Queen of Song,
Thy humble suppliant lead along,
Through Fancy's flowery plains:
Oh bear me to the ideal grove,
Where hand in hand the Graces rove,
And sooth me with seraphic strains!
It Is thine, harmonious maid, to cull
Delicious balm to heal our cares;
It Is thine to take the imprisoned soul,
And lap it in Elysian airs;
While quick as thought at thy divine command
The realms of Grace and Harmony expand.
I. 2.
And lo! before my ravished eyes
The visionary scenes arise!
I hear the tender lute complain,
While Sappho breathes her amorous pain;
(O guard me from such fierce desires,
Thou God of Raptures, God of Fires!)
I hear Anacreon's honey'd tongue
To Love and Wine repeat the song;
His flight sublime the Theban swan prepares,
And louder music wakes the wondering spheres.
I. 3.
But hark! how sweet the numbers swell,
While Homer waves his soul-enchanting wand!
Entranced the listening Passions stand,
Charmed with the magic of his shell.
Whether to arms his trump resounds,
The heart with martial ardor bounds;
Or sprightly themes his hand employ,
Instant we catch the spreading joy;
Or when in notes majestic, deep, and slow,
He bids the solemn streams of Sorrow flow,
Amazed we hear the sadly-pleasing strain,
While tender anguish steals through every vein.
II. 1.
Father of Verse, whose eagle flight
Fatigues the gazer's aching sight,
And strains the aspiring mind:
Teach me thy wondrous heights to view,
With trembling wings thy steps pursue,
And leave the lessening world behind.
Fond, foolish wish! -- Can human eyes
The rapid arrow's track descry?
Can gross Mortality arise,
And spring beyond the vaulted sky?
Lost is the momentary path, and bound
By cumbrous chains we creep along the ground!
II. 2.
Yet some there are with power endowed
To soar above the grovelling crowd;
By thee, fair Fancy, rapturous maid,
By thee, O sweet enthusiast, led,
Sublime beyond the milky way
With strong seraphic plumes they stray;
Or pierce within the sacred shade,
Where Nature's plastic forms are laid;
Then strike with daring hand the magic strings,
And warm to life a new creation springs.
II. 3.
Hail chosen few, whose happier birth
The Muse beheld, and bad your due feet climb
Fame's slippery hill, and paths sublime,
Untrod by vulgar sons of earth!
When Virtue droops, all sick and pale,
In bleak Misfortune's desert vale,
It Is yours to steal away her care,
And softly sooth the pensive fair:
It Is yours to cull from Fancy's fairy stores,
The brightest gems, and sweetest-breathing flowers.
Then bind with Daedal art such wreaths divine,
As bloom secure on Truth's immortal shrine.
III. 1.
Haste then! -- for soft Etesian gales
Supply the Pind.
pilot's welcome sails,
And waft him over the main:
And gentle showers, the daughters fair
Of pregnant clouds, and balmy air,
Rejoice the faint, and thirsty plain:
O haste, your sweetest numbers shed,
Fraught with the genial dew of praise,
On Glory's favorite sons, who tread
Unwearied Danger's thorny maze;
Who tear fresh laurels from War's ghastly brow,
Or steer the steadfast bark, though tides of Faction flow.
III. 2.
But, O ye delegates of Jove,
Sent from the starry realms above
To guard the clime, with dragon eyes,
When all the Muse's treasures rise,
Should Gothic Ignorance invade
With lawless foot the virgin shade,
And too incontinent presume
Rashly to pluck the golden bloom;
Wide wave the flaming sword, and send, O send
Your brightest shafts to quell the Stygian fiend!
III. 3.
With holy dread, ye guardians of her store,
Fulfill your charge, not too profuse of praise
Embalm, with her immortal lays,
The carrion corpse of Pride, or Power!
Let Dullness her vain favors shed
On smiling Folly's kindred head;
Or Vice, in tinsel trappings dressed,
Promote the wretch who flatters best;
Disdain the crew! -- and in some distant grove,
To Worth afflicted, friendless, raise your voice;
So shall the Muse your honest songs approve,
And deathless Fame reward your uncorrupted choice!
THE WISH: AN ELEGY.
TO URANIA.
BY THOMAS BLACKLOCK, D. D.
LET others travel, with incessant pain,
The wealth of earth and ocean to secure;
Then with fond hopes caress the precious bane;
In grandeur abject, and in affluence poor.
But soon, too soon, in Fancy's timid eyes,
Wild waves shall roll, and conflagrations spread;
While bright in arms, and of gigantic size,
The fear-form'd robber haunts the thorny bed.
Let me, in dreadless poverty retired,
The real joys of life, unenvied, share:
Favored by Love, and by the Muse inspired,
I Will yield to Wealth its jealousy and care.
On rising ground, the prospect to command,
Unting'd with smoke, where vernal breezes blow,
In rural neatness let my cottage stand;
Here wave a wood, and there a river flow.
Often from the neighboring hills and pastures round,
Let sheep with tender bleat salute my ear;
Nor fox insidious haunt the guiltless ground,
Nor man pursue the trade of murder near:
Far hence, kind heaven! expel the savage train,
Inured to blood, and eager to destroy;
Who pointed steel, with recent slaughter stain,
And place in groans and death their cruel joy.
Ye Powers of social life and tender song!
To you devoted shall my fields remain;
Here undisturbed the peaceful day prolong,
Nor own a smart but Love's delightful pain.
For you, my trees shall wave their leafy shade;
For you, my gardens tinge the lenient air;
For you, be Autumn's blushing gifts displayed,
And all that Nature yields of sweet or fair.
But, O! if plaints which love and grief inspire,
In heavenly breasts could ever compassion find,
Grant me, ah! grant my heart's supreme desire,
And teach my dear Urania to be kind.
For her, black Sadness clouds my brightest day;
For her, in tears the midnight vigils roll;
For her, cold horrors melt my powers away,
And chill the living vigor of my soul.
Beneath her scorn each youthful ardor dies,
Its joys, its wishes, and its hopes, expire!
In vain the fields of Science tempt my eyes;
In vain for me the Muses string the lyre.
O! let her often my humble dwelling grace,
Humble no more, if there she deign to shine;
For heaven, unlimited by time or place,
Still waits on god-like worth and charms divine.
Amid the cooling fragrance of the morn,
How sweet with her through lonely fields to stray!
Her charms the loveliest landscape shall adorn,
And add new glories to the rising day.
With her, all Nature shines in heightened bloom;
The silver stream in sweeter music flows;
Odours more rich the fanning gales perfume;
And deeper tinctures paint the spreading rose.
With her, the shades of night their horrors lose,
Its deepest silence charms if she be by;
Her voice the music of the dawn renews,
Its lambent radiance sparkles in her eye.
How sweet, with her, in Wisdom's calm recess,
To brighten soft desire with wit refined!
Kind Nature's laws with sacred Ashley trace,
And view the fairest features of the mind!
Or borne on Milton's flight, as heaven sublime,
View its full blaze in open prospect glow;
Bless the first pair in Eden's happy clime,
Or drop the human tear for endless woe.
And when, in virtue, and in peace grown old,
No arts the languid lamp of life restore;
Her let me grasp with hands convulsed and cold,
Till every nerve relaxed can hold no more.
Long, long on her my dying eyes suspend,
Till the last beam shall vibrate on my sight;
Then soar where only greater joys attend,
And bear her image to eternal light.
Fond man, ah! whither would thy fancy rove?
It Is thine to languish in unpitied smart;
It Is thine, alas! eternal scorn to prove,
Nor feel one gleam of comfort warm thy heart.
But, if my fair this cruel law impose,
Pleased, to her will I all my soul resign;
To walk beneath the burden of my woes,
Or sink in death, nor at my fate repine.
Yet when, with woes unmingled and sincere,
To Earth's cold womb in silence I descend;
Let her, to grace my obsequies, appear,
And with the weeping throng her sorrows blend.
Ah! no, be all her hours with pleasure crowned,
And all her soul from every anguish free:
Should my sad fate that gentle bosom wound,
The joys of heaven would be no joys to me.
AN HYMN TO FORTITUDE.
BY THE SAME.
NIGHT, brooding over her mute domain,
In aweful silence wraps her reign;
Clouds press on clouds, and, as they rise,
Condense to solid gloom the skies.
Portentous, through the foggy air,
To wake the Demon of Despair,
The raven hoarse, and boding owl,
To Hecate cursed anthems howl.
Intent with execrable art,
To burn the veins, and tear the heart,
The witch, unhallowed bones to raise,
Through funeral vaults and charnels strays;
Calls the damned shade from every cell,
And adds new labors to their hell.
And, shield me, heaven! what hollow sound,
Like Fate's dread knell, runs echoing round?
The bell strikes one, that magic hour,
When rising fiends exert their power.
And now, sure now, some cause unblest
Breathes more than horror through my breast:
How deep the breeze! how dim the light!
What specter swim before my sight!
My frozen limbs pale Terror chains,
And in wild eddies wheels my brains:
My icy blood forgets to roll,
And Death even seems to seize my soul.
What sacred power, what healing art,
Shall bid my soul herself assert;
Shall rouse the immortal active flame,
And teach her whence her being came?
O Fortitude! divinely bright,
O Virtue's child, and man's delight!
Descend, an amicable guest,
And with thy firmness steel my breast:
Descend, propitious to my lays,
And, while my lyre resounds thy praise,
With energy divinely strong,
Exalt my soul, and warm my song.
When raving in eternal pains,
And loaded with ten thousand chains,
Vice, deep in Phlegeton, yet lay,
Nor with her visage blasted day;
No fear to guiltless man was known,
For God and Virtue reigned alone.
But, when from native flames and night,
The cursed monster winged her flight,
Pale Fear, among her hideous train,
Chased sweet Contentment from her reign;
Placed Death and Hell before each eye,
And wrapped in mist the golden sky;
Banished from day each dear delight,
And shook with conscious starts the night.
When, from the imperial seats on high,
The Lord of Nature turned his eye,
To view the state of things below;
Still blessed to make his creatures so:
From earth he saw Astraea fly,
And seek her mansions in the sky;
Peace, crowned with olives, left her throne,
And white robbed Innocence was gone:
While Vice, revealed in open day,
Sole tyrant ruled with iron sway;
And Virtue veiled her weeping charms,
And fled for refuge to his arms,
Her altars scorned, her shrines defaced --
Whom thus the Essential Good addressed.
" Thou, whom my soul adores alone,
Effulgent sharer of my throne,
Fair Empress of Eternity!
Who uncreated reign'st like me;
Whom I, who sole and boundless sway,
With pleasure infinite obey:
To yon diurnal scenes below,
Who feel their folly in their woe,
Again propitious turn thy flight;
Again oppose yon tyrant's might;
To earth thy cloudless charms disclose,
Revive thy friends, and blast thy foes:
Thy triumphs man shall raptured see,
Act, suffer, live, and die for thee.
But since all crimes their hell contain,
Since all must feel who merit pain,
Let Fortitude thy steps attend,
And be, like thee, to man a friend;
To urge him on the arduous road,
That leads to virtue, bliss, and God.
To blunt the sting of every grief,
And be to all a near relief."
He said; and she, with smiles divine,
Which made all heaven more brightly shine,
To earth returned with all her train,
And brought the golden age again.
Since erring mortals, unconstrained,
The God, that warms their breast, profaned,
She guardian of their joys no more,
Could only leave them, and deplore:
They, now the easy prey of Pain,
Cursed in their wish, their choice obtain!
Till armed with heaven and fate, she came
Her destined honors to reclaim.
Vice and her slaves beheld her flight,
And fled like birds obscene from light,
Back to the abode of plagues return,
To sin and smart, blaspheme and burn.
Thou, Goddess! since, with sacred aid,
Have every grief and pain allayed,
To joy converted every smart,
And placed a heaven in every heart:
By thee we act, by thee sustain,
Thou sacred antidote of Pain!
At thy great nod the Alluding to the history of Hannibal.
Alps subside,
Reluctant rivers turn their tide;
With all thy force Alcides warmed,
His hand against Oppression armed:
By thee his mighty nerves were strung,
By thee his strength for ever young;
And whilst on brutal force he pressed,
His vigor with his foes increased.
By thee, like Jove's almighty hand,
Ambition's havoc to withstand,
Timoleon, having long in vain importuned his brother to resign the despotism
of Corinth, at last restored the liberty of the people by stabbing him. Vid.
Plut.
Timoleon rose, the scourge of fate,
And hurled a tyrant from his state;
The brother in his soul subdued,
And warmed the poniard in his blood;
A soul by so much virtue fired,
Not Greece alone, but heaven admired.
But in these dregs of human kind,
These days to guilt and fear resigned,
How rare such views the heart elate!
To brave the last extremes of fate;
Like heaven's almighty power, serene,
With fixed regard to view the scene,
When Nature quakes beneath the storm,
And Horror wears its direst form.
Though future worlds are now descried,
Though Paul has writ, and Jesus died,
Dispelled the dark infernal shade,
And all the heaven of heavens displayed;
Cursed with unnumber'd groundless fears,
How pale yon shivering wretch appears!
For him the daylight shines in vain,
For him the fields no joys contain;
Nature's whole charms to him are lost,
No more the woods their Music boast;
No more the meads their vernal bloom,
No more the gales their rich perfume:
Impending mists deform the sky,
And beauty withers in his eye.
In hopes his terror to elude,
By day he mingles with the crowd;
Yet finds his soul to fears a prey,
In busy crowds, and open day.
If night his lonely walk surprise,
What horrid visions round him rise!
That blasted oak, which meets his way,
Shown by the meteor's sudden ray,
The midnight murderer's known retreat,
Felt heaven's avengeful bolt of late;
The clashing chain, the groan profound,
Loud from yon ruined tower resound;
And now the spot he seems to tread,
Where some self-slaughter'd corse was laid:
He feels fixed Earth beneath him bend,
Deep murmurs from her caves ascend;
Till all his soul, by fancy swayed,
Sees lurid phantoms crowd the shade;
While shrouded manes palely stare,
And beckoning wish to breathe their care:
Thus real woes from false he bears,
And feels the death, the hell he fears.
O thou! whose spirit warms my song,
With energy divinely strong,
Erect his soul, confirm his breast,
And let him know the sweets of rest;
Till every human pain and care,
All that may be, and all that are,
But false imagined ills appear,
Beneath our hope, our grief, or fear.
And, if I right invoke thy aid,
By thee be all my woes allayed;
With scorn instruct me to defy
Imposing fear, and lawless joy;
To struggle through this scene of strife,
The pains of death, the pangs of life,
With constant brow to meet my fate,
And meet still more, Euanthe's hate.
And when some swain her charms shall claim,
Who feels not half my generous flame,
Whose cares her angel-voice beguiles,
On whom she bends her heavenly smiles;
For whom she weeps, for whom she glows,
On whom her treasured soul bestows;
When perfect mutual joy they share,
Ah! joy enhanc'd by my despair!
Mix beings in each flaming kiss,
And blessed, still rise to higher bliss:
Then, then, exert my utmost power,
And teach me being to endure;
Lest reason from the helm should start,
And lawless fury rule my heart;
Lest madness all my soul subdue,
To ask her Maker, What do thou?
Yet, could thou in that dreadful hour,
On my racked soul all Lethe pour,
Or fan me with the gelid breeze,
That chains in ice the indignant seas;
Or wrap my heart in tensold steel,
I still am man, and still must feel.
ODE AGAINST ILL NATURE.
BY CHRISTOPHER SMART, M. A.
I.
OFFSPRING of Folly and of Pride,
To all that is odious, all that is base allied;
Nursed up by Vice, by Pravity misled,
By pedant Affectation taught and bred:
Away, thou hideous hell-born spright,
Go, with thy looks of dark design,
Sullen, sour, and saturnine;
Fly to some gloomy shade, nor blot the goodly light.
Thy planet was remote, when I was born;
'Twas Mercury that ruled my natal morn,
What time the sun exerts his genial ray,
And ripens for enjoyment every growing day;
When to exist is but to love and sing,
And sprightly Aries smiles upon the spring.
II.
There in yon lonesome heath,
Which Flora, or Sylvanus never knew,
Where never vegetable drank the dew,
Or beaff, or sowl attempts to breathe;
Where Nature's pencil has no colors laid;
But all is blank, and universal shade;
Contrast to figure, motion, life and light,
There may thou vent thy spite,
For ever cursing, and for ever cursed,
Of all the infernal crew the worst;
The worst in genius, measure and degree;
For envy, hatred, malice, are but parts of thee.
III.
Or would thou change the scene, and quit thy den,
Behold the heaven-deserted sen,
Where spleen, by vapors dense begot and bred,
Hardness of heart, and heaviness of head,
Haverais'd their darksome walls, and placed their thorny bed;
There may thou all thy bitterness unload,
There may thou croak, in concert with the toad,
With thee the hollow howling winds shall join,
Nor shall the bittern her base throat deny,
The querulous frogs shall mix their dirge with thine,
The ear piercing hern, and plover screaming high,
While million humming gnats sit oe strum shall supply.
IV.
Away -- away -- behold an hideous band,
An herd of all thy minions are at hand:
Suspicion first with jealous caution stalks,
And ever looks around her as she walks,
With bibulous ear imperfect sounds to catch,
And prompt to listen at her neighbor's latch.
Next Scandal's meagre shade,
Foe to the virgins, and the Poet's fame,
A withered, time-deflower'd old maid,
That never enjoyed Love's ever sacred flame.
Hypocrisy succeeds with saint-like look,
And elevates her hands, and plods upon her book.
Next comes illiberal scambling Avarice,
Then Vanity and Affectation nice --
See, she salutes her shadow with a bow,
As in short Gallic trips she minces by,
Starting Antipathy is in her eye,
And squeamishly she knits her scornful brow.
To thee, Ill Nature, all the numerous group
With lowly reverence stoop --
They wait thy call, and mourn thy long delay,
Away -- thou art infectious -- haste away,
ODE ON ST. CECILIA's DAY.
BY THE SAME.
I.
FROM your lyre-enchanted towers,
Ye musically mystic Powers,
Ye, that inform the tuneful spheres,
Inaudible to mortal ears,
While each orb in either swims
Accordant to the inspiring hymns;
Hither Paradise remove,
Spirits of Harmony and Love!
Thou too, divine Urania, deign to appear,
And with thy sweetly-solemn lute
To the grand argument the numbers suit;
Such as sublime and clear,
Replete with heavenly love,
Charm the inraptur'd souls above.
Disdainful of fantastic play,
Mix on your ambrosial tongue
Weight of sense with sound of song,
And be angelically gay.
II.
And you, ye sons of Harmony below,
How little less than angels, when ye sing!
With Emulation's kindling warmth shall glow,
And from your mellow-modulating throats
The tribute of your grateful notes
In union of piety shall bring.
Shall Echo from her vocal cave
Repay each note the shepherd gave,
And shall not we our mistress praise,
And give her back the borrowed lays?
But farther still our praises we pursue;
For even Cecilia, mighty maid,
Confessed she had superior aid --
She did -- and other rites to greater Powers are due:
Higher swell the sound and higher:
Let the winged numbers climb:
To the heaven of heavens aspire,
Solemn, sacred, and sublime:
From heaven Music took its rise,
Return it to its native skies.
III.
Music's a celestial art;
Cease to wonder at its power,
Though lifeless rocks to motion start,
Though trees dance lightly from the bower,
Though rolling floods in sweet suspense
Are held, and listen into sense,
In Penshurst's plains, when Waller, sick with love,
Has found some silent, solitary grove,
Where the vague moon-beams pour a silver flood
Of tremulous light athwart the unshaven wood,
Within an hoary moss-grown cell,
He lays his careless limbs without reserve,
And strikes, impetuous strikes each querulous nerve
Of his resounding shell.
In all the woods, in all the plains,
Around a lively stillness reigns;
The deer approach the secret scene,
And weave their way through labyrinths green;
While Philomela learns the lay,
And answers from the neighboring bay.
But Medway, melancholy mute,
Gently on his urn reclines,
And all-attentive to the lute,
In uncomplaining anguish pines:
The crystal waters weep away,
And bear the tidings to the sea:
Neptune in the boisterous seas
Spreads the placid bed of peace,
While each blast,
Or breathes its last,
Or just does sigh a symphony and cease.
IV.
Behold Arion -- on the stern he stands,
Palled in theatrical attire,
To the mute strings he moves the enlivening hands,
Great in distress, and wakes the golden lyre:
While in a tender Orthian strain
He thus accosts the mistress of the main:
By the bright beams of Cynthia's eyes,
Through which your waves attracted rise,
And actuate the hoary deep;
By the secret coral cell,
Where Love, and Joy, and Neptune dwell,
And peaceful floods in silence sleep;
By the sea-flowers, that immerge
Their heads around the grotto's verge,
Dependent from the stooping stem;
By each roof-suspended drop,
That lightly lingers on the top,
And hesitates into a gem;
By thy kindred watery gods,
The lakes, the rivulets, founts and floods,
And all the Powers that live unseen
Underneath the liquid green;
Great Amphitrite (for thou can bind
The storm, and regulate the wind)
Hence waft me, fair Goddess, oh waft me away,
Secure from the men, and the monsters of prey!
V.
He sung -- The winds are charmed to sleep,
Soft stillness steals along the deep,
The Tritons and the Nereids sigh
In soul-reflecting sympathy,
And all the audience of waters weep.
But Amphitrite her dolphin sends -- the same,
Which erst to Neptune brought the nobly perjured dame. --
Pleased to obey, the beauteous monster flies,
And on his scales as the gilt sunbeams play,
Ten thousand variegated dies
In copious streams of luster rise,
Rise over the level main, and signify his way. --
And now the joyous Bard, in triumph bore,
Rides the voluminous wave, and makes the wished for shore.
Come, ye festive, social throng,
Who sweep the lyre, or pour the song,
Your noblest melody employ,
Such as becomes the mouth of Joy;
Bring the sky-aspiring thought,
With bright expression richly wrought;
And hail the Muse ascending on her throne,
The main at length subdued, and all the world her own.
VI.
But over the affections too she claims the sway,
Pierces the human heart, and steals the soul away;
And as attractive sounds move high or low,
The obedient ductile passions ebb and flow.
Has any nymph her faithful lover lost,
And in the visions of the night,
And all the day-dreams of the light,
In Sorrow's tempest turbulently tossed --
From her cheeks the roses die,
The radiations vanish from her sun-bright eye,
And her breast, the throne of love,
Can hardly, hardly, hardly move,
To send the ambrosial sigh.
But let the skilful Bard appear,
And pour the sounds medicinal in her ear:
Sing some sad, some plaintive ditty,
Steept in tears that endless flow,
Melancholy notes of pity,
Notes that mean a worldof woe;
She too shall sympathize, she too shall moan,
And pitying others sorrows sigh away her own.
VII.
Wake, wake the kettle-drum, prolong
The swelling trumpet's silver song,
And let the kindred accents pass
Through the horn's meandering brass.
Arise -- The patriot Muse invites to war,
And mounts Bellona's brazen car;
While Harmony, terrific maid!
Appears in martial pomp arrayed:
The sword, the target, and the lance
She wields, and as she moves, exalts the Pyrrhic dance.
Trembles the earth, resound the skies --
Swift over the fleet, the camp she flies
With thunder in her voice, and lightning in her eyes.
The gallant warriors engage
With inextinguishable rage,
And hearts unchill'd with fear;
Fame numbers all the chosen bands,
Full in the front fair Victory stands,
And Triumph crowns the rear.
VIII.
But hark the temple's hollowed roof resounds,
And Purcell lives along the solemn sounds. --
Mellifluous, yet manly too,
He pours his strains along,
As from the lion Sampson slew,
Comes sweetness from the strong.
Not like the soft Italian swains,
He trills the weak enervate strains,
Where Sense and Music are at strife;
His vigorous notes with meaning teem,
With fire, with force explain the theme,
And sing the subject into life.
Attend -- he sings Cecilia -- matchless dame!
It Is she -- it is she, -- fond to extend her fame,
On the loud chords the notes conspire to stay,
And sweetly swell into a long delay,
And dwell delighted on her name.
Blow on, ye sacred organs, blow,
In tones magnificently slow;
Such is the music, such the lays
Which suit your fair inventress' praise:
While round religious silence reigns,
And loitering winds expect the strains.
Hail majestic mournful measure,
Source of many a pensive pleasure!
Blessed pledge of love to mortals given,
As pattern of the rest of heaven!
And thou, chief honor of the veil,
Hail, harmonious virgin, hail!
When Death shall blot out every name,
And Time shall break the trump of Fame,
Angels may listen to thy lute:
Thy power shall last, thy bays shall bloom,
When tongues shall cease, and worlds consume,
And all the tuneful spheres be mute.
THE SEASONS.
IN IMITATION OF SPENSER.
BY MOSES MENDEZ, ESQUIRE.
SPRING,
ERE yet I sing the round revolving year,
And show the toils and pastime of the swain,
At Mr. Thomson, author of the Seasons.
Alcon's grave I drop a pious tear;
Right well he knew to raise his learned strain,
And, like his Milton, scorned the rhiming chain.
Ah! cruel Fate, to tear him from our eyes;
Receive this wreath, albe the tribute's vain;
From the green sod may flowers immortal rise,
To mark the sacred spot where the sweet Poet lies!
It is the Cuckoo that announceth Spring,
And with his Revengeful.
wreakful tale the spouse does fray;
Mean while the Finches harmless ditties sing,
And hop, in buxom youth, from spray to spray,
Proud as Sir Paridel of rich array.
The little wantons that draw Venus team,
Chirp amorous through the grove in beavies gay;
And he, who erst gained Leda's fond esteem,
Now sails on Thamis' tide, the glory of the stream!
Proud as the Turkish sultan, chaunticleer
Sees, with delight, his numerous race around:
He grants fresh favors to each female near;
For love as well as cherisaunce renowned.
The waddling dame that did the Gauls confound,
Her tawny sons does lead to rivers cold;
While Juno's Darling.
dearling, with majestic bound,
To charm his Lover.
leman does his train unfold,
That glows with vivid green, that flames with burning gold.
The balmy cowslip gilds the smiling plain,
The virgin snow-drop boasts her silver hue,
An hundred tints the gaudy daisy stain,
And the meek violet, in amiss blue
Creeps low to earth, and hides from public view:
But the rank nettle rears her crest on high;
So ribaulds loose their front unblushing show,
While modest merit does neglected lie,
And pines in lonely shade unseen of vulgar eye.
See! all around the gall-less Doves.
culvers bill,
Mean while the nightingale's becalming lays
Mix with the plaintive music of the rill,
The which in various Circles, or windings.
gyres the meadow Bathes.
bays.
Behold! the welkin bursts into a blaze!
Fast by the car of light the nimble Hours,
In songs of triumph, hail his genial rays,
And, as they Go.
wend to Thetis cooling bowers,
They bound along the sky, and strew the heavens with flowers.
And now the human bosom melts to love;
The raptured Bard awakes his skilful lyre,
By running streams, or in the laurel grove,
He tunes to amorous notes his sounding wire:
All, all his harmony, and all desire.
The happy numbers charm the blooming maid;
Her blushing cheeks pronounce her heart on fire,
She now consents, then shuns the embowering shade,
With faint reluctance yields; desirous, yet afraid.
Now rustic Cuddy, with untutored throat,
(Though much admired, I ween, of nymph and swain)
By various songs would various ends promote.
Seeks he to prove that woman's vows are vain!
He Bateman's fortune tells, a baleful strain!
And if to honor Britain he be led,
He sings a 'prentice bold, in londs profane,
Who, all unarmed, did strike two lions dead,
Tore forth their savage hearts, and did a princess wed.
But hark! the bag-pipe summons to the green,
The jocund bag-pipe, that awaketh sport;
The blithesome lasses, as the morning sheen,
Around the flower-crown'd may pole quick resort:
The Gods of pleasure here have fixed their court.
Quick on the wing the flying moment seize,
Nor build up ample schemes, for life is short,
Short as the whisper of the passing breeze.
Yet, ah! in vain I preach -- mine heart is ill at ease.
SUMMER.
BENEATH yon Knotty.
snubby oak's extended shade
Safe let me hide me from the eye of day;
Nor shall the dog star this retreat invade,
As through the heavens he speeds his burning way:
The sultry lion rages for his prey.
Ah Phoebus, quench thy wild destroying fire,
Each flower, each shrub does sink beneath thy ray,
Save the fresh laurel, that shall never expire.
The leaves that crown a bard may brave celestial ire.
Or shall I hie to mine own hermitage,
Round which the wanton vine her arms does wind,
There may I lonely turn the sacred page,
Improve my reason, and amend my mind;
Here against Life's ills a remedy I find.
An hundred flowers emboss the verdant ground;
A little brook does my sweet cottage bind,
Its waters yield a melancholy sound,
And sooth to study deep, or lull to sleep profound.
The playful insect hopping in the grass
Does tire the hearer with his sonnet shrill;
The pool-sprung gnat on sounding wing does pass,
And on the Starting, flying-out.
ramping steed does suck his fill;
Ah me, can little creatures work such ill!
The patient cow does, to eschew the heat,
Her body steep within the neighboring rill;
And while the lambs in fainter voices bleat,
Their mothers hang their head, in doleful plight I weet.
Careless.
Rechless of seasons, see the lusty swains
Along the meadow spread the tawny hay;
The maidens too undaunted seek the plains,
Ne fear to show their faces to the ray;
But all the honest badge of toil display.
See how they mould the haycock's rising head;
While wanton Colin, full of amorous play,
Down throws Susan, who does shriek for dread.
Fear not -- thou can be hurt upon so soft a bed.
At length the sun does hasten to repose,
And all the vault of heaven is streaked with light;
In flamy gold the ruddy welkin glows,
And, for the noonday heat, our pains does Requite.
quite,
For all is calm, serene, and passing bright:
Favonius gentle skims along the grove,
And sheds sweet odours from his pennons light.
The little bat in giddy orbs does rove,
And loud the screech-owl shrieks, to rouse her blue-ey'd love.
Menalcas came to taste the evening gale,
His cheeks impurpled with the rose of youth;
He won each damsel with his piteous tale,
They thought they listened to the words of truth,
Yet their belief did work them muchel Sorrow.
ruth.
His oaths were light as gossimer, or air,
His tongue was poisonous as an aspic's tooth.
Ah! cease to promise joy, and give despair:
It Is brave to smite the foe; it is base to wrong the fair.
The gentle Thyrsis, mild as opening morn,
Came to the lawn, and Marian there was found;
Marian whom many huswife arts adorn:
Right well she knew the apple to surround
With dulcet crust: and Thomalin renowned
For prow Hardy, valiant.
achievements in the wrestling ring;
He held at naught the vantage of the ground,
But prone to earth the hardiest wight would fling;
Such was Alcides erst, if poets Truth.
sooth do sing.
From tree-crown'd hill, from flower-enamel'd vale,
The mild inhabitants in crowds appear
To tread a measure; while Night's regent pale
Does through the sky her silver chariot steer,
Whose lucid wheels were decked with dew-drops clear;
The which, like pearls, descended on the plain.
Now every youth does clasp his mistress dear,
And every nymph rewards her constant swain.
Thrice happy he who loves, and is beloved again.
AUTUMN.
SEE jolly Autumn, clad in hunter's green,
In wholesome Vigor.
lusty-hed does mount the sphere;
A leafy girlond binds her temples sheen,
Instudded richly with the spiky ear.
Her right hand bears a vine-incircled spear;
Such as the crew did wield whom Bacchus lad,
When to the Ganges he his course did steer;
And in her left a bugle-horn she had,
On which she Often.
est did blow, and made the heart right glad.
In slow procession moves the tottering wain,
The sunburned hinds their finished toil Follow.
ensue;
Now in the barn they house the glittering grain,
And there the cries of "harvest home" renew.
The honest farmer does his friends Salute.
salew;
And them with jugs of ale his wife does treat,
Which for that purpose she at home did brew;
They laugh, they sport, and homely jests repeat,
Then smack their lasses lips, their lips as honey sweet.
On every hill the purple blushing vine
Beneath her leaves her racy fruit does hide:
Although.
Albe she pour not floods of foaming wine,
Yet are we not potations bland denied;
See where the pear tree does in earth abide!
Bruise her rich fruitage, and the grape disdain;
The apple too will grant a generous tide,
To sing whose honors Thenot raised his strain,
Whose soul-inchanting lays still charm the listening plain.
Through greyish mists behold Aurora dawns,
And to his sport the wary fowler hies;
Crouching to earth his guileful pointer fawns,
Now the thick stubble, now the clover tries,
To find where, with his race, the partridge lies.
Ah! luckless fire, ah! luckless race, I ween,
Whom force compels or subtle arts surprise;
More Daedalus envying Perdix his nephew's skill in mechanics, threw him into
the sea. He escaped death by being changed into a partridge.
uncles wait to cause thee dolorous Anguish, pain.
teen,
Doomed to escape the deep, and perish on the green.
The full-mouthed hounds pursue the timorous hare,
And the hills echo to the joyful cry;
Ah! borrow the light pennons of the hare,
If you're Reached, overtaken.
arraught, you die, poor wretch, you die.
Naught will avail the pity-pleading eye,
For our good squire does much against you rail,
And says you often magic arts do try;
At times you wave Grimalkin's sooty tail,
Or on a beesom vild you through the welkin sail.
The stag is roused; he stems the threatening flood,
That shall ere long his matchless swiftness quell;
And, to avoid the tumult of the wood,
Amongst his well known Companions,
pheers attempts to Mix.
mell:
With horn and hoof his purpose they repel.
Thus, should a maid from Virtue's lore ystray,
Your sex, my Daphne, show their vengeance sell;
Your cruel selves with gall the shaft Bathe.
embay,
And lash from Pardon's shrine the penitent away.
Now silence charms the sages of the gown,
To purer air does speed each crafty wight;
The well-squeez'd client quits the dusty town,
Grown gray in the asserting of his right,
With head yfraught with law, and pockets light,
Well pleased he wanders over the fallow lea,
And views each rural object with delight.
Never be my lot the brawling courts to see;
Who trusts to lawyer's tongue does much Judges ill.
misween, perdy.
Right blessed the man who free from bitter Sorrow.
bale,
Does in the little peaceful hamlet dwell,
No loud contention does his ears assail,
Save when the tempest whistles over his cell:
The fruitful down, the flower-depainted dell,
To please his eyne are variously arrayed;
And when in roundelay his flame he would tell,
He gains a smile from his beloved maid;
By such a gentle smile an age of pain's repaid.
WINTER.
THE little brook that erst my cot did lave,
And over its flinty pavement sweetly sung,
Does now forget to roll her wanton wave,
For Winter hoar her icy chain has flung,
And stilled the babbling music of her tongue.
The lonely woodcock seeks the splashy glen,
Each mountain head with fleecy snow is hung;
The snipe and duck enjoy the moorish fen,
Like Hermits.
Eremites they live, and shun the sight of men.
The Stupefied.
wareless sheep no longer bite the mead,
No more the plough-boy turns the stubborn ground,
At the full crib the horned laborers feed,
Their nostrils cast black clouds of smoke around;
A squalid coat does the lean steed surround.
The wily fox does prowl abroad for prey,
Rechless of snares, or of the avenging hound;
And trusty Lightfoot, now no longer gay,
Sleeps at the kitchen hearth his cheerless hours away.
Where erst the boat, and slowly moving barge,
Did with delight cut through the dimpling plain,
Now wanton boys and men do roam at large;
The river-gods quit their usurped domain,
And of the wrong at Neptune's court complain.
There mote you see mild Avon crowned with flowers,
And milky Wey withouten spot or stain;
There the fair stream that washes Hampton's bowers,
And Isis who with pride beholds her learned towers.
Intent on sport, the ever jocund throng
Quit their warm cots, and for the game prepare;
Behold the restless football whirls along,
Now near the earth, now mounted high in air.
Thus often men, in life's wild lottery fare,
Who quit true bliss to grasp an empty toy.
Our honest swains for wealth nor titles care,
But lusty health in exercise employ.
The distant village hears the rude tumultuous joy.
The careful hedger looks the fields around,
To see what labor may his skill demand;
He mends the fence, repairs the sinking mound,
Or in long drains he cuts the lower land,
That shall henceforth all sudden floods withstand.
Mean while at home his dame, with silver hair,
Does sit incircled by a goodly band
Of lovely maids, who various works prepare,
All chaste as Jove's wise child, as Cupid's mother fair.
She them discourses not of fashions nice,
Nor of the trilling notes which eunuchs sing;
Allurements vain, that prompt the soul to vice!
Ne tells she them of Kesar or of king;
Too great the subject for so mean a ring.
Her lessons teach to swell the capon's size;
To make the hen a numerous offspring bring;
Or how the way-ward mother to chastise,
When from her vetchy nest the weetless vagrant hies.
When glistering spangles deck the robe of night,
And all their kine in pens avoid the cold,
The buxom troops, still eager of delight,
Round Damon's eyne a A linen cloth.
drapet white infold,
He darkling gropes till he some one can hold.
Next Cori hides his head, and must impart
What wanton fair-one smote his hand so bold.
He Delia names, nor did from truth depart;
For well he knew her touch, who long had fired his heart.
Stay, I conjure you by your hopes of bliss,
Trust not, my Daphne, the rough-biting air,
Let not rude winds those lips of softness kiss;
Will Eurus stern the charms of beauty spare?
No, he will hurt my rosy-featur'd fair,
If aught so bright dares rugged carl invade,
Too tender thou such rough assaults to bear;
The mountain ash may stand though stripped of shade,
But at the slightest wound the silken flowers will fade.
ODE TO LIBERTY.
BY DR. JOSEPH WARTON.
O Goddess, on whose steps attend
Pleasure and laughter-loving Health,
White-mantled Peace with olive-wand,
Young Joy, and diamond-scepter'd Wealth,
Blithe Plenty, with her loaded horn,
With Science bright-ey'd as the morn,
In Britain, which for ages past
Has been thy choicest darling care,
Who made her wise, and strong, and fair,
May thy best blessings ever last.
For thee, the pining prisoner mourns,
Deprived of food, of mirth, of light;
For thee pale slaves to galleys chained,
That ply tough oars from morn to night;
Thee the proud Sultan's beauteous train,
By eunuchs guarded, weep in vain,
Tearing the roses from their locks;
And Guinea's captive kings lament,
By Christian lords to labor sent,
Whipped like the dull, unfeeling ox.
Inspired by thee, deaf to fond Nature's cries,
Stern Brutus, when Rome's Genius loudly spoke,
Gave her the matchless filial sacrifice,
Nor turned, nor trembled at the deathful stroke!
And he of later age, but equal fame,
Dared stab the tyrant, though he loved the friend.
How burnt the Leonidas.
Spartan with warm patriot-flame,
In thy great cause his valorous life to end!
How burst Gustavus from the Swedish mine!
Like light from chaos dark, eternally to shine.
When heaven to all thy joys bestows,
And graves upon our hearts -- Be free --
Shall coward man those joys resign,
And dare reverse this great decree?
Submit him to some idol-king,
Some selfish, passion-guided thing,
Abhorring man, by man abhorred,
Around whose throne stands trembling Doubt,
Whose jealous eyes still roll about,
And Murder with his reeking sword?
Where trampling Tyranny with Fate
And black Revenge gigantic goes:
Hark, how the dying infants shriek,
How hopeless Age is sunk in woes!
Fly, mortals, from that fated land,
Though rivers roll over golden sand:
Though birds in shades of Cassia sing,
Harvests and fruits spontaneous rise,
No storms disturb the smiling skies,
And each sost breeze rich odours bring.
Britannia, watch! -- remember peerless Rome,
Her high-tower'd head dashed meanly to the ground;
Remember, Freedom's guardian, Grecia's doom,
Whom weeping the despotic Turk has bound:
May never thy oak-crown'd hills, rich meads and downs,
(Fame, Virtue, Courage, Poverty, forgot)
Thy peaceful villages, and bufy towns,
Be doomed some death-dispensing tyrant's lot;
On deep foundations may thy freedom stand,
Long as the surge shall lash thy sea-encircled land.
ODE TO HEALTH.
WRITTEN ON A RECOVERY FROM THE SMALLPOX.
BY THE SAME.
O Whether with laborious clowns
In meads and woods thou love to dwell,
In noisy merchant-crouded towns,
Or in the temperate Brachman's cell;
Who from the meads of Ganges' fruitful flood,
Wet with sweet dews collects his flowery food;
In Bath, or in Montpellier's plains,
Or rich Bermudas' balmy isle,
Or the cold North, whose fur-clad swains
Never saw the purple Autumn smile,
Who over Alps of snow, and deserts drear,
By twinkling starlight drive the flying deer;
O lovely queen of mirth and ease,
Whom absent, beauty, banquets, wine,
Wit, music, pomp, nor science please,
And kings on ivory couches pine;
Nature's kind nurse, to whom by gracious heaven
To sooth the pangs of toilsome life it is given;
To aid a languid wretch repair,
Let pale-ey'd Grief thy presence fly,
The restless demon gloomy Care,
And meagre Melancholy die;
Drive to some lonely rock the giant Pain,
And bind him howling with a triple chain!
O come, restore my aching sight,
Yet let me not on Laura gaze,
Soon must I quit that dear delight,
O'erpower'd by Beauty's piercing rays;
Support my feeble feet, and largely shed
The oil of gladness on my fainting head.
How nearly had my spirit past,
Till stopped by Metcalf's skilful hand,
To Death's dark regions wide and wast,
And the black river's mournful strand;
Or to those vales of joy and meadows blessed,
Where sages, heroes, patriots, poets rest;
Where Maro and Musaeus sit
Listening to Milton's loftier song,
With sacred silent wonder smit;
While, monarch of the tuneful throng,
Homer in rapture throws his trumpet down,
And to the Briton gives his amaranthine crown.
ODE TO SUPERSTITION.
BY THE SAME.
HENCE to some convent's gloomy isles,
Where cheerful daylight never smiles,
Tyrant, from Albion haste to slavish Rome;
There by dim tapers livid light,
At the still solemn hours of night,
In pensive musings walk over many a sounding tomb.
Thy clanking chains, thy crimson steel,
Thy venomed darts, and barbarous wheel,
Malignant fiend, bear from this isle away,
Nor dare in Error's fetters bind
One active, freeborn, British mind,
That strongly strives to spring indignant from thy sway.
Thou bad'st grim Moloch's frowning priest
Snatch screaming infants from the breast,
Regardless of the frantic mother's woes;
Thou led'st the ruthless sons of Spain
To wondering India's golden plain,
From deluges of blood where tenfold harvests rose.
But lo! how swiftly art thou fled,
When Reason lifts his radiant head;
When his resounding, awful voice they hear,
Blind Ignorance, thy doting sire,
Thy daughter, trembling Fear, retire;
And all thy ghastly train of terrors disappear.
So by the Magi hailed from far,
When Phoebus mounts his early car,
The shrieking ghosts to their dark charnels slock;
The sull-gorg'd wolves retreat, no more
The prowling lionesses roar,
But hasten with their prey to some deep cavern'd rock.
Hail then, ye friends of Reason hail,
Ye foes to Mystery's odious veil,
To Truth's high temple guide my steps aright,
Where Clarke and Wollaston reside,
With Lock and Newton by their side,
While Plato sits above enthroned in endless light.
ODE TO A GENTLEMAN UPON HIS TRAVELS THROUGH ITALY.
BY THE SAME.
WHILE I with fond officious care
For you my chorded shell prepare,
And not unmindful frame an humble lay;
Where shall this verse my Cynthio find?
What scene of art now charms your mind?
Say, on what sacred spot of Roman ground you stray?
Perhaps you cull each valley's bloom,
To strew over Virgil's laurell'd tomb,
Whence often at midnight echoing voices sound;
For at that hour of silence, there
The shades of ancient Bards repair,
To join in choral song his hallowed urn around:
Or wander in the cooling shade
Of Sabine bowers, where Horace strayed,
And often repeat in eager thought elate,
(As round in classic search you trace
With curious eye the pleasing place)
" That fount he loved, and there beneath that hill he sat."
How longs my raptured breast with you
Great Raphael's magic strokes to view,
To whose blessed hand each charm the Graces gave!
Whence each fair form with beauty glows,
Like that of Venus, when she rose
Naked in blushing charms from Ocean's hoary (...)
As often by roving fancy led
To smooth Clitumnus' banks you tread,
What awful thoughts his fabled waters raise!
While the low-thoughted swain, whose flock
Grazes around, from some steep rock
With vulgar disregard his mazy course surveys.
Now through the ruined domes my Muse
Your steps with eager flight pursues,
That their cleft piles on Tyber's plains present,
Among whose hollow-winding cells
Forlorn and wild Rome's Genius dwells,
His golden scepter broke, and purple mantle rent.
Often to those mossy mouldering walls,
Those caverns dark, and silent halls,
Let me repair by midnight's paly fires;
There muse on Empire's fallen state,
And frail Ambition's hapless fate,
While more than mortal thoughts the solemn scen^ (...).
What lust of power from the cold North
Could tempt those Vandal-robbers forth,
Fair Italy, thy vine-clad vales to wast!
Whose hands profane, with hostile blade,
Thy story'd temples dared invade,
And all thy Parian seats of Attic art defaced.
They, weeping Art in fetters bound,
And gored her breast with many a wound,
And veiled her charms in clouds of thickest night;
Sad Poesy, much-injur'd maid,
They drove to some dim convent's shade,
And quenched in gloomy mist her lamp's resplendent light.
There long she wept, to darkness doomed,
'Till Cosmo's hand her light relum'd,
That once again in losty Tasso shone;
Since has sweet Spenser caught her fire,
She breathed once more in Milton's lyre,
And warmed the soul divine of Shakespeare, Fancy's son.
Nor she, mild queen, will cease to smile
On her Britannia's much-loved isle,
Where these her best, her favorite three were born,
While The author of the Pleasures of Imagination.
Thereon warbles Grecian strains,
Or polished Dodington remains,
The drooping train of Arts to cherish and adorn.
ODE AGAINST DESPAIR.
BY THE SAME.
FArewell thou dimpled cherub Joy,
Thou rose-crown'd, ever-smiling boy,
Wont thy sister Hope to lead
To dance along the primrose mead!
No more, berest of happy hours,
I seek thy lute-resounding bowers,
But to yon ruined tower repair,
To meet the God of groans, Despair;
Who, on that ivy-darken'd ground,
Still takes at eve his silent round,
Or sits yon new-made grave beside,
Where lies a frantic Suicide:
While laboring sighs my heart strings break,
Thus to the sullen Power I speak:
" Haste, with thy poisoned dagger, haste,
" To pierce this sorrow-laden breast;
" Or lead me at the dead of night,
" To some sea-beat mountain's height,
" Whence with headlong haste I Will leap
" To the dark bosom of the deep;
" Or show me far from human eye,
" Some cave to muse in, starve, and die,
" No weeping friend or brother near,
" My last fond, faultering words to hear?"
'Twas thus with weight of woes oppressed,
I sought to ease my bruised breast:
When straight more gloomy grew the shade,
And lo! a tall majestic maid!
Her limbs, not delicately fair,
Robust, and of a martial air;
She bore of steel a polished shield,
Where highly-sculptur'd I beheld
The Athenian Socrates.
martyr smiling stand,
The baleful goblet in his hand;
Sparkled her eyes with lively flame,
And Patience was the seraph's name;
Sternly she looked, and stern began --
" Thy sorrows cease, complaining man,
" Rouse thy weak soul, appease thy moan,
" Soon are the clouds of sadness gone;
" Though now in Grief's dark groves you walk,
" Where griesly fiends around you stalk,
" Beyond, a blissful city lies,
" Far from whose gates each anguish flies:
" Take thou this shield, which once of yore
" Ulysses and Alcides wore,
" And which in later days I gave
" To Regulus and Raleigh brave;
" In exile or in dungeon drear
" Their mighty minds could banish fear;
" Thy heart no tenfold woes shall feel,
" 'Twas Virtue tempered the rough steel,
" And, by her heavenly fingers wrought,
" To me the precious present brought."
ODE TO THE NIGHTINGALE.
BY THE SAME.
O Thou, that to the moonlight vale
Warblest often thy plaintive tale,
What time the village murmurs cease,
And the still eye is hushed to peace,
When now no busy sound is heard,
Contemplation's favorite bird!
Chauntress of Night, whose amorous song
First heard the tufted groves among,
Warns wanton Mabba to begin
Her revels on the circled green,
Whenever by meditation led,
I nightly seek some distant mead,
A short repose of cares to find,
And soothe my love-distracted mind,
O fail not then, sweet Philomel,
Thy sadly-warbled woes to tell;
In sympathetic numbers join
Thy pangs of luckless love with mine!
So may no swain's rude hand infest
Thy tender young, and rob thy nest;
Nor ruthless fowler's guileful snare
Lure thee to leave the fields of air,
No more to visit vale or shade,
Some barbarous virgin's captive made.
ODE TO A LADY WHO HATES THE COUNTRY.
BY THE SAME.
NOW Summer, daughter of the Sun,
Over the gay fields comes dancing on,
And earth overflows with joys;
Too long in routs and drawing-rooms,
The tasteless hours my fair consumes
'Midst folly, flattery, noise.
Come hear mild Zephyr bid the rose
Her balmy-breathing buds disclose,
Come hear the falling rill;
Observe the honey-loaded Be,
The beech-embower'd cottage see,
Beside yon' sloping hill.
By Health awoke at early morn,
We'll brush sweet dews from every thorn,
And help unpen the fold;
Hence to yon hollow oak we'll stray,
Where dwelt, as village-fables say,
An holy Druid old.
Come wildly rove through desert dales
To listen how lone Nightingales
In liquid lays complain;
Adieu, the tender thrilling note,
That pants in Monticelli's throat,
And Handel's stronger strain.
" Insipid pleasures these! you cry,
" Must I from dear assemblies fly,
" To see rude peasants toil?
" For operas listen to a bird?
" Shall Arcadia.
Sydney's fables be preferred
" To my sagacious Hoyle?
O falsely fond of what seems great,
Of purple pomp and robes of state,
And all life's tinsel glare!
Rather with humble violets bind,
Or give to wanton in the wind
Your length of sable hair.
Soon as you reach the rural shade,
Will Mirth, the sprightly mountain maid,
Your days and nights attend;
She Will bring fantastic Sport and Song,
Nor Cupid will be absent long,
Your true ally and friend.
ODE TO SOLITUDE.
BY THE SAME.
THOU, that at deep dead of night
Walk'st forth beneath the pale moon's light,
In robe of flowing black arrayed,
While cypress-leaves thy brows o'ershade;
Listening to the crowing cock,
And the distant sounding clock;
Or sitting in thy cavern low,
Do hear the bleak winds loudly blow,
Or the hoarse death-boding owl,
Or village maistiff's wakeful howl,
While through thy melancholy room
A dim lamp casts an awful gloom;
Thou, that on the meadow green,
Or daisy'd upland art not seen,
But wandering by the dusky nooks,
And the pensive-falling brooks,
Or near some rugged, herbless rock,
Where no shepherd keeps his flock!
Musing maid, to thee I come,
Hating the tradeful city's hum;
O let me calmly dwell with thee,
From noisy mirth and business free,
With meditation seek the skies,
This folly-fetter'd world despise!
HOLKHAM A seat belonging to the earl of Leicester in the county of Norfolk.
. A POEM.
BY MR. POTTER.
THE lofty beeches, and their sacred shade
Over Penshurst's flower embroidered vale displayed,
Have yet their glory: not that Sidney's hand
" Marshalled in even ranks the obsequious band;"
Or his fresh garlands in these bowers entwined,
Whilst all Arcadia opened on his mind:
But here sweet Waller breathed his amorous flame,
And taught the groves his Sacharissa's name;
Here met the Muse, "while gentle Love was by,
" That tuned his lute, and wound the strings so high:"
Still with the entraptur'd strains the valleys ring,
And the groves flourish in eternal Spring.
Eternal Spring smiles in those green retreats,
" No more the Monarch's, still the Muse's seats,"
Where crowned with towers majestic Windsor stands,
And the wide world beneath her feet commands:
Not that her regal rampires boast the fame
Of each great Edward's, each great Henry's name;
Not that, in days of high-atchiev'd renown,
There Britain's Genius fixed his aweful throne,
Encircled with that glorious blaze that springs
From conquered nations, and from captive kings:
When each proud trophy moulders from the wall,
And even the imperial dome itself shall fall:
When those great names, the Warrior and the Sage,
Lie clouded in the dark historic page;
Then shall the heaven-born Muse (to whom belong
The more than mortal-making powers of Song)
Through Time's deep shades her sacred light display,
And pour the beam of Fame's eternal day.
Queen of sweet numbers and melodious strains,
If yet thou deign to visit Britain's plains;
If yet thy hallowed haunts partake thy love,
Clear spring, enameled vale, or bowery grove;
O come, and range with me the aspiring glades,
Where Leicester spreads the lawns and forms the shades,
On Holkham's plains bid Grecian structures rise,
And the tall column shoot into the skies:
Beneath whose proud survey, extended wide,
New scenes, new beauties charm on every side:
Here, crowned with woods, the shaded hills ascend,
In open light there the low vales extend;
Here in rich harvests waves the ripened grain,
And there fresh verdure clothes the pastur'd plain,
Sweetly intermixed, and lovely to behold,
As the green emerald enchas'd in gold.
See where the limpid lake through pendant shades,
The hills between, her liquid treasures leads;
And to the boughs, that fringe her crisped sides,
Holds the clear mirror of her crystal tides:
Her crystal tides reflect the waving scene,
Their silvery surface darkening into green;
As on the steep banks, bending over the flood,
Grotesque and wild up springs the o'ershadowing wood;
Or the slope margent, with a softer rise,
Shade above shade, and rank over rank supplies;
The verdant basis of yon' champain mound,
Its hallowed head with God's own temple crowned:
The home-bound mariner from far descries,
Emerging from the waves the tall tower rise;
With transport bids the solemn structure hail,
And winged for Britain speeds the flying sail.
In nearer view, 'midst the lawn's wide extent,
That gently swells with an unforced ascent,
In just proportion rising on the sight,
The stately mansion lifts its towery height,
And glitters over the groves. An oak beneath,
That calls the cool gales through its boughs to breathe,
Where the sun darts his fervid rays in vain,
Like the great patriarch on Mamre's plain
The princely Leicester sits: the pageant pride
Of cumbrous greatness banished from his side,
In these blessed bowers he plans the great design;
With heightened charms bids modest nature shine;
Shows us magnificence allied to use;
Though rich, yet chaste; though splendid, not profuse;
Calls forth each beauty that from order springs;
From its loved Greece each honored Science brings;
Over Art's fair train extends his generous care;
And bids each polished Grace inhabit here.
Nor these alone: here Virtue loves to dwell,
No cold recluse self-cavern'd in a cell;
Active and warm she breathes a noble part,
Glows in the breast, and opens all the heart;
To generous deeds she fires the empassion'd mind,
The substitute of heaven to bless mankind;
She through desponding Misery's chearless gloom
Pours joy, and gives neglected Worth to bloom;
She in each bosom stills the rising sigh,
And wipes off every tear from every eye;
She to yon' almshouse, bosomed in the grove,
From toil and cares bids Age and Want remove;
There the tired eve of labored life to rest,
Fed by her hand, and by her bounty blessed.
These, these are rays that round true greatness shine,
And thine, bright Clifford! the full blaze is thine.
Bring the green bay, the fragraut myrtle bring,
The violet glowing in the lap of spring;
Bid the sweet valleys send each honied flower,
Each herb, each leaf of aromatic power;
The Muse's hand shall their mixed odours spread,
And screw the ground where Clifford deigns to tread.
In distant prospect, sinking from the eye,
Low in the tufted dales the hamlets lie;
Where virgin Innocence, and meek-ey'd Peace,
With calm Content, the straw-roof'd cottage bless:
And strong-nerv'd Industry in purest flow
Spreads over the vermeil cheek Health's roseate glow.
More distant yet the thronged commercial town,
That makes the wealth of other worlds her own,
Lifts her proud head, and sees with every tide
Rich-freighted navies crowd her harbored side:
Or bids the parting vessel spread the sail
Loose to the wind, and catch the rising gale:
Whilst the vast ocean, Albion's utmost bound,
Rolls its broad wave, a world of waters, round.
In sweet astonishment the impatient Mind
Bids her free powers expatiate unconfined;
From scene to scene in rapid progress flies,
Glances from earth to seas, from seas to skies;
Delights to feel the great ideas roll,
Swell on the sense, and fill up all the soul.
Not such the scene, when over the uncultur'd wild
No harvest rose, no cheerful verdure smiled;
On the bare hill no tree was seen to spread
The graceful foliage of its waving head;
No breathing hedge-row formed the broider'd bound,
Nor hawthorn blossomed on the unsightly ground;
Joy was not here; no bird of finer note
Poured the thick warblings of his dulcet throat;
Even Hope was fled; and over the chearless plain,
A waste of sand, Want held her unblessed reign.
Lo, Leicester comes! Before his mastering hand
Flies the rude Genius of the savage land;
The russet lawns a sudden verdure wear;
Starts from the wondering fields the golden ear;
Up rise the waving woods, and haste to crown
The hill's bare brow, and shade the sultry down:
The sheltered traveller sees, with glad surprise,
Over trackless wilds the extended rows arise;
And, as their hospitable branches spread,
Blesses the friendly hand that formed the shade:
Joy blooms around, and chears the peasant's toil,
As smiling plenty decks the cultured soil;
The brightning scenes a kinder Genius own,
And Nature finishes what Art begun.
But can the verse, though Philomela deign
To breathe the sweet notes through the warbled strain;
Though every Muse and every Grace should smile,
And raptures raise the honey-steeped style;
Can the verse paint like Nature? Can the power
That wakes to life free Fancy's imag'd store,
Boast charms like here is? or the creative hand
In blended tints such beauteous scenes command,
Though learned Poussin gives each grace to flow,
And bright Lorrain's ethereal colors glow?
Yet peerless is the power of sacred song,
That bursts in transport from the Muse's tongue:
And hark! methinks her hallowed voice I hear,
In notes mellifluous stealing on the ear;
Now clearer, and yet clearer trills the strain,
Swells through the grove, and melts along the plain.
" Ye nymphs, that love to range the lillied vale,
" Where streams the silver fount of Acidale;
" Ye, that in Pindus' laureled groves abide,
" Or haunt Cyllene's cypress-shaded side;
" Or braid your fine wreaths in the pearly caves,
" Where famed Ilissus rolls his Attic waves;
" Whilst the barbarian's rude unlettered race
" Profane your grottos, and your bowers deface,
" See Leicester courts you to the Icenian shore,
" Studious your long-lost honors to restore!
" See, the fair rival of your native seats,
" Aonian Holkham opens all its sweets;
" Deign then, ye sacred sisters! deign to tread
" The rich embroidery of yon velvet mead,
" As fresh, as lovely as your lilied vale,
" Where streams the silver fount of Acidale:
" If old Cyllene's cypress-shaded bower,
" Or Pindus' laureled mount delight you more;
" Go, sweet enthusiasts! softly-silent rove
" The studious mazes of the twilight grove;
" Or, at the foot of some hoar elm reclined,
" Wake the high thought that swells the raptured mind
" Or pensive listen to the solemn roar
" Of whitening billows breaking on the shore:
" If the majestic domes, whose towery pride
" Glitter over famed Ilissus' Attic tide,
" Your steps detain; yon' princely structure view,
" Graced with each finer art your Athens knew!
" Each finer art to just perfection brought,
" All that Vitruvius and Palladio thought;
" The trophied arch; the porphyry-pillar'd hall;
" The sculptured forms that breathe along the wall;
" Lycaean Pan; the faun's Arcadian race;
" The huntress-queen's inimitable grace;
" Athenian Pallas clad in radiant arms;
" Heaven's empress conscious of her slighted charms;
" Your own Apollo, on whose polished brow
" Youth blooms, and grace, and candor's brightning glow;
" Gods, heroes, sages, an illustrious train,
" Court you to Holkham's consecrated plain.
" Haste then, ye sacred sisters! haste, and bring
" The laurel steeped in the Castalian spring;
" On the choice bough a purer fragrance breathe,
" And twine for Leicester's brow the unfading wreath."
She ceased the raptured strain; and dear to fame,
Flows the proud verse inscribed with Leicester's name.
THE POOR MAN's PRAYER.
WRITTEN 1766. ADDRESSED TO THE EARL OF CHATHAM.
AMIDST the more important toils of state,
The counsels laboring in thy patriot soul,
Though Europe from thy voice expect her fate,
And thy keen glance extend from pole to pole;
O Chatham, nursed in ancient Virtue's lore,
To these sad strains incline a favoring ear;
Think on the God, whom thou, and I adore,
Nor turn unpitying from the poor man's prayer.
Ah me! how blessed was once a peasant's life!
No lawless passion swelled my even breast;
Far from the stormy waves of civil strife,
Sound were my slumbers, and my heart at rest.
I never for guilty, painful pleasures roved,
But taught by Nature, and by choice to wed,
From all the hamlet culled whom best I loved,
With her I staid my heart, with her my bed.
To gild her worth I asked no wealthy power,
My toil could feed her, and my arm defend;
In youth, or age, in pain, or pleasure's hour,
The same fond husband, father, brother, friend.
And she, the faithful partner of my care,
When ruddy evening streaked the western sky,
Looked toward the uplands, if her mate was there,
Or through the beech-wood cast an anxious eye.
Then, careful matron, heaped the maple board
With savoury herbs, and picked the nicer part
From such plain food as Nature could afford,
Ere simple Nature was debauched by Art.
While I, contented with my homely cheer,
Saw round my knees my prattling children play;
And often with pleased attention sat to hear
The little history of their idle day.
But ah! how changed the scene! On the cold stones,
Where wont at night to blaze the cheerful fire,
Pale Famine sits and counts her naked bones,
Still sighs for food, still pines with vain desire.
My faithful wife with ever-streaming eyes
Hangs on my bosom her dejected head;
My helpless infants raise their feeble cries,
And from their father claim their daily bread.
Dear tender pledges of my honest love,
On that bare bed behold your brother lie;
Three tedious days with pinching want he strove,
The fourth, I saw the helpless cherub die.
Nor long shall ye remain. With visage sour
Our tyrant lord commands us from our home;
And armed with cruel Law's coercive power,
Bids me and mine over barren mountains roam.
Yet never, Chatham, have I passed a day
In Riot's orgies, or in idle ease;
Never have I sacrificed to sport and play,
Or wished a pampered appetite to please.
Hard was my fare, and constant was my toil,
Still with the morning's orient light I rose,
Felled the stout oak, or raised the lofty pile,
Parched in the sun, in dark December froze.
Is it that Nature with a niggard hand
Witholds her gifts from these once favored plains?
Has God, in vengeance to a guilty land,
Sent Dearth and Famine to her laboring swains?
Ah no; yon hill, where daily sweats my brow,
A thousand flocks, a thousand herds adorn;
Yon field, where late I drove the painful plow,
Feels all her acres crowned with wavy corn.
But what avails that over the furrowed soil
In Autumn's heat the yellow harvests rise,
If artificial want elude my toil,
Untasted plenty wound my craving eyes?
What profits, that at distance I behold
My wealthy neighbor's fragrant smoke ascend,
If still the griping cormorants withold
The fruits which rain and genial seasons send?
If those fell vipers of the public weal
Yet unrelenting on our bowels prey;
If still the curse of penury we feel,
And in the midst of plenty pine away?
In every port the vessel rides secure,
That wastes our harvest to a foreign shore;
While we the pangs of pressing want endure,
The sons of strangers riot on our store.
O generous Chatham, stop those fatal sails,
Once more with out-strecth'd arm thy Britons save;
The unheeding crew but wait for favoring gales,
O stop them, ere they stem Italia's wave.
From thee alone I hope for instant aid,
It Is thou alone can save my childrens breath;
O deem not little of our cruel meed,
O haste to help us, for delay is death.
So may nor Spleen, nor Envy blast thy name,
Nor voice profane thy patriot acts deride;
Still may thou stand the first in honest fame,
Unstung by Folly, Vanity, or Pride.
So may thy languid limbs with strength be braced,
And glowing Health support thy active soul;
With fair renown thy public virtue graced,
Far as thou bad'st Britannia's thunder roll.
Then joy to thee, and to thy children peace,
The grateful hind shall drink from Plenty's horn:
And while they share the cultured land's increase,
The poor shall bless the day when Pit was born.
FIVE PASTORAL The scenes of these eclogues are supposed to lie among the
shepherds oppressed by the war in Germany.
ECLOGUES.
ECLOGUE I.
LYCAS AND ALPHON. ALPHON. ARISE, my Lycas: in yon' woody wilds
From a rough rock in deep enclosure hid
Of thickest oaks, a gushing fountain falls,
And pours its airy stream with torrent pure:
Which late returning from the field at eve
I found, invited by its dashing sound,
As through the gloom it struck my passing ear.
Thither I mean to drive our languid flocks;
Fit place to cool their thirst in midday hour.
Due west it rises from that blasted beech;
The way but short: -- come, Lycas, rouse thy dog;
Let us be gone.

LYCAS. Alas, my friend, of flock,
Of spring, or shepherd's lore, to me is vain
To tell: my favorite lamb, the solace dear
Of these gray locks, my sweet and sole delight,
Is snatched by cruel fate! An armed band,
On neighing steeds elate, in wide array
Trampled the youngling, as the vale along
At eve they passed, beneath their whelming march.

ALPHON. Such throng I heard, as in the neighboring wood
I wandered to reduce a straggling ewe
Escaped the fold: what time the griesly owl
Her shrieks began, and at the wonted elm
The cows awaiting stood Lucilla's hand.
When strait with sudden fear alarmed I start,
And listening to the distant-echoing steps
Of unseen horsemen with attentive ear,
I stand aloof. But why this deep-felt grief?
Merits such loss these tears and black despair?

LYCAS. Alphon, no more to Lycas now remains,
Since he my last and latest care is lost!
Thou know my little flock; three tender ewes
Were all my mean ambition wished or sought.
Even now nine days, and nine revolving nights
Are past, since these the Moldaw's raging flood
Swept with their wattled cotes, as over its banks
It rose redundant, swollen with beating rains,
And deep immersed beneath its whirling wave.
I waked at early dawn, and to the field
I issued to pursue my wonted toil,
When lo! nor flocks, nor wattled cotes I saw;
But all that met my wondering eyes around,
Was desolation sad. Here stateliest oaks
Torn from their roots, with broken branches lay
In hideous ruin: there the fields, that laughed
With ripening corn, of all their charms despoiled,
With oozy fragments scattered waste and wild
Were seen. I cursed the wicked Spirit drear,
That in the ruined abbey's darkest cell,
(That stands immured amid yon' lonesome piles)
I bound with triple chains: his magic power
Oft-times with howling storms, and thunder loud,
Deforms the night, and blackens Nature's face.
His tempests swelled the Moldaw's rising streams,
And thus overwhelmed my flock. -- But this my heart
Had learned to bear; at length to Comfort's voice
It had obeyed, and all its woes forgot;
When ah! too soon returning woes invade
My breast, just rising from its former stroke;
When this, the sole survivor of my flock,
Follows his lost companions; while a wretch
I here remain, deserted and forlorn!
He too had died beneath the whelming surge,
Had not the shelter of my low-roof'd cott
That fatal night preserved him; where at eve
I hap'ly placed him with providing care,
Lest the fell storm, which yet from southern clouds
Threatened destruction, and to lour began,
Might violate his tender-blooming age.

ALPHON. With piteous eye, and sympathizing heart,
Thy tears I view. -- These scenes of war and blood,
The calm repose of every field invade!
Myself had fallen a victim to their rage,
As in deep dead of night my cave beneath
I lay dissolved in sleep, with warning voice
Had not my dog alarmed with wondering ear.
When straight approached the cave a savage throng
With barbarous arms, and habit fierce and wild,
With stern demeanor and defying look
Terrify; which the moon's pale-glimmering rays
Presented to my sight, as in the boughs,
Close shrouded, of a neighboring pine I sat
(Where sudden fear had driven me to evade
Impending fate, unconscious and amazed)
Secure, but trembling, and in chilly damps
My limbs bedewed. -- The monsters as they past,
With dire confusion all the cavern filled;
Hurled to the ground my scrip, and beechen cup,
Dispersed the shaggy skins that form my bed,
And over the trampled floor had scattered wide
A hoard of choicest chestnuts, which I culled
With nice-discerning care, and had designed
A present to my beauteous Rosalind.
Alas! with them her love had been obtained,
And me to Myron she had then preferred!

LYCON. Shepherd, on thee has Fortune kindly smiled;
It Is mine to feel her grief-inflicting hand!
Alas! each object that I view around
Recalls my perished darling to my sight,
And mocks me with his loss! See there the spring
Where often he wont to slake his eager thirst!
And there the beech, beneath whose breezy shade
He loved to lie, close covert from the sun!
See yet the bark smooth-worn and bare remains,
Where often the youngling rubbed his tender side!
Ah! what availed my care, and foresight vain?
That day he fell oppressed by whelming steeds,
This hand had built a bower of thickest boughs
Composed, and wove with intermingling leaves,
Impervious to the sun; and strewn the floor
With choicest hay, that in the secret shade
He might repose, nor feel the dog-star's beam!
But why this sad, repeated track of woe
I still pursue? Farewell, my Alphon dear,
To distant fields, and pastures will I go,
Where impious War, and Discord, nurse of blood,
Shall never profane the silence of the groves.

ECLOGUE II.
ACIS AND ALCYON. ACIS. WHILE in the bosom of this deep recess
The voice of war has lost its madding shouts,
Let us improve the transient hour of peace,
And calm our troubled minds with mutual songs;
While this recess conspiring with the Muse
Invites to peaceful thoughts; this cavern deep,
And these tall pines that nodding from the rock
Wave over its mouth their umbrage black, and cast
A venerable gloom, with this clear fount
That cleaves the riven stone, and fills the cave
With hollow-tinkling sounds. Repeat the song
Which late, Alcyon, from thy mouth I heard,
As to the spring we drove our thirsting slocks;
It tells the charms of grateful Evening mild:
Begin, Alcyon: Acis in return
Shall sing the praises of the dawning Morn.

ALCYON. Behind the hills when sinks the western sun,
And falling dews breathe fragrance through the air,
Refreshing every field with coolness mild:
Then let me walk the twilight meadows green,
Or breezy up-lands, near thick-branching elms,
While the still landscape sooths my soul to rest,
And every care subsides to calmest peace:
The mists slow-rising from the rivers dank,
The woods scarce stirring at the whispering wind,
The streaky clouds, that tinge their darkened tops
With russet hues, and fainter gleams of light,
The solitude that all around becalms
The peaceful air, conspire to wrap my soul
In musings mild: and naught the solemn scene
And the still silence breaks, but distant sounds
Of bleating flocks, that to their destined fold
The shepherd drives; mean-time the shrill-tun'd bell
Of some lone ewe that wanders from the rest,
Tinkles far off, with solitary sound:
The lowing cows that wait the milker's hand,
The cottage-mastiff's bark, the joyous shouts
Of swains that meet to wrestle on the green,
Are heard around. But ah! since ruthless war
Has ravaged in these fields, so tranquil once,
Too often alas, the din of clashing arms
And discord fell disturbs the softer scene!
Thy sweet approach delights the wearied ox,
While in loose traces from the furrowed field
He comes: thy dawn the weary reaper loves,
Who long had sainted in the midday sun,
Pleased with the cooler hour, along the vale
Whistling he home returns to kiss his babes,
With joyful heart, his labor's sweet reward!
But ah! what sudden fears amaze his soul,
When near approaching, all before he sees
His lowly cottage and the village 'round
Swept into ruin by the hand of war,
Dispersed his children, and his much-loved wife,
No more to glad his breast with home felt-joys!
I too, when in my wattled cotes are laid
My supping flock, rejoice to meet my dear,
My fair Lauretta, at the wonted oak;
Or happily as her miking-pail she bears
Returning from the field, to ease her arm,
(Sweet office!) and impart my aiding hand!
Thy charms (O beauteous Evening!) shall be sung,
As long as these tall pines shall wave their heads,
Or this clear fountain cleave the riven stone!

ACIS. Sweet are the dews of Eve; her fragrance sweet;
Sweet are the pine-topt hills at sultry noon;
Sweet is the shelter of the friendly grot
To sheep, and shepherd, at impending storms;
But ah! less sweet the fragrant dews of Eve;
Less sweet the pine-topt hills at sultry noon;
Less sweet the shelter of the friendly grots,
Than when the rising sun with rosy beam
Peeps over the village-top, and over the fields,
The woods, the hills, the streams, and level meads,
Scatters bright splendors and diffusive joy!
As to his flock the shepherd issues forth,
Printing new footsteps in the dewy vale,
Each object of the joyous scene around
Vernal delight inspires, and glads his heart,
Unknowing of the cause, with new-felt glee!
The chaunt of early birds on every bush,
The steaming odours of the fresh-blown flowers --

ALCYON. Cease, Acis, cease thy song: -- from yonder hill,
Whose lofty sides enclose this secret seat,
Our flocks, that graze along its verdurous brow,
Tumultuous rush, as struck with sudden fright:
And hark, methinks I hear the deathful sounds
Of war approaching, and its thunders roar!

ACIS. Kind heaven preserve my wife and children dear!
Alas! I fear the sound, that louder now
Swells in the wind, and comes with fuller din,
Is near my cottage; which, thou know, my friend,
Stands at the spring, that issues from beneath
That rising hill, fast by the branching elm!

ALCYON. See, see, my friend, what darksome spires arise
Of wreathing smoke, and blacken all the sky! --
Nearer and nearer comes the threatening voice,
And more distinguished strikes our trembling ear!
But lo! the foes advance above the hill;
I see their glittering arms begin to gleam!
Come let us sly, and in the deepest nook,
The inmost cavern of this winding grott,
Close shroud ourselves, lest in the general stream
Of thousands thronging down, we sall oppressed.

ECLOGUE III.
WHEN sable midnight on the fields and woods
Had spread her mantle dark, then wandered forth
The pensive Alcon, and the bosom deep
Of a wild wood with solitary steps,
There to lament his wretched fate, he sought.
Him, late as over the vale at coming eve
Joyful he walked with his Lucilla dear,
A soldier stern advancing on his steed,
Robbed of his love, and to^e the beauteous maid
With brutal hand from his contending arms,
Weeping in vain, and shricking for his aid,
And frowning bore the precious prize away.
The wood, whose shades the plaintive shepherd sought,
Was dark and pathless, and by neighboring seet
Long time untrod: for there in ancient days
Two knights of bold emprise, and high renown,
Met in sierce combat, to d^spute the prize
Of beauty bright, whose valiant arm should win
A virgin fair, whose fair-emblazon'd charms
With equal love had smote their rival breasts.
The knight who fell beneath the victor's sword,
Unhears'd and restless, from that fatal day
Wanders the hated shades, a spectre pale;
And each revolving night, are heard to sound
Far from the inmost bower of the deep wood,
Loud shrieks, and hollow groans, and rattling chains.
When the dark secrets of the grove he gained,
Beneath an ancient oak his weary limbs
He laid adown, and thus to plain began.
This midnight deep to plaintive love accords;
This lonesome silence, and these hideous shades,
That in this darksome hour I dare to tread,
And all the horrors of this fearful place,
Will suit a wretch, abandoned to despair! --
But ah! -- what means this sudden fear, that creeps
In chilly sweats over all my trembling limbs? --
What hollow whispering sounds are those I hear
From yonder glade? -- Do not I hear his voice?
Does not the knight, that in these shades was slain,
Call me to come, and beckon with his hand?
Do not I see his visionary sword
Waved in bright circles through the murky air? --
Does not he point his wounds? -- Be still, my sears:
It Is vain illusion all, and fantasy.
These sears my love-distemper'd brain suggests:
Alas, they will not bring me back my love! --
Who now, perhaps, amid the thronging camp
On earth's cold breast reclines her weary head,
A helpless virgin, subject to the will
Of each rude ravisher, and distant far
From her dear Alcon, and her native fields. --
Ill will the hardships of inclement skies
Suit with her tender limbs; the various toils
Of painful marches; her unwonted ears
How bear the trumpet, and the sounds of war:
This task is hard indeed -- but soon, alas!
At will her savage lord may cast her off,
And leave her to succeeding scenes of woe!
I see my dear Lucilla, once my own,
Naked and hungry, tread the pensive steps
Of Desolation, doomed to wander over,
Helpless and vagabond, the friendless earth!
I hear her sigh for Alcon and her home;
And ask for bread at some proud palace-gate
With unavailing voice! This toilsome scene,
Alas, how different from the smoother paths
Of rural life my dear was wont to tread!
Forth to the field to bear the milking-pail
Was all her wont; to tread the tedded grass,
To tend her father's flock, beneath the oak
To snatch her dinner sweet, and on the green
With the companions of her age to sport!
In vain I now expect the coming on
Of dew-bath'd Eve, to meet my wonted love;
No more I hear the wood-girt valleys ring
With her blythe voice, that often has blessed mine ear,
As in the distant shade I sat unseen;
No more I meet her at the wonted spring,
Where each revolving noon she daily went
To fill her pitcher with the crystal flood! --
If in her native fields the hand of death
Had snatched her from my arms, I could have born
The fatal shoek with less repining heart;
For then I could have had one parting kiss;
I could have strewn her hearse with fairest flowers,
And paid the last sad office to my dear! --
Return, my sweet Lucilla, to my arms;
At thy return, all Nature will rejoice.
Together will we walk the verdant vales,
And mingle sweet discourse with kisses sweet.
Come, I will climb for thee the knotted oak,
To rob the stock-dove of his feathery young;
I Will show thee where the softest cowslips spring,
And clustering nuts their laden branches bend;
Together will we taste the dews of morn;
Together seek the grotts at sultry noon;
Together from the field at eve return. --
What have I said? what painted scenes of bliss
My vain imagination has displayed!
Alas, she is gone, ah, never to return!
Farewell my pasteral pipe, and my dear flock;
Farewell my faithful dog; my once-lov'd haunts
Farewell; or cave, or fountain, or fresh shade,
Farewell; and thou, my low ^^or'd cott, farewell! --
Here will I lie, and fellest wolves, that roam
This savage forest shall devour my limbs,
Unwept, unburied, in a place unknown!"
ECLOGUE IV.
MYCON AND PHILANTHES. MYCON. WELCOME, Philanthes, to thy native fields;
Thrice three revolving moons are gone and past,
Since first you parted from your father's cott,
To drive to pastures far remote your flock.
Since that, alas, how often has savage war
Disturbed our dwellings, and defaced our fields.

PHILANTHES. Mycon, each object that I view around
Speaks ruin and destruction. See, my friend,
The ancient wood, whose venerable shades
So often have sheltered us from noonday suns;
So often have echoed to the lowing herds,
That fed wide-wandering in the neighboring vales,
The soldier's ax has levelled with the ground,
And to the sun exposed its darksome bowers:
The distant villages, and blue-topt hills,
The far-stretch'd meads appear, and meet mine eyes,
That erst were intercepted by the grove.

MYCON. How is the wonted face of all things changed!
Those trees, by whose aspiring tops we knew
The sun's ascent at noon, unerring mark,
No more are seen to tell the coming hour.
How naked does the winding rill appear,
Whose banks its pendant umbrage deep-imbrown'd,
And far-invested with its arborous roof,
As by its side it rolled its secret streams!
How often, alas! those shadowy banks along
(Close solitude!) my Rosalind and I
Have walked in converse sweet, and linked in love!
But tell me, dear Philanthes, are the fields,
Which late you left, like ours by war oppressed,
Alike in tumult and confusion wrapped?

PHILANTHES. Mycon, I Will tell thee wonders past belief.
It happ'd one morn, when first the dawning sun
Began to cheer the light-enliven'd earth,
Caught with so bright a scene, I sought the fields
Before my wonted hour, and roving wide
Among the vales, the villages and woods,
Wherever my fancy led, or pleasure called,
I chanced upon a neighboring hill to stray,
To view the glittering prospect from its top
Of the broad Rhine, that rolled his waves beneath,
Amid the level of extended meads;
When It m^^ be supposed that in these lines the shepherd is giving an account
of Prince Charles's passing the Rhine.
lo! ere yet I gained its lofty brow,
The sound of dashing floods, and dashing arms,
And neighing steeds, confusive struck mine ear.
Studious to know what tumult was at hand,
With step adventurous I advanced, and gained
With timorous care and cautious ken its top.
Sudden a burst of brightness smote my sight,
From arms, and all the imblazonrie of war
Reflected far, while steeds, and men, and arms
Seemed floating wide, and stretched in vast array
Over the broad bosom of the big-swoln flood,
That dashing rolled its beamy waves between.
The banks promiscuous ^^^^m'd with thronging troops:
These on the flood embarking, those appeared
Crowding the adverse shore, already past.
All was confusion, all tumultuous (...).
I trembled as I looked, though far above,
And in one blaze their arms were blended bright
With the broad stream, while all the glistening scene
The morn illum'd, and in one splendour clad.
Struck at the sight, I lest with headlong haste
The steep-brow'd hill, and over the extended vales,
The wood-girt lawns I ran, nor slack'd my pace,
Till at my flock thick-panting I arrived,
And drove far off, beneath a deep-arch'd cave.
But come, my friend, inform me in return,
Since this my absence what has here fell out.

MYCON. Do thou remember at the river side
That solitary convent, all behind
Hid by the covert of a mantling wood? --
One night, when all was wrapped in darkness deep,
An armed troop, on rage and rapine bent,
Poured over the fields and ravaged all they met;
Nor did that sacred pile escape their arms,
Whose walls the murderous band to ruin swept,
And filled its caverns deep with armed throngs
Greedy of spoil, and snatched their treasures old
From their dark seats: the shrieking sisters fled
Dispersed and naked through the fields and woods,
While sable night concealed their wandering steps.
Part in my moss grown cottage shelter sought,
Which happily escaped their rage, in secret glade
Immersed deep. -- I rose at early morn,
With fearful heart to view the ruined dome,
Where all was desolation, all appeared
The seat of horror, and devouring war.
The deep recesses, and the gloomy nooks,
The vaulted isles, and shrines of imag'd saints,
The caverns worn by holy knees appeared,
And to the sun were opened. -- In musing thought
I said, as on the pile I bent my brow --
" This seat to future ages will appear,
" Like that which stands fast by the piny rock;
" These silent walls with ivy shall be hung,
" And distant times shall view the sacred pile,
" Unknowing how it fell, with pious awe!
" The pilgrim here shall visit, and the swain
" Returning from the field at twilight gray,
" Shall shun to pass this way, subdued by fear,
" And slant his course across the adverse vale!"

PHILANTHES. Mycon, thou see that cow, which stands in cool
Amid yon rushy lake, beneath the shade
Of willow green, and ruminates at ease
The watery herbage that around her floats.
That way my business leads. I go to greet
My father, and my wonted cottage dear.

MYCON. Come, let us go: my path is that way too.
Come, my Philanthes, and may piteous heaven
Indulge more happy days, and calm our griefs!
Alas! I thought some trouble was at hand,
And long before presaged the coming storm,
Even when the lightning one disastrous night
Blasted the hoary oak, whose ample boughs
Imbower my cottage; and as on the grass
At noon I slept, a serpent's sudden hiss
Broke my sweet rest! -- But come, let us be gone,
The sun begins to welk in ruddy west.

ECLOGUE V.
CORIN AND CALISTAN. CORIN. WHICH way, Calistan, whither do thou lead
That lamb, whom yet his mother scarce has weaned?

CALISTAN. His mother, Corin, as she wandering fed,
With this tender youngling by her side,
Fell by a shot which from the battle came,
That in the neighboring fields so lately raged.

CORIN. Alas! What woes that fatal day involved
Our suffering village, and the fields around!
But come, Calistan, on this rising bank,
Come, let us sit, and on the danger past
Converse secure, and number all our griefs.
See how the flaunting woodbine shades the bank,
And weaves a mantling canopy above!

CALISTAN. Corin, that day I chanced at earlier hour
To rise, and drove far-off my flock unpent;
To wash them in a spring that late I marked.
There the first motions of the deathful day
I heard, as listening to the trickling wave
I stood attentive: when like rising storms,
Hoarse, hollow murmurs from asar I heard,
And undistinguished sounds of distant din.
Alarmed I stood, unknowing whence it came;
And from the fount my flock unwash'd I drove
Suspecting danger: when as nearer yet,
I came advancing, all was tumult loud,
All was tempestuous din on every side,
And all around the roar of war was up,
From rock to rock retost, from wood to wood.
Not half so loud the tumbling cataract
Is heard to roar, that from the pine-clad cliff
Precipitates its waves; whose distant sounds
I often have listened, as at twilight gray
I pent my flocks within their wattled cotes.

CORIN. For three revolving days, nor voice of bird
Melodious chaunting, or the bleat of sheep,
Or lowing oxen, near the fatal place
Were heard to sound; but all was silence sad!
The ancient grove of elms deserted stood,
Where long had dwelt an aged race of rooks,
That with their nests had crowded every branch,
We often have heard them at the dusk of eve
In troops returning to their well known home,
In mingled clamours sounding from on high!

CALISTAN. Corin, thou know the fir-invested cave,
Where late we sheltered from a gathering storm,
Our flocks together driven: beneath its shade
I had appointed at sweet even-tide
To meet my Delia homeward as she passed,
Bearing her milking-pail^: Alas! the thoughts
Of that sweet congress, the preceding night
Softened my dreams, and all my senses lulled,
And with more joyful heart at morn I rose.
But ah! that tumult cropped my blooming hopes,
And in confusion wrapped my love and me.

CORIN. That day, nor in the fold my flock I pent,
Or walked at eve the vales, or on the turf
Beneath the wonted oak my dinner took,
Or slept at noon amid my languid sheep,
Reposed at ease on the green meadow's bed.
When sable night came on, for not even yet
The tumult had subsided into peace,
Even then low sounds, and interrupted bursts
Of war we heard, and cries of dying men,
And a confused hum of the ceasing storm.
All night close-shrouded in a forest thick
Wakeful I sat, my flock around me laid;
And of neglected boughs I kindled up
A scanty flame, whose darkly-gleaming blaze
Among the enlightened trees formed hideous shapes,
And specter pale, to my distempered mind.
How often I looked behind with cautious fear,
And trembled at each motion of the wind! --
But where did you, Calistan, shelter seek?
What dark retreat concealed your wandering steps?

CALISTAN. Corin, thou know the fur-clad Hermit's cell,
Deep-arch'd beneath a rock among the wilds;
Thither I bent my flight, a welcome guest,
And not unknown; for when my flock I fed
Of late beneath the neighboring pastures green,
I often was wont, invited at his call,
At noon beneath his cavern to retire
From the sun's heat, where all the passing hours
The good old man improved with converse high,
And in my breast enkindled Virtue's love;
Nor seldom would his hospitable hand
Afford a short repast of berries cool,
Which over the wilds (his scanty food) he plucked:
Here was my refuge. -- All the live-long night
Pensive by one pale lonesome lamp we sat,
And listened to the bleak winds whistling loud,
And the shrill crash of forests from without.
Soon as the morning dawned, the craggy height
Of the steep rock I climbed, on whose wild top
His rustic temple stood, and moss-grown cross
(The sacred object of his pious prayers)
Formed of a tall fir's thunder-blasted trunk:
Where all beneath the expansive plains I saw
With white pavilions hid, in deep array.
There too my little fold, which late I left
Standing at eve, amid the warlike scene
With tearful eyes affrighted, I beheld.
Alas, how changed the scene! when there I pitched
Those hurdled cotes, the night was calm and mild,
And all was peaceful. I remember well,
While there within that fold my flock I pent;
How blythe I heard my beauteous Delia sing!
Her distant echoing voice how sweetly rung,
And all my ravished senses wrapped in bliss!

CORIN. Have thou not seen the fatal plain of death,
Where raged the conflict? There, they say, at eve
Grim ghosts are seen of men that there were slain,
Pointing their wounds, and shrieking to their mates,
Still doomed to haunt the fields on which they fell.

CALISTAN. Corin, no more. This lamb demands my speed.
See how the youngling hangs his sickly head,
Tender, and fainting for his wonted food!
I haste to place him in my sheltering cot,
Fed from my hand, and cherished by my care. --
And see, my friend, far off in darkened west
A cloud comes on, and threatens sudden rains:
Corin, farewell, the storm begins to lower.

ON THE PEACE OF AIX LA CHAPELLE, MDCCXLVIII.
BY MR. HURD.
BE still my fears, suggest no false alarms;
The Poet's rapture and the lyric fire
Are vain: enough that inclination warms;
No foreign influence needs the willing Muse inspire.
The willing Muse, adventurous in her flight,
To thee, loved Peace, shall raise the untaught strain;
Her thy fair triumphs and thy arts delight,
Thy festive branch she bears and joins thy social train.
High on some wave worn cliff she views serene,
Safe on the deep, the freighted navies ride;
Old Ocean joys to see the peaceful scene,
And bids his billows roll with an exulting tide.
Or, where Augusta's turrets cleave the skies,
She loves to mix with Art's inventive band,
Sees Industry in forms unnumber'd rise,
To scatter blessings wide, and civilize the land;
Or flies, with transport, to her native plain,
Sees corn-clad fields, fresh lawns, and pastures fair,
Sees Plenty vindicate her ancient reign,
And pour forth all her charms to crown the various year.
But chief the Muse to Academic groves
Her kindred train and best-lov'd arts invite;
Through Cam's o'ershadowing bowers intranc'd she roves,
Whence sacred Science streams, and Genius spreads his light.
" Here will I rest, she cried; my laurel here
" Eternal blooms; here hangs my golden lyre,
" Which erst my Spenser tuned to shepherd's ear,
" And lostiest Milton smote with genuine epic fire.
" And O! if aught my fond presages show,
" On these loved bowers while Peace her influence sheds,
" Some hand again shall snatch it from the bough,
" Wake each high-sounding string, and charm the echoing glades.
" Then shall be sung the glorious deeds of war,
" How Virtue strove, where envious Fortune failed:
" Expecting Fame the conflict viewed from far,
" And Britain's valor crowned, though Gallia's host prevailed.
" Yet then, even then [th' indignant verse shall tell]
" A surer vengeance rose to whelm the foe;
" When hell-born Faction issued from her cell,
" And on her impious head drew half the destined blow.
" But, hark! the loud triumphant strains declare,
" How Britain's majesty unrivaled rose,
" When all the glories of the naval war
" Beamed round her conquering flag, and circled Anson's brows."
Till thus the Power by Freedom's sons obeyed:
" Let blood-stained glory swell the tyrant's breast;
" Be mine Compassion's healing wing to spread,
" To sheath the wasting sword, and give the nations rest:
" Then (as the Muse inraptur'd shall display)
" War's impious roar, and Faction's murmurs cease;
" His gracious eye sheds luster on the day,
" And lends the quickening beam to cheer the arts of Peace."
LAURA: OR, THE COMPLAINT. AN ELEGY.
BY JAMES MARRIOTT, L. L. D.
YE groves, with venerable moss arrayed,
That over yon caverns stretch your pendent shade,
Where sacred Silence lulls the rural vale,
And Love in whispers tells his tender tale,
Ye lonely rocks, ye streams that ever flow,
Still as my tears, and constant as my woe,
To you behold the wretched Laura flies,
And haunts those seats from whence her sorrows rise;
Where, lost to love, how often has she strayed?
When the fond lover led his blushing maid,
When his soft lips, too eloquent his art,
Poured the warm wish, and breathed out all his heart.
Ah once loved seats, your pleasing scenes are over,
Nor you can charm, since he can love no more;
Though smile your lawns with vernal glories crowned,
In vain gay Nature paints the enameled ground;
While through your solitary paths I rove,
A prey to grief, to sickness, and to love.
Though gentle Zephyrs fan the bending bowers,
Though breathes the incense of your opening flowers,
Nor opening flowers, nor gentle Zephyrs charm,
Nor beauteous scenes a grief like mine disarm;
Fade every flower, and languish every sense,
Ye have no sweets for fallen innocence.
Torn by remorse, sad victim of Despair,
Where shall I turn? or where address my prayer?
Far as the morn its early beam displays,
Or where the star of evening darts its rays;
Far as wide earth is stretched, or oceans roll,
Where blow the winds, or heaven invests the pole,
In vain my fluttering soul would wing its way;
Stern Care pursues, wherever the wretched stray.
Sost God of Sleep, whose ever-peaceful reign
Lulls earth, and heaven, and all the extended main,
Powerful to give the laboring heart to rest,
To wipe the tear, and heal the wounded breast,
Say, by what crime offended, slies from me,
Invoked, thy unpropitious Deity?
Or dooms, on racks of wildest Fancy torn,
In dreams my agonizing soul to mourn?
Why am I often on angry billows tossed,
Now in some wide and dreary desert lost?
Why yet in life infernal tortures feel,
Bound by fierce demons to some rapid wheel?
Now seem to climb, while hills on hills arife,
In vain: or fall in tempests from the skies,
Tread burning plains, or swim in seas of fire,
Just reach the shore, then see the shore retire?
As often, dear youth! thy pleasing form appears;
I stretch my arms, and wake dissolved in tears;
Yet waking Fancy all that loss supplies,
And still I view thee with a lover's eyes;
Entranced, in thought, over all thy charms I gaze,
See thy bright eyes diffuse their softest rays,
Hang on thy hand, and on thy breast reclined,
Play with thy locks that waver with the wind,
Joy in thy joy, or in thy sorrows join,
And on thy lips my spirit mix with thine.
Now over dark wilds, or rugged rocks we stray,
Love lights the gloom, and smooths the dreary way;
Now on soft banks our weary limbs repose,
Where every flower of vernal beauty glows;
But light as air each pleasing vision flew,
Swift as the fun dispels the morning dew;
While with the day returns the sense of woe,
We wake more wretched when the cheat we know.
Imagination! mistress of the soul,
What powers unseen the active mind control?
And fill the waking thought, or busy sleep?
When not a breeze disturbs the tranquil deep,
Nor lofty pines through all the forest move,
Why stir the motions of resistless love?
Urged by the golden morn, the night recedes,
And year to year in changeful course succeeds;
Nor night, nor morn, nor years to me restore
The peace which Laura's heart possessed before;
Involved in clouds one darksome scene I view;
Bleed the same wounds, and all my pains renew.
O boast of Laura's long-forgotten praise!
Past are the triumphs of my happier days,
When placed supreme on Beauty's radiant throne,
I saw with conscious pride each heart my own;
Wherever I turned, a thousand nymphs admired;
Whenever I smiled, a thousand swains expired:
I spoke, 'twas music dwelt upon my tongue;
I moved a goddess, and an angel sung.
My careless steps in joys were taught to rove;
Each voice was flattery, and each look was love;
But Beauty's power, too mighty long to last,
Fled on the wings of rapid Time is past.
As some proud vessel to the prosperous gale
Her streamer waves, and spreads the silken sail,
While silver oars to flutes soft breathing sweep
With measured strokes the scarcely heaving deep,
But soon tempestuous clouds the scene deform,
And the loud surge remurmurs to the storm;
Thus big with hope, from dark suspicion free,
I sailed with transport on Life's summer sea;
The gay attendants of my happy state,
The Smiles, the Graces round were seen to wait,
And all the moments, as they swiftly flew,
Shower'd down soft joys, and pleasures ever new.
How changed this fleeting image of a day?
How sets in awful gloom the evening ray?
While, fixed on earth her eye in sad suspense,
Pours the deep sigh incessant Penitence.
If youthful charms decay with age or pain,
Beauty, thy crowded worshippers how vain!
Why then such crowds of incense round ascend?
Why prostrate monarchs at thy altars bend?
Why earth's and ocean's mighty bounds explore
At once to win thee, and increase thy power?
Let sad example Reason's dictates aid;
Here see what ruin Grief and Love have made;
Even Love, who lives by Beauty's smiles carest,
Basks in her eyes, and wantons on her breast,
With cruel force the fatal shaft employs,
And soonest what he most adores destroys.
How cold I feel Life's idle current flow,
Where once the dancing spirits loved to glow!
No more these eyes with youthful rapture shine,
Nor cheeks soft blushing speak a warmth divine;
Graceful no more amid the festive dance
My steps with easy dignity advance,
And all the glossy locks, whose ringlets spread,
Over my fair neck, the honors of my head,
Cease the neat labors of my hand to know;
Ill suits the care of elegance with woe!
Why did not Nature, when she gave to charm,
With unrelenting pride my bosom arm?
Why was my soul its tender pity taught,
Each soft affection, and each generous thought?
Hence spring my sorrows, hence with sighs I prove
How feeble woman, and how fierce is love.
In unavailing streams my tears are shed;
Sad Laura's bliss is with Lorenzo fled.
For thee, false youth, was every joy resigned,
Young health, sweet peace, and innocence of mind;
Are these the constant vows thy tongue professed,
When first thy arms my yielding beauties pressed?
Thus did thy kiss dispel my empty fears,
Or winning voice delight my raptured ears;
Thus swore thy lips, by ocean, earth, and sky;
By hell's dread powers, and heaven's all-piercing eye?
Yawns not the grave for thee? Why sleeps the storm
To blast thy limbs, and rend thy perjured form?
Unmoved, O faithless, can thou hear my pain,
Like the proud rocks which brave the unwearied main?
Sooner the ship-wreck'd pilot shall appease
With sighs the howling winds, with tears the seas,
Than Laura's prayers thy heart unfeeling move,
O lost to fame, to honor, and to love.
Nursed in dark caverns on some mountain wild
To cruel manhood grew the daring child,
No female breast supplied thy infant food,
But tigers growling over their savage brood.
Cursed be that fatal hour thy charms were seen,
While yet this mind was guiltless, and serene.
With thee, false man, I urged my hasty flight,
And dared the horrors of tempestuous night,
Nor feared with thee through plains unknown to rove,
Deaf to the dictates of paternal love.
In vain for me a parent's tears were shed,
And to the grave descends his hoary head.
When at my feet entranced my lover lay,
And poured in tender sighs his soul away,
Fond, foolish heart! to think the tale divine;
Why started not my hands when pressed in thine?
Too well Remembrance paints the fatal hour
When Love, great conqueror, summoned all his power;
When bolder grown, your glances flashed with fire,
And your pale lips all trembled with desire;
Back to my heart my blood tumultuous flew,
From every pore distilled the chilling dew,
When Shame presaging spoke each future pain,
And struggling Virtue armed my soul in vain.
But O let silence all my weakness veil,
And burning blushes only tell the tale.
Ah! faithless man! and thou more wretched maid,
To guilt, and grief, and misery betrayed!
Far flies thy lover: to some distant plain
Now cleaves his bounding bark the peaceful main;
Avenging heaven, that heard the vows he swore,
Bid howl the blackening storm, and thunder roar.
'Till waves on waves in tumbling mountains roll,
Now sink to hell, and now ascend the pole;
Then on some plank over foaming billows borne,
Trembling, his perjured faith the wretch shall mourn,
But mourn in vain: his vigorous arm shall fail,
Guilt sink him down, and angry heaven prevail;
No friendly hand to earth his limbs convey,
But dogs and vultures tear the bloated prey.
Yet, ah! fond heart! avert, kind heaven, the stroke,
My heart denies what trembling lips have spoke.
The varying accents real nature prove,
And only show how wild a thing is love.
Go, much loved youth, with every blessing crowned,
And Laura's wishes ever guard thee round.
Me to the silent shades and sad retreat,
Where love's expiring flames forget their heat,
Death wooes all-powerful: ere he parts the clew,
Once more thy Laura bids her love adieu:
Bids health and affluence every bliss afford,
Bids thee be loved, be happy, and adored;
In ease, in mirth, glide each glad hour away;
No pain to spot thy Fortune's cloudless day;
Nor sigh to swell, no tear to flow for me:
O grant, heaven, all; but grant thee constancy.
Yet from my hand this last address receive,
This last address is all that hand can give.
In vain thy bark with spreading canvas flies,
If these sad lines shall meet thy conscious eyes,
And, taught with winning eloquence to move,
The winds and waters waft the voice of love;
That voice, O grant what dying lips implore,
Asks but one tear from thee; and asks no more.
Then world, farewell; farewell life's fond desires,
False flattering hopes, and love's tormenting fires.
Already, Death, before my closing eyes
Thy airy forms and glimmering shades arise.
Hark! hear I not for me yon' passing bell
Toll forth, with frequent pause, its sullen knell?
Waits not for me yon' sexton on his spade,
Blythe whistling over the grave his toil has made?
Say, why in lengthened pomp yon' sable train,
With measured steps, slow, stalk along the plain?
Say, why yon' hearse with fading flowers is crowned,
And midnight gales the deep-mouthed dirge resound?
Hail, sister worms, and thou my kindred dust,
Secure to you my weary limbs I trust.
Dim burns life's lamp; O Death, thy work complete,
And give my soul to gain her last retreat.
Such as before the birth of Nature swayed,
Ere springing light the first great word obeyed,
Let silence reign -- come, Fate, exert thy might;
And darkness wrap me in eternal night.
RINALDO AND ARMIDA.
TO A LADY SINGING.
BY THE SAME.
THE goldfinch swells his little throat,
And loudly pours his rural note;
High poised above his nest in air,
The shrill lark chaunts his matins clear;
At evening brown, in woodland dale
Soft gurgling trills her amorous tale
The solitary nightingale;
But what avails, ye feathered throng
Of warblers wild, your feeble song?
Our varying passions can ye move
With warmer hope, or fonder love?
Or run your notes the enchanting round
Through all the labyrinths of sound?
As breathes some soft angelic strain,
When Midnight spreads her solemn reign,
Entranced the lonely hermit lies,
And tastes ideal paradise,
When at Armida's feet he lay,
So sighed Rinaldo's soul away;
His tongue in mute attention bound,
His ear in rapture drank the sound,
While magic numbers lulled the sense,
And held swift thought in sweet suspense.
The mimic voice repeat the gales
That sigh along the flowery vales;
The flowery vales, the falling floods,
The rising rocks, and waving woods
To the sighing gales reply,
Redoubling all the harmony.
The Zephyrs, ever mild and fair,
Who lightly fan the vernal air,
Learn from Armida's voice the strain,
And whispering tell it to the main.
Whenever, the foaming billows flowing,
The wintry storms are fiercely blowing,
When sable clouds invade the pole,
And lightnings dart, and thunders roll,
The enchantress can the rage appease,
And clear the skies, and smooth the seas.
When hurried to the infernal coast,
His beauteous bride the Thracian lost,
Sure, hapless youth! so sweet a spell
Once more had charmed the powers of hell;
Or if such had been the song
Which warbled erst the siren throng,
For councils sage the chief renowned
His warrior limbs had vainly bound;
His eyes by love entranced, no more
Had seen with joy their native shore;
The cords had loosed; the magic tale
Had stayed his oars, and furled his sail.
SACRED ODE.
BY THE SAME.
HARK! through yon' fretted vaults and lofty spires
Peal the deep organs to the sacred quires;
And now, the full, the loud hosannas rise,
Float in the winds, and roll along the skies:
The solemn sounds Devotion's ardour raise;
Now mounts the spirit with diviner blaze:
Heaven opens: earth recedes: and Nature feels
The ray that fired the prophet's glowing wheels:
In fiery pomp bright seraphs quit the sky,
And wrap the soul in holy ecstasy;
While round the sapphire throne the ethereal train
Adoring prostrate raise the lofty strain:
I.
Arise, O Lord, arise;
In all thy awful glory stand confessed;
In thee for ever blessed,
Behold thy servants veil their dazzled eyes.
Night has for thee no shades;
Alike to thee appears the orient day;
While one vast light, one inexhausted ray
Of thy effulgent power the whole pervades.
Then whither shall we stray,
Where of thy forming hand no trace is found?
Above, beneath, around,
The mighty voice is heard;
Wherever the hills are reared,
Where spreads the vaulted sky,
Or foams the deep profound;
Through Nature's utmost bound
To us her works reply,
Proclaim a parent God, a present Deity.
II.
Creation's praise is least;
Nature's Restorer, to preserve is thine;
Whose awful voice divine
Created all: when Discord heard, and ceased;
For it is thine to bind
The moral chain of Order's perfect law,
And to their course the swerving motions draw
Of changeful things, and erring human kind.
Death with insatiate jaw
Gnash'd often his iron phang, and by his side
Stalking with ample stride
Vice reared his giant size
Up-towering to the skies.
The mourning earth was waste;
Confusion rolled her tide;
When down the Virtues glide;
Soft Mercies urged their haste,
And over the bleeding world the sacred mantle cast.
III.
Beyond created sense
Mysterious goodness, hid in deepest night!
In vain our feeble sight
Would pierce the gloom, O mighty Providence.
Where the deep mazes meet
Beneath thy awful throne no eye has seen,
Where wrapped in darkness sits thy power serene,
And the loud thunders roll beneath thy feet.
O, when shall close the scene?
And Hope be lost in Truth's wide bursting ray?
O haste, auspicious day.
O haste to light on earth
Great Nature's second birth;
New inmate of the skies,
When man renewed shall shine
With innocence divine;
And blessed Obedience rise
To snatch the palm that crowns her faithful victories.
INSCRIPTION UPON A HERMITAGE.
BY THE SAME.
BENEATH this rural cell
Sweet-smiling Peace and calm Content
Far from the busy crowd sequestered dwell.
Mortal, approaching near,
The hallowed seat revere,
Nor bring the loud tumultuous Passions here;
For not for these is meant
The sacred silence of the stream,
Nor cave prophetic prompting Fancy's dream;
If, with presumption rude,
Thy daring steps intrude,
Know, that with jealous eye
Peace and Content will fly;
The thoughtful Genius of the lone abode,
And Guardian Spirit of this solemn wood,
Will sure revenge the sacrilegious wrong;
Reflection's tear will then in secret flow,
And all the haunted solitude belong
To Melancholy's train,
Who point the sting of pain
With keen remorse, and often redoubled woe.
CANZONETTA.
BY THE SAME.
SOFT slept the sea within its silver bed.
To the scarce breathing gale
The silken sail
With venturous hands I spread,
And saw the rocks, and passed; yet felt no fear;
All danger distant seemed, which was alas! too near.
Love, calm deceiver, seated by my side,
His secret fraud enjoyed,
Too ost employed
In sport my bark to guide.
We reached the port: the little pilot smiled.
Can Love deceive! I said: and kissed the laughing child.
He clapped his wings, and lightly through the air
Flew from my longing eyes.
The storms arise,
And back my vessel bear.
Secure what port can hapless lovers meet:
We blame the winds and seas, yet clasp the dear deceit.
THE LOVER AND THE FRIEND.
ENDUED with all that could adorn
Or bless thee, first and fairest born!
A soul! that looks superior down,
Let giddy Fortune smile or frown;
With Age's wisdom, not her years,
Stella, all excellence appears;
Then, who can blame me if I blend
The name of Lover with the Friend.
Like Noah's dove, my busy breast
Has roved to find a place of rest!
Some faithful bosom, to repose,
And hush the family of woes.
Then, do I dream? or have I found
The fair and hospitable ground?
Ah! quit your sex's rules, and lend
A Lover's wishes to the Friend.
Absence I tried, -- but tried in vain!
It heals not, but upbraids my pain;
For thee! I Would bear the reaper's toil;
For thee! consume the midnight oil;
Then, to your judgment would I owe
All that I read, and write, and know.
Can those who wish like me, pretend
To part the Lover and the Friend?
Come, then, and let us dare to prove
Disinterested sweets of Love;
For generous Love no dwelling finds
In poor and mercenary minds:
Laugh at Life's idle fiuttering things;
Look down with pity upon kings;
Careless! who like, or discommend,
Blessed in the Lover and the Friend!
Oh! come, and we'll together haste
Over Life's uncomfortable waste:
Bear the sharp thorn, to find the rose,
And smile at transitory woes:
Keep the bright goal of Hope in view,
Nor look behind, as others do;
'Till death, and only death shall end
At once the Lover and the Friend.
THE ENTHUSIAST: AN ODE.
BY WM. WHITEHEAD, ESQUIRE.
ONCE, I remember well the day,
'Twas ere the blooming sweets of May
Had lost their freshest hues,
When every flower on every hill,
In every vale, had drank its fill
Of sunshine, and of dews.
In short, 'twas that sweet season's prime
When Spring gives up the reins of Time
To Summer's glowing hand,
And doubting mortals hardly know,
By whose command the breezes blow
Which fan the smiling land.
'Twas then, beside a green-wood shade,
Which clothed a lawn's aspiring head
I urged my devious way,
With loitering steps regardless where,
So soft, so genial was the air,
So wondrous bright the day.
And now my eyes with transport rove
Over all the blue expanse above,
Unbroken by a cloud!
And now beneath delighted pass,
Where winding through the deep-green grass
A full-brim'd river flowed.
I stop, I gaze; in accents rude,
To thee, serenest Solitude,
Burst forth the unbidden lay;
" Begone, vile world, the learned, the wise,
The great, the busy I despise,
And pity even the gay.
These, these are joys alone, I cry;
It Is here, divine Philosophy,
Thou deign'st to fix thy throne!
Here Contemplation points the road
Through Nature's charms to Nature's God!
These, these are joys alone!
Adieu, ye vain low-thoughted cares,
Ye human hopes, and human fears,
Ye pleasures and ye pains!"
While thus I spoke, over all my soul
A philosophic calmness stole,
A stoic stillness reigns.
The tyrant passions all subside,
Fear, anger, pity, shame and pride
No more my bosom move;
Yet still I felt, or seemed to feel
A kind of visionary zeal
Of universal love.
When lo! a voice, a voice I hear!
'Twas Reason whispered in my ear
These monitory strains:
What mean thou, man? would thou unbind
The ties which constitute thy kind,
The pleasures and the pains?
The same Almighty Power unseen,
Who spreads the gay or solemn scene
To Contemplation's eye,
Fixed every movement of the soul,
Taught every wish its destined goal,
And quickened every joy.
He bids the tyrant passions rage,
He bids them war eternal wage,
And combat each his foe:
Till from dissensions concords rise;
And beauties from deformities,
And happiness from woe.
Art thou not man, and dare thou find
A bliss which leans not to mankind?
Presumptuous thought and vain!
Each bliss unshar'd is unenjoy'd,
Each power is weak unless employed
Some social good to gain.
Shall light and shade, and warmth and air,
With those exalted joys compare,
Which active Virtue feels!
When on she drags, as lawful prize,
Contempt, and Indolence, and Vice,
At her triumphant wheels.
As rest to labor still succeeds
To man, whilst Virtue's glorious deeds
Employ his toilsome day;
This fair variety of things,
Are merely Life's refreshing springs,
To sooth him on his way.
Enthusiast go, unstring thy lyre,
In vain thou sing'st, if none admire,
How sweet soever the strain.
And is not thy overflowing mind,
Unless thou mixest with thy kind,
Benevolent in vain?
Enthusiast go, try every sense,
If not thy bliss, thy excellence,
Thou yet have learned to scan;
At least thy wants, thy weakness know,
And see them all uniting show,
That man was made for man."
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.
ORIENTAL Eclogues. By Mr. Collins. Eclogue I. Selim, or the Shepherd's Moral.
Page 1 Eclogue II. Hassan, or the Camel-driver. 2 Eclogue III. Abra, or the
Georgian Sultana. 8 Eclogue IV. Agib and Secander, or the Fugitives. 11
Ode on the Death of Mr. James Thomson. By the same. 15 Ode to Pity. By the
same. 17 Ode to Simplicity. By the same. 19 Ode to Peace. By the same. 22 Ode
to Mercy. By the same. 23 Ode to Liberty. By the same. 24 Ode to Fear. By the
same. 31 Ode on the Poetical Character. By the same. 34 The Manners, an Ode. By
the same. 38 The Passions, an Ode. By the same. 41 Written on a Paper which
contained a Piece of Bride-Cake. By Mr. Collins. Page 46 London, or the
Progress of Commerce. By Mr. Glover. 48 Modern Virtue, a Satire. 72 A Monody to
the Memory of Mrs. Woffington. By Mr. Hoole. 85 Spring, a Pastoral Ballad. By
Mr. Brerewood. 94 Summer. By the same. 97 Autumn. By the same. 99 Winter. By
the same. 102 The Cure of Saul, a sacred Ode. By Dr. Brown. 104 An Inscription
at a favorite Retirement, in May, 1758. 115 An Elegy written among the Ruins
of an Abbey. By Mr. Jerningham. 117 Il Latte, an Elegy. By the same. 123 The
Transformation of Lycon and Euphormius. By William Melcomb, Esquire. 128 A Tale. By
the same. 135 Epistle to Sappho. By the same. 137 Verses written in London at
the Approach of Spring. 139 Woodstock, an Elegy, written in the Year 1759. 151
Ode on the Rebellion in the Year 1745. By Dr. Schomberg. 164 Heaven, a Poem. By
the Rev. Mr. Scott. 177 Ode on Sleep. By the same. 189 Ode on Pleasure. By the
same. 193 Ode on Despair. By the same. 198 Ode to the Muse. By the same. Page
203 The Wish, an Elegy to Urania. By Dr. Blacklock. 207 An Hymn to Fortitude.
By the same. 211 Ode against Ill Nature. By C. Smart, M.A. 219 Ode on St.
Cecilia's Day. By the same. 222 The Seasons, in Imitation of Spenser. By Moses
Mendez, Esquire. Spring. 230 Summer. 233 Autumn. 237 Winter. 240
Ode to Liberty. By Doctor Jos. Warton. 243 Ode to Health, written on a
Recovery from the Small Pox. By the same. 246 Ode to Superstition. By the same.
248 Ode to a Gentleman upon his Travels through Italy. By the same. 250 Ode
against Despair. By the same. 253 Ode to the Nightingale. By the same. 255 Ode
to a Lady who hates the Country. By the same. 256 Ode to Solitude. By the same.
258 Holkham, a Poem. By Mr. Potter. 259 The Poor Man's Prayer, written in 1766,
addressed to the Earl of Chatham. By --. 267 Five Pastoral Eclogues. Eclogue I.
272 Eclogue II. 277 Eclogue III. 281 Eclogue IV. Page 285 Eclogue V. 290
On the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1748. By Mr. Hurd. 295 Laura, or the
Complaint, an Elegy. By Dr. Marriot. 298 Rinaldo and Armida, to a Lady singing.
By the same. 307 Sacred Ode. By the same. 309 Inscription upon an Hermitage. By
the same. 312 Cansonetta. By the same. 313 The Lover and the Friend. By -- 314
The Enthusiast, an Ode. By William Whitehead, Esquire. 316

