AN ESSAY Concerning the Growth of Empiricism; Or the Encouragement of Quacks.

WHEREIN The Present State of Physic in this Kingdom is fairly represented;
with some Reasons for the Necessity of a Regulation in the Practice of it.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Queen's Majesty, and the Parliament
of Great Britain.

By FRAN. GUYBON, M. D.

(...).

Hippocr. Lex. -- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Ov. Met. LONDON: Printed for R. Parker, at the Unicorn under the Royal
Exchange; and sold by J. Morphew, near Stationers Hall. 1712. Price 1 s.

THE PREFACE.
THE Design of the following Essay is briefly and plainly to represent the
present State of Physic in this Kingdom; and to demonstrate the Necessity of a
Regulation in the Practice of it. And as I Am fully persuaded such a Regulation
in Physic would tend both to the Honor of the Nation in general, and the Good
of her Majesty's Subjects in particular; so there seems no need of making any
manner of Apology for engaging in so very laudable an Attempt. I can, for my
own Part sincerely declare to those whose Chance it may be to have this Essay
fall into their Hands, that the Design of it is entirely honest, having
assuredly no other View than that of doing Service to the aggrieved, which is
the far greatest Part of the Kingdom. No private Consideration of what Nature
soever could have moved me thus to expose my self to the Censures of the World;
especially in an Affair for the Intermeddling with which, it is to be feared I
may expect more Reproaches than Thanks. For though I have often had it in my
Thoughts, that a Man could not do a better Piece of Service to the Public,
than to demonstrate the Necessity of such a Regulation in Physic; yet the
Consideration of what a vast Number of Enemies he must consequently raise to
himself, did for some time, I must confess, deter me from the Attempt. I was
very sensible, what a Multitude of People there are, who not only subsist but
enrich themselves by those very Methods which I had undertaken to condemn; and
therefore very well knew, that right or wrong I should not fail to meet with a
Legion of Opponents. But the Love of Truth, and a hearty Desire of contributing
somewhat to the common Good of Mankind, did at last outweigh and prevail with
me above all other Considerations.

If then the following Essay may but in some Measure contribute to the Removal
of those pernicious Encroachments, which have been unhappily made upon the
Province of Physic, I shall have gained my End, and shall despise any little
Censures or Reflections which thereby I may possibly draw upon my self. And though
I am not at present conscious of any valid Objections which can be made against
what I have advanced, yet do promise, whatever they be, if fairly and heartily
proposed, I Will endeavor to answer them in the same Manner. For to conclude, I
have given the Title of an ESSAY to the following Sheets, because I have only
touched upon, and not exhausted the Subject.

The CONTENTS.
INtroduction Page 1 Definition of a Quack or Empirick p. 3 Praerequisita to
the Medical Art demonstrated in general p. 4 Particular Enumeration of them p.
6 Necessity of Understanding I. The Learned Languages Ibid. II. Natural
Philosophy p. 8 III. The Animal Economy p. 11 IV. Pharmacology p. 14 V.
Nosology p. 20
Conclusions from the Enumeration of the Praerequisita p. 25 I. Experience will
not make a Physician p. 26 II. Difficulty of being qualified for the Practice
of Physic p. 33 III. Quacks, how unqualified for the Profession of Physic p.
35 IV. Greatest Part of the Practitioners in Physic Quacks p. 41 V.
Apothecaries can no more be said to be qualified than other Mechanical
Tradesmen p. 43
Further Reasons for the Necessity of a Regulation in the Practice of Physic
p. 52 I. From the Good of the Public in general Ibid. Better trusting Nature
than a Quack p. 54 II. The Universities in particular p. 57 III. The Art of
Physic it self p. 60 IV. The Regular Professors of the Art p. 66
Some Objections Answered p. 73 Several Excuses invalidated p. 75 Conclusion p.
80
AN ESSAY Concerning the Growth of Empiricism, Or the Encouragement of Quacks.
HEALTH being the greatest of Natural Blessings, it is as needless to say any
thing in its Praise as to enlarge upon the Usefulness of Physic, which
preserves and restores it. But as there is nothing which would more advance the
Usefulness of that Divine Art, (and is therefore of greater Importance to the
Public Good) than a Regulation in the Practice of it; so there is nothing
consequently more recommendable to the Consideration of the Queen and
Parliament than the present State of Physic in this Kingdom. The Encouragement
which Quacks and Empiricks have lately met with, is not only so surprizingly
great, but so vastly detrimental, that in the best of Governments, where Civil
and Religious Properties are so happily secured, there seems nothing more
wanting than some speedy and powerful Expedient to restrain so growing an Evil.

But before I proceed to offer any of my Reasons for the Necessity of a
Regulation in the Practice of Physic, or enter into a Detail of the evil
Consequences (deservedly to be lamented by all who have a just Sense of them)
which attend the Encouragement of Quacks and Empiricks, 'twill not be improper
to give the definition of, or to let the Reader know what I desire may be
understood by the Words. The Word Quack, says the Gazophylacium Anglicanum, is
of a Dutch Original, signifies a frivolous and vain Tatler, and so is
applicable to all Persons of any Profession, who oftentatiously pretend to a
great deal of Skill and Knowledge in Matters which they are really ignorant of,
or do very little understand: And by a Quack or Empirick, I mean any and every
one of those who pretend to practice Physic without Knowledge of the
Praerequisita to that most useful but most difficult Art. There are some, it is
true, who would fain persuade us, that the Medical Art is only to be promoted
by Experiments, or observing what things are hurtful, what beneficial in
Diseases; that the Study of Nature and the Knowledge of the Body are only
trifling Curiosities, and things altogether superfluous. But it is agreed, I am
apt to think, amongst the more intelligent part of Mankind, that there are
several things perfectly and absolutely necessary to be known, before a Man can
reason, and make Judgment either of the Nature of Diseases, or the Use of
Methods and Medicines for the remedying them, and therefore ought to be
understood before he presumes to take the Care of Men's Lives into his hands:
For how can he pretend to cure Diseases, unless he first apprehends what they
are, and in what they consist? How can he rationally prescribe Medicines if he
understands not their Operations? Or how can he expect any manner of Advantage
from them if he does not consider the Relation between the Disease and the
Operation? And how can he be qualified to do any of these things, unless he be
first acquainted with the Nature, Properties and Functions, of a human Body,
the Subject of his Art, and to which they relate? And that this was the Opinion
of the ancient Physicians, is evident from the Variety of Medical Introductions
and Institutions published by them. For it was not in those days thought proper
that the Care of Men's Lives should be entrusted with Persons, till they were
instructed in the Methods of preserving them.

-- Abrotanum aegro
Non audet, nisi qui didicit, dare --
Hor. Epist. But that there are several things absolutely necessary to be known
by Men before they ought to pretend to the Practice of Physic, and which are
what I mean by the Praerequisita to the Medical Art, will more fully appear by
a particular Enumeration of them, viz. the Knowledge of

I. The learned Languages. II. Natural Philosophy. III. The Animal Economy.
IV. Pharmacology. V. Nosology.
I. The first of the Praerequisita then, which I shall mention, is the
Knowledge of the learned Languages: For Physic being the Wisdom which is
heaped up in the various Labors and Observations of the Learned of all Ages,
or the Judgments of many Men wound up, as it were into one Cum unius hominis
vita ad omnium inventionem sufficere nequeat, longi temporis observationes
Historia colligit, ut ejus beneficio tanquam ex multis tot saeculorum hominibus
unus efficiatur eruditissimus. Galen. de subfigur. Empir. Cap. 9.
, 'twill be found necessary in a Physician to be versed in the Writings of the
Ancients as well as the Moderns, and to be well acquainted with their Rules,
Cautions and Remedies, they having laid the first Foundation of the most
excellent Art, by both observing and describing the Nature of Diseases. Most of
the Diagnostick and Prognostic Signs of Diseases are the Result of their
laborious and solid Observations, and will continue to be faithful Guides to
all that can make Use of them, as long as human Bodies and Nature it self
remain. Nothing therefore can be more previously necessary to the Practice of
Physic than an Acquisition of the Greek and Latin Tongues; for as in those
Languages the Art is delivered; so without them the Terms in the English
Translations are not possibly to be understood.

II. The next of the Praerequisita is Natural Philosophy: For as the Art of
Physic is only the Natural Knowledge applied to the Preservation of Health and
Life; so whoever intend to apply themselves to that Art will find it necessary
to consider the Human Body, the Subject of their Art, as a mere Natural
Substance, before they proceed to the Consideration of it as an Animated Being.
For though the Human Body, as an Animated Being, is, strictly speaking, the
immediate Subject of their Care; yet the peculiar Properties of Animated
Substances cannot well be distinguished or understood, unless the common
Affections of Matter be first known, out of which, the Human as well as other
Animated Bodies are composed. And notwithstanding those Particles of Matter,
which are modified into a Human Body, during that State, are enriched with
Properties and Perfections, distinguishing them from all other Beings, yet
there remain in them some Affections common to other animated Beings, and some
promiscuously to be found in all Natural Substances. Whoever, therefore designs
to apply himself to the Art of Physic, ought to comprehend the general
Properties and Affections of Matter; the Origin and transitory Nature of Forms
and Qualities; and how the Parts of a Human Body considered as a Natural
Substance may be moved, before he begins to inform himself (or indeed rightly
can) of the Affections observable in a human Body, as animated or endued with
Life. And this seems to have been the Method by which Novices were heretofore
initiated into that Art, as appears by the Institutes of Galen, Rhases,
Sennertus, Fuchsius, etc. as likewise in that they have blended and interwoven
the Philosophy esteemed in those Ages with that most excellent Art, and have
formed that proverbial Saying,

Ubi definit Physicus, ibi incipit Medicus. But Natural Philosophy is not only
absolutely necessary to form a right Apprehension of the Human Body as a Part
or Portion of Matter, but also to frame a true Idea of Medicines and their
Operations, as will more fully appear under that Head.

III. The next of the Praerequisita is the Knowledge of the Animal Economy, or
the Consideration of the human Body as animated or endued with Life, and that
as well in its natural or healthful, as in its praeternatural or morbid State;
it being altogether necessary to understand the natural State of the Body
before the Nature of a Disease can be rightly comprehended. The Animal Body is
now known to be a pure Machine, and its Actions and Motions demonstrated to be
the necessary Consequences of its Structure. And as the Actions of the Body,
from which Life and Health do flow, are the necessary Consequences of its
Economy; so likewise Diseases and all their Symptoms, are nothing but
Alterations or Disorders in it. It demonstratively therefore follows, that the
greater the Knowledge of the one is, the better the Nature of the other must be
known; and that a Physician ignorant of the Animal Economy is ignorant of the
Structure and Uses of the Machine he undertakes to regulate. The Parts of
Animated Bodies are aptly and usefully divided into Solid and Fluid. Anatomy,
or the Art of Dissecting the solid Parts of Animal Bodies, in order to an exact
Discovery of their Situation, Structure, Uses, etc. as it is absolutely
necessary to the Knowledge of the Animal Economy, so it has ever been justly
esteemed one of the Foundation Pillars of Physic. Nor indeed of less Use is
the Doctrine of the Fluids; under which Head I include a right Apprehension of
the general and particular Properties of the Animal Fluids, and of their
different Motions, Nature, Uses, Offices, etc. There are several other things
also included in the Knowledge of the Animal Economy (and some few of them I
shall just mention) which though not strictly referable to either Branch of the
abovementioned Division of the Parts, are yet equally necessary to be
understood; viz. the different Dependencies the Parts have on, and the
different Relations they bear to each other; the Powers of Motion (both
Voluntary and Involuntary) and Sensation; the general Reason and Nature of
Secretion; the Velocity of the Blood's Circulation, with the Reason of its
Differences at different Distances from the Heart; the Necessity of Breathing
after Birth, with the Force of the Air upon the Blood in that Action, etc. etc.
etc. But an exact Knowledge of the Animal Structure and Economy, will
afterward appear more particularly necessary, as well to explicate the Virtues
and Operation of Medicines, as to ascertain the Diagnosis, and comprehend the
Aetiology of Diseases.

IV. Another of the Praerequisita is Pharmacology; comprehending the Knowledge,
1. Of simple Natural Medicines, whether of the Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral
Kingdom. 2. Of the several Parts of Pharmacy, both Galenical and Chemical. 3.
Of the general Nature, Virtues, and Operation of Medicines. For as a Man cannot
be said to understand an Art, without understanding the Instruments as well as
the Subject of that Art; so the Human Body being the Subject, and Medicines the
Instruments of this Art, the Knowledge of the one must consequently be as
necessary as the Knowledge of the other.

1. By the Knowledge of simple Natural Medicines, I here mean that of the
Substances themselves as well as of their Medicinal Virtues and Efficacies.
'Twould be altogether needless to wast any Time in insisting upon the Necessity
of understanding this part of Pharmacology: For as without knowing the
Substances, a Man in his Practice must wholly confide in, or rely upon the
Gatherers and Venders of Medicines; so indeed the Knowledge of their Virtues
and Efficacies, without knowing the Substances themselves, seems to me, if of
any, of a very dangerous Use.

2. Pharmacy contains the Manner of Preparing and the Method of making such
simple Substances into Medicines, and consists of several Parts, whether
according to the Galenical or Chemical Forms. All the several Parts of
Pharmacy, and of Chemistry in particular, viz. as it teaches the most
Compendious and Efficacious Preparation of Medicines, are, and have been so
often demonstrated to be so absolutely necessary to be understood by all who
design for the Practice of Physic, that as there is nothing in which Men seem
more agreed than in the Necessity of understanding these things; so it would be
but Loss of Time to enlarge any further upon them. I shall therefore conclude
what I have to offer under this Head, with the following Observation; That
since it is so necessarily incumbent upon every one who pretends to the
Practice of Physic, to understand all the Parts of Pharmacy, there can be no
Objection made upon that Account, I mean, against a Physician's preparing his
own Medicines, but either by ignorant or interested Men. But though this
Observation is sufficient to excuse the Physicians for giving their own
Medicines (which indeed is only resuming what their Ancestors either out of
Pride or Laziness left off) yet it does not follow that there is any manner of
Apology to be made for the Apothecaries intruding themselves into the Practice
of Physic, as will more fully afterward appear.

3. Under the third Branch of Pharmacology is comprised the Knowledge of the
general Nature, Virtues and Operation of Medicines. And as Natural Philosophy
was proved to be necessary toward forming a right Notion of the Human Body, so
'twill be found as necessary toward comprehending the general Nature, Virtues
and Operation of Medicines. For Medicines being only natural Substances, only
Parts or Portions of Matter, it is evident, that their Powers and Properties are
not only under the same common Laws and Rules which are observed in the other
Parts of Matter, but are also to be explained in the same Methods; and
therefore Medicines are not only Natural Substances, but they also operate in a
Natural Way, [ i. e. by different Kinds and Degrees of Motion] such Natural
Substances loosing only their Denomination, and not their Natures, by being
termed or applied as Medicines. By a due Apprehension of these things, and
without which it is impossible for a Practitioner in Physic to be really
useful or serviceable in his Generation, Men will know what Effects to expect,
and be prevented from a credulous Expectation of Effects, which can in no wise
proceed from them in a natural Way. Medicines, notwithstanding the Materia
Medica is made up of so vast a Variety of Natural Substances, may, in respect
of their general Virtues or Operation, be comprised under such as produce some
Evacuation, or such as only effect some Alteration in the Body. And not only
Natural Philosophy, but a due Knowledge also of the Animal Economy is
absolutely necessary toward framing a right Notion of these Things: For unless
Men understand the Structure, and comprehend the Uses and Offices of the Parts
of the Body, it is impossible for them to know how, or by what Organs, or in
what Regions, Parts or Juices, Medicines perform their Operations.

V. The fifth and last of the Praerequisita, which I shall mention, is
Nosology; containing whatever relates to the General Nature, Signs, Causes,
etc. of Diseases. For as the Consideration of the Human Body, in its natural or
healthful State, is, by Physicians, only in order to the Consideration of it in
its Praeternatural or Morbid one; so consequently there can be nothing more
previously necessary to the Practice of Physic than whatever relates to the
Knowledge of the General Nature, Signs, Causes, etc. of Diseases.

1. And first the Want of a clear Idea of the General Nature of Diseases must
be a certain Means of laying a necessary and afterward unalterable Foundation
of Error and Miscarriage in Practice. One would be tempted to think, from the
erroneous Proceedings of unintelligent Practitioners, that Diseases were really
separate Essences, (or I know not what substantial Forms) and as such entered
and possessed the Bodies of Men. Whereas, by a due Consideration of their
Natures, they will be found to be nothing different or distinct from the Body,
but only Changes or Alterations in the Modification of its constituent Parts,
or different Modes of Indisposition in the same Body.

2. Secondly, the Doctrine of the Signs, both Diagnostick and Prognostic, is
not less necessary to be thoroughly understood, before a Man undertakes the
Practice of Physic, than the General Nature of Diseases. For as by a due
Knowledge of the Diagnostick Signs, he may be instructed truly to distinguish
one Disease, though never so much alike, from another; so through want of that
Knowledge, one Disease is very often mistaken for and treated as another. How
often, for Instance, has a Colica and a Nephritis, a Fluor Albus and a
Gonorrhaea, a Chlorosis and a Phthisis been confounded? So that the Foundation
of Cure seems primarily to be laid in a right Apprehension of the Diagnostick
Signs of each Distemper. But here it ought to be observed, that the better a
Man understands the Animal Structure and Economy, the more capable he will be
both of comprehending and ascertaining the Diagnosis, and that a Man ignorant
of those things must necessarily mislead himself by the Use of a common Name,
and apply it to denote Circumstances which are so far from being always alike,
that they will be sometimes found extremely different.

And as to the Prognostic Signs of Diseases; though it be certain that the
Recovery of the Sick is the great Design of the Medical Art, and undoubtedly
more necessary than Presaging the Event of Distempers, yet the Advances which
have been made in the Prognostic Part of Medicine, as acquiring no small
Esteem and Authority to the Physician, ought diligently to be collected from
the Observations of the Ancients, particularly of the Divine Hippocrates, as
well as from the Writings of the Moderns.

3. Thirdly, the Aetiology of Diseases; I mean more particularly as to the
immediate and conjunct Causes, will be found as necessary to be known by every
Practitioner, as either the General Nature of Diseases, or the Doctrine of the
Signs. For if, as is very evident in Practice, Diseases even of the same
Denomination, arising from different Causes, do administer different
Indications, or indicate different Methods of Cure; the Aetiology must
consequently be a grand Source from whence Rational Indications can be drawn.
'Twere very easy to give Instances in almost all the Diseases incident to the
Human Body, but thinking it altogether needless, because the Medical Writings
are so full of them, I shall conclude this Head with observing, That as an
exact Knowledge of the Animal Structure and Economy is absolutely necessary to
comprehend the Aetiology of Diseases; so the Modern Improvements in Anatomy
have very considerably advanced the Aetiological Part of Medicine.

Having thus, with the utmost Brevity demonstrated, that there are several
things perfectly and absolutely necessary to be known by Men before they ought
to pretend to the Practice of Physic; my present Design does not at all oblige
me to enquire whether I have enumerated all the Praerequisita to the Medical
Art; but from that Enumeration of them which I have made, and from what I have
advanced, under each of those Heads, may very fairly venture to draw the
following Conclusions, viz.

I. That Experience alone will not make a Physician. II. That the Enumeration
of the Praerequisita to the Medical Art is a sufficient Argument with what
Difficulty, a due Qualification for the Practice of it is attained. III. That
it is a plain Demonstration, how unqualified the Quacks are for exercising the
Profession they pretend to. IV. That it is an evident Indication to the
rational Part of Mankind, who do, and who do not, and that the far greatest
Part of the Practioners in Physic do come under the Denomination of Quacks. V.
That an Apothecary can no more be said to be Qualified for the Practice of
Physic, than any other Mechanical Tradesman.
I. That Experience alone will not make a Physician: For if there are, as I
have already proved, several things absolutely necessary to be known by Men,
before they can judge of the Nature of Diseases or Remedies, which are what I
mean by the Praerequisita to the Medical Art: It evidently follows that
Experience alone, i. e. Experience without the Praerequisita will not make a
Physician. The Art of Physic then may very aptly and usefully be said to
consist two Parts, viz. The Theoretical and Practical. And as there is nothing
truer on the one hand, than that the Theory, viz. the Knowledge of the
Praerequisita is, as has been fully proved, absolutely necessary to the
Practice: so there is nothing more evident on the other, than that the
Knowledge of the Theory, though previously necessary, is only in order to, and
therefore useless without, the Practice. For though it is impossible (I affirm) a
Man should make any considerable Figure in the Practice, who is ignorant of the
praeliminary Arts which compose the Theory of Physic: And if without the
Knowledge of those Arts, a Man jumps, as I may say, into Practice, such a one
is never to be trusted, though he had seen Thousands of Patients, and ten
thousand Prescriptions; yet do I not (as it is ridiculous to) suppose, that Men
should rest here, or dwell upon the Theory; or that the speculative Part of
Physic should teach them to cure all manner of Distempers in their Closets,
without a constant Attendance on the Sick, without a diligent and unwearied
Observation on Diseases. A due Apprehension of these things may be a Means to
determine the many unnecessary Disputes concerning the Preference of one Part
of Physic to the other; the Knowledge of the one absolutely depending on, and
consequently being altogether as necessary as that of the other. And as Theory
and Practice, so Reason and Observation ought not to be compared with, or
opposed to, each other, but joined together, as mutually adorning and
illustrating one another to the fully completing of a Physician. A Man may be
an Advocate for Experience, and well appriz'd of the Usefulness of accurate
Observations, and at the same time not discard the Use of Reason in Physic.
True Observations will never be found to contradict Right Reason, nor will
Right Reason exert it self in, opposition to matter of Fact. But lest any of
the Empirical Tribe should pretend to take Shelter under Authorities, or to
interpret what Baglivi says concerning Experience and Observation in favor of
themselves, I Have purposely read over all the Works of that celebrated Author,
and from innumerable Passages in his Writings, think nothing more evident, than
that it is a Literate, and not an Empirical Experience, which he contends for.
It Is not Experience without the Praerequisita, but such a well grounded
Experience as a Man duly qualified for the Practice of Physic, may daily with
Reason, be supposed to acquire. And it is as evident, that what he has advanced,
concerning the Importance of Observation in the Way of Physic, ought to be
interpreted in that very Sense. For though he says, That nothing so naturally
tends to the Improvement of Physic, as Experiments and Observations, yet it is
certainly true, that he desires it might be understood (as indeed it ought to
be) of Experiments directed by the Knowledge of the Animal Economy, and of
Observations grounded on that and the other Praerequisita. So notwithstanding
what Dr. Sydenham declares, viz. Vid. Epist. Ded. Obs. Med.
Artem Medicam haud rectius esse perdiscendam, quam ab ipsius Artis Exercitio
atque Usu; and Vid. Tract. De Podagra. p. 80. Edit. Lugd. Bat.
Praxin esse Medicinae Profitentium Lapidem Lydium, it is evident from Passages
enough in that worthy Author, particularly from the whole 81st Page of the last
mentioned Treatise, that he never designed, by what he says, to advance an
Empirical Experience, or to preclude the Necessity of understanding the
Praerequisita. As there is nothing more ridiculous than to suppose all Men
capable of making a good Use of Experience, or able to draw right Conclusions
from the Motions of Nature; so Quacks and Empiricks, who set out without either
Light or Method must undoubtedly prove stupid and erroneous Observators: It
being indeed impossible that Men ignorant of the Medical Praerequisita, should
be capable of improving either themselves or the Art by their Experience and
Observations. What therefore is daily said in praise of Experience (to which no
one pays a greater Deference than my self) and in Recommendation of experienced
Physicians, ought to be understood with such a Restriction as not to include
the Practitioners, who never had Opportunities of Understanding the
Praerequisita. How ridiculous then is the Folly of those People who magnify an
Empirical Experience, or cry up a Quack of whatsoever Figure or Fame, for a Man
of Experience, which wanting a Foundation, cannot be of any real Use and
Service either to himself or others.

II. That the Enumeration of the Praerequisita to the Medical Art, is a
sufficient Argument with what Difficulty a due Qualification for The Practice
of it is attained. For if it be so absolutely necessary, as has been already
proved, to understand the Praerequisita to that Art, it is very easy to infer,
both what Length of Time and Labor of Thought the Acquisition of so much
Knowledge will require. It Is not then a Raw and Superficial Knowledge of
Receipts and Medicines of Diseases and their Cures, which will qualify a Man
for the Practice of Physic, but a gradual Advancement through all the
abovementioned Foundations of the Art. It Is not to be supposed, that the Ars
longissima should be so quickly acquired, or the most difficult of Sciences so
instantly attained. And this Truth is not only confirmed by Hippocrates, in his
very first Aphorism (...).
, and in his Enumeration of the Necessaries which he requires to constitute a
Good Physician (...). Hippoer. Lex.
; but by the concurrent Testimonies, both of the Ancients and the Moderns. Yet
notwithstanding what has been advanced, concerning the Praerequisita to the
Medical Art, and the Difficulty of acquiring the Knowledge of them; it is very
surprising to consider what a vast Number of Persons there are, what would fain
become Physicians without Labor and Study, and be saluted Sons of Apollo,
without any manner of Right to the Title. But all and every one of those who
are ignorant of the Preliminary Arts, which compose the Theory, are but
Pretenders in Physic, do jump, as I said, into Practice, and are never to be
trusted though they had seen thousands of Patients, and ten thousand
Prescriptions. But I now proceed, in the third Place, more particularly to
consider,

III. That the Enumeration of the Praerequisita to the Medical Art, is a plain
Demonstration how unqualified the Quacks are for exercising the Profession they
pretend to. And if, as has been proved, there are so many things absolutely
necessary to be known, before a Man can either reason or judge of Diseases; it
evidently follows, that a Quack, ignorant of those things, is absolutely
unqualified for that Profession. Were but the Matter indeed, as impartially
considered as it ought to be, there seems nothing more ridiculous than to
pretend to the Practice of Physic, without a previous Knowledge of them; it
being impossible but such People must make either Improper, Dangerous and
Destructive, or Insignificant and Useless Applications. It is not only true in
Fact, that the most generous often prove the most deadly Medicines, if
administered without Judgment; but it is an every day's Observation, that those
very things which have the Reputation of being harmless and inoffensive, if
improperly applied, do too often create very great Mischiefs. In the Practice
of Physic there is required not only great Labor of Thought, in searching
into the several Appearances and Circumstances of Diseases, but also great
Strength of Judgment in duly weighing and comparing them together. And it is
not here, as in many other Cases, where Experiments may be repeated without any
great Injury; for this perhaps admits but of one single Trial, which possibly
may terminate in the Death of a Man, and one false Step, especially in an acute
Disease, may be of the most fatal Consequence. Physic, it is true, abounds with
a very large Number of excellent Medicines: But Medicines, being Relations to
Human Bodies, can only be said to be good or bad, as applied; and like all
other Instruments to do either Good or Hurt, according to the Nature of the
Hand which uses them. As there is nothing more conspicuous on the one hand,
than the useful Effects of Medicines, when Methodically and Judiciously
diciously administered: So there is nothing more obvious on the other, than the
deadly Effects even of those of the very first Rank, when used, without either
Method or Judgment. Can any thing then more fully demonstrate the Vanity of
Empiricism than the daily Experience how Inefficacious and Useless, even the
most celebrated Specificks are without a Judicious and Methodical Application?
For though a more Noble Specific than the Cortex, for Instance, was never known,
yet Experience convinces us how frequently we are forced even in intermitting
Fevers, to call in to our Assistance, the Knowledge of the Animal Economy; and
by Vomiting, Purging, or other proper Means, to render that Specific useful,
which would otherwise have been of no Effect: So that nothing seems more
ridiculous than for a Man to pretend to cure Diseases, though armed with the best
of Medicines, without the Knowledge of the Animal Economy, and the Nosological
Praerequisita. It may as well be expected that a blind Man should shoot flying,
or a deaf one tune an Organ.

I cannot therefore conclude this Head without observing (which indeed
naturally flows from the foregoing Considerations) how unaccountably infatuated
they are, who apply themselves to any of the Empirical Tribe; there being
nothing so monstrous as their Pretenses; nothing, but the no less monstrous
Credulity of those who employ them. But,

Quos perdere vult Jupiter, prius dementat. Does any one Man more deserve to be
ridiculed, than he, who thinks his Gold Watch of too great Value to be put into
the Hands of an under Workman, and at the same time, trusts his Body, a Machine
of infinitely more curious Structure, with an ignorant Pretender in Physic.
Can a Man put a greater Affront upon his Reason? Or can he give an odder
Demonstration of his Kindness to Wife, Children or Friends, than to commit any
of them to the Care of such unequal Managers? In Matters of far less Moment,
Men generally are more guided by the Dictates of Reason, and not so easily
imposed upon by any kind of empty Pretensions. If the Title of an Estate,
wherein they are concerned, be never so little suspected, they immediately
apply to the Best Advice, and will spare neither Cost nor Pains for a Right
Information; but which is the most unaccountable Piece of Folly imaginable, are
extremely less sollicitous about the Care of their Bodies than their Estates.

IV. That the Enumeration of the Praerequisita to the Medical Art, is an
evident Indication to the Rational Part of Mankind, who do, and who do not, and
that the far greatest Part of the Practitioners in Physic do come under the
Denomination of Quacks: I appeal to the Rational Part of Mankind, because they
are the fittest Judges in the Matter; for as they are capable of distinguishing
who have, and who have not, had Opportunities of understanding the
Praerequisita; so they cannot but at the same time be convinced, that the far
greatest Part of the Practitioners in Physic, come under the Denomination of
Quacks. There is nothing more Evident than that there are Pretenders in
Physic, who are so far from having any Knowledge of the learned Languages,
that they cannot write their own; are so far from having made any Searches into
the vast Collection of Ancient Learning, that they never perused even the
Observations of the Moderns; are so far from understanding Natural Philosophy
or the Animal Economy, that they never had Opportunities of learning Anatomy
or Chemistry; never saw a Dissection, or one Process of the Preparation of
Medicines. What a melancholy Reflection then is it, that such a Trade of
deceiving should be carried on under the Pretenses to so useful an Art; and to
consider, what a Number of People there are who having no other Foundation but
Impudence and Ignorance, bubble so many Thousands out of their Money and Lives?

V. That an Apothecary can no more be said to be Qualified for the Practice of
Physic than any other Mechanical Tradesman. Though the Preparation of Medicines,
according to the Prescript is properly speaking the Business of an Apothecary,
and which Preparation requires only the Knowledge of the Substances themselves,
and not of their Medicinal Virtues and Efficacies; yet let us suppose an
Apothecary endued with that Knowledge also, and let us consider how far it will
qualify him for the Practice of Physic. We will then suppose him to know that
this Medicine will purge; this, vomit; and this produce other Evacuations, or
perhaps only Alterations in the Body. But as to know what is Indicated is one
thing, and how to answer such an Indication another; so the Knowledge of the
Virtues and Efficacies of Medicines will not at all instruct or direct him in
the Application of them. For Medicines being Relations to Human Bodies, can be
only good or bad, as justly or unjustly applied: And therefore, as I instanced,
though we suppose a Man to know that such a Medicine will undoubtedly Purge, i.
e. solicit the Bowels into that Motion we call so; yet whether this will be to
the Advantage of the Person to whom it is given, depends not on the Man's
Knowledge of the Medicine's Operation, but on the Fitness and Disposition of
the Patients Body to receive it. Again, a Man may know, that there are some
Preparations of Antimony, etc. which will always produce Vomiting. But though by
the Exhibition of a Vomit, a Vitiated Stomach is sometimes restored; yet when
the Stomach is depraved from a Cause which cannot be removed by Vomiting, it is
plain, that the Use of such Medicines cannot possibly effect its Recovery. And
a great many more Instances might be given in respect to the Operation of
Medicines, which only produce some Alteration in the Body. The Excellency then
of the Medical Art consists in a right Apprehension of the Relation between the
Powers of the Medicine, and the Circumstances of the Disease. Now such a right
Apprehension of this Relation, as is sufficient to qualify a Man for the
Practice of Physic, cannot possibly be acquird by the Knowledge of Medicines,
their Preparation and Virtues; but of all the abovementioned Praerequisita to
the Art. And this single Consideration of the Relation between the Medicine and
the Body, as it distinguishes a Regular from an Empirical Practice; so it
sufficiently exposes the Vanity of confiding in Receipts or Nostrums, and
plainly demonstrates that the most celebrated Preparations (even of the
Philosophers by Fire) are not capable of curing Diseases, without a Judicious
and Methodical Application, and that there can be nothing consequently more
ridiculous than to suppose an Apothecary capable of advising from seeing the
Prescripts of Physicians. If then the Knowledge of the Preparation of
Medicines, if the Knowledge of their Virtues, and Efficacies, nay, if seeing
the very Prescripts of Physicians, will not amount to a Qualification; it
demonstratively follows that an Apothecary can no more be said to be Qualified
far the Practice of Physic, having no other Means or Opportunities of
acquiring The rest of the Praerequisita, than any other Mechanical Tradesman.
That small Pittance of Learning which is acquird at School, if not afterward
lost in the servile Offices of the Shop, can claim no manner of Consideration:
No; the Prolix and Laborious Study of Physic, ought assuredly to commence upon
a more Literate Foundation; and the Knowledge of it is not possibly attainable,
but by an Education of a quite different Nature.

Twill be very pertinent to my present Design, and not unacceptable to my
Reader, I hope, to acquaint him, how the Apothecaries first crept into Houses,
and introduced themselves into the Practice of Physic. Their officious Visits
were at first made under Pretense of carrying the Physic themselves, which
indeed might procure them the Reputation of careful Men, tho by running on the
Errands it is plain they changed Offices, with their Servants, and left them at
home to do the Duty of their Masters. This gave them Opportunities of
insinuating themselves into Nurses, Servants, and, other weak Persons attending
the Sick; and by their Means of being admitted to give their Opinions; and
thence under Pretense of good Husbandry for the Patient, to repeat the
Physicians Bills, without his Order; and at last to prescribe without his
Advice. Yet I am not, I must confess, for wholly laying aside this Order of
Men, they being, in my Opinion very useful and serviceable in their proper
Station and Business, which is the Preparation of Medicines according to the
Prescript of the Physician. But when an Apothecary deserts his Station in the
Shop, neglects the Business of his Trade, and runs about advising in all
Distempers; he becomes an Empirick, and invades a Profession which he cannot be
supposed to understand. Can any thing be more astonishing than the levelling of
a Learned Liberal Science, with a Mechanic Trade of the Hand directed by that
Science? I could wish the Fool's Character had been preserved in our
Chronicles, or that his Features were now to be seen in his Statue of Brass,
who first sent for the Handy-craft Labourer of the Medicines to answer any
Questions concerning the Nature of the Distemper.

There is certainly no more Relation between the Business of an Apothecary, and
that of a Physician, than between the Grinding of Colors and the Art of
Painting: And therefore an Apothecary, who, without Knowledge of the
Praerequisita, pretends to the Practice of Physic, is altogether as ridiculous
as a Colour-grinder, who, without any Skill in Drawing, should presume to
manage a Pencil The one may hear the Patients examined, make up the Medicines
himself, and observe their Effects; the other may see the first Strokes chalked
out, prepare the Colors himself, and afterward see his Master at Work; yet
neither of them, without being first instructed in the various Rules as well as
first Rudiments of the respective Arts, shall enter into the Skill of either
the Physician or Painter, though they looked on them till Doomsday. What Pity
it is the Imitations of both cannot be equally exposed to view, that the
unskilful Management of the one might be as conspicuous as would be the
ridiculous dawbing of the other.

There is also another Body of Men, I mean the Surgeons, who notoriously enough
(though not indeed so frequently in great Towns as the Apothecaries) invade the
Profession of Physic. But as the Rules abovementioned are sufficient to
distinguish an Empirical Pretender from a Qualified Practitioner; so by the
Application of those Rules to the Surgeons, it is very easily demonstrable, that
they cannot but come under the Denomination of Quacks in Physic.

Tho from what has been already advanced, both concerning the Praerequisita and
the Conclusions which have been drawn from the Enumeration of them, it may seem
altogether needless; yet I shall now proceed to offer three or four Reasons
more, which will further demonstrate the Necessity of a Regulation in Physic:
And those may be said to regard, I. The Good of the Public in General. II. The
Universities in Particular. III. The Art of Physic it self. IV. The Regular
Professors of it.


I. The first Reason then for the Necessity of such a Regulation (concerns the
Good of the Public and) is the Loss of her Majesty's Subjects. And if I affirm
that the Encouragement of Quacks tends as much to the dispeopling of the
Kingdom as the Wars; The Computation must be allowed to be modest, provided
they, kill as many in other Parts of the Kingdom as they do in those within the
Sphere of my own Observation. But the Truth of this Assertion will more
evidently appear to any one who does but fairly consider the Number of Quacks
with which every Corner of this Kingdom has the Misfortune to abound. For what
but the most dismal Execution upon the Lives, or the most dreadful Destruction
of Mankind, can be expected from such a Prodigious Number of Men, who
understanding not what they profess; may truly be said to be Qualified, as they
are Licensed, to kill. And though the most horrid Slaughters are daily committed
without any Fear of Punishment or Reproof; yet it is not a more melancholy
Reflection to consider what a vast Number of Men fall by the Hands of these
Executioners, than that the Executioners themselves should escape the Hands of
Public Justice. I am not able to express my Indignation against such
presumptuous Homicides: They ought to be extirpated, if not at once, yet by
Degrees, as the Wolves out of the Kingdom.

But to return; I hope to be excused (for whosoever is well appriz'd of her
Powers may be pardoned) for asserting, That it is better trusting to Nature
than to an ignorant Pretender in Physic. That Physicians are only Servants to
Nature, and that she is Morborum Medicatrix, are Truths known to the Ancients,
and confirmd by the irrefragable Experience of the Moderns. And as Nature alone
will conquer some Diseases, and judiciously assisted the greatest part; so
nothing is a brighter Demonstration of the Greatness of her Strength, than that
even the Mismanagement of Nurses, Apothecaries and other Quacks, is not able to
hinder the Recovery of very large Numbers, which fall under their Hands. The
greatest part of the Symptoms of Diseases are the Efforts of Nature, but which
Efforts being easily disturbed, or soon opposed, require the most strict and
wary Observance, and without Judgment, we may sooner injure than assist her;
sooner oppress than relieve her. A Physician ought therefore religiously to
observe and obey the Motions of Nature, to look upon them as his surest Guides
in the Cure of any Distemper, and to be advised, according to them, what to do,
and when, and in what manner to proceed. The Art of Physic is not understood
till the Artist comprehends, in the Words of my Lord Bacon, Quid Natura ferat,
and faciat. But if the Calamities of the Sick are increased by the very Means
which are used for their Relief; if instead of carefully assisting Nature in
her Progresses to the Preservation of Life, she be clogged with useless and
insignificant, or oppressed with dangerous and destructive Applications: I may
justly conclude the Condition of those People who have the Misfortune to fall
under such Hands, to be indeed a very deplorable one; and the Loss of her
Majesty's Subjects, from the fatal Mismanagement of so vast a Number of Quacks,
to be consequently so very great, that the Encouragement of them may truly be
said to tend as much to the dispeopling of the Kingdom as the Wars.

II. Another Argument for the Necessity of a Regulation in Physic, is, that
the Encouragement of Empiricism has already been a very great, and will
hereafter be a far greater Detriment to the Universities: For it can never be
supposed, that Men will be at the Expense of sending their Sons to any of the
Seminaries of Good Literature and ingenuous Education, when the Honors and
Employments of a Faculty may be obtained without it, and there is so little
Distinction made between a Regular and an extempore Doctor. The Apothecaries,
and other Quacks, now openly avow their Resolutions of seizing on the Practice
of Physic; and of excluding in time all the University Physicians. They give
not only Examples, but also Assurances of Success to all the Intruders into
Divinity, and others, of the pretended Education in the Liberal Sciences. It
would indeed be no great Matter of Wonder or Complaint, were Empiricks
encouraged only by the Ordinary Sort of People; or as the French call them, the
Petits Gens; there being, as I have often observed, a Sort of Sympathy between
Understandings. But it is very unaccountably surprising, and a just Matter of
Complaint, that any of the distinguished Part of Mankind should venture even in
dangerous Cases to employ such illiterate, and consequently ignorant
Pretenders. And what still enhances my Amazement is, that any of those
Gentlemen, and especially any of the Clergy, who have had the Happiness of an
University Education; should give any manner of Encouragement to this sort of
People. They have all laid themselves under the highest Obligations of
Preserving the Honor and Dignity of those Fountains of Learning. And the
Physicians of the Soul in particular being obliged to visit their Parishioners
in Sickness, ought not only to inform them that it is their Duty, but to press
them also to apply to the Physicians of the Body, whom the Divine Laws
Ecclesiast. 38. 1-12.
as well as our own have appointed; instead of either making use of Empiricks
themselves, or advising others to make use of them. I can never sufficiently
deplore these Indignities offered to our Universities, nor ever enough blame
and condemn the Abettors and Promoters of them; but am not without Hopes that
such growing Mischiefs as these are, will sometime be thought worthy the
Consideration of those in whom alone is lodged the Power of Redressing them.

III. Another Argument for the Necessity of a Regulation in Physic, regards
the Art it self; the Encouragement of Quacks and Empiricks threatening the Ruin
of the Profession as well as of the People. 'Twould be no very difficult Task
to demonstrate the Certainty of the Medical Principles, and consequently the
real Usefulness of Physic to Mankind. But such an Attempt does not at all seem
necessary in my present Design; because it is not to be supposed, that Persons
should apply themselves even to the most ignorant Pretenders in Physic, unless
such Persons really thought they should receive some Benefit from the
Directions of those to whom they did apply. Yet notwithstanding Physic is
undoubtedly established upon such Principles as do wholly free it from those
Reproaches of Uncertainty which it has often, though falsely, been charged with;
it must, at the same time, be confessed, that the Malignity of some Acute, and
the Stubbornness of some Chronical Diseases, do often elude all the Assistances
of Human Art: For the most judicious and the most experienced Physicians can
have no Power, as the Wise Man expresses it, in the Day of Death. But this can
be no manner of Objection to the Certainty of the Medical Principles, because
it may happen and not proceed from any Defect in the Rules of the Art it self.
For from a due Consideration of the Materials which compose a human Body, the
Elegancy of its Structure, and the continued Flux of its Parts, it is very
evident that it must necessarily be obnoxious to Disorders, which are Diseases;
and sooner or later as necessarily to a Dissolution, which is Death. So that
whoever is well appriz'd of the wonderful Fabric of the Human Body, how
curiously contrived and divinely fashioned a Machine it is, may consequently be
rather amazed at our living so long, than at our dying so soon. But though it
must be acknowledged that it is not in the Physician's Power at all times, or
in all Extremities, to retrieve or preserve his Patients from the Jaws of
Death, (since to die is an Entail upon our Natures) yet it may with Modesty be
affirmed, Experience abundantly proving it, that there is so much Power in
Medicines, and so much Virtue in Methods, as to enable him, if he but heedfully
weighs and judiciously applies them, to give Ease to such as are in Pain, Sleep
to such as are wearied out with Watching, and Strength to withstand the
Approaches of grim and dreaded Death. But a Physician cannot, I say, be
supposed capable of doing these things without a due Consideration of
Circumstances, and a Judicious Application of Medicines. For if Medicines are
promiscuously used in all Constitutions, or without Regard to the Circumstances
of each Case, it is no Wonder they so often deceive Men in their Expectations of
Success. And therefore as the Knowledge pf the Praerequisita is the only Means
of Qualifying a Man for a successful Practice in Physic, and consequently of
advancing the Credit and Reputation of the Art; so the Ignorance of Quacks,
both of the Nature, Causes, and Cure of Diseases, must necessarily produce so
many and so gross Mismanagements as cannot but extremely prejudice Mankind in
their Opinion of the Art. Their ill Successes are doubtless imputed to the
Uncertainty of the Art it self, especially by the Undistinguishing, which is
much the larger Part of Mankind; and Men from their lessened Opinion of it,
will by Degrees neglect to apply to any Advice at all; whereas the truly Noble
and Divine Art it self ought by no Means to be charged with what is only to be
imputed to the Ignorance of those who pretend to profess it.

Besides, it is a true and general Observation, that Arts and Sciences do
improve and grow useful, according to the Encouragement of those who profess
them. But the frequent Application to Quacks and Empiricks, by Men of all Ranks
and Degrees, even to the most exalted Stations, is so public and so vast a
Discouragement to the Professors of Physic, that it may truly be said to
threaten the very Ruin and Destruction of the Art it self. For as such a
Discouragement must necessarily lessen the Number of the Professors in Physic;
so it will consequently obstruct the glorious Progress of the Art, by hindering
further Inventions, and future Improvements in it. And how incapable the
illiterate Pretenders in Physic are of improving either themselves or the Art,
has been already demonstrated. We may then very fairly suppose there will be
but few Students in Physic, if after all the Labor and Pains of Acquiring
that Knowledge, and after all the Expenses of a Learned Education; their Bread
shall be taken off their Trenchers, as we say, by every Illiterate Pretender.
What a most ingenious Author observes upon another Occasion is very applicable
to this. If we consider, says he, the Expensiveness of the Voyage, which is
made in search of Knowledge, it is very hard the Undertakers should be plundered
of what they bring home by Privateers; under the very Canon which should
protect them. All which Considerations are sufficient to show, how far the
Encouragement of Quacks and Empiricks obstructs the Progress of that glorious
Art which teaches the Recovery as well as the Preservation of Health; and
consequently threatens the Ruin of the Profession as well as the People.

IV. The fourth and last Argument which I shall offer for the Necessity of a
Regulation in the Practice of Physic, regards the Physicians themselves, viz.
That no Profession is so invaded with unqualify'd Pretenders, as theirs. I do
not doubt, but 'twill evidently appear, that such an Invasion is singular to
the Profession of Physic, notwithstanding what some have endeavored, though
without any Color of Reason, to maintain. It Is well known that Divinity and
Law have their Palisadoes and Intrenchements; for who dare pretend in their
Pulpits or Courts, but those who are fairly initiated according to Form and
Custom? Whereas the Cobweb Fences of Physic are every Day invaded, any broken
Weaver, Tailor, Shoemaker, or merry Andrew, dubbing himself a Doctor Extempore,
and setting up for a AESCULAPIUS. So that Quacking and Ale-keeping are now a
days become the last Employments, to which Men of decayed Fortunes apply
themselves to get Bread. And as none but those who are fairly Initiated or
Admitted do presume upon the Professions either of Divinity or Law; so there is
but one way of Initiating or Admitting Persons into the Exercise of them.
Whereas on the other side, Men are admitted to practice Physic by the most
Unreasonable, and as they are at present managed, I may with Impunity, I hope,
venture to say, scandalous Methods; I mean by Licenses out of the
Ecclesiastical Courts. But that the Hardship of the Physicians Case may be set
in the clearest Light, 'twill be necessary to enquire into the original End and
Design, as well as present Management of such Ecclesiastical Licenses: I am
well enough satisfied that their original End and Design was very good and
laudable. The Statute of Hen. 8. 3. Vid. Pulton's Statutes.
very pathetically expresses the Inconveniences ensuing by Ignorant Persons
practicing Physic, to the high Displeasure of God, great Infamy to the
Faculty, and the grievous Hurt, Damage, and Destruction of his Majesty's liege
Subjects. For all which Reasons it enacts that the Bishop of each Diocese, or
his Vicar General, be empowered to examine all those (except Graduates) who
shall practice Physic in that Diocese. But the Wisdom of the same Statute is
no less remarkable in obliging either of them to call to him such expert
Persons in the said Faculty, as his Discretion shall think fit. For I hope, I
may venture to declare my Opinion thus far, that I cannot but think the
Gentlemen of those Courts very unfit Judges of a Man's Capacity to practice
Physic. And therefore in 14 and 15 of Hen. 8. 5. it is still, I think, more
prudentially enacted, That none shall practice in the Country, without a
Testimonial of his Sufficiency from the President of the College of Physicians,
and three of the Electors. I shall not here pretend to determine how far this
posterior may be said to abrogate or null the prior Act. But the very End and
Design of these Ecclesiastical Licenses, viz. Prevention of the Inconveniences
ensuing by Ignorant Persons practicing Physic, is not only, as they are
managed at present, wholly frustrated, but entirely perverted: For they are now
adays so far from preventing, that they are the only Means of bringing those
Mischiefs and Inconveniences upon us, which the Statute mentions, by admitting
such Shoals of unqualified Persons to practice Physic. That the Examination
previous to Admission was formerly strict and severe, is as certain as that now
a days Persons are admitted without any manner of Examination at all. Nay, so
far is the Practice of these Courts corrupted, and the very End and Design of
these Licenses perverted, that they are now a days granted even from a
Testimonial of two Licentiates. Can any thing then be more evidently apparent
than the Necessity of regulating these Matters? For though (as I before observed)
the first End and Design of these Licenses was undoubtedly Good and Laudable,
and though they were not Injurious (and I am apt to think they were not
originally designed to be or indeed really were) to the Regular Physicians; yet
if the Reason of a Law ceases, the Law it self ought to be annulled. But since
the Method of Examination is so very much altered; the Original End and Design
of these Licenses, so manifestly perverted, and they themselves become so
vastly Injurious both to the Faculty, and the Regular Professors of Physic;
these very Considerations are so many Arguments a fortiori for the Necessity of
a Regulation. And now I appeal to the sensible Part of Mankin, whether any
Profession be so invaded with unqualified Pretenders as Physic; and
consequently whether the Physicians have not the greatest Reason in the World
to complain. And to whom should they complain, but to the Legislature? For
doubtless, it was one of the Ends of Parliamentary Institution to receive the
Complaints, and redress the Grievances of the Injured. Nay, do we not find the
Legislature frequently interposing in other Professions to prevent or remove
Grievances; but what Regard has there been to the most enormous ones in
Physic? Are not our Lives worthy the Care of the Laws, as well as our Souls or
Estates?

I shall now endeavor to obviate some Objections which are generally made,
though indeed without any Shadow of Reason, against what I have advanced. And it
has been objected in the first Place, that such a Regulation would be an
Abridgment of the Natural Rights and Liberties of Mankind, to follow those
Employments whereby they may get a Livelihood. I should be the most unwilling
Man in the World to advance any thing which has the least Tendency to such an
Abridgment. No, I have the tenderest Regard to their Civil as well as religious
Properties. But this Objection would equally hold against the Suppression of
Gaming and other disorderly Houses, of the Royal Oak, and other such public
Nusances. For if the Good of the Public ought not to be considered and
preferred to that of private Persons, which I take to be an undeniable Maxim in
all Governments; the Natural Liberties of Mankind may as properly be said to be
abridg'd by such a Suppression, as by such a Regulation as I contend for. The
same Answer will serve to some other Objections, which are much of the same
Nature, and of no greater Force than the former, viz. That the Legislature is
under no manner of Obligation to concern it self in Mischiefs which Men
voluntarily pull upon themselves; That all flourishing Governments will
encourage their People some Way or other to employ themselves; That every Man
is sui Juris, and has a natural Right of making Use of any Body he pleases, and
if he be satisfied with the Risque he runs, what has any one to say in
contradiction to his Humor.

I now proceed to invalidate some Excuses which are frequently made in
Extenuation of those Practices which I have been condemning. And a great many
People I am apt to believe, will think to clear themselves from the Imputation
of Encouraging Quacks and Empiricks, by saying, That it is only in the
Beginning of Diseases they apply to them; That in Cases of Danger, they
generally have Recourse to better Advice; and, That this Custom being so very
common, does not seem to need any manner of Excuse: But upon a stricter Enquiry
into this Matter, the Custom of first sending for an Apothecary or other Quack,
will not, I am apt to think, appear the less ridiculous, for being so frequent.
For, as the Beginning of a Distemper is a very seasonable Opportunity of
Assisting Nature, toward the Recovery of Health, so the Conduct of those
People cannot be sufficiently condemned, who neglect to improve that
Opportunity, by not then calling in a judicious Assistant. But far more
egregious is the Folly of those who then apply themselves to any of the
Empirical Tribe; it being impossible, as has been observed, but such Persons
must make either insignificant and useless, or dangerous and destructive
Applications. And as the Consideration of neglecting the Improvement of this
Opportunity sufficiently condemns the Application to those who are called safe
Men; who, as they say themselves, will do no Hurt if they do no Good; so the
presumptuous Tamperers, on the other Side, may not only irreparably injure the
Patient, but so quite change the Face of a Distemper, as to render it very
difficult, if possible, for even a judicious Physician, when called in, to
discover its Nature. But when a Physician has the Care of a Disease from the
Beginning, he is able to make right Observations of the Progress and Alteration
of its Symptoms; and consequently, not only to form a surer Prognostication of
its Event, but more effectually to assist Nature in the Preservation of Life.

Again, there are others who pretend to excuse themselves for not applying to
the best Advice upon the Account of saving Charges; though this Consideration can
be of no manner of Force, unless it can be thought an Excuse to have the Chance
of being killed cheap. But would those very People, who satisfy themselves with
the Advice of an Empirical Pretender, but use their Arithmetic, they would
soon be convinced, they acted as much against their Interest as Reason. For by
physicking the Symptoms, and neglecting the Cause of a Disease, the Length of
the Bill, as well as the Distemper, must be consequently increased. It Is not
the collusive Pretense of giving Advice without a Fee, which can or ought to be
esteemed an Equivalent.

There are some again who pretend to excuse themselves by pleading, that those
to whom they apply, are Masters of some magnified Receipt, or pretended
infallible Remedy for this or that Distemper.

But the Vanity of confiding in such Trifles has been sufficiently exposed by
the plainest Demonstration, That the most celebrated Preparations even of the
Philosophers by Fire are not capable of curing Diseases, without a Judicious
and Methodical Application. I shall therefore only subjoin another
Consideration, which is an unanswerable Argument of their Insufficiency, viz.
That none of these magnified Receipts or infallible Nostrums have ever stood
the Test of an Age. Accordingly, our very own Experience is so far from
confirming, that it daily contradicts the Pretended Virtues which the
Alchymical Writers, and the public Venders of Quack Medicines, with a
peremptory Assurance ascribe to them.

It Is urged again, that though it must be confessed, that very easily curable
Diseases are often made fatal by Quacks; yet it is equally true, that several
Persons recover under their Hands. To this I answer, That they recover, it is
true, when the Patients have more of their natural Vigor than the others are
able to destroy, and rather to the Strength of Nature is the happy Event to be
ascribed, than to the Judgment of the Medicinal Administrator; such Particular
Cases being no more Arguments of their Skill than a blind Man's throwing
Stones, and hitting some People in a Crowd is an Argument of the Goodness of
his Aim.

Having thus fairly and impartially represented the present State of Physic in
this Kingdom, plainly indicated the Number of Quacks, with which it is so
unhappy as to abound; and fully demonstrated not only the Impossibility of
their being serviceable, but the absolute Necessity of their being injurious to
it, in the Exercise of the Profession they pretend to: I think nothing can be
more consequentially evident than the Necessity of a Regulation in the Practice
of Physic. And I am not without Hopes, that some of the abovementioned
Reasons, viz. The Good of her Majesty's Subjects in General; The Honor and
Advantages of Her Universities in particular; The Life and Reputation of so
useful an Art as Physic; or the Particular Hardships, which the Gentlemen of
that Faculty have the Misfortune to labor under; I am not without Hopes, I
say, that some of these Reasons will so far influence our Legislators, as to
prevail with them to take the Representation of this Case into their immediate
Consideration: It is a Case undoubtedly, of the greatest Moment and Importance;
for as the Life and Health of every individual Subject, so consequently all
Ranks and Qualities, all Parties and Distinctions of Men are in the highest
Degree, and equally concerned in it. And as the great Importance of the Debate
makes it not unworthy the Cognizance and Enquiry of our Legislators; so the
very Nature of it seems more particularly to recommend it self to their
Consideration. For it is certainly a great Shame, as well as an Unhappiness,
that in a Kingdom where so many good Laws are in Force, and in which as much
Care is taken of the Liberties and Properties of the Subject, as in any Nation
upon Earth, the People should lie open and unguarded in their dearest and most
valuable Enjoyments, Health and Life. There is nothing, therefore, which in my
Opinion seems more plainly to demonstrate a Deficiency in our Laws, than the
Want of some to Regulate the gross Miscarriages and enormous Abuses in the
Practice of Physic. The College of Physicians, it is true, is vested with some
Measure of Authority; But as their Authority is confined to certain Limits; so,
through Want of an Enlargement of their Charter, it is not at present of that
Use as seems correspondent to the Design of its Royal Institution: But either
by enlarging the Charter to the College of Physicians, or by such Ways and
Means as the Wisdom of our Legislature shall better approve of; there seems
nothing more feasible than to make a sufficient Provision against these
pernicious and destructive Practices. And whenever it shall seem expedient to
those who sit at the Helm of our excellent Government, to undertake so useful
and necessary a Work; I humbly recommend,

1. That the distinct Spheres of Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries, be
limited and specified; The Surgeons restrained to their proper Business; the
Apothecaries confined to their Shops; and all illiterate and Empirical
Pretenders in Physic suppressed.

2. That a Provision be made for the Poor to have their Share in the best
Advice and Medicines.

As the Want of such a Regulation in Physic is one of the greatest Flaws in
our Constitution; and highly reflects upon the best of Governments, so such a
Regulation would undoubtedly tend as much to the Honor of our Nation, as the
Preservation of its People; and which not only the present, but all succeeding
Generations will have the greatest Reason in the World to applaud.

FINIS.

