AN ACCURATE AND DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF THE SEVERAL PAINTINGS IN THE KING OF
SPAIN's PALACE AT MADRID; WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF THE PICTURES IN THE BUEN-RETIRO.

By RICHARD CUMBERLAND, Author of The Anecdotes of Eminent Painters in Spain.

LONDON: Printed for C. DILLY, in the Poultry; AND J. WALTER, Charing Cross.
M.DCC.LXXXVII.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THIS Catalogue was made at my request by the Gentleman, who has the
superintendance of the Royal Collection in the Palace at Madrid; and by his
favor transmitted to me after my return out of Spain, but too late to be
inserted in my Anecdotes of Spanish Painters: There can be no doubt therefore
of its being accurate; and I have accordingly so stated it in the title of this
publication. If the descriptive part had been executed by the same hand, I
might have safely recommended this performance even to Professors of the Art; I
must now address it to the Lovers only, and submit my weak attempt, with all
its errors, to the candor of the Public.

CATALOGUE OF PAINTINGS IN THE NEW PALACE.
FRESCOS.
1. Great Staircase; by D. Corrado Giaciunto.
THE composition of this brilliant ceiling represents the rising of the Sun:
Apollo, surrounded by various allegorical figures and emblems, gives life and
motion to the Elements. Spain, as a matron, habited in an imperial mantle, with
several attributes and insignia proper to her character. The coloring, drawing
and design very masterly.

The staircase itself is a very magnificent work, projected and executed by
the celebrated Sabatini, a Neapolitan, Architect to His Catholic Majesty.

2. Great Guard-Chamber; by D. Juan Bautista Tiepolo.
Vulcan forging the armor of Aeneas at the request of Venus: Mars, in a
triumphal character, superintending and protecting the work. Various figures,
emblematic of the Provinces, Religion, Valor, Victories and Productions of
Spain.

3. Ball-Room; by Corrado.
In the center of this ceiling Religion is seated, and the Church triumphant,
enthroned amidst the clouds; to which Spain is offering gifts and incense in an
attitude of adoration: The nations, subject to her empire, are introduced with
their respective emblems: In the four corners are the Elements, in medallic
compartments: Over one of the entrances there is a group of various figures,
with Boys employed in placing crowns of palm upon the principal characters:
Over another entrance, Hercules is described in the act of pulling down his
pillars at the command of Neptune, who in his chariot passes the Streights,
making his way through the barrier of ancient navigation. This is a very
brilliant design, rich and glowing in color and execution, and producing a
very superb and striking effect.

4. King's Antichamber; by Tiepolo.
The Monarchy of Spain, as a majestic Matron in an imperial mantle, with a Lion
at her side: An attendant figure in the act of placing a crown on her head:
Apollo with his lyre and the Muses form a separate group: Castile in the
character of a female, with her proper attributes: Hercules breaking down his
pillars for the purpose of laying open the barrier of Africa: Sacrifices and
Oblations represented in four medallic compartments, and addressed to the
Deities, who appear in the principal composition.

5. Grand Saloon; by the same Master.
The painter has here personified the various characters of the Spanish
monarchy: The figures are emblematic of Power, Religion, Wealth, Plenty,
Victory, etc. etc. The provinces of Spain are disposed over the cornice with
their proper attributes: The medals in the angles are by the same master; but
the Boys that support them, and the naked River-Gods, as likewise the gilt
compartments, where the Elements are represented, are by the hand of Robert
Mitchell. This ceiling and all the embellishments are profusely rich and
splendid.

Tiepolo was a student of the Venetian school, and died at Madrid, in the
king's service, on the 27th of March 1770.

6. King's Dining Room; by A. R. Mengs.
The Apotheosis of Trajan. The deified Hero is seated on a throne of
resplendent glory: The virtues and attributes of a perfect monarch surround his
throne: A chaplet of laurel is supported in the air by five imaginary beings,
under which the artist has contrived to delineate the victories of this
imperial Spaniard: The temple of Immortality appears in view, and the choir of
Muses are seen in the act of celebrating his glories. Other allegorical figures
are interspersed in the composition with extraordinary judgment and contrivance.

7. King's Supper-Room; by the same.
The Apotheosis of Hercules. He is conducted by Mercury to Jupiter, who invests
him with the crown of immortality, as a reward for his labors and conquests: A
group of Deities assist in the ceremony; the distinguishing characteristics of
the several Deities, male and female, are marked with great taste and much
classical precision: The artist has given proof of his profound study and
experience in the antique: The coloring, perspective, and general disposition
of these two ceilings are inimitable: There is no crowd, flutter, or deficiency
in the whole or part; the several groups conspire and harmonize in the most
perfect and beautiful manner; the eye is not distracted by any predominance of
detached parts, but receives the whole magnificent composition, as one complete
picture, at a glance.

These Frescos (especially the Apotheosis of Trajan) are, as I conceive, far
superior to his Paintings in oil; and in this province of his art, Mengs
appears a very capital master: I have never seen any thing equal to them; and
so admirable they appeared to me upon repeated visits, that I must believe
there are few productions in art, which can better gratify the curiosity of a
traveller. One thing is clear, that Mengs's coloring in fresco is totally of
another cast from what he practiced upon canvass.

8. King's Retiring-Room; by Tiepolo.
Juno in her car, with her proper attributes, etc.

9. Queen's first Antichamber; by Luis Velasquez.
The four Cardinal Virtues, with several allegorical accompaniments. This
painter must not be confounded with the famous Diego Velasquez.

10. Queen's second Antichamber; by Antonio Velasquez.
The subject nearly corresponds with the above, and the artist has treated it
pretty much in the same manner: Both are respectable performances. Antonio was
the brother of Luis Velasquez.

11. Queen's Dining Room; by Francisco Bayeu.
The Conquest of Grenada.

12. Presence Chamber; by Ant. Velasquez.
Christopher Columbus in the act of offering the new-discovered World to the
Catholic Sovereigns: The four compartments in the angles represent the
provinces of Mexico, Peru, Chili, and the Philippines.

13. State Bedchamber; by Mengs.
Another beautiful composition of this master, representing Aurora going forth
in her car, drawn by horses: All the emblems of Morning are exquisitely
conceived: The breaking forth of Light (which is personified), the
accompaniment of the Hours, the group of Night and her attendant emblems in the
rear of the procession, and all the correspondent embellishments in high
relief, are finely executed: In these are represented the four Seasons of the
year, and the Elements.

14. Prince of Asturias's Chamber; by Tiepolo.
The Conquest of Vellocino.

15. Prince's Dining Room; by the same.
Hercules in a car, drawn by Centaurs: The Muses and Graces celebrate his
victories.

16. Prince's Saloon; by Domingo Tiepolo.
Diana in the chase. Domingo was the brother of Juan Bautista Tiepolo.

17. Prince's Dressing Room; by Mariano Maella.
The Choice of Hercules.

Maella was a disciple of Mengs, and is now in the service of the King as Royal
Artist: He has made several portraits of the royal family. I have seen some
good original compositions of this master, and several copies from Mengs and
the elder painters of great merit and truth: I am convinced he is a man of
talents and candor, and could refer to a striking instance of his honor and
integrity. I would recommend it to any artist, or lover of art, who shall visit
Madrid, to introduce himself to the acquaintance of Maella, from whose
courtesy, I am persuaded, he will receive all possible good offices and
assistance.

18. Princess of Asturias's Antichamber; by Gonzalez.
The Arts.

19. Princess's Presence Chamber; by Bayeu.
The Fall of the Giants.

20. Princess's Cabinet; by Maella.
Juno solicits Aeolus for the Winds.

21. Princess's Drawing Room; by Bayeu.
The Deification of Hercules: The Virtues and Sciences attend.

22. Infant Don Gabriel's Dining Room; by the same.
Religion and the concomitant Virtues.

23. Infant's Drawing Room; by Luis Velasquez.
Allegorical composition relative to the kingdom of Spain.

24. Infant's Cabinet; by Domingo Tiepolo.
A group of Birds, with great variety of composition, and delicately executed.

PICTURES.
King's Antichamber.
Titian. Two large pictures of Sisyphus and Prometheus in their torments: the
figures above human size: They were painted by this master in Spain, and are
figures of great force, coloring and expression. The manner of treating the
Prometheus much resembles that of a celebrated picture on the same subject at
Kimbolton Castle: As the noble owner has no determined tradition of its author,
I shall hazard a conjecture, that it was painted by Rubens upon the idea of
this figure of Titian's, after that artist had visited Spain.

Titian. Four half-length pourtraits of Women, not in his brightest manner.

Titian. Four pourtraits of Men, seemingly of the same period; one of which is
a pourtrait of the great artist himself in his advanced age; a grand and
venerable piece.

Titian. A pourtrait of a Boy, full length. Correct and beautiful nature.

Titian. Two fancy compositions, companions; the figures half length: One, two
Bacchants; the other a Venus, admiring herself in a Mirror, which Cupid holds
up to her face. With one of her hands she presses her bosom, which is
uncovered, and the action is delicately expressed. These pictures hang level
with the eye on each side of a door fronting the great entrance; the effect is
remarkably striking, the relief bold, and the coloring nature itself; but
perhaps the execution has not that finished delicacy, which many of his earlier
compositions have: The characters, both of one and the other, are certainly of
a wanton cast; the person half-uncovered, half-concealed, with such a studied
negligence of dress, and so much playfulness of expression and attitude, that
the draperies seem introduced sor no other purpose but to attract the attention
more strongly to the charms they do not serve to hide.

Titian. Venus presents a cup to a Nymph: Two Satyrs in the back ground with
baskets of fruit: This, like the former, is the Venus lasciva. The contrast of
hues between the prominent figure and the Satyrs in shades is managed with
masterly address.

All who are conversant in the works of this master will better conceive the
striking effect of these three compositions, than any description of mine can
convey: In whatever collection they hung, they would certainly be very
dangerous neighbors to most other colourists who came in contact with them.

Titian. Adam and Eve in Paradise; the size of life; a very capital picture,
upon a large canvass; both figures of consummate beauty, and of a sublime and
chaste character; their attitudes simple, natural, without any trace of the
Academy in their disposition: The carnations are not florid, and the whole hue
of the piece rather duskier than is usual with this master: The back-ground
presents a noble landscape; the scenery finely charactered, and in beautiful
harmony.

Rubens. A copy of the above on a cloth of the same size; this copy hangs
between the windows in an unfavourable light, and opposite to the original. It
is a masterpiece of coloring, and though it has missed the delicacy of the
model, I am inclined to think it has surpassed it in force and effect. It is
evident that Rubens has put his whole strength to the work, and as his efforts
have been decidedly addressed to the coloring, his figures have a broader
nakedness (if I may so express it), than they have in the original; whereas
there is a purity in Titian's nakedness, which is in character with the
subject, and fully corresponds with the most refined conceptions of human
nature in it is primitive state of innocence and beauty: When we contemplate
Titian's Adam and Eve, we are convinced they never wore clothes; turn to the
copy, and the same persons appear to have laid theirs aside, and exposed
themselves to shame for the credit of the painter.

Tintoret. Two noble compositions from sacred history, companions. The one a
Judith, with the head of Holofernes; the other, a Martyrdom of Saint Ursula and
her companions: The characters in both are of great grandeur, finely conceived
and executed with peculiar brilliancy and spirit.

Paul Veronese. Two charming pictures, and the subjects beautiful. One, a Venus
and a Sleeping Adonis; the other, Cephalus and Procris, both natural size.

Juan Labrador. Two flower-pieces of the best master Spain ever produced in
this style of painting. These pieces are held in high esteem; and, though in
company with works of a superior cast, will attract the admiration of the
beholder. It has never been my chance to meet with any paintings of the like
sort, which I have thought comparable to these of Labrador. He died at Madrid
in 1600, at a very advanced age. (See Anecdotes, vol. i. p. 151.)

Pedro Orrente. A Nativity; a capital composition: This picture was removed
from the chapel de los Reyes nuevos, belonging to the cathedral of Toledo.
Orrente was a familiar of the Inquisition, and died in 1642, very old. He was a
disciple of Bassan; and greatly savoured and employed by the minister Olivares:
"He colored in the style of his master, but in his choice of nature did not
imitate his vulgarity of taste; in correctness of drawing, he has rarely been
exceeded. He was buried at Toledo, where he died, and is deservedly to be
numbered amongst the most eminent Spaniards of his profession." ( See
Anecdotes, vol. i. p. 193.)

Bassan. Nine pictures of this master, viz. Adam, naming the brute creation.
Noah, introducing them into the Ark, its companion; both charming pictures. Two
upon scripture subjects. Four of rural and domestic scenes. One, very
beautiful, of Orpheus harping to the beasts.


These pictures have been drawn from the great collection of Bassans in the
Buen Retiro; but it does not appear to have been a very judicious selection,
for they have certainly left many there of a superior merit to these;
particularly some upon historical subjects in a great style, and which are
probably the most capital of their master any where to be met with.

King's Dining Room.
Velasquez. Five magnificent pourtraits, by this greatest of all the Spanish
masters, adorn this stately chamber: It is altogether one of the most striking
spectacles that can meet the eye; few scenes are to be found, that can better
repay the curiosity of a traveller, and a stranger to the works of this great
painter. The magnitude of these objects, the force and vigor of their
coloring, the proud character they are displayed in, the profuse splendour of
the draperies, and (more than all) the stately horses, on which they are
mounted, dressed out with such redundancy of embellishment, conspire to produce
an astonishing effect; of these pourtraits, four are of royal personages, viz.

Philip III. and IV. and their respective Queens.

The last and best is the pourtrait of the Conde Duque de Olivares, minister of
Spain and patron of the artist. There are etchings of all these pourtraits,
copies of which I brought over from Spain.

Rubens. Philip the Third on horseback: A very noble pourtrait.

Vanlo. Philip the Fifth on horseback, and Queen Isabella on foot. The
inferiority of this artist is rendered very conspicuous by the contrast of the
capital pictures abovementioned.

Rubens. Four compositions of this master hang over the doors, viz. A Hercules
resting from his labors. The Judgment of Paris. Pluto in his car. Apollo in
his course; capital pieces.


The sculptures in this, and the antichamber above described, are numerous and
fine: In the former there is a remarkable bust of Seneca by Bernini; and in
this several of Roman emperors and empresses, antique; an infant Hercules
sleeping, of exquisite workmanship, etc. etc.

King's Supper-Room.
Velasquez. The famous Family-piece of the Infanta Da Margarita of Austria,
afterward empress of Germany, with various other persons in different
employments; a large group: The painter has introduced two dwarfs, and (what
adds greatly to its value) he is represented in person in the act of painting
the Infanta, whose pourtrait appears upon the easel. "It is related of this
picture, that King Philip, with his own hand, painted the order of Santiago
upon the drapery of Velasquez's figure, which order he was not till then
possessed of. When Charles the Second of Spain showed this picture to Luca
Jordano, he exclaimed with rapture and surprise, Sen^or, esta es la Theologia
de la pintura." (Anecdotes, vol. ii. p. 37.)

A copy of this famous picture, upon a small scale, was taken for the late Lord
Grantham, when he was ambassador in Spain, and brought over by his Lordship to
England. It is to be hoped his successors in that station will follow his
example, and obtain copies or drawings of other capital pictures in that
kingdom.

Titian. Charles V. in complete armor; his lance in his hand, his vizor up,
and himself mounted on a beautiful horse; he is preparing to pass his troops
over a river, which is described in the scenery of the back-ground, of the size
of life, upon a very large canvass: This picture sets all description at
defiance, at least all such description as I can attempt: I cannot doubt its
being the most capital pourtrait of the master, and has been so esteemed by the
best judges, who have seen it; there is reason to believe that Titian rated it
as such himself.

In the countenance of the monarch we read his history, or (which perhaps is
nearer to truth) recollecting his history, we acknowledge the agreement of
character in every line, and in the reflection of his features we find the
painter has recorded the annals of his life: Never was more expression of a
mind committed to canvass. A pensive dignity prevails, traced with marks of
pain and bodily decay: He is deep in thought; his eyes gloomy and severe, the
lids heavy, inflated and remarkably low over the eyeballs; the under-lip
projecting, and the mouth characteristic of revenge and resolution: He is
advancing to give battle to the unfortunate Elector of Saxony and the
Landgrave, those opposers of his power and of his faith; external objects have
no share in his attention; the whole man is engrossed by the deepest
meditation: His lance is poised parallel with the ground, and ranges along the
side of his horse, with the point advanced beyond its breast; the action of the
animal harmonizes with the character of his rider, slowly and composedly
stepping forward, the head low and submitted, and the eye expressive of the
most resigned obedience to his imperial master: All is calm and still in the
scene, no flutter or disturbance in the objects; the coloring, drawing and
perspective are the life itself; the whole is such perfect nature, that art
seems extinguished by its own excellence.

Titian. Philip II. in armor, his infant Son raised in his arms, whom he is
devoting to Fame, which is represented as descending from the skies, in the act
of crowning the newborn prince with a wreath of palm: On a scroll are these
words -- Majora Tibi. -- The artist has put his name to this picture in the
following words -- Titianus Vecellius, Eques Caesaris, fecit.

Vandyke. The Infant Don Ferdinand, on horseback.

Castiglione. Gladiators; very fine and spirited. This picture is doubtfully
ascribed to Castiglione, but my catalogue gives it to him without any remark.

Cavallero Maximo. Gladiators; its companion. -- These two pictures hang over
the doors, and have both great merit.

Titian. Venus and Adonis, and Europa on the Bull, its companion. -- These also
hang over the doors; and are beautiful pictures: Every spectator must regret
that they are not brought down nearer to the eye; but these and many other
instances occur of oversights in the hanging of this collection, which I am
informed was arranged by Mengs, and, as it should seem, with some partiality to
his own performances.

King's Dressing Room.
Velasquez. A group of Spaniards carousing. These rustic Bacchanalians are
evidently sketched from nature: Bacchus is introduced sitting on a cask,
putting a garland on the head of a Peasant, who kneels at his feet: On his left
hand is a group of five other rustics, one of which holds a goblet of wine,
another a can, and another has a leather bag slung across his shoulder; their
faces are grotesque and savage, and strongly marked with the Castilian cast of
features: On the right hand of Bacchus are two figures attendant upon him; one
of these is naked, and sits at his back, leaning on one elbow, and in the other
hand holding a narrow-bottomed drinking glass with wide lips; the other is in
strong shade in the fore-ground, his face turned from the spectator, in a
crouching attitude, embracing a large earthen amphora, which stands on the
ground; both these figures are crowned with wreaths of vine; and the God, who
has a mantle loosely thrown over his waist, has his whole head covered with a
large cluster of broad vine leaves, in a grand and picturesque style: His
countenance is strongly charactered in the Moorish or Andalusian cast, with a
broad nose, full lips, wide mouth, and black sparkling eyes: The figures are of
the size of life. A very capital composition.

Velasquez. A composition on the subject of Mercury and Argos: Its companion.

Velasquez. The Forge of Vulcan. The Cyclops are at work, and Apollo is
introduced, who is disclosing to Vulcan the intrigues of Venus with Mars. The
painter has here chosen a subject, which enables him to display his art in its
sullest extent, and he has persormed it with consummate address. The effect of
light and shade from the reflection of the forge, and the sparks which fly from
their hammers, produce a striking effect. The athletic forms and dusky hues of
the Cyclops are artfully contrasted with the beautiful proportions and fine
tints of Apollo's person: The character of Vulcan is finely conceived, the
story well told, and the group disposed with great judgment.

Velasquez. The celebrated picture of the Tapestry-workers, or women weaving
tapestry; a wonderful representation of nature in the best style of the master,
and of his clearest coloring.

Velasquez. The famous Aquador, or Water-bearer of Seville. One of his earliest
productions, (See Anecdotes, vol. ii. p. 6.)

Velasquez. Two pourtraits of Dwarfs, sitting on the ground. These Dwarfs
belonged to Philip IV. One has a large volume before him, and is turning over
the leaves; by his side are pen and ink and a commonplace book. A correct
resemblance of deformed nature.

Velasquez. A full-length pourtrait of an Old Man with papers in his hand, said
to be the Alcalde Ronquillo.

Velasquez. Two full-length pourtraits of dignified characters. Very fine.

These complete the number of ten pictures by this master here brought
together, and though there may be superior pictures of Velasquez in this
palace, in the Escorial, and particularly the Dead Christ on the Cross, in the
monastery of San Placido, yet there can no where be seen such a collection of
his works under one view; and whatever lover of the art shall enter this room,
I am persuaded he will not depart from it without a very high respect for this
illustrious Spaniard.

Murillo. Two large and fine compositions on scriptural subjects, viz. The
Annunciation, and The Nativity.


Murillo. Two small ditto, very delicately touched, and finely colored, viz.
The Espousals of Mary the Mother of Christ, and An Infant Jesus sleeping.


Murillo. A Jesus with St. John the Baptist, in his last and best manner: An
exquisite piece; middle sized.

Murillo. A Holy Family, large size.

Murillo. A Virgin half-length, with the Infant Jesus entire, standing.

Lanfranc. An Assumption, with a Glory of Angels; small size; very beautiful.
Ponz, in his Directory, calls this a Guido.

Vandyke. Two pourtraits of Ladies of the Austrian house, in the religious
habit of the Royal Carmelitish convent: One of them appears to be the Infanta
Don^a Margarita: Both half-lengths.

Titian. Three half-length pourtraits of noble persons.

Spagnolet. Saint John, Saint Bartholomew, Mary Magdalene, and Mary of Egypt.


Exquisite samples of a master, whose merit cannot be fully known but to those
who have seen his works in his native country.

Luca Jordano. The Flight into Egypt.

Abraham sacrificing his Son, its companion.

David Teniers. Four landscapes, with a great variety of figures; excellent.

There is also a picture, by a master unknown, in the Flemish style, a
composition of great labor and minuteness, after the manner of Brughel;
representing a cabinet surnished with a variety of pictures, statues, flowers,
and articles of different sorts, highly finished.

Mengs. A Nativity, the figures of the size of life.

This is his celebrated picture, which the king has covered with a magnificent
plate of glass: It was painted at Rome, and sent from thence to Madrid. In the
person of one of the Shepherds, the artist has introduced his own pourtrait:
The whole is labored with amazing care and study, and very tenderly colored:
His miniature-education is conspicuous in this performance, and the Infant is
remarkably diminutive and delicate: The subject perhaps precludes originality,
and it does not seem to be attempted. It is scarce necessary to add, that this
picture is a great court-favourite; all the works of Mengs are generally
extolled in Spain, and this the most: I have observed, however, that the
opinions of mankind at large, with regard to his rank in the list of artists,
run much into opposite extremes; and this is generally the fate which eminent
men experience in the judgment of their contemporaries: This does not seem to
proceed from any want of present capacity to ascertain the degrees of merit in
men, before Time has pronounced upon them with more authority, but is rather
owing to the good and evil passions of mankind, to their likings and their
antipathies, to an affectation of singularity, and a vanity to be thought a
leader in taste, and a discoverer of latent merit; surprised by these motives
into sudden applause, we commit ourselves to it with a warmth which, though it
frequently cools, we dare not disavow, and thus become parties in the
reputation we are pledged to support.

Mengs. An Incarnation, its companion: This also was painted in Rome, and
transmitted from thence.

King's Closet.
Teniers. Twenty-four pictures of this much-admired master, small in size, but
of admirable execution, hang in this room, and form of themselves a most
valuable collection.

Two of these are satirical and ludicrous allegories on the subject of the Arts.

Two others are much in the same style, and represent the temptations of Saint
Anthony.

The rest are landscapes of various sorts, with figures and cattle: Of these I
shall not offer any description, which scenes of this sort do not admit of like
pictures upon historical subjects. The eye of the artist will dwell upon them
with delight. If we may suppose for a moment that this whole magnificent
collection was at sale, perhaps these pictures of Teniers would be amongst the
very first that modern virtuosi would reach at.

Wouvermans. An exquisite picce: The landscape a most beautiful country, with
men and women, dogs and horses, and all the concomitants of a rural wake and
merry-making.

Segers. A grand Flower-piece.

Brughel. Eight beautiful pictures: Three of these are Flower-pieces; the other
five, small fabulous compositions, with nymphs adorned with garlands of
flowers, and various embellishments, rich and luxuriantly colored: The whole a
most captivating collection of a favorite master.

In this closet is a painted Cabinet, which would demand longer examination
than I could devote to it; it is by a Flemish hand, but the master's name has
escaped me, and my manuscript catalogue does not mention it: It is esteemed a
masterpiece in its kind.

Passage-Room to the King's Bedchamber.
Alonzo Cano. A Dead Christ, supported by an Angel.

This noble Spaniard may be styled the Michael Angelo of Spain; for he was
architect, statuary, and painter, and excelled in each. For his life, which is
curious, See Anecdotes, vol. ii. p. 72, etc.

Murillo. Head of an Ecce Homo.

Do of a Madona; both small pieces, very fine.

A single figure of the tutelar Saint James to the knees; excellent; in his
best and brightest manner.

Spagnolet. Saint Francis de Asis, half-length.

Saint Geronimo, a companion.

Amongst all the works of this artist, whether here or in the Escorial, I have
not met one, which did not engage my admiration; and I was surprised to find
him as great a master of grace and beauty, as he is of effect.

Cavallero Maximo. A Magdalene, half-length.

Mengs. A Holy Family, large size.

Baroccio. A Last Supper, small, and of exquisite delicacy.

Leonardo da Vinci. Herodias with the head of John the Baptist; half-length,
small size, very fine; but its originality doubtful.

Luca Jordano. A Madona, half-length, with the Child sleeping; Saint John
kissing his feet, and Saint Joseph in the background: An oval, painted in the
manner of Raphael; a charming piece. A very curious sample of the imitative
powers of this ingenious painter.

Joseph de Arpino. The Martyrdom of Saint Ines; a glory, with Saints and the
Blessed Virgin in the clouds. Clement VIII. made this painter a knight of
Christ, and Louis XIII. of France gave him the order of Saint Michael: He died
at Rome in 1640, aged eighty years.

This chamber being only a passage-room between the dressing room and
bedchamber, is lighted only from the glass doors, and very unfavourable to the
excellent pictures it contains.

King's Bedchamber.
Mengs. The king has here strongly marked his predilection for Mengs, by
admitting none but his paintings to hang in this chamber. These consist of six
compositions of the size of life, and two small ones, viz. A Descent from the
Cross; both the Marys and Saint John are represented: The air and expression of
the head of Saint John very capital, but closely copied from the Elder Mary, in
a painting of Vandyke's on the same subject, which was long in Mengs's hands,
and now in my possession. In my opinion this composition is far the best of all
his paintings in oil, that are in this palace. The Eternal Father, enthroned
amongst the Angels in heaven: This hangs over the picture abovementioned.
Christ praying in the Garden; Christ appearing to Mary Magdalen; Christ falling
under the Cross; Christ scourged. These four hang over the doors.


Two small pictures; one a Saint John, the other a Magdalen; highly finished
and well colored. Of the pictures over the doors I cannot speak in
commendation.

King's Retiring-Room.
Vandyke. Pourtrait of a woman; small size.

Guido. An Ecce Homo; a head, very fine.

Velasquez, A Boy, full-length, with a dog.

Peasant Boys, eating and drinking, of the size of life; half-length: In the
back-ground a clear and beautiful landscape.

Paul Veronese. Two small pourtraits.

Titian. Two small pourtraits.

Poussin. An old Bacchanal; inimitable: A landscape in the back-ground.

Brughel. A most beautiful collection of landscapes with historical figures,
eight in number; amongst these there is a Venus and Vulcan, very fine. -- The
Arts. -- A Saint John the Baptist preaching, capital. -- The Baths of Diana;
the scenery most charming.

Teniers. Twenty small compositions of this master, which, with the others
above mentioned, make this cabinet inestimable.

Berbedel. A small picture of a Dead Christ; very fine.

Queen's first Antichamber.
Lanfranc. A large and capital composition representing a Royal Funeral,
supposed to be that of Alexander, whose body is laid out in state, and in front
a fight of Gladiators, of the size of life.

Lanfranc. The Election of a Successor, in which is introduced another combat
of Gladiators: Both noble performances, in the best style of the Master.

Lanfranc died at Rome in 1647, aged 66 years.

Guido. Love and Avarice, personified in the characters of two Boys; very
beautiful.

Poussin. A very celebrated composition, representing a grand Bacchanalian
Sacrifice; priestesses performing rites at the altars of Bacchus and Priapus:
The landscape undescribably rich and fine; a large-sized picture.

What a noble subject had this been for our late incomparable Woollet! What a
study for Artists! a picture formed to captivate all beholders.

Jordaens. Two allegorical Paintings over the doors, viz. Wantonness, in the
character of a Fawn. Plenty, described by sundry female figures bearing fruits
and flowers; very like Rubens.


Titian. Philip the Third, of Spain;

A Venetian Cavalier; two excellent pourtraits.

Paul Veronese. Pourtrait of a Lady.

Youth, between Virtue and Vice; very fine.

Vandyke. Pourtrait of a man, full-length.

Velasquez. Two pourtraits of Buffoons, full-lengths.

Alexander Andriens. Four small pictures of Still Life, highly finished.

Corrado. Original Sketches of the Ceilings of the Grand Staircase and
Ball-Room.

Luca Jordano. Four compositions from the History of Sampson.

Three do of the Elements.

One large Historical Piece on the Subject of Solomon.

A small composition of Hercules drawn by Centaurs.

A Companion, on the Story of Cephalus and Procris.

Rubens. A large and capital composition, on the subject of Orpheus harping to
the Brutes.

This is truly an inestimable picture, giving such a display of coloring as
can hardly be conceived: It was painted by him in Spain, in his best age and
manner.

Flemish, Painter unknown. Three landscapes, and one large do.

Queen's Second Antichamber.
Lanfranc. Julius Caesar haranguing his Soldiers, large size: This picture does
honor to the school of the Caraccis.

French School (Painter unknown.) Two large compositions; a public entry, as it
should seem, of some ambassador.

Luca Jordano. Esau selling his birthright to Jacob.

Bathsheba in the bath.

Carlo Maratti. Two half-lengths of women with baskets of flowers; very
beautiful.

Cavallero Maximo. A sacrifice for Bacchus.

Andrea Vasari. The Life of St. Catherine, in four compositions.

A Magdalen.

Spagnolet. A Saint Bartholemew, half-length; horribly fine.

Corrado. Two original Sketches of Frescos.

Two large Landscapes over the doors, of great merit.

Brughel. Two most charming Flower-pieces.

Jordaens. A capital composition of Fruits and Flowers, with a Female Figure to
the knees.

Queen's Dining Room.
Luca Jordano. The Martyrdom of St. Lawrence, large size; four compositions
from the History of the Blessed Virgin.

A Saint Peter.

A Mary Magdalen.

A Transfiguration.

A Saint Michael, being the original design for the great alter-piece in the
King's chapel.

A Battle-piece.

Vasari. Two small compositions from the Story of Saint Cayetan.

Corrado. Three original Sketches of Frescos.

Teniers. An Armoury; very fine.

Teniers. A very curious and capital picture, in which the Artist has drawn
himself sitting in his painting-room, where is a grand collection of statues,
pictures, and designs; which, without doubt, is a pourtrait in all particulars.

Of all the pictures of Teniers, I have ever seen, this I think the most to be
coveted and admired: Another excellent subject for an engraving.

Brughels. Four fine Sea Pieces.

Two Landscapes.

One do, of a large size.

Three small Flower-pieces; a very valuable collection.

Queen's Great Sa^
Titian. A full-length pourtrait of the Emperor Charles V. on foot, with a
large mastiff, painted at Bologna before Titian entered into his service, and
as he was on his way to Rome. To this pourtrait Titian applied his utmost art,
and his success paved the way to the favor, in which he was ever after held by
the Emperor.

Zelma, a Spanish Artist of great merit, has engraved this pourtrait very
finely: It is bound up with the new publication of Sepulveda's Works; in which
is contained the History of Charles V. written in pure Latin, with other
matters, historical and miscellaneous, of a very curious nature: This work is
comprised in four quarto volumes, and was published whilst I was in Spain.

Titian. Philip the Second of Spain; a capital pourtrait.

Pourtrait of a man, half-length.

Do of a woman, do.

Rubens. The Rape of Proserpine; a capital composition.

A Garden Scene, in which he has introduced his family; the figures small.

A magnificent composition, exhibiting a very fine Landscape, in which he has
introduced a priest in the act of carrying the viaticum to a dying person: The
priest is mounted on a horse, which is led by a count of Augsberg.

This is one of the many capital pictures of this master to be found in Spain,
which have conspired to impress me with the highest veneration for his talents.
Perhaps I have already tired the reader with too many attempts at describing
objects, which interested my feelings upon the contemplation of them; and
therefore, although few occasions can offer, which might better warrant the
endeavor, I shall venture upon nothing more than to recommend it to the
traveller, who shall visit this collection, if he condescends to take this
Directory in his hand, to stop at this picture; and if he bestows his attention
upon it, I am persuaded he will not withhold his admiration.

Velasquez. Four capital pourtraits, full-length, viz. Margaret of Austria.
Philip the Second. Philip the Third of Spain. An African commander, supposed to
be the famous Barbarossa.


Luca Jordano. Four great Historical Pieces, on the subject of Solomon.

Three sabulous compositions, viz. Pluto in his car; Jupiter; and a Daedalus.

Jordaens. Still Life; Fruits, and various Viands.

Corrado. Sketches of emblematic Figures; Justice, Peace, etc.

Flemish. Two large and fine Landscapes.

Queen's Bedchamber.
Vandyke. Christ betrayed and seized by Judas and his followers, a night-piece.

Mengs, in his Observations upon the Royal Collection, particularizes this
picture; and says it is painted with great taste, and colored to as great a
perfection as the scene, which is by night, will admit of. Undoubtedly it
merits the warmest admiration, and is a very capital picture of the master.

Luca Jordano. Four, Histories from the Life of St. Anthony.

Two, from that of Solomon.

Two, of the Blessed Virgin.

Two, of St. Nicholas de Bari, and St. Francis Xavier.

Two others, of the Incarnation.

Pedro Orrente. Orpheus harping to the Brute Creation; very fine.

Of the School of Guido. Christ laid in the Sepulcher.

Vasari. The four Cardinal Virtues.

St. Rosalia, supported by Angels.

Carlo Maratt. St. Anthony adording the Infant Christ; a very charming picture;
a close copy of his master Andrea Sacchi.

Paul Veronese. A capital Painting of Susanna and the Elders.

Prince of Asturias's Saloon.
Luca Jordano. Four small Pictures; two of which are Battlepieces; one, a Rape
of the Sabines; and the other, a Curtius leaping the gulf.

A Seneca expiring in the bath, dictating to his disciples in his last moments.

I believe the picture at Burleigh is a fac-simile of this; but I did not carry
it sufficiently in mind to be sure of the assertion.

Velasquez. St. Anthony conversing in the Desert with St. Paul the Hermit;

A celebrated figure of the God Mars; both capital.

Spaniolet. Esau selling his Birthright, finely treated, with great effect of
light and shade, and strong expression of nature.

Lanfranc. Two magnificent Designs, viz. A Naval Combat in an amphitheatre; A
Pagan Sacrifice; in which a Roman Emperor is officiating in person; masterly
and bold compositions; large.


Rubens.

Mercury and Argos.

Satyrs.

School of Rubens. A Triumph, in which is introduced a combat of Gladiators,
male and female.

Two compositions upon the Allegories of the Senses and Elements.

Jordaens. A Pomona; the scenery very beautiful.

Prince's Dining Room.
Velasquez. Vulcan at his Forge.

The Prince of Spain mounted on a beautiful Spanish Jennet, in full speed. The
spirit, which the painter has thrown into this pourtrait, and the truth, with
which it is drawn and colored, render it a most admirable piece of art. I have
an etching from this pourtrait.

Velasquez. A grand and celebrated piece of history, upon a very large canvas,
representing the famous General Pescara receiving the keys of a Flemish citadel
from the Governor of the place; the groupe of Generals, Soldiers, Citizens,
Horses, etc. and the striking effect of the town and landscape in the
back-ground, all in the most harmonious perspective, have established the fame
of this noble picture, in the opinion of judges, as one of the first, if not
the very first, production of the master. Mengs says decidedly that it is the
chefd'oeuvre of Velasquez, and has pronounced it to be faultless, except in the
circumstance of the soldiers' lances, which he criticizes as being too long:
Surely this is a very trivial remark, to fall from the pen of so great
authority, and, trivial as it is, there is great reason to doubt if it is
founded in truth. After all, if the painter has enlarged upon the actual height
of Pescara's lances for the purpose of effect, who would expect that any
eminent critic, after pronouncing the composition faultless in every noble
part, would seriously state this remark as a single exception? Let us therefore
admit, with Mengs, that Velasquez has taken a wrong measure of Pescara's
lances; but at the same time let us take his word for the perfection of the
picture in every other respect. If any lover of the art, who resorts to this
collection, should at the same time discover that there is one foot in the
famous Pasmo de Sicilia more than can be accounted for, I hope for his sake it
will not abate the rapture he would else receive in the contemplation of such
unrivalled compositions.

Velasquez. Philip the Second of Spain;

Philip the Third; both full-length pourtraits, by the same great master; and
both very fine.

Two full-length characters, of Aesop one, and the other of Maenippus; of the
strongest expression, and in a great style. Of these two I have etchings.

Two half-length pourtraits; one of which is a very interesting and curious
picture of the unfortunate Antonio Perez: It hangs near the pourtrait of Philip
the Second.

A View of the Palace of the Pardo, in which he has introduced the persons of
Philip IV. and the Princess Margaret of Austria. This compleats a list of ten
paintings by Velasquez in this chamber; few apartments can be more royally
furnished.

Pedro Mazo. A perspective View of the City of Saragossa, with the course of
the river Ebro, and a group of figures; a fine and elaborate piece.

Titian. Six pourtraits; four of men and two of women, all half-lengths.

Titian. An Orpheus; this picture is highly celebrated: Of his best age and
manner.

Tintorett. Judith and Holofernes; capital.

Solimena. Six histories of Solomon, over the doors.

Murillo. An Old Woman selling grapes;

A Country-fellow selling wine; both half-lengths.

These are reputed to be the most finished heads Murillo ever painted; they are
the nature itself, colored to a miracle.

The Infant Don Gabriel has copied them in sifted cloth with great truth and
exactness, and has hung them in his lodge at the Escorial. There are also good
engravings of them taken in Spain, of which I have copies.

Antony Coypel. The Elders accusing Susanna.

Spagnolet. A small copy from Raphael.

Wouvermans. Two most beautiful Landscapes; companions.

Teniers. Two Alchymists; very fine:

Two small Paintings; companions.

A large and most capital Landscape.

Brughels. Two charming Landcapes, with variety of animals.

Passage-Room.
Teniers. Eight small Sketches; two of them Landscapes.

Brughels. Eight Flower-pieces.

Ten small Landscapes; some with fabulous stories introduced.

Pedro Orrente. Four Landscapes with figures; esteemed very capital.

Murillo. An Old Woman peeling a lemon; half-length: A very natural character;
much admired.

Corrado. Four Sketches of designs in fresco.

Vato. Two Landscapes with figures, personating Peace and Plenty.

Flemish. Still life; Fish and sundry Viands.

Prince's Dressing Room.
Raphael. The celebrated picture called PASMO DE SICILIA, purchased by Philip
the Fourth of the Monks of Palermo, and by him termed La Joya, in preference to
all others! An annual-rent of one thousand scudi was the price at which the
king purchased it of the monks of our Lady dello Spasimo; and hence it got the
name of Pasmo de Sicilia. Vasari, and the celebrated canon of Valencia, Don
Vicente Victoria, and in late times Mengs, have all written largely in
testimony of its unrivalled excellence; and there seems a general concurrence
amongst the judges of the art to set it down as the masterpiece of Raphael. In
my second volume of the Anecdotes of Spanish Painters I have collected several
circumstances relating to this famous picture, and attempted a description of
it, which, if the reader is disposed to, refer to will be found in vol. ii.
from page 172 to 182, inclusive.

Rubens. The Adoration of the Magi.

This picture, like the Last Supper of Titian in the Refectory of the Escorial,
is the standard work of its master. It was begun in Flanders; enlarged,
retouched and finished during his embassy in Spain; nothing that his art,
genius and industry could effect is omitted: In grandeur of design, display of
coloring, dignity of character; in composition, drawing, perspective, harmony,
it is a model of excellence: Rubens, in putting his last hand to it, has
inserted his own pourtrait amongst the groupe of the Magi; the noblest
signature that could be set upon his canvass.

The figures are the size of life.

Rubens. A Holy Family; a groupe of Female Saints and Boys in various
employments: The scenery and embellishments of this rich and noble composition
are admirable.

Vasari. Five historical pieces, taken from the Story of Saint Cayetan;
companions.

Murillo. A large Holy Family; the Mother and Savior to the knees.

Spagnolet. A celebrated picture, representing the Martyrdom of Saint
Bartholomew; a masterpiece of anatomical art and terrible expression.

A Saint Benito, and a Saint Geronimo, both penitential characters, finely
designed, and of the tenderest expression; a striking contrast to the Saint
Bartholomew.

A Mary Magdalen; a touching and most delicate design, conceived and executed
with all the grace of the Italian student, and all the nature of the Spanish
master.

The genius of Spagnolet, like his fortune, seems always to be engaged on
subjects either of terror or of pity; he never draws but with a tragic pencil,
and so truly, that he gives the nature itself upon his canvass: In melancholy
grace and penitential beauty he is equal to Guercino; in anatomical science and
muscular correctness he ranks with Leonardo de Vinci, and in the sublime and
terrible approaches to Michael Angelo. The examples of his art, which he has
left in Spain, if they were generally known, would, I am persuaded, warrant
what I now venture to say; and for his life and misfortunes, which are very
interesting, I beg leave to refer once more to the Anecdotes, vol. i. page 197.

Andrea Sacchi. A Nativity; a large and capital composition.

Mengs. A Nativity; large size.

Luca Jordano. An Incarnation.

A Flight into Egypt.

Vandyke. A Mary Magdalen, small size, under a groupe of Angels in the Clouds.

An historical composition from the Story of Saint Rosalia.

Poussin. A Saint Cecilia; full length.

Titian. An Ecce Homo; also A Matter dolorosa; capital heads.

Gerard Sepez. A Virgin, with Flowers thrown round, in a frame.

Albert Durer. A Virgin, dead; the Apostles are introduced as ministering on
the occasion. A very curious and claborace piece of art.

Leonardo de Vinci. A Madona and Child, half-length; also

A Madona with the Child, full-length and erect; very fine.

Andrea del Sarto. A Madona, something more than half-length, with the Child
entire.

A small Holy Family, from Raphael.

Vasari. A Nativity; small.

Brughels. An Adoration of the Magi; also

The Descent into Egypt, companions, small size.

A Madona, with Chaplets of Flowers, in frame-work, highly esteemed.

Palma. A Madona and Child; a person is introduced who presents his family in
adoration of the Infant Savior; a capital picture.

Juan Antonio Regilio, called Bordonon. A Madona and Child; various Saints
adoring; half-length; very fine.

Pedro Cortona. A Magdalen, size of life.

Carlo Maratt. A Saint Rosalia, size of life.

The Oratory.
Salvator Rosa. A Madona and Child, with Saint Joseph; a capital picture.

Luca Jordano. A large Altar-piece; Our Savior bearing his Cross; also

Two Side-pieces, viz. an Annunciation, and Nativity.

Andrea del Sarto. A Holy Family, very beautiful.

Prince's Bedchamber.
Daniel Crispio. A Dead Christ supported by his Mother, an Angel weeping over
the body; a large piece.

Raphael. A Madona, of small size, embracing the Child.

Corregio. Christ praying in the Garden;

A small picture, but of inexpressible beauty, and magical effect of coloring.
It has been particularly celebrated by Mengs in his Remarks. The figure of
Christ receives its light from a Glory; the scene is by night; a reflected
light from the Savior strikes on the Angel, who is attending for his
consolation: The manner in which this emanation is reflected and diffused
through the piece to the extremities of the background, and the exquisite
gradations observed in its distribution, are in the highest degree
characteristic of the master. Mengs remarks, that Christ and the Ministering
Angel are the only figures which meet the eye upon a first view; a closer
examination brings forward many other objects and much beautiful scenery. This
is truly observed; for the Troop that come to seize our Savior, the Apostles
standing aloof under the shade of Trees, the Foliage of the Grove, the Herbage
of the Garden, a Crown of Thorns, a Cross fixed in the earth, and several other
emblematic objects suitable to the action, come by degrees into view, and start
up like visions created by the fancy of the spectator rather than by the pencil
of the artist.

Corregio. A Madona and Child, with Saint Joseph at a distance.

Mengs observes that this may be called a sketch, as it plainly appears that
the attitude and action of the Mother and Child have undergone several
alterations in point of disposition; by a peculiar management of the middle
imperceptible tints in this small, yet inestimable painting, there is produced
a very wonderful effect of size and grandeur, from figures which do not measure
two inches. Mengs pronounces that Corregio possessed this art of treating lights
and shades in the first degree; Velasquez in the second to Corregio, and
Rembrandt next to Velasquez: He adds, that the Child in this sketch is a model
of consummate excellence, not only from the incomparable management of the
Clear-obscure, but also from the coloring, character, drawing and divine
grace. Of the outline he speaks with rapture, and remarks that Corregio, in
this most difficult branch of his art, was never equalled by any but the great
Michael Angelo and Raphael Urbin.

Corregio. A Head of Saint John; of a sweet character, and beautifully treated.

Leonardo de Vinci. A Madona and Child, small size;

A Holy Family; also

A Madona and Child, and Saint John; beautiful samples, and in fine
preservation.

Rubens. Two Heads of Old Men; sketch-like and very grand.

Andrea del Sarto. A large Holy Family, from Raphael.

Julio Romano. A Holy Family, the size of life; consisting of a Madona and
Child, Saint John and Saint Joseph. The composition and drawing is attributed
to Raphael, the finishing to Julio Romano.

Vasari. Two small historical pieces, from the Story of Saint Cayetan.

Velasquez. A large and noble composition, representing the Crowning of the
Holy Mother of Christ.

Titian. Saint Margaret and the Dragon, large size; a brilliant composition;
also

Mary worshipping Christ, in his first style.

Guido Rheni. Saint Denis with his Cross; a large and capital piece.

Mengs. A Flight into Egypt; large size.

Claudio Coello. Saint Fernando worshipping the Virgin, who is seated on a
Throne, with the Infant Jesus, in a rich and splendid Apartment; a beautiful
Landscape is discovered in the back-ground: A large and fine composition,
painted with great expression and effect, in the best manner of the master.

This painter was a native of Spain, out of which he never traveled; a
disciple of Francisco Ricci, and royal artist in the court of Philip IV. His
pictures are highly esteemed in Spain, and I have met some admirers of them,
who do not scruple to prefer him to Murillo, Spagnolet, and even to Velasquez.
His masterpiece is the great picture in the sacristy of the Escorial, upon
which he expended seven years labor: Of this, and many other anecdotes of his
history, I have given an account, vol. ii. page 130, etc.

Paul Veronese. Jesus disputing with the Doctors in the Temple. This I conceive
to be a picture of great beauty, majesty and effect; the composition is full
and finely disposed; the characters sublime and majestic, marked with striking
discrimination and contrast: The architecture is superb; the coloring clear
and of a most captivating brilliancy: The character of Christ is divinely
conceived, and of matchless beauty. The picture is of large size, and a most
capital performance of the master.

The Receiving Room.
Rembrandt. Cleopatra receives the Cup of melted Pearl from the Hands of a
Female Slave. An inestimable picture, in his finest style; large size.

Spagnolet. A Combat of Gladiators. This picture is esteemed one of the very
best of the master; it is a study for an Academy. The attitudes of the
Combatants, the spirit of their characters, and the great truth and correctness
of drawing, cannot be too much admired. The subject was well chosen to display
the science of the painter in the muscles and proportions of the human figure,
naked and in the strongest exertion of manly vigor.

Murillo. A Judith with the Head of Holofernes; a Female Servant with a Light;
half-length: This is managed with great skill and effect; it is a study from
nature admirably executed.

Titian. Two most capital compositions, celebrated through Europe, and justly
recorded by Mengs as the most consummate models of beauty. One represents a
group of Boys and Cupids; the other of Bacchanals; companions. "The figures in
each are of the third part of the natural size: In the fore-ground of the group
of Bacchanals there is a young Female Reveller sleeping, of which Mengs speaks
in raptures of admiration, and concludes his remarks on this picture by
observing, that all the harmonious accompaniments of Sky, variegated Ground,
with deep and tender shades of the Trees, form such an assemblage of beautiful
objects in nature perfectly imitated, that he does not think the world
possesses a better picture in this style. The Boys and Cupids in the other
piece are grouped with wonderful variety of attitudes; they are engaged in
puerile sports under a Grove of Apple Trees, the fruit of which they have
scattered on the ground, and are playing with it in the most gay and natural
manner. It is equally excellent with its companion. These pictures were
formerly in the Ludovici palace at Rome, and were a present to the king of
Spain. Sandrart reports of this group of Cupids, that it served for a study to
Domeniquino, Poussin, and Flameneco; Albano has taken part of it into a
composition of his painting, and there are copies of both these companions by
Rubens in the palace: Of these Mengs says, that they are like an elegant author
translated into Dutch, where the sentiments of the original may be guessed at,
but all the grace is vanished." (Anecdotes, vol. i. p. 60.) What subjects for
an eminent engraver!

Titian. Three pourtraits, half-length, one of a Man, another of a Woman, and a
third of a Girl.

Leonardo de Vinci. Three exquisite pourtraits, three quarters. One of these is
of Ann Bullen, exceeding beautiful, but of a wanton, sly character: The other
two are also of Women.

Rubens. Two capital and full-sized Landscapes; in one of which he has
introduced his own Family; the scene a Garden.

Two smaller ditto; in one a Diana in the Chase, companions; extremely fine.

Brughels. Two small Landscapes; one representing an Allegory of Love and War;
the other of Love protecting the Arts.

A third small Landscape, with a variety of Animals.

Luca Jordano. A large composition on the subject of Love and War, in the style
of Rubens, whom he has introduced in the act of painting the very picture in
question. A valuable and very curious picture.

Paul Veronese. Moses saved by Pharaoh's Daughter; a small piece, of great
beauty and masterly composition.

Mengs. Four pictures over the doors; viz. Morning, Noon, Evening, and Midnight.

Teniers. Two capital Landscapes, companions.

First Closet.
Mengs. Four pourtraits; viz. The Reigning Sovereign; The Prince of Asturias;
The Princess of Asturias; The late Queen.


Vanlo. Three pourtraits (copies) viz. The Infant Don Philip; Queen Isabella;
The Consort of Don Philip.


Antonio Ynza. Four pourtraits, viz. The Infanta Donna Josepha; The Infant Don
Gabriel; The Infant Don Antonio; and Don Francisco Xavier.


Second Closet.
Rubens. Six small sketches of his famous tapestry designs, representing the
Triumph of the Church.

Albert Durer. Three curious pourtraits; viz. Calvin, Luther, and His own.


Titian. A most lovely pourtrait of a Boy.

Basan. Two small compositions; one of the Adoration; the other, Christ praying
in the Garden; both admirable.

Wouvermans. Two small landscapes with figures, companions.

Antichamber of the Princess.
Luca Jordano. The miraculous Draught of Fishes;

Christ purging the Temple;

Absalom caught by the Hair;

David and Abigail.

Four Battle-pieces, small size: In one of these he has represented Francis I.
of France taken Prisoner.

A composition, emblematic of the Four Quarters of the Globe.

Rubens. A large and capital picture upon the Story of Marsyas and Apollo, Pan
and Faunus in the group.

The Story of the Centaurs; very capital.

Two companions; viz. Saturn, and The Rape of Ganymede; small size.


Two small pictures, companions; viz. An Icarus and Apollo, and A Narcissus;
beautiful.


A large composition on a scriptural subject, of which there is a copy by
Murillo.

Villa Vicenzi. A Scriptural Composition, companion in size with the above, in
the style of Murillo. The name of this painter was Pedro Nun^ez, a disciple of
Mathias Preti, commonly called El Cavellero Calabres. He died at Seville in
1700.

Flemish. A beautiful group of Fruits and Flowers; painter unknown.

Mazo. Philip IV. with his Queen and Dames of Honor: Mazo was a disciple of
the famous Velasquez.

I have now gone through the Catalogue of this noble collection; and, as I have
reason to think it is the only correct and entire account yet published, I hope
it will be acceptable to the curious reader. Mengs's remarks only go to a few
pictures, and the account of them in the Viage de Espan^a, by Don Antonio Ponz,
is very far from perfect, though it is a work otherwise replete with
interesting information; and, as a general directory to travelers in Spain, no
book can be better contrived.

If the lovers of the art are curious to analyze this account, and separate the
respective works of the several great masters, they will find it to be a vast
collection, which the Spanish monarchs Charles V. Philip II. III. and IV.
amassed within the periods of their reigns: And if we add to this the great
collection in the Escorial, that of the Buen-Retiro, the many fine pictures
which were burnt in the Pardo, and some of the most capital which have been
discarded in the present reign, the amount will appear prodigious, and, I
apprehend, is not to be equalled by any other single collection in Europe.

Of Titian, Velasquez, Rubens, Murillo and Spagnolet, I find above one hundred
and forty pictures in this single Catalogue; forty-three of which are by the
hand of Titian: I must take the liberty notwithstanding to suggest that this
collection would still allow of many draughts to be made; and if these
vacancies were filled up from the Buen-Retiro only (not to mention the
Escorial) it would be much more perfect. Some of Luca Jordano's pictures might
well be spared; Corrado's sketches, the pourtraits of Vanlo and Ynza, and some
of Mengs's inferior performances, would be well exchanged for a select number
of Bassan's from the old Palace, for a capital Lucretia by Guido, which hangs
there in obscurity, and many others that might be named.

It is also to be regretted, that Velasquez's famous picture of Jacob receiving
the bloody Coat of his Son Joseph, and a very fine Guercino on the subject of
Susanna and the Elders, both which now hang in a wretched hole in the Escorial,
not appropriated to any sacred uses, should not be removed from thence, and
added to the royal collection.

Advantageous changes might also be made in the arrangement of the pictures;
for in the quarter belonging to the Prince and Princess many capital pictures
of Raphael, Corregio, Leonardo de Vinci, Julio Romano, Andrea Sacchi, Andrea
del Sarto, and others, are very unfavourably hung; the chamber in which the
principal pieces are, being a mean obscure room, filled with lumber, and not in
the suite of great apartments: The masters are classed, in general, without
much scientific attention to their styles of coloring; so that the florid
pictures oftentimes brow-beat the more tender; and the cold, labored
regularity of Mengs ill contrasts the warm and glowing canvasses of Titian,
Rubens, and Velasquez. But if this remark holds good against the sorting of the
pictures in this palace, how much more to be lamented is the condition of the
capital pictures in the Escorial, where the inimitable Perla of Raphael, the
Holy Family of Andrea del Sarto, and the famous Tintorett of Christ washing his
Disciples' Feet, hang aloft in dust and darkness over the presses that contain
the Relics in the Sacristy, and are almost totally out of sight. This must be
painful to every lover of the art, but to the English traveller more than any,
who will naturally cast a look of pity and affection toward these interesting
objects, once in the possession of an elegant and unhappy monarch, who left
them as monuments of his taste, to be alienated from his crown and nation by an
unfeeling crew of fanatics, as barbarous as they were bloody.

It is to be regretted, that so few engravings have been taken from the capital
pictures in Spain; I procured all that were to be had, and the collection is
very small: Two more may be soon expected by the hand of Zelma, an eminent
artist; viz. of the Pasmo de Sicilia and the Perla: The Nra Sen^ora del pez has
been engraved by Bartolozzi. It were greatly to be wished that proper
encouragement should be given to our young artists of talents to take drawings
of some of these pictures above described; in which I am confident they would
meet every possible favor and protection from the royal owner of the
collection. Several pictures might be pointed out in this Catalogue, and
elsewhere, which would be admirable subjects, and raise the credit of our
artists, already so high in estimation: At the same time that I venture to
recommend this undertaking, I am not without some grounds to hope that it is in
contemplation.

I should here take notice, that in the above Catalogue no account is taken of
the pictures in the apartments of the Infants Don Gabriel; Don Antonio and Don
Luis: In the former there are six Sacred Histories by Luca Jordano, from
passages in the Life of the Virgin Mary; also an Absalom, and a small sketch by
the same hand; two sketches by Corrado; a Saint Joseph, with the young Jesus
about ten years of age, by Spagnolet; a Saint Sebastian and a Magdalen, by the
same; Charles V. haranguing his Army, by Titian; Orpheus harping to the Beasts,
by Rubens; and a Vulcan, by the same master; with a large Flemish painting of
Still Life, finely colored, and capital in its style.

In the quarter of Don Antonio there are several by Luca Jordano on sacred as
well as fabulous story: A pourtrait of a Youth in Armor, by Vandyke; another
of Carreno, after Velasquez; and a composition, after Rubens, on the subject of
Moses and Pharaoh's Daughter.

In the apartments late appropriated to Don Luis we find the copies which
Rubens made of Titian's famous pictures of the Cupids and Bacchanals above
described, and which Mengs so tauntingly compared to a Dutch translation: There
are several others of the same master, particularly a Saint George slaying the
Dragon, of the size of life, colored with surprising brilliancy, but in a
gaudy style and flattering. Amongst the works of Rubens there is an Archimedes,
a Mercury, Hercules killing the Hydra, Apollo and Pan, and two pourtraits of
Ladies of the House of Medici, with some sketches; two pourtraits by Vandyke,
one very capital of the Infant Don Ferdinand. There is a Woman, with several
boys, in the manner of Leonardo de Vinci; a Scriptural Piece by Paul Veronese;
a Christ, of the size of life, with the Cross, by Guido; a pourtrait of a
Woman, by Titian; of a Man, by Vandyke; and some beautiful Flower-pieces by
Brughel.

Having mentioned some pictures cast out of the royal collection, which I saw
in the custody of an artist belonging to the king, it may be proper to observe,
that they consist of five capital Titians; the first of which is his
inestimable Venus, once the property of King Charles I. of England, described
in the Anecdotes ( vol. i. p. 56.) the greatest model of beauty and perfection
in the world: 2. A Venus and Cupid, with a Person in the back-ground playing on
an Organ, the Venus recumbent on a couch: 3. A Venus of the same size,
attitude, etc. with the addition of a little Dog, which she is caressing: 4. A
Venus in the action of holding back Adonis in her embrace, who is setting out
for the chase with his dogs, etc. 5. A Danae, naked, receiving the golden
shower: There is also a half-length pourtrait of Titian, by his own hand.
Besides these, there is a Venus, by Paul Veronese; and an Adonis and Cupid, by
Annibal Caracci; an Atalanta and Hippomenes in the Race, by Guido, of
consummate beauty: The figures are of very tall life, the outline as glittering
as Corregio, the limbs divinely graceful, and the air of the heads unspeakably
elegant and expressive; the attitudes perhaps have more of the academy than
might be wished, the coloring warmer than his usual hue. Of Rubens there are
several, and such as would dignify the first collections in Europe; viz. The
Rape of the Sabines; The Baths of Diana; a Bacchanalian Triumph, wherein
several Bacchants are plucking fruits, and the figure of Bacchus himself in a
capital style; a Perseus and Andromeda, which is a wonderful picture; a group
of Juno, Minerva, and Venus; Paris carrying away Helen, capital; and The
Judgment of Paris, with the Rival Goddesses, a matchless piece of coloring;
all of the size of life, and the very best of the master. There are also two
beautiful pictures by Albano; one of them The Judgment of Paris; the other a
Venus coming out of the Bath; and a Lot and his Daughters, by Andrea del Sarto.
I need not observe what an accession these inestimable pictures might be to the
collection in the palace.

The royal chapel of the palace is a very beautiful piece of architecture,
supported by vast columns of Biscayan black and white marble, each of one
entire block; and in the sacristy and chaplain's room there are several fine
pictures by Spagnolet, Murillo, Luca Jordano, Corrado, Cambiaso, Alonzo Cano,
and other Spanish masters; besides which there is a Descent from the Cross, by
Albert Durer; and a Conversation-piece of Saint Anthony and Saint Paul the
Hermit, by Andrea Sacchi.

Old Palace of the Buen-Retiro.
In the chamber called de los Reynos, there are twelve large Battle-pieces by
Spanish masters, and the Labors of Hercules, boldly executed by Francisco
Zurbaran.

In the antichamber to the queen's apartment there are two large pictures by
Luca Jordano, some by Rico a Neapolitan, and the representation of an Auto de
Fe by Francisco Rizi; a Roman Triumph, by Borgiani; and a fine pourtrait of
Henry II. of France, ascribed to Titian; also pourtraits of Ferdinand and
Isabella.

In the chamber of Castrillo a Tantalus and an Ixion, both by Spagnolet,
colossal, and of striking expression; a view of Saint Peter's in Rome, Saint
Mark's Place in Venice, and the Vatican, with the Pope and Cardinals in
procession.

In a passage-room leading from this chamber there are some noble pictures of
Snyders, John Tillen, and Peter de Vos; in the Hunting-pieces of De Vos there
are several persons introduced with wonderful spirit and expression. A capital
composition by Rubens of Hercules slaying the Hydra; the Queen Mother of
Charles II. of Spain; two full-lengths of Charles V. by Juan Pantoia de la
Cruz; two of Philip IV. of different ages; and one of a Buffoon, in the style
of Velasquez; several Sacred Histories, finely executed by Bassan, and some by
Estevan Marc.

In a large room adjoining are two grand Historical Compositions by Pedro de
Cortona, in both which he has introduced Pope Urban VIII. with his Cardinals,
and views of the Vatican; two small compositions on the subject of Diana, by
Titian, painted in his latter age; a Mercury and Argos, by Jordaens, and
several excellent Bassans, and some landscapes by Marc.

In the Court-room many pictures by Luca Jordano; a large Bacchanalian piece,
by Cornelius de Vos; a large Fruit-piece, of unparalleled execution and
variety, representing the Golden Age, by Adrian Van Utrecht, with nine figures
of the School of Rubens; also another admirable piece of Fruits, Birds, etc. to
which Van Utrecht has set his name and the date of the year 1642; Orpheus
redeeming Eurydice from Hell, by Rubens; a capital Landscape, signed with the
Name of Jordaens, in which he has represented Vertumnus and Pomona, naked
figures.

In a small room next to this some copies by Luca Jordano, and a superb picture
by Rubens, representing the Fall of the Giants; a Saturn devouring a Child, by
the same. A fine composition, by Nicholas Poussin, with an Amphitheatre, and
many figures, amongst which are four Elephants; and several other pictures,
which I forbear to enumerate.

In one of the private chapels there is a fine Altar-piece by Vasari, with the
Holy Family at full-length, admirably executed; other pictures by Luca Jordano
and the Spanish masters.

In the passage to this chapel hangs an original drawing, by Raphael, of his
famous Battle-piece of Constantine and Maxentius, now in the Vatican; an
exquisite Parmegiano of the Espousals of Christ with Saint Catherine; the
Centurion at the Feet of our Savior, a fine picture by Paul Veronese; a grand
Head of Saint Jerome, by Guido; the four Evangelists, by Rubens; and sketches of
the famous pictures he made for the Convent of Loeches, by commission from
Olivarez; some heads of Martyrs by Spagnolet; several pictures by Corrado, and
a very fine composition by Marc. All these valuable pieces are buried in a dark
lobby, and every spectator, who has a feeling for merit in obscurity, will
regard them with a mixture of admiration and regret.

In the apartments of the Infants we again meet with several very fine
Scriptural Histories, by Bassan, in a style superior to any thing I have
elsewhere seen of that master; some landscapes by Claud Lorrain, several large
compositions by Sneyder, and a variety of pictures of the Spanish School.

In the passage to this apartment many curious pieces will be found; amongst
them a Saint J^es, by Paul Veronese, very fine; a beautiful Vertumnus and
Pomona, by Rubens; a half-length of a Woman with a basket on her arm, by
Spagnolet; a Saint Francis, by the same; some excellent pourtraits by Leonardo
de Vinci, and other old masters; a Boy and an old Woman, a candlelight, very
capital, by Rembrandt; Pilate washing his Hands, by Guercino, a noble picture;
and a Sacrifice to Pomona, exquisitely finished, by Jacobo Jordaeno.

In a room adjoining there is a great collection of Sneyders, Bassan, Golze,
Bosco, Dominichino, Francisco Perez, Luca Jordano, and others.

A Lucretia by Guido, full length, of the size of life, in the act of
self-destruction; a matchless picture, that would dignify the first collection
in Europe.

In this deserted palace are to be seen the celebrated frescos of Luca Jordano,
supposed to be the very best of the master: The climate at least has been
favorable to them, for they are in fresh and perfect preservation.

In the queen's chamber are some incomparable performances of Gaspar Poussin; a
Firework in the Spanish Square at Rome, finely painted by Sebastian Conca; an
Herodias, by Caravagio; a Hercules, by Caesar Tracarzane, and many others worth
attention.

There is a grand sketch of Tiniorett's famous Last Supper, in the quarter of
the late Infant Don Luis; some fine Spagnolets, and two very curious Histories
of Adam and Eve, the size of life, signed as follows, Albertus Durerus Almanus
faciebat post Virginis partum 1507.

The Theater, though now in disuse, is extremely fine, and so contrived as to
admit of the whole back scene to be occasionally drawn off, and laid open to
the garden: The paintings are by Amiconi.

From this imperfect account of the paintings in this deserted palace, it will
readily be acknowledged, that it still contains a very respectable collection,
and that a superb gallery might be furnished by draughts of the capital
pictures still remaining in it.

In the little suburban palace, called The Caso del Campo, are some curious
Caprichios of the noted Jacobo Calot, representing the Temptations of St.
Anthony, and an allegorical invention of Geronimo Bosch, which in wildness of
idea exceeds every thing that ever fell from the pencil of an artist: The
design is the Creation of Man, and the state to which his nature may be reduced
by vice, the painter having described the human passions by a vast multitude of
symbolical figures of Birds, Beasts, and monstrous compounds. The conceits of
this moral and satirical humourist are infinite; a man of curiosity may amuse a
leisure hour in the examination of them, but I am persuaded the reader will
readily excuse me from attempting to describe them.

The churches and convents of Madrid are possessed of very many fine paintings,
and it is in them the works of the Spanish masters will be found in the
greatest number and perfection: Several of them, however, contain very capital
productions of the best Italian painters, and in particular the Convent of San
Pasqual on the Prado, to which Cabrera, great admiral of Castile, bequeathed
his whole valuable collection. There is a large Altar-piece by Guercino,
superlatively fine, and several capital paintings on the altars and in the
sacristy, by Jacobo Palma, Leonardo de Vinci, Titian, Andrea Schiavone, Paul
Veronese, Guercino, Vandyke, Bassan, Luca Jordano and Spagnolet. A lover of the
art must not omit to visit the Convent of San Placido, if it were only for the
purpose of contemplating that wonderful picture of the Dead Christ on the
Cross, painted by Velasquez in the year 1638; though he will find further
gratification for his curiosity in the same convent, which possesses two of the
very best pictures which Claudio Coello ever composed.

As these churches and convents are very numerous, the research would be much
too intricate and laborious without a clue; but this will be so readily had in
the Viage de Espana before mentioned, that a traveller has only to provide
himself with those volumes, and he will there find an excellent guide for his
curiosity.

FINIS.

