One Thousand Eight Hundred; OR, I WISH YOU A HAPPY NEW YEAR. BEING A CHOICE
COLLECTION OF FAVORITE SONGS, ON SERIOUS, MORAL, AND LIVELY SUBJECTS.

Written and carefully revised BY GEORGE SAVILLE CAREY.

When Winter nights grow dull and long,
Propose the dance, or sing your song;
Or join concordant in some glee;
For Life should never vapid be.
TEWKESBURY: PRINTED BY W. DID; AND SOLD BY WEST AND HUGHES, PATERNOSTER-ROW;
C. CHAPPLE, PALL MALL; AND S. REED, STRAND, LONDON. 1800.

To Mr. INCLEDON.
SIR,
FROM the very eminent line you are ranked in as a vocal performer, and the
great pleasure I have often received when I have heard you sing some of the
following Songs, I thought there would be no impropriety, trusting at the same
time that you would not take it amiss, were I to inscribe the following little
work to you. I have been the more particularly urged to publish my songs in
this manner, from hearing of the frequent applications which have been made for
them to almost every bookseller in town, who have not had it in their power
until now, to gratify their different customers. There are more people capable
of reading than singing a song, therefore, those that have not studied music
sufficiently, may have the opportunity of looking over the words in the closet;
many of them have been set by some of the most able composers, and many also by
the most moderate ones; which have often been the cause of putting the reader
out of humor with the words, from the musician's misconception of the subject,
or his deficiency in respect to effect and harmony. Many an author has had the
mortification of seeing his words martyred by the composer of the music, who
has evidently shown, by his emphasis (if I may be allowed that phrase) being
wrongly placed, that although he might be full master of his science, so far as
to know a crotchet from a minim, yet if you had set him to read, perhaps, he
did not know a substantive from a verb, and a total stranger altogether of
antithesis or inflection; in such case, good words are often prostituted
through ignorance, which is as mortifying as if any body were to put a valuable
piece of broad cloth into the hands of an unskilful Tailor, who having no
taste, in respect to fashion or shape, often produces a coat not only unfit to
be worn, but unfit to be seen also, from which reason, it has disgusted, and
been thrown upon the shelf to rot in oblivion. And on the other hand, many a
song which has been merely measure, without the least pretention to the name of
Poetry, divested at the same time of instructive matter as well as of figure or
incident, has become a favorite ditty with the Public, from the ingenuity of
the composer of the music, who may have been lucky enough to give it a good
tune.

In the above instance we are told the Italian composers do often excel; and
the late ingenious Bonnel Thornton, joint writer of the Connoisieur, has, in
some part of his works, given us a translation of one of their popular airs,
which we also find to be strictly measure, and runs thus: " Where, which, and
wherefore,
" There, this, and therefore!!!"
This is a kind of fashionable scaffolding for the music, which the composer
builds upon, and finishes his part by line and rule, like a good mason or
bricklayer, who never considers, or looks into the imperfection of the
architect, but is perfectly contented that he has finished his part of the
business well, let the superstructure be ever so contemptible; but you are a
better judge of music than I am, and if this metaphor should not hold good, you
will be kind enough to pardon,

Sir, Your most obedient Servant, GEO. S. CAREY.

CONTENTS.
I WISH you an Happy New Year PAGE 5 The Loyal Tar 6 The Mason's Allegory 7 The
Soldier's Resolution 7 The Disconsolate Sailor 8 The Disconsolate Sailor's
Return 9 Mary of the Tyne 9 The Maid of the Rock 10 The Affectionate Soldier 11
Sequel to Poll of Plymouth 12 The Shipwrecked Boy 12 The Shipwrecked Boy at
Home 13 The Furloughed Soldier 14 On Yonder Style 15 Allen Brook of Windermere
15 Love without Return 16 The Valetudinarian 17 The Drooping Rose 18 The
Sailor's Allegory 18 Strangers at Home 19 Hold your Jaw 20 A monstrous good
Song 21 He saw I Loved 23 The Chichester Pack 24 Willy of the Woodland Side 24
William of Allerton Green 25 Give the Friendless Charity 26 The Gallant
Lieutenant 27 Eleanor of Exeter 28 Every Man his Mode PAGE 29 Bacchus's Advice;
or, the Good Evening 30 Ye Blushing Rays 31 The Negro's Soliloquy 31 My Little
Blithsome Sparrow 32 The Pirates 33 Cupid's Attributes 34 A Catch 34 The Pretty
Maid of Chelmsford 35 Pleasure's in the Vale 36 The Post Boy 36 Celia 37 The
Maiden's Resolution 38 Peg of the Moor 39 The Golden Ear-Ring; or, Autumnal
Leaf 40 The Good Merry Fellows all under the Holly 40 Edward and Editha 41 The
Loaves and the Fishes 42 Spring Water Cresses 44 Pity Kindled into Love 44 What
is Liberty? 46 Clody and Clara; or, Love's Controversy 47 My Own Fireside 48
An Old Friend with a New Face 49 The Responsive Dove 50 I thought it was Queer
50 Love and Time 51 The Royal Cottager 52 Poll of Prestbury 53 The Rationals 54
A CHOICE COLLECTION OF FAVORITE SONGS.
I WISH YOU AN HAPPY NEW YEAR.
JOHN ENGLISH, who often would speak without thought,
Not having the judgment to think as he ought,
From custom, let danger be ever so near,
Would annually wish you A HAPPY NEW YEAR.
Should our coast be in danger, and people afraid,
Lest the French, or the Dutch, should our country invade;
Give John but his Pipe, and his good Christmas cheer,
He Will greet all his friends WITH AN HAPPY NEW YEAR.
Some people call Johnny a national hack,
He bears such a national load on his back,
Should trade become dull, and should dockets appear,
Yet Johnny shall wish you A HAPPY NEW YEAR.
Should Monopoly threaten, or Famine surround,
And nothing about us but misery found,
When at every dwelling long faces appear,
Kind Johnny shall wish you A HAPPY NEW YEAR.
Without knowing the fate of the following day,
Or what heavy demands without money to pay,
Though the weather be bad, or provisions be dear,
Yet Johnny shall wish you A HAPPY NEW YEAR.
It Is a wish that our ancestors used to bestow,
In the good times of old we all very well know,
But those times are over, all wise people fear,
Who laugh when you talk of A HAPPY NEW YEAR!
THE LOYAL TAR.
'SDEATH what a fuss land-lubbers make
About their rights and laws,
As if in doubt what part to take,
And jar, as 'twere, for straws; --
If they would do the thing that is right,
Or cease prevarication,
Like loyal tars they would unite,
To save this envied nation.
Much talking argues little good,
For many do remark,
That our has not the truest blood,
Which is too apt to bark.
True courage never delights in noise;
But when there is occasion,
The loyal tar each nerve employs
To save his envied nation.
Let Frenchmen say whatever they will,
And pass such mad decrees,
That each a brother's blood shall spill,
Or father's if they please;
We are not quite so savage grown,
To ape so strange a fashion,
Each loyal tar will guard the crown,
His king, his friend, and nation!
THE MASON'S ALLEGORY.
THE trade of a Mason's a good moral school,
Where the measures of life are established by rule,
When affairs go awry let your judgment incline,
To make matters even by drawing the line.
Should your paths, being crooked, bewilder the mind,
Or, encircl'd by care, no alternative find,
Never let your guide, Reason, give way to despair,
Old Time, with exertion, your troubles may square.
Should you meet with a brother in craft too profound,
Make use of your plummet, his subtilty sound,
And if you no bottom should find in his heart,
When his hand he presents you, then bid him depart.
Let your converse be level, your life not too gay,
But just within compass the moderate way;
When you're crippl'd by age, infirm and oppressed,
Let Faith lend a pillar on which you may rest.
THE SOLDIER'S RESOLUTION.
SEE the night's taken its leave, the streamers of day,
Begin from the eastward to dart,
The ravilia beats, and I Am summoned away,
It Is hard my dear Betsey to part,
It is not the foe in the field that I dread,
Nor the point of the glittering steel,
It is not the whistling bullet of lead,
It Is parting with thee that I feel.
I must not indulge in the thought of my dear,
The bustle of war is around,
The bellowing trumpet blows loud in the ear,
My spirits start up at the sound.
I Will fight for my king as a soldier should fight,
Yet were I to 'scape with my life,
When the wars are all over, 'twou'd be my delight,
To make my dear Betsey my wife.
THE DISCONSOLATE SAILOR.
WHEN my money was gone that I gained in the wars,
And the world 'gan to frown at my fate,
What mattered my zeal or my honored scars
When indifference stood at each gate.
The face that would smile when my purse was well lined,
Showed a different aspect to me,
And when I could naught but ingratitude find,
I hi'd once again to the sea.
I thought it unwise to repine at my lot,
To bear with cold looks on the shore,
So I packed up the trifling remnants I Would got,
And a trifle, alas! was my store.
A handkerchief held all the treasure I had,
Which over my shoulder I threw,
Away then I trudged, with a heart rather sad,
To join with some jolly ship's crew.
The sea was less troubled, by far, than my mind,
For when the wide main I surveyed,
I could not help thinking the world was unkind,
And fortune a slippery jade.
And I vowed, if once more I could take her in tow,
I Would let the ungrateful ones see,
That the turbulent winds, and the billows could show
More kindness than they did to me.
THE DISCONSOLATE SAILOR'S RETURN.
ONCE more I returned to my own native shore,
Which I left so dejected, so heartless and poor,
Each face looked indignant and shy;
I sought for relief on the perilous main,
And, Fortune, she cheered my poor heart once again,
While I braved the caprice of the sky.
Though death seemed impatiently waiting around,
With sharp-pointed lightning and thunder profound,
Or roared in the turbulent wind,
When a calm has returned, I Have said to each mate,
Though the heavens have frowned, there is nothing I hate.
So much as the frowns of mankind.
I had not forgot how my heart was oppressed,
And slighted by those, whom I Would often caressed,
And parted my penny so free;
But if ever dame Fortune should leave me again.
No more shall ingratitude give me a pain,
I Will seek for resource on the sea.
MARY OF THE TYNE.
WHAT pleasure often it is to reveal,
The pain or pleasure that we feel;
It Is bliss, while either we impart
Unto a sympathetic heart; --
Just like that sweet heart of thine,
My lovely Mary of the Tyne.
I lose, when near thee, all my care,
When from thee, I am all despair;
My bosom heaves with anxious pain,
Until I meet with thee again;
What are the adverse pangs of mine,
My lovely Mary of the Tyne?
Say is it from thy beauteous face,
Or is it from thy natural grace,
Or is it thy angelic mind,
Or is it every one combined,
Making one sweet form divine,
My lovely Mary of the Tyne?
Should it be love, thou wilt sure forgive,
That is the food on which I live;
But if thou should that bliss deny,
Then must thy faithful lover die;
Or linger out his life and pine,
For lovely Mary of the Tyne.
THE MAID OF THE ROCK.
I SAT out one eve, with intention to roam,
To the Rock, where the surges wantonly play,
When the owl had stolen out from his secret home,
And bright-vested Hesperus closed in the day.
The moon was at full, and with dignity rose,
And tissu'd with silver the green-mantl'd seas,
The God of the ocean was gone to repose,
And Aeolus fanned with a whispering breeze.
On reaching the cave where old legends report,
And many a sorrowful tale has been sung,
Where blood-hunting robbers have often held their court,
On each side was some vestige of chivalry hung;
My eyes were alarmed on beholding a maid,
Who, near to the cavern, sat silent in grief,
Her head on her hand all in sorrow was laid,
A hard rocky pillow was all her relief.
She started with fear, and she fain would have fled,
I begged her to stay and her sorrows relate,
Then told her, from me, she had nothing to dread,
That I was sent there by the order of fate, --
You came by the order of one, she replied,
Who has done all she can to distract my poor mind,
O'er-whelm'd in the deep, my dear William, my pride,
Then sunk, and she gave her last breath to the wind!
THE AFFECTIONATE SOLDIER.
'TWAS in the evening of a wint'ry day,
When safe returning from a long campaign,
Allen o'er-toil'd and weary with the way,
Came home to see his Sally once again.
His battered arms he carelessly threw down,
And viewed his Sally with enraptured eyes,
But she received him with a modest frown,
She knew not Allen in his rough disguise.
His hair was knotted, and his beard unshorn,
His tattered 'coutrements about him hung;
A tear of pleasure did each cheek adorn,
And blessings fell in torrents from his tongue.
Am I so altered by this cruel trade,
That you your faithful Allen have forgot?
Or is your heart unto another strayed?
Ah! -- why escaped I from the murdering shot?
When thus he spoke, her wonted color fled,
She ran and sunk upon her Allen's breast,
All pale, awhile, she looked like one that is dead,
He kissed, she breathed, and all her love confessed.
Yes, my delight -- though altered as thou art,
Reduced by honest courage to this state,
Thou art the golden treasure of my heart,
My long-lost husband and my wished for mate!
SEQUEL TO POLL OF PLYMOUTH.
WHEN Edward first heard Poll of Plymouth was dead,
The functions of life made a pause,
His piteous eyes stood aghast in his head,
His ship-mates inquired the cause;
Reviving awhile, he addressed them around,
His hand closely pressed on his heart,
Within this sad letter at once I have found,
The spectre of death and his dart.
It tells that my dear Poll of Plymouth is dead,
My comfort, my joy, and my wife,
When I was torn from her, she flew to her bed,
And sighing, resigned her dear life.
He fancied he saw his dear Poll in the clouds;
Ah, stay for poor Edward he cries,
Then, swift as his fancy, he ran up the shrouds,
And eagerness flashed in his eyes.
He called for all hands, and he gave a loud shriek,
And now all distracted he raves;
Said, do you not see that my heart's sprung a leak,
Then threw himself into the waves.
All hands were employed to prevent his sad fate,
And the longboat was put out in vain,
That drags him aboard, but, alas, 'twas too late,
For he never once breathed again!
THE SHIPWRECKED BOY.
'TWAS near a rock, within a bay,
Where many a shattered vessel rides,
An ample cottage sheltered lay,
Which overlooked the ebbing tides;
Its calm inhabitants would view
The ocean struggling with the sky,
When ever the northern tempests blew,
Or when each wave ran mountains high.
Once at the closing of a day,
When angry Boreas in his rage,
Had cleared the dark'ning clouds away,
Which caused a thundering war to wage;
A ship-wreck'd sea-boy, pale and spent
With buffeting the threatening waves,
Straight to the peaceful cottage went,
And, bending low, for succor craves.
He told his tale with feeble voice,
For he would a heart that could not feign;
The listening hearers all rejoice,
That he was safe on land again.
The parents and the children strove,
Who now should first his wants supply,
While pity caused each heart to move,
And sympathy filled every eye.
The can was filled, the fire was made,
To cheer and dry their drenched guest,
For each brought something to his aid,
And anxiously the boy caressed;
At length revived, expressed his mind,
And showed his gratitude so plain,
Forgot the thunder and the wind,
Resolved to try the sea again.
THE SHIPWRECKED BOY AT HOME.
THE goddess of war threw her spear on the ground,
And Peace waved her olive branch gracefully round,
A stillness now reigned over the wide-spreading main,
The Sirens began a melodious strain;
The ship-wrecked sea-boy his troubles forgot,
The yawn of the waves and the whistling shot,
His dear native home strongly pressed on his mind,
His parents and sisters so loving and kind.
He hurried fast on with his heart all elate,
To embrace them around, and his story relate,
His hard-earned wages he longed to divide,
Amongst those that he loved near his own fireside;
But when he arrived, say what pen can express
The genial delight, the joy in excess;
So welcome at home was this brave little guest,
You Would have thought that their welcoming never would have ceased.
He hailed 'em around, and he smiled with glee,
Cried, hold out your hands, take this present from me;
A fine silken 'kerchief, each neck to enfold,
But gave to his parents a purse full of gold;
The fiddler was sent for that lived on the green,
Such dancing and romping sure never was seen;
They gambol'd, 'till Phoebus peeped over the shed,
Then kissing, and blessing, went peaceful to bed.
THE FURLOUGHED SOLDIER.
AS I Have plodded my way to some far country town,
Full many a wearisome day,
My purse has contained but a scanty half-crown,
And that has soon melted away.
Often weary and sad, in some wint'ry road,
With rain I Have been wet to the skin,
Of my knap-sack grown tired, I Have sought for abode,
At some friendly good alehouse or inn.
I Have hoped that good fortune on turning her wheel
Would cast me perchance on the place,
Where the wound in my bosom would instantly heal,
At the sight of my Sally's dear face.
She grieves; for she knows how I Am destined to roam,
On the strength of my furlough to rest,
And then she often wishes her Allen at home,
To bury his cares in her breast.
ON YONDER STYLE.
A DUET.
ON yonder style, let us sit awhile,
To hear the nightingale,
The lazy moon, will get up soon,
And silver over the vale;
Ah, did you know the pangs I feel,
I can no longer now conceal,
The tender tale I must reveal,
On yonder style let us sit awhile
To hear the nightingale,
The lazy moon, will get up soon,
And silver over the vale.
The golden sun his race has run,
The linnet seeks her nest,
The shepherd's care, all folded are,
While he plods home to rest;
Then let us Phoebe [William] onward move
Unto the streamlet near the grove,
And while I whisper over my love,
On yonder style let us sit awhile,
And hear the nightingale,
The lazy moon, will get up soon,
And silver over the vale.
ALLEN BROOK OF WINDERMERE.
SAY have you in the village seen,
A lovely youth of pensive mein,
If such a one has passed by,
With melancholy in his eye,
Where is he gone, ah, tell me where?
It Is Allen Brook of Windermere.
Last night he sighing took his leave,
Which caused me all the night to grieve,
And many maids I know there be,
Who try to wean my love from me;
But heaven knows my heart's sincere
To Allen Brook of Windermere.
My throbbing breast is full of woe,
To think that he should serve me so,
But if my love should angered be,
And try to hide himself from me,
Then death shall bear me on a bier,
To Allen Brook of Windermere!
LOVE WITHOUT RETURN.
WHERE are those hours fled
That used to yield delight,
My days with pleasure sped,
And sweet repose at night;
Within the shaded cot,
Which stands on yonder lea,
It was, alas, my lot
My Mary first to see.
Ah, were her love like mine,
How happy had I been,
Crowned with such bliss divine,
While Mary reigned my queen;
But she increased my woe,
While at her feet I sighed,
Disdain sat on her brow,
Which all my love defied.
If beauty makes her vain,
My Mary sure is wrong,
For, ah, who can retain,
Or boast of beauty long?
My love is so sincere,
Should time her charms disguise,
I Would love my Mary, dear,
'Till death enclosed my eyes.
THE VALETUDINARIAN.
YE that groan beneath the weight
Of dissipation, pride, or state,
Condemned to walk through life's parade,
At rout, or drum, or masquerade,
Ye that fain would pleasure find,
Led by Fortune, ever blind,
Come and sit along with me,
Come and taste tranquillity.
Or if chased by sallow care,
Would you shun the hag Despair?
Would you cheerful health restore,
When advice can do no more?
Seek the fresh reviving breeze,
Or the fanning of the trees,
Come and sit along with me,
Come and taste tranquillity.
Ye that feel the pangs of love,
Come and murmer with the dove;
Shun the false ungrateful maid;
Seek the sweet sequestered shade;
Let her never behold thy grief,
Time, ere long, will bring relief;
Come and sit along with me,
Come and taste tranquillity.
Ye that languish to regain
A breaking heart, or racking brain;
Driven by fortune or by fate
To a wild and frantic state;
Or mopeing wander like a loon,
Dreading often the wayward moon,
Come and sit along with me,
Come and taste tranquillity.
THE DROOPING ROSE.
GO, drooping Rose, by heat oppressed,
Go, and revive on Mary's breast,
Her breast benign, does all excel,
Go there my Rose, go there and dwell.
Not in the vale, nor on the hill,
Where summer gales their honey spill,
Not Flora's temples, when she is dressed,
Are half so fair as Mary's breast.
Were I to live 'till I be old,
And pinched by keen December's cold,
I should revive, were I to rest
My aged head on Mary's breast.
THE SAILOR'S ALLEGORY.
LIFE's like a ship in constant motion,
Sometimes high and sometimes low,
Where every one must brave the ocean,
Whatsoever wind may blow;
If unassail^d by squall or shower,
Wafted by the gentle gales,
Let Us not lose the favoring hour,
While success attends the sails.
Or if the wayward winds should bluster,
Let us not give way to fear,
But let us all our patience muster,
And learn from reason how to steer;
Let judgment keep you ever steady,
It Is a ballast never fails,
Should dangers rise, be ever steady,
To manage well the swelling sails.
Trust not too much your own opinion,
While your vessel's under way,
Let good example bear dominion,
That Is a compass will not stray.
When thundering tempests make you shudder,
And Boreas on the surface rails,
Let good discretion guide the rudder,
And Providence attend the sails.
Then when you're safe from dangers riding,
In some welcome port or bay,
Hope, be the anchor you confide in,
And Care, awhile, enslumber'd lay;
Or when each can's with liquor flowing,
And good fellowship prevails,
Let each true heart, with rapture glowing,
Drink success unto our sails.
STRANGERS AT HOME.
NOW we have drank to the king, to our lasses and friends,
And the Muses appear as the liquor ascends,
Setting Fancy a-wing, or on tip-toe to roam,
For a song or a catch to make Strangers at home.
May the man be despised, of whatever degree,
Who has wealth without feeling to make a friend free,
May his wife, night and morning, his caput well comb,
Who Is in want of a heart to make Strangers at home.
Or the boor that will frown, when an alien appears,
Whose heart fills his bosom with national fears,
That encloses his door, if from Paris or Rome,
Some poor stranger might knock who is in want of a home.
Or when merit appears in her scanty attire,
That may want a good meal, or the warmth of a fire;
May the wretch that denies her, never enter this dome,
To chill the warm hearts of us Strangers at home.
And may he that is a stranger to friendship and love,
Be denied all those blessings we hope for above,
May his mind be perplexed by some spell-setting gnome,
Who cannot, as we do, make Strangers at home.
Let us join all our hands with a bountiful mind,
And each to his neighbor, be cordial and kind;
May the spirit of light, when we are raised from the tomb,
Give us all a free welcome -- as Strangers at home!
HOLD YOUR JAW.
ACIT much distressed,
A statesman addressed,
Respecting the silencing law,
The statesman replied,
But spoke it aside,
The meaning is -- hold your Jaw.
Hold your Jaw, etc. etc.
In forming a mob
To plunder or rob,
Or seize an old friend by the craw,
This law points the way
To Botany Bay,
Then, prithee man, hold your Jaw.
Hold your Jaw, etc. etc.
Old Gallica sat,
As snug as a rat,
Concealed in a bundle of straw;
Would have eat all our fat,
Had not sly pussy cat,
Cried, sirrah, pray hold your Jaw.
Hold your Jaw, etc. etc.
To judge matters right,
Requires good sight,
Or would you the proper line draw,
Pray run not your rig,
On Tory or Whig,
But prudently hold your Jaw.
Hold your Jaw, etc. etc.
Let each hasty soul,
His passion control,
Remember wise Solomon's saw;
In venting your spite,
You Will get nothing by it,
'Twere better to hold your Jaw.
Hold your Jaw, etc. etc.
May each gallant crop,
Who Is head's like a mop,
With care keep his eye on his taw.
For should his long tongue
Cause him to be hung,
He Would certainly hold his Jaw.
Hold his Jaw, etc. etc.
A MONSTROUS GOOD SONG.
YE poets employ all the force of your lays,
To suppress all the ills of these troublesome days,
When Justice sits blind-folded, crippl'd and lame,
Say, do you not think it a monstrous shame?
In talking of Monsters, it puts one in mind,
Of the numbers we have, who all differ in kind;
Yet each is permitted to play a foul game,
Say, do you not think it a monstrous shame?
The great men who are deep in the nation's affairs,
Often play up old Nick, with the Bulls and the Bears,
With a hum, all Change Alley they set in a flame,
Say, do you not think it a monstrous shame?
The Lawyer's so deep in his logical skill,
He Is sure to entangle you, do what you will,
Should he fail or succeed in your cause, it is the same,
Say, do you not think it a monstrous shame?
The Methodist drives on a monstrous trade,
By setting up scare-crows to make us afraid,
Till kicking in fits you see many a Dame,
Say, do you not think it a monstrous shame?
Say, is it not the very worst species of vice,
That the comforts of life are so high in their price;
That knaves, by collusion, should play us this game,
I swear and protest, it is a monstrous shame?
Sure every good man must see with much pain,
That the Monster MONOPOLY's, suffered to reign,
But should he reign long, every mortal's to blame,
And if he is not hang' -- it is a monstrous shame!
The report of each day which is bawled in our ears,
Is a monster, which often is made by our fears;
Report tells us fibs, some dark purpose to frame,
That the world will believe -- is a monstrous shame!
HE SAW I LOVED.
LOW in a vale, beneath a rising hill,
Adown which hurries many a plaintive rill,
In soft accordance to the murmuring dove,
That morn and evening tells his tale of love;
Or in the grove that hangs the brow beside,
Sits nestling near his faithful feathered bride; --
'Twas there I first with faithless Edward strayed,
'Twas there my eyes my foolish heart betrayed.
He saw I loved; -- which if he had not seen,
He had not then so great a tyrant been,
Or over a heart, like mine, exulting shown,
That he would no love for me about his own;
Can I forget, while near the Medway's side,
How often he called me his intended bride,
And charmed me as we trod the banks along,
With some soft tale, or heart-bewitching song?
My ear was charmed, I listened and believed;
My love grew stronger as the youth deceived;
Who could have thought that falsehood ever hung,
Mixed with the love-like notes of Edward's tongue!
Ye banks of Medway, witness to his vows,
Ye willows too, that shaded us with boughs;
Ye tides that swelled, and kissed the meadow's brim,
As if you envied me each kiss of him.
Come swell again, receiving while I weep
My briny tears, and mix them with the deep;
For Edward's vows are false as subtle sands,
That many a fair and gallant vessel strands;
My Edward's false! and to some other strayed,
And left me wrecked beneath this willow shade;
Let me not live, to tyrant love, a slave,
First let me perish in this watery grave!
THE CHICHESTER PACK.
AN HUNTING SONG.
'TWAS six in the morn and the sky wore a dapple-grey,
Cheerly the horn through the village resounds,
Old Morpheus now took his leave of my bed,
And the vapors of slumber all hastily fled,
Say, who would not rise when the huntsman cries hark-away,
Sluggards to horse and join the sweet hounds.
Let urbanical prigs, grown feeble by revelling,
Come and behold of what pleasure we taste,
Each sportsman mounts up on his steed with such grace,
While health paints a ruddiness over each face,
They all bid defiance to impotent drivelling,
Exercise makes the blood vivid and chaste.
How pleasant's the sound when the huntsman is hollowing,
Near to the skirt of some echoing wood,
Each horseman with eagerness joins in the cry,
And the glorious clamor resounds to the sky,
While stretched all along the poor victim lies wallowing,
Farmers with pleasure exult in his blood.
WILLY OF THE WOODLAND SIDE.
SURE Willy will never return back again,
I Have waited this hour or more;
Like the Linnet, alas, I am left to complain,
Which sits on the whins of the moor.
My heart it will break with concern,
Unless my dear Willy return;
Some damsel has stole the dear heart of my swain,
And I shall never see my sweet Willy again.
The Thrush and the Ouzel are now gone to rest,
The Bat and the Owl are a-wing
The sun has this hour been sunk in the west,
And the sleep-lulling nightingales sing,
How pensively passes the day,
Whenever my Willy's away,
Some damsel has stole the clear heart of my swain,
And I shall never see my sweet Willy again.
WILLIAM OF ALLERTON GREEN.
WITH a face full of grief, and a heart full of love,
Poor William of Allerton Green,
In the deepest recess of a neighboring grove,
By Robin, the woodman, was seen;
His looks were intent on a murmuring rill,
Which ran over the pebbles below,
The flood from his eyes served the streamlet to fill,
Which sprang from the fountain of woe.
His Phaebe he would missed a whole night and a day,
They Would promised to meet at a wake;
He feared that some phantom had led her astray.
Which dances each night on the lake;
But Robin, the woodman, now langh'd in his sleeve,
Who well knew the cause of his tears;
And, smiling, he said I Will your sorrows relieve,
And soon put an end to your fears.
It Is true, the poor thing had mistaken her way,
I met her with grief in each eye,
So, like a poor sheep that was going astray,
She Is pounded in safety hard by;
Being all over sorrow, just like to yourself,
And making even just such ado,
I thought her a foolish young simpering elf,
Because she was piping for you.
Young William jumped up, all enraptured with joy,
Said, where is my dearest delight?
Now Robin cried don't you be jealous my boy,
With me she has housed all the night;
Between wife and myself we have kept her from harm,
And cautioned her never to roam,
You have nothing to do but to lend her your arm,
And see the dear creature safe home.
GIVE THE FRIENDLESS CHARITY.
EDWARD loves me, Clara cried,
But she knew him full of pride;
In a beggar's habit dressed,
Put his feelings to the test;
As he proudly passed by,
She entreated Charity.
With a high disdainful look
He but little notice took,
Saying, do not trouble me,
I have naught to do with thee;
Still his Clara drew more nigh,
Crying, sir, your Charity!
While she spoke, a gentle gale,
Blue aside her humble veil,
And exposed her lovely face,
When he slackened in his pace;
But she still, with down-cast eye,
Cried, dear sir, your Charity!
Soon as he her face beheld,
All the mystery was revealed;
Saying, while he seized her hand,
Listen now to my demand;
While thus suppliant on my knee,
Give thy Edward Charity.
Beggared he must ever be,
Doomed to endless misery;
Clara, smiling, now replied,
Seeing she had checked his pride,
All your love, dear youth, give me,
Give the friendless Charity!
THE GALLANT LIEUTENANT.
PREPARE, prepare, we are hailed on board,
It Is famed Britannia gives the word;
See the gallic bird on high,
Turn, turn upon your enemy.
Be steady hearts, be firm and bold,
And fight as Briton's fought of old,
Then swiftly fly on eagle's wing,
To guard your country and your king.
The Lion roars within his den,
The ancient crest of Englishmen,
Undaunted bid you meet the foe,
And lay their mighty vaunting low.
Be steady hearts, etc. etc.
Behold the fair Edina stand
Surrounded by her warlike band,
And see, she draws the hostile blade,
To lend her neighboring sister aid.
Be steady hearts, etc. etc.
Ere yet the battle is begun,
Unite ye Britons, be as one,
Be firm, true hearted and sincere,
And then, oh then, you have naught to fear.
Be steady hearts, etc. etc.
ELEANOR OF EXETER.
AS wandering out one summer's morn,
Near Exon's peerless stream,
I sought fair Eleanor forlorn,
And listened to her theme.
My heart was soon a prisoner made,
Enchanted were my eyes,
My ruddy cheeks began to fade,
My bosom heaved with sighs.
But when I heard her Edmund's name,
Repeated in each strain,
My heart renewed its wonted flame,
My cheeks they flushed again.
The love which modesty forbad,
That she should show to me,
The doubts which often made me sad,
Were changed to exstacy!
I ran and knelt at Ellen's feet,
She trembled all with fear,
And though she bid me often retreat,
She did it with a tear.
I wiped the precious gem away,
And told how much I loved;
Her eyes shot forth a vivid ray,
While she that love approved.
Then every morn and every eve,
We passed an hour divine,
Which caused full many a swain to grieve,
That Eleanor was mine.
When I from church, all trim and gay,
Led her across the green,
Every swain would whispering say,
Would I Would so happy been.
EVERY MAN HIS MODE.
SURE every man in his way is a prig,
From the cut of his coat, or the tie of his wig,
And most in some partial opinion is blessed,
For every man thinks his own is the best.
The Coachman, though plain, is an absolute fop,
With his shoulders well squared and his head like a mop,
Or his broad silver buttons, and tripple-cap'd coat,
And all the slang speeches of Newgate by rote,
The Bishop and Dean have a snug kind of cut,
With a solemn, a sage, and monastical strut,
The full-puffed sleeve and the well-starched band,
His wristbands like snow and a lilly-white hand.
The Judge is a fop, though he looks rather droll,
With his scarlet and fur, and his head like an owl;
And the Sergeant, as if through the Mohawks he would bled,
Or had lately been scalp'd, by the patch on his head.
The Quaker's a very queer kind of a quiz,
His back so erect, and so prim in his phiz,
In superfine cloth, though his coat be but plain,
Yet the Quaker's a coxcomb, a coxcomb in grain.
The Player's a prigster of every kind,
Of every fashion, of every mind,
Sometimes like a beggar, sometimes like a king,
A tragical, comical, whimsical thing.
Since men about fashion make such a great pother,
And every prig will find fault with his brother,
Let each be indulged in his different way,
For Charmen can tell it is the whim of a day.
BACCHUS'S ADVICE; OR, THE GOOD EVENING.
SINCE all are subject to vexation,
While in this state of expectation,
For joy is often alloy'd by sorrow,
We laugh today, and cry tomorrow;
No more with worldly sickness pine,
But let your regimen be wine.
Let us compound with Time for pleasure,
Our days he gives in scanty measure;
Slowly, often with grief he crambles,
Perplexing with his thorny brambles,
'Till Bacchus comes, and drives away,
The languid vapors of the day.
Or if you should in love be pining,
And at your mistress' window whining,
When she is unheedful of your 'plaining,
When all your resolution's waning,
Then take a goblet like to mine,
And bury all your love in wine.
While you are young be not too scanty,
When you are old, take bumpers plenty,
For when we slacken in our paces,
And care has wrinkl'd over our faces,
Wine makes young men often sage,
And gives a vigor to old age.
Then let us laugh while we are living,
There Is nothing ever got by grieving,
And when the spirit leaves its prison,
And to some better state is risen,
Good fellows shall in bumpers join,
And drink a long farewell in wine.
YE BLUSHING RAYS.
YE blushing rays of chearing light,
Come and dispel the shades of night,
The envious night, which often tries
To keep enclosed my Sarah's eyes.
Ah, gentle maid, though fair, be kind,
Come, and illume my pensive mind,
Darksome appears the brightest place,
Whenever compared to Sarah's face.
Disclose those eyes of sapphire blue,
And brighter far than morning dew,
Awake! my Sarah, make me blessed,
And ease thy Edward's throbbing breast.
THE NEGRO'S SOLILOQUY.
BY yon bright streamers in the sky,
Which glimmer on the sea;
The chearing sun approaches nigh,
Yet brings no hope to me.
The peaceful night yields me no rest,
Which gives to others sleep,
My heart it bleeds within my breast,
My eyes do naught but weep.
The toils, I could endure of day,
Or spurn the tyrant's chain,
But Norah's driven far away,
Which racks my tortured brain;
My wife is she, -- ah cruel heart,
That could her heart oppress,
But it is alone the tyrant's part,
To triumph over distress.
Haste, blessed tidings! haste along,
From fair Britannia's isle,
All, come and ease the anxious throng,
And make the slave to smile;
If then good hap, my Nora lives,
These limbs shall never have rest,
Until we meet, oh, then I Will cleave,
Forever to her breast.
MY LITTLE BLITHSOME SPARROW.
WHY turns my Jen her head away,
My little blithsome sparrow,
That used to wanton, smile, and play,
Upon the banks of Yarrow.
Sweet her breath, as primrose pale,
Her waist, well shaped, and narrow,
And with her smiles, she cheered the dale,
And crowned, the banks of Yarrow.
Ah what is it makes my Jenny weep,
What makes her look aw sorrow,
Say, has she lost some favorite sheep,
That fed on bonny Yarrow?
Alas, alas, I sadly fear,
The cause of aw this sorrow,
She Is seen some other swain more dear,
Upon the banks of Yarrow.
Ah, woe is me, ah, well a day!
I see what is caused this sorrow,
I Will over the hills, and far away,
And think no more of Yarrow.
THE PIRATES.
TO the restless main, we'll bend our sails,
A desperate trade to try,
Nor dread the howling, northern gales,
Or lowering of the sky;
Since there is no living here on land,
Let Us scow'r the bounteous sea,
On merchant fair, or contraband,
We'll practice Piracy.
On shore some Pirates thieve apace,
From precept every day,
To plunder there is no disgrace,
When once you have learnt the way;
Of tithes, the parson, trims the farm,
Prompt by his reverend plea,
Then tell me lads, where is the harm;
In water Piracy.
Regraters and forestallers too,
Accumulate their store,
The world must own this sentence true,
They peculate the poor;
The lawyer, is a name I hate,
And all men will agree,
They often lop a man's estate,
What Is that, but Piracy.
Then who'd be squeamish, since our lives
Are all we have to lose,
Each man gets bolder as he thrives,
And wealth does bliss diffuse;
The rogue that is rich never cares a jot,
Should he much censured be,
For it is, alas, each great man's lot
To practice Piracy.
CUPID'S ATTRIBUTES.
A GLEE.
TALK not of books, of dress, of riches,
Talk not of bacchanalian joy,
For beauty it is which most bewitches,
All Nature's governed by a boy.
At Cupid's touch, even hero's tremble,
To beauty, stoics often submit,
And nothing Clara can resemble,
Which has not beauty, love and wit.
A CATCH,
Which may be read as the lines follow in the printing, or as they are numbered
by figures.
1WHAT makes a modern gentleman
10The glory of the nation,
5To be as simple as he can,
8A coward in a passion.
7To keep a wench and starve a wife,
2The Tailor and the Tonsor,
9Damme, boys, but this is life,
4To have a wife and sconoe her.
11The world must end as it began;
6Say, is it not the fashion,
3Wed first, then wench, that is the plan,
12A world of innovation.
THE PRETTY MAID OF CHELMSFORD.
A TRUE STORY.
A Pretty maid, both kind and fair,
Dwell'd in Chelmsford town,
Her pleasing smiles, her easy air,
Engaged both fop and clown.
Being accosted the other day,
By a clumsy 'squire,
Who asked her if she knew the way
To quench a raging fire.
Pure water, sir, replied the maid,
Will quench it in a trice,
O no, said he, you little jade,
You give such cold advice.
Why then, said she, it is past my skill,
To tell you what will do;
I Am sure, said he, you know what will;
There Is nothing can but you.
Alas-a-day what do you mean,
Replied the pretty fair;
It Is like a coward to complain,
Yo never should despair.
Despair I cannot, cried the 'squire,
While you are in my sight,
It Is you must quench the burning fire,
You set it first alight.
Then straight he clasped her round the waist,
And forced from her a kiss;
Ho! ho! said she, is that your taste;
Then pray you, sir, take this:
And with a pail, placed at the door,
She sluic'd the amorous 'squire;
You're welcome, sir, to this and more,
To quench your raging fire.
PLEASURE'S IN THE VALE.
WHILE giddy pride, from day to day,
In quest of pleasure flies,
She often turns her head away,
Or dazzles with her eyes;
Or sometimes in the splendid throng,
Where courtly forms appear,
She Is often pursued the whole night long,
But Pleasure's seldom there.
Say, would you know then, where to find,
The fair capricious maid;
She rests within the humble mind,
The cottage, or the shade:
Or where you hear the nightingale,
Sequestered, near some brook;
While Cynthia, lights the silent vale,
There, there for Pleasure look.
THE POST BOY.
I AM a Hounslow young lad, and Tidy's my name,
Full many a job have I drove,
Yet never crossed nag that was windgall'd or lame,
But always had such as would move.
A tight pair of buckskins and boots jetty black,
My spurs, ever polished and smart,
A trim little jacket to put on my back,
Was always the pride of my heart.
A good ten miles an hour, in common my pace,
When leaving behind every rip,
They try to put by, but I lead them a chase,
And tip 'em the smack of the whip;
When often as I Am driving along in this style,
Through many a town as I go,
The girls of each inn, will bestow me a smile,
Their meaning I very well know.
Then I find 'em agig whenever I call,
And loll at my ease on return,
I laugh, and I jeer, and I talk with 'em all,
But Patty's ray only concern;
At an inn near to Windsor, this little rogue dwells,
Well known by her nice winning air,
That all other girls, of the place, she excels,
And is called pretty Patty the Fair.
We have both made a vow, should we get the stuff,
To marry, and so become one;
As others have done, for it is common enough,
We'll set up an inn of our own;
Then she will be called madam, and I Will be called sir,
We'll stick up the sign of the star,
Amongst post boys, and waiters, I Will bustle and stir,
While Pat hollows loud in the bar.
CELIA.
A SYMBOLICAL SONG.
OFTEN have I seen at early morn,
All tempting to the view,
A rose-bud on some lofty thorn
Adorned with glittering dew.
A symbol 'twas of that dear fair,
Whose beauties ranked so high;
From mortal reach, 'twas planted there,
To blush, to charm and die.
Yet, Celia, were thou fixed so near,
With every peril round;
And should the thorny bushes tear,
I Would triumph in each wound:
To climb for thee, no pains I Would dread,
Regardless bear the smart,
Nor dread what blood of mine I shed,
To get at Celia's heart.
THE MAIDEN'S RESOLUTION.
I WILL henceforth bear without a sigh,
All the secret pangs that grieve me,
No more on love will I rely,
He smiles on purpose to deceive me.
My Henry vowed a thousand times,
He would never, never leave me,
The strain of love was in his rhimes,
But, ah, he wrote 'em to deceive me.
He came at eve, he came at morn,
And begged I would of doubts bereave me,
Yet now he is left me all forlorn,
It was his pastime to deceive me.
The world, thank heaven's fair and wide,
Time and absence shall relieve me,
I Will now assume a maiden's pride,
Henry shall no more deceive me!
PEG OF THE MOOR.
YOUNG Will of the brook did fair Peggy adore,
Who lived on the skirts of old Bawtery Moor,
'Till once, at a wake, Will was sadly in fear,
For she nodded at Tom, and at Robin would leer,
He said she was false, and he bitterly swore,
That he would straight take his leave of Fair Peg of the Moor.
She laughed and she jeered him for what he had spoke,
And thought all his saying was naught but a joke;
So kept up the frolic, her lover to teaze,
Until he grew frantic, almost, by degrees:
She meant to have healed, but she opened the sore,
Which caused him to fly from Fair Peg of the Moor.
A drum and a fife, roared aloud in his ears,
And forth from the throng a gay sergeant appears,
Will vowed for a soldier, he would instantly go,
And so put an end to his love-kindl'd woe;
Resolved to take leave of the maid evermore,
And never again think of Fair Peg of the Moor.
To the sergeant he went, and he told him his mind,
The sergeant was pleased and he spoke him so kind,
But while he was 'bout with the wag to enlist,
Poor Peggy came kneeling, and begged he would desist,
Ah! will you, said she, leave the lass you adore,
Come, come, and enlist with your Peg of the Moor.
His bosom, which late with resentment was filled,
Relaxed of its heat, and his heart 'gan to yield,
He lifted her up, and he kissed her with glee,
Said, since you seem fearful of parting with me,
Let the drummer beat up in the morn, at my door,
And tell that I Am listed to Peg of the Moor.
THE GOLDEN EAR-RING, OR, AUTUMNAL LEAF.
GO to the glass, dear Bella, go,
And see what morals you sustain,
Can fashion shield the heart from woe,
Or palliate a growing pain.
While pendant, hanging on the ear,
The golden bauble charms the eye,
An emblem of the waneing year,
Say, who can tell the year we die.
A trifle sometimes yields relief,
But should reflection chance to rise,
We shudder at the yellow leaf,
And fall, to Time, a sacrifice.
THE GOOD MERRY FELLOWS ALL UNDER THE HOLLY.
Written for the Green-Holly Society under one of those trees, while in the
Vale of Clnyde, in North Wales.
LET never a face be melancholy
While underneath this verdant Holly,
We must laugh while we can,
Since life's but a span,
And to yield to old Care's a folly.
To repine at one's fate is treason,
Since fate has furnished us with reason,
Let us ever be seen,
Like this gay ever-green,
In good health throughout the season.
When you're warm in conversation,
'Twere best avoid prevarication,
And when matters grow wrong,
Let Us strike up a song,
And drink to each kind relation.
When age with wrinkl'd brow approaches,
And hoary Time on strength encroaches,
May each wint'ry day,
Like the Holly look gay,
And our end be without reproaches.
EDWARD AND EDITHA.
WHEN fair Editha, with young Edward sat,
Upon a cliff, that overlooked the main,
As if intended by some wayward fate,
A sudden tempest rose, of wind and rain,
Which from the dreadful height with fury cast,
The beauteous maid adown the frightful steep,
Into the green and wide expanded waste,
With Thetis, there, for ever more to sleep;
A maniac wild, distracted, Edward fled,
To all he met, this piteous burden said,
Say have you seen, where ever you have been,
Editha dear! my Fairy Queen.
Often over the desert wild, he would thoughtless roam,
Or where the gloom, by clust'ring limes is made;
And there, bewildered, make a transient home,
Or hold vague converse with Editha's shade;
And now he would sally forth, by frenzy led,
Or from his cell, rush with an hideous scream;
Then tear the beauteous ringlets from his head,
And seek the margin of some mournful stream:
His eyes expressed the tempest in his brain,
And thus he sung, in slow and pensive strain,
Ye Willows green, say, have ye seen,
Editha dear! my Fairy Queen.
Once, where the hurrying torrent rushes down,
With thundering roar, upon the gulf below;
While peering rocks, above the brambles frown,
Like stately monarchs, with imperious brow;
There, while poor Edward sat in abject mood,
He thought Editha lav'd upon each wave;
Then braved the deepest current of the flood,
And died, like her, within a watery grave.
But ere he sunk beneath the ruthless tide,
Around he looked, and thus he fainting cried,
Ye Willows green, say, have ye seen,
Editha dear! my Fairy Queen.
THE LOAVES AND THE FISHES.
THE Cooks of our councils great plenty provide,
They furnish the tables and then they divide,
But if you would know what their favorite dish is,
It Is the old-fashioned food, called the Loaves and the Fishes.
CHORUS. Then round about, round about, round about reel,
Since some have but little and some a great deal.
Each Patriot prates loud of his country's good,
And swears that for charters he would spill his dear blood;
He may talk of his zeal, but his principle wish is,
To come in at last for the Loaves and the Fishes.
CHORUS. -- Then round about, etc.
When a Poor Man is hung'ry he will make a long face,
And should he want fish-meat, then give him a place,
Let Neptune and Ceres provide to his wishes,
The old-fashioned food called the Loaves and the Fishes.
CHORUS. -- Then round about, etc.
The Bishop often prays he translated might be,
Or that chance would present him a much better See,
If a brother should die, the prelate's good wish is,
That heaven would send him the Loaves and the Fishes.
CHORUS. -- Then round about, etc.
And such is the ease with the kites of the law,
When they get a poor client once into their claw,
Should a Judge slip his wind, the first legal wish is,
That they may be bench'd near the Loaves and the Fishes.
CHORUS. -- Then round about, etc.
The great men in place are for raising the crown,
And those that are out, are for pulling it down,
The party on both sides have self in their wishes,
And all things give way to the Loaves and the Fishes.
CHORUS. -- Then round about, etc.
May heaven soon grant that we all have a meal,
Save those who pretend that they are chuck full of zeal,
For those who are full, must relinquish their wishes,
When they cannot make room for the Loaves and the Fishes.
CHORUS. Then round about, round about, round about reel,
Since some have but little and some a great deal.
SPRING WATER CRESSES.
WHEN hoary frost hung on each thorn,
Ere night had well withdrawn her gloom,
Poor Phoebe went one wint'ry morn,
From Colnbrook-down to Langly-broom:
When from the brake, or from the rill,
Half clad, and with neglected tresses,
Her rushy basket tried to fill,
With fresh and green SPRING WATER CRESSES.
Yet many a cheerful strain she would sing,
While wading through the chilling stream;
Her thoughtless spirits were a wing,
With love, or with some jocund theme;
Then with her humble merchandise,
In hopes to conquer her distresses;
Away to London next she hies,
And cries her YOUNG SPRING WATER CRESSES.
Through many an alley, lane, or street,
Ere luxury has left her bed;
You're sure poor Phoebe next to meet,
Trying to get her daily bread:
The wind and rain she often defies,
When ever her purse some mite possesses;
With cheerful voice she daily cries,
Come buy my YOUNG SPRING WATER CRESSES.
PITY KINDLED INTO LOVE.
IN spite of what my tongue can say,
Celia's deaf to all persuasion;
Cold seems her heart as earthly clay,
When love's my theme, she is all evasion;
Why did the gods impress my mind,
Or raise such ardour in my breast;
And yet the fair be so unkind,
To triumph over a heart distressed.
Say, why thou cherub-dimpl'd boy,
Have thou fettered my affection,
Or why, with frowns my peace destroy,
And leave me wilder'd by distraction?
Ah! would you Celia, were I laid,
Quite breathless in the silent grave,
Would you not then, dear cruel maid,
In pity once your bosom heave?
Fair Celia listened to his strain,
With a heartfelt strange obtrusion,
When Pity raised a gentle flame,
Which kindled into soft delusion;
Love fanned the blaze with magic breath,
And made her own the genial heat,
No more, no more dear youth of death,
Or vainly kneel at Celia's feet.
The nymph these words so sweetly said,
Strephon was with joy confounded,
Quickly he reared his drooping head,
And like the heart elate he bounded;
He seized her hand, and blessed her tongue.
And smiled with joy at her decree,
Said, through the plains let it be sung,
That Celia owns her love for me.
WHAT IS LIBERTY?
OLD Johnny Bull the other day,
Came to me across the way,
Said neighbor tell me, tell me pray,
What is Liberty?
I, instantly replied, sir,
It Is rushing like a tide, sir,
Good order to deride, sir,
That is Liberty.
It Is trying, without reason, sir,
To propagate high treason, sir,
Or cut a brother's wheezen, sir,
That is Liberty.
To knock your neighbor down, sir,
If ever it were known, sir,
That he possessed a crown, sir,
That is Liberty.
To set up guillotines, sir,
To murder kings and queens, sir,
And all such pretty scenes, sir,
That is Liberty:
To pull down church and state, sir,
At any kind of rate, sir,
Or knock you over the pate, sir,
That is Liberty.
To make mankind a clod, sir,
And what is very odd, sir,
Acknowledging no God, sir,
That is Liberty.
John said the times are bad, sir,
The folks are surely mad, sir,
For making such a sad stir,
If that be Liberty.
CLODY AND CLARA: OR LOVE'S CONTROVERSY.
CLODY. IS it because I love you more
Than ever mortal loved before;
Is it your sport to use me so;
Will you not marry, Clara?

CLARA. -- No.
Why will you teaze me every day,
When I Have so often said you nay,
Have I not daily bid you go?
Prithee now leave me Clody.

CLODY. -- No.
Would you then see poor Clody die,
Rather than with his suit comply?
Have you no feelings for my woe,
When I so dearly love you?

CLARA. -- No.
Were you in love all day to pine,
And at my door all night to whine,
My heart would still the harder grow;
Now will you follow Clara?

CLODY. -- No.
Since you're so savage and unkind,
I Will try some other maid to find,
But none shall ever treat me so,
For Clara has discharged me.

CLARA. -- No.
I hope my Clody does but rave,
Have I not been thy loving slave?
I did but joke, pray do not go;
Will you not Clara marry?

CLODY. -- No.
You Have teased the humble mouse too long,
You Have done your faithful Clody wrong;
Now to the winds your love I Will blow,
And heed no more your yes or no!

CLARA. Prithee my Clody do not go!

CLODY. Have you not said too often, no?

CLARA. Are you not joking! sure you are?

CLODY. Have you not borne the joke too far?

CLARA. But I will never more do so!
Say, will you not believe me?

CLODY. -- No.

MY OWN FIRESIDE.
KIT CUMILE talks of his high-fashion'd joys,
Of each trifle he speaks with delight?
His hours each day with his horse he employs,
And his bottle and mistress at night:
Give me the delights that will cherish the mind,
Dup'd neither by folly or pride,
A wife that is friendly, that is loving and kind,
On my knee by my own fire side.
The overgrown cit, that has throve by the gripe,
Distressing his neighbors around,
Would gladly his sins puff away with his pipe,
Or tries them in liquor to drowned:
On his riches he fain would eternity raise,
But Time clips the wings of his pride;
Give me that eternal, that genial blaze,
That glows by my own fireside.
Let princes, for honor, contend in the wars,
And the statesman for profit or place,
Astrologers wander about in the stars,
Or my lord break his neck in the chase;
Such pleasures are transient and dangerous all,
It Is a truth that can never be denied;
I sit at my ease, should they rise, should they fall,
And regale by my own fireside.
AN OLD FRIEND WITH A NEW FACE.
OF friendship men often will boast to each other,
For we all are considered as sister or brother;
Life's a mere masquerade, and it is often the case,
That you will meet an old friend, that shall wear a new face.
You shall sit at the board where the toasts freely pass,
And good sentiments given on filling each glass,
But meet the next morning, and often you will trace,
That your overnight friend has put on a new face.
If you have ever been connected with placemen or trade,
When your word or your vote would have yielded them aid,
Though your hand might be squeezed by old Grub or his Grace,
When their ends are once served they will show a new face.
Should Fortune by chance throw a purse in your way,
What a many fine things will each flatterer say,
Should she once turn her back, you shall sink in disgrace,
And the devil a friend but will wear a new face.
Then let each worthy fellow take care of himself,
And keep a few comforts in store on his shelf;
Yet be not a niggard, with prudence keep pace,
And despise that old friend that shall wear a new face.
THE RESPONSIVE DOVE.
YOUNG Phillis overnight had been,
To dance upon the rural green,
And while she mingled with the swains,
Assembled from the neighboring plains,
The envied partner which she chose,
Was Thyrsis, first of village beaus;
As accidents often come by chance,
They both were wounded in the dance.
Each found within the troubled breast
A pain that would not let them rest;
She to the wood sequestered strayed,
And in the gloomy sheltering shade,
Said to herself, in accents low,
What can it be disturbs me so?
When over her head, a listening dove,
Responsive cried -- fair maid it is love.
When Thyrsis heard she would left her home,
Resolved with hasty steps to roam,
And with an ardent lover's faith,
He sought each wood's remotest path,
Until he found his Phillis dear,
Who wondering cried -- What brought you here?
When straight replied the pensive dove,
What should it be fair maid but love?
I THOUGHT IT WAS QUEER.
AS I leaned over a gate one Midsummer's eve.
When the sky in the brook looked so clear,
Young Robin came slily and tugged at my sleeve,
And I could not help thinking it queer.
He patted my cheek, and he played with my hand,
And he gave such a whimsical leer,
Then talked about things I could scarce understand,
That I could not help thinking it queer.
Now all of a sudden he let his thoughts loose,
And he asked if to church I would steer,
I thought him a whimsical mad-headed goose,
For his talking of matters so queer.
I meant to have chid him for what he had said,
When he whispered so soft in my ear,
That if I had checked him my heart would have bled,
For it panted and fluttered so queer.
How long have you loved me, pray Robin, said I?
When he answered, "a calendar year;"
I then was resolved with his suit to comply,
Although it seemed hasty and queer.
Folks thought it so odd, that an hour or so,
Should have made me so ready appear;
But many a lass who have answered with -- no,
Have died like old maidens so queer!
LOVE AND TIME.
JOHN met with Peg the other day,
As she to church was walking,
And as he had a deal to say,
He straight began a talking;
He asked her if her heart was free,
Or if she him approved,
And all the while could plainly see,
Her snowy bosom moved.
His heart was yet, 'tween hope and fear,
And strove his doubts to smother,
Unless those heavings of his dear,
Might move thus for another;
Awhile she blushed, and now she smiled,
Cried, prithee be not simple;
Yet love, the more his heart beguiled,
And sported in each dimple.
She thought he talked too soon of love,
'Twas time enough for wooing,
He told her Time did swiftly move,
And Time was Love's undoing;
Peg then replied, if that is the case,
It Is time that we were moving,
And said, with sadness in her face,
He sure wont kill for loving.
Why then cried John, let us haste to church,
And all our fears deliver.
Old Time shall linger in the lurch,
And Love shall live for ever.
Away they went -- made most of Time,
In spite of all his flurry;
Love saw they both were in their prime,
So bound them in a hurry.
THE ROYAL COTTAGER.
WHEN ever I think on that dear spot,
On which I fixed my rural cot,
Then, when my rose hung on my arm,
All free from guile, and free from harm,
My days they glided on with glee,
And all things then, were well with me.
But when once drawn away by fate,
Unto a more exalted state,
By smiling fortune, promised fair,
Until she brought her train of care;
'Twas then I first began to see,
That happiness had fled from me.
The noise of cities, glare of courts,
Where gay dissimulation sports,
Where envy fain would blight my Rose,
Because her cheek so purely glows;
Let fortune take her stores again,
Give me my cot, and rural plain.
And while I tread the ocean's side,
The greatest pleasure, greatest pride,
Shall be each day, with Rose to walk,
In social inoffensive talk,
And when each blissful day shall close,
The waves shall lull us to repose.
POLL OF PRESTBURY.
ON a rural village green,
Where the rustic sports are seen,
When the lads and lasses play,
At the close of summer's day;
There young William chanced to see,
Pretty Poll of Prestbury.
If she tripp'd the turf along,
If she warbl'd out a song,
William seemed to show surprise,
In his love-enraptur'd eyes;
Said, how happy he could be,
With sweet Poll of Prestbury.
Often he fidl'd near her side,
Asking her to be his bride;
She would turn her head away,
Telling him, she would naught to say;
William cried, ah! turn to me,
Pretty Poll of Prestbury.
Bashfully she raised her head,
And these words, in pity said,
" William, you are come too late;
" To be Allen's is my fate."
Cruel fate, (replied he,)
Adieu, sweet Poll, of Prestbury.
Thou were once, my hope and pride,
All the world was naught beside;
Now each hope is fled away,
Leaving me to love a prey,
To pine, to weep, to think on thee,
My pretty Poll of Prestbury.
THE RATIONALS.
THE viands cleared, let naught be heard,
But jollity and fun,
And while we sit, let us call in wit,
She Will treat us with a pun.
Good wine you know, makes wit to flow,
Along in full career;
But let your wit, be always fit,
To meet a sage's ear;
For should you dash your thoughts with trash,
Or smuttily besmear,
We'll make you drink, twice to the brink,
To wash your senses clear.
Your lasses toast, but make no boast,
Lest envy should appear,
Some wag, that is by, perhaps may try,
Her blazoned charms to share;
They are not wise, who riches prize,
And tell where they are laid;
And he is the same, that boasts the fame,
Of his betrothed maid.
Then let us be blithe, lest with his scythe,
Old Time, upon his stumps,
Should come and see, we wanted glee,
And take us in the dumps.
FINIS
W. DID, PRINTER, TEWKESBURY.


