REMARKS ON THE SCURVY AS IT APPEARED AMONG The English Prisoners in France, IN
THE YEAR 1795; WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE EFFECTS OF OPIUM IN THAT DISEASE, AND OF
THE METHODS PROPER TO RENDER ITS USE MORE EXTENSIVE AND EASY; (WRITTEN DURING
HIS CONFINEMENT IN THE TOWER) BY R. T. CROSFEILD, M. D.

Quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis:
Who can refrain from tears at such a tale.
Delirant reges plectuntur Achivi:
-- The Greeks
Are punished for the faults of CRAZY Kings.
London: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; AND SOLD BY J. RIDGWAY, NO. 1, YORK STREET,
ST. JAMES'S SQUARE.

1797.

DEDICATION.
TO THOSE WORTHY CITIZENS OF LONDON,
John Greenside, Francis Barstow Nixon, William Walker, Alexander Black,
William Shone, Arthur Windus, William Norris, William Gosling, Daniel Pinder,
Benjamin White, John Reid, and John Coe.
GENTLEMEN,
BY inscribing the following trifle to you, I enjoy the highest of
gratifications, as it furnishes me with an opportunity of publicly thanking
you, for that noble exertion of justice and independence, which, at the same
time that it defeated political imposture, recorded your names in letters of
adamant among the glorious assertors of your country's rights.

To you, indeed, the following pages almost exclusively belong: they were
written during my dreary confinement in the Tower; they were seized with my
other papers, after a bill of indictment was found against me; and it is to
your courage, justice* and discernment, that I now live to lay them before the
world, after having been detained from me till the 20th of February last.

In pronouncing my acquittal, you did not violate your own feelings. It would,
indeed, be an affront to your understandings, enlightened as they were by the
manly eloquence of an Adam and a Gurney, to suppose that you would give the
least credit to four mere hearsay witnesses, inconsitent with each other and
with themselves; more especially when one was proved a notorious liar and
insane; two others appeared to have been actuated by malice, a fourth did not
know me when he saw me, and never had a moment's conversation with me in his
life; nor did one of them, except the madman, pretend to any degree of intimacy
with me. Whether it was probable that I should have made him my confidant was
certainly no very intricate question. Yet these were the witnesses on whose
credibility my shameless persecutors rested their case: nor can I assign any
reason for the delay of my trial, except that of rendering it impossible for me
to controvert their evidence. This plan (if it really was laid) had almost
proved successful; for, of near seventy witnesses, whose names I had given in
to my Solicitor, only two, owing to this very delay, could be procured. Had the
business been brought on at an earlier period, not one of the four hearsay
witnesses would, in all probability, have ventured into court; at least if he
had, he would hardly have escaped a conviction for wilful perjury, so
completely false was the whole of this evidence.

The pretended death of Upton was, perhaps, the most curious piece of evidence
ever produced or admitted in a court: his wife had been told by a waterman that
he was drowned: this hearsay evidence was to serve as a proof of his being able
to demonstrate what the other four hearsay witnesses pretended to have heard,
and you were supposed to be perfectly convinced by this unsupported report,
that four discordant stories were all true. Whether to admire most the
excessive candor of the court, in refusing to hear evidence of Upton being
then alive, or the exceeding modesty of the Attorney General, in admitting the
fact, I do not really know; but, it seems, it availed nothing to prove him to
be living, unless we could prove him to have been kept away by the prosecutors;
and for that we had only Upton's own word. In my opinion, they might have
produced him; for it can hardly be believed, that, if they wished him to
appear, they would have suffered a man to go at large, whose prevarication had
formerly induced them to commit him to prison: but had the Attorney General
brought forward in evidence, as a proof of my guilt, that the Pope was seen in
a gin-shop in St. Giles's, I am not sure whether I should, by the same rule
have been allowed to set up an alibi on the part of his Holiness, unless I
could prove he was kept away by authority.

It was stated that I run away to Bristol to secret myself; but this flight
proved only a visit to a friend who had given me an invitation, and my
secreting did not, it seems, extend either to my person or my sentiments. My
leaving England was not out of any fear of a prosecution, it was simply in
consequence of a plan I had long before formed of visiting the southern
hemisphere for the purpose of cultivating natural history; I had provided every
thing necessary for bringing home an extensive collection, together with an
astronomical, chemical, and anatomical aparatus. Having once made up my mind to
go, and prepared for the voyage, I certainly should not have staid an hour in
consequence of any message or summons whatever; however I received neither. I
sailed in January, and about a month after it was publicly known that I was
gone, out came a proclamation offering a reward of two hundred pounds for
apprehending me.

During my confinement in the Tower, when I was deprived of every means of
vindicating myself, no pains were spared to prejudice the public opinion
against me; a practice the more base and unwarrantable, as the law of England
holds it a very high offense to print or write any thing that may tend to
influence a decision even in the most trifling matters. In my case it amounted
to a premeditated murder; but, thanks to your honest and independent minds,
this villainous attempt was frustrated!

To those, however, who are acquainted with ministerial papers and ministerial
scribblers, it can be no matter of surprise that you as well as myself have
been exposed to the grossest, falsest, and most scurrilous libels. In fact, as
no prosecution could more completely terminate in the disgrace of the
prosecutors, the virulence of their hirelings, must be expected to display
itself in the most extravagant manner; and since the witnesses brought forward
could not persuade you that I deserved to be hanged, the next step naturally
was to endeavor to persuade the world that you did. Yet, as you well know,
nothing that could even be quibbled into a treasonable act appeared in evidence
against me.

For my own part, I have been highly entertained by their railing: and there is
even a satisfaction in reflecting, that a poor scoundrel, whom no body would
believe either on his word or his oath, can procure a dinner by scribbling an
innocent lie on you or me in a ministerial paper. Nay, we do not know but we
may have saved some of these miserable wretches from Botany Bay, since they
might, perhaps, if they had not made a little money of our names, have been
driven to the desperate resource of picking a pocket.

I am in possession of most of their names and haunts (for they have not all
fixed places of abode), and could, were I so disposed, take a severe revenge
upon the greatest part of them, by publishing their addresses, leaving to such
of their creditors as may despise or have forgotten the old adage "Sue a
beggar," etc. the task of punishing their delinquency.

As it is, I shall honor them with no farther notice than one would bestow on
a pack of snappish, hungry curs, who, in hopes of a crust from their masters,
are ready to snarl at and bite any innocent passenger that is pointed out to
them. I beg pardon for having wasted so much time and paper on such miscreants;
but it is the first, and shall be the last time I shall bestow either a word or
a thought on a nest of toothless reptiles, who may indeed hiss, but cannot
bite. I am,

With the sincerest esteem and respect, GENTLEMEN; Your grateful countryman, R.
T. CROSFEILD.
July 2, 1797.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS little production, from the nature of the situation in which it was
composed, must naturally be expected to abound in imperfections; nor can it
boast any merit except its containing a plain and faithful detail of facts.
With a desire of benefiting mankind, as well as of solacing the tedious hours
of confinement (and what can be a more solacing reslection, than that one is
endeavoring to render service to one's fellow-men?) the author committed to
writing what he had seen, whilst it was yet fresh in his memory. Denied the
access of his friends, ignorant of the specific charge on which he was
confined, and unable even to guess at the nature of the evidence to be adduced
against him, (which the copy of his indictment, when delivered to him, could no
way explain, as he was indicted for conspiring with three men whom he did not
even know by sight) he could not but look upon himself as a devoted victim;
yet, glowing with contempt for the authors of his injurious treatment, and
determined that nothing should discourage him from doing what he thought his
duty, he resolved to write, and leave his observations to their fate, hoping
that they might perhaps incite some man enjoying greater opportunities, or
greater abilities, either to confirm or confute them. Not much order or
exactness can therefore be expected in such a work, for he had no books to
refer to, nor has he made one alteration since his papers have been restored to
him, which however might have been done earlier had he known the proper channel
of application. To any gentleman whose opinions or labors may have been
mistated, overlooked, or misunderstood, he hopes the natural defects of a few
pages written solely from memory, will plead a sufficient excuse.

REMARKS ON THE SCURVY, etc. etc.
THE Sea Seurvy has been so often and so well treated upon, by various eminent
authors, that any additional remarks may seem almost superfluous. But as it has
been my hap to observe a few facts that may perhaps have been unnoticed by
others in similar situations, it appeared to me an indispensible duty to commit
them to paper, in hopes that they may furnish some useful hints to my
fellow laborers in the medical art.

The description of this disease, either with respect to its symptoms, rise, or
progress, is too well known to need repetition; I shall, therefore, content
myself with remarking, that, among the English prisoners in France, there was
scarcely any malady whose appearance it did not put on, though a few days
always cleared up the deception.

That the scurvy should lurk under the mask of rheumatism or asthma was,
indeed, nowise surprising; but it somewhat astonished me to meet with it under
the complete resemblance of pleurisy; particularly in the months of June and
July. I knew too much of this insidious enemy, to suffer myself to be deceived
by a full, or even pretty hard pulse; but I once had the curiosity to draw
about four ounces of blood from an otherwise healthy and robust young man, to
satisfy myself as to the presence of the inflammatory crust. The event,
however, showed the great propriety of abstaining from phlebotomy, even in
those eases that seem most to demand it; for the blood, during its flowing,
exhibited a very remarkable broken sparkling, and, as it were, sandy aspect;
nor did it, on standing, separate into serum and erassamentum, as usual, but
remained in a mass of various hues, and possessing but little firmness.

Though the scurvy often borrowed these forms, it most frequently assumed its
ordinary symptoms: -- these were stinking breath, swelled, spongy, and bloody
gums, tumors, stiffness of the joints (particularly of the knees), black,
brown, purple, or livid spots, some no larger than a flea-bite, others very
large, resembling bruises, accompanied by great debility and dejection of
spirits.

The scurvy has formerly been erroneously represented by some as a new disease,
It was said to have first appeared in 1556; but Dr. Solomon de Leon, in an
"Inaugural Dissertation," published at Leyden, in 1790, proves clearly that it
was known to the Ancients under the name of Stomacace.
and the almost peculiar progeny of cold climates, but experience has
sufficiently demonstrated that it is no stranger even to the warmest. Cold,
especially when joined with moisture, has, however, such manifest influence in
its production, when superadded to salt, and otherwise bad diet, that a slight
sketch of the weather, and treatment we experienced in France may not be amiss.

The latter part of the year 1794, and the beginning of 1795, were perhaps as
cold as any in the memory of man; nor was the cold confined to one country
only; but very severely felt almost through Europe. About the middle of
February the weather grew warmer (in France at least); but early in March it
again became cold and rainy, nor did it remarkably change for the better until
the beginning of May, when there were a few fine warm days. At this time cold,
chilling, easterly winds began again to set in, accompanied for the most part
by rain and remarkably damp weather. Notwithstanding the wind sometimes shifted
to the opposite points still the same cold, damp, and unseasonable temperature
of the air continued; nor did it become more pleasant and seasonable till
toward the end of July: after that it continued mild and pleasant till we left
France.

During the colds of the early part of spring, miserable indeed was the state
of too many of our captive countrymen. Several, particularly soldiers belonging
to the Loyal Clare regiment had neither beds nor a change of linen; the
consequence of which, joined to natural indolence and habits of dirt, rendered
them the first victims of disease. Nor were even some masters of merchantmen in
a much better situation; for, having been captured by, or put on board those
French men of war that were lost in the storms of the month of January, they
were barely able to preserve their lives with the loss of every article of
their wearing apparel.

The castle of Breast being full of prisoners, many (to the amount of 1200) were
forced to be put on board some old Indiamen, which lay in the harbor, and
served as temporary prison ships; here they were crowded without distinction
into confined and dirty apartments, and underwent unspeakable hardships.

It was my lot, on my arrival there, Feb. 23, to be put on board the Elizabeth,
which though reputed the most tolerable of the whole, was horrid beyond
description!

We had no place to sit down in, even to eat, but the open deck; our diet
consisted of rice soup, or, more properly speaking, rice water, qualified with
a little rancid, stinking oil; about six ounces of bad, course, salt beef; and
every third day our rice was alternated with a mess of horse beans, and our
beef with salt fish, or half rotten dried pilchards. We had, however, plenty of
good bread, and three half pints of poor small adulterated wine, but no
vegetables whatever, and the wine it seems was withheld from several of the
other ships. The water allotted us was foul and putrid, though there was plenty
of good water on board, nor was any allowed for the purposes of cleanliness.
Such were the miseries of the day; but those of the night far exceeded them,
nor were perhaps ever outdone, unless by the horrors of the black hole of
Calcutta!

The place allotted for us to sleep in was a part of the ship's hold, whither
we were thrust down at sunset, and which afforded no more than four inches in
breadth to six feet in length for each man. Our number was about 240; many,
therefore, were obliged to sleep upon the floor, notwithstanding two, and in
some parts three tiers of hammoes had been hung one under the other. After
having been enclosed in this den of misery for about an hour the heat grew
intolerable, and the odor arising from the effluvia of our bodies horribly
offensive. Those on the floor were incommoded by the saliva and urine of those
above, who were often so faint with the heat and stench of those that lay
below, that they could not move even for the homeliest occasions; and, to add
to these troubles, There were the soldiers of the Loyal Clares, who laid hold
of the situations next the hatchway: the other prisoners, therefore,
relinquished their claim, not caring to contend with men who each commanded and
maintained a legion.
the Irish soldiers gave themselves up to dirt and idleness in such a manner,
that as it was totally impossible to crawl in or out of our dungeon without
touching some of their hammoes with our backs, we were sure to find vermin upon
our clothes on coming upon deck in the morning.

As the heat and stench increased, many fainted, some broke out into raving
madness, uttering the most incoherent and horrid imprecations; and we had the
affliction, more than once, to see an unfortunate fellow-sufferer, on the first
moment of his exposure to the cold air of the morning, drop down on the deck to
rise no more.

It was in vain that the captain of the ship, a humane and good man,
endeavored to relieve our sufferings and check abuses. He gave orders that the
hatches should be left open at nights, and that his surgeon should look after
the sick; but as he had little compulsive power, no sooner was he gone to bed
than some one or other, in spite, as they said, to George and Pit When we
consider the very restutable business of the forged assignats, the war of La
Vendee, and other similar great exploits, we cannot be surprised at the
detestation in which the English are held by the French. Wars have ever been
carried on with blood, rapine, and plunder, but forgery is certainly a modern
improvement; nor need we wonder that our enemies should alike detest that
Government which they supposed to have planned, and that People which they knew
to have put in practice such a base and cowardly species of warfare. It was
however hard, that the weight of their resentment should fall on men who
detested such practices as much as themselves.
, laid the hatches down; the surgeon of the ship too was so ignorant, that
after one of the sick had applied to be sent to the hospital, he confidently
asserted, that nothing ailed him; in less than an hour, however, this poor
fellow contradicted his assertion by dying upon deck.

On the 2d and 3d of March, we were removed from this dismal place and put on
board some English cartels that had arrived from the West India Islands with
prisoners, and had been detained since the preceding summer in Landerneau road.

Here our condition was much mended; but several met with a great
mortification, for they now perceived that their trunks, etc. had been
privately broke open during their abode in the dismal mansions of the
Elizabeth, and many articles of value stolen out; among the rest, I thinking,
upon my arrival on board one of these cartels, to regale myself with a clean
shirt, discovered on looking that it was out of my power, they having been all
stolen.

Our allowance of provisions still continued the same, but those who
fortunately had saved a little money, or goods that were saleable, had an
opportunity of purchasing provisions of all kinds, which the French soldiers
brought, partly by stealth, from Breast and Landerneau. After we had been here
about a month, fresh beef was served out to the prisoners; but, from what cause
I know not, this allowance was soon discontinued; and, to our mortification,
bread likewise became so scarce and bad, that sickness and famine seemed to
unite for the destruction of those who were obliged to live upon such miserable
fare.

The poor fellows, who were our guards, were, however, in the same condition,
nor had either more or better provisions than the prisoners; and the
paper-money was so depreciated, that a merry old Frenchman swore heartily to me
that his pay would not find in him snuff; yet the laugh and the dance, and the
song, continued their usual round among these inflexible republicans.

As the fresh beef could be no longer procured the commandant, Captain
Forterie, used to send his boat every Saturday to Landerneau, to purchase
provisions for such as could pay the market price for them; this (which the
butcher's bill regularly brought with them, always made known) was eight livres
ten sous a pound for mutton, and six livres ten sous for veal; but if we
recollect, that from one thousand to one thousand four hundred livres were then
the price of the louis d'or, or guinea, we must reduce the pound of mutton to
two pence, and that of veal to one penny halfpenny.

It was on our arrival in Landerneau river that my attendance on the sick
commenced; a very laborious task, and replete with incessant vexation. We had
no medicines but such as had been put on board the ships before their leaving
England, for the use of their respective crews. These, originally of an
inferior quality, and many of them compounded without skill, had been much
damaged by length of time: nor was there a possibility of procuring proper diet
for the sick. The commandant's surgeon used, indeed, to come pretty often to
send such as he thought fit to the hospitals; but these were so crowded that
none could possibly be admitted except they were very ill, How many died is
impossible for me to ascertain, many remained in the hospitals after they were
cured, many ran away, and several were sent to other prisons.
and so very few returned of those that went that others were unwilling to go;
not to mention that several must have perished unless assistance could be
procured more speedily than their turn of admittance came on.

During the first part of the spring the diseases most common were fevers, in
which there was little remarkable, except the early attack of delirium; which
in some cases preceded every other symptom. The patients complained of pains in
the head and back, sickness and vomiting; most commonly of diarrhoea, but
sometimes obstinate costiveness, with which they had for the most part been
troubled some days previous to the coming on of more urgent symptoms. The pulse
was low and generally about 110, but sometimes during the first day or two very
little accelerated or different from the healthy state; the tongue was usually
white and foul, but sometimes very clean, and the patients generally complained
of a bitter taste in the mouth, together with vertiginous affections of the
head.

The plan of cure was obvious; for, after clearing the stomach by a gentle
emetic, the stimulant plan, with acidulated drinks, completed the cure, without
failing even in one instance. Blisters however availed nothing in removing the
delirium, which yielded only to free doses of opium.

About the middle of April the scurvy made its appearance, and soon spread to
an alarming degree, without any possibility of stopping its progress. The ships
were, indeed, smoaked with gunpowder and vinegar, cleanliness was endeavored
to be enforced, and vinegar was served out to such as chose to apply for it;
but all in vain.

The severely cold and damp weather chilled and benumbed a number of poor
wretches, halfnaked and half-starved, who, to avoid its inclemency, could
neither be prevailed upon to come upon deck, nor wash their apartments. Nor was
this all, for the crowd and dirt caused them to be overrun with vermin, in such
a manner that it was a most disagreeable business to go among them, even for
the few moments necessary to render them what little assistance lay in my power.

The scurvy, in the mean time, was daily extending its ravages: scarce a day
occurred but one or more were added to the number of the sick; nor did a week
pass in which ten at least were not sent to the hospitals of Breast or
Landerneau; insomuch, that by the middle of May, not more than one-third of the
original complement remained.

It was perhaps unfortunate that most of the ships, being lately arrived from
the West India Islands, had rum on board, The several captains were willing to
accommodate the prisoners with this, which indeed was a great refreshment when
temperately used; but some sailors, having got themselves intoxicated, broke
open the holds of the ships and plundered every thing they chose.

This business was carried on with surprising regularity, being put in practice
on board all the ships at the same hour; and, shame to tell! was encouraged by
some whose situations ought to have induced them to set a far different
example. This increased the sickness, and some were even said to have died
under intoxication.

On the 1st of May I was removed, by the commandant's order, at the desire of
the three captains below, from the ship in which I originally was, to the
Humphreys, as a mark of respect, that being the pleasantest situation; and as
from that time some degree of intimacy commenced between the commandant and
myself, it then lay in my power to render more service than formerly; I
therefore declined the offer of going upon parole, resolving to abide by my
countrymen in their distresses, in preference to consulting my own ease or
pleasure.

It is with infinite pleasure I write the names of Captain Anthony Collins, of
the Humphreys; Captain Wm. Yellowley, of the Resolution; and Captain Rob.
Alexander, of the Berwick, three men to whom the thanks of their country are
justly due, for the preservation of many valuable lives. The three ships to
which they belonged were moved close together in one tier, and as the greatest
harmony and friendship subsisted among them, they united their endeavors to
relieve the sufferings of those on board their vessels. With this view they
distributed among the prisoners, at their own risque, such stores as were on
board of bread, peace, oatmeal, beef, etc. in a regular manner. To the sick they
gave tea, sugar, and other accommodations, bought at their own expense; and
those masters of ships and passengers, with whom they had any acquaintance, or
who seemed to possess any merit, they entertained at their own tables. These
last amounted to ten in number, and we contrived to make our situation at least
tolerable. The stock of medicines was now made common, and the direction of it
was my province.

The work of humanity went on from this time more cheerfully: the scorbutic was
sent off more frequently to the hospitals; for our three marine philanthropists
were so much respected by the French, as well as the English, that whatever
they requested was immediately granted.

Those that were sick of other diseases generally remained with us, except they
were destitute of clothing, in which case they were recommended immediately, on
the attack of any serious illness whatever, to go to the hospitals. Though the
French It consists chiefly in administering decoctions of simples and ptisans
of different sorts. They are mighty friends to phlebotomy, blisters, and
clysters; nor do they scruple to use very rough emetics. But in general their
prescriptions are very inert; for instance, pulv. cort. Peruv. pulv. rhabarb
and pulv. sal. nit. aa. gr. x. to be given every third hour. Nor do they
scruple to wake a patient in the night to give him his dose.
medical practice is certainly much inferior to the British, the advantages of
proper diet, comfortable accommodations, and clean clothes (all which they had
at the hospitals), perhaps more than counterbalanced that inferiority: at all
events it was next to impossible to effect a cure where all these were wanting.

But though this imperfect practice promised not much to other patients, the
scorbutic very constantly found relief from the diet; and those from Landerneau
pretty generally returned to us; those sent to Breast frequently were put into
the castle there; but these in either hospital seldom were in any hurry to
return.

About the beginning of June the fevers began to assume a different and more
dangerous form. The sickness and vomiting no longer yielded to emetics; the
tongue was foul, blackish, or a deep yellow; the pulse generally, as in the
former fevers, only lower; but the delirium was, if possible, more early in its
attack, and remarkably obstinate. On the third, fourth, or fifth day, a
considerable degree of icterus came on, often followed by a diarrhoea, which
removed the other symptoms. This was the mildest and most favorable form; for
many times the vomiting would only stop with the eruption of sweat; profuse
haemorrhages exhausted the patient's strength, without in the least relieving
any of the symptoms; the icteric symptoms came on with much pain in the region
of the liver; and, the flux, by its profusion and obstinacy, threatened the
worst consequences.

It was here evident that the former plan of cure must be changed, in part at
least. The vomiting and sickness could only proceed from one of two causes,
BILE, or that general diathesis which frequently prevails in contagious and
pestilential diseases, and which only ceases with the appearance of sweat, some
pustular eruption, or glandular swelling; for putrid sordes, though frequently
the occasion of very troublesome symptoms in the more advanced state of those
diseases, rarely, if ever, exist at their commencement.

When, therefore bile was suspected for the cause, the vitriolic acid was
naturally pointed out as the obvious remedy; otherwise a combination of opium
and antimonials, or opium alone, was used to promote a free diaphoresis.

When the vomiting was checked, if the pulse was tolerably strong, and not much
delirium present, as was usually the case when bile abounded, a gentle
purgative was next administered, which frequently completed the cure without
needing a repetition.

In the other cases, after sweat has been excited, the icteric symptoms coming
gently on, were, for the most part, a sign that the worst was over: and if the
diarrhoea came on with moderation, I usually suffered it to proceed. Many cases
however occurred which required the utmost attention and exertion.

Delirium and haemorrhage were the most troublesome symptoms I had to
encounter. The cortex This might be owing to the bad quality of that we had.
peruvianus availed nothing, nor were blisters of the smallest service; but,
happily, the opium answered both these ends. If liberally given it procured
sleep, and removed the delirium: and in case of sudden haemorrhage (no
unfrequent occurrence) it was my custom to give Tinct. opii gtts L. or gr. iij
of the Extract, which usually stopped the bleeding in a few minutes.

Very troublesome fluxes were sometimes the consequence of the spontaneous
diarrhoea, or even of a single dose of rhubarb, given during the icteric stage;
but these were when necessary checked with great certainty and sasety by the
opiate.

By these means, aided by the generous and humane exertions of Captains
Collins, Alexander and Yellowley, I was fortunate enough to lose only one
patient in, I may safely say, near an hundred; whereas of those that went for
these complaints to the hospitals, where they were treated on a very opposite
plan of cure, not one tenth returned.

I had never, during all this time, attempted even to palliate a scorbutic
complaint, conscious that nothing effectual could be done without such a change
of diet as was impossible for the sick to procure. But, about the middle of
July, we were flattered with the hopes of a speedy exchange, and our numbers
were then reduced by death and sickness (notwithstanding two drafts from the
castle at Breast) to little more than three hundred. It then became impossible
to resist the entreaties of a number of miserable men, all anxious to revisit
their native soil. Terrified at the idea of being left behind in an hospital,
from whence but few had returned, they were desirous, however sick, to undergo
every hardship rather than remain longer where they were; I therefore began,
though with little hopes of success, to consider of the means probable to
relieve those whom I was convinced it was impossible to cure.

In the course of my reflections on this subject, I found reason to dissent
from many received opinions; and, by comparing what I had read with what I then
saw, endeavored to acquire more just ideas on the subject.

The scurvy has generally been represented as the offspring of cold, of salt
provisions, and of dirt; it has even been represented as infectious, and
capable of being communicated like common contagious complaints, by a short
abode among the sick. But though the circumstances of cold, salt provisions,
and diet, certainly contribute much to its formation, they are, in my opinion,
by no means its principal cause, nor could I trace, in any instance, the
smallest symptoms of infection.

That salt provisions are by no means its sole cause, is plain from the history
given us by Dr. Milmann of two women who had contracted the scurvy in a very
severe degree, though their diet consisted entirely of bread and tea; nor was
dirt (in that case) the cause, for these two poor women were remarkably cleanly.

The man, whose case is described by Dr. Huxham as having taken the horrid
resolution of starving himself, died with as many scorbutic symptoms upon him
as so short a time could be supposed to produce. The other person mentioned by
him, as having destroyed his health by eating immense quantities of concrete
volatile alkali, comes nearer to the supposition of its being produced by salt.
But here it must be remarked, that a total loss of appetite accompanied the
whole disease, from whence we are fairly entitled to draw the same conclusion,
as well as from the following facts.

Persons who, by habits of intemperance, have lost their appetites, often
exhibit appearances exactly resembling the sea-scurvy. Every person in the
least conversant with the disease, must have seen it frequently attack those in
a convalescent state from other complaints; and we know the African slaves are
extremely liable to it, though their diet is almost entirely vegetable.

In the cases of the two women, there was certainly no cause but defect of
nutriment; the same was also evidently true of the man that starved himself;
and as we know that vegetable diet will but poorly support those accustomed to
animal food, the same reasoning may probably apply to the negroes. It may,
however, be objected, that the laborers in many places live chiefly on meal,
and that they exhibit no scorbutic complaints; but it should be remembered,
that they make up by quantity for the defect of the quality. Those who by
intemperance lose their appetites, and consequently impair the digestive
powers, certainly must be in the same predicament of defective nutrition; nor
is the scurvy often found even among those obliged to live on salt provisions,
unless they are deficient in quantity.

Those who, upon their recovery from other diseases, are attacked by the
scurvy, do not immediately, on the turn of their former maladies, perceive its
approach. For a few days their convalescence goes on as usual; but, in a week's
time, or perhaps near a fortnight, they begin to complain of pains in the
limbs, and other scorbutic symptoms. This, as well as the other cases, seems
plainly to refer to the head of inanition; for we all know that convalescents
require not only more but better nutriment than those who have not been sick.

It was before observed, that nothing occurred that could countenance the idea
of infection, nor can I by any means subscribe to that opinion, however
respectable the authority of its maintainers. If by an infectious disease, we
mean one capable of being communicated by contact, of an infected person or
thing, or a short abode among the sick, or in infected places, scurvy can
hardly be referred in the class of infectious diseases. This opinion has, if I
mistake not, been chiefly founded on observations made upon the coast of
Africa, where it was frequently found that the slaves were seized with scurvy
in a few days after they arrived on board the ships. I have, however, been
informed by several gentlemen, who, though not of the faculty, are every way
qualified for making observations, that those who are so early attacked are
such as have been previously debilitated by disease or hunger; for the men, or
rather brutes, that bring these miserable creatures to the ships, are often
under the necessity of marching them through the woods for many hundred miles,
by which means they frequently catch violent fluxes, and are always liable to
great fatigue and hunger.

If, indeed, the scurvy were at all infectious, the marine hospitals would be
continually full of scorbutic patients, and those that went thither to be cured
of any other slight disease, would be almost sure of contracting a worse. But
we find the case very different; nor do the healthy experience the smallest
detriment from admitting the scorbutic among them. We need not however much
wonder that the scurvy has been styled infectious, when the gout itself has
more than once undergone the same slander.

That the scurvy is neither the peculiar production of heat nor cold is plain,
from its being alike to be found in the hottest and coldest regions; but there
can be no doubt that either, if carried to a debilitating degree, will assist
much in its formation.

It does not then appear that there is any one circumstance in which all the
cases of scurvy agree, except that single one of defective nutrition, which we
may therefore lay down as the remote cause of the whole disease; though other
adventitious circumstances certainly tend very much to influence its particular
forms. I cannot think with Dr. Trotter, that the cause of scurvy lies in any
peculiar state of the blood; for though such a state accompanies it, I see no
reason for supposing it to be the cause, as it may equally well be the effect.

It may be objected, that it has been known to appear contrary to my
supposition among those who had plenty, and who might have at least eaten as
much as they pleased. I must own I doubt the fact: but grant it true, it must
be considered, on the other hand, that salt provisions are by no means so
nutritive as a much less quantity of fresh. If eaten without steeping the
excessive saltness renders them almost intolerable, and if too long steeped (as
is generally the case) they become almost a mere caput mortuum.

Thus the very pains which are taken to render the provisions fresh, serve
perhaps more than any indigestible property of the food itself to prejudice the
health. This I very sensibly felt; for, being obliged to live for several days
on provisions so treated, I found them deprived of all their juices, and
reduced by a very moderate boiling, to an almost insipid bouille, which
retained searcely any taste except a faint rusty one. The older the provisions
are, the more readily they thus part with their most nutritive parts; which may
be another reason why scurvy more frequently appears on board merchant ships,
whose provisions are often old, than ships of war.

There is, besides, a certain natural propensity in the human frame to a
variety of food: any one kind soon cloys; and if once the quality becomes
thoroughly disagreeable, the stomach will not, without loathing, receive it in
any considerable quantity. Vegetables, either fresh or dried, as they require
salt to render them palatable, very much dispose the stomach to receive salted
food; and though they afford but little nutriment themselves, yet by qualifying
the disagreeable flavor of that which is more nutritious, render essential
service.

How much difference the quantity as well as the quality of the food makes, was
fully demonstrated to me, by the striking example before my eyes; for the
sailors belonging to the cartels, who had plenty of salt provisions (with now
and then a meal of fresh) were very little subject to the scurvy, unless
debilitated by previous disease; whereas the prisoners, whose food was as
miserably deficient in quantity as in every other respect, were daily falling
victims to it.

From these premises it was reasonable for me to conclude, that the only
radical cure for the scurvy was to be obtained not from medicine but from
change of diet; yet that some palliation might be expected from those means
that could be used to increase the appetite, joined with such as give what may
be called artificial strength. Such are the several acids, bark, opium, wine,
and strong liquors, taken in moderation; but none of these could be supposed to
do more than relieve for a few days.

Before I had perfectly satisfied my own mind on the subject, an event, less
the effect of design than of accident, convinced me that I was not totally
wrong. An old man having suffered intolerable pain, and lost the use of his
legs by the scurvy, took at night a pill of extract. opii, to alleviate his
torment. He was so much relieved in his complaints, by this single dose, that I
gave him a few small pills, with directions to take one three or four times a
day: to my great, and very pleasing surprise, not only his pains lest him, but
the stiffness of his joints likewise; the blackness which had almost completely
surrounded the knee, in a great measure disappeared; nor did I find any
difficulty in keeping him sufficiently well, to remain on board, till we sailed
for England.

Encouraged by this unexpected success, I proceeded to extend the same practice
to others in different states of the disease, till I ascertained the important
fact, that opium, prudently administered, is capable of palliating, for many
days, the most urgent symptoms of sea scurvy, at least in its incipient state;
and thus enabling the poor sufferers to hold out till perhaps some hospitable
shore may afford the only radical cure -- dry air, moderate exercise, and
plentiful diet.

It now remains for me to lay down a few practical rules for the general
management of scorbutic complaints, as well in the curative as preventive
intention; as likewise some hints that may facilitate the administration of
opium in those cases where its effects are deficient or excessive.

The prevention of scurvy is not attended with any remarkable difficulty. Every
obstacle has been nearly removed by the illustrious Captain Cook, whose plans
are now pretty exactly followed in the British navy.

Nearly the same method might be adopted on board every ship bound on a long
voyage, were not obstinate bigotry to old customs a too prominent feature in
the character of most navigators. Captain Cook's first improvement was to
divide his ship's company into three watches instead of two, a practice which
might be more frequently imitated than it is. It does not very often happen
that the whole watch (when the crew is formed into two watches only) is wanted
on deck at the same time; it would certainly then be better to lessen their
fatigue, by dividing them into three, so as to allow one-third to have eight
hours uninterrupted rest each night. This would allow sufficient time to wear
off the effects of bad and rainy weather, and to refresh completely those that
have been harassed with labor. Two-thirds might often serve, when, according
to the present custom, all hands are called; and when that is practicable, the
advantage of having a reinforcement of fresh hands every eighth hour is too
obvious to be overlooked.

Next to providing against over-fatigue, dry and sufficient clothing should be
attended to. This, though effectually done on board ships of war, is too little
attended to on board merchant ships. The sailors themselves are certainly of
all men the least proper to be trusted with laying in their own necessaries.
Few of them have the fortitude to resist the temptations of a glass of gin or a
strumpet; and, to indulge themselves in those pleasures, they will, without
scruple, expend their last farthing, and go to sea in the most deplorable
condition.

The master, therefore, who wishes to conduct his ship through a long voyage in
safety, will always take care to have on board a sufficient stock of necessary
clothing, to supply those who are to make the voyage, and may have come out in
want. It would not, for obvious reasons, be prudent for him to advance too much
before their leaving port, but at sea a mutual power ought to exist for him to
be enabled to compel the men to have necessary clothes, and for them to demand
to be so supplied by him, to be accounted for out of their wages, at a fair
price.

The article of provisions is of the greatest importance; but in this little
choice can be had after the fresh stock has been expended. Some means may
perhaps be discovered of preserving animal substances at a moderate expense,
without salt, or at least with a smaller quantity than is commonly employed for
that purpose: at all events, a discovery so very important and salutary, is
highly worthy the labors of the philosopher, and ought, in a commercial
country, to be encouraged by a most ample reward.

However, as this desirable discovery has not yet been made, all that can now
be done is to modify and correct the ordinary salt provisions, as to render
them as little noxious as possible. Too much steeping, as was before observed,
exhausts the nutritious parts of the salted beef or pork, which seems to be
chemically combined with the salt. Moderate washing is quite necessary to
remove that superfluity of salt which would otherwise render the meat too acrid
to be eaten; but beyond certain limits it is certainly detrimental. If pease,
beans, callivances, or other farinacea, are eaten along with the salt
provision, thus treated they will not only render it much more palatable, but
(as they themselves contain no very despicable share of nutriment) contribute
much to the preservation of health. This can however only be said of them in a
sound and perfect state; for, when spoiled with long keeping, or full of
vermin, they become totally useless and disagreeable.

Biscuit for long voyages cannot be kept too closely headed up in casks. Many
persons are of opinion, that it requires now and then to be opened and aired;
but experience, as well as reason, prove the contrary; for I have seen biscuit
which has been kept, with no other precaution than that of being put into a
tight cask, more than three years, perfectly fresh and pleasant to the taste.

Vegetables are, doubtless, of considerable use in combination with other food,
and in the intention of rendering it more palatable may be used fresh or
pickled; but if used alone they are neither able to check nor prevent the
scurvy. I have ever seen them hurtful when eaten too freely or raw. It has been
lately imagined by some of our navigators, that potatoes eaten raw are a
specific in this disease; but ocular demonstration has convinced me that this
nauseous dose produces little or no effect. The same I can affirm of cabbages,
with this addition, that several were taken ill in consequence of not being
able to digest these vegetables when too plentifully used.

The juices of acescent vegetables, infusions of malt, vinegar, etc. possess in
themselves no antiscorbutic powers; but by whetting the appetite and assuaging
thirst, they facilitate the reception and digestion of salt food. Were it
otherwise, we should find that a little vinegar or lemon juice would cure the
disease at sea; but the miracles said to be wrought by vegetables have in
general been performed on shore, where fresh meat is likewise to be had, with
tho additional luxury of a pure and dry air.

It has often been matter of surprise to me, that dried and smoked meats so
seldom enter into the lift of ships' provisions. Prepared in this manner,
though they are much inferior in nutrition and salubrity to fresh, they are
much superior in both these respects to the ordinary salt beef and pork. It
seems, indeed, notwithstanding this inferiority, if we may trust to the
numerous instances of the inhabitants of the north, whose diet is almost solely
composed of these dried meats and oatmeal, that, aided by the ordinary stores
of meal, pease, etc. they would hardly, if at all, produce the scurvy among
sailors. The great difference between dried and pickled meat is farther
obvious, if we reflect, that in the one the nutritious juices are but lightly
impregnated with salt, and dried, as it were, into a sirm glutinous mass of
easy solution; but, in the other, they are in one of two states, either kept
constantly in a state of solution by the surrounding pickle, or else so sixed
by the sait as not to yield to an aqueous menstruum. But the excessive
insipidity of pickled beef, freshened by long steeping, plainly shows that the
juices are by no means fixed: on the contrary, they are disposed to easy
solution, and ready to be washed away along with the salt that preserves them
from putrefaction.

The catching of fish is always encouraged, as it furnishes many a fresh meal
when no other can be had. The larger and stronger tasted ought to be boiled
rather than fried, and always used when quite fresh; fortunately when fish can
be caught, there are few sorts which a little oil and lemon juice, or vinegar,
will not render very tolerable.

While the beer lasts, not only the scurvy, but other diseases are generally
very rare; but when that is consumed the men often begin to grow sickly. The
water soon becoming putrid and disgusting, the sailors abstain as much as
possible from it, nor will they, unless compelled, mix their allowance of wine
or spirits with it, but prefer drinking each separate. In proportion to their
stomachs becoming palled with their provisions, their appetites and digestions
fail, and the obvious consequence, inanition, takes place. They are directed,
by a kind of instinct, to support a sort of artificial strength with their
allowance of wine and spirits; these produce that effect for a short time, but
lose their efficacy by degrees, till at last the unhappy mariner falls a victim
to the flow, but merciless disease.

Nothing contributes more than a cheerful mind and moderate bodily exertion to
prevent attacks of the scurvy, of which I saw some striking instances in
France. One in particular, a little, lively fellow, who though his fare was no
better than his fellow sufferers, escaped every scorbutic taint, which I could
attribute to nothing but his activity and good spirits. It has indeed long been
remarked, that the skulkers are the first sufferers: every means therefore
should be used to promote cheerfulness and gentle exercise, which last is the
more necessary, as the life of a failor is either that of the severest drudgery
or downright indolence.

Washing the mouth well in a morning with salt water and vinegar, may, as
tending to cleanliness, be productive of some good; but from this I can
entertain little higher expectations than from most other popular nostrums. If
foulness of the stomach, or obstinate costiveness, create uneasiness, they must
be immediately remedied; evacuations of all sorts must however be cautiously
employed, and phlebotomy, after men have been some time at sea, should never be
performed without the most urgent necessity.

The whole of the prophylactic plan may be summed up in a very few GENERAL
RULES, of which the preceding remarks may serve for an explanation.

1. Use the most nutritive and palatable diet that can be procured; 2. Vary the
food as much as possible, that it may not nauseate by constant repetition; 3.
Use wine or spirits in moderation; 4. Let dry clothes be put on when those worn
have got wet; 5. Let cleanliness be as strictly observed as possible; 6. Let no
unnecessary watching be required; 7. Let idleness and despondency be avoided.
The cure of scurvy at sea is certainly next to impossible, nor does the
palliation of its most troublesome symptoms appear to me to admit of great
variation in the practice. The excellent effects of opium have already been
mentioned, but I shall here somewhat enlarge upon that as well as a few other
useful articles of the materiae medica.

The acids and their effects have been already examined, nor does it seem
necessary to add any thing farther on them, except that as condiments they are
both useful and agreeable. The Peruvian bark I had but little opportunity to
try, nor indeed would any trials made by me have been in the least decisive; as
all the bark we had was not only spoiled by long keeping, but originally of the
worst quality.

Of all the medicines proposed for the eure of this complaint, I can find none
that has produced any remarkable effects except opium; but as experiments of
its utility are (so far as I know) in their infancy, I shall content myself
with subjoining a few hints on its more general use, sincerely wishing, that
others whose opportunities of rendering service to mankind exceed mine, may
find it as successful as I have done.

Among the various officinal forms of this incomparable article the solid,
unprepared, or, as commonly called, crude opium, seems the best calculated for
use in scorbutic cases; the tincture, and even the softer extract, being too
sudden, violent, and transitory in their effects. The solid will indeed agree
with many persons who cannot take it in any other form, though some are said to
be incapable of bearing it in any form whatever. This however (though certain
idiosyncrasies are beyond explanation) seems in general an ill-founded opinion;
and that either the opium has been administered when not wanted, or without
attending to the state of the primae viae.

On this account we must consider what are the states in which the first
passages are found, and what are the means indicated by reason, and confirmed
by experience, for the remedying such as are morbid.

The stomach in a healthy state neither abounds in acid, bile, phlegm, nor
putrid sordes, but performs its offices readily, and with ease; yet it is
liable, more or less readily, to contract any of the above morbid states.

These states are commonly the concomitants of certain habits of living. The
stomach generally abounds in acidities in the fat and indolent; in bile, in
persons whose excesses in drinking deprive them of appetite, in those exposed
to hot climates and seasons, and in those who have endured long anxiety of
mind, and in both acid and bilious state it is likewise apt to be stuffed with
phlegm. All these conditions of the primae viae may, according to
circumstances, be either the cause or consequences of various diseases; but the
putrid, when not owing to putrid ingesta, is, I believe, the sole production of
disease continued for a length of time. Nosologists have indeed talked of an
alkaline state, and have adapted a set of medicines to it under the barbarous
name of Antalkalina; but such a state is not, I believe, very commonly found,
at least no instance of it has ever come to my knowledge.

In the first (the acid) the resins and gum resins are nearly insoluble;
purgatives of that class operate slowly, and with griping; and opium, though
given in very large doses, produces but little effect. The corrector for this
is obvious, and was proved even to demonstration in the epidemic diarrhoea of
1789, which prevailed almost all through England. Rhubarb even increased the
disease, and opium alone produced little effect, but conjoined with either the
fixed, or volatile alkali, magnesia, or even common chalk, operated in the
happiest manner.

We may take, as a farther instance, a disease chiefly incident so old men,
which I have twice met with. It is so far, as I know, a nondescript, and
perhaps mistaken for a spurious apoplexy; but the perfect similarity of the two
cases, as well as their cure, show that neither was singular.

"I was sent for to an old farmer, who was said to have been seized with a fit,
and found him lying in a profound sleep, with a full slow pulse, deep snorting,
and subsultus tendinum: he had been attempted in vain to be let blood in both
arms, nor did I entertain the least doubt of his case being apoplectic.

"In about a quarter of an hour he came somewhat to his senses, and vomited a
small quantity of phlegm, but presently his eyes were distorted, his head drawn
aside, he uttered a piercing cry, and instantly relapsed into the same state in
which I had found him.

"On inquiry, I found he had complained of pain at the stomach before his fits;
and as there was some mint water at hand, I gave him, as foon as he was able to
take it, a small tea-cup full, with a few drops of tinct. opii. This however he
soon rejected, and relapsed in the same manner as before.

"Supposing that his complaint might proceed from some putrid substance lodged
in the stomach, I ordered him a draught containing gr. x. of kali ppt. with
gtts. xxx. tinct. opii, to be immediately followed by suce. limon ss. In the
hurry of giving it to him the lemon juice was spilt, and before any more could
be procured the patient found himself so much better that he positively refused
to take it. Next morning I found him almost well, his chief complaint being of
the soreness of his mouth and throat, which were almost excoriated by the
excessive acidity of what he had vomited: he said his whole complaint had lain
in his stomach, and that he had found immediate relief upon taking the
(alkaline) draught.

"He has several times since been threatened with similar attacks, but always
repels them by means of a mixture, containing a considerable portion of the
confectio aromatica and magnesia, which he keeps constantly by him."

The other case was so strictly similar, that nothing more need be said, but
that I removed the whole disease at once with the following draught: Aq. menth.
iss. Sp. nuc. mosch. iij. Tinct. opii gtt. xxx. Magness. Alb. ss. Sir. zinzib.
ij. M.


The next state of the stomach to be considered is the BILIOUS, in which all
the resinous substances operate with remarkable force. The purgatives of this
class act briskly and quickly; and opium very often occasions delirium.

Here the vitriolic acid is indicated both by reason and experience, for the
purpose of decomposing the bile, and removing its hurtful effects. Emetics
have, it is true, been the constant resource of physicians, ever since the days
of Hippocrates; and where the stomach is known to abound in phlegm are
certainly proper. But this mode of practice ought to be cautiously pursued,
unless there is great reason to suspect something more than bilious sordes in
the stomach. In many robust constitutions uneasiness in the stomach, vertigo,
and bitter, disagreeable taste in the mouth are removed with great certainty by
an emetic; but in tender and weakly persons the same symptoms often require a
very different method of cure. After these feeble patients have taken an
emetic, they seem, perhaps for a day or two, to be relieved by it, but are
sometimes about that time attacked by a cholera morbus, which proves remarkably
severe.

When, therefore, the want of strength gives the least ground for suspicion,
and there is no reason to believe that the complaint originates from any other
cause than redundant bile, the vitriolic acid taken in small doses, as occasion
may require, will be sufficient.

In the autumn of 1790, there appeared a bilious diarrhoea, which if not
prudently treated, was very apt to run into cholera morbus in a very short time.

The ordinary astringents excited vomiting, in proportion as they checked the
flux; purgatives, however gentle, brought on the cholera, and opium caused
delirium; but by premising a few drops of acid. vitriol. dilut. any of these
might be administered with safety.

Where the primae viae are clogged with phlegm, there is perhaps no way of
removing it but by evacuation; nor must we be discouraged if a dose of
extraordinary magnitude should be required. This tenacious substance lines the
stomach and alimentary tube in such a manner as to render them incapable of
being acted upon by ordinary doses; at the same time it obstructs the orifices
of the lacteals; and until it is cleared away the patient sinks under a train
of symptoms, often supposed to proceed from other causes. This is no where more
strongly exemplified than in the chronie colic; described by Aretaeus. Here it
should seem very brisk purgatives are quite necessary, as is made to appear by
the case (the only one I believe on record) published by me in the New London
Medical Journal, vol. I. part II.

The putrid state of the stomach, or lower intestines, is easily known, and can
only be remedied by the carbonic acid, whether it proceeds from putrid
substances taken in by the mouth, or from previous general disease. Riverius
was, I believe, the first that applied this acid, in the form of the fermenting
mixture, in the putrid vomiting, which takes place in some fevers; but since
his time, other physicians have considerably extended its use, upon rational
grounds, with the greatest success. When troublesome symptoms are excited by
putrid substances received by the mouth, it is equally efficacious; an instance
of which may be found in the Medical Journal abovementioned.

Many other medicines have been mentioned as possessing high antiseptic.
powers, but their effects seem very inconsiderable; nor, since we are provided
with one of such approved efficacy, is it of much consequence whether we have
any more.

I have been insensibly tempted into a long, and, perhaps, unnecessary
digression; but as the correction of medicines once was a favorite theme in
physic, and has of late been much neglected, I could not forbear giving my
sentiments on a subject, which, when rationally attempted, is of more
importance than feems at this time commonly imagined. Nor did I think it
superfluous to facilitate as much as lay in my power the use of one of the most
active and excellent articles of the materia medica.

When indeed I first undertook the profession of physic some rules, beyond what
are commonly taught, seemed necessary for extemporaneous prescription. The use
of articles confessedly inert struck me as a criminal species of trifling;
following implicitly the formulae of others seemed to be treated mildly, by
being only called servile indolence; nor did the use of disputed medicines, or
the random application of the more active, appear at all warrantable. Besides,
it has frequently happened that one physician, guided by experience, has
extolled to the skies an article which another, on the very same ground, has
pronounced totally inert. No other reason could be assigned for this, (if one
or both have not been deceived by using it in combination with other drugs, on
which its power solely depended), but that some local circumstance has been
overlooked. On this account it was obviously necessary to inquire into those
states of the living system which could produce any remarkable difference in
the power of medicines, and the above is some part of the result of that
inquiry.

But to return to our subject. Having corrected the state of the primae viae,
we may generally proceed to administer the opium to our scorbutic patients.
Sometimes, however obstinate costiveness renders its immediate use improper,
and this must be removed by the use of gentle cathartics, given in such doses
as are just sufficient to produce their proper effects. But though this
practice in general is necessary, it is not always so; for sometimes the opium,
strange as it may seem, produces an evacuation, even when small doses of
carthartics fail; an effect only to be accounted for on the supposition that
the faeces are retained, because the intestinal tube is too much debilitated to
expel them.

The patients must be kept dry and warm, but not too hot; nor should any
species of cleanliness be omitted. If they can move themselves, they should be
as much as possible in the open air, when the weather is fine: gentle exertions
should be encouraged; and even those who are themselves incapable of motion,
will find much refreshment on being carried in their hammocs, or otherwise,
upon deck. All surprises, and sudden emotions and exertions, ought to be
carefully avoided, cheerful ideas should be impressed, but even these should be
of the steady kind; amusements should be encouraged, but not laborious ones;
and the pleasing hope of reaching land in a few days should be constantly
instilled into the mind. Even when that desirable event takes place, it ought
to be gradually signified to these miserable objects. The exertions of the mind
have much effect on the body nor can I attribute the sudden deaths of scorbutic
patients, on their arrival in port, to any other cause than excess of joy. When
the body is much debilitated, any slight exertion, or passion, produces very
great effects; nor perhaps is a state of greater debility any where to be found
than in this disease; for here we often find persons who the moment before were
speaking cheerfully, suddenly expire on attempting to rise from their beds.

Scorbutic ulcers must be kept clean; but whether the practice of dressing them
with vegetable acids is of much avail, experience can alone determine. In
general the fewer applications are made to wounds and ulcers the better; if the
dressings be soft, and sufficient to keep out dirt and cold, little more is
required.

The earth-bath has been much commended, both as a topical and general
application in scorbutic complaints. It is said to occasion great pain on being
first used, but in a few repetitions the pains wear off, and the whole habit
quickly amends. How far this is the case I am unable to determine; but as the
earth-bath can only be practiced on shore, the change of diet which may be
supposed to obtain at that that time may perhaps effect the cure. The
application of the fresh earth may perhaps palliate the symptoms, but it must
strike every one as a manifest absurdity, to imagine that the morbid effects
can permanently cease whilst their cause (bad and insufficient food) remains.

If it is necessary to attempt the palliation of scorbutic complaints at sea,
the antiscorbutic diet, particularly so far as relates to nutriment, must be
adopted. If such food cannot be procured, the addition of a little wine to the
salt beef, when stewed, will render it more palatable, without destroying its
nutritive powers. The portable soups are highly proper, and may be rendered
still more so, by being united with pease, as it appears from experiment, that
fluid food is not so readily acted upon by the stomach as that which possesses
some degree of solidity.

For drink the liquors must be suited to the climate. But in all cases, as the
creating of artificial strength is the principal object, wine, punch, or beer,
may be taken, as appears most suitable. No liquor, perhaps in point of coolness
and briskness, exceeds spruce-beer, and as the essence of spruce is perfectly
portable, it becomes within the reach of every navigator.

These rules are likewise proper to be observed by those in a state of
convalescence from other diseases; for such are (as was before observed) very
liable to attacks of the scurvy, every symptom of which however after
disappears as they regain their strength.

For the use of such as are much reduced by acute diseases, an emulsion may be
made as follows; which, if well prepared, can hardly be distinguished from
cow's milk, and serves for tea or coffee equally as well:

Grind together in a marble mortar about a dram of fine loaf sugar, half a
dram of gum-arabic, and half a teaspoonful of common salt: when well powdered
and mixed, add from twenty to thirty blanched sweet almonds; bruise the whole
well together, and form them into a paste; to which add by degrees a pint of
boiled water. The slower the water is added, and more pains is taken with
rubbing them, the better will be the liquor; and when all the water is added,
strain through a fine linen cloth.

Upon standing, it throws up a fine rich cream, which may be collected in such
quantity, if we use enough of the emulsion, as to become a most delicate
article of luxury.

If to half a pint of this liquor a little spirits and sugar be added, it forms
a grateful and refreshing draught in any climate, hot or cold; nor can it
perhaps be paralleled unless by the luxurious milk of the cocoa nut.

In the mean time small doses of opium; for instance, pills of grj. Each must
be administered at short intervals.

A soon as ever the scurvy makes its appearance on board a ship, the first
consideration ought to be the possibility of making land in a short time. It is
in vain to flatter ourselves that the disease may not spread, because perhaps
only one man is sick.

The seeds of this cruel malady once sown, they only wait for a favorable
opportunity to produce their horrid fruit. Every little fatigue will be
severely felt, and a few, a very few days of bad weather may reduce a numerous
crew to the most helpless state; incapable alike to improve a favorable gale,
or to guard against the perils of a storm. To vessels in this situation no such
thing should exist as an enemy's port. The animosities of ambition should be
obliterated by the tears of humanity. This has more than once been the case,
when ships in distress have put into the ports of their enemies; they have been
relieved and set at liberty, and would always be so was man permitted to act
for himself. In few cases, indeed, will he, if left to his own feelings, do
wrong. The sacred voice of misery will ever be heard with attention; nay,
sometimes the hand of wretchedness, impelled by want, has been held privileged
even in violating the first rules of morality. The natural disposition of man
is to goodness; his heart yearns with benevolence toward his fellow creatures.
Cruelty constitutes no part of his native character; but custom and education
often sorely warp the naturally straight wand. Born with feelings tremblingly
alive to every representation of woe, vicious habits rooted by time too often
render him insensible to the miseries of others; he can see them without pity,
he can inflict them without remorse: but, permitted to obey the dictates of his
own heart, without any vicious precedent to pervert his actions, they are for
the most part generous, great, and good.

POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the above went to press, it has been suggested to me that the fevers
attended with icteric symptoms, p. 12, might possibly have been brought by the
ships from the West Indies, and communicated by infection to the prisoners who
s^ept upon the mattresses the English soldiers had used in those islands where
the yellow fever raged. That clothes and bedding are capable of retaining and
communicating infection, I am far from denying; but I cannot at the same time
allow, that the yellow fever, properly so called, is at all infectious. When
that fatal epidemic appeared at Philadelphia, no tolerably attested instance of
contagion is related of it. The weather, during July, August, September, and
October, was remarkably hot, calm, and droughty; but about the 8th of November
it became colder, and a good deal of rain fell, when the number of deaths
immediately decreased from upwards of two thousand, who died in October, to
about an hundred and twenty. If the yellow fever makes its appearance in the
West Indies in war-time, when the hospitals are crowded with sick, there can be
no doubt but that those in the hospitals will be liable to that contagious
disease which is proper to those places; but as all intercurrent diseases
partake of the form of the reigning epidemic, these will put on the general
form of the yellow fever, though of a widely different origin, and that they
may be communicated by infection is very evident.

In all the cases of disease originating from contagion that I have been able
to trace, delirium is seldom or never an early symptom: in the worst cases of
the smallpox the patient is very rarely delirious for several days. But when
diseases arise from the constitution of the air, the case is widely different,
and the first attack is often discovered by a derangement of intellect. In
those fatal maladies that attack Europeans who reside in some parts of Africa
during the rainy season, a kind of light delirium often precedes every other
symptom; when the angina maligna rages epidemically this is often the first
harbinger of the disease; when the plague ravaged London in 1665, it seems to
have been preceded by an epidemic delirium, which manifested itself among the
people by frantic pretenses to prophecy and power of seeing specter; and
finally, whilst I was in France, a gentleman, who was not in the way of any
infection, was seized with a violent fever, which first declared itself by his
being taken delirious whilst sitting at breakfast. We may perhaps then make
early delirium a criterion of an epidemic generated upon the spot, and not
imported from any foreign climate; nor, in fact, do I believe there ever was an
instance of an epidemic being brought out of one country into another: one or
two persons may certainly be infected by this mode of communication, but to
enable the contagion to spread to any extent, many other circumstances must
concur.

THE END.
Shortly will be Published, BY THE SAME AUTHOR, A TRANSLATION OF THE Genuine
Works of Hippocrates, WITH HIS LIFE; As collected from the best Authorities.
THIS work has been the labor of several years, and was originally undertaken
solely for the Author's own use. It was indeed perfectly evident to him on the
first perusal of the writings of the Venerable Fathers of Medicine, that his
Translators and Commentators had in general not only misconceived his ideas,
but even grossly misunderstood his language. In his Aphorisms these blunders
are often of the first magnitude; they not only distort the Author's meaning,
but sometimes entirely do it away, or else render grand and useful Theorem^
trifling and nonsensical. In his other works, which are of a less didactic
cast, blunders, though not of so great importance, are, nevertheless,
unpleasant to the reader. The great use of a correct Translation of an Author,
from whom more than half the Medical Writings of the last two thousand years
have been copied, stolen, or perverted, needs no remark: the Author submits his
performance to the judgment of his brethren, who will, he doubts not, praise or
censure him according to his merit.


