THE Castle of Andalusia, A COMIC OPERA.

IN THREE ACTS.

AS IT IS PERFORMED At the THEATERS in LONDON And DUBLIN.

By JOHN O'KEEFE, Esqr.

SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS.

M, DCC, LXXXIII.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Don Scipio, Mr. WILDER. Don Juan, Mr. MITCHELL. Don Ferdinando, Mr. PALMER.
Don Alphonzo, Mrs. MELMOTH. Phillipo, Mr. JOHNSTON. Ramirez, Banditti, Mr.
BUTLER. Sanguino, Banditti, Mr. FOTTERALL. Spado, Banditti, Mr. O'RIELLY.
Calvette, Banditti, Mr. KANE. Rapino, Banditti, Mr. LYNCH. Pedrillo, Mr. RYDER.
Vasques, Mr. WITHINGTON
WOMEN.
Donna Isabella, Mrs. HEAPHY. Lorenza, Miss. JARRETT. Victoria, Mrs. JOHNSON.
Catilina, Mrs. HITCHCOCK
Banditti, Attendants, etc.

The Castle of Andalusia.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Discovers a banditti sitting at a table drinking in a large cave. Ramirez,
(their captain) at their head. At the further end of the cave a large lamp,
suspended by a chain; a winding staircase, supposed leading to the trap door:
Rapino near it withinside; Calvetti without, as sentinel; the table covered
with Tigers skin; a parcel of carabines and firearms hung up. -- (All
laughing.) AIR AND CHORUS.
Ramirez and Banditti. CHORUS.
HERE we sons of freedom dwell,
In our friendly rock-hewn cell,
Pleasure's dictates we obey,
Nature points us our the way:
Ever great, and ever free,
Valor guards our liberty.
AIR.
Of severe and partial laws,
Venal judges, Alguazils,
Dreary dungeon's iron jaws,
Oar or gibbet, whips or wheels;
How can we think,
While we drink
Sweet Muscadine?
O, life divine!
CHORUS.
Here we sons of freedom, etc.
Ram. Come cavaliers, our confines are low, yet our hearts are high: -- Charge
your glasses -- Bacchus gives the word; it is wine makes us mortals noble as the
Gods. -- Fire!

they drink.
Spado. Oh! this is noble firing indeed! I like a volley of grape shot; but
pray will you let us have any sky lights in this cave?


All -- Oh! No, no, no!


Ram. Come, put about the toast: -- a good booty to us to night.


Alph. A good booty to us to night.


Spad. Oh! I love to rob a fat priest! -- stand! says I -- priest! and then I
knocks him down!


Sang. My nose bleeds; I wonder what color the blood of a coward is?


Spad. Why? don't you see?


Sang. Hah! do you call me a coward? I Will stab him; but the scar on my forehead
contradicts that.


Spa. The scar on your forehead; when you run away you know, you always look
behind you.


Sang. I Will stab him!

(Offers to draw.)
Spad. Don't hurt little Spado; I meant no harm.


Sang. Armies have confessed my valor; the time has been -- but no matter.


Ram. Come, come away, with reflections; hand us that red wine.

AIR. -- Ramirez.
Flow thou regal purple stream,
Tinted by the solar beam,
In my goblet, sparkling rise,
Cheer my heart, and glad my eyes;
My brain, ascend on fancy's wing,
'Noint me, wine, a jovial king.
While I live, I Will lave my clay,
When I Am dead, and gone away
Let my thirsty subjects say --
A month he reigned, but that was May.
(A loud clap of thunder.

All -- Hark! Hark!


Ram. How soon we hear the thunder through this vast body of earth and rock; --
Rapino -- is all safe above?


Rap. Yes.


Ram. Spado? it is your turn to relieve the sentinel.


Spad. Relieve him! what is the matter with him?


Ram. Come, sir! it is your watch.


Spa. My watch! let the wolves watch -- I only wish to watch the bottle.


Ram. Come, come, no jesting; to your duty.


(Another loud clap of thunder) -- Spa. What the devil! do you take me for a
salamander?


Ram. Don't you hear.


Spad. I Have taken up with the first swine's hovel I could find, upon such a
night as this.


Ram. Oh! there will be no sport I fear to night, cavaliers! therefore lock
down the trap-doors.


Spa. This being a night of peace; we'll have a dish of olives.


Sang. No, no! peace: we'll cut and scour the forest; there is a rich old
fellow, called Don Scipio, lives at the skirts of it: what say you to
plundering him to night?


Ram. Not to night! I have my reasons; but where is our prisoner?


Spad. There he lies; with his face so innocent, and yet he took some devilish
hard knocks.


Calvetto. (From above with a lantern in his hand.) A booty! a booty!
What is it?

Calv. One man; and alone.


Spa. One man, and alone! that is odd: will he fight?


Call. He seems to be drawing near: his hat bespeaks him noble.


Ram. Get my arms; our carabines, quick; and remove the table. (They all rise
and remove the table.) We will not all go to the attack of one man: leave Spado
and me alone, the rest prepare for a general excursion.


(They separate and go different ways.) Spad. (Looking over the rail of the
staircase.) Our prisoner seems a good natured looking man; if my brother rooks
will but fly off, I shall have the pigeon all to myself.


Enter Ramirez. Ram. Spado! Spado!


Spa. O Captain! you would better not let me (...) first, because I Am always so
rash.


Ram. Come on sirrah: leave buffoonery, and to your duty. Hallo! Spado: come
along you rascal.


Exit. Spad. Well, I Am coming;

(goes partly up stairs and stops.)
Enter Alphonzo. Alph. I find myself very unhappy; to have fallen into the
hands of these ruffians: while my rival Don Ferdinand, (I fear,) if he once
reaches Don Scipio's castle, wins my charming Victoria, and I loose her for
ever! but if I could procure an interview, love should plead my cause.

AIR. -- Alphonzo.
The hardy sailor braves the ocean.
Fearless of the roaring wind,
Yet his heart with soft emotion,
Throbs to leave his love behind.
To dread of foreign foes a stranger
Though the youth can dauntless roam,
Alarming fears paint every danger,
In a rival left at home.

Spalo. (Comes down stairs) What is it I see? Our prisoner! (aside.) Thou art a
poor bird that sings in this cage! (I Will have a little talk with him now they
are out of hearing:) Ha, ha, ha! I know more of his affairs than he thinks of;
I overheard a servant at an inn speak of him.


Alph. How shall I escape these rascals? (Aside.) O here is one of the gentlemen
I see! Pray sir, may I take the liberty?


Spad. No, truly, you will not take any liberty here, but upon certain
conditions: come, suppose you become one of us; I think you will make a devilish
good thief: nay, I don't flatter you; and by good luck, we have just got a
vacancy; having lately lost one of our troop, a fine bold youth, he now hangs
upon a gibbet, and you shall take his post.


Alph. What! upon the gibbet?


Spad. No: soft and fair, that is a very high post indeed; though I don't doubt
your merit. Your ingenuity, in time, may exalt you: give me your hand.


Alph. (Aside.) Infamous scoundrel.


Spa. Sir! I Have a mind to do you a favor, therefore will ask you in the pious
spirit of a holy inquisitor.


Alph. That is a very pious abjuration.


Spa. In the devil's name, who are you?


Alph. Sir, my name is Alphonzo: I am son of an eminent banker at Madrid.


Spad. Oh, ho! I thought he sung like a goldfinch, I Will convince him, I know
all his affairs, and then -- I Will hold his purse.


Alph. (Aside.) If I trust him, perhaps I may escape by his means, -- you wont
betray me.


Spa. Oh, no, there is honor amongst thieves.


Alph. I was going --


Spa. To Don Scipio's castle, upon the confines of this forest.


Alph. Then you know my business.


Spa. Yes, to Donna Victoria, who is contracted.


Alph. Then you know she is contracted.


Spa. Yes, to Don Ferdinand; to the destruction of your hopes: she now waits
for nothing but his arrival.


Alph. While I am penned up in this cursed cavern: -- How got you my story?


Spa. Oh, that is nothing at all; I could let you out of this cavern.


Alph. But will you?


Spa. Oh, that is another thing; our trap-door requires a golden key.


Alph. Your comrades have not left me one piastre.


Spa. Give me an order on your father's bank for 50 pieces, and I will secure
your escape.


Alph. I will.


Enter Ramirez. Spad. (Seeing him, turns to Alphonzo.) -- Oh! you impudent dog,
I Will secure your escape; what the devil! do you offer me a bribe? would you
corrupt my honesty? do you think I will betray my trust; what, corrupt my
honesty, that I inherit from my chaste mother. Oh! captain, I did not see you,
I did not know you was here.


Ram. What Is the matter?


Spa. Oh! I can hardly speak! he is a little mistaken in your man. -- Let you
escape.


Alph. (Aside.) Here is a rascal --


Spad. This rascal has been calling me names this half hour, only because I
wont let him out without your knowledge: Oh, what offers I have refused! I may
safely swear my integrity is secure against galleons, or the mines of Peru or
Mexico. What, offer to bribe me: I will cut your head off you dog; never let me
catch you out.


Ram. Get you gone, and leave us. -- (Exit Spado.) You have no occasion to
tamper with my men, you shall owe your liberty to none but me. Your story, told
me by Spado, has engaged me to your interest, I will convey you to the cottage
of the vines, which belongs to one Phillipo, a peasant not far from Don
Scipio's castle. -- There you may pursue your whole desires, and do whatever
love may inspire to obtain your wishes.


Alph. A thousand thanks to you, kind fir; time moves on leaden pinions, till I
again behold my charming Victoria.

AIR. -- Alphonzo.
Come ye hours with bliss replete,
Bear me to Victoria's feet,
Cheerless winter must I prove
Absent from the maid I love;
But the joys our meetings bring
Show the glad return of spring.

Exeunt Alphonzo and Ramirez. SCENE II. -- A forest: all dark, hail and rain.
Enter Don Ferdinando. Ferd. What a dreadful horrid place is this -- Pedrillo?
I Have lost my servant, I believe, since I lest Cales; by the pace I have rode, I
think Don Scipio's castle cannot be far off: this was to have been my wedding
night, Pedrillo.


Enter Pedrillo. Ped. Here, Sir.


Ferd. Where are you?


Ped. Here Sir.


Ferd. Which way?


Ped. Any body's way; for I have lost my own; -- do you see me, sir?


Ferd. No.


(A violent flash of lightning. Ped. Do you see me now, Sir?


Ferd. No, Sir. (Thunders.) How it thunders!


Ped. All this will frighten the poor mules, they will break their bridles, I
have tied them to a tree; how shall we escape the banditti.


Ferd. Oh, we shall find them in the morning, (A gun fired.) Hark! I hear a
gun; somebody is in trouble.


Ped. No, Sir, their trouble's over by this time.


Ferd. Who can deny assistance, to a fellow creature in distress?


Draws, and Exit. Ped. What fine creatures these gentlemen are, but for me, I
am a poor rascally servant; so I Will even take my chance with the mules.

AIR. -- Pedrillo.
I.
A master I have, and I am his man,
Galloping dreary dun,
And he will get a wife as fast as he can,
With a haily
Gaily
Gambo raily,
Gigg'ling,
Nigg'ling
Galloping galloway, draggle tail, dreary dun.
II.
I saddled his steed so fine and so gay,
Galloping, dreary dun,
I mounted my mule, and we rode away,
With our haily, etc.
III.
We canter'd along, until it grew dark,
Galloping dreary dun;
The nightingale sung instead of the lark,
With her haily, etc.
IV.
We met with a friar, and asked him our way,
Galloping dreary dun,
By the Lord, says the friar, you're both gone astray,
With your, etc.
V.
Our journey, I sear, will do us no good,
Galloping, dreary dun,
We wander alone, like the babes in the wood,
With our haily, etc.
VI.
My master is fighting, and I Will take a peep,
Galloping dreary dun,
But now I think better, I Would better go sleep,
With my haily,
Gaily,
Gambo raily,
Gigg'ling
Nigg'ling,
Galloping galloway, draggle tail, dreary dun.

Enter Don Scipio, fighting with banditti, Spado follows, and gets up a tree.
Band. Down with him, down with him.


Spado. Oh! Don't fire!


One of them fires. Enter Ferdinando, and drives off Banditti. Exit. Leaving.
Don Scipio. Scip. I have not fought so much these twenty years.


Spad. I think I could see but one man come to the assistance of the old
gentleman. (Comes down,) Where are you?


Scip. Here, approach my brave deliverer.


Spad. I shall -- [Aside.] Here is a victory, and nobody to claim it: I Will go
and pick up the laurels.


Scip. Who is this stranger that is come to my assistance?


Spad. [Aside.] I may pass for this angel in the dark: they may be ashamed to
attack a man in the king's highway: I made the dogs scamper.


Scip. Who is this I hear?


Spa. Are you the honest old gentleman I rescued from the Banditti?


Scip. I am so much beholden to you. --


Spa. Say nothing about it, I Have saved your life: a good action rewards itself.


Scip. Are you the gallant fellow? I faith, as well as I could distinguish in
the dark, you looked much higher just now.


Spa. O that was whilst I was fighting, I always appear six foot high, when I Am
in a passion, besides my hat and feather added to my height.


Scip. Why the rascals have run off without my purse.


Spad. Have I saved your purse? I think, of a poor fellow, I am the luckiest
dog in all Spain.


Scip. Poor fellow! Pray valiant stranger accept this purse, as a small token
of my gratitute.


Spad. No, no, no! Sir.


Scip. You shall take it, you shall have it.


Spa. Lord! Sir, I am so awkward at taking a purse.

Receives purse.
Scip. If I could but find my cane now. --


Spad. [Aside.] Here is somebody else coming, perhaps this is the real
conqueror.


Exit. Enter Ferdinando. Ferd. It was the darkness of the night that favored
their escape.


Scip. Aye, you made them fly like pigeons; my little game-cock.


Ferd. Perhaps you was the old gentleman that was attacked?


Scip. (Looking at Audience.) Pray seel if you don't find a ring; it was a
relic of my deceased lady.


Ferd. What ring, Sir?


Scip. A ring that you will find in the purse.


Ferl. This old gentleman has been robbed, and perhaps wishes me to reimburse
him.


Scip. Come, come along with me, my little hero: Why Zounds! Signior, you are
not in a passion now sure; for me thinks you look six foot high agian; -- come
along with me to the castle, and our daughter Victoria shall welcome you.


Ferd. Your daughter Victoria! then perhaps, you are my intended father-in-law?


Scip. Is it possible! you can be my expected son-in-law, Don Ferdinando de
Zelves!


Ferd. The same, Sir, and just now come from Cales; and upon my journey to the
castle, was benighted upon this forest; and upon hearing some persons were
attacked by the Banditti, went to their rescue.


Scip. (Aside.) It was damned mean though to take my purse.


Enter Spado. Listening. Spad. O then he is Don Alphonzo's rival, and they have
never met before.


Scip. What! you was resolved to touch some of your wife's fortune beforehand;
you have got the money, aye, and the ring too -- it is not gone out of the
family: come, come along, my brave valiant -- (Aside.) Damned paltry of him to
take my purse.


Exeunt. Spa. This purse has put a fine thing into my head -- how to delay
Ferdinando's wedding -- assist my new master Alphonzo, and procure a handsome
reward; -- I shall have a good reception at the castle, by means of this ring.
-- I will raise a fine confusion in Don Scipio's family; the clearing up of
which, I will be well paid for. -- I have lost part of my time aheady; I must
get away by a cross road to the castle: there I will provide a whimsical
reception for the son-in-law, (Whistling beard.) Hark! they are calling up to
supper, -- I thank you kindly, gentlemen, I am very much obliged to you -- but
I happended to be engaged.


Exit. SCENE III.
An Apartment in Scipio's Castle. Enter Victoria and Catilina. Cat. Nay, dear
madam, never submit to go into ^n nunnery.


Vict. Yes, I must; the trouble I feel from my parents slights, invite me to
forsake the transitory joys of a bad world.


Cat. Bad world! I Am sure it is good enough for me: what, in the name of wonder,
would your religious folks have? it is well enough for me. Here are fine flower
gardens, sun beams and refreshing gales to walk in, and there are good natured
men, and kind men. What a thing it is for a fair and lovely woman, to think of
living among the nuns, who turn their backs to each other, and go stalking to
their separate cells, and never marry: La ma'am! to marry, is the whole intent
of the creation.


Vict. You know nothing of what I feel.


Cat. Lord! ma'am, I wish I could see you once in love.


Vict. You talk of love, Catalina: I wonder what fort of a man this Ferdinando
is, that is expected at the castle!


Cat. He is a fine man, I can assure you, he rejoices at the very name of
Victoria: then here is your father, though you are the daughter and sole heiress
of all this castle, obliges you to resign it to Signora Lorenza, because he has
taken it into his head to marry her mother; and this Italian coquette is so
be-dizen'd out in fine clothes and jewels, and you to be sent to a convent! I
wish I may die, if I was to be served so -- if I could not put my best foot
first, and go to Madrid, and tell the king of it.


Vict. Deprived by death of a tender mother, and the affections of my father
alienated from me, has deprived me of every joy and hope: -- I shall therefore
quit the world without regret.

AIR. -- Victoria.
Ah, solitude, take my distress,
For my griess I Will unbosom to thee;
Each sigh thou can gently repiess,
And thy silence is music to me.
Yet peace from my sonnet may spring,
For sweet peace, let me fly the gay throng,
To soften my sorrows I sing,
Yet sorrow's the theme of my song.

Exit. Cat. My poor dear young lady! Oh; deuce take Dame Isabel and her upstart
minx of a daughter -- she be my mistress? no, that she shall not: I Will quit the
castle the moment Donna Victoria goes into a nunnery; shall I go with her? Oh,
no; -- I was never designed for a nun; I will go back to our village where my
dear Phillipo is; I dare say, he is as fond as ever: -- I Will warrant he has the
hearts of all the girls: -- then he can flute and fiddle, and oboe, and all the
rest of the things.

AIR. -- Catalina.
Like my dear swain, no youth you would see
So blithe, so gay, so full of glee,
In all our village, -- who but he,
To ^oot it up so featly?
His lute to hear,
From sar and near,
Each female came,
Both girl and dame,
And all his boon,
For every tune,
To kiss 'em round so sweetly.
While round him in the jocund ring,
We nimbly danced, he would play or sing;
Of May the youth was chosen King,
He caught our ears so neatly.
Such music rare
In his guittar,
But touch his lute,
The crowd was mute;
His only boon
For every tune,
To kiss 'em round so sweetly,

Exit. Enter Spado and Vasquez. Spad. Inform your Lady, that I am here.


Vasq. Are you Don Ferdinand?


Spa. Tell her I Am here.


Vasq. I will inform her of your arrival.


Spa. Then you will oblige me very much -- She is supreme directress of this
castle. -- (Exit Vasquez.) And as I Am informed, rules the roast: she is my mark
-- but the story is up, if I tell her one word of truth: (Sees her coming.)
This is the same widow Lady that ran away with an old master of mine to Italy:
I can remember some anecdotes of her, that do more credit to my memory than her
reputation, which I will take care to remind her of in due time -- she don't
recollect my face, I hope.


Enter Isabella and Vasquez. Isa. Don Scipio not returned yet, where can he
stay? where is this strange, ugly fellow, who wanted to speak with me?


Vasq. I did not say he was ugly.


Spa. Go along, young man!


(Exit Vasq. Isa. Well, Sir, who are you?


Spa. I Have the honor to be confidential secretary to Don Ferdinando.


Isa. Is he arrived? Here, Vasquez, Lopez, Diego.


Spa. Hold! Ma'am, my young master is not arrived: (most sagacious of all
women) (Aside.) My young master is coming incog.


Isa. Incog!


Spa. Yes, incog. You shall hear, Ma'am. (Now for a good lie.) The morning
before his departure, he calls me into the closet, and locking the door --
Spado, says he, -- you must know Ma'am, my name is Spado.


Isa. Well, Sir.


Spa. Spado, says he, you know this obstinate father of mine has engaged me to
marry a lady I have never seen. Tomorrow I set off for her castle, but
(striking his breast with one hand so -- twisting his mustaches, and turning up
his eyes!) if when I see her, she don't please my fancy, I will not marry her
by -- I don't care to mention his oath before you, Madam.


Isab. O no! pray don't.


Spa. Says he, I mean to dress up Pedrillo -- he shall personate me in Don
Scipio's Castle: -- If I like the lady I throw off the livery, and Pedrillo
waits upon her. -- If I do not like her, the deceit continues, and Pedrillo has
the lady. -- I will learn them to clap up marriages without consulting me.


Isab. So it was to have been my poor daughter, that was to have fallen into
this snare.


Spa. Says he, I mean to employ you as my spy, to cover the secret; let it be
done by imposing some damned lie or other, (which your genius may suggest) upon
a very ignorant ordinary woman, that you will see there -- named Donna Isabella.


Isab. Impose upon the stupid woman, that you will find there -- but he shall not
find me so stupid.


Spa. Does he think you would not find me out if I was to tell you a lie?


Isab. Aye! that I should.


Enter Vasquez. Vas. My master is arrived, and one Don Ferdinando with him.


Spa. You must know, ma'am, Pedrillo's mother was a Gipsey woman, his father a
merry-andrew to a mountebank, and himself five years a trumpeter to a company
of strolling players.


Isab. So I was only to have a trumpeter for my son-in-law! -- Good Sir! how
much I Am beholden to you for this timely notice.


Spa. I have only done the duty of an honest man; -- I have lived a good while
in the family, and could not bear my young master should be running about
making such a fool of himself, especially under such circumstances.


Isab. Pray, Sir, be at home; want for nothing the house affords.


Spa. Want for nothing --


Isab. By no means.


Spa. (Aside.) Then I will want for nothing I can lay my fingers on.


[Exit. Isab. Heaven's! what an honest fellow this is! what a lucky discovery.
-- Oh! here comes my darling Lorenza.


Enter Lorenza. Lor. Oh mother, don't you think I look charmingly today?


Isab. Yes, child; the toilette has done it.


Lor. Oh! signora -- the delicious hopes of an expected lover. --

AIR. -- Lorenza.
New graces
The thoughts of a lover
Invited, expected, and sighed for occasion,
Sweet faces
Fresh sweetness discover;
Our eyes then are diamonds; our cheeks are carnation,
Those eyes glances stealing,
Fond blushes revealing,
Sage prudence concealing
The wish of cur hearts.
But when once we gain him.
In love's link we chain him,
Now pleasing,
Now teazing,
In giddy flirtation.

Da. Ca. New graces, etc.


Isab. I am very glad to see you in such spirits.


Lor. Oh spirits! I am as sprightly and cheerful as a lapwing, when I expect a
lover; -- but when does Don Ferdinando come?


Isab. You forget you are to pass for Donna Victoria, Don Scipio's daughter, it
was for that purpose I had you brought here.


Lor. I don't think about a husband -- but a new lover.


Isab. It is fit you should, of Don Ferdinando, who is coming.


Enter Vasquez. Vas. Madam -- here is my master, and Don Ferdinando.


Isab. Has he a servant with him?


Vas. No, madam.


Exit. Enter Don Scipio and Ferdinando. Scip. Oh! my dainty dame, and delicate
daughter! you may bless your stars that you see me alive again! behold my
son-in-law and the preserver of my life, Don Ferdinando! that is your spouse,
and this is Donna Isabella; -- a lady of vast merit, of which my heart is
sensible.


Isab. What an impudent fellow --


Scip. Don Ferdinando -- you are welcome to this Castle -- as flattery to a
lady: -- There she is, embrace and caress her.


Lor. What a charming husband I shall have!


Scip. Come, enjoy yourself and be happy, while I take possession of this noble
tenement -- Hark' you dame! -- don't you think Don Ferdinando a fine noble
fellow?


Isab. Yes -- he is well enough for a trumpeter.


Scip. A trumpeter! -- what the devil do you mean by that? -- Oh! that is
because I sound his praise. -- But, madam, he is a cavalier of noble birth,
title, fortune and valor.


Isab. A word with you.

They retire.
Lor. Our castle here is but a horrid place: when compared with the beautiful
villas on the banks of the Arno.


Ferd. Arno! Don Scipio in his letter said, his daughter was bred at Florence.


Lor. I am afraid you had an indifferent journey, Signior.


Ferd. I am amply repaid by what I now enjoy.


Lor. He is a polite cavalier.


They sit down. Don Scipio and Isabel, come forward. Scip. A villain! Oh! a
rascal! look at that impudent son of a gipsey, he sits down already.


Isab. Don Ferdinando is under a livery.


Scip. A livery! This accounts for his behavior in the forest. Don Ferdinando
would never have accepted of my purse. (Pulls him by the arm.) Aye, you have
got it.


Ferd. Will you please to sit down, Sir, (Aside.) What a strange old fellow --


Scip. He looks like a trumpeter.


Enter Vasquez. Vasq. Sir, your servant Pedrillo is arrived.


Ferd. What, has he found his way at last?


Lor. What a charming fellow. --


Scip. What an impudent rascal. --


Enter Pedrillo, with his master's portmanteau. Ped. Is my master this way?


Scip. This is Don Ferdinando.


Isab. Will you please to sit, Sir?


Ferdinando goes to the other end of the stage. Scip. (To Pedrillo.) Be pleased
to sit down, Sir.


Placing him near Lorenza. Ped. I Have got among the gentlefolks.


Isab. How admirable he looks now in the servant!


Scip. I perceive the grandee under the livery.


Isab. (Curtsies to him.) Will you please to sit down, Sir?


Don Scip. Bows to Pedrillo: he bows with portmanteau on his shoulder; and hits
Scipio on the head.

Then puts it down.
Scip. Will you sit down, Sir?


Pedrillo sits down by Lorenza. Ped. These must be the upper servants of the
family: her ladyship -- there is the housekeeper -- and I suppose this young
tawdry tit, is the lady's maid: -- her mistress throws off good clothes, and
the old gentleman there, is Don Scipio's butler.


Ferdinando comes forward. Ferd. What means all this disrefpect?


Ped. Sir, Old Whiskers, the butler, asked me to sit down by Furbelow, the
waiting woman.


Ferd. Retire!


Scip. How rarely they act their parts? though I will let them know, I understand
the plot of their Comedy.


QUINTETTO.
Don Scipio, Ferdinando, Pedrillo, Isabel and Lorenza. Scip. Signor!


D. Isab, Signor!


Scip. D. Isab. Your wit must be keener
Our prudence to elude,
Your fine plot,
Though so pat,
Will do you little good.

Ped. My fine plot!
I am a sot,
If I know what
These gentlefolks are at.

Ferd. Past the perils of the night,
Tempests, darkness, rude alarms,
Phoebus rises clear and bright,
In the luster of your charms.

Loren. Oh, charming, I declare,
So polite a cavalier!
He understands the duty,
And homage due to beauty.

Scip. Bravo! O, Bravissimo!


Loren. Caro! O, Carissimo!
How sweet his honey words,
How noble is his mien!

Scip. Fine feathers make fine birds,


D. Isa. The footman's to be seen.


Scip. But both deserve a basting!


Ped. Since morning I Have been fasting


Scip. Yet, I could laugh for anger,


Ped. Oh, I could cry,


Scip. I could laugh,


Ped. I could cry,


Ferd. I could quaff,


Ped. So could I.


Scip. Ha! ha! ha! I Am in a fit,


Ped. Oh, I could pick a little bit.


Scip. Ped. together. Ha! ha! ha!

Oh, oh, oh,


Loren. A very pleasant party,


Ferd. A whimsical reception!


Scip. A whimsical deception!


Scip. D. Isa. But master and man accept a welcome hearty.


Ferd. Ped. Accept our thanks sincere for such a welcome hearty.


End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE. A room in Don Sciplo's house, with a clost door in it.
Enter Ramirez and Sanguino, from door. Ram. THUS far we have got into the
castle -- you seem well acquainted with it.


Sang. Yes, I was master of the horse to Don Scipio, and I know all the
turnings and windings, ^obbies, and every secret lock, and if I meet him
conveniently, I shall use this stiletto.


Ram. No, no; plunder is the word: hush! -- is not that Spado I hear?


He is beard without. Sang. Yes.


Ram. Impossible!


They retire one of each side. Enter Scipio and Spado. Scip. I have heard of
such places. You tell me you have seen the cave where this cursed banditti lay.


Spad. Very true, Sir, after robbing me of 500 ducatoons, and blinding my eyes,
they throw'd me over a mule's back, and carried me to their dungeon on, where
they live in all manner of debaucheries, from whence they rush out upon
passengers; but I slipped the bandage from my eyes as I went along, and marked
the path they took.


Scip. But my mock son-in-law Don Ferdinando and I, made them run like hares,
and I gave him my purse for his trouble.


Spad. Did he take it?


Scip. He did.


Spa. Oh! what a mean fellow! I never go un armed, I always take a blunderbuss
when I travel. O what a glorious thing it would be to deliver up this banditti
into the hands of justice! I would hang them like mad dogs: -- If you will get
us a strong guard and go with me, I will lead them to the very trap door of
their cave.


Scip. Then you will have the thanks of the whole country.


Spad. I have no motive but the good of my country, though I expect they will
order me a thousand pistoles for my trouble.


Sang. (From one side.) You have not long to live!


Spad. Pray, Sir, have an eye to their captain -- as they call him; he is one
of the most infernal, malignant, infamous villains that ever -- (Sees Ramirez.)
-- The Captain did I say? no! -- I found him a very honest good-natured kind of
fellow: No, no! I meant the scoundrel that thinks he ought to be captain: --
Sanguino they call him, whom I found a most wicked infernal rascal. -- (Sees
Sanguino.) Though I found him a very honest good-natured fellow.


Scip. A bloody, malignant, infernal, good natured kind of fellow! What the
devil is all this?


Spad. Why, Sir, I thought I saw those two gentlemen, and I thought they looked
so terrible, ^^at with the fright -- I awoke.


Scip. Awoke! What the devil was all this a dream you have been telling me?


Spad. Yes, Sir, and a most terrible dream as ever I had in my life; I Am
frightened out of my wits now!


Scip. Why you do look frightened indeed!


Spad. That made me talk about this cave, but don't mention it again I beg of
you.


Enter Vasquez. Vas. Sir, the ladies would be glad to speak with you.


Scip. I Will wait upon them directly.


(Exeunt Scip. and Vas. Spado in going to follow, it sciz'd by Ram. and
Sanguino.) Spad. Lord master! only think of your finding me out here!


Ram. Yes, yes, you are found out here.


Spad. Oh my good Sirs! such discoveries as I nave made in this house!


Sang. Aye, and you would have made discoveries in our cave!


Spa. Did not I hum the old fellow rarely?


Sang. As a reward for your treachery -- this to your heart --

Offers to stab him.
Ram. Hold! hold!


Spad. Lord! what is the matter; I cannot pass a jest upon a silly old man, but I
must be run through with a stiletto, when about the business.


Ram. Come, come, Spado, what is this business, tell us?


Spad. I intended to let every soul of you into the castle while the family
were in bed -- plunder is the word -- Do, Sanguino, only just peep into this
closet with me. (Takes him into closet and returns.) There is six chests of
massy gold. I have a master key will open every one of them -- shall I go --
fetch it.


Ram. Aye, go.


Spa. My two good masters, two good-natured souls. (Aside.) Two damned rascals.


Exit. Sang. Plunder, indeed!


Ram. There is something heavy in that chest.


Sang. We'll get them off this night.


Ram. I wish no more delay.


They retire. Enter Scipio. Scip. Well Spado, now do you take -- where is my
little dreamer? now why do they leave this closet door open; it contains many
valuables? why will they leave it open?


Exit after shutting door. Enter Spado, with Pedrillo's portmanteau. Spa. O
Lord! I cannot find the key; but however I Have stole Don Ferdinando's
portmanteau, only just as a peace offering for these two rascals. Lord! what a
pity the coming in of these rogues! Lord! I should have had the castle all to
myself: what a fine spot of work this would have been for a man of my industry!
There are the chests, gentlemen; there you may convey them out tonight. As for
cutting Don Scipio's throat --


Enter Scipio. Scip. Aye, cut my throat! what, are you in your dreams again?


Spa. O yes, Sir.


Scip. Well for a little fellow, you have the damn dst dreams I ever heard of.


Spa. Terrible they are indeed.


Scip. Come, let me have no more of your cursed dreams.


Spad. (Aside.) I Have got off, thanks to his coming.


Scip. Whose pormanteau is this?


Spa. (Aside.) Oh, I Am on again.


Scip. What! is it Ferdinando's?


Spa. It is my master's.


Scip. Who could have brought it here?


Spa. My fellow servant, Pedrillo, is too grand to mind his business; and my
master, though he has taken the habit, scorns to do the office of a servant -- I
will take care of it.


Scip. Do -- I now see what a comical fellow this master of yours is, with his
plots and contrivances -- and to think of imposing upon me too, I think I am
far from a fool.


Spa. Yes, Sir; but that is more than I am.


Scip. That is true, indeed; but your dreams hurt your brain. So your master
sent you here to see what you could pick up.


Spa. That is very true, indeed Sir, just to see what I could pick up.


Scip. What an honest servant this is -- he has an eye to every thing.


Exit. Spa. Egad, I Am almost tired of being a rogue, and I will turn honest --
But, before I do that, I must get what I can in this house to keep me so.

AIR. -- Spado.
In the forest here hard by
A bold robber late was I,
Sword and blunderbuss in hand
When I bid a trav'ller stand,
Zounds, deliver up your cash,
Or straight I Will pop and slash,
All amongst the leaves so green-o.
Damme, Sir,
If you stir,
Sluice your veins,
Blow your brains,
Hey down,
Ho down,
Derry, derry down,
All amongst the leaves so green-o.
Soon I Will quit the roving trade,
When a gentleman I Am made;
Then so spruce and debonnaire,
Gad I Will court a lady fair;
How I Will prattle, tattle, chat,
How I Will kiss her and all that,
All amongst the leaves so green-o.
How do you do?
How are you?
Why so coy?
Let us toy,
Hey down,
Ho down,
Derry, derry down,
All amongst the leaves so green-o.
But ere old, and gray my pate,
I Will scrape up a snug estate,
With my nimbleness of thumbs
I Will soon butter all my crumbs;
When I Am justice of the peace,
Then I Will master many a lease,
All among the leaves so green-o
Wig profound,
Belly round,
Sit at ease,
Snatch the sees.
Hey down,
Ho down,
Derry, derry down,
All amongst the leaves so greence,

Enter Ferdinando. Ferd. How came my father to think of an alliance in this mad
family; Don Scipio's brain is certainly turned; my father's ideas don't suit
mine. That lovely novice, of foolish dame Isabel's, has caught my heart. --
What, if I ask her about it? But she and Don Scipio carry themselves very
strangely to me. -- I cannot think what is become of my fellow Pedrillo, all
this while.


Enter Pedrillo, dressed in a white satin, embroidered, morning gown and a cap,
with gold tassel. Ped. Ha, ha, ha! a strange reception I Have met with in this
family; they talk of my marrying the daughter; I should like her very well --
but before I take off this dress, I will attack one of the maids; I will hide
my livery, and be quite the gallant.


Ferd. Here is a gentleman I Have never seen before. Ha, Pedrillo! where have you
been? what is the matter with you?


Ped. The matter, Sir! I cannot tell what is the matter; but some how or other,
I happened to sit down to supper of twelve covers, cracked two bottles, laid in
an embroidered bed, and sunk so low, that I slept till this morning like a
diamond in cotton: so indeed, Sir, I don't know what is the matter.


Ferd. What can all this mean?


Ped. Don Scipio has found out my merit, that is all -- and let me tell you --
he is not the only one, for when I lived in my last place, I once made free
with a suit of my master's best clothes -- went to the Prado, and strutted
about like a grandee; where an elderly lady of family and fortune fell in love
with me; I wrote a song upon the subject, and if you will give me leave, Sir,
I Will sing it to you.

AIR. -- Pedrillo.
The Prado I resorted,
That brilliant place,
That brilliant place,
This comely person sported,
All dressed in lace,
All dressed in lace
'Twas all about reported,
And no disgrace,
And no disgrace,
The ancient maid I courted,
Like this pretty face,
This pretty sace.
When first my person blessed her,
Sir, what d' ye want,
Sir, what d' ye want,
And when I Would have carest her,
Indeed you sha'n't,
Indeed you sha'n't.
So cunning I addressed her,
With sight and pant,
With sigh and pant,
That soon I kissed and pressed her,
I Am so gallant,
I Am so gallant.
My fair in wit so arch is,
I Am her dawdle,
I Am her dawdle,
My very foul she searches,
Shakes her noddle,
Shakes her noddle.
My heart with love she parches,
My blood does coddle,
My blood does coddle,
And like a duck she marches,
Widdle Waddle,
Widdle Waddle.

Ferd. Then be so obliging in your gown and slippers, to take off my boots.


(Stoops to take off boots. Enter Vasquez. Vas. Sir, the ladies wait breakfast
for you.


Ferd. My respects to the ladies, and I will attend them.


Vas. Sir, I mean his honor there --


(Points to Pedrillo. Ped. Yes, you mean my honor?


Ferd. I could drink a dish of chocolate as well as his honor there.


Vas. Chocolate! Ha, ha, ha!


Ped. Ha, ha, ha!


Ferd. (Draws his sword, and beats Pedrillo.) I Will teach you to laughed at me.


Ped. Teach me to laugh! you may be a good master, but you have a damned bad
method. (Aside.) Hey for chocolate and the ladies!


(Exeunt Ped. and Vas. Ferd. Don Scipio shall account to me for this; to hear
his contempt and be liable to the insults of his servants, as I don't like his
daughter, I have a fair pretense for quitting the castle; but then to leave the
mistress of my soul! suppose I make her a tender of my heart -- that will not
do -- she knows my hand is promised to another. O my Lorenza!

AIR. -- Ferdinando.
Dame Nature in forming a creature so fair
Each beauty selected, then culled the most rare;
Two bright constellations she caught for her eyes,
A station so blessed, can they wish for their skies?
The gale lends its sweets, as from Paphos it blows,
The snow-drop its whiteness, its blushes the rose,
Bright Venus, her hair, as from ocean she sprung,
Sage Pallas, the accents that fell from her tongue;
Though Nature, in forming this creature so fair,
Each beauty selected, and culled the most rare;
Yet Fortune, her step-dame, severe and unkind,
Is unjust to her worth, to her beauty is blind.

Enter Catilina, crossing the stage. Ferd. I see a young girl -- there can be
no harm in speaking to her -- how do you do my pretty creature?


Cat. Lord! master, how do you do? I don't know your name.


Ferd. You know who I am though, and what my business is.


Cat. Lord! man! you go about to sift a body -- yes, yes, we all know in the
house who you are; why Don Ferdinando's footman.


Ferd. So the ladies think I Am only Don Ferd nando's footman, all the while.


Cat. We all know that: Ha, ha, ha! notwithstanding your fine clothes.


Ferd. And pray, madam, where is my master?


Cat. Why, parading in the gallery yonder, in his sham livery and morning gown.


Ferd. (Aside.) This accounts for the embroidered head -- I Will carry it on.


Cat. Though if all the impostors in the castle were "well known, we should have
no wedding tomorrow night.


Ferd. You seem to be in the secret.


Cat. Aye, there is a piece of deceit much worse ^^an you are carrying on.


Ferd. I know that.


Cat. What do you know -- that this Italian lady is not Don Scipio's daughter,
but Dame Isabel's.


Ferd. Yes. (Aside.) Here is a discovery!


Cat. You know that.


Ferd. Yes, yes; and you know the lady I was speaking to just now, is really
Donna Victoria.


Cat. Yes, yes.


Ferd. Here is a piece of villainy: ny dear let me kiss you.

(Kisser ber.
Cat. Oh Lord! I never saw such a man. (He Is a delightful man though.) Lord! what
a discovery -- if you did not know it before? marry hang your assurance -- I
must go, I cannot play the lady as you do the gentleman: I have something else
to do than to stand -- kissing with you here all day.

AIR. -- Catilina.
I have a lover of my own,
So kind and true is he;
As true, I love but him alone,
And he loves none but me.
I boast not of his velvet down,
Or cheeks of rosy hue,
His spicy breath, his ringlets brown,
I priae the heart that is true.
So to all else I must say nay;
They only fret and teaze;
Dear youth, it is you alone -- that may
Come, court me, when you please.
I played my love a thousand tricks,
In seeming coy and shy; --
'Twas only, ere my heart I Would fix,
I thought his love to try.
So to all else I must say ney;
They only fret and teaze:
Dear youth, it is you alone, that may
Come, court me, when you please

Ferd. Why, what a villain is this Don Scipio? ungrateful -- but I scorn to
think of the services I rendered him last night in the forest: the faithless
friend of my father! -- the unnatural parent of his own amiable daughter! But
here my charmer comes.


(Exit. Enter Victoria. Vict. Catilina must be mistaken; it is impossible he
can be the servant with such a deportment; his native elegance of manners can
never be assumed. -- Yonder he walks -- and my flattering heart tells me, this
is really the amiable Don Ferdinando, whom I must resign to Isabella's daughter


Enter Don Ferdinando -- as she is going. Ferd. Stay, and let me look upon that
lovely excellence I can never obtain, Donna Victoria!


Vict. Did you call me then? or did you mean to speak with Victoria?


Ferd. I could gaze for ever and wonder at your charms -- thus transsix'd with
astonishment and delight! Beheve me, it is not the knowledge of your quality
that attracts my admiration -- I know you to be Don Seipio's daughter, the
innocent victim of injustice and oppression, and therefore acknowledge to you,
and you alone, (whatever you may have heard to the contrary) that I am really
Ferdinando De Zelves.


Vict. How you came acquainted with my story I know not -- but I Have perceived
something, which told me, by your behavior, you was Don Ferdinando.


Ferd. Permit me to relate the sentiments of my heart. -- I came here to ratify
the contract with Don Scipio's daughter; -- you are the beautiful Victoria
destined to me! -- Here take my hand -- my heart is yours already! And thus
upon my knee, let me make another tender of my heart!


Vict. Pray rise, Sign'or, my father cannot justisy his conduct toward me --
but, if I do any thing without his consent, it will be a breach of filial duty.

AIR. -- Victoria.
By woes thus surrounded, how vain the gay sinile
Of the little blind Archer, these woes to beguile!
Though skilful, he misses, his aim it is crossed,
His quiver exhausted, his arrows are lost
Your love, tho sincere, on the object you lose,
(Aside) How sweet is the passion! Ah! must I resuse?
If filial affection, that passion should sway,
Then Love's gentle dictates I cannot obey.

Ferd. Can you wish me to espouse dame Isabel's daughter? -- Say, you do not.
-- Do but satisfy me, my foul.


Vict. Before I say that, are you Don Ferdinando? if you are, you are already
contracted to Don Scipio's daughter!


Ferd. Yes, I am, (Aside) [I don't much regret I Have lost the title in the
family] a thousand thanks to you. -- Yes, my dear Victoria, I am Don
Ferdinando, and if fortune favors my designs, you again shall triumph over the
malice of your enemies.


Vict. If we are seen together by Donna Itabella, she will be interested in
whatever you may propose to my advantage.


Ferd. My life! my love!


DUET. -- Ferdinando and Victoria.
Idalian Queen, to thee we pray,
Record each tender vow;
As night gives place to cheerful day,
Let hopes of future bl^ss allay
The pangs we suffer now.
(Exit Vict. Ferd. So the whole family, except Victoria, have an idea I am the
servant. Since they will have impostors, they shall have me for one. Let them
bestow their mock Ferdinand on Lorenza. I share a just revenge for their
pentidy, and shall have the reward and sum of all my wishes, in the possession
of the true Victoria. -- Oh, here comes Don Scipio! -- Now let me begin -- Oh,
I Am tired of playing the gentleman -- I long to get into my livery -- my master
will never wear these again -- I Am sure Don Scipio suspects who I am.


Enter Don Scipio. Scip. I know you are!


Ferd. My dear friend, Don Scipio.


Scip. Friend! why you impudent dog I Will break your head; you are blown here
without the use of your trumpet.


Ferd. Lord, your honor, how came you to know I am Pedrillo?


Scip. Why, your fellow servant -- (Aside.) [Zounds, no! I must not betray my
little dreamer neither.] No matter who told me -- but here comes your master.


Ferd. (Aside.) Oh! he will spoil all -- I wish I had given him his cue; as sure
as you stand here, he will still persist in denying he is Ferdinando.


Enter Pedrillo. Ped. Master, shall I shave you this morning?


Scip. Shave you this morning! come, come, it is time to have done with your
tricks and fancies.


Ferd. Pedrillo.


Ped. Yes, Sir.


Ferd. You are found out.


Ped. Yes.


Ferd. You may as well consess.


Ped. What the devil shall I confess?


Scip. I tell you what, young gentleman, I will write an account of your pranks
to your father, and he shall trim your jacket for you.


Ped. Nay, for the matter of that, my father could trim your jacket for you.


Scip. Trim my jacket!


Ped. Why my father's the best tailor in all Cordova.


Scip. Your father the best tailor in all Cordova!


Ferd. Sir, will you give me leave to speak to him?


Scip. Aye.


Ferd. (Aside.) Tell Don Scipio you are my master.


Ped. I will. -- Don Scipio, you are my master.


Ferd. O the stupid dog! Say that you are Ferdinando, and I am Pedrillo.


Ped. I will Sir, I will -- Sir, you are Ferdinando, and I am Pedrillo.


Ferd. I told you he would persist in it.


Scip. I see it -- I see it -- I see it -- But I tell you what, Don Ferdinando,
now do be clever -- hold up your head.


(Puts his band under Pedrillo's chin. Ferd. (Aside.) Can you expect to make
such an alteration?


Lorenza is heard singing without. Scip. Here comes my daughter -- I think the
mock Ferdinando's acting is better than the real one.


Enter Lorenza. Ferd. Oh, that I was but in livery! this is well enough -- but
my master gives new liveries upon his marriage: -- then every body is new
clothed?


Scip. He is right -- see, there he stands! like a young tailor of Cordova. --
Here, this is Don Ferdinando.


(Introducing Pedrillo. Ped. Pedrillo, at your service, madam.


Ferd. Here, Pedrillo, take this purse, -- and tell Don Scipio you are
Ferdinando.


Ped. Aye, -- now I understand you -- true Sir, (To Don Scipio.) I am whatever
he says.


Scip. Give me your hand -- that is right and sensible -- like yourself, just
as it should be. -- Now I Will go and see about our business; we'll have all our
love affairs finished to night.


(Exeunt Ferd. and Scis. Lor. So then you are to be my husband! will you love
me then?


Ped. Will I love you?


Lor. If not -- I can be as cold as you are indifferent.

AIR. -- Lorenza.
Love! gay illusion,
Pleasing delusion,
With sweet intrusion
Possesses the mind;
Heart, with heart meeting,
Passion is fleeting,
Vows in repeating
We trust to the wind.
Faith, to faith plighted,
Love may be blighted,
Hearts often slighted
Will cease to be kind.

Exeunt. SCENE. A view of a Castle. A Moon Light Night.
Enter Alphonzo. Alph. If I had but the liberty to walk with the object of my
heart! my Victoria! her marriage with Ferdinando is determined: but if
possible, I will prevent it yet -- the youth of the cottage here shall bear him
a challenge.


Enter Phillipo. Are you at leisure, Phillipo, to take this billet to the
castle to Don Ferdinando?

Phil. Is your business with Don Ferdinando very pressing?


Alph. Very pressing! expremely so. -- (Aside.) He must not know it is a
challenge. It Is a letter to invite Don Ferdinando and a few select friends to
an entertainment: -- Pray do you know who Captain Ramirez is?


Phil No, I do not.


Alph. I find he is not acquainted with his real character -- I will not betray
him.


Phil. (Aside.) I wish Donna Victoria once married; while she remains single --
Catilina will never be mine.

AIR. -- Phillipo.
Oh charming maid! ah, why so coy
Unto the youth who loves so well?
Thy gracious smile gives every joy,
Thy frown a pang no tongue can tell.
To thee the Matin-song I raise,
Ere gay blooming Flora
Has welcomed Aurora,
At noon from Sol's refulgent blaze;
In close-braided bowers,
On beds of sweet flowers,
Reclining,
Adoring,
Yet pining,
Imploring;
Soft Ditty
Repeating,
Thy pity
Entreating,
Till the nightingale's lays
In Vespers seraphic bid nature repose:
Her strain on a lover no slumber bestows,
Nor ease to his mind, nor relies to his woes.

Alph. I find Phillipo and I, have been complaining lovers together. Phillipo,
may I depend upon your delivery of this?


Phil. You may depend upon it -- was but my Catilina -- kind!


Alph. Was my Victoria true!


DUET. -- Alphonzo and Phillipo.
Alph. So faithful to my fair I Will prove,

Phil. So kind and constant to my love,

Alph. I Would never range,

Phil. I Would never change,

Both. Nor time, nor chance, my faith should move.

Phil. No ruby clusters grace the vine,

Alph. Ye sparkling stars forget to shine,

Phil. Sweet flowers to spring,

Alph. Gay birds to sing,

Both. Those hearts then part that love shall join.

Exeunt. End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I. An Apartment in Don Scipio's Casile.
Enter Don Scipio and Lopez. Scip. HERE, Lopez, run to Father Benedict's, bid
him wipe his chin, put on his spectacles, pull out his breviary, find out
matrimony -- and stay till I come; we'll have a brace of weddings tonight.

Exit Lopez. AIR. -- Scipio.
Hey for a lass and a bottle to cheer,
And a thumping bantling every year;
With skin as white as snow,
And hair as brown as a berry
With eyes as a sloe,
And lips as red as a cherry.
Sing ro^y, tory,
Dancing, prancing,
Laugh and lay down is the play.
We'll fondle together,
To keep out the weather,
And kiss the cold winter away.
Laugh while you live,
For as life is a jest,
Who laughs the most,
Is sure to live best.
When I was not so old,
I frolic'd among the misses;
And when they thought me too bold,
I stopped their mouth with kisses.
Sing rory, tory, etc.
I wonder if Don Ferdinando is ready? Oh, here comes the servant in his proper
habiliments! (Enter Ferdinando in Livery.) Aye, now my lad, you look something
like --


Ferd. I was quite sick of that dress.


Scip. Where is your master -- I long to see him in his proper clothes?


Ferd. (Aside.) Passing so well in this disguise gives me a very humble opinion
of myself -- you must know we are behind hand in our finery, in regard to a
portmanteau of clothes.


Scip. O that is safe enough -- Spado your fellow servant the little spy has
got it.


Enter Spado. Spad. What! is this really so?


Scip. He has got into his livery again.


Spad. (Aside.) Is this the real master or no? Surely I Have not been telling
truth, and did not know it -- I must brazen it out. -- What my old friend --
I Am glad to see you, you look like yourself again.


Ferd. Thank you, my new old friend -- here is an old friend I never saw in my
life before.


Scip. Tell him where his portmanteau is, whilst I go and lead Don Ferdinando
in triumph to his bride.


(Exit. Ferd. Well, my good new old friend, where has your care bestowed my
portmanteau?


Spad. Gone


Ferd. Gone!


Spad. Quite gone.


Ferd. The man is not in his senses -- where is the portmanteau?


Spad. Poor old man it is all over with him; he talked of spies and dreamers,
and now he talks of portmanteaus; it is all over with him indeed.


Ferd. It must be so!


Spa. All grief! all grief! it runs in the family.


Ferd. He talked to me last night in a strange incoherent manner; it seems as
if this whimsical change between Pedrillo and me was the creation of his own
brain -- How come it to run in the family? it is the first time I ever heard
Don Scipio was disordered in his senses.


Spa. We all endeavor to keep it from your master, lest he should break off
the match; I don't suppose he would be willing to marry into a mad family.


Ferd. Pray what may you be?


Spa. I am Don Scipio's own gentleman these ten years,


Ferd. He accosted me as your fellow servants.


Spa. Lord, how you stare! I should not have contradicted him if he had called
me the Pope's Nuncio. I don't wonder at Isabella's taking advantage of his
weakness; now he has got something in his head about a ring, that every body he
meets has got a ring of his deceased lady's.


Ferd. Aye, he asked me about a ring.


Enter Don Scipio. Scip. Hark, you Pedrillo! now your disguises are over,
return me the ring, will you?


Spa. There -- I told you he would.


Scip. Come, come, give me the ring, and I will give you a better thing; that
ring belonged to my deceased lady; give me the ring -- here are five pistoles,
and the ring is not worth a dollar.


Spa. Egad that is more than I knew. (Aside.) Here give him this ring, he will
not know any better.


Ferd. There, Sir.

(Gives Scipio ring and receives money.)
Scip. O you mercenary rascal! did not I tell you the ring was in the purse I
gave you last night?


Spa. Here, give me the cash, for I must be accountable for all his pocket
money.


(Exeunt Ferd. and Spado. Enter Pedrillo, ricbly dressed. Ped. Pedrillo.

(Enter Ferdinando.
Ferd. Here, Sir.


Ped. Why how now, firrah? why do you sit loitering here and leave me to dress
myself?


Ferd. Sir, I was --


Ped. What was you? why you rascal you fancy yourself still in your finery --
you idle vagabond!


Scip. Bless me! Don Ferdinando is a very passionate man; aye, he takes after
his father.


Ped. Well, Don Scipio, am not I a man for the ladies? I have studied Ovid's
Art of Love!


Scip. Aye, and Ovid's Metamorphoses too.


Ped. (Aside.) [What a sneering figure my poor master cuts.] Egad! I Will pay him
off for all his domineering over me, Pedrillo.


Ferd. Sir.


Ped. Here fill my box with Macataw.


Ferd. Yes, Sir.


Ped. Here Sir, perfume my handkerchief.


Pulls out a common check handkerchief and thrusts it into his pocket again --
Looks confounded. Ped. Pedrillo, get me a tooth-pick.


Ferd. Yes, Sir.


Ped. Here Pedrillo.


Ferd. Sir.


Ped. Nothing -- abscond!


Ferd. If this is my picture* I blush for the original!


Ped. (Aside.) Master, to be like you, do let me give you one kick -- it will not
hurt you upon my honor.


Ferd. I will bear no more.


Ped. Why, what are you at you scoundrel! -- be gone! -- Exit Ferdinando.
(Aside.) It was cursed ill-natured not to let me give him one kick!


Scip. I like you vastly.


Ped. So you ought, Sir.


Scip. I like you very well -- I do indeed.


Ped. Tol de roll. [Why, who would suspect me to be the son of a tailor? half an
hour ago, perhaps, they might!] Tol de roll, etc.


Scip. Very well, you are a great beau; and really now to speak the truth, you
have got a very princely person.


Ped. Why Sir, all the young girls, whenever I get up behind them, withinside
the coach -- all the ladies of distinction when they were making their beds --
dusting -- dressing themselves at their toilette, run directly to the windows
-- peep through their fingers, (their fans I mean) and lisp out -- oh! upon my
life, their is not such another gentleman in the world as this same Don
Pedrillo!


Scip. Ferdinando you mean, he cannot forget Pedrillo: -- come, it is time to
forget it: -- its time to have done with Pedrillo, and be my son-in-law!


Ped. I will be your son-in-law -- you are sure of that honor, Don Scipio --
But pray, what fortune am I to have with your daughter? you are a grey-headed
old fellow, and by the course of nature, you cannot live long.


Scip. I beg your pardon, I don't know any such thing.


Ped. And when we put a stone upon your head --


Scip. A stone upon my head!


Ped. Yes, a stone -- that is when you are laid low, I shall have your daughter
to maintain -- but I don't think much of that, I am so generous.


Scip. Yes, generous as a Dutch usurer! (Aside.) If Don Ferdinando turns out
such a coxcomb, I Am not sorry my own daughter has escaped him -- a convent is
better than a marriage with a monkey -- then as to her fortune -- poor girl --
but Dame Isabel would have me on no other terms.


Ped. Let Us have a plentiful good supper.


Scip. A good supper.


Ped. Yes.


Scip. Was there ever such a genteel -- (Aside.) Ignorant, conceit'd dog.


Exit. Ped. I am a capital fellow -- so my poor master sets his wits to work
after a poor girl that I am told is going into a nunnery, and dresses me up to
address Donna Victoria -- To be sure I am not a capital fellow -- but I was
made for a gentleman: gentleman! did I say? I am the neat pattern of a lord --
I have a little honor about me -- a great deal of love and a scrap of courage
perhaps. -- I wish I had a rival to try. -- I think I could fight at any weapon
from a needle to a hatchet. -- I would not give a pin for a sweetheart without!
a rival.


Enter Phillipo. Phil. Sir, are you Don Ferdinando de Zelva.


Ped. Yes, Sir.


Phil. Sir, I have a letter from Don Alphonzo


Ped. I don't know of any Don Alphonzo, boy! what is the letter about?


Phil. I think, Sir, it is to invite you to a feast


Ped. Oh! I recollect this old acquaintance.


Phil. Are you sure you are Don Ferdinando?


Ped. What do you talk in that style for? do you think I don't know myself,
boy? -- come give me the letter!

(Reads.) 'Signor, Signor! though you seem ready to fall to on a love feast, I
hope a small repast in the field may not spoil your stomach.' (Aside.) Spoil my
stomach! that is only a snack before supper. -- 'I shall be at six o'clock in
the evening'. -- why you dog it is past six now 'in a meadow near the cottage of
the vines.' O Lord! I shall be too late. 'As you aspire to Donna Victoria your
sword must be long enough to reach my heart!' My sword long enough! Oh, the
devil of a feast! why this is a downright challenge!


Phil. I beg your pardon, Signor; if I had not met my sweetheart, Catilina,
you would have had that letter two hours ago.


Ped. Oh you have given it time enough my brave boy.


Phil. You Will come?


Ped. Yes, I Will give it him, my boy.


Phil. Give it him!


Ped. O yes, I dare say he will come.


Phil. Did not you say you was Ferdinando?


Ped. Never fear child, Don Ferdmando shall have it.


Phil. Why Sir, are you not Don Ferdinando?


Ped. Me! no not I, child; I am not Don Ferdinando, my boy; I would have gone
to the (...) but you delayed the letter so long I Have quite lost my stomach; you
have made a cursed blunder -- here my boy, Don Ferdinando shall attend you.
Aside. He is still a master for the gentlemen -- I am a man for the ladies.

Exit Phillipo AIR. -- Pedrillo.
A soldier I am for a lady,
What beau was ere armed compleater!
When face to face,
Her chamber the place,
I^m able and willing to meet her.
Gad's curse my dear lasses, I Am ready
To give you all satisfaction;
I am the man
For the crack of your fan
Though I die at your feet in the action
Your bobbins may beat up a row-dow-dow,
Your lap-dog may out with his bow-wow-wow,
The challenge in love,
I take up the glove,
Though I die at your feet in the action.

Enter Phillipo. Phil. As I live, here is Don Alphonzo! I wish Don Ferdinado
^^d got the letter sooner -- I lost my time with Catilina -- she was so cruel
indeed, I dread to approach her, though it is my delight to see her.

AIR -- Phillippo.
My fair one, like the blushing rose,
Can sweets to every sense disclose,
Those swee's l'd gather, but her scorn
Then wounds me like the sharpest thorn.
With sighs, each grace and charm I see,
Thus doomed to wither on the tree;
Till age shall chide the thoughtless maid,
When all those blooming beauties fade.

Exit Enter Ferdinando and Victoria. Ferd. By order of Don Scipio, Father
Benedict waits in the chapel: do let him join our hands, and then let Fortune
do her worst.


Vict. Why would you force me to so imprudent a step -- not withstanding my
consent you must have my father's --


Ferd. Our union is authorized by the consent of both our fathers; and Dame
Isabella is fully convinced I am Pedrillo, otherwise she would not give her
aid. But to get you out of the way of her daughter, she gives me her
assistance, my Victoria


Vict. The balm of consolation is the sweet result of conscious uprightness.

AIR -- Victoria
The musk-rose blooms in thorns and te^^^,
Vet queen of all the garden reigns;
While Phoebe in a cloud appears
Her virgin luster she retains.
(...) ^^es, or cruel friends unkind,
A thought consoles each deep distr^ss,
That conscious rectitude of mind,
In fortune's frown has power to bless.
For sweets, the tulip proud and gay
Unto the humble violet yields,
And Philomel's sequestered lay
Transcends the chorus of the fields.
If foes, etc,

Exeunt. Enter Pedrillo. Ped. Yes, my master is in for it: there they go, and
certainly to be married. The enraged Alphonzo is certainly come here to demand
satisfaction: my master and he were once friends; but jealousy and a long sword
have cut their friendship in two. He little knows I am the rival.


Enter Lorenza. Lor. Oh! here is my husband: he looks well enough, now he is
dressed; but not so well as my discarded lover, Alphonzo.


Ped. (Aside.) I will accost her with elegancy -- How do you do, Signora?


Lor. Very well at your service. (Aside.) He looks like Prince Radacasti.


Ped. Signora, you are a clever little body. Will you sit down, Signora.


Sits down himself. Lor. So polite too!


Ped. O, I admire politeness.


Lor. Full of good manners.


Ped. O, I forgot. Draws the other chair. Sit down upon this chair. I assure
you, I don't grudge the trouble, for the sake of good manners.


Lor. This be no good manners at Florence:


Ped. Yes, I sit upon my chair genteely, I had. I understand a little Italian
now to court her: what shall I say? (Aside.) I wish my master had gone through
the whole of the business, to the very drawing of the curtains. -- Signora.


Lor. Signor, I love to be courted -- begin, begin.


Ped. Oh Signora; (I believe I ought to kneel.) Oh you most beautiful goddess!
you angelic angel!

For you my Fair, I Would be a rose,
To blow beneath that comely nose;
No more I Will say, you stop my breath,
My only life! you will be my death.

Lor. There is something in Don Ferdinando's manner extremely strange, though
rather extravagant -- now for some sweet air.


Ped. If you will sing me a song, I will stay and hear you.


Lor. With pleasure, Sir.

AIR -- Lorenza.
Heart beating,
Repeating
Vows in palpitation,
Sweetly answer each fond hope;
Prithee leave me,
You Will deceive me,
After other beauties running,
Smiles so roguish, eyes so cunning.
Show where points the inclination
Heart beating,
Repeating
Vows in palpitation,
Sweetly answer each fond hope.

Exit. SCENE. A View of a Cathedral.
Enter Alphonzo. Al^p. Two lovers and both in distress!

AIR -- Alphonzo.
Love! sweet passion, torment pleasing,
Pure delight in pain you give.
Thrilling anguish, flattering, teasing,
Never from grief or rapture ceasing,
Yet I Will love, or cease to live.

Enter Don Ferdinando and Victoria. Ferd. Give me joy, Alphonzo, Father
Benedict! Benedict, has this moment made me the happiest of mankind, in giving
me Victoria!


Alph. Then it is certain all you told me of my Victoria is true.


Ferd. It is.


Alph. No matter, her very name is still dear to Alphonzo.


Ferd. You shall be no loser by this; we will endeavor to bring about your
marriage with Lorenza.


Alph. I should be happy indeed, to be blessed with my Lorenza!


GLEE -- Ferdinando, Alphonzo, and Victoria
Auspicious powers approving,
Reward true love in me,
No greater bliss than loving
When thus beloved by thee.
No, no.
No while thus beloved by thee.
SCENE. A View of the Castle.
Enter Spado. Spa. I am in love with this castle, I Have got my comrades out of
it at last. Ramirez and Sanguino are gone back to the cave, in high hopes that
I will let them in tomorrow night: well -- I Will keep my word with them, they
shall be welcomed with a strong guard. Old Don Juan is arrived I hear -- can
any thing be made of him I wonder -- I Have got a portmanteau, some cash and some
plate. -- I don't know how it is, but there is not half the bustle in the
castle I expected. -- I promised myself there would be a fine confusion -- then
is the time I pick up the loose things. I Am informed this Don Juan is very
passionate -- Egad if I could contrive to set him and Don Scipio together by
the ears -- O I have it -- I Will try however -- here is the old gentleman coming.


Exit. Enter Don Juan, with attendants. Juan. I suppose I shall surprise my son
Don Ferdinando and Don Scipio too -- tell them I am here -- I hope I Am time
enough for the wedding.


Enter Spado. Spa. A mighty grave looking old gentleman!


Juan. Whose dog are you?


Spa. How do you do, Sir?


Juan. Why are you a physician?


Spa. No, Sir, I am poor Spado.


Juan. Then what is it to you how I do; where is your master? what the devil is
this his hospitality when he hears I Am here.


Spa. Hears! O poor gentleman -- his misfortune!


Juan. Is he married?


Spa. Married! no, Sir.


Juan. Is he in his senses?


Spa. He has nearly lost one.


Juan. I would speak to him?


Spa. You must speak very loud then.


Juan. Is he deaf?


Spa. Aye, poor old gentleman, he can scarce hear one word.


Juan. Poor old fellow!


Spa. Now if I can but set the two old ones together -- I shall have a quarrel
between them.


Enter Don Scipio. Scip. I hope he has not heard of his son's pranks.


Spad. (Aside.) No, his hearing is so bad, I have been bellowing to him this
half hour, he can scarce hear one word; you may try what you can do, but you
must bellow like a speaking trumpet.


Scip. Bellow! ha! Don Juan, you are very welcome to my house.


Juan. (Aside.) It is very strange that deaf men always speak so loud! I Am very
glad to see you, Don Scipio.


Scip. When they are deaf themselves, they fancy every body else is so too. How
long have you been in this way?


Juan. Just arrived.


Scip. I mean at your hearing?


Juan. Yes, I find it is very bad with you; Zounds! I shall roar myself as
hoarse as a raven.


Scip. You are welcome to my house. -- (Aside.) But I wish you had staid at
home; I find I must speak to him by signs, my lungs will not hold out.

Makes signs.
Juan. What the devil! have you lost your tongue too?


Enter Servant. Scip. You may speak out, nobody can hear you but me.


Juan. What, is this cursed old fellow your master going to be married?


Serve. Sir, Don Ferdinando wants to speak with you.


Scip. I wish he would come and speak to his blockhead of a father. -- Don
Juan, you will soon see your son as great an ass as yourself.


Juan. Zounds! you are not deaf; you old rascal you will find me a very tiger --
you old --


Enter Ferdinando and Victoria. Ferd. What, my father!


Scip. What do you do with this fellow?


Vict. He is my husband.


Scip. What! that rascal?


Juan. What means all this? do you call my son a rascal?


Scip. Nobody is speaking of your son.


Juan. He has honored your family, you crackbrain'd old fellow.


Scip. A footman honor my family!


Juan. What do you mean by that, you superannuated old fool?


Enter Isabella. Isab. What is all this about? is this really Don Ferdinando?


Juan. Do you think I don't know my own son?


Scip. Do you say so, Don Juan.


Juan. To be sure I do.


Scip. You have done a fine thing then!


Ferd. Madam, yours was the contrivance, which Love has counteracted, in
justice to this injured lady.


Isab. O, that villain, Spado.


Juan. That was the villain who told me you was deaf.


Scip. The very same who told me you had lost your hearing.


Ferd. And he told me you had lost your senses, Don Scipio.


Isab. And led me into this unlucky error.


Juan. Zounds! what a lying scoundrel!


Enter Spado. Spa. (Aside.) I wonder how my work goes on. (To Don Juan.) I give
you joy, Sir.


Juan. Yes, and I Will give you sorrow, you damned rascal.


Scip. I Will have you hanged, you dog you.


Spa. O, that will be the death of me, Sir.


Enter Pedrillo leading Lorenza. Ped. Come along, my cara sposa. (Aside.) Aye,
my old master! I must brazen it out.


Juan. You rascal you, a pistol for you! I Will thrash you.


Ped. I Am going to be married to an heiress; so I must not be beat to a mummy.


Going up to Ferdinande. Ferd. Stay where you are; I don't want you.


Enter. Alphonzo. Ferd. (To Lorenza.) I understand, Don Alphonzo has been
honored with your partiality: I suppose you will have no objection to give him
your hand.


Lor. I blush to see him.


Alph. My dearest Lorenza!


Ped. Egad, my business goes on prettily between you.


Scip. You see, Don Juan, how this business is.


Juan. Aye, and very shameful it is.


Scip. Well, I give my blessing to them.


Ferd. But what will make amends for your innded breach of contract with me?


Scip. Did not I tell you I was in love?


Juan. Nothing can atone for your intention to introduce your Italian frippery
into my family.


Scip. How shall I get out of this? I will revenge all upon this rascal, Spado.
Here, a brace of alguazils and handcuffs for him.


Spa. For me! I Am the best friend you ever had in the world.


Scip. How? prove it.


Spad. Was not you going to marry that lady?


Scip. Yes.


Spa. You had better not. She and I happen to be old acquaintance.


Isab. What, more lies! and do you believe him?


Spa. Don't you know I lived with a certain captain that stole off with the
lady to Italy?


Isab. Oh Don Scipio, I will find the means to silence that wretch, and you
will feel the effects of it.


Exit. Spad. I think Sir, I Have proved a friend to you.


Scip. Aye, but that shall not save your neck.


Spa. I think I have saved your honor and your throat too.


Scip. Aye, how did you do that?


Spad. There were two of the banditti in the castle this morning, and I got
them out.


Scip. How?


Spad. Why I told them they might come and cut your throat tomorrow.


Scip. That was very kind of you. I am very much obliged to you.


Spa. And you have time to get a guard ready, and give them a warm reception.


Ferd. And pray, my little busy friend, what induced you to all this roguery on
my account?


Spa. Truly, I would have prevented your marriage with Donna Victoria, in hopes
of obtaining a reward from Don Alphonzo.


Scip. You have done no great mischief, after all your artifices; though I
believe you are a sad dog: but, as you have been the means of bringing things
about in the present agreeable manner, I forgive you.


Juan. No, let me tell you, Sir, I will have --


Half draws. Scip. And you shall have -- a bottle of the best wine in all
Andalusia. Here we will have flutes, and hautboys, and every thing else to make
us happy, and our friends welcome: and we hope our good-natured friends will
forget and forgive our defects.


GLEE -- FINALE.
Social powers, at pleasure's call.
Welcome here to Hymen's hall;
Bacchus, Ceres, bless the feast,
Momus lend the sprightly jest;
Songs of joy elate the soul,
Hebe fill the flowing bowl.
Every pure and chaste delight
Crown with love this happy night.
FINIS,

