SOME REASONS GIVEN AGAINST AN OPINION THAT A person infected with the
Smallpox may be cured by Antidote without incurring the Distemper:

WITH An attempt to explain the manner of the propagation and eruption of the
Smallpox from the practice of Inoculation; and why this distemper, taken, by
common infection, in the natural way, proves so much more fatal than that which
is given by Inoculation.

BY THOMAS FREWEN, M. D.

-- Ad mores natura recurrit
Damnatos, fixa, et mutari nescia.
JUV. Sat. xiii. l. 239-40. LONDON: Printed for J. WILKIE, at the Bible, in St.
Paul's Churchyard.

MDCCLIX.

TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
Honored Sirs!
IN the following pages are contained some reasons why the contagious poison of
the Smallpox, received into the human body, cannot be extinguished, or
expelled by any Antidote, or other means than what nature effects in producing
the distemper. I have also endeavored to explain the manner of the propagation
and eruption of the Smallpox from the practice of inoculation; and why this
distemper, taken, by common infection, in the natural way, proves so much more
fatal than that which is given by inoculation.

The reasons that have induced me to present you with this short account from
the press, were by no means owing to a consciousness of my having cleared up
these matters to any degree of certainty; but because I do not remember to have
seen any thing of this kind attempted before; and in hopes that my endeavors
may be the means of employing the thoughts of others to explain these laws of
Nature to a greater degree of perfection.

These inducements have encouraged me in this Address to your learned Society;
to which the World will ever be indebted for the improvement of Art and
Science; and I hope they may be admitted, as a necessary apology, for this
presumption.

I am, Honored SIRS, Your most respectful, AND Most obedient Servant, THOMAS
FREWEN.

Some reasons why the Contagion of the Smallpox, received into the human body,
cannot be extinguished or expelled by any Antidote, or other means than what
Nature effects in producing the distemper.
THAT most celebrated Professor, the learned Dr. Boerhaave, was of opinion that
there is to be found out, in Nature, such a kind of medicine as would have the
specific power of extinguishing, or eradicating the Contagion of the Smallpox,
from a body infected, without permitting any eruption of the pustules; in the
manner that other poisons are cured by peculiar Antidotes Aph. 1390-91-92. et
prax. med. V. v.
. Some other Physicians, also, revering the sentiment of this great man, have
pretended to support the same opinion.

But, as no improvements have yet appeared to have been made, at least nothing
material has been advanced, by the advocates for this enquiry, notwithstanding
the Doctor gave his reasons for his opinion, and explained his suggestions as
far as he could, it is probable, therefore, that the unsurmountable obstacles
which have arisen from the consideration of this contagious venom, and the
different manner of it is operations, have, hitherto, discouraged all the
attempts that may have been since made toward the discovery. And, indeed, I am
inclined to think, that, had the Doctor written on this particular subject,
after the practice of inoculation grew to be so much used in Europe, as it now
is, he would, from the new discovery of the operation of this morbific taint,
have established opposite reasons to an opinion, which, many years ago, he
thought uncontrovertable. For so conspicuous in experiment, as this is, could
never have escaped his sagacious observation; which proves that the least
particle of variolous pus, containing the very seeds of contagion, by enflaming
and corroding an external solid part, produces a kind of Carbuncle; whereby
the natural operation of this contagious infection is demonstrated to the
greatest degree of certainty, and silences all hypothetical notions of its
contaminating the fluids only, by explaining (as I shall endeavor to do more
hereafter) that the morbific effluvia of this disease received by inspiration,
in the ordinary way of infection, by inflaming and corroding, in like manner,
such internal parts as are more immediately subservient to the vital purposes,
are therefore more likely to be productive of the most dangerous consequences.

The method, however, given, for attaining to the knowledge of this discovery,
is, after the infection of the Smallpox is taken, to prevent inflammation, so
that a suppurated matter may not ensue: and this is proposed to be effected, by
treating the distemper, like other inflammatory cases, in the beginning; and
giving such correcting medicines, as, by gently diluting and dissolving the
blood, may carry off the cause by the convenient outlets; and so cure the
disease, while in it is first state, without coming to suppuration.

For this purpose the Doctor mentions a preparation of Mercury and Antimony,
brought to a great degree of penetrability, and rendered entirely destitute of
all Acrimony by dissolution, etc; from whence, he says, there arises almost
such a kind of medicine, and by which he has seen some good effects.

The Aethiops Mineralis has been likewise proposed as a specific medicine, for
the same intention, by Dr. Lobb, who has given some instances of the Smallpox
being, in his judgment, prevented by the timely use of it. But as there have
been frequent examples of people escaping this distemper, who had been supposed
to be in the greatest danger of taking it; it is not improbable but that some
of these may have been attributed, by mistake, to such preventive means as had
been used on those occasions.

Dr. Cheyne also has pronounced that the best Antidote in nature against the
Smallpox, and the Plague itself, is Aethiops Mineralis and Cinnabaris
Antimonii, taken, made up into boluses, twice or three times a day, and washed
down with Orange Whey. Of the efficacy of which, he says, he has had some
successful experience. For the confluent Smallpox, he adds, is but a miniature
of the Plague, and both are curable in good habits.

Many more writers (some of which are of great eminence) have touched also upon
this matter, as the sentiment of Boerhaave, but without presuming any further;
well knowing that an affair of this nature can admit of no alternative, and
that it is to no manner of purpose to pretend to defend by argument what cannot
be sufficiently warranted by experience. For such particularities in opinion
have been oftentimes ridiculed, in men of learning, as the effects of mere whim
and chimera.

But the character of Boerhaave is too sacred for reflection, as he certainly
had no design to impose on the judgment of others by a prediction of this sort,
which was grounded, probably, on such Speculations in Chemistry as are not
easily to be explained on mechanical principles.

Dr. Mead De variolis et morbillis.
, however, could not pass over this opinion of his learned friend without
wondering how he could be induced to hope that some time or other a specific
Antidote would be found against the contagious poison of the Smallpox; that
is, by which it would be so thoroughly destroyed, that, tho'it had been
received into the body, it could not produce the disease. For, continues he,
the elements of things are so certain, and so well established by the permanent
laws of Nature; that whosoever would endeavor to change them, would act like
those Philosophers by fire (as they style themselves) who labor hard to
transmute the baser metals into gold; and when continual disappointments have
convinced them of the vanity of their hopes, actually extract gold out of the
purses of the ignorant and credulous by the fumes of their charcoal Dr. Stack's
transl. p. 58.
.

In an affair of this kind, it is undoubtedly the safest and truest way to
consult nature herself, as a divine principle, diffused throughout the
creation, acting in all bodies by certain properties which are productive of
certain effects. And we may consider her in a vast variety of senses, as she
does nothing in vain; attempts always to preserve herself; cures all diseases;
and acts upon unerring rules in all her ways. Hence we observe in Fevers,
particularly those of the eruptive kinds, the most surprising commotions and
conflicts, which serve to throw off the morbific matter by various ways, for
the relief of the Patient; and, in these cases, especially, she is to be nicely
observed, and followed with the greatest care; because any counteracting means
would obstruct her first design, and make her proceed upon other different
principles, which would consequently beattended with very different effects.

It ought to be considered, therefore, whether a specific antidote against the
contagious taint of the Smallpox (if such an one were discoverable) would not
be likely to do more hurt than good, by preventing a distemper, which, perhaps,
was intended by nature, as Dr. Gilchrist observes, for a drain to clear the
constitution of some gross humors, which, if not carried off in this way,
would bring on other diseases. The same Gentleman supports this opinion by
observing that those Children who had had the Smallpox by inoculation in
Scotland were uncommonly healthy; which he supposes to be owing to this cause,
that the Fever in the Smallpox, communicated in the infant state, not only
destroys or expells the latent seeds of diseases, before they are, by time and
accidents, perfected, and put into action; but causes such an alteration of the
humors as may make them less susceptible of any morbid impressions: And the
vessels being so accustomed, before they become rigid, to certain motions and
extensions, the body is rendered, ever after, more passive to the impulses of
any subsequent distemper. This, he maintains, is agreeable to experience; for
one who has suffered an acute illness will bear sickness better than another,
who never had the like distemper, and be less overcome by it Edinb. Essays
Phys. and Liter. Vol. 2. Art. 30.
.

Hippocrates calls nature the great physican; and our judicious Sydenham says,
that a disease is nothing more than an effort of nature to throw off the
morbific matter for the health of the patient; which Dr. Mead has observed to
be no where more particularly verified than in those envenomed Fevers, in which
the violence of the distemper breaks out on the Skin either in the form of
pustules, carbuncles, or bubos. And hence it seems pretty plain that no art can
abrogate the law of nature, by the prevention of those kind of diseases which
happen from contagion.

Those corpuscular effluvia of the Smallpox, or particles which fly off from
distempered bodies, and, mixing with the juices of others, occasion the same
disease, are produced from a matter differing from all other poisons, and
liable to cause inflammation in a greater or lesser degree, according to the
constitutional state and condition of those that receive them: and some
miserable cases of the Smallpox have showed us instances where the whole
texture of the blood has been so broken and dissolved, that the crassamentum,
after it had stood a while to become cold, could but just hold together. Yet,
notwithstanding, there have been some instances where this poison has given so
little disturbance, as scarcely to introduce any perceivable lentor on the
blood, at least not enough to obstruct it in the capillary Vessels: And we have
several times remarked where it has been applied by inoculation, that if it had
not been for it is immediate action on a solid part, it would have proved
insufficient even to show the characteristick marks of the Smallpox.

Therefore it is not altogether improbable but that this contagious venom may
operate by various ways; sometimes by coagulating the blood; at others by
dissolving it; and sometimes by corroding the solid parts themselves: And this
may be owing, perhaps, to such natural causes as are not within the reach of
human penetration. Which considerations, notwithstanding the deference I pay to
Dr. Boerhaave's extraordinary merit and abilities, have induced me to question,
even, the bare possibility of such a discovery. But, to go on.

The Doctor intimates that the bite of the Scorpion, which was formerly
supposed to be certain death, is now cured by the application of the bruised
Scorpion, or the oil of it, and concludes that all poisons have their
antidotes; and, therefore, why may not a specific medicine be found out of such
a nature, that, being diffused all the body over, after the variolous infection
is received, may introduce contrary properties, and thereby extinguish the
distemper in the beginning, before those effects are produced which must,
otherwise, necessarily follow? For what Physician, says he, in a Pleurisy,
Quinsy, etc. would wait for a cure by suppuration, when daily experience
convinces us that these distempers are regularly cured without it? and why may
not the inflammation be carried off, as well, in the first stage of the
Smallpox, as in other inflammatory diseases, and so prevent its coming to
suppuration at all?

To this, it may be said, that the general method of cure in Pleurisies,
Quinsies, and other inflammatory distempers, which are neither contagious, nor
of the eruptive kinds, proves insufficient to prevent the return of them, as
often as the sudden changes and alterations of the weather, different seasons
of the year, and many other accidental causes may happen to produce them. But,
it is not so, in regard to the Smallpox; a disease which is propagated by it is
own contagion only, without any other antecedent cause; and where a determinate
length of time brings on every thing according to it is stated periods; so that
nature, in doing her part, is a most certain guide to the Physician for the
doing of his. Besides it is evident that the venom of this distemper can infect
us but once; insomuch that that pabulum in our bodies, which is productive of
this disease, being totally taken up by the contagion it has received, is
thereby expunged and eradicated, so that there remains nothing, afterward, on
which this morbific matter can have any further effect. And, indeed, in this
sense, it may be truly said that the Smallpox is it is own antidote, by
protecting all that undergo it from any future attack.

It may be granted how extremely difficult it is to clear the mass of blood of
this poison; yet it is most certainly true that Nature endeavors, with all her
might, at the expulsion of it in the most perfect manner; that is, by forcing
the morbid matter, as much as possible, to the pustules Mead de variol.
: And any interruption must prove of dangerous consequence, lest the humors
should be impeded in their circulatory motion, and fall into an intestine one,
and grow putrid; which is frequently the case after too large evacuations, or
excessive heat; where there is such a scarcity of spirits, that the solids do
not vibrate sufficiently to keep the fluids in their due velocity.

This plainly indicates the hurtfulness of too great evacuations in the
beginning of the Smallpox; and shows the Physician's part to be only to
assist, by following nature; and not going before her.

The Measles are an inflammatory fever of the eruptive kind; whose pustules
never arrive to a purulent state like those of the Smallpox; and they are
cured by bleeding, and cooling medicines: but, I believe, it was never yet seen
that these remedies could prevent their eruption, though made use of ever so soon
after taking in the nfection.

There have been some instances in the Smallpox, where spontaneous
hemorrhages, or other repeated bleedings have seemed to alter the nature of the
distemper in some degree, by making that prove kindly, which would, probably,
have fallen out otherwise, for want of those evacuations; but, I am persuaded,
there never was any one proof of the contagion being wholly carried off that
way, without some eruption of the pustules: so that it seems evident, even to a
demonstration, that Nature, after a removal of the load that oppresses her,
must be left to do her part in her own way, by causing suppuration, in a
greater or lesser degree, as there happens to be occasion for it; in order to
free the body from the corrupted state of the blood and humors arising from
the contagious taint of this disease.

Moreover it is certain that the whole animal body, at all times before it has
passed through the Smallpox, is, in every part alike, liable to receive the
morbose, or infecting taint, and so propagate the disease. We know, also, that
the least particle of the morbific matter, applied to any part of the body,
will cause the Smallpox to be produced as effectively as a much greater
quantity could be capable of doing it. And it is evident, from common
experience, that all mankind, as well those who come of parents that have had
the Smallpox, as those that have not, are alike liable to it; so that we may
conclude the pabulum of this distemper to be a part of the human nature,
conceived in the first rudiments of generation; and therefore not to be
extinguished by any art, or other means, than it is own natural destroyer, the
Smallpox itself; which only can render the body more perfect, by eradicating
this one natural principle of mortality, and thereby giving it a security, for
ever, against any further attack from this great evil.

The contagion of the Smallpox previously considered in a pestilential sense,
the true manner of it is operation on human bodies, as it may be best known from
the experiment of inoculation, seems sufficient to furnish more matter for the
Physician and Philosopher than could possibly have been advanced without it.
Insomuch that the discovery of a specific medicine to prevent the burning of a
Caustic, or even Fire itself, may as well be expected, as to destroy the power
of variolous contagion, when taken either in the natural way, or applied by
inoculation. Most certain, therefore, it is, that no discovery of this kind, so
seemingly repugnant to the laws of Nature, can ever be ascribed to human
invention.

An attempt to explain the manner of the propagation and eruption of the
Smallpox, from the practice of inoculation: And why this distemper, taken by
common infection, in the natural way, proves so much more fatal than that which
is given by inoculation.
THE main business of natural Philosophy, as Sir Isaac Newton observes, is to
argue from Phenomena, without feigning Hypotheses, and to deduce causes from
effects till we come to the very first cause. Therefore it ought to be the
study of Physicians to consider well the various and subtle methods which
Nature uses in producing diseases; and this can be known in general only by
the different symptoms that occur to individuals in all cases. For her progress
is undoubtedly slower or faster according to the different methods she takes in
expelling the morbific cause, so that the morbid particles, being separated by
her own action, may be discharged in her own way.

When a body, therefore, becomes contaminated by a contagious taint, it may be
of the greatest use to know by what means it so happened; as the mode of
nature, in her method of extricating the morbific matter, differs, probably, in
great measure according to the different manner of receiving it: insomuch that
the danger or safety of the patient may depend greatly on the primary
communication of this matter either to an external or an internal part. And
this opinion has been confirmed by many observations of the Smallpox produced
by inoculation, where the distemper has been remarkably great from a multitude
of the pustules, as well as the condition of them; which have gone off, by that
preventive means, without any great uneasiness; whereas the same, in the
natural way, are usually attended with a very high Fever, Delirium, and other
dangerous contingencies, owing probably to imperceptible effluvia conveyed, at
first, to the Lungs, Heart, Brain, etc.

But for a further explanation of this matter, by an enquiry into the different
methods that nature pursues in communicating the Smallpox both by common
infection, and the artificial experiment of inoculation, we shall the better
form a judgment, agreeable to her own elements and principles, by her own rules
and indications. And, in order thereto, it is manifestly certain, that, the air
being infected with the venom of this distemper, the morbific particles,
contained therein, are received into the human body by inspiration; and they
act, wherever they happen to fall, by an irresistible power, like fire
unextinguishable, until they have utterly subdued that pabulum in the body
which was susceptible of this contaminating taint, and so propagated the
disease: for thus it is we are secured from having the Smallpox a second time.
But the causes of it is destructive malignity may be more than the nicest
observation can discover. And, indeed, the mode of Nature, from this theory
alone, seems to be too intricate and perplexing for human understanding;
insomuch that the nature of the morbific matter, from whatever different kind
of the Smallpox it may happen to come, is certainly the same, and plainly
makes no difference in the nature of the disease. The difference of
constitutions, therefore, it may reasonably be supposed, is the principal cause
of the different kinds of the Smallpox. And, these principles being generally
admitted, I think it evident, therefore, as far as it can be demonstrated from
experience, that a different manner in giving the infection (I mean that of
inoculation) manifestly produces a different effect. And this, I make not the
least doubt, would unexceptionably appear upon the trial, if it was possible to
meet with two persons of exactly the same age and constitution, by
communicating, to each of them, the same contagious taint, by the different
ways of infection. But, for want of this, let us examine further, by pursuing
the mode of nature, also, under the experiment of inoculation, and see what new
discovery will arise to give an additional light to this matter.

By this method of trial it is evident that the smallest portion of the
variolous pus, applied, by a slight incision, to any part of the body, acts in
the manner of a caustic, by inflaming and corroding the part; insomuch that the
continuity, after some days, is destroyed; and an ulceration caused from the
separation of the eschar: And the taint of this infection, being infused into
the blood, is conveyed, by means of the circulation, throughout the whole
animal body; and touching every where on it is proper pabulum, like a spark of
fire among particles of Sulphur, or Nitre, in a certain length of time it does
it is office, by exciting feverish symptoms, which regularly go off in a
diaphoresis; whereby the salt serum of the blood, so impregnated, is driven out
by the glands of the skin; and then the pores, being properly enlarged, let out
the fiery pustules on the surface; which seems to be the true manner of the
propagation and eruption of the Smallpox.

From this experiment we may reasonably suppose that the morbific effluvia of
this distemper, received by inspiration also, produce the same kind of
phenomenon in the natural way; and that these venomous particles, happening to
fall on the vital parts, by inflaming and corroding the same, in like manner,
are so commonly attended with their fatal effects; for instance, on the Lungs,
Brain, etc.; where it is impossible for nature to help herself, or be furnished
with any assistance to her relief. And this may occasion, which we daily see,
high fevers, delirium, shortness of breath, the most surprising struggles and
conflicts, and sudden changes in the Smallpox.

It may be supposed, also, that an infinite number of the virose particles,
contained in the infected air, may be drawn in by the breath and nostrils at
the same time; and so conveyed by the divarication of the Trachaea to the
Lungs; and also by the olfactory nerves, or their fibrillae, to the most
delicate texture of the brain, whereby a multitude of different parts may
receive the contagious effect at the same instant of time; which, by pervading
the innermost recesses of the whole animal compages, may so break and destroy
the continuity of parts of moment, as to render a dissolution of the whole
frame unavoidable. And that particular species of the Smallpox, in which the
texture of the blood is so absolutely broken, that it discharges itself by
every outlet of the body; and, stagnating in the small cuticular vessels,
produces black, gangrenous spots, all the surface over, is but too melancholy
a proof of the truth of this hypothesis, from the sudden and untimely
destruction that it usually brings upon the patient.

Inoculation explains also the reasonableness of this opinion: for if the
morbific matter be applied to ever so many place, it will have the same effect
in every one; by occasioning so many corroding Carbuncles, if they may be so
called; which, the more they are, the more likely they will be to increase the
(...), or the contagious infection of the blood and spirits: and, for this
reason, I have wholly given up an opinion I had espoused some years ago; from a
supposition that discharges from more inoculated places than one would be of
advantage to the patient, by carrying off a greater quantity of the humors of
the body, by means of those drains; and so, consequently, would be likely to
prevent such feverish disorders and complaints, as might, otherwise, arise in
the course of the Smallpox. But experience has plainly shown this kind of
doctrine to be erroneous; and convinced me, that the application of the virose
matter, to one part only, is much safest and best; and, indeed, the corrosion
of any one part, caused by the application of variolous matter, is a sufficient
proof of its taking effect, and doing all that this contagion can do; even though
there may happen to be scarce any febril symptoms produced from it, or so much
as a perfectly distinguished pustule of the Smallpox: for the ulcerated part
being cicatrised, will remain, beyond all dispute, as certain a mark of
security to the patient, as if the skin had received the impressions of having
undergone this distemper in ever so great a degree. And truly, if it were not
so, several persons, under my own care, who had no pustulary eruptions, must
have taken the Smallpox, from those who were their companions and bed-fellows
in the distemper, by the ordinary way of infection; which the experience of
such trials plainly convinced me they could not. From these cases, therefore,
it seems reasonable to suppose, that this kind of artificial carbuncle, caused
by the inoculation, was alone capable of extricating from the human nature the
first principles of this distemper.

From what has been already advanced, it seems pretty certain that these first
principles of the Smallpox, being susceptible of the contagion to the most
distant extremities, are diffused, in all parts alike, throughout the whole
animal body; the principal caution, therefore, requisite to be observed by
Physicians, in regard to those in whom this matter is to be applied, is to
consider well their different constitutions and temperaments, as they are of
themselves naturally productive of the different kinds of the Smallpox. For it
is, I believe, a generally received opinion that the contagious venom of this
disease is in it is own nature the same, and differs only according to the
different bodies it is infused into. In some, for instance, we see that this
poison applied can produce no more than it is own variolous carbuncle, or a very
few of the pustules at most, and those of the shortest duration; whereas, in
others, it is manifest that the different fluids become more contaminated, and,
therefore, consequently produce other different degrees of the Smallpox: and
wherever the lymphatick vessels are corroded by the variolated acrimony, being
more than can be transpired by the pores of the skin, it occasions a suffusion
of the lympha itself, and so consequently produces a confluence of the
Smallpox; and this happening commonly in a greater degree on the head and
face, is undoubtedly owing to the great force of the circulation of the blood,
which, carrying with it a variolated power, causes the effects above mentioned.
The ventricles of the brain also, from the same morbose cause, are usually so
affected as to occasion delirium, etc; in the same manner probably, that the
effluvia of strong drink and spirits affect the brain in drunkenness: for thus
it is that the blood, having received any morbific taint, purifies itself in
the circulation, by throwing off it is heterogeneous particles by the common
emunctories which nature has provided, as far as the animal faculties, under a
morbid state are capable of accomplishing it.

Those principles in our nature, which are susceptible of the contagion of the
Smallpox, though they are not, I believe, as I have before observed, liable to
undergo a change, by any power of medicine, sufficient to prevent the influence
of variolous infection; yet experience convinces us (if we can be so
convinced) that the manner of propagating the distemper produces a very
different effect: and there can be no occasion to enforce the truth of this
opinion by argument, since God's Providence has appeared, in the success of
inoculation, so much in favor of that practice Since inoculation has been
brought into practice, it is said, by good authority, that there has been an
annual decrease of a fifth part of the deaths by the Smallpox within the bills
of mortality.
.

FINIS.

