SYMPATHY; OR, A SKETCH OF THE SOCIAL PASSION.

A POEM.

THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL.

M DCC LXXXI.

INTRODUCTION.
THE Reader is requested to consider the following Poem as nothing more than
what a part of its title page expresses, -- a SKETCH, and only a sketch, of the
Social Passion, or Sympathetic Principle, applied, first to the Author's
particular situation, and thence extended more generally, as influencing the
whole animal creation.

Upon visiting the Villa of a friend, and finding it deserted by a family
extremely dear to the Author, he experienced precisely the sensations he has
endeavored to describe. It was natural for him to pass beyond his own case,
and contemplate that of others under similar circumstances. The fairest
productions of animated nature were before him. They occupied the same spot. He
was seated in the midst of them. His heart dilated. If, as seems to be
admitted, a virtuous enthusiasm be necessary to the proper enjoyment of such
scenery, the Critic of Nature will hardly know how to be offended, should he
find, that here and there have been indulged effusions, which, if closely
examined when the mind is cold, may be sound not altogether in strict
connection.

It were easy to have thrown out from the argumentative parts some sentiments
not quite in keeping with the theme; but, zealous to prove the powers of
Universal Sympathy, the writer felt the sollicitudes of an author, united with
those of a philanthropist. Of course, the idea of obliterating what had any
chance of cementing the social affections was too painful to be adopted.

If, therefore, candor should urge that in stepping occasionally out of his
path, his intention has been rather to gather flowers than weeds, he will be
forgiven. The poetical license becomes a matter rather of right than of
courtesy, when an author pleads his privilege in the cause of Benevolence. He
pretends not to have preserved an exact correspondence between the several
members.

Immethodical, however, as the poem confessedly is, the lucidus ordo of
composition has not been by any means wantonly discarded; nor ought the Author
to conceal (what it is, indeed, his chief pride to acknowledge) the obligations
he is under to some of the first and greatest writers in this country, for many
valuable hints, of which he has availed himself in the course of the
performance.

SYMPATHY.
BOOK I.
OE'R you fair lawn, where often in various talk
The favoring Muses joined our evening walk,
Up yonder hill that rears its crest sublime,
Where we were wont with gradual steps to climb,
To woo the dew-bath'd zephirs on the wing,
And hear the Lark her earliest matin sing;
Fast by you shed, of roots and verdure made,
Where we have paused, companions of the shade,
In yonder cot just seated on the brow,
Whence unobserved we viewed the world below;
Whence often we culled fit objects for our song,
From land or ocean largely stretched along,
The morning vapors passing through the vale,
The distant turret, or the lessening sail,
The pointed cliff which overhangs the main,
The breezy upland, or the opening plain;
Or down yon foot-way saunter'd by the stream,
Whose little rills ran tinkling to the theme;
More softly touched the woe in Hammond's lay,
Or lapsed responsive to the lyre of Gray;
Over these dear bounds like one forlorn I roam,
Over these dear bounds, I fondly called my home.
And yet to touch me various powers combine,
Here summer revels with a warmth divine;
The bloomy season every charm supplies,
From earth's rich harvest crowned with cloudless skies,
Or future plenty bursting through the grain,
From golden sheaves that circle round the swain.
Here as I stop, beneath Eliza's tree,
Far, oh beloved associate! far from thee,
Some little CHANGE thy absence to declare
I pray to find, and friendship forms the prayer:
Less bright the sunbeams, or less soft the showers,
Some essence wanting to the fruits or flowers:
Those fruits and flowers, alas! more ripe appear,
And the lawn smiles as though my friend were here;
From the soft myrtle brighter blossoms spring,
In mellower notes the plumy people sing:
Near yonder church where we retired to pray,
The good man's modest cottage I survey;
The pious Pastor, who each sabbath taught
The listening rustic's noblest reach of thought:
That modest cottage and its garden still
Seek the soft shelter of the friendly hill;
The column'd smoke still curls its wreathes around,
And not one lessened beauty marks the bound.
As near you bower with pensive steps I go,
To view the shrubs your culture taught to grow,
The fair exotics boast a happier bloom
Than when their patron shared the rich perfume:
The orange still its tawny luster shows
The late rose reddens and the balsam blows;
While roving over the hedge the woodbine fair
Embalms with heaven's own essence heaven's own air,
Not softer and not sweeter flew the gale,
When we together trod this blooming vale;
When far beyond the busy world's control,
Nature our guide, we opened all the soul.
Whence this neglect? say, in thy loved domain,
Where all the virtues in thy presence reign;
Where gathering round thee, youth and age conspire,
While some as brother court thee, some as sire;
Where all the social passions softly blend,
To give the similing neighborhood a friend;
Where somewhat of thy gentle heart is seen,
A grace, or goodness, adding to the green;
Where the babe lisps thy mercies on the knee,
And second childhood leans it is crutch on thee;
Whence this neglect? Ingratitude retreat!
Go: and in shades less sacred fix thy seat:
Go to the treacherous world, thy proper sphere;
But oh! forbear to scatter poisons here:
About this dwelling and these harmless bounds,
Friendship and Love alone should take their rounds,
Fair as the blossoms which the walls sustain,
Rich as the fruits, and generous as the grain;
Secure as yonder warblers nesting near,
Like Honor steady, and like Faith sincere.
But soft, my friend! though shrubs and bowers remain
The fixed productions of the unconscious plain;
Though these no gentle sympathies can know,
But as the planter bends them learn to grow;
To higher parts as nature lifts her plan,
The kinder creatures, happily, feel for man;
The tame domestics, which attend his board,
Happily partake the fortune of their lord,
His presence hail, his absence long deplore,
Droop as he droops, and die when he is no more.
Pleased at the thought, still onward let me tread
Where flocks and herds diversify the mead,
Where breathing odours, winnow'd by the gale,
Fan the soft bosom of the smiling vale;
Behind, the rooks their brawling councils hold,
And the proud peacock trails his train of gold;
Around, the doves their purple plumage show,
And clucking poultry saunter, pleased, below;
While there the housedog with accustomed glee,
Fawns on the hind -- and never remembers thee.
These crop the food, those press the flowery bed,
Nor weep the absent, nor bewail the dead;
Their stinted feelings seem but half awake,
Dull as you steer now slumbering in the brake.
Whence then the gloom that gathers in the sky?
Whence the warm tear now starting to the eye?
Whence then the apparent change when friends depart?
It Is FANCY striking on the feeling heart:
It Is varied Fancy, whose aetherial wand
Bids plastic nature move to her command:
Oh should I follow where she leads the way,
What magic meteors to her touch would play!
Far, far from thee, this sun which gilds my brow
In deep eclipse would darken all below:
The herds, though now plain reason sees them feed,
Smit by her touch would languish in the mead;
The breeze which now disports with yonder spray,
The flocks which pant beneath the heats of day,
The pendent copse in passing shadows dressed,
The scanty herbage on the mountain's crest,
The balmy powers that essence every gale,
The glassy lakes that fertilize the dale,
Struck by her mystic scepter all would fade,
And sudden sadness brood along the shade:
Thus Chloe weds, but she the garland twines;
Thus Bacchus revels, but she twists the vines;
Thus falls a friend, but she around the grave
Bids willows whisper, and the cypress wave.
As poets sing, thus Fancy takes her range,
Whose fairy fables can the system change.
Soon as the generous master leaves his home,
Behold how thick the alterations come!
Soon as the much-loved mistress quits the scene,
The earth, be sure, no longer smiles in green;
In solemn sable every flower appears,
And skies relent in sympathizing tears!
Scarce had the Bard of Leasowes' loved domain
Closed his dimmed eye upon the conscious plain;
Ere birds, and beasts, and hills, and dales, it is said,
Mourned his sad fate, and funeral honors paid;
His gay parterres a serious habit wore,
His larks would sing, his lambs would frisk no more,
A deeper cadence murmured from the floods,
And elegiac sorrow shook his woods:
A solemn dirge the sable raven sung,
The muses wept, their lyres were all unstrung;
But chief his bowers their verdant honors shed,
And every laurel knew that he was dead.
Yet separate facts from fairy scenes like these,
Nature, we find, still keeps her first decrees;
The order due which at her birth was given
Still forms the unchanging law of earth and heaven,
In one fair tenor, on the circle goes,
And no obstruction, no confusion knows.
When Shenstone, nay, when Shakespeare pressed the tomb,
The shrubs that saw their fate maintained their bloom;
Clear ran the streams to their accustomed shore,
Nor gave one bubble less, one murmur more;
Nor did a single leaf, a simple flower,
Or fade, or fall, to mark their mortal hour.
But, is it Fancy ALL! what, no reserve?
From one dull point can nature never swerve?
Is change of seasons all the change she knows,
From autumn's sickly heats to winter snows;
From chilling spring, to summer's dog star rage;
From boy to man; from man to crawling age?
These her transitions, lingering, sad, and slow,
Whence then, embraced by flowers, my bosom's woe?
Ah! is it fancy, that with silent pace,
Impels me thus to range from place to place;
On every side to see an harvest bend,
Yet look on every side to find my friend?
Or is it fancy makes the village train,
For now it is evening, sport around in vain?
That plighted pairs, amidst the hazel boughs,
To me unseen, impart their tender vows;
While unsuspicious of a witness near,
They mix with nature's language, nature's tear?
That twilight's gentle gray which now comes on,
To wait, a sober handmaid, on the sun;
To watch his parting tinge, his softened fires,
Then blush with maiden grace as he retires;
The crescent moon which now ascended high,
Her silver mantle throws across the sky;
The still serene that seems to lull the breeze,
Soft in a leafy cradle 'midst the trees;
The lessened sound of yonder requiem bell,
With resignation in each mournful knell;
The dropping dew that settles on my cheek,
The frugal lights that from each cottage break;
The just-dropp'd latch, the little lattice closed,
To shield from eve's damp air the babe reposed,
And note the hour when temperance and health
Give the pale vigils of the night to wealth:
Say, is it Fancy's vision works the charm,
When these blessed objects lose their power to warm?
Ah! no; from other sources springs the smart,
Its source is here, hard pressing on my heart.
Yes, it is the heart which rules the roving eye,
And turns a gloomy to a cloudless sky;
The soft magician governs every scene,
Blossoms the rock, or desolates the green;
Along the heath bids fancied roses blow,
And sunshine rise upon a world of snow.
Yes, it is the heart endears each smiling plain,
Or to his native mountain binds the swain;
His native mountain where his cottage stands,
More loved, more fair, than all the neighboring lands;
For though the blast be keen, the soil be bare,
His friends, his wife, his little ones, are there.
Oh, had the brother of my heart been nigh,
When morning threw her mantle over the sky;
Or when gay noon a gaudier robe displayed,
Or modest evening took her softest shade;
Then had each shrub breathed forth its full perfume,
And like the flowers the feelings been in bloom:
For still to prove the natal bias right,
The senses with the season must unite.
The bias SOCIAL, man with men must share
The varied benefits of earth and air;
The leading law of life which governs all,
To some in large degrees, to some in small;
To lowest insects, highest powers a part,
Wisely dispensed to every beating heart;
To every creature just proportion's given,
From the mole's mansion to the seraph's heaven.
See the winged legions which at noontide play,
Together clust'ring in the solar ray,
There sports the social passion; see, and own,
That not an atom takes its flight alone.
The unwieldy monsters of the pregnant deep;
The savage troops that through the forest sweep;
The viewless tribes that populate the air;
The milder creatures of domestic care;
The rooks which rock their infants on the tree;
The race which dip their pinions in the sea;
The feathered train, gay tenants of the bush,
The glossy blackbird, and the echoing thrush,
The gaudy goldfinch which salutes the spring,
Winnowing the thistle with his burnished wing;
Jove's eagle, soaring to you orb of light;
Aurora's lark, and Cynthia's bird of night:
All these the laws of Sympathy declare;
And chorus heaven's first maxim, BORN TO SHARE.
Instinct, or Sympathy, or what you will,
The social principle is active still;
Of every element it glows the soul,
Touches, pervades, and animates the whole;
Floats in the gale, surrounds earth's wide domain,
Ascends with fire, and dives into the main;
Whilst dull, or bright, the affections know to play,
As full, or feebly, darts this social ray;
Dimly it gleams on insect, fish, and fowl,
But spreads broad sunshine over man's favored soul.
Man's favored soul then trace through every state,
And see it fitted for a social fate;
Behold how nature to connection tends,
Each seeks from each his relatives and friends.
You spacious dome which earth and sea commands,
Where Titus dresses his paternal lands;
Where water gushes, and where wood extends,
To share each beauty, Titus calls his friends;
A naked waste, till they adorn his flowers,
A desert scene, till they partake his bowers:
Nor this, though sweet, the greatest bliss he feels,
That greatest bliss his modesty conceals.
Pass the green slope which bounds his fair domain,
And seek the valley dropping from the plain;
There, in a blossomed nook, by pomp unseen,
An aged couple lead a life serene;
And there, behind those elms, a sickly pair
Exchange their labors for a softer care:
'Twas Titus gave to sickness this repose,
And placed life's second cradle near the rose;
In his own hall though louder joys prevail,
A dearer transport whispers from the vale;
Though mirth and frolic echo through the dome:
In those small cots his bosom finds a home.
Fame, fortune, friends, can providence give more?
Go, ask of heaven the blessings of the poor!
A greater comfort would you still supply?
Then wipe the tear from sorrow's streaming eye;
For social kindness to another shown,
Expands the bliss to make it more your own.
Lo! the rude savage, naked and untaught,
Shares with his mate what arts and arms have caught;
When winter darkness clouds his long, long night,
See how he strives to find the social light;
His woodland wife, his forest children dear,
Smooth the bleak storms that sadden half his year.
For them he tracks the monster in the snow;
For them he hurls his sling, and twangs his bow;
Nor scorching sunshine, nor the driving shower,
The vollied thunder, nor the light'ning's power,
Nor climes, where sickness pants in every breeze,
Nor worlds of ice, where nature seems to freeze,
Checks the fair principle, which bursts away,
Like Sol when clouds attempt his noontide ray.
Hence, ever lean the feeble on the strong,
As tender sires their children lead along;
While, by degrees, as transient life declines,
And florid youth to withering age resigns,
The social passion shifts with place and time,
And tender sires are led by sons in prime;
The guide becomes the guided in his turn,
While child and parent different duties learn.
Not then from fancy only, from the heart,
Pours the keen anguish on the immortal part,
And truth herself destroys the bloom of May,
When death or fortune tears a friend away;
From virtuous passion, virtuous feeling flows,
The grief that dims the lilly and the rose.
Drops a soft sorrow for a friend in dust?
There, truth and fancy both may rear the bust;
While one pours forth the tribute of the heart,
The other plies her visionary art,
Potent she calls her airy specter round,
And bids them instant consecrate the ground;
In magic circles, lo, the illusions come,
To shroud the earth in monumental gloom;
Fancy presides as sovereign of the scene,
And dark is every leaf of every green;
Whilst reason loves to mix with here is the tear,
And the fair mourners form a league sincere;
Her airy visions, fancy may impart,
And reason listen to the charmer's art.
In life's fair morn, I knew an aged seer,
Who sad and lonely past his joyless year;
Betrayed, heart-broken, from the world he ran,
And shunned, oh dire extreme, the face of man;
Humbly he reared his hut within the wood,
Hermit his beard, a hermit's was his food,
Nitch'd in some corner where the gelid caves
With chilling drops the rugged rockstone laves;
Hour after hour, the melancholy sage,
Drop after drop to reckon, would engage
The lingering day, and trickling as they fell,
A tear went with them to the narrow well.
Then thus he moraliz'd as slow it past,
"This, brings me nearer Lucia than the last;
"And this, now streaming from the eye," said he,
"Oh, my loved child, will bring me nearer thee."
When first he roam'd, his dog with anxious care,
His wandring's watched, as emulous to share;
In vain the faithful brute was bid to go,
Vain sought the sage a solitary woe;
The pilgrim paused, the attendant dog was near,
Slept at his feet, and caught the falling tear;
Up rose the pilgrim, up the dog would rise,
And every way to win a master tries.
"Then be it so. Come, faithful fool," he said;
One pat encouraged, and they sought the shade;
An unfrequented thicket soon they found,
And both reposed upon the leafy ground;
Mellifluous murm'rings told the fountains nigh,
Fountains, which well a pilgrim's drink supply.
And thence, by many a labyrinth it led,
Where every tree bestowed an evening bed;
Skilled in the chase the faithful creature brought
Whatever at morn or moonlight course he caught;
But softest pity gave the sage to all,
Nor saw unwept his dumb associates fall.
He was, in sooth, the gentlest of his kind,
And though a hermit had a social mind:
"And why, said he, must man subsist by prey,
"Why stop you melting music on the spray?
"Why, when assailed by hounds and hunter's cry,
"Must half the harmless race in terror fly?
"Why must we work of innocence the woe?
"Still shall this bosom throb, these eyes overflow.
"A heart too tender, here from man retires,
"A heart that aches if but a wren expires."
Thus lived the master good, the servant true,
Till to its God the master's spirit flew;
Beside a fount which daily water gave,
Stooping to drink, the pilgrim found a grave;
All in the running stream his garments spread,
And dark, damp verdure ill concealed his head;
Crouch'd in the water the survivor stood,
Sickening with sorrow, and rejecting food,
The faithful servant from that fatal day
Watched the loved corpse and piteous pined away;
Five nights he filled the forest with his moan,
Five nights he joined the passing spectre's groan;
At length the screech-owl flapping, boded death,
And soon the servant yielded up his breath:
His head upon his master's cheek was found,
While the obstructed waters mourned around.
But sordid souls are ever in distress,
To bless himself each must a second bless;
Then kindle on till he the world embrace,
And in love's Caestus gird the human race.
Thus social grief can finer joys impart
Than the dull pleasures of a miser heart:
Thus with more force can melancholy warm,
Than wild ambition's solitary charm.
And oh, just heaven, what gift can thou bestow,
What gem so precious as a tear for woe?
A tear more full of thee, oh power divine,
Than all the dross that ripens in the mine!
As man with man, with creature creature keeps,
In summer feeds in view, in winter creeps
More close; but take the lamb apart
From its loved mother, then the social heart
Plains in its voice, while sad, the dam around
Bleats over the theft and leaves uncropt the ground.
In yonder huts, at this profound of night,
The twelfth hour striking as these lines I write,
In yonder scattering huts, now every swain,
With every maid and matron of the plain,
In sleep's soft arms on wholesome pallets pressed,
Breathe forth the social passion as they rest:
But should dire fate the father make its prey,
Or snatch untimely one loved child away;
Should the fair damsel sicken in her bloom,
Or bear the faithful housewife to the tomb,
No aid from fancy seeks the sorrowing heart,
But truth with force unborrow'd points the dart.
For me, as weary of myself I rise,
To seek the rest which wakeful thought denies;
Over the long mansion as I lonely range,
Condemned at every step to feel the change;
Through each apartment, where so often my heart
Has shared each grace of nature and of art,
Where memory marks each object that I see,
And fills the bosom, oh my friend, with thee;
Through each apartment as I pass along,
Pause for relief, and then pursue my song;
For me, who now with midnight taper go,
In sleep to soothe a solitary's woe;
No greater good my closing thoughts can bless,
Ere this remembered, little couch I press,
Than the sweet hope, that at this sacred hour
My friend enjoys kind nature's balmy power;
Than the soft wish that on my bended knee,
I offer up, Eliza, warm for thee!
Wife of my friend; alike my faithful care,
Alike the object of each gentle prayer;
Far distant though thou art, thy worth is near,
And my heart seals its blessing with a tear.
END OF THE FIRST BOOK.
BOOK II.
AND now again it is morn, the orient sun
Prepares once more his radiant course to run;
Over you tall trees I see his glories rise,
Tinge their green tops, and gain upon the skies;
The SOCIAL PRINCIPLE resumes the shade,
Basks on the banks, or glides along the glade:
See how it pants, my friend, in yonder throng,
Where half a village bear thy sheaves along;
Low stoops the swain to dress his native soil,
And here the housewife comes to soothe his toil;
While heaven's warm beams upon her bosom dart,
She strains her wedded husband to her heart;
Or from his brow the labored drop removes,
And dares to show with what a force she loves;
Wherever the mother moves her race attend,
And often cull the corn, and often bend;
Or bear the scrip, or tug the rake along,
Or catch the burden of the reaper's song;
Or shrinking from the sickle's crescent blade,
Cling to the gown, half pleased, and half afraid;
While he who gave them life looks on the while,
And views his little household with a smile;
Imprints the kiss, then blessing every birth,
Carols his joy, and cultivates the earth.
But not to scenes of peasantry confined,
Though happily those more free, and unconfined;
Not to this spot, the object of thy care,
Nor to the neighboring greens that checquer fair,
The views which stretch beyond the western main,
And mark the district of a different plain;
Not circumscribed to these the social plan,
Which more extends, as more pursued by man.
Just as you pathway, winding through the mead,
Grows broad and broader by perpetual tread,
The social passion turns the foot aside,
And prompts the swains to travel side by side;
Both edge, by turns, upon the bord'ring sod,
And the path widens as the grass is trod.
In cities thus, though trade's tumultuous train
Spurn at the homely maxims of the plain,
Not all the toss of rank, the trick of art,
Can chase the social passion from the heart:
Nay more, a larger circle it must take,
Where men embodying, larger interests make,
And each perforce round each more closely twine,
Where thousands lean their weight upon the line.
As slow to yonder eminence I bend,
Gradual the views of social life extend,
Where benches soften the ascent I stray,
And stop at each to take a just survey;
At every step, as sinks the vale behind,
A wider prospect opens on mankind.
Far to the lest where those blue hills arise,
And bathe their swelling bosoms in the skies;
The barks of commerce set the flapping sail,
And the dark sea-boy sues the busy gale;
There the deep warehouse shows its native store,
And there flame riches of a foreign shore;
Thick swarm the sons of trade on every hand,
And either India breathes along the strand:
Gold, give me gold, each bustler cries aloud,
As hope or fear alternate seize the crowd;
To careless eyes the love of pelf alone,
Seems to drain off the golden tide for one;
But closer viewed a various course it takes,
And wide meanderings in its passage makes;
Through many a social channel see it run,
And carry plenty down from sire to son;
From thence in many a mazy stream it flows,
And feels no ebb, nor dull stagnation knows;
Gain, pleasure, passion, property, induce
Each single man to study general use.
Thus nature and necessity agree
The social chain to stretch from land to sea.
Thus even the miser opes his sordid soul,
Loves but himself, and yet befriends the whole.
Ask you a stronger proof? Place wealth alone;
With some hard niggard lock up all his own;
Pile bills, and bags, and bonds, upon his shelf,
And a close prisoner chain him to his pelf.
Unhappy man! from family and friends,
From all which heaven in soft compassion sends,
From touch of kindred, tune of tender speech,
And exiled from the social passion's reach;
How would he sigh his station to regain,
And buy a glance at man with half his gain!
How, at some chink or crevice would he ply,
And envy each poor beggar limping by!
Far happier he, who breasting every wind,
Lives on the common mercy of his kind,
Who roams the world to tell his piteous case,
And dies at last amidst the human race.
Ye friends to self, ye worshippers of gold,
Who deem a passion lavished if unsold;
Who farm the principles with statesman's art,
And like a us'rer traffic with the heart:
Who to that idol in its nich confine
The holy incense due at nature's shrine;
Say, can your sordid merchandise deny
The sacred force of heaven-born Sympathy?
Ah, no! the generous spirit takes a part,
As goodness, glory, pity, move the heart.
Else, why at every virtue do we glow?
Else, why at sorrow do the eyes overflow?
Why with the fabled hero do we bleed,
And scorn the base, and love the generous deed?
Why every turn of fortune do we share,
As with old Homer's chiefs we rush to war?
Why with the wife of Hector do we mourn,
Weep with poor Priam, with Achilles burn?
Attentive hear Apollo's priest complain,
Or join our griefs for good Patroclus slain?
Spite of your arts the sympathies arise,
And aid the cause of all the brave and wise;
Spite of your little selves, when virtue charms,
To nature true, the social passion warms;
Vain to resist, imperial nature still
Asserts her claim, and bends us to her will.
Hence the great principle to all expands,
Thaws Lapland's ice, and glows on India's sands;
Above, below, its genial splendours play,
Wherever an human footstep marks the way.
"Oh, for one trace of man upon the snow,
"The track of sweet society to show;
"Oh, for one print on swarthy Afric's shore!"
Thus prays the wanderer escaped from ocean's roar;
In every clime is felt the throb divine,
By land, by water, here, and at the Line.
Nor Climates only, for each Age imparts
The kindly bias to our social hearts;
See the swathed infant cling to the embrance,
And feel instinctive fondness for its race;
See it, ascending, strengthen as it grows,
Till ripe and riper the affection glows,
Then view the child, its toys and trinkets share,
With some loved partner of its little care:
Behold the man a firmer bond requires,
For him the passion kindles all its fires;
Next, see his numerous offspring twining near,
Now move the smile, and now excite the tear;
Terror and transport in his bosom reign,
Succession sweet of pleasure and of pain.
As Age advances, some sensations cease,
Some, lingering, leave the heart, while some increase:
Thus, when life's vigorous passions are no more,
Self-love creeps closest to the social power;
The stooping veteran of the silver hair
Crawls to the blazing hearth and wicker chair,
There huddled close, he fondly hopes to spy
His goodly sons and daughters standing by,
To the lisp'd tale he bends the greedy ear,
And over his children's children drops a tear;
Or, every friend survived, himself half dead,
Frail nature still demands her board, her bed;
And these some kindred spirit shall bestow,
His wants supply, or mitigate his woe;
Still Symphathy shall watch his fleeting breath,
And gently lead him to the gates of death.
Yet more; even WAR, the scourge of human kind,
But serves more close the social links to bind;
Confederate courage forms the embattled line,
Firm on each side connecting passions join;
It Is social danger either troop inspires,
It Is social honor either army fires,
It Is social glory burnishes the van,
It Is social faith spreads on from man to man:
These, all combining, agitate the breath,
Stake life on life, and hazard death for death.
As front to front the warring parties meet,
For social ends they dare the martial feat;
As breast to breast, and eye to eye they fix,
For social ends they separate or mix.
King, country, parents, children, prompt the fight,
For these alone they bleed, resist, unite;
And, happily, first hostilities arose
From nice distinctions made of friends and foes;
Some scornful slight where nature most can smart,
Some stinging insult sorest to the heart,
Some wrong detected, forfeited some trust,
A treaty broken, or a barrier burst,
Bade Sympathy call Justice to her aid
Till laws were fashioned, and till wars were made:
Affection sought from Power the wished relief
To smite the assassin, and to hang the thief,
And over those who faith's fair league invade
To wield the battle-axe, or lift the blade;
Or from the spoiler's hand to fence the flowers
That sweetly blossom round life's private bowers:
It Is thus, the steady eye of Reason finds
What seems to snap the chain more closely binds;
And thus each peril like each pleasure tried
Unites the rosy bonds on either side.
But less do arms than ARTS assist the plan,
If those defend, it is these embellish man;
These softly draw him nearer to his kind,
And mark distinct his seraph form of mind.
Lo, in firm compact, hand, and head, and heart,
To aid the system take a helping part,
Their various powers by various modes they lend,
And serve in union as one common friend;
Hence, by consent, men clear the unthrifty wood,
New model earth, and navigate the flood;
And hamlets grow into the city's pride,
While the soul opens like the talents wide.
By social pleasure, profit, passion, swayed,
Some soar to learning, and some stoop to trade.
Studious to gain the love of human kind,
The social sage at midnight stores his mind,
Robs weary nature of her just repose,
Nor drinks the dew that bathes the morning rose,
Nor when the sun to Cynthia gives the night,
Eyes the soft blessing of her tender light,
But over the taper leans his pensive head,
And for the Living communes with the Dead.
The dusky artizan, his effort made,
Asserts his rights, and leaves the sickly shade;
At eve he quits the spot where glooms annoy,
And seeks the bosom of domestic joy;
The social faggot, and the light repast,
Await to cheer him when his toils are past.
Hence too, each class of Elegant and Great,
Art decks the dome, and commerce crowds the street;
The heaven-born Muse impetuous wings her way,
When her loved Seward seeks the realms of day;
The painter hence his magic pencil plies,
And Reynolds bids a new creation rise;
Fair Kauffman sketches life's loved forms anew,
And holds the mirror of past times to view,
Restores each grace that marked the Grecian age,
And draws her lovely comment on the page;
And still to cheer the solitary hour,
For this has A very ingenious and rising artist, who has painted for the
author an admirable portrait of the gentleman to whom this poem is inscribed:
Mr. Beach now resides at Bath, where he is gaining that celebrity which is due
to uncommon genius, and which nothing but uncommon modesty could so long have
impeded.
Beach displayed his happiest power;
When far from thee, I hail his generous art,
And bless the hand which thus relieves my heart;
I see my friend upon the canvas glow,
And feel the smile that lightens every woe.
All, SYMPATHY, is thine; the Immortal strung
For thee, that more than golden harp the Tongue,
The spheres' best music taught it to impart,
And bade each soft vibration strike the heart.
Thine too, the varied fruitage of the fields,
The clustering crops which yonder valley yields,
The mossy down which feeds a thousand sheep,
The bowers umbrageous, and the cultured steep;
The still smooth joys that bloom over life's serene,
And all the bustle of the public scene.
These several efforts slow or rapid rise,
As men are good, or bad, or weak, or wise;
Here quick, there slow the impulse; but the whole
Points to this center, Sympathy of Soul.
Nor think the dull, cold reasoner can disprove
These varied powers of sympathetic love;
Nor hope, ye cynics, sedulous to find
From partial spots a flaw in human kind;
As well the panther might you charge with sin,
And call each streak a blemish on his skin;
Allow to self the broadest scope you can,
Still breathes the social principle in man.
Often when pride whispers that he stands alone,
His strength proceeds from other than his own;
Often when he seems to walk the world apart,
Another's interest twines about his heart;
And call his project rash, his effort vain,
Still social pleasure is the END to gain;
Or say, this builds for pomp, that digs for bread,
This shows you pictures, that a pompous bed,
This toils a niggard at his lonely trade,
That rears the bower, but asks not to its shade;
Say, for himself this bids the arches bend,
Or that directs the column to ascend;
This through his grot commands the streams to glide,
As that for Avarice braves the tossing tide;
That this for Vanity his wealth displays,
As that for Pride unravels learning's maze;
Trace but their PURPOSE to one general end,
You see it work the good of wife, or friend,
Parent, or child, their privilege still claim,
And social comfort springs from what we blame:
Frailty itself our sympathy may spare,
A graceful weakness when no vice is there.
Who hopes perfection breaks down nature's fence,
And spurns the modest bounds of sober sense.
When straw-like errors lean In the former Edition printed leap, very
improperly.
to virtue's side,
Ah, check, ye bigots, check your furious pride;
Some venial faults, like clouds at peep of day,
Blush as they pass, and but a moment stay;
Those venial faults from sordid bosoms start,
And spring up only in the generous heart,
As florid weeds elude the labourer's toil,
From too much warmth or richness of the soil;
While meaner souls, like Zembla's hills of snow,
Too barren prove for weeds or flowers to grow.
This then is clear, while human kind exist,
The social principle must still subsist,
In strict dependency of one on all,
As run the binding links from great to small.
Man born for Man some friendly aid requires,
The contract strengthening till the soul retires;
Nor then, even then it breaks, for still we pay
A brother's homage to the breathless clay,
Jealous of destiny the heart would save
Its favored object from the closing grave,
Its favored object chosen from the rest,
In grief, in joy, the monarch of the breast;
To earth we trust what fondness would retain,
And leave the corpse to visit it again;
Or unconsin'd by partial ties of blood,
Brave sternest peril for a stranger's good.
Once, and no second stroke of fancy this,
A truth too tender for the heart to miss,
Once, and not far from these loved feats serene,
Just where you white huts peep the copse between,
A damsel languish'd, all her kin were gone,
For God who lent, resumed them one by one;
Disease and penury in cruel strife,
Had ravished all the decent means of life,
Even the marked crown, her lover's gift she gave
In filial duty for a father's grave,
That so the honored clay which caused her birth
Might slumber peaceful in the sacred earth,
Chim'd to its grass-green home with pious peal,
While hallowed dirges hymn the last farewell;
At length, these searching woes her sense invade,
And lone and long the hapless wanderer strayed
Over the bleak heath, around the unmeasured wood,
Up the huge precipice, or near the flood,
Or mount the rock at midnight's awful hour,
Enjoy the gloom, and idly mock the shower;
Now scorn her fate, now patient bend the knee,
And call on every star to set her free,
Then, starting wilder, think those stars her foes,
Now smite her breast, now laugh amidst her woes;
Or child-like, chase the be, or braid the grass,
Or crop the hedge-flower, or disordered pass;
Else, would she loiter in the midway mead,
Sing to the birds at roost, the lambs at feed;
Or if a nest she found the brakes among,
No hand of here is destroyed the promised young;
And when kind nature brought the balmy sleep,
Too soon she woke to wander and to weep;
Across her breast the tangled tresses flew,
And frenzied glances all around she threw;
The unsettled soul those frenzied glances speak,
And tears of terror hurry down her cheek;
Yet still that eye was bright, that cheek was fair,
Though pale the rose, the lilly blossomed there.
A pilgrim swain, the beauteous Maniac found,
Her woes wild warbling to the rocks around;
A river rolled beside, aghast she ran,
Her vain fears starting at the sight of man;
And, save me God! my father's ghost! she cried,
Then headlong plunged into the sparkling tide.
The pilgrim follows, strikes each eager limb,
But these, alas! his first essays to swim;
Attempt, how vain! full wild the waters rose,
And over their heads in circling surges close,
He grasps the damsel struggling with the wave,
Till both untimely find a watery grave.
And lives the man, oh Nature, tell me where,
Whose rebel bosom knows no triumph here;
Whose coward cheek no tinge of honor feels,
Flushed with no pride at what the Muse reveals?
Lives there, who all unconscious could have stood
To see the victim buffet with the flood?
If such a man, if such a wretch there be,
Thanks to this aching heart, I am not he.
Hail, lovely griefs, in tender mercy given,
And hail, ye tears, like dew-drops fresh from heaven;
Hail, balmy breath of unaffected sighs,
More sweet than airs that ventilate the skies;
Hail, sacred source of sympathies divine,
Thine every social pulse, each fiber thine;
Hail, symbols of the God to whom we owe
The nerves that vibrate, and the hearts that glow;
Love's tender tumult, friendship's holy fires,
And all which beauty, all which worth inspires,
The joy that lights the hope-illumin'd eye,
The bliss supreme that melts in pity's sigh,
Affection's bloom quick rushing to the face,
The choice acknowledged and the warm embrace:
Oh power of powers, whose magic thus can draw
Earth, air, and ocean, by one central law,
Join bird to bird, to insect insect link,
From those which grovel up to those which think;
Oh, ever blessed! whose bounties opening wide
Fill the vast globe, for mortals to divide,
Whose heavenly favors stretch from pole to pole,
Encircle earth, and rivet soul to soul!
Cease then to wonder these loved scenes impart
No more the usual transport to my heart;
Though modest Twilight visit Eve again,
At whose soft summons homeward steps the swain;
Though from the breath of oxen in the vale,
I catch the spirit of the balmy gale,
And from the brakes the answering thrushes sing,
While the gray owl sails by on solemn wing;
Nor wonder, if when morning blooms again,
In discontent I quit the flowery plain.
Thus the poor mariner, his traffic over,
Crowds every sail to reach his native shore,
With smiles he marks the pennons stream to port,
And climbs the top-most mast to eye the fort;
Dim through the mist the distant land appears,
And far he slopes to hail it with his tears;
From foreign regions, foreign faces, come,
Anxious he seeks his much-loved friends at home,
Warm, and more warm, the social passion glows,
As near and nearer to the place he goes;
Quick beats his heart as pressing on he sees
His own fair cottage canopy'd with trees;
For there, in blessed health, he hopes to find
His wife and cradled infant left behind;
Panting, he plucks the latch that guards the door,
But finds his wife, his cradled babe, no more!
Like some sad ghost he wanders over the green,
Droops on the blossomed waste, and loathes the scene.
Yet happily you, by SYMPATHY, may know
That here awhile I paused to paint my woe,
For sure if ever Silph or Silphid bore
One true friend's message to a distant shore;
If ever spirit whispered gentle deed,
In such an absence most its aid we need.
Perhaps, for now let fancy take her flight,
My friend, like me, may wander through the night,
Amidst a different scenery may roam,
And many a gentle sigh address to home;
Even now, where moon-beams tremble on the wave,
And circling seagulls their long pinions lave,
Where anchored vessels in the harbor ride,
To wait the flux of the returning tide,
Where the salt billow beats against the strand,
My friend may take his solitary stand;
Or on the rock projecting to the main
May sit him down to mark the social strain,
Along the frothing beach may bend his way,
And suit, like me, his sorrows to his lay.
FAREWELL, my hour approaches with the dawn,
And up I spring to leave the flowery lawn;
The pain increases as I stay to trace
Another sunshine rising over the place:
Adieu then, balmy shrubs and shades, adieu,
This passing incense over your leaves I strew;
Adieu, thou dear and hill-screen'd cottage fair;
Adieu, thou decent dome of Sunday prayer;
To each, to all, adieu; your lonely guest
Retires. The SOCIAL PASSION speaks the rest.
THE END.

