A COLLECTION OF POETICAL ESSAYS.

CONSISTING OF I. An ELEGY on a Pile of SACRED RUINS; imitating the Manner of
Mr Cunningham's celebrated Elegy. II. ELEGIAC REFLECTIONS, written in the VAULT
of ST NICHOLAS CHURCH, Newcastle upon Tyne. III. FRAGMENT, written among the
RUINS of Tinmouth Castle and Monastery. IV. ODE for the Nativity of the
MESSIAH. V. MIRA's DESPAIR, an ELEGY. VI. ODE to PEACE, etc.


By J. B. of Newcastle upon Tyne.

NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE: Printed by I. THOMPSON, Esquire 1765.

And Sold by the BOOKSELLERS in Town and Country.

PREFACE.
CONTEMPLATIONS on the fluctuating Uncertainty of Temporal Things, and the
various Evils and Vicissitudes of Human Life, as they have in all Ages claimed
the Attention of the good and serious Part of Mankind, so are, in a more
particular Manner, beneficial to the INTERESTS of CHRISTIANITY.

They may be considered, I presume, as so many Addenda, to throw Light and
moral Confirmation upon those VOLUMES of REVEALED WILL, which, though presented
to us in the Medium of a critically imperfect Translation, proceed, in their
divine ORIGINALS, from the immediate Inspiration of unerring and eternal WISDOM.

By Way of Preface to these ELEGIAC ESSAYS, I have chosen to premise a few
Observations of this Kind, which, to me at least, appear the natural Result of
every candid and impartial Enquiry after Truth.

Whosoever takes an unprejudiced Survey of the FACULTIES of the HUMAN MIND,
must necessarily acknowledge their Constitution to be in many Respects
ENIGMATICAL and CONTRADICTORY; and indeed, whether we examine the Public Annals
of Society or have Regard to the Private Information of our own Consciences;
whether the Characters of the Learned or Illiterate, become Objects of our
Consideration; the Truth of this Assertion is made equally clear and
conspicuous: -- Separately we may discern the same longing Desires after
Happiness, and yet voluntary Subjection to Misery; the same boasted imaginary
Strength and Weakness, when tested by Experience; -- the same Love of Truth,
and leaning Credulity toward Error: -- In a Word, the same diametrically
opposite Inclinations of Virtue and Vice, ( though varied in Proportion to an
endless Variety of Circumstances producing them) may be easily traced through
the general Tenor of the Actions of Mankind: and, upon the whole, form so
intricate a Knot of Contraricties, as unassisted Reason shall by no Means be
able to unloose.

If we further add to this seemingly unaccountable Composition of the MIND,
that Multiplicity of Disorders, Pains, and disastrous Accidents to which the
BODY stands particularly exposed, we may with Hippocrates almost venture to
affirm, (...). "The whole Man from his Birth is a Disease." We may exclaim with
the Poet, O LIFE! tremendous Interval of Birth and Death!
Who shall recount thy ILLS? what Hand shall pen
The immeasurable Logarithm of Woes,
Mental Anxieties, corporeal Pains,
That 'twixt these solemn Periods intervene.
And, with all possible Justness and Propriety, may denominate MAN, the RIDDLE
of the CREATION.

I would infer from these Observations the apparent Necessity of DIVINE
REVELATION; how highly it behooves us to listen to the infallible Dictates of
this great CONDUCTRESS, whose peculiar Province it is to point out the hidden
Causes of all the inevitable Miseries and Misfortunes of Human Life; as also
how diffident we ought to be in trusling solely to the Directions of this so
much boasted Rational Faculty, which is but mole-ey'd at best, and whose chief
Constituent seems to be an inherent Pride, which refuses to put on the
CHRISTIAN YOKE; and of consequence secludes us from being Objects of the Favor
of the SUPREME BENIGNITY. -- This blind Reliance on our own Strength loosens
insensibly the Ties of our Dependence upon him who is ALL-SUFFICIENT. -- We
imperceptibly become ashamed of conversing with him by Prayer; -- regard, as
Superfluity, the tributary Incense of Gratitude and Praise; -- and at length,
wilfully shut our Eyes against the midday Beams of the SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.
-- Hence Irreligion, Profaneness, grovelling Sensuality, and all that black
Catalogue of Crimes, which are the evident Marks of the benighted unregenerate
Mind; -- hence the Beau Monde, the Papilios of the Human Race, place their
chief Happiness in contemplating the Finery of their own Dress; the Prude, or
Coquette, is more solicitous of Admiration in a brilliant Assembly upon Earth,
than studious to adorn herself for the inexpressibly magnificent Assembly of
the FIRSTBORN in HEAVEN.

Upon the whole, PRIDE may be justly styled the Primum Mobile of Evil, the Sire
of Sin, the Source of Mischief, and the Bane both of Temporal and Eternal
Felicity.

J. B.

ARGUMENT.
ELEGY may be termed, with metaphorical Propriety, the eldest Daughter of
Meditation, and highly merits the Veneration of the Learned and Benevolent, as
being a Species of the greatly diversified Science of Poetry, every Way adapted
to the serious Taste, or solemn Temper of the human Soul. When her Theme
contemplates the short Duration of all earthly Grandeur in the awful Ruins of
Temples, Towers, and other superb Edifices, become a Prey to Time, we are
naturally led by her to a Reflection on the empty Efforts of ambitious Art, the
Imbecility of mortal Power, and the changing Inconstancy and Vicissitude of
all sublunary Things.

* The public Candor is here more particularly requested, as the following
Essays are the first Offspring of a Juvenile Muse, and, on many Accounts of
Time, Person, and Circumstance, have been liable to Hinderance and unavoidable
Difficulties. If the Attempt merits the least Shadow of Approbation, let the
censorious Criticisins of the Injudicious be its Encomium.

AN ELEGY ON A PILE of SACRED RUINS.
The solemn TEMPLES,
Yea! the great Globe itself, and all which it inherit,
Shall dissolve; and, like the baseless Fabric of a Vision,
Leave not a Wreck behind.
SHAKESP.
I.
IN a lone VILLA, the once-lov'd Retreat,
Where, cloyed with Crowds, Wealth sought the silvan Shade;
Near the fallen Rubbish of some rural Seat,
A ruined TEMPLE towers its tottering Head.
II.
The Moss-grown Walls, high pil'd in Gothic Pride,
Stand, Time-defac'd with many a wide-rent Flaw;
Nor fails the Prospect viewed on every Side,
T'imprint the musing Mind with solemn Awe.
III.
Sadly sequestered, 'mid the dreary Waste,
A Row of blasted Yew Trees gloom around;
Redoubling Terror, and the Peasant's Haste,
That treads perforce the long-untrodden Ground.
IV.
Soon as cool Evening closed the Sun-scorch'd Day,
I left the laughing Throng in thoughtful Mood;
And, where the sacred Scene before me lay,
Thus sighed, in awed Attention as I stood:
V.
"Ah me! that hoary Time's all-changing Power,
Should this proud Dome, with stealing Pace, pervade;
Where erst Devotion, at th'inraptur'd Hour,
Through Faith's fixed Glass her promised Bliss surveyed.
VI.
Ah pitying Change! the swift-wing'd Hours have brought,
To blast the Beauty of devoted Stones;
Which once industrious the first Founder wrought;
A shrin'd Sepulcher to his honored Bones!
VII.
Hence now no more shall pious Prayer ascend,
Nor Sigh repentant from the guilt-gnaw'd Breast;
RELIGION here her solemn Rites shall end,
Nor more the intruding Spade this Mould molest.
VIII.
Hence now no more the sadd'ning Death-Bell's Note,
Shall knell the Alarm from this shattered Spire;
Nor Song harmonious swell the thrilling Throat,
With praiseful Tribute from the adoring Choir.
IX.
Where warbled Melody, harsh Ravens brood,
And dusky Bats that shun the lengthened Light;
And Eloquence, whence the raised Rostrum stood,
Has ceased her Charms, and soared her banished Flight.
X.
Still Silence reigns where once the social Crowd
Responsive chaunted to the lauding Lay;
Save when the solitary Owl screams loud,
Or through the dun I Will wings her fluttered Way.
XI.
This labored Font moved from its marble Base;
(Where once weak Nature lav'd her spotted Stain,
Though lower now, still stands a needed Vase,
Whence chatt'ring Sparrows sip the roof-fall'n Rain.
XII.
This high-arch'd Altar, from the raised Ascent,
Rears, awf'ly ruinous, its hallowed Head;
Whence the swift Spider, on wished Prey intent,
Now sports her, salient, on the self-spun Thread.
XIII.
The Angelic Host, in glittering Gold arrayed,
Fictitious colored on its pannel'd Oak,
Amid the Triumph ranc'rous Time has made,
Escapes not the Tyrant's sacreligious Stroke.
XIV.
This Iron Door, fast wedged with ranking Rust,
Scarce creaks an Entrance to the vaulted Cave:
Where, wrapped in Lead, the more ennobled Dust
Of MAMMON's Vot'ries found a peaceful Grave.
XV.
A shad'wy Pre-eminence yet remains
In this lone Mansion of illustrious Dead;
Though Death, regardless of their wide Demesnes,
Urged the shunned Summons with impartial Dread.
XVI.
This mouldering Pillar, on its sable Base,
Supports a Mon'ment of superior Art;
Time-unadorn'd from every finished Grace,
Industrious Elegance had deigned t'impart.
XVII.
Ah what avails it! though ambitious reared,
TO aggrandize some honored Hero's Fame;
Where martial Weapons pompously appeared,
And sculptured Sorrow wept the Warrior's Name.
XVIII.
Like all the Pageantry of earth-born Pride,
Like Night-still'd Dew-drops at the solar Ray,
'T has shrunk oblivious, and on every Side,
Nods tottered Ruin from its pillar'd Stay.
XIX.
Vain are the Trophies of a Funeral Pile;
The motto'd Monument, or gilded Bust:
Fame's flattering Tale, deep engraved in golden Style,
Time shall erase, and moulder into Dust.
XX.
Devouring Time! thou immaterial Space!
That swall'west moving what thy Motion breeds;
Whatever of visible the Eye can trace,
Or soon, or late, thy destined Prey succeeds.
XXI.
The sleecy Moments from thy fruitful Womb,
Though teemed unnum'rous, short lived Victims fall;
Alike the rock-reard Tower, and trophied Tomb,
Meet Dissolution at thy crumbling Call.
XXII.
Thrice happy he! in calm Contentment's Dale,
Far from Ambition, and Pride's noxious Noise;
That peacef'lly journ'ying through Life's varied Vale,
Never war'd thy Worth on empty air-blown Toys.
XXIII.
Not the wished Wreath of popular Applause,
Nor all the Joys precarious Wealth ever lent,
Afford so pleasing, so serene a Pause,
As one reflected Hour in VIRTUE spent.
XXIV.
The torturing Rack, the Faggot's fiercest Rage;
Nor all the Engines CRUELTY can devise,
Are half so horr'ble as time-wasted Age,
When grim DEATH's Terrors meet the enfeebled Eyes.
XXV.
Thou Stage invisible! we all must tread;
Thy ever-varying Scenes anon shall end;
When, awf'ly rousing the long-slumber'd Dead,
The ALL-RIGHTEOUS JUDGE, GREAT JESU shall descend.
XXVI.
Him comp'nying from the empyreal Throne,
A Choir celestial shall in Pomp surround:
The Thoughts secreted of all Hearts be known;
And Thou, in vast Eternity be drowned.
XXVII.
On that Day, joyous from their atom'd Tomb,
The once-fam'd Founders of this Dome shall rise:
Their dust-blent Bodies from Earth's teeming Womb,
Shall gain, re-animate the blissful Skies.
ELEGIAC REFLECTIONS, Wrote in the VAULT of ST NICHOLAS' CHURCH, NEWCASTLE.
This Vault is said to have been the Place of Interment for the Perey Family, in
past Ages, but without warrantable Authority, as the Shrine of Henry Earl of
Northumberland, who was tumultuously massacred at Cockslodge, near York, in the
4th Year of the Reign of Henry VII. is asserted to have been in the North-East
Corner, where the beautiful and magnificent Tomb of Sir George Selby lately
stood. However, from a Parity of Circumstances, it must undoubtedly have been
the Receptacle of some ancient and illustrious Family.

Mista Senum ac Juvenum densantur Funera, nullum
Saeva Caput Proserpina fugit.
HOR.
I.
HERE, CONTEMPLATION! to thy Vot'ry's Aid,
Propitious, sooth the moralizing Soul;
While Melancholy, from the sacred Shade,
Bids mournf'ly slow, the sullen Moments roll.
II.
As pensive through the scutcheon'd Isles I stray,
That high o'er-arch'd this hallowed Temple bound,
Often lead me on the long-untrodden Way,
Where sleeps fallen Grandeur on the gloom-wrapt Ground.
III.
Pride's Look elated, and her lofty Mien,
That Sight shall sadden from th'exulting Soar;
And Envy softened over the solemn Scene,
Shall drop a Tear from plaintive Pity's Lore.
IV.
Pale Terror trembles through each curdling Vein,
While harshly opes the iron-bolted Door;
While timid Fancy from the teeming Brain,
Glides fear-form'd Phantoms 'long the lettered Floor.
V.
How dread lowr's Darkness over the low-brow'd Cell!
Where listless Silence unmolested reigns;
Save when slow-sounding from the echoed Bell,
Time knells his Hours in mournf'ly pleasing Strains.
VI.
Save Meditation! when thy moral Muse,
From the shrin'd Porches of St Nicholas' Dome,
This Vault's illustrious Records would peruse,
And sigh her Speculations over the Tomb.
VII.
Here sable Solitude has fixed her Seat,
Sequestered from the social Scenes of Day;
And mild Humil'ty from this hoar Retreat,
Pours on the tear-thaw'd Soul her lev'ling Lay.
VIII.
DEATH, vengef'ly trampling on the Neck of Pride,
Here grins terrific over his triumphed Spoil;
And Horror guards, with dread-imposing Stride,
Th'unnotic'd Tenants of this lonely Soil.
IX.
Ah how unnotic'd! since the Pomp of Power
No more shall wait them, on attendant Wing;
Nor more convey them to the scented Bower,
Where wantons Pleasure on the Lap of Spring.
X.
Nor pampered LUXURY, Fiend of Hell!
That wilef'ly poisons as she-pleasures Sense;
Nor Memry's Wail, nor wild-ey'd Sorrow's Yell,
Shall rouse the Lethe-drench'd Slumberers hence.
XI.
The moulder'd Bones this loos'ning Lead unbares,
Wore once, perhaps, the purple Robe of State;
Ever Time had silvered over their honored Hairs,
Or weeping Elegy bemoaned their Fate.
XII.
Or moved some softer Female's fair Machinc,
Vibrated sweetly to the Springs of Thought;
Though low lies now that lofty-bearing Mien,
Vain Value once and prideful Passion taught.
XIII.
Ah me! how fallen thy vermeil-tinted Cheek,
Where Beauty bid her blushing Roses glow;
Where Joy in dimpled Smiles had learnt to speak,
Or salt Tears trickled to the Plaint of Woe.
XIV.
Even back retorted from the crumbling Clay,
To Silence now, and sullen Darkness doomed:
Loathed Vision shrinks, -- nor heeds the blasted Spray,
Where vivid once soul-thrilling Charms have bloomed.
XV.
Say, fashioned Heaven her featured Form in vain,
To sleep the Victim of eternal Death;
Or, settled on her Soul's etherial Train,
The short-lived Tenure of moment'ry Breath?
XVI.
Not so Intuition, from th'unbias'd Mind
Shallows the Sapience of omniscient Love;
Nor ever rapt Revelation thus confined
The illimitable Bounty from above.
XVII.
His; -- who, from Chaos and the Climes of Night,
Where crude Confusion's jarring Atoms howled,
Hailed newborn Beauty to the radiant Light,
That glittered from the bright Sun's beamy Gold.
XVIII.
Whose cloud-wrapt Ways, unsearchably secure,
None may unfold, or cast a Glance so high;
Nor pierce th'unbounded Prospect of his Power,
Save rapturing FAITH's perspicient Eye.
XIX.
What then avails vain Sophistry's Debate,
That proudly soars 'bove boasted Reason's Ken;
That impiously intrudes the Realms of Fate,
To pour Deception on the SONS OF MEN.
FRAGMENT, Supposed to have been written among the RUINS of TINMOUTH CASTLE,
the Remains of which are now to be seen adjacent to the Mouth of the River
Tyne, in Commit. Northumb. was, at the Suppression of Monasteries, in the Reign
of Henry VIII. made a Place of Defense and Fortification against Foreign
Invasions. -- It is situated upon a very high Rock, inaccessible from the East
and North, and is every Way so well adapted to the Purposes of War, as
sufficiently demonstrates the Military Skill of our Ancestors.
TINMOUTH CASTLE and MONASTERY, NORTHUMBERLAND.
**************** Lonely indeed!
It Is awful! it is superbly ruinous!
How changed this Scene! ***********
In Lethean Years long, long elapsed,
The swift-wing'd Bullet of Destruction,
Loud-lab'ring from the brazen Cannon's Womb,
Pierced hence with Lightning Speed, the perv'ous Air,
And roared, re-ecchoed from yon murmuring Main,
Death's thundering Summons, and sulphur'ous Call.
How levelled now the lofty Battlements!
The sky-topt Towers and rock-rear'd Batteries!
Impregnable to Military Art!
That ever and anon Time totters now,
And rushes down with dread Precipitation!
********************
********** Uninterrupted Solitude!
The sacred Tenant of this cheerless Shade,
Sequestered reigns in saddening Silence,
'Amid the hoary Heaps and weed-wrapt Ruins
Of yon old venerable Monast'ry: This famous Monastery of the Benedictine
Order, consisted of a Prior and fifteen Monks; and was suppressed 12th of
January, in the 30th of Henry VIII. being valued at 397 l. 10 s. 5 d. per Annum.

Where Times unnumer'd Offspring ceaseless ply,
Hours, Minutes, Moments, in their envious Round,
Defacing the proud Dome Devotion reared,
With all its lonesome, long-untrodden Isles,
By erring Superstition erst adorned,
With many a Cross and crumbling Relic.
More solemn still the dread-imposing Gloom
This vaulted Cloister yields, pale Terror's Cell!
That traverses now the bramble-wild'ring Waste,
Even unappall'd, though Cynthia's silvering Beam
Bright burnishes the Hemisphere of Heaven.
Ye blasted Efforts of aspiring Art!
Piles! Pillars! shattered with a Weight of Years,
Afford, beneath your mouldering Arches' Shade,
Unenvied, unmolested Privacy,
To the most wretched of the Sons of Woe,
Or suffering Victims of supernal Fate,
High over whose dreading and distempered Head
The Angel of Affliction torrents down
His fiercest Vial of unpit'ying Wrath.
************** call forth
The saline Tear from sullen Sorrow's Eye,
And mournf'ly smooth the haggard, frightful Frown
Of raven-vested Melancholy.
Ah me! that deep o'erwhelms, oppresses dire,
Shocks, sinks, and saddens down my moping Mind,
'Spite of FAITH's Balm, and every cheerful Ray
Of hope-inspiring CHRISTIANITY;
RELIGION's Messenger! last-born and best,
To rouse the sin-stain'd Race of Adam fallen.
*****************
************ Charnel Ground! A Parish Church formerly stood here, consecrated
in the Year 1668, by Bishop Cosyns; and its Burial Ground is at this Day opened
for the Interment of such of the deceased Inhabitants of Shields, Tinmouth,
etc. as have chosen to sleep in so quiet a Sepulcher, and moulder away among
such awful Ruins.

This Place of Skulls, and low-laid Mortals' Graves,
Where sable Memory pours her mourning Wail,
And slowly walks her moralizing Round
Among lettered Stones and marbled Monuments!
Hark! from the leafy Thicket of yon Grove,
What serenading Chorister awakes
The slumbering Stillness that surrounds me,
And far 'yond TINMOUTH's Villa distant sounds
To the dull, drowsy Ear of silent Night?
It Is PHILOMEL!
That sweetly thrills her melodizing Notes,
(Love-lengthen'd) to the listening Moon;
While, save herself, each feathered Songster sleeps:
-- Peace! warbling Innocence!
Thy shrill-tun'd Symphony is lost on me,
Nor aught accords my solitary Taste,
Save the nocturnal Owl's ill-omen'd Scream,
The day-skreen'd Bat, or croaking Raven's Cry,
Frequenting the obscene and ragg'd Retreats,
Where Ruin low'rs, and ven'ming Vermin dwell,
The baneful Asp, and poison-bloated Toad,
Inseparable 'ssociats of DESPAIR,
That even now maddens in my phrenzied Brain,
And points the desperate, disobedient Sting
Of Hell-suggested SUICIDE.
-- Triumphing over me,
Save that the heaven-born Beam of radiant Hope,
Like this tall Turret's A Light-house, maintained by the Company of Masters
and Mariners, in Newcastle upon Tyne, for the Preservation of Ships in the
Night Season.
air-illuming Flame,
That blinks to the benighted Mariner
A glimmering Passage over yon pathless Wave,
Cheers, soothes, supports --
Caetera desunt.
ODE, FOR THE NATIVITY of the MESSIAH.
Jam nova Progenies Coelo demittitur alto. VIRG.
I.
SEE, Light streaks the lengthening Lawn!
See, the auspicious Morning dawn,
That hailed MESSIAH to our Earth.
When Bethlehem's unnotic'd Plains
Resounded to the Angel Strains
That solemnized his BIRTH.
What Time the orient Sun arose,
To chase the Shadows of infernal Night;
To beam Destruction on our Foes,
And cheer the Nations with celestial Light.
Blow then the Trump of Joy, ye favored Throng!
Since JESU 's BIRTH demands our choral Song.
II.
Long-wish'd he comes to solve Sin's Chain,
T'erase the Bond of penal Pain,
That hapless Adam's Fall had wrote;
To sheath the Sword by Justice waved,
Through Sorrow's Pool his Paths he lav'd,
And PARDON with his BLOOD has bought.
He shuns all Pomp, all Pride disdains,
No Cradle Down his Infant Bosom pressed!
Rough Oxen heard his plaintive Strains;
An hay-stuff'd Manger was his softest Rest.
Blow then the Trump of Joy, ye favored Throng!
Since JESU 's BIRTH demands our choral Song.
III.
And lo! his CHRISTIAN BANNER reared,
By Millions loved, by Myriads feared,
Still waves us to the Rock of Rest;
Come, Criminal, that is smit by Sin,
(He only bids the Unworthy in)
Soft Pity's Tears bedew his Breast.
He shall wash thine Aethiop Stain,
In swan-plum'd Innocence thou shall appear,
When Time gives up his measured Reign,
And vast ETERNITY begins her Year.
Blow then the Trump of Joy, ye choral Throng!
Since JESU's BIRTH demands our annual Song.
MIRA's DESPAIR, An ELEGY.
Each Moment has its Sickle, emulous
Of Time 's enormous Scythe; each Moment plays
Its little Weapon in the narrower Sphere
Of sweet Domestic Comfort, and cuts down
The fairest Bloom of sublunary Bliss.
YOUNG.
I.
'TWAS the still Hour of Vesper's shining,
When MIRA sought a Rock's Retreat;
Where oozy Sea-Weeds hang entwining,
And wept salt Tricklings at her Feet.
II.
The watery Waste, Heav'us Concave bounding,
'Gan now with lashing Foam to flow;
And dusky Twilight all-surrounding,
Mourned sympathetic to her Woe.
III.
A while in sullen Silence musing,
She lay reflecting Scenes behind:
'Till torturing Thought Grief's Rage arousing,
Sighed thus her Sorrows to the Wind:
IV.
"Ye clifted Rocks! with Summits soaring,
That high o'erhang this sandy Plain;
Whence softer Streams, in Cat'racts roaring,
Conjoin the salt, caerulean Main.
V.
Within your wave-worn, lone Recesses,
Entomb a Grief-distracted Maid;
Where Terror stalks with startling Tresses,
And Darkness frowns a pitchy Shade.
VI.
And thou, O Deep! that hear'st my Pining,
(The unvailing Fume of phrenzied Breath)
'Twas conscious Thou and Fate combining,
That veiled my Damon's Eyes in Death.
VII.
Him howling Storms, of Life divested,
Have made some hungry Fishes Prey;
And from my Eyes for ever wrested,
On this Side Time's short-during Day.
VIII.
With Light'ning's Speed even now I Will follow
His Shade beyond the Reach of Pain;
Even now the heaving Surge I Will hollow,
And press the Bottom of the Main.
IX.
So icy Death, Heaven's awful Envoy,
Long-wish'd, shall change my sickening State;
And lend a fear-form'd fleeting Convoy,
And waft me to the Realms of Fate.
X.
She ceased -- for Night's dark Mantle spreading,
Had sably veiled the vaulted Sky;
Nor social Sound her Sorrows heeding,
Save mocking Echo made Reply.
XI.
DESPAIR her beauteous Bosom rending,
Had now suffus'd Hope's glimmering Ray;
When from the rude Rock's Summit bending,
She desperate plunged her headlong Way. LOVE, or that soft Interchange of
Affection between the Sexes, so called, when it acts in due Subordination to
the superior Love, Duty, Veneration, and Gratitude, owed Him, who, for wise
Purposes, has implanted it in our Breasts, is productive of the most happy and
beneficent Effects: But, on the other Hand, when the Possession, or Enjoyment
of the Object beloved is made the summum bonum of our Happiness, may be termed
the Origin of much Evil, and an Enthusiasm which too often leads its unhappy
Followers, (like Mira in the Elegy) to plunge themselves from the rocky
Precipices of Despair into an Ocean of Ruin and irretrieveable Misery.

ODE TO PEACE
I.
HAIL- Born of Heaven! thou Source of social Store,
Britannia hails thee to her Sea-girt Shore,
With laureled Wreaths and Conquest crowned;
Her Rights regained by Vict'ry's valiant Band,
She bows obedient to thine Olive Wand,
And courts firm Concord all around.
II.
Fan'd by Ambition Gallia's towering Pride,
Sought over her envicd Empire to preside,
And with despotic Rigor reign;
On Indian Plains the wide-waved Banner reared
Of hostile Discord, and in Arms appeared
To discompose thy mild Domain.
III.
But awful Justice, Heaven's Vicegerent, weighed.
The faithless Insult, and her Sword displayed,
As the impartial Balance hung:
Forced collcagu'd Monarchs, drenched in Sorrow's Brine,
To cringe as Suppliants at thy sacred Shrine,
And Slaughter's Blood-stained Bow unstrung.
IV.
Then hence dire War! to savage Shores retreat,
Where Tyranny supports the Tartar's Seat,
Or Slavery clanks her Ott'man Chain:
Henceforth no more thy firm-embattled Bands,
Shall stain with Crimson Gore Europa's Lands.
But lasting Peace irruptur'd reign.
TO HUMILITY.
HAIL Humility, Virgin pure!
From thy rosy rural Bower,
Deign thy Influence to impart:
From Wisdom's Lore thy Lesson lend,
That can Delight with Knowledge blend,
And bow the Iron-sinew'd Heart.
So shall for thee the plaited Primrose twine,
And scented Sweet-Briar deck thy sacred Shrine.
EPIGRAPH, ON THE GRAVE, A BEAUTIFUL POEM, so called.
WHEN EPITAPHS, Etch'd upon Brass,
Shall quit their worn Charge, and deeline;
And Time the tall Tablets erase,
Where Fame's gilded Flatt'ries shine:
The Lines of this Truth-letter's GRAVE,
(Where Frailty distills the sad Tear,)
Just Judgment and Merit shall save,
And MEMORY transmitted, revere.
FINIS.

