OF THE CRIME OF Onan (together with that of his Brot^er (...), Punished with
Sudden Death Genesis 38.10.) OR, THE HEINOUS Vice of Self-Defilement, with all its
Dismal Consequences, stated and examined in all those who may ever
misfortunately have injured themselves by this abominable Practice. Containing
all that can be said of this Unnatural Vice. Whereas nothing has been ever yet
writ before, on this difficult Su^ject of Impurity in both Sexes so full and
plain, as this Treatise is: I order tha^ all Sorts of Persons may Re^d it, (it
being highly necessary they should) to keep them from that Abyss of Misery and
Ruin, this one Vie^ of Impurity above all others, Involves its Slaves in.

SOmetimes the ^in does us overtake,
And on OUR WEAKNESS ^i^^;
Sometimes OUR SELVES, ^ur Ruin make,
And We overtake the ^in.
O save us Lord from all such Darts,
That seek our Souls to stay;
Sav^ US from US, and OUR FALSE HEARTS,
Lest WE OUR SELVES betray.
Aust. De^ VOL. ^

^^NDON: Prin^^d by: ^. Parker (...) to be had Only Up one Pair of Stairs, at
the (...) of ^^^mberlen's Anodyne Necklace, without Tem^^^ (...)

The Preface.
THE understanding of the present Subject, dependin^ upon a Knowledge of the
History of that Part o^ the Li^e of ^^AN ( Judah's second Son) which is related
in the ^^gh^ and thirtieth Chapter of the Book of Genesis it is necessary to
give the Reader the following Account of it

About the Year of the World 2009. just after Joseph was sold by Judah and the
rest of his Brethren into Egypt, Judah married a Wi^e who bo^e him two Sons*
the eldest he named ER, and the second ONAN

Er he married to a Wise whose Name was Thamar.

But Er wickedly defiling his Nuptial Bed, by frustrating the End of Marriage,
was snatched away by a sudden Death. The Reason why Er FIRST did this wicked
Action, and what it was he did, is hereafter shown.

Now amongst he Jews it was a Law, that if a Brother died without Children, the
next Brother was bound to many the Widow* to raise up Children to his
Brother's Name, and therefore Judah obliged his second Son ONAN to take his
deceased Brother's Widow Tha^^^^ to Wife.

But Onan knowing that the Children (if he should have any) were not to be
deemed HIS, but his Brother's frustrated also the End of Marriage, by Defiling
himself*

Semen Fund^bat in terram, Et idcirco percussit (...) Domin^^, quod (...)
Detestabilem faceret, Genesis Chap. 38 Ver 10.

And therefore the Lord slew him, because he had done Detestable Thing. Sales
the Vulgate Edition.

The Scripture here in this Chapter, calls it a Detestable Action, and in the
for^going Chapter, ver. 2. when Joseph was sent by his Father Jacob into the
Fields along with his Brethren to graze their Cattle, and they there committed
this Same Crime (acco^^ing to all Commentators) of Def^^eing themselves, he
told his Father of it, Accusavi^^ que Fratres suos apud Patrem CR^^INE PESSIMO,
says the Vulgate Edition, that is, of (...) Ugly, Abominable Action:

The Doers of which St. Paul expre^^^ly (...) by the ugly Name of Molles, and
ABUSERS of ^^EMSEL^^^ ^ Cor 6.10. And which Action is the Subject here treated^*

When any Thing is called by even the bare Na^^ (...) Crime, it shows an Action
to be very bad, but when (...) aggra^ating Epithet PESSIMUM is put to it, it is
a (...) that such an Action is more than a common Crim^ (...) of a most
Abominable Nature, as this unhappy Vice (...) the Ruin of the greatest Part of
Mankind.

And as this Vice of Person ^^^^ling and Abusing ^^^mselves, is not only the
most COMMON of all the ^^^mes of Impurity put together, where being more and
^onger Incitements to it, than (...) any other Vice (the ^el for it, and
craving Importu^^^^ is of Nature toward being always WITHIN our sel^^ ^^ but
also (...) attended ^^^h the most dismal of Consequences, involving these (...)
indulge themselves in it, in the utmost Misfortunes: nothing can be of greater
Service, than to show the Guil^^ how to g^t Rid of so vile a Habit, and to keep
off the ^^nocent from falling into it, Man's own self being here ^^s only Enemy,
that draws him into Ruin.

There are indeed Some that will run any Ri^que of ^ealth and S^fety, for the
sake of a Lewd Pleasure.

But again, there are a great many others in the World ^nthinkingly guilty of
this Curse, who would never da^^d to have ventured upon it, if they had but
been i^^^rmed of what B^dily Sufferings, Ailments. Distemper^, ^nfirmities, and
Ruin i^ brings upon them, and their ^osterity in this World, and their Soul in
the next.

Which makes it still the more necessary to inform Persons of the deplorable
Consequences that are entailed upon this Vice, to keep them the more
effectually from it.

Again: What makes also this Tre^^ise more necessary for the World, is because,
there is no Person Guilty of this Vice, but had much rather instruct themselves
by reading a Book upon it privately in their Chamber by themselves that no Body
may know of ^t, than they can well bear to hear another speak to them about it,
it being a Subject of so very a shocking Nature, that no one cares either to
speak about (...) ^r to be spoken to of it.

Dr. Baynard calls this Vice A School-Wick^dness, from many a young Person's
having learned it ther^, who had they not been misfortunately taught it by some
wicked Miscreant of a School-Fellow, would have been Chaste Men.

Farther Particulars of that unhappy M^^ Onan, in the C^mmission of this
detestable Action as ^^e H. Scripture purposely calls it, for Ever to deter
Mank^^d the more ^ffectually from it, are fully related, in this Treatise.

And which unhappy Man together with his Brother Er, are transmitted to us by
the Holy ^host, as lasting ^^end^ul Examples to continue upon (...) Record of
the Holy ^criptures to the End of the W^^^^, to deter Man^^^d from an Action so
very Unnas^^al in it. s^^, th^^ no Brute, ^s ever known to do it, ^ut only (to
his sh^me be it spoken) sensual and lus^^^ Man, as will (...) be fully shown.

^^^E^^ISEMENT: GIVEN GRATIS.
THE Practical Scheme on the following S^bjects.

I. How any Infected Person may privately Cu^^ themselves of any Secret Injury,
without Slip-stops (...) Physic, Suspicion, or discovering their Case to any
one. II. Of a BROKEN CONSTITUTION by Self-Defil^ments Fast Living, Former
Cures, use of Mercury, etc. III. Of GLEETS and Weaknesses in either Sex,
proceeding from the P^actice of Self-Defilement, or other Causes IV. Of the
GOUT, and Rheumatism. V. Of Childrens Cutting their TEETH. VI. Of TOBACCO, the
ITCH, Agues, and the EYES
Dedicated to Dr. CHAMBERLEN.
So that the very great Uneasyness of Mind, as well as Affliction of Body,
which Numbers of Persons lie under from the Vicious Practice of
Self-Defilement, or from the Secret Disease, or its pernicious Consequences,
such as the Breeding of their Constitution, Gleets in Men, and Drain^^^,
^eakne^^, Barrennesses, and other Misfortunes in Women; and ^^ow not How, or
Who to tell their Condition to.

Also: The ^ffliction many others lie under with the GOUT, and ha^^ been so
tired with Medicines, that they are resolved to t^^e no more, but to let Nature
and the Distemper take it Course, has occasioned the drawing up this ^ch^me,
conta^^ing certain Instructions, by which ^ Per^^^ under any of these
abovementioned unhappy ^ircum^^^^^es, may easily Cure themselves without the
Fatigue (...)-s^ops of Medicines, or consulting any one about their C^^dition,
or any further Trouble.

This (...), Given Gratis Up one Pair of Stairs at the Sign of (...)
Ch^^berlen's Anodyne Necklace for Chil^rens Tee^^ (...) by the Rose Tavern,
without Temple Bar.

At Mrs. (...), a^ the Sign of this Practical Scheme at the Roy^l E^^hang^
Gate, next to Corrhill.

At M^^ Go^^'^ book^^ller, next Shop t^ Northumberland-Hous^ (...) Cha^i^^
Cross in the Strand.

And of (...) B^adsha^ (who is the Author's Servant) (...) ^ouse at the W^^^^
Per^iw^g next to the King's Head, against ^^^ton-Stree^ End ^^ist by Soho Sq^^^^

The Contents of this Treatise
THE Reasons for publishing this Treatise in English.

What the real and true Thing was, that ONAN did?

What likewise it was, which his Brother ER did?

What the Crime of Self-Defilement, properly speaking, is?

How, and in What it differs from other Vices o^ Impurity?

And of the particular Deformity of it, above other Crime.

How this Vice crushes Nature, and nips Manhood in its

Bud? -- And of the craving Importunities of Nature to it.

What the many great Damages are, which the Vice of Self-Defilement brings upon
a Person's self, and Family?

Those particular Parts in both Sexes, examined into and described, which
suffer, and are immediately injured, by the Forcing Practice of this Unnatural
Vice.

Of those Person's Single or Married, who Defile others.

Of those (...), who permit, Or by Rewards, or Inticements, Cause themselves to
be Defiled by others.

Of the Use, Abuse of, and Frustrating the Marriage Bed.

Of this Vice in the State of WIDDOW-HOOD.

Of those (...), who permit themselves to be deluded, and Picked up by others
at Nights in the Streets, and are either defiled by them, or defile themselves
with them.

Why the Scripture calls the Doers of such ill Actions, by the infamous Name of
MOLLES (an ugly Word enough) and that Regnum Dei non possidebunt 1 Cor. 6.10.
Edit. Vulg.

The Signification and Meaning of the Word MOLLIS, (from the foregoing Ugly
Greek Word (...). from (...) Coinquino, to Pollute or Defile) fully explicated.

And how it happens that this UGLY Word Mollis made English, is applied to
Persons guilty of this Vice?

Of Nocturnal Emissions, Nightly Defilements, Illusions, Phantoms, and impure
Dreams; With Rules to know which are Criminal, and which not: And how to render
them Bofore-hand, always Innocent? Out of Bp. Tailor.

PRocul recedant Somnia
Et Noctium Phantasmata,
Hostemque nostrum comprime
Ne POLLUANTUR CORPORA.
S. Ambr. May nothing in our Minds excite
Vain Dreams and Phantoms of the Night.
Our Enemy subdue, that so
Our BODIES no UNCLEANNESS know.
And if any Nightly Uncleanness has happened, How t^ retrieve it Afterward,
and render it Innocent, although PAST

Fraud quicquid Doemonis
In NOCTIBUS DELIQUIMUS,
Et Culpa quam NOX intulit,
Lucis labascat munere.
S. Ambr. What Suppers are best against Nightly Defilements?

CARNIS terat SUBERBIAM
Potus, Cibique Parcitas.
S. Ambr What Persons are to do in Bed, to preserve themselves, from Nocturnal
Defilements, and Emissions in their Sleep?

Whether a Person ought (if they happen to Awake,) to resist, permit, or assist
Fluxum Seminis begun in Somnis? -- E^

An liccat gaudere de praeterito fluxu Seminali in their Sleep De Consensu
perfecto, and imperfecto, in tali fluxu.

The different Ways of Persons defiling themselves reckoned up, out of Sanchez;
and How many there are?

After which, is clearly shown, that, of all of them Manual Self-Defilement is
quite the worst, and Author o^ more ill Consequences, than all the other Ways
put together.

How Persons enslaved in this Vicious Habit, are to ge^rid of it, and retrieve
the manifold Misfortunes both Spiritual and Temporal, it may have brought upon
them?

The Particulars of a young Nobleman, who being highly solicited by the
greatest of Temptations to be Defiled, yet with the most Heroic Constancy
preserved his Purity

And notwithstanding the very inviting Posture he was in for so vile an Action,
attended with the most bewitching Circumstances for it, yet he never would
consent to it.

Of another (the Reverse) who began very young to Defil^ himself, and was
EMASCULATED by it.

The State of an Onanian on a Dying-Bed, and Afterward

What the usual Misfortune is, that attends the Vice o^

Self-Defilement in Men? viz. A Gleet, etc -- And

How to Remedy it, tho inveterate, and of long Date?

The true Difference stated between a Gleet (whether caused by the vicious
Practice of Self-Defilement, or proceeding from any Venereal Disorder, or its
Cure) a Gonor^h^^a, and that Efflux of Matter, that comes away from Persons who
have the Secret Disease upon them. -- viz.

What a True Gleet is? -- What a True Gonorrhaea is? And

Whither Persons under Venereal Disorders, have a Tru^ and Real Gonorrhaea upon
them, or not?

How to know certainly, When a Gleet (whether caused by Self-Defilements, or
proceeding from Venereal Causes, and their Cures) is really free from any
Venereal Taint, and Infection, which may perhaps have been at any Time formerly
contracted? -- Or (which is the same Thing)

How to know certainly when a Person is really Well, and well cured, and the
Malignity and Infection of a former ill Distemper thoroughly carried off by a
former Cure, although a Person may have a Gleet still hanging upon them?

Of the Difficulties that occur in the Cure of the Ailments and Disorders of
the Body, caused by the vicious Practice of Self Defilement, above any other
Bodily Ailments.

How this one Vice generally initiates Youth in Wickedness, who otherwise would
have been virtuous Persons?

What Opportunities are the most bewitching for this Crime?

ABsint Faces Libidinis,
Et omnis ACTUS NOXIUS
Ne Faeda sit, vel Lubrica,
Compago NOSTRI CORPORIS.
S. Greg. Let all Impurity be gone,
And us all FILTHY ACTIONS shun,
That so our BODIES may be PURE,
And to no Pleasure US allure.
Of committing this Crime in Presence of another.

The Particulars of a certain Person of Quality grievously addicted to the Vice
of Defileing himself. -- And

How his Lust carried him to so great a Degree of Brutality, as to commit the
Act frequently before One particular Servant which he kept as a Confident? Yet
nevertheless being apprehensive of his Servant's Incapacity of keeping the
Secret, he cut his Servant's Tongue out, that he might be sure that he should
not divulge it; and afterward kept him to live with him, with his Tongue thus
Cut out.

How the SECRECY and Impunity that attends the Commission of this Crime of
Self-Defilement above all others, are the real Cause of it in many Sober Young
Men* who have been otherwise of so modest a Behavior, as not to have dared
with any ILL DESIGN to almost have looked a Woman in the Face, and of such
Bashfulness, as has secured them from all other Acts of Impurity, yet have been
in Private, most extravagantly guilty of THIS:

So that whatever good Qualities they otherwise may have had, this ONE infamous
ungovernable Appetite has unhappily obscured, and clouded them all.

Of Relapsing into this Vice.

Of Impurity in WOMEN. -- Where is largely treated

Of those Young Women whose exterior Modesty has been such, as that they would
almost Die, rather than Consent to any Thing out of Marriage, or Betray their
Weakness to any Man living; yet have lived in the Commission of Actions so Ill,
that they cannot afterward think of them with Easiness of Mind: But by reason
of their SECRECY, have been unhappily betrayed into them, when nothing else in
the World, could ever have tempted them to do an Ill thing.

What the usual Misfortune of Impurity is in Women? viz. a Draining Weakness,
etc. And How to remedy it?

Of other worse Consequences and more deplorable Effects of Impurity in Women,
much more than in Men.

The Particulars of a young Lady, who, at the Age of 17, being taught ill
Actions by a wicked Companion at a Boarding School, entirely ruined her
Constitution thereby. Also,

Of another young Lady in the like Circumstances, who so far ruined her self by
Impurity, that she died.

Of those young Women, who by Early Impurities give Occasion to their Husbands
(when they come to be Married) wrongfully to suspect more, than they were ever
guilty of.

Of those Persons who by sleevless Questions, Excuses, Looks, or any light
Carriage, whether in the Streets, or elsewhere, give Occasion to others to
Invite them to ill.

Of those who frequent lewd Houses, and whether the Ways Men there use to keep
clear of an ill Distemper, are lawful?

Of those Persons who by this Vice, and other Fast Living, have so Emaciated
and worn themselves out, as to be perfectly Old, before half their Years come
on.

Answers to Excuses for this Crime, and Pleas of Frailty, Incapacity of
Continency, Violence of Temptation, etc.

Of PLEASURE's being the Motive for this Crime.

PLEASURE like Ice our Footing does betray,
And blindly leads Us on the slippery Way:
Deluded thus, We unthinkingly Run on,
And know the Dangers, yet We will not them shun.
S. Evrem. According to that -- Video Meliora, proboque; Deteriora sequor.

How this one Vice above all others, affects the Brain, Head, Nerves, and
EYESIGHT of the Body?

Of the Vice of Self-Defilement in Persons in Years.

Which is worse, This Vice in Youth, or Persons in Years?

Of the aggravating Circumstances of this Crime, from the diverse Ways;
Degrees, and Motives for committing it.

How Persons may secure themselves against this Vice?

Of such a particular Shame that attends this Action, that no one would commit
it, even before a Child.

Of the Heinous Practice of this Vice in a Married State.

Answers to all common Cases of this Vice in Married Persons, notwithstanding
as St. Hierom says, adv. Jovin. l. 1.

Periclitamur RESPONSIONIS Verecundia, and quasi inter Duos Scopulos
Necessitatis and Pudicitiae naufragium sustinemus.

Si ad proposita Respondeamus, Pudore suffundimur, Si Pudor imperarit
silentium, quasi de loco videmur cedere.

Melius est tamen clausis, quod dicitur, oculis, Andabatarum more pugnare, quam
directa spicula, clypeo Veritatis non Repellere.

And therefore, Cases relating to this Vice in all Sorts of Persons, whether by
a Person's Defileing himself, or causing himself to be Defiled by Another, are
treated quite in another manner here in English, than Sanchez has treated them
in his elaborate Folio's De Matrimonio in Latin.

Of the bewitching, and intoxicating Slavery of this Vice.

Of this Crime in (Single) WOMEN -- HATERS.

Of those wicked Clubs and Societies of Women-Haters, and others, etc. who meet
together to defile themselves.

And of whom St. Paul thus speaks to the Romans, chapter 1. verse. 26, 27. Nam
Faeminae eorum immutaverunt naturalem usum, in eum usum qui est contra naturam.
Similiter autem and Masculi, relicto naturali usu Faeminae, exarcerunt in
desideriis suis in invicem, Masculi in Masculos turpitudinem operantes, etc.

These are also those wicked Persons, which St. Paul in another Place calls
Effeminate and ABUSERS OF THEMSELVES with Mankind. MOLLES, and Masculorum
concubitores. etc. 1 Cor. c. 6. v. 9. And declares them abandoned, and given
over to Lewdness, and a reprobate Sense.

Traditi sunt in Reprobum sensum, in Immunditiam, and Passiones ignominiae, ut
contumeliis afficiant CORPORA SUA in semetipsis. To ABUSE and Defile their
BODIES, etc.

Of the various Steps and Degrees tending to this Vice.

Of the great Danger of Curiosity in regard to this Vice.

And how Words, Looks, and Touches, lead to it? Out of Mons. Ostervald's
Treatise of Uncleanness.

IMmodest Words admit of no Defense,
For want of Decency, is want of Sense.
Roscom. With Rules for Persons to govern themselves by,

NE Lingua....... ne Manus,
Oculive peccent Lubrici,
Ne Noxa CORPUS INQUINET.
Prudentius. Of the great Ease there is in engaging in Impurity, and the
Difficulty of getting out of it, Facilis est Descensus Averni, Sed revocare
pedem, Hic Labor, Hoc opus est, Virg.

And therefore whether in any Case or whatsoever, a Physician may lawfully
prescribe a Bodily Defilement? -- And

If a Physician should ever advise such a Thing,

Whether or no the Patient may ever lawfully consen^ to it? Out of Sanchez de
Matrimonio. Tom. 2. lib. 9. Disp. 1^

The Particulars of a certain Person of Quality, Qui gravi pressus infirmitate,
Mori potius, quam Castitatis jacturam (...) Medicorum Consilio subire,
constanter decrevit. Rara Avis in terris

The Particulars of another Person of Quality, in just the same Circumstances
of a very great Fit of Sickness and, when the Physicians intimated the same
Remedy, hi^ constant Answer was, MALO MORI, QUAM FOEDARI Semen corruptum, or
Distempered, An licet (ever) expellere

How. Persons are to behave themselves, and What they are to do, when under
violent Temptation to This Crime?

What Persons are to do, who seriously desire to leave This Vice? Where is
showed of the Means to get out of it viz. -- Of the Amendment, Resolution,
Sorrow, Repentance, and other Requisites, after the Commission of this Crime

How nothing more conduces to a healthy Old Age, than the abstaining from
Self-Defilements during Youth.

Of the Complaints that Uxores may reasonably make whose Husbands are guilty of
this Vice. -- And

Whether they may therefore refuse to Cohabit with them

Whether by Reason of any Impediment to the Debitum^ Conjugale, this Crime can
ever be any ways excusable?

How out of every Hundred miserable Wretches, Four score and Nineteen would
have been in happy and flourishing Circumstances, if they had not been
initiated, and decoyed into this Vice, by some vile Companion, or otherwise

Of those profligate Persons who postpone Health, Reputation, and every thing
else dear to them, to This Pleasure

Of other Sensualists, whose Thoughts and Minds run upon nothing else, but
Impurity, Lewdness, and Women.

Of the particular bewitching Power that this Vice above all others, has on the
Bodies of Young Persons.

And of the deplorable State, it involves them in.

Of those Persons who by Self-Defilements, or otherways have brought such a
Weakness upon themselves, as tha^ without any manner of Pleasure, or Motions of
the Flesh to Impurity, they experience a Fluxum Seminis involuntarily to come
from them in the Daytime, for Example, when they go to Stool, etc. And how to
Remedy this Misfortune

An vacet culpa dare operam causae alias licitae, vel necessariae^ quamvis
praevideatur sore, ut quis ex ea Polluatur? And therefore

Of Surgeons, etc. Qui exponunt se Periculo, in exerciseing the Duties of their
Business about Women.

Of this Crime in MINISTERS, Clergymen, etc.

Of the Commission of this Crime in a hot Constitution.

Of the it in a cold Constitution. -- Which is worst? -- And

Whether or no, the particular Heat and Solicitations of any particular
Person's Constitution, can ever at any Time plead for, and excuse this Vice in
any one?

Whether this Vice can be any Impediment, Dirimens or Im^ediens to Marriage? --
And, What Crime a Husband is guilty of, who renders himself Impotent by this
Vice?

Answers to Excuses of the Month whilst the Wife Lies in.

Or of Sanitas. -- Or being in Drink. -- Or of one of the married Party's
having any Distemper upon them. -- Or

Of having too many Children. -- Or of Poverty, and Incapacity of maintaining
them. -- Or Ignorance of its being a Fault: And Whether any of these Cases can
possibly at any Time make this Crime any ways excusable? Ex Jure Pontificio, or
the Canon Law, and Sanchez De Matrim.

Of the Case of Eunuchs, in respect to this Vice.

Of the great Ill in teaching others such ill Actions.

Whether any Thing of Homicide can be attributed to this Crime? According to
the following of Martial inveighing against it.

HOC nihil esse putas? Scelus est, mihi creed, sed Ingene,
Quantum vix animo concipis esse tuo:
Istud quod...... Pontice Perdis, HOMO est.
Mart. l. 9. Epigr. 42. How POVERTY in the End is the particular Effect of this
Vice, it bringing Plenty To a Morsel of Bread.

Of this Vice in Seafaring Men, Travelers, Persons in the Army, and others
absent from their Wives.

Whether any Married Person ever has Power to give Leave to the other Party for
the Commission of this Act?

Of the different ways of defiling the Marriage Bed.

Of those Persons who Frustrate the End of Marriage.

De DEBITO CONJUGALI with respect to this Crime.

How Turpia Audire, Aspicere, Ganere, Pingere, Scribere, Legere, Loqui, etc.
all concur to this Vice? Out of Sanchez.

De Distillatione Seminali, and How it differs from Moilities?

Whether it be lawful to think on a past Criminal Pleasure?

Of Person's defiling themselves in the Marriage Bed, in respect to the Duty
that regards the Debitum Conjugale.

Whether Time, Place, Age, Climate, etc. can change or add to the Guilt of this
Crime, or any ways excuse it?

What Paren^ts, Masters, and Mistresses of Boarding and other Schools, Tutors,
Guardians, and other who have the Care of Youth, are to do, for the
Preservation from ^his Vice, of those committed to their Charge?

Of those who have fallen accidentally into this Crime.

Of those who are Habituated, and plunged in this Vice.

De Delectatione Morosa in the Commission of this Crime.

Of the Numbers of Material Adulteries Persons are guilty of, and little dream
of it, by Picking up others at Nights in the Streets, with whom, as with Single
Persons they are Defiled, when in reality, they are Married ones.

Of Impotency and Barrenness caused by this Vice.

Of those Persons so abandoned to this (...) that (...)..... Till Impotent, are
never Chaste. (...) Sir C. Sedley.

Of the great Comfort and Relief, that accrues from the sincere Discovery of a
Person's Weaknes^ and Frailty in regard to this Vice to some Divine, or pious
good Friend.

Damnaberis Tacitus (says S. Aust) qui posses Liberari Confessus.

What Occasions of this Vice are to be chiefly ^voided?

The tempting Devil to it, being, as S. Austin says, like a Dog chained up,
Who, Latrare potest, sed Mordere non potest nisi VOLENTEM i. e. those who
Willingly put themselves within the Reach of his Chain, that is, in the
Occasions of it.

Of those whom the World so esteems, as little to dream that they live in
Secret Impurity with themselves, and who abstain from ill Women only for fear
of any ill Distemper.

Of the Blindness, Insensibility, and Obdurateness attending the Habit of this
Vice, out of St. Austin. Spargit Deus Paenales COECITATES super illicitas eorum
Cupiditates.

Whether thinking on a Married or Single Person in the Commission of this
Crime, changes or adds to the Guilt of it?

Whether being Defiled by a Married or Single Person changes, or adds to the
Guilt of this Crime. Out of Sanchez

Of Fornication, Adultery, and other Species of Impurity

ALL these Subjects, whether in Latin, Greek, or Englis^ throughout these
Contents, are fully Examined, and Discussed in English in the Volumes of this
Work.

With whatever other Matters can relate to the Commission of this Crime,
together with the most usual Cases relating to Single and Married Persons, who
have been extravagantly in Private with themselves, Guilty of it:

In order to retrieve the Guilty from that Abyss of Misery this wretched Vice
above others, involves its Slaves in

Price One Shilling and Six Pence each Volume.

APPENDIX.
A Rational Account of the Cause, Nature, Symptoms, and Cure of the GOUT.

CHAP. I. The Reasons for Publishing this Treatise.
IT may perhaps be wondered at, why a Subject of so very nice a Nature as this
is, should here be undertaken, sine in all Manner of Crimes of Impurity and
Uncleanness, Silence is generally much more advisable, than even so much as
once to mention them:

And this for fear of putting That into any Person's Mind, which it were much
better they could for ever, either Forget, or be wholly Ignorant of as long as
they live.

But as this Branch of Uncleanness, viz. Sinning with a Person's own Self, is
the most general of any Sin of Impurity whatsoever, by consequence some
Instructions concerning it, are the most of any wanted in the World, in order
to awake the Guilty, and deterr the Innocent and Unwary from falling into it,
through Inadvertence or Ignorance.

There are a great many admirable Treatises extant on the several other
Branches and Sins of Impurity, but very few (if any) really SERIOUS ones upon
This.

Now, why less should have been written on This one Sin than others, seems to
proceed from the Nature of the Crime it self, and the Difficulty of managing it
with such Prudence and Caution, as neither to omit what is necessary to be
said, nor to say any Thing that may seem indecent,

And this is the true Reason of the Scarceity of Books on this Sin in
particular; and yet never was more need of dissuasive Instructions against it
than now, when Debauchery is become so barefaced, that the generality of
Mankind are neither afraid, nor ashamed to glory in it.

So that when People come to this Height of Uncleanness, it is high time to warn
them of their Folly and Danger, lest Almighty God's Anger break in by a sudden
Death upon them, and there be no escaping.

Upon Enquiry then, how it comes to pass, that this miserable unhappy Sin of
Self-Defilement reigns so in all Places as it does, it must be owned, that one
of the chief Reasons is, the great Scarceity of serious Instructive Books to
give Assistance in relation to it.

For certainly, if Persons did but rightly understand the Hainousness of this
Sin, and the convincing Reasons and Motives there are for refraining from it,
it would be much Rarer than it is: But the Misery is, Christians are not
sufficiently informed of this Matter:

Authors that have writ of the Sins of Impurity, have (out of a well designed
indeed Modesty) only treated of this Sin in general: So that there are scarce
any Books extant, that sufficiently supply the want of Instruction about IT in
particular: Insomuch, that whilst there ar^ plenty of wicked Books that
encourage this abominable Vice, there are hardly any for reclaiming Persons
from it.

This Observation makes it justly to be conclude, that a dissuasive Discourse
against this reigning Sin in particular, cannot fail of being very useful to
the World:

And this more especially since there is no Guilty Person but had much rather
instruct themselves by reading a Book privately in their Chamber by themselves
on this Sin, than they can well bear to hear another speak to them about it, it
being a Subject of so very a shocking Nature, that no one Cares either to
speak, or be spoken to of it.

The Reason of this is: Because although Persons may be so far abandoned, as
sometimes to make their Brags of other Sins, yet they always dread being known
to be Guilty of THIS, it is so very Shameful, Odious and Unnatural.

And therefore in treating this Sin, the Case is not the same, as in treating
on other moral Subjects.

For, in handling other Subjects, a Man may safely say whatever he thinks any
ways advantageous to his Design, and has nothing to hinder him from mentioning
whatever he apprehends necessary, and proposing his Arguments in their utmost
Extent and Force, making them as plain as possible, and answering all
Difficulties relating to them.

But in arguing against this Sin of Self-Defilement, the same Liberty is not to
be taken; but a Writer is extremely confined, and is obliged to express himself
with all. Circumspection and Caution, for fear of intrenching upon Modesty,
whilst he endeavors to make himself understood.

For which Reason, whoever treats this Subject, is obliged to abstain from
pressing his Reasonings near so home or from enforcing his Proofs with that
Degree of Plainness, they might otherwise have had.

And therefore in treating of this particular Branch of Impurity, some Points
might be much more enlarged, and many Objections more particularly considered:

But then this would necessitate the touching upon some Things which Decency
forbids.

Whatever then Decency commands throughout this Treatise to be mentioned only
in general, shall be nevertheless so ordered by Principles that shall be laid
down, as to give sufficient room to every attentive (but more particularly
every guilty) Reader fully to understand and themselves supply. And therefore
this Subject, how Dirty soever it may in it self be, shall here be wrapped up in
the Clean^^^ Clothing that possibly it can.

To diswade against an Action that is above others:

First, So very Heinous, and Unnatural in its self.

Secondly, So very abominable and displeasing before Almighty God: -- And
Thirdly, So highly pernicious to Person's Selves and Families, both as to Body
and Soul, requires no Arguments which are not entirely agreeable to Truth, and
can stand the Test of the strictest Reason to the greatest of Libertines, as in
the following Chapters will fully appear: -- All which being duly considered:

It would be very deplorable, if Young and ignorant People should remain
without Warning and Assistance against so powerful, so treacherous, and
domestic and Enemy, as the Sin of Self-Defilement is, merely for want of being
better instructed, concerning the Abomination of it.

Youth are in greater Danger of this Sin, than of any other, there being far
stronger Incitements and Temptations to it (as being within our selves) than to
any other Sin whatsoever, the Fuel and Treacherous inticement to it always
accompanying us wherever we go:

For: Let us change never so much from one Place to another, we always carry
our Selves and our own corrupt vicious Inclinations along with us, changing
only the Place, but not the Man; and therefore Horace justly says, Caelum non
animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt.

Those who even Pass the Seas, change only the Climate, ^ut make no more Change
to the corrupt Inclinations of ^he Man, than a Change of mere Clothes only
does; and every one is fully convinced that Habitus non facit Monachum.

The Occasions of other Sins may be avoided and run Away from, but we cannot
run Away from OUR SELVES:

And therefore it is betraying OUR SELVES, that is our greatest Danger, as is
admirably, and with an uncommon Inction, expressed by a late pious Author in
the following lymn.

OH my Soul! how many Snares,
Lie spread before our Feet?
In all our Joys, in all our Cares,
Some Danger still we meet.
Sometimes the Sin does us overtake,
And on OUR WEAKNESS win;
Sometimes OUR SELVES, our Ruin make,
And WE overtake the Sin.
O save us Lord, from all such Darts,
That seek our Souls to slay;
Save US from US and OUR FALSE HEARTS,
Lest WE OUR SELVES betray.
For here the main Danger lies in our betraying OUR OWN SELVES, and drawing OUR
OWN SELVES into Sin, and therefore with good Reason every one ought earnestly
to beg of Almighty God to save US from US, that is, OUR SELVES from OUR SELVES:

Man having no greater Enemy against HIMSELF, than HIMSELF; as our Savior
expressly tells us. Math. chap. 10. v. 36. Inimici hominis Domestici ejus. Every
Man's worst Enemy is from his OWN SELF.

All which makes it a Matter of just Lamentation, that a Vice so odious in its
Nature, and so pernicious in its Consequences, should have such forcible Means
to insinuate it self so far among the flourishing, ( i. e. the youthful) Part
of Mankind, as to become so general as it is, and no instructive Books to deter
from it extant:

It being almost certain, that many Delinquents would never have been such, if
they had but had some good Book to have read on this Subject, that might have
informed and instructed them of, and pointed out to them the Heinousness of
this Sin in particular, and the deplorable Consequences that follow it, to the
Ruin of Body and Posterity in this World, and of Soul in the next.

Hence it is hoped, that putting this Book into the World, may prove a prevalent
Means to hinder many a one from being falsely lulled a sleep, and indulging
themselves in this abominable Vice, by furnishing them with the strongest
Considerations how heinous a Crime it is, what terrible Effects follow from it,
how it Basely defiles every Person's Body that commits it, Tortures and racks
the Mind, ruins so many hail flourishing Constitutions, and leads the ready Way
to the Paths of Death, and eternal Destruction.

So that notwithstanding the State of Sodom and Gomorrah was so very deplorable
as every one that has but read the 19th Chapter of Genesis knows it to be, on
account of their enormous Lewdnesses, and unnatural Debaucheries:

Yet our Blessed Savior tells us, that the Condition of Christians who act
these abominations with themselves, will be far worse in the Day of Judgment:

The Thought of which, how much soever any abandoned Onanian may divert and put
off from himself for the present, yet it will one Day, to their eternal
Wailling and Sorrow come upon them, unless they truly repent.

Now to any considering Person, can the momentary satisfying of a Filthy
Passion, be ever worth all this Misery?

Since as an ancient Author truly says, it is only Momentaneum quod delectat,
but it is Aeternum quod cruciat.

For one only Moments Pleasure, every Onanian incurs an Eternity of Wailing,
Torments, Misery, and Sorrow.

Whoever acts such vile Things, is perfectly his own Slave, and is led on by
his own Passion, as the Scripture says, As an Ox goes to the Slaughter, or, As
a Bird hastens to the Snare, to his own Death and Destruction.

These Ways are the Ways of Ruin, and AT BEST can end in nothing but Grief and
Repentance, if ever any Onanian be so happy as to grieve and repent for them.

O dear bought Moment of Pleasure! A Bargain the most to be regretted, that
certainly ever any poor Sinner made, to purchase so many Evils, and such a
Train of Miseries, for one only Moments Satisfaction, in the acquiring of which
every Onanian shows himself much more stupid than a silly Fly in a Candle, that
has some Cause to take the Flame to be sweet, because it is beautiful.

For the little Fly seeing the Flame, hovers greedily about it, to try whether
it be as sweet as it seems fair, and carried away with this Fancy, perishes at
the first trial.

But a poor Onanian knows very well, that what he is going about is extremely
filthy and ill in it self, highly offensive to Almighty God, and utterly
ruinous to his own Person, and yet WILL commit the horrid Fact.

O Man! What art thou? An ancient Poet had Reason to say, Video Meliora,
Proboque: Deteriora sequor. He SEES and knows, that the filthy Action he is
going about, will be his Ruin, and yet He is resolved, He WILL do it.

And all this for want of rightly considering the miserable State this Sin
involves him in; which seriously, ^^rongly, and homely to represent to him, is
the Design and Purpose of this Book, and the Motive for writing on ^his
difficult Subject.

But as it is so hard a Matter to write on a Subject of so nice a Nature as
this is, within the reach of the meanest Capacities, without Danger of
Encroachments upon the Bounds of Decency, and the Risque of giving Offense to
chaste Minds, notwithstanding it may proceed from a Design to promote Virtue and
discourage Vice:

Therefore this Subject shall be here so treated, as to be rather less
intelligible to some, by leaving several things to every Readers private
Consideration, than by any over-freedom of Expression, to run the Hazard of
putting That into any chaste Mind, which every Person ought with the utmost
Christian Courage and Care to stifle and destroy.

Subjects of this Nature being as Dr. Baynard calls, it Res faeda dictu, an
Action unfit to be even mentioned, and therefore the Scripture calls it a
detestable Thing.

And what, if mere Necessity (in order to deter the World from it,) did not
urge, St. Paul exhorting the Ephesians, a People wholly abandoned to their Lust
and Impurity, forbids even to be so much as named amongst Christians. Let all
Uncieanness be not once Named amongst you. chapter 5. ver. 3. Nee Nominetur in
vobis, says the Vulgate Edition.

For which Reason, if ever Caution, Care, Waryness, and Circumspection is
necessary, in the treating of any Moral Subject, in the World, it is most
certainly in this, wherein St. Paul thought he could express the Enormity of
the Crime in no stronger a Manner, than by imposing a perpetual Silence of it
amongst all Christians.

It Is not to be doubted, but those Persons who are conscious to themselves of
having unhappily bartered and exchanged away their Innocence for a momentary
Satisfaction, as Esau did his Birthright for the present transient Sensuality
of a Mess of Pottage, and by consequence have the Misfortune to find themselves
concerned in this present Treatise, will sufficiently understand the Meaning of
it without much Explication, and it is to them it is recommended, with a hearty
desire of their most serious Consideration of what is contained in it.

And as for those whom it no way concerns, and by consequence who understand it
not (O happy Ignorance!) their unspotted Innocence is to be congratulated:

Rara avis in terris! It shall be endeavored that nothing be said here, which
may endanger then loosing it, but rather confirm their happy keeping it:

All possible Care then shall be taken throughout this Treatise that no
Expression be used, which may either shock the most modest Class of Mankind, or
sully or give offense to even the chastest Mind.

CHAP. II. Of the Heinousness and Abomination of the Sin of Self-Defilement.
BY the Word Self-Defilement, is here meant that unnatural and shameful Action,
by which Persons of either Sex endeavor to cause, procure, and imitate with
themselves that Sensual Carnal Pleasure, which Alm. God has ordered to attend
only a Married State for the Propagation of Mankind: The hainousness of which
Action fully appears from that remarkable Instance in the Holy Scripture, of
its severe Punishment by Almighty God in the Person of Onan, in the Eighth and
Thirtieth Chapter of Genesis Verse the 10th, expressed in these Words, And
therefore the Lord slew him, because he had done a Detestable Thing.

Ideo percussit eum Dominus, quod rem DETESTABILEM faceret, says the Vulgate
Edition.

The Cambridge Edition of the Bible has it thus, And the Thing which he did,
displeased the Lord, wherefore He slew him.

So that the very Name of ONAN is fully sufficient to put the Reader at once in
mind both of the Sin, and the dreadful Punishment inflicted on him for it.

The other particulars of this unhappy Man Onan, in the perpetration of this
Detestable Action, as the Holy Scripture Purposely calls it, to make it to be
the more abhorred, and detested by all Mankind, as long as the World endures,
shall not be here mentioned, but every Reader is referred to the serious perusal
of the just now cited Chapter of Genesis, where every one may read the whole
History at length, (as also of his Brother Er, who was likewise Slain for the
same Fact) transmitted as dreadful Examples to all succeeding Ages, to deter
from an Action so unnatural in it self, that no Brute is ever known to do it,
but only (to his Shame be it spoken) unhappy Man.

And therefore it is very reasonable to believe, that a great many Persons
would never fall into this Sin, if they were but throly convinced of the
grievousness of it, and the deplorable Consequences to the Body in this World,
as well as to the Soul in the next, which follow from it:

Which makes it highly necessary, that Persons should be apprised how crying an
Offense it is, in order to keep them from it.

In Order then to this, it is remarkable, that there is no Place in the whole
Scripture, where Sins of Impurity and Uncleanness are condemned, but This
Unhappy One here treated of, is in a more particular Manner than others Pointed
out to us, with a Conclusion, that Nothing Defiled, nor who ACTS WITH
THEMSELVES such Abominable Things, shall ever enter the Kingdom of God, but are
to have their Share and Part hi the Lake, that Burns with Fire and Brimstone.

And to give us still a more thorough Conviction of the particular Deformity,
Filthyness, Baseness, and Unnaturalness, that there is in this Vice, above
others.

St. Paul speaking of it in the Heathens says, that they, being a People wholly
given up, and abandoned to their Lewdness and Uncleanness, by this particular
Vice above others Dishonored their own Bodies, Romans 1.24.

And therefore gives a singular Charge to the Christians he wrote to, never to
imitate them in the commission of this Detestable Action. Be not deceived (says
he, 1 Cor. chapter 6.10.) neither the Effeminate, nor the ABOMINABLE, shall ever
inherit the Kingdom of God.

The Vulgate Edition of the Bible has it thus. MOLLES (an Ugly Word enough)
Regnum Dei non possideb^nt.

The Cambridge Edition of the English Bible has it thus, Neither the
Effeminate, nor ABUSERS OF THEMSELVES, shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God. 1
Cor. 6.10.

Where the Words ABUSING A PERSON'S SELF are used, to express with as much
Modesty as is possible the Unnatural Action this Treatise is here writ against.

For of all the Actions which a rational Creature CAN possibly commit, within
the whole Latitude and Exten^ of his Liberty and Power, there is no One, by
which Persons so egregiously ABUSE, and Basely Dishonor themselves, as by this
one Vile Action of Self-Defilement.

And therefore St. Paul says, that the Heathens by these unclean Filthy
Actions, not only Abused and Defiled, but shamefully Dishonored their own
Bodies.

This singularly modest Man St. Paul was indeed loath to Rake so particularly
into the Nature of the Action, as to express it in any Manner whatsoever, and
therefore

First tells the Christians of the Church at Ephesus. c. 5. ver. 12. That He
was even ashamed to mention and speak of those Things the Heathens did IN
SECRET, meaning the Crime of Self-Defilement, which was so common amongst them:

But finding himself under a Necessity of speaking plainly to them, lest they
should not understand his Meaning, he chose out at least the modestest Words to
explain himself by to them, that he could.

Not at all doubting, but that those Christians who should hear his Letters
read (as they usually were especially on Sundays amongst the Primitive
Christians in their Assemblies) would fusty understand his Meaning, and what
Sin it was he forewarned them against.

And concludes with a modest Repetition in general of all he had said before,
in these Words, That All those who DO SUCH THINGS shall never inherit the
Kingdom of God.

Therefore he charges them every one, To Possess, Preserve, and Keep His Vessel
(that s their Bodies) in Holiness and Honor. As if he should have said, That
all Sorts of Persons (without Exception) ought to be extremely watchful over
THEIR OWN BODIES, and never to Abuse nor Defile them by such unnatural Actions.
-- Again.

St Paul (who throughout his whole Mission, had always to do, with an
abominably Lustful and Luxurious Set of Men, as fully appears from those
unnatural Vices he reprehends in the Inhabitants of Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, Colossia, Thesalonica, and those other Provinces abandoned to Luxury,
which he writ his Letters to) thought he could produce no more powerful
Argument to dissuade them from this foul Sin, than to tell them, that their
Bodies being the Temples of the Holy Ghost, by consequence to defile and abuse
such a Temple must be the highest Offense against to Almighty God. -- His
Argument is this.

That if material Temples and Churches built only of Stone, and Mortar, and
dediated to the external Worship only of God Almighty, are in no wise to be
profaned:

Much less Spiritual ones, such as our Bodies are, in which the Spirit and
Grace of Almighty God, and an immortal Soul honored with his own Image,
inhabits.

This Argument of this Great Apostle, and Reclaimer of those Lustful Luxurious
People, gives us clearly to understand, that whenever any Person commits any
filthy and immodest Action with themselves, their Body is then Profaned,
Sullied, and Defiled, and no more a Temple or Place for God Almighty's Grace to
reside in.

And least Persons should object, that hereby they do no Injury to any but
themselves, their Bodies being their own, and at their own disposal, this great
Preacher of Purity St. Paul, (foreseeing this their Objection) tells them
expressly, that their Bodies are not their OWN, nor at their own disposal, no
more than when a Person has BOUGHT any Thing, the Thing so bought belongs no
more to the Person who Sold it; and therefore St. Paul tells all Christians,
that they are Bought and Redeemed with a great Pric^.

This Consideration made St. Austin cry out, O quam lugenda perversitas! Ut
quis animam quam Christus Sanguine suo Redemit, propter unius momenti
Delectationem Diabolo vendat. Sermon. 350. O Madness! To sell that Soul which
Christ has BOUGHT, for one Moment of Pleasure.

And to show that when St Paul mentioned this, he alluded particularly to the
Sin here treated of, he presently adds these Words, And therefore we ought to
serve God in our BODIES, which are God's, as well as our Souls.

Again: As the greatest Punishment that can be inflicted, is the taking away
any ones Life, so when an Offense is so punished, it most certainly shows that
such a Crime is of a most heinous and grievous Nature:

Almighty God in the Scriptures, threatens a great many Sins with several Sorts
of Punishments, some of longer, some of shorter Durance, but this Sin of Onan,
had immediate Death inflicted for it, which is the greatest Proof of God
Almighty's being highly offended at it.

And if any one examines the whole Scripture through, where mention is made of
Vices and Sins, they will find that there is not any other Crime, so many times
inveighed against, as Sins of Uncleanness

A most detestable and unnatural Degree of which is a Person's Defiling their
own Selves; and against which St. Paul is continually preaching, accusing the
Heathens of this Sin in particular, and tells them of their Dishonouring their
own Bodies by it. -- Hence a learned Divine says of it,

That the Crime in it self is Monstrous and Unnatural:

In its Practice Filthy, Base and odious to Extremity:

Its Guilt is crying, and its Consequences ruinous.

It destroys conjugal Affection, perverts natural Inclination, ^ends to
extinguish the Hopes of Posterity, brings on a numerous Train of Diseases on
the Body in this World, and utterly ruins the Soul for all Eternity in the
next.

Which made St. Paul expressly write to the Inhabitants of Corinth about this
Matter, knowing them to be a People exorbitantly addicted to this Vice, and
tells them 1 Cor. c. 6 v. 9. Be not deceived (says this great Apostle neither
Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor ABUSERS OF THEMSELVES, shall ever inherit the
Kingdom of God.

The same he writes to the People of Galatia, and thos^ of Ephesus, after
having told them, that it was a Shame even so much as only to speak of the
Things which the^ did in Secret, ( meaning this private Ugly Sin with
themselves and tells them still in the same Language, That those tha^ do such
vile abominable unnatural Actions, shall nev^^ enter into the Kingdom of God.

CHAP. III. Of the Blindness, and some other Circumstances attending the
Commission of this Sin.
THE BLINDNESS here meant, is that spiritual Blindness and Unconcernedness,
with which miserable Onanians repeat this Crime. -- For as for those particular
pernicious Effects which this Sin has proper to it self above all other Vices,
on the SIGHT and EYES of the Body by draining off those animal Spirits, which
are so the peculiar Strength of the Optic Nerves, as that Persons addicted to
this Vice, will find their Sight and Eyes to fail them a deal sooner than
otherwsie they would, to their great Grief and Sorrow afterward, when it is
too late; this Subjects shall be particularly treated of hereafter.

St. Paul speaking of the Sin here treated of, attributes the Commission of it
to Blindness and Insensibility.

And says, that the Gentiles, Being past feeling: had given themselves over to
Act all Uncleanness WITH THEMSELVES with Greediness. -- And for this Reason St.
Austin calls Spiritual Blindness a just Punishment of Almighty God upon Sins of
Impurity, Spargit Deus paenales caecitates super illicitas little cupiditates.
Almighty God throws a Darkness on the Understanding as a particular Punishment
for this Sin:

And hence it is, that of those great Numbers that are guilty of it, very few
ever come to be truly sensible of it, but are lulled asleep in it, and
eternally loose their Soul.

A Loss, to balance which our Savior expressly tells us, that even the gaining
of the whole World is not an Equivalent. What Profit is it to a Man to gain the
whole World, if he loses his own Soul. Math. Chap. 16. Verse 26.

The saving of which is every ones greatest Affair, and every ones only Affair
that he came into this World For:

It Is the Unum necessarium, that One Thing which our Savior declares to be
only Necessary for all Mankind:

It Is not Necessary to be great, to be Rich, and abound with the Things of this
World, but it is absolutely Necessary to be saved: And yet Onanians are so
stupidly Blind, as to exchange this Thing so Necessary, to wit* the saving
themselves for all Eternity, for the gratifying this Lust.

Now what spiritual Darkness must surround such a Person, that is thus stark
Blind in this Necessary Concern, and so clear sighted in other things that are
Trifles?

Yet there is one Thing more contradictory still, which is, that a Person shall
with all the Unconcernedness of Mind imaginable fall into, and repeat this
Crime over and over again, which he knows in his Conscience is a deadly Sin,
and not only cuts off at once, without bearing any Manner of Dispute in the
Matter, his Right for ever to the Kingdom of Heaven, but condemns him to the
eternal Fire and Torments of Hell:

And yet at the same Time, out of a Principle of Religion and Christianity,
would not take a False Oath, nor renounce his Religion for all the World.

Again: How many are there in the World, who are punctually just Men in their
Dealings, no Swearers, no Drunkards, nor addicted to any visible Vice, and
firmly believe all the Truths of Christian Religion, and yet fall Victims to
themselves, and the filthy Cravings of their own beastly Bodies, by living in
this abominable Sin.

But what will all this avail them? Quid prodest (says an ancient Author) si
quis Catholice credat, and Gentiliter vivat? Petr. Dam. What good does any
Person's believing as a Christian do him, if he acts like a Heathen, and does
not use that Faith, as a Guide and Rule for his Actions?

How can any Person reconcile their Faith with such a Practice? And how can
they make such a Practice, and their Reason agree? It Is very surprising, that
Men of Sense and Wisdom, who Reason so well about every Thing else, should
Reason so very falsely in This?

A poor blind Onanian freely owns his Action to be a very great Crime, highly
offensive to God Almighty, and if unrepented of, most certainly throws him for
all Eternity into Hell Fire: All this he will argue over with the strongest of
Reasoning and Eloquene with himself, and yet will habitually live in this
odious Sin.

From whence can this Stupidity, and contradicting thus his own Reason proceed?
He believes the Mysteries of Christian Religion, and is ready to Die rather
than renounce this Faith, although they are not only above his Understanding, but
even seem to shock his Reason:

And at the same equally believes these abominable Actions he lives in the
commission of, to be grievous Sins, and that the doing of them condemns him for
all Eternity to Hell Fire, and yet WILL do them.

Whence come these so very unaccountable Contradictions thus between an
Onanian's Life, and his Faith?

The Reason of this can be nothing else, but because the believing the
Mysteries of Christian Religion, does not contradict nor thwart his Passions:

So that although it is as equally certain that an Onanian will be eternally Lost
for the commission of these abominable Actions, as he would be, if he renounced
his Faith, and turned Heathen, both being alike grounded on the same infallible
Authority, viz. the Word of God:

Yet because the one does not contradict his Passions, and the other does,
therefore for the sake of a Moment's Pleasure, he will thus contradict, and act
against his own Reason, and give himself for all his Life time after, such vast
Room for Grief and Repentance.

What a sort of Faith shall we call this?

It Is a Dead Faith; which can no more save an impenitent Onanian, than the most
moral good Works will save an obstinate Heathen. Now let an Onanian ask himself
seriously, whether he really believes all this or not?

If he does not believe any thing of this, then he does in other things a great
deal too much, by being a just Man in his Dealings where safe Opportunities of
Gain by Frauds offer themselves without ever being detected:

By not being a Drunkard, a Swearer, an Adulterer, etc. all which corrupt
Nature inclines to.

And if he does really believe these Truths, then it is beyond Dispute, that he
does not do near enough.

What then is this Faith? What is this offending God Almighty? This Soul and
its being either saved for all Eternity, or lost for all Eternity, that is so
much talked of?

It Is in reality nothing else but this: That a great many say they believe the
Truths of Christian Religion, because they will be of the Fashion of the
Country where they live:

So that in Rigor, such Persons calling themselves Christians, is no more than
conforming to Custom and Fashion.

For else; as no Man ever in his Senses, would travel any particular Road, if
he was credibly informed and firmly believed that there were High-way-men and
Robbers in that very Road, that would murder him:

So, either this is the exact Condition of every Onanian, or else his Faith,
the Gospel and Christian Religion must seem to him as a Fable, our Savior an
Impostor, and St. Paul a Liar and a Cheat, thus to persuade Men from and
threaten them out of their Pleasure, and taking their Swing in This World, for
a mere Nothing in the Next.

And if a Heathen was to be asked his Opinion of such a Person, that says he
believes what the Christian Religion teaches, and yet acts so contrary to it,
he would presently answer, that either he does not really believe, or else,
that he is a Madman to act so opposite to his Faith.

CHAP. IV. Of the great Damages the Sin of Self-Defilement brings upon a
Person's self and Family.
THE Damage this grievous Sin brings upon many a Family fully appears, from
those Numbers of Families so frequently extinct for want of Heirs:

Which Misfortune were it to be traced up to its Origin, is owing to nothing
else but that Impotency in one Sex, and Barrenness in the other, caused by
those unnatural Actions here treated of, by which the Strength of Youth has
been so nipt in its Bud, by having been so profusely squandred away, that very
few can afterward much boast of the Fruits of a married State.

And although it be supposed, that such Persons ever have Children, (which
nevertheless happens not often) they are most commonly weak puny little sickly
Things* that either die soon, or if they happen by chance, and mere Force more
of Physic than the Kitchen, to live and grow up, they prove generally but
tender sickly Persons, always ailing and complaining of one Malady or another.

What a Pleasure is it to see (says an ancient Author) a Man at the Age of
Fourscore, with a Wife of the same Antiquity, both blessed with healthy hail
Constitutions, fresh wholesome Looks, sound Minds and perfect quick Senses,
(Men's sana in corporo sano as Juvenal describes) with active strait upright
Limbs:

Walking without the adventitious Support of either Stick or Staff, with
pleasant cheerful Tempers, residing over a healthful numerous Progeny, perhaps
to the third or fourth Generations.

And all these Blessings owing under Almighty God, to the Temperance, and
Continence of their Youths.

When, if we do but turn our Eyes upon Licentious and Voluptuous Livers, we
shall find them surrounded with a whole Legion and Complication of Diseases:

Lean Jaws, hagged pale livid Looks, hollow Eyes sunk into their Heads, feeble
Hams, Legs without Calves, Limping and Hobling with a Stick, Gouty u^active
Limbs, continually complaining of Weaknesses and Pains in their Reins and Small
of their Backs, in fine worn and wasted away in the Prime of their Years, by
having thus ruined and abused their Bodies by these. Self-Defilements.

And if they happen to arrive at any advanced Years, ^hey are usually harrassed
with some draining Weakness or another, such as an habitual Gleet, etc.

Or Wasted away with a Consumption, their Spirits sunk, Body decayed, Strength
spent and exhausted.

All which Complication of Evils, makes them shift about restless from Place to
Place, for the Change of Air, and Trial of this and the other Bath: Always
consulting one Physician or another, and yet after all, upon the least Rigor
of any Season, or any small Accident, continually in fear of giving up their
corrupted Breath.

And all this from having enervated, exhausted, consumed, and Worn out their
Bodies and Strength by these detestable Actions and Sins of their Youth here
meant, and thereby now become the Sco^n and Jest of others, and a perfect
Trouble, and Torment to themselves.

What a melancholy Reflection must it be for such a Person to think now on
these vile filthy Actions of their Life past? Who being hardly come at half the
Age they might reasonably have expected to arrive at, find themselves now
enervated, consumed, drained, wasted, and out by this detestable Habit of
Self-Defilement.

What a dismal Thing is it for a Person thus to see themselves on a sudden
become Old, and perfectly Worn out, by having thus destroyed and ruined
themselves, oftentimes before they are even 30 Years of Age?

Again: Of those unhappy and unthinking Persons who have by these Actions in
their Lives past thus prostra^ed and enervated their Strength, very few ever
come to that Vigor, and Robustness, which otherwise they would have arrived
at, and continued so to a good old Age.

Besides Stranguries, Gleets, Gonorrhoeas, etc. far more difficult to be cured,
than those very Same Ailments when otherwise contracted from some ill Distemper
or its Cure.

So that we'll suppose Two Persons to be afflicted with what is commonly called
a Gleet either in Men, or a Draining Weakness in Women, by either of which is
understood an Involuntary, and almost constant Efflux or Coming away of Matter
from a Human Body.

In one of these Persons, these Infirmities, whether in a Man or Woman, we'll
suppose to be purely the Effect of either some Former ill Distemper, or its
Cure:

In the other Person we'll suppose these Infirmities, to proceed purely from
the Weakness of the Parts, whose Tone, Springiness, and Strength, has been
enervated and destroyed (as will hereafter be showed) by those unnatural
Actions here treated of.

This Last Gleet or Weakness whether in Man or Woman is much harder to cure,
and the Constitution broke thereby much more difficult to repair, than the
Former.

The Reason of this will be obvious to every Person who does but consider, that
the Actions by which Person thus defile themselves, being altogether UNNATURAL
by consequence are so many repeated Violences, Strains, an^ FORCES upon and
against Nature:

And therefore the Seminal Vessels and Parts continguou^ to them, are so
extremely relaxed, and weakened thereby, that it is no wonder that the whole
Constitution pay^ so dearly for it afterward, as the generality of Person^ too
fatally Experience, who ever in their Lives past have been guilty of this
abominable Practice.

Insomuch that a great many Young Persons of either Sex, who were strong, hail,
and lusty before they abandoned themselves to this Vice, have been so worn out
by it, as to become old before half their Years came on.

For by thus robbing and violently Forcing from themselves their Strength, and
empoverishing their Spirits, by depriving their Bodies of its Balmy, and vital
Juice, by this detestable Vice, they have become so dry and emaciated as to be
sent to their Graves a great many Years sooner than otherwise they would have
been.

And indeed nothing is so common as the Experience that this Sin brings upon
its Slaves, not only various Aches, and Pains about the Body, Head-achs,
Dizzynesse^ and such a Wasting of the Spirits, as to impair the very Vitals,
and bring Rottenness upon the Bones.

But Numbers of Persons who were healthy and well before they gave themselves
over to this vile Habit, have been so weakened, and drained by it, as to have
been brought into a visible Consumption, and so far gone, as to puzzle
sometimes the best of Physicians to set them on their Legs again, their Case
has been so desperate.

From all which it plainly appears, that no Sin draws i^ Votaries into a
greater Abyss of Miseries, and Ruin tha^ This, and therefore it is of the utmost
Consequence, tha^ all possible Endeavou^s be used to keep Persons from it.

In order to which, as nothing can be more prevalent than for Persons seriously
to consider that the time WILL come, when they shall be one Day laid on a
Deathbed, and must bid adieu to all these and other Pleasures, the Subject of
the next Chapter shall be to represent lively t^ the Reader, the Condition of
an Onanian on a Dying Bed

CHAP. V. Of the Condition of an ONANIAN on a Dying Bed.
IN order to fix the better your Imagination of this Melancholy and dreadful
Time, suppose your self now upon your Deathbed, in your last Sickness, having
but a few Hours more to live, reduced, (as ONE DAY you WILL be) to the last
Extremity of Weakness:

Your Soul oppressed and over whelmed with Fear, your Heart already seized by
the Convulsions of Death, your Breath failing, your Color changed, your Eyes
just ready to close themselves for ever to Time, and open in a new State to
Eternity, of which you know nothing.

Suppose your Self again abandoned by all you so dearly loved, and just upon
the Point of leaving the World, and expiring either by your self alone, or at
best in the Arms of some Domestic, Relation, or Friend.

These Things being thus supposed: Consider next how strangely a Lustful dying
Person is now changed:

He who a few Days ago was strong and in perfect Health, and in the full
Enjoyment of his Pleasures, is now all on a sudden confined to his Bed, reduced
to exremity, unable to help himself, incapable of Pleasure the Pursuit of which
has been his only Aim) and now forced ^o abandon all, and to be abandoned by
all.

So that the Separation whereby a Sensualist is by Death ^nathed from his
Pleasures, is still the more terrible to him, inasmuch as the more any one has
loved their Plea^u^^s, the greater Grief will it be to him to part with them;
and the more he has sought after them in his Life ^ime, the more bitter will
Death be to him.

Every One, that does but seriously reflect on this, must ^ry out, Lord! what
is Man, tho he enjoys never so much Plea^ure, since a few Hours Sickness are
thus able to make him useless ^o all the World, and render all the World of no
use to him.

What will be able to comfort this unhappy Person in ^his dreadful Hour? When
the Remembrance of his past ^^ameful Defilements leaves only a mortal Regret
behind them, and the Fear of suture Pains makes him already ^egin to feel them.

When every Thing conspires to terrify and fright him.

How do the Tears of Friends cut him to the Heart?

With what Fear has he recourse to desperate Remedies, and what a Terror is it
to find those Remedies prove ineffectual? And he who but a few Days ago had a
Constitution that promised the Enjoyment of Pleasures for many Years, has not
now even Hours to enjoy them.

But to calm his Frights, a Clergyman is desired to come and Pray with him.
And does this Allay his Trouble?

He trembles and is confounded, at the remembrance of his past shameful
Actions, which he now blushes at

How dismal must his Apprehensions be, after so many repeated Self-Defilements,
to think that now he has but a few Hours more to live, and is going to have his
Destiny determined, either of being saved, or lost for all Eternity.

And in this Agony, He is now with the Assistance of this his spiritual Friend
to prepare for Death.

But is this a fit Time for it, when he is just going to expire? When Fear and
Trouble has weakened his Reason, how can he go about so great a Work?

A Work that requires the greatest Leisure, Application, and Tranquillity of
Mind that is possible, and for which all the Saints have ever thought their
whole Lives too short, and this sick Man has it now all upon his Hands to
dispatch on a sudden in a Hurry, and in a few Hours:

And also at a Time the most improper of any for it, when his Ills and Pains
render him so incapable of applying even to any Small Affairs, that his
Physician absolutely forbids it, and now at this Time, he has the great and
intricate Account of his Soul to adjust and make up.

If it is so difficult a Thing to prepare for Death as it is whilst a Person is
in Health, and has his Head clear and free to think, how hard, (not to say
almost impossible) must it be on a sick Bed, when the Head is racked with Pains
and cannot apply, and the whole Body so disordered, that (...) quiet free
Thought can scarce be had.

So that he has put off his Repentance to a Time, tha^ is no Time for him: A
Time of Sickness being to Tim^ at all for such a Person as this to Prepare for
Death in.

What should we think of a Captain of a Ship, wh^ never enquires whether his
Anchors and Cables be in (...) readiness, and fit for Service, 'till he is just
perishin^ in a violent Storm, and upon the point of sinking?

What should we think of a Governor who neglects t^ repair the Breaches of his
Town, and lets his Magazine remain empty, 'till he is close besieged, and the
Trenche^ opened?

Death is a dangerous Voyage, a Dying Man is going to sail from Time to
Eternity among Rocks and Tempests:

It is a sudden Siege where his Enemy blocks him up in a Moment, and can he
think this a fit time to prepare, himself in to Fight? No: No: Whoever puts off
their Conversion to this Time, most wretchedly cheats themselves.

And for this reason our Savior bids us be ready when the Hour comes, and not
then to prepare our selves.

But let us consider a little farther, what passes between this dying Person
and his spiritual Friend.

He now speaks not his own Sentiments, but only repeats what the Clergyman
puts in his Mouth, not knowing perhaps what he says, or what he ought to say.

The Merits and Passion of Jesus Christ himself, which in this last Hour is the
great Consolation of a Good Man on a Deathbed, now only serves to ubraid this
Sinner.

With whom then shall he now find Ease?

His Friends and Relations retire, leaving him and the Clergyman by themselves
for a while alone.

Consider now what Thoughts this distressed Person will have, when the Divine
only stays to exhort him to fix his Eyes on Jesus Christ crucified, and to
inform him, that being now past all Hopes of Recovery, and bereft of all
Creatures, Jesus Christ alone must be his only Refuge and Consolation. -- Jesus
Christ crucified must be now, Dear Brother (says the Divine) your only Hope,
etc.

You must seek Strength in his Death, against the Fear of yours: Place then
your Confidence in this comfortable Object, in the Thoughts of which I leave
you to your self: And the Clergyman withdraws for a while.

This is the End of all those shameful Pleasures, which Lustful Persons with so
much Greediness pursue.

Did it ever enter into such a Person's Thoughts on his Deathbed, to regret
that he had not in his Life pleased himself, and gratified his brutish craving
Passios more?

Every dying Person will repent his having pleased him self too much, but never
that he did not more.

But alas, there is now no more World for him; he has acted His Part on the
Stage of it, and must now (notwithstanding all his unwillingness) go off from
it.

And as Actors go off a Stage with Applause, more or less according to the
Merits of their Performance; so this dying Man goes off the Stage of this Life
loaded with his Self-Defilements and Impurities, as our blessed Savior
foretold of impenitent Christians. John chap. 8. v. 21. That they shall die in
their Sins.

What Comfort will this Person find now in thinking of Jesus Christ, who has
during his Life had so little resemblance to him? Whilst in Health, how often
has he perhaps made a Jest of the great Truths of Christian Religion? And now
he must, notwithstanding all his Rallery, in a few Hours appear before the
great Founder of it.

The Divine visits him again and prays by him, and says,

Lord save this thy Servant:

And the dying Person answers if he can, tho perhaps very faintly and with
trembling and stammering Lips:

Which -- put -- his -- Trust -- in -- thee.

He utters this indeed with his trembling Lips, but his Weakness and Fears do
so cloud his Reason, that he scarce has Liberty to use it, and by consequence
scarce knows what he says -- Next: What Terror must it be to him to hear the
Clergyman go on with those Words?

We commend the Soul of this thy Servant into thy Hands, O Lord, etc. -- To him
who loved his Pleasures and the World so much as he has done:

Nay who perhaps never loved any Thing else but his Pleasures, and never made
One serious real Step toward Heaven in all his Life. -- Again: What a Terror
must; those Words give him, -- Go Christian Soul out of this World:

Profciscere Ammo Christiana de hoc Mundo, etc.

There is no more for you to do in it:

You must leave it; but How? And Why?

By Force: And because your Pleasures leave you, and not you them. -- St.
Austin speaking to you in this Condition tells you, Sermon. 1.

Non vis relinquere Mundum, relinquet te Mundus.

You are unwilling to leave the World and your Pleasures, but that is nothing,
the World will now leave you:

There is no avoiding it, a Dying Person cannot help it:

There is no Appeal. -- You MUST go Christian Soul out of this World, etc. You
must leave it, -- But

The Divine goes on: Accept O Lord his Tears, etc.

What Tears? -- Alas! Tears and Sorrow from his unwillingness to Die, and
leave the World and his Pleasures, and because he can enjoy them no longer:
Nothing else.

Lord! In what a Condition is this dying Man?

If he has yet his Senses left, the Remembrance of his past Actions rifle his
very Soul, and tear him to pieces.

The shameful Action now leaves him, being no more capable of it, and not he
the Action.

O Death! How terrible is thy Memory to this poor Wretch, thus drowned and,
absorpt in his own Guilt?

CHAP. VI. Some farther Considerations of the Condition of this ONANIAN on his
Dying-Bed.
THis almost Distracted SENSUALIST being now upon the brink of having his
Eternal Doom decided, his past Actions tear him with inexpressible Remorse.

Every one of his past Defilements appears now to him as big as a Mountain, and
in all its Deformity and ghastly Shape, which before he cheated himself in the
Commission of, by the deceiving Name of Weakness and Frailty.

How dismal must the Apprchensions of this dying LEACHER be, when he reflects
that he has now but a few Hours more to live, and if not sincerely reconciled
to Almighty God, by a true Repentance, is for ever lost?

What must this Sinner do at this dreadful Hour?

In which St. Peter tells us, that the very Saints themselves are not secure, 1
Epistle Chapter 4. v. 18. If the rightcous scarcely are saved, where shall the
wicked appear?

In this terrible Extremity, ALL that he has ever in his Life Time heard of
Judgment, of Hell, of Eternity, and other awakening Truths of Christian
Religion, comes now all on a sudden fresh into his Mind, and fright him.

And it is wonderful that he, who some few Days ago was so full of Doubts, and
Uncertainties as to Religion, and who made almost a Jest of Christanity, and
the Purity of the Gospel, and would believe SO LITTLE, should now be so fully
convinced of these Truths, and all on a sudden believe SO MUCH: For no People
in the World believe more, or have stronger Faith than Dying Men:

But what does this convincing Faith avail an impenitent Onanian then? The
Devils believe as much as any Christians:

But as St. James says, 2.19. their Faith only, serves to make them tremble.
Doemones credunt and contrennscunt.

And just in the same Case is this Person on a Dying-bed.

What lie was so unwilling to believe all his Life Time, he cannot help
believing now: So that a Deathbed will give him a lively Faith, when nothing
else will.

This Person whilst he was well and in Health, made nothing of ridiculeing
Piety and Religion:

Let him now carry on the Jest with his Wit and Rallery if he can. No, No, A.
Deathbed teaches a true Lesson, convinces the most obstinate, and opens their
Eyes.

O Mo^s bonum est judicium tuum, says the wise Man, Eccles. ^1.3.

If ever a Man's Judgment is impartial, 'twill be on a Deathbed. Then the Mind
is filled with cruel Remorse, the Conscience is terribly awakened, past
Defilements come fresh in to the Mind, and seizes it with inexpressible
Consternation:

And it is then, that every Sensualist will begin to open their Eyes, and to
judge of things after quite another Manner than ever they did before, and would
give All the whole World, were it at their Disposal, that they could now call
their past Actions back again.

Now Terror and Remorse begin to show themselves, and the dying Man is seized
with inexpressible Anguish.

Now he would forsake his Sin: Now he condemns himself:

Now he is willing to open his Case to his spiritual Friend, who before could
never be brought to it.

But alas! It is now too late, he has no more Time left, He is a Dying: -- He
is now of no more use to the World, nor it to him. He may with good Reason cry
out

NOW my Soul the Day is gone,
Which in the Morn was thine,
Now it is Glass no more shall run,
It Is Sun no longer shine.
True alas! the Day is gone,
O we it only so:
But it is lost as well as done,
To my eternal Woe.
Aust. Dev. The Example of the good Thelf's Repentance has very little room
here to encourage any Delay to such Persons of their Conversion. Because as St.
Aug. justly says,

The Scripture comfortably furnishes us with this Example of ONE True Death Bed
Repentance, that we may not Despair.

But alas! it is the only ONE throughout the whole Scripture, that we may not
Presume, and to convince us, what a Height of Folly (not to say Madness) it is,
and how extremely dangerous to live in the habitual commission of this
abominable Sin with any such ill grounded Hopes.

So that whatever Person does so, most miserably imposes upon, and abominably
CHEATS himself at last, with only an Appearance of Conversion and Repentance.

If therefore any deluded Sensualists find themselves disposed to take any
Encouragement in remaining in the Habit of this detestable Vice, from the
Example of those so very Few, who have risen again, and sincerely and truly
Repented, after terrible Falls;

Let such know, that they have much more Reason to tremble at the Remembrance
of infinite Numbers of others who have fallen in like Manner, and never did
rise, but have been utterly undone by it, and eternally lost.

If a Person could die Twice, an unprepared First Death might be repaired by a
Second: But he can die but ONCE, and an Eternity of Happiness or Misery depends
upon this ONCE. And being once only ill done is for ever ill done, and never
can be repaired.

Any One then who goes on in his Sin, with the Design of Repenting on a
Deathbed; puts it off to a Time, the most unfit for it of all his whole Life,
and which (is to be feared) will prove no Time at all for him.

If a good Death consisted only in a few Tears, in having a few Friends to pray
by one, in having the Assistance of a Divine, in a Remorse of Conscience, a
Design to amend, and even in receiving the Holy Sacrament, this Person's
Madness would not be near so great:

But alas! How many daily die with all these VERY SAME Helps, and many more,
and yet Die miserably, and are now irreparably lost for all eternity?

And could but any of them return upon Earth, to tell us how all this came to
pass, and could possibly be with so many Helps; their Answer would be, that
they died miserably, because they did not prepare before hand, by quitting this
Sin in Time when they might.

They would also tell us, that those Helps they had on their Death Beds, were
only Opera Operata, mere outward Works, which to them were of no Effect, for
want of requisite Inward Dispostions, and a real Conversion of the Heart, and a
leaving off this abominable Sin whilst they were in Health: Whereas their
professing with their Lips outwardly to detest, renounce, and leave this Sin
now at a Time, when the Sin leaves them, deserves no manner of Thanks to them
at all for it.

And that this is evidently true, fully appears from those who do by a singular
Mercy of Almighty God, recover from great Fits of Sicknesses, after, all
imaginable Protestations whilst they were Sick, of mending their Lives in Case
of Recovery: But when recovered, think no more on it, but return again (like a
Dog to his Vomit) to their old Ways. Which is a convincing Proof, how little
Deathbed Protestations and Designs are to be depended on.

So that it is not having a Sorrow upon a Deathbed, that is merely enough,
Numbers having gone oat of this World perfectly bathed in Tears, and in
appearance Sorrowful, and yet have been eternally lost:

And the Reason of this has been, because their Sorrow was for leaving the
World, and all they loved in it, and nor for having offended Almighty God. --
Again:

How can any One imagine that he shall be able upon a Deathbed to hate what he
has all his Life time so loved, so doated upon, and so eagerly pursued?

And yet every Dying Person that does not truly abominate his darling and
beloved Sin above any Thing in the World, and this for the Love of Almighty
God, who is highly offended thereby, will be eternally lost.

This is as true, as that he has committed the Sin, which when once committed,
the Delinquent is always Certain of, but entirely Uncertain of the Pardon of it.

Will it be easy for this Man, now all on a sudden to detest and abhor what he
has always so much loved, and who perhaps never made so much as one serious Act
of Repentance for it, in his whole Life.

Will it be easy for One who has doated on this Sin all his Life, now to abhor
it, because Death tears him from it, and because he now is no more able to
commit it.

No No: Deceive not your self, every Onanian, whoever you are that reads this
Book: This will One Day be your own Case really and in Fact, as now it is in
Imagination.

Oh! the miserable State, will such a One say to himself, whereto I find my
self now reduced! Oh! that whilst I was in Health, I had left off this Sin!

But I have brought my self now (by continuing in it) to that Pass, that I am
(morally speaking) unable to Repent for it. And now after all, I am come to my
Last Day, I am laid upon that Bed, from whence I shall rise no more, but must
go to appear before my God loaded and defiled with these my repeated Crimes.

Consider again, what long and languishing Farewells your Soul will give to her
Body and this World.

She will then take her Leave of all those past shameful Actions she has so
long been enslaved to, together with an eternal Farewell to Riches, Vanities,
Company, Pleasures, Pastimes, Friends, Neighbors, Kindred, Children, Husband,
Wife, and in sine to every Creature, and at last even to her own Body, which
she is now about to leave Pale, Hideous, and Loathsome.

And thus the poor Onanian expires, and becomes a mournful, but indeed a very
moving Sight to deter Lustful Persons, from the Commission of those Unnatural
Actions, which have now given so much Trouble to this poor deceased Wretch's
Soul at present, and rendered his Doom so uncertain for the future.

CHAP. VII. Of the Condition of an ONANIAN departed this Life.
THis SENSUALIST being after all now dead, although Resore, the most accomplished
and beautiful Person in the World, now inspires nothing but Horror:

Immediately ALL is silent, the Corpse is covered, the Curtains are drawn, and
every one retires, with a (faintly as they go) Lord have Mercy upon his Soul.

And the usual COMPLIMENT now made him is,

He is gone poor Man: HE WAS NO BOBY'S ENEMY BUT HIS OWN. God's Peace be with
him, they will say: and that is all: He is gone after all his Pleasure, and has
carried all his Actions (for his Pasport) along with him:

And the Best they can say is, We hope he has made his Peace with God, etc. Oh
Peace! How uncertain and doubt full art thou to this poor Wretch, that never
perhaps thought of thee, 'till reduced to a Dying-Bed?

Where is now the Beauty, the Galantry, and good Mien of this Person? What is
become of all his Pleasures?

But above all, what is become of his Soul?

Alas! of this we have all the Reason in the World, from his foregoing
Conduct, to apprehend but badly.

What now becomes of this Body so often defiled?

It begins already to grow offensive and burdensome.

So that notwithstanding all its former Charms and Beauty, every Body now flies
it, Nor would any one now lie but one only Night alone in a Bed with it, on any
Account whatsoever.

Husband, Wife, Children, Relations, Friends, Neighbors, Servants are all in a
hurry to get rid of it.

Those who loved it best, are now most desirous to have it conveyed away, and
put out of Sight:

They All make have to Nail it up, and put it into the Ground, and so get rid
of it: And Would not for any thing, so much as only Look at it, a few Weeks
after.

Thus this Person is forgot almost as soon as gone, every one returns to his
Business, your Friends seek other Friends, take new Measures, and hardly think
any more of you.

They concern themselves no more about you, than if you had never been, they
often undo all you had done, and in a little Time you are no more talked off.

All the Pleasures of this Sensualist thus end in a Shroud, a Coffin, the
Grave, Worms, Rottenness, and Corruption:

But the immortal Soul of this so often defiled Body is gone into a new Region
and amongst new Company, to be Judged and have its definitive Sentence pasted
upon it; either to go to the Right Hand, or to the Left:

Alas! whither shall yours go? What Way shall it take?

No other than that which it has begun here in this World. -- The Sentence
passed on unrepenting Onanians is this, Go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Math. 25.51.

Ponder well every One, that reads this, these weighty Words. Go, says the
Judge. A Word of Eternal Banishment from Happiness.

He calls them Cursed. O how dreadful a Curse must this be? A General Curse
including all Woes, an Irrevocable Curse, comprehending all Times:

The Judge adds, into Everlasting Fire: Oh Eternity of Pains, how dreadful will thou be to this poor Sensualist, that has done little else but indulged himself
in Pleasure?

Men are so used to hear Talk of Hell, that it very little affects them,
whereas if every Onanian was but truly sensible what Hell is, he would tremble
at the very thought of committing an Action, that so certainly Insures it to
him.

In order then to make every One, that may read this Book, as sensible of this
State of Misery, as our gross Conceptions, and material Comparisons can make it,

Imagine that you see in the Center of the Earth a vast Gulf and Lake of Fire
and Flames, and those two unhappy Men Er and Onan, together with all others who
have impenitently imitated them in the Perpetration of this abominable Fact,
plunged and roling in it, all covered and transpersed with Fire, which they not
only suck in with their Breath, but which enters also at their Eyes and Ears,
their Mouths and Nostrils casting forth dreadful Flames, their Skin scorched,
their Flesh, Blood, Humors, and Brains boiling up with the Violence of the
Burning, their Bones and Marrow all transparent with Fire, like a Piece of Iron
taken red Hot out of a Furnace, and all the Parts of their Bodies glowing with
Fire.

Having here put Er along with his Brother Onan, the Reader doubtless will
desire to know, whether or not the Crime of Er was the same as that of Onan,
the Holy Scripture mentioning only of him, That Er Judah's First Born was
wicked in the Sight of the Lord, and the Lord slew him. Genesis 38.7.

And afterward Verse 10. in the Cambridge Edition of the English Bible,
speaking of the Punishment of Onan, says that The Lord slew him ALSO.

Commentators on this Place of the Scripture all agree, that the Crime of these
two Brothers Er and Onan was exactly the same as to the Fact, but only,
different as to the Motive: Er would not have his Wife Thamar bear Children, to
preserve her Beauty.

Onan would not have her bear a Child by him, because (according to the Law) it
would not be called by his Name, nor esteemed HIS. Thus St. Austin, lib. 22.
contra Eaustum, cap. 84. Consentiunt Hebraei and Christiani tam Er quam Onan
peccasse eodem peccato Mollitiei, quod est contra naturam generationis: Sed Er
fecit, ne scilicet Puerperia aliquid de pulchritudine suae Uxoris decerperet,
Onan vero ex alio motivo, ut ex Scriptura patet. -- But to return to our
Subject.

How glad would these two unhappy Men be to suffer only from Our Fire? But
alas there is no comparison between it, and the Fire of Hell.

St. Austin compares Our Fire to it, as only a painted Fire. Our Fire is
lightsome, their's is dark and horrible.

Ours is the Effect of the Goodness, and Bounty of God, their's is the Product
of his incensed Omnipotence.

Again: Represent to your self a Man tormented with the Gout, or some other
violent Pain.

What Torment does he feel? How does he cry out?

How willingly would he die to put an End to his Torture? And yet he suffers
only in some ONE Part of his Body: He has the Liberty of complaining, and the
Satisfaction of seeing himself pitied.

But what would he undergo, if every Member and Part of his Body suffered the
same Torment?

And if instead of helping and pitying him, every Stander-by should abuse and
upbraid him without any Liberty of Complaining?

In Hell, the Damned do not only suffer the Pains to which we are subject in
this Life, they suffer all these and infinitely more, their Torments are
universal, violent, complicated, and unsupportable, and yet they MUST and do in
every Instant of Time feel them ALL, and in the Midst of them ALL, they cannot
receive, or even so much as hope for any Respite, Ease, or Comfort.

What would only ONE poor single Drop of Water be against such a Sea and
Torrent of Flames? And yet such a poor Refreshment, such a mere Nothing is and
ever will ^^ce denied them, as it was to the rich Man in Hell, who ^^eg'd it of
Lazarus. Luke 16.24.

The Sick find some Ease in tumbling and removing from one Place to another,
but unhappy Onan together with his Brother Er, and their Followers, are now at
this Time that You read this, in this Fire immovable as at Rock.

But all this is the least Part of their Suffering; for notwithstanding all
these Torments are so excessive, yet it would be an inexpressible Comfort to
them, if they were but ever to have an End: But what adds infinitely to their
Miseries, is their Knowledge that all these Torments will be for all Eternity,
and never are to have an End.

So that notwithstanding all their Horror, there is no Manner of Hopes that
they will ever end, or diminish.

What are now the Thoughts of those two miserable Men Onan, and his Brother Er?
Who have now been in all these Torments almost Four Thousand Years,

For these two young Men were cut off by Alm. God for these Wickednesses in the
Prime of their Youths, about the Year of the World Two Thousand twenty nine,
neither Er nor Onan being 20 Years old when this happened to them, and
therefore ought to be a particular Example to all young Persons: And they know
that they are no nearer to the End of their Sufferings, than they were the very
first Moment they began them.

Was miserable Onan together with his Brother Er, obliged to fill only the
Hollow of a Man's Hand with each of their Tears, and each of them to drop but
ONE single Tear at the End of every Thousand Years: What a terrible Duration
would this be? Onan would have now shed but Three Tears toward it; and his
unhappy Brother Er just as many: But if each of them were obliged at the same
Rate of One single Tear for every Thousand Years to make a Brook or a River
with their Tears, or even to fill the Sea, what a prodigious Length of Time
would this require? Our Imaginations are Lost and confounded, our Thoughts are
stunned in so vast a Duration.

And yet all this great and inconceivable Extent of Time is nothing to
Eternity, and that Duration which these unhappy Wretches are to suffer.

A Time WILL come when Onan and every one of his Imitators will be able to say,
that One Tear for every Thousand Years that I have been in Hell would have been
equal to the Sea, would have drowned the World, and would have filled up the
immence Space between Heaven and Earth, and yet I am to begin again, to shed
the same Quantity of Tears over, and over, and ever again; having an Eternity
of Torments to suffer even Millions of Ages after the World shall be ended.

So that there WILL be a Time when Onan himself will be able to say, that
having Already shed as many Tears at the Rate of One only single Tear for every
Thousand Years, as would fill the whole Sea, as many times over again, as there
are (in all the Fields and Meadows in the World, and throughout the whole
Universe) Blades of Grass and Corn in the Fields, Leaves on the Trees, Grains
of Sand in the Sea, and upon its Shore, and Stars in the Firmament, yet I am
now after all this to begin my Work over and over again.

The same also WILL one Day every Onanian be able (as well as Onan himself)
with inconceivable Regret to say. And all this for a base Pleasure of only a
Moment.

Our Imagination is perfectly Lost, and our Thoughts are swallowed up, stunned
and confounded, in the View of such a vast extent of Duration, insomuch that
after Millions of Ages as many Times multiplied, unhappy Onan will still have
his Work to begin, over again, as fresh and as much A new, as the very first
Moment he entered there, and every Onanian the same.

O DREADFUL! OH INCOMPREHENSIBLE ETERNITY!

Was Onan to burn only as many Millions of Ages, as there have passed Minutes
since the Creation of the World, which is now Five Thousand Seven Hundned, and
Seventy odd, Years ago, his Pains would at least one Time have an End, but he
knows his Torments will NEVER end.

When every One that is in Hell reflects on this and compares it with the
inconsiderable Time his Pleasure, for which he is condemned, lasted when he was
in this World, what must his Rage be?

Where are now those great Men, who have for past Ages enjoyed all this World
could give them?

What are they the better for all their Sensuality, Debauchery, and Pleasure,
if they are Damned?

All Pleasure is now past and gone, as if it had never been, but the Soul will
FOR EVER BE, and that miserably too, if not prevented by a true Repentance.

If these Reflections make no Impression upon an Onanian that reads this; if
this Eternity does not touch him, can he call himself a rational Creature?

But to represent to the Reader in Epitome all these awakening Truths together,
nothing is more proper, than a Version ( Mutatis Mutandis, for the Exigency of,
and Application to our present Subject) of a certain celebrated Latin Hymn on
the terrible Day of Judgment, beginning Dies Irae dies illa, etc.

COME it WILL that dreadful Day,
Which shall the World in Ashes lay,
As David, and the Sybills say.
A Trumpet first will rend the Skies,
And all wherever laid, must rise,
To appear before this Great Assize.
How will the SELF-DEFILED grow Pale,
To see their Judge with Sword and Scale,
Ready to weigh the Crimes of all.
Before that Judge, whose Hand, whose Eye,
None can endure, yet none can fly,
They MUST appear to live or die.
Nature and Death shall with surprise,
Behold the Pale Offender rise,
Before his Judge with guilty Eyes.
The great Account Book then shall li^
Open to every Offender's Eye,
To try his Self-Defilements by.
Then sits the Judge upon his Throne,
And makes all Self-Defilements known,
When each Onanian knows HIS OWN.
Each SELF-ABUSE will open lie,
No Crime so Secret then can fly
This Judge's fierce All-Seeing Eye.
Thus sits the Judge himself and Tries,
No shifting from his angry Eyes,
No Crime escapes, who'ere deserves it, Dies.
O then! Poor I, what shall I do?
To save me from this dreadful Blow,
When Saints themselves are scarce secure from Woe.
Thou mighty formidable King,
Thou Mercy's unexhausted Spring,
To poor Onanians Pity bring.
Forget not what my Ransom cost,
Nor let my dear-bought Soul be Lost,
In Storms of guilty Terror tossed.
Surrounded with amazing Fears,
Whose Load my Soul with Anguish bears,
I Sigh, I weep; accept my Tears.
True it is, I Am Guilty, ere thou try me,
My Self-Defilements now descry me,
But Mercy Lord, Mercy do not deny me.
Thy granting Magdalen Relief,
And opening Heaven to the Thief,
Has given me Hope; now give Relief.
Reject not my unworthy Prayer,
Preserve me from that dangerous Snare,
Which Death, and gaping Hell prepare.
And then those great Assizes done,
And all the Cursed in the Fire thrown,
Say, Come ye Blessed, meaning me for one.
Lord this I beg on bended Knee,
With Heart contrite as Ashes be,
That thou take Care both of my End and me.
From what then has been here said, let every Onanian consider the Uncertainty
of the Day of his Death:

And let him say, Oh my Soul, thou must one Day OUT of this so often Defied
Body: But when, shall that Day be?

Shall it be in Winter, or in Summer?

In City or in Country? By Day or by Night?

Shall it be suddenly, or on Notice given thee?

By Sickness, or by Accident? Shall thou have Leisure and Time to repent, and
make thy Peace with God or not?

Shall thou have the Assistance of a spiritual Friend?

Alas! Of all this We know nothing.

Only certain it is, that we are to DIE, and that always sooner and less
prepared than we imagine.

And that then the World will End in regard of you:

Having now thus far laid before the Reader these dismal Consequences,
attending this wretched Sin, in order effectually to deter Persons from it:

It may not be amiss, next to consider of some Assistance for those unhappy
Persons, who have fallen into it, and thereby suffered a Share of those
Inconveniences abovementioned.

CHAP. VIII. What the usual Misfortune is that attends the Sin of
Self-Defilement: And how to remedy it.
THE common ill Effect the Habit of this Vice of Self-Defilement has on the
Body, is to bring Persons of either Sex insensibly into a Gleet, or other such
draining Weaknesses as hereafter will be shown:

Which Disorders are the Forerunners of various Pains, Aches, and other
Ailments about the Body, wastes the Spirits, decays the Strength, causes
particular Pains, and Dizzyness in the Head, and so wears out the Body, as to
bring it in the End into a Consumption.

And what also is to be much lamented is, that these Ailments are of such an
Out of the Way kind from common Distempers (to say nothing of the Shame that
attends them, which usually keeps Persons from discovering their Condition to
another in order to obtain a Cure) that the best Physicians are oftentimes
puzzled with them.

And for these Reasons it is, that so many unhappy Persons are daily ruined,
and their Constitutions utterly Broke and spoiled by these Sort of Gleets and
Weaknesses, caused by this wretched Sin of Self-Defilement, for want of the
right and proper Method of curing them.

As then a great many Persons will doubtless read this Book in Hopes of Relief
from it, the next thing to be considered shall be, of the most rational Method
of Cure, according to the Principles of Anatomy and Physic, of these Gleets
and draining Weaknesses in either Sex, consequent from, and caused by a Habit
of this Vice.

And which cannot fail of being very acceptable to every Reader laboring under
them, because, there is no Treatise hitherto extant, that has so treated of
this Matter, as to assist Persons satisfactorily in their Cure.

But as to be able to cure a Distemper, there must be a perfect Knowledge had
of its Cause (or else it is only guess Work, and acting in the Dark) (...), says
Hippocrates, He that knows best the Cause of an All^ment or Distemper, is the
most likely Person Best to cure it, which made that great Physician Celsus
afterward say, That Recte curaturum quem prima Origo causoe non fefellerit.

Therefore, in order to explicate how it comes to pass that a Gleet, etc. is
thus so Usually caused by this Abominable Vice, and thereby be led into the
truest Method of its Cure, and prevent the Ruin of Numbers of Persons and their
Families, whom this wretched Sin of Self-Defilement has been the Bane of, it
will first of all be absolutely necessary to examine into the Anatomy of that
particular Part of the Body where these Gleets are situated. As

First. To examine its inward Structure and Make.

2dly. What Alterations this Sin of Self-Defilement is capable of causing in
this its inward Make and Structure, and How it comes to cause them? -- 3dly.
What Effects such Alterations caused by this Sin, are likely to produce.

And Lastly, Whether or no these Effects are such as Persons addicted to this
Vice, find in themselves, who have by it brought such a Gleet, or Weakness upon
them.

Which Observations being premised, we shall afterward enquire how it happens
that such a Change of State of these mucous Glands, viz. from an elastick,
springy, and strong State, to a limber, loose, and flaccid one, can produce,
and be the Cause of that Quantity of Matter which drips and comes away in the
Course of a Gleet, caused by the vicious habit of this Sin of Self-Defilement.

Or in other Terms, (but the Meaning is still the same) Whether or no, the
productive Cause of a Gleet, ie. the Relaxation of the Orifices or Mouths of
the mucous Glands in the Urethra, can so far increase the Quantity of Liquor
naturally produced by these Glands, as to be such as is experienced by Persons
who have a Gleet, etc. upon them.

Hence the Motive of proceeding thus with our present Subject is, First, the
great Inconvenience that Persons afflicted with a Gleet lie under, from the
Quantities of Physic exhibited to them for their Cure, which even it self is a
Disease, and often serves for little else than breaking a sound Constitution,
or making a bad one worse:

Secondly, The great Uneasyness (notwithstanding a daily Change of Linen)
which such Persons harrass'd thus with a Gleet, or other such Weakness,
oftentimes for a long while labor under, by Reason of such a Dripping
continually upon them: And which tho for the present may give no other Trouble,
than as it is opposite to Cleanliness, (being no pleasant Companion to a clean
neat Person) yet will in Time impair and break the best of Constitutions, and
most certainly bring on a Consumption, being a constant Drain and Wast of the
Animal Spirits, as in the Second Volume will be clearly showed.

CHAP. IX. Some few Anatomical Obsevations necessary to be taken Notice of, in
order to a right Knowledge of the true C^use, Seat, and. Nature of GLEETS, etc.
caused by this Vice, or otherwise.
BY a Gleet, or other such draining Weakness, which Onanians have by their
wicked Practice drawn upon themselves, is here understood an Involuntary and
almost constant Efflux or Dripping away of Matter from a human Body, and that
in much the same Quantity, whether the Person be asleep or awake, this Gleet
being of just the same Kind as any other Gleet following any ill Distemper,
such as the Secret Disease and its Cure, etc.

From this Definition it naturally offers it self to our Consideration, to
enquire into the Cause of this Efflux or Coming away of Matter, and How it
happens that such a Quantity of it should thus involuntarily come away.

Which Difficulty will easily be removed by examining ti^^ ^^^^ard Anatomical
Structure and Make of that particular Pa^^ where this Weakness is situated,
which is the only Thing that can give Light to our present Question:

And then to examine, if there is naturally any Liquor separated in that Part,
capable of becoming the Matter of that Epidemical Weakness and common Companion
of Persons habituated to this Vice, usually called a Gleet.

It is observable by Anatomy, that in the Nervo-Spongious Substance of the
Urethra or Urinary Passage, there are several Glandulous Openings, like so many
little Pin-holes, first discovered by that great Anatomist Mr. Cowper, which
serve as so many excretory Ducts or Channels designed by Nature constantly to
convey and furnish a certain viscid, clammy, mucous Kind of Liquor or Moisture
into the Urinary Passage; the Use of which Liquor is to lubricate and besmear
by its Viscidity the Pipe or Passage, and thereby to preserve and defend it
from being fretted and corroded by the sharp Salts of the Urine which is daily
passing through it, and which, without this defensative Liquor would certainly be
fretted, and become raw, and by consequence, Sore as any fleshy Part would be,
that should have such a salt sharp fretting Liquor as Urine so often passing
over it, unless it were preserved by some such proper Defensative, as the
continual anointing or besmearing it with some such smooth, soft, unctuous
Substance would be:

Insomuch that were it not for this Slimy Liquor or Moisture that Nature is
continually supplying the Urinary Passage with, by means of those glandulous
Openings just now mentioned, to keep it thus moist, it would in a little Time
become so fretted and raw, by the Sharpness of the Urine daily passing through
it, that All Mankind in general would have a perpetual Scalding and Heat of
Urine upon them.

By which is not here meant, that the Urine in it self would be hotter in that
Supposition, than it is now, but that the Passage being raw and sore for want
of that defensative slimy Moisture which now protects it, it would be fretted
by the Saltness of the Urine, and so would smart, and seem as it were to Burn
and Scald, whenever the Urine passed through it: Just as any other raw sore
Place divested of its Scarf-Skin, would smart and seem to burn, if one should
throw Urine or salt Water upon it.

This being thus established from the nice Anatomical Inspection of the inward
Structure and Make of the Urethra,

We are next to consider what Changes and Alterations these glandulous Openings
in the Passage, are subject to, and capable of: And then, whether or no such
Changes can furnish us with such a large Supply of Matter as is experienced
Involuntarily to drip away from Persons who have that Weakness commonly called
a Gleet upon them.

Our next Endeavor then must be to examine How the Urethra only and the
glandulous Openings abovementioned which it contains, are able to furnish so
great a Quantity of Matter, as is observed to be involuntarily discharged in
the Course of any Sore of Gleet.

In order to which we must consider, That Nature designing these Glands in the
Urethra constantly to furnish and supply a certain Moisture to the whole Pipe
or Passage, which may defend it from being fretted by the sharp Urine so
frequently passing through it, as has been already ^hewed, the Orifices or
Mouths of these Glands in entire ^ealthy, sound, hail Persons, are in some
Measure, (to use ^he Comparison, servata always debita proportione) like the
Sphincter Muscles of the Anus, Bladder, etc.

By which is meant, that the Openings of these Glands, ^otwithstanding their
being so very small, have a certain Springiness and Elasticity proportionable
to their Bigness, and Size, belonging to them, by which they are endowed with a
certain Power of straitning, contracting, and drawing themselves together, more
or less, upon every Emission of that abovementioned Moisture Nature designs
them to supply the Urethra with: Just as the Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder is
endowed with a Power of retaining, holding, and keeping in the Urine.

And by this Means it is, that so much and no more of this Moisture is thrown
out of these ^lands into the Urethra, than is just necessary for the
lubricating and moistening it, preparatively for the Passage of the Urine.

So that as by reason of the Strength and Vigor of the Sphincter-Muscle, for
Example of the Bladder, the Neck and Mouth of it is endowed with a Power of
straitening, contracting and closing it self together after every Emission of
Urine, every one experiences in themselves a Power of either Holding, or
letting go their Water:

So, much in the same manner, by Reason of the Strength and Vigor of the
Orifices of these Glandules, they are endowed with a not unlike Power of
straitening, contracting, and drawing themselves together (which the Reader is
desired always to suppose to be in a Degree proportionable to their Bigness)
after every Emission of the mucous slimy Liquor they contain:

Which Strength being once lost, the Power of retaining and keeping in this
Liquor is also lost with it

The State then and Condition of these glandulous Openings (or as Dr. Drake
calls them, Mucous Glands, from their thus furnishing and supplying the Passage
with this Mucous slimy Liquor,) being thus considered in healthy Persons.

Our next Enquiry must be into the State of them in Persons afflicted with a
Gleet, or other such draining Weakness, after a vicious Habit of this Sin, or
otherwise.

Which State we shall soon be apprised of, by considering that when a Person
has been addicted to this Vice, by a frequent Pressure upon, and a violent, and
Unnatural Use, Forcing, and Irritation of these Glands, by the abominable Act
of this Sin, this Unnatural Forcing Practice has rendered them flaccid, limber,
weak, and loose, which before were healthy, vigorous, springy, and strong.

The Truth of these Assertions) abstracting from the Reasonableness they carry
along with them) will appear by giving an Account of the State of these Glands
as they have been observed in some Anatomical Dissections made of that
particular Part, where all Gleets are seated that is, the Urethra or Urinary
Passage.

That great Anatomist Mr. Cowper tells us, that to inform himself the better in
this Point, he dis^ected the Urinary Passage of several Criminals: Some of
which were healthy sound Persons: The others were executed with Gleets upon
'em, having been lustful libidinous wicked Men.

In the healthy found Persons he found these glandulous Openings to be so firm,
as to have had even a perfect Elasticity, or Springiness belonging to them:

Insomuch that upon pressing them, (but not without this Pressure) he says,
they discharged a certain Quantity of transparent viscous slimy Liquor, such as
it shows it self, and ought to be in statu sano; whereas if these Glands had
not had such a Firmness and Strength, in which consisted their Power of
retaining or letting go the viscid slimy Liquor they contain; this Liquor would
have slipped out of them without any such Pressure at all:

And by consequence, its not owzing out, but upon such a Pressure, was an
evident Mark of their Springiness and Strength. He also observed the whole
Urethra to be besmeared and lined with a viscous, slimy, unctuous Moisture,
which was discharged from these Glaudulous Openings or little Bags in order to
lubricate the Passage.

But in the Urethra of those Criminals executed with a Gleet upon them, the
Case was quite different:

He observed the mucous Glands all along the Urinary Passage to be limber,
flaccid, flabby, and loose, very much stretched, and dilated, and their
Orifices by the Help of a a nice Microscope to be visibly open, stretched,
dilated, and distended, and thereby totally destitute of their Strength and
Vigor; from whence he concluded, that they were also entirely deprived of
their retentive Faculty and Springyness, having no Power left of contracting
themselves upon any emission of that mucous slimy Liquor they contain, as those
other Glands could do in the Criminals that were executed in perfect Health.

This will appear still more clear, by an Example of Persons who have a
Diabetes upon them:

For, from the Loss of the Springiness and Tone of the Sphincter Muscle of the
Bladder, the Neck, and mouth of it is so weakened and relaxed, as to be deprived
of its retentive Faculty, through a want of that Power of contracting and drawing
it self together after any Emission of Urine, which healthy Persons experience
in themselves:

From whence it follows, that the Urine comes away involuntarily from them,
being altogether deprived of both that expulsive, as well as retentive Power
which healthy Persons have.

CHAP. X. How the abovementioned Weakness of the Mucous Glands, and their
Orifices in the Urethra, are the only Cause of all Sorts of Gleets, etc.
THE Springiness and retentive Faculty of the mucous Glands in the Urethra of
healthy found Persons consisting in their Strength and Power of either dilating
or contracting their Orifices or Ostiola, (as in the foregoing Chapter has been
showed) by which Power of retaining or letting out the viscous slimy Moisture
they contain, they discharge just so much and no more of it, than is just
necessary for the lubricating and besmearing the Passage:

It must of Necessity follow, that when these Glands are, by a violent and
unnatural Straining and Forceing of them by the vicious Habit of
Self-Defilement, so weakened as to become limber, flaccid, flabby, and loose,
they must be deprived of this retentive Power or Faculty also.

Insomuch that although these Glands in healthy sound Persons, are naturally so
Springy and Strong, as to discharge and let out into the Urethra, just so much
and no more of the slimy Liquor designed by Nature to besmear, and as it were
to Cover over the whole Tube or Passage, and thereby defend it from the
Sharpness of the Urine:

Yet in Persons who have a Gleet or other such Weakness upon them from this
vicious Practice, the Case is not so:

For the Offices or Ostiola of these Glands in these Persons are so weakened
and relaxed by the Violence, and repeated Unnatural Forceing of them, as to be
in a Manner always open, by which Means the mucous Liquor they contain, is
continually slipping out of them into the Urethra; the Openings of these Glands
not having Springiness, nor Strength lest to contract themselves, and thereby
to keep it in, as formerly they could.

By which Means the contained Liquor involuntarily and continually comes out
into the Urethra, and by sucessive Quantities of it pushing one after another,
thus drips and ownes away Involuntarily from the Body.

The Difficulty then that now remains, is to conceive how such very small
Glands and their Orifices can furnish such a Quantity of Matter, as is daily
experienced to flow away in some Gl^ets, and how the mucous Liquor which
naturally is discharged our of these Glands into the Urethra in healthy
Persons, should be increased to such a Degree, as it is in Persons who have a
Gleet.

To Clear this Matter, it cannot but be allowed, that these mucous Glands, as
little as they are, may naturally discharge into the Urethra for its
Lubrication as much of this Liquor in one Minute as may weigh at least one
quarter of a Grain: This in an Hour will be 15 Grains, or a quarter of a Dram:
In 24 Hours, or a Natural Day, it will amount to 6 Drams, which is 3 Quarters
of an Ounce; a Quantity sufficient in all Reason to give that Uneasiness to the
Person, as well as Wetness to the Linen, which is usually experienced by those
under die uncomfortable Circumstances of a Gleet upon them.

If you ask, how these Glands in the Urethra can discharge so great a Quantity
of Fluid, in the Time of a Gleet, above what they do in their natural State.

The Answer is, that it is manifest from the Animal Economy, that if any Gland
or excretory Duct be weakened, and deprived of its retentive Faculty, the
Quantity of Liquor that it discharges by Reason of chat Weakness, is
considerably augmented in Proportion to the Degree of Weakness with which these
Glands or Ducts are affected:

Just as a little Powder of Spanish Flies applied any where, by breaking through
the Texture of the Outward Scarf-Skin, does so weaken the Glands as soon to
excite a Blister, and by its thus weakening the Glands under the Scarf-Skin,
makes them discharge a Quantity of Matter immensly greater, than what would
naturally flow away otherwise from that Part by insensible Perspiration only.

Much in the same Manner, the Orifices of these Glands being weakened and
relaxed by the Unnatural Forcing Action of this Sin, have thereby lost their
retentive Faculty, and therefore cannot hold in the Liquor they contain, but
lets more of it slip away than the mere Lubrication of the Urethra requires,
and therefore it continually is discharging it self by that Dripping commonly
called a Gleet.

Thus the true Origin and Cause of, not only those particular Gleets and
Weaknesses, which are the Consequences of the vicious Practice of Self
Defilement, but also of any other Gleet, are clearly explicated, without
recourse to any other Part, or Parts, that have no Manner of Claim to fall
under our present Consideration, as for Example the Seminal Vessels, or the
Prostatae, or the Parastatae which Terms will be explicated in the Second
Volume.

And which Parts having been erroneously thought to furnish the Matter of a
Gleet* has been the Reason that the Vulgar so commonly (tho very improperly)
call almost every Gleet a Gonorrhaea, whereas they are widely different:

The only Seat of a Gleet, being no other than the mere Urinary Passage, and
not at all farther up in the Body.

Whereas that Efflux of Matter that is really and truly a Gonorrhaea, comes
from the Seminal Vessels themselves, as will be clearly showed in the next Volum

Hence all the Difficulties about a Gleet, or other such draining Weakness in
either Sex, whether proceeding from the vicious Habit of the odious Sin of
Self-Defilement, or from any ill Distemper, or its Cure (either of these Gleets
being of the same Nature,) are overcome in a few Words: Its Symptoms become
obvious upon a small Principle so clear in Anatomy, as to carry not only
Evidence along with it, but also more clearly explicates all the Symptoms and
Effects of it, than hitherto has been done.

These Gleets then being of just the lame Nature, and by consequence to be
cured by just the same Method, as other Gleets and Weaknesses are, which are
contracted by either a former ill Distemper, such as the Secret Disease, and
its Cure in either Sex; but more frequently in Women after hard and difficult
Labors, Colds contracted in Lyingsin, Wrenches, Falls, Hurts, Strains, and
other such innocent Causes, as will be hereafter showed.

To effect a Cure of them in either Sex, every Reader is referred to that
Method of Cure for Gleets and other such Weaknesses, which is treated of in the
15th Page of a little Book, entitled The Practical Scheme, and which Book is
Given Gratis at the three following Places, viz.

Up one Pair of Stairs at the Sign of that Celebrated Anodyne Necklace which
Dr. Chamberlen has Recommended for Children to Wear for the easy breeding and
cutting of their Teeth, just by the Rose Tavern, without Temple Bar.

At Mrs. Garway's at the Sign of the just now mentioned Book, entitled The
Practical Scheme, at the Royal Exchange-Gate, which is on Cornhill Side.

And at Mr. Greg's a Bookseller's Shop next to Northumberland-House at
Charing Cross.

Also: Where a Constitution has been Broke and empaired by a Habit of this
Vice, the Reader is referred to that Discourse on Broken Constitutions caused
by Self-Defilements, etc. in the said Practical Scheme, Page 16.

So that Persons laboring under these Disorders, may by this Means happily
find that Relief and Recovery of their Health and Constitution, which perhaps
they might never have the Opportunity otherwise of meeting with.

But more of all this in the Second Volum.

The End of the First Volum.

