AN ESSAY CONCERNING THE OUTWARD AND SALUTARY APPLICATION OF OILS ON THE HUMAN
BODY.

BY THE REV. WILLIAM MARTIN TRINDER, MD.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, By W. WILSON, St. Peter's Hill, Doctors'
Commons: AND SOLD BY T. N. LONGMAN, PATERNOSTER-ROW; J. COOK, OXFORD; AND
MESSRS. MERRILL, CAMBRIDGE.

M DCC XCVII.

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF PORTLAND, CHANCELLOR, THE
REVEREND DOCTOR BERDMORE, VICE CHANCELLOR, THE HEADS OF COLLEGES AND HALLS, AND
THE OTHER CONSTITUENT MEMBERS THEREOF, This humble Attempt to be useful, IS, IN
ALL FILIAL DUTY AND RESPECT, INSCRIBED BY WILLIAM MARTIN TRINDER, A GRADUATE OF
OXFORD, AND DOCTOR OF PHYSIC AT LEYDEN.

AN ESSAY.
WE read, in the Holy Scriptures, not only of wine that makes glad the heart
of man, but of oil to make his face to shine, or his outside, for so the word
(...) frequently signifies, and it ought, in this place, Psalm civ. 15. so to
be understood.

The ancients accustomed themselves to the outward application of oil, in order
to heighten the comeliness of their persons -- and they did well: for what
constitutes beauty more than the natural diffusion of gelatinous juices
extracted from the aliment, and brought forward, through the arteries, to all
parts of the body? or, if these be wanting, what better substitute can there be
than oils properly applied?

This practice of inunction was so general, and so frequent, that our Savior
gently reproved Simon, the Pharisee, for omitting this instance of civility.
Luke vii. 46. -- The rich and honorable were anointed with oils of the
greatest fragrance. -- (...). HOMER.
Thus due respect was shown to our blessed Lord by having precious ointment
poured upon his head. Mark xxvi. 7.

But the ancients used oil not only for the decoration and refreshment of their
persons, but for the preservation of their health and strength. After bathing,
they rubbed themselves over with ceromata to close the pores of the body, (...).
and thus to give strength to the system. They also anointed their heads with
ointments to prevent drunkenness. (...). ANACREON.
(Athenaeus lib. xv. cap. 13.) Before engaging in violent and fatiguing
exercises, they always used ceromata, or medicated oils, to prevent strains, to
make their limbs supple, and, by hindering transpiration, to preclude any great
waste of strength. Now although it must be confessed that the ancients were not
the most improved anatomists, yet their general and frequent practice in the
use of ointments and friction was excellent, being very preventative of
disease, and conducive to health, as will appear from the following statement
of facts.

1st. All over the human body are innumerable inhalants, which are the orifices
and branches of the absorbent vessels that ultimately terminate in the great
veins near the heart. These absorb and carry fluids into the body, but they
cannot carry any out.

2dly. There are also innumerable exhalants, which perforate the surface of the
skin, that are the extremities of the arteries, and which carry fluids out of
the body, but they cannot carry any in. According to Sanctorius, the
transpiration from the skin far exceeds, in quantity, all the excretions by the
other emunctories, and, comparatively to alvine discharges, the proportion is
as one to four, so that if the skin ejects twenty-four, the intestines shall
discharge only six ounces. If by any means the exhalants be so closed, as to
hinder the greater part of transpiration, it must be confessed that the
deliciae animalis vitae, that is to say, good eating, may be rendered, for a
time, unnecessary; for it appears in story, that wetting the body with salt
water, prevented hunger in six people, who were on a raft in the sea for six
days in the Gulf of Mexico; and Captain Bligh of the Bounty experienced the
same effect after he had been turned adrift, in a boat, by his crew, in the
Pacific Ocean.


3dly. Animal, or vital heat, which is most necessary to the nutrition and
preservation of the body, is generated by the decomposition in the lungs of
atmospheric air by animal gas BOERHAAVE, MARTIN, and others, were of opinion,
that the motion of the blood was the cause of animal heat. If so, how is it
that the vital heat is nearly the same in all persons in health, although the
circulation of the blood be very different? How is it that the vital heat shall
be the same in a young lady, sitting at her sampler, as in a sawyer, in the
violent exercise of his trade? The circulation shall be far above par in one,
and below it in the other; but, nevertheless, the vital heat shall be the same
in both!
Plenck.
. And hence it is, that the more and quicker we inspire atmospheric ai^ the
warmer we become, as in running up hill, or in vehement reading and speaking.
Vegetables perspire from their leaves as animals from their lungs. This
vegetable perspirable matter, when acted upon by the sun's light, produces the
pure part of the atmospheric, or vital air; hence it is, that exercise in a
garden, caeteris paribus, is far more salubrious than in the streets of a city.
That vital heat is generated by the aforesaid decomposition in the lungs,
appears from considering that animals, destitute of lungs, are not hotter than
the circumambient air, whereas the vital heat of animals possessed of lungs is
by no means dependent on the temperature of the air. In the human body it is
hardly ever less than 95 degrees, or more than 105 of Fahrenheit's tongue
thermometer; but if the living body, in a healthy state, be placed in contact
to much hotter bodies, it will not acquire their excess; nor, if in the midst
of much colder bodies, will it acquire their coldness; thus, on the coast of
Africa, where the heat of the climate shall rise to 140 degrees of Fahrenheit's
thermometer, the human body will retain its natural heat of 96 degrees, because
of the evaporation of sweat which generates coldness; hence it is, that the
negroes in the West India Islands endure labor in the sun far better than
white men, because, as it is said, of their quicker evaporation of perspirable
matter from their skin and lungs. So again in the frozen regions of the North,
the heat of the living body shall experience no material change; and this is
providential, for if the living body had not the means to resist excessive
heat, The heat of the room in which Dr. Blagden, and others, entered, was
raised, whilft they were in it, to 240o, and to 260o; these excessive heats
were borne for a considerable time, with little inconvenience, by the gentlemen
who exposed themselves to them, both naked and with their clothes on; nor was
the heat of Dr. Blagden's body at all increased, though the velocity of his
pulse was, in one instance, more than doubled. A blast of the heated air from a
pair of bellows was searcely to be endured, for the following obvious reason:
When the same air remained for any time in contact with the body, part of its
heat was destroyed, and, consequently, the body was surrounded with a colder
medium than the air of the room; whereas, when fresh portions of the air were
applied to the body in such a quick succession that no part of it could remain
in contact a sufficient time to be cooled, the heat was seasibly greater. Vide
CHAMBERS'S Dictionary, under the article HEAT.


the fluids would become too thin, run out, or putrify; and if it could not
resist excessive cold, the fluids of the body could not circulate, and, of
course, become coagulant.

This vital heat is the cause of that strong intestine action by which the
solids of the body are expanded, the fluids broke down and divided, and
superfluous and heterogeneous matter separated and discharged. When it is
sufficiently strong, in a healthy state, This vital heat may be in excess, as
in hectic and inflammatory fevers, acute rheumatism, etc. Que^e, -- Is not
vitiated air, in jails, when combined with animal gas, productive of patrid
miasma?
it forces the blood and juices into the extreme arteries, the skin becomes
soft and glowing, and the flesh turgescent from that bland oleaginous aliment
so well, and so universally diffused.

4thly. Friction, although far less preservative and restorative than bodily
exercise in the open country air, especially if used to the point of fatigue,
yet, in one particular, it is more serviceable, because of its topical
application.

Friction, by obliging the veins to admit of distension, causes the arterial
blood more abundantly to flow into them, hereby increasing the velocity of the
circulation, diffusing the vital heat, and augmenting vigor; moreover, the
venal blood, by means of friction, runs quicker toward the heart, which it
stimulates to a greater propulsion of the blood and juices over the whole body.

If cold coagulated blood be rubbed, in a glass mortar, it will again become a
frothy liquid of a crimson color. It is said, indeed, that this effect arises
from fresh surfaces of blood being exposed to the atmospheric air, with the
oxygen, of which it immediately combines, restoring it to the same floridity as
when in the body; nevertheless, it is also true, that gentle friction so
attenuates stagnant blood, in bruises, that it will enter into the mouths of
the bibulous veins.

Friction moves and attenuates the otherwise immeable juices in the vessels
that encumber and relax the nervous system; but if vehemently and immoderately
used it excites inflammation, and, by too much, increasing the contraction of
the heat and arteries, the liquids exhale, and the body becomes parched and
dry. Immoderate labor, in like manner, is prejudicial to the health, and it
prevents longevity, for hard-working people soon look old; and it is
observable, that women, in general, live longer than men.

5thly. Oil, whether contained in the celular membrane of the body, or
externally applied, greatly, by its lubricity, facilitates muscular motion. It
keeps off the coldness of the atmosphere; hence, fat persons are not so
susceptible of cold as lean people, and it is the best preventive against
chilblains. It gives whiteness to the tender skin; hence it is, that the
fattest parts of the body are the whitest, as the breasts of young women. -- It
gives roundness and beauty to the human form; for the skin, when not distended
by it, contracts itself into unsightly wrinkles. It gives nourishment to the
body, for being absorbed by the inhalants, it is carried, with the chyle, into
the blood. If it be said that oil, externally applied, stops the excretory
pores, thereby preventing sweat and insensible perspiration, I answer, from my
own experience, that it does not, but it rather promotes both, especially if
applied by brisk friction, for it cleanses the exhalants of that ever
encrusting luting sordes, which covers even the most delicate persons, and
which the vapor bath soon discovers to every individual. The cuticle, or upper
skin, by time, wears rough, and decays, and a new one is generated; hence it
is, that serpenes and shellfish, every summer, become new coated. Vegetables
and trees seem to have this property, according to the ingenious Mr. FORSYTH's
experiments on this curious subject.
The ancients, who were in the frequent practice of inunction, never found
plain oil to stop the pores; for when they wished to stop or hinder
transpiration, they used wax with their oil; such were the precious ceromata,
mentioned by Athenaeus, (Deipnosoph 5.) as of saffron, sweet marjoram,
fenugreek, flower-de-luce, and of roses; and not thinking even these
preparations sufficiently obstructive of the pores, they, before engaging in
gymnastic exercises, and after anointing themselves with oil, rolled themselves
in the sand.

From what I have written concerning the inhalants, the exhalants, vital heat,
friction and oil, I think, that the following practice will be thought, by the
public, reasonable, useful and important.

In incipient dropsy, particularly the leucophlegmatic, and anasarcous (arising
from the debility of the vascular system), the chief cure is to strengthen the
vessels by friction, and a stimulating oil; so that the absorbents shall take
up the water from the cavities, and the perspiratory powers recover their
wonted action. That the dropsy does not arise, as is commonly imagined, from an
atony, or laxity of the whole body, and the viscera thereof, appears from this
consideration, that many cachectic persons are not dropsical, and many who have
cisted dropsy, are entirely free from any cachexy whatsoever.

In chronic rheumatism, owing to a serous colluvies of humors predominant
about the moving fibers of the muscles; as also in stiffness, and rigidity of
the joints and muscles, particularly in old military men, arising from frequent
and long exposures to the injuries of the weather, and from old healed-up
wounds and fractures; medicated oils, with a flesh-brush, together with
electrical shocks on the stiffened parts, will be found very serviceable.

The fibers of old people are hard and rigid, their perspiration is little, and
that bland vapor which formerly bedewed their bodies is no more; inunction,
with friction to them, is most salutary, for the animal warmth and juices are
hereby drawn into the skin, and the oil, by its nourishing powers, renovates
and invigorates the whole system. The sagacious Sydenham had great success in
the recovery of debilitated nature, by recommending healthy young men as
bedfellows to the aged and infirm; he said, that heat alone was not the cause
of restoration, for the application of warm napkins did no good, (sec. i. cap.
iv. p. 79.) it was therefore only to be ascribed to the mild oleaginous
effluvia. Now, if the human oleaginous effluvia be so penetrating and balsamic
as to afford revivifying nourishment by absorption, why should not the oil of
sweet-almonds, for instance, do the same thing, especially when broke down and
pressed in, by heat and friction.

Soldiers that are exposed to excessive heats in hot countries, should
frequently be ordered to rub their bodies with ceromata, to prevent too great a
waste of strength by perspiration; and when in cold countries, they are exposed
to rain, and sleep in damp camps, they should be enjoined to follow the
practice of inunction; for being generally young men, such stimuli would
quickly arouse their native heat, draw it to the surface, and keep it there,
and also, by closing the inhalants, effectually shut out an otherwise too
penetrating a humidity.

After hard labor, or excessive fatigue, the outward use of oil is wonderfully
restorative and refreshing: this is not only testified by the practice of the
ancient Athletae, but by some mowers at Hendon, this summer, who, before the
application, were nearly exhausted by excessive labor at task work, but
afterward followed it up with ease and pleasure.

After warm bathing in the winter season, the application of a ceroma is very
advisable, for by rendering the inhalants impervious to the cold air, colds
are prevented, and, by closing the orifices of exhalants, the dewy, nutritious
juice, and vital heat (drawn toward the skin by the bath) is then retained,
which must greatly warm and invigorate the system.

An imperfect paralysis in the aged, not only arises from a deficiency of
vigor, and a relaxation of nerves, strained and worn by various destroying
causes, as gluttony, ebriety, etc. but often it is owing to a supineness of the
vital principle, or the Anima-Medica, See the curious and elegant oration of
the late learned Dr. Nicholls, (Physician to George the IId.) on the Powers of
the Anima Medica, before the College of Physicians in London.
for terror, or imminent danger, has often been the means of restoring those
limbs (during the paroxysm of fear) that were before useless. Here then it
seems, that impotency is not the cause, but sloth; surely then the natural and
best cure must be obtained from exercise, friction, and stimulating oil.

Chilly, sedentary persons who ill endure the winter's cold, should frequently
use friction, and a stimulating oil, for it is, through debility from want of
exertion, that the arteries do not propel the fluids with such force as would
prove sufficient to distend the exhalants in the skin.

A nervous unhappiness, with susceptibility of cold is often occasioned by a
thick cacochymy of humors, not at all inflammatory; in this case, after proper
evacuation, it is proper to draw the juices to the surface of the body by light
frictions with the aromata, so indeed as to promote the due circulation of the
blood, but not by violent application, to encumber the heart and lungs by the
reflux of these thick and foul humors. The mind of man may be considered
figuratively as the axle-tree, round which the wheel of life can best turn, for
although it may be unconscious of its power, yet it works wonders on the solids
and fluids of the body, rectifying their irregularity, and reducing them to
moderation, or else rendering them inordinate and destructive. But if the mind
have power over the body, so also has the body a wonder-working power over the
mind, for it is the blood that constitutes the temperament of different
persons. The red part abounds in the sanguineous, whose veins are large and
cerulean, the head thin of hair, the flesh soft and abundant, and the cheeks of
a rosy color. Persons of this temperament are fond of pleasure, they are soon
but not long angry, easily persuaded and inconstant.

The albumenous part of the blood abounds in the petuitous, whose veins are
small and almost imperceptible; the face pale, the flesh abundant, but cold and
flaccid. The mind is usually placid and serene, regardful of decorum, and of
the honestum, and of what it ought to do, but generally too lazy to exert its
powers.

When the blood is too concrete, having lost its proper fluidity, it forms the
melancholic temperament. The flesh and hair are of a very dark color, as among
the Jews, (who are commonly of this temperament) the head frequently bald. The
body is very lean and dry, the blood vessels dense and thin. The mind is
constant to its purpose, not hasty, mindful of injuries, and remarkable for
earnestness in thinking.

From these temperaments are made up the rest, as the bilious, where the body
is thin, the color brown, the hair black, crisp and bushy, the veins large,
the mind intelligent and resolute.

The phlegmatic are cold, not hairy, subject to baldness, fat and unweildly,
liable to tumors, the mind sometimes timid, generally inoffensive. The warm
temperament is in body agile and robust, well covered with yellow, thick, and
copious pile, as the head with hair; the angles of the eyes, and also the face
and lips are of a very red color, the pulse full and frequent, the mind
capable, but impetuous.

But nevertheless, to vindicate the supremacy of the mind over the body, it is
to be observed that, by the medicinal and dietetic art, one temperament may be
altered, in some degree into another, so that the pituitous may become
sanguineous, the sanguineous melancholic et vice versa. St. Paul says, "I keep
my body under, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I
have preached to others, I myself should be a cast away." 1 Cor. ix. 27.
Undoubtedly the mind can, and often does reduce the body to reason, by the
means of diet and the forbearing virtues; hence the use of fasting and
religious meditation: but here observe, that what would stimulate one person,
say of a hot temperament, into passion, might only lift up another who is
pituitous into reasonable comfort.

Phlegmatic persons of irritable habits of body (whose circulation is weak, the
blood not being sent in sufficient force to the surface, so as in a due degree,
to promote perspiration, and who by their inhalants, absorb more moisture from
the atmosphere than stronger people), should perseveringly use friction, if not
oil; they should also pay particular attention to diet. They should avoid sugar
and butter, which, by thickening the juices, impedes the circulation. Instead
of eating glary food, as pig-meat and fatted calf, they should be contented
with a more drying and attenuating diet, which would prevent alarming portions
of lymph from collecting in the lungs, or in the joints. True indeed it is,
that although a person be charged with too much lymph he may continue in
health, but how long these defluxions may remain benign and unhurtful, no one
can say, for also true it is, that, by the adverse diameters of a very few
vessels, the juices may soon become stagnant and banefully acrimonious. The too
abundant lymph should be discharged by drastic purges, at long intervals, and
for diet, such as strengthens the elasticity of the fibers, should be
recommended. Roast meat Roasting, except the little that flies off by vapor,
concentrates the juices of the meat within it, giving the meat an empyreumatic
and stimulating flavor; whereas, boiling discharges the gelatinous part and
essential oil of the meat into the water, rendering it insapid; therefore, it
will not. I believe, be too much to say, that half a pound of roast will afford
as much nourishment with a greater stimulus, as three quarters of a pound of
boiled meat; moreover, the organs of digestion require fibrous matter to work
upon, as will appear from the following experiment, which, I heard, was tried
by an eminent surgeon in London: He confined one large dog to the broth of meat
boiled down, as we say, to rags, and another large dog to the ragged meat so
boiled down, allowing him, I suppose, a little water to quench his thirst. The
dog that drank the broth soon became emaciated, and died; but he that eat the
fibers of the meat remained in health, and grew fat. The old French way of
dressing meat with little or no water, but with a few vegetables, as potatoes,
in a pan so closely covered or luted, as to confine all the vapor or essential
oil within, is, me judice, the most palatable, and the best mode of cookery.


and game are proper; fruits, if any, should be somewhat austere, and also the
wine; say good rough port, but ever let this dietetic rule be carefully
observed, "ne quid nemis."

Wine, if medically taken, augments the strength of the animal fibers and
rarifies the juices of the body; but if immoderately drank, it excites a
universal spasm that ends in weakness and relaxation, as the trembling hands
and staggering gate of bacchanalians sufficiently evince. Wine after much use
loses its stimulating power; hence it is that hard-drinkers proceed from bad to
worse, from wine to the drinking of pure spirit; thus destroying their health,
their reputation, and their life, for a very transient and miserable
satisfaction. In general debility brought on by drinking spirituous liquors,
with loss of appetite, it is, first, advisable for the patient to leave off
drinking one fourth of his usual quantity: if, in a fortnight, his appetite
somewhat returns, let him leave off another fourth part, and so every fortnight
continue the decrease, 'till the burning potation be totally exchanged for a
daily, but small quantity of red port wine. If indeed, the natural powers of
digestion be quite destroyed, by the means of spirituous liquors, then there is
but little hope of restoration.
But wine, if moderately taken, enables the vessels of the body with increased
alacrity to take up and disperse nourishment over the system. It is of
excellent use after fatigue; also in the cure of mental languors, and in urgent
fears, for it not only braces the fibers, but it tonifies the mind; and
therefore it is that soldiers and sailors after a dram of spirituous liquor,
despise danger, and joyously enter into a battle.

Again, pituitous persons who use but little exercise, are particularly
susceptible of the ill effects of a damp air, which although, by the
thermometer, may not be colder than a dry one, is more penetrating because it
conducts better, filling the inhalants with crude noxious vapor; hence
swellings of the great joints of the limbs are frequent, which are mistaken for
the gout. Certainly the best preservatives are strong daily exercise to the
point of fatigue, so as to sweat; a dry cardiac diet; frequent friction with
ceromata of essential oil, to counteract the baneful effects of the atmosphere;
and such clothing as of wool close to the skin, which, being a bad conductor,
will prevent the inhalants from improper absorption. By warm clothing, we may
indeed avoid in part, a cold humidity, but if we would do so entirely, the face
and the hands must be also clothed; whereas, by counteracting the humidity of
the air by stimulants and essential oils, every good effect will be answered,
without acquiring the bad habit of too warm clothing.


It is also not uncommon for such persons to be troubled with an aqueous, not a
chyliferous, diabetes, for by checked exhalation, what is not discharged by
perspiration and sweat, passes through the bladder; and their too copious
absorption of circumambient fluids doubtless increases the quantity of urine.
Perspiratio ad urinam in aestate est in ratione, 5. 3; in hyeme vero ut, 2. 3.
This very common, and too unnoticed, yet dangerous disease, may, I think, be
abated if not entirely cured, by the following practice: -- If it arise from
hectic fever, mucilages (perhaps with acids to correct the hectic) are
serviceable; but if from hysteric, or any transitory relaxing causes, mucilages
and diffusible stimuli are more proper. In either case the primae viae should
be cleansed first by ipecacuanha, then by rhubarb; strengtheners, and mild
astringents should be used; a dry binding diet, and morning and evening
friction in a warm room, with a defensive oil against damp weather, Cold gives
additional strength to persons already strong in health, because of the
re-action of the vital power, and because the air may be nearly uncharged with
vapor, and therefore more of it, in a given time, is inhaled; but cold
debilitates very weak and sedentary people, because of the want of re-action.
Damp and cold air, or damp and hot air, is hurtful to all persons, because less
pure air, and too much humidity is inhaled by the skin and lungs. Certainly the
healthiest is the warm and dry atmosphere, which ought to be a consideration of
some weight to valetudinarians who can afford either to change their residence,
or to make it comfortable.
should be earnestly recommended.

Sometimes cold and damp air shall so relax the nervous system, as to deprive
the patient of the use of his limbs; then a brisk vomit and the application, by
friction, of warm medicated oil on the back bone, or on the inert limbs, will
be of great service.

The disease of children, called the rickets, after discharging the redundant
lymph by vomits and detergent doses of rhubarb, is to be cured by friction, and
with woollen cloths properly fumigated.

It is not uncommon to see, in young sedentary people, the skin discolored,
the muscles lank, the face pale and variously disfigured with pustules; the
spirits generally in a low state, and the body sluggish. The cure is to excite
the perspiratory powers by bodily labor, friction, roast meat, and wine; and
to heal the face by lenient innoxious liniment.

Old strains, and stubborn pains in the back, loins, and elsewhere, are, for
the most part, curable by friction and medicated oil, and even incipient white
swellings, that would otherwise cripple or render the limb useless, are thus to
be dispersed and destroyed.

Dry white scaly eruptions on the elbows and knees, even of long standing, may
be cured by friction and medicated oil; When, through neglect, the hair of the
head in children becomes matted and stuck together, by a viscid humor that the
exhalants cast upon the skin, the safest and speediest cure, after cutting off
the hair, is, daily to sponge the head with hot water, always taking care,
after spunging, to dry the head well with hot cloths.
and here I must remark, that although the cure of the sea scurvy may be
obtained by the vegetable acid of oranges and lemons, yet I submit to the
consideration of the surgeons of the navy, whether or not, rubbing the oil of
the rinds on the diseased parts, would not accelerate the cure.

After fevers, and some chronical diseases, the hair of the head falls off,
either because the skin shrinks and becomes dry, through want of nutritious
juices, or because through diseased relaxation, the stabulum of the hair
becomes too weak. In the first case, baldness may be cured by oily liniments.
In the second, good strengtheners of the system will be found most useful.

If this publication should serve as a hint to a more enlarged mode of medical
practice than the present, I shall, as a Clergyman of the Church of England,
most heartily rejoice as having been the humble means of doing some good to my
fellow creatures.

It may be necessary here to observe, that I had been seven years in holy
orders, before I became doctor of physic, at Leyden, never thinking it at all
improper to blend two very useful professions together, and more especially, as
our blessed Lord himself healed the diseases of the body as well as of the soul.

Indeed, I am strongly of opinion, as I have elsewhere observed in my
Philanthropic Monitor, that the public and private good resulting from such a
union of professions, would be great and incalculable. The unbeneficed clergy
(being physicians) would enlarge the sphere of their usefulness, especially
amongst the poor people, and by accepting moderate fees A visit near the
practitioner's residence might be rated at half-a-guinea. If two miles off, one
guinea, and so on, in modo. Journeys in the night, and in bad weather, when
carriages must be hired, deserve a larger consideration.
from the yeomanry and gentry, they would soon disentangle themselves from that
poverty and distress, which is as subversive of their respectability in
civilized life, as of their deserved comfort.

To the public at large, the advantages would be very great, having able
practitioners always near at hand, and the present enormous expense of cure so
properly cut down as to exclude none from the benefit of good medical advice.

If it be said, that the clergy would not be so competent in the healing art as
the faculty, I will ask why not? They have the same advantages of learning at
Oxford and Cambridge, where there are hospitals, as other medical students, and
if degrees in physic are thought to be particularly honorable from Oxford and
Cambridge, surely the competency ought not to be disputed. By this union of
professions in the clergy, as physicians, no injury would be done to surgeons,
apothecaries, and chemists, nor no injustice to physicians of established fame
and practice; for, if successful, they would still retain their patients, and
even increase the number, though, possibly, they might receive fees more
suitable to their respective merit.

"He that is wise will ponder these things!" The Author will attend patients at
home and abroad.

MILL HILL, HENDON, MIDDLESEX, AUGUST 31, 1797.
PUBLISHED by the same AUTHOR.
I. SERMONS on various Subjects. 1 Vol. Price 5 s. II. The PHILANTHROPIC
MONITOR. 1 Vol. Price 7 s. 6 d. III. AN ESSAY on ENGLISH GRAMMAR, with POETICAL
ILLUSTRATIONS. Price 1 s. 6 d. IV. A CHEMICAL ESSAY on the WATERS of ESSEX.
Price 1 s.

