AN ACCOUNT OF A NEW METHOD OF TREATING FRACTURED LEGS.

READ BEFORE THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, On FEBRUARY 12, 1767.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED

A LETTER on that Subject to JAMES PARSONS, M. D. a Member of that RESPECTABLE
SOCIETY, dated November 6, 1766.

LONDON: Printed in the YEAR MDCCLXVII.

SIR,
AS the following Treatment of Fractured Legs (from the Experience I have had
of its Success during a Practice of several Years) appears to me preferable to
any I have hitherto known; and as it may be a Means of lessening many of the
Inconveniences attending such Accidents, I take the Liberty of sending it for
your Opinion; and, if you think it of Consequence enough to be made public,
shall be glad to have it laid before the ROYAL SOCIETY.

The Instrument here recommended was first applied, with great Success, in an
oblique Fracture of the TIBIA, (which could not be kept in a proper Situation
by the usual Methods), and afterward, as happily, in a Dislocation of the
lower Extremity of the same Bone, accompanied with a Fracture of the FIBULA. In
this latter Case it is often difficult to reduce the Dislocation, even with a
strong Extension, and more so to retain the Bones in their proper Situation,
whilst the Limb is laid in the usual extended Posture.

But both these Difficulties are absolutely avoided by the Means I am about to
describe.

The remarkable good Effects, in the Cases abovementioned, induced me to try
the same in different Fractures of the Leg, as well compound as simple, in all
which I have found it to answer my Expectation. I have formerly explained this
Method of treating Fractures to many Gentlemen of the Profession, as well as to
yourself, and have also had several Cases where other Surgeons have been
cencerned with me, who have in general expressed great Satisfaction, (and some
of them have introduced it into their own Practice), so that I have Reason to
believe it would have become more general, if the Instruments, that have
hitherto been sold for that Purpose, had been made according to the original
Pattern; but the Workman, whom I employed, has made and sold many that differ
from mine in some essential Points. I have therefore thought it necessary to
send you, enclosed, a Description of the Instrument, made after such a Manner,
as I have found by Experience to succeed best.

I am, with great Esteem, SIR, Your most obedient, and Most humble Servant, Wm.
SHARP.
Mincing-Lane, Nov. 6, 1766. To Dr. PARSONS.
DESCRIPTION of a NEW-CONSTRUCTED INSTRUMENT for FRACTURED LEGS, recommended to
be used instead of the common Apparatus. See the Plate.
THE Figures are drawn on a Scale of three Inches to a Foot, and represent two
Splints of strong Pasteboard made with Glue, to be fastened upon a fractured
Leg, by three Straps which surround the whole.

These are adapted to the Leg of a middle-sized Man: nevertheless it may be
convenient to have two other Sizes; the one almost twenty-two Inches in Length,
and the other sixteen.

Fig. I. A represents an under Splint of an irregular Form, suitable to that
Part of the Leg it is intended to cover; it is a little unequal externally and
concave internally. The Length eighteen Inches from (a) to (b). The Width two
Inches and three Quarters at the Strap near the Knee; and two Inches and a
Quarter at both the other Straps.

B,B,B, three Leather Straps from fifteen to twenty Inches long and one wide,
having two Rows of Holes so placed, that every Hole in each Row may be opposite
to a Space in the other. These must be sewed fast to the Middle and Outside of
the under Splint. The Portions of Straps (ddd) on the anterior Part of the
Splint must be shorter than those on the posterior (eee) which are to surround
the more muscular Part of the Leg.

C, a Part to support the Foot from the Point (a) to the Heel (c), five Inches
long at an Angle of sixty Degrees.

D, the Foot-strap, twelve Inches long, sewed to the Bottom of the under
Splint, within two Inches of the Point, to pass under the Heel and through the
Leather Loop on the upper Splint, to the lowest Pin.

E, an irregular oval Hole two Inches long and almost one wide in the lowest
Part, but decreasing upwards to receive the Malleolus externus, or lower
Extremity of the Fibula.

Fig. II. represents the Leg raised up, to show the Situation of the under
Splint when properly applied.

Fig. III. represents a fractured Leg when laid within the Splints, according
to the Method I am about to recommend, having the Stocking-Foot (or Sock) and
Shoe upon it. The darkest Shade in this and Fig. II. being intended to show
that Part of the Splints within the Shoe.

Fig. IV. A, the upper Splint. B,B,B, the Pins. C, the Leather Loop to receive
the Foot-Strap.

Fig. V. A many-tailed Bandage, made of Slips of Russia Linen, regularly
increasing in Length, from twelve or fourteen, to eighteen or twenty Inches,
according to the Size of the Leg. Each of these Slips (being two Inches broad)
is so laid as to cover Half the Breadth of that which is underneath it ( viz.
one Inch.) Another Slip, ten or twelve Inches long, is sewed on the Back, so as
to unite them all in the Middle, making a Bandage equally as firm as a circular
one, and which may be used without disturbing the Leg. The narrowest Part must
be placed nearest to the Heel. As the Number of Slips is to be increased or
lessened, according to the Space necessary to be enclosed within them, I call
this a many-tailed Bandage, leaving the precise Number to be determined
according to the Nature of the Circumstances.

This has been used many Years in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, instead of the
old eighteen-headed Bandage: Nevertheless, as it is not generally known, I hope
this Description will not be thought superfluous.

The three different Sizes of Splints abovementioned will generally be
sufficient; at least one or other of them may serve any Leg of an Adult till
others can be provided.

The Legs of Children, as they are more round and less muscular, may be
defended, nearly in the same Manner, with the common wooden Splints, properly
bolstered, that are now made Use of in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, provided
they are long enough to secure both Articulations of the fractured Bones.

When a Surgeon is called to a fractured Leg, at the Place where the Accident
happened, let him lay the Patient on the injured Side, on a flat Surface, and
raise the Knee of the fractured Limb toward the Abdomen, bending at the same
Time the Knee-Joint, so as to put the Extensor-Muscles of the Foot (which are
the strongest) into a State of Relaxation. He will then be enabled to replace
the Ends of the fractured Bones, and restore them to their proper Situation,
without the customary strong Extension of the Limb, which is troublesome to the
Surgeon, painful to the Patient, and apt to bring on Tension, Spasms, and
Inflammation of the stretched Muscles.

When the Ends of the fractured Bone are replaced, (which may often be done
even without removing the Shoe or Stocking,) let an under Splint, of the most
suitable Size, be applied to the Fibula, (or outside of the Leg,) and, if it
does not fit exactly, let it be made to do so, by adding such Compresses of
Tow, or thick Flannel, Or combed Wool.
as may be necessary for that Purpose.

This Posture is much more comfortable and convenient, (rendering it less
troublesome for the Patient to ease himself or be moved by others,) and removes
the Foot and Toes out of the Way of being hurt by the Weight of the
Bed-Cloathes, so as to make a Fracture-Box or Cradle unnecessary.

If the Fracture be compound, the Wound generally heals by the first Intention,
the great Impediment, (Irritation,) being prevented; of which I can produce
many Instances. Add to this, that the Leg may be taken up with the whole
Apparatus, and the Knee-Joint gently moved as often as necessary, to prevent
that Stiffness which always succeeds a Case of this Kind, and is attended with
much Pain and Inconvenience, a long Time after the Leg is otherwise well. The
Patient may also be taken out of Bed frequently, without Pain or Danger, if not
very heavy or unweildy.

The under Splint makes a safe and secure Bed for the Leg whilst the upper Part
is dressing, (if a compound Fracture,) and the Leg may, by a steady Hand, be
supported also against the upper Splint, and put into any Posture that may be
necessary to dress a Sore on the Fibula, or under Part.

I do not always remove the Shoe and Stocking-Foot; as well because they serve
to keep the Part in Perspiration, as that the Shoe adds Steadiness to the Limb,
by the Connection it may have with the inferior Part of the Instrument.

Let also the upper Splint be applied on the Inside of the Leg, so as almost to
cover the Tibia, on its whole Length. The Straps may then be fastened
sufficiently tight to secure the Whole. This done, the Patient may easily be
removed in a Sedan Chair, (having the Cushion so raised that the Leg may hang
down without resting upon the Bottom,) or in a Coach, with the Limb supported
by the Hand of a Surgeon, so that it may yield to every Motion uniformly, or
all together, as it were, whilst it swings in his Hand; for it matters not how
great the Motion of the Body be, provided the Points of the fractured Bone are
secured from being moved, the one against the other.

In this Manner I have carried many Patients, from the Place of the Accident,
over the London Pavements, to their own Homes, at a great Distance, without
their having suffered any Inconvenience from the Motion, even when the
Fractures were compound.

When the Patient is brought home and put to Bed, (the Bed having a Mattrass
upon it,) let the Stocking be removed, and the proper Remedies, with the
manytailed Bandage and the above Splints, applied, observing the same
Directions, as to Posture, which I have already given; viz. that the Patient be
laid on his Side, with the broken Leg undermost, the Knee bent, and the Thigh
drawn up, instead of laying him on his Back, with the injured Limb extended.

Both the Splints are, designedly, made narrow, to leave Room for Examination
of the Parts affected, lest any undue Pressure should occasion Pain; but if it
should be objected that they are not sufficiently broad for a thick Leg, that
Inconvenience may be remedied by putting a Slip of Pasteboard, or thin Wood,
between them, on the fore Part of the Leg, if thought necessary. The Straps of
the Instrument are sufficient to secure the Whole. Some Persons have proposed,
by Way of Improvement, to have a Rivet or Pin, like that upon the Tibial or
upper Splint, fixed upon an Iron Plate near one End of the middle Strap,
instead of having the Strap fixed to the fibular or under Splint, in Order that
it may be applied, as the Cale may require it; but I nevertheless think it
necessary to be fixed as described in the Plate, to prevent the Splints from
approaching or receding from each other, if either of the other Straps become
too loose: though I approve very much of an additional Strap to be applied
wheresoever such Compression may be necessary.


I made, with my own Hand, the first of these Instruments, of strong
Pasteboard, with Iron Plates rivetted upon them, which succeeded very well. I
have tried also various Materials for the same Purpose, such as strong About
the Year 1748, Mr. Holmes, Instrument-Maker to St. Bartholomew's Hospital,
made, by my Direction, some Splints of this Shape of strong Hide Leather
hardened with Glue: But the extraordinary Expense, as well as the Difficulty of
being supplied with a sufficient Quantity of them, induced me to continue the
Splints of Pasteboard made with Glue, in my constant Practice, which by long
Experience I have found to answer the Purpose effectually.
Hide Leather, hardened with Glue; also Wood, and Plate Copper; any one of
which will answer sufficiently, if well formed: nevertheless I shall prefer the
Pasteboard, if made strong enough, till I can meet with a Workman that will
make them accurately of harder Materials.

The same Posture that is recommended for broken Legs, I have found equally
serviceable with Respect to broken Thighs, and for the same Reason. In which
Case the common wooden Splint is as good as any other, provided it be long
enough to secure both Extremities of the fractured Bone.

I have, through the Whole of this Description, made Use of the Terms upper and
under Splints, for the Sake of being more easily understood; though perhaps the
calling the one Tibiale, Or Tibial Splint.
and the other Fibularium, Fibular Splint.
would serve to distinguish them better, and give a more precise Idea of the
Manner of their Application; the first being placed so as to cover a great Part
of the Tibia, and the second forming a safe Bed for the Fibula.

FINIS.
depictions of the splint as discussed in the text Fig. I
Fig. II
Fig. III
Fig. IV
Fig. V
Dent Sculp.Ball ^i^ of Lombard Street



