A MECHANICAL ENQUIRY INTO THE NATURE, CAUSES, SEAT, AND CURE OF THE DIABETES.
With an Explication of the most Remarkable Symptoms.

Igitur hi, qui rationalem Medicinam profitentur, haec necessaria esse
proponunt: Abditarum and morbos continentium causarum notitiam, deinde
Evidentium, post haec etiam Naturalium actionum, novissime partium interiorum.

Rationalem quidem puto medicinam esse debere: instrui vero ab evidentibus. A.
Corn. Cells. in praefat. lib. 1.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER for James Fletcher in the Turl; and Sold by M.
Cooper in Paternoster Row, London, Ben. Hickey in Bristol, and J. Leake at
Bath. 1745.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE NATURE AND SEAT OF THE DIABETES.
SCARCE any disorder has afforded greater matter of speculation, especially of
late Years, than the Diabetes; yet the true Rationale of it is not so
accurately understood, as to render a farther enquiry into its nature and
causes, in order, if possible, to search out the reasons of the several
Symptoms of it, useless or unnecessary. Amongst the Ancients is was seldom
heard of. Aretaeus speaks of it, as something miraculous, (...), Miraculum
quoddam: And Galen confesses, that in the course of his Practice he only saw
two Patients laboring under this complaint. The uncommoness of it might be
owing to a different manner of Living, but the disorder was probably the same.
For the description, which they give of it, in the most essential points agrees
with that of the Moderns; it is true indeed, that most of them speak of liquor
passing through the kidney not in the least changed, and make no mention of the
sweetness of the Urine: But these are mistakes, which the color of the Urine
for want of accuracy, and observation, might be the cause of their falling
into; for, as Dr. Willis observes, it always appears crude, and watery as of
those laboring with the Pica, or with the Dropsy. Their Methods also of cure,
which were rationally founded, and in most respects similar to the present
practice, are a farther confirmation of this opinion. Galen made use of the
following Medicines, as he himself testifies, to the great relief of his
Patient. Bol. Armen. Gum. Tragac. -- Arab. -- Mastich. Spodium. Sem. Endiv. --
Portulac. etc. and they seem to be well adapted to the removal of this disease,
so far as they are known to strengthen weakn'd Solids, to sheath acrimonious
humors, to incrassate too much attenuated blood, to abate hectic fevers, and
to cool the body. But this will be farther considered in its proper place. It
may not be improper, before we enter upon the enquiry, briefly to point out the
opinions, which the Ancients and some of the Moderns entertained of this
disease.

De curat. Diabet. Lib. 2. c. 2.
Aretaeus supposed it to be a species of a Dropsy, (...), and that it was owing
to an Universal debility of body. For as in a Dropsy the solid parts of the
body are dissolved into water, so in a Diabetes they are melted down into
(...). De morb. diut. Lib. 2. c. 2.
Urine. But supposing such a waste of the body, and such a dissolution of the
Solids, how comes it to pass, that they are dissolved into Urine? May not the
humors arising from such a supposed decay, and wasting of the body tend to any
other Viscus, as well as to the kidney? And seeing it is well known, that all
fluids naturally tend to the weakest parts, is it not by far more reasonable to
suppose, that they should be lodged either in the Abdomen, or membrana
cellulosa, (being those parts of the body, which give the least resistance,)
and form dropsical swellings, than be evacuated by Urine? Such an Universal
consumption then of the body does not seem to be the primary cause of this
disease, but may be, and is the consequence of it.

(...).

-- (...). De loc. affect. lib. sect. p. 4.


Galen, and his followers, (...).

Alexander Trallianus p. 150. to the same purpose speak Oribasius, Paulus
Aegineta and Aetius.


differed from this opinion and thought it owing to an imbecility in the
kidneys; and so far indeed they seem to have judged right: But then their
manner of accounting for such a copious discharge of Urine was very whimsical;
for they supposed, that the humors contained in the several parts of the body
were brought to the kidneys by an attractive power in them, and that the
humors so attracted quickly forced their exit out of the body. This account of
it then shows rather a fertility of imagination, than solidity of reasoning.
For the possibility of such an attraction is surely as difficult to be
conceived, as the cause of attraction itself. Et quandoque facit Diabetem potus
aquae frigidae, aut obsessio vehemens frigoris in totum penetrantis, aut
propter vehementiam attractivae propter virtutem calidam -- quare renes
attrahunt ab hepate. P. 684.
Avicenna speaks of it much to the same purpose, and no wonder; seeing that the
Arabian Physicians borrowed their Systems of Physic from the Greek.
Aurelianus's chapter upon this disease is lost: and Tom. prim. p. 234.
Celsus only lays down some general methods of cure to be observed, cum Vrina
super potionum modum mingitur.

A Diabetes, says Tom. prim. p. 376.
Etmuller, is either genuine, or spurious. The former is a voiding of liquors
by Urine without undergoing any alteration in the body: The latter is a voiding
of a much larger quantity of Urine than of liquids received into the body: The
cause of the former, he thinks, is owing to a laxity and openness of the
passages, which lead directly from the first passages to the kidneys. But
these, he confesses, are not yet known, and no wonder; because it is evident
from the nicest observations made in Anatomy, that there are no such passages
leading directly to the kidneys, as he imagines, and therefore that no liquor
can possibly arrive to the kidneys, but by first entering into the blood. To
account for the latter, he supposes, a sharp acrimony in the blood, which
resolves, attenuates, and melts down the blood, and even the muscular flesh
itself into serum, which being thus melted down, stimulate the kidneys, and
force their passage. But this account of it is so very strange and
unphilosophical, that it will not admit of a serious consideration.

Exercit. de Diabete p. 65.
Lister is singular in his opinion, and thinks that the chief seat of this
disorder is in the Stomach, and small Intestines: At primaria hujus morbi seeds
est Stomachus, and Intestina tenuia: But if these parts of the body were
principally affected, a Lientery, or a Diarrhaea rather than a Diabetes, would
surely be produced.

Dr. Willis, that great Physician of his time, observes, that Rhenish Wine,
Cider, and acid liquors being drank provoke a more plentiful Diuresis or
evacuation by Urine: The cause of this evacuation he attributes to a fusion or
melting of the blood into serosities by such acid liquors; so that the Crasis
or mixtion of the blood being dissolved, the watery parts cannot be contained by
the more thick, but sliding from their embraces, and being imbued with saline
particles, do run through the most open passages of the Reins, and so cause a
Diabetes. And he gives us an Instance of one, who by using Rhenish Wine for his
ordinary drink twenty days together, contracted an incurable Diabetes, of which
he died within a month. But the Diabetes in this case, and when brought on by
an immoderate drinking of such thin acid liquors does not seem to be owing to
such a dissolution of the blood, as the Doctor intimates, but to the natural
disposition of such liquors to pass off by Urine. The Secerning Vessels of the
kidney then must necessarily be overloaded by the great quantity of fluids,
which they admit, and of course greatly relaxed, and hence a Diabetes will
ensue, as will be shown more particularly in its due place. For let the blood
be in ever so dissolute and broken a state, this Distemper will not be
produced, unless there is a relaxation of the kidney in conjunction with it,
but rather a dropsy, and for reasons that have been already insisted upon. An
immoderate drinking then of acid liquors, and thin wines, by their quick and
sudden passage through the kidneys will bring on a debility of these organical
parts, widen their Secretory ducts, and in this manner produce a Diabetes; and
such an excess of them seems to be the most frequent cause of it.

The account which Animal Secretion p. 70.
Dr. James Keil gives of this disease comes next to be considered.

He asserts "that the most evident cause of this disease is an habitual
drinking of strong liquors; and that the more spirituous they are, the sooner
and more violently they bring it. By such an habitual drinking of strong
liquors it comes to pass in process of time, that the Serum, or thin part of
the blood, contains a large proportion of a spirituous Fluid, or that part of
the Serum, which should be water, is for the greatest part Spirit. Now the
Salts of the Urine or blood will not dissolve in a vinous spirit, that is, the
particules of which the salts consist, are more strongly attracted by one
another, than they are by such a fluid, as by experiment appears; and therefore
the Quantity of Salts in the blood will be daily increased, and circulating
through the Capillary Vessels must irritate the fine fibers, and cause little
pains and twitchings all over the body, which, he says, are the preceding
Symptoms of this disorder. But when the Serum is full of these salts, the
distance between them and the Globules of the blood will be less, and
consequently they will attract the Globules of the blood more strongly than the
Globules attract one another; And the Globules or red part of the blood will be
dissolved and diffused through the Serum of the blood. And this again is
confirmed by experiments, for nothing does render the red part of the blood so
fluid, and keeps it more from coagulating when drawn into a cup, than Urinous
Salts and Spirits. When the red part of the blood is thus dissolved, and united
to its Serum, it will with the Serum be carried off through the Glands of the
kidneys, and being united to their Salts, will alter their Figures, and
properties, as Litharge and Coral do the Salts of Vinegar, giving them a sweet
taste."

In this account of the Diabetes there seems to be more ingenuity, than truth.
That Spirituous liquors when drank to excess may be productive of this
disorder, will be shown in the sequel of this dissertation; but that an
habitual drinking of them is the most evident cause of it, is evidently not
true. But granting such a dissolution of the red part of the blood, as the Dr.
imagines, which may be possible, but does by no means seem probable, there is
no reason assigned, why it should with its Serum be carried off through the
Glands of the kidney. The objections which have been already made, occur here.

Proceed we now to the opinion of the celebrated In the new Edit. of his book
on poisons p. 32.
Dr. Mead, which demands our attention as well for its singularity, as for the
eminent Character of its Author. "The Diabetes, he says, is not as Physicians
have commonly judged, a distemper of the Kidneys, but of the Liver, proceeding
likewise from a vitiated mixture of the bile. It most frequently happens to
those, who without due exercise indulge themselves in drinking vinous liquors,
and then quench their thirst arising from these, by too great a quantity of
such as are cooling.

By such ill-timed heating, and cooling of the humors of the body, the natural
proportion of Salt in the bile, by which its oily part is incorporated with the
water, is not sufficient, now the water over-abounds, to preserve the mixture:
So that a great portion of this, together with some of the thinnest of the oil
will be discharged by the kidneys; and the Urinary Ducts will be greatly
enlarged by a constant aflux that way. By which means the thicker oily
particles are left in a degree of coagulation in the smaller tubes of the
Liver, and are there formed into a hard fatty substance.

The dissection of those, who have died of the Diabetes, proves this to be so:
For I have always found a steatomatous collection in their Liver, in appearance
not unlike to what is often discharged by stools in a confirmed jaundice, but
of a harder consistence."

In the first place let it be here observed, that the texture of the v.
Boerhaave 's acad. Lect. V. 3. p. 110.
kidney is so very close and compact, that in its natural state, before it has
suffered any kind of violence, it will not admit any oily substance whatever,
unless it be highly attenuated, and thoroughly incorporated in a proper
vehicle. A Preternatural dilatation of the kidney must be prior to its
admittance of any fluid, that is more gross than the Urine. It does not then
seem probable, that even this thinnest oil in such circumstances, when the
mixture is destroyed, can be admitted to pass through the kidney. Beside, such
a disposition of the liver, as is here supposed, and such a vitiated mixture of
the bile must necessarily be attended with a high jaundice, but as the Diabetes
often appears without the least icterical Symptom, it seems necessarily to
follow, that the liver is not the Seat of the Diabetes.

The ingenious Dr. Randolph in his treatise upon the Medicinal Virtues of the
Bristol Water, after having made some just observations upon these accounts of
it last mentioned, gives us his opinion of it, and is inclined to think the
kidneys the Seat of this disorder, though he owns, that the great alteration made
in the Urine seems very much to favor the opinion of a fault in the fluids;
for if the kidneys, says he, were only in fault, why should Diabetical Urine
differ so much from that which is natural, not only in Quantity, but in Quality
also? But the reason of this alteration will evidently appear by prosecuting
the enquiry farther, than seems to have been consistent with his design; and in
order to proceed more methodically;

I shall first describe a Diabetes by pointing out the several Symptoms of it.

2dly, show how a relaxation of the Secretory Ducts of the kidneys with a
broken state of the blood, which may be prior to such a relaxation, must
necessarily be the cause of such Symptoms, and when not, will be the
consequence of it.

A Person then is known to labor under a Diabetes by the following Symptoms,
to wit; a copious and frequent discharge of pale-colour'd Urine; the taste of
which is sweet; the Quantity evacuated exceeds in proportion the Quantity of
liquors taken in; it is found to acquire a ropy consistence by being exposed
for some time to the air; as a consequence of this discharge, a hectic fever,
loss of flesh, great thirst, a sense of weakness about the Loins; and if
constitutional, or too far advanced by a neglect of proper remedies, the Person
so affected in reality dies of a consumption. These are then the most
remarkable Symptoms of a Diabetes, and the known consequences of it.

I am in the next place to show how a relaxation of the Secretory Ducts of the
kidneys with a dissolute broken blood must necessarily be productive of these
Symptoms. But here it will be proper first to point out the causes, by which
such a relaxation may be brought on.

And here let it be remarked, that whenever a Gland is in a state of relaxation
it will not duly perform its respective office.

It is well known, that whatever stretches out an animal fiber beyond its due
degree of distension, and keeps it for some time so distended, will weaken the
contractive spring of that fiber.

Now the Glands may be relaxed, or their contractive spring weakn'd, by several
different means; as first, by being pressed upon with too great a quantity of
fluids, and this may happen either from a stoppage of perspiration, or from a
defect of Secretion in one Gland, which may be occasioned by some obstruction
formed in the Secretory Ducts of that Gland, and is known to increase the
Secretion in another; because such an obstruction will in effect be the same as
an actual increase of the fluids; a consequence of which will be increased
Secretions. It may also happen from the Critical discharges of acute fevers
lodging their malignity on these parts; and from excesses of every kind falling
on these parts; and here it may be observed, that such excesses will chiefly
affect those parts, which are by constitution the weakest, and the disorder
produced will correspond with the nature and office of that organical part,
which is affected.

The Glands may also be relaxed, and the crasis of the blood broke by Mercurial
Salivations, by a long continued use of powerful Deobstruent Medicines, and the
kidneys in particulr by an improper use of such as are styled Diuretic.

An habitual drinking of Spirituous liquors will also bring on the same ill
effects, and may in some circumstances be the cause of a Diabetes.

But to explain the reason of this. --

It appears from several Dr. Hale's Haemas. p. 124.
experiments, that all strong liquors not only contract the small arteries, but
also coagulate the fluids, which are contained in them. A consequence of these
effects will be a stoppage of the Secretions, and if often produced, a
relaxation of the fibers of the Stomach, and Intestines; hence will arise a
failure of digestion, and of course of nutrition. When these necessary offices
fail, the solids will soon become weak, and languid, and the blood poor and
watery. The body then being brought to this deplorable state by such an abuse of
them; if we suppose the prevailing weakness to be in the kidneys, which may
happen to be the case either accidentally or constitutionally, it is easy to
conceive, that a Diabetes will come on. Opiates are known to act in the same
manner, and therefore will produce like effects.

As the kidneys then may be relaxed by any preternatural pressure, so it is
easy to apprehend, how a long suppression of Urine, (be the cause of that
suppression what it will,) should be productive of this disorder. Dr. Lib. 2.
obs. 3.
Harris gives us an instance of such a cause of it in a case, that fell under
his own observation. After having prescribed several Medicines very
unsuccessfully for his Patient, whose case was a total Suppression of Urine for
five whole days; the following Cataplasm was ordered to be applied to the
Umbilical Region of the Sick Person,

Sapon. Nigr. vj Croc. Opt. ss Sal. Succini gr. xv. F. Cataplasma. The day
following all the Urinary springs appeared in a manner burst; and a Diluvium of
sweet Urine came on, but was however soon stopped by the Assistance of Rhubarb
chiefly: This Medicine was judged by reason of the warmth of it to be the best,
that could be adapted to the age of his Patient, who was seventy seven years
old; and by reason of the astringency of it, to the nature of the disease;
there being no reason to think, why it might not be of equal efficacy in a
Renal flux, as well as an Intestinal one; seeing that the difference of the
parts affected constituted the difference of the disorder; in which observation
there seems to be a great deal of truth.

But to proceed -- As a stone in the kidney by its great pressure or irritation
will bring on a relaxation of its fibers, so it may be the cause of this
distemper.

Bonet. pract. anat. Tom. 2. lib. 3. sect. 26. obs. 5.
Bonetus gives us such an instance of it in one, who dying of a Diabetes, was
dissected, and a stone found in the left kidney. Ren sinister lapide obsessus
est angulos habente obtusos -- Lingua squallida, and horridula, aestus, and
sitis, meiebat plus justo, urina plane aquea, sensim extabuit, Diabete interiit.

The bites of some kind of animals, particularly the A kind of serpent found in
Libya
Dipsas, have been known to occasion this disorder. The venomous juice of which
Animal, I presume, taken into the blood, and received by the kidney, will bring
on a mortification of it, that is, a resolution or relaxation of its several
component parts; and then it is easy to conceive, that a Diabetes will ensue:
Though I am more inclined to think it brought on by the drinking a large quantity
of cooling acid liquors in order to appease the intolerable thirst consequent
on the bite of this Reptile.

Hypochondriacal complaints have sometimes been the Forerunners of this
disease. The reason of this may easily be accounted for; because as such
disorders generally proceed from a weakness of the Solids, so by supposing the
predominant weakness to be in the kidneys, this disorder will necessarily be
produced.

A Sphacelated tumor in the bladder, or whatever causes a relaxation of its
Sphincter, will be attended with plentiful discharges of Urine. Hence some have
imagined this distemper to be an affection of the Multis ementitus Diabetes:
causam ad affectionem renum referebant: Mortuis contracta plane vesica reperta
est cum gangraena and tumore (...) in capacitate ipsius vesicae. Bonet. obs. 4.
in. loc. prius cit.
bladder, but very erroneously. For it is reasonable to think, that the flux of
Urine in all such cases will be involuntary; which constitutes no part of this
disorder, and therefore does not properly come under the denomination of a
Diabetes.

The kidneys and their Secretory Ducts being relaxed (be the cause of that
relaxation what it will) a general debility of body will come on. Such is the
close dependence that the several organical parts of the humane body bear to
each other, that if any one be in a diseased state the others will be affected
by it. Every part of this complicated Machine must regularly discharge its
respective office in order to preserve the harmony or health of the whole. In
such a state of the body then as this, there can neither be a due combination
of the several parts of the blood, nor a proper assimilation of the Ingesta.
The consequences of which will be just now considered.

Having then enumerated the several causes by which the kidneys may be relaxed,
and the crasis of the blood broke; we proceed to show how such a state of the
body must necessarily bring on a Diabetes.

And here I shall beg leave to mention one disorder, which seems to be in most
respects analogous to this, and that is, a lacteal Diabetes. The learned and
judicious Dr. Boerhaave's Acad. Lect. V. 3. p. 143.
Boerhaave gives us an instance of such a disease. "There was, he says, a
certain Woman who dwelt at the City of Dort, who bore and suckled Children for
twelve years successively; but at length she fell into a lacteal Diabetes, in
which all the nourishment that was taken ran through her Breasts without any
suction, under the appearance of milk, insomuch that if she drank a pint of ale
there was almost the like quantity of milk evacuated from her Breasts."

This instance then beautifully illustrates, and strongly confirms the Theory
laid down.

But to proceed -- The first Symptom, that I shall take notice of, by which a
Person is known to labor under a Diabetes is the copious and frequent
discharge of pale colored Urine. That this is an effect necessarily arising
from such a state of the body will evidently appear from a little
consideration. The Secretory Ducts of the kidneys being in this relaxed morbid
state, they will readily admit those humors, which in a natural state by
reason of the compactness of their texture, they would by no means give
admittance to; and consequently the discharge must be proportionably great. The
little stay the Secreted humors make in the body will be the cause of their
undergoing but a little change as to their color and rancidity: Seeing that
the color and rancid smell of the Urine, when evacuated in a healthy state of
the body, are owing most probably to its long retention in it; for by such a
retention its oily parts become putrid, and will of course put on a different
complexion. Diabetical Urine then is somewhat of a Chylous nature, and as all
the nutritious juices are of a tenacious viscid disposition, so they readily
coagulate, when exposed to the Atmosphere; and to this seems to be owing the
reason of its ropy consistence.

That the quantity evacuated should exceed in proportion the quantity of
liquors taken in, appears from what has been already observed; for in this
weakn'd state of the kidneys, and broken condition of the blood, a great
portion of those juices, which should be retained in the body for its
nourishment, will be admitted to pass through the kidneys, and of course be
thrown out of it, as though excrementitious; to which may be added the actual
increase of fluids arising from a general waste of the Solids, which the
kidneys being now enlarged will greedily receive. No wonder then, that the
quantity evacuated should exceed in proportion the quantity of liquors taken
in. A necessary consequence of such a discharge, (and because in such
circumstances the important office of Nutrition is in a manner suspended,) will
be loss of flesh, and a great waste of the body, which is always observable,
when this disorder is far advanced, and the Patient almost brought by it to a
period of his days; and it frequently happens in this last stage of it that
even solid pieces of flesh are brought away with the Urine.

The sense of weakness about the Loins must be owing partly to this relaxation
of the kidneys, and partly to the evacuation made; for in all drains whatever
those parts of the body sustain the greatest loss of fluids, which are nearest
to that part, from which the drain is made, and will consequently be sensible
of a proportionably greater weakness. The same complaint is made in other
fluxes, in a gonorrhaea by Men, and the fluor albus by Women; and the reason of
it in both cases is the same.

The Symptom that comes next to be accounted for is the sweetness of the Urine.

As a different configuration of the particles of the same body is well known
to impress on the nervous Papillae of the Tongue different sensations; We
conclude, and I think, very reasonably, that the difference of the tastes of
bodies is owing to some different texture of their particles; but, as I
apprehend, it is no very easy matter to determine absolutely what particular
disposition or combination of the several parts, of which all bodies are known
to consist, is necessary to make a body either sweet or bitter; so till this
can be ascertained, we must be contented with this general account of the
sweetness of diabetical Urine; that it is owing to some different texture of
its several heterogeneous parts.

Animal substances when putrefied give a faetid taste, and the reason of this
is ascribed not only to their natural disposition to give such a taste; but
also to some different modification of their parts acquired in the Process of
Putrefaction. Chemistry teaches us, that all bodies are composed of the same
Elements, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, Salt, and Oil; and therefore the variety of
their color, smell, taste, and the like, must be owing primarily to some
different disposition of these Elements. We learn indeed from observation, that
the nearer the parts of any body approach to a sphaerical disposition; the more
mild and soft is the taste of that body; and that the farther they recede from
such a disposition, the more acrid, and rough is the sensation, that such
bodies excite in us.

That the tastes of bodies do depend upon a different combination of their
particles is a truth not to be disputed.

Mercury in its sphaerical figure is both innocent, and tastless, but when
sublimed, it loses its sphaericity, and becomes acrid, corrosive, and poisonous.

An entire mass of See Mr. Boyle's Mechanical production of tastes.
Silver is insipid, but by being dissolved in aqua fortis, and shooting into
Chrystalls, it becomes bitter; Lead another tastless body dissolved in the same
Menstruum makes the solution sweet.

A mixture of Spirit of Nitre, and rectified Spirit of Wine, the former highly
corrosive, the latter very pungent, composes a body of an agreeable taste.

It appears then from experiments, that a different disposition of the
particles of bodies is the cause of that variety of tastes, which is observable
in bodies, and that it will also excite tastes in those bodies, which before
were insipid.

We have hitherto accounted for the sweetness of diabetical Urine, upon no
other principles, than the original and primary cause of the difference of the
tastes of natural bodies in general; and into this indeed must all other
accounts of it be at last resolved: For could we know the various mixtures the
Urine may possibly undergo in this state of the body; yet we should still be
at a loss to give a reason for the alterations arising from such mixtures.

But to be more particular -- It is known from observation, that the Ingesta of
what kind soever, after they have been prepared and elaborated fine enough by
the digestive organs to enter the Lacteals, are v. Boerhaave's Acad. Lect. V.
2. p. 48.
sweet to the taste. The milk, which the Infant sucks from the Breasts of the
Mother, is sweet; and even the blood itself is relatively sweet. It has been
already observed that a long retention of the humors in the body is the sole
cause of the rancidity of them; and it has been also shown that in a Diabetes,
part of those juices, which should be retained in the body for its nutrition,
is thrown out of it, as though excrementitious; so that the Urine in this disease
is somewhat of a Chylous nature, and as the salt of Chyle or milk is sweet, so
the taste of the Urine must also be sweet; seeing that it has not been long
enough circulating in the Vessels to acquire any degree either of rankness or
Acrimony. This Chylous nature then of the Urine with a different combination of
its several parts will easily account for its remarkable sweetness.

That a Diabetes should be attended with a hectic fever will appear evident
from a consideration of the known causes of it. But it would be foreign to my
purpose to run through all the causes, by which this kind of fever is produced,
and to show how necessarily a cachectical body must produce a Hectic. A very
common cause of it however is an acrimony in the blood, whether it be of the
acid or alkaline kind, which by irritating and fretting the Solids will
accelerate the circulation of the blood, in the accelerated course of which is
fixed the Idea of a sever. The same irritation will happen from an absorption of
Pus in case of an inward Ulcer. But whether or no there is such an absorption
of Pus is at present a disputed point: Though, I think, there is all the reason,
that can be desired, to resolve it in the affirmative; and chiefly because of
that true purulent matter, with which the faeces in ulcerated cases are
sometimes known to be tinctured, even when there has been no Ulcer in these
parts, and theresore could not possibly have been evacuated by stool; had it
not been first absorbed into the blood. That there are Vessels in the humane
body capable of such absorption is granted by every one; That Pestilential and
other noxious efluvia are absorbed by them, and communicated to the blood, is
often verified by fatal experience; That the drops of blood, which gush out
from the rupture of a small artery, are also absorbed into the mass of blood,
every day's experience proves. As it is clear then beyond all possible doubt,
that there is such an absorption of fluids into the blood, I can see no reason,
why the Pus, which is discharged from an Ulcer, may not also be absorbed.

That a great loss of blood will also bring on a Hectic, whether occasioned by
Haemorrhoidal, or Dysenterical fluxes, too plentiful Phlebotomy, or the like,
appears from observation, and is confirmed by experiment.

The accurate and ingenious Haemas. v. 2. Exper. 2. p. 12.
Dr. Hales observed, that the pulse of a horse, upon which he was going to make
an experiment, "beat forty strokes in a minute, before he was disturbed or tied
down. But when the Glass tube was fixed to the left Crural Artery, it beat fixty
five in a minute. And as the horse grew fainter by the loss of blood, the pulse
was more and more accelerated, so as to beat an hundred times or more in a
minute: Whence we see, that the pulse is weak and quick, when the heart is
supplied with little blood; which is the case in the hectic fevers."

But to explain the reason of the hectic, when brought on by any great
evacuation more fully.

It is well known, that the Velocity, with which all fluids move through all
known Vessels, is reciprocal to the resistance, which they meet with in their
passage through such Vessels. Now this resistance among other causes of it will
be increased or diminished in proportion to the Quantity of fluids contained in
these Vessels; for the greater the Quantity of fluids is contained for instance
in those Conical Vessels the arteries; the greater degree of force will be
required in the blood thrown out of the Heart to drive forward that already in
the arteries; and there will also be in such circumstances a greater degree of
friction; the Quantity of blood then being diminished, these resistances, which
are known to retard its progressive motion, will be proportionably removed; and
the motion of the blood then will now be more free, it will consequently be
more quick; and as a quick circulation will cause a quick pulse; and as the
pulse is denominated to be either strong or weak in proportion to the greater
or less distension of the artery, which depends upon the Quantity or density of
the blood; so we may easily collect the reasons from these known facts both of
the weakness and quickness of the pulse in Hectic Fevers; and how
Preternatural fluxes of any kind are necessarily productive of a Hectic. From
a diminution of the fluids, or from a relaxation, or dilatation of the Glands,
(in which circumstances the Quantity of blood may be supposed to be
diminished,) Dr. Cheyne in his new Theory of Fevers, has very ingeniously, and
fully demonstrated all the Phenomenon of Hectic Fevers. Thus then we come to a
reason of the Hectic in a Diabetes; (viz.) the relaxation of the kidney, and
the great evacuation made from it.

The great thirst, which is the last Symptom, that remains to be insisted upon,
is owing partly to this inward fever, and partly to the great drain; for in
such a case the fauces will become dry and rough; the dryness and roughness of
which will excite in us that uneasy sensation, which we call, Thirst.

I have now gone through what I intended to insist upon, and hope, that the
observations made, though rudely digested, will serve to throw some light into
the nature of this disorder, and into the reasons of the several Phenomenon of
it. The Symptoms indeed seem to flow necessarily from the causes assigned,
which is an argument in their favor.

But as the cure of a disease is of far greater concern to mankind, than the
Rationale of it; though this should be first known to the skilful Physician, that
he may the more effectually proceed to the removal of it; it may not be
improper briefly to point out the Indications of cure, which arise from the
account given of it. But I shall content myself by observing in general, that
Medicines of a mild, Balsamic, compacting nature, seem to claim the first
place: As they will be well adapted to agglutinate the fluids, and will
moderately strengthen the weakn'd part. It is however often found necessary to
make use of Medicines of a more astringent nature. If the weakness or
relaxation of the kidney arises from an acrimony in the blood, that acrimony is
first to be corrected by proper rememies. The greatest regard should be had in
the cure of this, as well as all other Chronical diseases to a proper Diet,
which in this case should undoubtedly be that of the incrassating kind. A good
Regimen of the Non-Naturals has been known to eradicate the most stubborn
distempers, when Medicines of great efficacy have failed: Nor is this at all
strange; for seeing that most Chronical disorders are owing to some bad
disposition of the blood, and the blood is made from what is taken into the
body by way of food; a proper Regimen in such cases must surely be the best, as
well as the most natural Alterative.

That the Bristol Water is of remarkable service in this disorder, Experience
abundantly testifies. But the reason of its operation does not seem to be
clearly understood; neither shall I take upon me to give any account of it;
seeing that this is to be learnt only from knowing its Ingredients; and these
are to be found out only by Chemical experiments, which are best made on the
spot: And the late accurate Enquirer into its Medicinal Virtues intends to
insist upon this point in the remaining part of his work. But as it is well
known to cool the body, to thicken broken fluids, and to strengthen in some
degree; so it seems to be well calculated to answer all the Intentions of Cure
in this disorder.

I shall only offer one word more in order to prevent any objection, that may
possibly be raised to this manner of enquiring into the nature of the diseases
of the humane body.

And here let it be remembered, that the first improvement, which the Science
of Medicine received, was made by Reasoning upon Mathematical Principles. This
then paved the way for those great discoveries, which have lately been made in
the nature of the Animal Economy by the assistance of Mechanical observations.
" Dr. Mead's preface to his book on Poisons.
Nor could malice itself (as Dr. Mead expresses himself on the like occasion)
deny this, were not ignorance in confederacy with it, which will secure any one
from being benefitted by the most useful Demonstration." And that this is not
only the most likely, but is without all possible doubt, the only certain
method of improving Physical Knowledge, is evident from the structure of the
humane body. For it appears by Anatomy to consist of Solids and Fluids, both
which are subject to the known Laws of Matter and Motion, and therefore the
various disorders, to which this wonderful Fabric is hourly liable, can no way
be more rationally accounted for, than by Mechanical Reasonings, and the
application of these Laws to such alterations, as are observable in it.

This method then of enquiring into the nature of the diseases of the humane
body, when it can be made use of, is the only certain one; I say, when it can
be made use of; for there are some disorders of so complicated a nature, others
again of so peculiar a one, that they are not capable of being considered in
this advantageous Light; or of being reduced to any known Principles, whereon
to found our enquiry. All that can possibly be done in such unhappy cases is to
be effected by a careful observation of the Symptoms produced, by a diligent
attention to the efforts, which Nature endeavors to make for her own relief,
and by assisting her in the struggle by a due application of proper Remedies.

"It is past doubt with me, says In his account of the Non-Naturals p. 168.
Dr. Wainewright, whatever some Physicians say against Theory, which they don't
understand, that it is not only useful, but a necessary Qualification of a good
Physician. For one that understands the structure of a Humane Body, the nature
of the Solids and Fluids, the manner how animal actions are performed, the
Nature of Secretion, the effect of either encreasng or lessening any
evacuation, the known Laws of Motion as applied to Mechanics, and
Hydrostaticks, with the application of them to the alterations made in Humane
Bodies, is Caeteris paribus better qualified for a Physician, than one who is
ignorant of these things."

FINIS.

