POEMS.

POEMS, BY A GENTLEMAN.

-- AMAT NEMUS, ET FUGIT URBES. HORACE. LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE
STRAND. MDCCLXXXII.

COLIN's ELEGY, On Revisiting the Place where he first became acquainted with
DELIA.
Indeed (said Lucid) I have often heard
Fair Rosalind of diverse fowly blamed
For being to that Swain too cruel hard.
That her bright glory else has much defamed.
Spenser's Colin Clout's come home again.
YET once again, by wayward fortune led,
I view the sacred walls where dwelt my fair;
Where, blessed with her, my days in rapture fled;
Too soon alloy'd, and shaded with despair!
Three years are past, since first my yielding heart
It Is virgin vows to love and Delia paid;
(Sincere itself, it never suspected art!)
And ah! what changes those three years have made!
Young Corydon, to whom the fair one gave
Her earliest faith, and holiest union vowed,
Sleeps in the silent chamber of the grave,
And for a wedding garment wears a shroud.
Large tides of grief in Delia's bosom rolled:
But soon Dametas dried the mourner's tears;
Dametas, rich, but petulant and old,
And damned with jealousy, the crime of years.
What need I more -- by treacherous friends deceived,
He marked each venial fault with jaundic'd eyes,
Each paltry tale with partial ear believed,
And construed Indiscretion into Vice.
Now, banished from a husband's board, she mourns;
Her woes embitter'd by a parent's frown;
Condemned, rejected, for a crime she scorns;
And like a dream her transient glories flown.
Fair daughter of the morn, thy star is set!
Thy star is set, nor ever more must rise!
O may no wrongs of mine, in judgment met,
Swell thy full soul's distress with added cries!
We might have lived! -- Ah sadly pleasing thought!
Vain Recollection! What art thou to me!
We might have lived! As virtuous love had taught,
In unreproved pleasures ever free.
We might have lived! -- But execrable gold
Love's unsubstantial claims and tears outweigh'd:
For wealth her charms the venal Delia sold,
For wealth her lover and her friend betrayed.
For me, (who now with pain review the place
Where once my Delia called her Colin dear;
Each well-known path with aching heart retrace,
Think on her ^ickleness and drop a tear:)
Silent and sole, I seek the accustomed bower,
The Bower once sacred to my love and me;
Where often with her I passed the enraptured hour,
And bore the siren charmer on my knee.
I seek the Plane, whose trunk, with mine combined
Bears the dear letters of my Delia's name;
I mark their growth, but that distracts my mind,
For such I once had hoped our mutual flame.
Even while I write, these scenes of former bliss
Such fond reflections in my bosom move,
What then my fortune was, what now it is,
That though I cannot esteem, I still must love.
I love; but it is not with that youthful heat
Which once inflamed my soul, to reason blind;
It Is with that soothing grief, that soft regret,
Which those who think on friends departed, find.
I grieve; but it is a calm and virtuous woe,
By reason sanctified, by heaven approved;
It Is such as kindred saints in heaven might know,
Seeing those fall whom when on earth they loved.
Time and reflection long have chased away
The painted phantoms that bewitched my sight;
God's wise behests submissive I obey,
And own, convinced, "Whatever is, is right."
Vain love, farewell! -- for me, should heaven design
Such added blessing to my future life;
Soon may I call the ingenuous Mira mine,
And meet, unwarpt by love, a virtuous wife.
COLIN, TO HIS FRIENDS, Exhorting him to the attainment of Honors by a steady
Application to the LAW.
"Business! too often the frivolous pretense
"Of human lusts, to shake off innocence;
"Business! the grave impertinence;
"Business! the thing which I of all things hate;
"Business! the contradiction of thy fate.
Cowley's Complaint -- The muse speaks.
MY friends, no more! -- your kind remonstrance spare!
Your kind remonstrance, your advice is vain:
Conscious I shall not answer half your care
It serves no purpose but to give me pain.
I cannot feel one wish for pomp or power,
I seek no titles, I desire no place;
Born as I was in unambitious hour
I scorn the prize, and can I run the race?
When Westminster Hall.
in the Courts I take my silent stand,
Unenvious I behold the judge's state;
Behold with pitying eye, Law's restless band,
And wonder man will bustle to be great.
Onward I pass -- A soberer scene succeeds:
Westminster Abbey.
It Is the sad mansion of departed kings!
Where every stone that blazons forth their deeds
Proclaims the vanity of earthly things.
Proclaims the aspiring crowd I left behind,
Mere insect swarms that shine but for an hour;
Then, nipt by cold or shattered by the wind,
Fleet, like the transient bow that gilds a shower.
Shall I then sacrifice life's happiest prime
To gain employments I should wish to shun?
Enslave the sacred freedom of my time
To win a title I should hate when won?
No! -- Let me live with independence blessed,
Blessed with the sweets of no unlearned ease;
Indulge the unruffl'd calm my soul loves best,
And eat my bread in privacy and peace.
One sole inducement could have roused my mind;
That sole inducement has been long no more:
Delia was false! -- with her at once resigned
Fled all the schemes I ever formed for power.
Had she been mine, what could not I have done
To give that wealth she now has bought so dear?
What prize so great that I could not have won,
When all my efforts were inspired by her?
Now for myself I live: -- With books my morn,
With friends perchance my evening hours are spent:
The rich man's wonder, and the proud man's scorn,
I envy neither, for I feel content.
Free, unconstrained, my country's laws I choose;
Those laws by which even monarchs are controlled;
Their changes trace, their origin deduce;
But do it for instruction, not for gold.
Thus let me live, till manhood's steadier day
Matures the seeds that laboring youth has sown:
Then might some favoring female, chastely gay,
Wise without pride, and fair without a frown:
Would such a one, from mean coquetry free,
Who held her word as sacred as her fame:
Would Mira plight her spotless faith to me,
And at the altar grace her Colin's name!
Blessed beyond hope, how gladly I Would forswear
The wild fantastic pageants London yields,
To breathe the country's pure untainted air
That sweeps with fresh'ning breeze the new-plough'd fields.
Me rural scenes! me woods! and streams can please
That through the fertile vales irriguous rove!
Here let me stretch my wearied limbs at ease!
For I, inglorious, woods and streams can love!
Happy the man, whose philosophic eye
Could to their causes Nature's workings trace;
Could learn from thence death's terrors to defy,
And joy to meet his Maker face to face.
Blessed too is he, whom woods and streams can charm,
Whose humble thoughts to lesser flights aspire;
Who tunes, (his heart with thankful rapture warm,)
To Nature's bounteous lord the rural lyre.
No toil of office ruffles his repose,
No purpled monarch's proud unyielding state;
Unvers'd in public scenes, he little knows
The loud discordant senate's vain debate.
He little knows the embattled powers that join
From Britain's grasp her western world to rend;
Nor sees her sickening Genius droop and pine,
Nor deems her lessening glories near their end.
Untost by storms, he gently glides through life;
His fields, his trees, give sweet though simple fare;
He scapes the madding town's unholy strife,
He scapes the noisy clamours of the Bar.
THE DELIGHTS OF FANCY.
On the green bank I sat, and listened long
(Sitting was more convenient for the song:)
Nor till her lay was ended could I move,
But wished to dwell for ever in the grove.
Only methought the time too swiftly passed,
And every note I feared would be the last.
My sight, and smell, and hearing, were employed,
And all three senses in full gust enjoyed.
And what alone did all the rest surpass,
The sweet possession of the fairy place;
Single, and conscious to myself alone
Of pleasures to the excluded world unknown:
Pleasures which no where else were to be found,
And all Elysium in a spot of ground.
Dryden's flower and leaf, imitated from Chaucer.
Again the summer shines! with mightier flame
The Sun exults his lengthened course to roll,
And wide diffuses through the human frame
A languid bliss that melts the poet's soul.
It melts the soul, but gives the power to sing
Those visionary scenes itself inspires;
Tunes it to harmonies of noblest string,
And bids it glow with more than mortal fires.
Great Life of all the world, and Lord of day!
Best symbol of our common Maker's might!
Well might the unguided heathen thee obey,
And prostrate hail thy orb's returning light;
For often myself have felt thy rapturous heat
Steal over my senses like a fairy dream;
Then, when my yielding limbs have sought retreat,
And sunk in silence near some shaded stream;
My soul, on Fancy's wing sublimely borne,
Has mused of scenes too bright for mortal eye;
Has seen white robes by saints and martyrs worn,
And heard the eternal carols of the sky.
Often too luxuriant Fancy reigns alone,
And calls from fablers old a varying band;
And scenes of bliss to waking life unknown,
Rise, change, and vanish, as she gives command.
Imagination works with all her powers,
And gorgeous Knights in glittering troops are seen,
And courteous squires, and dwarfs, and moated towers,
And all the splendours of the gothic scene.
Bards too of other times resume their lyres!
The glorious tale that Chaucer's Knight has told
Sounds in mine ears, and fills me with its fires:
And now the jousting warriors I behold,
And Palamon is to the stake conveyed:
Now from the earth upstarts the infernal fiend;
Now dying Arcite wills the dear bought maid,
If she can ever love, to love his friend.
Anon See Spenser's Faerie Queen.
prince Arthur's blazing shield o'erthrows
The giant conqueror of the Red Cross Knight;
Or ruthless Talus drives his host of foes
With unrelenting flail and iron might.
Dear scenes of blessed delusion! golden dreams!
And always innocent, and always new!
Where often with truths sublime the fiction teems,
And Virtue's noblest patterns strike the view:
Ye feed the fancy, nor seduce the heart!
For from our reach remote your actions lie;
No youth can now assume Pyrochles' part,
No modern maid like poor See Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia.
Parthenia die.
Not so the spurious and destructive brood,
The graceless toys of more enlightened times,
That teach the child to languish to be wooed,
Create her follies, and contrive her crimes:
These clear the paths to ruin and to shame:
Perhaps, by these poor Delia was undone!
Delia! whose lost and desolated fame
Friendship can only weep, and virtue shun!
But O! the gorgeous tales of earlier days,
Where fancy shines in mystic fiction bright;
Where chastity is woman's fairest praise,
And virtue's cause inspires the venurous knight;
Be these my choice! and who, by these refined,
Would bear the business of life's public crowd;
Would change these wand'rings of the enchanted mind
For all the splendid slavery of the proud.
But these to few are given: -- unknown they lie,
Unsought, unhonour'd, by the venal herd
Where purseproud wealth can injured worth defy,
And poverty alone is shunned and feared.
Unknown they lie where sturdy labor lives
And earns with ceaseless care his scanty meal;
Often too where chance the powers of leisure gives,
Superior fate denies the power to feel.
Yet some perchance, in this tempestuous time
Some still remain, and sure not meanly blessed,
Whose rambling thoughts have reached this rapturous clime,
And viewed these scenes of fancy and of rest.
For them all nature breathes elysian grace,
And sweets ambrosial stream from every flower;
Fairies for them the green-sward ringlets trace,
And magick's mightiest influence guards their bower.
And should blessed Competence from heaven descend,
And from a patron's will their freedom save;
To such, congenial with myself, I Will bend,
And consecrate the verse these visions gave.
THE END.

