THE LUCUBRATIONS OF Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire

Revised and Corrected by the Author.

VOL. I.

(...)
Homer. LONDON, Printed by John Nutt, and sold by John Morphew, near
Stationers' Hall. MDCCXII.

TO Mr. Maynwaring.
SIR,
THE State of Conversation and Business in this Town having been long perplexed
with Pretenders in both Kinds, in order to open Men's Eyes against such Abuses,
it appeared no unprofitable Undertaking to publish a Paper which should observe
upon the Manners of the Pleasurable, as well as the Busy Part of Mankind. To
make this generally read, it seemed the most proper Method to form it by Way of
a Letter of Intelligence, consisting of such Parts as might gratify the
Curiosity of Persons of all Conditions, and of each Sex. But a Work of this
Nature requiring Time to grow into the Notice of the World, it happened very
luckily, that a little before I had resolved upon this Design, a Gentleman had
written Predictions, and Two or Three other Pieces in my Name, which had
rendered it famous through all Parts of Europe; and by an inimitable Spirit and
Humor, raised it to as high a Pitch of Reputation as it could possibly arrive
at.

By this good Fortune, the Name of Isaac Bickerstaff gained an Audience of all
who had any Taste of Wit, and the Addition of the ordinary Occurrences of
common Journals of News brought in a Multitude of other Readers. I could not, I
confess, long keep up the Opinion of the Town, that these Lucubrations were
written by the same Hand with the first Works which were published under my
Name; but before I lost the Participation of that Author's Fame, I had already
found the Advantage of his Authority, to which I owe the sudden Acceptance
which my Labors met with in the World.

The general Purpose of this Paper, is to expose the false Arts of Life, to
pull off the Disguises of Cunning, Vanity, and Affectation, and to recommend a
general Simplicity in our Dress, our Discourse, and our Behavior. No Man has a
better Judgment for the Discovery, or a nobler Spirit for the Contempt of all
Imposture, than your self; which Qualities render you the most proper Patron
for the Author of these Essays. In the general, the Design, however executed,
has meet with so great Success, that there is hardly a Name now eminent among
us for Power, Wit, Beauty, Valor, or Wisdom, which is not subscribed, for the
Encouragement of the Two Volumes in Octavo, on a Royal or Medium Paper. This is
indeed an Honor for which it is impossible to express a suitable Gratitude;
and there is nothing could be an Addition to the Pleasure I take in it, but the
Reflection that it gives me the most conspicuous Occasion I can ever have, of
subscribing my self,

SIR, Your most Obliged, most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, Isaac
Bickerstaff.

[No 1. THE TATLER:
BY Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Quicquid agunt Homines uostri Farrago Libelli.

Tuesday, April 12. 1709.
THOUGH the other Papers which are published for the Use of the good People of
England have certainly very wholesome Effects, and are laudable in their
particular Kinds, they do not seem to come up to the main Design of such
Narrations, which I humbly presume, should be principally intended for the Use
of politic Persons, who are so publick-spirited as to neglect their own
Affairs to look into Transactions of State. Now these Gentlemen, for the most
Part, being Persons of strong Zeal, and weak Intellects, It is both a
Charitable and Necessary Work to offer something, whereby such worthy and
well-affected Members of the Commonwealth may be instructed, after their
Reading, what to think; which shall be the End and Purpose of this my Paper:
Wherein I shall from Time to Time Report and Consider all Matters of what Kind
soever that shall occur to Me, and publish such my Advices and Reflections
every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday in the Week, for the Convenience of the
Post. I resolved also to have something which may be of Entertainment to the
Fair Sex, in Honor of whom I have taken the Title of this Paper. I therefore
earnestly desire all Persons, without Distinction, to take it in for the
present Gratis, and hereafter at the Price of One Penny, forbidding all Hawkers
to take more for it at their Peril. And I desire all Persons to consider, that
I am at a very great Charge for proper Materials for this Work, as well as that
before I resolved upon it, I had settled a Correspondence in all Parts of the
Known and Knowing World. And forasmuch as this Globe is not trodden upon by
mere Drudges of Business only, but that Men of Spirit and Genius are justly to
be esteemed as considerable Agents in it, we shall not, upon a Dearth of News,
present you with musty Foreign Edicts, or dull Proclamations, but shall divide
our Relation of the Passages which occur in Action or Discourse throughout this
Town as well as elsewhere, under such Dates of Places as may prepare you for
the Matter you are to expect, in the following Manner:

All Accounts of Gallantry, Pleasure, and Entertainment, shall be under the
Article of White's Chocolate-house; Poetry under that of Will's Coffee-house:
Learning, under the Title of Grecian; Foreign and Domestic News, you will
have from St. James's Coffee-house; and what else I have to offer on any other
Subject shall be dated from my own Apartment.

I once more desire my Reader to consider, That as I cannot keep an ingenious
Man to go daily to Will's, under Twopence each Day mereby for his Charges; to
White's, under Sixpence; nor to the Grecian, without allowing him some Plain
Spanish, to be as able as others at the Learned Table; and that a good Observer
cannot speak with even Kidney at St. James's without clean Linen. I say, these
Considerations will, I hope, make all Persons willing to comply with my Humble
Request (when my Gratis Stock is exhausted) of a Penny a-piece; especially
since they are sure of some proper Amusement, and that it is impossible for me
to want Means to entertain 'em, having, besides the Force of my own Parts, the
Power of Divination, and that I can, by casting a Figure, tell you all that
will happen before it comes to pass.

But this last Faculty I shall use very sparingly, and speak but of few Things
'till they are passed for fear of divulging Matters which may offend our
Superiors.

White's Chocolate-house, April 7.
THE deplorable Condition of a very pretty Gentleman, who walks here at the
Hours when Men of Quality first appear, is what is very much lamented. His
History is, That on the 9th of September 1705. being in his One and twentieth
Year, he was washing his Teeth at a Tavern Window in Pall Mall, when a fine
Equipage passed by, and in it a young Lady who looked up at him; away goes the
Coach, and the young Gentleman pulled off his Nightcap, and instead of rubbing
his Gums, as he ought to do out of the Window till about Four a Clock, sits him
down, and spoke not a Word till Twelve at Night; after which, he began to
enquire, If any Body knew the Lady -- The Company asked, What Lady? But he said
no more, 'till they broke up at Six in the Morning. All the ensuing Winter he
went from Church to Church every Sunday, and from Playhouse to Playhouse every
Night in the Week, but could never find the Original of the Picture which dwelt
in his Bosom. In a Word, his Attention to any Thing but his Passion, was
utterly gone. He has lost all the Money he ever played for, and been confuted
in every Argument he has entered upon since the Moment he first saw her. He is
of a Noble Family, has naturally a very good Air, and is of a frank, honest
Temper: But this Passion has so extremely mauled him, that his Features are set
and uninformed, and his whole Visage is deaden'd by a long Absence of Thought.
He never appears in any Alacrity, but when raised by Wine; at which Time he is
sure to come hither, and throw away a great deal of Wit on Fellows, who have no
Sense further than just to observe, That our poor Lover has most Understanding
when he is drunk, and is least in his Senses when he is sober.

Will's Coffee-house, April 8.
On Thursday last was acted, for the Benefit of Mr. Betterton, the Celebrated
Comedy, called Love for Love. Those excellent Players, Mrs. Barry, Mrs.
Bracegirdle, and Mr. Dogget, though not at present concerned in the House,
acted on that Occasion. There has not b en known so great a Concourse of
Persons of Distinction as at that Time; the Stage it self was covered with
Gentlemen and Ladies, and when the Curtain was drawn, it discovered even there
a very splendid Audience. This unusual Encouragement, which was given to a Play
for the Advantage of so great an Actor, gives an undeniable Instance, That the
true Relish for Manly Entertainments and Rational Pleasures is not wholly lost.
All the Parts were acted to Perfection: the Actors were careful of their
Carriage, and no one was guilty of the Affection to insert Witticisms of his
own, but a due Respect was had to the Audience, for encouraging this
accomplished Player. It is not now doubted but Plays will revive, and take
their usual Place in the Opinion of Persons of Wit and Merit, notwithstanding
their late Apostasy in Favor of Dress and Sound. This Place is very much
altered since Mr. Dryden frequented it; where you used to see Songs, Epigrams,
and Satyrs, in the Hands of every Man you met, you have now only a Pack of
Cards; and instead of the Cavils about the Turn of the Expression, the Elegance
of the Style, and the like, the Learned now dispute only about the Truth of the
Game. But however, the Company is altered, all have shown a great Respect for
Mr. Betterton: And the very Gaming Part of this House have been so much touched
with a Sense of the Uncertainty of Humane Affairs, (which alter with themselves
every Moment) that in this Gentleman, they pitied Mark Anthony of Rome, Hamlet
of Denmark, Mithridatus of Pontus, Theodosius of Greece, and Henry the Eighth
of England. It is well known, he has been in the Condition of each of those
illustrious Personages for several Hours together, and behaved himself in those
high Stations, in all the Changes of the Scene, with suitable Dignity. For
these Reasons, we intend to repeat this Favor to him on a proper Occasion,
lest he who can instruct us so well in personating Feigned Sorrows, should be
lost to us by suffering under Real Ones. The Town is at present in very great
Expectation of seeing a Comedy now in Rehearsal, which is the 25th Production
of my Honored Friend Mr. Thomas D'Urfey; who, besides his great Abilities in
the Dramatick, has a peculiar Talent in the Lyrick Way of Writing, and that
with a Manner wholly new and unknown to the Ancient Greeks and Romans, wherein
he is but faintly imitated in the Translations of the Modern Italian Opera's.

St. James's Coffee-house, April 11.
Letters from the Hague of the 16th say, That Major General Cadogan was gone to
Brussels, with Orders to disperse proper Instructions for assembling the whole
Force of the Allies in Flanders in the Beginning of the next Month. The late
Offers concerning Peace, were made in the Style of Persons who think themselves
upon equal Terms: But the Allies have so just a Sense of their present
Advantages, that they will not admit of a Treaty, except France offers what is
more suitable to her present Condition. At the same Time we make Preparations,
as if we were alarmed by a greater Force than that which we are carrying into
the Field. Thus this Point seems now to be argued Sword in Hand. This was what
a Great General alluded to, when being asked the Names of those who were to be
Plenipotentiaries for the ensusuing Peace; answered, with a serious Air, There
are about an Hundred thousand of us. Mr. Kidney, who has the Ear of the
greatest Politicians that come hither, tells me, There is a Mail come in to Day
with Letters, dated Hague, April 19. N. S. which say, a Design of bringing Part
of our Troops into the Field at the latter End of this Month, is now altered to
a Resolution of marching toward the Camp about the 20th of the next. There
happened the other Day, in the Road of Scheveling, an Engagement between a
Privateer of Zealand, and one of Dunkirk. The Dunkirker, carrying 33 Pieces of
Cannon, was taken and brought into the Texel. It is said, the Courier of
Monsieur Rouille is returned to him from the Court of France. Monsieur Vendo^e
being reinstated in the Favor of the Duchess of Burgundy, is to command in
Flanders.

Mr. Kidney added, That there were Letters of the 17th from Ghent, which give
an Account, That the Enemy had formed a Design to surprise two Battalions of
the Allies which lay at Alost; but those Battalions received Advice of their
March, and retired to Dendermond. Lieutenant General Wood appeared on this
Occasion at the Head of 5000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, upon which the Enemy
withdrew, without making any further Attempt.

From my own Apartment.
I am sorry I am obliged to trouble the Public with so much Discourse upon a
Matter which I at the very first mentioned as a Trifle, viz. the Death of Mr.
Partridge, under whose Name there is an Almanac come out for the Year 1709. In
one Page of which it is asserted by the said John Partridge, That he is still
living, and not only so, but that he was also living some Time before, and even
at the Instant when I writ of his Death. I have in another Place, and in a
Paper by it self, sufficiently convinced this Man that he is dead, and if he
has any Shame, I don't doubt but that by this Time he owns it to all his
Acquaintance: For though the Legs and Arms, and whole Body of that Man may still
appear and perform their animal Functions; yet since, as I have elsewhere
observed, his Art is gone, the Man is gone. I am, as I said, concerned, that
this little Matter should make so much Noise; but since I am engaged, I take my
self obliged in Honor to go on in my Lucubrations, and by the Help of these
Arts of which I am Master, as well as my Skill in Astrological Speculations, I
shall, as I see Occasion, proceed to confute other dead Men, who pretend to be
in Being, that they are actually deceased. I therefore give all Men fair
Warning to mend their Manners, for I shall from Time to Time print Bills of
Mortality; and I beg Pardon of all such who shall be named therein, if they who
are good for nothing shall find themselves in the Number of the Deceased.

The TATLER. [No 2.
From Tuesd. April 12. to Thursd. April 14. 1709.
Will's Coffee-house, April 13.
THere has lain all this Evening on the Table, the following Poem. The Subject
of it being Matter very useful for Families, I thought it deserved to be
considered, and made more public. The Turn the Poet gives it, is very happy;
but the Foundation is from a real Accident which happened among my
Acquaintance. A young Gentleman of a great Estate, fell desperately in Love
with a great Beauty, of very high Quality, but as ill-natured, as long Flattery
and an habitual Self will could make her. However, my young Spark ventures upon
her, like a Man of Quality, without being acquainted with her, or having ever
saluted her, till it was a Crime to kiss any Woman else. Beauty is a Thing
which palls with Possession; and the Charms of this Lady soon wanted the
Support of good Humor and Complaisancy of Manners. Upon this my Spark flies to
the Bottle for Relief from his Satiety. She disdains him for being tired with
that for which all Men envied him; and he never came Home, but it was -- Was
there no Sot that would stay longer? Would any Man living but you? Did I leave
all the World for this Usage? To which he -- Madam, Split me, you are very
impertinent! In a Word, this Match was Wedlock in its most terrible
Appearances. She, at last weary of Railing to no Purpose, applies to a good
Uncle, who gives her a Bottle of Water: The Virtue of this Powerful Liquor
(said he) is such, that if the Woman you marry proves a Scold, (which, it
seems, my dear Niece, is your Misfortune; as it was your good Mother's before
you,) let her hold six Spoonfuls in her Mouth, for a full half Hour after you
come Home -- But I find I am not in Humor for telling a Tale, and nothing in
Nature is so ungrateful as Story-Telling against the Grain, therefore take it
as the Author has given it you.

The MEDECIN.
A Tale -- for the Ladies.
Miss Molly, a famed Toast, was Fair and Young,
Had Wealth and Charms -- but then she had a Tongue!
From Morn' to Night, the Eternal Larum run,
Which often lost those Hearts her Eyes had won.
Sir John was smitten, and confessed his Flame,
Sighed out the usual Time, then wed the Dame;
Possessed he thought of every Joy of Life,
But his Dear Molly proved a very Wife.
Excess of Fondness did in Time decline,
Madam loved Money, and the Knight loved Wine.
From whence some petty Discords would arise,
As, You're a Fool; -- and, You are mighty Wife!
Though he and all the World allowed her Wit,
Her Voice was shrill, and rather loud than sweet;
When she began, -- for Hat and Sword he would call.
Then, after a faint Kiss, -- Cry, B'y, Dear Moll:
Supper and Friends expect me at the Rose.
And, what, Sir John, You Will get your usual Dose:
Go, stink of Smoke, and guzzle nasty Wine,
Sure, never Virtuous Love was used like Mine!
Often, as the watchful Bellman marched his Round,
At a fresh Bottle gay Sir John he found.
By Four the Knight would get his Business done,
And only then reeled off, because alone;
Full well he knew the dreadful Storm to come,
But armed with Bourdeaux, he durst venture Home.
My Lady with her Tongue was still prepared,
She rattled loud, and he impatient heard:
It Is a fine Hour! In a sweet Pickle made!
And this, Sir John, is every Day the Trade.
Here I sit moping all the live-long Night,
Devoured with Spleen, and Stranger to Delight;
Till Morn' sends stagg'ring Home a Drunken Beast,
Resolved to break my Heart, as well as Rest.
Hey! Hoop! do you hear my damned obstrep'rous Spouse!
What, cannot you find one Bed about the House!
Will that perpetual Clack lie never still!
That Rival to the Softness of a Mill!
Some Couch and distant Room must be my Choice,
Where I may sleep uncurs'd with Wife and Noise.
Long this uncomfortable Life they led,
With snarling Meals, and each a separate Bed.
To an old Uncle often she would complain,
Beg his Advice, and scarce from Tears refrain.
Old Wisewood smoked the Matter as it was,
Cheer up, cried he! and I Will remove the Cause.
A wondrous Spring within my Garden flows,
Of Sovereign Virtue, chiefly to compose
Domestic Jarrs, and Matrimonial Strife,
The best Elixir to appease Man and Wife;
Strange are the Effects, the Qualitles Divine,
It Is Water called, but worth its Weight in Wine.
If in his sullen Airs Sir John should come,
Three Spoonfuls take, hold in your Mouth -- then Mum:
Smile, and look Pleased, when he shall Rage and Scold,
Still in your Mouth the Healing Cordial hold;
One Month this Sympathetick Med'cin tried,
He Will grow a Lover, you a Happy Bride.
But, dearest Niece, keep this Grand Secret close,
Or every prat'ling Hussy'll beg a Dose.
A Water-Bottle's brought for her Relief,
Not Nants could sooner ease the Lady's Grief:
Her busy Thoughts are on the Trial bent,
And Female-like, impatient for the Event:
The Bonny Knight reels Home exceeding clear,
Prepared for Clamor, and Domestic War.
Entering, he cries, -- Hey! Where Is our Thunder fled!
No Hurricane! Betty's your Lady dead?
Madam, aside, an ample Mouthful takes,
Court'sys, looks Kind, but not a Word she speaks:
Wondering, he star'd, scarcely his Eyes believed,
But found his Ears agreeably deceived.
Why, How now, Molly, What Is the Crotchet now?
She smiles, and answers only with a Bow.
Then clasping her about, -- Why, let me die!
These Nightclothes, Moll, become thee mightily!
With that, he sighed, her Hand began to press,
And Betty calls, her Lady to undress.
Nay, kiss me, Molly, -- for I Am much inclined.
Her Lace she cuts, to take him in the Mind.
Thus the fond Pair to Bed enamored went,
The Lady pleased, and the good Knight content.
For many Days these fond Endearments passed,
The reconciling Bottle fails at last;
'Twas used and gone, -- Then Midnight Storms arose,
And Looks and Words the Union discompose.
Her Coach is ordered, and Post-haste she flies,
To beg her Uncle for some fresh Supplies;
Transported does the strange Effects relate,
Her Knight's Conversion, and her happy State!
Why, Niece, says he. -- I prithee apprehend
The Water's Water, -- Be thy self thy Friend;
Such Beauty would the coldest Husband warm,
But your provoking Tongue undoes the Charm:
Be silent, and complying, -- You Will soon find,
Sir John, without a Med'cin, will be kind.
St. James's Coffee-house, April 13.
Letters from Venice say, The Disappointment of their Expectation to see his
Danish Majesty, has very much disquieted the Court of Rome. Our last Advices
from Germany inform us, That the Minister of Hanover has urged the Council at
Ratisbonne to exert themselves in Behalf of the Common Cause, and taken the
Liberty to say, That the Dignity, the Virtue, the Prudence of his Electoral
Highness, his Master, were called to the Head of their Affairs in vain, if they
thought fit to leave him naked of the proper Means to make those Excellencies
useful for the Honor and Safety of the Empire. They write from Berlin of the
13th, O. S. That the true Design of General Fleming's Visit to that Court was,
to insinuate, that it will be for the mutual Interest of the King of Prussia
and King Augustus to enter into a new Alliance; but that the Ministers of
Prussia are not inclined to his Sentiments. We hear from Vienna, That his
Imperial Majesty has expressed great Satisfaction in their High Mightinesses
having communicated to him the whole that has passed in the Affair of a Peace.
Though there have been Practices used by the Agents of France, in all the
Courts of Europe, to break the good Understanding of the Allies, they have had
no other Effect, but to make all the Members concerned in the Alliance, more
doubtful of their Safety from the great Offers of the Enemy. The Empire is
rouzed by this Alarm, and the Frontiers of all the French Dominions are in
Danger of being insulted the ensuing Campaign: Advices from all Parts confirm,
That it is impossible for France to find a Way to obtain so much Credit, as to
gain any one Potentate of the Allies, or conceive any Hope for Safety from
other Prospects.

From my own Apartment, April 13.
I find it of very great Use, now I am setting up for a Writer of News, that I
am an Adept in Astrological Speculations; by which Means. I avoid speaking of
Things which may offend Great Persons. But at the same Time, I must not
prostitute the Liberal Sciences so far, as not to utter the Truth in Cases
which do not immediately concern the Good of my Native Country. I must
therefore contradict what has been so assuredly reported by the News-Writers of
England, That France is in the most deplorable Condition, and that their People
die in great Multitudes. I will therefore let the World know, that my
Correspondent, by the Way of Brussels, informs me, upon his Honor, That the
Gentleman who writes the Gazette of Paris, and ought to know as well as any
Man, has told him, That ever since the King has been past his 63d Year, or
Grand Climacterick, there has not died one Man of the French Nation who was
younger than his Majesty, except a very few, who were taken suddenly near the
Village of Hickstet in Germany; and some more, who were straightened for Lodging
at a Place called Ramilies, and died on the Road to Ghent and Bruges. There are
also other Things given out by the Allies, which are Shifts below a Conquering
Nation to make use of. Among others, it is said, There is a general Murmuring
among the People of France, though at the same Time all my Letters agree, That
there is so good an Understanding among them, that there is not one Morsel
carried out of any Market in the Kingdom, but what is delivered upon Credit.

The TATLER. [No 3.
From Thursd. April 14. to Saturd. April 16. 1709.
Will's Coffee-house, April 14.
THis Evening, the Comedy, called The Country Wife, was acted in Drury Lane,
for the Benefit of Mrs. Bignall. The Part which gives Name to the Play was
performed by her self. Through the whole Action, she made a a very pretty
Figure, and exactly entered into the Nature of the Part. Her Husband, in the
Drama, is represented to be one of those Debauchees who run through the Vices
of the Town, and believe when they think fit they can marry and settle at their
Ease. His own Knowledge of the Iniquity of the Age, makes him choose a Wife
wholly ignorant of it, and place his Security in her Want of Skill how to abuse
him. The Poet, on many Occasions, where the Propriety of the Character will
admit of it, insinuates, That there is no Defense against Vice, but the
Contempt of it: And has, in the natural Ideas of an untainted Innocent, shown
the gradual Steps to Ruin and Destruction, which Persons of Condition run into,
without the Help of a good Education how to form their Conduct. The Torment of
a Jealous Coxcomb, which arises from his own False Maxims, and the Aggravation
of his Pain, by the very Words in which he sees her Innocence, makes a very
pleasant and instructive Satyr. The Character of Horner, and the Design of it,
is a good Representation of the Age in which that Comedy was written; at which
Time Love and Wenching were the Business of Life, and the Gallant Manner of
pursuing Women was the best Recommendation at Court. To which only it is to be
imputed, that a Gentleman of Mr. Wicherly's Character and Sense, condescends to
represent the Insults done to the Honor of the Bed, without just Reproof; but
to have drawn a Man of Probity with Regard to such Considerations, had been a
Monster, and a Poet had at that Time discovered his Want of knowing the Manners
of the Court he lived in, by a Virtuous Character in his fine Gentleman, as he
would show his Ignorance, by drawing a Vicious one to please the present
Audience. Mrs. Bignall did her Part very happily, and had a certain Grace in
her Rusticity, which gave us Hopes of seeing her a very Skilful Player, and in
some Parts, supply our Loss of Mrs. Verbruggen. I cannot be of the same Opinion
with my Friends and Fellow Laborers, the Reformers of Manners, in their
Severity toward Plays, but must allow, that a good Play acted before a
well-bred Audience, must raise very proper Incitements to good Behavior, and
be the most quick and most prevailing Method of giving Young People a Turn of
Sense and Breeding. But as I have set up for a Weekly Historian, I resolve to
be a Faithful One; and therefore take this public Occasion, to admonish a
Young Nobleman, who came flustered into the Box last Night, and let him know,
how much all his Friends were out of Countenance for him. The Women sat in
Terror of hearing something that should shock their Modesty, and all the
Gentlemen in as much Pain, out of Compassion to the Ladies, and perhaps
Resentment for the Indignity which was offered in coming into their Presence in
so disrespectful a Manner. Wine made him say nothing that was Rude, therefore
he is forgiven, upon Condition he weill never hazard his offending more in this
Kind. As I just now hinted, I own my self of the Society for Reformation of
Manners. We have lower Instruments than those of the Family of Bickerstaff, for
punishing great Crimes, and exposing the Abanddoned. Therefore, as I disign to
have Notices from all Public Assemblies, I shall take upon me only Indecorums,
Improprieties, and Negligences, in such as should give us better Examples.
After this Declaration; if a Fine Lady thinks fit to giggle at Church, or a
Great Beau come in drunk to a Play, either shall be sure to hear of it in my
ensuing Paper: For merely as a well-bred Man, I cannot bear these Enormities.

After the Play, we naturally stroll to this Coffee-house, in Hopes of meeting
some new Poem, or other Entertainment, among the Men of Wit and Pleasure, where
there is a Dearth a present. But it is wonderful there should be so few
Writers, when the Art is become merely Mechanic, and Men may make themselves
Great that Way, by as certain and infallible Rules, as you may be a Joiner or a
Mason. There happens a good Instance of this, in what the Hawker just now has
offered to Sale; to wit, Instructions to Vanderbank; A Sequel to the Advice to
the Poets; A poem, occasioned by the Glorious Success of Her Majesty's Arms,
under the Command of the Duke of Marlborought, the last Tear in Flanders. Here
you are to understand, that the Author finding the Poets would not take his
Advice, he troubles himself no more about 'em; but has met with one Vanderbank,
who works in Arras, and makes very good Tapestry Hangings: Therefore, in order
to celebrate the Hero of the Age, he claps me together all that can be said of
a Man that makes Hangings: As, Then, Artist, who do Nature's Face express
In Silk and Gold, and Scenes of Action dress;
Do figured Arras animated leave,
Spin a Bright Story, or a Passion weave
By mingling Threads; can mingle Shade and Light,
Delineate Triumphs, or describe a Fight?


Well, what shall this Work man do? Why? To show how great an Hero the Poet
intends, he provides him a very good Horse: Champing his Foam, and bounding on
the Plain
Arch his High Neck, and Graceful spread his Mane.


Now as to the Intrepidity, the calm Courage, the constant Application of the
Hero, it is not necessary to take that upon your self; you may, in the Lump,
bid him you employ raise him as High as he can, and if he does it not, let him
answer for disobeying Orders. Let Fame and Victory in inferior Sky,
Hover with balanced Wings, and smiling fly
Above his Head, etc.


A whole Poem of this Kind may be ready against an ensuing Campaign, as well as
a Space left in the Canvass of a Piece of Tapestry for the principal Figure,
while the Under-Parts are working: So that in Effect, the Adviser copies after
the Man he pretends to direct. This Method should, methinks, encourage young
Beginners: For the Invention is so fitted to all Capacities, that by the Help
of it a Man may make a Receipt for a Poem. A young Man may observe, that the
Gigg of the Thing is, as I said, finding out all that can be said of his Way
you employ to set forth your Worthy. Waller and Denham had worn out the
Expedient of Advice to a Painter: This Author has transferred the Work, and
sent his Advice to the Poets; that is to say, to the Turners of Verse, as he
calls 'em. Well, that Thought is worn out also, therefore he directs his Genius
to the Loom, and will have a new Set of Hangings in Honor of the last Year in
Flanders. I must own to you, I approve extremely this Invention, and it might
be improved for the Benefit of Manufactury: As, suppose an Ingenious Gentleman
should write a Poem of Advice to a Callico-Printer: Do you think there is a
Girl in England, that would wear any Thing but The Taking of Lisle, or The
Battle of Oudenarde? They would certainly be all the Fashion, till the Heroes
Abroad had cut out some more Parterns. I should fancy small Skirmishes might do
for Under-Petticoats, provided they had a Siege for the Upper. If our Adviser
were well imitated, many Industrious People might be put to Work. Little Mr.
Dactile, now in the Room, who formerly writ a Song and a Half, is a Week gone
in a very pretty Work, upon this Hint: He is writing an Epigram to a young
Virgin who knits very well ('it is a Thousand Pities he is a Jacobite): But his
Epigram is by Way of Advice to this Damsel, to knit all the Actions of the
Pretender and the Duke of Burgundy last Campaign in the Clock of a Stocking. It
were endless to enumerate the many Hands and Trades that may be employed by
Poets, of so useful a Turn as this Adviser's. I shall think of it; and in this
Time of Taxes, shall consult a great Critic employed in the Custom-house, in
order to propose what Tax may be proper to put upon Knives, Seals, Rings,
Hangings, Wrought-Beds, Gowns and Petticoats, where any of those Commodities
bear Motto's, or are worked upon Poetical Grounds.

St. James's Coffee-house, April 15.
Letters from Turin of the 3d Instant, N. S. inform us, That his Royal Highness
employs all his Address in alarming the Enemy, and perplexing their
Speculations, concerning his real Designs the ensuing Campaign. Contracts are
entered into with the Merchants of Milan, for a great Number of Mules to
transport his Provisions and Ammunition. His Royal Highness has ordered the
Train of Artillery to be conveyed to Susa before the 20th of the next Month. In
the mean Time, all Accounts agree, Thas the Enemy are very backward in their
Preparations, and almost incapable of defending themselves against an Invasion,
by reason of the general Murmurs of their own People; which, they find, are no
way to be quieted, but by giving them Hopes of a speedy Peace. When these
Letters were dispatched, the Marshal de Thesse was arrived at Genoa, where he
has taken much Pains to keep the Correspondents of the Merchants of France in
Hopes, that Measures will be found out to support the Credit and Commerce
between that State and Lions; But the late Declaration of the Agents of
Monsieur Bernard, that they cannot discharge the Demands made upon them, has
quite dispirited all those who are engaged in the Remittances of France.

From my own Apartment, April 15.
It is a very natural Passion in all good Members of the Commonwealth, to take
what Care they can of their Families. Therefore I hope the Reader will forgive
me, that I desire he would go to the Play called the Stratagem, this Evening,
which is to be acted for the Benefit of my near Kinsman Mr. John Bickerstaff. I
protest to you, the Gentleman has not spoken to me to desire this Favor; but I
have a Respect for him, as well in Regard to Consanguinity, as that he is an
intimate Friend of that Famous and Heroic Actor, Mr. George Powell, who
formerly played Alexander the Great in all Places, though he is lately grown so
reserved, as to act it only on the Stage.

The TATLER. [No 4.
From Saturd. April 16. to Tuesd. April 19. 1709.
IT is usual with Persons, who mount the Stage for the Cure or Information of
the Crowd about 'em, to make solemn Professions of their being wholly
disinterested in the Pains they take for the Public Good. At the same Time,
those very Men, who make Harangues in Plush Doublets, and extol their own
Abilities and Generous Inclinations, tear their Lungs in vending a Drug, and
show no Act of Bounty, except it be, that they lower a Demand of a Crown, to
Six, nay, to One Penny. We have a Contempt for such Paultry Barterers, and have
therefore all along informed the Public, that we intend to give them our
Advices for our own Sakes, and are laboring to make our Lucubrations come to
some Price in Money, for our more convenient Support in the Service of the
Public. It is certain, that many other Schemes have been proposed to me; as a
Friend offered to show me a Treatise he had writ, which he called, The Whole
Art of Life, or, The Introduction to Great Men, illustrated in a Pack of Cards.
But being a Novice at all Manner of Play, I declined the Offer. Another advised
me, for want of Money, to set up my Coach and practice Physic, but having been
bred a Scholar, I feared I should not succeed that Way neither; therefore
resolved to go on in my present Project. But you are to understand, that I
shall not pretend to raise a Credit to this Work, upon the Weight of my
Politic News only, but as my Latin Sentence in the Title Page informs you,
shall take any Thing that offers for the Subject of my Discourse. Thus, New
Persons, as well as New Things, are to come under my Consideration; as, when a
Toast, or a Wit, is first pronounced such, You shall have the freshest Advice
of their Preferment from me, with a Description of the Beauty's Manner, and the
Wit's Style, as also in whose Places they are advanced. For this Town is never
good-natured enough to raise One, without depressing Another. But it is my
Design, to avoid saying any Thing, of any Person, which ought justly to
displease; but shall endeavor, by the Variety of the Matter and Style, to give
Entertainment for Men of Pleasure, without Offense to those of Business.

White's Chocolate-house, April 18.
ALL Hearts at present pant for Two Ladies only, who have for some Time
engrossed the Dominion of the Town. They are indeed both exceeding Charming,
but differ very much in their Excellencies. The Beauty of Clarissa is Soft,
that of Chloe Piercing. When you look at Clarissa, you see the most exact
Harmony of Feature, Complexion, and Shape; you find in Chloe nothing
extraordinary in any one of those Particulars, but the whole Woman
irresistible. Clarissa looks Languishing; Chloe Killing. Clarissa never fails
of gaining Admiration; Chloe of moving Desire. The Gazers at Clarissa are at
first unconcerned, as if they were observing a fine Picture. They who behold
Chloe, at the first Glance, discover Transport, as if they met their dearest
Friend. These different Perfections are suitably represented by the last great
Painter Italy has sent us, Mr. Jervase. Clarissa is, by that skilful Hand,
placed in a Manner that looks artless, and innocent of the Torments she gives;
Chloe drawn with a Liveliness that shows she is conscious, but not affected, of
her Perfections. Clarissa is a Shepherdess; Chloe a Country Girl. I must own,
the Design of Chloe's Picture shows, to me, great Mastery in the Painter; for
nothing could be better imagined than the Dress he has given her, of a
Straw-Hat and Ribband, to represent that Sort of Beauty which enters the Heart
with a certain Familiarity, and cheats it into a Belief, that it has received a
Lover as well as an Object of Love. The Force of their different Beauties is
seen also in the Effects it makes on their Lovers. The Admirers of Chloe are
eternally gay and wellpleased: Those of Clarissa, melancholy and thoughtful.
And as this Passion always changes the natural Man into a quite different
Creature from what he was before, the Love of Chloe makes Coxcombs; that of
Clarissa, Madmen. There were of each Kind just now in this Room. Here was one
that whistles, laughs, sings, and cuts Capers, for Love of Chloe. Another has
just now writ Three Lines to Clarissa, then taken a Turn in the Garden, then
came back again, then tore his Fragment, then called for some Chocolate, then
went away without it.

Chloe has so many Admirers in the House at present, that there is too much
Noise to proceed in my Narration: So that the Progress of the Loves of Clarissa
and Chloe, together with the Bottles that are drank each Night for the One, and
the many Sighs which are uttered, and Songs written, on the Other, must be our
Subject on future Occasions.

Will's Coffee-house, April 18.
Letters from the Hay-market inform us, That on Saturday Night last the Opera
of Pyrrhus and Demetrius was performed with great Applause. This Intelligence
is not very acceptable to us Friends of the Theater; for the Stage being an
Entertainment of the Reason and all our Faculties, this Way of being pleased
with the Suspense of 'em for Three Hours together, and being given up to the
shallow Satisfaction of the Eyes and Ears only, seems to arise rather from the
Degeneracy of our Understanding, than an Improvement of our Diversions. That
the Understanding has no Part in the Pleasure is evident, from what these
Letters very positively assert, to wit, That a great Part of the Performance
was done in Italian: And a great Critic fell into Fits in the Gallery, at
seeing, not only Time and Place, but Languages and Nations confused in the most
incorrigible Manner. His Spleen is so extremely moved on this Occasion, that he
is going to publish a Treatise against Opera's, which, he thinks, have already
inclined us to Thoughts of Peace, and if tolerated, must infallibly dispirit us
from carrying on the War. He has communicated his Scheme to the whole Room, and
declared in what Manner Things of this Kind were first introduced. He has upon
this Occasion considered the Nature of Sounds in general, and made a very
elaborate Digression upon the London Cries, wherein he has shown from Reason
and Philosophy, why Oysters are cried, Card-matches sung, and Turnips and all
other Vegetables neither cried, sung, nor said, but sold, with an Accent and
Tone neither natural to Man or Beast. This Piece seems to be taken from the
Model of that excellent Discourse of Mrs. Manly the School Mistress, concerning
Samplers. Advices from the upper End of Piccadilly say, That May-Fair is
utterly abolished; and we hear, Mr. Penkethman has removed his ingenious
Company of Strollers to Greenwich: But other Letters from Deptford say, the
Company is only making thither, and not yet settled; but that several Heathen
Gods and Goddesses, which are to descend in Machines, landed at the
Kings-Head-Stairs last Saturday. Venus and Cupid went on Foot from thence to
Greenwich; Mars got drunk in the Town, and broke his Landlord's Head, for which
he sat in the Stocks the whole Evening; but Mr. Penkethman giving Security
that he should do nothing this ensuing Summer, he was set at Liberty. The most
melancholy Part of all, was, that Diana was taken in the Act of Fornication
with a Boat-man, and committed by Justice Wrathful, which has, it seems, put a
Stop to the Diversions of the Theater of Black Heath. But there goes down
another Diana and a Patient Grissel next Tide from Billingsgate.

St. James's Coffee-house, April 18.
They write from Saxony of the 13th Instant, N. S. That the Grand General of
the Crown of Poland was so far from entering into a Treaty with King Stanislaus,
that he had written Circular Letters, wherein he exhorted the Palatinates to
join against him; declaring, that this was the most favorable Conjuncture for
asserting their Liberty.

Letters from the Hague of the 23d Instant, N. S. say, they have Advices from
Vienna, which import, That his Electoral Highness of Hannover had signified to
the Imperial Court, that he did not intend to put himself at the Head of the
Troops of the Empire, except more effectual Measures were taken for acting
vigorously against the Enemy the ensuing Campaign. Upon this Representation,
the Emperor has given Orders to several Regiments to march toward the Rhine,
and dispatched Expresses to the respective Princes of the Empire to desire an
Augmentation of their Forces.

These Letters add, That an Express arrived at the Hague on the 20th Instant,
with Advice, That the Enemy having made a Detachment from Tournay of 1500
Horse, each Trooper carrying a Foot Soldier behind him, in order to surprise
the Garrison of Alost; the Allies, upon Notice of their March, sent out a
strong Body of Troops from Ghent, which engaged the Enemy at Asche, and took
200 of them Prisoners, obliging the rest to retire without making any farther
Attempt. On the 22d in the Morning a Fleet of Merchant Ships coming from
Scotland, were attacked by Six French Privateers at the Entrance of the Meuse.
We have yet no certain Advice of the Event: But Letters from Rotterdam say,
That a Dutch Man of War of Forty Guns, which was Convoy to the said Fleet, was
taken, as were also Eighteen of the Merchants. The Swiss Troops, in the Service
of the States, have completed the Augmentation of their respective Companies.
Those of Wirtemberg and Prussia are expected on the Frontiers within few Days;
and the Auxiliaries from Saxony, as also a Battalion of Holstein, and another
of Wolfembuttle, are advancing thither with all Expedition. On the 21st
Instant, the Deputies of the States had a Conference near Woerden with the
President Rouille, but the Matter which was therein debated is not made
public. His Grace the Duke of Marlborough and Prince Eugene continue at the
Hague.

From my own Apartment, April 18.
I have lately been very studious for Intelligence, and have just now, by my
Astrological Flying-Post, received a Packet from Felicia, an Island in America,
with an Account that gives me great Satisfaction, and lets me understand that
the Island was never in greater Prosperity, or the Administration in so good
Hands, since the Death of their late glorious King. These Letters import, That
the Chief Minister has entered into a firm League with the ablest and best Men
of the Nation, to carry on the Cause of Liberty, to the Encouragement of
Religion, Virtue, and Honor. Those Persons at the Helm are so useful, and in
themselves of such Weight, that their strict Alliance must needs tend to the
universal Prosperity of the People. Camillo, it seems, presides over the
Deliberations of State; and is so highly valued by all Men for his singular
Probity, Courage, Affability, and Love of Mankind, that his being placed in
that Station has dissipated the Fears of that People, who of all the World are
the most jealous of their Liberty and Happiness. The next Member of their
Society is Horatio, who makes all the Public Dispatches. This Minister is
Master of all the Languages in Use to great Perfection. He is held in the
highest Veneration imaginable for a severe Honesty, and Love of his Country: He
lives in a Court unsullied with any of its Artifices, the Refuge of the
Oppressed, and Terror of Oppressors. Martio has joined himself to this Council;
a Man of most undaunted Resolution and great Knowledge in Maritime Affairs;
famous for destroying the Navy of the Franks, and singularly happy in one
Particular, That he never preferred a Man who has not proved remarkably
serviceable to his Country. Philander is mentioned with particular Distinction;
a Nobleman who has the most refined Taste of the true Pleasures and Elegance of
Life, joined to an indefatigable Industry in Business: A Man eloquent in
Assemblies, agreeable in Conversation, and dextrous in all Manner of Public
Negotiations. These Letters add, That Verono, who is also of this Council, has
lately set Sail to his Government of Patricia, with Design to confirm the
Affections of the People in the Interests of his Queen. This Minister is Master
of great Abilities, and is as industrious and restless for the Preservation of
the Liberties of the People, as the greatest Enemy can be to subvert them. The
Influence of these Personages, who are Men of such distinguished Parts and
Virtues, makes the People enjoy the utmost Tranquillity in the Midst of a War,
and gives them undoubted Hopes of a secure Peace from their Vigilance and
Integrity.

The TATLER. [No 5.
From Tuesd. April 19. to Thursd. April 21. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, April 20.
WHO names that lost Thing, Love, without a Tear,
Since so debauched by ill-bred Customs here.
To an exact Perfection they have brought
The Action, Love, the Passion is forgot.
This was long ago a witty Author's Lamentation, but the Evil still continues;
and if a Man of any Delicacy were to attend the Discourses of the young Fellows
of this Age, they would believe there were none but Prostitutes to make the
Objects of Passion. So true it is what the Author of the above Verses said, a
little before his Death, of the modern Pretenders to Gallantry: "They set up
for Wits in this Age, by saying when they are Sober, what they of the last
spoke only when they were Drunk." But Cupid is not only Blind at present, but
Deaddrunk; he has lost all his Faculties: Else how should Celia be so long a
Maid with that agreeable Behavior? Corinna, with that sprightly Wit? Lesbia,
with that Heavenly Voice? And Sacharissa, with all those Excellencies in one
Person, frequent the Park, the Play, and murder the poor Tits that drag her to
public Places, and not a Man turn pale at her Appearance? But such is the
fallen State of Love, that if it were not for honest Cynthio, who is true to
the Cause, we should hardly have a Pattern left of the ancient Worthies that
Way: And indeed he has but very little Encouragement to persevere; but he has a
Devotion, rather than Love, for his Mistress; and says, Only tell her that I
love,
Leave the rest to her, and Fate;
Some kind Planet from Above,
May, perhaps, her Passion move:
Lovers on their Stars must wait.


But the Stars I am so intimately acquainted with, that I can assure him he
will never have her: For would you believe it, though Cynthio has Wit, Good
Sense, Fortune, and his very Being depends upon her, the Termagant for whom he
fighs, is in Love with a Fellow, who stares in the Glass all the Time he is
with her, and lets her plainly see, she may possibly be his Rival, but never
his Mistress. Yet Cynthio, the same unhappy Man whom I mentioned in my first
Narrative, pleases himself with a vain Imagination, that with the Language of
his Eyes, now he has found who she is, he shall conquer her, though her Eyes
are intent upon one who looks from her; which is ordinary with the Sex. It is
certainly a Mistake in the Ancients, to draw the little Gentleman, Love, as a
blind Boy; for his real Character is, a little Thief that squints. For ask Mrs.
Meddle, who is a Confident, or Spy, upon all the Passions in Town, and she will
tell you, that the Whole is a Game of Cross Purposes. The Lover is generally
pursuing one who is in Pursuit of another, and running from one that desires to
meet him. Nay, the Nature of this Passion is so justly represented in a
squinting little Thief, (who is always in a Double Action) that do but observe
Clarissa next Time you see her, and you will find, when her Eyes have made their
soft Tour round the Company, she makes no Stay on him they say she is to marry,
but rests Two Seconds of a Minute on Wildair, who neither looks nor thinks on
her, or any Woman else. However, Cynthio had a Bow from her the other Day, upon
which he is very much come to himself; and I heard him send his Man of an
Errand Yesterday without any Manner of Hesitation; a Quarter of an Hour after
which he reckoned Twenty, remembered he was to sup with a Friend, and went
exactly to his Appointment. I sent to know how he did this Morning, and I find
he has not forgot that he spoke to me Yesterday.

Will's Coffee-house, April 20.
This Week being Sacred to Holy Things, and no public Diversions allowed,
there has been taken Notice of, even here, a little Treatise, called, A Project
for the Advancement of Religion: Dedicated to the Countess of Berkeley. The
Title was so uncommon, and promised so peculiar a Way of Thinking, that every
Man here has read it, and as many as have done so, have approved it. It is
written with the Spirit of one who has seen the World enough to undervalue it
with good Breeding. The Author must certainly be a Man of Wisdom, as well as
Piety, and have spent much Time in the Exercise of both. The real Causes of the
Decay of the Interest of Religion, are set forth in a clear and lively Manner,
without unseasonable Passions; and the whole Air of the Book, as to the
Language, the Sentiments, and the Reasonings, show it was written by one whose
Virtue sits easy about him, and to whom Vice is thoroughly contemptible. It was
said by one of this Company, alluding to that Knowledge of the World the Author
seems to have, the Man writes much like a Gentleman, and goes to Heaven with a
very good Mien.

St. James's Coffee-house, April 20.
Letters from Italy say, That the Marquis de Pry, upon the Receipt of an
Express from the Court of Vienna, went immediately to the Palace of Cardinal
Paulucci, Minister of State to his Holiness, and demanded in the Name of his
Imperial Majesty, that King Charles should be forthwith acknowledged King of
Spain, by a solemn Act of the Congregation of Cardinals appointed for that
Purpose: He declared at the same Time, That if the least Hesitation were made
in this most important Article of the late Treaty, he should not only be
obliged to leave Rome himself, but also transmit his Master's Orders to the
Imperial Troops to face about, and return into the Ecclesiastical Dominions.
When the Cardinal reported this Message to the Pope, his Holiness was struck
with so sensible an Affliction, that he burst into Tears. His Sorrow was
aggravated by Letters which immediately after arrived from the Court of Madrid,
wherein his Nuncio acquainted him, That upon the News of his Accommodation with
the Emperor, he had received a Message to forbear coming to Court; and the
People were so highly provoked, that they could hardly be restrained from
insulting his Palace. These Letters add, That the King of Denmark was gone from
Florence to Pisa, and from Pisa to Leghorn, where the Governor paid his
Majesty all imaginable Honors. The King designed to go from thence to Lucca,
where a Magnificent Tournament was prepared for his Diversion. An English Man
of War, which came from Port Mahon to Leghorn in 6 Days, brought Advice. That
the Fleet commanded by Admiral Whitaker was safely arrived at Barcelona, with
the Troops and Ammunition which he had taken in at Naples.

General Boneval, Governo of Commacchio, had summoned the Magistrates of all
the Towns near that Place to appear before him, and take an Oath of Fidelity to
his Imperial Majesty, commanding also the Gentry to pay him Homage, on Pain of
Death and Confiscation of Goods. Advices from Swisserland inform us, That the
Bankers of Geneva were utterly ruined by the Failure of Mr. Bernard. They add,
That the Deputies of the Swiss Cantons were returned from Soleure, where they
were assembled at the Instance of the French Ambassador; but were very much
dissatisfied with the Reception they had from that Minister. It Is true, he
omitted no Civilities, or Expressions of Friendship from his Master, but he
took no Notice of their Pensions and Arrears; what further provoked their
Indignation, was, That instead of 25 Pistoles formerly allowed to each Member
for their Charge in coming to the Diet, he had presented them with 6 only. They
write from Dresden, That King Augustus was still busy in recruiting his
Cavalry, and that the Danish Troops, which lately served in Hungary, had Orders
to be in Saxony in the Middle of May, and that his Majesty of Denmark was
expected at Dresden in the Beginning of that Month. King Augustus makes great
Preparations for his Reception, and has appointed Sixty Coaches, each drawn by
Six Horses, for that Purpose: The Interview of these Princes affords great
Matter for Speculation. Letters from Paris of the 22d of this Month say, That
Marshall Harcourt and the Duke of Berwick were preparing to go into Alsace and
Dauphine, but that their Troops were in Want of all Manner of Necessaries. The
Court of France had received Advices from Madrid, That on the 7th of this Month
the States of Spain had with much Magnificence acknowledged the Prince of
Asturias Presumptive Heir of the Crown. This was performed at Buen Retiro; the
Deputies took the Oaths on that Occasion from the Hands of Cardinal
Portocarrero. These Advices add, That it was signified to the Pope's Nuncio, by
Order of Council, to depart from that Court in 24 Hours, and that a Guard was
accordingly appointed to conduct him to Bayonne.

Letters from the Hague of the 26th Instant inform us, That Prince Eugene was
to set out the next Day for Brussels, to put all Things in a Readiness for
opening the Campaign. They add, That the Grand Pensioner having reported to the
Duke of Marlborough what passed in the last Conference with Mr. Rouille, his
Grace had taken a Resolution immediately to return to Great Britain, to
communicate to Her Majesty all that has been transacted in that important
Affair.

From my own Apartment, April 20.
The Nature of my Miscellaneous Work is such, that I shall always take the
Liberty to tell for News such Things (let 'em have happened never so much
before the Time of Writing) as have escaped public Notice, or have been
misrepresented to the World, provided that I am still within Rules, and
trespass not as a Tatler any further than in an Incorrectness of Style, and
writing in an Air of common Speech. Thus if any Thing that is said, even of old
Anchises or Aeneas, be set by me in a different Light than has hitherto been
hit upon, in order to inspire the Love and Admiration of worthy Actions, you
will, Gentle Reader, I hope, accept of it for Intelligence you had not before.
But I am going upon a Narrative, the Matter of which I know to be true: It is
not only doing Justice to the deceased Merit of such Persons, as, had they
lived, would not have had it in their Power to thank me, but also an Instance
of the Greatness of Spirit in the lowest of Her Majesty's Subjects. Take it as
follows:

At the Siege of Namur by the Allies, there were in the Ranks of the Company
commanded by Captain Pincent, in Colonel Frederick Hamilton's Regiment, one
Unnion a Corporal, and one Valentine a private Sentinel: There happened between
these Two Men a Dispute about a Matter of Love, which, upon some Aggravations,
grew to an irreconcilable Hatred. Unnion being the Officer of Valentine, took
all Opportunities even to strike his Rival, and profess the Spite and Revenge
which moved him to it. The Sentinel bore it without Resistance, but frequently
said, He would die to be revenged of that Tyrant. They had spent whole Months
thus, one injuring, the other complaining; when in the Midst of this Rage
toward each other, they were commanded upon the Attack of the Castle, where
the Corporal received a Shot in the Thigh, and fell; the French pressing on,
and he expecting to be trampled to Death, called out to his Enemy, Ah,
Valentine! Can you leave me here? Valentine immediately ran back, and in the
Midst of a thick Fire of the French, took the Corporal upon his Back, and
brought him through all that Danger as far as the Abbey of Salsine, where a
Cannon-Ball took off his Head: His Body fell under his Enemy whom he was
carrying off. Unnion immediately forgot his Wound, rose up, tearing his Hair,
and then threw himself upon the bleeding Carcass, crying, Ah Valentine! Was it
for me, who have so barbarously used thee, that thou have died? I will not live
after thee. He was not by any Means to be forced from the Body, but was removed
with it bleeding in his Arms, and attended with Tears by all their Comrades,
who knew their Enmity. When he was brought to a Tent, his Wounds were dressed
by Force; but the next Day, still calling upon Valentine, and lamenting his
Cruelties to him, he died in the Pangs of Remorse and Despair.

It may be a Question among Men of Noble Sentiments, Whether of these
unfortunate Persons had the greater Soul, he that was so generous as to venture
his Life for his Enemy, or he who could not survive the Man that died, in
laying upon him such an Obligation?

When we see Spirits like these in a People, to what Heights may we not suppose
their Glory may arise, but (as it is excellently observed by Sallust) it is not
only to the general Bent of a Nation that great Revolutions are owing, but to
the extraordinary Genio's that lead 'em. On which Occasion he proceeds to say,
That the Roman Greatness was neither to be attributed to their superior Poli y,
for in that the Carthaginians excelled; nor to their Valor, for in that the
French were preferable; but to particular Men, who were born for the Good of
their Country, and formed for great Attempts. This he says to introduce the
Characters of Caesar and Cato. It would be entering into too weighty a Discourse
for this Place, if I attempted to show, that our Nation has produced as great
and able Men for public Affairs as any other. But I believe, the Reader
outruns me, and fixes his Imagination upon the Duke of Marlborough. It is,
methinks, a pleasing Reflection to consider the Dispensations of Providence in
the Fortune of this Illustrious Man, who, in the Space of Forty Years, has
passed through all the Gradations of Humane Life, till he has ascended to the
Character of a Prince, and become the Scourge of a Tyrant, who sat in one of
the greatest Thrones of Europe, before the Man who was to have the greatest
Part in his Downfall had made one Step in the World. But such Elevations are the
Natural Consequences of an exact Prudence, a calm Courage, a well governed
Temper, a patient Ambition, and an affable Behavior. These Arts, as they are
the Steps to his Greatness, so they are the Pillars of it now it is raised. To
this her Glorious Son, Great Britain is indebted for the happy Conduct of her
Arms, in whom she can boast, She has produced a Man formed by Nature to lead a
Nation of Heroes.

The TATLER. [No 6.
From Thursd. April 21. to Saturd. April 23. 1709.
Will's Coffee-house, April 22.
I AM just come from visiting Sappho, a fine Lady, who writes Verses, sings,
dances, and can say and do whatever she pleases, without the Imputation of any
Thing that can injure her Character; for she is so well known to have no
Passion but Self-Love, or Folly but Affectation, that now upon any Occasion,
they only cry, It Is her Way, and That Is so like her, without further
Reflection. As I came into the Room, she cries, Oh! Mr. Bickerstaff, I am
utterly undone! I have broke that pretty Italian Fan I showed you when you were
here last, wherein were so admirably drawn our First Parents in Paradise asleep
in each other's Arms. But there is such an Affinity between Painting and
Poetry, that I have been improving the Images which were raised by that
Picture, by reading the same Representation in Two of our greatest Poets. Look
you, here are the Passages in Milton and in Dryden. All Milton's Thoughts are
wonderfully just and natural, in this inimitable Description which Adam makes
of himself in the Eighth Book of Paradise Lost. But there is none of them finer
than that contained in the following Lines, where he tells us his Thoughts when
he was falling asleep a little after his Creation:

While thus I called, and strayed I know not whither,
From whence I first drew Air, and first beheld
This happy Light; when Answer none returned,
On a green shady Bank, profuse of Flowers,
Pensive I sat me down, there gentle Sleep
First found me, and with soft Oppression seized
My drowned Sense, untroubled, though I thought
I then was passing to my former State,
Insensible and forthwith to dissolve.
But now I cannot forgive this odious Thing: This Dryden, who, in his State of
Innocence, has given my Great-Grandmother Eve the same Apprehension of
Annihilation on a very different Occasion: As Adam pronounces it of himself.
when he was seized with a pleasing Kind of Stupor and Deadness, Eve fancies
herself falling away, and dissolving in the Hurry of a Rapture. However, the
Verses are very good, and I don't know but it may be natural what she says.
I Will read 'em:

When your kind Eyes looked languishing on mine,
And wreathing Arms did soft Embraces join;
A doubtful Trembling seized me first all over,
Then Wishes, and a Warmth unknown before:
What followed, was all Ecstasy and Trance,
Immortal Pleasures round my swimming Eyes did dance;
And speechless Joys, in whose sweet Tumults tossed,
I thought my Breath and my New Being lost.
She went on, and said a Thousand good Things at Random, but so strangely
mixed, that you would be apt to say, All her Wit is mere good Luck, and not the
Effect of Reason and Judgment. When I made my Escape hither, I found a
Gentleman playing the Critic on Two other great Poets, even Virgil and Homer.
He was observing, that Virgil is more judicious than the other in the Epithets
he gives his Hero. Homer's usual Epithet, said he, is (...), or (...), and his
Indiscretion has been often rallied by the Critics, for mentioning the
Nimbleness of Foot in Achilles, though he describes him standing, sitting,
lying down, fighting, eating, drinking, or in any other Circumstance, however
foreign or repugnant to Speed and Activity. Virgil's common Epithet to Aeneas,
is Pius, or Pater. I have therefore considered, said he, what Passage there is
in any of his Hero's Actions, where either of these Appellations would have
been most improper, to see if I could catch him at the same Fault with Homer:
And this, I think, is his Meeting with Dido in the Cave, where Pius Aeneas
would have been Absurd, and Pater Aeneas a Burlesque: The Poet has therefore
wisely dropped 'em both for Dux Trojanus. Speluncam Dido Dux and Trojanus candem
Deveniunt, --
Which he has repeated twice in Juno's Speech, and his own Narration: For he
very well knew, a loose Action might be consistent enough with the usual
Manners of a Soldier, though it became neither the Chastity of a Pious Man, nor
the Gravity of the Father of a People.

Grecian Coffee-house April 22.
While other Parts of the Town are amused with the present Actions, we
generally spend the Evening at this Table in Enquiries into Antiquity, and
think any Thing News which gives us new Knowledge. Thus we are making a very
pleasant Entertainment to our selves, in putting the Actions of Homer's Iliad
into an exact Journal.

This Poem is introduced by Chryses, King of Chryseis, and Priest of Apollo,
who comes to redemand his Daughter, who was carried off at the Taking of that
City, and given to Agamemnon for his Part of the Booty. The Refusal he received
enrages Apollo, who for Nine Days showered down Darts upon them, which
occasioned the Pestilence.

The 10th Day Achilles assembles the Council, and encourages Calchas to speak
for the Surrender of Chryseis to appease Apollo. Agamemnon and Achilles storm
at one another, notwithstanding which Agamemnon will not release his Prisoner,
unless he has Briseis in her Stead. After long Contestations, wherein Agamemnon
gives a glorious Character of Achilles's Valor, he determines to restore
Briseis to her Father, and sends Two Heralds to fetch away Chryseis from
Achilles, who abandons himself to Sorrow and Despair. His Mother Thetis came to
comfort him under his Affliction, and promises to represent his sorrowful
Lamentations to Jupiter: But he could not attend it; for the Evening before, he
had appointed to divert himself for Two Days beyond the Seas with the harmless
Aethiopians.

'Twas the 21st Day after Chryseis's Arrival to the Camp, that Thetis went very
early to demand an Audience of Jupiter. The Means he uses to satisfy her were,
to persuade the Greeks to attack the Trojans; that so they might perceive the
Consequence of contemning Achilles, and the Miseries they suffer if he does not
head them. The next Night he orders Agamemnon, in a Dream, to attack them; who
was deceived with the Hopes of obtaining a Victory, and also taking the City
without sharing the Honor with Achilles.

On the 22d in the Morning, he assembles the Council, and having made a Feint
of raising the Siege and retiring, he declares to them his Dream; and, together
with Nestor and Ulysses, resolves on an Engagement.

This was the 23d Day, which is full of Incidents, and which continues from
almost the Beginning of the Second Canto to the Eighth. The Armies being then
drawn up in View of one another, Hector brings it about, that Menelaus and
Paris, the Two Persons concerned in the Quarrel, should decide it by a single
Combat; which tending to the Advantage of Menelaus, was interrupted by a
Cowardice infused by Minerva: Then both Armies engage, where the Trojans have
the Disadvantage; but being afterward animated by Apollo, they repulse the
Enemy, yet they are once again forced to give Ground; but their Affairs were
retrieved by Hector, who has a single Combat with Ajax. The Gods threw
themselves into the Battle, Juno and Minerva took the Gracians Part, and Apollo
and Mars the Trojans: But Mars and Venus are both wounded by Diomedes.

The Truce for burying the Slain ended the 23d Day; after which the Greeks
threw up a great Intrenchment to secure their Navy from Danger. Councils are
held on both Sides. On the Morning of the 24th Day, the Battle is renewed, but
in a very disadvantagious Manner to the Greeks, who were beaten back to their
Retrenchments. Agamemnon being in Despair at this ill Success, proposes to the
Counsel to quit the Enterprise and retire from Troy. But by the Advice of
Nestor, he is persuaded to regain Achilles, by returning Chryseis, and sending
him considerable Presents. Hereupon, Ulysses and Ajax are sent to that Hero,
who continues inflexible in his Anger. Ulysses, at his Return, joins himself
with Diomedes, and goes in the Night to gain Intelligence of the Enemy: They
enter into their very Camp, where, finding the Sentinels asleep, they made a
great Slaughter. Rhesus, who was just then arrived with Recruits from Thrace
for the Trojans, was killed in that Action. Here ends the 10th Canto. The
Sequel of this Journal will be inserted in the next Article from this Place.

St. James's Coffee-house, April 22.
We hear from Italy, That notwithstanding the Pope has received a Letter from
the Duke of Anjou, demanding of him to explain himself upon the Affair of
acknowledging King Charles, his Holiness has not yet thought fit to send any
Answer to that Prince. The Court of Rome appears very much mortified, that they
are not to see his Majesty of Denmark in that City, having perhaps given
themselves vain Hopes from a Visit made by a Protestant Prince to that See. The
Pope has dispatched a Gentleman to compliment his Majesty, and sent the King a
Present of all the Curiosities and Antiquities of Rome, represented in
Seventeen Volumes, very richly bound, which were taken out of the Vatican
Library. Letters from Genoa of the 14th Instant say, A Felucca was arrived
there in Five Days from Marseilles, with an Account, That the People of that
City had made an Insurrection, by reason of the Scarcity of Provisions; and
that the Intendant had ordered some Companies of Marines, and the Men belonging
to the Galleys, to stand to their Arms to protect him from Violence; but that
he began to be in as much Apprehension of his Guards, as those from whom they
were to defend him. When that Vessel came away, the Soldiers murmured publicly
for Want of Pay; and it was generally believed, they would pillage the
Magazines, as the Garrisons of Grenoble, and other Towns of France, had already
done. A Vessel which lately came into Leghorn brought Advice, That the British
Squadron was arrived at Port Mahon, where they were taking in more Troops, in
order to attempt the Relief of Alicant, which still made a very vigorous
Defense. It Is said, Admiral Bing will be at the Head of that Expedition. The
King of Denmark was gone from Leghorn toward Lucca.

They write from Vienna, That in case the Allies should enter into a Treaty of
Peace with France, Count Zinzendorf will be appointed First Plenipotentiary,
the Count de Goes the Second, and Monsieur Van Konsbruch a Third. Major General
Palms, Envoy Extraordinary from Her Britannick Majesty, has been very urgent
with that Court to make their utmost Efforts against France the ensuing
Campaign, in order to oblige it to such a Peace, as may establish the
Tranquillity of Europe for the future.

We are also informed, That the Pope uses all imaginable Shifts to elude the
Treaty concluded with the Emperor, and that he demanded the immediate
Restitution of Commacchio, insisting also, That his Imperial Majesty should ask
Pardon, and desire Absolution for what has formerly passed, before he would
solemnly acknowledge King Charles: But this was utterly refused.

They hear at Vienna, by Letters from Constantinople, dated the 22d of February
last, That on the 12th of that Month the Grand Signior took Occasion, at the
Celebration of the Festivals of the Musselmen, to set all the Christian Slaves
which were in the Galleys at Liberty.

Advices from Swisserland import, That the Preachers of the County of
Tockenburg continue to create new Jealousies of the Protestants, and some
Disturbances lately happened there on that Account. The Protestants and Papists
in the Town of Hamman go to Divine Service one after another in the same
Church, as is usual in many other Parts of Swisserland; but on Sunday the 10th
Instant, the Popish Curate having ended his Service, attempted to hinder the
Protestants from entering into the Church according to Custom; but the
Protestants briskly attacked him and his Party, and broke into it by Force.

Last Night, between Seven and Eight, his Grace the Duke of Marlborough arrived
at Court.

From my own Apartment, April 22.
The present great Captains of the Age, the Duke of Marlborough and Prince
Eugene, having been the Subject of the Discourse of the last Company I was in,
it has naturally led me into a Consideration of Alexander and Caesar, the Two
greatest Names which ever appeared before this Century. In order to enter into
their Characters, there needs no more but examining their Behavior in Parallel
Circumstances. It must be allowed, That they had an equal Greatness of Soul;
but Caesar's was more corrected and allayed by a Mixture of Prudence and
Circumspection. This is seen conspicuously in one Particular in their
Histories, wherein they seem to have shown exactly the Difference of their
Tempers. When Alexander, after a long Course of Victories, would still have led
his Soldiers farther from Home, they unanimously refused to follow him. We meet
with the like Behavior in Caesar's Army in the Midst of his March against
Ariovistus. Let us therefore observe the Conduct of our Two Generals in so nice
an Affair: And here we find Alexander at the Head of his Army, upbraiding them
with their Cowardice, and Meanness of Spirit; and in the End, telling them
plainly, He would go forward himself, though not a Man followed him. This
showed indeed an excessive Bravery; but how would the Commander have come off,
if the Speech had not succeeded, and the Soldiers had taken him at his Word?
The Project seems of a Piece with Mr. Bays's in the Rehearsal, who, to gain a
Clap in his Prologue, comes out, with a terrible Fellow in a Fur-Cap following
him, and tells his Audience, If they would not like his Play, he would lie down
and have his Head struck off. If this gained a Clap, all was well; but if not,
there was nothing left but for the Executioner to do his Office. But Caesar
would not leave the Success of his Speech to such uncertain Events: He shows
his Men the Unreasonableness of their Fears in an obliging Manner, and
concludes, That if none else would march along with them, he would go himself
with the Tenth Legion, for he was assured of their Fidelity and Valor, though
all the rest forsook him; not but that in all Probability they were as much
against the March as the rest. The Result of all was very natural: The Tenth
Legion fired with the Praises of their General, send Thanks to him for the just
Opinion he entertains of 'em; and the rest, ashamed to be outdone, assure him,
That they are as ready to follow where he pleases to lead them, as any other
Part of the Army.

The TATLER. [No 7.
From Saturd. April 23. to Tuesd. April 26. 1709.
IT is so just an Observation, That Mocking is Catching, that I am become an
unhappy Instance of it, and am (in the same Manner that I have represented Mr.
Partridge) my self a dying Man, in Comparison of the Vigor with which I first
set out in the World. Had it been otherwise, you may be sure I would not have
pretended to have given for News, as I did last Saturday, a Diary of the Siege
of Troy. But Man is a Creature very inconsistent with himself: The Greatest
Heroes are sometimes Fearful; the Spriteliest Wits at some Hours Dull; and the
Greatest Politicians on some Occasions Whimsical. But I shall not pretend to
palliate, or excuse the Matter; for I find, by a Calculation of my own
Nativity, that I cannot hold out with any tolerable Wit longer than Two Minutes
after Twelve a Clock at Night, between the 18th and 19th of the next Month. For
which Space of Time, you may still expect to hear from me, but no longer,
except you will transmit to me the Occurrences you meet with relating to your
Amors, or any other Subject within the Rules by which I have proposed to walk.
If any Gentleman or Lady sends to Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire at Mr. Morphew's near
Stationers' Hall, by the Penny-Post, the Grief or Joy of their Soul, what they
think fit of the Matter shall be related in Colors as much to their Advantage,
as those in which Gervase has drawn the Agreeable Chloe. But since, without
such Assistance, I frankly confess, and am sensible, that I have not a Month's
Wit more, I think I ought, while I am in my sound Health and Senses, to make my
Will and Testament; which I do in Manner and Form following:

Imprimis, I give to the Stock-jobbers about the Exchange of London, as a
Security for the Trusts daily reposed in them, all my Real Estate; which I do
hereby vest in the said Body of worthy Citizens for ever.

Item, For as much as it is very hard to keep Land in Repair without ready
Cash, I do, out of my Personal Estate, bestow the Bear-skin, which I have
frequently lent to several Societies about this Town, to supply their
Necessities. I say, I give also the said Bear-skin, as an immediate Fund to the
said Citizens for ever.

Item, I do hereby appoint a certain Number of the said Citizens to take all
the Custom-house or Customary Oaths, concerning all Goods Imported by the whole
City, strictly directing, That some select Members, and not the whole Number of
a Body Corporate, should be perjured.

Item, I forbid all N -- s and Persons of Q -- ty, to watch Bargains near and
about the Exchange, to the Diminution and Wrong of the said Stockjobbers.

Thus far, in as brief and intelligible a Manner as any Will can appear, till
it is explained by the Learned, I have disposed of my Real and Personal Estate:
But, as I am an Adept, I have by Birth an equal Right to give also an
indefeasible Title to my Endowments and Qualifications; which I do in the
following Manner:

Item, I give my Chastity to all Virgins who have withstood their Market.

Item, I give my Courage among all who are ashamed of their distressed Friends,
all Sneakers in Assemblies, and Men who show Valor in Common Conversation.

Item, I give my Wit, (as Rich Men give to the Rich) among such as think they
have enough already. And in case they shall not accept of the Legacy, I give it
to Bentivolio, to defend his Works from Time to Time, as he shall think fit to
publish 'em.

Item, I bestow my Learning upon the Honourary Members of the Royal Society.

Now for the Disposal of this Body.

As these Eyes must one Day cease to gaze on Teraminta, and this Heart shall
one Day pant no more for her Indignation: That is to say, since this Body must
be Earth, I shall commit it to the Dust in a Manner suitable to my Character.
Therefore, as there are those who dispute, Whether there is any such Real
Person as Isaac Bickerstaff or not? I shall excuse all Persons who appear what
they really are, from coming to my Funeral. But all those who are, in their Way
of Life, Personae, as the Latins have it, Persons assumed, and who appear what
they really are not, are hereby invited to that Solemnity.

The Body shall be carried by Six Watchmen, who are never seen in the Day.

Item, The Pall shall be held up by the Six most known Pretenders to Honesty,
Wealth and Power, who are not possessed of any of them. The Two First, an Half
Lawyer, a Complete Justice. The Two next, a Chemist, a Projector. The Third
Couple, a Treasury Solicitor, and a small Courtier.

To make my Funeral (what that Solemnity, when done to common Men, really is in
it self) a very Farce; and since all Mourners are mere Actors on these
Occasions, I shall desire those who are professedly such, to attend me. I
humbly therefore beseech Mrs. Barry to act once more, and be my Widow-When she
swoons away at the Church Porch, I appoint the Merry Sir John Falstaff, and the
Gay Sir Harry Wildair, to support her. I desire Mr. Penkethman to follow in the
Habit of a Cardinal, and Mr. Bullock in that of a Privy-Councellor. To make up
the rest of the Appearance, I desire all the Ladies from the Balconies to weep
with Mrs. Barry, as they hope to be Wives and Widows themselves. I invite all,
who have nothing else to do, to accept of Gloves and Scarves.

Thus, with the Great Charles V. of Spain, I resign the Glories of this
Transitory World: Yet, at the same Time, to show you my Indifference, and that
my Desires are not too much fixed upon any Thing, I own to you, I am as willing
to stay as go: Therefore leave it in the Choice of my Gentle Readers, whether I
shall hear from them, or they hear no more from me.

White's Chocolate-house, April 25.
EAster Day being a Time when you cannot well meet with any but humble
Adventures; and there being such a Thing as low Gallantry, as well as low
Comedy, Colonel Ramble and my self went early this Morning into the Fields,
which were strewed with Shepherds and Shepherdesses, but indeed of a different
Turn from the Simplicity of those of Arcadia. Every Hedge was conscious of more
than what the Representations of enamoured Swains admit of. While we were
surveying the Crowd around us, we saw at a Distance a Company coming toward
Pancras-Church; but though there was not much Disorder, we thought we saw the
Figure of a Man stuck through with a Sword, and at every Step ready to fall, if
a Woman by his Side had not supported him; the rest followed Two and Two. When
we came nearer this Appearance, who should it be but Monsieur Guardeloop, mine
and Ramble's French Tailor, attended by others, leading one of Madam Depingle's
Maids to the Church, in order to their Espousals. It was his Sword rucked so
high above his Wast, and the Circumflex which Persons of his Profession take in
their Walking, that made him appear at a Distance wounded and falling. But the
Morning being rainy, methought the March to thi^ Wedding was but too lively a
Picture of Wedlock it self. They seemed both to have ^ Month's Mind to make the
best of their Wa^ single; yet both tugged Arm in Arm; an^ when they were in a
dirty Way, he was bu^ deeper in the Mire, by endeavoring to pu^ out his
Companion, and yet without helpin^ her. The Bridegroom's Feathers in his Hat
(...) drooped, one of his Shoes had lost an He^ In short, he was in his whole
Person and Dress so extremely soused, that there did not appear one Inch or
single Thread about him unmarried. Pardon me, that the melancholy Object still
dwells upon me so far as to reduce me to Punning. However, we attended to the
Chapel, where we stayed to hear the irrevocable Words pronounced upon our old
Servant, and made the best of our Way to Town. I took a Resolution to forbear
all married Persons, or any in Danger of being such, for Four and twenty Hours
at least; therefore dressed, and went to visit Florimell, the vainest Thing in
Town, where I knew would drop in Colonel Picket, just come from the Camp, her
professed Admirer. He is of that Order of Men who has much Honor and Merit,
but withal a Coxcomb; the other of that Set of Females who has Innocence and
Wit, but the First of Coquets. It is easy to believe, These must be Admirers of
each other. She says, The Colonel rides the best of any Man in England: The
Colonel says, She talks the best of any Woman. At the same Time, he understands
Wit just as she does Horsemanship. You are to know, these extraordinary Persons
see each other daily; and they themselves, as well as the Town, think it will
be a Match: But it can never happen that they can come to the Point; for
instead of addressing to each other, they spend their whole Time in Reports of
themselves: He is satisfied if he can convince her he is a fine Gentleman, and
a Man of Consequence; and she, in appearing to him an accomplished Lady and a
Wit, without further Design. Thus he tells her of his Manner of posting his Men
at such a Pass, with the Numbers he commanded on that Detachment: She tells
him, how she was dressed on such a Day at Court, and what Offers were made her
the Week following. She seems to hear the Repetition of his Men's Names with
Admiration; and waits only to answer him with as false a Muster of Lovers. They
talk to each other not to be informed, but approved. Thus they are so like,
that they are to be ever distant, and the Parallel Lines may run together for
ever, but never meet.

Will's Coffee-house, April 25.
This Evening the Comedy, called Epsom-Wells, was acted for the Benefit of Mr.
Bullock, who, though he is a Person of much Wit and Ingenuity, has a peculiar
Talent of looking like a Fool, and therefore excellently well qualified for the
Part of Biscuit in this Play. I cannot indeed sufficiently admire his Way of
bearing a Beating, as he does in this Drama, and that with such a Natural Air
and Propriety of Folly, that one cannot help wishing the Whip in one's own
Hand; so richly does he seem to deserve his Chastisement. Skilful Actors think
it a very peculiar Happiness to play in a Scene with such as Top their Parts.
Therefore I cannot but say, when the Judgment of any good Author directs him to
write a Beating for Mr. Bullock from Mr. William Penkethman, or for Mr. William
Penkethman from Mr. Bullock, those excellent Players seem to be in their most
shining Circumstances, and please me more, but with a different Sort of Delight
than that which I receive from those Grave Scenes of Brutus and Cassius, or
Anthony and Ventidius. The whole Comedy is very just, and the Low Part of
Humane Life represented with much Humor and Wit.

St. James's Coffee-house, April 25.
We are advised from Vienna, by Letters of the 20th Instant, That the Emperor
has lately added 20 new Members to his Council of State, but they have not yet
taken their Places at the Board. General Thaun is returned from Baden, his
Health being so well re-established by the Baths of that Place, that he designs
to set out next Week for Turin, to his Command of the Imperial Troops in the
Service of the Duke of Savoy. His Imperial Majesty has advanced his Brother
Count Henry Thaun to be a Brigadier, and a Councellor of the Aulick Council of
War. These Letters import, That King Stanislaus and the Swedish General Crassau
are directing their March to the Nieper, to join the King of Sweden's Army in
Ukrania: That the States of Austria have furnished Marshal Heister with a
considerable Sum of Money, to enable him to push on the War vigorously in
Hungary, where all Things as yet are in perfect Tranquillity: And that General
Thungen has been very importunate for a speedy Reinforcement of the Forces on
the Upper Rhine, representing at the same Time, what Miseries the Inhabitants
must necessarily undergo, if the Designs of France on those Parts be not
speedily and effectually prevented.

Letters from Rome, dated the 13th Instant, say, That on the preceding Sunday
his Holiness was carried in an open Chair from St. Peter's to St. Mary's,
attended by the Sacred College, in Cavalcade; and, after Mass, distributed
several Dowries for the Marriage of poor and distressed Virgins. The
Proceedings of that Court are very dilatory concerning the Recognition of King
Charles, notwithstanding the pressing Instances of the Marquis de Pry, who has
declared, That if this Affair be not wholly concluded by the 15th Instant, he
will retire from that Court, and order the Imperial Troops to return into the
Ecclefiastical State. On the other Hand, the Duke of Anjou's Minister has, in
the Name of his Master, demanded of his Holiness to explain himself on that
Affair; which, it is said, will be finally determined in a Consistory to be held
on Monday next; the Duke d'Uzeda defigning to delay his Departure till he sees
the Issue. These Letters also say, That the Court was mightily alarmed at the
News which they received by an Express from Ferrara, that General Boneval, who
commands in Commachio, had sent Circular Letters to the Inhabitants of St.
Alberto, Longastrino, Fillo, and other adjacent Parts, enjoining them to come
and swear Fealty to the Emperor, and receive new Investitures of their Fiefs
from his Hands. Letters from other Parts of Italy say, That the King of Denmark
continues at Lucca; that four English and Dutch Men of War were seen off of
Oneglia, bound for Final, in order to transport the Troops designed for
Barcelona; and that Her Majesty's Ship the Colchester arrived at Leghorn the
4th Instant from Port Mahon, with Advice, That Major General Stanhope designed
to part from thence the 1st Instant with 6 or 7000 Men to attempt the Relief of
the Castle of Alicant.

Our last Advices from Berlin, bearing Date the 27th Instant, import, That the
King was gone to Linum, and the Queen to Meckleuburg; but that their Majesty's
designed to return the next Week to Oranienburg, where a great Chase of
Wild-Beasts was prepared for their Diversion, and from thence they intend to
proceed together to Potsdam; That the Prince Royal was set out for Brahant, but
intended to make some short Stay at Hanever, These Letters also inform us, That
they are advised from Obory, that the King of Sweden, being on his March
toward Holki, met General Reune with a Dotachment of Muscovites, who placing
some Regiments in Ambuscade, attacked the Swedes in their Rear, and putting
them to Flight, killed 2000 Men, the King himself having his Horse shot under
him.

We hear from Copenhagen, That the Ice being broke, the Sound is again open for
the Ships; and that they hoped his Majesty would return sooner than they at
first expected.

Letters from the Hague, dated May 4. N. S. say, That an Express arrived there
on the 1st from Prince Eugene to his Grace the Duke of Marlborough. The States
are advised, That the Auxiliaries of Saxony were arrived on the Frontiers of
the United Provinces; as also, That the Two Regiments of Wolfembuttel, and 4000
Troops from Wirtemberg, which are to serve in Flanders, re in full March
thither. Letters from Flanders say, That the great Convoy of Ammunition and
Provisions which set out from Ghent for Lisle, was safely arrived at Courtray.
We hear from Paris, That the King has ordered the Militia on the Coasts of
Normandy and Bretagne to be in a Readiness to march; and that the Court was in
Apprehension of a Descent, to animate the People to rise in the Midst of their
present Hardships.

They write from Spain, That the Pope's Nuncio left Madrid the 10th of April,
in order to go to Bayonne; that the Marquis de Bay was at Badajos to observe
the Motions of the Portugueze, and that the Count d'Estain, with a Body of 5000
Men, was on his March to attack Gironne. The Duke of Anjou has deposed the
Bishop of Lerida, as being a Favourer of the Interest of King Charles; and has
summoned a Convocation at Madrid, composed of the Archbishops, Bishops and
States of that Kingdom, wherein he hopes they will come to a Resolution to send
for no more Bulls to Rome.

The TATLER. [No 8.
From Tuesd. Apr. 26. to Thursd. Apr. 28. 1709.
Will's Coffee-house, April 26.
THE Play of The London Cuckolds was acted this Evening before a suitable
Audience, who were extremely well diverted with that Heap of Vice and
Absurdity. The Indignation which Eugenio, who is a Gentleman of a just Taste,
has, upon Occasion of seeing humane Nature fall so low in their Delights, made
him, I thought, expatiate upon the Mention of this Play very agreeably. Of all
Men living, said he, I pity Players, (who must be Men of good Understanding to
be capable of being such) that they are obliged to repeat and assume proper
Gestures for representing Things of which their Reason must be ashamed, and
which they must disdain their Audience for approving. The Amendment of these
low Gratifications is only to be made by People of Condition, by encouraging
the Presentation of the Noble Characters drawn by Shakespeare and others, from
whence it is impossible to return without strong Impressions of Honor and
Humanity. On these Occasions, Distress is laid before us with all its Causes
and Consequences, and our Resentment placed according to the Merit of the
Persons afflicted. Were Drama's of this Nature more acceptable to the Taste of
the Town, Men who have Genius would bend their Studies to excel in 'em. How
forcible an Effect this would have on our Minds, one needs no more than to
observe how strongly we are touched by mere Pictures. Who can see Le Brun's
Picture of the Battle of Porus, without entering into the Character of that
fierce gallant Man, and being accordingly spurred to an Emulation of his
Constancy and Courage? When he is falling with his Wound, the Features are at
the same Time very terrible and languishing; and there is such a stern
Faintness diffused through all his Look, as is apt to move a kind of Horror,
as well as Pity in the Beholder. This, I say, is an Effect wrought by mere
Lights and Shades, consider also a Representation made by Words only, as in an
Account given by a good Writer: Catiline in Sallust makes just such a Figure as
Porus by Le Brun. It is said of him, Catilina vero long a suis inter Hostium
Cadavera repertus est; paululum etiam spirans, Ferocitatemque Animi quam vivus
habuerat in Vultu retinens. ' Catiline was found killed far from his own Men
among the dead Bodies of the Enemy: He seemed still to breath, and still
retained in his Face the same Fierceness he had when he was living." You have
in that one Sentence a lively Impression of his whole Life and Actions. What I
would insinuate from all this, is, That if the Painter and the Historian can do
thus much in Colors and Language, what may not be performed by an excellent
Poet? When the Character he draws is represented by the Person, the Manner, the
Look, and the Motion, of an accomplished Player: If a Thing painted or related
can irresistibly enter our Hearts, what may not be brought to pass by seeing
generous Things performed before our Eyes? Eugenio ended his Discourse, by
recommending the apt Use of a Theater, as the most agreeable and easy Method
of making a polite and moral Gentry, which would end in rendering the rest of
the People regular in their Behavior, and ambitious of laudable Undertakings.

St James's Coffee-house, April 27.
Letters f om Naples of the 9th Instant, N. S. advise, That Cardinal Grimani
had ordered the Regiment commanded by General Pate to march toward Final, in
order to embark for Catalonia, whither also a Thousand Horse are to be
transported from Sardinia, besides the Troops which come from the Milanese. An
English Man of War has taken Two Prizes, One a Vessel of Malta, the ^ther of
Genoa, both laden with Goods of the Enemy. They w ite from Florence of the
13th, That his Majesty of Denmark had received a Courier from the Hague, with
an Account of some Matters relating to the Treaty of a Peace; upon which he
declared, that he thought it necessary to hasten to his own Dominions.

Letters from Swisserland inform us, That the Effects of the great Scarcity of
Corn in France we e felt at Geneva; the Magistrates of which City had appointed
Deputies to treat with the Cantons of Bern and Zurich, for Leave to buy up such
Quantities of Grain within their Territories as should be thought necessary.
The Protestants of Tockenburg are still in Arms about the Convent of St. John,
and have declared, That they will not lay them down, till they shall have
sufficient Security from the Roman Catholics, of living unmolested in the
Exercise of their Religion. In the mean Time, the Deputies of Bern and
Tockenburg have frequent Conferences at Zurich with the Regency of that Canton,
to find out Methods for the quieting these Disorders.

Letters from the Hague of the 3d of May advise, That the Prendent Rouille,
after his last Conference with the Deputies of the States, had retired to
Bodegrave, five Miles distant from Worden, and expected the Return of a Courier
from France on the 4th, with new Instructions. It is said, if his Answer from
the French Court shall not prove Satisfactory, he will be desired to withdraw
out of these Parts. In the mean Time it is also reported, That his Equipage, as
an Ambassador on this great Occasion, is actually on the March toward him.
They write from Flanders, That the great Convoy of Provisions, which set out
from Ghent, is safely arrived at Lisle. Those Advices add, That the Enemy had
assembled near Tournay a considerable Body of Troops drawn out of the
Neighboring Garrisons. Their High Mightinesses having sent Orders to their
Ministers at Hamburgh and Dantzick, to engage the Magistrates of those Cities
to forbid the Sale of Corn to the French, and to signify to them, That the
Dutch Merchants will buy up as much of that Commodity as they can spare. The
Hamburghers have accordingly contracted with the Dutch, and refused any
Commerce with the French on that Occasion.

From my own Apartment.
After the Lassitude of a Day spent in the strolling Manner, which is usual
with Men of Pleasure in this Town, and with a Head full of a Million of
Impertinencies, which had danced round it for Ten Hours together, I came to my
Lodging, and hastened to Bed. My Valet de Chamber knows my University. Trick of
reading there; and he being a good Scholar for a Gentleman, ran over the Names
of Horace, Tibullus, Ovid, and others, to know which I would have. Bring
Virgil, said I, and if I fall asleep, take Care of the Candle. I read the Sixth
Book over with the most exquisite Delight, and had gone half through it a
second Time, when the pleasing Idea's of Elysian Fields, deceased Worthies
walking in them, sincere Lovers enjoying their Languishment without Pain,
Compassion for the unhappy Spirits who had misspent their short Daylight, and
were exiled from the Seats of Bliss for ever; I say, I was deep again in my
Reading, when this Mixture of Images had taken Place of all others in my
Imagination before, and lulled me into a Dream, from which I am just awake, to
my great Disadvantage. The happy Mansions of Elysium by Degrees seemed to be
wafted from me, and the very Traces of my late walking Thoughts began to fade
away, when I was cast by a sudden Whirlwind upon an Island, encompassed with a
roaring and troubled Sea, which shak'd its very Center, and rocked its
Inhabitants as in a Cradle. The Islanders lay on their Faces without offering
to look up, or hope for Preservation; all her Harbors were crowded with
Mariners, and tall Vessels of War lay in Danger of being driven to Pieces on
her Shores. Bless me! said I, why have I lived in such a Manner, that the
Convulsion of Nature should be so terrible to me, when I feel in my self, that
the better Part of me is to survive it? Oh! may that be in Happiness. A sudden
Shriek, in which the whole People on their Faces joined, interrupted my
Soliloquy, and turned my Eyes and Attention to the Object which had given us
that sudden Start, in the Midst of an inconsolable and speechless Affliction.
Immediately the Winds grew calm, the Waves subsided, and the People stood up,
turning their Faces upon a magnificent Pile in the Midst of the Island. There
we beheld an Hero of a comely and erect Aspect, but pale and languid, sitting
under a Canopy of State. By the Faces and dumb Sorrow of those who attended, we
thought him in the Article of Death. At a Distance sat a Lady, whose Life
seemed to hang upon the same Thread with his: She kept her Eyes fixed upon him,
and seemed to smother Ten Thousand Thousand nameless Things, which urged her
Tenderness to clasp him in her Arms: But her Greatness of Spirit overcame those
Sentiments, and gave her Power to forbear disturbing his last Moment; which
immediately approached. The Hero looked up with an Air of Negligence, and
Satiety of Being, rather than of Pain to leave it; and leaning back his Head,
expired.

When the Heroine, who sat at a Distance, saw his last Instant come, she threw
her self at his Feet, and kneeling, pressed his Hand to her Lips; in which
Posture she continued under the Agony of an unutterable Sorrow, till conducted
from our Sight by her Attendants. That commanding Awe, which accompanies the
Grief of great Minds, restrained the Multitude while in her Presence; but as
soon as she retired, they gave Way to their Distraction, and all the Islanders
called upon their deceased Hero. To him, methought, they cried out, as to a
Guardian Being, and I gathered from their broken Accents, That it was he who
had the Empire over the Ocean and its Powers, by which he had long protected
the Island from Shipwreck and Invasion. They now give a Loose to their Moan,
and think themselves exposed without Hopes of Humane or Divine Assistance.
While the People ran wild, and expressed all the different Forms of
Lamentation, methought a Sable Cloud over-shadowed the whole Land, and covered
its Inhabitants with Darkness: No Glimpse of Light appeared, except one Ray
from Heaven upon the Place in which the Heroine now secluded her self from the
World, with her Eyes fixed on those Abodes to which her Consort was ascended.
Methought a long Period of Time had passed away in Mourning and in Darkness,
when a Twilight began by Degrees to enlighten the Hemisphere; and looking round
me, I saw a Boat rowed toward the Shore, in which sat a Personage adorned
with Warlike Trophies, bearing on his left Arm a Shield, on which was engraven
the Image of Victory, and in his Right Hand a Branch of Olive. His Visage was
at once so winning and so awful, that the Shield and the Olive seemed equally
suitable to his Genius.

When this illustrious About this Time the D. of M. returned from Holland with
the Preliminaries of a Peace.
Person touched on the Shore, he was received by the Acclamations of the
People, and followed to the Palace of the Heroine. No Pleasure in the Glory of
her Arms, or the Acclamations of her applauding Subjects, were ever capable to
suspend her Sorrow for one Moment, till she saw the Olive Branch in the Hand of
that auspicious Messenger. At that Sight, as Heaven bestows its Blessings on
the Wants and Importunities of Mortals, out of its Native Bounty, and not to
increase its own Power or Honor, in Compassion to the World, the Celestial
Mourner was then first seen to turn her Regard to Things below; and taking the
Branch out of the Warrior's Hand, looked at it with much Satisfaction, and
spoke of the Blessings of Peace, with a Voice and Accent, such as that in which
Guardian Spirits whisper to dying Penitents Assurances of Happiness. The Air
was hushed, the Multitude attentive, and all Nature in a Pause, while she was
speaking. But as soon as the Messenger of Peace had made some low Reply, in
which, methought, I heard the Word Iberia, the Heroine assuming a more severe
Air, but such as spoke Resolution, without Rage, returned him the Olive, and
again veiled her Face. Loud Cries and Clashing of Arms immediately followed,
which forced me from my charming Vision, and drove me back to these Mansions of
Care and Sorrow.

The TATLER. [No 9.
From Thursd. Apr. 28. to Saturd. Apr. 30. 1709.
Will's Coffee-house, April 28.
THis Evening we were entertained with The Old Bachelor, a Comedy of deserved
Reputation. In the Character which gives Name to the Play, there is excellently
represented the Reluctance of a battered Debauchee to come into the Trammels of
Order and Decency: He neither languishes nor burns, but frets, for Love. The
Gentlemen of more regular Behavior are drawn with much Spirit and Wit, and the
Drama introduced by the Dialogue of the first Scens with uncommon, yet natural,
Conversation. The Part of Fondlewife is a lively Image of the unseasonable
Fondness of Age and impotence. But instead of such agreeable Works as these,
the Town has this half Age been tormented with Insects, called Easy Writers,
whose Abilities Mr. Wicherly one Day described excellently well in one Word:
That, said he, among these Fellows is called Easy Writing, which any one may
easily write. Such Jantie Scribblers are so justly laughed at for their Sonnets
on Phillis and Chloris, and Fantastical Descriptions in 'em, that an ingenious
Kinsman of mine, of the Family of the Staffs, Mr. Humphrey Wagstaff by Name,
has, to avoid their Strain, run into a Way perfectly new, and described Things
exactly as they happen: He never forms Fields, or Nymphs, or Groves, where they
are not, but makes the Incidents just as they really appear. For an Example of
it, I stole out of his Manuscript the following Lines: They are a Description
of the Morning, but of the Morning in Town; nay, of the Morning at this End of
the Town, where my Kinsman at present lodges.

Now hardly here and there an Hackney-Coach
Appearing, showed the ruddy Morn's Approach.
Now Betty from her Master's Bed had flown,
And softly stole to discompose her own.
The Slipshod 'Prentice from his Master's Door,
Had pared the Street, and sprinkled round the Floor.
Now Moll had whirled her Mop with dextr'ous Airs,
Prepared to scrub the Entry and the Stairs.
The Youth with broomy Stumps began to trace
The Kennel Edge, where Wheels had worn the Place.
The Smallcoal Man was heard with Cadence deep,
Till drowned in shriller Notes of Chimney sweep.
Duns at his Lordship's Gate began to meet;
And Brickdust Moll had scream'd through half a Street.
The Turnkey now his Flock returning sees,
Duly let out a' Nights to steal for Fees.
The watchful Bailiffs take their silent Stands;
And Schoolboys lag with Satchels in their Hands.
All that I apprehend is, that dear Numps will be angry I have published these
Lines; not that he has any Reason to be ashamed of them, but for fear of those
Rogues, the Bane to all excellent Performances, the Imitators. Therefore,
beforehand, I bar all Descriptions of the Evening; as, a Medley of Verses
signifying, Grey-Peas are now cried warm: That Wenches now begin to amble round
the Passages of the Playhouse: Or of Noon; as, That find Ladies and great Beaux
are just yawning out of their Beds and Windows in Pall Mall, and so forth. I
forewarn also all Persons from encouraging any Draughts after my Cousin; and
foretell any Man who shall go about to imitate him, that he will be very
insipid. The Family Stock is embarked in this Design, and we will not admit of
Counterfeits: Dr. Anderson and his Heirs enjoy his Pills, Sir Willium Read has
the Cure of Eyes, and Monsieur Roselli can only cure the Gout. We pretend to
none of these Things; but to examine who and who are together, to tell any
mistaken Man he is not what he believes he is, to distinguish Merit, and expose
false Pretenses to it, is a Liberty our Family has by Law in 'em, from an
Inter-Marriage with a Daughter of Mr. Scoggin, the famous Droll of the last
Century. This Right I design to make Use of; but will not encroach upon the
abovementioned Adepts, or any other. At the same Time I shall take all the
Privileges I may, as an Englishman, and will lay hold of the late Act of
Naturalization to introduce what I shall think fit from France. The Use of that
Law may, I hope, be extended to people the polite World with new Characters, as
well as the Kingdom it self with new Subjects. Therefore an Author of that
Nation, called Le Bruyere, I shall make bold with on such Occasions. The last
Person I read of in that Writer, was, Lord Timon. Timon, says my Author, is the
most generous of all Men; but is so hurried away with that strong Impulse of
Bestowing, that he confers Benefits without Distinction, and is Munificent
without laying Obligations. For all the Unworthy, who receive from him, have so
little Sense of this noble Infirmity, that they look upon themselves rather as
Partners in a Spoil, than Partakers of a Bounty. The other Day, coming into
Paris, I met Timon going out on Horseback, attended only by one Servant. It
struck me with a sudden Damp, to see a Man of so excellent a Disposition, and
that understood making a Figure so very well, so much shortened in his Retinue.
But passing by his House, I saw his great Coach break to Pieces before his
Door, and, by a strange Enchantment, immediately turned into many different
Vehicles. The first was a very pretty Chariot, into which stepped his Lordship's
Secretary. The second was hung a little heavier; into that strutted the Fat
Steward. In an Instant followed a Chaise, which was entered by the Butler. The
rest of the Body and Wheels were forthwith changed into Go-carts, and ran away
with by the Nurses and Brats of the rest of the Family What makes these
Misfortunes in the Affairs of Timon the more astonishing, is, That he has a
better Understanding than those who cheat him; so that a Man knows not which
more to wonder at, the Indifference of the Master, or the Impud nce of the
Servant.

White's Chocolate-house, April 29.
It is a Matter of much Speculation among the Beaus and Oglers, what it is that
can have made so suddeu a Change, as has been of late observed, in the whole
Behavior of Pastorella, who never sat still a Moment till she was Eighteen,
which she has now exceeded by Two Months. Her Aunt, who has the Care of her,
has not been always so rigid as she is at this present Date; but has so good a
Sense of the Frailty of Woman, and Falsehood of Man, that she resolved on all
Manner of Methods to keep Pastorella, if possible, in Safety, against her self,
and all her Admirers. At the same Time the good Lady knew by long Experience,
that a gay Inclination, curbed too rashly, would but run to the greater
Excesses for that Restraint: Therefore intended to watch her, and take some
Opportunity of engaging her insensibly in her own Interests, without the
Anguish of an Admonition. You are to know then, That Miss, with all her
Flirting and Ogling, had also naturally a strong Curiosity in her, and was the
greatest Eves-Dropper breathing. Parisatis (for so her prudent Aunt is called)
observed this Humor, and retires one Day to her Closet, into which she knew
Pastorella would peep, and listen to know how she was employed. It happened
accordingly, and the young Lady saw her good Governante on her Knees, and after
a mental Behavior, break into these Words: As for the dear Child committed to
my Care, let her Sobriety of Carriage, and Severity of Behavior, be such, as
may make that Noble Lord, who is taken with her Beauty, turn his Designs to
such as are honorable. Here Parisatis heard her Niece nestle closer to the
Keyhole: She then goes on; Make her the joyful Mother of a numerous and
wealthy Offspring; and let her Carriage be such, as may make this Noble Youth
expect the Blessings of an happy Marriage, from the Singularity of her Life, in
this loose and censorious Age. Miss having heard enough, sneaks off for Fear of
Discovery, and immediately, at her Glass, alters the Sitting of her Head; then
pulls up her Tucker, and forms herself into the exact Manner of Lindamira: In a
Word, becomes a sincere Convert to every Thing that is commendable in a fine
young Lady; and Two or Three such Matches as her Aunt feigned in her Devotions,
are at this Day in her Choice. This is the History and Original Cause of
Pastorella's Conversion from Coquettry. The Prudence in the Management of this
young Lady's Temper, and good Judgment of it, is hardly to be exceeded. I
scarce remember a greater Instance of Forbearance of the usual peevish Way with
which the Aged treat the Young, than this, except that of our famous Noy, whose
good Nature went so far, as to make him put off his Admonitions to his Son,
even till after his Death, and did not give him his Thoughts of him, till he
came to read that memo able Passage in his Will: All the rest of my Estate,
says he, I leave to my Son Edward (who is Executor to this my Will) to be
squandred as he shall think fit: I leave it him for that Purpose, and hope no
better from him. A generous Disdain, and Reflection upon how little he deserved
from so excellent a Father, reformed the young Man, and made Edward, from an
errant Rake, become a fine Gentleman.

St. James's Coffee-house, April 29.
Letters from Portugal of the 18th Instant, dated from Estremos, say, That on
the 6th the Earl of Galway arrived at that Place, and had the Satisfaction to
see the Quarters well furnished with all Manner of Provisions, and a Quantity
of Bread sufficient for subsuting the Troops for 60 Days, besides Biscuit for 25
Days. The Enemy give out, That they shall bring into the Field 14 Regiments of
Horse, and 24 Battalions. The Troops in the Service of Portugal will make up
14000 Foot, and 4000 Horse. On the Day these Letters were dispatched, the Earl
of Galway received Advice, that the Marquis de Bay was preparing for some
Enterprise, by gathering his Troops together on the Frontiers. Whereupon his
Excellency resolved to go that same Night to Villa Vicosa, to assemble the
Troops in that Neighborhood, in order to disappoint his Designs.

Yesterday in the Evening Captain Foxon, Aidde-Camp to Major General Cadogan,
arrived here Express from the Duke of Marlborough. And this Day a Mail is come
in, with Letters dated from Brussels of the 6th of May, N. S. which advise,
That the Enemy had drawn togethera Body, consisting of 20000 Men, with a
Design, as was supposed, to intercept the great Convoy on the March toward
Lisle, which was safely arrived at Menin and Courtray, in its Way to that
Place, the French having retired without making any Attempt.

We hear from the Hague, That a Person of the First Quality is arrived in the
Low Countries from France, in order to be a Plenipotentiary in an ensuing
Treaty of Peace.

Letters from France acknowledge, That Monsieur Bernard has made no higher
Offers of Satisfaction to his Creditors than of 35 l. per Cent.

These Advices add, That the Marshall Boufflers, Monsieur Torcy, (who
distinguished himself formerly, by advising the Court of France to adhere to
the Treaty of Partition) and Monsieur d' Harcourt, (who negotiated with
Cardinal Portocarrero for the Succession of the Crown of Spain in the House of
Bourbon) are all Three joined in a Commission for a Treaty of Peace. The
Marshall is come to Ghent: The other Two are arrived at the Hague.

It is confidently reported here, That the Right Honorable the Lord Townshend
is to go with his Grace the Duke of Marlborough into Holland.

The TATLER. [No 10.
By Mrs. Jenny Distaff, Half-Sister to Mr. Bickerstaff.
From Saturd. April 30. to Tuesd. May 3. 1709.
From my own Apartment, May 1.
MY Brother Isaac having a sudden Occasion to go out of Town, ordered me to
take upon me the Dispatch of the next Advices from Home, with Liberty to speak
it my own Way; not doubting the Allowances which would be given to a Writer of
my Sex. You may be sure, I undertook it with much Satisfaction: And I confess,
I am not a little pleased with the Opportunity of running over all the Papers
in his Closet, which he has left open for my Use on this Occasion. The first
that I lay my Hands on, is, A Treatise concerning The Empire of Beauty, and the
Effects it has had in all Nations of the World, upon the public and private
Actions of Men; with an Appendix, which he calls, The Batchelor's Scheme for
Governing his Wife. The first Thing he makes this Gentleman propose, is, That
she shall be no Woman; for she is to have an Aversion to Balls, to Opera's, to
Visits: She is to think his Company sufficient to fill up all the Hours of Life
with great Satisfaction: She is never to believe any other Man Wise, Learned,
or Valiant; or at least but in a second Degree. In the next Place, he intends
she shall be a Cuckold; but expects, that he himself must live in perfect
Security from that Terror. He dwells a great while on Instructions for her
discreet Behavior, in case of his Falsehood. I have not Patience with these
unreasonable Expectations, therefore turn back to the Treatise it self. Here,
indeed, my Brother deduces all the Revolutions among Men from the Passion of
Love; and in his Preface, answers that usual Observation against us, That there
is no Quarrel without a Woman in it; with a gallant Assertion, That there is
nothing else worth Quarrelling for. My Brother is of a Complexion truly
Amorous; all his Thoughts and Actions carry in 'em a Tincture of that obliging
Inclination; and this Turn has opened his Eyes to see, we are not the
inconsiderable C eatures which unlucky Pretenders to our Favor would
insinuate. He observes, That no Man begins to make any tolerable Figure, till
he sets out with he Hopes of Pleasing some one of us. No sooner he takes that
in Hand, but he pleases every one else by the by. It has an immediate Effect
upon his Behavior. There is Colonel Ranter, who never spoke without an Oath,
till he saw the Lady Betty Modish; now never gives his Man an Order, but it is,
Pray Tom, do it. The Drawers where he drinks, live in perfect Happiness. He
asked Will at the George the other Day, How he did? Where he used to say, Damn
it, Is it so? He now believes there is some Mistake: He must confess, he is of
another Opinion; but however he will not insist.

Every Temper, except downright insipid, is to be animated and softened by the
Influence of Beauty: But of this untractable Sort is a lifeless handsome Fellow
that visits us, whom I have dressed at this Twelvemonth; but he is as
insensible of all the Arts I use, as if he conversed all that Time with his
Nurse. He outdoes our whole Sex in all the Faults our Enemies impute to us; he
has brought Laziness into an Opinion, and makes his Indolence his Philosophy:
Insomuch, that no long r ago than Yesterday in the Evening he gave me this
Account of himself: I am, Madam, perfectly unmoved at all that passes among
Men, and seldom gives my self the Fatigue of going among 'em; but when I do, I
always appear the same Thing to those whom I converse with. My Hours of
Existence, or being awake, are from Eleven in the Morning to Eleven at Night;
half of which I live to my self, in picking my Teeth, washing my Hands, paring
my Nails, and looking in the Glass. The Insignificancy of my Manners to the
rest of the World, makes the Laughers call me a Quid Nunc, a Phrase which I
neither understand, or shall ever enquire what they mean by it. The last of me
each Night is at St. James 's Coffee-house, where I converse, yet never fall
into a Dispute on any Occasion, but leave the Understanding I have Passive of
all that goes through it, without entering into the Business of Life. And thus,
Madam, have I arrived by Laziness, to what others pretended to by Philosophy, a
perfect Neglect of the World. Sure, if our Sex had the Liberty of frequenting
Public Houses and Conversations, we should put these Rivals of our Faults and
Follies out of Countenance. However, we shall soon have the Pleasure of being
acquainted with 'em one Way or other; for my Brother Isaac designs, for the Use
of our Sex, to give the exact Characters of all the Chief Politicians who
frequent any of the Coffee-houses from St. James's to the Change; but designs
to begin with that Cluster of Wise Heads, as they are found sitting every
Evening from the Left-side of the Fire, at the Smyrna, to the Door. This will
be of great Service for us, and I have Authority to promise an exact Journal of
their Deliberations; the Publication of which I am to be allowed for Pin-Money.
In the mean Time, I cast my Eye upon a new Book, which gave me a more pleasing
Entertainment, being a sixth Part of Miscellany Poems, published by Jacob
Tonson; which, I find, by my Brother's Notes upon it, no Way inferior to the
other Volumes. There are, it seems, in this, a Collection of the best Pastorals
that have hitherto appeared in England; but among them, none superior to that
Dialogue between Sylvia and Dorinda, written by one of my own Sex; where all
our little Weaknesses are laid open in a Manner more just, and with truer
Raillery, than ever Man yet hit upon.

Only this I now discern,
From the Things thou'st have me learn;
That Womankind's peculiar Joys
From past or present Beauties rise.
But to reassume my first Design, there cannot be a greater Instance of the
Command of Females, than in the prevailing Charms of the Heroine in the Play
which was acted this Night, called, All for Love; or, The World well lost. The
enamoured Antony resigns Glory and Power to the Force of the attractive
Cleopatra, whose Charms were the Defense of her Diadem, against a People
otherwise invincible. It is so natural for Women to talk of themselves, that it
is to be hoped, all my own Sex, at least, will pardon me, that I could fall
into no other Discourse. If we have their Favor, we give our selves very
little Anxiety for the rest of our Readers. I believe I see a Sentence of Latin
in my Brother's Day-Book of Wit, which seems applicable on this Occasion, and
in Contempt of the Critics.

-- Tristitiam and Metus
Tradam protectis in Mare Criticum
Portare Ventis.
But I am interrupted by a Packet from Mr. Kidney from St. James's
Coffee-house, which I am obliged to insert in the very Style and Words which
Mr. Kidney uses in his Letter.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 2.
We are advised by Letters from Bern, dated the 1st Instant, N. S. That the
Duke of Berwick arrived at Lions the 25th of the last Month, and continued his
Journey the next Day to visit the Passes of the Mountains, and other Posts in
Dauphine and Provence. These Letters also informed us, That the Miseries of the
People in France are heightened to that Degree, that unless a Peace be speedily
concluded, half of that Kingdom would perish for want of Bread. On the 24th,
the Marshall de Thesse passed through Lions, in his Way to Versailles; and Two
Battalions, which were marching from Alsace to reinforce the Army of the Duke
of Berwick, passed also through that Place. Those Troops were to be followed by
6 Battalions more.

Letters from Naples of the 16th of April say, That the Marquis de Prie's Son
was arrived there, with Instructions from his Father, to signify to the Viceroy
the Necessity his Imperial Majesty was under, of desiring an Aid from that
Kingdom, for carrying on the extraordinary Expenses of the War. On the 14th of
the same Month, they made a Review of the Spanish Troops in that Garrison, and
afterward of the Marines; one Part of whom will embark with those designed for
Barcelona, and the rest are to be sent on Board the Galleys appointed to convoy
Provisions to that Place.

We hear from Rome. by Letters dated the 20th of April, That the Count de
Mellos, Envoy from the King of Portugal, had made his Public Entry into that
City with much State and Magnificence. The Pope has lately held Two other
Consistories, wherein he made a Promotion of Two Cardinals; but the
Acknowledgment of King Charles is still deferred.

Letters from other Parts of Italy advise us, That the Doge of Venice continues
dangerously Ill: That the Prince de Carignan having relapsed into a violent
Fever, died the 23d of April, in his 80th Year.

Advices from Vienna of the 27th of April import, That the Archbishop of
Saltzburg is dead, who is succeeded by Count Harrach, formerly Bishop of
Vienna, and for these last Three Years Coadjutor to the said Archbishop; and
that Prince Maximilian of Lichtenstein has likewise depa ted this Life, at his
Country Seat called Cromaw in Moravia. These Advices add, That the Emperor has
named Count Zinzendorf, Count Goes, and Monsieur Consbruck, for his
Plenipotentiaries in an ensuing Treaty of Peace; and they hear from Hungary,
That the Imperialists have had several successful Skirmishes with the
Malcontents.

Letters from Paris, dated May the 6th, say, That the Marshall de Thesse
arrived there on the 29th of the last Month; and that the Chevalier de Beuil
was sent thither by Don Pedro Rouquillo with Advice, That the Confederate
Squadron appeared before Alicant on the 17th, and having for some Time
cannonaded the City, endeavored to land some Troops for the Relief of the
Castle; but General Stanhope finding the Passes well guarded, and the
Enterprise dangerous, demanded to capitulate for the Castle; which being
granted him, the Garrison, consisting of 600 Regular Troops, marched out with
their Arms and Baggage the Day following; and being received on Board, they
immediately set Sail for Barcelona. These Letters add, That the March of the
French and Swiss Regiments is further deferred for a few Days; and that the
Duke of Nouilles was just ready to set out for Roussillon, as well as the Count
de Bezons for Catalonia.

The same Advices say, Bread was sold at Paris for 6 d. per Pound; and that
there was not half enough, even at that Rate, to supply the Necessities of the
People, which reduced them to the utmost Despair; that 300 Men had taken up
Arms, and having plundered the Market of the Suburb of St. Germain, pressed
down by their Multitude the King's Guards who opposed them. Two of those
Mutineers were afterward seized, and condemned to Death; but Four others went
to the Magistrate who pronounced that Sentence, and told him. He must expect to
answer with his own Life, for those of their Comrades. All Order and Sense of
Government being thus lost among the enraged People, to keep up a Show of
Authority; the Captain of the Guards, who saw all their Insolence, pretended,
That he had represented to the King their deplorable Condition, and had
obtained their Pardon. It is further reported, That the Dauphin, and Duchess
of Burgundy, as they went to the Opera, were surrounded by Crowds of People,
who upbraided them with their Neglect of the general Calamity, in going to
Diversions, when the whole People were ready to perish for want of Bread.
Edicts are daily published to suppress these Riots; and Papers, with Menaces
against the Government, as publicly thrown about. Among others, these Words
were dropped in a Court of Justice, France wants a Ravilliac or a Jesuit to
deliver her. Besides this universal Distress, there is a contagious Sickness,
which, it is feared, will end in a Pestilence. Letters from Bourdeaux bring
Accounts no less lamentable: The Peasants are driven by Hunger from their
Abodes into that City, and make Lamentations in the Streets without Redress.

We are advised by Letters from the Hague, dated the 10th Instant, N. S. That
on the 6th, the Marquis de Torcy arrived there from Paris, but the Passport, by
which he came, having been sent blank by Monsieur Rouille, he was there Two
Days before his Quality was known. That Minister offered to communicate to
Mons. Heinsius the Proposals which he had to make; but the Pensionary refused
to see them, and said, He would signify it to the States, who deputed some of
their own Body to acquaint him, That they would enter into no Negotiation till
the Arrival of his Grace the D. of Marlborough, and the other Ministers of the
Alliance. Prince Eugene was expected there the 12th Instant from Brussels. It Is
said, That besides Monsieur de Torcy, and Monsieur Pajot, Director General of
the Posts, there are Two or Three Persons at the Hague whose Names are not
known; but it is supposed, that the Duke d'Alba, Ambassador from the Duke of
Anjou, was one of them. The States have sent Letters to all the Cities of the
Provinces, desiring them to send their Deputies to receive the Propositions of
Peace made by the Court of France.

The TATLER. [No 11.
By Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
From Tuesday May 3. to Thursday May 5. 1709.
Will's Coffee-house, May 3.
A Kinsman has sent me a Letter, wherein he informs me, He had lately resolved
to write an Heroic Poem; but by Business has been interrupted, and has only
made one Similitude, which he should be afflicted to have wholly lost, and begs
of me to apply it to something, being very desirous to see it well placed in
the World. I am so willing to help the Distressed, that I have taken it in: But
though his greater Genius might very well distinguish his Verses from mine, I
have marked where his begin. His Lines are a Description of the Sun in Eclipse,
which I know nothing more like than a brave Man in Sorrow, who bears it as he
should, without imploring the Pity of his Friends, or being dejected with the
Contempt of his Enemies: As in the Case of Cato:

When all the Globe to Caesar's Fortune bowed,
Cato alone his Empire disallowed;
With Inborn Strength alone opposed Mankind,
With Heaven in View, to all below it blind:
Regardless of his Friend's Applause, or Moan,
Alone Triumphant, since he falls alone.
' Thus when the Ruler of the Genial Day,
' Behind some dark'ning Planet forms his Way,
' Desponding Mortals, with officious Care,
' The Concave Drum, and Magic Brass prepare;
' Implore him to sustain the important Fight,
' And save depending Worlds from endless Night.
' Fondly they hope their Labor may avail,
' To ease his Conflict, and assist his Toil.
' Whilst he in Beams of Native Splendour bright
' (Though dark his Orb appear to Humane Sight)
' Shines to the Gods with more diffusive Light.
' To distant Stars with equal Glory burns,
' Inflames their Lamps, and feeds their Golden Urns.
' Sure to retain his known superior Tract,
' And proves the more illustrious by Defect.
This is a very lively Image; but I must take the Liberty to say, My Kinsman
drives the Sun a little like Phaeton: He has all the Warmth of Phoebus, but
will not stay for his Direction of it. Avail and Toil, Defect and Tract, will
never do for Rhimes. But however, he has the true Spirit in him; for which
Reason I was willing to entertain any Thing he pleased to send me. The Subject
which he writes upon, naturally raises great Reflections in the Soul, and puts
us in Mind of the mixed Condition which we Mortals are to support; which, as it
varies to Good or Bad, adorns or defaces our Actions to the Beholders: All
which Glory and Shame must end in what we so much repine at, Death. But
Doctrines on this Occasion, any other than that of living well, are the most
insignificant and most empty of all the Labors of Men. None but a Tragedian
can die by Rule, and wait till he discovers a Plot, or says a fine Thing upon
his Exit. In real Life, this is a Chimaera; and by Noble Spirits, it will be
done decently, without the Ostentation of it. We see Men of all Conditions and
Characters go through it with equal Resolution: And if we consider the Speeches
of the mighty Philosophers, Heroes, Lawgivers, and Great Captains, they can
produce no more in a discerning Spirit, than Rules to make a Man a Fop on his
Deathbed. Commend me to that natural Greatness of Soul, expressed by an
innocent, and consequently resolute Country Fellow, who said in the Pains of
the Cholick, If I once get this Breath out of my Body, you shall hang me before
you put it in again. Honest Ned. and so he died.

But it is to be supposed, from this Place you may expect an Account of such a
Thing as a New Play is not to be omitted. That acted this Night is the newest
that ever was writ. The Author is my ingenious Friend Mr. Thomas D -- y. This
Drama is called, The Modern Prophets, and is a most unanswerable Satyr against
the late Spirit of Enthusiasm. The Writer had by long Experience observed, That
in Company, very grave Discourses have been followed by Bawdry; and therefore
has turned the Humor that Way with great Success, and taken from his Audience
all Manner of Superstition, by the Agitations of pretty Mrs. Bignall, whom he
has, with great Subtilty, made a Lay-Sister, as well as a Prophetess; by which
Means, she carries on the Affairs of both Worlds with great Success. My Friend
designs to go on with another Work against Winter, which he intends to call,
The Modern Poets; a People no less mistaken in their Opinions of being
inspired, than the other. In order to this, he has by him several Songs,
besides many Ambiguities, which cannot be mistaken for any Thing but what he
means them. Mr. D -- y generally writes State-Plays, and is wonderfully useful
to the World in such Representations. This Method is the same that was used by
the Old Athenians, to laugh out of Countenance, or promote Opinions among the
People. My Friend has therefore, against this Play is acted for his own
Benefit, made Two Dances, which may be also of an universal Benefit. In the
First, he has represented Absolute Power in the Person of a Tall Man with an
Hat and Feather, who gives his First Minister, that stands just before him, an
huge Kick; the Minister gives the Kick to the next before; and so to the End of
the Stage. In the Moral and Practical Jest, you are made to understand, That
there is, in an Absolute Government, no Gratification, but giving the Kick you
receive from one above you, to one below you. This is performed to a grave and
melancholy Air; but on a sudden the Tune moves quicker, and the whole Company
fall into a Circle, and take Hands; then at a certain sharp Note, they move
round, and kick as kick can. This latter Performance he makes to be the
Representation of a Free State; where, if you all mind your Steps, you may go
round and round very jollily, with a Motion pleasant to your selves and those
you dance with: Nay, if you put your selves out, at the worst you only kick and
are kicked, like Friends and Equals.

From my own Apartment, May 4.
Of all the Vanities under the Sun, I confess that of being proud of one's
Birth is the greatest. At the same Time, since in this unreasonable Age, by the
Force of prevailing Custom, Things in which Men have no Hand, are imputed to
them; and that I am used by some People, as if Isaac Bickerstaff, though I write
my self Esquire, was no Body: To set the World right in that Particular, I
shall give you my Genealogy, as a Kinsman of ours has sent it me from the
Heralds-Office. It is certain, and observed by the wisest Writers, That there
are Women who are not nicely Chaste, and Men not severely Honest, in all
Families; therefore let those who may be apt to raise Aspersions upon ours,
please to give us as Impartial Account of their own, and we shall be satisfied.
The Business of Heralds is a Matter of so great Nicety, that, to avoid
Mistakes, I shall give you my Cousin's Letter Verbatim, without altering a
Syllable.

Dear Cousin,
SInce you have been pleased to make your self so famous of late, by your
ingenious Writings, and some Time ago by your learned Predictions: Since
Partridge of Immortal Memory is dead and gone, who, Poetical as he was, could
not understand his own Poetry; and Philomathical as he was, could not read his
own Destiny: Since the Pope, the King of France, and great Part of his Court,
are either literally or metaphorically defunct: Since, I say, these Things (not
foretold by any one but your self) have come to pass after so surprising a
Manner; it is with no small Concern I see the Original of the Staffian Race so
little known in the World as it is at this Time; for which Reason, as you have
employed your Studies in Astronomy, and the Occult Sciences; so I, my Mother
being a Welsh Woman, dedicated mine to Genealogy, particularly that of our own
Family, which, for its Antiquity and Number, may challenge any in Great
Britain. The Staffs are originally of Staffordshire, which took its Name from
them: The First that I find of the Staffs was one Jacobstaff, a famous and
renowned Astronomer, who by Dorothy his Wife, had Issue Seven Sons, viz.
Bickerstaff. Longstaff, Wagstaff, Quarterstaff, Whitestaff, Falstaff, and
Tipstaff. He also had a Younger Brother who was twice married, and had Five
Sons; viz. Distaff, Pikestaff, Mopstaff, Broomstaff, and Raggedstaff. As for
the Branch from whence you spring, I shall say very little of it, only that
it is the Chief of the Staffs, and called Bickerstaff, quasi Biggerstaff; as
much as to say, the Great Staff, or Staff of Staffs; and that it has applied it
self to Astronomy with great Success, after the Example of our aforesaid
Forefather. The Descendants from Longstaff, the second Son, were a rakish
disorderly Sort of People, and rambled from one Place to another, till in Harry
II.'s Time they settled in Kent, and were called Long-Tails, from the
Long-Tails which were sent them as a Punishment for the Murder of Thomas a
Becket, as the Legends say. They have been always seeked after by the Ladies;
but whether it be to show their Aversion to Popery, or their Love to Miracles,
I cannot say. The Wagstaffs are a merry thoughtless Sort of People, who have
always been opinionated of their own Wit; they have turned themselves mostly to
Poetry. This is the most numerous Branch of our Family, and the poorest. The
Quarterstaffs are most of them Prize-fighters, or Deerstealers: There have been
so many of them hanged lately, that there are very few of that Branch of our
Family left. The Whitestaffs are all Courtiers, and have had very considerable
Places. There have been some of them of that Strength and Dexterity. That Five
hundred of the ablest Men in the Kingdom have often tugged in vain to pull a
Staff out of their Hands. The Falstaffs are strangely given to Whoring and
Drinking: There are Abundance of them in and about London. And one Thing is
very remarkable of this Branch, and that is, There are just as many Women as
Men in it. There was a wicked Stick of Wood of this Name in Harry IV.'s Time,
one Sir John Falstaff. As for Tipstaff, the youngest Son, he was an honest
Fellow; but his Sons, and his Sons Sons, have all of them been the veriest
Rogues living: It Is this unlucky Branch has stocked the Nation with that Swarm
of Lawyers, Attorneys, Sergeants, and Bailiffs, with which the Nation is
overrun. Tipstaff, being a Seventh Son, used to cure the King's Evil; but his
rascally Descendants are so far from having that healing Quality, that by a
Touch upon the Shoulder, they give a Man such an ill Habit of Body, that he can
never come abroad afterward. This is all I know of the Line of Jacobstaff: His
younger Brother Isaacstaff, as I told you before, had Five Sons, and was
married twice; his First Wife was a Staff, (for they did not stand upon false
Heraldry in those Days) by whom he had one Son, who in Process of Time being a
Schoolmaster, and well read in the Greek, called himself Distaff or
Twicestaff. He was not very rich, so he put his Children out to Trades; and the
Distaffs have ever since been employed in the Woollen and Linen Manufactures,
except my self, who am a Genealogist. Pikestaff, the eldest Son by the Second
Venture, was a Man of Business, a downright plodding Fellow, and withal so
plain, that he became a Proverb. Most of this Family are at present in the
Army. Raggedstaff was an unlucky Boy, and used to tear his Clothes a getting
Birds Nests, and was always playing with a tame Bear his Father kept. Mopstaff
fell in love with one of his Father's Maids, and used to help her to clean the
House. Broomstaff was a Chimney-Sweeper. The Mopstaffs and Broomstaffs are
naturally as civil People as ever went out of Doors; but alas! If they once get
into ill Hands, they knock down all before them. Pilgrimstaff run away from his
Friends, and went strolling about the Country: And Pipestaff was a Wine-Cooper.
These Two were the unlawful Issue of Longstaff.

N. B. The Canes, the Clubs, the Cudgels, the Wands, the Devil upon Two Sticks,
and one Bread, that goes by the Name of Staff of Life, are none of our
Relations.

I am, Dear Cousin, Your humble Servant, D. Distaff.
From the Heralds Office, May 1.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 4.
As politic News is not the principal Subject on which we treat, we are so
happy as to have no Occasion for that Art of Cookery which our Brother
Newsmongers so much excel in; as appears by their excellent and inimitable
Manner of dressing up a second Time for your Taste the same Dish which they gave
you the Day before, in case there come over no new Pickles from Holland.
Therefore, when we have nothing to say to you from Courts and Camps, we hope
still to give you somewhat new and curious from our selves: The Women of our
House, upon Occasion, being capable of carrying on the Bufiness, according to
the laudable Custom of the Wives in Holland; but, without further Preface, take
what we have not mentioned in our former Relations.

Letters from Hanover of the 30th of the last Month say, That the Prince Royal
of Prussia arrived there on the 15th, and left that Court on the Second of this
Month, in Pursuit of his Journey to Flanders, where he makes the ensuing
Campaign. Those Advices add, That the young Prince Nassau, Hereditary Governor
of Friesland, consummated on the 26th of the last Month his Marriage with the
beaureous Princess of Hesse-Cassel, with a Pomp and Magnificence suitable to
their Age and Quality.

Letters from Paris say, His most Christian Majesty retired to Marly on the
first Instant, N. S. and our last Advices from Spain inform us, That the Prince
of Asturias had made his public Entry into Madrid in great Splendour. The Duke
of Anjou has given Don Joseph Hartado de Amaraga the Government of Terra-Firma
de Veragua, and the Presidency of Panama in America. They add, That the Forces
commanded by the Marquis de Bay has been reinforced by Six Battalions of
Spanish and Walloon Guards. Letters from Lisbon advise, That the Army of the
King of Portugal was at Elvas on the 22d of the last Month, and would decamp on
the 24th, in order to march upon the Enemy, who lay at Badajos.

Yesterday, at Four in the Morning, his Grace the Duke of Marlborough set out
for Margate; and embarked for Holland at Eight this Morning.

Yesterday also Sir George Thorold was declared Alderman of Cordwainers Ward,
in the Room of his Brother Sir Charles Thorold deceased.

The TATLER. [No 12.
From Thursd. May 5. to Saturd. May 7. 1709.
May 5.
WHen a Man has engaged to keep a Stage-Coach, he is obliged, whether he has
Passengers or not, to set out: Thus it fares with us Weekly Historians; but
indeed, for my Particular, I hope I shall soon have little more to do in this
Work than to publish what is sent me from such as have Leisure and Capacity for
giving Delight, and being pleased in an elegant Manner. The present Grandeur of
the British Nation might make us expect, that we should rise in our Public
Diversions, and Manner of enjoying Life, in Proportion to our Advancement in
Glory and Power. Instead of that, take and survey this Town, and you will find,
Rakes and Debauchees are your Men of Pleasure; Thoughtless Atheists, and
Illiterate Drunkards, call themselves Free-Thinkers; and Gamesters, Banterers,
Biters, Swearers, and Twenty new born Insects more, are, in their several
Species, the Modern Men of Wit. Hence it is, that a Man who has been out of
Town but one half Year, has lost the Language, and must have some Friend to
stand by him, and keep him in Countenance for talking common Sense. To Day I
saw a short Interlude at White's of this Nature, which I took Notes of, and put
together as well as I could in a Public Place. The Persons of the Drama are,
Pip, the last Gentleman that has been made so at Cards; Trimmer, a Person half
undone at them, and is now between a Cheat and a Gentleman; Acorn, an honest
English Man, of good plain Sense and Meaning; and Mr. Friendly, a reasonable
Man of the Town.

White's Chocolate-house, May 5.
Enter Pip, Trim. and Acorn. Ac. What Is the Matter, Gentlemen? What! Take no
Notice of an old Friend?


Pip. Pox on it! Don't talk to me, I am Vowel'd by the Count, and cursedly out
of Humor.


Ac. Vowel'd! Prithee, Trimmer, What does he mean by that?


Trim. Have a Care, Harry, speak softly; don't show your Ignorance: -- If you
do, they will bite you wherever they meet you; they are such cursed Curs, --
the present Wits.


Ac. Bite me! What do you mean?


Pip. Why! Don't you know what Biting is? Nay, you are in the Right on it.
However, one would learn it only to defend ones self against Men of Wit, as one
would know the Tricks of Play, to be secure against the Cheats. But don't you
hear, Acorn, that Report, That some Potentates of the Alliance have taken Care
of themselves, exclusive of us?


Ac. How! Heaven forbid! After all our Glorious Victories; all this Expense of
Blood and Treasure!


Pip. Bite --


Ac. Bite! How?


Trim. Nay, he has Bit you fairly enough; that is certain.


Ac. Pox! I don't feel it -- How? Where?

Exit Pip and Trimmer laughing.
Ac. Ho! Mr. Friendly, your most humble Servant; you heard what passed between
those fine Gentlemen and me. Pip complained to me, That he has been Vowel'd;
and they tell me, I am Bit.


Friend. You are to understand, Sir, That Simplicity of Behavior, which is the
Perfection of good Breeding and good Sense, is utterly lost in the World; and
in the Room of it, there are started a Thousand little Inventions, which Men,
barren of better Things, take up in the Place of it. Thus for every Character
in Conversation that used to please, there is an Impostor put upon you. Him
whom we allowed formerly for a certain pleasant Subtilty, and natural Way of
giving you an unexpected Hit, called a Droll, is now mimick'd by a Biter, who
is a dull Fellow, that tells you a Lie with a grave Face, and laughs at you for
knowing him no better than to believe him. Instead of that Sort of Companion,
who could rally you, and keep his Countenance, till he made you fall into some
little Inconsistency of Behavior, at which you your self could laugh with him,
you have the Sneerer, who will keep you Company from Morning to Night, to
gather your Follies of the Day, (which perhaps you commit out of Confidence in
him) and expose you in the Evening to all the Scorners in Town. For your Man of
Sense and free Spirit, whose Set of Thoughts were built upon Learning, Reason,
and Experience, you have now an impudent Creature made up of Vice only, who
supports his Ignorance by his Courage, and Want of Learning by Contempt of it.


Ac. Dear Sir, hold: What you have told me already of this Change in
Conversation, is too miserable to be heard with any Delight; but, methinks, as
these new Creatures appear in the World, it might give an excellent Field to
Writers for the Stage, to divert us with the Representation of them there.


Friend. No, No: As you say, there might be some Hopes of Redress of these
Grievances, if there were proper Care taken of the Theater; but the History of
that is yet more lamentable, than that of the Decay of Conversation I gave you.


Ac. Pray, Sir, a little: I have not been in Town these Six Years, till within
this Fortnight.


Friend. It is now some Years, since several Revolutions in the Gay World had
made the Empire of the Stage subject to very fatal Convulsions, which were too
dangerous to be cured by the Skill of little King Oberon, who then sat in the
Throne of it. The Laziness of this Prince threw him upon the Choice of a Person
who was fit to spend his Life in Contentions, an able and profound Attorney, to
whom he mortgaged his whole Empire. This Divite is the most skilful of all
Politicians: He has a perfect Art in being unintelligible in Discourse, and
uncomeatable in Business. But he having no Understanding in this polite Way,
brought in upon us, to get in his Money, Ladder-dancers, Rope-dancers,
Jugglers, and Mountebanks, to strut in the Place of Shakespeare's Heroes, and
Johnson's Humourists. When the Seat of Wit was thus mortgaged, without Equity
of Redemption, an Architect arose, who has built the Muse a new Palace, but
secured her no Retinue; so that instead of Action there, we have been put off
by Song and Dance. This latter Help of Sound has also began to fail for want of
Voices; therefore the Palace has since been put into the Hands of a Surgeon,
who cuts any Foreign Fellow into an Eunuch, and passes him upon us for a Singer
of Italy.


Ac. I Will go out of Town to Morrow.


Friend. Things are come to this Pass; and yet the World will not understand,
that the Theater has much the same Effect on the Manners of the Age, as the
Bank on the Credit of the Nation. Wit and Spirit, Humor and good Sense, can
never be revived, but under the Government of those who are Judges of such
Talents, who know, that whatever is put up in their Stead, is but a short and
trifling Expedient, to support the Appearance of them for a Season. It is
possible, a Peace will give Leisure to put these Matters under new Regulations;
but at present all the Assistance we can see toward our Recovery, is as far
from giving us Help, as a Poultice is from performing what can be done only by
the Grand Elixir.


Will's Coffee-house, May 6.
According to our late Design in the applauded Verses on the Morning, which you
lately had from hence, we proceed to improve that just Intention, and present
you with other Labors, made proper to the Place in which they were written.
The following Poem comes from Copenhagen, and is as fine a Winter-piece, as we
have ever had from any of the Schools of the most learned Painters. Such Images
as these give us a new Pleasure in our Sight, and fix upon our Minds Traces of
Reflection, which accompany us whenever the like Objects occur. In short,
excellent Poetry and Description dwell upon us so agreeably, that all the
Readers of them are made to think, if not write, like Men of Wit. But it would
be Injury to detain you longer from this excellent Performance, which is
addressed to the Earl of Dorset by Mr. Philips, the Author of several choice
Poems in Mr. Tonson's new Miscellany.

Copenhagen, March 9. 1709.
From Frozen Climes, and endless Tracks of Snow,
From Streams that Northern Winds forbid to flow;
What Present shall the Muse to Dorset bring;
Or how, so near the Pole, attempt to sing?
The heary Winter here conceals from Sight,
All pleasing Objects that to Verse invite.
The Hills and Dales, and the delightful Woods,
The Flowery Plains, and Silver Streaming Floods,
By Snow disguised, in bright Confusion lie,
And with one dazzling Waste fatigue the Eye.
No gentle breathing Breeze prepares the Spring,
No Birds within the Desert Region sing.
The Ships unmoved the boisterous Winds defy,
While rattling Chariots over the Ocean fly.
The vast Leviathan wants Room to play,
And spout his Waters in the Face of Day.
The starving Wolves along the main Sea prowl,
And to the Moon in Icy Valleys howl.
For many a shining League the level Main
Here spreads it self into a Glassy Plain:
There solid Billows of enormous Size,
Alps of green Ice, in wild Disorder rise.
And yet but lately have I seen even here,
The Winter in a lovely Dress appear.
Eer yet the Clouds lot fall the treasured Snow,
Or Winds begun through hazy Skies to blow.
At Evening a keen Eastern Breeze arose;
And the descending Rain unsullied freze.
Soon as the silent Shades of Night withdrew,
The ruddy Morn disclosed at once to View
The Face of Nature in a rich Disguise,
And brightened every Object to my Eyes:
For every Shrub, and every Blade of Grass,
And every pointed Thorn, seemed wrought in Glass.
In Pearls and Rubies rich the Hawthorns show,
While through the Ice the Crimson Berries glow.
The thick sprung Reeds the watery Marshes yield,
Seem polished Lances in a hostile Field.
The Stag in limpid Currents with Surprise,
Sees Crystal Branches on his Forehead rise.
The spreading Oak, the Beech, and towering Pine,
Glazed over, in the freezing Ether shine.
The frighted Birds the rattling Branches shun,
That wave and glitter in the distant Sun.
When if a sudden Gust of Wind arise,
The brittle Forest into Atoms flies:
The crackling Wood beneath the Tempest bends,
And in a spangled Shower the Prospect ends.
Or, if a Southern Gale the Region warm,
And by Degrees unbind the Wintry Charm,
The Traveller a miry Country sees,
And Journeys sad beneath the dropping Trees.
Like some deluded Peasant, Merlin leads
Through fragrant Bowers and through delicious Meads;
While here enchanted Gardens to him rise,
And airy Fabrics there attract his Eyes,
His wandering Feet the Magic Paths pursue;
And while he thinks the fair Illusion true,
The trackless Scenes disperse in fluid Air,
And Woods, and Wilds, and Thorny Ways appear:
A tedious Road the weary Wretch returns,
And; as he goes, the transiens Vision mourns.
From my own Apartment, May 6.
There has a Mail this Day arrived from Holland; but the Matter of the Advices
importing rather what gives us great Expectations, than any positive
Assurances, I shall, for this Time, decline giving you what I know, and apply
the following Verses of Mr. Dryden, in the Second Part of Almanzor, to the
present Circumstances of Things, without discovering what my Knowledge in
Astronomy suggests to me.

When Empire in its Childhood first appears,
A watchful Fate e'ersees its tender Years:
Till grown more strong, it thrusts and stretches out,
And elbows all the Kingdoms round about.
The Place thus made for its first breathing free,
It moves again for Ease and Luxury:
Till swelling by Degrees it has possessed
The greater Space, and now crowds up the rest.
When from behind there starts some petty State,
And pushes on its now unweildy Fate.
Then down the Precipice of Time it goes,
And sinks in Minutes, which in Ages rose.
The TATLER. [No 13.
From Saturd. May 7. to. Tuesd. May 10. 1709.
From my own Apartment, May 8.
MUch Hurry and Business had to Day perplexed me into a Mood too thoughtful for
going into Company; for which Reason, in stead of the Tavern, I went into
Lincoln's Inn-Walks; and having taken a Round or Two, I sat down, according to
the allowed Familiarity of these Places, on a Bench; at the other End of which
sat a venerable Gentleman, who speaking with a very affable Air, Mr.
Bickerstaff, said he, I take it for a very great Piece of good Fortune that you
have found me out. Sir, said I, I had never, that I know of, the Honor of
seeing you before. That, replied he, is what I have often lamented; but I
assure you, I have for many Years done you good Offices, without being observed
by you; or else, when you had any little Glimpse of my being concerned in an
Affair, you have fled from me, and shunned me like an Enemy; but however, the
Part I am to act in the World is such, that I am to go on in doing Good, though
I meet with never so many Repulses, even from those I oblige. This, thought I,
shows a great good Nature, but little Judgment in the Persons upon whom he
confers his Favors. He immediately took Notice to me, That he observed by my
Countenance I thought him indiscreet in his Beneficence, and proceeded to tell
me his Quality in the following Manner: I know thee, Isaac, to be so well
versed in the Occult Sciences, that I need not much Preface, or make long
Preparations to gain you Faith that there are Airy Beings, who are employed in
the Care and Attendance of Men, as Nurses are to Infants, till they come to an
Age in which they can act-of themselves. These Beings are usually called
amongst Men, Guardian Angels; and, Mr. Bickerstaff, I am to acquaint you, that
I am to be yours for some Time to come; it being our Orders to vary our
Stations, and sometimes to have me Pationt under our Protection, and sometimes
another, with a Power of assuming what Shape we please, to ensuare our Words
unto their own Good. I have of late been upon such hard Duty, and know you have
so much Work for me, that I think fit to appear to you Face to Face, to desire
you would give me as little Occasion for Vigilance as you can. Sir, said I, it
will be a great Instruction to me in my Behavior, if you please to give me
some Account of your late Employments, and what Hardships or Satisfactions you
have had in them, that I may govern my self accordingly. He answered: To give
you an Example of the Drudgery we go through, I will entertain you only with my
Three last Stations: I was on the First of April last put to mortify a great
Beauty, with whom I was a Week; from her I went to a common Swearer, and have
been last with a Gamester. When I first came to my Lady, I found my great Work
was to guard well her Eyes and Ears, but her Flatterers were so numerous, and
the House, after the modern Way, so full of Looking-glasses, that I seldom had
her safe but in her Sleep. Whenever we went Abroad, we were surrounded by an
Army of Enemies: When a well-made Man appeared, he was sure to have a
Side-glance of Observation: If a disagreeable Fellow, he had a full Face, out
of mere Inclination to Conquests. But at the Close of the Evening, on the Sixth
of the last Month, my Ward was fitting on a Couch, reading Ovid's Epistles; and
as she came to this Line of Helen to Paris, She half consents who silently
denies;
entered Philander, who is the most skilful of all Men in an Address to Women.
He is arrived at the Perfection of that Art which gains them, which is, To talk
like a very miserable Man, but look like a very happy One. I saw Dictinna blush
at his Entrance, which gave me the Alarm; but he immediately said something so
agreeable on her being at Study, and the Novelty of finding a Lady employed in
so grave a Manner, that he on a sudden became very familiarly a Man of no
Consequence; and in an Instant laid all her Suspicions of his Skill asleep, as
he almost had done mine, till I observed him very dangerously turn his
Discourse upon the Elegance of her Dress, and her Judgment in the Choice of
that very pretty Mourning. Having had Women before under my Care, I trembled at
the Apprehension of a Man of Sense who could talk upon Trifles, and resolved to
stick to my Post with all the Circumspection imaginable. In short, I
prepossessed her against all he could say to the Advantage of her Dress and
Person; but he turned again the Discourse, where I found I had no Power o ver
her, on the abusing her Friends and Acquaintance. He allowed indeed, That Flora
had a little Beauty, and a great deal of Wit; but then she was so ungainly in
her Behavior, and such a laughing Hoyden -- Pastorella had with him the
Allowance of being Blameless: But what was that toward being Praiseworthy? To
be only Innocent, is not to be Virtuous. He afterward spoke so much against
Mrs. Dipple's Forehead, Mrs. Prim's Mouth, Mrs. Dentifrice's Teeth, and Mrs.
Fidget's Cheeks, that she grew downright in Love with him: For it is always to
be understood, That a Lady takes all you detract from the rest of her Sex to be
a Gift to her. In a Word, Things went so far, that I was dismissed, and she
will remember that Evening Nine Months, from the Sixth of April, by a very
remarkable Token. The next, as I said, I went to was a common Swearer: Never
was a Creature so puzzled as my self when I came first to view his Brain; half
of it was worn out, and filled up with mere Expletives, that had nothing to do
with any other Parts of the Texture; therefore, when he called for his Clothes
in a Morning, he would cry, John? -- John does not answer. What a Plague! No
Body there? What the Devil, and rot me! John, for a laxy Dog as you are. I knew
no Way to cure him, but by writing down all he said one Morning as he was
dressing, and laying it before him on the Toilet when he came to pick his
Teeth. The last Recital I gave him of what he said for half an Hour before,
was, What, a Pox rot me! Where is the Washball? Call the Chairmen: Damn 'em, I
warrant they are at the Alehouse already! Zounds, and Confound 'em. When he
came to the Glass, he takes up my Note -- Ha! This Fellow is worse than me:
What, Does he swear with Pen and Ink? But reading on, he found them to be his
own Words. The Stratagem had so good an Effect upon him, that he grew
immediately a new Man, and is learning to speak without an Oath, which makes
him extremely short in his Phrases; for, as I observed before, a Common Swearer
has a Brain without any Idea on the Swearing Side; therefore my Ward has yet
mighty little to say, and is forced to substitute some other Vehicle of
Nonsense to supply the Defect of his usual Expletives. When I left him, he made
Use of, Odsbodikins! Oh me! and Never stir alive! and so forth; which gave me
the Hopes of his Recovery. So I went to the next I told you of, the Gamester.
When we first take our Place about a Man, the Receptacles of the Pericranium
are immediately searched. In his, I found no one ordinary Trace of Thinking;
but strong Passion, violent Desires, and a continued Series of different
Changes, had torn it to Pieces. There appeared no middle Condition; the Triumph
of a Prince, or the Misery of a Beggar, were his alternate States. I was with
him no longer than one Day, which was Yesterday. In the Morning at Twelve, we
were worth Four Thousand Pounds; at Three, we were arrived at Six Thousand;
half an Hour after, we were reduced to One Thousand; at Four of the Clock we
were down to Two Hundred; at Five, to Fifty; at Six, to Five; at Seven, to One
Guinea; the next Bet, to Nothing. This Morning, he borrowed Half a Crown of the
Maid who cleans his Shoes; and is now gaming in Lincolns-Inn-Fields among the
Boys for Farthings and Oranges, till he has made up Three Pieces, and then he
returns to White's into the best Company in Town. This ended our first
Discourse; and it is hoped, you will forgive me that I have picked so little
out of my Companion at our first Interview. In the next, it is possible he may
tell me more pleasing Incidents; for though he is a Familiar, he is not an Evil
Spirit.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 9.
We hear from the Hague of the 14th Instant, N, S. That Monsieur de Torcy has
had frequent Conferences with the Grand Pensioner, and the other Ministers who
were heretofore commissioned to treat with Monsieur Rouille. The Preliminaries
of a Peace are almost settled, and the Proceedings wait only for the Arrival of
the Duke of Marlborough; after whose Approbation of the Articles proposed, it
is not doubted but the Methods of the Treaty will be publicly known. In the
mean Time, the States have declared an Abhorrence of making any Step in this
great Affair, but in Concert with the Court of Great Britain, and other Princes
of the Alliance. The Posture of Affairs in Franes does necessarily oblige that
Nation to be very much in Earnest in their Offers; and Monsieur de Torcy has
professed to the Grand Pensioner, That he will avoid all Occasions of giving
him the least Jealousy of his using any Address in private Conversations for
accomplishing the Ends of his Embassy. It is said, That as soon as the
Preliminaries are adjusted, that Minister is to return to the French Court. The
States of Holland have resolved to make it an Instruction to all their Men of
War and Privateers, to bring into their Ports whatever Neutral Ships they shall
meet with laden with Corn, and bound for France; and to avoid all Cause of
Complaint from the Potentates to whom these Ships shall belong, their full
Demand for their Freight shall be paid them there. The French Protestants
residing in that Country have applied themselves to their respective
Magistrates, desiring that there may be an Article in the Treaty of Peace,
which may give Liberty of Conscience to the Protestants in France. Monsieur
Bosnage, Minister of the Walloon Church at Rotterdam, has been at the Hague,
and has had some Conferences with the Deputies of the States on that Subject.
It is reported there That all the French Refugees in those Dominions are to be
naturalized, that they may enjoy the same good Effects of the Treaty with the
Hollanders themselves, in respect to France.

Letters from Paris say, The People conceiv^ great Hopes of a sudden Peace,
from Monsieu^ Torcy's being employed in the Negotiation, h^ being a Minister of
too great Weight in that Court, to be sent on any Employment in which his
Master would not act in a Manner wherein he might justly promise himself
Success. The France Advices add, That there is an Insurrection in Poicton; 3000
Men having taken up Arms, and beaten the Troops which were appointed to
disperse them: Three of the Mutineers being taken, were immediately executed;
and as many of the King's Party were used after the same Manner.

Our late Act of Naturalization has had so great an Effect in Foreign Parts,
that some Princes have prohibited the French Refugees in their Dominions to
sell or transfer their Estates to any other of their Subjects; and at the same
Time have granted them greater Immunities than they hitherto enjoyed. It has
been also thought necessary to restrain their own Subjects from leaving their
native Country, on Pain of Death.

The TATLER. [No 14.
From Tuesd. May 10. to Thursd. May 12. 1709.
From my own Apartment, May 10.
HAD it not been that my Familiar had appeared to me, as I told you in my last,
in Person, I had certainly been unable to have found even Words, without
Meaning, to keep up my Intelligence with the Town: But he has checked me
severely for my Despondence, and ordered me to go on in my Design of observing
upon Things, and forbearing Persons; for, said he, the Age you live in is such,
that a good Picture of any Vice or Virtue will infallibly be misrepresented;
and though none will take the kind Descriptions you make so much to themselves,
as to wish well to the Author, yet all will resent the ill Characters you
produce, out of Fear of their own Turn in the License you must be obliged to
take, if you point at particular Persons. I took his Admonition kindly, and
immediately promised him to beg Pardon of the Author of the Advice to the
Poets, for my Raillery upon his Work; though I aimed at no more, in that
Examination, but to convince him, and all Men of Genius, of the Folly of laying
themselves out on such Plans as are below their Characters. I hope too it was
done without Ill-Breeding, and nothing spoken below what a Civilian (as it is
allowed I am) may utter to a Physician. After this Preface, all the World may
be safe from my Writings; for if I can find nothing to commend, I am silent,
and will forbear the Subject: For, though I am a Reformer, I scorn to be an
Inquisitor.

It would become all Men as well as me, to lay before 'em the noble Character
of Verus the Magistrate, who always sat in Triumph over, and Contempt of Vice;
He never searched after it, or spared it when it came before him: At the same
Time, He could see through the Hypocrisy and Disguise of those, who have no
Pretense to Virtue themselves, but by their Severity to the Vicious. This same
Verus was, in Times long past, Chief Justice (as we call it amongst us) in
Faelicia. He was a Man of profound Knowledge of the Laws of his Country, and as
just an Observer of 'em in his own Person. He considered Justice as a Cardinal
Virtue, not as a Trade for Maintenance. Wherever he was Judge, he never forgot
that he was also Council. The Criminal before him was always sure he stood
before his Country, and, in a Sort, a Parent of it. The Prisoner knew, that
though his Spirit was broken with Guilt, and incapable of Language to defend it
self, all would be gathered from him which could conduce to his Safety; and
that his Judge would wrest no Law to destroy him, nor conceal any that could
save him. In his Time, there were a Nest of Pretenders to Justice, who happened
to be employed to put Things in a Method for being examined before him at his
usual Sessions: These Animals were to Verus, as Monkeys are to Men, so like,
that you can hardly disown them; but so base, that you are ashamed of their
Fraternity. It grew a Phrase, Who would do Justice on the Justices? That
certainly would Verus. I have seen an old Trial where he sat Judge on Two of
'em; one was called Trick-Track, the other Tearshift; one was a learned Judge
of Sharpers, the other the quickest of all Men at finding out a Wench.
Trick-Track never spared a Pick-pocket, but was a Companion to Cheats:
Tearshift would make Compliments to Wenches of Quality, but certainly commit
poor ones. If a poor Rogue wanted a Lodging, Trick-Track sent him to Gaol for a
Thief: If a poor Whore went only with one thin Petticoat, Tearshift would
imprison her for being loose in her Dress. These Patriots infested the Days of
Verus, while they alternately committed and released each others Prisoners. But
Verus regarded them as Criminals, and always looked upon Men as they stood in
the Eye of Justice, without respecting whether they sat on the Bench, or stood
at the Bar.

Will's Coffee-house, May 11.
Yesterday we were entertained with the Tragedy of The Earl of Essex, in which
there is not one good Line, and yet a Play which was never seen without drawing
Tears from some Part of the Audience: A remarkable Instance, that the Soul is
not to be moved by Words, but Things for the Incidents in this Drama are laid
together so happily, that the Spectator makes the Play for himself, by the
Force which the Circumstance has upon his Imagination. Thus, in spite of the
most dry Discourses, and Expressions almost ridiculous with respect to
Propriety, it is impossible for one unprejudiced to see it untouched with Pity.
I must confess this Effect is not wrought on such as examine why they are
pleased; but it never fails to appear on those who are not too learned in
Nature, to be moved by her first Suggestions. It is certain, the Person and
Behavior of Mr. Wilks has no small Share in conducing to the Popularity of the
Play; and when an handsome Fellow is going to a more course Exit than
Beheading, his Shape and Countenance makes every tender one reprieve him with
all her Heart, without waiting till she hears his dying Words.

This Evening The Alchymist was played. This Comedy is an Example of Ben's
extensive Genius and Penerration into the Passions and Follies of Mankind. The
Scene in the Fourth Act, where all the cheated People oppose the Man that would
open their Eyes, has something in it so inimitably excellent, that it is
certainly as great a Masterpiece as has ever appeared by any Hand. The
Author's great Address in showing Covetousness the Motive of the Actions of the
Puritan, the Epicure, the Gamester, and the Trader; that all their Endeavors,
how differently soever they seem to tend, center only in that one Point of
Gain, shows he had to a great Perfection that Discernment of Spirit, which
constitutes a Genius for Comedy.

White's Chocolate-house, May 11.
It is not to be imagined how far the Violence of our Desires will carry us
toward our own Deceit in the Pursuit of what we wish for. A Gentleman here
this Evening was giving me an Account of a dumb Fortune Tellers, who outdoes Mr.
Partridge, my self, or the Unborn-Doctor, for Predictions. All his Visitants
come to him full of Expectations, and pay his own Rate for the Interpretations
they put upon his Shrugs and Nods. There is a fine rich City-Widow stole
thither the other Day, (though it is not Six Weeks since her Husband's
Departure from her Company to rest) and, with her trusty Maid, demanded of him,
Whether she should marry again, by holding up Two Fingers, like Horns on her
Forehead. The Wizard held up both her Hands forked. The Relict desired to know,
Whether he meant by his holding up both Hands, to represent that she had one
Husband before, and that she should have another? Or that he intimated, she
should have Two more? The Cunning Man looked a little sour; upon which Betty
jogged her Mistress, who gave the other Guinea; and he made her understand, She
should positively have Two more; but shaked his Head, and hinted, that they
should not live long with her. The Widow sighed, and gave him the other half
Guinea. After this Prepossession, all that she had next to do, was to make
Sallies to our End of the Town, and find out who it is her Fate to have. There
are Two who frequent this Place, whom she takes for Men of Vogue, and of whom
her Imagination has given her the Choice. They are both the Appearances of fine
Gentlemen, to such as do not know when they see Persons of that Turn; and
indeed, they are industrious enough to come at that Character, to deserve the
Reputation of being such. But this Town will not allow us to be the Thing we
seem to aim at, and are too discerning to be fobb'd off with Pretenses. One of
these pretty Fellows fails by his laborious Exactness; the other, by his as
much studied Negligence. Frank Careless, as soon as his Valet has helped on and
adjusted his Clothes, goes to his Glass, sets his Wig awry, tumbles his Cravat;
and in short, undresses himself to go into Company. Will Nice is so little
satisfied with his Dress, that all the Time he is at a Visit, he is still
mending it, and is for that Reason the more insufferable; for he who studies
Carelessness, has, at least, his Work the sooner done of the Two. The Widow is
distracted whom to take for her first Man; for Nice is every Way so careful,
that she fears his Length of Days; and Frank is so loose, that she has
Apprehensions for her own Health with him. I am puzzled how to give a just Idea
of them; but in a Word, Careless is a Coxcomb, and Nice a Fop: Both, you will
say, very hopeful Candidates for a gay Woman just set at Liberty. But there is
a Whisper, her Maid will give her to Tom Terror the Gamester. This Fellow has
undone so many Women, that he will certainly succeed if he is introduced; for
nothing so much prevails with the vain Part of that Sex, as the Glory of
deceiving them who have deceived others.

Desunt Multa.
St. James's Coffee-house, May 11.
Letters from Berlin, bearing Date May 11. N. S. inform us, That the Birthday
of her Prussian Majesty has been celebrated there with all possible
Magnificence; and the King made her, on that Occasion, a present of Jewels to
the Value of Thirty Thousand Crowns. The Marquis de Quesne, who has
distinguished himself by his great Zeal for the Protestant Interest, was, at
the Time of the Dispatch of these Letters, at that Court, soliciting the King
to take Care, that an Article in Behalf of the Refugees, admitting their Return
to France, should be inserted in the Treaty of Peace. They write from Hanover
of the 14th, That his Electoral Highness had received an Express from Count
Merci, representing how necessary it was to the Common Cause, that he would
please to hasten to the Rhine; for that nothing but his Presence could quicken
the Measures toward bringing the Imperial Army into the Field. There are very
many Speculations upon the intended Interview of the King of Denmark and King
Augustus. The latter has made such Preparations for the Reception of the other,
that it is said, his Danish Majesty will be entertained in Saxony with much
more Elegance than he met with in Italy it self.

Letters from the Hague of the 18th Instant, N. S. say, That his Grace the Duke
of Marlborough landed the Night before at the Brill, after having been kept out
at Sea by adverse Winds two Days longer than is usual in that Passage. His
Excellency the Lord Townshend, Her Majesty's Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary to the State-General, was driven into the Veer in Zealand on
Thursday last, from whence he came to the Hague within few Hours after the
Arrival of his Grace. The Duke, soon after his coming to the Hague, had a Visit
from the Pensioner of Holland. All Things relating to the Peace were in
Suspense till this Interview; nor is it yet known what Resolutions will be
taken on that Subject; for the Troops of the Allies have fresh Orders
dispatched to them to move from their respective Quarters, and march with all
Expedition to the Frontiers, where the Enemy are making their utmost Efforts
for the Defense of their Country. These Advices further inform us, That the
Marquis de Torcy had received an Answer from the Court of France to his Letters
which he had sent thither by an Express on the Friday before.

Mr. Bickerstaff has received Letters from Mr. Coltstaff, Mr. Whipstaff, and
Mrs. Rebecca Wagstaff; all which relate chiefly to their being left out in the
Genealogy of the Family lately published; but my Cousin being a Clerk in the
Herald's Office who writ that Draught, and being at present under the
Displeasure of the Chapter; it is feared. if that Matter should be touched upon
at this Time, the young Gentleman would lose his Place for Treason against the
Kings at Arms.

The TATLER. [No 15.
From Thursd. May 12. to Saturd. May 14. 1709.
From my own Apartment, May 12.
I Have taken a Resolution hereafter, on any Want of Intelligence, to carry my
Familiar abroad with me, who has promised to give me very proper and just
Notices of Persons and Things, to make up the History of the passing Day. He is
wonderfully skilful in the Knowledge of Men and Manners, which has made me more
than ordinary curious to know how he came to that Perfection, and I
communicated to him that Doubt. Mr. Pacolet, said I, I am mightily surpised to
see you so good a Judge of our Nature and Circumstances, since you are a mere
Spirit, and have no Knowledge of the Bodily Parts of us. He answered, smiling,
You are mistaken, I have been one of you, and lived a Month amongst you, which
gives me an exact Sense of your Condition. You are to know, That all who enter
into Humane Life, have a certain Date or Stamen given to their Being, which
they only who die of Age may be said to have arrived at; but it is ordered
sometimes by Fate, that such as die Infants, are after Death to attend Mankind
to the End of that Stamen of Being in themselves, which was broke off by
Sickness or any other Disafter. These are proper Guardians to Men, as being
insensible of the Infirmity of their State. You are Philosopher enough to know,
that the Difference of Men's Understanding proceeds only from the various
Dispositions of their Organs; so that he who dies at a Month old, is in the
next Life as knowing (though more innocent) as they who live to Fifty; and after
Death, they have as perfect a Memory and Judgment of all that passed in their
Lifetime, as I have of all the Revolutions in that uneasy, turbulent
Condition of yours; and, you would say, I had enough of it in a Month, were I to
tell you all my Misfortunes. A Life of a Month, cannot have, one would think,
much Variety; but pray, said I, let us have your Story.

Then he proceeds in the following Manner:

It was one of the most wealthy Families in Great Britain into which I was
born, and it was a very great Happiness to me that it so happened, otherwise I
had still, in all Probability, been living: But I shall recount to you all the
Occurrences of my short and miserable Existence, just as, by examining into the
Traces made in my Brain, they appeared to me at that Time. The first Thing that
ever struck my Senses, was a Noise over my Head of one shrieking; after which,
methought I took a full Jump, and found my self in the Hands of a Sorceress,
who seemed as if she had been long waking, and employed in some Incantation: I
was thoroughly frightened, and cried out, but she immediately seemed to go on in
some Magical Operation, and anointed me from Head to Foot. What they meant, I
could not imagine; for there gathered a great Crowd about me, crying, An Heir,
an Heir; upon which I grew a little still, and believed this was a Ceremony to
be used only to great Persons, and such as made them, what they called, Heirs.
I lay very quiet; but the Witch, for no Manner of Reason or Provocation in the
World, takes me and binds my Head as hard as possibly she could, then ties up
both my Legs, and makes me swallow down an horrid Mixture; I thought it an
harsh Entrance into Life to begin with taking Physic; but I was forced to it,
or else must have taken down a great Instrument in which she gave it me. When I
was thus dressed, I was carried to a Bedside, where a fine young Lady (my
Mother I wot) had like to have hugged me to Death. From her, they faced me
about, and there was a Thing with quite another Look from the rest of the Room,
to whom they talked about my Nose. He seemed wonderfully pleased to see me; but
I knew since, my Nose belonged to another Family. That into which I was born,
is one of the most numerous amongst you; therefore Crowds of Relations came
every Day to congratulate my Arrival; among others, my Cousin Betty, the
greatest Romp in Nature: She whisks me such a Height over her Head, that I
cried out for fear of falling. She pinched me, and called me squealing Chit,
and threw me into a Girls Arms that was taken in to tend me. The Girl was very
proud of the Womanly Employment of a Nurse, and took upon her to strip and
dress me anew, because I made a Noise, to see what ailed me: She did so, and
stuck a Pin in every Joint about me. I still cried: Upon which, she lays me on
my Face in her Lap; and to quiet me, fell a nailing in all the Pins, by
clapping me on the Back, and skreaming a Lullaby. But my Pain made me exalt my
Voice above hers, which brought up the Nurse, the Witch I first saw, and my
Grandmother. The Girl is turned down Stairs, and I stripped again, as well to
find what ailed me, as to satisfy my Granam's further Curiosity. This good old
Woman's Visit was the Cause of all my Troubles. You are to understand, That I
was hitherto bred by Hand, and any Body that stood next, gave me Pap, if I did
but open my Lips; insomuch, that I was grown so cunning, as to pretend my self
asleep when I was not, to prevent my being crammed. But my Grandmother began a
loud Lecture upon the Idleness of the Wives of this Age, who, for Fear of their
Shapes, forbear suckling their own Offspring: And Ten Nurses were immediately
sent for; one was whispered to have a wanton Eye, and would soon spoil her
Milk; another was in a Consumption; the Third had an ill Voice, and would
frighten me, instead of lulling me to sleep. Such Exceptions were made against
all but one Country Milch-Wench, to whom I was committed, and put to the
Breast. This careless Jade was eternally romping with the Footmen, and
downright starved me; insomuch that I daily pined away, and should never have
been relieved, had it not been, that on the Thirtieth Day of my Life, a Fellow
of the Royal Society, who had writ upon Cold Baths, came to visit me, and
solemnly protested, I was utterly lost for want of that Method: Upon which he
sous'd me Head and Ears into a Pail of Water, where I had the good Fortune to
be drowned, and so escaped being lashed into a Linguist till Sixteen, running
after Wenches till Twenty five, and being married to an ill natured Wife till
Sixty: Which had certainly been my Fate, had not the Enchantment between Body
and Soul been broke by this Philosopher. Thus, till the Age I should have
otherwise lived. I am obliged to watch the Steps of Men; and if you please,
shall accompany you in your present Walks, and get you Intelligence from the
Aerial Lacquey, who is in Waiting, what are the Thoughts and Purposes of any
whom you enquire for. I accepted his kind Offer, and immediately took him with
me in an Hack to White's.

White's Chocolate-house, May 13.
We got in hither, and my Companion threw a Powder round us, that made me as
invisible as himself; so that we could see and hear all others, our selves
unseen and unheard.

The first Thing we took Notice of, was a Nobleman of a goodly and frank
Aspect, with his generous Birth and Temper visible in it, playing at Cards with
a Creature of a black and horrid Countenance, wherein were plainly delineated
the Arts of his Mind, Cousenage and Falsehood. They were marking their Game with
Counters, on which we could see Inscriptions, imperceptible to any but us. My
Lord had scor'd with Pieces of Ivory, on which were writ, Good Fame, Glory,
Riches, Honor, and Posterity. The Spectre over against him had on his Counters
the Inscriptions of Dishonor. Impudence, Poverty, Ignorance, and Want of
Shame. Bless me! said I; Sure my Lord does not see what he plays for! As well
as I do, says Pacolet. He despises that Fellow he plays with, and scorns
himself for making him his Companion. At the very Instant he was speaking, I
saw the Fellow who played with my Lord, hide Two Cards in the Roll of his
Stocking: Pacolet immediately stole 'em from thence; upon which the Nobleman
soon after won the Game. The little Triumph he appeared in, when he got such a
tri^ing Stock of ready Money, though he had ventured so great Sums with
Indifference, increased my Admiration. But Pacolet began to talk to me. Mr.
Isaac, This to you looks wonderful, but not at all to us higher Beings: That
Noble has as many good Qualities as any Man of his Order, and seems to have no
Faults but what, as I may say, are Excrescencies from Virtues. He is Generous
to a Prodigality, more Affable than is consistent with his Quality, and
Courageous to a Rashness. Yet, after all this, the Source of his whole Conduct
is (though he would hate himself if he knew it) mere Avarice. The Ready Cash laid
before the Gamester's Counters makes him venture, as you see, and lay
Distinction against Infamy, Abundance against Want; in a Word, all that is
desirable against all that is to be avoided. However, said I, be sure you
disappoint the Sharpers to Night, and steal from 'em all the Cards they hide.
Pacolet obeyed me, and my Lord went Home with their whole Bank in his Pocket.

Will's Coffee-house, May 13.
To Night was acted a Second Time a Comedy, called, The Busy Body: This Play
is written by a Lady. In old Times, we used to sit upon a Play here after it
was acted; but now the Entertainment is turned another Way; not but there are
considerable Men appear in all Ages, who, for some eminent Quality or
Invention, deserve the Esteem and Thanks of the Public. Such a Benefector is a
Gentleman of this House, who is observed by the Surgeons with much Envy; for he
has invented an Engine for the Prevention of Harms by Love-Adventures, and by
great Care and Application, has made it an Immodesty to name his Name. This
Act of Self-denial has gained this worthy Member of the Commonwealth a great
Reputation. Some Law-giver^ have departed from their Abodes for ever, an^
commanded the Observation of their Laws til^ their Return; others have used
other Artifice^ to fly the Applause of their Merit; but this Person shuns Glory
with greater Address, and has, by giving his Engine his own Name, made it
obscene to speak of him more. However, he is ranked among, and received by the
modern Wits, as a great Promoter of Gallantry and Pleasure. But I fear,
Pleasure is less understood in this Age, which so much pretends to it, than in
any since the Creation. 'Twas admirably said of him who first took Notice, That
(Res est severa Voluptas) there is a certain Severity in Pleasure. Without
that, all Decency is banished; and if Reason is not to be present at our
greatest Satisfactions, of all the Races of Creatures, the Humane is the most
miserable. It was not so of old; when Virgil describes a Wit, he always means a
virtuous Man; and all his Sentiments of Men of Genius are such as show Persons
distinguished from the common Level of Mankind; such as placed Happiness in the
Contempt of low Fears, and mean Gratifications: Fears, which we are subject to
with the Vulgar; and Pleasures, which we have in common with Beasts. With these
illustrious Personages, the wisest Man was the greatest Wit; and none was
thought worthy of that Character, unless he answered this excellent Description
of the Poet:

Qui -- Metus omnes and inexorabile Fatum
Subjecit Pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari.
St. James's Coffee-house, May 13.
We had this Morning Advice, That some English Merchant Ships, convoyed by the
Bristol of 54 Guns, were met with by a Part of Mons. du Gui Trouin's Squadron,
who engaged the Convoy. That Ship defended it self till the English Merchants
got clear of the Enemy, but being disabled, was her self taken. Within few
Hours after, my Lord Dursley came up with Part of his Squadron, and engaging
the French, retook the Bristol (which being very much shattered, sunk), and
took the Glorieux, a Ship of 44 Guns, as also a Privateer of 14. Before this
Action, his Lordship had taken Two French Merchant Men, and had, at the
Dispatch of these Advices, brought the whose safe into Plymouth.

The TATLER. [No 16.
From Saturd. May 14. to Tuesd. May 17. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, May 15.
SIR Thomas, of this House, has showed me some Letters from the Bath, which
give Accounts of what passes among the good Company of that Place; and allowed
me to transcribe one of them, that seems to be writ by some of Sir Thomas's
particular Acquaintance, and is as follows:

Dear Knight,
I Desire you would give my humble Service to all our Friends, which I speak of
to you (out of Method) in the very Beginning of my Epistle, lest the present
Disorders, by which this Seat of Gallantry and Pleasure is torn to Pieces,
should make me forget it. You keep so good Company, that you know Bath is
stocked with such as come hither to be relieved from luxuriant Health, or
imaginary Sickness, and consequently is always as well stowed with Gallants as
Invalids, who live together in a very good Understanding. But the Season is so
early, that our fine Company is not yet arrived; and the Warm Bath, which in
Heathen Times was dedicated to Venus, is now used only by such as really want
it for Health's Sake. There are however a good many Strangers, among whom are
Two ambitious Ladies, who being both in the Autumn of their Life, take the
Opportunity of placing themselves at the Head of such as we are, before the
Chloe's, Clarissa's, and Pastorella's come down. One of these Two is
excessively in Pain, that the ugly Being called Time will make Wrinkles in
Spite of the Lead Forehead-Cloth; and therefore hides with the Gaiery of her
Air, the Volubility of her Tongue, and Quickness of her Motion, the Injuries
which it has done her. The other Lady is but Two Years behind her in Life, and
dreads as much being laid aside as the former, and consequently has taken the
necessary Precautions to prevent her Reign over us. But she is very discreet,
and wonderfully turned for Ambition, being never apparently transported either
with Affectation or Malice. Thus, while Florimel is talking in Public, and
spreading her Graces in Assemblies, to gain a Popular Dominion over our
Diversions, Prudentia visits very cunningly all the Lame, the Splenatick, and
the Superannuated, who have their distinct Classes of Followers and Friends.
Among these, she has found that some Body has sent down printed Certificates of
Florimel's Age, which she has read and distributed to this unjoyful Set of
People, who are always Enemies to those in Possession of the good Opinion of
the Company. This unprovoked Injury done by Prudentia, was the first Occasion
of our fatal Divisions here, and a Declaration of War between these Rivals.
Florimel has abundance of Wit, which she has lavished in decrying Prudentia,
and giving Defiance to her little Arts. For an Instance of her superior Power,
she bespoke the Play of Alexander the Great, to be acted by the Company of
Strollers, and desired us all to be there on Thursday last. When she spoke to
me to come, As you are, said she, a Lover, you will not fail the Death of
Alexander: The Passion of Love is wonderfully hit -- Statira! Oh that happy
Woman -- To have a Conqueror at her Feet -- But you will be sure to be there. I,
and several others, resolved to be of her Party. But see the irresistible
Strength of that unsuspected Creature, a Silent Woman. Prudentia had
counterplotted us, and had bespoke on the same Evening the Popper-Show of The
Creation of the World. She had engaged every Body to be there; and to turn our
Leader into Ridicule, had secretly let 'em know, that the Poppet Eve was made
the most like Florimel that ever was seen. On Thursday Morning the
Poppet-Drummer, Adam and Eve, and several others who lived before the Flood,
passed through the Streets on Horseback, to invite us all to the Pastime, and the
Representation of such Things as we all knew to be true; and Mr. Mayor was so
wise as to prefer these innocent People the Poppets, who, he said, were to
represent Christians, before the wicked Players, who were to show Alexander, an
Heathen Philosopher. To be short, this Prudentia had so laid it, that at Ten of
the Clock Footmen were sent to take Places at the Poppet-Show, and all we of
Florimel's Party were to be out of Fashion, or desert her. We chose the latter.
All the World crowded to Prudentia's House, because it was given out, no Body
could get in. When we came to Noah's Flood in the Show, Punch and his Wife were
introduced dancing in the Ark. An honest plain Friend of Florimel's, but a
Critic withal, rose up in the midst of the Representation, and made many very
good Exceptions to the Drama it self, and told us. That it was against all
Morality, as well as Rules of the Stage, that Punch should be in Jest in the
Deluge, or indeed that he should appear at all. This was certainly a just
Remark, and I thought to second him; but he was hissed by Prudentia's Party;
upon which, really, Sir Thomas, we who were his Friends hissed him too. Old
Mrs. Petulent desired both her Daughters to mind the Moral; then whispered Mrs.
Mayoress, This is very proper for young People to see. Punch at the End of the
Play made Madam Prudentia a Compliment, and was very civil to the whole
Company, making Bows till his Buttons touched the Ground. All was carried
triumphantly against our Party. In the mean Time Florimel went to the Tragedy,
dressed as fine as Hands could make her, in Hopes to see Prudentia pine away
with Envy. Instead of that, she sat a full Hour alone, and at last was
entertained with this whole Relation from Statira, who wiped her Eyes with her
Tragical cut Handkerchief, and lamented the Ignorance of the Quality. Florimel
was stung with this Affront, and the next Day bespoke the Poppet-Show.
Prudentia, insolent with Power, bespoke Alexander. The whole Company came then
to Alexander. Madam Petulant desired her Daughters to mind the Moral, and
believe no Man's fair Words; For you will see Children, said she, these Soldiers
are never to be depended upon; they are sometimes here, sometimes there --
Don't you see. Daughter Betty, Colonel Clod, our next Neighbor in the Country,
pulls off his Hat to you? Court'sie, good Child, his Estate is just by us.
Florimel was now mortified down to Prudentia's Humor; and Prudentia exalted
into hers. This was observed: Florimel invites us to the Play a Second Time,
Prudentia to the Show. See the Uncertainty of Humane Affairs! The Beaux, the
Wits, the Gamesters, the Prues, the Coquets, the Valitudinarians, and Gallants,
all now wait upon Florimel. Such is the State of Things at this present Date;
and if there happens any new Commotions, you shall have immediate Advice from,

SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant.
Bath, May 11. 1709.

To CASTABELLA.
Madam,
I Have the Honor of a Letter from a Friend of yours, relating to an
Incivility done to you at the Opera, by one of your own Sex; but I, who was an
Eyewitness of the Accident, can testify to you, that though she pressed before
you, she lost her Ends in that Design; for she was taken Notice of for no other
Reason, but her Endeavors to hide a finer Woman than her self. But indeed, I
dare not go further in this Matter, than just this bare Mention; for though it
was taking your Place of Right, rather than Place of Precedence, yet it is so
tender a Point, and on which the very Life of Female Ambition depends, that it
is of the last Consequence to meddle in it: All my Hopes are from your
beautiful Sex; and those bright Eyes, which are the Bane of others, are my only
Sunshine. My Writings are Sacred to you; and I hope, I shall always have the
good Fortune to live under your Protection; therefore take this public
Opportunity to signify to all the World, That I design to forbear any Thing
that may in the least tend to the Diminution of your Interest, Reputation, or
Power. You Will therefore forgive me, that I strive to conceal every wrong Step
made by any who have the Honor to wear Petticoats; and shall at all Times do
what is in my Power to make all Mankind as much their Slaves as my self. If
they would consider Things as they ought, there needs not much Argument to
convince 'em, that it is their Fate to be obedient to you, and that your
greatest Rebels do only serve with a worse Grace. I am,

MADAM, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, Isaac Bickerstaff.
May 16.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 16.
Letters from the Hague, bearing Date the 21st Instant, N. S. advise, That his
Grace the Duke of Marlborough, immediately after his Arrival, sent his
Secretary to the President and the Pensionary, to acquaint them therewith. Soon
after, these Ministers visited the Duke, and made him Compliments in the Name
of the States General; after which they entered into a Conference with him on
the present Posture of Affairs, and gave his Grace Assurances of the firm
Adherence of the States to the Alliance: At the same Time acquainting him, That
all Overtures of Peace were rejected, till they had an Opportunity of acting in
Concert with their Allies on that Subject. After this Interview, the Pensionary
and the President returned to the Assembly of the States. Monsieur Torcy has
had a Conference at the Pensioner's House with his Grace the Duke of
Marlborough, Prince Eugene, and his Excellency the Lord Townshend. The Result
of what was debated at that Time is kept secret; but there appears an Air of
Satisfaction and good Understanding between these Ministers. We are apt also to
give our selves very hopeful Prospects from Monsieur Torcy's being employed in
this Negotiation, who has been always remarkable for a particular Way of
Thinking, in his Sense of the Greatness of France; which he has always said,
Was to be promoted rather by the Arts of Peace, than those of War. His
delivering himself freely on this Subject, has formerly appeared an
unsuccessful Way to Power in that Court; but in its present Circumstances,
those Maxims are better received; and it is thought a certain Argument of the
Sincerity of the French King's Intentions, that this Minister is at present
made use of. The Marquis is to return to Paris within few Days, who has sent a
Courier thither to give Notice of the Reasons of his Return, that the Court may
be the sooner able to dispatch Commissioners for a formal Treaty.

The Expectations of Peace are increased by Advices from Paris of the 17th
Instant, which say, The Dauphin has altered his Resolution of commanding in
Flanders the ensuing Campaign. The Saxon and Prussian Reinforcements, together
with Count Merci's Regiment of Imperial Horse, are encamped in the
Neighborhood of Brussels; and sufficient Stores of Corn and Forage are
transported to that Place and Ghent for the Service of the Confederate Army.

They write from Mons, That the Elector of Bavaria had Advice, That an advanced
Party of the Portugueze Army had been defeated by the Spaniards.

We hear from Languedoc, That their Corn, Olives, and Figs, were wholly
destroyed; but that they have a hopeful Prospect of a plentiful Vintage.

The TATLER. [No 17.
From Tuesday May 17. to Thursday May 19. 1709.
Will's Coffee-house, May 18.
THE Discourse has happened to turn this Evening upon the true Nature of
Panegyric, the Perfection of which was asserted to consist in a certain artful
Way of conveying the Applause in an indirect Manner. There was a Gentleman gave
us several Instances of it: Among others, he quoted (from Sir Francis Bacon, in
his Advancement of Learning) a very great Compliment made to Tiberius, as
follows: In a full Debate upon Public Affairs in the Senate, one of the
Assembly rose up, and with a very grave Air said, He thought it for the Honor
and Dignity of the Commonwealth, that Tiberius should be declared a God, and
have Divine Worship paid him. The Emperor was surprised at the Proposal, and
demanded of him to declare whether he had made any Application to incline him
to that Overture? The Senator answered, with a bold and haughty Tone, Sir, In
Matters that concern the Commonwealth, I will be governed by no Man. Another
Gentleman mentioned something of the same Kind spoken by the late Duke of B --
m, to the late Earl of O -- y: My Lord, (says the Duke, after his Libertine
Way) you will certainly be Damned. How, my Lord! says the Earl with some
Warmth. Nay, says the Duke, there is no Help for it, for it is positively said,
Cursed is he of whom all Men speak well. This is taking a Man by Surprise, and
being welcome when you have so surprised him. The Person flattered receives you
into his Closet at once; and the sudden Change in his Heart, from the
Expectation of an Ill-wisher, to find you his Friend, makes you in his full
Favor in a Moment. The Spirits that were raised so suddenly against you, are
as suddenly for you. There was another Instance given of this Kind at the
Table: A Gentleman who had a very great Favor done him, and an Employment
bestowed upon him, without so much as being known to his Benefactor, waited
upon the Great Man who was so Generous, and was beginning to say, he was
infinitely obliged. Not at all, says the Patron, turning from him to another,
Had I known a more deserving Man in England, he should not have had it.

We should certainly have had more Examples, had not a Gentleman produced a
Book which he thought an Instance of this kind: It was a Pamphlet, called, The
Naked Truth. The Idea any one would have of that Work from the Title, was, That
there would be much Plain Dealing with People in Power, and that we should see
Things in their proper Light, stripped of the Ornaments which are usually given
to the Actions of the Great: But the Skill of this Author is such, that he has,
under that rugged Appearance, approved himself the finest Gentleman and
Courtier that ever writ. The Language is extremely sublime, and not at all to
be understood by the Vulgar: The Sentiments are such as would make no Figure in
ordinary Words; but such is the Art of the Expression, and the Thoughts are
elevated to so high a Degree, that I question whether the Discourse will sell
much. There was an ill-natured Fellow present, who hates all Panegyric
mortally. P -- take him! said he, What the Devil means his Naked Truth, in
speaking nothing but to the Advantage of all whom he mentions? This is just
such a great Action as that of the Champion's on a Coronation Day, who
challenges all Mankind to dispute with him the Right of the Sovereign,
surrounded with his Guards. The Gentleman who produced the Treatise, desired
him to be cautious, and said, it was writ by an excellent Soldier, which made
the Company observe it more narrowly: And (as Critics are the greatest
Conjurers at finding out a known Truth) one said, he was sure it was writ by
the Hand of his Sword-Arm. I could not perceive much wit in that Expression;
but it raised a Laugh, and I suppose, was meant as a Sneer upon valiant Men.
The same Man pretended to see in the Style, that it was an Horse-Officer; but
sure that is being too nice: For though you may know Officers of the Cavalry by
the Turn of their Feet, I cannot imagine how you should discern their Hands from
those of other Men. But it is always thus with Pedants; they will ever be
carping, if a Gentleman or a Man of Honor puts Pen to Paper^ I don't doubt,
but this Author will find this Assertion too true, and that Obloquy is not
repulsed by the Force of Arms. I will therefore set this Excellent Piece in a
Light too glaring for weak Eyes, and, in Imitation of the Critic Longinus,
shall, as well as I can, make my Observations in a Style like the Author's, of
whom I treat; which perhaps I am as capable of as another, having an unbounded
Force of Thinking, as well as a most exquisite Address extensively and wisely
indulged to me by the supreme Powers. My Author, I will dare to assert shows
the most Universal Knowledge of any Writer who has appeared this Century. He is
a Poet, and Merchant, which is seen in Two Master-Words, Credit Blossoms. He is
a G^ammarian, and a Politician; for he says, The Uniting the Two Kingdoms, is
the Emphasis of the Security to the Protestants Succession. Some would be apt
to say, he is a Conjurer; for he has found, That a Republic is not made up of
every Body of Animals, but is composed of Men only, and not of Horses. Liberty
and Property have chosen their Retreat within the Emulation Circle of an Humane
Commonwealth. He is a Physician; for he says, I observe a constant Equality in
its Pulse, and a just Quickness of its vigorous Circulation. And again: I view
the Strength of our Constitution plainly appear in the Sanguine and ruddy
Complexion of a well-contented City. He is a Divine: For he says, I cannot but
bless my self. And indeed, this Excellent Treatise has had that good Effect
upon me, who am far from being Superstitious, that I, also, cannot but bless my
self.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 18.
This Day arrived a Mail from Lisbon, with Letters of the 13th Instant, N. S.
containing a particular Account of the late Action in Portugal. On the 7th
Instant, the Army of Portugal, under the Command of the Marquis de Frontera,
lay on the Side of the Caya, and the Army of the Duke of Anjou, commanded by
the Marquis de Bay, on the other. The latter Commander having an Ambition to
ravage the Country, in a Manner in Sight of the Portugueze, made a Motion with
the whole Body f his Horse toward Fort St. Christopher, near the Town of
Badajos. The Generals of the Portugueze, disdaining that such an Insult should
be offered to their Arms, took a Resolution to pass the River, and oppose the
Designs of the Enemy. The Earl of Galway ^epresented to them, That the present
Postu^e of Affairs wa such on the Side of the Allies, that there needed no more
to be done at present in that Country, but to carry on a Defensive Part. But
his Arguments could not avail in the Council of War. Upon which, a great
Detachment of Foot, and the whole of the Horse of the King of Portugal's Army,
passed the River, and with some Pieces of Cannon did good Execution on the
Enemy. Upon observing this, the Marquis de Bay advanced with his Horse, and
attacked the Right Wing of the Portugueze Cavalry, who faced about, and fled,
without standing the first Encounter. But their Foot repulsed the same Body of
Horse in three successive Charges, with great Order and Resolution. While this
was transacting, the British General commanded the Brigade of Pearce, to keep
the Enemy in Diversion by a new Attack. This was so well executed, that the
Portugueze Infantry had Time to retire in good Order, and repass the River. But
that Brigade, which rescued 'em, was it self surrounded by the Enemy, and
Major General Sarkey, Brigadier Pearce, together with both their Regiments, and
that of the Lord Galway, lately raised, were taken Prisoners.

During the Engagement, the Earl of Barrymore having advanced too far to give
some necessary Order, was hemmed in by a Squadron of the Enemy; but found Means
to gallop up to the Brigade of Pearce, with which he remains also a Prisoner.
My Lord Galway had his Horse shot under him in this Action; and the Conde de
St. Juan, a Portugueze General, was taken Prisoner. The same Night the Army
encamped at Aronches, and on the 9th moved to Elvas, where they lay when these
Dispatches came away. Colonel Stanwix's Regiment is also taken. The whole of
this Affair has given the Portugueze a great Idea of the Capacity and Courage
of my Lord Galway, against whose Advice they entered upon this unfortunate
Affair, and by whose Conduct they were rescued from it. The prodigious
Constancy and Resolution of that great Man is hardly to be paralleled, who,
under the Oppression of a maimed Body, and the Reflection of repeated ill
Fortune, goes on with an unspeakable Alacrity in the Service of the Common
Cause. He has already put Things in a very good Posture after this ill
Accident, and made the necessary Dispositions for covering the Country from any
further Attempt of the Enemy, who lie still in the Camp they were in before the
Battle.

Letters from Brussels, dated the 25th Instant, advise, That notwithstanding
the Negotiations of a Peace seem so far advanced, that some do confidently
report the Preliminaries of a Treaty to be actually agreed on; yet the Allies
hasten their Preparations for opening the Campaign; and the Forces of the
Empire, the Prussians, the Danes, the Wirtembergers, the Palatines, and Saxon
Auxiliaries, are in Motion toward the General Rendevous, they being already
arrived in the Neighborhood of Brussels. These Advices add, That the Deputies
of the States of Holland, having made a General Review of the Troops in
Flanders, set out for Antwerp on the 21st Instant from that Place. On the same
Day the Prince Royal of Prussia came thither incognito, with a Design to make
the ensuing Campaign under his Grace the Duke of Marlborough.

This Day is published a Treatise, called, The Difference between Scandal and
Admonition. By Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire And on the 1st of July next, you may
expect A Prophecy of Things past; wherein the Art of Fortune-telling is laid
open to the meanest Capacity. And on the Monday following, Choice Sentences for
the Company of Masons and Bricklayers, to be put upon new Houses, with a
Translation of all the Latin Sentences, that have been built of late Years,
together with a Comment upon Stone Walls, by the same Hand.

The TATLER. [No 18.
From Thursd. May 19. to Saturd. May 21. 1709.
From my own Apartment, May 20.
IT is observed too often, that Men of Wit do so much employ their Thoughts
upon fine Speculations, that Things useful to Mankind are wholly neglected; and
they are busy in making Emendations upon some Encliticks in a Greek Author,
while obvious Things, that every Man may have use for, are wholly overlooked.
It would be an happy Thing, if such as have real Capacities for Public
Service, were employed in Works of general Use; but because a Thing is every
Body's Business, it is no Body's Business: This is for Want of public Spirit.
As for my Part, who am only a Student, and a Man of no great Interest, I can
only remark Things, and recommend the Correction of 'em to higher Powers. There
is an Offense I have a Thousand Times lamented, but fear I shall never see
remedi d; which is, That in a Nation where Learning is so frequent as in Great
Britain, there should be so many gross Errors as there are in the very
Directions of Things, wherein Accuracy is necessary so the Conduct of Life.
This is notoriously observed by all Men of Letters when they first come to Town
(at which Time they are usually curious that Way) in the Inscriptions on
Sign-Posts. I have Cause to know this Matter as well as any Body; for I have
(when I went to Merchant-Taylor's School) suffered Stripes for spelling after
the Signs I observed in my Way; though at the same Time, I must confess, staring
at those Inscriptions first gave me an Idea and Curiosity for Medals; in which
I have since arrived at some Knowledge. Many a Man has lost his Way and his
Dinner by this general Want of Skill in Orthography: For, considering that the
Painters are usually so very bad, that you cannot know the Animal under whose
Sign you are to live that Day, How must the Stranger be missed, if it be wrong
spelled, as well as ill painted? I have a Cousin now in Town, who has answered
under Batchellor at Queen's College, whose Name is Humphrey Mopstaff: (He is a
Kin to us by his Mother.) This young Man going to see a Relation in Barbekin,
wandered a whole Day by the Mistake of one Letter, for it was written, This is
the BEER, instead of, This is the BEAR. He was set right at last, by enquiring
for the House, of a Fellow who could not read, and knew the Place mechanically,
only by having been often drunk there. But, in the Name of Goodness, let us
make our Learning of Use to us, or not. Was not this a Shame, that a
Philosopher should be thus directed by a Cobbler? I Will be sworn, if it were
known how many have suffered in this Kind by false Speeling since the Union,
this Matter would not long lie thus. What makes these Evils the more
insupportable, is, That they are so easily amended, and nothing done in it. But
it is so far from that, that the Evil goes on in other Arts as well as
Orthography. Places are confounded, as well for want of proper Distinctions, as
Things for Want of true Characters. Had I not come by the other Day very early
in the Morning, there might have been Mischief done; for a worthy North-Britain
was swearing at Stocks-market that they would not let him in at his Ludgings;
but I knowing the Gentleman, and observing him look often at the King on
Horseback, and then double his Oaths, that he was sure he was right, found he
mistook that for Charing Cross, by the Erection of the like Statue in each
Place. I grant, private Men may distinguish their Abodes as they please; as one
of my Acquaintance who lives at Marybone, has put a good Sentence of his own
Invention upon his Dewlling Place, to find out where he lives: He is so near
London, that his Conceit is this, The Country in Town; or, The Town in the
Country; for you know, if they are both in one, they are all one. Besides that,
the Ambiguity is not of great Consequence; if you are safe at the Place, it is
no Matter if you do not distinctly know where to say the Place is. But to
return to the Orthography of Public Places: I propose, That every Tradesman in
the Cities of London and Westminster, shall give me Sixpence a Quarter for
keeping their Signs in Repair, as to the Grammatical Part; and I will take into
my House a Swiss Count of my Acquaintance, who can remember all their Names
without Book, for Dispatch sake, setting up the Head of the said Foreigner for
my Sign; the Features being strong, and fit for hanging high.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 20.
This Day a Mail arrived from Holland, by which there are Advices from Paris,
That the Kingdom of France is in the utmost Misery and Distraction. The
Merchants of Lions have been at Court, to remonstrate their great Sufferings by
the Failure of their Public Credit; but have received no other Satisfaction,
than Promises of a sudden Peace; and that their Debts will be made good by
Funds out of the Revenue, which will not answer, but in case of the Peace which
is promised. In the mean Time, the Cries of the common People are loud for Want
of Bread, the Gentry have lost all Spirit and Zeal for their Country, and the
King himself seems to languish under the Anxiety of the pressing Calamities of
the Nation, and retires from hearing those Grievances, which he has not Power
to redress. Instead of Preparations for War, and the Defense of their Country,
there is nothing to be seen but evident Marks of a general Despair.
Processions, Fastings, Public Mournings, and Humiliations, are become the sole
Employments of a People, who were lately the most vain and gay of any in the
Universe.

The Pope has written to the French King on the Subject of a Peace, and his
Majesty has answered in the lowliest Terms, That he entirely submits his
Affairs to Divine Providence, and shall soon show the World, that he prefers
the Tranquillity of his People to the Glory of his Arms, and Extent of his
Conquests.

Letters from the Hague of the 24th say, That his Excellency the Lord Toxnshend
delivered his Credentials on that Day to the States General, as Plenipotentiary
from the Queen of Great Britain; as did also Count Zinzendorf, who bears the
same Character from the Emperor.

Prince Eugene intended to set out the next Day for Brussels, and his Grace the
Duke of Marlborough on the Tuesday following. The Marquis de Torcy talks daily
of going, but still continues here. The Army of the Allies is to assemble on
the 7th of the next Month at Helchin; though it is generally believed, that the
Preliminar es to a Treaty are fully adjusted.

The Approech of a Peace strikes a Pannick through ou Armies, though that of a
Battle could never do it, and they almost repent of their Bravery, that made
such have to humble themselves and the French King. The Duke of Marlborough,
though otherwise the greatest General of the Age, has plainly shown himself
unacquainted with the Arts of Husbanding a War. He might have grown as old as
the Duke of Alva, or Prince Waldeck, in the Low Countries, and yet have got
Reputation enough every Year for any reasonable Man: For the Command of General
in Flanders has been ever looked upon as a Provision for Life. For my Pa t, I
cannot see how his Grace can answer it to the World, for the great Eagerness he
has shown to send a Hundred Thousand of the bravest Fellows in Europe a
begging. But the pr vate Gentlemen of the Infantry will be able to shift for
themselves; a brave Man can never starve in a Country stocked with Hen-roosts.
There is not a Yard of Linen, says my honored P ogenitor, Sir John Falstaff,
in my whole Company; but as for that, says this worthy Knight, I am in no great
Pain, we shall find Shirts on every Heage. There is another Sort of Gentlemen
whom I am much more concerned for, and that is, the ingenious Fraternity of
which I have the Honor to be an unworthy Member; I mean th News-Writers of
Great Britain, whether Post-Men or Post-Boys, or by what other Name or Title
soever dignified or distinguished. The Case of these Gentlemen is, I think,
more hard than that of the Soldiers, considering that they have taken more
Towns, and fought more Battles. They have been upon Parties and Skirmishes,
when our Armies have lain still; and given the General Assault to many a Place,
when the Besiegers were quiet in their Trenches. They have made us Masters of
several strong Towns many Weeks before our Generals could do it; and completed
Victories, when our greatest Captains have been glad to come off with a drawn
Battle. Where Prince Eugene has slain his Thousands, Boyer has slain his Ten
Thousands. This Gentleman can indeed be never enough commended for his Courage
and Intrepidity during this whole War: He has laid about him with an
inexpressible Fury, and like the offended Marius of Ancient Rome, made such
Havoc among his Countrymen, as must be the Work of Two or Three Ages to
repair. It must be confessed, the Redoubted Mr. Buckley has shed as much Blood
as the former; but I cannot forbear saying, (and I hope it will not look like
Envy) that we regard our Brother Buckley as a kind of Drawcansir, who spares
neither Friend or Foe: But generally kills as many of his own Side as the
Enemy's. It is impossible for this ingenious Sort of Men to subsist after a
Peace: Every one remembers the Shifts they were driven to in the Reign of King
Charles the Second, when they could not furnish out a single Paper of News,
without lighting up a Comet in Germany, or a Fire in Moscow. There scarce
appeared a Letter without a Paragraph on an Earthquake. Prodigies were grown so
familiar, that they had lost their Name, as a great Poet of that Age has it I
remember Mr. Dyer, who is justly looked upon by all the Fox-hunters in the
Nation as the greatest Statesman our Country has produced, was particularly
famous for dealing in Whales, insomuch that in Five Months Time (for I had the
Curiosity to examine his Letters on that Occasion) he brought Three into the
Mouth of the River Thames, besides Two Porpusses and a Sturgeon. The judicious
and wary Mr. I. Dawks has all along been the Rival of this great Writer, and
got himself a Reputation from Plagues and Famines, by which, in those Days, he
destroyed as great Multirudes, as he has lately done by the Sword. In every
Dearth of News, Grand Cairo was sure to be unpeopled.

It being therefore visible, that our Society will be greater Sufferers by the
Peace than the Soldiery it self; insomuch that the Daily Courant is in Danger
of being broken, my Friend Dyer of being reformed, and the very best of the
whole Band of being reduced to Half-Pay; Might I presume to offer any Thing in
the Behalf of my distressed Brethren, I would humbly move, That an Appendix of
proper Apartments furnished with Pen, Ink, and Paper, and other Necessaries of
Life, should be added to the Hospital of Chelsea, for the Relief of such
decayed News-Writers as have served their Country in the Wars; and that for
their Exercise, they should compile the Annals of their Brother Veterans, who
have been engaged in the same Service, and are still obliged to do Duty after
the same Manner.

I cannot be thought to speak this out of an Eye to any private Interest; for,
as my chief Scenes of Action are Coffee-houses, Play Houses, and my own
Apartment, I am in no need of Camps, Fortifications, and Fields of Battle, to
support me, I don't call out for Heroes and Generals to my Assistance. Though
the Officers are broken, and the Armies disbanded, I shall still be safe as
long as there are Men or Women, or Politicians, or Lovers, or Poets, or Nymphs,
or Swains, or Cits, or Courtiers in Being.

The TATLER. [No 19.
From Saturd. May 21. to Tuesd. May 24. 1709.
From my own Apartment, May 23.
THERE is nothing can give a Man of any Consideration greater Pain, than to see
Order and Distinction laid aside amongst Men, especially when the Rank (of
which he himself is a Member) is intruded upon by such as have no Pretense to
that Honor. The Appellation of Esquire is the most notoriously abused in this
Kind of any Class amongst Men, insomuch that it is become almost the Subject of
Derision; but I will be bold to say, This Behavior toward it proceeds from
the Ignorance of the People in its true Origin. I shall therefore, as briefly
as possible, do my self and all true Esquires the Justice to look into
Antiquity upon this Subject.

In the First Ages of the World, before the Invention of Jointures and
Settlements, when the noble Passion of Love had Possession of the Hearts of
Men, and the Fair Sex were not yet cultivated into the merciful Disposition
which they have showed in latter Centuries, it was natural for Great and
Heroic Spirits to retire to Rivulets, Woods, and Caves, to lament their
Destiny, and the Cruelty of the fair Persons who were deaf to their
Lamentations. The Hero in this Distress was generally in Armor, and in a
Readiness to fight any Man he met with, especially if distinguished by any
extraordinary Qualifications, it being the Nature of Heroic Love to hate all
Merit, lest it should come within the Observation of the Cruel One, by whom its
own Perfections are neglected. A Lover of this Kind had always about him a
Person of a Second Value, and subordinate to him, who could hear his
Afflictions, carry an Enchantment for his Wounds, hold his Helmet when he was
eating (if ever he did eat); or in his Absence, when he was retired to his
Apartment in any King's Palace, tell the Prince himself, or perhaps his
Daughter, the Birth, Parentage, and Adventures, of his valiant Master. This
trusty Companion was styled his Esquire, and was always fit for any Offices
about him; was as gentle and chaste as a Gentleman Usher, quick and active as an
Equerry, smooth and eloquent as a Master of the Ceremonies. A Man thus
qualified was the first, as the Ancients affirm, who was called an Esquire; and
none without these Accomplishments ought to assume our Order: But, to the utter
Disgrace and Confusion of the Heralds, every Pretender is admitted into this
Fraternity, even Persons the most Foreign to this courteous Institution I have
taken an Inventory of all within this City, and looked over every Letter in the
Post Office for my better Information. There are of the Middle Temple,
including all in the Buttery-Books, and in the Lists of the House, 5000. In the
Inner, 4000. In the King's Bench Walks the whole Buildings are inhabited by
Esquires only. The adjacent Street of Essex, from Morris's Coffee-house, and
the Turning toward the Grecian, you cannot meet one who is not an Esquire.
'till you take Water. Every House in Norfolk and Arundel Streets is gove ned
also by a 'Squire, or his Lady. Soho-Square, Bloomsbury-Square, and all other
Places, where the Floors rise above Nine Foot, are so many Universities, where
you enter your selves, and become of our Order. However, if this were the worst
of the Evil, it were to be supported, because they are generally Men of some
Figure and Use; though I know no Pretense they have to an Honor which had its
Rise from Chivalry. But if you travel into the Counties of Great Britain, we
are still more imposed upon by Innovation. We are indeed derived from the
Field: But shall that give Title to all that ride mad after Foxes, that holloo
when they see an Hare, or venture their Necks full Speed after an Hawk,
immediately to commence Esquires? No; our Order is Temperate, Cleanly, Sober,
and Chaste; but these Rural Esquires commit Immodesties upon Hay-cocks, wear
Shirts half a Week, and are drunk Twice a Day. These Men are also to the last
Degree excessive in their Food: An Esquire of Norfolk eats Two Pounds of
Dumplin every Meal, as if obliged to it by our Order: An Esquire in Hampshire
is as ravenous in devouring Hogs-flesh: One of Essex has as little Mercy on
Calves. But I must take the Liberty to protest against them, and acquaint those
Persons, that it is not the Quantity they eat, but the Manner of eating, that
shows a Squire. But above all, I am most offended at small Quill men, and
Transcribing Clerks, who are all come into our Order, for no Reason that I know
of, but that they can easily flourish it at the End of their Name. I Will
undertake, that if you read the Superscriptions to all the Offices in the
Kingdom, you will not find Three Letters directed to any but Esquires. I have
my self a Couple of Clerks, and the Rogues make nothing of leaving Messages
upon each other's Desk: One directs, To Degory Goosequill Esquire to which the
other replies by a Note, To Nehemiah Dashwell Esquire with Respect. In a Word, it
is now Populus Armigerorum, A People of Esquires. And I don't know, but, by the
late Act of Naturalization, Foreigners will assume that Title, as Part of the
Immunity of being Englishmen. All these Improprieties flow from the Negligence
of the Heralds-Office. Those Gentlemen in Party-colored Habits do not so
rightly, as they ought, understand themselves; though they are dressed Cap-a-pe
in Hieroglyphics, they are inwardly but ignorant Men. I asked an Acquaintance
of mine, who is a Man of Wit, but of no Fortune, and is forced to appear as
Jack-pudding on the Stage to a Mountebank: Prithee, Jack. Why is your Coat of
so many Colors? He replied, I act a Fool, and this spotted Dress is to
signify, that every Man living has a weak Place about him; for I am Knight of
the Shire, and represent you all. I wish the Heralds would know as well as this
Man does, in his Way, that they are to act for us in the Case of our Arms and
Appellations: We should not then be jumbled together in so promiscuous and
absurd a Man. I design to take this Matter into fu there Consideration, and no
Man shall be received as an Esquire, who cannot bring a Certificate, That he
has conquered some Lady's obdurate Heart; That he can lead up a Country Dance,
or carry a Message between her and her Lover, with Address, Secrecy, and
Diligence. A 'Squire is properly born for the Service of the Sex, and his
Credentials shall be signed by Three Toasts, and One Prude, before his Title
shall received in my Office.

Will's Coffee-house, May 23.
On Saturday last was presented, The Busy Body, a Comedy, written (as I have
heretofore remarked) by a Woman. The Plot and Incidents of the Play are laid
with that Subtilty of Spirit which is peculiar to Females of Wit, and is very
seldom well performed by those of the other Sex, in whom Craft in Love is an
Act of Invention, and not, as with Women, the Effect of Nature and Instinct.

To Morrow will be acted a Play, called, The Trip to the Jubilee. This
Performance is the greatest Instance that we can have of the irresistble Force
of proper Action. The Dialogue in it self has something too low to bear a
Criticism upon it: But Mr. Wilks enters into the Part with so much Skill, that
the Gallantry, the Youth, and Gaiety of a young Man of a plentiful Fortune, is
looked upon with as much Indulgence on the Stage, as in real Life, without any
of those Intermixtures of Wit and Humor, which usually prepossess us in Favor
of such Characters in other Plays.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 23.
Letters from the Hague of the 23d Instant, N. S. say, Mr. Walpole (who is
since arrived) was going with all Expedition to Great Britain, whither they
doubted not but he carried with him the Preliminaries to a Treaty of Peace. The
French Minister, Monsieur Torcy, has been observed in this whole Negotiation to
turn his Discourse upon the Calamities sent down by Heaven upon France, and
imputed the Necessities they were under to the immediate Hand of Providence, in
inflicting a general Scarcity of Provision, rather than the superior Genius of
the Generals, or the Bravery of the Armies against them. It would be impious
not to acknowledge the Indulgence of Heaven to us; but at the same Time, as we
are to love our Enemies, we are glad to see 'em mortified enough to mix
Christianity with their Politics. An Authentic Letter from Madam Maintenon to
Monsieur Torcy has been stolen by a Person about him, who has communicated a
Copy of it to some of the Dependants of a Minister of the Allies. That Epistle
is writ in the most Pathetick Manner imaginable, and in a Style which shows her
Genius, that has so long engrossed the Heart of this great Monarch.

SIR,
I Received yours, and am sensible of the Address and Capacity with which you
have hitherto transacted the great Affair under your Management. You well
observe, that our Wants here are not to be concealed; and that it is Vanity to
use Artifices with the knowing Men with whom you are to deal. Let me beg you
therefore, in the Representation of our Circumstances, to lay aside Art, which
ceases to be such when it is seen, and make use of all your Skill, to gain us
what Advantages you can from the Enemy's Jealousy of each other's Greatness;
which is the Place where only you have Room for any Dexterity. If you have any
Passion for your unhappy Country, or any Affection for your distressed Master,
come Home with Peace. Oh Heaven! Do I live to talk of Lewis the Great as the
Object of ^ity? The King shows a great Uneasiness to be informed of all that
passes; but at the same Time, is fearful of every one who appears in his
Presence, lest he should bring an Account of some new Calamity. I know not in
what Terms to represent my Thoughts to you, when I speak of the King with
Relation to his Bodily Health. Figure to your self that Immortal Man, who stood
in our Public Places, represented with Trophies, Armor, and Terrors, on his
Pedestal: Consider, the Invincible, the Great, the Good, the Pious, the Mighty,
which were the usual Epithets we gave him, both in our Language and Thoughts. I
say, consider him whom you knew the most Glorious and Great of Monarchs; and
now think you see the same Man an unhappy Lazar, in the lowest Circumstances of
Humane Nature it self, without Regard to the State from whence he is fallen. I
write from his Bedside: He is at present in a Slumber. I have many, many Things
to add; but my Tears flow too fast, and my Sorrow is too big for Utterance.

I am, etc.


There is such a Veneration due from all Men to the Persons of Princes, that it
were a Sort of Dishonesty to represent further the Condition which the King is
in; but it is certain, That soon after the Receipt of these Advices, Monsieur
Torcy waited upon his Grace the Duke of Marlborough and the Lord Townshend, and
in that Conference gave up many Points, which he had before said were such, as
he must return to France before he could answer.

The TATLER. [No 20.
From Tuesd. May 24. to Thursd. May 26. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, May 24.
IT is not to be imagined how far Prepossession will run away with People's
Understandings, in Cases wherein they are under present Uneasiness. The
following Narration is a sufficient Testimony of the Truth of this Observation.

I had the Honor the other Day of a Visit from a Gentlewoman (a Stranger to
me) who seemed to be about Thirty. Her Complexion is Brown; but the Air of her
Face has an Agreeableness, which surpasses the Beauties of the Fairest Women.
There appeared in her Look and Mien a sprightly Health; and her Eyes had too
much Vivacity to become the Language of Complaint, which she began to enter
into. She seemed sensible of it; and therefore, with down-cast Looks, said she,
Mr. Bickerstaff, You see before you the unhappiest of Women; and therefore, as
you are esteemed by all the World both a great Civilian, as well as an
Astrologer, I must desire your Advice and Assistance, in putting me in a Method
of obtaining a Divorce from a Marriage, which I know the Law will pronounce
void. Madam, said I, your Grievance is of such a Nature, that you must be very
ingenuous in representing the Causes of your Complaint, or I cannot give you
the Satisfaction you desire. Sir, she answers, I believed there would be no
need of half your Skill in the Art of Divination, to guess why a Woman would
part from her Husband. It Is true, said I, but Suspicions, or Guesses at what
you mean, nay, Certainty of it, except you plainly speak it, are no Foundation
for a formal Suit. She clapped her Fan before her Face; My Husband, said she, is
no more an Husband (here she burst into Tears) than one of the Italian Singers.

Madam, said I, the Affliction you complain of, is to be redressed by Law; but
at the same Time, consider what Mortifications you are to go through in
bringing it into open Court; how you will be able to bear the impertinent
Whispers of the People present at the Trial, the licentious Reflections of the
Pleaders, and the Interpretations that will in general be put upon your Conduct
by all the World: How little (will they say) could that Lady command her
Passions. Besides, consider, that curbing our Desires is the greatest Glory we
can arrive at in this World, and will be most rewarded in the next. She
answered, like a prudent Matron, Sir, if you please to remember the Office of
Matrimony, the first Cause of its Institution is that of having Posterity:
Therefore, as to the curbing Desires, I am willing to undergo any Abstinence
from Food as you please to enjoin me; but I cannot, with any Quiet of Mind,
live in the Neglect of a necessary Duty, and an express Commandment, Increase
and Multiply. Observing she was learned, and knew so well the Duties of Life, I
turned my Arguments rather to dehort her from this Public Procedure by
Examples, than Precepts. Do but consider, Madam, what Crowds of beauteous Women
live in Nunneries, secluded for ever from the Sight and Conversation of Men,
with all the Alacrity of Spirit imaginable; they spend their Time in Heavenly
Raptures, in constant and frequent Devotion, and at proper Hours in agreeable
Conversations. Sir, said she hastily, Tell not me of Papists, or any of their
Idolatries. Well then, Madam, consider how many fine Ladies live innocently in
the Eye of the World, and this gay Town, in the midst of Temptation: There Is
the Witty Mrs. W -- is a Virgin of 44, Mrs. T -- s is 39, Mrs. L -- ce 33; yet
you see, they laugh and are gay, at the Park, at the Playhouse, at Balls, and
at Visits; and so much at Ease, that all this seems hardly a Self-denial. Mr.
Bickerstaff, said she, with some Emotion, you are an excellent Casuist; but the
last Word destroyed your whole Argument; if it is not Self-denial, it is no
Virtue. I presented you with an Half-Guinea, in Hopes not only to have my
Conscience eased, but my Fortune told. Yet -- Well Madam, said I, Pray of what
Age is your Husband? He is, replied my injured Client, Fifty, and I have been
his Wife Fifteen Years. How happened it, you never communicated your Distress
in all this Time to your Friends and Relations? She answered, He has been thus
but a Fortnight. I am the most serious Man in the World to look at, and yet
could not forbear laughing out. Why, Madam, in case of Infirmity, which
proceeds only from Age, the Law gives no Remedy. Sir, said she, I find you have
no more Learning that Dr. Case; and I am told of a young Man, not Five and
Twenty, just come from Oxford, to whom I will communicate this whole Matter,
and doubt not but he will appear to have Seven Times more useful and
satisfactory Knowledge than you and all your boasted Family. Thus I have
entirely lost my Client: But if this tedious Narrative preserves Pastorella
from the intended Marriage with one Twenty Years her Senior -- To save a Fine
Lady, I am contented to have my Learning decry'd, and my Predictions bound up
with Poor Robin's Almanacks.

Will's Coffee-house, May 25.
This Evening was acted, The Recruiting Officer, in which Mr. Estcourt's proper
Sense and Observation is what supports the Play. There is not, in my humble
Opinion, the Humor hit in Sergeant Kite; but it is admirably supplied by his
Action. If I have Skill to judge, that Man is an excellent Actor; but the Crowd
of the Audience are fitter for Representations at May-Fair, than a
Theater Royal. Yet that Fair is now broke, as well as the Theater is breaking:
But it is allowed still to sell Animals there. Therefore, if any Lady or
Gentleman have Occasion for a tame Elephant, let them enquire of Mr.
Penkethman, who has one to dispose of at a reasonable Rate. The Downfall of
May-Fair has quite sunk the Price of this noble Creature, as well as of many
other Curiosities of Nature. A Tiger will sell almost as cheap as an Ox; and I
am credibly informed, a Man may purchase a Cat with Three Legs, for very near
the Value of one with Four. I hear likewise, That there is a great Desolation
among the Gentlemen and Ladies who were the Ornaments of the Town, and used to
shine in Plumes and Diadems; the Heroes being most of them pressed, and the
Queens beating Hemp, Mrs. Sarabrand, so famous for her ingenious Puppet-Show,
has set up a Shop in the Exchange, where she sells her little Troop under the
Term of Jointed-Babies. I could not but be solicitous to know of her, how she
had disposed of that Rake-hell Punch, whose lewd Life and Conversation had
given so much Scandal, and did not a little contribute to the Ruin of the Fair.
She told me, with a Sigh, That despairing of ever reclaiming him, she would not
offer to place him in a Civil Family, but got him in a Post upon a Stall in
Wapping, where he may be seen from Sunrising to Sunsetting, with a Glass in
one Hand, and a Pipe in the other, as Centry to a Brandy-Shop. The great
Revolutions of this Nature bring to my Mind the Distresses of the unfortunate
Camilla, who has had the ill Luck to break before her Voice, and to disappear
at a Time when her Beauty was in the Height of its Bloom. This Lady entered so
thoroughly into the great Characters she acted, that when she had finished her
Part, she could not think of retrenching her Equipage, but would appear in her
own Lodgings with the same Magnificence that she did upon the Stage. This
Greatness of Soul has reduced that unhappy Princess to an involuntary
Retirement, where she now passes her Time among the Woods and Forests,
thinking on the Crowns and Scepters she has lost, and often humming over in her
Solitude, I was born of Royal Race,
Yet must wander in Disgrace, etc.


But for Fear of being overheard, and he Quality known, she usually sings it
in Italian; Naqui al Regno, naqui al Trono
E pur sono
Iventurata Pastorella --


Since I have touched upon this Subject, I shall communicate to my Reader Part
of a Letter ^ have received from an Ingenious Friend at Amsterdam, where there
is a very noble Theatre^ though the Manner of furnishing it with Actors is
something peculiar to that Place, and gives us Occasion to admire both the
Politeness and Frugality of the People.

MY Friends have kept me here a Week longer than ordinary to see one of their
Plays, which was performed last Night with great Applause^ The Actors are all
of them Tradesmen, who, after their Day's Work is over, earn about a Gilder a
Night by personating Kings and Generals. The Here of the Tragedy I saw, was a
Journey-man Tailor, und his First Minister of State a Coffee-man. The Empress
made me think of Parthenope in the Rehearsal; for her Mother keeps an Alehouse
in the Suburbs of Amsterdam. When the Tragedy was over, they entertained us
with a short Farce, in which the Cobbler did his Part to a Miracle; but upon
Enquiry, I found he had really been working at his own Trade, and representing
on the Stage what he acted every Day in his Shop^ The Profits of the Theater
maintain an Hospital. For as here they do not think the Profession of an Actor
the only Trade that a Man ought to exercise^ so they will not allow any Body to
grow rich on a Profession that, in their Opinion, so little conduce^ to the
Good of the Commonwealth. If I am no^ mistaken, your Play Houses in England
have done the same Thing; for, unless I am misinformed^ the Hospital at
Dulledge was erected and endowed by Mr. Allen, a Player: And it is also said, A
famous She-Tragedian has settled her Estate, after her Death, for the
Maintenance of decayed Wits, who are to be takeu in as soon as they grow dull,
at whatever Time of their Life that shall happen. St. James's Coffee-house, May
25.
Letters from the Hague of the 31st Instant, N. S. say, That the Articles
Preliminary to a general Peace were settled, communicated to the
States General, and all the Foreign Ministers residing there, and transmitted
to their respective Masters on the 28th. Monsieur Torcy immediately returned to
the Court of France, from whence he is expected again on the 4th of the next
Month with those Articles ratified by that Court. The Hague is agreed upon for
the Place of Treaty, and the 15th of the next Month the Day on which it is to
commence. The Terms whereon this Negotiation is founded, are not yet declared
by public Authority; but what is most generally received, is as follows:

Her Majesty's Right and Title, and the Protestant Succession to those
Dominions, is forthwith to be acknowledged. King Charles is to be owned the
lawful Sovereign of Spain. The French King shall not only recall his Troops out
of that Kingdom, and deliver up to the Allies the Towns of Roses, Fonterabia,
and Pampelona; but in case the Duke of Anjou shall not retire out of the
Spanish Dominions, he shall be obliged to assist the Allies to force him from
thence. A Cessation of Arms is agreed upon for Two Months from the first Day of
the Treaty. The Port and Fortifications of Dunkirk are to be demolished within
Four Months; but the Town it self left in the Hands of the French. The
Pretender is to be obliged to leave France. All Newfoundland is to be restored
to the English. As to the other Parts of America, the French are to restore
whatever they may have taken from the English, as the English in like Manner to
give up what they may have taken from the French before the Commencement of the
Treaty. The Trade between Great Britain and France shall be settled upon the
same Foundation as in the Reign of King Charles the Second.

The Dutch are to have for their Barriers, Newport, Berg, St. Vinox, Furnes,
Ipres, Lille, Tournay, Doua, Valenciennes, Conde, Maubeuge, Mons, Charleroy,
Namur, and Luxemburg; all which Places shall be delivered up to the Allies
before the End of June. The Trade between Holland and France shall be on the
same Foot as in 1664. The Cities of Strasburg, Brisac, and Alsatia, shall be
restored to the Emperor and Empire; and the King of France, pursuant to the
Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, shall only retain the Protection of Ten Imperial
Cities, viz. Colmar, Schlestat, Haguenau, Munster, Turkeim, Keisemberg,
Obrenheim, Rosheim, Weisemburg, and Landau, Huninguen, Fort Louis, Fort Khiel,
and New Brisac, shall be demolished, and all the Fortifications from Basil to
Philipsburg. The King of Prussia shall remain in the peaceable Possession of
Neufchatel. The Affair of Orange, as also the Pretensions of his Prussian
Majesty in the French Comte, shall be determined at this general Negotiation of
Peace. The Duke of Savoy shall have a Restitution made of all that has been
taken from him by the French, and remain Master of Exilles, Chamont,
Fenestrelles, and the Valley of Pragelas.

The TATLER. [No 21.
From Thursd. May 26. to Saturd. May 28. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, May 26.
A Gentleman has writ to me out of the Country a very civil Letter, and said
Things which I suppress with great Violence to my Vanity. There are many Terms
in my Narratives which he complains want explaining, and has therefore desired,
that, for the Benefit of my Country Readers, I would let him know what I mean
by a Gentleman, a Pretty-Fellow, a Toast, a Coquet, a Critic, a Wit, and all
other Appellations of those in the gayer World, who are in Possession of these
several Characters; together with an Account of those who unfortunately pretend
to 'em. I shall begin with him we usually call a Gentleman, or Man of
Conversation.

It is generally thought, That Warmth of Imagination, quick Relish of Pleasure,
and a Manner of becoming it, are the most essential Qualities for forming this
Sort of Man. But any one that is much in Company will observe, that the Height
of good Breeding is shown rather in never giving Offense, than in doing
obliging Things. Thus he that never Shocks you, though he is seldom entertaining,
is more likely to keep your Favor, than he who often entertains, and sometimes
displeases you. The most necessary Talent therefore in a Man of Conversation,
which is what we ordinarily intend by a Fine Gentleman, is a good Judgment. He
that has this in Perfection, is Master of his Companion, without letting him
see it; and has the same Advantage over Men of any other Qualifications
whatsoever, as one that can see would have over a blind Man of Ten times his
Strength.

This is what makes Sophronius the Darling of all who converse with him, and
the most Powerful with his Acquaintance of any Man in Town. By the Light of
this Faculty, he acts with great Ease and Freedom among the Men of Pleasure,
and acquits himself with Skill and Dispatch among the Men of Business. All
which he performs with such Success, that, with as much Discretion in Life as
any Man ever had, he neither is, nor appears Cunning. But as he does a good
Office, if he ever does it, with Readiness and Alacrity; so he denies what he
does not care to engage in, in a Manner that convinces you, that you ought not
to have asked it. His Judgment is so good and unerring, and accompanied with so
cheerful a Spirit, that his Conversation is a continual Feast, at which he
helps some, and is helped by others, in such a Manner, that the Equality of
Society is perfectly kept up, and every Man obliges as much as he is obliged:
For it is the greatest and justest Skill in a Man of Superior Understanding, to
know how to be on a Level with his Companions. This sweet Disposition runs
through all the Actions of Sophronius, and make his Company desired by Women,
without being envied by Men. Sophronius would be as just as he is, if there
were no Law; and would be as discreet as he is, if there were no such Thing as
Calumny.

In Imitation of this agreeable Being, is made that Animal we call a Pretty
Fellow; who being just able to find out, that what makes Sophronius acceptable,
is a Natural Behavior; in order to the same Reputation, makes his own an
Artificial one. Jack Dimple is his perfect Mimick, whereby he is of Course the
most unlike him of all Men living. Sophronius just now passed into the inner
Room directly forward: Jack comes as fast after as he can for the Right and
Left Looking-glass, in which he had but just approved himself by a Nod at each,
and marched on. He will meditate within for Half an Hour, till he thinks he is
not careless enough in his Air, and come back to the Mirror to recollect his
Forgetfulness.

Will's Coffee-house, May 27.
This Night was acted the Comedy, called, The Fox; but I wonder the Modern
Writers do not use their Interest in the House to suppress such
Representations. A Man that has been at this, will ha dly like any other Play
during the Season: Therefore I humbly move, That the Writings, as well as
Dresses, of the last Age, should give Way to the present Fashion. We are come
into a good Method enough (if we were not interrupted in our Mi^th by such an
Apparition as a Play of Johnson's) to be entertained at more Ease, both to the
Spectator and the Writer, than in the Days of Old. It is no Difficulty to get
Hats, and Swords, and Wigs, and Shoes, and every Thing else, from the Shops in
Town, and make a Man show himself by his Habit, without more ado, to be a
Counselor, a Fop, a Courtier, or a Citizen, and not be obliged to make those
Characters talk in different Dialects to be distinguished from each other. This
is certainly the surest and best Way of Writing: But such a Play as this makes
a Man for a Month after overrun with Criticism, and enquire, What every Man on
the Stage said? What had such a one to do to meddle with such a Thing? How came
the other, who was bred after this or that Manner, to speak so like a Man
conversant among a different People? These Questions rob us of all our
Pleasure; for at this Rate, no Sentence in a Play should be spoken by any one
Character which could possibly enter into the Head of any other Man represented
in it; but every Sentiment should be peculiar to him only who utters it.
Laborious Ben's Works will bear this Sort of Inquisition; but if the present
Writers were thus examined, and the Offenses against this Rule cut out, few
Plays would be long enough for the whole Evening's Entertainment.

But I don't know how they did in those old Times: This same Ben Johnson has
made every one's Passion in this Play be toward Money, and yet not one of them
expresses that Desire, or endeavor to obtain it any Way but what is peculiar
to him only: One sacrifices his Wife, another his Profession, another his
Posterity, from the same Motive; but their Characters are kept so skilfully
apart, that it seems prodigious their Discourses should rise from the Intention
of the same Author.

But the Poets are a Nest of Hornets, and I Will drive these Thoughts no farther,
but must mention some hard Treatment I am like to meet with from my Brother
Writers. I am credibly informed, that the Author of a Play, called, Love in a
Hollow Tree, has made some Remarks upon my late Discourse on The Naked Truth. I
cannot blame a Gentleman for writing against any Error; it is for the Good of
the learned World. But I would have the Thing fairly left between us Two, and
not under the Protection of Patrons. But my Intelligence is, that he has
dedicated his Treatise to the Honorable Mr. Edw -- d H -- rd.

From my own Apartment, May 27.
To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
York, May 16. 1709. SIR,
BEing convinced, as the whole World is, how infallible your Predictions are,
and having the Honor to be your near Relation, of the Staffian Family; I was
under great Concern at one of your Predictions relating to your self, wherein
you foretold your own Death would happen on the 17th Instant, unless it were
prevented by the Assistance of welldisposed People: I have therefore prevailed
on my own Modesty to send you a Piece of News, which may serve instead of
Goddard's Drops, to keep you alive for Two Days, till Nature be able to recover
it self, or till you meet with some beteer Help from other Hands. Therefore,
without further Ceremony, I will go on to relate a singular Adventure just
happened in the Place where I am writing, wherein it may be highly useful for
the Public to be informed.

Three young Ladies of our Town were on Saturday last indicted for Witchcraft.
The Witnesses against the First deposed upon Oath before Justice Bindover, That
she kept Spirits locked up in Vessels, which sometimes appeared in Flames of
blue Fire; That she used Magical Herbs, with some of which she drew in Hundreds
of Men daily to her, who went out from her Presence all inflamed, their Mouths
parched, and a hot Steam issuing from them, attended with a grievous Stench;
That many of the said Men were by the Force of that Herb metamorphosed into
Swine, and lay wallowing in the Kennels for Twenty four Hours, before they
could reassume their Shapes or their Senses.

It was proved against the Second, That she cut off by Night the Limbs from
dead Bodies that were hanged, and were seen to dig Holes in the Ground, to
mutter some conjuring Words, and bury Pieces of the Flesh, after the usual
Manner of Witches.

The Third was accused for a notorious Piece of Sorcery, long practiced by
Hags, of moulding up Pieces of Dough into the Shapes of Men, Women and
Children; then heating them at a gentle Fire, which had a Sympathetick Power to
torment the Bowels of those in the Neighborhood.

This was the Sum of what was objected against the Three Ladies, who indeed had
nothing to say in their own Defense, but downright denying the Facts, which is
like to avail very little when they come upon their Trials.

But the Parson of our Parish, a strange refractory Man, will believe nothing
of all this; so that the whole Town cries out, Shame! That one of his Coat
should be such an Atheist? And design to complain of him to the Bishop. He goes
about very odly to solve the Matter. He supposes, That the First of these
Ladies keeping a Brandy and Tobacco Shop, the Fellows went out smoking, and
got drunk toward Evening, and made themselves Beasts. He says, The Second is a
Butcher's Daughter, and sometimes brings a Quarter of Mutton from the
Slaughterhouse over Night against a Market Day, and once buried a Bit of Beef
in the Ground, as a known Receipt to cure Warts on her Hands. The Parson
affirms, That the Third sells Gingerbread, which, to please the Children, she
is forced to stamp with Images before it is baked; and if it burns their Guts,
it is because they eat too much, or do not drink after it.

These are the Answers he gives to solve these wonderful Phenomenon; upon which
I shall not animaavert, but leave it among Philosophers: And so wishing you all
Success in your Undertakings for the Amendment of the World, I remain,

Dear Cousin, Your most Affectionate Kinsman, and Humble Servant, Ephraim
Bedstaff.


P. S. Those who were condemned to Death among the Athenians, were obliged to
take a Dose of Poison, which made them die upwards, seizing first upon their
Feet, making them cold and insensible, and so ascending gradually, till it
reached the Vital Parts. I believe your Death, which you foretold would happen
on the 17th Instant, will fall out the same Way, and that your Distemper has
already seized on you, and makes Progress daily. The lower Part of you, that
is, the Advertisements, is dead; and these have risen for these Ten Days last
past, so that they now take up almost a whole Paragraph. Pray, Sir, do your
Endeavor to drive this Distemper as much as possible to the extreme Parts, and
keep it there, as wise Folks do the Gout; for if it once gets into your
Stomach, it will soon fly up into your Head, and you are a dead Man.

St. James's Coffee-house, May 27.
We hear from Leghorn, That Sir Edward Whitaker, with Five Men of War, Four
Transports, and Two Fireships, was arrived at that Port, and Admiral Bing was
suddenly expected. Their Squadrons being joined, they design to sail directly
for Final, to transport the Reinforcements, lodged in those Parts, to Barcelona.

They write from Milan, That Count Thaun arrived there on the 16th Instant, N.
S. and proceeded on his Journey to Turin on the 21st, in order to concert such
Measures with his Royal Highness, as shall appear necessary for the Operations
of the ensuing Campaign.

Advices from Dauphine say, That the Troops of the Duke of Savoy being already
to appear in those Valleys, whereof he made himself Master the last Year; and
that the Duke of Berwick applied himself with all imaginable Diligence to
secure the Passes of the Mountains, by ordering Intrenchments to be made
toward Briancon, Tourneau, and the Valley of Queiras. That General has also
been at Marseilles and Tboulon, to hasten the Transportation of the Corn and
Provisions designed for his Army.

Letters from Vienna, bearing Date May 23. N. S. import, That the Cardinal of
Saxe-Zeits and the Prince of Litchtenstein were preparing to set out for
Presburgh, to assist at the Diet of the States of Hungary, which is to be
assembled at that Place on the 25th of this Month. General Heister would
shortly appear at the Head of his Army at Trentschin, which Place is appointed
for the general Rendevous of the Imperial Forces in Hungary; from whence he
will advance to lay Siege in Newhausel: In the mean Time, Reinforcements, with
a great Train of Artillery, are marching the same Way. The King of Denmark
arrived on the 10th Instant at Inspruck, and on the 26th at Dresden, under a a
Triple Discharge of the Artillery of that Place; but his Majesty refused the
Ceremonies of a Public Entry.

Our Letters from the Upper Rhine say, That the Imperial Army began to form it
self at Etlingen; where the respective Deputies of the Elector Palatine, the
Prince of Baden Durlach, the Bishopric of Spires, etc. were assembled, and had
taken the necessary Measures for the Provision of Forage, the Security of the
Country against the Incursions of the Enemy, and laying a Bridge over the
Rhine. Several Vessels laden with Corn are daily passing before Frankfort for
the Lower Rhine.

Letters from Poland inform us, That a Detachment of Muscovite Cavalry, under
the Command of General Infland, had joined the Confederate Army; and the
Infantry, commanded by General Goltz, was expected to come up within few Days.
These Succor will amount to 20000 Men.

Our last Advices from the Hague, dated June the 4th, N. S. say, That they
expected a Courier from the French Court with the Ratification of the
Preliminaries that Night or the Day following. His Grace the Dake of
Marlborough will set out for Brussels on Wednesday or Thursday next, if the
Dispatches which are expected from Paris don't alter his Resolutions. Letters
from Majorca confirm the Honorable Capitulation of the Castle of Alicant, and
also the Death of the Governor Major General Richards, Colonel S^bourg, and
Major Vignolles, who were all buried in the Ruins of that Place by the
springing of their great Mine, which did, it seems, more Execution than was
reported. Monsieur Torcy passed through Mons in his Return, and had there a long
Conference with the Elector of Bavaria; after which, that Prince spoke
publicly of the Treatment he had received from France with the utmost
Indignation.

Any Person that shall come publicly Abroad in a fantastical Habit, contrary
to the present Mode and Fashion, except Don Diego Desmallo, or any other out of
Poverty, shall have his Name and Dress inserted in our next.

N. B. Mr. Howd'call is desired to leave off those Buttons.

The TATLER. [No 22.
From Saturd. May 28. to Tuesd. May 31. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, May 28.
I Came hither this Evening to see Fashions, and who should I first encounter
but my old Friend Cynthio (encompassed by a Crowd of young Fellows) dictating
on the Passion of Love with the gayest Air imaginable. 'Well, says he, as to
what I know of the Matter, there is nothing but Ogling with Skill carries a
Woman; but indeed it is not every Fool that is capable of this Art: You will
find Twenty can speak eloquently, Fifty can fight manfully, and a Thousand that
can dress genteely at a Mistress, where there is one that can gaze skilfully.
This requires an exquisite Judgment, to take the Language of her Eyes to yours
exactly, and not let yours talk too fast for hers; as at a Play between the
Acts, when Beau Frisk stands upon a Bench full in Lindamira's Face, and her
dear Eyes are searching round to avoid that flaring open Fool; she meets the
watchful Glance of her true Lover, and sees his Heart attentive on her Charms,
and waiting for a second Twincle of her Eye for its next Motion. Here the good
Company sneer'd; but he goes on. Nor is this Attendance a Slavery, when a Man
meets Encouragement, and her Eye comes often in his Way: For, after an Evening
so spent, and the Repetition of Four or Five significant Looks at him, the
happy Man goes Home to his Lodging, full of Ten thousand pleasing Images: His
Brain is dilated, and gives him all the Idea's and Prospects which it ever lets
in to its Seat of Pleasure. Thus a kind Look from Lindamira revives in his
Imagination all the Beauteous Launs, Green Fields, Woods, Forests, Rivers, and
Solitudes, which he had ever before seen in Picture, Description, or Real Life:
And all with this Addition, That he now sees 'em with the Eyes of an happy
Lover, as before only with those of a common Man. You laugh, Gentlemen: But
consider your selves, (you common People that were never in Love) and compare
your selves in good Humor with your selves out of Humor, and you will then
acknowledge, that all External Objects affect you according to the Disposition
you are in to receive their Impressions, and not as those Objects are in their
own Nature. How much more shall all that passes within his View and
Observation, touch with Delight a Man who is prepossessed with successful Love,
which is an Assemblage of soft Affections, gay Desires, and hopeful
Resolutions?'

Poor Cynthio went on at this Rate to the Crowd about him, without any Purpose
in his Talk, but to vent an Heart overflowing with Sense of Success. I wondered
what could exalt him from the Distress in which he had long appeared, to so
much Alacrity. But my Familiar has given me the State of his Affairs. It seems
then, that lately coming out of the Playhouse, his Mistress, who knows he is
in her Livery, as the Manner of insolent Beauties, is resolved to keep him
still so, and gave him so much Wages, as to complain to him of the Crowd she
was to pass through. He had his Wits and Resolution enough about him to take
her Hand, and say, He would attend her to her Coach. All the Way thither, my
good young Man stammer'd at every Word, and stumbled at every Step. His
Mistress, wonderfully pleased with her Triumph, put him to a Thousand
Questions, to make a Man of his natural Wit speak with Hesitation, and let drop
her Fan, to see him recover it aukwardly. This is the whole Foundation of
Cynthio's Recovery to the sprightly Air he appears with at present.

I grew mighty curious to know something more of that Lady's Affairs, as being
amazed how she could dally with an Offer of one of his Merit and Fortune. I
sent Pacolet to her Lodgings, who immediately brought me back the following
Letter to her Friend and Confident Amanda in the Country, wherein she has
opened her Heart and all its Folds.

Dear Amanda,
THE Town grows so empty, that you must expect my Letter so too, except you
will allow me to talk of my self instead of others: You cannot imagine what
Pain it is, after a whole Day spent in Public, to want your Company, and the
Ease which Friendship allows in being vain to each other, and speaking all our
Minds. An Account of the Slaughter which these unhappy Eyes have made within
Ten Days last past, would make me appear too great a Tyrant to be allowed in a
Christian Country. I shall therefore confine my self to my Principal Conquests,
which are the Hearts of Beau Frisk, and Jack Freeland, besides Cynthio, who,
you know, wore my Fetters before you went out of Town. Shall I tell you my
Weakness? I begin to love Frisk: It is the best humoured Impertinent Thing in
the World: He is always too in waiting, and will certainly carry me off one
Time or other. Freeland's Father and mine have been upon Treaty without
consulting me; and Cynthio has been eternally watching my Eyes, without
approaching me, my Friends, my Maid, or any one about me: He hopes to get me, I
believe, as they say the Rattle Snake does the Squirrel, by staring at me till
I drop into his Mouth. Freeland demands me for a Jointure which he thinks
deserves me; Cynthio thinks nothing high enough to be my Value: Freeland
therefore will take it for no Obligation to have me; and Cynthio's Idea of me,
is what will vanish by knowing me better. Familiarity will equally turn the
Veneration of the one, and the Indifference of the other, into Contempt. I will
stick therefore to my old Maxim, To have that Sort of Man, who can have no
greater Views than what are in my Power to give him Possession of. The utmost
of my Dear Frisk's Ambition is, to be thought a Man of Fashion; and therefore
has been so much in Mode, as to resolve upon me, because the whole Town likes
me. Thus I choose rather a Man who loves me because others do, than one who
approves me on his own Judgment. He that judges for himself in Love, will often
change his Opinion; but he that follows the Sense of others, must be constant,
as long as a Woman can make Advances. The Visits I make, the Entertainments I
give, and the Addresses I receive, will be all Arguments for me with a Man of
Frisk's second-hand Genius; but would be so many Bars to my Happiness with any
other Man. However, since Frisk can wait, I shall enjoy a Summer or Two longer,
and remain a single Woman, in the sublime Pleasure of being followed and
admired; which nothing can equal, except that of being beloved by you.

I am, etc.


Will's Coffee-house, May 30.
My chief Business here this Evening was to speak to my Friends in Behalf of
honest Cave Underhill, who has been a Comic for Three Generations: My Father
admired him extremely when he was a Boy. There is certainly Nature excellently
represented in his Manner of Action; in which he ever avoided that general
Fault in Players, of doing too much. It must be confessed, he has not the Merit
of some ingenious Persons now on the Stage, of adding to his Authors; for the
Actors were so dull in the last Age, that many of them have gone out of the
World, without having ever spoke one Word of their own in the Theater. Poor
Cave is so mortified, that he quibbles, and tells you, he pretends only to act
a Part fit for a Man who has one Foot in the Grave; viz. a Grave-digger. All
Admirers of true Comedy, it is hoped, will have the Gratitude to be present on
the last Day of his Acting, who, if he does not happen to please them, will
have it even then to say, That it is his first Offense.

But there is a Gentleman here, who says he has it from good Hands, that there
is actually a Subscription made by many Persons of Wit and Quality, for the
Encouragement of new Comedies. This Design will very much contribute to the
Improvement and Diversion of the Town: But as every Man is most concerned for
himself, I, who am of a Saturnine and Melancholy Complexion, cannot but murmur,
that there is not an equal Invitation to write Tragedies, having by me, in my
Book of Common Places, enough to enable me to finish a very Sad one by the
Fifth of the next Month. I have the Farewell of a General, with a Truncheon in
his Hand, dying for Love, in Six Lines. I have the Principles of a Politician,
(who does all the Mischief in the Play,) together with his Declaration on the
Vanity of Ambition in his last Moments, expressed in a Page and an half. I have
all my Oaths ready, and my Similies want nothing but Application. I will not
pretend to give you an Account of the Plot, it being the same Design upon which
all Tragedies have been writ for several Years last past; and from the
Beginning of the First Scene, the Frequenters of the House may know, as well as
the Author, when the Battle is to be fought, the Lady to yield, and the Hero
proceed to his Wedding and Coronation. Besides these Advantages which I have in
Readiness, I have an eminent Tragedian very much my Friend, who shall come in,
and go through the whole Five Acts, without troubling me for one Sentence,
whether he is to kill or be killed, love or be loved, win Battles or lose them,
or whatever other Tragical Performance I shall please to assign him.

From my own Apartment, May 30.
I have this Day received a Letter, subscribed Fidelia, that gives me an
Account of an Enchantment under which a young Lady suffers, and desires my Help
to exorcise her from the Power of the Sorcerer. Her Lover is a Rake of Sixty;
the Lady a virtuous Woman of Twenty five: Her Relations are to the last Degree
afflicted, and amazed at this irregular Passion: Their Sorrow I know not how to
remove, but can their Astonishment; for there is no Spirit in Woman half so
prevalent as that of Contradiction, which is the sole Cause of her
Perseverance. Let the whole Family go dressed in a Body, and call the Bride to
Morrow Morning to her Nuptials, and I Will undertake, the Inconstant will forget
her Lover in the midst of all his Aches. But if this Expedient does not
succeed, I must be so just to the young Lady's distinguishing Sense, as to
applaud her Choice. A fine young Woman, at last, is but what is due from Fate
to an honest Fellow, who has suffered so unmercifully by the Sex; and I think
we cannot enough celebrate her Heroic Virtue, who (like the Patriot that ended
a Pestilence by plunging himself into a Gulf) gives her self up to gorge that
Dragon which has devoured so many Virgins before her.

A Letter directed to Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Astrologer and Physician in
Ordinary to Her Majesty's Subjects of Great Britain, with Respect, is come to
Hand.

The TATLER. [No 23.
From Tuesd. May 31. to Thursd. June 2. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, May 31.
THE Generality of Mankind are so very fond of this World, and of staying in
it, that a Man cannot have eminent Skill in any one Art, but they will, in
Spite of his Teeth, make him a Physician also, that being the Science the
Worldings have most need of. I pretended, when I first set up, to Astrology
only; but I am told, I have deep Skill also in Medecin. I am applied to now by
a Gentleman for my Advice in Behalf of his Wife, who, upon the least
Matrimonial Difficulty, is excessively troubled with Fits, and can bear no
Manner of Passion without falling into immediate Convulsions. I must confess,
it is a Case I have known before, and remember the Party was recovered by
certain Words pronounced in the midst of the Fit, by the Learned Doctor who
performed the Cure. These Ails have usually their Beginning from the Affections
of the Mind: Therefore you must have Patience to let me give you an Instance,
whereby you may discern the Cause of the Distemper, and then proceed in the
Cure as follows:

A fine Town Lady was married to a Gentleman of ancient Descent in one of the
Counties of Great Britain, who had good Humor to a Weakness, and was that Sort
of Person, of whom it is usually said, He is no Man's Enemy but his own: One
who had too much Tenderness of Soul to have any Authority with his Wife; and
she too little Sense to give him Authority for that Reason. His kind Wife
observed this Temper in him, and made proper Use of it. But knowing it was
below a Gentlewoman to wrangle, she resolved upon an Expedient to save Decorum,
and wear her Dear to her Point at the same Time. She therefore took upon her to
govern him, by falling into Fits whenever she was repulsed in a Request, or
contradicted in a Discourse. It was a Fish-Day, when in the midst of her
Husband's good Humor at Table, she bethought her self to try her Project. She
made Signs that she had swallowed a Bone. The Man grew pale as Ashes, and ran
to her Assistance, calling for Drink. No, my Dear, said she, recovering, It is
down; don't be frightened. This Accident betrayed his Softness enough. The next
Day she complained, a Lady's Chariot, whose Husband had not half his Estate,
had a Crane-Neck, and hung with twice the Air that hers did. He answered,
Madam, You know my Income, you know I have lost Two Coach-Horses this Spring.
-- Down she fell. -- Hartshorn! Betty, Susan, Alice, throw Water in her Face.
With much Care and Pains she was at last brought to her self, and the Vehicle
in which she visited was amended in the nicest Manner, to prevent Relapses; but
they frequently happened during that Husband's whole Life, which he had the
good Fortune to end in few Years after. The Disconsolate soon pitched upon a
very agreeable Successor, whom she very prudently designed to (...) by the same
Method. This Man knew her little Arts, and resolved to break through all
Tenderness, and be absolute Master, as soon as Occasion offered. One Day it
happened, that a Discourse arose about Furniture: He was very glad of the
Occasion, and fell into an Invective against China, protesting, he would never
let Five Pounds more of his Money be laid out that Way as long as he breathed.
She immediately fainted -- He starts up as amazed, and calls for Help -- The
Maids ran to the Closet -- He chafes her Face, bends her forwards, and beats
the Palms of her Hands: Her Convulsions increase, and down she tumbles on the
Floor, where she lies quite dead, in Spite of what the whole Family, from the
Nursery to the Kitchen, could do for her Relief.

While every Servant was thus helping or lamenting their Mistress, he, fixing
his Cheek to hers, seemed to be following her in a Trance of Sorrow; but
secretly whispers her, My Dear, This will never do: What is within my Power and
Fortune, you may always command, but none of your Artifices: You are quite in
other Hands than those you passed these pretty Passions upon. This made her
almost in the Condition she pretended; her Convulsions now come thicker, nor
was she to be held down. The kind Man doubles his Care, helps the Servants to
throw Water in her Face by full Quarts; and when the sinking Part of the Fit
came again, Well, my Dear, (said he) I applaud your Action; but I must take my
Leave of you till you are more sincere with me. Farewell for ever: You shall
always know where to hear of me, and want for nothing. With that, he ordered
the Maids to keep plying her with Hartshorn, while he went for a Physician: He
was scarce at the Stair-head when she followed, and pulling him into a Closet,
thanked him for her Cure; which was so absolute, that she gave me this Relation
her self, to be communicated for the Benefit of all the voluntary Invalids of
her Sex.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 1.
Advices from Brussels of the 6th Instant, N. S. say, His Highness Prince
Eugene had received a Letter from Monsieur Torcy, wherein that Minister, after
many Expressions of great Respect, acquaints him, That his Master had
absolutely refused to sign the Preliminaries to the Treaty which he had, in his
Majesty's Behalf, consented to at the Hague. Upon the Receipt of this
Intelligence, the Face of Things at that Place were immediately altered, and
the necessary Orders were transmitted to the Troops (which lay most remote from
thence) to move toward the Place of Rendezvous with all Expedition. The Enemy
seem also to prepare for the Field, and have at present drawn together
Twenty-five Thousand Men in the Plains of Lenz. Marshall Villars is at the
Head of those Troops; and has given the Generals under his Command all possible
Assurances, that he will turn the Fate of the War to the Advantage of his
Master.

They write from the Hague of the 7th, That Monsieur Rouille had received
Orders from the Court of France, to signify to the States General and the
Ministers of the High Allies, That the King could not consent to the
Preliminaries of a Treaty of Peace, as it was offered to him by Monsieur Torcy.
The great Difficulty is the Business of Spain, on which Particular his
Ministers seemed only to say, during the Treaty, that it was not so immediately
under their Master's Direction, as that he could engage for its being
relinquished by the Duke of Anjou: But now he positively answers, That he
cannot comply with what his Minister has promised in his Behalf, even in such
Points as are wholly in himself to act in or not. This has had no other Effect,
than to give the Alliance fresh Arguments for being diffident of Engagements
entered into by France. The Pensioner made a Report of all which this Minister
had declared to the Deputies of the States General, and all Things turn toward
a vigorous War. The Duke of Marlborough designed to leave the Hague within Two
Days, in order to put himself at the Head of the Army, which is to assemble on
the 17th Instant between the Scheld and the Lis. A Fleet of Eighty Sail, laden
with Corn from the Baltic, is arrived in the Texel. The States have sent
Circular Letters to all the Provinces, to notify this Change of Affairs, and
animate their Subjects to new Resolutions in Defense of their Country.

From my own Apartment, May 31.
The Public is not so little my Concern, though I am but a Student as that I
should not interest my self in the present great Things in Agitation. I am
still of Opinion, the French King will sign the Preliminaries. With that View,
I have sent him by my Familiar the following Epistle, and admonished him, on
Pain of what I shall say of him to future Generations, to act with Sincerity on
this Occasion.

London, May 31.
Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire of Great Britain, to Lewis the Fourteenth of France.
THE surprising News which arrived this Day, of your Majesty's having refused
to sign the Treaty your Ministers have in a Manner sued for, is what gives
Ground to this Application to your Majesty, from one whose Name, perhaps, is
too obscure to have ever reached your Territories; but one, who with all the
European World, is affected with your Determinations. Therefore, as it is mine
and the common Cause of Mankind, I presume to expostulate with you on this
Occasion. It will, I doubt not, appear to the Vulgar extravagant, that the
Actions of a mighty Prince should be balanced by the Censure of a private Man,
whose Approbation or Dislike are equally contemptible in their Eyes, when they
regard the Thrones of Sovereigns. But your Majesty has shown, through the whole
Course of your Reign, too great a Value for Liberal Arts to be insensible, that
true Fame lies only in the Hands of Learned Men, by whom it is to be
transmitted to Futurity, with Marks of Honor or Reproach to the End of Time.
The Date of Humane Life is too short to recompense the Cares which attend the
most private Condition: Therefore it is, that our Souls are made as it were too
big for it, and extend themselves in the Prospect of a longer Existence, in a
good Fame and Memory of worthy Actions after our Decease. The whole Race of Men
have this Passion in some Degree implanted in their Bosoms, which is the
strongest and noblest Incitation to honest Attempts: But the base Use of the
Arts of Peace, Eloquence, Poetry, and all the Parts of Learning, have been
possessed by Souls so unworthy those Faculties, that the Names and Appellations
of Things have been confounded by the Labors and Writings of prostituted Men,
who have stamped a Reputation upon such Actions, as are in themselves the
Objects of Contempt and Disgrace. This is that which has misled your Majesty in
the Conduct of your Reign, and made that Life, which might have been the most
imitable, the most to be avoided. To this it is, that the great and excellent
Qualities of which your Majesty is Master, are lost in their Application; and
your Majesty has been carrying on for many Years the most cruel Tyranny, with
all the noble Methods which are used to support a just Reign. Thus it is, that
it avails nothing that you are a Bountiful Master; that you are so Generous as
to reward even the Unsuccessful with Honor and Riches; that no laudable Action
passes unrewarded in your Kingdoms; that you have searched all Nations for
obscure Merit. In a Word, that you are in your private Character endowed with
every Princely Quality, when all this is subjected to unjust and ill-taught
Ambition, which to the Injury of the World, is gilded by those Endowments.
However, if your Majesty will condescend to look into your own Soul, and
consider all its Faculties and Weaknesses with Impartiality; if you will but be
convinced, that Life is supported in you by the ordinary Methods of Food, Rest,
and Sleep; you would think it impossible that you could ever be so much imposed
on, as to have been wrought into a Belief, that so many Thousands of the same
Make with your self were formed by Providence for no other End, but by the
Hazard of their very Being to extend the Conquests and Glory of an Individual
of their own Species. A very little Reflection will convince your Majesty, that
such cannot be the Intent of the Creator; and if not, What Horror must it give
your Majesty to think of the vast Devastations your Ambition has made among
your Fellow Creatures? While the Warmth of Youth, the Flattery of Crowds, and a
continual Series of Success and Triumph, indulged your Majesty in this Allusion
of Mind, it was less to be wondered at, that you proceeded in this mistaken
Pursuit of Grandeur; but when Age, Disappointments, Public Calamities,
Personal Distempers, and the Reverse of all that makes Men forget their true
Being, are fallen upon you: Heavens! Is it possible you can live without
Remorse? Can the wretched Man be a Tyrant? Can Grief study Torments? Can Sorrow
be Cruel? --

Your Majesty will observe, I do not bring against you a railing Accusation;
but as you are a strict Professor of Religion, I beseech your Majesty to stop
the Effusion of Blood, by receiving the Opportunity which presents it self, for
the Preservation of your distressed People. Be no longer so infatuated, as to
hope for Renown from Murder and Violence: But consider, that the Great Day will
come, in which this World and all its Glory shall change in a Moment: When
Nature shall sicken, and the Earth and Sea give up the Bodies committed to
them, to appear before the last Tribunal. Will it then, Oh King! be an Answer
for the Lives of Millions who have fallen by the Sword? They perished for my
Glory. That Day will come on, and one like it is immediately approaching:
Injured Nations advance toward thy Habitation: Vengeance has began its March,
which is to be diverted only by the Penitence of the Oppressor. Awake, O
Monarch, from thy Lethargy! Disdain the Abuses thou have received: Pull down
the Statue which calls thee Immortal: Be truly Great: Tear thy Purple, and put
on Sackcloth. I am

Thy Generous Enemy, Isaac Bickerstaff.


The TATLER. [No 24.
From Thursd. June 2. to Saturd. June 4. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, June 2.
IN my Paper of the 28th of the last Month, I mentioned several Characters
which want Explanation to the Generality of Readers: Among others, I spoke of a
Pretty Fellow. I have since received a kind Admonition in a Letter, to take
Care that I do not omit to show also what is meant by a very Pretty Fellow,
which is to be allowed as a Character by it self, and a Person exalted above
the other by a peculiar Sprightliness; as one who, by a distinguishing Vigor,
outstrips his Companions, and has thereby deserved and obtained a particular
Appellation, or Nickname of Familiarity. Some have this Distinction from the
Fair Sex, who are so generous as to take into their Protection such as are
laughed at by the Men, and place them for that Reason in Degrees of Favor.

The chief of this Sort is Colonel Brunett, who is a Man of Fashion, because he
will be so; and practices a very janty Way of Behavior, because he is too
careless to know when he offends, and too sanguine to be mortified if he did
know it. Thus the Colonel has met with a Town ready to receive him, and cannot
possibly see why he should not make use of their Favor, and set himself in the
First Degree of Conversation. Therefore he is very successfully loud among the
Wits, familiar among the Ladies, and dissolute among the Rakes. Thus he is
admitted in one Place, because he is so in another; and every Man treats
Brunett well, not out of his particular Esteem for him, but in Respect to the
Opinion of others. It is to me a solid Pleasure to see the World thus mistaken
on the good-natured Side; for it is Ten to One but the Colonel mounts into a
General Officer, marries a fine Lady, and is Master of a good Estate, before
they come to explain upon him. What gives most Delight to me in this
Observation, is, that all this arises from pure Nature, and the Colonel can
account for his Success no more than those by whom he succeeds. For these
Causes and Considerations, I pronounce him a true Woman's Man, and in the first
Degree, A very pretty Fellow.

The next to a Man of this universal Genius, is one who is peculiarly formed
for the Service of the Ladies, and his Merit chiefly is to be of no
Consequence. I am indeed a little in Doubt, Whether he ought not rather to be
called a very Happy, than a very Pretty Fellow? For he is admitted at all
Hours: All he says or does, which would offend in another, are passed over in
him; and all Actions and Speeches which please, doubly please if they come from
him: No one wonders or takes Notice when he is wrong; but all admire him when
he is in the Right. -- By the Way it is fit to remark, That there are People of
better Sense than these, who endeavor at this Character; but they are out of
Nature; and though, with some Industry, they get the Characters of Fools, they
cannot arrive to be very, seldom to be merely Pretty Fellows. But where Nature
has formed a Person for this Station amongst Men, he is gifted with a peculiar
Genius for Success, and his very Errors and Absurdities contribute to it; this
Felicity attending him to his Life's End. For it being in a Manner necessary
that he should be of no Consequence, he is as well in old Age as Youth; and I
know a Man, whose Son has been some Years a pretty Fellow, who is himself at
this Hour a very Pretty Fellow.

One must move tenderly in this Place, for we are now in the Ladies Lodgings,
and speaking of such as are supported by their Influence and Favor; against
which there is not, neither ought there to be, any Dispute or Observation. But
when we come into more free Air, one may talk a little more at large.

Give me Leave then to mention Three, whom I do not doubt but we shall see make
considerable Figures; and these are such as, for their Bacchanalian
Performances, must be admitted into this Order. They are Three Brothers lately
landed from Holland: As yet, indeed, they have not made their public Entry,
but lodge and converse at Wapping. They have merited already on the Waterside
particular Titles: The First is called Hogshead; the Second, Culverin; and the
Third, Musket. This Fraternity is preparing for our End of the Town by their
Ability in the Exercises of Bacchus, and measure their Time and Merit by Liquid
Weight, and Power of Drinking. Hogshead is a prettier Fellow than Culverin by
Two Quarts, and Culverin than Musket by a full Pint. It is to be feared,
Hogshead is so often too full, and Culverin over-loaded, that Musket will be
the only lasting very Pretty Fellow of the Three.

A Third Sort of this Denomination are such as, by very daring Adventures in
Love, have purchased to themselves Renown and new Names; as, Jo. Carry, for his
excessive Strength and Vigor; Tom Drybones, for his generous Loss of Youth and
Health; and Cancrum, for his meritorious Rottenness.

These great and leading Spirits are proposed to all such of our British Youth
as would arrive at Perfection in these different Kinds; and if their Parts and
Accomplishments were well imitated, it is not doubted but that our Nation would
soon excel all others it Wit and Arts, as they already do in Arms.

[ N. B. The Gentleman who stole Betty Pepin, may own it, for he is allowed to
be a very Pretty Fellow.]

But we must proceed to the Explanation of other Terms in our Writings.

To know what a Toast is in the Country, gives as much Perplexity as she her
self does in Town: And indeed, the Learned differ very much upon the Original
of this Word, and the Acceptance of it among the Moderns. However, it is by
all agreed to have a joyous and cheerful Import. A Toast in a cold Morning,
heightened by Nutmeg, and sweetened with Sugar, has for many Ages been given to
our Rural Dispensers of Justice, before they entered upon Causes, and has been
of great and politic Use to take off the Severity of their Sentences; but has
indeed been remarkable for one ill Effect, that it inclines those who use it
immoderately, to speak Latin, to the Admiration, rather than Information, of an
Audience. This Application of a Toast makes it very obvious, that the Word may,
without a Metaphor, be understood as an apt Name for a Thing which raises us in
the most sovereign Degree. But many of the Wits of the last Age will assert,
That the Word, in its present Sense, was known among them in their Youth, and
had its Rise from an Accident at the Town of Bath, in the Reign of King Charles
the Second.

It happened, that on a Public Day a celebrated Beauty of those Times was in
the Cross Bath, and one of the Crowd of her Admirers took a Glass of the Water
in which the Fair One stood, and drank her Health to the Company. There was in
the Place a Gay Fellow, half fuddled, who offered to jump in, and swore, Though
he liked not the Liquor, he would have the Toast. He was opposed in his
Resolution; yet this Whim gave Foundation to the present Honor which is done
to the Lady we mention in our Liquors, who has ever since been called a Toast.

Though this Institution had so trivial a Beginning, it is now elevated into a
formal Order; and that happy Virgin who is received and drank to at their
Meetings, has no more to do in this Life, but to judge and accept of the first
good Offer. The Manner of her Inauguration is much like that of the Choice of a
Doge in Venice: It is performed by Ballotting; and when she is so chosen, she
reigns indisputably for that ensuing Year; but must be elected anew to prolong
her Empire a Moment beyond it. When she is regularly chosen, her Name is
written with a Diamond on a Drinking-glass. The Hieroglyphick of the Diamond is
to show her, that her Value is imaginary; and that of the Glass to acquaint
her, that her Condition is frail, and depends on the Hand which holds her. This
wise Design admonishes her, neither to over-rate or depreciate her Charms; as
well considering and applying, that it is perfectly according to the Humor and
Taste of the Company, whether the Toast is eaten, or left as an Offal.

The Foremost of the whole Rank of Toasts, and the most undisputed in their
present Empire, are Mrs. Gatty and Mrs. Frontlet: The First an Agreeable, the
Second an Awful Beauty. These Ladies are perfect Friends, out of a Knowledge,
that their Perfections are too different to stand in Competition. He that likes
Gatty, can have no Relish for so solemn a Creature as Frontlet; and an Admirer
of Frontlet, will call Gatty a Maypole Girl. Gatty for ever smiles upon you;
and Frontlet disdains to see you smile. Gatty's Love is a shining quick Flame;
Frontlet's a slow wasting Fire. Gatty likes the Man that diverts her; Frontlet
him who adores her. Gatty always improves the Soil in which she travels;
Frontlet lays waste the Country. Gatty does not only smile, but laughs at her
Lover; Frontlet not only looks serious, but frowns at him. All the Men of Wit,
(and Coxcombs their Followers) are professed Servants of Gatty: The Politicians
and Pretenders give solemn Worship to Frontlet. Their Reign will be best judged
of by its Duration. Frontlet will never be chosen more; and Gatty is a Toast
for Life.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 3.
Letters from Hamburgh of the 7th Instant, N. S. inform us, That no Art or Cost
is omitted to make the Stay of his Danish Majesty at Dresden agreeable; but
there are various Speculations upon the Interview between King Angustus and
that Prince, many putting Politic Constructions upon his Danish Majesty's
Arrival, at a Time when his Troops are marching out of Hungary, with Orders to
pass through Saxony, where it is given out, that they are to be recruited. It
is said also, That several Polish Senators have invited K. Augustus to return
into Poland. His Majesty of Sweden, according to the same Advices, has passed
the Nieper without any Opposition from the Muscovites, and advances with all
possible Expedition toward Volhinia, where he proposes to join King Stanislaus
and General Cressau.

We hear from Bern of the 1st Instant, N. S. That there is not a Province in
France, from whence the Court is not apprehensive of receiving Accounts of
Public Emotions, occasioned by the Want of Corn. The General Diet of the 13
Cantons is assembled at Baden, but have not yet entered upon Business, so that
the Affair of Tockenburgh is yet at a Stand.

Letters from the Hague, dated the 11th Instant, N. S. advise, That Monsieur
Rouille having acquainted the Ministers of the Allies, that his Manner had
refused to ratify the Preliminaries of a Treaty adjusted with Monsieur Torcy,
set out for Paris on Sunday Morning. The same Day the Foreign Ministers met a
Committee of the States General, where Monsieur van Hessen opened the Business
upon which they were assembled, and in a very warm Discourse laid before them
the Conduct of France in the late Negotiations, representing the abject Manner
in which she had laid open her own Distresses, that reduced her to a Compliance
with the Demands of all the Allies, and her Meannesses in receding from those
Points to which Monsieur Torcy had consented. The respective Minister of each
Potentate of the Alliance severally expressed their Resentment of the faithless
Behavior of the French, and gave each other mutual Assurances of the Constancy
and Resolution of their Principals, to proceed with the utmost Vigor against
the common Enemy-His Grace the Duke of Marlborough set out from the Hague on
the 9th in the Afternoon, and lay that Night at Rotterdam, from whence at Four
the next Morning he proceeded toward Antwerp, with a Design to reach Ghent the
next Day. All the Troops in the Low Countries are in Motion toward the general
Rendezvous between the Scheld and the Lis, the whole Army will be formed on the
12th Instant; and it is said, That on the 14th they will advance toward the
Enemy's Country. In the mean Time, the Marshall de Villars has assembled the
French Forces between Lens, la Basses, and Douay.

Yesterday Morning Sir John Norris, with the Squadron under his Command, sailed
from the Downs for Holland.

From my own Apartment, June 3.
I have the Honor of the following Letter from a Gentleman whom I receive into
my Family, and order the Heralds at Arms to enroll him accordingly.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
THOUGH you have excluded me the Honor of your Family, yet I have ventured to
correspond with the same great Persons as your self, and have wrote this Post
to the King of France; though I am in a Manner unknown in his Country, and have
not been seen there these many Months.

To LEWIS le Grand.
Though in your Country I Am unknown,
Yet, Sir, I must advise you;
Of late so poor and mean you're grown,
That all the World despise you.
Here Vermin eat your Majesty,
There meagre Subjects stand unfed;
What surer Signs of Poverty,
Than many Lice, and little Bread?
Then, Sir, the present Minute choose,
Our Armies are advanced;
Those Terms you at the Hague refuse,
At Paris will not be granted.
Consider this, and Dunkirk raze,
And Anna's Title own;
Send one Pretender out to graze,
And call the other Home.
Your Humble Servant, Bread, the Staff of Life.


The TATLER. [No 25.
From Saturday June 4. to Tuesd. June 7. 1709.
White's Chocolate house, June 6.
A Letter from a young Lady, written in the most passionate Terms, wherein she
laments the Misfortune of a Gentleman, her Lover, who was lately wounded in a
Duel, has turned my Thoughts to that Subject, and inclined me to examine into
the Causes which precipitate Men into so fatal a Folly. And as it has been
proposed to treat of Subjects of Gallantry in the Article from hence, and no
one Point in Nature is more proper to be considered by the Company who frequent
this Place than that of Duels, it is worth our Consideration to examine into
this Chimaerical groundless Humor, and to lay every other Thought aside, till
we have stripped it of all its false Pretenses to Credit and Reputation amongst
Men.

But I must confess, when I consider what I am going about, and run over in my
Imagination all the endless Crowd of Men of Honor who will be offended at such
a Discourse; I am undertaking, methinks, a Work worthy an invulnerable Hero in
Romance, rather than a private Gentleman with a single Rapier: But as I am
pretty well acquainted by great Opportunities with the Nature of Man, and know
of a Truth, that all Men fight against their Will, the Danger vanishes, and
Resolution rises upon this Subject. For this Reason I shall talk very freely on
a Custom which all Men wish exploded, though no Man has Courage enough to
resist it.

But there is one unintelligible Word which I fear will extremely perplex my
Dissertation; and I confess to you I find very hard to explain, which is, the
Term Satisfaction. An honest Country Gentleman had the Misfortune to fall into
Company with Two or Three modern Men of Honor, where he happened to be very
ill treated; and one of the Company being conscious of his Offense, sends a
Note to him in the Morning, and tells him, He was ready to give him
Satisfaction. This is fine Doing (says the plain Fellow). Last Night he sent me
away cursedly out of Humor, and this Morning he fancies it would be a
Satisfaction to be run through the Body.

As the Matter at present stands, it is not to do handsome Actions denominates
a Man of Honor; it is enough if he dares to defend ill Ones. Thus you often
see a common Sharper in Competition with a Gentleman of the first Rank; though
all Mankind is convinced, that a fighting Gamester is only a Pick-pocket with
the Courage of an Highway-Man. One cannot with any Patience reflect on the
unaccountable Jumble of Persons and Things in this Town and Nation, which
occasions very frequently, that a brave Man falls by a Hand below that of the
common Hangman, and yet his Executioner escapes the Clutches of the Hangman for
doing it. I shall therefore hereafter consider, how the bravest Men in other
Ages and Nations have behaved themselves upon such Incidents as we decide by
Combat; and show, from their Practice, that this Resentment neither has its
Foundation from true Reason, or solid Fame; but is an Imposture, made up of
Cowardice, Falsehood, and Want of Understanding. For this Work, a good History
of Quarrels would be very edifying to the Public, and I apply my self to the
Town for Particulars and Circumstances within their Knowledge, which may serve
to embellish the Dissertation with proper Cuts. Most of the Quarrels I have
ever known, have proceeded from some valiant Coxcomb's persisting in the Wrong,
to defend some prevailing Folly, and preserve himself from the Ingenuity of
owning a Mistake.

By this Means it is called, Giving a Man Satisfaction, to urge your Offense
against him with your Sword; which puts me in Mind of Peter's Order to the
Keeper, in The Tale of a Tub: If you neglect to do all this, damn you and your
Generation for ever; and so we bid you heartily farewell. If the Contradiction
in the very Terms of one of our Challenges were as well explained, and turned
into downright English, would it not run after this Manner?

SIR,
YOur extraordinary Behavior last Night, and the Liberty you were pleased to
take with me, makes me this Morning give you this, to tell you, because you are
an ill-bred Puppy, I will meet you in Hide-Park an Hour hence; and because you
want both Breeding and Humanity, I desire you would come with a Pistol in your
Hand, on Horseback, and endeavor to shoot me through the Head; to teach you
more Manners. If you fail of doing me this Pleasure, I shall say, You are a
Rascal on every Post in Town: And so, Sir, if you will not injure me more, I
shall never forgive what you have done already. Pray Sir, do not fail of
getting every Thing ready, and you will infinitely oblige,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, etc.


From my own Apartment, June 6.
Among the many Employments I am necessarily put upon by my Friends, that of
giving Advice is the most unwelcome to me; and indeed, I am forced to use a
little Art in the Matter; for some People will ask Counsel of you, when they
have already acted what they tell you is still under Deliberation. I had almost
lost a very good Friend the other Day, who came to know how I liked his Design to
marry such a Lady. I answered, By no Means; and I must be positive against it,
for very solid Reasous, which are not proper to communicate. Not proper to
communicate! (said he with a grave Air) I will know the Bottom of this. I saw
him moved, and knew from thence he was already determined; therefore evaded it
by saying, To tell you the Truth, dear Frank, Of all Women living, I would have
her my self. Isaac, said he, Thou art too late, for we have been both one these
two Months.

I learned this Caution by a Gentleman's consulting me formerly about his Son.
He railed at his damned Extravagance, and told me, In a very little Time, he
would beggar him by the exorbitant Bills which came from Oxford every Quarter.
Make the Rogue bite upon the Bridle, said I, pay none of his Bills, it will but
encourage him to further Trespasses. He looked plaguey sour at me. His Son soon
after sent up a Paper of Verses, forsooth, in Print, on the last public
Occasion; upon which, he is convinced the Boy has Parts, and a Lad of Spirit is
not to be too much cramped in his Maintenance, lest he take ill Courses.
Neither Father nor Son can ever since endure the Sight of me.

These Sort of People ask Opinions, only out of the Fullness of their Heart on
the Subject of their Perplexity, and not from a Desire of Information.

There is nothing so easy as to find out which Opinion the Person in Doubt has
a Mind to; therefore the sure Way is to tell him, that is certainly to be
chosen. Then you are to be very clear and positive; leave no Handle for
Scruple. Bless me! Sir, there is no Room for a Question. This rivets you into
his Heart; for you at once applaud his Wisdom, and gratify his Inclination.
However, I had too much Bowels to be insincere to a Man who came Yesterday to
know of me, With which of two eminent Men in the City he should place his Son?
Their Names are Paulo and Avaro. This gave me much Debate with my self, because
not only the Fortune of the Youth, but his Virtue also, depended upon this
Choice. The Men are equally wealthy; but they differ in the Use and Application
of their Riches, which you immediately see upon entering their Doors.

The Habitation of Paulo has at once the Air of a Nobleman and a Merchant. You
see the Servants act with Affection to their Master, and Satisfaction in
themselves: The Master meets you with an open Countenance, full of Benevolence
and Integrity: Your Business is dispatched with that Confidence and Welcome
which always accompanies honest Minds: His Table is the Image of Plenty and
Generosity, supported by Justice and Frugality. After we had dined here, our
Affair was to visit Avaro: Out comes an awkward Fellow with a careful
Countenance; Sir, Would you speak with my Master? May I crave your Name? After
the first Preambles, he leads us into a noble Solitude, a great House that
seemed uninhabited; but from the End of the spacious Hall moves toward us
Avaro, with a suspicious Aspect, as if he believed us Thieves; and as for my
Part, I approached him as if I knew him a Cutpurse. We fell into Discourse of
his noble Dwelling, and the Great Estate all the World knew he had to enjoy in
it: And I, to plague him, fell a commending Paulo's Way of Living. Paulo,
answered Avaro, is a very good Man; but we who have smaller Estates, must cut
our Coat according to our Cloth. Nay, says I, Every Man knows his own
Circumstance best; you are in the Right, if you have not wherewithal. He looked
very sour; (for it is, you must know, the utmost Vanity of a meanspirited rich
Man to be contradicted, when he calls himself Poor.) But I was resolved to vex
him, by consenting to all he said; the main Design of which was, that he would
have us find out, he was one of the wealthiest Men in London, and lived like a
Beggar. We left him, and took a Turn on the Change. My Friend was ravished with
Avaro: This (said he) is certainly a sure Man. I contradicted him with much
Warmth, and summed up their different Characters as well as I could. This Paulo
(said I) grows wealthy by being a common Good; Avaro, by being a general Evil:
Paulo has the Art, Avaro the Craft of Trade. When Paulo gains, all Men he deals
with are the better: Whenever Avaro profits, another certainly loses. In a
Word, Paulo is a Citizen, and Avaro a Cit. I convinced my Friend, and carried
the young Gentleman the next Day to Paulo, where he will learn the Way both to
gain, and enjoy a good Fortune. And though I cannot say, I have, by keeping him
from Avaro, saved him from the Gallows, I have prevented his deserving it every
Day he lives: For with Paulo he will be an honest Man, without being so for
Fear of the Law; as with Avaro, he would have been a Villain within the
Protection of it.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 6.
We hear from Vienna of the 1st Instant, That Baron Imoff, who attended her
Catholic Majesty with the Character of Envoy from the Duke of Wolfembuttel,
was returned thither. That Minister brought an Account, That Major General
Stanhope, with the Troops which embarked at Naples, was returned to Barcelona.
We hear from Berlin, by Advices of the 8th Instant, That his Prussian Majesty
had received Intelligence from his Minister at Dresden, that the King of
Denmark desired to meet his Majesty at Magdeburg. The King of Prussia has sent
Answer, That his present Indisposition will not admit of so great a Journey;
but has sent the King a very pressing Invitation to come to Berlin or Potsdam.
These Advices say, That the Minister of the King of Sweden has produced a
Letter from his Master to the King of Poland, dated from Batitzan the 30th of
March, O. S. wherein he acquaints him, that he has been successful against the
Muscovites in all the Occasions which have happened since his March into their
Country. Great Numbers have revolted to the Swedes since General Mazeppa went
over to that Side; and as many as have done so, have taken solemn Oaths to
adhere to the Interests of his Swedish Majesty.

Advices from the Hague of the 14th Instant, N. S. say, That all Things tended
to a vigorous and active Campaign; the Allies having strong Resentments against
the late Behavior of the Court of France; and the French using all possible
Endeavors to animate their Men to defend their Country against a victorious
and exasperated Enemy. Monsieur Rouille had passed through Brussels without
visiting either the Duke of Marlborough or Prince Eugene, who were both there
at that Time. The States have met, and publicly declared their Satisfaction in
the Conduct of their Deputies during the whole Treaty. Letters from France say,
That the Court is resolved to put all to the Issue of the ensuing Campaign. In
the mean Time, they have ordered the Preliminary Treaty to be published, with
Observation upon each Article, in order to quiet the Minds of the People, and
persuade them, that it has not been in the Power of the King to procure a
Peace, but to the Diminution of his Majesty's Glory, and the Hazard of his
Dominions. His Grace the Duke of Marlborough and Prince Eugene arrived at Ghent
on Wednesday last, where, at an Assembly of all the General Officers, it was
thought proper, by reason of the great Rains which have lately fallen, to defer
forming a Camp, or bringing the Troops together; but as soon as the Weather
would permit, to march upon the Enemy with all Expedition.

The TATLER. [No 26.
From Tuesday June 7. to Thursd. June 9. 1709.
From my own Apartment, June 8.
I Have read the following Letter with Delight and Approbation, and I hereby
order Mr. Kidney at St. James's, and Sir Thomas at White's, (who are my Clerks
for enrolling all Men in their distant Classes, before they presume to drink
Tea or Chocolate in those Places) to take Care, that the Persons within the
Descriptions in the Letter be admitted, and excluded according to my Friend's
Remonstrance.

June 6. 1709. SIR,
YOur Paper of Saturday has raised up in me a noble Emulation, to be recorded
in the foremost Rank of Worthies therein mentioned; and if any Regard be had to
Merit or Industry, I may hope to succeed in the Promotion, for I have omitted
no Toil or Expense to be a Proficient; and if my Friends do not flatter, they
assure me, I have not lost my Time since I came to Town. To enumerate but a few
Particulars; There Is hardly a Coachman I meet with, but desires to be excused
taking me, because he has had me before. I have compounded Two or Three Rapes;
and let out to Hire as many Bastards to Beggars. I never saw above the First
Act of a Play: And as to my Courage, it is well known, I have more than once
had sufficient Witnesses of my drawing my Sword both in Tavern and Playhouse.
Dr. Wall is my particular Friend; and if it were any Service to the Public to
compose the Difference between Martin and Sintilaer the Pearl-driller, I don't
know a Judge of more Experience than my self: For in that I may say with the
Poet; Quae Regio in Villa nostri non plena Laboris?


I omit other less Particulars, the necessary Consequences of greater Actions.
But my Reason for troubling you at this present is, to put a Stop, if it may
be, to an insinuating, increasing Set of People, who sticking to the Letter of
your Treatise, and not to the Spirit of it, do assume the Name of Pretty
Fellows; nay, and even get new Names, as you very well hint. Some of them I
have heard calling to one another as I have sat at White's and St. James's, by
the Names of, Betty, Nelly, and so forth. You see them accost each other with
effeminate Airs: They have their Signs and Tokens like Free-Masons: They rail
at Womenkind; receive Visits on their Beds in Gowns, and do a Thousand other
unintelligible Prettinesses that I cannot tell what to make of. I therefore
heartily desire you would exclude all this Sort of Animals.

There is another Matter I am foreseeing an ill Consequence from, but may be
timely prevented by Prudence; which is, that for the last Fortnight, prodigious
Shoals of Volunteers have gone over to bully the French, upon hearing the Peace
was just signing; and this is so true, that I can assure you, all Engrossing
Work about the Temple is risen above 3 s. in the Pound for want of Hands. Now
as it is possible, some little Alteration of Affairs may have broken their
Measures, and that they will post back again, I am under the last Apprehension,
that these will, at their Return, all set up for Pretty Fellows, and thereby
confound all Merit and Service, and impose on us some new Alteration in our
Nightcap-Wigs and Pockets, unless you can provide a particular Class for them.
I cannot apply my self better than to you, and I am sure I speak the Mind of a
very great Number as deserving as my self.


The Pretensions of this Correspondent are worthy a particular Distinction: He
cannot indeed be admitted as a Pretty, but is, what we most justly call, a
Smart Fellow. Never to pay at the Playhouse, is an Act of Frugality that lets
you into his Character; and his Expedient in sending his Children a begging
before they can go, are Characteristical Instances that he belongs to this
Class. I never saw the Gentleman; but I know by his Letter, he hangs his Cane
on his Button; and by some Lines of it, he should wear red-heel'd Shoes; which
are essential Parts of the Habit belonging to the Order of Smart Fellows.

My Familiar is returned with the following Letter from the French King:

Versailles, June 13. 1709.
Lewis the Fourteenth, to Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
SIR,
I Have your Epistle, and must take the Liberty to say, That there has been a
Time, when there were Generous Spirits in Great Britain; who would not have
suffered my Name to be treated with the Familiarity you think fit to use. I
thought Liberal Men would not be such Timeservers, as to fall upon a Man
because his Friends are not in Power. But having some Concern for what you may
transmit to Posterity concerning me, I am willing to keep Terms with you, and
make a Request to you, which is, That you would give my Service to the
Nineteenth Century, (if ever you or yours reach to them) and tell them, That I
have settled all Matters between them and me by Monsieur Boileau. I should be
glad to see you here.


It is very odd this Prince should offer to invite me into his Dominions, or
believe I should accept the Invitation. No, no, I remember too well how he
served an ingenious Gentleman, a Friend of mine, whom he locked up in the
Bastile for no Reason in the World, but because he was a Wit, and feared he
might mention him with Justice in some of his Writings. His Way is, That all
Men of Sense are preferred, banished, or imprisoned. He has indeed a Sort of
Justice in him, like that of the Gamesters; for if a Stander-by sees one at
Play cheat, he has a Right to come in for Shares, as knowing the Mysteries of
the Game.

This is a very wise and just Maxim; and if I have not left at Mr. Morphew's,
directed to me, Bank Bills for 200 l. on or before this Day Sevennight, I shall
tell how Tom Cash got his Estate. I expect Three Hundred Pounds of Mr. Soilett,
for concealing all the Money he has lent to himself, and his Landed Friend
bound with him, at Thirty per Cent. at his Scrivener's. Absolute Princes make
People pay what they please in Deference to their Power: I do not know why I
should not do the same, out of Fear or Respect to my Knowledge. I always
preserve Decorums and Civilities to the Fair Sex: Therefore if a certain Lady,
who left her Coach at the New Exchange Door in the Strand, and whipped down
Durham-Yard into a Boat with a young Gentleman for Fox-Hall; I say, if she will
send me Word, that I may give the Fan which she dropped, and I found, to my
Sister Jenny, there shall be no more said of it. I expect Hush-Money to be
regularly sent for every Folly or Vice any one commits in this whole Town; and
hope, I may pretend to deserve it better than a Chambermaid, or Valet de
Chamber: They only whisper it to the little Set of their Companions; but I can
tell it to all Men living, or who are to live. Therefore I desire all my
Readers to pay their Fines, or mend their Lives.

White's Chocolate-house, June 8.
My Familiar being come from France, with an Answer to my Letter to Lewis of
that Kingdom, instead of going on in a Discourse of what he had seen in that
Court, he put on the immediate Concern of a Guardian, and fell to enquiring
into my Thoughts and Adventures since his Journey. As short as his Stay had
been, I confessed I had had many Occasions for his Assistance in my Conduct;
but communicated to him my Thoughts of putting all my Force against the horrid
and senseless Custom of Duels; If it were possible, said he, to laugh at Things
in themselves so deeply Tragical as the impertinent Profusion of Humane Life, I
think I could divert you with a Figure I saw just after my Death, when the
Philosopher threw me, as I told you some Days ago, into the Pail of Water.

You are to know, That when Men leave the Body, there are Receptacles for them
as soon as they depart, according to the Manner in which they lived and died.
At the very Instant that I was killed, there came away with me a Spirit which
had lost its Body in a Duel. We were both examined. Me, the whole Assembly
looked at with Kindness and Pity, but at the same Time with an Air of Welcome,
and Consolation: They pronounced me very happy, who had died in Innocence; and
told me, a quite different Place was allotted to me, than that which was
appointed for my Companion; there being a great Distance from the Mansions of
Fools and Innocents: Though at the same Time, said one of the Ghosts, there is a
great Affinity between an Idiot who has been so for long Life, and a Child who
departs before Maturity. But this Gentleman who has arrived with you is a Fool
of his own making, is ignorant out of Choice, and will fare accordingly. The
Assembly began to flock about him, and one said to him, Sir, I observed you
came into the Gate of Persons murdered, and I desire to know, What brought you
to your untimely End? He said, He had been a Second. Socrates (who may be said
to have been murdered by the Commonwealth of Athens) stood by, and began to
draw near him, in order, after his Manner, to lead him into a Sense of his
Error by Concessions in his own Discourse. Sir, said that Divine and Amicable
Spirit, What was the Quarrel? He answered, We shall know very suddenly, when
the Principal in the Business comes, for he was desperately wounded before I
fell. Sir, said the Sage, Had you an Estate? Yes, Sir, the new Guest answered,
I have left it in a very good Condition, and made my Will the Night before this
Occasion. Did you read it before you signed it? Yes sure, Sir, said the new
Comer. Socrates replies, Could a Man, that would not give his Estate without
reading the Instrument, dispose of his Life without asking a Question? That
illustrious Shade turned from him, and a Crowd of impertinent Goblins, who had
been Droles and Parasites in their Lifetime, and were knocked on the Head for
their Sawciness, came about my Fellow-Traveller, and made themselves very merry
with Questions about the Words Cart and Terce, and other Terms of Fencers. But
his Thoughts began to settle into Reflection upon the Adventure which had
robbed him of his late Being; and with a wretched Sigh, said he, How terrible
are Conviction and Guilt when they come too late for Penitence! Pacolet was
going on in this Strain, but he recovered from it, and told me, It was too soon
to give my Discourse on this Subject so serious a Turn; you have chiefly to do
with that Part of Mankind which must be led into Reflection by Degrees, and you
must treat this Custom with Humor and Raillery to get an Audience, before you
come to pronounce Sentence upon it. There is Foundation enough for raising such
Entertainments from the Practice on this Occasion. Don't you know, that often a
Man is called out of Bed to follow implicitly a Coxcomb (with whom he would not
keep Company on any other Occasion) to Ruin and Death? -- Then a good List of
such as are qualified by the Laws of these uncourteous Men of Chivalry to enter
into Combat (who are often Persons of Honor without common Honesty): These, I
say, ranged and drawn up in their proper Order, would give an Aversion to doing
any Thing in common with such as Men laugh at and contemn. But to go through
this Work, you must not let your Thoughts vary, or make Excursions from your
Theme: Consider at the same Time, that the Matter has been often treated by the
ablest and greatest Writers; yet that must not disencourage you; for the
properest Person to handle it, is one who has roved into mixed Conversations,
and must have Opportunities (which I shall give you) of seeing these Sort of
Men in their Pleasures and Gratifications; among which, they pretend to reckon
Fighting. It was pleasantly enough said of a Bully in France, when Duels first
began to be punished: The King has taken away Gaming, and Stage-playing, and
now Fighting too; How does he expect Gentlemen shall divert themselves?

The TATLER. No 27.
From Thursd. June 9. to Saturd. June 11. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, June 9.
PAcolet being gone a strolling among the Men of the Sword, in order to find
out the secret Causes of the frequent Disputes we meet with, and furnish me
with Materials for my Treatise on Duelling; I have Room left to go on in my
Information to my Country Readers, whereby they may understand the bright
People whose Memoirs I have taken upon me to write. But in my Discourse of the
28th of the last Month, I omitted to mention the most agreeable of all bad
Characters; and that is, a Rake.

A Rake is a Man always to be pitied; and if he lives, is one Day certainly
reclaimed; for his Faults proceed not from Choice or Inclination, but from
strong Passions and Appetites' which are in Youth too violent for the Club of
Reason, good Sense, good Manners, and good Nature: All which he must have by
Nature and Education, before he can be allowed to be, or have been of this
Order. He is a poor unweildy Wretch, that commits Faults out of the Redundance
of his good Qualities. His Pity and Compassion makes him sometimes a Bubble to
all his Fellows, let 'em be never so much below him in Understanding. His
Desires run away with him through the Strength and Force of a lively
Imagination, which hurries him on to unlawful Pleasures, before Reason has
Power to come in to his Rescue. Thus, with all the good Intentions in the World
to Amendment, this Creature sins on against Heaven, himself, his Friends, and
his Country, who all call for a better Use of his Talents. There is not a Being
under the Sun so miserable as this: He goes on in a Pursuit he himself
disapproves, and has no Enjoyment but what is followed by Remorse; no Relief
from Remorse, but the Repetition of his Crime. It Is possible I may talk of this
Person with too much Indulgence; but I must repeat it, that I think this, a
Character which is the most the Object of Pity of any in the World. The Man in
the Pangs of the Stone, Gout, or any acute Distempers, is not in so deplorable
a Condition in the Eye of right Sense, as he that errs and repents, and repents
and errs on. The Fellow with broken Limbs justly deserves your Alms for his
impotent Condition; but he that cannot use his own Reason, is in a much worse
State; for you see him in miserable Circumstances, with his Remedy at the same
Time in his own Possession, if he would or could use it. This is the Cause
that, of all ill Characters, the Rake has the best Quarter in the World; for
when he is himself, and unruffled with Intemperance, you see his natural
Faculties exert themselves, and attract an Eye of Favor toward his
Infirmities.

But if we look round us here, how many dull Rogues are there, that would fain
be what this poor Man hates himself for? All the Noise toward Six in the
Evening, is caused by his Mimicks and Imitators. How ought Men of Sense to be
careful of their Actions, if it were merely from the Indignation of seeing
themselves ill drawn by such little Pretenders? Not to say, he that leads, is
guilty of all the Actions of his Followers: And a Rake has Imitators whom you
would never expect should prove so-Second-hand Vice sure of all is the most
nauseous. There is hardly a Folly more absurd, or which seems less to be
accounted for, (though it is what we see every Day) than that grave and honest
Natures give into this Way, and at the same Time have good Sense, if they
thought fit to use it: But the Fatality (under which most Men labor) of
desiring to be what they are not, makes 'em go out of a Method, in which they
might be received with Applause, and would certainly excel; into one, wherein
they will all their Life have the Air of Strangers to what they aim at.

For this Reason, I have not lamented the Metamorphosis of any one I know so
much as of Nobilis, who was born with Sweetness of Temper, just Apprehension,
and every Thing else that might make him a Man fit for his Order. But instead
of the Pursuit of sober Studies, and Applications, in which he would certainly
be capable of making a considerable Figure in the noblest Assembly of Men in
the World; I say, in spite of that good Nature, which is his proper Bent, he
will say ill-natured Things aloud, put such as he was, and still should be, out
of Countenance, and drown all the natural Good in him, to receive an artificial
ill Character, in which he will never succeed: For Nobilis is no Rake. He may
guzzle as much Wine as he pleases, talk Bawdy if he thinks fit; but he may as
well drink Water Gruel, and go twice a Day to Church, for it will never do. I
pronounce it again, Nobilis is no Rake. To be of that Order, he must be vicious
against his Will, and not so by Study or Application. All Pretty Fellows are
also excluded to a Man, as well as all Inamaratoes, or Persons of the Epicene
Gender, who gaze at one another in the Presence of Ladies. This Class, of which
I am giving you an Account, is pretended to also by Men of strong Abilities in
Drinking; though they are such whom the Liquor, not the Conversation, keeps
together. But Blockheads may roar, fight, and stab, and be never the nearer;
their Labor is also lost; they want Sense: They are no Rakes.

As a Rake among Men is the Man who lives in the constant Abuse of his Reason,
so a Coquet among Women is one who lives in continual Misapplication of her
Beauty. The chief of all, whom I have the Honor to be acquainted with, is
pretty Mrs. Toss: She is ever in Practice of something which disfigures her,
and takes from her Charms; though all she does, tends to a contrary Effect. She
has naturally a very agreeable Voice and Utterance, which she has changed for
the prettiest Lisp imaginable. She sees what she has a Mind to see, at half a
Mile Distance; but poring with her Eyes half shut at every one she passes by,
she believes much more becoming. The Cupid on her Fan and she have their Eyes
full on each other, all the Time in which they are not both in Motion. Whenever
her Eye is turned from that dear Object, you may have a Glance and your Bow, if
she is in Humor, returned as civilly as you make it; but that must not be in
the Presence of a Man of greater Quality: For Mrs. Toss is so thoroughly well
bred, that the chief Person present has all her Regards. And she, who giggles
at Divine Service, and laughs at her very Mother, can compose her self at the
Approach of a Man of a good Estate.

Will's Coffee-house, June 9.
A fine Lady showed a Gentleman of this Company, for an eternal Answer to all
his Addresses, a Paper of Verses, with which she is so captivated, that she
professed, the Author should be the happy Man in Spite of all other Pretenders.
It is ordinary for Love to make Men Poetical, and it had that Effect on this
enamored Man: But he was resolved to try his Vein upon some of her Confidents
or Retinue, before he ventured upon so high a Theme as her self. To do
otherwise than so, would be like making an Heroic Poem a Man's first Attempt.
Among the Favorites to the Fair One, he found her Parrat not to be in the last
Degree: He saw Poll had her Ear, when his Sighs were neglected. To write
against him, had been a fruitless Labor; therefore he resolved to flatter him
into his Interests, in the following Manner:

To a Lady on her Parrat.
When Nymphs were coy, and Love could not prevail,
The Gods disguised were seldom known to fail,
Leda was chaste, but yet a Feathered Jove
Surpised the Fair, and taught her how to love.
There Is no Celestial but his Heaven wou^d quit,
For any Form which might to thee admit.
See how the wanton Bird, at every Glance,
Swells his glad Plumes, and feels an amorous Trunce.
The Queen of Beauty has forsook the Dove,
Henceforth the Parrat be the Bird of Love.
It is indeed a very just Proposition, to give that Honor rather to the Parrat
than the other Volatile. The Parrat represents us in the State of making Love:
The Dove in the Possession of the Object beloved. But instead of turning the
Dove off, I fancy it would be better if the Chaise of Venus had hereafter a
Parrat added, (as we see sometimes a Third Horse to a Coach) which might
intimate, That to be a Parrat, is the only Way to succeed; and to be a Dove, to
preserve your Conquests. If the Swain would go on successfully, he must imitate
the Bird he writes upon. For he who would be loved by Women, must never be
silent before the Favor, or open his Lips after it.

From my own Apartment, June 10.
I have so many Messages from young Gentlemen who expect Preferment and
Distinction, that I am wholly at a Loss in what Manner to acquit my self. The
Writer of the following Letter tells me in a Postscript, he cannot go out of
Town till I have taken some Notice of him, and is very urgent to be some Body
in it, before he returns to his Commons at the University. But take it from
himself.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Monitor General of Great Britain.
Sheer-Lane, June 8. SIR,
I Have been above 6 Months from the University, of Age these 3 Months, and so
long in Town. I was recommended to one Charles Bubbleboy near the Temple, who
has supplied me with all the Furniture he says a Gentleman ought to have. I
desired a Certificate thereof from him, which he said would require some Time
to consider of; and when I went Yesterday Morning for it, he tells me, upon due
Consideration, I still want some few odd Things more, to the Value of
Threescore or Fourscore Pounds, to make me complete. I have bespoke them; and
the Favor I beg of you is, to know, when I am equipped, in what Part or Class
of Men in this Town you will place me. Pray send me Word what I am, and you
shall find me,

SIR Your most humble Servant, Jeffry Nicknack.


I am very willing to encourage young Beginners; but am extremely in the Dark
how to dispose of this Gentleman. I cannot see either his Person or Habit in
this Letter; but I Will call at Charles's, and know the Shape of his Snuff Box,
by which I can settle his Character. Though indeed, to know his full Capacity, I
ought to be informed, whether he takes Spanish or Musty.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 10.
Letters from the Low Countries of the 17th Instant say, That the Duke of
Marlborough and the Prince of Savoy intended to leave Ghent on that Day, and
join the Army, which lies between Pont d'Espiere and Courtray, their Head
Quarters being at Helchin. The same Day the Palatine Foor was expected at
Brussels. Lieutenant General Dompre, with a Body of Eight Thousand Men, is
posted at Alost, in order to cover Ghont and Brussels. The Marshal de Villars
was still on the Plains of Lenz; and it is said, the Duke of Vendosme is
appointed to command in Conjunction with that General. Advices from Paris say,
Monsieur Voisin is made Secretary of State, upon Monsieur Chamillard's
Resignation of that Employment. The Want of Money in that Kingdom is so great,
that the Court has thought fit to command all the Plate of pivate Families to
be brought into the Mint. They write from the Hague of the 18th, That the
States of Holland continue their Session; and that they have approved the
Resolution of the States General, to publish a Second Edict to prohibit the
Sale of Corn to the Enemy. Many eminent Persons in that Assembly have declared,
that they are of Opinion, that all Commerce whatsoever with France should be
wholly forbidden: Which Point is under present Deliberation; but it is feared
it will meet with powerful Opposition.

The TATLER. [No 28.
From Saturd. June 11. to Tuesd. June 14. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, June 13.
I Had suspended the Business of Duelling to a distant Time, but that I am
called upon to declare my self on a Point proposed in the following Letter.

June 9. at Night. SIR,
I Desire the Favor of you to decide this Question, Whether calling a
Gentleman a Smart Fellow, is an Affront or not? A Youth entering a certain
Coffee-house, with his Cane tied at his Button, wearing red-heel'd Shoes, I
thought of your Description, and could not forbear telling a Friend of mine
next to me, There enters a Smart Fellow. The Gentleman hearing it, had
immediately a Mind to pick a Quarrel with me, and desired Satisfaction: At
which I was more puzzled than at the other, remembering what Mention your
Familiar makes of those that had lost their Lives on such Occasions. The Thing
is referred to your Judgment, and I expect you to be my Second, since you have
been the Cause of our Quarrel. I am,

SIR, Your Friend and humble Servant.


I absolutely pronounce, that there is no Occasion of Offense given in this
Expression; for a Smart Fellow is always an Appellation of Praise, and is a Man
of double Capacity. The true Cast or Mould in which you may be sure to know him
is, when his Livelihood or Education is in the Civil List, and you see him
express a Vivacity or Mettle above the Way he is in by a little Jerk in his
Motion, short Trip in his Steps, well-fancied Lining of his Coat, or any other
Indications which may be given in a vigorous Dress. Now, What possible
Insinuation can there be, that it is a Cause of Quarrel for a Man to say, he
allows a Gentleman really to be, what he, his Tailor, his Hosier, and his
Millener, have conspired to make him? I confess, if this Person who appeals to
me had said, He was not a Smart Fellow, there had been Cause for Resentment;
but if he stands to it that he is one, he leaves no Manner of Ground for a
Misunderstanding. Indeed, it is a most lamentable Thing, that there should be a
Dispure raised upon a Man's saying another is, what he plainly takes Pains to
be thought.

But this Point connot be so well adjusted, as by enquiring what are the
Sentiments of wise Nations and Communities of the Use of the Sword, and from
thence conclude, Whether it is honorable to draw it so frequently or not? An
Illustrious Commonwealth of Italy has preserved it self for many Ages, without
letting one of their Subjects handle this destructive, Instrument, always
leaving that Work to such of Mankind as understand the Use of a whole Skin so
little, as to make a Profession of exposing it to Cuts and Scars.

But what need we run to such Foreign Instances: Our most ancient and
well-governed Cities are conspicuous Exemples to all Mankind in their
Regulation of Military Achievements. The chief Citizens, like the noble
Italians, hire Mercenaries to carry Arms in their Stead; and you shall have a
Fellow of a desperate Fortune, for the Gain of one Half-Crown, go through all
the Dangers of Tuttle-Fields, or the Artillery-Ground, clap his Right Jaw
within Two Inches of the Touchhole of a Musket, fire it off, and Huzza, with
as little Concern as he tears a Pullet. Thus you see, to what Scorn of Danger
these Mercenaries arrive, out of a mere Love of sordid Gain: But methinks it
should take off the strong Prepossession Men have in Favor of bold Actions,
when they see upon what low Motives Men aspire to 'em. Do but observe the
common Practice in the Government of those Heroic Bodies, our Militia and
Lieutenancies, the most ancient Corpse of Soldiers, perhaps, in the Universe; I
question, Whether there is one Instance of an Animosity between any Two of
these illustrious Sons of Mars since their Institution, which was decided by
Combat? I remember indeed to have read the Chronicle, of an Accident which had
like to have occasiond Bloodshed in the very Field before all the General
Officers, though most of them were Justices of the Peace: Captain Crabtree of
Birching-Lane, Haberdasher, had drawn a Bill upon Major General Maggot,
Cheesemonger in Thames Street. Crabtree draws this upon Mr. William Maggot and
Company. A Country Lad received this Bill, and not understanding the Word
Company, used in drawing Bills on Men in Partnership, carried it to Mr. Jeffrey
Stitch of Crooked-Lane (Lieutenant of the Major-General's Company) whom he had
the Day before seen march by the Door in all the Pomp of his Commission. The
Lieutenant accepts it, for the Honor of the Company, since it had come to him.
But Repayment being asked from the Major General, he absolutely refuses. Upon
this, the Lieutenant thinks of nothing less than to bring this to a Rupture,
and takes for his Second, Tobias Armstrong of the Counter, and sends him with a
Challenge in a Scrip of Parchment, wherein was written, Stitch contra Maggot,
and all the Fury vanished in a Moment. The Major General gives Satisfaction to
the Second, and all was well.

Hence it is, that the bold Spirits of our City are kept in such Subjection to
the Civil Power. Otherwise, Where would our Liberties soon be? If Wealth and
Valor were suffered to exert themselves with their utmost Force: If such
Officers as are employed in the terrible Bands abovementioned, were to draw
Bills as well as Swords: These dangerous Captains, who could victual an Army as
well as lead it, would be too powerful for the State. But the Point of Honor
justly gives Way to that of Gain; and by long and wise Regulation, the richest
is the bravest Man. I have known a Captain rise to a Colonel in Two Days by the
Fall of Stocks; and a Major, my good Friend, near the Monument. ascended to
that Honor by the Fall of the Price of Spirits, and the Rising of right Nantz.
By this true Sense of Honor, that Body of Warriors are ever in good Order and
Discipline, with their Colors and Coats all whole: As in other Battalions
(where their Principles of Action are less solid) you see the Men of Service
look like Specter, with long Sides, and lank Cheeks. In this Army, you may
measure a Man's Services by his Waste, and the most prominent Belly is
certainly the Man who has been most upon Action. Besides all this, there is
another excellent Remark to be made in the Discipline of these Troops. It being
of absolute Necessity that the People of England should see what they have for
their Money, and be Eyewitnesses of the Advantages they gain by it, all
Battles which are fought abroad are represented here. But since one Side must
be beaten, and the other conquer, which might create Disputes, the eldest
Company is always to make the other run, and the younger retreats, according to
the last News and best Intelligence. I have my self seen Prince Eugene make
Catinat fly from the Backside of Grays-Inn-Lane to Hockley in the Hole, and
not give over the Pursuit, till obliged to leave the Bear-Garden on the Right,
to avoid being borne down by Fencers, Wild Bulls and Monsters, too terrible for
the Encounter of any Heroes, but such whose Lives are their Livelihood.

We have here seen, that wise Nations do not admit of Fighting, even in the
Defense of their Country, as a laudable Action; and they live within the Walls
of our own City in great Honor and Reputation without it. It would be very
necessary to understand, by what Force of the Climate, Food, Education, or
Employment, one Man's Sense is brought to differ so essentially from that of
another; that one is ridiculous and contemptible for forbearing a Thing which
makes for his Safety; and another applauded for consulting his Ruin and
Destruction.

It will therefore be necessary for us (to show our Traveling) to examine this
Subject fully, and tell you how it comes to pass, That a Man of Honor in
Spain, though you offend him never so gallantly, stabs you basely; in England,
though you offend never so basely, challenges fairly: The former kills you out of
Revenge; the latter out of good Breeding. But to probe the Heart of Man in this
Particular to its utmost Thoughts and Recesses, I must wait for the Return of
Pacelet, who is now attending a Gentleman lately in a Duel, and sometimes
visits the Person, by whose Hand he received his Wounds.

St. James's Coffee-house. June 13.
Letters from Vienna of the 8th Instant say, there has been a Journal of the
Marches and Actions of the King of Sweden, from the Beginning of January to the
11th of April, N. S. communicated by the Swedish Ministers to that Court. These
Advices inform, That his Swedish Majesty entered the Territories of Muscovy in
February last with the main Body of his Army, in order to oblige the Enemy to a
general Engagement; but that the Muscovites declining a Battle, and an
universal Thaw having rendered the Rivers unpassable, the King returned into
Ukrania. There are mentioned several Rencounters between considerable
Detachments of the Swedish and Russian Armies. Marshal Heister intended to take
his Leave of the Court on the Day after the Date of these Letters, and put
himself at the Head of the Army in Hungary. The Malcontents had attempted to
send in a Supply of Provisions into Newhausel; but their Design was
disappointed by the Germans.

Advices from Berlin of the 15th Instant, N. S. say, That his Danish Majesty
having received an Invitation from the King of Prussia to an Interview,
designed to come to Potsdam within few Days; and that King Augustus resolved to
accompany him thither. To avoid all Difficulties in Ceremony, the Three Kings,
and all the Company who shall have the Honor to sit with them at Table, are to
draw Lots, and take Precedence accordingly.

They write from Hamburgh of the 18th Instant, N. S. That some particular
Letters from Dantzick speak of a late Action between the Swedes and Muscovites
near Jeroslaw; but that Engagement being mentioned from no other Place, there
is not much Credit given to this Intelligence.

We hear from Brussels, by Letters dated the 20th, That on the 14th in the
Evening the Duke of Marlborough and Prince Eugene arrived at Courtray, with a
Design to proceed the Day following to List, in the Neighborhood of which
City the Confederate Army was to rendezvous the same Day. Advices from Paris
inform us, that the Marshal de Bezons is appointed to command in Dauphine; and
that the Duke of Berwick is set out for Spain, with a Design to follow the
Fortunes of the Duke of Anjou, in case the French King should comply with the
late Demands of the Allies.

The Court of France has sent a Circular Letter to all the Governors of the
Provinces, to recommend to their Consideration his Majesty's late Conduct in
the Affair of Peace. It is thought fit in that Epistle, to condescend to a
certain Appeal to the People, Whether it is consistent with the Dignity of the
Crown, or the French Name, to submit to the Preliminaties demanded by the
Confederates? That Letter dwells upon the Unreasonableness of the Allies, in
requiring his Majesty's Assistance in dethroning his Grandson, and treats this
Particular in Language more suitable to it, as it is a Topic of Oratory, than
a real Circumstance on which the Interests of Nations, and Reasons of State,
which affect all Europe, are concerned.

The Close of this Memorial seems to prepare the People to expect all Events,
attributing the Confidence of the Enemy to the Goodness of their Troops; but
acknowledging, that his sole Dependence is upon the Intervention of Providence.

The TATLER. [No 29.
From Tuesd. June. 14. to Thursd. June 16. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, June 14.
HAving a very solid Respect for humane Nature, however it is distorted from
its natural Make, by Affectation, Humor, Custom, Misfortune, or Vice, I do
apply my self to my Friends to help me in raising Arguments for preserving it
in all its Individuals, as long as it is permitted. To one of my Letters on
this Subject, I have received the following Answer:

SIR.
IN Answer to your Question, Why Men of Sense, Virtue and Experience are seen
still to comply with that ridiculous Custom of Duelling? I must desire you to
reflect, that Custom has disb'd up in Ruffs the wisest Heads of our Ancestors,
and put the best of the present Age into huge Falbala Periwigs. Men of Sense
would not impose such Encumbrances on themselves; but be glad they might show
their Faces decently in Public upon easier Terms. If then such Men app^ar
reasonably Slaves to the Fashion, in what rega^ds the Figure of their Persons,
me ought not to wonder, that they are at least so in what seems to touch their
Reputations. Besides, you cannot be ignorant, that Dress and Chivalry have been
always encouraged by the Ladies, as the Two principal Branches of Gallantry.
It Is to avoid being sneer'd at for his Singularity, and from a Desire to appear
more agreeable to his Mistress, that a wise, experienced, and polite Man,
accomplices with the Dress commonly received, and is prevailed upon to violate
his Reason and Principles, in hazarding his Life and Estate by a Tilt, as well
as suffering his Pleasures to be constrained and sowred by the constant
Apprehension of a Quarrel. This is the more surprising, because Men of the most
delicate Sense and Principles have naturally in other Cases a particular
Repugnance in accommodating themselves to the Maxims of the World: But one may
easily distinguish the Man that is affected with Beauetry, and the Reputation
of a Tilt, from him who complies with both, merely as they are imposed upon him
by Custom; for in the former you will remark an Air of Vanity and Triumph;
whereas when the latter appears in a long Duvillier full of Powder, or has
decided a Quarrel by the Sword, you may perceive in his Face, that he appeals
to Custom for an Excuse. I think it may not be improper to enquire into the
Genealogy of this Chimerical Monster, called a Duel, which I take to be an
illegitimate Species of the ancient Knight-Errantry. By the Laws of this Whim,
your Heroic Person, or Man of Gallantry, was indispensibly obliged to starve
in Armor a certain Number of Years in the Chase of Monsters, encounter them at
the Peril of his Life, and suffer great Hardships, in order to gain the
Affection of the Fair Lady, and qualify himself for assuming the B^lle-Air,
that is, of a Pretty Fellow, or Man of Honor according to the Fashion: But
since the Publishing of Don Quixot, and Extinction of the Race of Dragons,
which Suetonius says happened in that of Wantley, the gallant and heroic
Spirits of these latter Times have been under the Necessity of creating new
Chimerical Monsters to entertain themselves with, by Way of single Combat, as
the only Proofs they are able to give their own Sex, and the Ladies, that they
are in all Poin's Men of nice Honor. But to do Justice to the ancient and real
Monsters, I must observe, that they never molested those who were not of a
Humor to Hunt for them in the Woods and Deserts; whereas on the contrary, our
modern Monsters are so familiarly admitted and entertained in all the Courts
and Cities of Europe, (except France) that one can scarce be in the most
humaniz'd Society without risquing ones Life; the People of the best Sort, and
the fine Gentlemen of the Age, being so fond of 'em, that they seldom appear in
any public Place without one. I have some further Considerations upon this
Subject, which as you encourage me, shall be communicated to you, by, Sir, a
Cousin; but once removed from the best Family of the Staffs, namely,

SIR, Your humble Servant, Kinsman and Friend, Tim. Switch.


It is certain, Mr. Switch has hit upon the true Source of this Evil; and that
it proceeds only from the Force of Custom that we contradict our selves in half
the Particulars and Occurrences of Life. But such a Tyranny in Love, which the
Fair impose upon us, is a little too severe, that we must demonstrate our
Affection for 'em by no certain Proof but Hatred to one another, or come at
them (only as one does to an Estate) by Survivorship. This Way of Application
to gain a Lady's Heart, is taking her as we do Towns and Castles, by
distressing the Place, and letting none come near 'em without our Pass. Were
such a Lover once to write the Truth of his Heart, and let her know his whole
Thoughts, he would appear indeed to have a Passion for her; but it would hardly
be called Love. The Billet-Deux would run to this Purpose:

Madam,
I Have so tender a Regard for you and your Interests, that I Will knock any Man
in the Head whom I observe to be of my Mind, and like you. Mr. Truman the other
Day looked at you in so languishing a Manner, that I am resolved to run him
through to morrow Morning: This, I think, he deserves for his Guilt in admiring
you; than which I cannot have a greater Reason for murdering him, except it be
that you also approve him. Whoever says he dies for you, I will make his Words
good, for I will kill him. I am,

Madam, Your most Obedient, Most Humble Servant.


From my own Apartment, June 14.
I am just come hither at Ten at Night, and have ever since Six been in the
most celebrated, though most nauseous, Company in Town: The Two Leaders of the
Society were a Critic and a Wit. These Two Gentlemen are great Opponents upon
all Occasions, not discerning that they are the nearest each other in Temper
and Talents of any Two Classes of Men in the World; for to profess Judgment,
and to profess Wit, both arise from the same Failure, which is Want of
Judgment. The Poverty of the Critic this Way proceeds from the Abuse of his
Faculty; that of the Wit, from the Neglect of it. It Is a particular Observation
I have always made, That of all Morrals, a Critic is the silliest; for by
inuring himself to examine all Things, whether they are of Consequence or not,
he never looks upon any Thing but with a Design of passing Sentence upon it; by
which Means, he is never a Companion, but always a Censor. This makes him
earnest upon Trifles; and dispute on the most indifferent Occasions with
Vehemence. If he offers to speak or write, that Talent which should approve the
Work of the other Faculties, prevents their Operation. He comes upon Action in
Armor; but without Weapons: He stands in Safety; but can gain no Glory. The
Wit on the other Hand has been hurried so long away by Imagination only, that
Judgment seems not to have ever been one of his natural Faculties. This
Gentleman takes himself to be as much obliged to be merry, as the other to be
grave. A thorough Critic is a Sort of Puritan in the polite World. As an
Enthusiast in Religion stumbles at the ordinary Occurrences of Life, if he
cannot quote Scripture Examples on the Occasion; so the Critic is never safe
in his Speech or Writing, without he has among the celebrated Writers an
Authority for the Truth of his Sentence. You will believe we had a very good
Time with these Brethren, who were so far out of the Dress of their native
Country, and so lost to its Dialect, that they were as much Strangers to
themselves, as to their Relation to each other. They took up the whole
Discourse; sometimes the Critic grew passionate, and when reprimanded by the
Wit for any Trip or Hesitation in his Voice, he would answer, Mr. Dryden makes
such a Character on such an Occasion break off in the same Manner; so that the
Stop was according to Nature, and as a Man in a Passion should do. The Wit, who
is as far gone in Letters as himself, seems to be at a Loss to answer such an
Apology; and concludes only, that though his Anger is justly vented, it wants
Fire in the Utterance. If Wit is to be measured by the Circumstances of Time
and Place, there is no Man has generally so little of that Talent, as he who is
a Wit by Profession. What he says, instead of arising from the Occasion, has an
Occasion invented to bring it in. Thus he is new for no other Reason, but that
he talks like no Body else; but has taken up a Method of his own, without
Commerce or Dialogue with other People. The lively Jasper Dactyle is one of
this Character. He seems to have made a Vow to be witty to his Life's End. When
you meet him, What do you think, says he, I have been entertaining my self
with? Then out comes a premeditated Turn; to which it is to no Purpose to
answer, for he goes on in the same Strain of Thought he designed without your
speaking. Therefore I have a general Answer to all he can say; as, Sure there
never was any Creature had so much Fire! Spondee, who is a Critic, is seldom
out of this fine Man's Company. They have no Manner of Affection for each
other, but keep together, like Novell and Oldfox in the Plain-Dealer, because
they show each other. I know several of Sense who can be diverted with this
Couple; but I see no Curiosity in the Thing, except it be, that Spondee is dull
and seems dull; but Dactyle is heavy with a brisk Face. It must be owned also,
that Dactyle has almost Vigor enough to be a Coxcomb; but Spondee by the
Lowness of his Constitution, is only a Blockhead.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 15.
We have no Particulars of Moment since our last, except it be, that the Copy
of the following Original Letter came by the Way of Ostend. It is said to have
been found in the Closet of Monsieur Chamillard, the late Secretary of State of
France, since his Disgrace. It was signed by Two Brothers of the famous
Cavalier, who led the Cevennois, and had a Personal Interview with the King, as
well as a Capitulation to lay down his Arms, and leave the Dominions of France.
There are many other Names to it; among whom, is the Chief of the Family of the
Marquis Guiscard. It is not yet known, whether Monsieur Chamillard had any real
Design to favor the Protestant Interest, or only thought to place himself at
the Head of that People, to make himself considerable enough to oppose his
Enemies at Court, and reinstate himself in Power there.

SIR,
WE have read your Majesty's Soon after the Conclusion of the late Treaty of
Peace, the French King dispersed a Letter through his Dominions, wherein he
shows the Reasons why he could not ratify the Preliminaries. Vide the public
Newspapers of this Date.
Letter to the Governors of your Provinces, with Instructions what Sentiments
to insinuate into the Minds of your People: But as you have always acted upon
the Maxim, That we were made for you, and not you for us; we must take Leave to
assure your Majesty, that we are exactly of the contrary Opinion, and must
desire you to send for your Grandson Home, and acquaint him, that you now know
by Experience, Absolute Power is only a Vertigo in the Brain of Princes, which
for a Time may quicken their Motion, and double in their diseased Sight the
Instances of Power above 'em; but must end in their Fall and Destruction. Your
Memorial speaks a good Father of your Family, but a very ill one of your
People. Your Majesty is reduced to hear Truth when you are obliged to speak it:
There is no governing any but Savages by other Methods than their own Consent,
which you seem to acknowledge, in appealing to us for our Opinion of your
Conduct in treating of Peace. Had your People been always of your Council, the
King of France had never been reduced so low, as to acknowledge his Arms were
fallen into Contempt. But since it is thus, we must ask, How is any Man of
France, but they of the House of Bourbon, the better that Philip is King of
Spain? We have outgrown that Folly of placing our Happiness in your Majesty's
being called, The Great: Therefore as you and we are all alike N.B. Mons.
Bernard and the chief Banker: of France became Bankrupts about this Time.
Bankrupts, and undone, let us not deceive our selves, but compound with our
Adversaries, and not talk like their Equals. Your Majesty must forgive us that
we cannot wish you Success, or lend you Help; for if you lose one Battle more,
we may have an Hand in the Peace you make; and doubt not but your Majesty's
Faith in Treaties will require the Ratification of the States of your Kingdoms.
So we bid you heartily farewell, till we have the Honor to meet you assembled
in Parliament. This happy Expectation makes us willing to wait the Event of
another Campaign, from whence we hope to be raised from the Mise y of Slaves,
to the Privileges of Subjects. We are,

Your Majesty's Truly Faithful, and Loyal Subjects, etc.


The TATLER. [No 30.
From Thursd. June 16. to Saturd. June 18. 1709.
From my own Apartment, June 16.
THE Vigilance, the Anxiety, the Tenderness, which I have for the good People
of England, I am persuaded will in Time be much commended; but I doubt whether
they will ever be rewarded. However, I must go on cheerfully in my Work of
Reformation: That being my great Design, I am studious to prevent my Labor's
increasing upon me; therefore am particularly observant of the Temper and
Inclinations of Childhood and Youth, that we may not give Vice and Folly
Supplies from the growing Generation. It is hardly to be imagined how useful
this Study is, and what great Evils or Benefits arise from putting us in our
tender Years to what we are fit, or unfit: Therefore on Tuesday last (with a
Design to sound their Inclinations) I took Three Lads who are under my
Guardianship, a rambling, in a Hackney-Coach, to show them the Town, as the
Lions, the Tombs, Bedlam, and the other Places which are Entertainments to raw
Minds, because they strike forcibly on the Fancy. The Boys are Brothers, one of
Sixteen, the other of Fourteen, the other of Twelve. The First was his Father's
Darling, the Second his Mother's, and the Third is mine, who am their Uncle.
Mr. William is a Lad of true Genius; but being at the upper End of a great
School, and having all the Boys below him, his Arrogance is insupportable. If I
begin to show a little of my Latin, he immediately interrupts: Uncle, under
Favor, that which you say is not understood in that Manner. Brother, says my
Boy Jack, You do not show your Manners much in contradicting my Uncle Isaac.
You queer Cur, says Mr. William, Do you think my Uncle takes any Notice of such
a dull Rogue as you are? Mr. William goes on; He is the most stupid of all my
Mother's Children: He knows nothing of his Book: When he should mind that, he
is hiding or hoarding his Taws and Marbles, or laying up Farthings. His Way of
Thinking is, Four and twenty Farthings make Sixpence, and Two Sixpences a
Shilling, Two Shillings and Sixpence Half a Crown, and Two Half-Crowns Five
Shillings. So within these Two Months, the close Hunks has scraped up Twenty
Shillings, and we'll make him spend it all before he comes Home. Jack
immediately claps his Hands into both Pockets, and turns as pale as Ashes.
There is nothing touches a Parent (and such I am to Jack) so nearly, as a
provident Conduct. This Lad has in him the true Temper for a good Husband, a
kind Father, and an honest Executor. All the great People you see make
considerable Figures on the Change, in Court, and sometimes in Senates, are
such as in Reality have no greater Faculty than what may be called Humane
Instinct, which is a natural Tendency to their own Preservation, and that of
their Friends, without being capable of striking out of the Road for
Adventures. There Is Sir William Scrip was of this Sort of Capacity from his
Childhood: He has bought the Country round him, and makes a Bargain better than
Sir Harry Wildfire with all his Wit and Humor. Sir Harry never wants Money but
he comes to Scrip, laughs at him half an Hour, and then gives Bond for the other
Thousand. The close Men are incapable of placing Merit any where but in their
Pence, and therefore gain it; while others, who have larger Capacities. are
diverted from the Pursuit by Enjoyments, which can be supported only by that
Cash which they despise; and therefore are in the End, Slaves to their
Inferiors both in Fortune and Understanding. I once heard a Man of excellent
Sense observe, That more Affairs in the World failed by being in the Hands of
Men of too large Capacities for their Business, than by being in the Conduct of
such as wanted Abilities to execute them. Jack therefore being of a plodding
Make, shall be a Citizen; and I design him to be the Refuge of the Family in
their Distress, as well as their Jest in Prosperity. His Brother Will shall go
to Oxford with all Speed, where, if he does not arrive at being a Man of Sense,
he will soon be informed wherein he is a Coxcomb. There is in that Place such a
true Spirit of Raillery and Humor, that if they cannot make you a wise Man,
they will certainly let you know you are a Fool, which is all my Cousin wants
to cease to be so. Thus having taken these Two out of the Way, I have Leisure
to look at my Third Lad. I observe in the young Rogue a natural Subtilty of
Mind, which discovers it self rather in forbearing to declare his Thoughts on
any Occasion, than in any visible Way of exerting himself in Discourse. For
which Reason I will place him where, if he commits no Faults, he may go further
than those in other Stations, though they excel in Virtues. The Boy is well
fashioned, and will easily fall into a graceful Manner; wherefore, I have a
Design to make him a Page to a great Lady of my Acquaintance; by which Means he
will be well skilled in the common Modes of Life, and make a greater Progress
in the World by that Knowledge, than with the greatest Qualities without it. A
good Mien in a Court will carry a Man greater Lengths than a good Understanding
in any other Place. We see a World of Pains taken, and the best Years of Life
spent, in collecting a Set of Thoughts in a College for the Conduct of Life;
and after all, the Man so qualified shall hesitate in his Speech to a good Suit
of Clothes, and want common Sense before an agreeable Woman. Hence it is, that
Wisdom, Valor, Justice, and Learning, cannot keep a Man in Countenance that is
possessed with these Excellencies, if he wants that inferior Art of Life and
Behavior, called Good Breeding. A Man endowed with great Perfections without
this, is like one who has his Pockets full of Gold, but always wants Change for
his ordinary Occasions.

Will. Courtly is a living Instance of this Truth, and has had the same
Education which I am giving my Nephew. He never spoke a Thing but what was said
before, and yet can converse with the wittiest Men without being ridiculous.
Among the Learned, he does not appear ignorant; nor with the Wise, indiscreet.
Living in Conversation from his Infancy, makes him no where at a Loss; and a
long Familiarity with the Persons of Men, is in a Manner of the same Service to
him, as if he knew their Arts. As Ceremony is the Invention of wise Men to keep
Fools at a Distance, so good Breeding is an Expedient to make Fools and wise
Men Equals.

Will's Coffee-house, June 17.
The Suspension of the Playhouse has made me have nothing to send you from
hence; but calling here this Evening, I found the Party I usually sit with,
upon the Business of Writing, and examining what was the handsomest Style in
which to address Women, and write Letters of Gallantry. Many were the Opinions
which were immediately declared on this Subject: Some were for a certain
Softness; some for I know not what Delicacy; others for something inexpressibly
Tender: When it came to me, I said there was no Rule in the World to be made
for writing Letters, but that of being as near what you speak Face to Face as
you can; which is so great a Truth, that I am of Opinion, Writing has lost more
Mistresses than any one Mistake in the whole Legend of Love. For when you write
to a Lady for whom you have a solid and honorable Passion, the great Idea you
have of her, joined to a quick Sense of her Absence, fills your Mind with a
Sort of Tenderness, that gives your Language too much the Air of Complaint,
which is seldom successful. For a Man may flatter himself as he pleases, but he
will find, that the Women have more Understanding in their own Affairs than we
have, and Women of Spirit are not to be won by Mourners. He that can keep
handsomely within Rules, and support the Carriage of a Companion to his
Mistress, is much more likely to prevail, than he who lets her see, the whole
Relish of his Life depends upon her. If possible therefore divert your
Mistress, rather than sigh to her. The pleasant Man she will desire for her own
Sake; but the languishing Lover has nothing to hope from, but her Pity. To show
the Difference, I produced two Letters ^ Lady gave me, which had been writ by
two Gentlemen, who pretended to her, but were bot^ killed the next Day after
the Date at the Batt^ of Almonza. One of them was a mercurial ga^ humored Man;
the other a Man of a serious, b^ a great and gallant Spirit. Poor Jack Careles^
This is his Letter: You see how it is folded: T^ Air of it is so negligent, one
might have re^ half of it by peeping into it, without breaking (...) open. He
had no Exactness.

MADAM,
IT is a very pleasant Circumstance I am in, that while I should be thinking of
the good Company we are to meet within a Day or two, where we shall go to
Loggerheads, my Thoughts are running upon a Fair Enemy in England. I was in
Hopes I had left you there; but you follow the Camp, though I have endeavored to
make some of our Leaguer Ladies drive you out of the Field. All my Comfort is,
you are more troublesome to my Colonel than my self: I permit you to visit me
only now and then; but he downright keeps you. I laugh at his Honor as far as
his Gravity will allow me: But I know him to be a Man of too much Merit to
succeed with a Woman. Therefore defend your Heart as well as you can, I shall
come Home this Winter irresistibly dressed, and with quite a new Foreign Air.
And so I had like to say, I rest, but alas! I remain,

Madam, Your most Obedient, Most Humble Servant. John Careless.


Now for Colonel Constant's Epistle; you see it is folded and directed with the
utmost Care.

MADAM,
I Do my self the Honor to write to you this Evening, because I believe to
Morrow will be a Day of Battle, and something forebodes in my Breast that I
shall fall in it. If it proves so, I hope you will hear, I have done nothing
below a Man who had the Love of his Country, quickened by a Passion for a Woman
of Honor. If there be any Thing noble in going to a certain Death; if there be
any Merit, that I meet it with Pleasure, by promising my self a Place in your
Esteem; if your Applause, when I am no more, is preferable to the most glorious
Life without you: I say, Madam, If any of these Considerations can have Weight
with you, you will give me a kind Place in your Memory, which I prefer to the
Glory of Caesar. I hope, this will be read, as it is writ, with Tears.


The beloved Lady is a Woman of a sensible Mind; but she has confessed to me,
that after all her true and solid Value for Constant, she had much more Concern
for the Loss of Careless. Those noble and serious Spirits have something equal
to the Adversities they meet with, and consequently lessen the Objects of Pity.
Great Accidents seem not cut out so much for Men of familiar Characters, which
makes them more easily pitied, and soon after beloved. Add to this, that the
Sort of Love which generally succeeds, is a Stranger to Awe and Distance. I
asked Romana, Whether of the Two she should have chosen had they survived? She
said, She knew she ought to have taken Constant; but believed, she should have
chosen Careless.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 17.
Letters from Lisbon of the 9th Instant, N. S. say, That the Enemy's Army,
having blocked up Olivenza, was posted on the Guadiana. The Portuguese are very
apprehensive that the Garrison of that Place, though it consists of five of the
best Regiments of their Army, will be obliged to surrender, if not timely
relieved, they not being supplied with Provisions for more than Six Weeks.
Hereupon their Generals held a Council of War on the 4th Instant, wherein it
was concluded to advance toward Badajos. With this Design the Army decamped on
the 5th from Jerumena, and marched to Cancaon. It Is hoped, that if the Enemy
follow their Motions, they may have Opportunity to put a sufficient Quantity of
Provision and Ammunition into Olivenza.

Mr. Bickerstaff gives Notice to all Persons that dress themselves as they
please, without Regard to Decorum, (as with blue and red Stockings in Mourning;
tucked Cravats, and Nightcap Wigs, before People of the First Quality) That he
has yet received no Fine for indulging them in that Liberty, and that he
expects their Compliance with this Demand, or that they go Home immediately and
shift themselves. This is further to acquaint the Town, That the Report of the
Hosiers, Toymen, and Milleners, having compounded with Mr. Bickerstaff for
tolerating such Enormities, is utterly false and scandalous.

The TATLER. [No 31.
From Saturday June 18. to Tuesd. June 21. 1709.
Grecian Coffee-house, June 18.
IN my Dissertation against the Custom of single Combat, it has been objected,
that there is not Learning, or much Reading, shown therein, which is the very
Life and Soul of all Treatises; for which Reason, being always easy to receive
Admonitions, and reform my Errors, I thought fit to consult this learned Board
on the Subject. Upon proposing some Doubts, and desiring their Assistance, a
very hopeful young Gentleman, my Relation, who is to be called to the Bar
within a Year and an half at farthest, told me, That he had ever since I first
mentioned Duelling turned his Head that Way; and that he was principally moved
thereto, because he designed to follow the Circuits in the North of England and
the South of Scotland, and to reside mostly at his own Estate at Landbadernawz
in Cardiganshire. The Northern Britains and the Southern Scots are a warm
People, and the Welsh a Nation of Gentlemen; so that it behooved him to
understand well the Science of Quarrelling. The young Gentleman proceeded
admirably well, and gave the Board an Account, that he had read Fitzherbert's
Grand Abridgment, and had found, that Duelling is a very ancient Part of the
Law: For when a Man is sued, be it for his Life or his Land, the Person that
joins the Issue, whether Plaintiff or Defendant, may put the Trial upon the
Duel. Further he argued, under Favor of the Court, that when the Issue is
joined by the Duel in Treason or other Capital Crimes, the Parties accused and
Accuser must fight in their own proper Persons: But if the Dispute be for
Lands, you may hire a Champion at Hockley in the Hole, or any where else. This
Part of the Law we had from the Saxons; and they had it, as also the Trial by
Ordeal, from the Laplanders. It is indeed agreed, said he, the Southern and
Eastern Nations never knew any Thing of it; for though the ancient Romans would
scold, and call Names filthily, yet there is not an Example of a Challenge that
ever passed amongst them.

His quoting the Eastern Nations, put another Gentleman in Mind of an Account
he had from a Boatswain of an East India Man; which was, that a Chinese had
tricked and bubbled him, and that when he came to demand Satisfaction the next
Morning, and like a true Tar of Honor called him Son of a Whore, Liar, Dog,
and other rough Appellatives used by Persons conversant with Winds and Waves;
the Chinese, with great Tranquillity, desired him not to come Abroad fasting,
nor put himself in a Heat, for it would prejudice his Health. Thus the East
knows nothing of this Gallantry.

There sat at the Left of the Table a Person of a venerable Aspect, who
asserted, That half the Impositions which are put upon these Ages, have been
transmitted by Writers who have given too great Pomp and Magnificence to the
Exploits of the ancient Bear-Garden, and made their Gladiators, by fabulous
Tradition, greater than Gorman and others of Great Britain. He informed the
Company, that he had searched Authorities for what he said, and that a learned
Antiquary, Humphrey Scarecrow Esquire of Hockley in the Hole, Recorder to the
Bear-Garden, was then writing a Discourse on the Subject. It appears by the
best Accounts, says this Gentleman, that the high Names which are used among us
with so great Veneration, were no other than Stage-fighters, and Worthies of
the ancient Bear-Garden. The renowned Hercules always carried a Quarterstaff,
and was from thence called Claviger. A learned Chronologist is about proving
what Wood this Staff was made of, whether Oak, Ash, or Crab-Tree. The first
Trial of Skill he ever performed, was with one Cacus, a Deer-Stealer; the next
was with Typhonus, a Giant of Forty Foot Four Inches. Indeed it was unhappily
recorded, that meeting at last with a Sailor's Wife, she made his Staff of
Prowess serve her own Use, and dwindle away to a Distaff: She clapped him on an
old Tar-Jacket of her Husband's; so that this great Hero drooped like a scabbed
Sheep. Him his Contemporary Theseus succeeded in the Bear-Garden, which Honor
he held for many Years: This grand Duellist went to Hell, and was the only One
of that Sort that ever came back again. As for Achilles and Hector, (as the
Ballads of those Times mention) they were pretty Smart Fellows; they fought at
Sword and Buckler; but the former had much the better of it; his Mother, who
was an Oyster-Woman, having got a Blacksmith of Lemnos to make her Son's
Weapons. There Is a Pair of trusty Trojans in a Song of Virgil's, that were
famous for handling their Gauntlets, Dares, and Entellus; and indeed it does
appear, they fought no Sham Prize. What Arms the great Alexander used, is
uncertain; however, the Historian mentions, when he attacked Thalestris, it was
only at single Rapier; but the Weapon soon failed; for it was always observed,
that the Amazons had a Sort of Enchantment about them, which made the Blade of
the Weapon, though never of so good Metal, at every home Push lose its Edge and
grow feeble.

The Roman Bear-Garden was abundantly more magnificent than any Thing Greece
could boast of; it flourished most under those Delights of Mankind, Nero and
Domitian: At one Time it is recorded, 400 Senators entered the List, and thought
it an Honor to be cudgelled and quarterstaffed. I observe, the Lanistae were
the People chiefly employed, which makes me imagine our Bear-Garden copied much
after this, the Butchers being the greatest Men in it.

Thus far the Glory and Honor of the Bear-Garden stood secure, till Fate, that
irresistible Ruler of sublunary Things, in that universal Ruin of Arts and
politer Learning, by those savage People the Goths and Vandals, destroyed and
levelled it to the Ground. Then fell the Grandeur and Bravery of the Roman
State, till at last the Warlike Genius (but accompanied with more Courtesy)
revived in the Christian World under those puissant Champions, St. George, St.
Dennis, and other dignified Heroes: One killed his Dragon, another his Lion,
and were all afterward canonized for it, having red Letters before them to
illustrate their Martial Temper. The Spanish Nation, it must be owned, were
devoted to Gallantry and Chivalry above the rest of the World. What a great
Figure does that great Name, Don Quixot, make in History? How shines this
glorious Star in the Western World? O renowned Hero! O Mirror of Knighthood!
Thy branish'd Winyard all the World defies,
And kills as sure as del Tobosa's Eyes.
I am forced to break off abruptly, being sent for in Haste, with my Rule, to
measure the Degree of an Affront, before the Two Gentlemen (who are now in
their Breeches and Pumps ready to engage behind Mountague-House) have made a
Pass.

From my own Apartment, June 18.
It is an unreasonable Objection I find against my Labors, that my Stock is
not all my own, and therefore the kind Reception I have met with is not so
deserved as it ought to be. But I hope, though it be never so true, that I am
obliged to my Friends for laying their Cash in my Hands, since I give it them
again when they please, and leave them at their Liberty to call it Home, it
will not hurt me with my gentle Readers. Ask all the Merchants who act upon
Consignments, Where is the Necessity (if they answer readily what their
Correspondents draw) of their being wealthy themselves? Ask the greatest
Bankers, If all the Men they deal with were to draw at once, what would be the
Consequence? But indeed a Country Friend has writ me a Letter which gives me
great Mortification; wherein I find I am so far from expecting a Supply from
thence, that some have not heard of me, and the rest do not understand me. His
Epistle is as follows:

Dear Cousin,
I Thought when I left the Town to have raised your Fame here, and helped you
to support it by Intelligence from hence; but alas! they had never heard of the
Tatler till I brought down a Set. I lent them from House to House; but they
asked we what they meant. I began to enlighten them, by telling who and who
were supposed to be intended by the Characters drawn. I said for Instance,
Chloe and Clarissa are two eminent Toasts. A Gentleman (who keeps his Greyhound
and Gun, and one would think might know better) told me, he supposed they were
Papishes, for their Names were not English: Then, said he, Why do you call live
People Toasts? I answered, That was a new Name found out by the Wits, to make a
Lady have the same Effect as Burridge in the Glass when a Man is drinking. But
says I, Sir, I perceive this is to you all bamboozling; why you look as if you
were Don Diego'd to the Tune of a Thousand Pounds. All this good Language was
lost upon him: He only stared, though he is as good a Scholar as any Layman in
the Town, except the Barber. Thus, Cousin, you must be content with London for
the Center of your Wealth and Fame; we have no Relish for you. Wit must
describe its proper Circumference, and not go beyond it, lest (like little
Boys, when they straggle out of their own Parish) it may wander to Places where
it is not known, and be lost. Since it is so, you must excuse me that I am
forced at a Visit to sit silent, and only lay up what excellent Things pass at
such Conversations.

This Evening I was with a Couple of young Ladies; one of them has the
Character of the prettiest Company, yet really I thought her but silly; the
other, who talked a great deal less, I observed to have Understanding. The Lady
who is reckoned such a Companion among her Acquaintance, has only, with a very
brisk Air, a Knack of saying the commonest Things: The other, with a sly
serious one, says home Things enough. The first (Mistress Giddy) is very quick;
but the second (Mrs. Slim) fell into Giddy's own Style, and was as good Company
as she. Giddy happens to drop her Glove; Slim reaches it to her: Madam (says
Giddy) I hope you will have a better Office. Upon which Slim immediately
repartees, and sits in her Lap, and cries, Are you not sorry for my Heaviness?
This sly Wench pleased me to see how she hit her Height of Understanding so
well. We sat down to Supper. Says Giddy, mighty prettily, Two Hands in a Dish,
and One in a Purse: Says Slim, Ay, Madam, the More the Merrier; but the Fewer
the Better Cheer. I quickly took the Hint, and was as witty and talkative as
they. Says I, He that will not when he may,
When he will he shall have Nay;
and so helped my self. Giddy turns about, What have you found your Tongue?
Yes, (says I) it is Manners to speak when I am spoken to; but your greatest
Talkers are the least Doers, and the still Sow eats up all the Broth. Ha! Ha!
says Giddy, One would think he had nothing in him, and do you hear how he talks
when he pleases! I grew immediately roguish and pleasant to a Degree in the
same Strain. Slim, who knew how good Company we had been, cries, You Will
certainly print this bright Conversation.


It is so; and hereby you may see how small an Appearance the prettiest Things
said in Company make when in Print.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 20.
A Mail from Lisbon has brought Advices of June the 12th, from the King of
Portugal's Army encamped at Torre Allegada, which inform us, That the General
of the Army called a Court Martial on the 4th at the Camp of Gerumhena, where
it was resolved to march with a Design to attempt the Succor of Olivenza.
Accordingly the Army moved on the 5th, and marched toward Badajos. Upon their
Approach, the Marquis de Bay detached so great a Party from the Blockade of
Olivenza, that the Marquis das Minas, at the Head of a large Detachment,
covered a great Convoy of Provisions toward Olivenza, which threw in their
Stores, and marched back to the main Army, without Molestation from the
Spaniards. They add, That each Army must necessarily march into Quarters within
Twenty Days.

Whosoever can discover a Surgeon's Apprentice, who fell upon Mr. Bickerstaff's
Messenger, or (as the Printers call him) Devil, going to the Press, and tore
out of his Hand Part of his Essay against Duels, in the Fragments of which were
the Words, You lie, and Man of Honor, taken up at the Temple-Gate; and the
Words, Perhaps, -- May be not, -- By your Leave, Sir, -- and other Terms of
Provocation, taken up at the Door of Young Man's Coffee-house, shall receive
Satisfaction from Mr. Morphew, besides a Set of Arguments to be spoken to any
Man in a Passion, which, if the said enraged Man listens to, will prevent
Quarrelling.

Mr. Bickerstaff does hereby give Notice, That he has taken the Two famous
Universities of this Land under his immediate Care, and does hereby promise all
Tutors and Pupils, That he will hear what can be said of each Side between
them, and to correct them impartially, by placing them in Orders and Classes in
the Learned World, according to their Merit.

The TATLER. [No 32.
From Tuesday June 21. to Thursd. June 23. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, June 22.
AN Answer to the following Letter being absolutely necessary to be dispatched
with all Expedition, I must trespass upon all that come with Horary Questions
into my Antichamber, to give the Gentleman my Opinion.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
June 18. 1709. SIR,
I Know not whether you ought to pity or laugh at me; for I am fallen
desperately in Love with a professed Platonne, the most unaccountable Creature
of her Sex. To hear her talk Seraphicks, and run over Norris and Moor, and
Milton, and the whole Set of Intellectual Triflers, torments me heartily; for
to a Lover who understands Metaphors, all this pretty Prattle of Idea's gives
very fine Views of Pleasure, which only the dear Declaimer prevents, by
understanding them literally. Why should she wish to be a Cherubim, when it is
Flesh and Blood that makes her adorable? If I speak to her, that is a high
Breach of the Idea of Intuition: If I offer at her Hand or Lip, she shrinks
from the Touch like a Sensitive Plant, and would contract her self into mere
Spirit. She calls her Chariot, Vehicle; her furbelow'd Scarf, Pinnions: Her
blue Mant and Petticoat is her Azure Dress; and her Footman goes by the Name of
Oberon. It Is my Misfortune to be Six Foot and a half high, Two full Spans
between the Shoulders, Thirteen Inches Diameter in the Calves; and before I was
in Love, I had a noble Stomach, and usually went to Bed sober with Two Bottles.
I am not quite Six and twenty, and my Nose is marked truly Aquiline. For these
Reasons, I am in a very particular Manner her Aversion. What shall I do?
Impudence it self cannot reclaim her. If I write miserable, she reckons me
among the Children of Perdition, and discards me her Region: If I assume the
Gross and Substantial, she plays the real Ghost with me, and vaniand;shes in a
Moment. I had Hopes in the Hypocrisy of her Sex; but Perseverance makes it as
bad as fixed Aversion. I desire your Opinion, Whether I may not lawfully play
the Inquisition upon her, make use of a little Force, and put her to the Rack
and the Torture, only to convince her, she has really fine Limbs, without
spoiling or distorting them. I expect your Directions, e're I proceed to
dwindle and fall away with Despair; which at present I don't think advisable,
because, if she should recant, she may then hate me perhaps in the other
Extreme for my Tenuity. I am (with Impatience)

Your most humble Servant, Charles Sturdy.


My Patient has put his Case with very much Warmth, and represented it in so
lively a Manner, that I see both his Torment and Tormenter with great
Perspicuity. This Order of Platonic Ladies are to be dealt with in a peculiar
Manner from all the rest of the Sex. Flattery is the general Way, and the Way
in this Case; but it is not to be done grossly. Every Man that has Wit, and
Humor, and Raillery, can make a good Flatterer for Woman in general; but a
Platoune is not to be touched with Panegyric: She will tell you, it is a
Sensuality in the Soul to be delighted that Way. You are not therefore to
commend, but silently consent to all she does, and says. You are to consider in
her, the Scorn of you is not Humor, but Opinion.

There were some Years since a Set of these Ladies who were of Quality, and
gave out, That Virginity was to be their State of Life during this mortal
Condition, and therefore resolved to join their Fortunes, and erect a Nunnery.
The Place of Residence was pitched upon; and a pretty Situation, full of
natural Falls and Risings of Waters, with shady Coverts, and flowery Arbours,
was approved by Seven of the Founders. There were as many of our Sex who took
the Liberty to visit those Mansions of intended Severity; among others, a
famous Rake of that Time, who had the grave Way to an Excellence. He came in
first; but upon seeing a Servant coming toward him, with a Design to tell him,
this was no Place for him or his Companions, up goes my grave Impudence to the
Maid: Young Woman, said he, if any of the Ladies are in the Way on this Side of
the House, pray carry us on the other Side toward the Gardens: We are, you
must know, Gentlemen that are traveling England; after which we shall go into
Foreign Parts, where some of us have already been. Here he bows in the most
humble Manner, and kissed the Girl, who knew not how to behave to such a Sort
of Carriage. He goes on: Now you must know we have an Ambition to have it to
say, That we have a Protestant Nunnery in England: But pray Mrs. Betty -- Sir,
she replied, my Name is Susan, at your Service. Then I heartily beg your Pardon
-- No Offense in the least (says she) for I have a Cousin-German whose Name is
Betty. Indeed, said he, I protest to you that was more than I knew, I spoke at
Random: But since it happens that I was near in the Right, give me Leave to
present this Gentleman to the Favor of a civil Salute. His Friend advances,
and so on, till that they had all saluted her. By this Means, the poor Girl was
in the middle of the Crowd of these Fellows at a Loss what to do, without
Courage to pass through 'em; and the Platonicks, at several Peep-holes, pale,
trembling, and fretting. Rake perceived they were observed, and therefore took
Care to keep Suky in Chat with Questions concerning their Way of Life; when
appeared at last Madonella, a Lady who had writ a fine Book concerning the
Recluse Life, and was the Projectrix of the Foundation. She approaches into the
Hall; and Rake, knowing the Dignity of his own Mien and Aspect, goes Deputy
from his Company. She begins; Sir, I am obliged to follow the Servant, who was
sent out to know, What Affair could make Strangers press upon a Solitude which
we, who are to inhabit this Place, have devoted to Heaven and our own Thoughts?
Madam, replies Rake, (with an Air of great Distance, mixed with a certain
Indifference, by which he could dissemble Dissimulation) your great Intention
has made more Noise in the World than you design it should; and we Travelers,
who have seen many foreign Institutions of this Kind, have a Curiosity to see,
in its first Rudiments, this Seat of Primitive Piety; for such it must be
called by future Ages, to the Eternal Honor of the Founders. I have read
Madonella's excellent and seraphick Discourse on this Subject. The Lady
immediately answers, If what I have said could have contributed to raise any
Thoughts in you that may make for the Advancement of intellectual and divine
Conversation, I should think my self extremely happy. He immediately fell back
with the profoundest Veneration; then advancing, Are you then that admired
Lady? If I may approach Lips which have uttered Things so sacred -- He salutes
her. His Friends followed his Example. The Devoted within stood in Amazement
where this would end, to see Madonella receive their Address and their Company.
But Rake goes on -- We would not transgress Rules; but if we may take the
Liberty to see the Place you have thought fit to choose for ever, we would go
into such Parts of the Gardens as is consistent with the Severitics you have
imposed on your selves. To be short, Madonella permitted Rake to lead her into
the Assembly of Nuns, followed by his Friends, and each took his Fair One by
the Hand, after due Explanation, to walk round the Gardens. The Conversation
turned upon the Lillies, the Flowers, the Arbors, and the growing Vegetables;
and Rake had the solemn Impudence, when the whole Company stood round him, to
say, That he sincerely wished Men might rise out of the Earth like Plants; and
that our Minds were not of Necessity to be sullied with carnivorous Appetites
for the Generation, as well as Support of our Species. This was spoke with so
easy and fixed an Assurance, that Madonella answered, Sir, under the Notion of
a pious Thought, you deceive your self in wishing an Institution foreign to
that of Providence: These Desires were implanted in us for reverend Purposes,
in preserving the Race of Men, and giving Opportunities for making our Chastity
more Heroic. The Conference was continued in this Celestial Strain, and
carried on so well by the Managers on both Sides, that it created a Second and
a Second Interview; and, without entering into further Particulars, there was
hardly one of them but was a Mother or Father that Day Twelvemonth.

Any unnatural Part is long taking up, and as long laying aside; therefore Mr.
Sturdy may assure himself, Platonica will fly for ever from a forward
Behavior; but if he approaches her according to this Model, she will fall in
with the Necessities of mortal Life, and condescend to look with Pity upon an
unhappy Man, imprisoned in so much Body, and urged by such violent Desires.

From my own Apartment, June 22.
The Evils of this Town increase upon me to so great a Degree, that I am half
afraid I shall not leave the World much better than I found it. Several worthy
Gentlemen and Critics have applied to me, to give my Censure of an Enormity
which has been revived (after being long oppressed) and is called Punning. I
have several Arguments ready to prove, that he cannot be a Man of Honor who is
guilty of this Abuse of Humane Society. But the Way to expose it, is, like the
Expedient of curing Drunkenness, showing a Man in that Condition: Therefore I
must give my Reader Warning, to expect a Collection of these Offenses; without
which Preparation, I thought it too adventurous to introduce the very Mention
of it in good Company; and hope, I shall be understood to do it, as a Divine
mentions Oaths and Curses, only for their Condemnation. I shall dedicate this
Discourse to a Gentleman my very good Friend, who is the Janus of our Times,
and whom, by his Years and Wit, you would take to be of the last Age; but by
his Dress and Morals, of this.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 22.
Last Night arrived Two Mails from Holland, which bring Letters from the Hague
of the 28th Instant, N. S. with Advice, That the Enemy lay encamped behind a
strong Retrenchment, with the Marsh of Remieres on their Right and Left,
extending it self as far as Bethune: La Bassee is in their Front, Lens in their
Rear, and their Camp is strengthened by another Line from Lens to Douay. The
Duke of Marlborough caused an exact Observation to be made of their Ground, and
the Works by which they were covered, which appeared so strong, that it was not
thought proper to attack them in their present Posture. However, the Duke
thought fit to make a Feint as if he designed it; His Grace accordingly
marching from the Abbey at Looze, as did Prince Eugene from Lampret, and
advanced with all possible Diligence toward the Enemy. To favor the
Appearance of an intended Assault, the Ways were made, and Orders distributed
in such a Manner, that none in either Camp could have Thoughts of any Thing but
charging the Enemy by Break of Day the next Morning: But soon after the Fall of
the Night of the 26th, the whole Army faced toward Tournay, which Place they
invested early in the Morning of the 27th. The Marshall Villars was so
confident that we designed to attack him, that he had drawn great Part of the
Garrison of the Place, which is now invested, into the Field: For which Reason,
it is presumed it must submit within a small Time; which the Enemy cannot
prevent, but by coming out of their present Camp, and hazarding a general
Engagement. These Advices add, That the Garrison of Mons had marched out under
the Command of Marshall d' Arco; which, with the Bavarians, Walloons, and the
Troops of Cologne, have joined the grand Army of the Enemy.

The TATLER. [No 33.
By Mrs. Jenny Distaff, Half-Sister to Mr. Bickerstaff.
From Thursd. June 23. to Saturd. June 25. 1709.
From my own Apartment, June 23.
MY Brother has made an Excursion into the Country, and the Work against
Saturday lies upon me. I am very glad I have got Pen and Ink in my Hand; for I
have for some Time longed for his Absence, to give a Right Idea of Things,
which I thought he put in a very odd Light, and some of them to the
Disadvantage of my own Sex. It is much to be lamented, that it is necessary to
make Discourses, and publish Treatises, to keep the horrid Creatures, the Men,
within the Rules of common Decency. Turning over the Papers of Memorials or
Hints for the ensuing Discourses, I find a Letter subscribed by Mr. Truman.

SIR,
I Am lately come to Town, and have read your Works with much Pleasure. You
make Wit subservient to good Principles and good Manners. Yet, because I design
to buy the Tatlers for my Daughters to read, I take the Freedom to desire you,
for the future, to say nothing about any Combat between Alexander and
Thalestris.


This Offense gives me Occasion to express my self with the Resentment I ought,
on People who take Liberties of Speech before that Sex of whom the honored
Names of Mother, Daughter, and Sister, are a Part: I had like to have named
Wife in the Number; but the senseless World are so mistaken in their Sentiments
of Pleasure, that the most amiable Term in Humane Life is become the Derision
of Fools and Scorners. My Brother and I have at least Fifty Times quarreled
upon this Topic. I ever argue, That the Frailties of Women are to be imputed
to the false Ornaments which Men of Wit put upon our Folly and Coquetry. He
lays all the Vices of Men upon Women's secret Approbation of Libertine
Characters in them. I did not care to give up a Point; but now he is out of the
Way, I cannot but own I believe there is very much in what he asserted: For if
you will believe your Eyes, and own, that the wickedest and the wittiest of
them all marry one Day or other; Is it possible to believe, that if a Man
thought he should be for ever incapable of being received by a Woman of Merit
and Honor, he would persist in an abandoned Way, and deny himself the
Possibility of enjoying the Happiness of well-governed Desires, orderly
Satisfactions, and honorable Methods of Life? If our Sex were wise, a Lover
should have a Certificate from the last Woman he served, how he was turned
away, before he was received into the Service of another: But at present any
Vagabond is welcome, provided he promises to enter into our Livery. It is
wonderful, that we will not take a Footman without Credentials from his last
Master; and in the greatest Concern of Life, we make no Scruple of falling into
a Treaty with the most notorious Offender in his Behavior against others. But
this Breach of Commerce between the Sexes, proceeds from an unaccountable
Prevalence of Custom, by which a Woman is to the last Degree reproachable for
being deceived, and a Man suffers no Loss of Credit for being a Deceiver.

Since this Tyrant Humor has gained Place, Why are we represented in the
Writings of Men in ill Figures for Artifice in our Carriage, when we have to do
with a professed Impostor? When Oaths, Imprecations, Vows, and Adorations, are
made use of as Words of Course, What Arts are not necessary to defend us from
such as glory in the Breach of 'em? As for my Part, I am resolved to hear all,
and believe none of 'em; and therefore solemnly declare, no Vow shall deceive
me, but that of Marriage: For I am turned of Twenty, and being of a small
Fortune, some Wit. and (if I can believe my Lovers and my Glass) Handsome, I
have heard all that can be said toward my Undoing, and shall therefore, for
Warning-sake, give an Account of the Offers that have been made me, my Manner
of rejecting 'em, and my Assistances to keep my Resolution.

In the Sixteenth Year of my Life, I fell into the Acquaintance of a Lady
extremely well known in this Town for the quick Advancement of her Husband, and
the Honors and Distinctions which her Industry has procured him, and all who
belong to her. This excellent Body sat next to me for some Months at Church,
and took the Liberty (which she said her Years and the Zeal she had for my
Welfare gave her Claim to) to assure me, that she observed some Parts of my
Behavior which would lead me into Errors, and give Encouragement to some to
entertain Hopes I did not think of. What made you (said she) look through your
Fan at that Lord, when your Eyes should have been turned upward, or closed in
Attention upon better Objects? I blushed, and pretended Fifty odd Excuses; --
but confounded my self the more. She wanted nothing but to see that Confusion,
and goes on: Nay, Child, do not be troubled that I take Notice of it, my Value
for you made me speak it; for though he is my Kinsman, I have a nearer Regard
to Virtue than any other Consideration. She had hardly done speaking, when this
noble Lord came up to us, and lead her to her Coach.

My Head ran all that Day and Night on the exemplary Carriage of this Woman,
who could be so virtuously impertinent, as to admonish one she was hardly
acquainted with. However it struck upon the Vanity of a Girl that it may
possibly be, his Thoughts might have been as favorable of me, as mine were
amorous of him, and as unlikely Things as that have happened, if he should make
me his Wife. She never mentioned this more to me; but I still in all public
Places stole Looks at this Man, who easily observed my Passion for him. It is
so hard a Thing to check the Return of agreeable Thoughts, that he became my
Dream, my Vision, my Food, my Wish, my Torment.

That Minister of Darkness, the Lady Semphronia, perceived too well the Temper
I was in, and would one Day after Evening Service needs take me to the Park.
When we were there, my Lord passes by; I flushed into a Flame. Mrs. Distaff,
(said she) You may very well remember the Concern I was in upon the first
Notice I took of your Regard to that Lord, and forgive me, who had a tender
Friendship for your Mother (now in her Grave) that I am vigilant of your
Conduct. She went on with much Severity, and after great Solicitation,
prevailed on me to go with her into the Country, and there spend the ensuing
Summer out of the Way of a Man she saw I loved, and one whom she perceived
meditated my Ruin, by frequently desiring her to introduce him to me; which she
absolutely refused, except he would give his Honor that he had no other Design
but to marry me. To her Country House a Week or Two after we went: There was at
the farther End of her Garden a Kind of Wilderness, in the Middle of which ran
a soft Rivulet by an Arbor of Jessamin. In this Place I usually passed my
retired Hours, and read some Romantic or Poetical Tale till the Close of the
Evening. It was near that Time in the Heat of Summer, when gentle Winds, soft
Murmurs of Water, and Notes of Nightingals had given my Mind an Indolence,
which added to that Repose of Soul, Twilight and the End of a warm Day
naturally throws upon the Spirits. It was at such an Hour, and in such a State
of Tranquillity I sat, when, to my unexpressible Amazement, I saw my Lord
walking toward me, whom I knew not till that Moment to have been in the
Country. I could observe in his Approach the Perplexity which attends a Man big
with Design; and I had, while he was coming forward, Time to reflect that I was
betrayed; the Sense of which gave me a Resentment suitable to such a Baseness:
But when he entered into the Bower where I was, my Heart flew toward him, and,
I confess, a certain Joy came into my Mind, with an Hope, that he might then
make a Declaration of Honor and Passion. This threw my Eye upon him with such
Tenderness, as gave him Power, with a broken Accent, to begin. Madam, -- You
will wonder -- For it is certain, you must have observed -- though I fear you
will misinterpret the Motives -- But by Heaven, and all that is Sacred! If you
could -- Here he made a full Stand. And I recovered Power to say, The
Consternation I am in you will not, I hope, believe -- An helpless innocent
Maid -- Besides that, the Place -- He saw me in as great Confusion as himself;
which attributing to the same Causes, he had the Audaciousness to throw himself
at my Feet, talk of the Stilness of the Evening, and then ran into Deifications
of my Person. Pure Flames, Constant Love, Eternal Raptures, and a Thousand
other Phrases drawn from the Images we have of Heaven, which ill Men use for
the Service of Hell, were run over with uncommon Vehemence. After which, he
seized me in his Arms: His Design was too evident. In my utmost Distress, I
fell upon my Knees -- My Lord, pity me, on my Knees -- On my Knees in the Cause
of Virtue, as you were lately in that of Wickedness. Can you think of
destroying the Labor of a whole Life, the Purpose of a long Education, for the
base Service of a sudden Appetite; to throw one that loves you, that doats on
you, out of the Company and Road of all that is virtuous and Praiseworthy? Have
I taken in all the Instructions of Piety, Religion and Reason, for no other
End, but to be the Sacrifice of Lust, and abandoned to Scorn? Assume your self,
my Lord, and do not attempt to vitiate a Temple Sacred to Innocence, Honor,
and Religion. If I have injured you, stab this Bosom, and let me die, but not
be ruined by the Hand I love. The Ardency of my Passion made me incapable of
uttering more; and I saw my Lover astonished and reformed by my Behavior: When
rushed in Semphronia. Ha! Faithful base Man, could you then steal out of Town,
and lurk like a Robber about my House for such brutish Purposes!

My Lord was by this Time recovered, and fell into a violent Laughter at the
Turn which Semphronia designed to give her Villainy. He bowed to me with the
utmost Respect: Mrs. Distaff, said he, be careful hereafter of your Company;
and so retired. The Friend Semphronia congratulated my Deliverance with a Flood
of Tears.

This Nobleman has since very frequently made his Addresses to me with Honor,
but I have as often refused them; as well knowing, that Familiarity and
Marriage will make him, on some ill-natured Occasion, call all I said in the
Arbor a Theatrical Action. Besides that, I glory in contemning a Man, who had
Thoughts to my Dishonor. If this Method were the Imitation of the whole Sex,
Innocence would be the only Dress of Beauty; and all Affectation by any other
Arts to please the Eyes of Men, would be banished to the Stews for ever. The
Conquest of Passion gives Ten times more Happiness than we can reap from the
Gratification of it; and she that has got over such a one as mine, will stand
among Beaux and Pretty Fellows, with as much Safety as in a Summer's Day among
Grass-hoppers and Butterflies.

P. S. I have Ten Millions of Things more against Men, if I ever get the Pen
again.

St. James's Coffee-house, June 24.
Our last Advices from the Hague, dated the 28th Instant, N. S. say, That on
the 2^th a Squadron of Dutch Men of War sailed out of the Texel to join Admiral
Baker at Spithead. The 26th was observed as a Day of Fasting and Humiliation,
to implore a Blessing on the Arms of the Allies this ensuing Campaign. Letters
from Dresden are very particular in the Account of the Gallantry and
Magnificence in which that Court has appeared since the Arrival of the King of
Denmark. No Day has passed in which public Shows have not been exhibited for
his Entertainment and Diversion: The last of that Kind which is mentioned is a
Carousal, wherein many of the Youth of the first Quality, dressed in the most
splendid Manner, ran for the Prize. His Danish Majesty condescended to the
same; but having observed that there was a Design laid to throw it in his Way,
passed by without attempting to gain it. The Court of Dresden was preparing to
accompany his Danish Majesty to Potsdam, where the Expectation of an Interview
of three Kings had drawn together such Multitudes of People, that many Persons
of Distinction will be obliged to lie in Tents as long as those Courts continue
in that Place.

The TATLER. [No 34.
By Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
From Saturd. June 25. to Tuesd. June 28. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, June 25.
HAving taken upon me to cure all the Distempers which proceed from Affections
of the Mind, I have labored, since I first kept this public Stage, to do all
the Good I could, and have perfected many Cures at my own Lodgings; carefully
avoiding the common Method of Mountebanks, to do their most eminent Operations
in Sight of the People; but must be so just to my Patients as to declare, they
have testified under their Hands their Sense of my poor Abilities, and the Good
I have done them, which I publish for the Benefit of the World, and not out of
any Thoughts of private Advantage.

I have cured fine Mrs. Spy of a great Imperfection in her Eyes, which made her
eternally rolling them from one Coxcomb to another in public Places, in so
languishing a Manner, that it at once lessened her own Power, and her Beholders
Vanity. Twenty Drops of my Ink, placed in certain Letters on which she
attentively looked for half an Hour, have restored her to the true Use of her
Sight; which is, to guide, and not mislead us. Ever since she took this Liquor,
which I call, Bickerstaff's Circumspection-Water, she looks right forward, and
can bear being looked at for half a Day without returning one Glance. This
Water has a peculiar Virtue in it, which makes it the only true Cosmetick or
Beauty-Wash in the World: The Nature of it is such, that if you go to a Glass,
with a Design to admire your Face, it immediately changes it into downright
Deformity. If you consult it only to look with a better Countenance upon your
Friends, it immediately gives an Alacrity to the Visage, and new Grace to the
whole Person. There is indeed a great deal owing to the Constitution of the
Person to whom it is applied: It is in vain to give it when the Patient is in
the Rage of the Distemper; a Bride in her first Month, a Lady soon after her
Husband's being Knighted, or any Person of either Sex who has lately obtained
any new good Fortune or Preferment, must be prepared some Time before they use
it. It has an Effect upon others, as well as the Patient, when it is taken in
due Form. Lady Petulant has by the Use of it cured her Husband of Jealousy, and
Lady Gad her whole Neighborhood of Detraction.

The Fame of these Things, added to my being an old Fellow, makes me extremely
acceptable to the Fair Sex. You would hardly believe me, when I tell you there
is not a Man in Town so much their Delight as my self. They make no more of
visiting me, than going to Madam d'Epingle's. There were two of them, namely,
Damia and Clidamira, (I assure you Women of Distinction) who came to see me
this Morning in their Way to Prayers, and being in a very diverting Humor, (as
Innocence always makes People chea full) they would needs have me, according to
the Distinction of pretty and very pretty Fellows, inform them, if I thought
either of them had a Title to the very Pretty among those of their own Sex; and
if I did, which was the more deserving of the Two?

To put them to the Trial, Look ye, said I, I must not rashly give my Judgment
in Matters or this Importance; pray let me see you dance: I play upon the Kit.
They immediately fell back to the lower End of the Room (You may be sure they
curt'sy'd low enough to me): And began. Never were Two in the World so equally
matched, and both S^ars to my Namesake Isaac. Never was Man in so dange ous a
Condition as my se f, when they began to expand their Charms. Oh! Ladies,
Ladies, cried I, not half that Air, you will fire the House. Both smiled; for by
the by, there is no carrying a Metaphor too far, when a Lady's Charms are spoke
of. Some Body, I think, has called a fine Woman dancing, a Brandished Torch of
Beauty. These Rivals moved with such an agreeable Freedom, that you would
believe their Gesture was the necessary Effect of the Music, and not the
Product of Skill and Practice. Now Clidamira came on with a Crowd of Graces,
and demanded my Judgment with so sweet an Air -- And she had no sooner carried
it, but Damia made her utterly forgot by a gentle sinking, and a Rigadoon Step.
The Contest held a full half Hour; and I protest, I saw no manner of Difference
in their Perfections, till they came up together, and expected (...) Sentence.
Look ye Ladies, said I, I see no Preference in the least in your Performance;
but you Clidamira seem to be so well satisfied that I shall determine for you,
that I must give it to Damia, who stands with so much Diffidence and Fear,
after showing an equal Merit to what she pretends to. Therefore, Clidamira, you
are a pretty; but, Damia, you are a very pretty Lady. For, said I, Beauty loses
its Force, if not accompanied with Modesty. She that has an humble Opinion of
her self, will have every Body's Applause, because she does not expect it;
while the vain Creature loses Approbation through too great a Sense of
deserving it.

From my own Apartment, June 27.
Being of a very spare and hective Constitution, I am forced to make frequent
Journies of a Mile or Two for fresh Air; and indeed by this last, which was no
further than the Village of Chelsea, I am further convinced of the Necessity of
traveling to know the World. For as it is usual with young Voyagers, as soon as
they land upon a Shore, to begin their Accounts of the Nature of the People,
their Soil, their Government, their Inclinations, and their Passions; so really
I fancied I could give you an immediate Description of this Village, from the
Five Fields where the Robbers lie in wait, to the Coffee-house where the
Literari sit in Council. A great Ancestor of ours by the Mother's Side, Mr.
Justice Overdo, (whose History is written by Ben Johnson) met with more
Enormities by walking incog. than he was capable of correcting; and found great
Mortifications in observing also Persons of Eminence, whom he before knew
nothing of. Thus it fared with me, even in a Place so near the Town as this.
When I came into the Coffee-house, I had not Time to salute the Company, before
my Eye was diverted by Ten Thousand Gimcracks round the Room and on the
Sieling. When my first Astonishment was over, comes to me a Sage of a thin and
meagre Countenance; which Aspect made me doubt, whether Reading or Fretting had
made it so Philosophic: But I very soon perceived him to be of that Sect which
the Ancients call Gingivistae; in our Language, Tooth-Drawers. I immediately
had a Respect for the Man; for these practical Philosophers go upon a very
rational Hypothesis, not to cure, but take away the Part affected. My Love of
Mankind made me very benevolent to Mr. Salter, for such is the Name of this
eminent Barber and Antiquary. Men are usually, but unjustly, distinguished
rather by their Fortunes, than their Talents, otherwise this Personage would
make a great Figure in that Class of Men which I distinguish under the Title of
Odd Fellows. But it is the Misfortune of Persons of great Genius, to have their
Faculties dissipated by Attention to too many Things at once. Mr. Salter is an
Instance of this: If he would wholly give himself up to the String, instead of
playing Twenty Beginnings to Tunes, he might before he dies play Roger de
Caubly quite out. I heard him go through his whole Round, and indeed I think he
does play the merry Christ-Church Bells pretty justly; but he confessed to me,
he did that rather to show he was Orthodox, than that he valued himself upon
the Music it self. Or if he did proceed in his Anatomy, Why might not he hope
in Time to cut off Legs, as well as draw Teeth? The Particularity of this Man
put me into a deep Thought, whence it should proceed, that of all the lower
Order, Barbers should go further in hitting the Ridicul us, than any other Set
of Men. Watermen brawl, Cobblers sing: But why must a Barber be for ever a
Politician, a Musician, an Anatomist, a Poet, and a Physician? The learned
Vossius says, his Barber used to comb his Head in Iambicks. And indeed in all
Ages, one of this useful Profession, this Order of Cosmetick Philosophers, has
been celebrated by the most eminent Hands. You see the Barber in Don Quixot is
one of the principal Characters in the History, which gave me Satisfaction in
the Doubt, why Don Saltero writ his Name with a Spanish Termination: For he is
descended in a right Line, not from John Tradescan, as he himself asserts, but
from that memorable Companion of the Knight of Mancha. And I hereby certify all
the worthy Citizens who travel to see his Rarities, that his doublebarrelled
Pistols, Targets, Coats of Mail, his Sclopeta, and Sword of Toledo, were left
to his Ancestor by the said Don Quixot, and by the said Ancestor to all his
Progeny down to Don Saltero. Though I go thus far in favor of Don Saltero's
great Merit, I cannot allow a Liberty he takes of imposing several Names
(without my License) on the Collections he has made, to the Abuse of the good
People of England; one of which is particularly calculated to deceive Religious
Persons, to the great Scandal of the Well-disposed, and may introduce Heterodox
Opinions. He shows you a Straw-Hat, which I know to be made by Madge Peskad,
within Three Miles of Bedford; and tells you. it is Pontius Pilate 's Wife's
Chambermaid's Sister's Hat. To my knowledge of this very Hat, it may be added,
that the Covering of Straw was never used among the Jews, since it was demanded
of them to make Bricks without it. Therefore this is really nothing, but under
the specious Pretense of Learning and Antiquity, to impose upon the World.
There are other Things which I cannot tolerate among his Rarities; as, the
China Figure of a Lady in the Glass-Case; the Italian Engine for the
Imprisonment of those who go Abroad with it: Both which I hereby order to be
taken down, or else he may expect to have his Letters Patents for making Punch
superseded, be debarred wearing his Muff next Winter, or ever coming to London
without his Wife. It may perhaps be thought I have dwelt too long upon the
Affairs of this Operator; but I desire the Reader to remember, that it is my
Way to consider Men as they stand in Merit, and not according to their Fortune
or Figure; and if he is in a Coffee-house at the Reading hereof, let him look
round, and he will find there may be more Characters drawn in this Account than
that of Don Saltero; for half the Politicians about him, he may observe, are,
by their Place in Nature, of the Class of Tooth-Drawers.

The TATLER. [No 35.
From Tuesd. June 28. to Thursd. June 30. 1709.
Grecian Coffee-house, June 28.
THere is an Habit or Custom which I have put my Patience to the utmost Stretch
to have suffered so long, because several of my intimate Friends are in the
Guilt; and that is, the Humor of taking Snuff, and looking dirty about the
Mouth by Way of Ornament.

My Method is to dive to the Bottom of a Sore before I pretend to apply a
Remedy. For this Reason, I sat by an eminent Story-teller and Politician who
takes half an Ounce in five Seconds, and has mortgaged a pretty Tenement near
the Town, merely to improve and dung his Brains with this prolifick Powder. I
observed this Gentleman the other Day in the midst of a Story diverted from it by
looking at something at a Distance, and I softly hid his Box. But he returns to
his Tale, and looking for his Box, he cries, And so Sir -- Then when he should
have taken a Pinch; As I was saying, says he -- Has no Body seen my Box? His
Friend beseeches him to finish his Narration. Then he proceeds; And (...) Sir
-- Where can my Box be? Then turning to me; Pray Sir, Did you see my Box? Yes
Sir, said I, I took it to see how long you could live without it. He resumes
his Tale; and I took Notice, that his Dullness was much more regular and fluent
than before. A Pinch supplied the Place of, As I was saying, And so Sir; and he
went on currently enough in that Style which the Learned call the Insipid. This
Observation easily led me into a Philosophic Reason for taking Snuff, which is
done only to supply with Sensations the Want of Reflection. This I take to be
an (...), a nostrum; upon which I hope to receive the Thanks of this Board. For
as it is natural to lift a Man's Hand to a Sore, when you fear any Thing coming
at you; so when a Person feels his Thoughts are run out, and has no more to
say, it is as natural to supply his weak Brain with Powder at the nearest Place
of Access, viz. the Nostrils. This is so evident, that Nature suggests the Use
according to the Indigence of the Persons who use this Medicine, without being
prepossessed with the Force of Fashion or Custom. For Example; the Native
Hibernians, who are reckoned not much unlike the ancie t Baeotians, take this
Specific for Emptiness in the Head, in greater Abundance than any other Nation
under the Sun. The learned Sotus, as sparing as he is in his Words, would be
still more silent if it were not for this Powder.

However low and poor, the taking Snuff argues a Man to be in his own Stock of
Thought, or Means to employ his Brains and his Fingers, yet there is a poorer
Creature in the World than He, and this is a Borrower of Snuff; a Fellow that
keeps no Box of his own, but is always asking others for a Pinch. Such poor
Rogues put me always in Mind of a common Phrase among Schoolboys when they are
composing their Exercise, who run to an upper Scholar, and cry, Pray give me a
little Sense. But of all Things, commend me to the Ladies who are got into this
pretty Help to Discourse. I have been this Three Years persuading Sagissa to
leave it off; but she talks so much, and is so Learned, that she is above
Contradiction. However, an Accident the other Day brought that about, which my
Eloquence never could accomplish: She had a very pretty Fellow in her Closet,
who ran thither to avoid some Company that came to visit her. She made an
Excuse to go in to him for some Implement they were talking of. Her eager
Gallant snatched a Kiss; but being unused to Snuff, some Grains from off her
upper Lip made him sneeze aloud, which alarmed the Visitants, and has made a
Discovery, that profound Reading, very much Intelligence, and a general
Knowledge of who and who is together, cannot fill up her vacant Hours so much,
but that she is sometimes obliged to descend to Entertainments less
intellectual.

White's Chocolate-house, June 29.
I know no Manner of News for this Place, but that Cynthio, having been long in
Despair for the inexorable Clarissa, lately resolved to fall in Love the good
old Way of Bargain and Sale, and has pitched upon a very agreeable young Woman.
He will undoubtedly succeed; for he accosts her in a Strain of Familiarity,
without breaking through the Deference that is due to Woman whom a Man would
choose for his Life. I have hardly ever heard rough Truth spoken with a better
Grace than in this his Letter.

MADAM,
I Writ to you on Saturday by Mrs. Lucy, and give you this Trouble to urge the
same Request I made then, which was, that I may be admitted to wait upon you. I
should be very far from desiring this, if it were a Transgression of the most
severe Rules to allow it: I know you are very much above the little Arts which
are frequent in your Sex, of giving unnecessary Torments to their Admi^rs;
therefore hope, you will do so much Justice to the generous Passion I have for
you, as to let me have an Opportunity of acquainting you upon what Motives I
pretend to your good Opinion. I shall not trouble you with my Sentiments, till
I know how they will be received; and as I know no Reason why Difference of Sex
should make our Language to each other differ from the ordinary Rules of right
Reason, I shall affect Plainness and Sincerity in my Discourse to you, as much
as other Lovers do Perplexity and Rapture. Instead of saying, I shall die for
you, I profess I should be glad to lead my Life with you: You are as beautiful,
as witty, as prudent, and as good humored, as any Woman breathing; but I must
confess to you, I regard all these Excellencies as you will please to direct
them, for my Happiness or Misery. With me, Madam, the only lasting Motive to
Love is the Hope of its becoming mutual. I beg of you to let Mrs. Lucy send me
Word when I may attend you. I promise you, I Will talk of nothing but indifferent
Things; though at the same Time I know not how I shall approach you in the
tender Moment of first seeing you, after this Declaration of,

MADAM, Your most Obedient, and most Faithful Humble Servant, etc.


Will's Coffee-house, June 29.
Having taken a Resolution when Plays are acted next Winter by an entire good
Company, to publish Observations from Time to Time on the Performance of the
Actors, I think it but just to give an Abstract of the Laws of Action, for the
Help of the less learned Part of the Audience, that they may rationally enjoy
so refined and instructive a Pleasure as a just Representation of humane Life.
The great Errors in Playing are admirably well exposed in Hamlet's Direction to
the Actors who are to play in his supposed Tragedy; by which we shall form our
future Judgments on their Behavior, and for that Reason you have the Discourse
as follows:

Speak the Speech as I pronounce it to you, trippingly on the Tongue; but if
you mouth it as many of our Players do, I had as lieu the Town-Cryer had spoke
my Lines: Nor do not saw the Air too much with your Hand thus; but use all
gently: For in the very Torrent, Tempest, and, as I may say, the Whirlwind of
Passion, you must acquire and beget a Temperance that may give it Smoothness.
Oh! It offends me to the Soul, to see a robustous Periwig-pated Fellow tear a
Passion to Tatters, to very Rags, to split the Ears of the Groundlings, who
(for the most Part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb Shows and
Noise. I could have such a Fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant: It out-
Herod's Herod. Be not too tame neither; but let your own Discretion be your
Tutor: Suit the Action to the Word, the Word to the Action; with this special
Observance, that you o'erstop not the Modesty of Nature; for any Thing so
overdone, is from the Purpose of Playing, whose End, both at the first and now,
was, and is, to hold as 'twere the Mirror up to Nature; to show Virtue her own
Feature; Scorn her own Image; and the very Age and Body of the Time its Form
and Pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the
Unskilful laugh, cannot but make the Judicious grieve. The Censures of which
one must, in your Allowance, oversway a whole Theater of others. Oh! there be
Players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, (not
to speak it profanely) that neither having the Accent of Christian, Pagan, or
Norman, have so strutted and bellowed, that I have thought some of Nature's
Journey men had made Men, and not made them well, they imitated Humanity so
abominably. This should be reformed altogether; and let those that play your
Clowns, speak no more than is set down for them: For there be of them that will
of themselves laugh, to set on some Quantity of barren Spectators to laugh too;
though in the mean Time, some necessary Question of the Play be then to be
considered; that is villainous, and shows a most pitiful Ambition in the Fool
that uses it. From my own Apartment, June 29.
It would be a ve y great Obligation, and an Assistance to my Treatise upon
Punning, if any one would please to inform in what Class, among the Learned who
play with Words, to place the Author of the following Letter.

SIR,
NOT long since you were pleased to give us a Chimerical Account of the famous
Family of Staffs, from whence I suppose you would insinuate, that it is the
most ancient and numerous House in all Europe. But I positively deny that it is
either; and wonder much at your audacious Proceedings in this Matter, since
it is well known, that our most illustrious, most renowned, and most celebrated
Roman Family of Ix, has enjoyed the Precedence to all others from the Reign of
good old Saturn. I could say much to the Defamation and Disgrace of your
Family; as, that your Relations Distaff and Broomstaff were both inconsiderate
mean Persons, one spinning, the other sweeping the Streets, for their daily
Bread. But I forbear to vent my Spleen on Objects so much beneath my
Indignation. I shall only give the World a Catalogue of my Ancestors, and leave
them to determine which has hitherto had, and which for the future ought to
have, the Preference.

First then comes the most famous and popular Lady Meretrix, Parent of the
fertile Family of Bellatrix, Lotrix, Netrix, Nutrix, Obstetrix, Famulatrix,
Coctrix, Ornatrix, Sarcinatrix, Fextrix, Balneatrix, Portatrix, Saltatrix,
Divinatrix, Conjectrix, Comtrix, Debitrix, Creditrix, Donatrix, Ambulatrix,
Mercatrix, Adsectrix, Assectatrix, Palpatrix, Preceptrix, Pistrix. I am

Yours, Eliz. Potatrix.


St. James's Coffee-house, June 29.
Letters from Brussels of the 2d of July, N. S. say, That the Duke of
Marlborough and Prince Eugene having received Advice, That the Marshal Villars
had drawn a considerable Body out of the Garrison of Tournay to reinforce his
Army, marched toward that Place, and came before it early in the Morning of
the 27th. As soon as they came into that Ground, the Prince of Nassau was sent
with a strong Detachment to take Post at St. Amand; and at the same Time my
Lord Orkney received Orders to possess himself of Mortagne; both which were
successfully executed; whereby we are Masters of the Scheld and the Scarp.
Eight Men were drawn out of each Troop of Dragoons and Company of Foot in the
Garrison of Tournay, to make up the Reinforcement which was ordered to join
Marshal Villars; but upon Advice that the Allies were marching toward Tournay,
they endeavored to return into the Town; but were intercepted by the Earl of
Orkney, by whom that whole Body was killed or taken. These Letters add, That
1200 Dragoons (each Horseman carrying a Foot-Soldier behind him) were detached
from Mons to throw themselves into Tournay; but upon Appearance of a great Body
of Horse of the Allies, retired toward Conde. We hear, That the Garrison does
not consist of more than 3500 Men. Of the 60 Battalions designed to be employed
in this Siege, 7 are English, viz. Two of Guards, and the Regiments of Argyle,
Temple, Evans and Meredith.

The TATLER. [No 36.
By Mrs. Jenny Distaff, Half-Sister to Mr. Bickerstaff.
From Thursd. June 30. to Saturd. July 2. 1709.
From my own Apartment, June 30.
MANY Affairs calling my Brother into the Country, the Care of our Intelligence
with the Town is left to me for some Time; therefore you must expect the
Advices you meet with in this Paper to be such, as more immediately and
naturally fall under the Consideration of our Sex: History therefore written by
a Woman, you will easily imagine to consist of Love in all its Forms, both in
the Abuse of, and Obedience to that Passion. As to the Faculty of Writing it
self, it will not, it is hoped, be demanded, that Style and Ornament shall be
so much consulted, as Truth and Simplicity; which latter Qualities we may more
justly pretend to beyond the other Sex. While therefore the Administration of
our Affairs is in my Hands, you shall from Time to Time have an exact Account
of all false Lovers, and their shallow Pretenses for breaking off; of all
Termagant Wives who make Wedlock a Yoke; of Men who affect the Entertainments
and Manners suitable only to our Sex, and Women who pretend to the Conduct of
such Affairs as are only within the Province of Men. It is necessary further to
advertise the Reader, that the usual Places of Resort being utterly out of my
Province or Observation, I shall be obliged frequently to change the Dates of
Places, as Occurrences come into my Way. The following Letter I lately received
from Epsom.

Epsom, June 28.
IT is now almost Three Weeks since what you writ about happened in this Place:
The Quarrel between my Friends did not run so high as I find your Accounts have
made it. The Truth of the Fact you shall have very faithfully. You are to
understand, that the Persons concerned in this Scene were, Lady Autumn, and
Lady Springly: Autumn is a Person of good Breeding, Formality, and a singular
Way practiced in the last Age; and Lady Springly, a modern Impertinent of our
Sex, who affects as improper a Familiarity, as the other does Distance. Lady
Autumn knows to an Hair's Breadth where her Place is in all Assemblies and
Conversations; but Springly neither gives nor takes Place of any Body, but
understands the Place to signify no more, than to have Room enough to be at
Ease wherever she comes. Thus while Autumn takes the Whole of this Life to
consist in understanding Punctilio and Decorum, Springly takes every Thing to
be becoming which contributes to her Ease and Satisfaction. These Heroines have
married Two Brothers, both Knights. Springly is the Spouse of the elder, who is
a Baronet; and Autumn, being a rich Widow, has taken the younger, and her Purse
endowed him with an equal Fortune and Knighthood of the same Order. This Jumble
of Titles, you need not doubt, has been an aching Torment to Autumn, who took
Place of the other on no Pretense, but her Carelessness and Disregard of
Distinction. The secret Occasion of Envy broiled long in the Breast of Autumn;
but no Opportunity of Contention on that Subject happening, kept all Things
quiet till the Accident, of which you demand an Account.

It was given out among all the gay People of this Place, That on the 9th
Instant several Damsels, swift of Foot, were to run for a Suit of Head-Clothes
at the Old Wells. Lady Autumn on this Occasion invited Springly to go with her
in her Coach to see the Race. When they came to the Place where the Governor
of Epsom and all his Court of Citizens were assembled, as well as a Crowd of
People of all Orders, a brisk young Fellow addresses himself to the younger of
the Ladies, viz. Springly, and offers her his Service to conduct her into the
Musick-Room. Springly accepts the Compliment, and is led triumphantly through a
bowing Crowd, while Autumn is left among the Rabble, and has much ado to get
back into her Coach; but she did it at last: And as it is usual to see by the
Horses my Lady's present Disposition, she orders John to whip furiously Home to
her Husband; where, when she enters, down she sits, began to unpin her Hood,
and lament her foolish fond Heart to marry into a Family where she was so
little regarded, she that might -- Here she stops; then rises up and stamps,
and sits down again. Her gentle Knight made his Approaches with a supple
beseeching Gesture. My Dear, said he, -- Tell me no Dears, replied Autumn -- in
the Presence of the Governor and all the Merchants -- What will the World say
of a Woman that has thrown her self away at this Rate? Sir Thomas withdrew, and
knew it would not be long a Secret to him; as well as that Experience told him,
He that marries a Fortune, is of Course guilty of all Faults against his Wife,
let them be committed by whom they will. But Springly, an Hour or Two after,
returns from the Wells, and finds the whole Company together. Down she sat, and
a profound Silence ensued. You know a premeditated Quarrel usually begins and
works up with the Words, Some People. The Silence was broken by Lady Autumn,
who began to say, There are Some People who fancy, that if Some People --
Springly immediately takes her up; There are Some People who fancy, if Other
People -- Autumn repartees; People may give themselves Airs; but Other People,
perhaps, who make less ado, may be, perhaps, as agreeable as People who set
themselves out more. All the other People at the Table sat mute, while these
Two People, who were quarrelling, went on with the Use of the Word People,
instancing the very Accidents between them, as if they kept only in distant
Hints. Therefore, says Autumn, redning, There are some People will go Abroad in
other People's Coaches, and leave those with whom they went to shift for
themselves; and if, perhaps, those People have married the younger Brother;
yet, perhaps, he may be beholden to those People for what he is. Springly
smartly answers, People may bring so much ill Humor into a Family, as People
may repent their receiving their Money; and goes on, -- Every Body is not
considerable enough to give her Uneasiness. Upon this, Autumn comes up to her,
and desired her to kiss her, and never to see her again; which her Sister
refusing, my Lady gave her a Box on the Ear -- Springly returns; Ay, ay, said
she, I knew well enough you meant me by your Some People, and gives her another
on the other Side. To it they went with most Masculine Fury: Each Husband ran in.
The Wives immediately fell upon their Husbands, and tore Periwigs and Cravats.
The Company interposed; when (according to the Slip-Knot of Matrimony, which
makes them return to one another when any put in between) the Ladies and their
Husbands fell upon all the rest of the Company; and having beat all their
Friends and Relations out of the House, came to themselves time enough to know,
there was no bearing the Jest of the Place after these Adventures, and
therefore marched off the next Day. It is said, the Governor has sent several
Joints of Mutton, and has proposed diverse Dishes very exquisitely dressed, to
bring them down again. From his Address and Knowledge in Roast and Boiled, all
our Hopes of the Return of this good Company depend. I am,

Dear Jenny, Your Ready Friend and Servant, Martha Tatler.


White's Chocolate-house, June 30.
This Day appeared here a Figure of a Person, whose Services to the Fair Sex
have reduced him to a Kind of Existence, for which there is no Name. If there
be a Condition between Life and Death, without being absolutely dead or living,
his State is that. His Aspect and Complexion in his robust Days gave him the
illustrious Title of Africanus: But it is not only from the warm Climates in
which he has served, nor from the Disasters in which he has suffered, that he
deserves the same Appellation with that renowned Roman; but the Magnanimity
with which he appears in his last Moments, is what gives him the undoubted
Character of Hero. Cato stabbed himself, and Hannibal drank Poison; but our
Africanus lives in the continual Puncture of aching Bones and poisoned Juices.
The Old Heroes fled from Torments by Death, and this Modern lives in Death and
Torments, with an Heart wholly bent upon a Supply for remaining in them. An
ordinary Spirit would sink under his Oppressions; but he makes an Advantage of
his very Sorrow, and raises an Income from his Diseases. Long has this Worthy
been conversant in Bartering, and knows that when Stocks are lowest, it is the
Time to buy. Therefore, with much Prudence and Tranquillity, he thinks, that now
he has not a Bone sound, but a Thousand nodous Parts for which the Anatomist
have not Words, and more Diseases than the College ever heard of, it is the
only Times to purchase an Annuity for Life. Sir Thomas told me, it was an
Entertainment more surprising and pleasant than can be imagined, to see an
Inhabitant of neither World without Hand to lift, or Leg to move, scarce Tongue
to utter his Meaning, so keen upon biting the whole World, and making Bubbles
at his Exit. Sir Thomas added, that he would have bought Twelve Shillings a
Year of him, but that he feared there was some Trick in it, and believed him
already dead: What! Says that Knight, Is Mr. Partridge, whom I met just now
going on both his Legs firmer than I can, allowed to be quire dead; and shall
Africanus, without one Limb that can do its Office, be pronounced alive.

What heightened the Tragi-Comedy of this Market for Annuities was, that the
Observation of it provoked Monocalus (who is the most Eloquent of all Men) to
many excellent Reflections, which he spoke with the Vehemence and Language both
of a Gamester and an Orator. "When I cast (said that delightful Speaker) my Eye
upon thee, thou unaccountable Africanus, I cannot but call my self as
unaccountable as thou art; for certainly we were born to show what
Contradictions Nature is pleased to form in the same Species. Here am I, able
to eat, to drink, to sleep, and do all Acts of Nature, except begetting my
Like; and yet by an unintelligible Force of Spleen and Fancy, I every Moment
imagine I am dying. It is utter Madness in thee to provide for Supper; for I Will
bet you Ten to One, you don't live till half an Hour after Four; and yet I am
so distracted as to be in Fear every Moment, though I Will lay Ten to Three, I
drink Three Pints of burnt Claret at your Funeral Three Nights hence. After
all, I envy thee; thou that have no Sense of Death, art happier than one that
always fears it." The Knight had gone on, but that a Third Man ended the Seen
by applauding the Knight's Eloquence and Philosophy, in a Laughter too violent
for his own Constitution, as much as he mocked that of Africanus and Monoculus.

St. James's Coffee-house, July 1.
This Day arrived Three Mails from Holland, with Advices relating to the
Posture of Affairs in the Low Countries, which say, That the Confederate Army
extends from Luchin, on the Causeway between Tournay and Lisle, to Epain near
Mortagne on the Scheld. The Marshal Villars remains in his Camp at Lens; but it
is said, he detached Ten Thousand Men under the Command of the Chevalier de
Luxemburg, with Orders to form a Camp at Crepin on the Haine, between Conde and
St. Guillain, where he is to be joined by the Elector of Bavaria with a Body of
Troops, and after their Conjunction, to attempt to march into Brabant. But they
write from Brussels, That the Duke of Marlborough having it equally in his
Power to make Detachments to the same Parts, they are under no Apprehensions
from these Reports for the Safety of their Country. They further add from
Brussels, that they have good Authority for believing, That the French Troops
under the Conduct of Marshal de Bezons are retiring out of Spain.

The TATLER. [No 37.
By Mrs. Jenny Distaff, Half-Sister to Mr. Bickerstaff.
From Saturd. July 2. to Tuesd. July 5. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, July 2.
IT may be thought very unaccountable, that I who can never be supposed to go
to White's, should pretend to talk to you of Matters proper for, or in the
Style of, that Place. But though I never visit these public Haunts, I converse
with those that do; and for all they pretend so much to the contrary, they are
as talkative as our Sex, and as much at a Loss to entertain the present
Company, without sacrificing the last, as we our selves. This Reflection has
led me into the Consideration of the Use of Speech; and made me look over in my
Memory all my Acquaintance of both Sexes, to know to which I may more justly
impute the Sin of superfluous Discourse, in Regard to Conversation, without
entering into it as it respects Religion.

I foresee my Acquaintance will immediately, upon starting this Subject, ask
me, How I shall celebrate Mrs. Alse Copswood, the Yorkshire Huntress, who is
come to Town lately, and moves as if she were on her Nag, and going to take a
Five-Bar Gate; and is as loud as if she were following her Dogs? I can easily
answer that; for she is as soft as Damon, in Comparison of her Brother-in-Law
Tom. Bellfrey, who is the most accomplished Man in this Kingdom for all
Gentleman-like Activities and Accomplishments. It is allowed, that he is a
professed Enemy to the Italian Performers in Music. But then for our own
native Manner, according to the Customs and known Usages of our Island, he is
to be preferred, for the Generality of the Pleasure he bestows, much before
those Fellows, though they sing to full Theaters. For what is a Theatrical
Voice to that of a Fox-hunter? I have been at a Musical Entertainment in an
open Field, where it amazed me to hear to what Pitches the chief Masters would
reach. There was a Meeting near our Seat in Staffordshire, and the most emine t
of all the Counties of England were at it. How wonderful was the Harmony
between Men and Dogs! Robin Cartail of Bucks was to answer to Jowler; Mr.
Tinbreast of Cornwall was appointed to open with Sweetlips, and Beaux Slimber, a
Londoner, undertook to keep up with Trips, a Whelp just set in: Tom. Bellfrey
and Ringwood were coupled together, to fill the Cry on all Occasions, and be in
at the Death of the Fox, Hare, or Stag; for which both the Dog and the Man were
excellently suited, and loved one another, and were as much together as
Banister and King. When Jowler first alarmed the Field, Cartail repeated every
Note; Sweetlips's Treble succeeded, and shook the Wood; Tinbreast echoed a
Quarter of a Mile beyond it. We were soon after all at a Loss, till we rid up,
and found Trips and Slimber at a Default in Half Notes: But the Day and the
Tune was recovered by Tom. Bellfrey and Ringwood, to the great Joy of us all,
though they drowned every other Voice: For Bellfrey carries a Note Four Furlongs,
Three Rood, and Six Paces, further than any other in England.

I fear the Mention of this will be thought a Digression from my Purpose about
Speech: But I answer, No. Since this is used where Speech rather should be
employed, it may come in o Consideration in the same Chapter: For Mr. Bellfrey
being at a Visit where I was, viz. his Cousin's (Lady Dainty's) in Soho, was
asked, What Entertainments they had in the Country? Now Bellfrey is very
ignorant, and much a Clown; but confident withal. In a Word, he struck up a
Fox-Chase: Lady Dainty's Dog, Mr. Sippet, as she calls him, started and jumped
out of his Lady's Lap, and fell a barking. Bellfrey went on, and called all the
neighboring Parishes into the Square. Never was Woman in such Confusion as
that delicate Lady. But there was no stopping her Kinsman. A Room full of
Ladies fell into the most violent Laughter: My Lady looked as if she was
shrieking; Mr. Sippet in the Middle of the Room, breaking his Heart with
barking, but all of us unheard. As soon as Bellfrey became silent, up gets my
Lady, and takes him by the Arm to lead him off: Bellfrey was in his Boots. As
she was hurrying him away, his Spurs takes hold of her Petticoat; his Whip
throws down a Cabinet of China: He cries, What! Are your Crocks rotten? Are
your Petticoats ragged? A Man cannot walk in your House for Trincums.

Every County of Great Britain has One Hundred or more of this Sort of Fellows,
who Roar instead of Speaking. Therefore if it be true, that we Women are also
given to greater Fluency of Words than is necessary, sure she that disturbs but
a Room or a Family is more to be tolerated, than one who draws together
Parishes and Counties, and sometimes (with an Estate that might make him the
Blessing and Ornament of the World around him) has no other View and Ambition,
but to be an Animal above Dogs and Horses, without the Relish of any one
Enjoyment, which is peculiar to the Faculties of humane Nature. I know it will
here be said, that talking of mere Country Squires at this Rate, is, as it
were, to write against Valentine and Orson. To prove any Thing against the Race
of Men, you must take 'em as they are adorned with Education, as they live in
Courts, or have received Instructions in Colleges.

But I am so full of my late Entertainment by Mr. Bellfrey, that I must defer
pursuing this Subject to another Day; and wave the proper Observations upon the
different Offenders in this Kind, some by profound Eloquence on small
Occasions, others by degrading Speech upon great Circumstances. Expect
therefore to hear of the Whisperer without Business, the Laugher without Wit,
the Complainer without receiving Injuries, and a very large Crowd, which I
shall not forestall, who are common (though not commonly observed)
Impertinents, whose Tongues are too voluble for their Brains, and are the
general Despisers of us Women, though we have their Superiors, the Men of
Sense, for our Servants.

St. James's Coffee-house, July 4.
There has arrived no Mail since our last; so that we have no Manner of Foreign
News, except we were to give you, for such, the many Speculations which are on
Foot concerning what was imported by the last Advices. There are, it seems,
Sixty Battalions and Seventeen Squadrons appointed to serve in the Siege of
Tournay; the Garrison of which Place consists but of Eleven Battalions and Four
Squadrons. Letters of the 29th of the last Month from Berlin have brought
Advice, That the Kings of Denmark, Prussia, and his Majesty Augustus, were
within few Days to come to an Interview at Potsdam. These Letters mention, That
Two Polish Princes of the Family of Sapicha and Lubermirsky, lately arrived
from Paris, confirm the Reports of the Misery in France for Want of Provisions,
and give a particular Instance of it, which is, That on the Day Monsieur
Rouille returned to Court, the Common People gathered in Crowds about the
Dauphin's Coach, crying, Peace and Bread, Bread and Peace.

Mrs. Distaff has taken upon her, while she writes this Paper, to turn her
Thoughts wholly to the Service of her own Sex, and to propose Remedies against
the greatest Vexations attending Female Life. She has for this End written a
small Treatise concerning the Second Word, with an Appendix on the Use of a
Reply, very proper for all such as are married to Persons either ill-bred or
illnatured. There is in this Tract a Digression, for the Use of Virgins,
concerning the Words, I will.

A Gentlewoman who has a very delicate Ear, wants a Maid who can whisper, and
help her in the Government of her Family. If the said Servant can Clear-Starch,
Lisp, and Tread softly, she shall have suitable Encouragement in her Wages.

The TATLER. [No 38.
By Mrs. Jenny Distaff, Half-Sister to Mr. Bickerstaff.
From Tuesd. July 5. to Thursd. July 7. 1709.
From my own Apartment, July 6.
I Find among my Brother's Papers the following Letter verbatim, which I wonder
how he could suppress so long as he has, since it was sent him for no other
End, but to show the good Effect his Writings have already had upon the ill
Customs of the Age.

London, June 23. SIR,
THE End of all public Papers ought to be the Benefit and Instruction, as well
as the Diversion of the Readers: To which I see none so truly conducive as your
late Performances; especially those tending to the rooting out from amongst us
that Unchristian-like and Bloody Custom of Duelling; which, that you have
already in some Measure performed, will appear to the Public in the following
no less True than Heroic Story.

A Noble Gentleman of this City, who has the Honor of serving his Country as
Major in the Train-Bands, being at that General Mart of Stock-Jobbers called
Jonathans, endeavoring to raise himself (as all Men of Honor ought) to the
Degree of Colonel at least; it happened that he bought the Bear of another
Officer, who, though not Commissioned in the Army, yet no less eminently serves
the Public than the other, in raising the Credit of the Kingdom, by raising
that of the Stocks. However, having sold the Bear, and Words arising about the
Delivery, the most Noble Major, no less scorning to be outwitted in the
Coffee-house, than to run into the Field, according to Method, abused the other
with the Titles of, Rogue, Villain, Bearskin-Man, and the like. Whereupon
Satisfaction was demanded, and accepted: So, forth the Major marched,
commanding his Adversary to follow. To a most spacious Room in the Sheriff's
House, near the Place of Quarrel, they come; where, having due Regard to what
you have lately published, they resolved not to shed one another's Blood in
that barbarous Manner you prohibited; yet, not willing to put up Affronts
without Satisfaction' they stripped, and in decent Manner fought full fairly
with their wrathful Hands. The Combat lasted a Quarter of an Hour; in which
Time Victory was often doubtful, and many a dry Blow was strenuously laid on by
each Side, till the Major finding his Adversary obstinate, unwilling to give
him further Chastisement, with most shrill Voice cried out, I am satisfied,
enough. Whereupon the Combat ceased, and both were Friends immediately.

Thus the World may see, how necessary it is to encourage those Men, who make
it their Business to instruct the People in every Thing necessary for their
Preservation. I am informed, a Body of worthy Citizens have agreed on an
Address of Thanks to you for what you have writ on the foregoing Subject,
whereby they acknowledge one of their highly esteemed Officers preserved from
Death.

Your humble Servant, A. B.


I fear the Word Bear is hardly to be understood among the polite People; but I
take the Meaning to be, That one who ensures a Real Value upon an Imaginary
Thing, is said to sell a Bear, and is the same Thing as a Promise among
Courtiers, or a Vow between Lovers. I have writ to my Brother to hasten to
Town; and hope, that printing the Letters directed to him, which I knew not how
to answer, will bring him speedily; and therefore I add also the following:

July 5. 1709. Mr. Bickerstaff,
YOU having hinted a generous Intention of taking under your Consideration the
Whisperers without Business, and Laughers without Occasion; as you tender the
Welfare of your Country, I entreat you not to forget or delay so
Publick-spirited a Work. Now or never is the Time. Many other Calamities may
cease with the War; but I dismally dread the Multiplication of these Mortals
under the Ease and Luxuriousness of a settled Peace, half the Blessing of which
may be destroyed by 'em. Their Mistake lies certainly here, in a wretched
Belief, That their Mimickry passes for Real Business, or True Wit. Dear Sir,
convince 'em, that it never was, is, or ever will be, either of them; nor ever
did, does, or to all Futurity ever can look like either of them; but that it is
the most cursed Disturbance in Nature, which is possible to be inflicted on
Mankind, under the noble Definition of a Sociable Creature. In doing this, Sir,
you will oblige more Humble Servants, than can find Room to subscribe their
Names.


White's Chocolate-house, July 6.
In Pursuance of my last Date from hence, I am to proceed on the Accounts I
promised of several Personages among the Men, whose conspicuous Fortunes, or
Ambition in showing their Follies, have exalted them above their Fellows: The
Levity of their Minds is visible in their every Word and Gesture, and there ^s
not a Day passes but puts me in Mind of Mr. Wycherley's Character of a Coxcomb
He is ugly all over with the Affectation of the fine Gentleman. Now though the
Women may put on Softness in their Looks, or affected Severity, or impertinent
Gaiety, or pert Smartness, their Self-Love and Admiration cannot, under any of
these Disguises, appear so invincible as that of the Men. You may easily take
Notice, that in all their Actions there is a secret Approbation, either in the
Tone of their Voice, the Turn of their Body, or Cast of their Eye, which shows
that they are extremely in their own Favor.

Take one of your Men of Business, he shall keep you half an Hour with your Hat
off, entertaining you with his Consideration of that Affair you spoke of to him
last, till he has drawn a Crowd that observes you in this Grimace. Then when he
is public enough, he immediately runs into Secrets, and falls a whispering.
You and he make Breaks with Adverbs; as, But however, thus far; and then you
whisper again, and so on, till they who are about you are dispersed, and your
busy Man's Vanity is no longer gratified by the Notice taken of what Importance
he is, and how inconsiderable you are; for your Pretender to Business is never
in Secret, but in Public.

There is my dear Lord Nowhere, of all Men the most gracious and most
obliging, the Terror of all Valets de Chamber, whom he oppresses with good
Breeding, in enquiring for my good Lord, and for my good Lady's Health. This
imitable Courtier will whisper a Privy-Counsellor's Lacquey with the utmost
Goodness and Condescension, to know when they next sit; and is thoroughly taken
up, and thinks he has a Part in a Secret, if he knows that there is a Secret.
What it is he will whisper you, that Time will discover; then he shrugs, and
calls you back again -- Sir, I need not say to you. That these Things are not
to be spoken of -- And hark'ee, No Names, I would not be quoted. What adds to
the Jest is, that his Emptiness has its Moods and Seasons, and he will not
condescend to let you into these his Discoveries, except he is in very good
Humor, or has seen some Body in Fashion talk to you. He will keep his Nothing
to himself, and pass by and overlook as well as the best of 'em; not observing
that he is insolent when he is gracious, and obliging when he is haughty. Show
me a Woman so inconsiderable as this frequent Character.

But my Mind (now I am in) turns to many no less observable: Thou dear Will.
Shoestring! I profess my self in Love with thee? How shall I speak thee? How
shall I address thee? How shall I draw thee? Thou dear Outside! Will you be
combing your Wig, Playing with your Box, or Picking your Teeth? Or chusest thou
rather to be Speaking; to be speaking for thy only Purpose in Speaking, to show
your Teeth? Rub 'em no longer, dear Shoestring: Do not premeditate Murder: Do
not for ever Whiten: Oh! That for my Quiet and his own they were rotten.

But I will forget him, and give my Hand to the courteous Umbra; He is a fine
Man indeed, but the soft Creature bows below my Apron-String before he takes
it; yet after the first Ceremonies, he is as familiar as my Physician, and his
Insignificancy makes me half ready to complain to him of all I would to my
Doctor. He is so courteous, that he carries half the Messages of Ladies Ails in
Town to their Midwives and Nurses. He understands too the Art of Medicine as
far as to the Cure of a Pimple or a Rash. On Occasions of the like Importance,
he is the most assiduous of all Men living, in consulting and searching
Precedents from Family to Family; then he speaks of his Obsequiousness and
Diligence in the Style of real Services. If you sneer at him, and thank him for
his great Friendship, he bows, and says, Madam, all the good Offices in my
Power, while I have any Knowledge or Credit, shall be at your Service. The
Consideration of so shallow a Being, and the intent Application with which he
pursues Trifles, has made me carefully reflect upon that Sort of Men we usually
call an Impertinent: And I am, upon mature Deliberation, so far from being
offended with him, that I am really obliged to him; for though he will take you
aside, and talk half an Hour upon Matters wholly insignificant with the most
solemn Air, yet I consider, that these Things are of Weight in his Imagination,
and he thinks he is communicating what is for my Service. If therefore it be a
just Rule, to judge of a Man by his Intention, according to the Equity of
Goodbreeding, he that is impertinently kind or wise, to do you Service, ought
in Return to have a proportionable Place both in your Aff ction and Esteem; so
that the courteous Umbra deserves the Favor of all his Acquaintance; for
though he never served 'em, he is ever willing to do it, and believes he does
it.

As impotent Kindness is to be returned with all our Abilities to oblige; so
impotent Malice is to be treated with all our Force to depress it. For this
Reason, Fly-Blow (who is received in all the Families in Town through the
Degeneracy and Iniquity of their Manners) is to be treated like a Knave, though
he is one of the weakest of Fools: He has by Rote, and at Second hand, all that
can be said of any Man of Figure, Wit, and Virtue in Town. Name a Man of Worth,
and this Creature tells you the worst Passage of his Life. Speak of a beautiful
Woman, and this Puppy will whisper the next Man to him, though he has nothing to
say of her. He is a Fly that feeds on the sore Part, and would have nothing to
live on, if the whole Body were in Health. You may know him by the Frequency of
pronouncing the Particle But; for which Reason I never hear him spoke of with
common Charity, without using my But against him: For a Friend of mine saving
the other Day, Mrs. Distaff has Wit, good Humor, Virtue and Friendship; this
Oaf added, But she is not handsome. Coxcomb! The Gentleman was saying what I
was, not what I was not.

St. James's Coffee-house, July 6.
The Approaches before Tournay have been carried on with great Success; and our
Advices from the Camp before that Place of the 11th Instant say, That they had
already made a Lodgment on the Glacis. Two Hundred Boats were come up the
Scheld with the heavy Artillery and Ammunition, which would be employed in
dismounting the Enemy's Defenses, and raised on the Batteries the 15th. A great
Body of Miners are summoned to the Camp to countermine the Works of the Enemy.
We are convinced of the Weakness of the Garrison, by a certain Account, That
they called a Council of War, to consult whether it was not advisable to march
into the Citadel, and leave the Town defenseless. We are assured, That when the
Confederate Army was advancing toward the Camp of Marshal Villars, that
General dispatched a Courier to his Master with a Letter, giving an Account of
their Approach, which concluded with the following Words: The Day begins to
break, and your Majesty's Army is already in Order of Battle. Before Noon, I
hope to have the Honor of congratulating your Majesty on the Success of a
great Action; and you shall be very well satisfied with the Marshal Villars.

It is to be noted, That when any Part of this Paper appears dull, there is a
Design in it.

The TATLER. [No 39.
By Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
From Thursd. July 7. to Saturd. July 9. 1709.
Grecian Coffee-house, July 7.
AS I am called forth by the immense Love I bear to my Fellow Creatures, and
the warm Inclination I feel within me, to stem, as far I can, the prevailing
Torrent of Vice and Ignorance; so I cannot more properly pursue that noble
Impulse, than by setting forth the Excellence of Virtue and Knowledge in their
native and beautiful Colors. For this Reason I made my late Excursion to
Oxford, where those Qualities appear in their highest Luster, and are the only
Pretenses to Honor and Distinction. Superiority is there given in Proportion
to Men's Advancement in Wisdom and Learning; and that just Rule of Life is so
universally received among those happy People, that you shall see an Earl walk
bear-headed to the Son of the meanest Artificer, in Respect to seven Years more
Worth and Knowledge than the Nobleman is possessed of. In other Places they bow
to Men's Fortunes, but here to their Understandings. It is not to be expressed,
how pleasing the Order, the Discipline, the Regularity of their Lives, is to a
Philosopher, who has, by many Years Experience in the World, learned to contemn
every Thing but what is revered in this Mansion of select and well-taught
Spirits. The Magnificence of their Palaces, the Greatness of their Revenues,
the Sweetness of their Groves and Retirements, seem equally adapted for the
Residence of Princes and Philosophers; and a Familiarity with Objects of
Splendor, as well as Places of Recess, prepares the Inhabitants with an
Equanimity for their future Fortunes, whether humble or illustrious. How was I
pleased when I looked round at St. Mary's, and could, in the Faces of the
ingenious Youth, see Ministers of State, Chansellors, Bishops, and Judges. Here
only is Humane Life! Here only the Life of Man is a Rational Being! Here Men
understand and are employed in Works worthy their noble Nature. This transitory
Being passes away in an Employment not unworthy a future State, the
Contemplation of the great Decrees of Providence. Each Man lives as if he were
to answer the Questions made to Job, Where wast thou when I laid the
Foundations of the Earth? Who shut up the Sea with Doors, and said, Hitherto
shall thou come, and no further? Such Speculations make Life agreeable, make
Death welcome.

But alas! I was torn from this noble Society by the Business of this dirty
mean World, and the Cares of Fortune: For I was obliged to be in London against
the 7th Day of the Term, and accordingly governed my self by my Oxford
Almanac, and came last Night; but find, to my great Astonishment, that this
ignorant Town began the Term on the 24th of the last Month, in Opposition to
all the Learning and Astronomy of the famous University of which I have been
speaking; according to which, the Term certainly was to commence on the 1st
Instant. You may be sure, a Man who has turned his Studies as I have, could not
be mistaken in Point of Time; for knowing I was come to Town in Term, I
examined the passing Moments very narrowly, and called an eminent Astronomer to
my Assistance. Upon very strict Observation we sound, that the Cold has been so
severe this last Winter, (which is allowed to have a benumming Quality) that it
retarded the Earth in moving round from Christmas to this Season full Seven
Days and Two Seconds. My Learned Friend assured me further, That the Earth had
lately received a Shog from a Comet that crossed its Vortex, which, if it had
come Ten Degrees nearer us, had made us lose this whole Term. I was indeed once
of Opinion, That the Gregorian Computation was the most regular, as being
Eleven Days before the Julian; but am now fully convinced, that we ought to be
Seven Days after the Chancellor and Judges, and Eighteen before the Pope of
Rome; and that the Oxonion Computation is the best of the Three.

These are the Reasons which I have gathered from Philosophy and Nature; to
which I can add other Circumstances in Vindication of the Account of this
Learned Body who published this Almanac.

It is notorious to Philosophers, that Joy and Grief can hasten and delay Time.
Mr. Lock is of Opinion, That a Man in great Misery may so far lose his
Measures, as to think a Minute an Hour; or in Joy, make an Hour a Minute. Let
us examine the present Case by this Rule, and we shall find, that the Cause of
this general Mistake in the British Nation, has been the great Success of the
last Campaigne, and the following Hopes of Peace. Stocks ran so high at the
Change, that the Citizens had gained Three Days of the Courtiers; and we have
indeed been so happy this Reign, that it the University did not rectify our
Mistakes, we should think our selves but in the Second Year of Her pretent
Majesty. It would be endless to enumerate the many Damages that have happened
by this Ignorance of the Vulgar. All the Recognizances within the Diocese of
Oxford have been forfeited, for not appearing on the First Day of this
Fictitious Term. The University has been Nonsuited in their Action against the
Booksellers for printing Clarendon in Quarto. Indeed what gives me the most
quick Concern, is the Case of a poor Gentleman my Friend, who was the other Day
taken in Execution by a Set of ignorant Bailiffs. He should, it seems, have
pleaded in the first Week of Term; but being a Master of Arts of Oxford, he
would not recede from the Oxonian Computation. He showed Mr. Broad the
Almanac, and the very Day when the Term began; but the merciless ignorant
Fellow, against all Sense and Learning, would hurry him away. He went indeed
quietly enough; but he has taken exact Notes of the Time of Arrest, and
sufficient Witnesses of his being carried into Gaol; and has, by Advice of the
Recorder of Oxford, brought his Action; and we doubt not but we shall pay 'em
off with Damages, and blemish the Reputation of Mr. Broad. We have one
convincing Proof, which all that frequent the Courts of Justices are Witnesses
of: The Dog that comes constantly to Westminster on the First Day of the Term,
did not appear till the First Day according to the Oxford Almanac; whose
Instinct I take to be a better Guide than Men's erroneous Opinions, which are
usually biased by Interest. I judge in this Case, as King Charles II.
victual'd his Navy, with the Bread which one of his Dogs chose of several
Pieces thrown before him, rather than trust to the Asseverations of the
Victuallers. Mr. Cowper, and other learned Council, have already urged the
Authority of this Almanac in Behalf of their Clients. We shall therefore go on
with all Speed in our Cause; and doubt not, but Chancery will give at the End
what we lost in the Beginning, by protracting the Term for us till Wednesday
come Se'nnight: And the University Orator shall for ever pray, etc.

From my own Apartment, July 7.
The Subject of Duels has, I find, been started with so good Success, that it
has been the frequent Subject of Conversation among polite Men; and a Dialogue
of that Kind has been transmitted to me verbatim, as follows. The Persons
concerned in it are Men of Honor, and Experience in the Manners of Men, and
have fallen upon the truest Foundation, as well as searched the Bottom of this
Evil.

Mr. Sage. If it were in my Power, every Man that drew his Sword, unless in the
Service, or purely to defend his Life, Person, or Goods, from Violence, (I mean
abstracted from all Puncto's or Whims of Honor) should ride the Wooden Horse
in the Tilt-Yard for such First Offense, for the Second stand in the Pillory,
and for the Third be Prisoner in Bedlam for Life.


Colonel Plume. I remember, that a Rencounter or Duel was so far from being in
Fashion among the Officers that served in the Parliament Army, that on the
contrary, it was as disreputable, and as great an Impediment to Advancement in
the Service, as being bashful in Time of Action.


Sir Mark. Yet I have been informed by some old Cavaliers, of famous Reputation
for brave and gallant Men, that they were much more in Mode among their Party,
than they have been during this last War.


Col. Plume. That is true too Sir.


Mr. Sage. By what you say, Gentlemen, one should think that our present
Military Officers are compounded of an equal Proportion of both those Tempers;
since Duels are neither quite discountenanced, nor much in vogue.


Sir Mark. That Difference of Temper, in Regard to Duels, which appears to have
been between the Court and Parliament Men of the Sword, was not (I conceive)
for Want of Courage in the latter, nor of a liberal Education, because there
were some of the best Families in England engaged in that Party; but Gallantry
and Mode, which glitter agreeably to the Imagination, were encouraged by the
Court, as promoting its Splendor; and it was as natural that the contrary
Party (who were to recommend themselves to the Public for Men of serious and
solid Parts) should deviate from every Thing Chimerical.


Mr. Sage. I have never read of a Duel among the Romans; and yet their Nobility
used more Liberty with their Tongues than one may do now without being
challenged.


Sir Mark. Perhaps the Romans were of Opinion, that ill Language, and brutal
Manners, reflected only on those who were guilty of them; and that a Man's
Reputation was not at all cleared by cutting the Person's Throat who had
reflected upon it: But the Custom of those Times had fixed the Scandal in the
Action; whereas now it lies in the Reproach.


Mr. Sage. And yet the only Sort of Duel that one can conceive to have been
fought upon Motives truly honorable and allowable, was that between the
Horatii and Curiatii.


Sir Mark. Colonel Plume, Pray what was the Method of Single Combat in your
Time among the Cavaliers? I suppose, that as the Use of Clothes continues,
though the Fashion of them has been mutable; so Duels, though still in Use, have
had in all Times their particular Modes of Performance.


Col. Plume. We had no constant Rule, but generally conducted our Dispute and
Tilt according to the last that had happened between Persons of Reputation
among the very Top Fellows for Bravery and Gallantry.


Sir Mark. If the Fashion of Quarrelling and Tilting was so often changed in
your Time, Colonel Plume, a Man might fight, yet lose his Credit for want of
understanding the Fashion.


Col. Plume. Why, Sir Mark, in the Beginning of July, a Man would have been
censured for want of Courage, or been thought indigent of the true Notions of
Honor, if he had put up Words; which in the End of September following, one
could not resent without passing for a brutal and quarrelsome Fellow.


Sir Mark. But Colonel, Were Duels or Rencounters most in Fashion in those Days?


Col. Plume. Your Men of nice Honor, Sir, were for avoiding all Censure of
Advantage which they supposed might be taken in a Rencounter; therefore they
used Seconds, who were to see that all was upon the Square, and make a faithful
Report of the whole Combat; but in a little Time it became a Fashion for the
Seconds to fight, and I Will tell you how it happened.


Mr. Sage. Pray do, Colonel Plume, and the Method of a Duel at that Time, and
give us some Notion of the Puncto's upon which your nice Men quarrelled in
those Days.


Col. Plume. I was going to tell you, Mr. Sage, That one Cornet Modish had
desned his Friend, Captain Smart,'s Opinion in some Affair, but did not follow
it; upon which Captain Smart sent Major Adroit (a very Topping Fellow of those
Times) to the Person that had slighted his Advice. The Major never enquired
into the Quarrel, because it was not the manner then among the very Topping
Fellows; but got two Swords of an equal Length, and then waited upon Cornet
Modish, desiring him to choose his Sword, and meet his Friend Captain Smart.
Cornet Modish came with his Friend to the Place of Combat; there the Principals
put on their Pumps, and striped to their Shirts, to show they had nothing but
what Men of Honor carry about 'em, and then engaged.


Sir Mark. And did the Seconds stand by Sir?


Col. Plume. It was a received Custom till that Time; but the Swords of those
Days being pretty long, and the Principals acting on both Sides upon the
Defensive, and the Morning being frosty, Major Adroit desired that the other
Second, who was also a very Topping Fellow, would try a Thrust or Two only to
keep them warm, till the Principals had decided the Matter, which was agreed to
by Modish's Second, who presently whipped Adroit through the Body, disarmed him,
and then parted the Principals, who had received no Harm at all.


Mr. Sage. But was not Adroit laughed at?


Col. Plume. On the Contrary, the very Topping Fellows were ever after of
Opinion. That no Man who deserved that Character, could serve as a Second,
without Fighting; and the Smarts and Modishes finding their Account in it, the
Humor took without Opposition.


Mr. Sage. Pray Colonel, How long did that Fashion continue?


Col. Plume. Not long neither, Mr. Sage; for as soon as it became a Fashion,
the very Topping Fellows thought their Honor reflected upon, if they did not
proffer themselves as Seconds when any of their Friends had a Quarrel; so that
sometimes there were a Dozen of a Side.


Sir Mark. Bless me! If that Custom had continued, we should have been at a
Loss now for our very Pretty Fellows; for they seem to be the proper Men to
officer, animate, and keep up an Army: But, pray Sir, How did that sociable
Manner of Tilting grow out of Mode?


Col. Plume. Why, Sir, I Will tell you: It was a Law among the Combatants, That
the Party which happened to have the first Man disarmed or killed, should yield
as vanquished; which some People thought might encourage the Modishes and
Smarts in quarrelling, to the Destruction of only the very Topping Fellows; and
as soon as this Reflection was started, the very Topping Fellows thought it an
Encumbrance upon their Honor to fight at all themselves. Since that Time, the
Modishes and the Smarts, throughout all Europe, have extolled the French King's
Edict.


Sir Mark. Our very pretty Fellows, whom I take to be the Successors of the
very Topping Fellows, think a Quarrel so little Fashionable, that they will not
be exposed to it by another Man's Vanity, or Want of Sense.


Mr. Sage. But, Colonel, I have observed in your Account of Duels, that there
was a great Exactness in avoiding all Advantage that might possibly be between
the Combatants.


Col. Plume. That Is true, Sir; for the Weapons were always equal.


Mr. Sage. Yes, Sir; but suppose an active, adroit, strong Man, had insulted an
awkward, or a feeble, or an unpracticed Swords-man.


Col. Plume. Then, Sir, they fought with Pistols.


Mr. Sage. But, Sir, there might be a certain Advantage that Way; for a good
Marks-man will be sure to hit his Man at 20 Yards Distance; and a Man whose
Hand shakes (which is common to Men that debauch in Pleasures, or have not used
Pistols out of their Holsters) will not venture to fire, unless he touches the
Person he shoots at. Now, Sir, I am of Opinion, that one can get no Honor in
killing a Man (if one has it all Rug) as the Gamesters say, when they have a
Trick to make the Game secure, though they seem to play upon the Square.


Sir Mark. In Truth, Mr. Sage, I think such a Fact must be Murder in a Man's
own private Conscience, whatever it may appear to the World.


Col. Plume. I have known some Men so nice, that they would not fight but upon
a Cloak without Pistols.


Mr. Sage. I believe a Custom, well established, would outdo the Grand
Monarch's Edict.


Sir Mark. And Bullies would then leave off their long Swords; but I don't find
that a very Pretty Fellow can stay to change his Sword, when he is insulted by
a Bully with a long Diego, though his own at the same Time be no longer than a
Penknife; which will certainly be the Case, if such little Swords are in Mode.
Pray Colonel, how was it between the Hectors of your Time and the very Topping
Fellows?


Col. Plume. Sir, Long Swords happened to be generally worn in those Times.


Mr. Sage. In answer to what you were saying, Sir Mark, give me Leave to inform
you, that your Knights-Errant, (who were the very Pretty Fellows of those
Ancient Times) thought they could not honorably yield, though they had fought
their own trusty Weapons to the Stumps; but would venture as boldly with the
Page's Leaden Sword, as if it had been of enchanted Meta^ Whence I conceive,
there must be a Spice o^ Romantic Gallantry in the Composition of tha^ very
Pretty Fellow.


Sir Mark. I am of Opinion, Mr. Sage, tha^ Fashion governs a very pretty
Fellow; Nature^ or common Sense, your ordinary Persons, an^ sometimes Men of
fine Parts.


Mr. Sage. But what is the Reason, that Me^ of the most excellent Sense and
Morals (in other Points) associate their Understandings with the very Pretty
Fellows in that Chimaera of a Duel?


Sir Mark. There Is no disputing against so great a Majority.


Mr. Sage. But there is one Scruple, (Col. Plume) and I have done: Don't you
believe, there may be some Advantage even upon a Cloak with Pistols? Which a
Man of nice Honor would scruple to take.


Col. Plume. Faith, I cannot tell, Sir; but since one may reasonably suppose,
that (in such a Case) there can be but one so far in the Wrong as to occasion
Matters to come to that Extremity, I think the Chance of being killed should
fall but on one; whereas by their close and desperate Manner of Fighting, it
may very probably happen to both.


Sir Mark. Why Gentlemen, if they are Men of such nice Honor, (and must fight)
there will be no fear of foul Play, if they threw up Cross or Pile who should
be shot.


The TATLER. [No 40.
From Saturday July 9. to Tuesd. July 12. 1709.
Will's Coffee house, July 11.
LEtters from the City of London give an Account of a very great Consternation
that ^ace is in at present, by reason of a late Enquiry ^ade at Guildhall,
Whether a Noble Person has ^rts enough to deserve the Enjoyment of the ^reat
Estate of which he is possessed? The City (...) apprehensive, that this
Precedent may go fur^er than was at first imagined. The Person a^inst whom this
Inquisition is set up by his Re^tions, is a Peer of a neighboring Kingdom, ^d
has in his Youth made some few Bulls, by which it is insinuated, that he has
forfeited his ^oods and Chattels. This is the more astonish^g, in that there
are many Persons in the said ^ity who are still more guilty than his Lord^ip,
and who, though they are Idiots, do not ^nly possess, but have also themselves
acquired ^reat Estates, contrary to the known Laws of ^is Realm, which vests
their Possessions in the Crown.

There is a Gentleman in the Coffee-house at ^is Time exhibiting a Bill in
Chancery against ^s Father's younger Brother, who by some ^range Magic has
arrived at the Value of half ^ Plumb, as the Citizens call an Hundred Thou^nd
Pounds; and in all the Time of growing up (...) that Wealth, was never known in
any of his ^rdinary Words or Actions to discover any Proof of Reason. Upon this
Foundation my Friend ha^ set forth, that he is illegally Master of his Coffers,
and has writ two Epigrams to signify his own Pretensions and Sufficiency for
spending that Estate. He has inserted in his Plea some Things which I fear will
give Offense, for he pretends to argue, that though a Man has a little of the
Knave mixed with the Fool, he is nevertheless liable to the Loss of Goods; and
makes the Abuse of Reason as just an Avoidance of an Estate as the total
Absence of it. This is what can never pass; but witty Men are so full of
themselves, that there is no persuading 'em; and my Friend will not be
convinced, but that upon quoting Solomon, who always used the Word Fool as a
Term of the same Signification with Unjust, and makes all Deviation from
Goodness and Virtue to come under the Notion of Folly, I say he doubts not, but
by the Force of this Authority, let his Idiot Uncle appear never so great a
Knave, he shall prove him a Fool at the same Time.

This Affair led the Company here into an Examination of these Points; and none
coming here but Wits, what was asserted by a young Lawyer, that a Lunatic is
in the Care of the Chancery, but a Fool in that of the Crown, was received with
general Indignation. 'Why that? says old Renault. Why that? Why must a Fool be
a Courtier more than a Madman? This is the Iniquity of this dull Age: I
remember the Time when it went on the mad Side; all your Top Wits were
Scowrers, Rakes, Roarers, and Demolishers of Windows. I knew a mad Lord who was
drunk five Years together, and was the Envy of that Age; who is faintly
imitated by the dull Pretenders to Vice and Madness in this. Had he lived to
this Day, there had not been a Fool in Fashion in the whole Kingdom. When
Renault had done speaking, a very worthy Man assumed the Discourse. This is
(said he) Mr. Bickerstaff, a proper Argument for you to treat in your Article
from this Place; and if you would send your Pacolet into all our Brains, you
would find, that a little Fiber or Valve, scarce discernable, makes the
Distinction between a Politician and an Idiot. We should therefore throw a Veil
upon those unhappy Instances of humane Nature, who seem to breath without the
Direction of Reason and Understanding, as we should avert our Eyes with
Abhorrence from such as live in perpetual Abuse and Contradiction to these
noble Faculties. Shall this unfortunate Man be divested of his Estate, because
he is tractable and indolent, runs in no Man's Debt, invades no Man's Bed, nor
spends the Estate he owes his Children and his Character; when one who shows no
Sense above him, but in such Practices, shall be esteemed in his Senses, and
possibly may pretend to the Guardianship of him who is no Ways his Inferior,
but in being less wicked? We see old Age brings us indifferently into the same
Impotence of Soul, wherein Nature has placed this Lo^d.'

There is something very fantastical in the Distribution of Civil Power and
Capacity among Men. The Law certainly gives these Persons into the Ward and
Care of the Crown, because that is best able to protect 'em from Injuries, and
the Impositions of Craft and Knavery; that the Life of an Idiot may not ruin
the Intail of a noble House, and his Weakness may not frustrate the Industry or
Capacity of the Founder of his Family. But when one of bright Parts, as we say,
with his Eyes open, and all Men's Eyes upon him, destroys those Purposes, there
is no Remedy. Folly and Ignorance are punished! Folly and Guilt are tolerated!
Mr. Lock has somewhere made a ^stinction between a Madman and a Fool: A For is
he that from right Principles makes a wro^ Conclusion; but a Madman is one who
draws ^ just Inference from false Principles. Thus the Fool who cut off the
Fellow's Head that lay aslee^ and hid it, and then waited to see what he wou^
say when he awaked and missed his Headpiece was in the Right in the first
Thought, that a Man would be surprised to find such an Alteration i^ Things
since he fell asleep; but he was a little mistaken to imagine he could awake at
all afte^ his Head was off. A Madman fancies himself a Prince; but upon his
Mistake, he acts suitably (...) that Character; and though he is out in supposion
he has Principalities, while he drinks Gruel, and lies in Straw, yet you shall
see him keep the Port of a distressed Monarch in all his Words and Actions.
These Two Persons are equally taken into Custody: But what must be done to half
this good Company, who every Hour of their Life are knowingly and wittingly
both Fools and Madmen, and yet have Capacities both of forming Principles, and
drawing Conclusions, with the full Use of Reason?

From my own Apartment, July 11.
This Evening some Ladies came to visit my Sister Jenny; and the Discourse,
after very many frivolous and public Matters, turned upon the main Point among
the Women, the Passion of Love. Sappho, who always leads on this Occasion,
began to show her Reading, and told us, That Sir John Suckling and Milton had,
upon a parallel Occasion, said the tenderest Things she had ever read. The
Circumstance, said she, is such as gives us a Notion of that Protecting Part
which is the Duty of Men in their honorable Designs upon, or Possession of
^omen. In Suckling's Tragedy of Brennoralt, ^e makes the Lover steal into his
Mistress's Bed^amber, and draw the Curtains; then, when ^is Heart is full of
her Charms, as she lies sleep^g, instead of being carried away by the Vio^ce of
his Desires into Thoughts of a warmer nature, Sleep, which is the Image of
Death, ^ives this generous Lover Reflections of a diffe^ent Kind, which regard
rather her Safety than ^is own Passion. For, beholding her as she lies ^eeping,
he utters these Words: So Misers look upon their Gold,
Which, while they joy to see, they fear to lose:
The Pleasure of the Sight scarce equalling
The Jealousy of being dispossessed by others.
Her Face is like the Milky Way in the Sky,
A Meeting of gentle Lights without Name!
Heavens! Shall this fresh Ornament of the World,
These precious Love-Lines, pass with other common Things
Amongst the Wastes of Time? What Pity 'twere!


When Milton makes Adam leaning on his Arm, beholding Eve, and lying in the
Contemplation of her Beauty, he describes utmost Tenderness and Guardian
Affection in one Word: Adam with Looks of Cordial Love
Hung over her enamored.


This is that Sort of Passion which truly deserves the Name of Love, and has
something more generous than Friendship it self; for it has a constant Care of
the Object beloved, abstracted from its own Interests in the ^ossession of it.
Sappho was proceeding on the Subject, when my Sister produced a Letter sent to
her in the Time of my Absence, in Celebration of the Marriage State, which is
the Condition wherein only this Sort of Passion reigns in (...) Authority. The
Epistle is as follows:

Dear Madam,
YOur Brother being absent, I dare take the Liberty of writing to you my
Thought of that State, which our whole Sex either is or desires to be in:
You Will easily guess I mean Matrimony, which I hear so much decry'd, that it was
with no small Labor I maintained my Ground against Two Opponents; but, as your
Brother observed of Socrates, I drew them into my Conclusion from their own
Concessions; thus: In Marriage are Two happy Things allowed,
A Wife in Wedding Sheets, and in a Shroud.
How can a Marriage State then be accursed,
Since the last Day's as happy as the First?


If you think they were too easily confuted, you may conclude them not of the
First Sense, by their talking against Marriage.

Yours, Mariana.


I observed Sappho began to redden at this Epistle; and turning to a Lady, who
was playing with a Dog she was so fond of, as to carry him Abroad with her;
Nays, says she, I cannot blame the Men if they have mean Ideas of our Souls and
Affections, and wonder so many are brought to take us for Companions for Life,
when they see our Endearments so triflingly placed: For, to my knowledge, Mr.
Truman would give half his Estate for half the Affection you have shown to that
Shock: Nor do I believe you would be ashamed to confess, that I saw you cry,
when he had the Cholick last Week with lapping sour Milk. What more could you
do for your Lover himself? What more! replied the Lady. There is not a Man in
England for whom I could lament half so much. Then she stifled the Animal with
Kisses, and called him, Beau, Life, Dear, Monsieur, Pretty Fellow, and what
not, in the Hurry of her Impertinence. Sappho rose up; as she always does at
any Thing. The observes done, which discovers in her own. Sex a Levity of Mind,
which renders 'em iuconsiderable in the Opinion of ours.

St. James's Coffee-house, July 11.
Letters from the Hague of the 16th Instant, N. S. say, That the Siege of
Tournay went on with all imaginable Success; and that there has been no manner
of Stop given to the Attempts of the Confederates since they undertook it,
except that by an Accident of Firing a Piece of Ordnance it burst, and killed
15 or 16 Men. The French Army is still in the Camp of Lens, and goes on in
improving their Intrenchments. When the last Advices came away, it was believed
the Town of Tournay would be in the Hands of the Confederates by the End of
this Month. Advices from Brussels inform us, That they have an Account of a
great Action between the Malcontents in the Vivarez, and the French King's
Forces under the Command of the Duke of Roquelaure, in which Engagement there
were Eighteen Hundred Men Killed on the Spot. They add, That all Sorts of
People who are under any Oppression or Discontent do daily join the Vivarois;
and that their present Body of Men in Arms consisted of Six Thousand. This
sudden Insurrection has put the Court of France under great Difficulties; and
the King has given Orders, That the main Body of his Troops in Spain shall
withdraw into his own Dominions, where they are to be quartered in such
Countries as have of late discovered an Inclination to take up Arms: The
Calamities of that Kingdom, being such, that the People are not by any Means to
be kept in Obedience, except by the Terror of Military Execution. What makes
the Distresses still greater, is, That the Court begins to be doubtful of their
Troops, some Regiments in the Action of the Cevennes having faced about against
their Officers; and after the Battle was over, joined the Malcontents. Upon
receiving Advice of this Battle, the Duke of Berwick detached Twelve Battalions
into those Parts, and began to add new Works to his Intrenchments near
Brianzon, in order to defend his Camp, after being weakened by sending so great
a Reinforcement into the Cevennes. Letters from Spain say, That the Duchess of
Anjou was lately delivered of a Second Son. They write from Madrid of the 25th
of June, That the Blockade of Olivenza was continued; but acknowledge, that the
late Provisions which were thrown into the Place, make them doubt whether they
shall be Masters of it this Campaign; though it is at present so closely
blocked up, that it appears impracticable to send in any more Stores or
Succors. They are preparing with all Expedition to repair the Fortifications
of Alicant, for the Security of the Kingdom of Valencia.

The TATLER. [No 41.
-- Celebrare Domestica Facta.

From Tuesd. July 12. to Thursd. July 14. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, July 12.
THere is no one Thing more to be lamented in our Nation, than their general
Affectation of every Thing that is Foreign; nay, we carry it so far, that we
are more anxious for our own Countrymen when they have crossed the Seas, than
when we see them in the same dangerous Condition before our Eyes at Home: Else
how is it possible, that on the 29th of the last Month, there should have been
a Battle fought in our very Streets of London, and no Body at this End of the
Town have heard of it. I protest, I, who make it my Business to enquire after
Adventures, should never have known this, had not the following Account been
sent me enclosed in a Letter. This, it seems, is the Way of giving out of
Orders in the Artillery Company; and they prepare for a Day of Action with so
little Concern, as only to call it, An Exercise of Arms.

An Exercise at Arms of the Artillery Company, to be performed on Wednesday
June 29. 1709. under the Command of Sir Joseph Woolf, Knight and Alderman,
General; Charles Hoplon, Esquire, present Sheriff, Lieutenant General; Captain
Richard Sing, Major; Major John Shorey, Captain of Granadiers; Capt. William
Grayhurst, Capt. John Butler, Capt. Robert Carellis, Captains.
THE Body march from the Artillery-Ground through Moregate, Coleman street,
Lothbury, Broad street, Finch-Lane, Cornhill, Cheapside, St. Martins, St.
Anne's-Lane, Hault the Pikes under the Wall in Noble-street, Draw up the
Firelocks facing the Goldsmiths Hall, make Ready and Face to the Left, and
Fire, and so ditto Three Times. Beat to Arms, and March round the Hall, as up
Lad-Lane, Gutter-Lane, Honey-Lane, and so Wheel to the Right, and make your
Salute to my Lord, and so down St. Anne's Lane, up Aldersgate Street, Barbican,
and draw up in Red-Cross street, the Right at St. Paul's- Alley in the Rear.
March off Lieutenant General with Half the Body up Beech-Lane: He sends a
Sub-Division up Kings-Head-Court, and takes Post in it, and marches Two
Divisions round into Red-Lion-Market, to defend that Pass, and succor the
Division in Kings-Head-Court, but keeps in White-Cross-street, facing
Beech-Lane, the rest of the Body ready drawn up. Then the General marches up
Beech-Lane, is attacked, but forces the Division in the Court into the Market,
and enters with Three Divisions while he presses the Lieutenant-General's Main
Body; and at the same Time, the Three Divisions force those of the Revolters
out of the Market, and so all the Lieutenant-General's Body retreats into
Chiswel-street, and lodges Two Divisions in Grub-street; and as the General
marches on, they fall on his Flank, but soon made to give Way; but having a
Retreating-Place in Red-Lion-Court, but could not hold it, being put to Flight
through Paul's- Alley, and pursued by the General's Granadiers, while he marches
up and attacks their main Body, but are opposed again by a Party of Men as lay
in Black-Raven-Court; but they are forced also to Retire soon in the utmost
Confusion, and at the same Time those Brave Divisions in Paul's- Alley ply
their Rear with Granadiers, that with Precipitation they take to the Rout along
Bunhill-Row: So the General marches into the Artillery-Ground, and being drawn
up, finds the Revolting Party to have found Entrance, and makes a Show as if
for a Battle, and both Armies soon Engage in Form, and Fire by Platoons.

Much might be said for the Improvement of this System; which, for its Style
and Invention, may instruct Generals and their Historians, both in fighting a
Battle, and describing it when it is over. These elegant Expressions, Ditto --
And so -- But soon -- But having -- But could not -- But are -- But they --
Finds the Party to have found, etc. -- do certainly give great Life and Spirit
to the Relation.

Indeed I am extremely concerned for the Lieutenant General, who, by his
Overthrow and Defeat, is made a deplorable Instance of the Fortune of War, and
Vicissitudes of humane Affairs. He, alas! has lost in Beech-Lane and
Chiswel-street, all the Glory he lately gained in and about Holborn and St.
Giles's. The Art of Subdividing first, and Dividing afterward, is new and
surprising; and according to this Method, the Troops are disposed in
Kings-Head-Court and Red-Lion-Market: Nor is the Conduct of these Leaders less
conspicuous in their Choice of the Ground or Field of Battle. Happy was it,
that the greatest Part of the Achievements of this Day was to be performed
near Grub-street, that there might not be wanting a sufficient Number of
faithful Historians. who being Eyewitnesses of these Wonders, should
impartially transmit them to Posterity: But then it can never be enough
regretted, that we are left in the Dark as to the Name and Title of that
extraordinary Hero who commanded the Divisions in Paul's-Alley; especially
because those Divisions are justly styled Brave, and accordingly were to push
the Enemy along Bunhill-Row, and thereby occasion a general Battle. But Pallas
appeared in the Form of a Shower of Rain, and prevented the Slaughter and
Desolation which were threatened by these extraordinary Preparations.

Hi Motus Animorum atque haec Certamina tanta
Pulveris exigui Jactu compressa quiescunt.
Will's Coffee-house, July 13.
Some Part of the Company keep up the old Way of Conversation in this Place,
which usually turned upon the Examination of Nature, and an Enquiry into the
Manners of Men. There is one in the Room so very judicious, that he manages
Impertinents with the utmost Dexterity. It was diverting this Evening to hear a
Discourse between him and one of these Gentlemen. He told me before that Person
joined us, that he was a Questioner, who, according to his Description, is one
who asks Questions, not with a Design to receive Information, but an
Affectation to show his Uneasiness for Want of it. He went on in asserting,
that there are Crowds of that modest Ambition, as to aim no further than to
demonstrate that they are in Doubt. By this Time Will. Why-not was fate down by
us. So Gentlemen, (says he) In how many Days, think you, shall we be Masters of
Tournay? Is the Account of the Action of the Vivarois to be depended upon?
Could you have imagined England had so much Money in it as you see it has
produced? Pray Sirs, What do you think? Will the Duke of Savoy make an
Irruption into France? But (says he) Time will clear all these Mysteries. His
Answer to himself gave me the Altitude of his Head, and to all his Questions I
thus answered very satisfactorily -- Sir, have you heard that this
Slaughterford never owned the Fact for which he died? Have the Newspapers
mentioned that Matter? But, pray, Can you tell me what Method will be taken to
provide for these Palatines? But this, as you say, Time will clear. Ay, ay,
says he, and whispers me, They will never let us into these Things beforehand.
I whispered him again, We shall know it as soon as there is a Proclamation --
He tells me in the other Ear, You are in the Right of it. Then he whispered my
Friend to know what my Name was; then made an obliging Bow, and went to examine
another Table. This led my Friend and me to weigh this wandering Manner in many
other Incidents, and he took out of his Pockets several little Notes or Tickets
to solicit for Votes to Employments: As, "Mr. John Taplash having served all
Offices, and being reduced to great Poverty, desires your Vote for
Singing-Clerk of this Parish. Another has had Ten Children, all whom his Wife
has suckled her self; therefore humbly desires to be a Schoolmaster.'

There is nothing so frequent as this Way of Application for Offices. It is not
that you are fit for the Place, but because the Place would be convenient for
you, that you claim a Merit to it. But commend me to the great Kirleus, who has
lately set up for Midwisery, and to help Childbirth, for no other Reason, but
that he is himself the Unborn Doctor. The Way is to hit upon something that
puts the Vulgar upon the Stare, or that touches their Compassion, which is
often the weakest Part about us. I know a good Lady, who has taken her
Daughters from their old Dancing Master, to place them with another, for no
other Reason, but because the new Man has broke his Leg, which is so ill set,
that he can never dance more.

From my own Apartment, July 13.
As it is a frequent Mortification to me to receive Letters, wherein People
tell me, without a Name, they know I meant them in such and such a Passage; so
that very Accusation is an Argument, That there are such Beings in Humane Life,
as fall under our Description, and our Discourse is not altogether fantastical
and groundless. But in this Case I am treated as I saw a Boy was the other Day,
who gave out pocky Bills: Every plain Fellow took it that passed by, and went
on his Way without further Notice: At last came one with his Nose a little
abridg'd; who knocks the Lad down, with a, Why you Son of a W -- e, do you
think I am p -- d? But Shakespeare has made the best Apology for this Way of
Talking against the Public Errors: He makes Jaques, in the Play, called, As
you like it, express himself thus:

Why, Who cries out on Pride,
That can therein tax any private Party?
What Woman in the City do I name?
When that I say the City Woman bears
The Cost of Princes on unworthy Shoulders.
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she, such is her Neighbor?
Or, What is he of basest Function,
That says his Bravery is not on my Cost?
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His Folly to the Mettle of my Speech.
There then! How then? Then let me see wherein
My Tongue has wronged him: If it do him right,
Then he has wronged himself: If he be free,
Why then my Taxing like a wild Goose flies,
Unclaimed of any Man.
St. James's Coffee-house, July 13.
We have received, by Letters of the 18th Instant from the Camp before Tournay,
an Account, That we were in a fair Prospect of being Masters of the Town within
seven Days after that Date. Our Batteries had utterly overthrown those of the
Enemy. On the 16th Instant, N. S. General Schuylemburgh had made a Lodgment on
the Counterscarp of the Tenaille; which Post was so weakly defended, that we
lost but Six Men in gaining it. So that there seems Reason to hope, that the
Citadel will also be in the Hands of the Confederates about the 6th of August,
O. S. These Advices inform us further, That Marshal Villars had ordered large
Detachments to make Motions toward Douay and Conde. The swift Progress of this
Siege has so much alarmed the other Frontier Towns of France, that they were
throwing down some Houses in the Suburbs of Valenciennes, which they think may
stand commodiously for the Enemy in case that Place should be invested. The
Elector of Cologue is making all imaginable Haste to remove from hence to
Rheims.

The TATLER. [No 42.
-- Celebrare Domestica Facta.

From Thursd. July 14. to Saturd. July 16. 1709.
From my own Apartment, July 15.
LOoking over some old Papers, I found a little Treatise, written by my
Great-Grandfather, concerning Bribery, and thought his Manner of treating that
Subject not unworthy my Remark. He there has a Digression concerning a
Possibility, that in some Circumstances a Man may receive an Injury, and yet be
conscious to himself that he deserves it. There are abundance of fine Things
said on the Subject; but the whole wrapped up in so much Jingle and Pun, (which
was the Wit of those Times) that it is scarce intelligible; but I thought the
Design was well enough in the following Sketch of the old Gentleman's Poetry:
For in this Case, where Two are Rivals for the same Thing, and propose to
obtain it by Presents, he that attempts the Judge's Honesty, by making him
Offers of Reward, ought not to complain when he loses his Cause by a better
Bidder. The good old Dogrel runs thus:

A Poor Man once a Judge besought,
To judge aright his Cause,
And with a Pot of Oil salutes
This Judger of the Laws.
My Friend, quoth he, thy Cause is good:
He glad away did trudge;
Anon his wealthy Foe did come
Before this partial Judge.
An Hog well fed this Churl presents,
And craves a Strain of Law;
The Hog received, the Poor Man's Right
Was judged not worth a Straw.
Therewith he cried, O! Partial Judge,
Thy Doom has me undone;
When Oil I gave, my Cause was good;
But now to Ruin run.
Poor Man, quoth he, I thee forgot,
And see thy Cause of Foil;
An Hog came since into my House,
And broke thy Pot of Oil.
Will's Coffee-house, July 15.
The Discourse happened this Evening to fall upon Characters drawn in Plays,
and a Gentleman remarked, That there was no Method in the World of knowing the
Taste of an Age, or Period of Time so good, as by the Observations of the
Persons represented in their Comedies. There were several Instances produced,
as Ben. Johnson's bringing in a Fellow smoking as a Piece of Foppery; but,
said the Gentleman, (who entertained us on this Subject) this Matter is no
where so observable as in the Difference of the Characters of Women on the
Stage in the last Age, and in this. It is not to be supposed that it was a
Poverty of Genius in Shakespeare, that his Women made so small a Figure in his
Dialogues; but it certainly is, that he drew Women as they then were in Life;
for that Sex had not in those Days that Freedom in Conversation; and their
Characters were only, that they were Mothers, Sisters, Daughters, and Wives.
There were not then among the Ladies, shining Wits, Politicians, Virtuosae,
Free-Thinkers, and Disputants; nay, there was then hardly such a Creature even
as a Coquet: But Vanity had quite another Turn, and the most conspicuous Woman
at that Time of Day was only the best Housewife. Were it possible to bring into
Life an Assembly of Matrons of that Age, and introduce the learned Lady Woodby
into their Company, they would not believe the same Nation could produce a
Creature so unlike any Thing they ever saw in it.

But these Ancients would be as much astonished to see in the same Age so
illustrious a Pattern to all who love Things Praiseworthy, as the divine
Aspasia. Methinks, I now see her walking in her Garden like our first Parent,
with unaffected Charms, before Beauty had Spectators, and bearing celestial
conscious Virtue in her Aspect. Her Countenance is the lively Picture of her
Mind, which is the Seat of Honor, Truth, Compassion, Knowledge, and Innocence.
There dwells the Scorn of Vice and Pity too.
In the Midst of the most ample Fortune, and Veneration of all that behold and
know her, without the least Affectation, she consults Retirement, the
Contemplation of her own Being, and that supreme Power which bestowed it.
Without the Learning of Schools, or Knowledge of a long Course of Arguments,
she goes on in a steady Course of uninterrupted Piety and Virtue, and adds to
the Severity and Privacy of the last Age all the Freedom and Ease of this. The
Language and Mien of a Court she is possessed of in the highest Degree; but the
Simplicity and humble Thoughts of a Cottage, are her more welcome
Entertainments. Aspasia is a Female Philosopher, who does not only live up to
the Resignation of the most retired Lives of the ancient Sages, but also to the
Schemes and Plans which they thought beautiful, though inimitable. This Lady is
the most exact Oeconomist, without appearing busy; the most strictly virtuous,
without tasting the Praise of it; and shuns Applause with as much Industry, as
others do Reproach. This Character is so particular, that it will very easily
be fixed on her only, by all that know her: But I dare say, she will be the
last that finds it out.

But, alas! If we have One or Two such Ladies, How many Dozens are there like
the restless Poluglossa, who is acquainted with all the World but her self; who
has the Appearance of all, and Possession of no one Virtue: She has indeed in
her Practice the Absence of Vice, but her Discourse is the continual History of
it; and it is apparent, when she speaks of the criminal Gratifications of
others, that her Innocence is only a Restraint, with a certain Mixture of Envy.
She is so perfectly opposite to the Character of Aspasia, that as Vice is
terrible to her only as it is the Object of Reproach, so Virtue is agreeable
only as it is attended with Applause.

St. James's Coffee-house, July 15.
It is now Twelve a Clock at Noon, and no Mail come in; therefore I am not
without Hopes, that the Town will allow me the Liberty which my Brother
News-Writers take, in giving them what may be for their Information in another
Kind, and indulge me in doing an Act of Friendship, by publishing the following
Account of Goods and Movables.

This is to give Notice, That a magnificent Palace, with great Variety of
Gardens, Statues, and Waterworks, may be bought cheap in Drury Lane; where
there are likewise several Castles to be disposed of, very delightfully
situated; as also Groves, Woods, Forests, Fountains and Country Seats, with
very pleasant Prospects on all Sides of them; being the Movables of Ch -- r R
-- ch Esquire who is breaking up Housekeeping, and has many curious Pieces of
Furniture to be disposed of, which may be seen between the Hours of Six and Ten
in the Evening. The INVENTORY.
Spirits of Right Nants Brandy, for Lambent Flames and Apparitions. Three
Bottles and a Half of Lightning. One Shower of Snow in the whitest French
Paper. Two Showers of a browner Sort. A Sea, consisting of a Dozen large Waves;
the Tenth bigger than ordinary, and a little dammaged. A Dozen and a half of
Clouds, trimmed with black, and well conditioned. A Rainbow a little faded. A
Set of Clouds after the French Mode, streaked with Lightning, and furbelow'd. A
New Mood something decayed. A Pint of the finest Spanish Wash, being all that
is left of Two Hogsheads sent over last Winter. A Coach very finely gilt, and
little used, with a Pair of Dragons, to be sold cheap. A Setting-Sun, a
Pennyworth. An Imperial Mantle, made for Cyrus the Great, and worn by Julius
Caesar, Bajazet, King Henry the Eighth, and Signior Valentini. A Basket-Hilt
Sword, very convenient to carry Milk in. Roxana's Nightgown. Othello's
Handkerchief. The Imperial Robes of Xerxes, never worn but once. A Wild-Boar,
killed by Mrs. Tofts and Dioclesian. A Serpent to sting Cleopatra. A
Mustard-Bowl to make Thunder with. Another of a bigger Sort, by Mr. D -- is's
Directions, little used. Six Elbow-Chairs, very expert in Country-Dances, with
Six Flower-Pots for their Partners. The Whiskers of a Turkish Bassa. The
Complexion of a Murderer in a Band-box; consisting of a large Piece of burnt
Cork, and a Cole-black Peruke. A Suit of Clothes for a Ghost, viz. a bloody Shi
t, a Doublet curiously pink'd, and a Coat with Three great Eyelet-Holes upon
the Breast. A Bale of Red Spanish Wool. Modern Plots, commonly know by the Name
of Trap-Doors, Ladders of Ropes, Visard-Masques, and Tables with broad Carpets
over them. Three Oak Cudgels, with one of Crab-Tree; all bought for the Use of
Mr. Penkethman. Materials for Dancing; as Masks, Castanets, and a Ladder of
Ten Rounds. Aurengezebe's Scymeter, made by Will. Brown in Piccadilly. A Plume
of Feathers, never used but by Ocdipus and the Earl of Essex. There are also
Swords, Halberts, Sheep-Hooks, Cardinals Hats, Turbants, Drums, Gally Pots, a
Gibbet, a Cradle, a Rack, a Cart-Wheel, an Altar, a Helmet, a Back-Piece, a
Breast Plate, a Bell, a Tub, and a Jointed-Baby.
These are the hard Shifts we Intelligencers are forced to; therefore our
Readers ought to excuse us, if a Westerly Wind blowing for a Fortnight
together, generally fills every Paper with an Order of Battle; when we show our
Martial Skill in each Line, and, according to the Space we have to fill, we
range our Men in Squadrons and Battalions, or draw out Company by Company, and
Troop by Troop; ever observing, that no Muster is to be made, but when the Wind
is in a cross Point, which often happens at the End of a Campaign, when half
the Men are deserted or killed. The Courant is sometimes Ten deep, his Ranks
close: The Post-Boy is generally in Files, for greater Exactness; and the
Post-Man comes down upon you rather after the Turkish Way, Sword in Hand,
Pell-mell, without Form or Discipline; but sure to bring Men enough into the
Field; and wherever they are raised, never to lose a Battle for Want of
Numbers.

The TATLER. [No 43.
-- Been Nummatum decorat Swadela Venusque.
Hor.
From Saturd. July 16. to Tuesd. July 19. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, July 18.
I Write from hence at present to complain, That Wit and Merit are so little
encouraged by People of Rank and Quality, that the Wits of the Age are obliged
to run within Temple Bar for Patronage. There is a deplorable Instance of this
in the Case of Mr. D -- y, who has dedicated his inimitable Comedy, called, The
Modern Prophets, to a worthy Knight, to whom, it seems, he had before
communicated his Plan, which was, To Ridicule the Ridiculers of our established
Doctrine. I have elsewhere celebrated the Contrivance of this excellent Drama;
but was not, till I read the Dedication, wholly let into the Religious Design
of it. I am afraid it has suffered Discontinuance at this gay End of the Town,
for no other Reason but the Piety of the Purpose. There is however in this
Epistle the true Life of Panegyrical Performance; and I do not doubt but, if
the Patron would part with it, I can help him to others with good Pretensions
to it; viz. of Uncommon Understanding, who would give him as much as he gave
for it. I know perfectly well a Noble Person to whom these Words (which are the
Body of the Panegyric) would fit to a Hair.

Your Easiness of Humor, or rather your harmonious Disposition, is so
admirably mixed with your Composure, that the rugged Cares and Disturbance that
Public Affairs brings with it, which does so vexatiously affect the Heads of
other great Men of Business, etc. does scarce ever ruffle your un louded Brow
so much as with a Frown. And what above all is Praiseworthy, you are so far
from thinking your self better than others, that a flourishing and opulent
Fortune, which by a certain natural Corruption in its Quality, seldom fails to
infect other Possessors with Pride, seems in this Case as if only
providentially disposed to enlarge your Humility.

But I find, Sir, I am now got into a very large Field, where though I could with
great Ease raise a Number of Plants in Relation to your Merit of this
plauditory Nature; yet for Fear of an Author's general Vice, and that the plain
Justice I have done you should, by my Proceeding and others mistaken Judgment,
be imagined Flattery, a Thing the Bluntness of my Nature does not care to be
concerned with, and which I also know you abominate.

It is wonderful to see how many Judges (...) these fine Things spring up every
Day by the Rise of Stocks, and other elegant Methods (...) abridging the Way to
Learning and Criticism^ But I do hereby forbid all Dedications to any Persons
within the City of London, except Sir Francis, Sir Stephen, and the Bank, will
take Epigrams and Epistles as Value received for their Notes; and the
East India Companies accept of Heroic Poems for their Sealed Bonds. Upon which
Bottom, our Publishers have full Power to treat with the City in Behalf of us
Authors, to enable Traders to become Patrons and Fellows of the Royal Society,
as well as receive certain Degrees of Skill in the Latin and Greek Tongues,
according to the Quantity of the Commodities which they take off our Hands.

Grecian Coffee-house, July 18.
The Learned have so long labored under the Imputation of Dryness and Dullness
in their Accounts of their Phenomenon, that an ingenious Gentleman of our
Society has resolved to write a System of Philosophy in a more lively Method,
both as to the Matter and Language, than has been hitherto attempted. He read
to us the Plan upon which he intends to proceed. I thought his Account, by Way
of Fable of the Worlds about us, had so much Vivacity in it, that I could not
forbear transcribing his Hypothesis, to give the Reader a Taste of my Friend's
Treatise, which is now in the Press.

The Inferior Deities having designed on a Day to play a Game at Football,
knead together a numberless Collection of dancing Atoms into the Form of Seven
rolling Globes: And that Nature might be kept from a dull Inactivity, each
separate Particle is endued with a Principle of Motion, or a Power of
Attraction, whereby all the several Parcels of Matter draw each other
proportionably to their Magnitudes and Distances, into such a remarkable
Variety of different Forms, as to produce all the wonderful Appearances we now
observe in Empire, Philosophy, and Religion. But to proceed.

At the Beginning of the Game, each of the Globes being struck forward with a
vast Violence, ran out of Sight, and wandered in a straight Line through the
infinite Spaces. The nimble Deities pursue, breathless almost, and spent in the
eager Chase; each of them catched hold of one, and stamped it with his Name;
as, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and so of the rest. To prevent this Inconveniene for
the future, the Seven are condemned to a Precipitation, which in our inferior
Style we call Gravity. Thus the Tangential and Centripetal Forces, by their
Counter-struggle, make the Celestial Bodies describe an exact Ellipsis.

There will be added to this, an Appendix, in Defense of the First Day of the
Term according to the Oxford Almanac, by a learned Knight of this Realm, with
an Apology for the said Knight's Manner of Dress; proving, That his Habit,
according to this Hypothesis, is the true Modern and Fashionable; and that
Buckles are not to be worn, by this System, till the 10th of March, in the Year
1714, which, according to the Computation of some of our greatest Divines, is
to be the first Year of the Millennium; in which blessed Age, all Habits will
be reduced to a Primitive Simplicity; and whoever shall be found to have
persevered in a Constancy of Dress, in Spite of all the Allurements of
profane and heathen Habits, shall be rewarded with a never-fading Doublet of a
Thousand Years. All Points in the System which are doubted, shall be attested
by the Knight's Extemporary Oath, for the Satisfaction of his Readers.

Will's Coffee house, July 18.
We were upon the Heroic Strain this Evening, and the Question was, What is
the True Sublime? Many very good Discourses happened thereupon; after which a
Gentleman at the Table, who is, it seems, writing on that Subject, assumed the
Argument; and though he ran through many Instances of Sublimity from the ancient
Writers, said, He had hardly known an Occasion wherein the true Greatness of
Soul, which animates a General in Action, is so well represented, with Regard
to the Person of whom it was spoken, and the Time in which it was writ, as in a
few Lines in a modern Poem: There is (continued he) nothing so forced and
constrained, as what we frequently meet with in Tragedies; to make a Man under
the Weight of a great Sorrow, or full of Meditation upon what he is soon to
execute, cast about for a Simile to what he himself is, or the Thing which he
is going to act: But there is nothing more proper and natural for a Poet, whose
Business is to describe, and who is Spectator of one in that Circumstance when
his Mind is working upon a great Image, and that the Idea's hurry upon his
Imagination; I say, there is nothing so natural, as for a Poet to relieve and
clear himself from the Burden of Thought at that Time, by uttering his
Conception in Simile and Metaphor. The highest Act of the Mind of Man, is to
possess it self with Tranquillity in eminent Danger, and to have its Thoughts so
free, as to act at that Time without Perplexity. The ancient Authors have
compared this sedate Courage to a Rock that remains immovable amidst the Rage
of Winds and Waves; but that is too stupid and inanimate a Similitude, and
could do no Credit to the Hero. At other Times they are all of 'em wonderfully
obliged to a Lybian Lion, which may give indeed very agreeable Terrors to a
Description; but is no Compliment to the Person to whom it is applied: Eagles,
Tigers, and Wolves, are made Use of on the same Occasion, and very often with
much Beauty; but this is still an Honor done to the Brute, rather than the
Hero. Mars, Pallas, Bacchus, and Hercules, have each of 'em furnished very good
Similes in their Time, and made, doubtless, a greater Impression on the Mind of
a Heathen, than they have on that of a modern Reader. But the sublime Image
that I am talking of, and which I really think as great as ever entered into
the Thought of Man, is in the Poem called, The Campaign; where the Simile of a
ministering Angel sets forth the most sedate and the most active Courage,
engaged in an Uproar of Nature, a Confusion of Elements, and a Scene of Divine
Vengeance. Add to all, That these Lines compliment the General and his Queen at
the same Time, and have all the natural Horrors, heightened by the Image that
was still fresh in the Mind of every Reader.

'Twas then Great Marlbro's mighty Soul was proved,
That, in the Shock of charging Hosts unmoved,
Amidst Confusion, Horror, and Despair,
Examined all the dreadful Scenes of War;
In peaceful Thought the Field of Death surveyed,
To fainting Squadrons sent the timely Aid,
Inspired repulsed Battalions to engage,
And taught the doubtful Battle where to rage.
So when an Angel by Divine Command,
With rising Tempests shakes a guilty Land,
Such as of late over pale Britannia past,
Calm and serene he drives the furious Blast;
And, pleased the Almighty's Orders to perform,
Rides in the Whirlwind, and directs the Storm.
The whole Poem is so exquisitely Noble and Poetic, that I think it an Honor
to our Nation and Language. The Gentleman concluded his Critic on this Work,
by saying, that he esteemed it wholly new, and a wonderful Attempt to keep up
the ordinary Idea's of a March of an Army, just as they happened in so warm and
great a Style, and yet be at once Familiar and Heroic. Such a Performance is a
Chronicle as well as a Poem, and will preserve the Memory of our Hero, when all
the Edifices and Statues erected to his Honor are blended with common Dust.

St. James's Coffee-house, July 18.
Letters from the Hague of the 23d Instant, N. S. say, That the Allies were so
forward in the Siege of Tournay, that they were preparing for a general
Assault, which, it was supposed, would be made within a few Days. Deserters
from the Town gave an Account, That the Garrison was carrying their Ammunition
and Provisions into the Citadel, which occasioned a Tumult among the
Inhabitants of the Town. The French Army had laid Bridges over the Scarp, and
made a Motion as if they intended to pass that River; but though they are joined
by the Reinforcement expected from Germany, it was not believed they would make
any Attempt toward relieving Tournay. Letters from Brabant say, There has been
a Discovery made of a Design to deliver up Antwerp to the Enemy. The States of
Holland have agreed to a general Naturalization of all Protestants who shall
fly into their Dominions; to which Purpose, a Proclamation was to be issued
within few Days.

They write from France, That the great Misery and Want under which that Nation
has so long labored, has ended in a Pestilence, which began to appear in
Burgundy and Dauphin^. They add, That in the Town of Mazon, Three Hundred
Persons had died in the Space of Ten Days. Letters from Lisle of the 24th
Instant advise, That great Numbers of Deserters came daily into that City, the
most Part of whom are Dragoons. We are advised from France, That the Loire
having overflowed its Banks, has laid the Country under Water for 300 Miles
together.

The TATLER. [No 44.
-- Nullis Amor est medicabilis Herbis.

From Tuesday July 19. to Thursd. July 21. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, July 19.
THIS Day, passing through Covent Garden, I was stopped in the Piazza by
Pacolet, to observe what he called the Triumph of Love and Youth. I turned to
the Object he pointed at; and there I saw a gay gilt Chariot drawn by fresh
prancing Horses; the Coachman with a new Cockade, and the Lacques with
Insolence and Plenty in their Countenances. I asked immediately, What young
Heir or Lover owned that glittering Equipage? But my Companion interrupted: Do
not you see there the mourning Aesculapius? The Mourning! said I. Yes Isaac,
said Pacolet, He is in deep Mourning, and is the languishing hopeless Lover of
the divine Hebe, the Emblem of Youth and Beauty. The excellent and learned Sage
you behold in that Furniture, is the strongest Instance imaginable, that Love
is the most powerful of all Things:

You are not so ignorant as to be a Stranger to the Character of Aesculapius,
as the Patron and most successful of all who profess the Art of Medicine. But
as most of his Operations are owing to a natural Sagacity or Impulse, he has
very little troubled himself with the Doctrine of Drugs; but has always given
Nature more Room to help her self, than any of her learned Assistants; and
consequently has done greater Wonders than is in the Power of Art to perform:
For which Reason he is half deify'd by the People; and has ever been justly
courted by all the World, as if he were a Seventh Son.

It happened, that the charming Hebe was reduced, by a long and violent Fever,
to the most extreme Danger of Death; and when all Skill failed, they sent for
Aesculapius. The renowned Artist was touched with the deepest Compassion to see
the faded Charms and faint Bloom of Hebe; and had a generous Concern in
beholding a Struggle, not between Life, but rather between Youth and Death. All
his Skill and his Passion tended to the Recovery of Hebe, beautiful even in
Sickness: But, alas! the unhappy Physician knew not, that in all his Care he
was only sharpening Darts for his own Destruction. In a Word, his Fortune was
the same with that of the Statuary, who fell in Love with the Image of his own
making; and the unfortunate Aesculapius is become the Patient of her whom he
lately recovered. Long before this Disaster, Aesculapius was far gone in the
unnecessary and superfluous Amusements of old Age, in increasing unweildy
Stores, and providing, in the midst of an Incapacity of Enjoyment of what he
had, for a Supply of more Wants than he had Calls for in Youth it self. But
these low Considerations are now no more, and Love has taken Place of Avarice,
or rather is become an Avarice of another Kind, which still urges him to pursue
what he does not want. But behold the Matamorphosis; the anxious mean Cares of
an Usurer are turned into the Languishments and Complaints of a Lover. Behold,
says the aged Aesculapius, I submit, I own, great Love, thy Empire: Pity, Hebe,
the Fop you have made: What have I to do with Guilding but on Pills? Yet, O
Fair! For thee I sit amidst a Crowd of painted Deities on my Chariot, buttoned
in Gold, clasped in Gold, without having any Value for that beloved Metal, but
as it adorns the Person, and laces the Hat of thy dying Lover. I ask not to
live, O Hebe! Give me but gentle Death: Euthanasia, Euthanasia, that is all I
implore. When Aesculapius had finished his Complaint, Pacolet went on in deep
Morals on the Incertainty of Riches with this remarkable Exclamation; O Wealth!
How impotent art thou? And how little do thou supply us with real Happiness,
when the Usurer himself can forget thee for the Love of what is as foreign to
his Felicity as thou art?

Will's Coffee-house, July 19.
The Company here, who have all a delicate Taste of Theatrical Representations,
had made a Gathering to purchase the Movables of the neighboring Playhouse,
for the Encouragement of one which is setting up in the Hay-Market. But the
Proceedings at the Auction (by which Method the Goods have been sold this
Evening) have been so unfair, that this generous Design has been frustrated;
for the Imperial Mantle made for Cyrus was missing, as also the Chariot and Two
Dragons: But upon Examination it was found, that a Gentleman of Hampshire had
clandestinely bought them both, and is gone down to his Country Seat; and that
on Saturday last he passed through Stains attired in that Robe, and drawn by
the said Dragons, assisted by Two only of his own Horses. This Theatrical
Traveller has also left Orders with Mr. Hall to send the faded Rainbow to the
Scowrers, and when it comes home, to dispatch it after him. At the same Time C
-- R -- Esquire is invited to bring down his Setting Sun himself, and be Box-keeper
to a Theater erected by this Gentleman near Southampton. Thus there has been
nothing but Artifice in the Management of this Affair; for which Reason I beg
Pardon of the Town, that I inserted the Inventory in my Paper, and solemnly
protest, I knew nothing of this artful Design of vending these Rarities: But I
meant only the Good of the World in that and all other Things which I divulge.

And now I am upon this Subject, I must do my self Justice in Relation to an
Article in a former Paper, wherein I made Mention of a Person who keeps a
Puppet-Show in the Town of Bath; I was tender of naming Names, and only just
hinted, that he makes larger Promises, when he invites People to his Dramatick
Representations, than he is able to perform: But I am credibly informed, that
he makes a profane lewd Jester, whom he calls Punch, speak to the Dishonor of
Isaac Bickerstaff with great Familiarity; and before all my learned Friends in
that Place, takes upon him to dispute my Title to the Appellation of Esquire. I
think I need not say much to convince all the World, that this Mr. Powell (for
that is his Name) is a pragmatical and vain Person to pretend to argue with me
on any Subject. Mecum certasse feretur; that is to say, It will be an Honor to
him to have it said he contended with me; but I would have him to know, that I
can look beyond his Wires, and know very well the whole Trick of his Art, and
that it is only by these Wires that the Eye of the Spectator is cheated, and
hindered from seeing that there is a Thread on one of Punch's Chops, which
draws it up, and lets it fall at the Discretion of the said Powell, who stands
behind and plays him, and makes him speak sawcily of his Betters. He! To
pretend to make Prologues against me! -- But a Man never behaves himself with
Decency in his own Case; therefore I shall command my self, and never trouble
me further with this little Fellow, who is himself but a tall Puppet, and has
not Brains enough to make even Wood speak as it ought to do: And I, that have
heard the Groaning Board, can despise all that his Puppets shall be able to
speak as long as they live. But, Ex quovis Ligno non fit Mercurius. He has
pretended to write to me also from the Bath, and says, He thought to have
deferred giving me an Answer till he came to his Books; but that my Writings
might do well with the Waters: Which are pert Expressions that become a
Schoolboy, better than one that is to teach others: And when I have said a
civil Thing to him, he cries, Oh! I thank you for that -- I am your humble
Servant for that. Ah! Mr. Powell, these smart Civilities will never run down
Men of Learning: I know well enough your Design is to have all Men Automata,
like your Puppets; but the World is grown too wise, and can look through these
thin Devices. I know you design to make a Reply to this; but be sure you stick
close to my Words; for if you bring me into Discourses concerning the
Government of your Puppets, I must tell you, I neither am, nor have been, nor
will be, at Leisure to answer you. It is really a burning Shame this Man should
be tolerated in abusing the World with such Representations of Things: But his
Parts decay, and he is not much more alive than Partridge.

From my own Apartment, July 14.
I must beg Pardon of my Readers that for this Time I have, I fear, huddled up
my Discourse, having been very busy in helping an old Friend of mine out of
Town. He has a very good Estate, is a Man of Wit; but he had been Three Years
absent from Town, and cannot bear a Jest; for which Reason I have, with some
Pains, convinced him, that he can no more live here than if he were a downright
Bankrupt. He was so fond of dear London, that he began to fret only inwardly;
but being unable to laugh and be laughed at, I took a Place in the Northern
Coach for him and his Family; and hope he is got to Night safe from all
Sneerers in his own Parlour.

St. James's Coffee-house, July 20.
This Morning we received by Express, the agreeable News of the Surrender of
the Town of Tournay on the 28th Instant, N. S. The Place was assaulted at the
Attacks of General Schuylemberg, and that of General Lottum, at the same Time.
The Action at both those Parts of the Town was very obstinate, and the Allies
lost a considerable Number at the Beginning of the Dispute; but the Fight was
continued with so great Bravery, that the Enemy observing our Men to be Masters
of all the Posts which were necessary for a general Attack, beat the Chamade,
and Hostages were received from the Town, and others sent from the Befiegers,
in order to come to a formal Capitulation for the Surrender of the Place. We
have also this Day received Advice, That Sir John Leak, who lies off of
Dunkirk, had intercepted several Ships laden with Corn from the Baltic; and
that the Dutch Privateers had fallen in with others, and carried them into
Holland. The French Letters advise, That the young Son to the Duke of Anjou
lived but Eight Days.

The TATLER. [No 45.
Credo Pudicitiam Saturno Rege moratam
In Terris. --

From Thursd. July 21. to Saturd. July 23. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, July 22.
THE other Day I took a Walk a Mile or Twoout of Town, and strolling wherever
Chance led me, I was insensibly carried into a By-Road, along which was a very
agreeable Quickset, of an extraordinary Height, which surrounded a very
delicious Seat and Garden. From one Angle of the Hedge, I heard a Voice cry,
Sir, Sir -- This raised my Curiosity, and I heard the same Voice say, but in a
gentle Tone, Come forward, come forward. I did so, and one through the Hedge
called me by my Name, and bad me go on to the Left, and I should be admitted to
visit an old Acquaintance in Distress. The Laws of Knight Errantry made me obey
the Summons without Hesitation; and I was let in at the Back-Gate of a lovely
House by a Maidservant, who carried me from Room to Room, till I came into a
Gallery; at the End of which, I saw a fine Lady dressed in the most sumptuous
Habit, as if she were going to a Ball, but with the most abject and
disconsolate Sorrow in her Face that I ever beheld. As I came near, she burst
into Tears, and cried, Sir, Do not you know the unhappy Teraminta? I soon
recollected her whole Person: But (said I) Madam, The Simplicity of Dress, in
which I have ever seen you at your good Father's House, and the Cheerfulness of
Countenance with which you always appeared, are so unlike the Fashion and
Temper you are now in, that I did not easily recover the Memory of you. Your
habit was then decent and modest, your Looks serene and beautiful: Whence then
this unaccountable Change? Nothing can speak so deep a Sorrow as your present
Aspect; yet your Dress is made for Jollity and Revelling. It is (said she) an
unspeakable Pleasure to meet with one I know, and to bewail my self to any that
is not an utter Stranger to Humanity.

When your Friend my Father died, he left me to a wide World, with no Defense
against the Insults of Fortune, but rather, a Thousand Snares to entrap me in
the Dangers to which Youth and Innocence are exposed, in an Age wherein Honor
and Virtue are become mere Words, and used only as they serve to betray those
who understand them in their native Sense, and obey them as the Guides and
Motives of their Being. The wickedest of all Men living, the abandoned Decius,
who has no Knowledge of any good Art or Purpose of Humane Life, but as it tends
to the Satisfaction of his Appetites, had Opportunities of frequently seeing
and entertaining me at a House where mixed Company boarded, and where he placed
himself for the base Intention which he has since brought to pass. Decius saw
enough in me to raise his brural Desires, and my Circumstances gave him Hopes
of accomplishing them. But a l the glittering Expectations he could lay before
me, joined by my private Terrors of Poverty it self, could not for some Months
prevail upon me; yet however I hated his Intention, I still had a secret
Satisfaction in his Courtship, and always exposed my self to his Solicitations.
See here the Bane of our Sex! Let the Flattery be never so apparent, the
Flatterer never so ill thought of, his Praises are still agreeable, and we
contribute to our own Deceit. I was therefore ever fond of all Opportunities
and Pretenses of being in his Company. In a Word, I was at last ruined by him,
and brought to this Place, where I have been ever since immured; and from the
fatal Day after my Fall from Innocence, my Worshipper became my Master and my
Tyrant.

Thus you see me habited in the most gorgeous Manner, not in Honor of me as a
Woman he loves, but as this Attire charms his own Eye, and urges him to repeat
the Gratification he takes in me, as the Servant of his brutish Lusts and
Appetites. I know not where to fly for Redress; but am here pining away Life in
the Solitude and Severity of a Nun, but the Conscience and Guilt of an Harlot.
I live in this lewd Practice with a Religious Awe of my Minister of Darkness,
upbraided with the Support I receive from him, for the inestimable Possession
of Youth, of Innocence, of Honor, and of Conscience. I see, Sir, my Discourse
grows painful to you, all I beg of you is, to paint in so strong Colors, as to
let Decius see I am discovered to be in his Possession, that I may be turned
out of this detestable Scene of regular Iniquity, and either think no more, or
sin no more. If your Writings have the good Effect of gaining my Enlargement, I
promise you I will atone for this unhappy Step, by preferring an innocent
laborious Poverty, to all the guilty Affluence the World can offer me.

Will's Coffee-house, July 21.
To show that I do not bear an irreconcilable Hatred to my mortal Enemy, Mr.
Powell at Bath, I do his Function the Honor to publish to the World, that
Plays represented by Puppets are permitted in our Universities, and that Sort
of Drama is not wholly thought unworthy the Critic of learned Heads: But as I
have been conversant rather with the greater Ode, as I think the Critics call
it, I must be so humble as to make a Request to Mr. Powell, and desire him to
apply his Thoughts to answering the Difficulties with which my Kinsman, the
Author of the following Letter, seems to be embarrassed.

To my Honored Kinsman Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Dear Cousin,
HAD the Family of the Beadlestaffs, whereof I, though unworthy, am one, known of
your being lately at Oxon, we had in our own Name, and in the Universities, (as
it is our Office) made you a Compliment: But your short Stay here robbed us of
an Opportunity of paying our due Respects, and you of receiving an ingenious
Entertainment, with which we at present divert our selves and Strangers. A
Puppet-Show at this Time supplies the Want of an ACT. And since the Nymphs of
this City are disappointed of a luscious Musick-Speech, and the Country Ladies
of hearing their Sons or Brothers speak Verses; yet the vocal Machines, like
them, by the Help of a Prompter, say Things as much to the Benefit of the
Audience, and almost as properly their own. The License of a Terra-Filius is
refined to the well-bred Satyr of Punchenella. Now, Cousin Bickerstaff, though
Punch has neither a French Nightcap, nor Long Pockets, yet you must own him to
be a Pretty Fellow, a very Pretty Fellow: Nay, since he seldom leaves the
Company, without calling, Son of a Whore, demanding Satisfaction, and Duelling,
he must be owned a Smart Fellow too. Yet, by some Indecencies toward the
Ladies, he seems to be of a Third Character, distinct from any you have yet
touched upon. A young Gentleman who sat next me (for I had the Curiosity of
seeing this Entertainment) in a tufted Gown, red Stockings, and long Wig,
(which I pronounce to be tantamount to red Heels and a dangling Cane) was
enraged when Punchenello disturbed a soft Love-Scene with his Ribaldry. You
would oblige us mightily by laying down some Rules for adjusting the
extravagant Behavior of this Almanzor of the Play, and by writing a Treatise
on this Sort of Dramatick Poetry, so much favored, and so little understood,
by the learned World.

From its being conveyed in a Cart after the Thespian Manner, all the Parts
being recited by one Person, as the Custom was before Aeschilus, and from the
Behavior of Punch as if he had won the Goal, you may possibly deduce its
Antiquity, and settle the Chronology, as well as some of our Modern Critics.
In its natural Transitions, from Mournful to Merry; as, from the Hanging of a
Lover, to Dancing upon the Rope; from the Stalking of a Ghost, to a Lady's
presenting you with a Jig; you may discover such a Decorum, as is not to be
found elsewhere than in our Tragi-Comedies. But I forget my self; it is not for
me to dictate: I thought fit, dear Cousin, to give you these Hints, to show
you, that the Beadlestaff's don't walk before Men of Letters to no Purpose; and
that though we do but hold up the Train of Arts and Sciences, yet like other
Pages, we are now and then let into our Ladies Secrets. I am

Your most Affectionate Kinsman, Benjamin Beadlestaff.
From Mother Gourdon's, at Hedington, near Oxon, June 18.

From my own Apartment, July 22.
I am got hither safe, but never spent Time with so little Satisfaction as this
Evening; for you must know, I was Five Hours with Three Merry, and Two Honest
Fellows. The former sang Catches; and the latter even died with laughing at the
Noise they made. Well, (says Tom Belfrey) You Scholars, Mr. Bickerstaff, are
the worst Company in the World. Ay, (says his Opposite) You are dull to Night;
prithee be merry. With that I huzza'd, and took a Jump cross the Table, then
came clever upon my Legs, and fell a laughing. Let Mr. Bickerstaff alone (says
one of the Honest Fellows), when he is in a good Humor, he is as good Company as
any Man in England. He had no sooner spoke, but I snatched his Hat off his
Head, and clapped it upon my own, and burst out a laughing again; upon which we
all fell a laughing for half an Hour. One of the Honest Fellows got behind me
in the Interim, and hit me a sound Slap on the Back; upon which he got the
Laugh out of my Hands, and it was such a Twang on my Shoulders, that I confess
he was much merrier than I. I was half angry; but resolved to keep up the good
Humor of the Company; and after hollowing as loud as I could possibly, I drank
off a Bumper of Claret, that made me stare again. Nay, (says one of the Honest
Fellows) Mr. Isaac is in the Right, there is no Conversation in this; What
fignifies Jumping, or hitting one another on the Back? Let Us drink about. We
did so from Seven a Clock till Eleven; and now I am come hither, and, after the
Manner of the wise Pythagoras, begin to reflect upon the Passages of the Day. I
remember nothing, but that I am bruised to Death; and as it is my Way to write
down all the good Things I have heard in the last Conversation to furnish my
Paper, I can from this only tell you my Sufferings, and my Bangs.

I named Pythagoras just now, and I protest to you, as he believed Men after
Death entered into other Species, I am now and then tempted to think other
Animals enter into Men, and could name several on Two Legs, that never discover
any Sentiment above what is common with the Species of a lower Kind; as we see
in these bodily Wits whom I was with to Night, whose Parts consist in Strength
and Activity; but their boisterous Mirth gives me great Impatience for the
Return of such Happiness as I enjoyed in a Conversation last Week. Among others
in that Company, we had Florio, who never interrupted any Man living when he
was speaking; or ever ceased to speak, but others lamented that he had done.
His Discourse ever arises from a Fullness of the Matter before him, and not from
Ostentation or Triumph of his Understanding; for though he seldom delivers what
he need fear being repeated, he speaks without having that End in View; and his
Forbearance of Calumny or Bitterness, is owing rather to his good Nature than
his Discretion; for which Reason, he is esteemed a Gentleman perfectly
qualified for Conversation, in whom a general Good Will to Mankind takes off
the Necessity of Caution and Circumspection.

We had at the same Time that Evening the best Sort of Companion that can be, a
good-natured old Man. This Person meets in the Company of young Men, Veneration
for his Benevolence, and is not only valued for the good Qualities of which he
is Master, but reaps an Acceptance from the Pardon he gives to other Men
Faults: And the ingenious Sort of Men with whom he converses, have so just a
Regard for him, that he rather is an Example, than a Check to their Behavior.
For this Reason, as Senecio never pretends to be a Man of Pleasure before
Youth, so young Men never set up for Wisdom before Senecio; so that you never
meet, where he is, those Monsters of Conversation, who are grave or gay above
their Years. He never converses but with Followers of Nature and good Sense,
where all that is uttered is only the Effect of a communicable Temper, and not
of Emulation to excel their Companions; all Desire of Superiority being a
Contradiction to that Spirit which makes a just Conversation, the very Essence
of which is mutual Good Will. Hence it is, that I take it for a Rule, that the
natural, and not the acquired Man, is the Companion. Learning, Wit, Gallantry,
and good Breeding, are all but subordinate Qualities in Society, and are of no
Value, but as they are subservient to Benevolence, and tend to a certain Manner
of being or appearing equal to the rest of the Company; for Conversation is
composed of an Assembly of Men, as they are Men, and not as they are
distinguished by Fortune: Therefore he that brings his Quality with him into
Conversation, should always pay the Reckoning; for he came to receive Homage,
and not to meet his Friends. -- But ^he Din about my Ears from the Clamor of
^he People I was with this Evening, has carried ^e beyond my intended Purpose,
which was to ^xplain upon the Order of Merry Fellows; but I ^hink I may
pronounce of them, as I heard good ^enecio, with a Spice of the Wit of the last
Age, ^ay, viz. That a Merry Fellow is the Saddest Fel^ow in the World.

The TATLER. [No 46.
Non been convenient, nec in una Sede morantur,
Majestas and Amor. --

From Saturd. July 23. to Tuesd. July 26. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, July 25.
WE see every Day Volumes written against that Tyrant of Humane Life called
Love, and yet there is no Help found against his Cruelties, or Barrier against
the Inroads he is pleased to make into the Mind of Man. After this Preface, you
will expect I am going to give particular Instances of what I have asserted.
That Expectation cannot be raised too high for the Novelty of the History, and
Manner of Life, of the Emperor Aurengezebe, who has resided for some Years in
the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Air and Mien indeed of his
Imperial Quality, but the Equipage and Appointment only of a private Gentleman.
This Potentate, for a long Series of Time, appeared from the Hour of Twelve
till that of Two at a Coffee-house near the Change, and had a Seat (though
without a Canopy) sacred to himself, where he gave diurnal Audiences concerning
Commerce, Politics, Tare and Tret, Usury and Abatement, with all Things
necessary for helping the Distressed, who are willing to give one Limb for the
better Maintenance of the rest; or such joyous Youths, whose Philosophy is
confined to the present Hour, and were desirous to call in the Revenue of next
half Year to double the Enjoyment of this. Long did this growing Monarch employ
himself after this Manner: And as Alliances are necessary to all great
Kingdoms, he took particularly the Interests of Lewis the Fourteenth into his
Care and Protection. When all Mankind were attacking that unhappy Monarch, and
those who had neither Valor or Wit to oppose against him, would be still
showing their impotent Malice by laying Wagers in Opposition to his Interests,
Aurengezebe ever took the Part of his Contemporary, and laid immense Treasures
on his Side in Defense of his important Magazine of Toulon. Aurengezebe also
had all this while a constant Intelligence with India, and his Letters were
answered in Jewels, which he soon made Brillant, and caused to be affixed to
his Imperial Castor, which he always wears cocked in Front, to show his
Defiance; with an Hear of Imperial Snuff in the Middle of his ample Visage, to
show his Sagacity. The Zealots, for this little Spot called Great Britain, fell
universally into this Emperor's Policies, and paid Homage to his superior
Genius, in forfeiting their Coffers to his Treasury.

But Wealth and Wisdom are Possessions too solemn not to give Weariness to
active Minds, without the Relief (in vacant Hours) of Wit and Love, which are
the proper Amusements of the Powerful and the Wise: This Emperor therefore,
with great Regularity, every Day at Five in the Afternoon, leaves his
Money Changers, his Publicans, and little Hoarders of Wealth, to their low
Pursuits, and ascends his Chariot to drive to Will's; where the Taste is
refined, and a Relish given to Men's Possessions, by a polite Skill in
gratifying their Passions and Appetites. There it is that the Emperor has
learned to live and to love, and not, like a Miser, to gaze only on his Ingots
or his Treasures; but with a nobler Satisfaction, to live the Admiration of
others, for his Splendor and Happiness in being Master of them. But a Prince
is no more to be his own Caterer in his Love, than in his Food; therefore
Aurengezebe has ever in waiting Two Purveyors for his Dishes, and his Wenches
for his retired Hours, by whom the Scene of his Diversion is prepared in the
following Manner.

There is near Covent Garden a Street known by the Name of Drury, which, before
the Days of Christianity, was purchased by the Queen of Paphos, and is the only
Part of Great Britain where the Tenure of Vassalage is still in Being. All that
long Course of Building is under particular Districts or Ladyships, after the
Manner of Lordships in other Parts, over which Matrons of known Abilities
preside, and have, for the Support of their Age and Infirmities, certain Taxes
paid out of the Rewards of the amorous Labors of the Young. This Seraglio of
Great Britain is disposed into convenient Allies and Apartments, and every
House, from the Cellar to the Garret, inhabited by Nymphs of different Orders,
that Persons of every Rank may be accommodated with an immediate Consort, to
allay their Flames, and partake of their Cares. Here it is, that when
Aurengezebe thinks fit to give a Loose to Dalliance, the Purveyors prepare the
Entertainment; and what makes it more august is, that every Person concerned in
the Interlude has his set Part, and the Prince sends beforehand Word what he
designs to say, and directs also the very Answer which shall be made to him.

It has been before hinted, that this Emperor has a continual Commerce with
India; and it is to be noted, that the largest Stone that rich Earth has
produced, is in our Aurengezebe's Possession.

But all Things are now disposed for his Reception. At his Entrance into the
Seraglio, a Servant delivers him his Bever of State and Love, on which is fixed
this inestimable Jewel as his Diadem. When he is seated, the Purveyors,
Pandarus and Nuncio, marching on each Side of the Matron of the House,
introduce her into his Presence. In the midst of the Room, they bow all
together to the Diadem.

When the Matron --

Whoever thou art, (as thy awful Aspect speaks thee a Man of Power) be
propitious to this Mansus of Love, and let not the Severity of thy Wisdom
disdain, that by the Representation of naked Innocence, or pastoral Figures, we
revive in thee the Memory at least of that Power of Venus, to which all the
Wise and the Brave are some Part of their Lives devoted. Aurengezebe consents
by a Nod, and they go out backward.

After this, an unhappy Nymph, who is to be supposed just escaped from the
Hands of a Ravisher, with her Tresses disheveled, runs into the Room with a
Dagger in her Hand, and falls before the Emperor.

Pity, Oh! pity! whoever thou art, an unhappy Virgin, whom one of the Train has
robbed of her Innocence; her Innocence, which was all her Portion -- Or rather,
let me die like the memorable Lucretia -- Upon which she stabs her self. The
Body is immediately examined after the Manner of our Coroners. Lucretia
recovers by a Cup of right Nants; and the Matron, who is her next Relation,
stops all Process at Law.

This unhappy Affair is no sooner over, but a naked Mad-woman breaks into the
Room, calls for her Duke, her Lord, her Emperor. As soon as she spies
Aurengezebe, the Object of all her Fury and Love, she calls for Petticoats, is
ready to sink with Shame, and is dressed in all haste in new Attire at his
Charge. This unexpected Accident of the Mad-woman, makes Aurengezebe curious to
know, whether others who are in their Senses can guess at his Quality. For
which Reason the whole Convent is examined one by one. The Matron marches in
with a tawdry Country Girl -- Pray Winifred, (says she) Who do you think that
fine Man with those Jewels and Pearls is? -- I believe (says Winifred) it is
our Landlord -- It must be the Squire himself -- The Emperor laughs at her
Simplicity -- Go Fool, says the Matron: Then turning to the Emperor -- Your
Greatness will pardon her Ignorance! After her, several others of different
Characters are instructed to mistake who he is in the same Manner: Then the
whole Sisterhood are called together, and the Emperor rises, and cocking his
Hat, declares, He is the Great Mogul, and they his Concubines. A general Murmur
goes through the Assembly, and Aurengezebe certifying, that he keeps them for
State rather than Use; tells them, they are permitted to receive all Men into
their Apartments; then proceeds through the Crowd, among whom he throws Medals
shaped like Half-Crowns, and returns to his Chariot.

This being all that passed the last Day a which Aurengezebe visited the
Women's Apartments, I consulted Pacolet concerning the Foundation of such
strange Amusements in old Age: To which he answered; You may remember, when I
gave you an Account of my good Fortune in being drowned on the 30th Day of my
Humane Life, I told you of the Disasters I should otherwise have met with
before I arrived at the End of my Stamen, which was Sixty Years. I may now add
an Observation to you, That all who exceed that Period, except the latter Part
of it is spent in the Exercise of Virtue and Contemplation of Futurity, must
necessarily fall into an Indecent old Age, because, with Regard to all the
Enjoyments of the Years of Vigor and Manhood, Childhood returns upon them: And
as Infants ride on Sticks, build Houses in Dirt, and make Ships in Gutters, by
a faint Idea of Things they are to act hereafter; so old Men play the Lovers,
Potentates, and Emperors, from the decaying Image of the more perfect
Performances of their stronger Years: Therefore be sure to insert Aesculapius
and Aurengezebe in your next Bill of Mortality of the Metaphorically Defunct.

Will's Coffee-house, July 24.
As soon as I came hither this Evening, no less than Ten People produced the
following Poem, which they all reported was sent to each of them by the
Penny-Post from an unknown Hand. All the Battle-Writers in the Room were in
Debate, who could be the Author of a Piece so martially written; and every Body
applauded the Address and Skill of the Author, in calling it a Postscript: It
being the Nature of a Postscript to contain something very Material which was
forgotten, or not clearly expressed in the Letter it self. Thus, the Verses
being occasioned by a March without Beat of Drum, and that Circumstance being
no ways taken Notice of in any of the Stanza's, the Author calls it a
Postscript; not that it is a Postscript, but figuratively, because it wants a
Postscript. Common Writers, when what they mean is not expressed in the Book it
self, supply it by a Preface; but a Postscript seems to me the more just Way of
Apology; because otherwise a Man makes an Excuse before the Offense is
committed. All the Heroic Poets were guessed at for its Author; but though we
could not find out his Name, yet one repeated a Couplet in Hudibras which spoke
his Qualifications:

In The midst of all this Warlike Rabble,
Crowdero marched, expert and able.
The Poem is admirably suited to the Occasion: For to write without discovering
your Meaning, bears a just Resemblance to Marching without Beat of Drum.

On the March to Tournay without Beat of Drum.
The Brussels POSTSCRIPT.
Could I with plainest Words express
That great Man's wonderful Address,
His Penetration, and his towering Thought;
It would the gazing World surprise,
To see one Man at all Times wise,
To view the Wonders he with Ease has wrought.
Refining Schemes approach his Mind,
Like Breezes of a Southern Wind,
To temperate a sultry glorious Day;
Whose Fannings, with an useful Pride,
Its mighty Heat does softly guide,
And having cleared the Air, glide silently away.
Thus his Immensity of Thought,
Is deeply formed, and gently wrought,
His Temper always softening Life's Disease;
That Fortune, when she does intend
To rudely frown, she turns his Friend,
Admires his Judgment, and applauds his Ease.
His great Address in this Design,
Does now, and will for ever shine,
And wants a Waller but to do him Right:
The whole Amusement was so strong,
Like Fate he doomed them to be wrong,
And Tournay's took by a peculiar Slight.
Thus, Madam, all Mankind behold
Your vast Ascendant, not by Gold,
But by your Wisdom, and your pious Life:
Your Aim no more, than to destroy
That which does Europe's Ease annoy,
And supersede a Reign of Shame and Strise.
St. James's Coffee-house, July 24.
My Brethren of the Quill, the ingenious Society of News-writers, having with
great Spirit and Elegance already informed the World, that the Town of Tournay
capitulated on the 28th Instant, there is nothing left for me to say, but to
congratulate the good Company here, that we have Reason to hope for an
Opportunity of thanking Mr. Withers next Winter in this Place, for the Service
he has done his Country. No Man deserves better of his Friends than that
Gentleman, whose distinguishing Character it is, that he gives his Orders with
the Familiarity, and enjoys his Fortune with the Generosity, of a
Fellow-Soldier. His Grace the Duke of Argyle had also an eminent Part in the
Reduction of this important Place. That illustrious Youth discovers the
peculiar Turn of Spirit and Greatness of Soul, which only make Men of high
Birth and Quality useful to their Country; and considers Nobility as an
imaginary Distinction, unless accompanied with the Practice of those generous
Virtues by which it ought to be obtained. But that our Military Glory is
arrived at its present Height, and that Men of all Ranks so passionately affect
their Share in it, is certainly owing to the Merit and Conduct of our glorious
General: For as the great Secret in Chemistry, though not in Nature, has
occasioned many useful Discoveries; and the fantastic Notion of being wholly
disinterested in Friendship, has made Men do a Thousand generous Actions above
themselves; so, though the present Grandeur and Fame of the Duke of Marlborough
is a Station of Glory to which no one hopes to arrive, yet all carry their
Actions to an higher Pitch, by having that great Example laid before them.

The TATLER. [No 47.
Quicquid agunt Homines nostri Farrago Libelli.

From Tuesd. July 26. to Thursd. July 28. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, July 27.
MY Friend Sir Thomas has communicated to me his Letters from Epsom of the 25th
Instant, which give, in general, a very good Account of the present Posture of
Affairs in that Place; but that the Tranquillity and Correspondence of the
Company begins to be interrupted by the Arrival of Sir Taffety Trippet, a
Fortune-hunter, whose Follies are too gross to give Diversion; and whose Vanity
is too stupid to let him be sensible that he is a public Offense. If People
will indulge a splenatick Humor, it is impossible to be at Ease, when such
Creatures as are the Scandal of our Species, set up for Gallantry and
Adventures. It will be much more easy therefore to laugh Sir Taffety into
Reason, than convert him from his Foppery by any serious Contempt. I knew a
Gentleman that made it a Maxim to open his Doors, and ever run into the Way of
Bullies, to avoid their Insolence. The Rule will hold as well with Coxcombs:
They are never mortified, but when they see you receive, and despise them;
otherwise they rest assured, that it is your Ignorance makes them out of your
good Graces; or, that it is only want of Admittance prevents their being amiable
where they are shunned and avoided. But Sir Taffety is a Fop of so sanguine a
Complexion, that I fear it will be very hard for the fair One he at present
pursues to get rid of the Chase, without being so tired, as for her own Ease to
fall into the Mouth of the Mungrel she runs from. But the History of Sir
Taffety is as pleasant as his Character.

It happened, that when he first set up for a Fortune-hunter, he chose
Tunbridge for the Scene of Action; where were at that Time Two Sisters upon the
same Design. The Knight believed of Course the Elder must be the better Prize;
and consequently makes all his Sail that Way. People that want Sense, do always
in an egregious Manner want Modesty, which made our Hero triumph in making his
Amor as public as was possible. The adored Lady was no less vain of his
public Addresses. An Attorney with one Cause is not half so restless as a
Woman with one Lover. Wherever they met, they talked to each other aloud,
chose each other Partner at Balls, saluted at the most conspicuous Parts of the
Service at Church, and practiced in Honor of each other all the remarkable
Particularities which are usual for Persons who admire one another, and are
contemptible to the rest of the World. These Two Lovers seemed as much made for
each other as Adam and Eve, and all pronounced it a Match of Nature's own
making; but the Night before the Nuptials, (so universally approved) the
younger Sister, envious of the good Fortune even of her Sister, who had been
present at most of their Interviews, and had an equal Taste for the Charms of a
Fop (as there are a Set of Women made for that Order of Men); the younger, I
say, unable to see so rich a Prize pass by her, discovered to Sir Taffety, that
a Coquet Air, much Tongue, and Three Suits, was all the Portion of his
Mistress. His Love vanished that Moment, himself and Equipage the next Morning.
It is uncertain where the Lover has been ever since engaged; but certain it is,
he has not appeared in his Character as a Follower of Love and Fortune till he
arrived at Epsom, where there is at present a young Lady of Youth, Beauty, and
Fortune, who has alarmed all the Vain and the Impertinent to infest that
Quarter. At the Head of this Assembly, Sir Taffety shines in the brightest
Manner, with all the Accomplishments which usually ensuare the Heart of Woman;
with this particular Merit, (which often is of great Service) that he is
laughed at for her Sake. The Friends of the fair One are in much Pain for the
Sufferings she goes through from the Perseverance of this Hero; but they may be
much more so from the Danger of his succeeding, toward which they give him an
helping Hand, if they dissuade her with Bitterness; for there is a fantastical
Generosity in the Sex, to approve Creatures of the least Merit imaginable, when
they see the Imperfections of their Admirers are become Marks of Derision for
their Sakes; and there is nothing so frequent, as that he who was contemptible
to a Woman in her own Judgment, has won her by being too violently opposed by
others.

Grecian Coffee-house, July 27.
In the several Capacities I bear, of Astrologer, Civilian, and Physician, I
have with great Application studied the public Emolument: To this End serve
all my Lucubrations, Speculations, and whatever other Labors I undertake,
whether nocturnal or diurnal. On this Motive am I induced to publish a
never-failing Medicine for the Spleen: My Experience in this Distemper came
from a very remarkable Cure on my ever worthy Friend Tom Spindle, who, through
excessive Gaiety, had exhausted that natural Stock of Wit and Spirits he had
long been blessed with: He was sunk and flattened to the lower Degree
imaginable, sitting whole Hours over the Book of Martyrs, and Pilgrims
Progress; his other Contemplations never rising higher than the Color of his
Urine, or Regularity of his Pulse. In this Condition I found him, accompanied
by the learned Dr. Dram, and a good old Nurse. Dram had prescribed
Magazines of Herbs, and Mines of Steel. I soon discovered the Malady, and
descanted on the Nature of it, till I convinced both the Patient and his Nurse,
that the Spleen is not to be cured by Medicine, but by Poetry. Apollo, the
Author of Physic, shone with diffusive Rays the best of Poets as well as of
Physicians; and it is in this double Capacity that I have made my Way, and have
found sweet, easy, flowring Numbers, are often superior to our noblest Medicines.
When the Spirits are low, and Nature sunk, the Muse, with sprightly and
harmonious Notes, gives an unexpected Turn with a Grain of Poetry, which I
prepare without the Use of Mercury. I have done Wonders in this Kind; for the
Spleen is like the Tarantula, the Effects of whose malignant Poison are to be
prevented by no other Remedy but the Charms of Music: For you are to
understand, that as some noxious Animals carry Antidotes for their own Poisons;
so there is something equally unaccountable in Poetry: For though it is
sometimes a Disease, it is to be cured only by it self. Now I knowing Tom
Spindle's Constitution, and that he is not only a pretty Gentleman, but also a
pretty Poet, found the true Cause of his Distemper was a violent Grief that
moved his Affections too strongly: For during the late Treaty of Peace, he had
writ a most excellent Poem on that Subject; and when he wanted but Two Lines in
the last Stanza for finishing the whole Piece, there comes News that the French
Tyrant would not sign. Spindle in a few Days took his Bed, and had lain there
still, had not I been sent for. I immediately told him, there was great
Probability the French would now sue to us for Peace. I saw immediately a new
Life in his Eyes; and knew, That nothing could help him forward so well, as
hearing Verses which he would believe worse than his own; I read him therefore
the Brussels Postscript. After which I recited some Heroic Lines of my own,
which operated so strongly on the Tympanum of his Ear, that I doubt not but I
have kept out all other Sounds for a Fortnight; and have Reason to hope, we
shall see him abroad the Day before his Poem.

This you see, is a particular Secret I have found out, viz. That you are not
to choose your Physician for his Knowledge in your Distemper, but for having it
himself. Therefore I am at Hand for all Maladies arising from Poetical Vapors,
beyond which I never pretend. For being called the other Day to one in Love, I
took indeed their Three Guinea's, and gave them my Advice; which was, to send
for Aesculapius. Aesculapius, as soon as he saw the Patient, cries out, It Is
Love! It Is Love! Oh! the unequal Pulse! These are the Symptoms a Lover feels;
such Sighs, such Pangs, attend the uneasy Mind; nor can our Art, or all our
boasted Skill, avail -- Yet, O Fair! for thee -- Thus the Sage ran on, and
owned the Passion which he pitied, as well as that he felt a greater Pain than
ever he cured: After which he concluded, All I can advise, is Marriage: Charms
and Beauty will give new Life and Vigor, and turn the Course of Nature to its
better Prospect. This is the new Way; and thus Aesculapius has left his beloved
Powders, and writes a Recipe for a Wife at Sixty. In short, my Friend followed
the Prescription, and married Youth and Beauty in its perfect Bloom.

Supine in Silvia's snowy Arms he lies,
And all the busy Care of Life defies:
Each happy Hour is filled with fresh Delight,
While Peace the Day, and Pleasure crowns the Night.
From my own Apartment, July 27.
Tragical Passion was the Subject of the Discourse where I last visited this
Evening; and a Gentleman who knows that I am at present writing a very deep
Tragedy, directed his Discourse in a particular Manner to me. It is the common
Fault (said he) of you, Gentlemen, who write in the Buskin Style, that you give
us rather the Sentiments of such who behold Tragical Events, than of such who
bear a Part in 'em themselves. I would advise all who pretend this Way, to read
Shakespeare with Care, and they will soon be deterred from putting forth what is
usually called Tragedy. The Way of common Writers in this Kind, is rather the
Description than the Expression of Sorrow. There is no Medium in these
Attempts; and you must go to the very Bottom of the Heart, or it is all mere
Language; and the Writer of such Lines is no more a Poet, than a Man is a
Physician for knowing the Names of Distempers, without the Causes of them Men
of Sense are professed Enemies to all such empty Labors: For he who p^etends
to be sorrowful, and is not, is a Wretch yet more contemptible than he who
pretends to be me^ry, and is not. Such a Tragedian is only maudlin drunk. The
Gentleman went on with much Warmth; but all he could say had little Effect upon
me: But when I came hither, I so far observed his Counsel, that I looked into
Shakespeare. The Tragedy I dipped into was, Harry the Fourth. In the Scene where
Morton is preparing to tell Northumberland of his Son's Death; the old Man does
not give him Time to speak, but says, The Whiteness of thy Cheeks
Is apter than thy Tongue to tell thy Errand;
Even such a Man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in Look, so Woe -- Be gone.
Drew Priam's Curtain at the Dead of Night,
And would have told him Half his Troy was burnt
But Priam found the Fire, e're he his Tongue,
And I my Percy's Death e're thou report'st it.


The Image in this Place is wonderfully noble and great; yet this Man in all
this is but rising toward his great Affliction, and is still enough himself,
as you see, to make a Simile? But when he is certain of his Son's Death, he is
lost to all Patience, and gives up all the Regards of this Life; and since the
last of Evils is fallen upon him, he calls for it upon all the World.

Now let not Nature's Hand
Keep the wild blood confined; let Order die,
And let the World no longer be a Stage,
To feed ^on^tion in a lingering Act;
But let one Spirit of the firstborn Cain
Reign in all Bosoms, that each Heart being set
On bloody Courses, the wide Scene may end,
And Darkness be the Burier of the Dead.
Reading but this one Scene has convinced me, that he who describes the Concern
of great Men, must have a Soul as noble, and as susceptible of high Thoughts,
as they whom he represents: I shall therefore lay by my Drama for some Time,
and turn my Thoughts to Cares and Griefs, somewhat below that of Heroes, but no
less moving. A Misfortune proper for me to take Notice of, has too lately
happened: The disconsolate Maria has three Days kept her Chamber for the Loss
of the beauteous Fidelia, her Lap dog. Lesbia her self did not shed more Tears
for her Sparrow. What makes her the more concerned, is, that we know not
whether Fidelia was killed or stolen; but she was seen in the Parlour-Window
when the Train-bands went by, and never since. Whoever gives Notice of her,
dead or alive, shall be rewarded with a Kiss of her Lady.

The TATLER. [No 48.
-- Virtutem Verba putant, ut
Lucum Ligna. --
Hor.
From Thursd. July 28. to Saturd. July 30. 1709.
From my own Apartment, July 29.
THIS Day I obliged Pacolet to entertain me with Matters which regarded Persons
of his own Character and Occupation. We chose to take our Walk on Tower Hill;
and as we were coming from thence in o der to stroll as far as Garraway's, I
obse ved two Men, who had but just landed, coming from the Waterside. I thought
there was something uncommon in their Mien and Aspect; but though they seemed
by their Visage to be related, yet, was there a Warmth in their Manner, as if
they differed very much in their Sentiments of the Subject on which they were
talking. One of them seemed to have a natural Confidence, mixed with an
ingenuous Freedom in his Gesture, his Dress very plain, but very graceful and
becoming: The other, in the midst of an over-bearing Carriage, betrayed (by
frequently looking round him) a Suspicion that he was not enough regarded by
those he met, or that he feared they would make some Attack upon him. This
Person was much taller than his Companion, and added to that Height the
Advantage of a Feather in his Hat, and Heels to his Shoes so monstrously high,
that he had Three or Four Times fallen down, had he not been supported by his
Friend. They made a full Stop as they came within a few Yards of the Place
where we stood. The plain Gentleman bowed to Pacolet; the other looked on him
with some Displeasure: Upon which I asked him, Who they both were? When he thus
informed me of their Persons and Circumstances.

You may remember, Isaac, that I have often told you, there are Beings of a
superior Rank to Mankind, who frequently visit the Habitations of Men, in order
to call them from some wrong Pursuits in which they are actually engaged, or
divert them from Methods which will lead them into Errors for the future. He
that will carefully reflect upon the Occurrences of his Life, will find he has
been sometimes extricated out of Difficulties, and received Favors where he
could never have expected such Benefits; as well as met with cross Events from
some unseen Hand, which have disappointed his best laid Designs. Such Accidents
arrive from the Interventions of Aerial Beings, as they are benevolent or
hurtful to the Nature of Man, and attend his Steps in the Tracts of Ambition,
of Business, and of Pleasure. Before I ever appeared to you in the Manner I do
now, I have frequently followed you in your Evening Walks, and have often, by
throwing some Accident in your Way, as the passing by of a Funeral, or the
Appearance of some other solemn Object, given your Imagination a new Turn, and
changed a Night you had destined to Mirth and Jollity, into an Exercise of
Study and Contemplation. I was the old Soldier who met you last Summer in
Chelsea-Fields, and pretended that I had broken my Wooden-Leg, and could not
get Home; but I snap'd it short off on purpose, that you might fall into the
Reflections you did on that Subject, and take me into your Hack. If you
remember, you made your self very merry on that Fracture, and asked me, Whether
I thought I should next Winter feel Cold in the Toes of that Leg? As is usually
observed, that those who lose Limbs, are sensible of Pains in the extreme
Parts, even after those Limbs are cut off. However, my keeping you then in the
Story of the Battle of the Boin, prevented an Assignation, which would have led
you into more Disasters than I then related.

To be short: Those Two Persons you see yonder, are such as I am; they are not
real Men, but are mere Shades and Figures: One is named Alethes, the other
Verisimilis. Their Office is to be the Guardians and Representatives of
Conscience and Honor. They are now going to visit the several Parts of the
Town, to see how their Interests in the World decay or flourish, and to purge
themselves from the many false Imputations they daily meet with in the Commerce
and Conversation of Men. You observed Verisimilis frowned when he first saw me.
What he is provoked at, is, that I told him one Day, though he strutted and
dressed with so much Ostentation, if he kept himself within his own Bounds, he
was but a Lacquey, and wore only that Gentleman's Livery whom he is now with.
This frets him to the Heart; for you must know, he has pretended a long Time to
set up for himself, and gets among a Crowd of the more unthinking Part of
Mankind, who take him for a Person of the First Quality; though his
Introduction into the World was wholly owing to his present Companion.

This Encounter was very agreeable to me, and I was resolved to dog them, and
desired Pacolet to accompany me. I soon perceived what he told me in the
Gesture of the Persons: For when they looked at each other in Discourse, the
well-dress'd Man suddenly cast down his Eyes, and discovered that the other had
a painful Superiority over him. After some further Discourse, they took Leave.
The plain Gentleman went down toward Thames Street, in order to be present, at
least, at the Oaths taken at the Custom House; and the other made directly for
the Heart of the City. It is incredible how great a Change there immediately
appeared in the Man of Honor when he got rid of his uneasy Companion: He
adjusted the Cock of his Hat anew, settled his Sword-Knot, and had an
Appearance that attracted a sudden Inclination for him and his Interests in all
who beheld him. For my Part (said I to Pacolet) I cannot but think you are
mistaken in calling this Person, of the Lower Quality; for he looks much more
like a Gentleman than the other. Don't you observe all Eyes are upon him as he
advances: How each Sex gazes at his Stature, Aspect, Address, and Motion?
Pacolet only smiled, and shaked his Head; as leaving me to be convinced by my
own further Observation. We kept on our Way after him till we came to
Exchange-Alley, where the plain Gentleman again came up to the other; and they
stood together after the Manner of eminent Merchants, as if ready to receive
Application; but I could observe no Man talk to either of them. The One was
laughed at as a Fop; and I heard many Whispers against the other, as a
whimsical Sort of Fellow, and a great Enemy to Trade. They crossed Cornhill
together, and came into the full Change, where some bowed, and gave themselves
Airs in being known to so fine a Man as Verisimilis, who, they said, had great
Interest in all Princes Courts; and the other was taken Notice of by several as
one they had seen somewhere long before. One more particularly said, He had
formerly been a Man of Consideration in the World; but was so unlucky, that
they who dealt with him, by some strange Infatuation or other, had a Way of
cutting off their own Bills, and were prodigiously slow in improving their
Stock. But as much as I was curious to observe the Reception these Gentlemen
met with upon Change, I could not help being interrupted by one that came up
toward us, to whom every Body made their Compliments. He was of the common
Height, and in his Dress there seemed to be great Care to appear no Way
particular, except in a certain exact and feat Manner of Behavior and
Circumspection. He was wonderfully careful that his Shoes and Clothes should
be without the least Speck upon them; and seemed to think, that on such an
Accident depended his very Life and Fortune. There was hardly a Man on Change
who had not a Note upon him; and each seemed very well satisfied that their
Money lay in his Hands, without demanding Payment. I asked Pacolet, What great
Merchant that was, who was so universally addressed to, yet made too familiar
an Appearance to command that extraordinary Deference? Pacolet answered, This
Person is the Demon or Genius of Credit; his Name is Umbra. If you observe, he
follows Alethes and Verisimilis at a Distance; and indeed has no Foundation for
the Figure he makes in the World, but that he is thought to keep their Cash;
though at the same Time, none who trust him, would trust the other for a Groat.
As the Company rolled about, the Three Specters were jumbled into one Place:
When they were so, and all thought there was an Alliance between them, they
immediately drew upon them the Business of the whole Change. But their Affairs
soon increased to such an unweildy Bulk, that Alethes took his Leave, and said,
He would not engage further than he had an immediate Fund to answer.
Verisimilis pretended, that though he had Revenues large enough to go on his
own Bottom, yet it was below one of his Family to condescend to trade in his
own Name; therefore he also retired. I was extremely troubled, to see the
glorious Mart of London left with no other Guardian, but him of Credit. But
Pacolet told me, That Traders had nothing to do with the Honor or Conscience
of their Correspondents, provided they supported a general Behavior in the
World, which could not hurt their Credit or their Purses: For (said he) you may
in this one Tract of Building of London and Westminster see the imaginary
Motives on which the greatest Affairs move, as well as in rambling over the
Face of the Earth. For though Alethes is the real Governor, as well as
Legislator of Mankind, he has very little Business but to make up Quarrels, and
is only a general Referree, to whom every Man pretends to appeal; but is
satisfied with his Determinations no further than they promote his own
Interest. Hence it is, that the Soldier and the Courtier model their Actions
according to Verisimilis's Manner, and the Merchant according to that of Umbra.
Among these Men, Honor and Credit are not valuable Possessions in themselves,
or pursued out of a Principle of Justice; but merely as they are serviceable to
Ambition and to Commerce. But the World will never be in any Manner of Order or
Tranquillity, till Men are firmly convinced, that Conscience, Honor, and
Credit, are all in one Interest; and that without the Concurrence of the
former, the latter are but Impositions upon our selves and others. The Force
these delusive Words have, is not seen in the Transactions of the busy World
only, but also have their Tyranny over the Fair Sex. Were you to ask the
unhappy Lais, What Pangs of Reflection, preferring the Consideration of her
Honor to her Conscience, has given her? She could tell you, That it has forced
her to drink up half a Gallon this Winter of Tom Dassapas's Potions; That she
still pines away for fear of being a Mother; and knows not, but the Moment she
is such, she shall be a Murderess: But if Conscience had as strong a Force upon
her Mind as Honor, the first Step to her unhappy Condition had never been
made; she had still been innocent, as she is beautiful. Were Men so enlightened
and studious of their own Good, as to act by the Dictates of their Reason and
Reflection, and not the Opinion of others, Conscience would be the steady Ruler
of humane Life; and the Words, Truth, Law, Reason, Equity, and Religion, would
be but Synonymous Terms, for that only Guide which makes us pass our Days in
our own Favor and Approbation.

The TATLER. [No 49.
Quicquid agunt Homines nostri Farrago Libelli.

From Saturd. July 30. to Tuesd. Aug. 2. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, August 1.
THE Impo ition of honest Names and Words upon improper Subjects, has made so
regular a Confusion amongst us, that we are apt to sit down with our Errors,
well enough satisfied with the Methods we are fallen into, without attempting
to deliver ou selves from the Tyranny under which we are reduced by such
Innovations. Of all the laudable Motives of humane Life, none has suffered so
much in this Kind, as Love; under which revered Name, a brutal Desire called
Lust is frequently concealed and admitted; though they differ as much as a Matron
from a Prostiture, or a Companion from a Buffoon. Philander the other Day was
bewailing this Misfortune w^ much Indignation, and upbraided me for have ^g some
Time since quoted those excellent Lines of the Satyrist: To an exact Perfection
they have brought
The Action Love, the Passion is forgot.


How could you (said he) leave such a Hint so coldly? How could Aspasia and
Semphronia enter into your Imagination at the same Time, and you never declare
to us the different Reception you gave 'em?

The Figures which the ancient Mythologists and Poets put upon Love and Lust in
their Writings, are very instructive. Love is a beauteous Blind Child, adorned
with a Quiver and a Bow, which he plays with, and shoots around him, without
Design or Direction; to intimate to us, that the Person beloved has no
Intention to give us the Anxieties we meet with; but that the Beauties of a
worthy Object are like the Charms of a lovely Infant: They cannot but attract
your Concern and Fondness, though the Child so regarded is as insensible of the
Value you put upon it, as it is that it deserves your Benevolence. On the other
Side, the Sages figured Lust in the Form of a Satyr; of Shape, part Humane,
part Bestial; to signify, that the Followers of it prostitute the Reason of a
Man to pursue the Appetites of a Beast. This Satyr is made to haunt the Paths
and Coverts of the Wood-Nymphs and Shepherdesses, to lurk on the Banks of
Rivulets, and watch the purling Streams, (as the Resorts of retired Virgins) to
show, that lawless Desire tends chiefly to prey upon Innocence, and has
something so unnatural in it, that it hates its own Make, and shuns the Object
it loved, as soon as it has made it like it self. Love therefore is a Child
that complains and bewails its Inability to help it self, and weeps for
Assistance, without an immediate Reflection or Knowledge of the Food it wants:
Lust, a watchful Thief which seizes its Prey, and lays Snares for its own
Relief; and its principal Object being Innocence, it never robs, but it murders
at the same Time.

From this Idea of a Cupid and a Satyr, we may settle our Notion of these
different Desires, and accordingly rank their Followers. Aspasia must therefore
be allowed to be the first of the beauteous Order of Love, whose unaffected
Freedom, and conscious Innocence, give her the Attendance of the Graces in all
her Actions. That awful Distance which we bear toward her in all our Thoughts
of her, and that cheerful Familiarity with which we approach her, are certain
Instances of her being the truest Object of Love of any of her Sex. In this
accomplished Lady, Love is the constant Effect, because it is never the Design.
Yet, though her Mien carries much more Invitation than Command, to behold her is
an immediate Check to loose Behavior; and to love her, is a liberal Education:
For, it being the Nature of all Love to create an Imitation of the beloved
Person in the Lover, a Regard for Aspasia naturally produces Decency of
Manners, and good Conduct of Life in her Admirers. If therefore the giggling
Leucippe could but see her Train of Fops assembled, and Aspasia move by 'em,
she would be mortified at the Veneration with which she is beheld, even by
Leucippe's own unthinking Equipage, whose Passions have long taken Leave of
their Understandings.

As Charity is esteemed a Conjunction of the good Qualities necessary to a
virtuous Man, so Love is the happy Composition of all the Accomplishments that
make a Fine Gentleman. The Motive of a Man's Life is seen in all his Actions;
and such as have the Beauteous Boy for their Inspirer, have a Simplicity of
Behavior, and a certain Evenness of Desire, which burns like the Lamp of Life
in their Bosoms; while they who are instigated by the Satyr, are ever tortured
by Jealousies of the Object of their Wishes; often desire what they scorn, and
as often consciously and knowingly embrace where they are mutually indifferent.

Florio, the generous Husband, and Limberham, the kind Keeper, are noted
Examples of the different Effects which these Desires produce in the Mind.
Amanda, who is the Wife of Florio, lives in the continual Enjoyment of new
Instances of her Husband's Friendship, and sees it the End of all his Ambition
to make her Life one Series of Pleasure and Satisfaction; and Amanda's Relish
of the Goods of Life, is all that makes 'em pleasing to Florio: They behave
themselves to each other when present with a certain apparent Benevolence,
which transports above Rapture; and they think of each other in Absence with a
Confidence unknown to the highest Friendship: Their Satisfactions are doubled,
their Sorrows lessened by Participation.

On the other Hand, Corinna, who is the Mistress of Limberham, lives in
constant Torment: Her Equipage is, an old Woman, who was what Corinna is now;
an antiquated Footman, who was Pimp to Limberham's Father; and a Chambermaid,
who is Limberham's Wench by Fits, out of a Principle of Politics to make her
jealous and watchful of Corinna. Under this Guard, and in this Conversation,
Corinna lives in State: The Furniture of her Habitation, and her own gorgeous
Dress, make her the Envy of all the strolling Ladies in the Town; but Corinna
know she her self is but Part of Limberham's Household Stuff, and is as capable
of being disposed of elsewhere, as any other Moveable. But while her Keeper is
persuaded by his Spies, that no Enemy has been within his Doors since his last
Visit, no Persian Prince was ever so magnificently bountiful: A kind Look or
falling Tear is worth a Piece of Brockade, a Sigh is a Jewel, and a Smile is a
Cupboard board of Plate. All this is shared between Corinna and her Guard in
his Absence. With this great Economy and Industry does the unhappy Limberham
purchase the constant Tortures of Jealousy, the Favor of spending his Estate,
and the Opportunity of enriching one by whom he knows he is hated and despised.
These are the ordinary and common Evils which attend Keepers, and Corinna is a
Wench but of common Size of Wickedness, were you to know what passes under the
Roof where the fair Messalina reigns with her humble Adorer!

Messalina is the professed Mistress of Mankind; she has left the Bed of her
Husband and her beauteous Offspring, to give a Loose to Want of Shame and
Fullness of Desire. Wretched Nocturuus, her feeble Keeper! How the poor Creature
fribles in his Gate, and skuttles from Place to Place to dispatch his necessary
Affairs in painful Daylight, that he may return to the constant Twilight
preserved in that Scene of Wantonness, Messalina's Bedchamber! How does he,
while he is absent from thence, consider in his Imagination the Breadth of his
Porter's Shoulders, the spruce Nightcap of his Valet, the ready Attendance of
his Butler! Any of all whom he knows she admits, and professes to approve of.
This, alas! is the Gallantry; this the Freedom of our Fine Gentlemen: For this
they preserve their Liberty, and keep clear of that Bugbear, Marriage. But he
does not understand either Vice or Virtue, who will not allow, that Life
without the Rules of Morality is a wayward uneasy Being, with Snatches only of
Pleasure; but under the Regulation of Virtue, a reasonable and uniform Habit of
Enjoyment. I have seen in a Play of old Haywood's, a Speech at the End of an
Act, which touched this Point with much Spirit. He makes a married Man in the
Play, upon some endearing Occasion, look at his Spouse with an Air of Fondness,
and fall into the following Reflection on his Condition:

Oh Marriage! Happiest, easiest, safest State;
Let Debauchees and Drunkards scorn thy Rights,
Who, in their nauseous Draughts and Lusts, profane
Both thee and Heaven by whom thou were ordained.
How can the Savage call it Loss of Freedom,
Thus to converse with, thus to gaze at
A faithful, beauteous Friend?
Blush not, my fair One, that thy Love applauds thee,
Nor be it painful to my wedded Wife,
That my full Heart overflows in Praise of thee.
Thou art by Law, by Interest, Passion, mine:
Passion and Reason join in Love of thee.
Thus, through a World of Calumny and Fraud,
We pass both unreproach'd, both undeceived;
While in each other's Interest and Happiness,
We without Art all Faculties employ,
And all our Senses without Guilt enjoy.
St. James's Coffee-house, August 1.
Letters from the Hague of the 6th Instant, N. S. say, That there daily arrive
at our Camp Deserters in considerable Numbers; and that several of the Enemy
concealed themselves in the Town of Tournay when the Garrison marched into the
Citadel; after which, they presented themselves to the Duke of Marlborough;
some of whom were Commissioned Officers. The Earl of Albemarle is appointed
Governor of the Town. Soon after the Surrender, there arose a Dispute about a
considerable Work, which was asserted by the Allies to be Part of the Town, and
by the French to belong to the Citadel. It is said, Monsieur de Survill^ was so
ingenuous as to declare, he thought it t^ be comprehended within the Limits of
the Town^ but Monsieur de Mesgrigny, Governor of the Citadel, was of a
contrary Opinion. It is reported^ That this Affair occasioned great
Difficulties^ which ended in a Capitulation for the Citadel i^ self; the
principal Article of which is, That i^ shall be surrendered on the 5th of
September next^ in case they are not in the mean Time relieved^ This
Circumstance gives Foundation to believe that the Enemy have acted in this
Manner, rather from some Hopes they conceive of a Treaty of Peace before that
Time, than any Expectation from their Army, which has retired toward their
former Works between Lens and La Bassee. These Advices add, That his Excellency
the Czarish Ambassador has communicated to the States General, and the Foreign
Ministers residing at the Hague, a Copy of a Letter from his Master's Camp,
which gives an Account of the entire Defeat of the Swedish Army. They further
say, That Count Piper is taken Prisoner, and that it is doubted whether the
King of Sweden himself was not killed in the Action. We hear from Savoy, That
Count Thaun having amused the Enemy by a March as far as the Tarantaise, had
suddenly repassed Mount Cennis, and moved toward Brianzon. This unexpected
Disposition is apprehended by the Enemy as a Piece of the Duke of Savoy's
Dexterity; and the French adding this Circumstance to that of the Confederate
Squadron's lying before Toulon, convince themselves, that his Royal Highness
has his Thoughts upon the Execution of some great Design in those Parts.

The TATLER. [No 50.
From Tuesd. Aug. 2. to Thursd. Aug. 4. 1709.
White's Chocolate-house, August 2.
The History of Orlando the Fair. Chap. I.
WHatever malicious Men may say of our Lucubrations, we have no Design but to
produce unknown Merit, or place in a proper Light the Actions of our
Contemporaries who labor to distinguish themselves, whether it be by Vice or
Virtue. For we shall never give Accounts to the World of any Thing, but what
the Lives and Endeavors of the Persons (of whom we treat) make the Basis of
their Fame and Reputation. For this Reason it is to be hoped, that our
Appearance is reputed a public Benefit; and though certain Persons may turn what
we mean for Panegyric into Scandal, let it be answered once for all, That if
our Praises are really designed as Raillery, such malevolent Persons owe their
Safety from it only to their being too inconsiderable for History. It is not
every Man who deals in Ratsbane, or is unseasonably amorous, that can adorn
Story like Aesculapius; nor every Stock-Jobber of the India Company can assume
the Port, and personate the Figure of Aurengezebe. My noble Ancestor Mr.
Shakespeare, who was of the Race of the Staffs, was not more fond of the
memorable Sir John Falstaff, than I am of those Worthies; but the Latins have
an admirable Admonition expressed in two Words, to wit, Nequid nimis, which
forbids my indulging my self on those delightful Subjects, and calls me to do
Justice to others, who make no less Figures in our Generation. Of such, the
first and most renowned is, that eminent Hero and Lover, Orlando the Handsome,
whose Disappointments in Love, in Gallantry, and in War, have banished him from
public View, and made him voluntarily enter into a Confinement, to which the
ungrateful Age would otherwise have forced him. Ten Lustra and more are wholly
passed since Orlando first appeared in the Metropolis of this Island: His
Descent noble, his Wit humorous, his Person charming. But to none of these
Recommendatory Advantages was his Title so undoubted as that of his Beauty. His
Complexion was fair, but his Countenance manly; his Stature of the tallest, his
Shape the most exact; and though in all his Limbs he had a Proportion as delicate
as we see in the Works of the most skilful Statuaries, his Body had a Strength
and Firmness little inferior to the Marble of which such Images are formed.
This made Orlando the universal Flame of all the Fair Sex; Innocent Virgins
sighed for him, as Adonis; experienced Widows, as Hercules. Thus did this
Figure walk alone the Pattern and Ornament of our Species, but of Course the
Envy of all who had the same Passions, without his superior Merit and Pretenses
to the Favor of that enchanting Creature, Woman. However, the generous Orlando
believed himself formed for the World, and not to be engrossed by any
particular Affection. He sighed not for Delia, for Chloris, for Chloe, for
Betty, nor my Lady, nor for the ready Chambermaid, nor distant Baroness: Woman
was his Mistress, and the whole Sex his Seraglio. His Form was always
irresistible: And if we consider, that not One of Five hundred can bear the
least Favor from a Lady without being exalted above himself; if also we must
allow, that a Smile from a Side-Box has made Jack Spruce half mad, we cannot
think it wonderful that Orlando's repeated Conquests touched his Brain: So it
certainly did, and Orlando became an Enthusiast in Love; and in all his
Address, contracted something out of the ordinary Course of Breeding and
Civility. However, (powerful as he was) he would still add to the Advantages of
his Person, that of a Profession which the Ladies always favor, and
immediately commenced Soldier. Thus equipped for Love and Honor, our Hero
seeks distant Climes and Adventures, and leaves the despairing Nymphs of Great
Britain to the Courtship of Beaus and Witlings till his Return. His Exploits in
Foreign Nations and Courts, have not been regularly enough communicated unto
us, to report 'em with that Veracity which we profess in our Narrations: But
after many Feats of Arms, (which those who were Witnesses to them have
suppressed out of Envy, but which we have had faithfully related from his own
Mouth in our public Streets) Orlando returns home full, but not loaded with
Years. Beaus born in his Absence made it their Business to decry his Furniture,
his Dress, his Manner; but all such Rivalry he suppressed (as the Philosopher
did the Sceptick, who argued there was no such Thing as Motion) by only moving.
The Beauteous Villar J. who only was formed for his Paramour, became the O^ of
his Affection. His first Speech to he was as follows:

Madam, It is not only that Nature has made us Two the most accomplished of
each Sex, and minted to us to obey her Dictates in becoming One; but (...)
there is also an Ambition in following the mighty Persons you have favored.
Where King, and Heroes, as great as Alexander, or such as could personate
Alexander, have bowed, permit your General to lay his Laurels:

According to Milton; The Fair with conscious Majesty approved
His pleaded Reason. --


Fortune having now supplied Orlando with Necessaries for his high Taste of
Gallantry and Pleasure, his Equipage and Economy had something in them more
sumptuous and gallant than could be received in our degenerate Age; therefore
his Figure (though highly graceful) appeared so exotic, that it assembled all
the Britons under the Age of Sixteen, who saw his Grandeur to follow his
Chariot with Shouts and Acclamations, which he regarded with the Contempt which
great Minds affect in the midst of Applauses. I remember I had the Honor to
see him one Day stop, and call the Youths about him, to whom he spoke as
follows:

'Good Bastards -- Go to School, and don't lose your Time in following my
Wheels: I am loath to hurt you, because. I know not but you are all my own
Offspring: Hark'ee, you Sirrah with the white Hair, I am sure you are mine:
There Is Half a Crown. Tell your Mother, This, with the Half Crown I gave her
when I got you, comes to Five Shillings. Thou have cost me all that, and yet
thou art good for nothing. Why, you young Dogs, did you never see a Man
before?' Never such a one as you, Noble General, replied a Truant from
Westminster. 'Sirrah, I believe thee: There is a Crown for thee. Drive on
Coachman.'

This Vehicle, though sacred to Love, was not adorned with Doves. Such an
Hieroglyphick denoted too languishing a Passion. Orlando therefore gave the
Eagle, as being of a Constitution which inclined him rather to seize his Prey
with Talons, than pine for it with Murmurs.

From my own Apartment, August 2.
I have received the following Letter from Mr. Powell of the Bath, who, I
think, runs from the Point between us, which I leave the whole World to judge.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
SIR,
HAving a great deal of more advantageous Business at present on my Hands, I
thought to have deferred answering your Tatler of the 21st Instant, till the
Company was gone, and Season over; but having resolved not to regard any
Impertinences of your Paper, except what relate particularly to me, I am the
more easily induced to answer you (as I shall find Time to do it): First, pa
tly lest you should think your self neglected, which I have Reason to believe
you would take heinously ill. Secondly, partly because it will increase my
Fame, and consequently my Audience, when all the Quality shall see with how
much Wit and Raillery I show you -- I don't care a Farthing for you. Thirdly,
partly because being without Books, if I don't show much Learning, it will not
be imputed to my having none.

I have traveled Italy, France, and Spain, and fully comprehend whatever any
German Arrist in the World can do; yet cannot I imagine, why you should
endeavor to disturb the Repose and Plenty which (though unworthy) I enjoy at
this Place. It cannot be, that you take Offense at my Prologues and Epilogues,
which you are pleased to miscall Foolish and Abusive. No, no, until you give a
better, I shall not forbear thinking, that the true Reason of your picking a
Quarrel with me was, because it is more agreeable to your Principles, as well
as more to the Honor of your ^ured Victory, to attack a Governor. Mr. Isaac,
Mr. Isaac, I can see into a Millstone as far as another (as the Saying is).
You (...) for sowing the Seeds of Sedition and ^bedience among my Puppets, and
your ^eal for the (good old) Cause would make you persuade Punch to pull the
String from his Chops, and not move his Jaw when I have a Mind he should
harangue. Now I appeal to all Men, if this is not contrary to that
uncontrollable, unaccountable Dominion, which by the Laws of Nature I exercise
over them; for all Sorts of Wood and Wire were made for the Use and Benefit of
Man: I have therefore an unquestionable Right to frame, fashion, and put them
together, as I please; and having made them what they are, my Puppets are my
Property, and therefore my Slaves: Nor is there in Nature any Thing more just,
than the Homage which is paid by a less to a more excellent Being: So that by
the Right therefore of a superior Genius, I am their supreme Moderator, although
you would insinuate (agreeably to your levelling Principles) that I am my self
but a great Puppet, and can therefore have but a coordinate Jurisdiction with
them. I suppose I have now sufficiently made it appear, that I have a paternal
Right to keep a Puppet-Show, and this Right I will maintain in my Prologues on
all Occasions.

And therefore, if you write a Defense of your self against this my
Self-Defence, I admonish you to keep within Bounds; for every Day will not be
so propitious to you as the 29th of April; and perhaps my Resentment may get
the better of my Generosity, and I may no longer scorn to fight one who is not
my Equal with unequal Weapons: There are such Things as Scandulums Magnatums;
therefore take Heed hereafter how you write such Things as I cannot easily
answer, for that will put me in a Passion.

I order you to handle only these Two Propositions, to which our Dispute may be
reduced: The First, Whether I have not an Absolute Power, whenever I please, to
light a Pipe with one of Punch's Legs, or warm my Fingers with his whole
Carcass? The Second, Whether the Devil would not be in Punch, should he by Word
or Deed oppose my Sovereign Will and Pleasure? And then, perhaps, I may (if I
can find Leisure for it) give you the Trouble of a second Letter.

But if you intend to tell me of the Original of Puppet-Shows, and the several
Changes and Revolutions that have happened in them, since Thespis, and I don't
care who, that is Noli me tangere; I have solemnly engaged to say nothing of
what I cannot approve. Or, if you talk of certain Contracts with the Mayor and
Burgesses, or Fees to the Constables, for the Privilege of Acting, I will not
write one single Word about any such Matters; but shall leave you to be mumbled
by the learned and very ingenious Author of a late Book, who knows very well
what is to be said and done in such Cases. He is now shuffling the Cards, and
dealing to Timothy; but if he wins the Game; I will send him to play at
Backgammon with you; and then he will satisfy you, that Deuce-Ace makes Five.

And so, submitting my self to be tried by my Country, and allowing any Jury of
12 good Men, and true, to be that Country; not excepting any (unless Mr. Isaac
Bickerstaff) to be of the Panel, for you are neither good nor true; I bid you
heartily farewell; and am,

SIR, Your Loving Friend, Powell.
Bath, July 28.

The End of the First Volume.
A Faithful INDEX OF THE Dull as well as ingenious Passages IN THE TATLERS.
VOL. I.
A.
ACTS the Country Wife: (Mrs. Bignell.) Page 15 Advice asked, not for
Information, but out of the Fullness of Heart on its Perplexity. 181 Advice not
to be given by every Body. Ibid. Aesculapius and Hebe. 317 Aesculapius's Recepe
for Love. 345 Africanus's Magnanimity and Manner of purchasing Annuities. 263
Alchymist. 102 Alicant taken. 155 Amanda, Wife of Florio. 357 Annihilation
described by Milton and Dryden. 38 Aspasia's Character. 306 Avaro's Character.
182 Aurengezebe Trades with the English. 331
B.
Bankers should take Poems for Bills. Page ^ Batchelor's Scheme to govern a
Wife. 70 Battle near Badajos. 123 Beadlestaff's Testimony of the Reformation at
Oxford, and of a Puppet-Show. 316 Betterton's Character. 5 Mr. Bickerstaff's
Cures. 245 Mr. Bickerstaff's Disposal of his Three Nephews. 214 -- A Base
Report that he has compounded with the Toymen and Milleners. 221 Mr.
Bickerstaff makes his Will. ^ Billet-deux concerning a Rival. ^ Brussels
Postscript (a Poem) considered. ^ Busy-Body: (A Play.) ^
C.
Camilla's Exit. ^ Cancrum, his Merit. ^ Cant of modern Men of Wit. ^
Careless's Character. ^ Challenge, the Style of it. ^ Charms of Music cure the
Spleen. ^ Children, how nursed. ^ Circumspection-Water, its Effects. ^ Clarissa
and Chloe, celebrated Beauties. ^ Clidamira, a Woman of Distinction. ^ Comment
on Stone-Walls. ^ Comparison between Caesar and Alexander. ^ Conscience
described under the Character of Alethes. ^ Contention between Two Ladies to
the Title of Ver^ Pretty. ^ Conversation-Repartees. ^ Coquet. 19 Corinna's Life
with Limberham. ^ Country's Ignorance of Bickerstaff's Characters. ^ Credit
described under the Character of Umbra. Page 353 Critic. 210 Cynthio's
History. 3 Cynthio's History continued. 29 Cynthio dictating on the Passion of
Love. 156 Cynthio's Letter to his Mistress. 253 Cynthio (once in Despair for
Clarissa) is now resolved upon the good old Way of Loving, as Bargain and Sale.
Ibid. Czar's Victory. 360
D.
Damia, a Woman of Distinction. 246 Decius, a lewd Person. 324 Description of
the Morning in Town: (A Poem.) 64 Dial^gue on Duelling. 282 Difference between
a Madman and a Fool. 292 Digression upon the London Cries. 25 Directions on
writing Letters. 217 Discourse concerning Bribery. 304 Dissertation on
Duelling. 221 Distaff (Jenny), her Discourse on Love, the Command and Power of
Women. 70 Distaff (Jenny), her Reflections on her Brother's Writings. 237 --
Her Account of her own Conduct in an Amor, etc. 239 Distinction between an
Idiot and Politician. 291 Diversions for the K. of D. at Dresden. 243 D^'s Sale
of Goods Celestial and Terrestrial. 308 Dryden, on Empire. 92 Duellers, how
treated after Death. 190 -- How used by different Nations. 203 Duelling, and
its Terms explained. 178 Duell^ng, the Source of it. 206 D^ Fortune Tellers. 103
D'Urfey's Panegyric. 311
E.
Earl of Essex; a Play: Its Character. Page 101 Easy Writers. 63 Emblem of the
Parrat and Dove. 197 Epigram on Marriage. 294 Epsom-Wells; a Play: Its
Character. 52 The Order of Esquires, etc. 133 Every Temper to be animated or
softened by the Influence of Beauty. 71 Exercise of Arms in the Metropolis of
Great Britain, with Considerations thereupon. 298
F.
Felicia, its Happiness. 27 Florimel and Picket, their Way of Courtship. 51
Florio's Character. 329 Fly-blow's Character. 276 Foot-Race by Damsels at
Epsom-Wells. 260 The Fox(a Play) applauded. 149 France, its Misery. 129 Frank
Careless. 104 Free Thinkers. 86 French King's Subjects Answer to his Letter.
212 Frontlet, her Character. 174
G.
Gamester. 102 Gamesters Misery and alternate State. 97 What Men of Wealth play
against Gamesters, etc. 110 Gatty, her Character. 174 Genealogy of the
Bickerstaffs. 81 Genii, their good Offices to Men. 349 Gentleman, what. 147
Good Breeding, what. 31, 217 Good-natured old Man. 330 Guilt applies the Satyr.
302
H.
Honest Fellows described. ^ Hush-Money demanded. ^
I.
Jack Spruce. Page 363 Impressions made on us by Pictures. 57 Instance of the
noble British Genius, in Valentine and Unnion. 36 Insurrection in Poictou. 99
Insurrection in Marseilles. 43 Invention never to have ones Name mentioned, 112
Inventory of Goods in Drury Lane of C -- R -- ch Esquire 308 Johnson (Ben), his
Manner of Writing. 149 Journal of Homer's Iliad. 40 Justice of Lewis le Grand,
much like unto Gamesters. 188
K.
Knaves proved Fools. 290
L.
Lady (being young) strangely enchanted by a Rake of 60 Years. 161 Lady's
Complaint of her Husband. 140 Lady consults Mr. Bickerstaff about being
divorced. Ibid. Lady, how recovered out of Fits. 164 Lady's Lover wounded in a
Duel. 178 Ladies trifling Endearments give us mean Ideas of their Souls. 294
Letter for Mr. Bickerstaff's Return. 273 Letter of Challenge. 180 Lewis XIV.'s
Letter to Isaac Bickerstaff, and Reflections thereon. 188 Limberham, the
Keeper. 357 London Cuckolds; a Play: Its Character. 56 London in Consternation,
an Idiot being tried. 289 Love and Lust distinguished. 355 Love, its Decay. 29
Love-Letter, by Cynthio. 253 Lucubrations, their Design. 361
M.
Madam Maintenon's Letter to M. Torcy, on the Peace. Page 138 Madonella's
Nunnery for Virgins. 231 Maria loses her Lap-Dog. 347 Marriage a Bugbear to our
fine Gentlemen. 358 Marriage described. 50 Marriage the safest, happiest State
this World affords. 359 May-Fair broke, and several Movables put to Sale. 142
Medecin for a Scold: (A Poem.) 9 Meeting of Hunters described. 267 Men in Love,
Poetical. 196 Men of Sense are Women's humble Servants. 269 Merry Fellows
described. 331 Messalina's Character. 358 Military Achievements of London. 201
Milton and Suckling, on a parallel Occasion, show the Duty of Man in their
Designs upon Women, in an Instance of true Love. 292 Movables of the Playhouse
intended to be purchased by a Gathering at Will's, but frustrated by unfair
Dealings. 319
N.
Naked Truth, a dangerous Pamphlet. 121 Natural for Women to talk of
themselves. 73 Naturalization Act, how advantageous. 99 Nice's Character. 104
Noy's Expedient to reform his Son by a Legacy. 67
O.
Ogling gains Women. 156 Old Bachelor, its Character. ^ Opera's condenmed. ^
Orlando's History. ^ Orlando's Speech to beauteous Villara. ^ Orlando's Speech
to the Youth that followed his Chariot. Page 364 Oxford Discipline applauded.
278 -- Their Almanac considered. 279
P.
Pacolet checks Mr. Bickerstaff in not going on with his Design. 99 Pacolet's
Admonition to B. on his Writings. 100 Pacolet's Discourse with Mr. Bickerstaff
in Lincoln's- Inn Walks. 93 Pacolet's first Interview with Bickerstaff. Ibid.
-- His Relation of his Wards. 94 Pacolet's Life of a Month. 107, etc. Pacolet's
Observation on Gamesters and Cheats. 110 Panegyric, its Nature. 120 Paris
Gazette. 14 Partridge's Death demonstrated. 7 Pastorella's Character. 66
Paulo's Character. 182 Philander the most skilful in addressing the Female Sex.
95 Pinkethman's Progress with his Company to Greenwich. 25 Places pretended to,
not out of Merit, but because they are convenient. 301 Plan of Philosophy, with
an Appendix. 312 Platonne described. 230 Players instructed in the Laws of
Action, out of Shakespeare. 255 Plays (Modern) described. 149 Plays, proper
In^tements to good Behavior. 16 Poem on Bribery. 304 Poluglossa's Character.
307 Powell's Letter, in Answer to the Puppet-Show at Bath. 365 -- He affronts
Mr. Bickerstaff. 320 Preliminaries of a Peace. 145 Pretty Fellow, who. Page 147
Pretty Fellow, with the Word [very], is a true Woman's Man in the First Degree.
171 Proceedings at Rome about the Recognition of K. Charles. 32 Progress of the
Siege of Tournay. 295 Prophets (Modern), their Character, with Reflections. 79,
80 Punning treated of. 235 Punning, an Instance of it. 257
Q.
Quality always to pay the Reckoning. 330 Quarrel at Epsom between Autumn and
Springly about Precedence. 259 Questioners. 300 Quid Nunc's Character of
Laziness, etc. 71
R.
Raillery against Persons taking upon them the Names of the Females. 186 Rake,
his Character. 192 Ranter civilized at the Sight of the Lady Betty Modish. 71
Reconsideration on Instructions to Vanderbank: (A Poem.) 18 Recruiting Officer:
Its Character. 142 Reflections on the French King's Letter to his Subjects
after the Treaty. 205 Religion, a Project for its Advancement recommended. 31
Remarks on Virgil and Homer's Choice of their Epithets. 39
S.
Sacharissa's Character. 29 Saltero's Qualifications, Name and Relics. 248
Sappho's Character. 37 Sarabrand's Puppet-Show at her Shop in the Exchange.
Page 143 Sarabrand's Rake-hell Punch disposed of. Ibid. Satisfaction, a Term in
Duelling, explained. 179 Sempronia's Character. 240 Senecio's Character. 330
Sentiment of the Allies on the Rupture of the Treaty. 176 Shakespeare's Apology
for Satyr. 302 Of Shakespeare. 56 S^gn Posts false spelled, how pernicious. 128
Smart Fellow, his Pretensions, Exploits and Character. 185, etc. -- Whether an
Affront to be called so. 199 Snuff taking, etc. 251 Sophronius's just Carriage.
148 Sorrow expressed, by Shakespeare. 346 Spindle (Tom) cured of the Spleen. 342
Staff of Life's Poem on the Fr. K. 177 Sublime, instanced in a Simily of the
Campaign. 315 Swearer, how reformed. 96
T.
Taste of an Age, known by the Characters of their plays. 305 Teraminta, her
miserable State. 324 Theaters recommended. 57 Of a Toast. 173 Toasts, and why
they are so called. 226 Tom. Drybones. 172 Tournay invested. 258 Treaty of
Peace broken off. 168 Trippet (Sir Taffety), his Amors at Tunbridge. 340, 341
Trip to the Jubilee. 137 T^ is at Paris. 75, 76
V.
Verses on a Parrat. Page 196 Verus's Character. 100 Villaria, beauteous. 363
W.
Welsh, all Gentlemen, and given much to Duelling. 222 Whisperers without
Business. 273 Wife is become the Derision of F^ols. ^ Winter P^ce from
Copenhagen. ^ Witchcraft a^scribed and explained. 151 Wit, his Character. ^
Women more (...) than Men in their own Affairs. ^
FINIS.

