A BRIEF VIEW OF THE FIGURES; AND EXPLICATION OF THE METAPHORS, CONTAINED IN
SCRIPTURE.

BY JOHN BROWN, Minister of the Gospel at Haddington.

John v. 39. Search the Scriptures.

Hos. xii. 10. I have used SIMILITUDES, by the ministry of the prophets.

EDINBURGH: PRINTED BY AND FOR GAVIN ALSTON. M.DCC.LXXXII.

THE PREFACE.
THE advantage of a clear, comprehensive, and regular view of the FIGURES, the
TYPES, and the PREDICTIONS of scripture, is obvious. In the FIRST, we observe
the surprising eloquence of Heaven, and discern almost every form in nature, a
guide to, and an illustrator of inspired truth. By the SECOND, we perceive the
whole substance of the gospel of Christ, truly exhibited in ancient shadows,
persons, and things; -- in laws apparently carnal and trifling. In the THIRD,
we observe how astonishingly inspired predictions properly arranged, and
compared with the history of nations and churches, do illustrate each other;
and modern events, as with the evidence of miracles, confirm our faith in the
oracles of God. The usefulness of what I have attempted, with respect to all
the THREE, must be lest to the providence of God.

The subsequent MEDITATIONS, relate to the FIGURES of sacred writ. To avoid too
peremptory parallels, and to awaken devotion, they are cast into the present
form. The EMBLEMS, the signification of which appeared uncertain or
DIVersified, are repeated under different heads. To shun interfering with
TYPES, many rich EMBLEMS, as of ZION, PRIESTS, etc. are wholly omitted, or but
slightly touched. To shun a tiresome length, and a sinking dullness, that which
was just before hinted on a similar EMBLEM, is not seldom passed over; and the
history of EMBLEMS is lest to be collected from the account of the OBJECTS
which they represent; nor on THIS are ought but hints offered, and the
enlargement is left to the reader's own meditation. What friendly indulgence is
requisite to pardon mistakes, the peruser must judge. Meanwhile, it is hoped he
will remember, that the espial of faults is much easier work than to avoid them.

The CONTENTS.
BOOK I.

A general view of the FIGURES of scripture language, p. 1. -- 11.

BOOK II.

Explication of METAPHORS respecting PERSONS, viz. God, p. 11. -- Christ, 39.
-- The Holy Ghost, 109. -- Holy angels, 116. -- Fallen angels, 119. -- Men in
general, 125. -- Saints, 138. -- Wicked men, 184. -- Faithful ministers, 209.
-- False teachers, 223. -- The true church, 229. -- Corrupt churches,
Antichrist, 250. -- Nations, Jews, Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, Persians,
Greeks, Romans, Tyrians, Saracens, Turks; armies, families, 257.

BOOK III.

Explication of METAPHORS respecting THINGS, viz. God's purpose and providence,
289. -- Covenants of works and grace, 295. -- Word of God, 297. -- Law and
gospel, 306. -- Gospel Dispensation and ordinances, 318. -- God's favor, and
gifts of change of state and nature; justification, sanctification, fellowship
with God, 327. -- Saving grace, faith, hope, love, repentance, zeal, humility,
and exercise of grace, 339. -- Sin, in its state, course, kinds, temptations,
357. -- Prosperity, spiritual or temporal, 382. -- Adversity, 384. -- Human
life, 395. -- Opportunities of doing good, 399. -- Death, 402. -- The
resurrection, 405. -- The day of judgment, 407. -- This world, 409. -- The
state of glory in heaven, 411. -- Hell, 416.

N. B. The above contents show, that the ensuing work contains a whole system
of DIVine truth, represented in scripture-metaphors.

A BRIEF VIEW OF THE FIGURES, and EXPLICATION of METAPHORS, CONTAINED IN
SCRIPTURE.
BOOK I. Scripture Language in general.
IN the manner of the East, the language of inspiration abounds with the most
striking and instructive figures. In noble and candid simplicity, -- in bold
allusion, not all the writings of men can vie with these oracles of God. Here,
-- as one would expect in the idiom of Godhead, the principal truths are
brought down to the weakest capacity, that ignorance may have nothing to plead
for excuse; others, chiefly predictions, are often wrapped up in figures,
obscure, and hard to be understood. Thus, till the fulfillment, the learned are
forced to acknowledge their ignorance, and malicious opposers rendered
incapable to stop the predicted event.

The figures of sacred language are either SIMPLE or COMPLEX. The former,
without changing the native sense of the words, embellish the style, enliven
the representation, or illustrate the subject: the latter, while they ennoble
the style, and illustrate the subject, do also convert the terms, from their
ordinary signification, to another connected with it.

Simple figures are, 1. A REPETITION of the same term or phrase; whether in the
same, or in different sentences of a chapter, or section; as of MY, Psalm.
xviii. 1. 2. 3.; my God, Psalm. xxii. 1. and cxviii. 28.; my help, Psalm. cxxi.
1. 2.; -- whatsoever things are, Phil iv. 8.; his mercy endures for ever,
Psalm. cxxxvi.; Lord our Lord, etc. Psalm. viii. 1. 9. 2. DIVERSIFYING of the
sense, while the sound is nearly retained. Thus, Walk in the flesh; and war
after the flesh; agree pretty much in found, but differ vastly in sense. 3.
CHANGING of the sense of a word in the same sentence. Thus good, in Matthew. xix.
16. signifies, first, what is good and useful, in a limited sense; and then,
what is infinitely and originally good: fruit of the vine, Matthew. xxvi. 29.
both signifies natural wine, and eternal happiness. 4. CONFORMATION of the
sound of the terms, to the mournful, the joyful, the terrible, deterstable, or
amiable nature of the subject. Thus the portion of the wicked is described in
words sounding forth terror, Psalm. xi. 5. 6.; the last day, in most dreadful
language, 2 Pet. iii. 10. 12. 5. OUTCRIES of admiration, abhorrence, derision,
commendation, wishing, pity, joy, grief; as, How great is his goodness! Zech.
ix. 17. O wretched man that I am! etc. Romans vii. 24, O woman great is thy
says! Matthew. xv. 28. 6. CORRECTIONS of what was just before asserted; as, Yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. ii. 20. Yet not I, but the grace of God, 1
Cor. xv. 10. 7. In promises, the reward; and especially that which is terrible
in a threatening, complaint, or oath, is sometimes partly SUPPRESSED: as, He
shall be chief ana captain, 2 Samuel v. 8. I will drive him out, Genesis iii. 22.
Will thou cast me off? Psalm. vi. 3. Let me cease to exist, if I lie, Psalm.
lxxxix. 35. 8. Interrupting ADDRESSES: as, of Nehemiah to God, chap. iv. 4. 5.;
of God, by Joel, to the Hebrews, chap. ii. 12. 13.; of David to the mountains
of Gilboa; to the daughters of Israel; to Jonathan, 2 Samuel i. 21. 24. 25. 26.
9. INTRODUCTION of speeches, real or feigned: as, of the chosen ruler of Judah,
Is. iii. 7.; of their women, Is. iv. 1.; of the fir-trees, and of the dead, Is.
xiv. 8. 9.; of hell and destruction, Job xxviii. 22. When these speeches are
wicked, they are sometimes expressed, not as uttered by the author, but as they
truly meant. Thus, sinful means of relief are called a covenant with hell, and
agreement with death, Is. xxviii. 15.: flattering prophecies are called
deceits, Is. xxx. 10.: false witnesses are called sons of Belial, 1 Kings xxi.
10. 10. QUESTIONS, expressive of absurdity, wonder, doubt, demonstration,
expostulation, anger, insult, grief, negation, pity, desire, refusal,
prohibition: as, How can a man be born when he is old? John iii. 4. How
excellent is thy loving kindness! Psalm. xxxvi. 7. Shall Sarah, that is ninety
years old, bear? Genesis xvii. 17. Is anything too hard for the Lord? Genesis xviii.
14. etc. 11. APPEALS to those who are argued against: as, of the apostles to
the Jewish rulers, Acts iv. 19.; of Paul to the Galatians, chap. iii. 2. 12.
RETORTION, or throwing back an accusation or objection, on the starter of it.
So God throws back the charge of injustice on the Jews, who charged him with
it, Ezekiel. xviii.: the Syrophenician woman pleads the character of a dog, thrown
out against her, -- as an argument for mercy, Matthew. xv. 26. 27. To repel the
question, By what authority he acted? Jesus posed the inquirers, Whether the
baptism of John was from heaven, or of men? Matthew. xxi. 23. -- 25. 13.
PREVENTION of objections, by answering them before they be started: Thus the
objection, of God's deserting his church, is prevented, Is. xlix. 14. 15. 14.
An apparent YIELDING of that which an opposer pleads, in order to show its
absurdity; or its insufficiency to establish the point in dispute. So Paul
grants the Jews to have great knowledge of the law, and a capacity to instruct
others; -- in order to show them, how their sin in breaking the law was
aggravated, Romans ii. 17. -- 24. James grants the ungodly professor, that he had
faith; but shows that the devils also believed and trembled, Jam. ii. 19. 15.
ASSIGNATION of the reason of an action, or name. Thus, Paul was not ashamed of
the gospel, because it was the power of God for salvation to believers; and it
was so, because therein the righteousness of God was revealed, Romans i. 16. 17.
The law silenceth and condemns all men, because by it is the knowledge of sin;
and therefore, by the deeds of it shall no flesh be justified; Romans iii. 19.
20. No man can be saved by the law; because it works wrath in our corrupt
nature against God, and condemns us to his just wrath, Romans iv. 14. 15. 16.
Lively DESCRIPTIONS; which, as it were, present the objects to our eyes, and
other senses: as, of Tophet, Is. xxx. 33.; of Goliath, 1 Samuel xvii. 4. -- 6.; of
God's compassion, Jer. xxxi. 20. Hos. xi. 7. 8. 17. DIGRESSIONS; in which the
speaker, for a time, turns aside from his immediate subjects, and descants upon
an object occasionally mentioned. Thus the apostles often turn aside to
discourse concerning Jesus Christ: as Rev. i. 5. -- 8. Col. i. 14. -- 22. 18.
TRANSITIONS; in which one part of the sentence respects that which went before,
and another what follows. Thus, Covet earnestly the best gifts, respects what
precedes; and, I show you a more excellent way, that which follows, 1 Cor. xii.
31. 19. CONTRASTS; in which subjects dissimilar are compared, in order to mark
clearly the nature, value, or unworthiness of the one: so the condition of the
wicked is contrasted with that of the righteous, Psalm. i. God's kindness, and
men's unfruitfulness and wickedness, are contrasted, Is. v. 1. -- 4. Men and the
Holy Ghost are contrasted, Acts v. 4. 20. COMPARISON of things, like or unlike,
in order to argue from the one to the other. Thus Christ argues from the lesser
to the greater, Matthew. vi. 30. and vii. 11.; and that God is to feared rather
than men, Matthew. x. 28. 21. INDUCTION; by which compound things are represented
in their various parts. And here there is, generally, an ascending, as to the
object, or the language. Thus the desolation of a country is described from the
case of the fields, the inhabitants, people, priest, servant, master, seller,
buyer, etc. Is. xxiv. 1. 2. 3. God's just judgment is represented in his
rewarding the righteous, and punishing the wicked, Romans ii. 6. -- 9. The
resurrection is described, as partly to happiness, and partly to damnation,
John v. 28. 29. Christ's state is described, from the debased and exalted
circumstances of it, Phil. i. 6. -- 10. Thus the sin or the judgment of men is
often described, in a variety of particulars, Ezekiel. xxii. and xxiii. 22.
CROWDING of various qualities or things into one sentence: as, of sacrifices,
rams, bullocks, lambs, he-goats, vain oblations, new moons, sabbaths,
assemblies, Is. i. 11. 13. 14.; of foreknowledge, predestination, calling,
justificati^n, glorification, Romans viii. 29. 30. 23. REDOUBL^D REPRESENTATIONS;
in which objects are represent^d, first more obscurely, and then more plainly;
as, Har the right; attend to my cry: give car to my prayer, Psalm. xvii. 1.;
Water, and the Spirit, John iii. 5. Thy silver is become dross; thy wine is
mixed with water; thy princes are rebellious, and companions, of thieves, Is. i.
22. 23. 24. CIRCUMLOCUTIONS; in which, for modesty, or to sweeten or heighten
the language, the proper name of an object is avoided, and an indirect
description is given in its stead. So a chamber pot is called a vessel wherein
there is no pleasure, Jer. xxii. 2. 8. Urine is called the waters of the feet,
2 Kings xviii. 27. Heb. Death is called the king of terrors, Job xviii. 14. 25.
REFERENCES; in which the words, or sense of another speaker, or writer, are
quoted, or alluded to. Here the words are sometimes quoted, in a sense which
they did not originally seem to bear; and sometimes the terms or the sense of
Diverse passages are conjunctly quoted into one. -- Quotations or allusions
abound in the New Testament, Matthew. i. 23. and xxi. 4. 5. Acts vii. 43. etc.
etc.: concerning which, many excellent observations may be found in Carpzow's
Defense of the Bible.

Complex figures are, metonymy; synecdoche; meiosis; hyperbole; irony; metaphor.

By METONYMY, the name of one object is given to another, because of some
connection, not similitude, betwixt them. Thus, 1. The name of the matter, the
author, the cause, or instrument, is given to that which is produced from, or
by it; or the name of the effect is given to the author, cause, or instrument.
Thus the wood in the houses and furniture of Jerusalem is called a forest, Jer.
xxi. 14. Ezekiel. xx. 46.; the temple, for its plenty of cedar-wood that grew in
Lebanon, is called Lebanon, Zech. xi. 1.; a heavenly frame is called the
Spirit, Rev. i. 10.; the name of a father, as of Jacob, Moab, etc. is given to
his posterity, Is. xliii. 22. and xvi.; a testimony is called the mouth, Deuteronomy.
xvii. 6.; speech is called the tongue, Prove. xxv. 15.; the benefits God bestows
are called his love, 1 John iii. 1. Contrariwise, Christ is called salvation,
because he is the author of it, Genesis xlix. 18.; Esau's, taking Canaanitish
wives is called a grief, i. e. a cause of grief, Genesis xxvi. 35.; the gospel is
called the power of God, i. e. the instrument of exerting it, Romans i. 16.;
victory over the world is called faith, as faith obtains it, 1 John v. 4.; the
transgression of Israel is called Samaria; and the high places of Judah,
Jerusalem; because these cities chiefly promoted wickedness and idolatry, Mic.
i. 5; wisdom and knowledge are called stability, because they are the means of
it, Is. xxxiii. 6. 2. The name of a subject is given to its adjunct; and of an
adjunct to its subject. Thus a city, a country, the earth, the world, is put
for the inhabitants of it, Jer. iv. 29. Genesis vi. 11.; a cup, for that which is
contained in it, 1 Cor. xi. 25. This cup, etc. Psalm. xxxiii. 4.; a nest for the
pullets in it, Deuteronomy xxii. 11.; the heart, for the desires, or other things,
contained in it, Psalm. lxii. 8.; Pour out your hearts. The name of a possessor,
is given to what is possessed; so Christ's people are called himself, Matthew.
xxv. 35. -- 45. Acts ix. 4. 1 Cor. xii. 12.; so the Lord, i. e. what offerings
belonged to him, is called Levi's inheritance, Deuteronomy. x. 9. The name of the
thing signified is given to the sign; so the wine in the Lord's supper is
called Christ's blood, or the New Testament in it, Matthew. xxvi. 26.; and of the
sign to the thing signified; the sovereign rule is called a scepter, Genesis xlix.
10. The name of the quality is given to its subject; so a scarlet and crimson
colored thing is called scarlet and crimson, Is. i. 18. The name of that which
is contained, is given to that which contains it; so fields are called the
upper and nether springs, Josh. xv. 19. 3. Names are put for the person or
thing named; so the name of Christ, or of God, often signifies precisely
Christ, or God himself, Acts iv. 12. Deuteronomy xxviii. 58. 4. Persons and things are
named according to appearance, not reality: so angels are called men, Genesis
xviii.; Satan is called Samuel, 1 Samuel xxviii. 14. -- 20.; error is called a
gospel, Gal. i. 6*

By SYNCEDOCHE, 1. More universal terms are put for such as are more
restricted: as ALL, for many; for all kinds; for the greater or better part,
Matthew. iii. 5. and xix. 28.; the world, for the Roman empire, the Gentiles, the
wicked, the Antichristians, Luke ii. 1. 1 John ii. 2. and v. 18. Rev. xiii. 8.;
every creature, for men, Mark xvi. 15.; or the plural number for the singular,
as children, for child, Genesis xxi. 7. 2. More restricted terms are put for such
as are more extensive: as, one for all of the kind, Psalm. i. 1.; yesterday, for
time past, Heb. xiii. 8,; a limited number, as thrice, seven, or ten times, for
frequently, 2 Cor. xii. 8. Psalm. cxix. 164.; a thousand, five thousand, for an
uncertain number, Is. xxx. 17. 3. A whole person, thing, place, or time, is put
for an adjunct or part of it. So Christ is said to die; to be buried; when only
his body died, and was buried, John xix. 42. and ii. 13.; world is put for
Canaan, Romans iv. 13.; north for Caldea, Jer. i. 13. for ever, for a long time,
Dan. ii. 4. 4. A part of a person, thing, place, or time, is put for the whole
of it. So souls denote human persons, Acts ii. 41; resurrection is put for
Christ's whole appearance in our nature, Acts i. 22.; hour for a period of
time, John iv. 23.

By MEIOSIS, a great deal less is expressed, than is really signified. Thus, in
the negative precepts, much more is intended than is literally expressed, Exodus
xx. 3. -- 17.

By HYPERBOLE, things are represented, as far more insignificant, great,
glorious, or numerous, than they really are. So the Hebrew spies are
represented as grasshoppers, Numb. xiii. 33.; the top of a tower or wall is
said to reach to heaven, Genesis xi. 4. Deuteronomy. xi. 1.; the histories of all
Christ's works could not be contained, rather perused, by the world, John xxi.
25.; the Israelites are represented, as in number like to the sand on the sea
shore, or dust of the earth, Genesis xiii 16. and xxii. 17.; so contentions are
called wars, Jam. iv. 1.; plenty of milk, honey, and butter, or oil, is
represented as rivers of it, Job. xxix. 6.; Saul and Jonathan are represented
as swifter than eagles, and stronger than lions, 2 Samuel i. 23. The terms of
this figure must always be understood with due limitation.

By IRONY, words are uttered with such an air, or other circumstance, as makes
them bear a signification quite contrary to their common one: as, Let them, the
false gods, rise up and help you, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 38. Bless God, and die, Job. ii.
12. Rejoice, O young man, etc. Eccl. xi. 9. Sleep on now, etc. Matthew. xxvi. 45.
Cry aloud; for he is a God, etc. 1 Kings xviii. 27. Go up and prosper; for the
Lord shall deliver it, etc. 1 Kings xxii. 15. When the irony is extremely sharp
and reproachful, it is called a sarcasm, as a goodly price, etc. Zech. xi. 13.
How glorious was the King of Israel to day! 2 Samuel vi. 20. He trusted in God,
Psalm. xxii. 8.

By METAPHOR, the names, qualities, and actions, proper to some persons or
things, are ascribed to other persons or things, because of some likeness
between them. These of rational beings, are ascribed to other rational beings;
so Satan is called a god; ministers angels, etc. Those of inanimate things, to
other inanimate things; so, God's purpose, or gospel, is called a foundation,
etc. These of living creatures, to things without life: so the creation is said
to groan, to travail, to will, etc. Those of things without life, to such as
have it; so Christ is called a way, a door, the truth, etc. -- That, by
comparing the volumes of nature with the oracles of God, we may be always, and
everywhere, surrounded with spiritual monitors. No figure is more frequent
than this: nor is there almost any thing in nature, from which it is not drawn.
Particularly, 1. From RATIONAL BEINGS: as God, holy angels, devils; chiefly
from men, in their PARTS, soul, body, flesh, blood, bones, head, face, eyes,
ears, nose, mouth, cheeks, locks, hair, neck, shoulder, back, belly, hands,
loins, bowels, navel, bosom, knees, legs, feet; in their RELATIONS, marriage,
husband, spouse, men, women, virgins, young men, fathers, mothers, sons,
daughters, children, babes, widows, masters, servants, kings, judges, captains,
subjects, soldiers, army, shepherds, teachers, merchants, Caananites, Arabians,
Sodom, Gomorrah, Babylon, Egypt; in their ADJUNCTS, life, health, strength,
beauty, wounds, sickness, leanness, lameness, blindness, plague, consumption,
death, burial; and in their SENSATIONS, of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting,
feeling hunger, thirst; with their RELATIVES, comely, green, red, white, black,
ugly, sweet, bitter, loathsome, hard, soft; in their ACTIONS, to eat, drink,
stay, stanp, walk, run, gird, care, fight, steal, rob, beget, etc. 2. From
BEASTS, fowls, birds, eagles, pelicans, owls, doves, hens, sparrows, flies,
bees, locusts, grasshoppers, lions, unicorns, leopards, bears, boars, wolves,
foxes, hinds, hearts, roes, goats, kids, horse, bullocks, kine, heifers, asses,
wild-asses, dromedaries, dogs, swine, sheep, rams, lambs, dragons, serpents,
asps, vipers, scorpions, worms, spiders, fishes; with their ADJUNCTS, tail,
horns, teeth, wings, scales, sting, fat, milk; and ACTIONS, to bite, sting,
swallow, tear, fly, etc. 3. From THINGS CELESTIAD, heaven, firmament, light,
sun, moon, stars, clouds, vapor; shadow, darkness, rain, dew, wind, hail,
snow, thunder, tempest, lightning, rainbow, etc. 4. From fire, flame, coal,
brand, fuel, furnace, smoke, light, heat, burning. 5. From LIQUID SUBSTANCES,
water, sea, fountain, rivers, streams, brooks, cisterns, channels, banks,
flowing, overflowing, breaking out, dropping, swelling, honey, wine, oil, etc
6. From THINGS EARTHLY, dust, sand, mountains, hills, Carmel, Lebanon Sharon,
Bashan, earth, rocks, dens, deeps, pits, valleys, fields, gardens, ways,
deserts, dirt, dung, stones, gold, silver, brass, iron, tin, lead, carbuneles,
agates, adama^ts, sardine, sapphire, jasper, emerald, j^wels nitre, brimstone,
salt, pearl woods, trees, cedars, fi^s oak^ tyles, Shittahs, palms,
a^p^e-trees, pomegran^tes, myrtles, olives, vines, thorns, brters, flowers,
myrrh, camphire, spikenard, ^innamon, lilies, ^^mwood, nettles, grass, corn,
seed, root, leaves, branches, b^^s, plants, fruit, mandrakes, apples, grap^s,
wheat, barley, chaff, plowing, sowing, planting, reaping, threshing, innowing,
sifting, grinding, harvest, vintage, grape treading, leaven, bread, earthquake,
etc. 7. From human ACCOMMODATIONS and UTENSILS, kingdom, nation, country, city,
house, chamber, foundation, wall, pillar, corner, window, gate, door, bed, bar,
beam, raster, gallery, fort, prison, grave, food, feast, supper, morsel, table,
vessel, cover, garment, girdle, yoke, bond, cord, rope, mirror, rod, armor,
sword, sheath, shield, spear, helmet, bow, arrows, quiver, staff, chariot,
bridle, race, prize, price, spoil, measure, balances, weights, scales, wealth,
treasure, inheritance, debt, wages, handwriting, testament, crown, scepter,
throne, guard, ship, nail, hammer, net. 8. From DURATION of time, year, month,
week, day, night, watch of the night, morning, noon, evening, hour, moment. 9.
From Old Testament TYPES, and New Testament INSTITUTIONS; as from Adam, David,
Solomon, Israel, priests, Levites, Canaan, Jerusalem, Zion, tabernacle, temple,
holy of holies, altar, mercy-seat, sacrifices, first fruits, circumcision,
sprinkling of blood, anointing with oil, new moons, passover, feast of
tabernacles, baptism, etc.

To understand Metaphors, it must be observed, that the foundation thereof is
LIKENESS between the things from which the metaphor is drawn, and that to which
it is applied. When this likeness is exhibited in one or a few expressions, it
is a SIMPLE METAPHOR, When it is pursued with a variety of expressions, or
there is a continued assemblage of metaphors, it is called an ALLEGORY. When
the resemblance is harsh and far fetched, as to set a voice, it is a
CATACHRESIS. When it is couched in a short saying, obscure and ambiguous, it is
called a RIDDLE. When it is couched in a short saying commonly used, it is
termed a PROVERB. When the metaphoric representation is delivered in form of a
history, it is a PARABLE. 2. Because every thing has various qualities and
operations, one thing may be the metaphorical emblem of persons or things
different, or contrary: so a LION is the emblem of God, of Christ, of Satan,
and of men, good and bad. 3. The difference between the emblem, and the object
of the metaphor; that is, between that from which the metaphor is drawn, and
that which it exhibits, renders it impossible for any metaphor fully to
represent its object, and absurd to expect, that an universal similitude
betwixt the emblem and the object should ever be found. 4. Hence it sollows,
that to squeeze metaphors, by running the parallel further than truth and
decency, with respect to the emblem and object, will admit, is not to
illustrate, but to discredit and darken the mysteries of God. 5. Nay, in the
sacred metaphors, one particular is generally the principal thing thereby
exhibited. THIS, by the attentive reader or preacher, should, from the
circumstances of the text or context, be especially enquired after, and
considered

BOOK II.
Metaphors representing Persons.

CHAP I*
Metaphors respecting God

1. GOD is compared to a MAN, because of his wisdom and prudence; his manifold
excellency; his extensive sovereignty; his dominion over, and tender affection
toward his creatures. Things respecting man, almost innumerable, are DIVinely
constituted the emblems of his perfections and works. He is called the HEAD of
Christ; to him, as man and Mediator, he is the undoubted superior; and he
supports, rules, and directs him, as such 1 Cor. xi. 3. John xiv. 2^.
. His countenance and face, when represented as set against any, denote the
manifestation of his indignation and wrath Psalm. lxviii. 1. Ezekiel. xiv. 28.
. In other circumstances, they signify the discovery of of his glory, his
favor and grace Dan. ix. 17.
. Commonly his eyes import his knowledge; his care; his favor, and regard; but
sometimes they mean the display of his wrath Heb. iv. 13. Deuteronomy. xi. 12. Psalm.
xxxi. 8. and xviii. 8. Amos ix. 4. Is. iii. 8.
. His ears denote his perfect knowledge; his exact observation, and favorable
regard James v. 4. Psalm. x 17. and cxxx. 2.
. His nostrils and nose signify his anger, his approbation, and his exact
judgment Psalm. xviii. 8. Is. lxv. 5.
. His mouth and lips denote his will; his authority; his word; his command; his
wrath Deuteronomy. viii. 3. Is. xi. 3. and xxx. 27.
. His back imports his anger and disregard Jer. xviii. 17. Is. xxxviii. 17.
. His back parts denote discoveries of his glory and goodness; -- but such as
are scanty and obscure, in respect of our immediate vision of him, face to
face, in heaven Exodus xxxiii. 23.
. His arms, his hands, his fingers, denote his almighty power manifested in
acts of sovereignty, justice, bounty, and grace Jer. xxxii. 17. Exodus xv. 16
Psalm. xxxi. 6.
. His right hand imports a signal display of his almighty power, his love,
mercy, or wrath Psalm. xxx. 6. Song ii. 5. Exodus xv 6.
. But, as relating to the exalted station of Christ, it imports the highest
power, authority, glory, and dignity Psalm. cx. 1. 5.
. The hollow of his hand, denotes his easy comprehension, protection, and
support of all things Is. xl. 12. Prove. xxx 4.
. His soul is his nature, his holiness, and love Lev. xxvi. 11. Jer. xxxii. 39.
40.
. His heart is his essence; his will; purpose; pleasure; and grace Genesis vi. 6*
and viii 21. Jer. xix. 5. and xxxii. 41.
. His bowels are his most ardent love; his tender mercy; and unbounded
compassion Is. lxiii. 15
. His bosom imports secrecy; safety; eminent nearness; amazing intimacy; and
endeared love Psalm. lxxvi. 11. John i 18.
. His feet are the less glorious manifestations of his presence; the exercise
of his power and providence, for the relief of his people, and the overthrow of
his enemies Is. lxvi. 1. and lx. 13. Psalm. lxxvi. 3.
.

His joy imports his DIVine pleasure; approbation; and delight Psalm. civ. 31.
Deuteronomy xxviii. 9.
. His hatred, anger, wrath, fury, denote his fixed, high, and holy displeasure
with sin, and sinners; and his awful displays thereof, in his righteous
judgment Psalm. v. 4. -- 6. and vii. 10. Jer. ix. 9.
. His sadness and grief import, his just displeasure, and righteous
withdrawment of favor Is. lxiii. 20. Ezekiel. vi. 9.
. His grief for the misery of his people, denotes his tender mercy; his
infinite compassion toward them Judge. x. 16.
. His repentance imports the changing, not of his mind and purpose, but of the
course of his providential work Genesis iv. 6. 1 Samuel xv. 26.
. His jealousy, denotes his distrust of his creatures; his tender regard of his
honor; his love to his people, and his indignation against his enemies Exodus
xx. 6. Zech. i. 14. 15.
. His knowledge imports his clear view of all things his discovery of secrets;
his approbation and love John xxi. 17. Matthew. vii. 23. Genesis xxii. 12.
. His thoughts, are his purposes; and his judgment concerning things Jer. xxix.
11. Is. lix. 8.
.

His enquiry and search, imports the perfection and infallibility of his
knowledge; his patient and convincing procedure against transgressors; and his
discovery of things that are hid Genesis iii. 9. -- 13. and iv. 10. and xviii. 21.
. His remembrance, denotes his extensive knowledge and observation; with the
signal displays of his pity, favor, or wrath Psalm. cxxxvi. 23. and xxv. 7.
Rev. xviii. 5.
. His remembering sin, imports his punishing men on account of it: his not
remembering it, denotes his gracious forgiving of it Psalm. lxxix. 8. Heb. viii.
11.
. His forgetting persons, imports his disregarding and exposing them to
affliction and misery Psalm xiii. 1. and ix 18.
. His hissing for men, denotes his easy and sudden assembling, and bringing
them to execute his judgments Is. v. 26. and vii. 18.
. His breath or breatbing signifies the exercise of his power, in the easy
formation of man; in the ready destruction of his enemies, or the deliverance
of his people Genesis ii. 7. Ezekiel. xxi. 31. Is xi. 4.
. His mocking and laughing at men, denotes his pleasure in their just
punishment; his full security from, and disregard of their wicked attempts
against his interests; and his contemning the prayers which they present to him
in their affliction Psalm. ii. 4. Prove. i. 26.
. His crying out, imports his earnest invitation of sinful men to accept his
favors, and return to their duty; and his severe correction and punishment of
those that obstinately offend him Prove. i. 22. Is. xlii. 13. Mic. vi. 9.
. His speaking, signifies the virtue of his will; his forming a voice in the
air; his declaring his mind to men, by his Spirit, his word, or his providence
Genesis i. 3. Exodus xx. 1. Psalm. lxxxv. 8. 2 Samuel xxiii. 3. Psalm. ii. 5.
. His rebukes, imports his convincing men of sin; his correcting and punishing
them for it; and his restraining of things John. xvi. 9. Is. xvii. 1^. Psalm.
civ. 7.
. His calling things, signifies his easy forming, exciting, and managing of
them: his calling persons, imports his authoritative sending them to an office;
and earnest inviting and drawing them to their duty and privilege Psalm. cv. 16.
Romans iv. 17. Heb. v. 4. and iii. 1.
.

His commanding things, imports his making them do whatsoever he pleases Is.
v. 6.
. His being commanded by his people, signifies his ready fulfillment of his
gracious promises, whenever they are pled by the prayer of faith Is. xlv. 11.
. His hearing, his giving ear to, and answering of prayer, imports his gracious
regard to and acceptance of it, and his readily granting the benefits therein
requested Psalm. iv. 1. and v. 1.
. His silence to men, denotes his sovereign delay to comfort or relieve them
Psalm. xxviii. 1.
. His shutting out prayer, and casting the dung of their sacrifices into men's
faces, imports his contempt and disregard of them: and, by his terrible
judgments, showing himself greatly displeased therewith Lam. iii. 8. Mal. ii. 3.
. His numbering of things, signifies his exact knowledge and perfect management
of them; his regard to, or wrathful destruction of, them Psalm. lvi. 8. Dan. v.
28.
. His selling of men, imports his apparently renouncing of his favorable claim
to them; and giving them up into the hand of their enemies, for the vindication
of his holiness, and satisfaction of his justice Judge. ii. 14. Psalm. xliv. 12.
. His selling his favors, denotes his open offer, his deliberate and gracious
bestowal of them on Christ's account Is. lv 1.
. His buying men, signifies his delivering them from misery; his bringing them
into an outward church state of nearness to himself; or his bringing them into
a newcovenant state through the blood of his Son Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6. 2 Pet. ii. ^.
1 Cor. vi. 19.
. His redeeming men, is his recovering them, by price or by power, to former
felicity; chiefly his recovering them from sin and misery through the price of
his Son's blood, and the power of his holy Spirit, to everlasting holiness and
happiness Is. xlviii. 11. 1 Pet. i. 19.
. His labor or working, is his almighty, his wise production, upholding,
actuating, and ruling of all things John v. 17.
. His resting, imports his ceasing from his work of creation; his taking
pleasure in his creatures; his forbearing signally to interpose between
contending nations Exodus xxxi. 17. Is. xix. 4.
His resting in the tabernacle or temple, or in Zion, imports the lasting
continuance of the cloud of his glory there: and the fixed continuance of his
gracious influences and good will in the church Psalm. cxxxii. 14.
.

His wiping away men's tears, denotes his removing all occasions of grief, and
filling them with comfort and joy Rev. vii. 17.
. His wiping out persons or things, imports his angry, his easy, and sudden
destruction of them from off the face of the earth 2 Kings xxi. 13
. His binding angels, or men, signifies his severely afflicting them; his
powerful restraint of their motions and work Job. xxxv. 8.
. His tea^ing men, his wounding and making them sore, import his severe,
shocking, and painful afflicting of them in soul or body Job. v. 18.
. His binding men up, imports his kindly redressing their grievances, and
healing the plagues, the griefs, the diseases, of their soul Hos vi. 1.
. His girding men, denotes his fitting and preparing them for their work; his
rendering them powerful and active therein Psalm. xviii. 32.
. His loosing, imports his taking off restraints; his conferring liberty, ease,
and felicity, temporal and spiritual Psalm. cxlvi. 7.
. But his loosing the bands of kings, denotes his depriving them of their
power, their honor and authority Is xlv. 1. Job. xii. 18.
. His opening his hand, imports the ready, the free, the large, the liberal,
communication of his favors and influence Psalm. cxlv. 16.
. His opening a door to the apostles, imports his giving them great opportunity
to preach the gospel with success 1 Cor. xv^. 9.
. His opening the door of faith to the Gentiles, denotes his offering them
Christ, and his salvation, in the preached gospel; and giving them faith to
receive the same Acts xiv. 29.
. His opening the heart, imports his convincing the conscience; his
enlightening the mind; his renewing the will, and stirring up the affections,
to embrace Christ, his unspeakable gift, in the word Acts xvi. 14.
. His knocking at the door of men's heart, implies his inviting and commanding
them by his word, his alarming them by his providence, and exciting them by the
striving of his Spirit, to receive himself in his Son into their heart Rev. iii
20.
. His holding one's hand, implies his directing, upholding, and succeeding him
in his work Is. xlii. 6. and xlv. 1.
. His concluding men in sin, signifies his permitting them to harden themselves
in it; his solemn declaration of their being guilty of it, and by nature fixed
in a state of it Gal. iii. 22. Romans xi. 32.
. His shutting men up, denotes his bereaving them of their liberty, and laying
them under sore affliction Job xii. 14.
.

His trying men, imports his making a discovery of their state and quality; his
purging them, by means of trouble, from their corruption; his destroying them
in his just indignation Psalm. xvii. 3.
. His breaking men, imports his awfully chastising, or wrathfully punishing
them Is. xxxviii. 13.
. His sifting his people, denotes his toffing, afflicting, and correcting of
them, while he wonderfully preserves them Amos ix. 9.
. His sifting the nations, signifies his severely punishing and scattering them
Is. xxx. 28.
. His shaving men, and making them bald, imports his depriving them of their
number, their wealth, their glory Is. iii. 17. and vii. ^0.
. His stripping men naked, implies his bereaving them of their safety, their
riches; and exposing them to trouble, shame, and reproach ^z^k. xxiii. 26.
. His blotting men's names from under heaven, imports his destroying them
utterly, and causing their remembrance to cease Deuteronomy. xxix 20.
. His devouring and swallowing up, signifies his easy, his sudden, his
terrible, his utter destruction of an object Is. xxv. 8.
. His pouring out, imports the heavenly, the gradual, the regular, the abundant
communication of his spiritual influence, his merciful favors, or wrathful
judgments Prove. i. 24. Is. xliv. 3. 4. 5. Psalm. lxxix. 5. 6.
. His hewing men, implies his alarming their conscience, or his hardening their
soul, and ripening it for destruction Hos. vi. 5.
. His stretching out the line of confusion upon a land, imports his giving it
up to desolating judgments, to the perplexing of the inliabitants, and the
putting of every thing in it out of due order Is. xxxiv. 11.
. His bearing, carrying, and upholding, implies his preserving inexistence, or
life; his bestowing of refreshful comfort; his protecting from injury; and his
governing, directing, and drawing in a right way Psalm. xlvi. 4. Psalm. cxlv. 14.
. His binding up men's souls in the bundle of lise with himself, imports his
kindly securing and promoting their life, their health, their prosperity, and
comfort 1 Samuel xxv. 29.
. His slinging out men's souls, implies his cutting them off by a sudden, a
violent, a wrathful exit ibid.
.

His making a way for his anger, signifies his providential ordering of events,
to promote the execution of his righteous judgments Psalm. lxxviii. 50.
. His making mountains his way, and exalting his high way, imports, that, to
the exaltation of his gracious designs and methods toward his people, he makes
ordinances, and even obstructions, subservient to further his work Is. xlix. 1.
. His weighing the mountains in scales, and comprehending the waters in a
measure, implies his full knowledge; his easy support; and management of all
things, even the greatest Is. xl* 12.
. His weighing men's spirits, imports his comprehensive knowledge of their
state, their frames, their qualities, and thoughts Prove. xvi 2.
. His weighing men's paths and prayer; his considering their meditation; implies
his most perfect acquaintance therewith, and his constant readiness to render a
due reward and proper answer to it Is. xxvi. 7. Psalm. v. 1. Job xxxi. 6.
. His searching Je usalem with lighted candles, imports his open discovery, and
punishing of the most secret sins thereof Zeph. i. 12.
. His blotting out sin, is his full and final pardon thereof, through the blood
of his Son Is. xliv. 21.
. His blotting men out of his book, signifies his casting off his providential
care of them on earth; his cutting them off by death; and his manifesting, by
wrathful events, that they were never written in his book of life, Exodus xxxii.
32. Rev. xxii. 18.
. His cutting men off from his hand, imports his taking them away by death, so
that their temporal life is no longer the object of his care or providence
Psalm. lxxxviii. 5.
.

His writing things in a book, denotes his perfect knowledge, exact
remembrance, and continued just regard to them Is. lxv. 6. and xlix^. 16.
. His writing bitter things against one, signifies his gradual afflicting of
him with severe and lasting ^^o^bles Job xiii. 26.
. His writing of his law in men's heart, and sealing them with his Spirit,
imports his applying his word, by his Spirit, to their heart; that they may be
conformed to his image and law; and comforted by his influence 2 Cor. iii. 3.
Jer. xxxi. 33.
. His writing men's names in heaven, in his book of life, with the living, or
with the righteous, imports his particular and fixed choice of them, with the
rest of the elect, to obtain everlasting life Luke x. 20. Rev. xiii. 8. Psalm.
ixix. 28. Is. iv. 3.
. His writing his name in their foreheads, imports his rendering them like him
in holiness; and enabling them to make an open profession of his truth Rev.
xiii. 12. and xiv. 1.
. His putting their tears into his battle, and making them in his book, imports
his kind observation, and careful rewarding of them Psalm. lvi. 8.
. His engraving of Christ the one corner stone, implies his forming of his
human nature; his furnishing it with all beautiful graces; and his severely
bruising, and deeply wounding him with the strokes of his wrath Zech iii 9.
. His breaking men's teeth, arms, or bow, imports his depriving them of ability,
of courage, of opportunity to oppress and do violence to others; or defend
themselves Psalm. x. 15. and lviii 6. H^s. i. 5.
. His putting his hook in their nose, and his bridle in their jaws, denotes his
checking their fury, and thwarting their projects Is. xxxvii. 29.
. His fanning men, imports his trying, his scattering, and destroying them
Matthew. iii. 2. Jer. xv. 7.
. His cutting off their spirit, signifies his taking away their wisdom, their
strength, their courage, or life Psalm. lxxvi. 1.
. His sweeping a land with the besom of destruction, imports his cutting off
the inhabitants by death, or giving them up for captivity and spoil; his
overturning the buildings, and rendering it desolate Is. xiv 23.
. His bruising Satan under the feet of his people, implies his restraining, his
conquering, and triumphing over him, in and by them Romans xvi. 20.
. His bruising, smiting, striking, wounding, of men, imports his laying heavy
afflictions on them Is. liii. 4. 10.
.

His sealing up men's hands, denotes his forbidding, his hindering them to act
Job xxxvii. 7.
. His sealing or sewing up iniquity in a bag, imports his exact knowledge of
it; his continued remembrance of it, and readiness to revenge it Job xiv. 17.
. His sealing up his people, denotes his particular protection of them in
danger; his confirming and marking them by his Spirit; his assuring them of his
special love 2 Cor. i. 23. Rev. vii. 3.
. His sealing of Christ, imports his sending him into the world with sufficient
authority and furniture to be the Mediator, Savior, Prophet, Priest, and King
of his church John vi. 27.
. His drawing of men, imports his freeing them from trouble; his bringing them
from a state of sin and misery; enabling them to receive his Son; and giving
them more and more intimate fellowship with himself Psalm. xviii 16. John vi 44.
Song i. 4.
. His pursuing men, his driving them away, imports his bringing sudden and
heavy judgments upon them, notwithstanding whatever they can do to prevent or
escape them; his quick and wrathful bereaving them of their outward property,
comfort, or life Lam. iii. 66. Prove. xiv. 32.
. His setting a hedge about men, denotes his favorable protection of them; or
his angry surrounding of them with manifold grievous afflictions Job. i. 10.
Lam. iii. 9.
. His removing the hedge, implies his exposing them to danger and ruin Psalm.
lxxx. 12. and lxxxix. 40.
. His treading men under his feet, imports his severe punishing of them; his
reducing them to the lowest plunge of contempt, misery, and want Lam. i. 5.
.

His seeing or looking to persons or things, implies his exact knowledge of
them; his gracious favor and approbation; the execution of his righteous
indignation Psalm. x. 11. and lxxxiv. 9. Numb. xvi. 1.
. Before him; before his eyes, or in his sight, is openly, boldly, well known
to him. Out of his sight, is out of his favor, deprived of his peculiar
displays of his love and and care; out of his peculiar land and church Genesis x.
9. 2 Kings xvi. 30. Genesis iv. 16.
. His hearing, denotes his fixed attention to, and exact knowledge of all
things; chiefly his gracious acceptance, and kind answering, of his people's
prayers Psalm. x. 16.
. His smelling and tasting import his unerring judgment, and gracious
approbation of things Exodus xix. 18. 25. 41. Hos. ix. 4.
. His touching. denotes his easy change and removal of things; his afflicting
of persons Psalm. civ. 32 and cxliv. 5.
. His sleeping, denotes his apparent indisserency about his cause and people;
his delaying to comfort or help them Psalm. xliv. 23. 24. Numb. x. 36. Psalm.
lxviii. 1.
. His awaking and rising up, imply his manifestation of his power, mercy, and
wrath, in favors of his people, and for the ruin of his enemies Psalm. xliv.
23. 24. Numb. x. 36. Psalm. lxviii. 1.
. His coming to men, his visiting and meeting them, imports his freely granting
them his comfortable presence, deliverance, or help; or his severely punishing
and afflicting them Exodus xx. 24. Genesis xxi. 1. Psalm. xvii. 3 Is. xxvii. 1.
. His going, or walking with men, signifies his pleasure to grant his
comfortable presence, abide with, do good to, uphold, and defend, and direct
them Lev. xxvi. 17. Genesis xlvi. 4.
. His walking contrary to men, imports his deliberate crossing of their
designs, and his executing his terrible judgments upon them Lev. xxvi. 24.
. His showing himself froward, or a wrestler, with the froward, signifies his
heaping of the most disagreeable and irresistible troubles upon them Psalm.
xiii. 26.
. His coming down, denotes his condescension; his manifestation of his peculiar
presence on earth, to favor and bless his people; and for the punishment and
destruction of his enemies Is. lxiv. 1. Genesis xi 5. 7.
. His going up signifies the ascent, or removal, of some visible-token of his
presence Genesis xxxv. 12.
. His returning to his place, imports the withdrawment of his favors; and his
coming out of it, denotes his beginning to display his perfections, in
executing judgment upon his opposers Hos. v. 15. Is. xxvi. 21.
. His returning on high, imports his open display of his glorious and
tremendous excellencies, and sovereign dominion, in helping and comforting his
people, and in avenging himself of his adversaries Psalm. vii. 7.
. His returning to men, denotes his showing them his glory and grace; and
bestowing his favors on them after a signal hiding, or withdrawment thereof
Psalm. vi. 4. 5.
. His hiding himself, his covering himself with a cloud, his standing afar off,
import his refusing to discover his glory and grace; and denying to bestow
sensible favors, to regard or grant men's requests, or to help them in a time
of need Psalm. xiii. 1. Lam. iii. 44. Psalm. x. 1.
. His riding on cherubims, represents his majestic employment of angels in the
adminstrations of his providence Psalm. xviii. 10.
. His riding on swift clouds, imports his awful and majestic, speed in
executing his manifold, his astonishing judgments Is. xix. 1.
. His running, his flying, denotes the quick, the easy progress of his
wrathful, or merciful providence ^uke xv 20. Psalm. x^iii. 10.
. His passing by iniquities, imports his forgiving them; and forbearing to
punish men on their account Mic. vii. 18.
. His passing through, or over a people or land, signifies his forbearing to
afflict them, or his humbling them by lighter strokes Amos vii. 3. and viii. 2.
Hos. x. 11.
.

His searching out a land, implies his wise allotment of it to a people; and
his preparing it for them Ezekiel. xx 6.
. His seeking and finding of men, imports his delight in men; and his
delivering them from their fallen state; or from the depths of apostasy,
distance, distress John iv. 23. Psalm. cxix. 176.
. His seeking, finding out, and visiting iniquity, denotes his discovering it,
and punishing men for it Genesis x^iv. 16. Exodus xx. 6.
. His finding out his enemies, implies his exact knowledge of their persons and
crimes; and his irresistible and easy execution of his vengeance upon them
Psalm. xxi. 8.
. His finding out Christ, imports his infinitely wise choice of him to be our
Mediator Psalm. lxxxix. 20.
. His anointing of persons, denotes his calling and furnishing them for an
office; or his giving them the Holy Ghost to sanctify, comfort, and strengthen
them Psalm. xiv. 7. 2 Cor. i. 21.
. His tempting a person, imports his trying his obedience; and calling him to
make aclear discovery of his real grace Genesis xxii. 1.
. His leading into temptation; his hardening, deceiving, blinding, or
sleepening men, imports his righteous exposure of them to such things as may
innocently occasion their sin; his withholding his preserving, softening,
directing, and awakening influences from them; and his permitting Satan, wicked
men, and their own lusts, to entice them to sin, and render them stupid and
obstinate, mistaken, ignorant, and careless therein Matthew. vi. 13. Exodus vii.
3. Ezekiel. xiv. 9. Romans xi. 8.
. His being disjointed from his professing people, implies how very
disagreeable it is to him, to be provoked to withdraw his special favors from
them Jer. vi. ^.
. His being made to serve with men's sins, signifies that his goodness, his
mercy, his patience, his ordinances, words, and works, are, by them, rendered
occasions to, and instruments of iniquity Is. xiiii. 24.
. His being wearied with, grieved by, and pressed under sin and sinners,
import, his being long and singularly provoked by their course of iniquity; and
his purposing speedily to punish the guilty transgressors Is. xliii. 24. Genesis
vi. 6. Am^s ii. 13.
.

God's place, or presence, denotes his being every where; his special
friendship, intimacy, and favor; or that part of creation, as Eden, the
tabernacle, temple, heaven, etc where some symbol of his glory is seen Psalm.
cxxxix. 7. Psalm. xxiv. 3. Genesis iv. 16
. His seat or throne, is Christ; his ordinances; heaven; or whatever he
displays his especial presence, majesty, and authority, in Heh. iv. 16. M^tth.
v. 34.
. His dwelling in Christ, in eternity; in heaven; in the hearts of his people;
in the temple, imports his abiding and delightful connection with them; and his
showing forth, and exerting the riches of his glory and grace in them 2 Cor. v.
19. Is. lvii. 15. Psalm. cxv. 3.
. His ^ootstool is the earth, where he vouchsafes but imperfect displays of
his excellency and brightness; and where he crusheth down and afflicts his
adversaries: and his tabernacle, temple, or ordinances; where he abides with
imperfect saints, and bestows but scanty views of his glory Is. lxvi. 1. Psalm.
cxix. 5.
. His standing imports his fitness to govern, and his readiness to help,
comfort, correct, or punish men Psalm. cix. 31.
. His sitting, denotes his supreme authority; his unlimited power; his ever
fixed happiness, and undisturbed repose His lifting up his hand, imports his
swearing, his giving the most solemn, firm, Psalm. ii. 4. and. xx^x. 10.
and evident security for a thing; his threatening of trouble; or his exerting
of his power Deuteronomy. xxxii. 40. Ezekiel. xx. 5. 6.
.

His life, denotes the eternal existence, activity, and happiness of his nature
Psalm. xviii. 46. Jer. x. 10.
. His days and years, signify his everlasting and unsuccessive duration; with
the distinguished seasons of his mighty works Dan. vii. 9. Psalm. lxxvii. 10.
. His being clothed with light, with majesty, with honor, zeal, etc. imports
his DIVine pleasure in his constant and glorious display of his wisdom,
holiness, power, greatness, authority, righteousness, kindness, or wrath Psalm.
xciii. 1. and civ. 1. 2. Is. li. 9. and lix. 17.
. His being armed, denotes his full sufficiency; his perpetual readiness to
conquer and protect his people, and to punish his enemies Is. lix. 17. 18.
. His bow, his strings, and arrows, his sword, his spear, and helmet, are his
power and justice, with the threatenings and instruments of his vengeance: or
his all-conquering and protecting love, promise, and grace Psalm. xxxv. 23. Lam.
ii. 4. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 41. Hab. iii. 11. Psalm. xlv. 3. 5.
. Wicked men are called his sword, and hand, because by them he executes his
afflictive designs Psalm. xvii. 13. 14.
. His buckler and banner denote his all powerful help, and protection of his
people, by means of his word, his providence, and grace Psalm. xxxv. 2. and lx.
4.
. His rod, his staff, and scepter, represent the direction, support, defense,
and correction of his people, according to his promise; and the destruction of
his enemies, according to his threatening: rod too denotes the instruments of
God's judgment Psalm. xxiii. 4. Mi^. vii. 14. Psalm. ii. 8. 9. Is. x. 5.
. The cup in his hand, is anger, wrath, ripe for execution; which is full of
mixture, as the judgments contained are numerous, various, and bitter Psalm.
lxxv. 8.
. And without mixture, as no mercy is mingled therewith in hell Rev. xiv. 10.
N. B. In Canaan wine was mixed with spices, to render it strong, Song viii. 2.
in Greece, wine was mixed with water, to render it weak.
. His chariots, are clouds, angels, and providence Psalm. lxviii. 17. Is. 19. 1.
. His chariotwheels are the wind, flames of fire, awful judgments, or rolling
clouds Psalm. lxv. 11.
. His riches are his fullness of majesty, glory, and grace, with all the blessed
effects thereof Phil. iv. 19.
. His treasures, are his power, vengeance, justice, gooodness, patience, or the
clouds and heavens Deuteronomy. xxxii. ^4. and xxviii. 12.
. His furnace is the execution of his just judgments, for the resining of his
people, and the ruin of his enemies Is. xxxi. 9.
. His lot and portion, is his chosen people, whom he esteems, delights in, and
from whom he receives a revenue of glory Deuteronomy. xxxii. 9.
. The Mosaic sacrifices are called his bread, and the wine-offerings
represented as chearing his heart: they were food dedicated to his service; and
he accepted and delighted in them, when offered in the faith of his promised
Son Numb. xxviii. 2. Psalm. civ.
. His book, is his predestining purpose; his infinite knowledge; his unfailing
remembrance; and exact providential care Is. iv. 3. Dan. xii. 1. Psalm. cxxxix.
16. Exodus xxxii. 32.
. His signet and seal, are what is very dear to him: chiefly his seal is his
holy Spirit Jer. xxii. 24. Ephesians. i. 13.
. -- My soul, Is every thing in me, every thing about me, an emblem of God? why
then are not the thoughts of him innumerable, and precious to me? why, when I
walk by the way, when I lie down or rise up, am not I still with him? Why does
not my God? my ALL, meet me in every view?

2. God is called the ANCIENT OF DAYS Dan. vii. 9.
: he is from everlasting to everlasting: when empires are overturned, and
nations destroyed, he continues ever the same. His garment white as snow, is
the purity of his nature; the brightness of his glory and majesty; and his
uncorruptness in judgment. His hair like pure wool, denotes his venerableness,
gravity, wisdom, and fitness for judgment. His fiery throne, denotes his awful
nature; his severe, irresistible, and piercing judgments: its fiery wheels, may
signify his clear and distinct view of all things, and the speedy, and terrible
execution of his sentences.

3. God is compared to a FATHER Jer. iii. 4.
. In the first person of the adorable Godhead, he, from eternity, begot our
Lord Jesus Christ. He is the contriver, purposer, former, and preserver of all
things. He is the author and source of all light, knowledge, glory, mercy, and
goodness. From eternity, he chose into the number of his children; in time, he
spiritually begets all his ransomed people: he bears, preserves, and comforts
them; he nourishes them with the flesh and blood of his Son; with the fullness
of his love; the influence of his Spirit; and the sincere milk of his word: he
clothes them with the imputed righteousness of his Son; the robe of implanted
grace; and of a glorious gospelconversation. Never is he judicially wroth with
any of his saints; but, to astonishment, loves and delights in their persons,
their graces, and good works: never does he hurt; but saves and defends them
from sin, Satan, and the world. He is especially tender of them, when they are
weak and afflicted. Himself he proposes for their copy and pattern: in every
point of due behavior, in all spiritual knowledge, godliness, and honesty, he
trains them up and instructs them; readily he hears their requests; grants them
every good thing; preserves them from evil, that it may not defile, hurt, or
grieve them: his honorable name he puts upon them; his holy Spirit within
them; and appoints his angels and ministers to guard, direct, and supply them.
In all their ways, he leads them, takes them by their arms, teaching them to
go: his word is their rule; his Spirit their comforter, instructor, and guide:
his church and ordinances are his chamber of fellowship with them; his heavenly
mansions he assigns for their habitation; affectionately he remembers and cares
for them, even while they seem to be cast out of his sight; graciously he
forgives their transgressions; he bears with their infirmities; and tenderly he
sympathizes with them under their troubles; he is exceedingly grieved and
dishonored by their offenses; and he wisely and kindly corrects them on
account thereof; every one of them he enriches with his fullness, and makes
heirs of his kingdom. In the promises of his word he dispones; in due time, he
actually bestows salvation, endless, unsearchable glory; nay, his infinite
Self, for their everlasting inheritance. -- Be thou, JEHOVAH, my father, and
the guide of my youth, my Father of glory, mercies, and comforts.

4. God is compared to a MASTER and HOUSEHOLDER. By him every mansion of heaven
and earth was erected and furnished; by him is the whole family of angels, men,
and every creature, ordered and settled. To every one he has assigned his
proper law, his station, and work. Angels and men he has peculiarly connected
with himself; and, by laying before them the most enriching and agreeable
rewards, and the most shocking and fearful punishments, he engages them to be
faithful in their respective rank and service. His family he instructs and
protects. Every thing necessary for their peace, their health, and happiness,
he richly provides. Those who are unruly, he corrects and punishes. Wicked
angels, and incorrigible men, he expels from his house. He has appointed a
day, in which he will call every rational servant to account, for his trust and
conduct. His peculiar family is his church among men: to this he gives peculiar
laws: this he governs, protects, and corrects; and rewards or punishes every
member according to his work. -- Lord, may I dwell in thy house, and be still
praising thee. Every where is a hell, if I am absent from my God.

5. God is compared to a KING. How infinite is his dignity; extensive his
renown; great his power; absolute his authority! To every reasonable creature
he gives laws and wisely governs, righteously rewards, or punishes them.
Heaven is his palace and throne. Angels and saints are his honorary guards. All
creatures are his armies. DIVine glory and greatness are his crown. Infinite
power, justice, and love are his scepter. Every lawful court on earth, every
man's breast, and the general judgment, are his courts of judicature:
conscience, magistrates, and ministers, are his deputies. The saved nations of
mankind are his queen, his children. The ancient, the everlasting council of
peace is the PRIVY, the governing fource of his whole administration. Our
adored Mediator is his Secretary, his Minister of state. The scriptures of
truth are the statutes of his kingdom, and the authentic records of his reign.
The sentences of free forgiveness, of undeserved happiness, or of everlasting
damnation, are the momentous edicts which proceed from his throne. -- "Thou art
my King, O God, command deliverance for Jacob."

6. God is compared to a JUDGE. With infinite wisdom and prudence; with
unblemished equity, terrible majesty, unbounded authority, power, and courage,
he maintains the honor of his sacred laws. Effectually he fists every man and
devil at his bar: solemnly and convincingly he charge them with their proper
deeds: authoritatively he pronounces, and infallibly he executes upon them,
the most righteous sentences, correspondent to the precept and the sanction of
his law. It is at the highest peril, if I, if any creature, despise him;
pretend to appeal from him; or find fault with his decisions. -- Lord, "enter
not into into judgment with thy servant," upon his own works; "for in thy sight
no living can be justified."

7. God is a swift WITNESS. How exact is his knowledge of all things! he is
infinitely true and faithful. Solemnly, by subscription and oath, he attests
the inspired declarations of truth; the glad tidings of great joy; the record
concerning his Son, -- That in him there is eternal life for sinners of
mankind, even the chief. In opposition to my wretched unbelief, he testifies to
my heart, I am God, even thy God. At the tremendous peril of calling, of
attempting to make the God of truth a liar, a perjured person, do I, and do you
children of men, hesitate a moment to believe the joyful sound? Your whole
conduct he knows; and according to his remembrance of it shall you be quickly
judged, and your eternal state fixed. Even now, ye wicked, he testifies of your
guilt by his judgments upon you; by his word unto you: but suddenly he shall
declare it to your face; publish it to the world; and hasten your endless ruin.
If God be my witness, what manner of person ought I to be "in all holy
conversation and godliness?"

8. God is compared to a CAPTAIN, and called the LORD OF HOSTS. It is his to
levy, to march, to muster, and manage every army upon earth. It is his to
appoint, to arm, to strengthen, direct, and make all his creatures to fight
against his enemies; and to protect his chosen subjects. He enlists his people
under his banner of truth, and of love. He teaches them the spiritual warfare;
gives them the whole "armor of righteousness, on the right hand and on the
left*" and directs, encourages, and enableth them to use it aright. To every
one he prescribes his proper station and work; chooses for them the field, and
manner of conflict; safely he leads them on; secures them from death; heals
their wounds; procures them complete victory; and bestows on them an
everlasting reward. -- Let me always follow him, and fight under his protection.

9. God is styled a MAN OF WAR, or expert warrior. With unbounded wisdom,
equity, power, and courage, he manageth every temporal, every spiritual warfare
on earth. His chosen people he conquers by the sword of his Spirit, and the
power of his grace. His, and their enemies, he seasonably, secretly, suddenly,
boldly, and furiously attacks, routs, and destroys. Thus he advances his
honor; extends his peculiar dominion; protects his friends; and enricheth them
with his spoil. -- Against my corruptions, Lord, draw out the spear and shield;
stain all thy raiment with their blood.

10. God is likened to a GIANT; because of his unbounded might, bold courage,
and awful terror. No creature is able, nor without infinite peril dares to
oppose him. With ease he dismays, discomfits, and rains his enemies. Fearfully
he often corrects his friends, and makes them to tremble under his hand. "Stand
in awe," my soul, "and sin not Fear him that is able to cast soul and body into
hellfire; yea, I say, Fear him?" And be thou strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might.

11. God is compared to an HUSBAND. By the invitations of his word, and
exercise of his providence, he wooeth his chosen people. He enters into
marriage covenant with them, and they become his. He dwells with, and in them,
according to his infinite knowledge and love, Other members of the visible
church are united to him by external relation, and share of his common favors:
but those he peculiarly provides for, counsels, comforts, protects, and
cherishes: nor does he ever leave them, or forsake them. -- Is my Maker my
husband! is the Lord of hosts his name? the God of the whole earth MAY he be
called.

12. God is compared to an HUSBANDMAN John xv. 1. Is. v. 1. -- 6.
. The universal frame of nature, the whole vineyard of his church, and outfield
wilderness of this world, is of his plantation; and is under his care and
management. This he Divides, hedgeth, defends, plants with men, good or bad,
as he pleases. According to the benefits he bestows, is the fruit he requires.
In the rich pastures of prosperity are many sinners, through their own
corruption, fed for the slaughter of endless ruin. His own Son he planted in
the barren soil of our nature; raised him up a plant of renown, the growth, the
branch of the Lord: in death he cut him down, and trod him to dust, in the
wine-fat of his indignation: he raised him again, and gave him glory; that our
faith and hope might be in God. At infinite expense of power, love, care,
meritorious suffering, and DIVine intercession, he plants, he manageth, the
vineyard of his church. The stones of Heathenism, Popery, and like
abominations, he gradually digs out. The wine press of ordinances, he
graciously erects. Her members he DIVides into their proper place and station.
With rules of government, and with his special protection, he hedgeth her
about. He sows her with the good seed of his word, and plants her with his
precious saints. Every one of these he forms into a fruitful field, and
delightful vineyard for himself. By breaking, by melting, and removing their
hardness and obduracy, he digs out the stones of their heart: by convincing,
enlightening and renewing influence, he ploughs up its fallow ground and sows
therein the good seed of his grace. It is thine O JEHOVAH, to weed, to prune
thy vineyard, by sanctified affliction, and sin-killing influence: to water it
with the heavenly dew, the blessed rain of thy word and Spirit: thine to purge
the world, by rooting out, by lopping off the noxious, the luxuriant
transgressors; and to water it with the drops of prosperity. Angels, ministers,
and magistrates, are employed to labor in, cultivate, and protect thy
husbandry. Thine all-seeing eyes are ever on it, to show thyself strong in the
behalf of them that fear thee. But such as bring not forth good fruit, will thou give up to the stroke of thy wrath, and at last to the vengeance of hell
fire. -- May I, Lord, be thy husbandry: plant me in Christ; sow to me, in his
righteousness; so shall I reap in mercy.

13. God is compared to a SHEPHERU Psalm. xxiii. 1.
. He forms his people to be the sheep of his pasture. By his providence, by his
word, and chiefly by his Spirit, he gathers them out from an evil world that
lies in wickedness; and feeds, refreshes, leads, heals, and protects them. --
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.

14. God is compared to a GUIDE Psalm. xlviii. 14.
. The proper course of every creature he fully understands; and directs them in
their respective motions. His conduct is the most perfect pattern. It is his to
recover his bewildered chosen; to bring them into the way that leads unto
life; to comfort, direct, defend, and keep them in it; to reduce them from
every wandering; and at last usher them safely into everlasting glory and
happiness. -- Is this, my soul, thy God, and thy guide even unto death? Shall
he guide me with his counsel while here, and afterward bring me to glory?

15. God is compared to a HUNTER Job. x. 16.
. How great is his activity; he slumbers not, nor sleeps; quickly his vengeance
overtaketh his enemies; nor can any escape out of his hand. His chastisements
of his people are severe, terrible, and disturbing -- How often, by inward
terrors, and outward troubles, has he hunted my soul as a lion!

16. God is compared to a BUILDER Heb. iii. 4.
. In his eternal purpose he wisely planned; in time he skilfully formed, the
whole structure of heaven and earth, and all that is therein. Upon his own
power and will he laid the foundation. Gradually he finished, and marvellously
he connected, and adorned his work. Wisely he rears up the body of every animal
for its particular use. In a gradual, a well-connected, comely, and mavelous
manner, he fashions the bodies and persons of men. By increasing their number
and prosperity, he builds up particular families on earth. According to his
eternal purpose, he raises up, strengthens, and embellisheth the nations: and
when they are corrupted and wasted with sin, he pulls them down, and rears up
others in their stead. In his everlasting love, in the blood of his Son, he
lays the foundation of our salvation, and of his church, and of the work of
grace in his people's hearts. Gradually he carries forward the erection, till
it be perfected in that endless felicity, that house eternal in the heavens,
which he has prepared and furnished for them that love him.

17. God is compared to a POTTER Is. lxiv. 8.
. With infinite care and skill he formed all things according to his purpose
and pleasure. In the most different forms, and for the most different ends, he
fashioned his creatures. Many of them he formed out of the clay and dust of the
earth. Some angels and men he sovereignly appointed to everlasting honor;
others, for their sin, to everlasting shame and contempt. At his pleasure, he
disposes of things, of persons, and nations; and wonderfully he preserves
them amidst their native frailty and weakness -- Never, my soul, say to him,
Why have thou made, why have thou used me thus?

18. God compares himself to a TRAVAILING WOMAN Is. xlii. 14.
. In infinite tenderness to, and care for his children, he, after a while's
patient restraint of the breath, the blast, of his judgments, cries aloud in
his terrible providence; and to the confusion of his enemies, brings forth
great deliverance to them, and rejoiceth therein. -- Lord, how excellent is thy
loving kindness!

19. God is compared to an EAGLE Deuteronomy. xx^ii. 11. 12.
. How high his excellency and sovereign dominion over all things! How infinite
his knowledge, and exact his observation! How great his strength! how eminent
his duration, and care to provide for, uphold, cherish, and preferve his
people! By the exercise of his wisdom, his power, his goodness and truth; by
the agency of his providence, and the accomplishment of his promise, He, as
with feathers and wings, bears, covers, protects, and warms them. -- My God
thou have borne and carried me from the womb, and from the belly; and even unto
old age thou art HE: thou will bear, thou will carry, and wilt deliver me.

20. God is compared to a LION Hos. xiii. 7. and v. 14.
. How terrible O JEHOVAH, is thy majesty! How unlimited thy sovereignty! How
unbounded thy might to destroy thy foes, and to save thy children! How
shocking! how alarming the voice of thy roaring in the threatenings of thy
word, or the judgments of thine hand! How unblemished thine equity, toward
every creature! How watchful! how ever-open thine eyes, to observe all our
goings, and advert to thine interest! He that keeps Israel neither stumbers nor
sleeps. How perfect thy hatred to those who indulge themselves in wolvish
tyranny; apish flattery; or squint looks of hypocritical dissimulation! O thy
astonishing patience! thy unmatched generosity! thy unbounded mercy, to such as
submit themselves to thy sovereign will! thy infinite readiness to reward the
services done to thee! But, ah thy hatred! the terrible, the unrelenting rage
of thy wrath, against those who dare to oppose thee! who dare to oppress, to
injure thy chosen seed! -- Consider now, my soul, lest he tear thee in pieces,
while there is no deliverer.

21. God is compared to a LEOPARD Hos. xiii. 7.
. How infinitely comely and glorious in himself, how DIVersified his
appearences to creatures! How fierce, especially after a long sleep of
exercised patience, is his wrath against his enemies! how he observes their
goings! watches for the evil to bring it upon them! how often his judgments
break forth on them before thy are aware! and what spiritual blindness and
everlasting darkness are their remediless doom! -- With me, Lord, wait that
thou may be gracious; be exalted that thou may show mercy: and, because
thou art a God of judgment, let me wait for thee.

22. God is compared to a BEAR bereaved of her whelps, and lying in wait Hos.
xiii. ^.
. How terrible, though often slow, are his judgments! how wisely his providence
decoys these, who hate him, into destruction and ruin! How astonishing his love
to, and care of his people, whom, by the application of his infinite kindness
in his promise, he forms into new, into perfect men! How fearful his vengeance
against those that hurt them, or seek to draw them from him! In hell his mercy
is clean gone, and he will be favorable no more! Behold, my soul, the goodness
and severity of God! on others that fell, severity; toward thee, goodness, if
thou continue in his goodness; otherwise thou shall also be cut off.

23. God compares himself to a MOTH and ROTTENNESS Hos. v. 12.
. Secretly, insensibly, and gradually, he often, by his judgments, wastes men's
spirits; their gifts; their privileges; and property; and renders them useless
and contemptible.

24. God is called LOVE 1 John. iv. 8.
. O the incomprehensible and unbounded love of the three DIVine persons, one to
another! O his kindness to all his creatures! How full of love his heart, his
purpose, his word, his work; chiefly, the giving of his Son for and to sinful
men! How kindly he wills good to them! does them good! and delights in them! --
How high! how extensive! how free! how powerful and conquering his love to my
soul! may it ever be shed abroad in my heart by the Holy Ghost!

25. God is compared to LIGHT 1 John i. 5.
. How infinitely glorious, pure, holy, pleasant, and incomprehensible, is his
nature! how clear and unbounded his knowledge! how unlimited his omnipresence!
O the quick approaching, the refreshful, the illuminating, discovering, and
directing influences, of his goodness and grace! Walk, my soul, for ever walk,
in the light of the Lord.

26. God is compared to the SUN Psalm lxxxiv. 11.
. O his unspeakable greatness! his dazzling glory! his transcendent highness!
He is the restful center of all things; the father and source of all light,
natural, gracious, or glorious: all things are naked and open to him: and it is
his to refresh, quicken, and support, his creatures, chiefly his chosen; and to
render them fruitful after their kind. He is always the same, and useful to the
whole world: all his influences are bestowed without money, and without price.
Yet, O your unhappiness who live far from him! ye who live in the tor^id zone
of a natural, an infernal state, what tremendous power has he to scorch you
with fire! Uncreated Sun, now during our temporary night, we but see thee by
the reflected rays of thy glory in creatures, in ordinances, in words, in
works; and, though it be a day of grace to our soul, how clouds of guilt,
desertion, dark providence, shear thy rays, and hide thee from our view! -- O
for that eternal noon, when my sun shall no more go down, no more be hid! but I
shall for ever see thee as thou art; shall for ever, enlightened and dazzled
with thy brightness, bask and melt in the rays of redeeming Godhead; till my
soul be kindled into a pure, an endless flame of love!

27. God is compared to FIRE Is. x. 17. Deuteronomy. iv. 24.
. O the infinite pureness, power, and awful, majesty of his nature! How
heart-warming, purifying, and softening, his influence! He is a consuming fire:
how terrible the nature of his justice and wrath! how righteous, holy
tremendous, irresistible, quick, spreading, and destructive his vengeance! how
suddenly his judgments break forth in an instant! how effectually they purge
away his people's dross, while they fill their hearts with terror! how
fearfully they consume the wicked! and, as in a solemn day, surround them with
horror.

28. God is compared to a CLEAR HEAT after rain; and a CLOUD OF DEW in harvest
Is. xviii. 4.
. How refreshful how nourishing, comforting, and fructifying, the saving
influences of his goodness and grace, during, or after, our trouble; how
refreshful, ye Jews, was your deliverance from Sennacherib, after the fearful
judgments of God on Egypt and Ethiopia?

29. God is compared to a FOUNTAIN Jer. ii. 13.
. O the purity; the perpetuity; the self existence of his nature and influence!
O the mystery, not of his orgin, but of his unorigination! How sweet the
fullness! the refreshful, cleansing, and fructifying virtue of his influences!
How free! how common! how patent our access to receive of his goodness,
redeeming or natural! O Fountain of living waters, it is thine to possess an
infinite fullness of life, and of ever-fresh influence, in thyself: thine, to be
the source of all created life, natural, spiritual, or eternal; thine to be
ever communicating such virtue as begets, maintains, restores, increases, and
perfects life in his creatures; chiefly thy redeemed. -- O Fountain of life,
because thou live, I shall live also.

30. God is compared to BROAD RIVERS Is. xxxiii. 21.
. By him, ye saints, are you, your situation, your blessings, adorned and
beautified: by him the air, your souls breathe in, is rendered pure and
wholesome: by him ye are completely defended from every foe: by him ye have
full access to the profitable commerce of the celestial country: in him, how
wide your prospect into eternity! into things in heaven and on earth! How
inexhaustible his fullness to quench your thirst! satisfy your desires! refresh
your soul, and purge away your filth! Art thou Lord, my God, that satisfies,
that sanctifies me!

31. God is compared to a ROCK Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4.
. How transcendent his height! how immovable his firmness! Though invisible in
his nature, how visible in all his works! clearly seen by the things which he
has made! What a refreshful and protecting shade to his people! what herbs of
precious blessings and healing promises proceed from him! what unsearchable and
enriching mines of grace and glory, better than gold, are in him! what springs
of comforting, -- of nourishing virtue, flow from him! -- Be thou, JEHOVAH, my
rock, to which I may ever resort: what time mine enemies are in power, I will
trust in thee.

32. God is compared to a SHADOW Psalm. lvii. 1.
. How sweet the safety, the refreshment, the secret happiness, which his people
find in him, and in the exercise of his perfections toward, and the
accomplishment of his promises to them! -- Here may I hide myself, till all
calamities be overpast.

33. God is compared to a HIDING PLACE, Psalm. xxxii. 7.
. How invisible is his nature! how hidden and mysterious are his methods of
protecting his people! how great their secret comfort and happiness in him! how
fully his defense of them preserves them from every danger, encourages their
fainting heart, dispels their fears, and disappoints their foes! -- Lord, I
flee to thee to cover me; hide the outcast, the criminal that flies to thy
refuge.

34. God is compared to a REFUGE Psalm. xlvi. 1.
. In his perfections, his covenant, his promise, his providence, what unlimited
fullness of sure protection from every danger, every enemy! With what speed,
assurance of welcome, ought every man to flee to him, through Christ, the new,
the sole, the plain, the patent way! In him we may boldly defy our adversaries;
and in him we must for ever abide: for O the fearful, the eternal, the
unavoidable danger of those, who, in the moments of death, of judgment, are
found without him! Lord, all that are far from thee shall perish. When all
refuge fails me, when no man man cares for my soul, then be thou "my refuge, my
portion in the land of the living."

35. God is compared to a STRONG-HOLD and FORTRESS Psalm. xviii. 2. 3.
. In him is all fullness of spiritual defense, armor, and provision. It is
impossible to batter down, scale, or undermine, the ETERNAL; and with infinite
hazard do any attempt it; or to hurt these who are in him. It is only his to be
the protector of his people. Only those who flee to him, share of his full
security, and safe rest: and it is theirs to boast and glory of him; and by his
influence to fight against, and annoy their spiritual enemies, sin, Satan, and
the world.

36. God is called his people's REREWARD Is. lii. 12.
. While they are unfit, unready, to defend themselves against the secret, the
sudden attacks of their enemies, he kindly protects their person, and maintains
their cause. -- Cry, my soul, unto God, "unto God, who performs all things
for me."

37. God is compared to a SHIELD: his love, favor, and truth, to a SHIELD and
BUCKLER Genesis xv. 2. Psalm. 5. 12. and xci. 3. 4.
. His perfections, his promise, his providence are especially useful in danger:
they protect the whole man, chiefly, what is most exposed; and from the most
eminent enemies, temptations, and troubles, we are thereby protected: By God's
exerting his favor, and fulfilling his truth, his faithful word; he not only
defends from dangers, but emboldens and enableth us, unhurt, to contend with
our spiritual foes. -- Let me say of the Lord, "He is my shield and buckler, my
God in whom I will trust: though an host encamp against me, I will be confident
in this."

38. God is compared to a WALL, and WALL OF FIRE Ezekiel. xi. 41. Zech. ii. 5.
. He is the great support, beauty, and protector of his people on every side:
he surrounds them with his promise, perfections, and presence; and on him do
all their chambers of ordinances, and worshipping assemblies depend: with his
benign influence, he enlightens and warms the hearts of his people: with his
complete, his awful protection, he renders them safe, bold, and fearless,
amidst their brutish and outrageous enemies.

39. God is compared to an HABITATION and DWELLING PLACE Psalm. xc. 1.
. We enter into his favor, by Jesus, as our door, our way: In him are
contained all our choice riches, and comfort: In a state of union to, and
fellowship with him, we are safe from the scorching heat of DIVine wrath, the
fiery darts of temptation, the cold of spiritual deadness, and storms of
trouble; and enjoy complete pleasure, and rest to our soul; with every thing
comely and useful: here we have sweet fellowship with DIVine persons, holy
angels, and ransomed men. -- Thrice, thrice unhappy is our case, if we be
without him! we want every thing good; and are exposed to endless danger,
wandering and woe.

40. God is compared to a PORTION and INHERITANCE Psalm. xvi. 5. 6.
. In infinite kindness, and through our relation to Jesus as our father, he is
freely bestowed upon us: In himself he comprehends every thing necessary,
useful, precious, or comely: The enjoyment of him supports, satisfies,
enriches, ennobles, enables to usefulness in our station; and how highly, O
JEHOVAH, are we to esteem, love, delight in, and boast of thee, -- O thou
incorruptible, sweet, ever-present, infinite, necessary, allcomprehending,
unmixed, unmatched, and everlasting portion of our soul! -- "Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee!"

41. God is called an EXCEEDING GREAT REWARD; and EXCEEDING JOY Genesis xv. 2
Psalm. xliii. 4.
. Our enjoyment of him is the proper reward of Christ's righteousness imputed;
and the gracious reward of our holy obedience: He infinitely surpasses every
other privilege. Nothing, my soul, is worth thy joys, or lovely as thy God: He
infinitely transcends our comprehension, and desert. He is the cause and object
of such solid, pure, and spiritual joy, as in sweetness, usefulness, and
duration, far exceeds the joy of childbirth, of marriage, of harvest, of
victory, of friendship, or of recovery of what had been lost. -- Rejoice, my
soul, in the Lord, and again rejoice.

42. God is compared to GOLD and SILVER Job xxii. 25.
. How infinitely pure, precious, glorious, desirable, durable, useful, and
enriching! How glorious and honorable he renders every one that enjoys him!
how to them he answers all things! how he emboldens them toward himself;
toward their conscience; toward Satan; and toward a present evil world! Be
thou, O Almighty, my gold, and I shall have plenty of silver.

43. God is compared to a JASPER STONE Rev. iv. 3.
, which is either white; or green, and spotted with red or purple. O the
excellency! the glory! the brightness! the majesty! and the refreshful
influence of his nature, and countenance! He is light itself, dwelis in, and is
clothed with it. How sweetly, how mysteriously, are all his perfectious
connected together, and contained in one another! Thrice fair Original of all
that is lovely, be thou mine, my God, and my ALL IN ALL.

44. God is likened to a red SARDINE STONE Ibid.
. How terrible his majesty! How fiery his indignation against his enemies! how
severe his correction of his people! No wonder my soul be, with Moses, afraid
to look on God.

45. God is called the STRENGTH; SALVATION; HOPE; and GLORY, of his people If.
xii. 2. and lx. 19. Joel iii. 16.
. He is the author, the substance, the maintainer, perfecter, and end of their
glory, salvation, and strength; and the ground, the object, the cherisher,
preserver, and perfecter of their hope. Is JEHOVAH now my strength and song? Is
he also become my salvation?

46. God's justice is called his SWORD Zech. xiii 7.
. By it, with astonishing pain, he slaughtered the Son of his love: It reached
even to his heart. His soul was amazed and very heavy; troubled till he knew
not what to say; sorrowful even unto death. By it, with tormenting pain, and
often suddenly, he cuts off his enemies. Thou bloody flaming sword, how wast
thou sheathed in a Savior's heart for me! -- for poor, -- for sinful, --
worthless, -- wretched me!

CHAP. II. Metaphors respecting Christ.
1. CHRIST is compared to an ANGEL Is. lxiii. 9. Dan. xii. 1. Rev. xii. 7. and
xiv. 18. and xviii. 1.
. As Mediator, he is his Father's servant, his principal attendant; sits at his
right hand; is admitted into ineffable nearness and intimacy with him; Clearly
he always beholds, and with infinite pleasure and delight is he always beheld
by, him; God's heart and eyes are on him continually. It is thine, O Jesus, to
excel in holiness, in activity, wisdom, and strength: thine to be sent on the
principal errands of Heaven; and to publish the most important messages of God
to men. He is the great MICHAEL, who is as the mighty God; who saves, protects,
and delivers his people; and restrains and conquers his foes: the Angel that
appeared to the ancient patriarchs; and was with the Hebrews in the wilderness.
His having power over fire, imports his absolute dominion over all the
judgments of God, and the angry contentions of men; and his coming in flaming
fire, to take vengeance on them who know not God, and who obey not the gospel.
His lightening the whole earth with his glory, imports his display of his
shining excellencies in his righteous and fearful judgments; and in the spread
of his glorious gospel. -- Is it not thine, blessed Angel, to minister to me;
to encamp about me? Am not I sanctified by God the Father, preserved in Christ
Jesus, and called?

2. Christ is compared to a MAN Zech. vi. 12.
. In the new covenant-transaction, he represents only men; under the Old
Testament he often appeared in the likeness of man; in his incarnation he
partook of the common nature of man: To represent him are the parts, the
actions, the adjuncts, and relations of men, used in scripture, times almost
innumerable. His whole body, signifies his person, God man; or his obedience
and suffering in his human nature Dan. x. 5.
. His having the appearance of brass, imports his firmness, strength, purity,
and brightness Ezekiel. xl. 3.
. His likeness to amber, or rather a metal mixed of gold and silver, imports
the preciousness and shining glory of his person; and the union of his two
natures in it: or, if the word signifies a burning coal, it denotes his
infinite purity; his being the brightness of the Father's glory; his flaming
love to his people; his burning zeal for their good, and his Father's honor;
and his fiery indignation against his enemies Ezekiel. i. 4. 27.
. His having the appearance of a rainbow, signifies that he is the surety, the
mediator, the head, the messenger, the ALL of the new covenant Ezekiel. i. 28.
. His having the appearance of fire, imports his awful and unspotted Godhead;
his warming, and enlightening his people; his being a wall of fire to protect,
and pillar of fire to direct and guide them Ezekiel. i. 27.
. His body being like the azure beryl, denotes his excellency, preciousness,
heavenly glory, and brightness: or, if the sardonyx, a flesh-coloured stone be
meant, it signifies his dwelling in our nature Dan. x. 6.
. His body, as distinguished from his head, denotes his church, which, by the
neck of covenant union, of scripture, and of ministers, is united to him,
directed, and nourished by him Ephesians. i. 22.
. He is white, glorious, pure, and comely, in his DIVinity, his holiness, his
exaltation, and love; and ruddy in his manhood, his bloody suffering, his low
abasement, and his tremendous vengeance Song v. 10.
. His head as the most fine, the most solid and shining gold, is his all
comely, exalted, precious, and durable Godhead, high dignity, and royal
dominion over all Song v. 11.
. But the filling of his head with the dew, and his locks with the drops of the
night, imports his manifold, his shocking, and perplexing sufferings for our
sins; and his enduring our innumerable and provoking affronts Song v. 2.
. His white hairs, denote his wisdom, his majesty; and his being from
everlasting God Rev. i. 14.
. His bushy and black locks, import his unchangeableness; his perpetual vigor,
freshness, and beauty; with the shining wisdom of his appearances and counsels
Song v. 11.
. His eyes, denote his knowledge of all things; his tender care and affection
toward his people. These, like the eyes of doves washed with milk, and sitting
on fullness, are pure, clear, comely, condescending, and fixed on his chosen
bride; are ever fixed on his own fullness of Godhead, and communicative grace;
on the fullness of time appointed by the Father; and on the church, which is the
fullness of him that fills ALL IN ALL Song v. ^2.
. These, like a flame of fire, are piercing, irresistible, and terrible to his
enemies Dan. x. 6. Rev. i. 14.
. His lips and mouth, denote his authority and word; which, like lilies
dropping sweet smelling myrrh, are pure, pleasant, savoury, glorious, majestic,
and condescending; and do gradually, powerfully, constantly, and gently,
communicate his ever-fresh, his precious, his purifying, his soul-refreshing,
and perfuming grace and glory Song v. 13.
. His cheeks like a bed of spices, are the comely, delightful, refreshful
Testaments of his word; and the ordinances of his grace; the manifestation of
his glory to us; or his humiliation and suffering in our stead Ibid.
. His mighty voice like many waters, like the roaring of a lion, or the voice
of a multitude, is the awful, the important language of his word and
providence; which extends to every end of the earth; reaches the heart of men;
brings manifold particular messages; is terrible to his enemies, and threatens
them with sudden and fearful destruction Rev. i. 15. and x. 3. Dan. x. 6.
. His whole face and countenance, are his manifestations of himself, in his
person and office; which, like lightning, are surprising, majestic, and awful:
like the sun shining in his strength, are enlightening, warming, glorious,
dazzling and pleasant: are as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars, ever fresh,
firm, comely, and delightful. But his face and visage as marred more than any
man, import the dreadful suffering and shame which he endured in his human
nature Dan. x. 6. Rev. i. 16. Song v. 15. Is. lii. 14.
.

His shoulders, denote his almighty power, his infinite wisdom, care, and love,
which qualify him to bear our sins in his own body on the tree; to bear our
persons to glory; and to bear the charge of government committed to him by the
Father Luke xv. 5. Is. ix. 6.
. His arms like polished brass, are his powerful, his glorious strength,
providence, mercy, and love Is. xl. 11. Dan. x. 6.
. His hands, are his power, his operation, and bounty; which, like goldrings
set with the beryl; are pefect, celestial, comely, and every way excellent; and
by which he apprehends and holds fast his jewels, his chosen seed Song v. 14.
. His paps denote his communicative, his all-nourishing, fullness of grace and
glory Rev. i. 13.
. His bosom is his love, his care, his special protection; his bestowal of
eminent fellowship with himself Is. xl. 11.
. His belly or bowels as bright ivory overlaid with sapphires, are his tender
sympathy; his boundless compassion; which, O how valuable! how pure and
unmixed! how constant, firm, and durable! how reviving, refreshing, and
love-exciting Song v. 14.
! His heart, denotes his most endeared affection, and tender regard Song viii.
6.
. His loins, are his firm purposes, and almighty power Dan. x. 5.
. His legs like pillars of marble set in sockets of gold, denote his
everlasting ability, to support the weight of creation; the weight of the
newcovenant concerns; the weight of the persons, the sins, the punishments, the
care, and salvation of his people; and the weight of the glory bestowed on him
by the Father; and his sufficiency to travel the whole journey, and run the
whole race of our redemption, set before him; and to tread down his opposers
with fury and ease Song v. 15.
. His feet, are his providence; his various motions, in coming to this world,
in traveling through suf^^ring and woe, in treading the wine press of his
vengeance, and trampling down his obdurate foes; which, like polished brass,
are firm and determined, glorious and pure; and like fire or brass burning in a
furnace, are awful and majestic to all, but destructive and terrible to them
that oppose him Dan. x. Rev. i. 15. and x. 1.
. His heel, is his holy, but created manhood, which Satan bruised and afflicted
during his humbled debasement; and his people and followers, whom, while on
earth, Satan bruiseth and afflicts by his manifold temptations Genesis iii. 15.
. His steps and goings, are his various approaches, toward incarnation in the
likeness of sinful flesh; his conduct, in fulfilling all righteousness, and
receiving his glorious reward: his manifold approaches toward our persons, in
the influence of his grace; his operations innumerable in managing the world
Psalm. lxxxix. 51. and lxviii. 24.
. His one foot on the sea, and the other on the earth, signifies that all the
creation, every thing troublous, or restful, is subject to his will, and under
his care Rev. x. 2.
.

His having a rainbow round about his head, imports his high estimation of the
new covenant; his being ever mindful of it; and in his whole conduct acting
according to the tenor of it Rev. x. 1.
. His power, his glory, and zeal for our salvation, and his Father's honor,
are his beautiful garments, which adorn his person, and render him fit for his
work Is. lix. 17.
. His linen garment down to the foot, is the universal purity of his
administration; and the finished righteousness, which covers both him and his
seed Rev. i. 13.
. His being clothed with a cloud, imports his tremendous majesty; his
incomprehensible nature; and his gloomy and unsearchable providence Rev. x. i.
. His glorious, his pure, and everlasting power, faithfulness, equity, and
love; and his Father's commission, to be our priest and sovereign, are his
golden girdle, by which he is adorned and qualified for his mediatorial work
Dan. x. 5. Rev. i. 13.
. His life, is his uninterrupted activity, with the fullness of grace and of
glory, lodged in him, for us John v. 36. Gal. ii. 20.
. His meat, is the infinite pleasure he takes in honoring his Father, and
saving his chosen John iv. 34.
.

His sitting at God's right hand, imports the firm security, the unceasing
continuance, of his high dignity; his extensive authority, and his undisturbed
rest Psalm. cx. 1.
. His sitting on a cloud, or white cloud, denotes the mysterious, the awful,
but pure, righteous, and glorious nature of his procedure Rev. xiv. 14.
. His standing at God's right hand, and appearing in his presence, signifies
his constant, zealous, and ever-prevalent intercession for us Acts vii. 56.
. His standing among the myrtle-trees in the bottom, and at the right hand of
the poor, and at the door of our heart, denotes his favorable presence with
the Jews in their captive and distressed condition; his presence with his
people in their deepest afflictions; and his readiness to help and relieve
them; and his readiness to enter into our soul, and his desire to be received
by us Zech. i. 8. Psalm. cix. 31. Rev. iii. 20.
. His walking among the golden candlesticks, imports his peculiar presence and
delight in his churches; his constant operations in them; his unceasing supply
of them with the oil of his spiritual influence; and his unwearied snuffing off
their corruptions Rev. ii. 1.
. His walking with persons in a fiery furnace, represents his distinguished
nearness to, comfort, and support of his people, under their heaviest and
sharpest trials Dan. iii. 25.
. His treading in the wine press, and staining his garments with red, imports
his terrible and bloody victory over all his opposers, sin, Satan, the world,
or death Is. lxiii. 1. 2. 3.
. His traveling in the greatness of his strength, imports his gracious
presence in every part of his church; and his display of the exceeding
greatness of his power and love, to save his people, and ruin their foes Is.
lxiii. 1.
. His having a writer's inkhorn by his side, to mark for safety the mourners in
Jerusalem; and his being over the men with the slaughter-weapons; import his
sovereign power to save alive or destroy; his tender and exact preservation of
his mourning saints; and his supreme direction and management of the bloody
ruin of his enemies Ezekiel. ix. and x.
. His measuring the visionary temple and city before Ezekiel, and showing him
the parts and ordinances thereof, import his prerogative to appoint every form
and statute of the church; and to give men the true knowledge thereof Ezekiel. xl.
-- xlviii. chap.
. His holding the stars in his right hand, imports his giving ministers their
commission, and his supporting them in their work Rev. ii. 1.
. His having the seven Spirits of God, implies his full possession of the
DIVine Spirit, in his DIVersified gifts and graces Rev. iii. 1.
. His having a little book in his hand, which he delivered to John to eat; and
his opening the seven seals of God's book, import his manifesting of the
secrets, the purposes, and mysteries of God, to men Rev. x. and v. and vi. chap.
.

His house, is his church; which he planned; which he built and furnished;
which he rules, protects, and with pleasure dwells in Song i. 17.
. His chambers, are his ordinances; his worshipping assemblies; and his
bestowing of intimate communion with himself Song i. 4.
. His green bed, is his ever-pleasant, flourishing, and refreshful church,
covenant, word, and ordinances Song i. 16.
. His table may denote heaven, where he was before his incarnation, and where
he now is; -- Judea, where he resided during most of his debasement; -- or
rather the ordinances of the gospel, where he delights himself, and nourishes
his friends Song i. 12.
. His provision on it, of bread, of flesh, of honey, milk, water, or wine, is
the blessings of the new covenant; himself, and his righteousness; his Father
and fullness; his Spirit and grace Prove. ix. 5. If. xxv. 6. Song v. 1.
. His ointments, are his fullness of Spirit and grace, which softens our heart,
and renders us pleasant and comely to God Song i. 3.
. The kisses of his mouth, may denote his coming into our nature and world:
rather the promises of his gospel, and manifestations of his love; which mark
his kindness and reconciliation to us; inexpressibly delight our soul, and
enkindle our love to himself Song i. 2.
. His chariot of the wood of Lebanon, is his pure, his firm, his fragrant, and
incorruptible manhood: its silver pillars, are precious, comely, pure, and
durable graces: its golden bottom, is his glorious, almighty, immutable,
inestimable, and everlasting Godhead: its purple covering, is his bloody
suffering, and royal exaltation: its mid pavement of love, is his unbounded
favor to his chosen, that inspired him to undertake for, obey, and suffer in
their stead; and which is the foundation of all their comfort and rest: -- or
this chariot may denote his new covenant, his gospel, or church Song iii. 9. 10.
. His white horse, is his pure, pleasant, and glorious gospel of peace; by
means of which he marks out his greatness, marches through his church,
conquers, and enters the hearts of his people Rev. vi. 2.
. His bow, his arrows, and sword, are his powerful word, and almighty
influences, whereby he convinces his chosen, and subdues them to himself. His
taking his bow; shooting his arrows; and girding his sword on his thigh,
denotes his spirited exertion of his soul-conquering grace Rev. vi. 2. Psalm.
xlv. 3. 5.
. His key of David, is his royal authority over his church, to rule and correct
at his pleasure; and his inspired word, by which he opens our heart to himself,
and opens for us an escape from every danger, and an entrance into the house
eternal in the heavens Rev. iii. 7. If. xxii. 22.
. His sharp sickle, is his unlimited and irresistible power, by which he
punishes and cuts off the nations, and gathers them to his bar, and to their
eternal state Rev. xiv. 14.
. -- Does my adored Redeemer so resemble a man? call him then, my soul, no more
Baali; but call him Ishi, MY MAN, MY HUSBAND. Go thou with this MAN. Hide not
thyself from thine own flesh.

3. Christ is called the man of God's right hand Psalm. lxxx. 17.
. By solemn oath, JEHOVAH consecrated him to his office. By his infinite
strength he supports him in it. Through him he manifests the exceeding
greatness of his power in the salvation of men. And to his right hand he has
exalted him, to sit thereon, till he make all his enemies his footstool. -- O
thou Man of God, let my life be precious in thy sight. Thus says my soul, Come
down quickly; be thou ever at my right hand, that I may never be moved.

4. Christ is often, especially by himself, called the SON OF MAN Rev. xiv. 14.
; to denote the reality of his human nature; his astonishing debasement; and
his amazing delight in it. -- But did God indeed dwell with man! dwell in
manhood upon earth! Was he indeed the carpenter's son! Was his mother called
Mary! and were his brethren and sisters here with us! O what is this that God
has done for! -- has done to us!

5. Christ is compared to an HEAD Col. 1. 18.
. His people, like hairs, are rooted and grounded, and do grow up in him. In
the purpose of God, they were chosen in him; in the new covenant, they were
represented by him. He is the great honor and beauty of, and directs, governs,
and conveys nourishment to, all his saints; -- who are joined to him by faith.
It is his to add honor and dignity to, and to rule over his church, which is
united to him by his word, his ordinances, and ministers. -- Is this
Carmel-like head, this lofty, pleasant, fruitful, and all-exhibiting Immanuel;
this crimson like, this sin bearing, this suffering, this royally-exalted
Jesus, my one head? my Lord, and my God?

6. Christ is called a MEDIATOR, or DAYS-MAN 1 Timothy ii. 5.
. He is God and man in one person; a truly middle person between God and us.
How infinitely wise! how peaceful and condescending! how just! how merciful!
how impartial, faithful, and well affected toward both God and men!
Necessarily chosen to reconcile his Father's honor with our happiness, he
effects it by satisfying his offended justice with his righteousness and blood;
by staying our enmity by his Spirit and love. -- If I refuse his mediation, am
I not infallibly left to the severity of the broken law, and incensed vengeance
of God? Kiss, receive, my soul, the Son, lest he be angry. Obey his voice;
beware of him; provoke him not.

7. Christ is called a SURETY Heb. vii. 22.
. At his Father's call, he, from eternity, became one with us in the eye of the
broken law: kindly he undertook for us: infallibly he secured the full payment
of that obedience and satisfaction which we owed to his Father's law and
justice. Kind to astonishment, he took our whole debt upon himself, and erased
our name from the bond: kindly he said, If thou, Father, if thou, justice,
admit me, let these go their way: what they owe thee, put it on mine account.
-- Never, my soul, go about to establish thine own righteousness: never thus
attempt to thrust Jesus's name from thy debt-bond, to insert thy own: never
repine, that when I had nothing to pay, he frankly undertook all; and in due
time gave his life a ransom for many.

8. Christ is compared to a FATHER Is. ix. 6.
. By his sufferings, the travel of his soul; by his resurrection from the dead;
by the influence of his Spirit; by the incorruptible seed of his grace and
word; he, in our regeneration, begets us again to a lively hope: his image he
puts on us, and calls us by his new name. By his word and Spirit he teaches,
and guides us in the way wherein we should go. By his power, his angels, and
ministers, he guards and protects us from danger. With his "robes of
righteousness, and garment of salvation," he covers our nakedness, and adorns
our person. With his flesh and blood, his person, obedience, and atonement, he
refreshes and nourishes our soul: and for drink, he gives us his love, which
is better than wine. -- Thrice blessed Father of the fatherless, stay of the
orphans! when both father and mother forsake me, do thou take me up.

9. Christ is called a TESTATOR Heb. ix. 15. 16.
. In his unbounded affection to his poor kinsmen, he, as our dying Redeemer,
irreversibly disannulled our obligation to the broken law; and before
witnesses, before God, angels, and men, he, in the latter will of his blessed
word, solemnly bequeathed to us his whole fullness, his purchased blessings. By
his death he confirmed; with his name he signed; in the inspired records he
registered; in the ordinances of the gospel he publishes; in the sacraments he
seals, his donation: He himself, his Father, his blessed Spirit, are the
faithful executors thereof. -- Search, my soul, the Scriptures, they are the
Testament of a DIVine Father, of a bleeding Redeemer; let them be sweeter than
honey to my taste: Can I, without astonishment, without enrapturing love,
without rage against my sins, his murderers, think what he there dispones in
legacy to me!

10. Christ is compared to a BRIDEGROOM and HUSBAND Math. xxv. 6. 2 Cor. xi. 2.
. With his Father's consent, he, with infinite wisdom and prudence, fixed his
love on sinful men. His friends and servants, the prophets, and blessed
Baptist, he sent before him to intimate his gracious designs. In the fullness of
time, he assumed our nature. To pay our debt; to disannul our marriage with
sin, Satan, and the broken law: to conquer and slay our spiritual foes; to
prepare for himself and us a wedding garment of everlasting righteousness; --
he laid down his life. -- In the gospel he demands and wooeth our heart.
Notwithstanding our base birth, our froward temper, our loathsome appearance,
our brutish ignorance and folly, our poverty, weakness, unworthiness, our
infamous character, and the affronts and injuries without number, we do him,
he, to the endless admiration of angels and men, intimates his love to us,
offers and presents himself for our spiritual husband. In the promise he
proclaims his intention of marriage: with unmatched earnestness and patience,
he invites, he entreats, he urges our heart to accept him. With the motives,
of our absolute necessity; of his own excellency; his high dignity; his
unfading comeliness; his unsearchable riches; his dying, his giving, his
almighty love, -- he enforces his suit. The love tokens of ordinances, of
common spiritual operations, being given, he, in the moment fixed by his
ancient purpose, breaks our union to the broken covenant, to our lusts, to
Satan, and to a present evil world. With pleasure and joy he unites, he
espouseth us to himself; he gives us an interest in his person, and all that
he has; he arrays us with the robes of his righteousness and grace; he
forgiveth our offenses; he covers our infirmity; and supplies our need. Kindly
and prudently he abides with, cherishes, delights in, defends, enricheth,
ennobles, and favors with due direction, warning, reproof. At last, with
solemn pomp, and with amazing joy, he transports us, without spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing, into his celestial mansions, that we may be ever with him,
to behold his glory, and become perfectly like him, by seeing him as he is. --
Listen, ye children of men, "all things are ready, come ye to the marriage. See
that ye refuse not him that comes," that wooeth, "from heaven. My beloved is
mine, and I am his."

11. Christ is compared to an HEIR, or FIRSTBORN Heb. i. 12. Col. i. 5. -- 18.
. He is the eternal Son of God. He has the most honorable, full, and
unchangeable right to his Father's whole property. He is the support, the
honor of his family, in heaven or in earth. Him has his Father solemnly
infeoffed in all that he has, and blessed him above all blessing and praise.
It is his to portion out every creature, chiefly his ransomed brethren and
sisters of men* and out of his fullness do we all receive, and grace for grace.
-- For ever, in all things, let him have the pre-eminence. Ah! alas! that he
was so lately born in my heart!

12. Christ is compared to a BROTHER Song viii. 1.
. He is a true descendant of Adam, and wears the same human nature with us. O
how he loves, how bound, how ready to teach, to help, relieve, and protect us!
Nor, however worthy, exalted, and honorable he be, is he ashamed to own his
fraternal relation to us. How pleased in converse, in fellowship, in familiar
intimacy with us! He is a brother born for adversity: in days of tribulation,
he shows the most distinguished kindness; he affords the most speedy and signal
relier. -- Never, O Possessor of all fullness, shall thy bowels suffer me, thy
base, thy sinful, thy indigent brother, to perish for want! Jesus, thou art he
whom thy brethren shall praise; thy Father's children shall bow down before
thee. When I find thee without, in this evil world, let me kiss; let me
embrace; let me openly avouch thee; let me bring thee to my mother's house, to
the chambers of that church that conceived me.

13. Christ is compared to a FRIEND Song v. 16.
. In no wise can his people be without him. Infinitely he loves them; tenderly
he sympathizeth with them. O the countless, the astonishing, the gracious
words, and deeds, by which he shows them his kindness! How wisely he
considers their case! With his love, that thinks no evil; with his imputed
atonement; he covers our nakedness, and conceals our infirmity. It is not
thine, adored Redeemer, to say, Be warmed and filled; but to give what is
neeedful, even above all that we can ask or think. It is thine, to warn us of
out danger; to reprove our mistakes: surely thy smiting shall not break my
head, but be a precious oil to me. It is thine, to help us in trouble; to turn
all our bed in our sickness; to comfort us when cast down. In death, and at the
awful bar, it is thine to stick closer to us than a brother: though all men
forsake us, yet wilt not thou. It is thine, rather to die for us, than to deny
us in any wise; -- it is thine to solve our doubts; to give us counsel in
perplexity; to allow us frequent messages of thy love; to impart to us, the
secrets of thy providence, thy covenant: -- thine to delight in our, ah
thrice-unworthy company: It is thine always to seek our true welfare; to be
highly grieved when we slight thy favors; to count them, who hate us, thine
enemies, and avenge them as such. -- "This is my beloved and my friend, O ye
daughters of Jerusalem." Let me show myself friendly; mine own friend, and my
Father's friend, my soul, forget, forsake thou not.

14. Christ is a LAWGIVER Rev. ix. 21.
. He gives law to every creature in heaven and on earth. All the laws of
inspiration derive their origin from him. It is only his to enact statutes of
doctrine, worship, discipline and government, for his visible church. It is his
to give us the law of faith, fulfilled not by doing, but by believing on him
that justifies the ungodly; to give us the moral law, without an annexed
sanction of eternal life or death; to give us the new commandment, to love one
another. And from regard to his authority, must we ransomed subjects obey; for,
though dead to the law as a covenant, we are not without law to God, but under
the law to Christ. O Jesus, "how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the
day.

15. Christ is called a KING Psalm. cx. 5. Rev. xv. 3. and xix. 16.
. As God he has a natural right to rule over all; as Mediator, he has given
to him "all power in heaven and on earth." It is his to prescribe rules for his
kingdom of the church, and see to the execution thereof. It is his to erect,
maintain, and order his kingdom; his to subdue to himself, to pardon, to rule,
honor, reward, and protect, his people; and to observe, restrain, conquer, and
punish, his and their enemies, as is good in his sight. In his hands is the
power and disposal of our life and death, spiritual, temporal, or eternal. His
special kingdom is the church visible and invisible, militant or triumphant.
His palace is the celestial mansions, the gospel church, nay, every sanctified
heart. The new covenant, the true church, the ordinances of the gospel, are his
royal chariot and bed of state. The Father's right hand, the airy clouds, the
ordinances of his worship, the hearts of his people, are his stately throne.
The oracles of inspiration, are his useful, his unblemished, his binding laws.
The promises and threatenings, with the execution thereof, are his golden and
iron scepter, whereby he manifests his favor and wrath. The Holy Ghost is his
royal seal, which distinctly marks and secures what is his. The high dignity,
the amazing glory, the various offices bestowed on him by his Father, the
honors ascribed to him by his mother the church, are his everlasting, his
golden, his many crowns. The service of every creature, the praises of angels
and men, are his revenue royal. Gospel ministers are his watchmen, deputies,
ambassadors, and heralds. Every creature, chiefly angels and saints, are his
army and honorary guard. Truly, O Jesus, many kings "have done virtuously, but
thou excellest them all." It is thi^e to form thy subjects in creation; to make
them anew in regeneration; to need nothing from them; to be anointed by God
himself; to possess an universal dominion. It is thine to be infinitely wise,
mighty, merciful, patient, peaceful, honorable, unchangeable, immortal. --
Have I, my soul, seen this King in his beauty? Have I beheld his goings in the
sanctuary? Have I felt his powerful voice, and mighty arm, in my heart? do I
think, do I "speak, of the things that concern the King?" Is my tongue "as the
pen of a ready writer?"

16. Christ is a COUNSELOR Is. ix. 6.
. O his infinite dignity, wisdom and prudence! He is the high favorite of
Heaven; entirely acquainted with all the DIVine secrets. Nor is any thing
transacted by his Father, without his express concurrence. In harmonious
concert. with his adored Father, and blessed Spirit, he devised, he fixed, the
whole plan of our redemption, and every concern thereof, without ever needing
assistance from the wisdom of creatures. His whole conduct is infinitely
reasonable and wise in itself, though often dark and mysterious to created,
chiefly to carnal, reason. It is thine, O Jesus, to advise and direct us in
every hard and intricate case; to acquaint us savingly with the laws, the
statutes, the gospel-edicts, of Heaven. It is thine to show us the weakness or
validity of our claim, and of our evidence of right to the inheritance above;
-- thine to manage every important concern of our spiritual marriage, our
peace, or prosperity, to thy honor and our endless advantage. -- Shall I bless
the Lord, that gave me counsel, and made my reins to instruct me, in the secret
watches of the night!

17. Christ is represented by the PRINCE in Ezekiel's last visions Ezekiel. xliv.
1. 2. 3. and xlv. 7. -- 25. and xlvi. 1. -- 18.
. By his own righteousness, and as the sovereign head of the church, he alone
enters into the temple, the presence of God. How extensive is his dominion, and
redoubled his glory in heaven and earth! Under his evangelic, his mistennial
reign, magistrates, ministers, and people, do justice; work righteousness, and
cheerfully exert themselves, and their substance, to promote his honor. It is
his to bear the whole expense of offerings for his chosen subjects: -- His to
offer himself an atoning sacrifice; and to enable them to offer their persons
and service, living and acceptable sacrifices to God: -- His to cause his own
person sacrifice, and fullness, to be duly exhibited, and spiritually received,
on every proper and solemn occasion. He is always in the midst of his people, to
protect them from every foe; sympathize with them in every trouble; supply them
with every necessary grace; assist them in every holy service; and to be
constantly seen and enjoyed by them. He goes in with them to the throne of
grace, to in troduce and present their petitions; in to the house of God, to
l^ad them into green pastures; in to the search of their hearts, to show them
what and whose they are. He goes out with them, from ordinances, to give them
his Spirit, to bring to their remembrance what he said to them; to preserve
them from an evil world, and keep them from falling: and to go out with them at
death, to usher them into the inheritance of the saints in light. Whatever he
bestows, is out of his own immense fullness. What is given to slavish and formal
professors, he will in wrath take from them: But what is bestowed on his
genuine children, shall abide with them for ever.

18. Christ is compared to an AMBASSADOR Is. xlix. 3. -- 8. 2 Cor. v. 18. 19.
20. Is. liii. 13. 14. 15.
. In the name of JEHOVAH, the great King, whose name is dreadful among the
Heathen, he came perfonally in the flesh; and, in the gospel, still comes
spiritually to our world. With infinite wisdom, untainted faithfulness,
unspotted integrity, and tender affection to God, and to men, he solemnly
proposes the terms, lays the foundation of, and completes the blessed treaty
of everlasting peace and friendship; of spiritual marriage and traffic, between
his almighty Father, and us sinful, rebellious, and self-ruined men. Think, my
soul, how it grieves him, when his proposals are slighted! how he leaves the
despisers to wonder and perish, under the fury of his Father's just vengeance!
to whom, at the end, he will deliver up the kingdom, and render an exact
account of his management and success. -- If this Ambassador of peace weep
bitterly; if by tears, by groans, by blood, by death, he beseech me to be
reconciled unto God; O my foul, beware of him; obey his voice; provoke him not;
he will not pardon my wilful, my final, transgressions; for my Father's name is
in him.

19. Christ is a JUDGE John v. 22. 2 Timothy iv. 8.
. In his Father's name and authority, he, with unlimited wisdom, impartial
equity, almighty power, and undaunted courage, maintains the honor of the
DIVine law, and the peace and order of his subjects. By passing and executing
proper and seasonable sentences, he renders himself infinitely terrible to
offenders. It is his to recognize every man's deeds, and to reward or revenge,
as they are good, or bad. Now, every conscience, every church ruler, is deputy
under him. At the last day, every man, every apostate angel; shall be publicly
fisted at his decisive tribunal. By the testimony of God and of their
conscience, shall he fully evince; and openly shall he declare, what they have
been, or done. According to his righteous law, shall he pronounce and execute
their sentence; dismissing the wicked into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal. -- Meditate terror, ye obstinate transgressors,
"behold, he comes with clouds; every eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him: all the wicked kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him.
Now, now is the accepted time; now, is the day of salvation:" now, embrace him
as your offered, your all-sufficient Savior; so shall ye be for ever delivered
from him, as your angry Judge. If you neglect this, how shall you "abide the
day of his coming, in flaming fire, to take vengeance on all them that know not
God, and who obey not the gospel?" Lift up thine head, my foul; none else is
judge but Christ. Will he, who bare my sins, plead against me in judgment? "No;
but he will put strength in me. I know in whom I have believed; and that he is
able to keep that salvation of my soul, which I have committed to him, against
that day."

20. Christ is an ADVOCATE 1 John ii. 1.
. According to his Father's appointment, he openly invites sinful men,
particularly his children, to commit their spiritual causes into his hand.
Kindly, freely, readily, and often undesired, he undertakes them, as far as
equity permits. With insinite skill, integrity, faithfulness, boldness, care,
and success, he pleads them at his Father's bar, notwithstanding all that a
broken law, a malicious devil, or guilty conscience, can allege to oppose him.
Insisting on the unanswerable plea, of his finished righteousness, of his own
and his Father's honor, love, promise, his intercession always prevails,
obtains the gracious pardon of every crime, the full claim to, and perfect
possession of, all that grace, and that glory, allotted and established by the
laws of the new covenant, -- Hail, my soul, Jesus "is able to save me to the
uttermost; seeing he ever lives to make intercession for me." Let me intercede
for myself, and others, with groanings which cannot be uttered.

21. Christ is the CAPTAIN of salvation Heb. ii. 10. Rev. xix. 12. -- 21. Is.
lv. 4.
. By his Father's commandment, he, in the display of his honor, his valor,
his wisdom, faithfulness, and strength, cheerfully, openly, and boldly
proclaimed war with sin, Satan, and a carnal world. Armed with zeal, with
righteousness, with power and wrath, he, in his incarnation, his death,
resurrection, ascension, his spiritual and second coming, fights with,
conquers, and spoils them; enriching his friends with the prey. It is thine, O
Jesus, with the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, with the gospel-
arrows, of deep conviction, of saving illumination and heart-melting influence,
to subdue thy people, and make them willing in the day of thy power. It is
thine, to cause them enlist under they banner, and take hold of thy covenant:
-- Thine to teach their hands to war, and their fingers to fight, with
principalities, powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places; and to mortify
the deeds of the body, and crucify the flesh, that they may live: -- Thine to
array them with the military robes of thy righteousness and grace, and to equip
them with the whole armor of God. It is thine to appoint each his particular
station and work, and direct them to watch, march, attack, or retreat; to watch
against temptation; lust against the flesh; resist the devil; or flee youthful
lusts. It is thine to encourage their heart, with the hopes of victory, and of
an exceeding great reward. Thine to provide their spiritual provision; to show
them the enemy; prudently discover their force, and point out their stratagems.
It is thine to protect from the fiery darts of the devil, and keep from evil,
that it may not grieve them. Thine to lead on to the attacks; and to succeed,
prefer, reward, or correct, as is good in thy sight. It is thine to purchase,
to bestow, to promote, and maintain our everlasling salvation; and to punish
with unsupportable ruin, such as refuse thy terms of peace, or decline to
enlist in thy bands. -- In all my spiritual warfare, let me set the Lord
continually before me: let me stand still, and see his salvation; "and follow
after him, only to spoil."

22. Christ is a LEADER and GUIDE If. lv. 4.
. By his DIVine providence he directs all things. In the wilderness of a
natural state, and of a present evil world, he meets with his chosen. In their
regeneration, he converts them from the error of their way; makes them to enter
in at the strait gate; and brings them into himself, the way that leads unto
life. He abides with, comforts, assists, goes before, and shows a pattern to
them; and by his word and Spirit directs them in every case, till they enter
into the joy of their Lord. Rejoice, my soul, -- he shall guide me in a right
way; thy way to him commit; he shall bring it to pass: with him I shall walk,
and not be weary; I shall run, and not be faint.

23. Christ is called a PROPHET and TEACHER Acts iii. 22. John iii.
. In consequence of DIVine appointment and furniture for his work, he, by his
word and Spirit, faithfully and infallibly reveals to men his Father's will;
chiefly, what relates to a future state, and the way to it. How unbounded, and
exact, is his knowledge of the DIVine mind. It is his to have "compassion on
the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way:" with astonishing patience
and care, freely to teach them the mysteries of the kingdom. It is his to
inform his people, how to cleanse themselves from iniquity; how to avert DIVine
judgments; how to war with their spiritual foes, and to assure them of success
therein. It is his to solve all their doubts; and speak a word in season to
them that are weary. It is his to confirm his mission with miracles, obvious to
the world; and with almighty influence, felt by the heart. It is his to appoint
and qualify every true teacher in his church. And ah the fearful doom, that
awaits such as neglect to attend his instructions! O ye sons of men, whether
you hear, or whether you forbear, you shall know that a prophet was among you!
-- God forbid that our Prophet should be without honor in his own country.

24. Christ is the INTERPRETER, one among a thousand Acts iii. 22. John iii.
. To his children he explains the secrets of his covenant; the mysteries of his
word; the deeps of his Job xxxiii. 23.
nature, person, and purpose; the wonders of his providence. By him they are
made to understand, when, and what, the Lord speaks to them; and taught to
express the language of heaven in prayer, praise, and holy conference. -- When,
O Jesus, will thou privately explain every parable to me? When will thou
unteach me this Ashdod-like jargon of carnal and unknown words? and turn to me
a pure language? O when shall this Babellike strife about words entirely cease
in the church and world; and men "serve the name of the Lord with one consent."

25. Christ is called the faithful and true WITNESS Rev. iii. 15. Is. lv. 4.
. Being DIVinely called, he, with the utmost fidelity and clearness, declares
to men the whole truth of God, necessary to be known, and nothing else.
Solemnly he confirmed it, by his own, and his prophets and apostles miracles,
almost innumerable. Solemnly he confirmed it, by his own suffering and death.
Solemnly he confirms it, by his oath and sacraments; by the testimony of his
Spirit to men's conscience, and by the attesting course of his providence in the
world. And according to thy declarations, O Jesus, shall we be judged at the
last day. -- Shall I reject the attested promises of God? -- My soul, do thou
now believe?

26. Christ is called the APOSTLE, or missionary of our profession Heb. iii. 1.
. Solemnly has God called thee, O Redeemer; and wonderfully has he qualified
thee, to make a clear, complete, and infailible revelation of his will to men,
as the standard and rule of their religious profession. It is truly thine to
confirm thy mission and doctrine with miracles, benevolent, great, and many; to
confer the Holy Ghost, by laying on of thy hands; to be equally concerned with
all the churches; and to be properly succeeded by none in thy office. It is
thine to frame, to found, and order the gospel church; and to be the author,
matter, and end, of our whole Christianity. -- My soul, consider him; let him
be thy meditation all the day.

27. Christ is called a BISHOP, overseer, and MINISTER 1 Pct. ii. 25. Heb.
viii. 2. Romans xv. 8.
. For the welfare of his church, he overseeth, watches over, preaches the
gospel to, instructs, governs, and intercedes for, his people. He is the bishop
of souls; he searches the heart, and tries the reins; he instructs, governs,
and corrects the souls of men; nor does a visible profession, but real inward
grace, constitute any the sheep of his pasture. He is called the minister of
the sanctuary. How near he approaches to God! intercedes in the holy place
above! and at last will, for ever, remain the only minister of the church. He
is called the minister of the circumcision. In his debased state, he preached
to few but circumcised Jews. -- Am I returned to this shepherd and bishop of
souls? Am I of the true circumcision, who worship God in the spirit, rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh?

28. Christ is called a PRIEST Heb. iii. 1. and vii. 21. Rev. viii. 3. 4. 5.
Ezekiel. x. 7.
. Taken from among men, with respect to his humanity, he is solemnly called of
God, and furnished with all necessary gifts and grace, to give himself a
sacrifice of infinite value, to satisfy DIVine justice, and reconcile us to
God; and to make continual intercession for us. His golden altar is himself,
his own precious and DIVine nature. The much incense, wherewith he offers up
the prayers of all saints to God, is his own merits and intercession His
"taking fire from the altar, or from between the cherubims, and casting it on
the earth," imports that the contempt of his person and finished righteousness,
is the great cause of vengeance; and he has the management of all the fiery
judgments of God sent upon apostate churches. He is made priest with an oath:
for his encouragement, and for our comfort and stedfastness in the faith of his
righteousness and intercession, God has, in the most solemn way, ascertained
the eternal duration of his priesthood. He is a priest of good things to come:
his purchase and intercession chiefly relate to the good things, the spiritual
privileges enjoyed in the evangelic and eternal state of the church. He is "the
High priest of our profession," our only Mediator whose sacrifice and
intercession are the whole sum and substance of the gospel. He is a great High
priest altogether unparallelled in the dignity of his person office, and work.

29. Christ is called the BREAKER that is gone UP Mic. ii. 13.
. In the greatness of his wisdom and power, he, in the counsel of peace, came
UP, and engaged for us. In his incarnation, he came UP, and assumed our nature.
In his life, and in his death, he came UP, and obeyed the law, and satisfied
the justice of God in our stead. In his resurrection, in his ascension, he went
UP, and took possession of everlasting felicity in our name. In his
intercession, he stands UP, as our advocate, to "appear in the presence of God
for us." At last he will break through and come in the clouds. Even now he
breaks through, and comes UP, in the offer and application of his grace Having,
through manifold impassable-like paths, broken up a new and living way, to
eternal happiness, he breaks the head of Satan, by destroying his power breaks;
off our chains of darkness; removes our guilt and corruption; brings us out of
our spiritual prison of blindness and bondage. By conviction and illumination,
he breaks up the fallow-ground of our heart. By the almighty influence of his
love, he breaks the power of our emnity and rebellion. With heavy
chastisements, he often breaks the spirits of his people. And with unrelenting
strokes, and unceasing storms of wrath, he breaks to pieces his incorrigible
foes. -- Rejoice, my soul, for I shall go up and pass through; and the Lord on
my head. Break all things as they will, never shall I be broken off from him.

30. Christ is compared to a MASTER and LORD John xiii. 13.
. With infinite expense, tenderness, skill, and authority, he erects his
church; and provides for her every thing necessary. He instructs, admonishes,
and corrects his people; assigns them their respective work and reward. It is
his to be heartily chosen, highly feared, loved, honored, and served with
faithfulness, and singleness of heart. -- Let, me call no man master; for one
is my master, even Christ: he is my Lord: O my soul, worship thou him.

31. Christ is compared to a MINISTER OF STATE, a TREASURER, and STEWARD John
iii. 35. Col. i. 19. Psalm. lxviii. 18. Heb. iii. 2.
. To him has the Father committed all power in heaven and earth; and given him
to be head over all things to the church. Into his hand is given all the
fullness of grace and glory, to be distributed by him to sinful men, according
to the manner prescribed in the purpose and covenant of God. On him the
happiness of creation, chiefly of his body the church, does depend: and to him
we must apply in every time of need. With infinite prudence, with unspotted
fidelity, he manageth and dispenses every thing committed to his charge. In
the end, he will render to God an honorable account of it; and be rewarded
with everlasting glory and greatness. -- My soul, cast all thy "care upon him;
for he cares for thee;" and will give thee thy portion in due season.

32. Christ has the KEY OF DAVID Rev. iii. 7. Is. xx^i. 22.
. He "opens and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man opens. He has
the key of knowledge; he knows all his people's persons, cases, and cares: he
understands the scriptures, and appoints others to explain them. He has the
key of authority, and government in his church; he fixes ordinances, bestows
gifts, and dispenses blessings as he pleases. Maugre all opposition, he opens
the scripture; spreads the light and knowledge thereof: he opens a door of
opportunity to preach the gospel, and gives ministers a door of utterance
therein; and opens the heart to receive the ingrafted word, to the saving of
the soul. It is his to open the door of the church, and admit his chosen sheep,
adding daily "such as shall be saved." It is his to open the door of heaven by
his blood, and bring his saints into that glorious place. Notwithstanding every
contrary attempt, it is thine, O Jesus, to shut up the scripture, and render it
a sealed book; to shut out the gospel, by forbidding to preach it; to shut the
heart, by giving it up to the power of its corruptions; or having entered
thyself, to shut out thy rivals in hell or in earth; and at last to shut the
gates of happiness against thine obstinate despisers. It is thine to shut up
men in trouble, spiritual or temporal; and to relieve them therefrom, at thy
pleasure. -- "O bring my soul out of prison, that I may glorify thy name. Shut"
be my heart to every temptation; to every vanity; to every lust.

33. Christ is compared to an HUSBANDMAN, or master of a field, or vineyard
Luke xiii, 6. -- 9.
. With the inestimable price of his blood, he purchased the field, the vineyard
of his church. He hedgeth it about with discipline and government. Every one
in, or about it, he places in his proper station. All his people, chiefly his
ministers, he appoints to labor in, and watch over it. By convictions, he digs
and ploughs it. By gospel-offers and gracious influences, he fattens it. With
his full flood of DIVine doctrines, and spiritual grace, he waters it. By
cutting off unruly professors, by death, or by church-censure; by purging out
unruly lusts, and irregular practices; by means of sanctified afflictions, good
laws, and gracious influences, he prunes and weeds it. With infinite pleasure
he reviews, walks in, watches over it, and patiently waits for the fruit of
it. His ripe saints he cuts down, transports them to his celestial barns, and
storehouse; while he casts the wicked tares into unquenchable fire. -- The
chief honor of the whole management, he claims for himself; but allows a
proportionate reward to his ministers, his people. -- Be thou, my soul, the
vineyard of the Lord of hosts; and be my graces his pleasant plants.

34. Christ is compared to a SOWER Matthew. xiii. 3. -- 8. 24. -- 32.
. With infinite care and skill, he casts abroad the good seed of his word in
the visible church. Partly it falls upon inattentive sinners, who, like the
way-side, give it no reception, not so much as into their memory and judgment:
part of it upon stony ground, upon obdurate and hardhearted sinners, who,
though at first somewhat affected, quickly wither and return to their wonted
unconcern: part of it among thorns, upon sinners under the power of carnal
cares, which choke and render it unfruitful: part of it upon good ground, upon
renewed hearts, which, in different degrees, bring forth abundant fruits of
righteousness, to the praise and glory of God. After ploughing our heart by
conviction and trouble, it is thine, O Jesus, to cast into it the good seed of
thy grace; thine, by repeated influence, to water and harrow the soil. --
Justly do thou call, and look for our precious fruits; justly do thou
reckon thyself honored, when evangelical truths, gracious influences, and
special providence, make us to abound in the work of the Lord. -- O thy
long-suffering patience, and kind waiting for our repentance! -- But ah the
vengeance, that shall at last overtake such as are obstinate and barren! Alas!
what tares of hypocrites, Satan sows in thy church! What tares of sinful
inclinations and practices are in our heart and life! But we look for a time,
when these dissemblers shall be utterly destroyed. -- Hasten, my soul, unto the
coming of this day of God.

35. Christ is compared to a SHEPHERD Is. xl. 11. Heb. xiii. 20.
. The Father has appointed Him to oversee his people, the flock of his
pasture, to seek and save them when lost. In the wilderness of a natural state,
on the mountains of vanity and guilt, he seeks them out, follows after, and
apprehends them by the word and power of his grace: with joy and gladness, he
lays them on the shoulder of his almighty love; bears them into a new covenant
state; carries them through a present evil world; and, notwithstanding their
weakness and frowardness, bears them at last to his heavenly fold. Exact, O
Savior, is thy knowledge of them, in their persons, their state, and case. It
is thine, to mark the sheep of thy outer pasture, thy visible church, with a
semblance of sanctity; and those of the inner, the invisible church, with thy
real image and Spirit in the hidden man of their heart. It is thine to feed
them with knowledge and understanding, upon the green pastures of thy person,
thy relations, covenant, righteousness, and love. It is thine to preserve them
from the unwholesome pastures of false doctrine, sinful corruption, and carnal
care. It is thine to gather the weak lambs with thy arms, and earry them in thy
bosom; and gently to lead those who are burdened in spirit, and are with young;
concerned to convert others to thy way. It is thine to gather thy chosen into
the fold of the visible church, and of intimate nearness to thyself. In the
scorching noon tide of persecution, of temptation, or of prevalent corruption,
it is thine to give them rest, under the shadow of thy powerful protection and
love; to cause them lie down in the green pastures, and beside the still waters
of refreshful ordinances, redeeming kindness, and gracious influence. By
exposing, by giving thy life for them; by applying thy righteousness; and by
exerting thy providence, in their defense; it is thine to shelter them from
every storm; to save them from every devourer; and preserve them from
destruction: It is thine, tenderly, and with infinite exactness, to observe
their condition, watch over, and keep them, that none may ever be lost: It is
thine to follow after, and by power and love reduce them from every wandering;
-- kindly to pluck them out of every fearful pit, and miry clay, and wash from
their filthiness in the streams of thy blood, thy Spirit. It is thine, to heal
their grievous, their unnumbered diseases; to restore their soul when faint;
and lead them in a way that is right. By church-censure, he now separates the
infected with scandal, that the rest be not partakers in their sins, or their
plagues: at last, he will fully separate the goats, the unclean; and present
the residue before God, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. The Lamb
that is in the midst of the throne shall for ever feed them, in a good pasture;
he shall guide them unto fountains of living water. -- Bless the Lord, O my
soul, that he "brought again from the dead, the great Shepherd of the sheep,"
by the finished price of our redemption, "the blood of the everlasting
covenant."

36. Christ is compared to a PHYSICIAN Matthew. ^x. 12* 13. Is. lxi. 1. Exodus iv.
26.
. Him the Father has sent, sealed, and furnished, to heal our spiritual
ailments. Every man, whose soul is affected with the blindness of ignorance,
the deafness of spiritual unconcern, the fever of concupiscence, the jaundice
of malice, the swelling tympany of pride, the vertigo of inconstancy, the
quinzy of cursing and blasphemy, the dropsy of covetousness, the palsy of
stupidity, the p^eurisy of envy, the rheumatism of discontent, the delirium of
constant levity, the moon-struck madness of passion and rage, or with legality,
unbelief, hardness of heart, the temptations of Satan, the stings of
conscience, or any other plague, has full warrant to apply to him for a cure.
In the word of the everlasting gospel, he exhibits his sign, pul^isheth his all
comprehending skill, and the unfailing efficacy of his prescriptions. He fully
understands our distempers, and their proper, their infallible remedy. By day
or night, he is infinitely ready to visit the distressed! how he rides on
cherubs, on wings of everlasting love, to attend them! O his infinite concern
for the welfare of his patients! All of them, poor and needy, he heals without
money, and without price. How often, while insensibility, self-naughtiness,
unbelieving fear, and shame, restrain us from calling him, comes he, of his own
accord, and says to our soul, Will thou not be made whole? O the large
assortment of his spiritual medicines, contained in the promises of the new
covenant! When he applies them, how thoroughly he examines our case, not that
he, but that we may know it! How thoroughly he searches our wounds, by
convictions and trouble! The poisonous morsels we had swallowed, he makes us,
by penitent grief, to vomit up: our sinful, our inward filth, he purges away.
Every means of cure he applies in its proper order and time. Tenderly he binds
up our painful wounds; and by his promise applies his blood, his
righteousness, and grace to our soul. To prevent, or recover from, sainting
fear and despondency, he pours out his Spirit, sheds abroad his encouraging,
supporting, and refreshful love in our heart, by the Holy Ghost. How often he
visits! how kindly he sympathizeth with us in our affliction! How greatly he
rejoiceth in our recovery! How wisely he prescribes such spiritual exercise and
diet, as infallibly tend to restore and promote our inward health! Nor do any
ever perish under his hand. -- Is he the Lord my God, that heals me? My
all-diseased soul, what would thou that Christ should do unto thee?

37. Christ is the spiritual MIRACLE-WORKER Matthew. xi. 5. John ii. 1. -- 19.
Matthew. xxi 12. John v 44. Mark i. 21. -- 46. Luke viii. 42. 43. 44. John v. 5.
-- 9 Mark iii. v. Luke ^iii 49. -- 55. and vii. 11. -- 17. J^^n xi 39. -- 44.
John ix. Mark vii^. 22. -- 26. Matthew. xx. 34. Matthew viii. 24. -- 33. Mark. v.
1. -- 20. Matthew. xiv. and x^. Matthew viii. 5. -- 13. and xv. 21. -- 28. Luke xx
i. 50. 51. Matthew. xxi. 18. 19. Luke v. 1. -- 10. John xxi. 6. It is here
supposed, Christ's real outward miracles were emblems of his spiritual work.
. Such as were dead in trespasses and sins, he raises to spiritual and
everlasting life. To the blind and ignorant, he gives saving instruction. The
deaf, the stupid, he causes to hear his melting, his still, his small, his
gospel voice. The dumb, he enableth to express themselves in prayer and praise.
He cleanses from the leprosy of indwelling sin. The gospel of peace, the glad
tidings of salvation, he preaches to sinful men, poor, wretched, miserable,
blind, and naked. In consequence of our happy marriage with him, he turns our
water of adversity into comfort and usefulness; he sweetens it, enableth to
rejoice in it, and causes it to work for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. The Jewish confined and carnal sacrifices he threw out of his
church, and made her a sanctified house of prayer for all people. Many Gentile
sinners, many Roman subjects, notwithstanding all their astonishing ignorance
and unbelief, he restored to everlasting life. Satan he ejects from our heart.
By a word, a touch of his power, he cures our spiritual fever, our long-running
issues, our aged impotency; and determines us, when we are healed, to honor
him with the best that we have, and to spread abroad the good savor of his
fame. Along with his command, he enables the withered to stretch out the hand
of faith for a cure. Such as are not only spiritually dead, but by repeated
acts of horrid transgressions, seemingly desperate; or by long custom, stinking
and utterly loathsome in lust, he restores to eternal life; and makes the
distinguished transgressors the chief of his saints. By despised ordinances and
promises; by conviction of our blindness; by the washing of his blood and
Spirit, he opens our blind understanding: gradually he increases our spiritual
knowledge, till we see every thing clearly in the immediate vision of God. The
enraged, the torn by Satan, he kindly delivers, and makes sound in the faith.
The storms of trouble, outward or inward, his word changes into a calm of
peace. By a few debased apostles, he nourished the souls of sinners unnumbered
in the wilderness of the people: by a few despised truths, he nourishes his
people in this wilderness-world, without diminishing the virtue thereof: nay,
the more of his provision we receive, the more we behold to remain. How ready
to do any thing expected by a vigorous, a courageous faith! How many, of his
betrayers and murderers, did he heal by his saving touch! How fearfully, amidst
their lazy, their fair pretenses to holiness, did he curse the Jewish church
into barrenness; and, quickly after his ascension, make them to wither away!
But witness, ye apostles, when you cast the gospel-net on the right, on the
New Testament side of the church, what thousands of souls were caught in it! --
"Sing unto the Lord, for he has done excellent things; this is known in all
the earth. Is any thing too hard for the Lord?"

38. Christ is compared to a MERCHANT Is. lv. 1. Rev. iii. 18.
. How infinite is his assortment of all necessary, and useful blessings,
temporal, spiritual, and eternal. In the gospel he publishes his fullness, and
his gracious terms of sale. How there he constantly exhibits his manifold
blessings, to attract our affection, and excite our souls to buy; to receive
them as the free, the unspeakable, the offered "gift of God, without money and
without price," without righteousness present, and without engaging to render a
requital! How earnest his invitations! How enraptured his joy, when numbers
apply for his benefits, and humbly submit to his terms of grace! How grieved,
when we will have none of him! will not come to him, that we may have life! How
displeased, when, by presenting our base, our counterfeit, our
self-righteousness, we aver that his gifts may be purchased with our money; and
when we try to raise his price! -- Always he understands the whole state of his
affairs; what blessings he has on hand; who are his merchants; and what debts
they owe: and, at the last day, he will call every man to an account. -- Trade
with him, my soul, for thy God, thy glory, and thy all in all.

39. Christ is compared to a REFINER Mal. iii. 2. 3.
. Finding his chosen in a state of corruption and misery, he breaks them with
the hammer of his word, melts them in the furnace of a fiery law, of fiery
troubles, and especially, of his redeeming love contained in the promise, and
shed abroad in their heart by the Holy Ghost, the spirit of burning. Thus he
purges away their corrupt dross, and nothing more; and forms them into
glorious vessels of eternal mercy and happiness. By persecution and censure, he
purges his church from scandalous and naughty persons, till at last he present
her before God without dross, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing.
Blessed Refiner, O when will thou purge away all my dross, and take away all my
tin!

40. Christ is compared to a BUILDER Zech. vi. 13.
. Upon the foundation of his own infinite love, he, with his everlasting
Father, and adored Spirit, laid the foundation, and built up the whole
structure of his new covenant, and of our salvation by it. The fabric of his
human nature he built up, in assuming it: this temple being destroyed by death;
he, in rising from the dead, reared it up in three days. By his birth, his
life, his death, his resurrection, his ascension, intercession, and second
coming; by his word, ordinances, and influences, he builds up the church and
temple of God. On his own mavelous person he founds it: with his blood,
grace, and truth, he cements it: mysteriously he connects all the parts and
concerns thereof: according to his ancient purpose and plan, he frames every
thing relative to it. -- It is thine, O Jesus, to dig us, thy chosen, out of
the quarry of our natural state; to hew and form us by regeneration and
sanctification; to bind us to thyself by mystical union; to rear up a structure
of grace in each of our hearts; build us up in our most holy faith; and to
adorn and finish the work, "with shoutings of grace, grace unto it. -- Mercy
shall be built up for ever."

41. Christ is compared to a TRAVELLER Is. lxiii. 1.
. In the greatness of his strength, in the display of his love, he, as it were,
goes about in the ordinances, and influences of his grace, to seek and save
sinners even the chief; and to visit his people. How often he endures the
saddest injuries! By his word, his providence, and Spirit, how he knocks at the
door of our heart! How wickedly! how shamefully is he often resisted; and
excluded! What ravishing feast of spiritual delights he bestows on those who
receive him! He and his Father enter in, and manifest to them the glory and
sweetness of their person and love.

42. Christ is compared to a SERVANT Is. xlix. 3.
. Cheerfully he engaged to his Father in the service of our salvation. With
amazing diligence, faithfulness, humble condescension, and single regard to his
father's honor, he assumed our nature, and obeyed and suffered in our stead.
By his word he publishes, by his Spirit he applies, his purchased redemption
to our soul. In all mediatorial procedure, he promotes our everlasting
happiness; glorifieth his Father to the highest, performs the work which he
gave him to do; and shall receive from him, a transcendent, an eternal reward
of personal glory, and a numerous seed. What, O Redeemer, shall I render unto
thee for thy service for me! "Truly I am thy servant; I am thy servant: thou
have loosed my bonds."

43. Christ is called a FORERUNNER H^b. vi. 20.
. His goings forth for us were of old, from everlasting. With what swiftness,
strength, and courage! with what patience, cheerfulness, and joy, did he run
the race set before him; go about doing good, healing diseases, preaching the
gospel, obeying the law, and suffering death for us! Glorious Jesus, how much
more excellent than all runners! How have thou outrun and exceeded all! how
have thou first entered into heaven by thy blood; and opened the gates thereof
for us; and taken possession of it in our name! How have thou at once paved our
way, and given us a complete pattern! Lord, draw me; we will run after thee.

Christ is compared to a BURDEN-NEARER Psalm. lv. 2.
. He bare our sins and the punishment thereof, in his own body upon the tree.
He bears the care of all his churches. On his shoulders of power, mercy, and
love, he bears the persons of all his saints, and carries them s^fe to the
mansions above: he bears their cares, in lightning their pressure, and caring
for them: he bears their troubles, in sympathizing with, and supporting them
under them: he bears their burden of service, their work and labor of love, in
performing it in and for them, working in them "to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure." -- It is thine, O Jesus, to bear me up under every pressure: bear me
out, against every opposition; bear me on, in the way of holiness; bear me
home, to glory; and bear me in to thy immediate embraces, that where thou art,
I may be there also, to behold thy glory.

45. Christ resembles the KIND SAMARITAN Luke x. 30. -- 37.
. However much hated, reproached, and abused by our race; yet finding us fallen
among thievish and murderous devils and corruptions, and by them rendered dead
in trespasses and sins; -- when neither broken, nor ceremonial law, nor any
thing earthly, could show us the least pity or relief, he tenderly turns
aside to us, binds up our wounds, applies the most effectual medicine,
commands his angels and ministers to take care of us, comfort, and help us with
the doctrines of his word; and promises to them a proper, an abundant reward.
Blessed Redeemer, pass by me, who am more than half dead; let my time be a time
of love; and say unto my soul, L^VE.

46. Christ resembles LAZARUS of the parable Luke xvi. 19. -- 31.
. In his debased estate he was exceeding poor, had no help but in God alone:
was oppressed with griefs, sorrows, wounds, and bruises. As an humbled Savior,
he was DIVinely sent to, offered, and laid at the door of the scribes,
Pharisees, and other Jews; -- urged on their heart and conscience. These, being
rich in the conceit of their own righteousness, many of them rich in worldly
honor and wealth, and every day refreshed and delighted with the views of
their numerous admirers, wickedly refused and despised him. Mean while, numbers
of d^tested publicans, unclean Gentiles, and notorious sinners, affectionately
applied his blood and suffering for the nourishment of their soul. In due time
he died: quickly he rose again: and thereafter, amidst innumerable hosts of
angels, ascended to heaven. Soon after, God's flaming vengeance to the
uttermost came upon his Jewish despisers. In a hell of trouble upon earth, they
were partly awakened, and lifted up their eyes: partly convicted of his
M^ssiahship, they earnestly wished further demonstration thereof for
themselves, their various sects, and their brethren of the ten tribes. But
notwithstanding their requests, and their relation to Abraham, never shall any
but scripture-evidence be allowed them. If you believe not this, ye children of
men, neither will ye "be persuaded, though one rose from the dead."

47. Christ is compared to a TRAVAILING WOMAN Is. liii.
. Ah, how dreadful the pangs, the throws, the agonies which he underwent! How
shocking the voice of his roaring! How necessary this, to accomplish and bring
forth our everlasting salvation! How comely and pleasant the fruit of his
travail; "glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good will toward
men!" No more ask, my soul, Does a man travail with child? Wherefore see I him
with his hands on his loins? But ask, with astonishment ask, Does the God-man
travail with child? Why, O Redeemer, see I thee "exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death, amazed, and very heavy?" Why thy tears? thy cries? thine anguish? Was
ever sorrow like unto thy sorrow? But now thou rememberest it no more, for joy
that men-children are born unto God: NOW, thou see thy seed, the travail of
thy soul, and art satisfied.

48. Christ resembles a WOMAN with a candle sweeping an house, to find a lost
piece of silver Luke xv. 8.
. To search out, and bring his chosen people to everlasting life, he lights the
candle of his inspired oracles, and preached gospel. Often he sweeps nations
and churches, with the besom of fearful calamity. He sweeps and purges places
and persons, by the dispensation of his ordinances; which, through the
opposition of men, raise a mighty stir, when they enter a country or
conscience: Nevertheless Jesus continues his work, till his precious, his
ransomed ones, are, to the praise of God, the joy of angels and saints,
recovered from among the reprobate world, and the dross of their own
corruption. O Redeemer, how have thou condescended to seek and save me, who was
lost! how precious have I been in thine eyes! shall not thou be infinitely
precious in mine!

49. Christ is compared to an EAGLE Rev. xii. 14.
. Uncomely indeed were his debased appearances, but how infinite is his power!
all piercing his knowledge! unbounded his duration and age! speedy his
execution of his purpose! deep rooted his enmity to Satan and his serpentine
seed! furious his conquest and destruction of them! powerful and majestic the
voice of his word and providence! mysterious and incomprehensible the track of
his purpose and work! royal and large his dominion over all things, especially
over the household of faith! It is thine, adored Immanuel, with steadfast and
comprehensive view, to behold the uncreated SUN of Godhead: thine to instruct
thy people, and enable them to apprehend it now, by faith; hereafter, by
immediate vision. It is thine to ascend on high far above all heavens,
principality, and power; and for ever sit down on the right hand of God; that,
with amazing love and vigor, thy Spirit may descend to take the prey from the
mighty; that, with amazing, but god-like fury, thou may make thine enemies
thy footstool. It is thine to love thy children with an infinite, invincible
love; and, by kind application of thyself, to bring them into spiritual
existence. It is thine to protect them in danger, and hide them in the
munitions of rocks; bear them amidst weakness; and, as is necessary, nourish
them with thy blood. -- Rejoice, my soul; upon the two wings of his word and
providence, shall I, shall all the ransomed escape from our enemies. With the
feathers of his love, his faithfulness, his power, and protecting care, he
shall cover us; and his truth shall be our shield and buckler.

50. Christ compares himself to a HEN gathering her chickens under her wings
Matthew. xxiii. 37.
. How boundless his love! How tender his pity and compassion toward his
people! How kindly, how earnestly, chiefly amidst danger, he invites ^^em to
himself! How readily he receives, hides, and protects them! How tenderly he
cherishes them in their weakness! Think, my soul, how, in our behalf, he
submitted to the sword of DIVine justice, fought to the death with sin, Satan,
and the world; and through his own poverty and want, secures our sweet, our
plentiful provision. -- Blush, ye gospel-despisers, how often would the tender
Jesus "have gathered you, and ye would not!"

51. Christ is compared to a LION Rev. v. 5.
. How royal is his power and dignity! How great his terrible majesty! How
infinitely tender, even unto death, is his love to his seed! How courageous,
even toward God, his boldness, in his suffering and intercession! How narrow
and unceasing his observation of, and how fearful his indignation against his
enemies; who presumptuously oppose, guilefully dissemble with him, wilfully
hurt his interest, or wickedly injure his children! How unbounded his mercy to
those that wholly submit to him! But, thy despisers, O LION, sprung of the
tribe of Judah, shall none deliver out of thy hand, How full is his death, like
the carcass of Samson'^ lion, of honey and sweetness for us! filled indeed with
all the savoury, the inexhaustible fullness of God! How effectually the
sprinkling of his blood heals the most malignant gangrenes of our corruption!
How infallibly it prevents our destruction from those wild beasts, sinful
lusts, a malicious devil, an evil world, -- and a devouring death.

52. He is compared to an ox; FATLING; FATTED CALF Prove. ix. 2. Matthew. xxii. 4.
Luke xv. 23.
. How unbounded his patience? his purity! his strength! his nourishing fullness
of grace and glory! How laborious in his work! Was, not he, my soul, by bloody
suffering, slaughter, and sacrifice, prepared to be thy sweet, thy wholesome
and nourishing food? His "flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed.

53. Christ is compared to a ROE; a HIND, or HEART Song 9. Psalm. xxii. title.
. How extensive is his duration! How great his love! his loveliness! his
gentleness! How quick his motions! How quickly he discerns the case of his
children! How readily he hears their prayer. How kindly he helps them, when
they pass through the waters of affliction! How eminently he delights in
fellowship with them! How speedily, how triumphantly, he leaps OVER the
mountains of distance, suffering, sin, separation; and ON the mountains of
gospel ordinances, to do them good! How kindly he watches over, and cares for
them, while they are young, tender, and weak! How wisely he teaches them to
walk in the way of his commandments; and where to flee in time of danger! How
valiantly he fights with their enemies in their defense! How strong and
irreconcilable is his hatred of the old serpent and his seed! In his debased
state, how these fastened upon and tormented him! In devouring them, his
"thirst was great; and his throat dried as a potsherd." In destroying them, he
was "obedient unto death, even the death of the cross." Hunted and pursued by
woe, from the morning to the end of his life, he was rendered the sweet, the
tender, the DIVinely-allotted nourishment of our soul. Nor do his righteousness
and grace ever fail to counterwork the rage and venom of hell. -- Blessed Hind
of the morning, wast thou early hunted by JEHOVAH's wrath! cursed be my (...)
the cause!

54. Christ is the LAMB Rev. v. John i. 29.
. How infinite is his innocence, meekness, purity, patience, resignation,
loveliness. How mavelous an oblation, a sacrifice to God! How exposed to the
wrath of devils and wicked men! How useful to cover our nakedness, with his
robes of righteousness and salvation! and to be the sweet, the nourishing food
of our soul! He is the Lamb, which God begat, prepared, slew, raised up,
received into glory, and set down on his right hand: the Lamb, which God loves
as himself; and in whom his soul delights. His being in "the midst of God's
throne," imports his fixed residence, his universal influence, his equal
accessibleness to all comers, and his having the Father's heart and eye on him
continually. His appearing there as he had been slain, imports, that his honor
and intercession for us, are the fruit of his suffering, and reward of his
death. His seven horns, signify his perfect power and authority over all
things, particularly in the sevenfold period of the New Testament dispensation,
for the good of his church. His seven eyes, denote his perfect knowledge of all
things, past, present, or future; and his perfect fullness of the DIVine Spirit,
in his various gifts and grace, to bestow upon his ministers and people on
earth. -- "Behold, my soul, this Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the
world. The marriage of the Lamb is come," and himself has made me ready.
Quickly, O quickly may I meet him, "as a bride adorned for her husband; and so
be for ever with the Lord!

55. Christ compares himself to a scarlet-colored WORM Psalm. xxii. 6.
. He assumed our weak and earthly nature; he condescended to the deepest
abasement; our scarlet-like iniquites, our crimson-crimes, were imputed to, and
laid upon him; the punishment of them, the satisfaction for them was exacted,
and he answered it. Ah, how he was exposed to oppression, suffering,
detestation, contempt! In the garden! on the cross, how bedewed! how reddened
with his own blood! Take heed, my soul; beware of trampling him under thy feet:
crucify not the Son of God afresh; nor put him to an open shame. O sweet! O
shocking! -- Why, great JEHOVAH, wast thou made a worm, a bruised, a bloody
worm for ME! Bread of life, why hungry for ME! Fountain of living waters, why
thirsty for ME! Consolation of Israel, why a man of sorrows for ME! Holy one,
why made sin for ME! Adored Immanuel, why despised, rejected, and contemned for
ME! God blessed for ever, why made a curse for ME! Plant of renown, why a
reproach of men for ME! Brightness of the Father's glory, why thy visage
marred! why abused with shame and spitting for ME! Omnipresent, exalted God,
why shut up in a stable, nailed to a cross, for ME! Life eternal, why murdered
by my sins! why, love slain for ME!

56. Christ is called the NAME of God Psalm. xxv. 11. Exodus xxiii. 21.
. In him the glory, the perfections, the titles, ordinances, words, and works,
of God, do center, and are illustriously and for ever displayed. By knowing
him, I know the Father, who he is, "the holy One of Israel, the Father of
light," glory, mercy, and grace; the God of all grace, patience, salvation, and
comfort; my God, and mine exceeding joy. How sweet; how lofty his name! How can
they who know it forbear to trust in it?

57. He is called the IMAGE of God Heb. i. 3.
. In his divine sonship, he is a person distinct from, perfectly like to, and
equal with the Father; the brightness, the bright representation of his glory,
and equally precious to the saints. As Mediator, he is the most illustrious
work of God. In his undertaking, his birth, life, death; in his ascension,
intercession, second coming, and unceasing glory; in his saving office of
Surety, Mediator, Redeemer, Prophet, Priest, and King; in his amiable
relations, appearances, and works, the infinity, the eternity,
unchangeableness, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness, truth,
sovereignty, love, mercy, and majeily of God, with the subsistence of his
unDIVided essence in three distinct persons, are most harmoniously, clearly,
and gloriously unfolded, and represented. Truly, O Jesus, he that has seen
thee, has seen the Father also. Thrice wonderful! in one person, JEHOVAH's
adequate image, and the likeness of sinful flesh! Turn aside, my soul, and
behold this great sight.

58. Christ is called the POWER of God 1 Cor. i 24.
. In his DIVine person, he is possessed of the same infinite power with his
Father and blessed Spirit, In the union of his of his infinitely different, his
opposite natures; in God's punishing him for our sin, and supporting him under
it; in his numerous miracles; in his bearing our sins, and rendering full
satisfaction for them; in his rising from the sealed, the watched grave, as our
quickening head; in his ascending to glory, and sitting down on the right hand
of the Majesty on high; in his eternal and ever-prevalent intercession; in his
judging the world, and executing his decisive sentences; in his removing our
guilt, by justification; in his removing the power and filth of our sin, by
regeneration and sanctification; in his bearing with our unnumbered infirmities
and provocations; in his preserving us from dangers, snares, and temptations,
more than the hairs of our head; in his bearing us to a state of unspotted
holiness, and everlasting joy; is the almighty power of God, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, vigorously exerted, and illustriously displayed. O to know, to
feel, the exceeding greatness; the heart captivating force thereof!

59. He is called the WISDOM of God 1 Cor. i. 24. Prove. viii. and ix.
. As the second person in the adorable Godhead, he is infinitely wise and
prudent. As Mediator, he is the foundation of all the counsels of God. In the
constitution of his person; in his saving offices, relations, and acts; -- how
clearly is the manifold wisdom of God manifested! Here natures, infinitely
distinct, are closely, are inseparably joined. Here, in the purpose, the
promise, the purchase, and application of our redemption, mercy meets with
truth, righteousness and peace kiss each other. Here DIVine justice is
satisfied in the nature that sinned. Satan is conquered in the nature which he
corrupted. Sin is condemned and destroyed, while the sinner is acquitted and
saved. Sin, the worst of all things, occasions the highest honor to God, whom
it had offended; and the greatest felicity to transgressors, whom it had
ruined. The innocent, the holy One and the Just, is justly condemned, and
punished; while ungodly criminals are righteously acquitted, accepted, and
rewarded with endless and inconceiveable bliss. Everlasting life to the
betrayers and murderers, flows from the death of God. Sinners are saved
according to the riches of his grace, and yet in equity most strict.
Temptations and troubles are made to work for us, an exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. And in thee, O Jesus, are "hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge," to be communicated to men. -- Whatever therefore thou art to Jews
or Greeks, be to me the "wisdom of God, and the power of God."

60. Christ is called LOVE Song ii. 7.
. How astonishing his kindness to unworthy sinful men! in undertaking our debt!
in assuming our likeness of sinful flesh! in fulfilling our bond service! in
suffering and dying in our stead! and rising again for our justification! in
ascending to prepare celestial mansions for us! in appearing in the presence of
God for us, as our advocate! and in his coming the second time without sin unto
our salvation! O his kindness in inviting, in seeking and saving that which was
lost! in convincing, in enlightening, in converting, and espousing us to
himself! in forgiving our sin, accepting our person, and cleansing our nature!
in supporting our spirit, cheering our heart, and allowing us the most familiar
fellowship, and endless intimacy with himself? O the love of God to him, and to
us, in giving him to us, our surety, our husband, our portion! -- O blessed
channel of JEHOVAH'S love to us, and of our's to him! blessed author, cause,
and object of our love! and who, in thy person, thy nature, thy names, thy
qualities, thy office, relations, appearances, states, words, and works, art
altogether lovely! Despised, detested, be my love, that is not fixed on thee.

61. Christ is called the TRUTH John xiv. 6.
. He is the ^^ue God, and the true, the sole Mediator between God ^^d man: the
true, the only way to the Father. In his incarnation, suffering, resurrection,
and work, how clearly is marked the untainted faithfulness of God in every
promise and threatening! How plain, that he is the truth and substance of all
the promises; of all the ancient ceremonies! the repository, center, matter,
chief preacher, and witness of all inspired truth! the storehouse and dispenser
of all true holiness and happiness! If I prosess to be his, let truth be in my
inward part; let me "love the peace and the truth;" receive inspired truth in
the love of it; and speak always the truth to my neighbor.

62. Christ is called the WORD of GOD John. i. 1. Rev. xix. 13.
. He is the express image of his Father's person and mind. In the council of
peace he spoke for us; undertook as our surety. In the beginning he spoke of
all things out of nothing. In his intercession with the Father, he ever speaks
in our behalf. By his word and Spirit, he speaks to our ear, our heart. He is
the author, the interpreter, the witness, the subject matter and scope of God's
written word. Inspired page, if he is thy all in all, be thou the darling of my
heart.

63. Christ is called the MERCY promised Luke i. 58. 72. 73.
. Without controversy, he is the greatest blessing ever promised, offered, or
given by a gracious God, to sinful wretched men. He is the contriver, the
purchaser, the price, the repository, the dispenser, the center, the substance,
the glory, and end, of all the gracious benefits of the new covenant. Give
thanks, my soul, to God, for he is good; for his MERCY endures for ever. Thy
mercy, Lord, is in the heavens; the earth is full of thy mercies.

64. Christ is called the unspeakable GIFT of God 2 Cor. ix. 15.
. Freely, without constraint, without request, without defert, without hope of
any requital, without money and without price, God, in the council of peace,
and in his debased estate, gave him for us as our surety and ransom. Now, in
the gospel invitations and promises, he gives him as a complete, able,
willing, and ready Savior, a glorious husband, and everlasting portion to us,
as sinners, even the chief. Is not unspeakable love the sole source and motive
of the donation? Is there not in him all inexpressible, all inconceivable
goodness, all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge? is he not made of God to
us unspeakable fullness of wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. How unspeakably precious and useful is he in his person, office,
and work! From what unspeakable corruption and misery; and to what unspeakable
holiness and felicity does he save us! How unspeakably his entrance into our
heart endears God to us; makes room for him in our soul; and works in us
gladness, and joy unspeakable, and full of glory! And through what unspeakable,
inconceivable duration, shall he abide with us as our God, and our all! "Thanks
be to God for his unspeakable gift."

65. Christ is called the COVENANT given to the people Is. xlii. 6. and xlix. 8.
. He is the foundation, the framer, the finisher, the fulfiller, of the new
covenant. He is the surety, the Mediator, the priest, the trustee, the
testator, the prophet, interpreter, messenger, witness, and king of it. Its
condition he undertook and performed: its blessings he purchased; and is the
substance and glory thereof. All of them were primarily promised to him, and
lodged in his hand. According to the terms of it, he bestows them upon sinful
men, who, being clothed with his righteousness, and quickened by his Spirit,
do, in his strength, lay hold on it, enter into the bond of it, and perform the
gratitude required by the law of it. Blessed covenant, thou art "all my
salvation, and all my desire."

66. Christ is called our PEACE (a). From eternity he devised the matter, the
means, the measure of our peace with God; with our conscience; with neighbors;
with angels; with animals; with creatures unnumbered. With his blood he
purchased it. His continuance in our nature is the unceasing pledge and
security of it. His advocacy before God procures and maintains the actual
possession of it. In the blessed gospel he preaches it to them "that are far
off, and to them that are near." In our new birth, our pardon, our acceptance,
our adoption, sanctification, and endless felicity, he, Mic. v. 5. Ephesians. ii. 14.
by his Spirit, supplies it; slays our enmity; and constrains us to love God,
who first loved us. By his inearnation and death, he made of Jews and Gentiles
one new man, so making peace. Blessed reconciler of all things, author, means,
and end, of all true peace in the church, militant or triumphant; thy peace
thou have left us; peace thou have given us; not sparingly, not revocably, as
the world gives. In the world we shall have tribulation; but in thee we shall
have peace. Thy covenant of peace shall not be broken.

67. Christ is called the SALVATION of God Is. xlix. 6.
. Of our great deliverance from sin and woe, to everlasting holiness and
happiness, his love is the source, the moving cause; his wisdom the deviser;
his blood the price; his person and fullness the substance, the repository; his
word the publisher; his Spirit the applier and confirmer; his glory the end. --
Bless the Lord, O my soul, that he remembered us in our low estate. He "has
devised means, that his banished should not be expelled from him." He has
delivered my soul from the lowest hell. The Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and
song: he also is become my salvation.

68. Christ is called the CONSOLATION of Israel Luke ii. 25.
. He is the deviser, the procurer, the price, the dispenfer, the matter, and
ground, the end of all our true joy and comfort. In his undertaking, his
person, his office, his acts, past, present, and future, how our spirit
rejoiceth in God our Savior! In every DIVine person, character, word, and
work, as manifested in him, how exceedingly we rejoice, and are glad! how
comforted when cast down! In him shall I be justified, preserved, and
sanctified; and in him will I glory. Nor principalities, nor powers, nor sin,
nor trouble, nor death, shall stop me of this boasting. Rejoice, my soul, in
the Lord; and again rejoice. Rejoice evermore.

69. Christ is called the RESURRECTION John xi. 25.
. By his incarnation, his death, his resurrection, and spiritual influence, he
recovers us from the sting of a natural, and from the power of spiritual and
eternal death. The honor of the DIVine perfections, and broken law, man's
primitive integrity, knowledge, righteousness, holiness, peace, friendship, and
intimacy with God, he recovers from death, rubbish, and ruin. He is the
life-giving source, and author of our faith, our hope, our repentance, love,
and new obedience. It is his to revive our languishing graces and comforts; to
restore the expiring life, beauty, and order of his church; to quicken the
dead, and bring them out of their graves; some to everlasting life, and some to
everlasting shame and contempt. He that believes on him, though he were dead,
yet shall he live.

70. Christ is called the LIFE 1 John v. 20.
. He is the living God, who gives life and breath unto all things. In his
wisdom and love he devised; by his obedience, suffering, and death, he
purchased; in himself he exemplifieth; by his intercession he procures; from
his fullness he gives; by his word and Spirit he conveys and maintains; and
himself and fullness are the matter, and his glory the end of -- our life of
justification, holiness, comfort, and endless felicity. It is his to revive us
again; restore our fainting soul; and render us lively and active in the
service of God. -- Is my life hid with Christ in God, that when he who is my
life shall appear, I may also appear with him in glory? Am I crucified with
Christ, and yet live; and yet not I, but Christ lives in me? Is the lise that
I live, by faith on the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me?

71. Christ is called LIGHT John i. 4. 9. and viii. 12.
. He is the excellency, the influencer, the director, the glory of all things.
Being coeval with his eternal Father, that DIVine Sun, how sweet, pleasant,
incomprehensible, bright, and glorious! He gives the power of vision; is the
cause, means, and first object of spiritual knowledge; is seen in his own
influence, and by his own light. It is thine, O light of life, to diffuse
beauty, cheerfulness, joy, and life, among thy people. It is thine, by thy
presence, to chase away the shadows and darkness of ignorance, corruption, and
woe. Without thee, every thing appears to lose its beauty and comeliness; and
existence, enjoyments, creation, nay, Godhead, appear an unsightly, an awful
spectre to my soul. How free, common, accessible, and useful, art thou! and yet
only reported of, to multitudes of blind sinners, who never beheld thy
brightness! It is thine to discover things in their true nature: and hence how
hated, how shunned by men, whose foolish heart is darkened; whose deeds are
evil! It is thine, without contracting any defilement, to penetrate, to shine
into, defiled churches and souls. How swift thy approaches to, and thy motions
in our heart! And as the lightning comes from the east, and shines unto the
west, so shall thy coming, O Son of man, be. -- Blessed author, purchaser,
price, repository, bestower, substance of all our light, spiritual and eternal;
when I sit in darkness, be thou a light unto me; my everlasting light, my God,
my glory.

72. Christ is called the DAYSPRING from on high Luke i. 78.
. He is the Most High, God over all, blessed for ever, amen. How necessary! how
choice! how refreshful a blessing to men! Breaking up and appearing for us in
the council of peace; breaking forth toward us in ancient promises and types;
-- in his actual incarnation; -- in his obediential life, bloody death, and
glorious resurrection; visiting us in the gospel-revelation; manifesting
himself to us in the moment of conversion, of renewed discoveries of his love,
of death, and at the last day, he, after a sad, cold, and dark night of
ignorance, corruption, trouble, or death, does in a most sovereign, certain,
free, gradual, and irresistible manner, rouse, refresh, quicken, and enlighten
his people or church; and manifest his own glory; and introduce a pleasant, a
happy day, of love, of grace, of power, of salvation, of spiritual espousals,
of life, of liberty, of everlasting felicity, rest, admiration, and praise. --
Dawn, O DAYSPRING, on my soul, on the world. Let thy glory fill the whole
earth. Amen, and amen.

73. Christ is called the SUN of righteousness, with healing in his wings Mal.
iv. 3.
. All things are obvious, naked, and open to him. He is the only fountain of
saving light and knowledge. From him do angels, ministers, and saints, derive
their whole insight into the mystery of our salvation. How wonderful! how
unbounded! how high! how sovereign! how comely! how glorious! how pure,
undefiled, and undefileable! how pleasant! how useful is this our blessed Sun!
How cheerfully! how freely! how regularly! how constantly! how unweariedly! how
powerfully! how extensively! he communicates his convincing, his enlightening,
his heart-penetrating, warming, and melting; his soul-quickening, healing,
refreshing, directing, and fructifying; his sin-withering, and consuming
influence! How truly is he the restful center of all things, chiefly of you
redeemed, and of all your concerns! How fast fixed in his sphere! No
principapality nor power, nor sin, nor trouble, nor death, shall ever pluck him
from his station, in the new covenant, -- in the third heaven, -- in the
church, -- or in my heart; nor ever arrest his course. Not ten thousand lamps
of ordinances, ministers, or graces; not ten thousand moons of creation, but
his countenance alone, can give day to my soul. It is thine, O blessed Sun, to
bring life and immortality to light; to guide our feet in the way of peace. Oh,
how sweet to walk in thy light, and work out our salvation with fear and
trembling! It is thine, to warm my cold affections, to melt my frozen heart, to
enkindle my soul into an unquenchable flame of love. It is thine to dispel my
clouds of ignorance, guilt, desertion, temptation; and to chase these shadows
as far as east is distant from the west. It is thine to gild my clouds of
trouble, and make my darkness, my death, my grave, to smile. It is thine to
cheer my heart, call forth my flowers of grace, make them cast out their roots,
and spread their smell as Lebanon. None, O Jesus, remain in darkness, but those
who shut their eyes to thy illumination. Ye sons of sloth, you offspring of
darkness, awake from your sleep; arise that Christ may give you light. It is
high time for you to awake; the day of your life is far spent; now is your
damnation, if mercy prevent not, nearer than when you were conceived. How
different, Lord, the tendency of thy solar, thy gospel light! how it operates
according to the nature of those on whom it shines! Some are instructed,
melted, fructified, and ripened in grace; others are blinded, offended,
hardened, scorched, and fitted for endless fire. Blessed Sun, how DIVersified
is thy appearance! thy perceived influence! Now, the clear shine of thy
incomprehensible brightness, makes all my heart to leap, and all my lot to
smile, with joy and gladness. Viewed, in the firm faith that thou art mine, the
defart of adversity, the valley of the shadow of death, blossoms as the rose;
the excellency of Carmel and Sharon is given to it; I account myself, above
all, loaded with loving kindness, and tender mercies. Dazzled with thy glory,
that excels, my eyes lose sight of created comely scenes; I tread the moon
of this world under my feet: I count all but loss, but dung, for the excellency
of Christ Jesus my Lord: all my powers cry out, "O Lord, who is like unto thee?
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none on earth that I desire
besides thee." ANON, how beclouded with black defertion, towering guilt,
slavish fear, and raging corruption! How eclipsed by our earthly moon! Her
cares, her comforts, come between thee and my heart! Ah, how they hide thy
face, shear thy rays, and blot out the day from my soul! How often is my sun
put down at noon! Now, blessed Lord, thy near approach, thy high elevation,
create the summer of my soul: I bask, I melt, below thy warming rays; and am
love-sickened with thy genial heat. ANON, thou do withdraw, and stand afar
from me; sure cause of inward wintry woe! What then succeeds? A withered,
fruitless, miry life; a faint, a frozen, careless heart! Have I forgot the
shocking period, when the sun himself was darkened; the cause of summer was
bewintered! Bright Sun! brightness of the Father's glory! how wast thou turned
into blackness, and into blood! how fall from heaven! lie groaning on the
ground! hang fixed to a cross! descend to the sides of the pit! darkness thy
curtain, and thy bed the grave I The astonished earth on trembling fell!
created sun was shocked to see thy shame! How I saw! ten thousands saw thee set
in darkness, and in purple gore! Vile, rocky, shameless heart, did thou see
and sit unmoved at the sight! Cursed be my sins, my lusts, the guilty cause.
But happy morn! by faith I saw him burst the bonds of death; I saw him rise; --
rise with ten thousand charms; -- my finished ransom; my endless light; my God;
my glory; and my ALL IN ALL! I saw him rise with thousands of once fallen, but
now rising stars. I felt the raising power, and straight with him did mount, to
plant the new-framed heavens of grace. How, blessed Jesus, by rising in the
ancient promise, did thou dispel the midnight ignorance, and utter
hopelessness of men! By rising in thy birth, thy death, thy resurrection, and
ascension, how did thou dispel the darkness, and chase away the shadows of
Hebrew ceremonies! By arising in gospel ordinances, how did thou abolish the
winter of Heathenism, error, and delusion! By rising in thy spiritual
influence, how thou turnest our darkness into light; make our darkened*souls
become light in the Lord! By rising to judgment, how thou will totally,
finally, dispel the darkness of ignorance and error! banish the cold of sin,
trouble, temptation, or death! chase far off every shadow of imperfection, of
vain imagination! extinguish every candle, of minister, ordinance, or
scripture! and usher in the eternal noon of perfect vision, and unclouded
glory! Eternal Sun, whose morning measures all our temporary periods of
duration, how gradually have thou risen all along; and gradually thou risest in
my soul! O when will thou attain thy blessed meridian, that in my flesh I may
see God; see him as he is, and know him even as I am known! Art not thou the
Sun of righteousness? Thine it is to bring in an everlasting righteousness. It
is thine to declare and preach the righteousness of God. It is thine, by the
imputation of thy life, thy death, and by the influence of thy grace, to render
all thy people righteous. O the healing in thy wings! If I but see thy
countenance; if I but feel thy rays; I am made whole of whatsoever disease I
had.

74. Christ is called the MORNING STAR Rev. ii. 28.
. In greatness, and constancy, how far his height, his glory, his benign
influence, transcend those of angels and ministers! Who, O Jesus, among gods,
or stars, is like unto thee? O great ornament in the firmament of the creation
and church, it is thine to guide thy chosen in this world, chiefly in the
winter of their affliction. It is thine to be the sure pledge of an
approaching, an everlasting glory. Thou art the first and the last; the Alpha
and Omega of all our salvation, and all our desire: the author and the finisher
of our knowledge, our faith, our hope, our repentance, love, and new obedience;
our evening and our morning comforter and guide. Nothing can pluck thee from
thy office and station. Nothing can arrest thy course, or retard thy coming to
suffer or save. To the adulterous and thievish sons of obscurity, how unwelcome
and terrible is thy brightness! But how desired of those who hate the
unfruitful works of darkness! Thy coming in the flesh ushered in the day of the
gospel-period. Thy spiritual coming ushers in the day of effectual salvation.
Thy coming in the clouds shall introduce a day of universal account, and of
endless glory. -- Is this day star, O my soul, risen in thine heart?

75. Christ is compared to RAIN and DEW Psalm. lxxii. Hos. xiv.
. JEHOVAH alone is his Father. He is at once the Lord from heaven; and the
virgin's son, the fruit of the earth. From the vast ocean of redeeming love,
his offices, his relations, his promises, and influences, proceed; and to the
glory thereof they return and redound. O how sovereign! how seasonable! how
gradual! how comely! how numerous and necessary! how refreshful! how reviving,
and nourishing, and fructifying, the applications of them to our heart.

76. Christ is a FOUNTAIN or WELL Song iv. 15. Zech. xiii. 1.
. In the council of peace, and in his incarnation and death, he was dug by
his Father. In his person, his office, his relations, his righteousness and
grace, what a mavelous, a deep, an abundant, a never-failing source of all
necessary, free, plentiful, pure, pleasant, refreshful, heart-cooling,
comforting, cleansing, quickening, and fructifying influence to men! and which
are especially conveyed to them, while they are abased in his sight!
Thrice-blessed, that, by purifying millions of polluted souls, he himself can
never contract defilement! He is a fountain of gardens, for the use of his
churches: in these, in his worshipping assemblies, and in the hearts of his
people, his influence breaks forth, and is effectual. He is a fountain of
living waters. The ever-fresh influence of his word, his blood, his Spirit,
begets life in dead sinners, maintains it in saints, restores it when
languishing, and perfects it into life eternal. He is a fountain opened. He is
publicly and freely exhibited to every sinner in the gospel: and how constant
is our access to apply his word, his blood, his Spirit, for our purification!
So, Jesus, sprinkle thou many nations. Except thou wash me, I can have no part
in thee.

77. Christ is compared to RIVERS of water in a dry place Is. xxxii. 2.
. To you, sons of men, who live in the dry, the barren, the blasted, withered
wilderness of this world; to you who are in the barren, sapless state of
nature; to you who are in a scorched, withered, and lifeless condition; there
is in him, an open, free, common, a perpetual, pure, fresh, ever-running, and
abundant fullness of cleansing, comforting, strengthening; of fructifying,
adorning, enriching, protecting power, grace, love, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. Thrice-blessed River, whose streams make glad
the city, the church of God. Here drink, here bathe, my soul; drink, yea, drink
and wash abundantly, O beloved.

78. Christ is called STREAMS from Lebanon Song iv. 15.
. From the bowels of Godhead, his mediatory office and fullness proceed. From
the high mountain of his DIVine person, his influences stream. How various
their forms and effects! How powerfully they bear down, conquer, and remove
every impediment, of sin, unworthiness, or guilt! How free! how cooling! how
pleasant! how refreshful, nourishing, and constant! Ho every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters; whosoever will, let him take of the water of
life freely: come to him, and drink. Never, ye chief of sinners, shall you be
able to exhaust and draw up this overflowing Jordan into your mouth. Ye leprous
Syrians, wash here; wash seven times, and be clean. Will men leave this snow of
Lebanon, that comes from the Rock of ages, the rock of the field, the free,
the common, the obvious Savior? Shall the cold flowing waters, that come from
the heavenly place, be forsaken?

79. Christ is compared to a TREE Ezekiel. xvii. 22. 23. 24.
. How deeprooted in self-existence, absolute independency, and immutability, is
his DIVine person! How strong! how durable, exalted, and glorious! How firmly
rooted in the everlasting, and infinite love, in the unchangeable perfections
and purposes of God, are the constitution of his person as God-man, and his
mediatory office! In his humble birth, how, in his manhood, he grew up, as a
root out of a dry ground! In his life, afflicted and sorrowful; how he grew up!
how he increased in grace, and in favor with God and with men! In his
sufferings, how the axe of his Father's wrath was laid to the root of the tree!
In his death, how hewas cut down! Three days and three nights, he lay prostrate
in his grave. In his resurrection, and in his ascension, how he grew up to
astonishing height, transcending both angels and men! Now he is planted, he
grows on the high mountain and eminent of his Father's right hand; on the lofty
ordinances of the gospel church. In him there is abundant sap, -- a
never-failing fullness of grace and glory. Among the branches, and under the
shadow of his excellencies, offices, and relations, do the ransomed birds of
paradise six themselves, and sing forth his praise. May I sit there triumphant,
and shout the Redeemer.

80. Christ is called the TREE OF LIFE Rev. xxii. 2.
. He prepared, he purchased, he offers, he bestows, he restores maintains, and
perfects our life, spiritual and eternal. He is the food on which we now live
by faith: the certain pledge that we shall live for ever; because he lives we
shall live also: and when HE who is our life shall appear, we "shall also
appear with him in glory. He grows in the street, and on either side of the
river:" In every gospel-ordinance, he is exhibited: to men in general, wicked,
or gracious, Jews, or Gentiles, he is offered: every where in his church
militant or triumphant is he present, and is the life, the open refreshment,
the substance, the support, and glory thereof. And by the influence of his
blessed Spirit, that river of life, is he apprehended and enjoyed. He "bears
twelve manner of fruits every month:" by him an angry God is appeased and
reconciled: justice is satisfied; the broken law is magnified! an everlasting
righteousness is brought in; the covenant of grace, confirmed? Satan conquered;
our sin pardoned and subdued; our persons accepted; our hopes of glory
recovered; our victory over sin, Satan, death, and an evil world, secured;
ministerial gifts bestowed; the gospel published; the Holy Ghost sent to
sanctify, preserve, direct, and comfort us; the mansions of heaven prepared for
us; freedom from a broken covenant, a ceremonial law, and satanical
temptations; boldness toward God; familiar intimacy with him; a full and ready
answer to every charge, that can be laid against us, before him; the favorable
acceptance of our good works; the constant hearing and seasonable granting of
our requests; a believing assurance of all new covenant bessings, are
infallibly secured. All are ever ripe and ready, for the enjoyment of his
people in every case, delightful or grievous. His "leaves for the healing of
the nations," are his word, his ordinances, and spiritua linfluences, which
communicate spiritual healing to the nations of them that are saved, in every
age, place, and condition.

81. Christ is compared to an APPLE TREE Song ii 3.
. In usefulness, for honoring his Father, and saving his people; in comeliness
and beauty, he infinitely transcendeth angels and men: he is the darling, the
chief, care of Heaven. His honor is easily injured; he is readily touched with
the injuries, done to his children. For us, he bears the wholesome, the sweet,
the savoury, the cooling, the refreshing, the healing, the love exciting,
apples of everlasting righteousness, of pardon, acceptance, regeneration,
adoption, sanctification, of spiritual, peace, comfort, and endless happiness.
How savoury! how medicinal, are the very leaves and blossoms of his word and
ordinances, to those who labor under the sense of their spiritual emnity,
ignorance, pride, hypocrisy; malice, envy, unbelief, legality, earthly
mindedness; of heart-wandering, deadness, or other inward plagues! If by faith
we touch the hem of his garment, we shall be made whole. But if the ^OMECITRON
TREE be here meant, Christ is compared to it, for his greatness and excellency.
In the production, how bitter tasted to him were his fruits, which are so
fragrant to us! and amidst what bitter tribulations we now experience their
delightful sweetness! How constantly ripe! how effectual a remed against the
poison of sin! How they strengthen, and perfame our spiritual breath! -- Sit, O
my soul, under his shadow with great delight, and let his fruit be sweet to my
taste.

82. Christ is compared to a CEDAR-TREE Song. v. 15. Ezekiel. xvii. 23.
. How infinite the depth, the firmness of his root; his Godhead, and even the
establishment of his Mediatorial person and office! How high! how excellent!
how strong, firm, and incoruptible! how ever flourishing and comely! In his
incarnation, he grew as a root out of dry ground. In his humiliation, how
exposed to storms and suffering! How complete! how extensive and refreshing the
shadow of his protection and righteousness! How abundant his fullness of sap! --
of grace and virtue! How manifold his use in erecting the temple! the church!
the newcovenant building of mercy! and the frame of grace in our heart! How
sweet! how fragrant to our soul, his person, his office, his relations, his
names, his ordinances, righteousness, and grace! -- Is he to me as "Lebanon,
excellent as the cedars!"

83. Christ is compared to a FIR TREE (a). In his debasement, he sprang up in a
barren ground, from a degenerate nation, and from a debased family, and an
impoverished virgin; and grew up in the cold, the barren soil of a blasted
world, a low, an afflicted life. How infinite his excellency and comeliness!
How untainted his integrity and uprightness! Being exalted too the right hand
of the Majesty on high, how he bends downward his boughs of promises and
influences, that he may dwell with, and be apprehended and held fast by the
debased transgressor, the humble soul! how perpetually verdant; "the same
yesterday, today, and for ever!" How unfading his glory! How free from every
knot of corruption! How unbounded his sap, his fullness of grace and of glory!
In him it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell. How completely he
protects his chosen from the heat, the storm of almighty vengeance, and of the
temptations of Satan! How he exposed his head, his heart, for our sake! How
sweet! how open! how abundant the access of unclean storks of polluted sinners
Hos. xiv. 8.
to enter in, and abide under, the shadow of his branches! -- My soul, make him
thy house, thy safe, thine endless habitation.

84. Christ is compared to an OLIVE TREE, or two OLIVE BRANCHFS Zech. iv. 11.
-- 14.
. How infinite is the fullness of grace, which resides in his complex person.
And how infinite is his readiness to communicate it to his people. And what a
sure emblem of perfect peace between God and my soul! -- If I hear of him in
the gospel, it is the voice of the Lord, saying, "Peace, peace to him that is
afar off, and to him that is near," If I believe; if I feel him in my heart;
God keeps me in perfect peace: his covenant of peace shall not be broken.

85. Christ is compared to a CLUSTER OF COPHER, in the vineyards of Engedi
Song. i. 14.
. If COPHER mean the cyprus vine; Christ resembles it in his abundant, his
nourishing, his strenghthening, and comforting virtue; If it mean the
cypress-tree; Christ resembles it in his sweetness, his purity, his healing,
and anointing virtue; his ever appearing as our dying, our crucisied Redeemer.
If it signify the cypirus, or sword-grass; Christ resembles it in his
fruitfulness, his savouriness, his mavelous virtue to strengthen our soul,
and to heal the bites, the stings, the wounds made by the old serpent. If it
mean dates, the fruit of the palm tree; Christ resembles them in his
wide-spread renown, his infinite sweetness, and nourishing virtue. If it denote
balsam; Christ resembles it in his preciousness, his acceptableness, his
sweetness and fragrancy, his preserving, his allhealing, and nourishing virtue.
If it be camphire; Christ resembles it in his good savor, his healing, his
reviving, and exhilarating virtue. He is compared to a CLUSTER: for, O the
fullness, the sweet, the firm, the mysterious connection of his unnumbered
excellencies, graces, blessings, promises!

86. Christ calls himself the TRUE VINE John xv. i.
. In his humanity, how tender, weak, debased! exposed to contempt and
suffering! how spoiled by foxes, by Satan, by Jewish seducers! by Gentile
persecutors! but how honorable in his person, his character, and office! how
easily; how much injured! how sensible, and observant of it! how quickly he
grew up in favor with God, and with men! How early was he about his Father's
business! how he abounds with quickening, with heart-warming, and enlightening
virtue! What sweet, what profitable, refreshing, and medicinal grapes of
righteousness, of peace, of pardon, acceptance; of spiritual sonship,
sanctification, perseverance, comfort, and eternal glory, he brings forth! what
extensive and refreshful shadow of protecting perfections, offices, promises,
and providence, he affords to his people! Blessed Vine, why, after thy
fruitfulness, wast thou cut down! why burnt in the fire of thy Father's wrath!
not for thine, but for our barrenness, our unprofitableness. Why wast thou
trodden in the wine press of his indignation? why was thy soul troubled,
squeezed, and pressed out of measure! Was it, that I might for it for ever
drink new wine with thee in the Father's kingdom! Arise, ye sinners, ye
companions of sorrow; take this cup of salvation, and call on the name of the
Lord. With pleasure, sit every one under the shadow of Jesus, his own vine, his
own fig tree.

87. Christ is compared to a ROOT Is. liii. 1. Rev. xxii. 16.
. He is the hidden, the invisible God: on earth his glory was veiled: now we
see him not, but believing we rejoice. How infinitely safe, firm, and
unchangeable! how full of sap, of communicative virtue! how he supports! how
mysteriously he conveys existence, life, and nourishing virtue to his people!
In the winter of spiritual indifference, deadness, darkness, desertion, and in
the storms of persecution, temptation, and trouble, how effectually he
preserves them from total withering! Against him, in his person, office,
righteousness, and grace, do our enemies with their axe of opposition
principally strike. -- Blessed Root of David, and of every other creature,
especially of these of the household of faith, neither storm, nor drought, nor
axe, nor age, can despoil thee of thy vigor, thy freshness. When the earth and
the works thereof are burnt up, thou shall appear in all the budding glories of
the spring, and because thou live, I shall live also.

88. Christ is called the BRANCH or GROWTH Is. xi. 1. Zech. iii. 8.
. In his humanity he springs out of the root of Jesse. His humanity has no
root of itself, but subsists in his divine person. How comely, verdant, and
fruitful is he as man and Mediator. With honor to God, and happiness to men!
He is a TOP BRANCH, sprung of David's royal family; and in himself most
excellent and honorable; higher than kings of any land, He is the branch of the
Lord, raised up by, cared for, and fruitful to the glory of, God. He is a
branch of righteousness; for the display of his righteousness, God sent him
into the world, raised him up, and made him bring forth, an everlasting
righteousness, for our justification; and by his influence are all his children
made righteous in good works.

89. Christ is called the PLANT OF RENOWN raised up by God Ezekiel. xxxiv. 29.
. In his ancient purpose, in his incarnation and death, God planted him: in his
resurrection and ascension, he raised him up, and gave him glory: In the
preaching of the gospel, in the esteem and affection of his people, he
continues to exalt him: at the last day he will raise him up to judge the
world, and thereby display his astonishing height and grandeur. In his
pedigree, his person, his natures, names, his qualities, offices, relations,
and work, how infinitely famous! for antiquity; for deep humiliation; for
excellent beauty; for never-fading verdure; for nourishing and medicinal
virtue; for refreshful savor and shadow; for astonishing fruitfulness in every
necessary, every useful benefit; how widely is he renowned! -- O publish his
name; declare his doings among the people; ascribe ye greatness to our Christ;
let every one to another, "the fathers unto the children, declare his truth. My
Soul, what think I of Christ, whom prophets, apostles, and DIVine persons, so
much extol?

90. Christ is called the ROSE OF SHARON, or field Song ii. 1.
. In his birth, he grew out of David's withered root; he grew up in the field
of this world, and was therein exposed to contempt, trouble, and death. In the
field of his word and ordinances, he is to be found as the free, the common
Savior of men. In his person God-man, how beautiful and glorious, -- the
honor of creation! His character, offices, his relations, righteousness, and
grace, how savoury and refreshful! how effectually, if applied, they cure our
heart-burning enmity and malice! our spiritual blindness, despondency, and
consumption in sin!

91. Christ is called the LILY OF THE VALLEY Song ii. 1.
. Once he was planted in a debased state, in the low valley of our world. To
the most wretched sinners he is offered; and in the humble heart he takes up
his abode. How infinitely savoury, pure, comely, and fruitful! How high; yet
how meek, lowly, and condescending! What an effectual remedy are his
influences, against our spiritual pride, faintness, blindness, hardness of
heart, or any like plague! None of the diseases of Egypt, O Savior, shall come
upon me; for thou art the Lord my God, that heals me. Under my foolish, my
sinful attempts, every ailment is hopeless; but thou have power over all
plagues; when thou will, thou can make me whole.

92. Christ is compared to a BUNDLE OF MYRRH Song i. 13.
. How unbounded and unsearchable! how well connected, and inamissible, his
fullness of righteousness and grace! how it endears him to his Father, and to
his people! how it pleases, refreshes, beautifieth, perfumes, purifies, --
prevents corruption, heals and anoints their soul! Bitter indeed, O Redeemer,
were thy sufferings to thee! bitter is our cross, which attends thy coming to
our soul! but, thyself, how precious an offering to God, and how precious a
gift of God to men! -- O, till the night of trouble, of time, be finished, lie
between my breasts; dwell near my heart: lodge amidst the embraces of my faith
and love!

93. Christ compares himself to a CORN OF WHEAT, cast into the ground, that it
might die and bring forth much fruit John xii. 24.
. In himself how pure, precious, and substantial! how sweet and durable! -- In
his incarnation he fell into the earth; in his suffering and exit he died; but
rose again, and grew up to amazing heights of exaltation. Innumerable glories
he brought forth, to himself and to his Father: innumerable blessings he
brought forth, for the wholesome nourishment of our soul: innumerable saints he
brings forth, and renders the blessing and substance of the nations. -- Feed,
my soul, on this finest of the wheat. Let my useful life bear witness, that for
me Jesus died, and rose again, according to the scriptures.

94. Christ is called the FIRST FRUITS 1 Cor. xv.
. First in order of nature, and as the pledge of our resurrection, he rose from
the dead. How transcendent and incomparable is his excellency! How solemnly was
he himself, and, by him, are his saints, consecrated to the service of God. On
that day the first fruits of barley were offered, he rose from the grave. On
that, upon which the first fruits of wheat were offered, he returned to bless
the nations in the power of his Spirit.

95. Christ is compared to a GREAT ROCK Is. xxxii. 2. Matthew. xvi. 18. Matthew.
vii. 24. 25.
. How infinitely high! how firm! unchangeable! and invincible! What a boundless
mine of precious; of more than golden blessings! What a source of living, of
life-giving waters! What a furnished herbary of medicinal simples for the
healing of the nations! What a sure foundation of our hope! our endless
felicity! What a safe, a lofty, a curious residence! where no enemy can annoy
us! where we are sheltered, protected, and refreshed, with DIVine perfections
and providence! where we enjoy the most clear, extensive, and pleasant
prospect of the whole fullness and ways of God! Blessed Rock higher than I; more
excellent than mountains of prey; sufficient to overshadow me! Lofty munition
of rocks, cause my soul to mount up, and reside in thee; so shall I see the
King in his beauty, and the land that is very far off: bread shall be given me,
and my water shall be sure. O Rock of ages, while I am in this weary world,
this weary estrangement from my God, be thou my rest and my refreshing. Smitten
by thy Father's wrath, pour me forth streams of oil, of honey, and butter.
Never envy, O my soul, the portion of the wicked: their rock is not as my rock,
mine enemies themselves being judges.

96. Christ is compared, perhaps, to mount CARMEL Song vii. 5.
. As God, how infinitely high! As Mediator, how exalted! In him, on the one
hand, how wide our prospect of creation and time! on the other, of the sea-like
perfections of God! of unbounded eternity! How fertile he, of grace and of
truth! How productive of glory to God, and blessings to men! Planted in him,
how we abound in the fruits of righteousness, to the praise of the glory of his
virtue and grace! But if the word signify CRIMSON, Christ resembles it, in
bearing our sins, in suffering their punishment; and in receiving his royal and
glorious reward. Suppose, my soul, thou should resist unto blood, striving
against sin, let thy conversation be in heaven, whence I look for the Savior:
let the fruits of the Spirit in all goodness be in me, and abound; so shall I
never fail.

97. Christ is compared to LEBANON, that goodly mountain on the north of Canaan
Song v. 15.
. How infinitely higher than angels and men! How far ascended above all
heavens! How great! how unfading his comeliness and excellency! how pleasant to
behold! How fragrant and precious his product! his unfailing fruits of
righteousness and grace! What unnumbered cedars of saints grow up in him! What
cleansing and refreshful streams of mercy flow from his bowels! How fully he
protects our promised land, our new covenant state, from the northern blasts of
devouring wrath! And happy! happy! in him are no dens of lions, no lodging of
leopards. -- Be thou my residence, my dwelling place in all generations.

98. Christ is compared to a LITTLE STONE, cut out of the mountain without
hands, which brake in pieces Daniel's fourth beast, and became a great
mountain, which filled the whole earth Dan. ii. 34. 35.
. In his debasement, how low was his condition! How is he despised and rejected
of men! How much unknown to, and disesteemed by the saints! How sovereignly
sent of God to save us! How conceived and born into human nature by a virgin,
who knew not a man! To make way for his spiritual kingdom, he overthrew the
Heathenish empire of Rome, and subdued the nations to himself. A time comes,
when the knowledge of him shall cover the whole earth, as the waters cover the
sea; when the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever. -- O blessed Mountain,
fill my country, my house, my heart!

99. Christ is called a STONE, living, chosen, precious, and tried Is. xxviii.
16. 1 Pet. ii. 8.
. How firm, strong, immutable, and lasting! He has all life in himself, and
quickens whom he will! How infinitely valuable, and dear to God, angels, and
saints! the desire of all nations! the gold that perishes not! the inestimable
jewel, that makes multitudes boast themselves, because they are become
exceeding rich! JEHOVAH chose him to be our Mediator, and tried him in the fire
of his indignation. The saints choose him for their husband, their ALL; and try
him, by dependence on him, in their conviction, their temptations, and fiery
troubles.

100. Christ is called ONE STONE, upon which are seven eyes Zech iii. 9.
. How infinitely firm and durable! How distinguished and unmatched! The chief
among ten thousand! Of what perfect, what DIVine knowledge is he possessed! It
is his to know and direct all things; to observe, to pity, and regard his
chosen in every state and case. On him how fixed are his Father's eyes! With
what pleasure he views his person! his undertaking! his incarnation! his life!
his death! his resurrection, and ascension! his intercession for us! How fixed
on him are the eyes of the blessed Spirit, to take of his, and show it unto us!
How fixed on him, the eyes of angels, to admire, depend, and wait on, worship,
and serve him! How fixed on him were the eyes of ancient believers, looking,
and longing for his coming into the likeness of sinful flesh! They saw his day
afar off, and rejoiced to see it. How fixed on him are the eyes of all saints,
looking to him for pardon, for righteousness and salvation; and longing for his
second appearance! When he comes with clouds, how fixed on him shall be the
eyes of every rational creature! Every eye shall see him; and all the wicked
kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. With what burning love,
ravishing wonder, and enrapturing praise, shall holy angels, and ransomed men,
for ever gaze on his person, and see him as he is! Look to him, my soul, that
thou may be lightened. Let my waiting eyes be set on him. Beholding as in a
glass, the glory of the Lord; be thou changed into the same image from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. He is the stone, of which God
engraveth the graving. Upon the palms of his hands, are divinely engraven the
names of all his chosen; their salvation is put under his care and management.
They are graven on his heart. He was DIVinely constituted their kind
representative and surety, and appointed to appear in the presence of God for
us. In respect of manifestation, how deep engraven, on his person and office,
are the perfections of God! How gloriously engraven on his humanity, the
adorning graces of the Holy Ghost! In his debasement, how was he marked with
wounds and bruises! how DIVinely made perfect through suffering! In his
exaltation, how DIVinely is he marked with glory and honor!

101. Christ is called a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense 1 Pet. ii. 8.
. Provoked at his humble birth, his debased life, his ignominious death, and
sorry retinue of disciples; at the holiness of his law, the searching and
evangelic nature of his doctrine; at the simplicity of his ordinances, the
meanness and misconduct of his followers; -- the Jews, and many others, to
their spiritual hurt, to their everlasting ruin, refuse to embrace and obey
him. Blessed, O Jesus, is he, whosoever is not offended in thee.

102. Christ is compared to a WAY John xiv. 6. Is. xxxv. 8.
. By his Father's royal appointment, he came into this world. He removed every
impediment of our access to God, and left us an example to walk in his steps.
Through his mediation, his atonement, and intercession, we must go out to our
warfare with Satan, with the world, and our lusts; must go sorth to trade with
heaven in the free receipt of all the fullness of God; and to walk in holiness
toward the celestial bliss. In the gospel, his person and office are
exhibited, as the sole means of JEHOVAH'S kind visits to us, and of our passage
from Satan to God; and from sin and misery to grace and glory. In THIS, all who
hear the gospel, are fully warranted to enter and walk; and by him they are
graciously received, freely supported, perpetually directed, and finally
ushered into endless felicity. O new and living way of holiness, in which men
shall not remain unclean, though it be for THOSE! O sure, safe, easy, plain,
pleasant, heavenly path! O costly, free, DIVine way! may foolish I walk in
thee, without erring! United to thy person; justified by thy blood; influenced
by thy love; enabled by thy strength; subject to thine authority; acting as
under thine eye; always intending thine honor; let me follow thee, and go up
and down in thy name, and walk humbly with my God.

103. Christ is compared to a GATE and DOOR John x. 9.
. By the wisdom, the power, and authority of God, he is constituted the proper
means of our admission to the church, and the offices thereof: the only means
of our access into a gracious state, or into the knowledge, favor, and
presence of God: the sole means of our defense from the storm of DIVine wrath,
or the violence of our spiritual foes. Through him alone, JEHOVAH bestows his
gracious alms of a full salvation, on those destitute sinners, who apply for
the same: and in him alone, our prayers and services are accepted. Now, in the
promises, the invitations, and offers of the gospel, he is wide opened to men;
him that comes to him, he will in no wise cast out. At death, this exhibition
will be shut to us; and at the judgment, to all his despisers: and for ever
shall those, who are found without him, be confirmed in their miserable estate.
He is represented as several, as twelve gates, three looking toward every
airth: he is preached to sinners in all the ends of the earth; and O their
free, their abundant access to God by him! He is represented as gates of pearl:
for, O his unbounded preciousness and excellency, in his person and mediation!
And, blessed be the Lord, he is open night and day; in every case, a ready
means of access to God. They that come to him, shall, in spiritual liberty, go
in and out, and find pasture; but shall no more go out from their gracious
state. By this gate of God, let me enter in, and bless the Lord.

104. Christ is compared to an HABITATION, and dewlling place John vi. 50.
. How furnished with every necessary accommodation, all spiritual provision!
His righteousness and strength are the covering: his love the bed to refresh,
and the fi^e to warm and melt our heart: his flesh and blood, his person,
righteousness, and purchased benefits, are the nourishing provision: he, his
Father, and blessed Spirit, the delightful companions. With transcendent
pleasure and gladness, his people abide in their state of union and communion
with him. With familiar boldness, they receive and improve the righteousness,
peace, pardon, acceptance, adoption, wisdom, sanctification, and redemption,
which are lodged in him. -- Where, my soul, dwell thou? Is Christ thy home?
Hail then thy happy state! No plague shall come near thy dwelling. Charge me,
my conscience, to be a keeper at home, that my HOUSE may guide me: never let me
be a bird wandering from her nest.

105. Christ is compared to a COVERT and HIDINGPLACE Is. iv. 6. and xxxii. 2.
. Secretly and mysteriously, in his person, righteousness, power, and love, are
the persons, the life, safety, happiness, and comfort of his people, hidden and
infallibly secured, from the avenging fury of an angry God, and against all
danger and hurt, from sin, Satan, the world, death, or hell. -- Am I hidden in
him? Let rains come, and winds of temptation blow; no evil shall come near me.
Quickly, O mine enemies, shall you seek me, and shall not find me; nay, even
now, whither I go, ye cannot come; for having entered into his heart, his hand,
the Lord has shut me in.

106. Christ is called a SANCTUARY and REFUGE Heb. vi. 19.
. What a sufficient shelter and residence for guilty and bestormed sinners! How
DIVinely prepared, and allotted for them to flee to, for protection from God's
avenging justice, from a broken law, a raging devil, and an evil world! And in
him we are to live, denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and walking
soberly, righteously, and godly, offering the proper sacrifice, and incense of
prayer, of praise, and of good works unto God.

107. Christ is compared to a TENT and shadow Is. iv. 5.
. How DIVinely reared! By his imputed righteousness, how sweetly he saves his
people from the scorching beat of God's wrath! By his power and love he
protects them from the windy storms which are raised by Satan and wicked men,
and gives them a sweet, a refreshful rest in himself. This, my soul, is thy
rest, and thy refreshing.

108. Christ is compared to a REST, or RESTINGPLACE Matthew. xi. 28. Psalm. cxvi.
7.
. God has prepared him for sinful men, wearied with fulfilling their lusts,
with bearing their troubles, with enduring the shocking views of their sin, and
their punishment. The imputation of his righteousness removes our burden of
guilt. The faith, the sensible perception of it, removes our burden of legal
conviction. The effectual intimation of his love makes our heart to cease from
her sinful and legal courses; and delivers it from its burdens of carnal care.
The faith of his unstinging our trouble, our death, and of his sympathizing
with us therein, and making them to work for us a "far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory," removes their oppressive load. The faith of his
veracity pledged in his promise, dispels every despondent fear, relative to our
own or the church's true interest. In him we enjoy the firmest establishment in
grace; the most powerful security against spiritual wandering; the fullest
satisfaction to all our desires; and the sweetest refreshment, joy, and comfort
to our soul. -- Return to this rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee.

109. Christ is represented as God's HABITATION; his resting place; his THRONE
of grace 2 Cor. v. 19. Heb. iv. 16.
. Not only is the Father in him, by mutual coexistence of nature; but he is
eminently and eternally glorified by, satisfied with, delighted in, and
rejoiceth over him, as our Mediator. In him God is ever accessible to our
humble requests, and ever found ready to bestow his purchased mercy and grace.
-- Go therefore boldly, my soul, to his throne of grace, that thou may
"obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need."

110. Christ is compared to a FOUNDATION Is. xxviii. 16.
. First, in order of nature, his person, his office, his righteousness, and
intercession, are placed by his Father, as the firm, the eternal principle,
support, security, and ornament of his whole dispensation of mercy and grace;
and of every doctrine, ordinance, and true member, of the church; and of all
our religious worship and service; and of all our hopes of eternal felicity.
"Another foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Christ
Jesus." -- Be thou, my soul, grounded in him; nor do thou build on him the hay
and stubble of legal righteousness, of fanciful opinions, or unwarranted
practices.

111. Christ is called the CHIEF CORNER STONE Ephesians. ii. 20.
. He was indeed despised and rejected by the Jewish builders, their rulers in
church and state: but, by his person, his office, his relations, his
righteousness, his intercession, power, and love, -- the whole new covenant
building of mercy, the whole temple of the church, Jewish or Gentile, militant
or triumphant, the whole structure of grace in every believer's heart, is
mysterioufly and beautifully united, regulated, adorned, supported,
strengthened, and preserved. -- Blessed Cornerstone, cement my soul to thee.

112. Christ is compared to a NAIL in a sure place Is. xxii. 21. -- 24.
. On him, as irrevocably appointed of God, to be our sole, our all-sufficient
Mediator, does every purpose, promise, and providence of God, relative to our
salvation, -- and does the whole doctrine, worship, discipline, and government,
of the church; every office, officer, and member, thereof; and every person,
privilege, gift, and grace, of his people, firmly and safely hang, and depend.
-- Here hang, my soul, thy life, thy hope, thy work, thy care, thy ALL.

113. Christ is represented as FOOD INDEED, and BREAD OF LIFE John vi. 55. 43.
. Being broken and bruised for our sins; ^rodden in the wine press of his
Father's wrath; roasted in the flames of his indignation; his person, his
righteousness, and saving benefits, are the most excellent, the wholesome,
pleasant, nourishing, the strengthening and medicinal, the universal,
absolutely necessary, and never-surfeiting provision of our soul, which begets,
restores, maintains, and perfects our everlasting life. "Bread that comes down
from heaven," true, substantial provision, given of God to us, starving sinful
men: may I, with all saints, daily by faith receive thee, with earnest desire,
particular appropriation, and inward delight. -- Evermore give us this bread.

114. Christ is called the HIDDEN MANNA Rev. ii. 17.
. Himself and his fullness are the heavenly, the DIVinely prepared, the free,
the all-suiting provision, on which his chosen people are for ever nourished
and fed. How invisible and unknown to a carnal world! How much at present
unknown to the saints! How incomprehensible in any state, to angels or men! --
Ever may my soul have this bread to eat, which the world knows not of.

115. Christ is compared to RAIMENT Romans xiii. 14. Rev. iii. 18. and xix 8,
Math. xxii. 11. 12.
. How exactly suited to our condition, are his imputed righteousness, and
imparted grace! How they hide, they remove, our sinful deformity, guilt, and
pollution! How they protect from scorching heat, from freezing cold, and every
other spiritual hurt! How comely and acceptable they render us before God,
angels, and good men! What spiritual health, what warmth of affection to good,
they promote! How they qualify us for good works, and distinguish us from the
rest of the world! They are "white raiment, fine linen, clean and white!" How
pure and beautiful! How comely a badge, that we are more than conquerors of
sin, Satan, and the world; and do always triumph in him; are at peace with God;
are kings and priests, unto him; and always called to rejoice in him, as the
God of our salvation! How they extract our corruption, and refresh our heart!
They are a wedding garment, applied in the moment of our mystical marriage to
Christ. And how transcendent their richness, and beauty! How ornamental to our
person and nature. How far preferable to any other covering! His righteousness
imputed, is the ground of our joy; the foundation of our right to the prefence
and favor of God. His grace imparted, is the occasion of our spiritual joy;
the mark of our union to Christ; and the substance of our meetness for his
fellowship, and of our becoming a joy and rejoicing to him. -- Not only profess
but put on, O my soul, "the Lord Jesus, and make no provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof:" let my garments of a holy, cheerful conversation, be
always white, and let my head, my heart, lack no ointment of his grace.

116. Christ is compared to GOLD tried in the fire Rev. iii. 18.
. How solid and substantial are his person and fullness! How comely, pure, and
unmixed! How precious, incorruptible, and lasting! What an enriching, a
satisfying treasure and ornament! How tried in his Father's estimation; in his
own fiery sufferings; and in his people's hot tribulation; and yet always found
sufficient and genuine! Effectually counsel me, O Jesus, to buy this gold tried
in the fire, that I may be rich; and thy white raiment of imputed atonement,
that I may be clothed; and that the shame of my filthy, my sinful nakedness, do
not appear.

117. Christ is called the PEARL of great price Matthew. xiii. 45. 46.
. How wonderful his DIVine, his human generation! Who can declare it? Not round
in shape, but, the everlasting God, he has an absolute fullness of spiritual
excellency! How solid, substantial, comely, and glorious! How truly he
reconcileth hearts, makes peace by the blood of his cross, and is the one
Mediator between God and man! How adorning, preserving, healing, strengthening!
-- How enriching, and ennobling, his virtue! What care; what diligence it
requires to find him! How often, DIVing amidst waves and floods of guilt,
corruption, and trouble, are we in danger of being torn asunder by Satan and
his agents! How precious not millions of worlds; not the obedience of angels or
men; but only thine own bleeding righteousness, can purchase our title to thee.
Yet, alas, how few possess, desire, or know, thine excellency! Having found
thee in the gospel, let me deliberately consent to sell all, disesteem all,
forego all, to "win Christ, and be found in him," ^^d he in me the hope of
glory. Tread not, my soul, on him: turn not again to tear the Father that
gives him.

118. Christ is called a TREASURE HID in the field Matthew. xiii. 44.
. How precious and inexhaustible are his excellency and fullness! How he
satisfies, enricheth, ennobleth, and, before God, devils, and men, emboldens
such as posses^ him! What blessings, useful, lasting, invaluable, unnumbered,
are comprehended in him! in him all the promises benefits of the new covenant,
are summed up! On him his saved nations for ever live; and of him do they boast
and glory! With infinite skill he is securely deposited in the purpose, the
power, the love, the faithfulness of God; In the field of inspiration he is
DIVinely laid up, hid, and concealed, that carnal, careless sinners, behold him
not. -- O for a firm, a lively faith, to credit the Almighty's word, and call
the treasure all my own? Be it hid for ever in the treasury of my heart.

119. Christ is compared to a TREASURY or STOREHOUSE Col. i. 19.
. In him, as Mediator, God-man, God has bid, lodged, and secured, all the rich
innumerable, and everlasting blessings of the new covenant, that they might be
ever near to us; and none of them be lost; and that he might be honored in the
conveyance of them. Without receiving him, we obtain no saving benefit; and in
embracing him, we obtain all inexhaustible stores of grace and glory. -- Fear
God, my soul, "there is no want to them that fear him."

120. Christ is compared to a refiner's FIRE, and fuller's SOAP Mal. ^ii. ^.
. By the pure preaching of his word, he removes drossy and spotted errors and
heresies. By the influence of his Spirit, he purges out spots, and drossy
corruption from our heart. By common or special influence, he renders spotted
persons apparently, or really pure in his sight. By fearful judgments, he
removes the spots, the wicked persons, of a nation or church, into endless
misery. Who may abide the day of his coming!

121. Christ is compared to a STANDARD, ^NSIGN, or BANNER Is. xi. 10. and lix.
19.
. The elevation of him in his person, his faithfulness, and love, in the
ancient council of peace; in the Old Testament promises and types; in his
incarnation, life, death, resurrection and glory; and in the^ gospel
revelation, and saving discovery of his excellency; -- is God's great signal of
war with sin, with Satan, and the world; and of his victory over them; and of
our peace with God, with our conscience, with holy angels, and good men: it is
the grand means of dispiriting Satan and his allies; and of gathering us to,
and enlisting us under Jesus himself; the great means of exciting, encouraging,
and directing us in our spiritual conflicts, and enabling us, to obtain
complete victory therein. He is represented as a standard bearer among ten
thousand. In the above manner, and for the mentioned purposes, he lifts up
himself, and goes before his people in their spiritual war. -- Be thou, my
soul, "strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might."

122. Christ is compared to a STAFF, a STAY, or SUPPORTING friend Song viii. 5.
. By dependence on his righteousness, his power, his love, his intercession,
and faithfulness, his chosen people are supported under their burdens, of
guilt, of corruption, or trouble; and enabled to walk up through this
wilderness-world, to the high, the promised land of endless felicity. For ever,
O Jesus, let me lean on thee.

123. Christ is like the CHARIOTS of Amminadib Song vi. 12.
. How quick! how majestic his love approaches, to relieve and comfort his
distressed saints! in what easy, safe, quick, and royal manner, he bears and
carries them, through this waste howling desert, into eternal happiness!

124. Christ is called WONDERFUL Is. ix. 6.
. What countless! what unsearchable mysteries and miracles of infinite,
eternal, and immutable, being, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness, and
truth, are exhibited in his person, his office, appearance, and work! In him
every wonderful union, created or DIVine, concurs, and every mavelous
purpose, doctrine, promise, and providence, do center! How incomprehensible his
DIVine excellencies! his eternal generation! his assuming the likeness of
sinful flesh! How deep his abasement! how high his exaltation! how finished his
righteousness! how tender his love! how incomprehensible his whole work! how
strange his bounty! how mavelous his habitation in us! and his returns to
bless us! -- Ask, my soul, pry into his name; for it is secret.

125. Christ is called ALL IN ALL Col. iii. 11.
. He is in all places, in all the churches, and all the hearts of his people.
He makes and performs all things: he comprehends all excellency, transcends all
creatures, contains, and bestows all good. He is the Creator, the preserver,
the governor, disposer, heir, and end of all creatures, the antitype, the
substance, the scope, and end of all DIVinely instituted ceremonies; the
deviser, the foundation, ^he means, and end of all DIVine purposes; the maker,
the furnisher, the publisher, the confirmer, the fulfiller, the substance,
center, and scope, of all gracious promises; the author, the revealer, the
exemplifier the subject, and end of all inspired doctrines; the giver, the
fulfiller, the end of all sacred laws; the contracter, the magnifier, and
executer of all DIVine covenants; and the purchaser, price, dispenser, matter,
and end of all saving privileges. He is the institutor, maintainer, substance,
and scope of all gospel ordinances; the author the object, the example, the
preserver, restorer, increaser, and finisher of all Christian graces; and the
cause, the pattern, the motive, the assistant, the director, and mean of
acceptance, in all holy exercises. -- All-comprehending Lord, art thou MY GOD,
and MY ALL?

126. Christ's name is like OINTMENT poured forth Song i. 3.
. Apprehended by faith, his person, character, office, relations,
righteousness, and grace, have a most free, a most extensive, precious, and
sweet smelling influence to quicken, cleanse, mollify, heal, strengthen,
exhilarate, and adorn our souls, and fit them for wrestling with Satan and our
lusts; and for running in the way of God's commandments. -- Be thou, my soul, a
good savor of Christ to all around.

127. Christ's love is LIFE, and BETTER THAN LIFE Psalm. xxx 5. and lxiii. 3.
. It is the source, the begetter, the restorer, the maintainer, and perfecter
of our spiritual life; the bestower, conserver, and substance of our eternal
life. How inexpressible its comforts! How it sweetens my natural existence!
heals my maladies! redresseth my grievances! enricheth my soul with God as her
portion! and enraptureth my heart! How much more precious, pleasant, lasting,
sure, and useful than this natural life! -- When heart and flesh faint and
fail, it shall be my eternal excellency, and joy of many generations.

128. Christ's love is compared to WINE Song i. 2. 4.
. By his being trodden in the wine-fat of his Father's wrath it was manifested,
and prepared. How precious, pleasant, and distinguishing is it! and what a
reviving, comforting, healing, appetizing, invigorating, and emboldening
influence it has on our heart! And for antiquity, duration, harmlessness,
freeness, purity, plenty; and for its power to quicken the dead in trespasses
and sins, preserve from death eternal, and create joy unspeakable, and full of
glory, how far it exceeds the best wine! -- Drink of it abundantly, O my soul,
that thou may forget thy sorrows, and remember thy misery no more.

129. Christ's love is compared to a BANNER displayed in a banqueting house
Song ii. 4.
. While he opens his word to his people; while he admits them into
covenant-union, and entertains them with special intimacy with himself; how his
love engages and draws their heart to his service; and excites, encourages,
strengthens, distinguishes, directs, and protects them in their spiritual
conflicts with Satan, the world, and their lusts! -- Thus let me sight with
principalities and powers, and with spiritual wickedness in high places.

130. Christ's righteousness is called BLOOD 1 Pet. i. 2.
. By the shedding of his blood he finished it. Closely it adheres where ever it
is applied. How mavelous its efficay to quench the fiery indignation of God,
the fiery darts of Satan's temptation, and the flaming enmity of our corrupt
heart! The sprinkling of it, imports a real, a close, a liberal, full, kindly,
and skilful application of it to our conscience, by the Spirit of God. -- "To
him who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, be glory and honor
for ever and ever. Amen."

131. Christ's righteousness is called CLEANWATER Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25.
. It is the pure righteousness of God. How sweetly it refreshes our heart,
purisieth our conscience from dead works, purges off all our guilt; and,
before God as a judge, renders us clean every whit, whiter than the snow!
Blessed water, how plentiful! how common and free! how useful, quickening, and
refreshing! how it spreads its virtue; and penetrates into my heart! -- And how
unhampered my access to drink of, or bathe myself in it!

132. Christ's righteousness is compared to a BREASTPLATE Ephesians. vi. 14.
. Being imputed by God and applied by faith, it protects our soul, repels
Satan's accusations, resists his fiery temptations, and secures us from the
condemnation, the vengeance of Heaven,

Christ's righteousness is compared to a GARMENT or LINEN ROBE. See No. 115.

CHAP. III. Metaphors respecting the Holy Ghost.
1. THE Holy Ghost is compared to an AMBASSADOR John xvi. 7.
. Agreeable to the dispensation of the new covenant, he is sent by; he comes in
the name of Jesus Christ, the King of nations, and of his adored Father. And
with infinite wisdom, power, and solemnity, he, in the word of the gospel,
proposes to our soul, a treaty of peace with God, of marriage with Christ, and
of traffic with heaven. Powerfully he persuadeth us, heartily to accept of it;
and, by sealing us up to the day of redemption, he irreversibly ratifieth the
agreement. And alas! how vexed, how grieved with our rejection of his
proposals; our resistance of his motions, and his striving with our conscience!
-- Grieve not, my soul, the holy Spirit, by whom I am sealed to the day of
redemption.

2. The Holy Ghost is called an ADVOCATE John xvi. 8. 9. 10. Romans viii. 16. 27.
. By his word, and by the miracles and common operations which attend it, he
pleads the cause of our adored Redeemer against an evil world. By his saving
discoveries and influences, he pleads it in our heart, against our corrupt
lusts and affections; and against the false and injurious allegations of Satan.
According to the will of God, he makes intercession for the saints, exciting
them to prayer; enditing their requests; directing and enabling them to present
them at a throne of grace; and wait for the gracious answer of them. -- Blessed
pleader, make intercession for and in me, with groanings, which cannot be
uttered.

3. The Holy Ghost is compared to a TEACHER John xiv. 26.
. Possessed of a comprehensive, an infinite knowledge of all things; and,
notwithstanding the most fearful contempt and opposition, he, with amazing
skill, care, kindness, and patience, seasonably and effectually inspired, and
still opens up the mysterious doctrines, laws, promises, and threatenings of
the oracles of God, and sixeth them in our memory and heart. He shows us the
sinfulness and misery of our fallen state: shows what and whose we are. He
enlightens our mind in the knowledge of the person, the offices, the relations,
righteousness, power, and love of Jesus Christ: and instructs us how to receive
and improve him, as made of God to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption. He teaches us the way to manage our heart, our time, our
gifts, our grace; and how, therewith, best to promote the glory of God, and our
own, and our neighbor's real and lasting felicity. His presence, how
inestimable a blessing! his absence, how fearful a plague! When sinners remain
hardened in sin, how often he cease striving with their conscience, and
gives them up to the lusts and imaginations of their evil heart. -- O
unparallelled Instructor, "open thou mine eyes, that I may see wondrous things
out of thy law." Instruct and teach me in the way wherein I should go.

4. The Holy Ghost is compared to a WITNESS John xv. ^6. Romans viii. 16.
. With unbiassed fidelity, and with unsullied clearness and evidence, he
testifies against us; undeniably proves to our conscience, the truth, and the
heinous nature of our crimes: he testifies of Christ; convincingly proves to
our soul, that he is infinitely glorious, powerful, suitable, and ready to save
us, who are lost: he testifies of the promises of the new covenant, that they
are adapted to our case, and DIVinely directed to our conscience: he testifies
the truth of our gracious estate, witnessing with our spirits that we are the
children of God; exciting and shining on the grace within us, and on the marks
of it exhibited in scripture; and persuading us of the true similitude betwixt
them: he testifies the sincerity of our good works, witnessing with our
conscience, that they proceed from Jesus' presence in our heart, and are
agreeable to God's law, and acceptable in his sight.

5. The Holy Ghost is compared to a LEADER and GUIDE John xiv. 16. 17.
. Possessed of a perfect knowledge of the wilderness and sea of a present evil
world, and of the course proper for every believer while in it, he comes to
them in their time of need, continually abides with them, dwells in their
heart, and by his word and influence, leads them to the promise, the person,
the blood and righteousness, power and fullness of the Redeemer; he encourages
their spirit; directs them to their duty; and points out the dangerous errors,
habits, and practices which they ought to avoid: he protects them from the
assaults of sin, Satan, and the world; and at last brings them safe to the
desired habitation of endless felicity. -- To thee, O good Spirit, I resign my
blind, my bewildered soul; lead thou me to the land of uprightness: Let me no
more complain of rough ways; it is the Lord who leads me about, to humble me,
and to prove me, and to do me good in my latter end.

6. The Holy Ghost is called the COMFORTER John xiv. 26.
. How kindly he sympathizeth with the saints in their manifold afflictions! he
comes to, abides with, and is highly desired and esteemed by them. Tenderly he
examines our case, reproves what is faulty, and enableth us to wash off its
guilt in a Savior's blood, and in his strength, mortify the deeds of the body,
that we may live. In his word he seasonably presents the most sweet,
substantial, and sure grounds of spiritual comfort: that Jesus the Son, the
sent of God, has borne our griefs, carried our sorrows, satisfied for our
sins, and brought in an everlasting righteousness to cover our guilty souls:
that, well pleased for his righteousness sake, God, who loves us with an
everlasting love, does in the promise give himself to be our God: that in the
newcovenant promises, the whole fullness of God is brought near and secured to
our soul: that our manifold troubles flow from redeeming kindness, are light
and short; but useful to promote our sanctification, and work for us an
exceeding and eternal weight of glory: that we shall be for ever with the Lord,
filled with his fullness, and made like him, by seeing him as he is. These he
determines and enables our heart to apply, and so quickens, supports,
refreshes, sanctifies, and fills it with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

7. The Holy Spirit is represented as a GUEST, an INHABITANT Romans viii.
. His person being infinite, and all the saints the one mystical body of
Christ, he, in his person and influence, resides in each of their hearts. This
dwelling he chooses, prepares, and furnishes for himself, and is, with
inexpressible delight, ever present and operative therein. Blessed-Spirit of
all grace, let all my powers be filled with thy glory. If I have not thee, I am
none of Christ's.

8. He is compared to a DOVE or TURTLE Matthew. iii. 16 Song ii. 12.
. In subsistence he is distinct from the Father and Son; is a complete, a
DIVine person in himself. How infinitely glorious, pure, and holy! How meek,
condescending, and peaceable! How firmly he cleaves to such as are once joined
to him! How swiftly he flies to relieve and comfort them! How affectionately he
delights in them! how convincingly he informs their conscience, that the
winter-storm of God's wrath is past, and the floods of his vengeance are dried
up! And, by resting on Christ and his members, how mysteriously be conveys his
quickening, sanctifying, meekening, and refreshful influence!

9. He is called the POWER or FINGER of God Luke i. 34. and xi. 20.
. Operating in his person, with what astonishing might and skill, does the
DIVine nature make, furnish, and adorn the works of creation, providence, and
redemption! -- Come, my soul, behold the doing of the Lord: let it be wondrous
in thine eyes.

10. He is compared to FIRE, and called the spirit of burning Is. iv. 4. Acts
ii. 3. Rev. iv. 5.
. How powerfully his influence penetrateth into the inmost recess^s of our
soul! How it enlightens our mind; melts, softens, and subdues our will; purges
our conscience; warms and quickens our affections; comforts our heart; consumes
our dross, rendering us holy as he is holy, and enabling us to ascend in
heavenly desires, affections, and meditations! But alas! how hindered,
obscured, and quenched, by carnality of mind; by sensuality; sloth, or
presumptuous sinning! He is represented by cloven tongues of fire sitting on
the apostles, to denote his qualifying them, zealously, successfully, and in
Diverse languages, to preach the everlasting gospel. He is called seven lamps of
fire, to denote his perfect fullness of enlightening and heart-warming influence.

11. He is compared to WIND John iii. 8.
. In what a sovereign, surprising, incomprehensible, invisible, piercing,
powerful, and conquering manner, do his convincing his illuminating, his
renewing, comforting, strengthening, -- his heart-melting, drawing, enlarging,
sanctifying, -- his lust-cooling, sin-mortifying, -- his interceding,
witnessing, and sealing influences, affect our soul! His influences are
represented by a rushing mighty wind; to signify, that nothing can withstand
their power. They are called four winds; to denote their abundant variety;
their fitness and readiness to answer every man's case. His convincing
influences are called the north wind, because they are often boisterous, always
nipping to our conscience, causing us to tremble on account of our sinful
nakedness and guilt. His enlightening and comforting influence, is called the
south wind, because it delights, warms, refreshes, and fructifies our heart.

12. The Holy Ghost is compared to RAIN and DEW Is. v. 6.
. What a free, a sovereign, a seasonable gift of God to men! How gently; how
gradually; how extensively, and irresistibly, do his influences descend on our
soul! and on some, while others are passed by! How absolutely necessary in the
seed-time of conversion; and in the season of spiritual drought, whether
occasioned by desertion, or produced by carnal care, and prevalent lust! How
often they descend in consequence of fervent prayer! And what a beneficial,
softening, and refreshing, fructifying, and adorning mercy they are to the
church!

13. He is compared to WATER John iii. 5.
. How absolutely necessary are his influences to our spiritual life! In the
gospel, how generally offered and free! How effectual to quench the fire of
lust, of pride, of passion, hatred, malice; to extinguish the fiery darts, the
temptations of Satan; to wash away our sinful defilement; heal our spiritual
wounds and bruises; soften our stony hearts, and render them susceptible of
impressions by the word, and providence of God! How sweetly they refresh our
languishing soul; quench our sinful thirst after carnal things; nourish our new
man; render us strong in gracious habits, and fruitful in every good word and
work! God's pouring out this water, denotes his liberal and abundant
communication thereof. His sprinkling it on us, imports his real, his close,
his plentiful, kindly, skilful, and gradual application thereof.

14. He is compared to WATERS; RIVERS; and FLOODS Is. xxxv 6. and xiiv. 4.
Zech. xiv. 8. Rev. xxii. 17. John iv. 14. Ezekiel. xlvii. 1. -- 13. Rev. xxii. 1,
2. Joel iii. 18.
. How pure, perpetual, free, patent! How abundant, powerful, unsearchable,
spreading, and allovercoming his influences! How pleasing, refreshing, and
cleansing! How fructifying, enriching, adorning, and protecting! How, on some
occasions, they over flow the banks of ordinances, which are their ordinary
channels! By these, how sweetly we trade with God, in receipt of his free
favors, and returns of holy duties; and with men, in the exercise of charity
and brotherly kindness! by them, how sweetly are we separated and distinguished
from carnal men; are protected from our spiritual enemies; and at last carried
out into the ocean of endless felicity! He is called "living waters; water of
life; a well of water, springing up to everlasting life." His influences are
ever fresh and running; and do beget, restore, maintain, and perfect the life
of our foul. His "proceeding from under the temple; from Jerusalem; from under
the throne of God, and the Lamb; his running beside the altar in the midst of
the city toward the east, to water the valley of Shittim; and running into the
dead sea, causing every thing to live, and be fruitful; healing every thing
except the marshes, and continuing both summer and winter;" imports, that his
saving influences are the fruit of Jesus' death, and of God's being pacified
and pleased in him; that they are easily and equally accessible to all that are
in the church; that they water the lowly, fructify the barren, quicken the
dead, and make all that are ordained to eternal life to revive, and live by
faith on the Son of God; that they are to be obtained, and do attend the saint,
in every case, pleased, or distressing. -- Blessed River, O quicken, and with
the streams of thine influences make glad the city of our God. May thy floods
prevail, till our highest mountains of corruption, error, and DIVision, be
covered.

15. The Holy Ghost is compared to WINE Is. lv. 1. Joel iii. 18.
. Is not his saving influence the fruit of the pressure of Jesus Christ, in the
fat of his Father's fury? And how refreshful, exhilarating, nourishing,
strengthening, and emboldening to our soul! How, blessed Spirit, it refreshes
my languishing heart, and restores me again! How it fills me with joy and
gladness; strengthens me in the Lord my God; enables me to run in the way of
his commandments, when thou have enlarged my heart; makes me to rejoice in God
my Savior, rejoice in tribulation, and fill my mouth with his praise all the
day! How it emboldens me to come near unto God, even to his seat, and plead my
very sinfulness and crimes, as an argumeat for mercy! Refreshful with this
wine, I seek out my spiritual enemies; and in the name of the Lord destroy
them. Though ten thousands rise up against me, in this I am confident:
dauntless, I resist the devil, till he flee from me; crucify: he flesh, with
its affections and lusts; glory in the cross of Christ, by which the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

16. The Holy Ghost is compared to MILK Song v. 1.
. How pure and unmixed his influence! How sweet and pleasant! How nourishing
under weakness! How natural provision to the heaven born soul! How medicinal
and healing! How restorative under spiritual consumptions!

17. He is compared to OIL and OINTMENT 1 John ii. 20. 27. Psalm. xlv. 7. Rev.
iii. 18.
. How efficaciously his influences enlighten our mind in the knowledge of
Christ and spiritual things; soften our heart; search, cleanse, and cure our
spiritual wounds! revive, exhilarate, warm, refresh, nourish, strengthen, and
adorn our soul,! How they sweeten, give an agreeable relish to the word, and
providence of God! expel the poison, the venom of sinful corruption! prevent
convul^^ve fits of unbelief, despondent fainting, and carnal fear! open
obstructions of legal terror and perplexing doubts! how they enable us to
breathe after God in holy desire and fervent prayer! anoint and consecrate us
to, and qualify us for serving God, and warring with our spiritual enemies!
Never, Blessed Spirit, can thy influence utterly dry up, nor in the least
incorporate with our lust: and for this, how hated; how disrelished by carnal
men! He is called the oil of joy or gladness; for what pleasure and joy,
especially in the heavenly state, does his influence, produce! -- Under its
power, "I rejoice in tribulation, count it all joy when I fall into Diverse
temptations.

18. The Holy Ghost is compared to a SEAL Ephesians. i. 13. and iv. 30.
. By the application of his word and gracious influences, he, with infinite
power and authority, changes our heart, making us holy as he is holy. He
stamps the authority of Heaven upon the histories, the doctrines, the laws, the
promises, threatenings, and predictions of scripture; and unfolds, or conceals
them from men as he pleases. He confirms the new covenant with his chosen,
confirms them in their gracious state, seals them up to the day of redemption,
and hides, secures, and distinguishes them from the rest of the world. Nay, it
was he that furnished and marked out our adored Jesus to his mediatory office.
At your highest peril, do you, sons of men, counterfeit and break this seal, by
adding to, or taking from the terms or sense of his word; or by indulging
yourselves in hypocrisy and lust. -- If I name the name of Christ, let me
depart from iniquity.

19. He is compared to an EARNEST Ephesians. i. 14.
. His influences conferred on us in this life are of the same nature with those
in heaven: they confirm God's covenant to us, and our engagement to him: they
secure our eternal happiness; and are sufficient to preserve our spiritual
life, till we arrive at that more abundant perfection. -- Blessed Spirit, be
thou in me, my God, my guide, my seal, my earnest, and my ALL IN ALL.

CHAP. IV. Metaphors respecting good angels.
1. ANgels are called ELOHIM or GODS (c), for their spiritual nature, their
transcendent dignity, Psalm. xcvii. 7.
power, and wisdom.

2. They are called SONS OF GOD Job xxxviii. 7.
. They were immediately created by him, and dearly are they beloved in his
sight: daily they attend his glorious presence; and are admitted into the most
familiar intimacy. How like him in their spiritual substance, wisdom, and
strength! How actively they imitate him in his spotless holiness, and care of
his church! And with what readiness, delight, and pleasure, do they keep his
commandments, and hearken to the voice of his word!

3. They are called PRINCES, PRINCIPALITIES, POWERS, THRONES, DOMINIONS Col. i.
16. Dan. x. 21.
. With distinguished power, and as the deputies of God, they inspect, manage,
and direct events unnumbered, and execute his purposes of mercy and judgment on
earth.

4. They are called God's HOST Genesis xxxii. 2.
. Commanded by JEHOVAH, by Jesus the captain of our salvation, they, in comely
order, guard and protect his saints; repress, or cut off his and their enemies;
and with loud Hallelujah's celebrate his victorious triumphs. -- Rejoice, ye
ransomed, more and stronger are with you, than with the world.

5. Perhaps they are called WATCHERS Dan. iv. 17.
. They sleep not, day nor night; but are continually exercised in attending and
praising God; in waiting their respective orders from him; in careful
observation of persons and things in this world; in providing for, in healing,
comforting, teaching, encouraging, guarding, delivering, and rejoicing over the
saints; in transporting their soul to heaven at death, in gathering and
separating them from the wicked at the last day; and in infatuating,
restraining, and ruining their enemies: -- and are sometimes DIVinely employed
to give warning of approaching Judgments or mercies? -- But watchers in that
text may mean the DIVine persons.

6. Angels are represented as the MESSENGERS of God, and MINIS^ERS to his
saints Heb. i. 14.
. At God's commission they come forth to assist the saints, in whatever
business they have need of them. How often they assist to provide for their
bodies, to heal their maladies, to direct and preserve them on journies; to
deliver them from outward calamities; to restrain what tends to hurt them; or
to cut off their enemies! How often they make known to the saints the will of
God; suggest good thoughts; comfort them; help and assist them against
temptations! See No 5.

7. They are called MEN Genesis xviii. and xix.
. Often they appeared in the likeness of strong and beautiful men, importing
their beauty of holiness, and their readiness to run in the way of God's
commandments, or to fight his battles.

8. They are called CHERUBIMS Psalm. xviii. 10.
, because of their strength and comeliness. And if the cherubims of image-work
had four faces, that of a MAN represented angels knowledge, affection, majesty,
prudence, and beauty: that of a LION, their might, boldeness, and courage: that
of an OX, their delight, patience, activity, and faithfulness in God's service:
that of an EAGLE, their immediate vision of God; their deep penetration into
his mysteries; their perpetual vigor; and quick execution of their work.

9. Perhaps they are called SERAPHIMS, or fiery, ones Is. vi. 2. 3. 4.
, because of their spiritual nature, purity, strength, and majestic awe. Their
wings import their vigor, readiness, and quick execution of God's
commandments: "the covering of their faces with their wings," signifies their
inability to behold the full brightness of the DIVine glory their "covering of
their feet with their wings" denotes their blushing at their best services
before God.

10. Angels are compared to CHARIOTS and HORSES 2 Kings ii. 11. and vi. 17.
, because of their spiritual comeliness, strength, courage, and usefulness, in
the display of God's peculiar presence, majesty, glory, and might; and in
saving his people, transporting them to paradise, and in conquering and
treading down their opposers. They are sometimes represented as red and fiery,
to signify how terrible and destructive is their execution of God's wrath; and
what dread their protection of the saints spread among their enemies; sometimes
as white, to denote their execution of God's purposes of mercy and love:
sometimes as black, to signify the unsearchable, awful, and confounding nature
of their work: sometimes as bay and grizzled, to signify their mixed execution
of mercy and wrath.

11. Angels are called MORNINGSTARS Job. xxxviii. 7.
. Being created in the beginning of God's work, how beautiful and glorious are
they in their nature! how constant in their holy exercise! how useful to
conduct and comfort the saints in the dark morning of their militant state! And
is not their attendance, a sure pledge of an approaching, a near day of endless
brightness and joy?

12. They are compared to FLAMES OF FIRE Psalm. civ. 4.
. How eminent their love to God! how burning their zeal for his glory! How
awful, irresistible, and often sudden, is their destruction of the wicked! How
complete their defense of the saints!

13. They are compared to the WIND Psalm. civ. 4. Heb.
. Being invisible to our bodily eye, they come forth, move, and act at the
pleasure of God. How transcendently quick and powerful their operation, in
blasting the persons and property of the wicked; and in refreshing the saints,
and helping them forward to their haven of bliss!

CHAP. V. Metaphors respecting fallen angels.
1. THEY are called DEVILS, or false accusers Matthew. iv. 24.
. They most wickedly slander God to men, misrepresenting his wisdom, his power,
holiness, justice, goodness, mercy, and truth; -- his doctrines, his laws,
purposes, promises, threatenings, and providence. In order to obtain his
permission to hurt and destroy, they often maliciously accuse men to God! How
often to men's own consciences, they falsely accuse them, saints as hypocritical
dissemblers; and convinced persons as chargeable with the unpardonable sin! How
actively, though secretly, they suggest the reproachful thoughts and speeches
so common on earth! Till I choose to be a devil incarnate, let me speak evil of
no man.

2. They are called PRINCIPALITIES, POWERS, and RULERS of the darkness of this
world Ephesians. vi. 11.
. How great and extensive is their power and dominion over Jews, Heathens,
Mahometans, and nominal Christians, these large, but blind and ignorant tribes
of mankind! Ignorance and delusion are the support of their power and
influence; men being all naturally ignorant of God, are subject to them, till
effectually called from darkness to God's mavelous light: and where, on
earth, the light of inspired truth is unknown, or obscured, they openly govern.
-- Ah, how these other lords have had dominion over me! But now, Lord, will I
only make mention of thy name.

3. They are compared to WARRIORS Rev. xii. 7.
. Armed with the permission of God and their own malice, they with the utmost
fury and fraud, oppose the work of God, in his church and in the souls of men;
they cast terrible, destructive, and fiery darts of temptation into men's
hearts, and fiery contentions and persecutions into the visible church: How
often, with open violence, they attack the people of God: Or, under some
innocent or holy appearance, they lay snares for their life: Proud, daring,
unwearied and cruel, they always thirst for our ruin: constantly they watch in
their own defense, and seize every advantage against our soul. How often they
take captive, and cruelly use the most precious saints! How haughtily they
triumph in every defeat given to the church, and her true members! -- But,
fresh sprinkled with Jesus' blood, strong in his might, resist, my soul, the
devil, and he shall flee from thee.

4. They are called BELIAL, without yoke, profit, or ascent 2 Cor. vi. 15.
. Furiously they rebel against God, as if they were unbound by his law: no
promise to their deluded votaries they sincerely regard: nothing in them, or
done by them, is of any true value or use: never shall they regain their former
estate, or ascend to their ancient felicity.

5. They are compared to PRISONERS and CAPTIVES Rev. xx. 1. 2. Jude 6. Psalm.
lxviii. 18.
. In the strong, the tormenting, the shameful chains of darkness; the chains of
their own corruptions, and of the condemning curse, and restraining providence
of God, they are confined, and bound over to endless wrath. From their wretched
state they can never escape; nor can they do ought, without a DIVine
permission. In his death, in his exaltation to glory, Jesus took them captives,
and condemned them to the slavish drudgery of scourging his foes, or chastizing
hi^ children, as he pleases. Let never their dread damp my soul; they are fast
bound in my God, my Savior's chain.

6. They, and their agents, are compared to FOWLS of the air Matthew. xiii. 4.
. How devoid is their condition of all true fixedness and rest! How suddenly
they assault us when we are hearing God's sacred word, and carry it off from
our memory, our heart, our affection! Lord, hide it deep in my soul, that it
may ever abide with me, and bring forth much fruit.

7. They are called GOATS, or HAIRY ONES Lev. xvii. 7. 2 Chronicles. xi. 15. Heb.
. Before God, their moral appearance, and often before men, their visible, --
how unsightly, abominable, and shocking! how they delight in, seed upon, and
are filled with the poison of iniquity! How detestable is their behavior, to
every one holy and pure! With what pleasure they perform mischief; what injury
they do to Christ's sheep in this world! And how often, under the form of
goats, satyrs, and other hairy animals, have their Heathenish votaries adored
them as gods of this world.

8. Evil angels, especially their chief, is called SATAN, the malicious,
obstinate, impudent adversary Job i. and ii.
. How burning, shameless, and implacable, is their malice toward God, or
toward men! How craftily; how furiously, they seek and and seize opportunities
of dishonouring the former, and ruining the latter! -- "When he speaks fair,
my soul, believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart."

9. Satan is called the GOD of this world 2 Cor. iv. 4.
. To the most part of men on earth he gives law and governs, directs, and
influenceth them; and by their ignorance, profaneness, dissimulations,
idolatry, and superstition, is he cheerfully and zealously worshipped and
served. Other evil spirits, wicked magistrates, and ministers, are his angels,
messengers, attendants, and deputies, whom he sends forth to act in his name.
Transgressing against God, and injuring of the souls of men, are his acceptable
worship. Sinful oaths, witchcraft, sorcery, charming, necromancy, are his
solemn appointments. Superstitious seasons are his sabbaths, his festivals.
Wanton balls, stage plays, drunken clubs, conventions for idolatry, or
will worship, are the solemn assemblies of his adorers. "Come not, my soul,
into their secret: mine honor be thou not united."

10. Satan is transformed into an ANGEL OF LIGHT 2 Cor. xi. 14.
. Once he was so; and how often, while he seeks to promote the vilest crimes,
does he put on the most shining pretenses to eminent knowledge, wisdom,
evangelical liberty, holiness, or zeal! -- Be not, my soul, ignorant of, or
inadvertant to his devices.

11. He is called the PRINCE of the power of the air Ephesians. ii. 2.
. Such evil spirits as partly reside in, and fly about in the air; such
unstable men as labor and feed on airy and unsubstantial fancies, -- are under
his rule and direction. And, at God's permission, he can raise aerial storms
and tempests. -- Is my God in the heavens! what pleased him he has done: Die
not then, my soul, for want of heavenly and substantial wisdom: ask it of God.

12. He is called the FATHER of lying and liars John viii. 44.
. By him was deceit and falsehood conceived and brought into the world. By him
it is affectionately cherished, protected, encouraged, and rewarded with
momentary, but earnal profit and pleasure. He first rendered men wicked and
deceitful; and by them he is naturally, cheerfully, and readily honored and
obeyed. -- Behold your parent, you children of falsehood and guile; be ashamed;
return; do so no more.

13. He is compared to a captain Rev. ^ii. 7.
. How active, daring, and crafty; in his warlike attempts against God and his
people! What numbers of evil angels, of wicked men, of mistaken saints, he
gathers, hires, encourages, directs, and commands to concur with him, in
fighting against God and his ways! -- But "if God be for me, who can be against
me?" Though mine enemies flourish, it is that they may be destroyed.

14. Satan in called a STRONG MAN ARMED, that keeps the house in peace Matthew.
xii. 29.
. Armed with his own malice, with the DIVine permission, with the curse of the
broken law lying on men's conscience, and with the dominion of sin over our
heart; he, with great power, activity, care, and craft, maintains his work of
wickedness in us, and his authority over us; confirms and promotes our
ignorance and unconcern; bolts our heart with carnality, enmity, unbelief, or
despair, till Jesus Christ, who is stronger than he, in the day of his power
come, recall his permission, awaken our conscience, enlighten our mind, remove
the curse, subdue our corruption, and so spoil him of his armor and goods. --
Search, my soul, and look, who is thy guardian; who keeps thee.

15. Satan is compared to a TRAVELLER Matthew xii. 43. 44. 45.
. Constantly he walks to and fro in the earth, to spy opportunities of
mischief; to tempt and ruin men. Often, for a while, he seemingly departs from
wicked professors, withholds his gross suggestions, or even stirs up to the
external performance of religious exercise. After employing himself a while in
the heart of real believers, where there is less corrupt moisture to work upon,
or in dry and withered Heathenish countries, he returns to those whom he had
deserted, and hurries them more furiously than ever into wickedness. -- Why, to
entertain him, did thou, Hebrew monarch, defile the wife of thy faithful
hero; his one lamb, that lay in his bosom?

16. Satan is compared to a SOWER of tares Matthew. xi^i. 3^.
. In the field of creation, he first sowed the seeds of iniquity. His cursed
temptations he daily sows in our heart, to produce the good-checking tares of
sinful lusts. By him is the seed of open abominations, contention, idolatry,
and will worship, sown among men. He is the true parent of every tare-like,
every naughty person in the church. -- How, Lord, has thy enemy sowed tares in
my soul, while I slept! Nor shall they be weeded out, till I die.

17. He is compared to an HUNTER and FOWLER Prove. vi. 4. 5.
. With astonishing and unwearied care, alertness, and fraud, he allures, he
indiscernibly spreads his entangling nets of temptation; transforms himself
into an angel of light; employs false teachers, wicked rulers, and deceitful
men, to ensnare and ruin our souls. And how often we are unawares entangled and
undone! -- Lord, deliver me as a bird, as a roe, from this hunter; from the
snare of this fowler.

18. He is compared to a LION 1 Pet. v. 8.
. How terrible is his roaring, his temptations to the watchful saint! How
infatiable in doing mischief! With what vigor, violence, and cruelty, he ever
seeks to devour the souls, especially of his opposers! -- Blessed Lion of the
tribe of Judah, for me, tear him in pieces, while there is none to deliver him:
make me sober and vigilant; because he goes about seeking whom he may devour.

19. He is called a great DRAGON Rev. xx. 24.
. How terrible is his appearance! How shocking his fierceness! his bloody
cruelty! How outrageous his fury and malice against mankind, chiefly against
Christ and his followers, who dare to oppose him, and trample on his authority!
How suddenly he assaults! How infectious and deadly are his bites, his
breathing, his temptations to our soul! In the night of debasement, how he bit
and bruised, though not infected the heel, the manhood of Jesus Christ! In the
night of ignorance, desertion, and trouble, how he assaults the children of
men! -- When, Lord, will thou bruise; when shall I tread the lion and the
dragon under my feet?

20. Satan is called an OLD SERBENT Rev. xx. 2.
. In the form of a serpent, he anciently seduced mankind. In this form, have
they since frequently adored him! How filled with the poison of sinful
corruption, wherewith he infects and ruins the children of men! How astonishing
his subtle deceit! How deep rooted his envy! How implacable his malice! With
what surprising care, craft, and vigor, he secures his head, his authority! --
Come not, my soul, into his lurking places; pass not by his paths; turn away;
get thee far hence.

CHAP. VI. Metaphors respecting men in general.
1. MEN are compared to a HUMAN BODY. A human body is their most visible part;
their complex frame consists of various well-connected powers and members, and
grows to a proper measure and stature. Many bodily members and acts, are used
as symbols of human acts and endowments. To bow down the head as a bulrush Is.
lviii. 5.
, imports appearance of humiliation and grief, without any real concern. Women's
having power on their head because of the angels 1 Cor. xi. 10.
, imports, that in religious assemblies, where holy angels observe, where evil
angels tempt, women ought to mark their husbands power over them by a decent
covering on their head. The falling of the countenance Genesis iv. 5.
, denotes a mixture of shame, anger, and grief. To open the ear Is. xlii. 20.
, is to hear, or make one hear, with attention. To stop the ear Acts vii. 57.
, is to refuse and disregard. Tingling of the ears 1 Samuel iii. 11.
, signifies shocking terror at the report of some fearful calamity. Itching
ears 2 Timothy iv. 3.
, denote unsettled levity of mind, always desirous of novelties, and not
relishing simple truths. Eyes Deuteronomy. xvi. 19. Genesis iii. 7.
, represent knowledge, and what is dear to a man. A right eye to be plucked out
Matthew. v. 29.
, is a beloved lust, or endeared sinful enjoyment, deemed very pleasant and
useful; and which cannot, without much pain, be mortified or forsaken. To list
up the face or eyes Job. xxii. 20. Is. xxxvii. 23. Psalm. cxxiii. 1.
, imports boldness, courage, expectation, and desire. Not to do it Ezra ix. 6.
, implies shame and blushing. Our eyes look straight on Prove. iv. 25.
, when we singly aim at the glory of God; heartily espy and follow the path of
duty, without turning aside to any crooked way. An evil eye Prove. xxiii. 6.
, imports discovered covetousness, malice, hatred, or discoutent. To be of one
mouth 1 Kings xxii. 13.
, is to be, profess, and speak the same thing. To devour with open mouth Is.
ix. 12.
, is greedily, quickly, extensively, and almost irrecoverably, to swallow up
and destroy. To open the mouth wide, that God may fill it Psalm. lxxxi. 10.
, is earnestly to desire, pray for, expect, and receive his promised goodness.
To draw out the tongue, shoot out the lip, and make a wide mouth against one
Is. lvii. 4.
, is cruelly, openly, and impudently, to mock and reproach him. To stop the
mouth Romans iii. 19.
, is to be, or to render one silent, ashamed, and sensible of guilt. To come
out of the mouth Rev. xvi. 13.
, is to proceed from one's authority, influence, or principles. To bring out of
one's mouth or belly, what he had swallowed Job xx. 13* 15.
, is to take from him what he had unjustly seized, and seemingly secured to
himself. One's mouth kissing his hand Job xxxi. 27.
, imports idolatrous reverence and worship. To keep the mouth or lips Psalm.
xxxix. 1.
, is to watch carefully over our speech. To lay the hand upon the mouth Job xl.
4.
, imports sense of guilt, blushing, shame, and resignation to the will of God.
Mouth, lips, and tongue Job xix. 16. and ii. 10.
, signify speech. Uncircumcised lips Exodus vi. 30.
, denote a difficulty of speaking freely, readily, and pleasantly. God's
speaking to men with stammering lips, deep speech, and another tongue Is.
xxviii. 11.
, imports his declaring his will, by making a foreign nation, whose language is
not understood, to harass or destroy them. To make the lips of those that are
asleep to speak Song vii. 9.
, is to awaken, revive, edify, comfort, slothful and unconcerned souls, and
induce them to praise the Lord, and express his kindness. The calves of the
lips, and the fruit of the lips Hos. xiv. 2. Is. lvii. 19.
, sacred to, or created by God, are sacrifices of prayer and praise, through
his influence, offered up unto him. The priests lips keeping knowledge Mal. ii.
7.
, imports their habitual readiness to give good and wholesome instruction or
reproof. The talk of the lips tends only to penury Prove. xiv. 23.
, when it is vain and unprofitable, wastes time, is not attended with, but
hinders our proper work. The tongue is represented as a scourge Job v. 21.
, because with its reviling angry speeches, we lash our neighbor. It is
compared to a fire Jam. iii. 6.
, because its passionate and sinful words emit the fire of our inward lust; and
kindles the lust, pride, or passion of others. It is called a world of
iniquity. What astonishing and extensive wickedness is contained in our
language! Or the words may be rendered an ornament of iniquity Jam. iii. 6.
, because by excusing, extenuating, and defending, it attempts to deck and gild
over our sin with fair colors. It is represented as untameable Jam. iii. 8.
, because no creature can wholly restrain it from evil. A soft tongue which
breaks the bones Prove. xxv. 15.
, signifies meek, mild, and humble language, which removes prejudices, melts
the heart, and draws out the love, the compassion of our friend or neighbor.
The cleaving of the tongue to the jaws, or roof of the mouth Psalm. xxii. 15.
and cxxxvii. 6.
, imports deep silence, painful thirst. Whispering, or low speech Is. xxix. 4.
, signifies our speaking in a humble, a debased manner. Fair speech Prove. vii.
21.
, is flattery, whereby we show much more kindness than is really in our heart.
Hard speeches Jude 15.
, are these which are passionate, contemptuous, and reviling. Sound speech Tit.
ii. 8.
, is that which is true, solid, and edifying to men's souls. To have a stiff
neck, a neck like an iron sinew Jer. xvii. 23. Is. xlviii. 4.
, is to be obstinate and perverse in sinning. To harden our neck or heart Neh.
ix. 16 Deuteronomy. xv. 7.
, is to despise the alarms of God's word and providence, and refuse to return
to him. To have a yoke on the neck Jer. xxvii. 12.
, is to lie under sore trouble and bondage. The arm Ezekiel. xxx. 21.
, denotes help, power, and wealth. A sword on the arm Zech. xi. 17.
, denotes an enraged enemy, taking away our power and wealth. Drying up of the
arm Zech xi. 17.
signifies the loss of our strength or riches, or of the proper use thereof.
Men's eating the flesh of their own arm Is. ix. 20.
, is their destroying that which ought to be dear, or would be helpful to them.
To make flesh our arm Jer. xvii. 5.
, is chiefly to depend on men for our assistance, and felicity. Hands Jer.
xxiii. 14.
, signify power of receiving or acting: and our actions and practice. Clean or
cleansed hands Job xvii. 9.
, denote a holy and blameless conversation. Laying on of hands 2 Timothy i. 6.
imported the conveyance of the Holy Ghost, in his miraculous influence, or the
ordaining of men to office in the church. Stretching out the hand to God Psalm.
lxviii. 31.
, imports earnest prayer for, ready reception of his salvation, and cheerful
surrender to his service. To lift up the hands to him Psalm. xxviii. 2.
, is to pray earnestly. To lift up the hands that hang down, and feeble knees
Heb. xii. 12.
, is to help and encourage persons faint and distressed. To lift up the hand
against a king 2 Samuel xx. 21.
, is to rebel against him. Consecration to the Jewish priesthood is called a
filling of their hands Exodus xxix. 9. Heb.
, because therein their hands were filled with their wave-offering. Washing of
the hands Psalm. xxvi. 6.
, imports a solemn profession of innocence; an application of Jesus' blood for
the removal of past guilt; and a serious purpose of reformation. Pouring water
upon one's hands 2 Kings iii. 11.
, signified to be his servant. Smiting the hands together Ezekiel. xxi. 14.
, imports an alarm of approaching judgment; or lamentation over distress.
Clapping of hands Psalm. xlvii. 1.
, denotes shouting for victory; great joy and gladness. Men of war not finding
their hands Psalm. lxxviii. 5.
implies their being quite dispirited and d^senabled to exert their might, and
improve their advantages. A right hand, or right foot offending, to be cut off,
Matthew. v. 30.
, is a beloved lust, however dear and apparently useful, to be mortified. There
being a lie in our right hand Is. xliv. 20.
, imports our loving, practicing, and holding fast hypocrisy and deceit. The
putting out of the finger Is. lviii. 9.
, imports ridicule and reproach. Rehoboam's little finger being thicker than
his father's loins 1 Kings xii. 10.
, signified, that he would reduce his subjects to far more grievous servitude
and punishment. Shoulder Is. ix 4.
, signifies ability to bear, help, or oppress. Breasts Song viii. 10.
, denote useful comfort and assistance. Breasts or teats of virginity pressed
or bruised Ezekiel. xxiii. 3.
, imply commission of whoredom, natural, or spiritual. Smiting or tabering on
the breasts Nah. ii. 7.
, implies sore trouble, vexing grief, and bitter lamentation. Bosom Eccl. vii.
9.
, denotes love, intimacy, secrecy. But to hide the hand in the bosom Prove. xix.
24.
, imports excessive sloth, Bowels Is. xvi. 11.
, import compassion, or the soul. Inward parts, heart, belly Prove. xx. 5. 27.
, signify the soul, understanding, will, affections, and conscience. The curse
coming like water into one's bowels Psalm. cix. 18.
, imports extensive and shocking inward fear, trouble, and grief. Unequal legs
of the lame Prove. xxvi. 7.
, signify, that one's profession and practice, or some part, or either, does
not correspond with the other. Feet or foot Eccl. v. 1.
, denote the affections and conversation. To dip one's foot in the blood of his
enemies Psalm. lxviii. 23.
, is to behold an awful revenge of their injuries. To dip one's foot, or wash
one's steps in butter, honey, and oil, Job xxix. 6.
, is to enjoy great prosperity, or great abundance of these particular
comforts. Stumbling or slipping of the feet Job xii. 5.
, implies the loss of comfort or hope; the falling into sin, temptation, or
trouble. To withdraw the foot Prove. xxv. 17. Is. lviii. 13.
, is to leave off a dangerous or sinful practice. To keep the feet E^e^. v. 1.
, is to watch over our affections and conversation, in order to preserve them
from sin and danger. To open the feet, and scatter the way to strangers Ezekiel.
xvi. 25.
, implies great forwardness to whoredom or idolatry. Stamping with the foot
Ezekiel. vi. 11.
, is expressive of great trouble and anguish. Stamping down, treading under
foot Dan. viii. 13.
, implies contempt, abuse, utter destruction. To lift up the feet Genesis xxix. 1.
, imports walking with speed, alterness, and joy. To lift up the heel; to kick
against Psalm. xli. 9.
, imports contemptuous treachery and rebellion. To kick against the pricks Acts
ix. 5
, is furiously to offend God, and injure his people, notwithstanding eminent
warning and danger. The iniquities of our heels Psalm xi^x. 5.
, are the sins of our daily conversation. Steps, footsteps Song i. 8.
, represent the acts of our life, by which we set an example to others. To hear
Is. lv. 3.
, is to attend, to perceive, be affected with. To see John vi. 40.
is to discern, experience, enjoy, suffer, feel. To taste Psalm. xxxiv. 8.
, is to experience, know, feel the power of. To handle 1 John i. 1.
, is to have a familiar knowledge. To pant hunger, thirst Psalm. xlii. 1. Matthew.
v. 6.
, is to have a deep, painful sense of want; and an earnest desire and longing.
To stand Psalm. i. 5. 1 Kings xvii. 1.
, imports a fixed condition; a bold appearance; earnest prayer. Sitting Rev.
iii. 21.
, imports rest; continuance; and sometimes honor. To sit under one's vine and
figtree Mic. iv. 4.
, implies safety, prosperity, and comfort. To sit in the dust Is. xlvii. 1.
, implies humility and abasement. Dwelling Joel iii. 20.
, implies fixed continuance, and often that attended with pleasure and delight.
Walking 2 Cor. x. 3.
, represents the practice and conversation. Being hid Nah. iii. 11. Job v. 21.
, is to be unknown, or protected. Clothing or garments Jude 23.
, represent the practice, or what cleaves close to us, as our garments and
ornaments do.

2. Men are compared to HUSBANDMEN Hof. x. 12.
. With great care and diligence ought they to manage and keep the field, the
vineyard of their heart and conversation. They ought earnestly to break up the
fallow-ground of their soul; to labor after thorough convictions; and as they
sow in the springtide of this life, so shall they reap hereafter: these that
sow to the Spirit, sow in righteousness, receive the righteousness and Spirit
of Christ, and live agreeably thereto, shall reap in mercy, reap everlasting
life: and those who sow to the flesh, sow among thorns, -- live under the
influence of sinful corruption and carnal cares, -- shall reap endless misery.

3. Men are compared to BEASTS Eccl. iii. 18.
. Their bodies are of the earth, earthy. How ignorant, stupid, and thoughtless
are most of them! How vile, carnal: how outrageous, untameable, hurtful! How
generally they care only for their body, and neglect the concerns of their
immortal, their rational soul! How often are even the worst horned with
authority, and teethed with power of doing mischief! How they roar like lions!
mourn sore like doves, who have lost their mates! hiss like serpents! with
anguish wail like dragons! enlarge their baldness; mourn desperately; and
become stripped of all things like moulted eagles! But blessed be the Lord,
that now the Gentiles, as well as Jews, are cleansed, and no man has right to
exclude us from the offer of a Savior, as common or unclean.

4. They are compared to FOWLS or BIRDS Da^. iv. 12.
. How light and vain their disposition! How necessary their dependence on air!
How great their stupidity! their readiness to be ensnared in the evil net of
temptation! How frequent their exposure to storms and hazards! How unsettled
their nests of carnal confidences, and earthly enjoyments! What need of JEHOVAH
for our provider, director, and deliverer! And how quickly must we wing our
flight into the eternal state!

5. They are compared to ASSES and WILD ASSES Job xi. 12.
. How stupid and unteachable! How exceedingly they affect the wilderness of a
present world; and of a natural state! How they snuff up, and amuse themselves
with vanity! How averse to restraints of their inclination! -- Stupendous! has
God redeemed me, a wild ass, with the death of his Son; his Lamb! Has he sent
out my soul free; and allowed me to drink my fill of the river of life, that
runs among the hills of DIVine ordinances! the range of the everlasting
mountains is my pasture. Scorn, my soul, the multitude of the city; be not
conformed to the men of this world, who act, as if they had been born to make a
noise, and no more.

6. They are compared to DEAD DOGS 2 Samuel ix. 8. 1 Samuel xxiv. 14.
. How destitute of power and life! How base! how vile, insignificant, and
useless! -- And did the Son of God look upon! did he die for! did he espouse
such a dead dog as I am! Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I
cease to publish the praises of his love.

7. They are compared to FISHES Hab. i. 13. -- 19. Matthew. xiii. 47.
How astonishing their multitude! How different their disposition, their
station, power, and guilt! In the sea of this world, in the sea of their
natural state, with what confusion and unconcern they live and act! How
barbarously they prey upon one another; robbing every one his neighbor of his
character, property, or life! At last, how caught in the gospel-net, and drawn
to Jesus! Or caught in the net of trouble and punishment, and drawn to infernal
fire! -- When, my Lord, shall I be fit for drawing to the happy, the eternal
shore?

8. They are compared to WORMS Job xxv. 6.
. From the earth our bodies proceed; on it they live and move; and to it at
death they return. How much we affect earthly things! The heart of the earth,
the grave, is our long home. How insignificant is our value and strength! How
daily are we obnoxious to ten thousand dangers! How easily affrighted or
ruined! How different our tempers and disposition! Some delight in the dunghill
riches and profits of this present world. Others with pleasure wallow amidst
unsufferable corruption, uncleanness, drunkenness, malice, and other vices
unnumbered. Some have a hypocritical, a gilded appearance, while their heart is
filled with all unrighteousness. Some, as glow worms, shine only in the dark
night of trouble or time: In distress how gracious, when pangs come upon them!
they fear the Lord, and cry to him. How many, as caterpillars and canker-worms,
mar every thing good, which comes in their way! How many, as the silkworm, out
of their own bowels, spin a covering of self-righteousness! But ah! how few
like her, spend themselves to be useful! -- Be thou, my soul, one of these;
ready to spend, and be spent for Christ.

9. David compares himself to a FLEA 1 Samuel xxiv. 14.
How hard for Saul to apprehend him! And to how little purpose, when done! --
Astonishing! how, Lord, have thou pursued and laid hold on me! My goodness
extends not unto thee. O, why was not I cursed, with the enjoyment of my mad
wish, of vanity, of filth, of distance from my God!

10. Men are compared to FLESH Is. xl. 6.
. Our body is a fleshy substance; and how weak and frail are we! What a source
of inward corruption! unless salted with God's purifying, his preserving, and
sin-mortifying influence, how quickly, especially in the summer of prosperity,
do we become utterly corrupt and noisome, with sinful habits, and wicked
courses! How quickly we die away to a state of corruption in the grave! --
Lord, what an insignificant dog's head am I! O rectify me with thy grace; and
make me as seasoning, as purifying salt, to all around me.

11. Men are compared to FRUIT-BEARING TREES Matthew. iii. 10. and vii. 16. -- 20.
. According to the quality of our nature, such is the fruit, ^he works, we bear
in our life. If our heart be unregenerated, every thing we do is evil fruit;
abomination to the Lord; we cannot cease from sin. If our nature be changed, we
cannot but in some degree bring forth good works; our persons being accepted in
Christ, our good works must be well pleasing in his sight. -- Now, my soul, the
axe is laid to thy root; take heed lest, for thy bad fruit, his judgments
suddenly cut thee off.

12. They are compared to TREES OF THE WOOD Song ii. 3.
. How high in pride, or in station, many of them tower! How barren of good
works! How confused their order! How often one draws the sap from, and
depresseth his fellow! How sour; how unprofitable, or hurtful, their fruit!
What wild beasts of sinful corruptions or satanical fiends, lodge among them!
How many of them, after they are a while used, by DIVine providence, are cast
into eternal fire! How contemptible, are all of them, in comparison of Jesus,
the apple tree among the trees of the wood! Now my soul, the axe of the gospel
is laid to thy root, to cut thee off from thy natural stock; quickly shall the
axe of trouble or death be laid to my root; if I am sound without Christ, how
fearful shall be my fall! my ^wo!

13. They are compared to GRASS and FLOWERS Is. xl. 7. 8. James i. 10.
. From one root, what multitudes descend! How fresh, and pleasant; but
short-lived, our first appearance on earth! How weak! how easily endangered!
how quickly blasted and withered by trouble! How often in the top of our
prosperity, are we mown down by death, and cast into the oven of DIVine
vengeance! Under the most blooming and rich appearance, how often lurk the most
unsavory lives and wicked hearts! Under an unsightly aspect, how often a
gracious disposition! In the field of the world, that lies in wickedness, grow
the most; but in the church, the most valuable. And even here, are not the
flourishing saints, at their best, cropped off, and cut down by death?

14. They are compared to LEAVES and STUBBLE Jo^ xiii. 25.
. How light and unsubstantial! How quickly withered! How readily plucked and
scattered by trouble or death! How easily scorched, or burnt up, by the sire of
God's wrath! -- How, Lord, have thou pursued the leaf tossed to and fro!
honored the dry stubble, to unite ME to, and fix ME in thy Son! Here no fire
can consume me; no blast can drive me away; neither height nor depth,
principalities nor powers, can separate me from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus my Lord.

15. They are likened to a WIND that passes away Psalm. lxxviii. 39.
. How unsolid and fleeting! How proud, noisy, and boisterous! How blasting and
hurtful! How sovereignly, at God's pleasure, are they brought forth, and
managed on earth! How he rides on them, as instruments of fulfilling his
purposes! How quickly the breath of his mouth blows them into eternity! Know
thou, my soul, whence I came? and whither I shall go?

16. They are compared to POTTERS VESSELS Romans ix. 21.
. Being formed out of the clay, according to the sovereign will of God, how
base are they in themselves! how easily broken to pieces! how reasonably may
God, at his pleasure, make them vessels unto honor, or dishonor! -- Blessed
for ever, be the Lord; that thousands of them are vessels of mercy, before
prepared unto glory.

17. They are compared to POTSHERDS Is. xlv. 9.
. How broken by sin! by trouble! In themselves, how useless and unprofitable!
how exposed to the vilest debasement! Never, ye frail, ye easily destroyed
potsherds of the earth, strive with your Maker: let not the clay affront her
Creator. -- Shall I, a broken pot, a worthless, bruised nothing, be refitted,
sanctified, and made meet for the Master's use!

18. They are compared to EARTH, DUST, and ASHES Jer. xxii. 29. Genesis xviii. 27.
. Of earth we are formed; on earth we live; and to earth we return, by death.
Naturally our affections cleave to earthly things. Ah! how unfit for spiritual
meditation! for heavenly desire! for holy exercise! How base before God! and
how miserable, stupid, and and useless, till we be enlightened, watered,
warmed, and nourished, with the benign influences of his Spirit!

19. Man's soul is compared to a DARLING child Psalm. xxii. 20.
. How eminently precious! How dear it ought to be to us! Ought not the watching
over, the feeding, the guiding, the cleansing, the eternal salvation thereof,
to be our great care; our principal business! For, what am I profited, if I
gain the whole world, and lose my own soul?

20. It is compared to a SHIP If. 54. 11.
. How curious its frame! How great its worth! How extensive its use! With what
care ought it to be bottomed in Jesus and his covenant! to be cleanfed from all
silthiness of flesh and spirit! and often repaired with new strength and grace
from the fullness of Christ! How incapable to move heavenward, without the gales
of the Holy Ghost! In the troubled sea of this world, how exposed to swelling
billows of adversity! to rocks of temptation! to robberies of Satan and wicked
men! How carefully are its motions to be watched, and its course directed by
the word of God! To secure a happy landing on the shores of immortality, how
necessary is a firm anchoring of faith and hope in Jesus, the Rock of ages,
within the vail! Alas! how many, the neglect of proper bottoming on Christ, the
neglect of proper ballast of humbling grace, and of proper care about spiritual
things, bring to make shipwreck of the doctrines of faith, and of a good
conscience! and to drown themselves in everlasting perdition! -- O to swim for
ever in the deeps of everlasting love, where there is neither brink, nor
bottom, surface, nor shore!

21. Man's soul is compared to a HOUSE or PALACE Rev. iii. 20.
. The understanding faculty is the windows: the receptive capacity is the door:
the will, in her supreme regard, is the throne: sin or grace is the furniture:
divine persons, or infernal fiends, are the inhabitants. Christ's knocking for
entrance at the door of it, is his alarming it by his providence; inviting it
by his word; and striving for it, by the common operations of his Spirit. To
open the heart to him, is to receive his instructive light into the mind, and
embrace him and his given fullness as excellent, with our desire and will. --
Ah, my soul, what bolts of ignorance, Atheism, enmity, pride, attachment to
self-righteousness, worldly mindedness, shut thee fast against him!

22. Man's soul is compared to a TREASURY Job xxxiii. 18. Matthew. xiii. 52.
. How secret and undiscovered to the world! How furnished with things deemed
precious; and which are indeed of everlasting consequence! with her contents,
we trade with God, and with men. -- O could I, out of the good treasure of my
heart, bring forth things new and old!

23. Man's soul or conscience is compared to a CANDLE or LAMP Prove. xx. 27.
. How ufeful, enlightening, and searching, her power! At the infinite knowledge
of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, must her understanding be lighted. And how
small, in comparison thereof! Ah, how neglect to improve our light, occasions
our walking in dark ignorance; our falling into snares, and tumbling headlong
into eternal misery!

24. Man's conscience is compared to a JUDGE 1 John iii. 20. 2^.
. To our conscience it belongs to enquire into our state, our thoughts, words,
and actions; compare them with the law of God; and according thereto, condemn
our wickedness, and sentence us to correction or punishment on account of it;
and approve what is good, and assure us of a proper reward for it. May my
conscience be sprinkled with Jesus' blood; may my life be by faith on him, a
constant looking to, and following his steps: so shall not my heart reproach or
condemn me while I live.

25. Man's conscience is compared to a WITNESS Romans ix. 1. and ii. 15.
. How privy to all our conduct! When faithful, upon what strict examination it
gives clear testimony of the fact, and the form, of our actions, whether they
be good or bad! If it live drousy, ignorant, and inattentive to the nature of
our qualities, our thoughts, our words, or actions; or is swayed in its
testimony by any bribe, any consideration of carnal pleasure, honor, or
advantage; how horrid its wickedness! and what a plague to the possessor! When
faithful, what secret abominations, or excellencies, it manifests! Hence, how
reproached; how abused by the wicked! And how loved by; and what a trusty
friend, protector, and comfort to them, who live soberly, righteously, and
godly, in this present world! How horrid the crime of stifling or denying its
evidence! of muzzling its mouth, by mad rushing into further abomination! or of
attempting to bribe it with some carnal or legal motive! My conscience, let me
deal tenderly with thee; he that touches thee, touches the apple of God's
eye. Be thou, in a Savior's blood, purged from dead works, enlightened by his
word, quickened by his Spirit, and softened by his love: so shall thou be to me
a faithful reprover on an obedient ear; thy smiting shall be a precious oil to
me; with joy and gladness shall I hear thy declarations at the decisive, the
awful, bar.

26. Man's conscience is compared to an INTIMATE COMPANION Psalm. iv. 4.
. What important hints and interesting news, it can ever declare unto us! What
a candid reprover, or kind comforter! How useful to promote our holiness and
felicity, is true friendship and intimacy with it! In the secret watches of the
night, and on every important affair, how necessary is converse with, and
deliberate consultation of it! -- Turn aside, even now, my soul, and ask how
this companion does. Ask, what inward change have I felt? what important choice
have I made? what spiritual mercy do I need? what is my great motive? whither
do my affections bend? am I born from above? is my heart married to Jesus? i^
it right with God? what have I done? what has the Rock of Israel done to me?
whence have I come? and whither should I now go in point of duty? and whither
shall I go into the eternal state?

27. Man's conscience is compared to a SERPENT, a gnawing WORM Eccl. x. 8. Mark
ix 44.
. By presenting our crimes, by condemning and upbraiding for them, it stings
and torments our soul. You despisers of Jesus, how, at last, shall your now
blind, now bribed, now seared conscience, awaken upon you? For your breaking
over the hedge of the DIVine law, how shall it bite you like a serpent, and
sting like an adder! How call your sin to remembrance, and slay your soul! What
lively, bright horror, shall stare through your eye lids, while the living worm
lies gnawing within you! -- Be my conscience, adored Redeemer, satiated with
thy blood; so shall it be a pleasant roe in my bosom, a supporting staff in my
hand.

CHAP. VII. Metaphors respecting saints.
1. THE saints are likened to GOD Zech. xii. 8.
. They are made partakers of, and have fellowship with the DIVine nature. How
spiritual their mind! how real their wisdom! their sanctity! How transcendent
their excellency above their neighbors! How powerful their interest, their
prayer, in the government of the world! By weeping and suplication they have
power with God, and prevail; they command him concerning his sons and his
daughters, and the work of his hands: for their sakes the days of tribulation
are shortened; and they have power to smite the earth with plagues as often as
they will. All are theirs, and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

2. They are compared to ANGELS ibid. 1 Pet. i. 4.
. How near a people to the Most High! How real and efficacious their views of
his glory! How intimate with Heaven! "The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him." How they run the way of his commandments, hearkening to, and
declaring the voice of his word! In the future state, how mavelous their
spiritual wisdom and strength! How perfect in holiness! How fully disengaged
from every nat^^^l relation, and carnal concern! How uninterrupted; how ready,
how cheerful, unwearied, and universal, their service to God and the Lamb!
"What manner of person ought I then to be, in all holy conversation!"

3. In respect of different degrees of grace, they are likened to men of a
different age 1 John ii. 12. -- 14.
. Weak saints are called BABES and LITTLE CHILDREN. They cannot live
comfortably without pleasant frames. How apt to be easily tossed to and fro,
with temptations! with every wind of doctrine! How weak and unfit to digest and
feed on the deeper mysteries of God's word! or, without frequent staggering, to
continue in the course of their duty! Sai^ts of a moderate standing and
experience in grace, are called YOUNG MEN; because of their vigor; their
alertness; and ability to attack and fight the good fight of faith, with Satan,
with their lusts, and with a present evil world. And how upright their stature;
their conversation! how heavenly! how ready to run in the way of God's
commandments! Aged eminent saints are called FATHERS. How multiplied their
experience of Jesus kindness! How distinguished their sagacity in knowing his
voice and way! How prudent their foresight of danger; and ready hiding of
themselves under his wings! how tender their love to weak saints! How earnest
their endeavors to instruct, admonish, and give them an inviting pattern of
gospel-holiness.

4. In respect of different seize, Saints are comparable to WOMEN of
different stations in life Song. vi. 8. 9. and i. 5. and iii. 11.
. Young weak saints to VIRGINS and DAUGH (...). Though their grace be real, yet
how scanty their experience of Christ's power and love! How small their
boldness and confidence before him! How ready to be slavishly afraid, that
every trial shall sink them; every temptation seduce them from Christ! Others
of some standing, to CONCUBINES: For, how legal their disposition! How powerful
their spirit of bondage! How much influenced in duty by legal hopes of heaven,
and servile fears of hell! How limited the beauty and cheerfulness of their
spiritual practice! How few distinguished visits and views of Jesus' love they
enjoy* Strong, believers are comparable to QUEENS. In the a^^^red faith of
their marriage relation to Christ, they dail^ live: How great is their familiar
boldness, and sweet their intimacy with him! How triumphantly free grace reigns
in their heart! How glorious it renders them before God, and their fellow
saints! -- Be thou; my soul, one of those.

5. Saints in general are compared to WOMEN Song. i. 8. 10. 11. 16. 17. and
iii. 6.
: for their beauty, as adorned with Jesus' righteousness and grace; for their
weakness; their tender affection; their subjection to manifold infirmities,
troubles, and dangers on earth. The human body, especially of women, in its
members and adjuncts, is often used to represent their endowments and concerns.
Their head upon them as Carmel, or crimson Song. vii. 5.
, signisies Christ himself as a lofty, a bleeding Redeemer; or, their top grace
of hope, founded in his blood, supported by faith as a neck, and animating
their spirit, and preserving it from sinking; and which looks at things that
are heavenly, distant, and eternal. Their hair on their head, as a flock of
goats, and as purple Song. iv. 1. and vii. 5.
, may signify their numerous, their beautiful, their adorning, though small,
and self-undervalued, holy thoughts, words, and deeds, that spring from Jesus'
fullness, and our assured hope of seeing him as he is. Their locks Song vi. 7.
, represent the beauty and connection of their gracious exercises. Their ^yes
Song. iv. 1. and vii. 4.
, are their spiritual knowledge and their faith by which they discern
supernatural things, and are exceedingly beautified before God. These are as
doves eyes, comely, chaste, and fixed on Jesus their husband. Their eyes being
within their locks, implies their modesty; and how unseen their grace is to a
carnal world. Their being in their head Eccl. ii. 14.
, denotes the propriety, usefulness, and excellency of their knowledge. Their
ears Is. lv. 3.
. denote their attention to, knowledge of, and obedience to, Christ's voice, in
his word. Their nose like the tower of Lebanon looking toward Damascus Song.
vii. 4. 8.
, is their holy courage; their prudence, and their spiritual discerning;
whereby their conversation is mightily adorned; themselves rendered stately,
and majestic; their worst, their Syrian-like adversaries are watched and
dismayed; and their pleasant savor of inward grace is manifested. The smell of
their nose like apples, imports, that they relish heavenly and ^piritual
things; and that the exertion of their inward grace in holy desires, edifying
speech, or useful conversation, is extremely agreeable to Christ and his
people. Their cheeks and temples as a piece of a pomegranate Song. i. 10. and
iv. 3.
, denote their holy blushing; and their humble, sober, and chaste conversation;
which in a distinguished manner adorn them. The rows of jewels, on their checks
Song i. 10.
, may signify the laws of Christ; which are exemplified, and his graces
exerted, in their holy humble practice. Their mouth being a deliverer Prox.
xii. 6.
, imports, that by their prayer and godly instruction, many are refined and
preserved from snares and trouble. Their wholesome tongue being a tree of life;
health; honey and milk under their tongue; and their lips feeding many Prove.
xv. 4 and xii 18. and x. 21.
, imports, that, by their fervent supplications and spiritual conference, many
are graciously quickened, refreshed, healed, and nourished; and themselves kept
in vigor and health; and prepared for eternal life. Their lips of knowledge
and instruction, are as a precious jewel, or choice silver Prove. xx. 15. and x.
20.
; comely, precious, and useful. Their words are as deep waters, very refreshful
and unnoisy; fitly and seasonably spoken, they more adorn their life, and prove
more beneficial to others, than apples of gold in pictures of silver Prove.
xviii. 4. and xxv. 11.
. Their lips are as a thread of scarlet Song iv. 3.
: their gracious converse, their earnest prayer, and grateful praise, turn upon
Jesus' bloody death; are presented to God through his bleeding righteousness;
and are a sure token of the soundness of their inner-man. Their teeth like an
even-shorn, newely washed, and fruitful flock Song iv. 2.
, are their DIVinely-cleansed faith, and spiritual meditation, whereby they
chew the bread of life, and render themselves truly holy, and fruitful in good
works; or their holy, regular, and prudent zeal, by which they are active in
raising up monuments of praise, and a seed to serve the Lord Christ. Their neck
Song iv. 4 and vii. 4.
, is their faith, by which they are united to the Redeemer as their head;
receive nourishment from him; and return their love and praises to him; and are
exceedingly beautified before him. The chains of gold about it Song i. 10.
, are the precious and everlasting promises which it embraces; the blessings
which it receives; the graces which it actuates; and the gifts which it
improves. Their shoulder and back Psalm. cxxix. 3.
, are their strength and patience; or that wherein they are exposed to burdens,
scourges, and suffering. Their hands and fingers dropping with sweet smelling
myrrh upon the handles of the lock Song v. 5.
, are their faith by which they touch, and receive Christ, and work by love;
and which, -- O with what refreshful, and purifying virtue, -- attempts to open
the heart to him. Their breasts like young roes, towers, or clusters of grapes
Song vii. 3. 8. and viii. 10.
, are their love, their affection, and desire after Christ, and their edifying
talk and conduct; whereby their soul is beautified, and endeared to Christ; and
whereby others are refreshed, helped, encouraged, and nourished, with the
sincere milk, and spiritual, wine of his word and grace. Betwixt their breasts
Song i. 13.
, is in their, heart, their most endeared embrace. Their heart is at their
right hand Eccl 1. 2.
; they execute their purposes with dexterity and dispatch. Their merry heart,
or good conscience, does good like a medicine Prove. xvii. 22. and xv. 15.
, promotes their foundness, and strength, natural, chiefly spiritual, and
eternal; and is a continual feast, affords eminent and unceasing satisfaction,
joy, and pleasure. Their bowels Col. iii 12.
, are mercy, kindness, long-suffering, gentleness. Their belly like an heap of
wheat, set about with lilies Song vii. ^.
, may denote their particular application of Jesus Christ, and feeding on him
for spiritual nourishment; and their tender concern to bring forth, and win
others to him; both which are eminently and plentifully connected and adorned
with solid, savoury, and flourishing promises and fruits. Their navel as a
round goblet full of liquor Song vii. 2.
, may signify their ever-receiving appetite and desire after Jesus Christ;
whereby nourishment is conveyed to their tender grace. The joints of their
thighs like curious jewels Song vii. 1.
, are their valuable, their holy principles of faith and love; which being
curiously framed by the Redeemer, enable them with decency, pleasure, and
exactness, to walk in his ways. Their seet Song vii. 1.
, denote their affections, and well-ordered conversation: their shoes on their
feet, denote the gospel of peace, as it were supporting, animating, and
interwoven with their affections and practice; that with spiritual freedom,
courage, and safety, they may walk by gospel-influence, and according to
gospel-rule. Their feet only need to be washed John xiii. 10.
; the justification of their person is at first complete; but the guilt of
daily sins in their soul and practice, ever needs to be washed away. But the
washing of feet, pled in excuse, for not readily receiving of Christ Song v. 3.
, is indifference about gospel truth, and weariness of spiritual exercise. The
saints being black, but comely; the fairest among women Song i. 5. 8.
, imports, that though in their own view, though in themselves, and as
surrounded with infirmities and trouble, they be unsightly, yet, as adorned
with Jesus righteousness and grace, and in his kind estimation, they are
exceeding comely and beautiful. Their glorious garments, wrought with
embroidery of gold, and of fine linen Psalm. xlv. 13. 14.
, are his righteousness and grace; and the holy conversation founded thereon.
It is their conversation-garment they wash and make clean in the blood of the
Lamb Rev. vii. 14.
; by improving it as the sole ground of their hope, of their pardon, salvation,
and acceptance with God. But the putting off the coat, which indisposeth them
to receive Christ Song v. 3.
, is indifference about him and his righteousness, leaving off first love to
him, neglect of commanded duty, inclination to carnal ease, and spiritual
sleep. Unfaithful ministers take away the saints vail from them Song v. 7.
: they expose their infirmities; deny them the faithful preaching of imputed
righteousness; corrupt them from the simplicity of truth; and draw them to a
compliance with the superstitious devices of men. Their borders of gold and
studs of silver, for their robes Song i. 11.
, are the precious and permanent blessings, graces, and gifts, which flow from
their Mediator's righteousness; and which shine in their holy conversation.
Their green bed Song i. 16.
, is the comely, the refreshful, the flourishing and fruitful church, new
covenant, scriptures, ordinances, and peculiar fellowship with Christ. Their
perfumes Song iii. 6.
, are the graces given them. The church below, the heavens above, are their
house, and residence Song
. Their heart, and the task of duty assigned them, are the vineyard appointed
to their care Song. i. 6. and viii. 12.
.

6. The saints are compared to ROYAL PERSONS, kings, queens, princes,
princesses Rev. i. 6. Psalm. xlv. 9. 13. 16.
. Begotten of God, the King of all the earth: begotten of Jesus, the King of
kings, by the travail of his soul; they possess royal blood, are partakers of a
DIVine nature, endowed with a living principle of grace derived from Christ;
are royally educated at his school of sacred inspiration, spiritual influence,
and sanctified trouble; are disposed to a free, a generous, and princely
service of him; are married to him in the day of his power; and from him
receive their honor, their fullness, and their title to an endless crown. How
royal their apparel of imputed righteousness! implanted grace! and holy
conversation! How royal their nourishment of his flesh and blood; of all the
fullness of God! How royal their palace of his invisible church, his celestial
mansion! How royal their chariot of the new covenant and gospel of God! How
royal their rest in his well-guarded bed! How royal their guard of DIVine
attributes, holy angels, and faithful ministers! How royal their unction of the
Holy Ghost, to consecrate and furnish them for their work! How royal the crown
of DIVine loving kindness and tender mercy, which they wear, and the triple
crown of glory, life, and righteousness, which they expect! How royal their
throne, being raised up together, and made to sit together in heavenly places,
in, and with Christ Jesus! How royal their council, the ADORED THREE speaking
in the scripture! How royal their heart! set upon things above, and not upon
things of the earth! How royal and extensive their influence in managing and
protecting the world, ruling the nations with a rod of iron, bearing rule over
their own spirit, and conquering Satan and their lusts! -- O mavelous, that
by the grace of God I am what I am!

7. They are a ROYAL PRIESTHOOD 1 Pet. ii. 9.
. Most honorably, by the sprinkling of Jesus' blood, by the received fullness
of his Spirit, are they consecrated, and set apart to the service of God! and
appointed to draw near to him, and through his Son, offer sacrifices of prayer,
and praise, of holy services, and broken hearts; and if called, of their life,
for the honor of his name.

8. They are called PROPHETS Psalm cv. 15. 1 John ii. 20. 27.
. They know much of God's mind in comparison of others; and faithfully ought
they to declare it unto others: Chiefly about future things are they concerned;
and from inspired revelation, have they a solid and certain knowledge thereof.

9. They are called a CHOSEN GENERATION, or KINDRED 1 Pet. ii. 9.
. In Christ, before the world began, JEHOVAH chose, and ordained them to
eternal life. By his grace he renders them choice and excellent. Of his own
will, by the soul-travail of his Son, and the regenerating influence of his
Spirit, he begets them again; espouseth them to Jesus, as their husband and
brother; adopts them into his family, and constitutes them fellow members with
angels and ransomed men. -- Thou have not, my soul, first chosen him, but he
has chosen thee.

10. They are called a HOLY NATION 1 Pet. ii. 9.
. In whole they are a very numerous body, and closely connected, members one of
another. Unfailing faith in a Redeemer, and unceasing love to one another,
being their bonds of union, how firm and lasting is the duration of their body!
Christ is their King in the midst of them, and their ambassador at the court of
heaven. Fellowship with him, receiving out of his fullness, and loving one
another, are their gainful traffic. Angels, and implanted graces, are their
armies, DIVine attributes and promises, are their strong holds and
fortifications. Resistance of sin, Satan, and the world, is their warfare. The
heavenly oracles are their laws. Attendance on DIVine worship and service,
their tribute. And how holy are they in their birth; their state; their
statutes; vows; purposes; and conversation!

11. They are called a PECULIAR PEOPLE 1 Pet. ii. 9.
. What a numerous, a flourishing body, whom God has made the objects of his
peculiar love! whom he has purchased with the peculiar price of the blood of
his Son! whom he subdues to himself, by a peculiar warfare of kindness and
mercy! whom he has enriched with peculiar blessings! whose hearts are
inhabited by peculiar guests; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost! whom God has formed
for himself, to show forth his peculiar praise! whom he watches over, day and
night, with peculiar care! and prepares for, and assures of peculiar mansions
of joy! And O how different their pedigree; their foundation; their government;
their spirit; their way; their end; from that of the men of this world!

12. They are a people that DWELL ALONE Numb. xxiii. 9.
. In God's predestining purpose, they have a distinct situation and place. They
alone are set as a seal on Jesus' heart and arm. They alone are within the bond
of the new covenant, and pale of the invisible church. And it is yours, ye
ransomed, to avoid all unnecessary intimacy with carnal men; to study a
contrariety of conduct; and to seek the unknown, but happy attainment of secret
fellowship with God. Let me live alone from the world: but let the Father and
the Son come unto me, and manifest themselves to my soul.

13. They are CITIZENS and FELLOW-CITIZENS with the saints Ephesians. ii. 19. Phil.
iii. 20.
. Solemn is their admission into the visible church. Glorious are their
privileges: they are the objects of Heaven's distinguished care. Great is their
gospel-freedom from the law as a covenant, and from the yoke of human
impositions; gainful their traffic with Christ; great their honor in bearing
his image and badge; comely their order; binding their common laws; strict
their connection; and tender their care, one of another: peculiar the right of
their seed to an interest in Heaven's distinguished benefits. They are citizens
of the church-triumphant; their burgesship, their conversation, is in heaven.
They are born from above; have their names written in heaven, in the Lamb's
book of life: Being made free by the Son, they are free indeed. Their stock,
their treasure, their heart are in heaven: in heavenly things they trade; in
good and perfect things that come from above: they set their affections on
these things that are above, where Jesus is at the right hand of God. Shortly
shall THERE be their endless residence; they shall see the King in his beauty,
and dwell in his presence. -- Can thou, my soul, instruct thy celestial
lineage; speak the heavenly dialect of cordial praise? Is the ticket, the
everlasting covenant, laid up in my heart, as all my salvation, and all my
desire?

14. They are represented as an HOUSEHOLD and FAMILY Ephesians. ii. 20. Gal. vi. 10.
. How, being gathered, protected, and ruled by God, they dwell together in
unity! How closely joi^ed in Christ; in God, their habitation! How bound and
disposed to promote one another's welfare and joy! They are the household of
God, made, collected, owned, provided for, employed, and governed by him to his
own g^^ry. They are the household of faith. By the grace of faith they credit,
and contend earnestly for the doct^^ne of faith once delivered to the saints.
By these things they live; and in them be the life of my soul.

15. They are represented as CHILDREN of God Romans viii. 17.
. By him they are adopted. Of him their new man is spiritually begotten and
born. His image is engraven, his name called upon, and his Spirit put within
them. Dearly he loves them. Every thing necessary for time and et^rnity, he
provides for them. In every danger he protects; in every part of conduct, in
every good word and work, he directs them: and for their faults, chiefly their
stubbornness, he corrects them. Their prayers he hears; their suits he grants.
They are heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. It is theirs to be humble,
teachable, and obedient before hlm: -- Theirs to inmitate him in mercy, in
meekness, in holiness, righteousness: -- Theirs to hate what he hates; to love
what he loves: -- Theirs to incline to abide in his family; dwell in his
presence; and seek after the most intimate fellowship with him. It is theirs to
know, esteem, love, delight in him, as their Father; and to take pleasure in
his word his ordinances, and people: -- Theirs to be grieved and concerned when
he is dishonored, or his church oppressed or polluted. -- Are these things, my
soul, found in thee? Am I certainly a child of God by faith in Christ Jesus?

16. Saints are compared to BABES Matthew. xi. 25. 1 Pet. ii. 1.
. In themselves how exceeding helpless, weak, and insignificant! How exposed to
danger! but wonderfully protected and preserved by God. In what imperfect
degree, they here possess all the graces of the perfect, the glorisied saints!
How native; how earnest, their inclination to pray; to suck the sincere milk of
God's word! How carefully, by Christ, by his angels, and ministers, are they
watched, guided, and guarded! If not hindered by their peevish temper, how
quick is their spiritual growth, about the time of their heavenly birth! How
innocent, meek, harmless, and humble they are; How candid and sincere in their
faith; their love; their Christian profession, and holy obedience! Except, my
soul thou become as a little child, thou shall in no wise enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

17. They are called SONS; HEIRS; FIRST BORN Gal. iv. 4. 5. 6. Heb. xii. 23.
. For a time indeed they continue in a low condition, and retain much of the
Spirit of bondage; but solemnly are they separated to the service of God, as
his peculiar property. How bleeed are they with all the best blessings of his
righteousness, his grace, and salvation. How princely and exalted is their
dominion over the rest of the world! What a substantial blessing and honor are
they to them. How sure and sweet is their title to the everlasting inheritance.
-- Rejoice, my soul, I am an heir of God, and joint heir with Christ: nor can
sins, nor devils, nor wicked men, disinherit me. God is my Father, my tutor, my
ALL. His covenant is my charter; thrice surer than heaven or earth.

18. They are called DAUGHTERS; VIRGINS; SISTERS of Christ Song i. 3. 5. and
iii. 11. and v. 1. Psalm. xlv. 13.
. How weak in themselves! How exposed to danger and infirmity! How engaging
their spiritual comeliness! How glorious their apparel of imputed
righteousness, implanted grace, and holy conversation! How single their love to
Jesus Christ! How chaste their adherence to him! How sound and incorrupt in the
faith! How sincere in their worship! How pure in their heart and life! How
candid their care to avoid temptations to, and appearances of evil! How
disposed to blush at the best of their services! Inferior, indeed, in every
respect, they are to Christ; but being begotten of the same Father, children in
the same family, they partake of the same human nature with him; have his image
on them; are nearly connected with, dearly beloved, and tenderly cared, and
provided for, by him. They are daughters of Jerusalem, children of Zion. In the
true church, they are born; and by means of her ordinances and ministers, is
their spiritual birth accomplished. On her spiritual provision of
gospel truths, and new covenant blessings, they are nourished. With the
garments of salvation, DIVinely granted to her, they are clothed. In her they
abide; and are governed, directed, protected, and perfected. If I am such, why
should I wear the attire of an harlot? why whorishly turn aside by the flocks
of thy companions? -- When, O my Brother, shall I find thee without, on thy
great white throne, that I may kiss thee, may embrace thee, and not be ashamed?
When shall I come to the Jerusalem above, which is the mother of us all? When
shall we, the ransomed of the Lord, return and come to Zion, with songs, and
everlasting joy on our heads, and sorrow and sighing flee away?

19. They are CHILDREN OF PROMISE Gal. iv. 28.
. From eternity their birth, their life, their endless felicity, was promised
to our adored Redeemer. Not by natural influence, but by the gospel-promises
and fullness thereof, are they spiritually begotten, born, suckled, nourished,
directed, supported, carried, healed, revived, restored, comforted, and
sanctified. And highly they esteem and delight in the promises. -- Let these
thy words be found by me; let me eat them; and let them be to me the joy and
rejoicing of my heart. Never let me forget thy statutes, for by them thou have
quickened me.

20. They are called Christ's SEED, the TRAVAIL of his soul Is. liii. 11.
. By his infinite labor and suffering, and from his fullness of virtue and
grace, they are brought forth unto God. His honor they represent; his name
they continue; and to all generations, they are the joy and rejoicing of his
heart. On the very substance of his person, his flesh and blood, that he gives
for the life of the world, he feeds and nourishes their soul. -- Lord Jesus,
am I so dear to thee? am I the offspring of thy love; thy blood; thy grace?
Detested then be my heart, if it love father, or mother, more than thee.

21. Saints are called BRETHREN (c), In the same purpose of God, all of them
are chosen. All of them have God for their Father; the church for their mother;
Christ for their elder brother. Their grace, their profession, their practice,
is similar. Their love is mutual. They are Christ's brethren: they have one
Father with him. They are ineffably near to him, and precious in his sight. In
so far as their finite nature admits, they share with him in his grace, his
office, and work. How quickly, my Lord, shall I hear thee say, "Inasmuch as ye
did it to the least of these my brethren, you did it unto me."

22. They are Christ's BRIDE and SPOUSE John xx. 17.
. In infinite kindness he chooses them for himself. Heartily and deliberately
they accept of him, as their head and husband. All their sinful debt was
charged upon him; and he, by his obedience and sufferings, answered for it.
Highly he loves; faithfully he dwells in, tenderly he sympathizeth with;
sufficiently he provides for; fully he protects them. How deep is his interest
and concern in their persons, graces, temptations, and troubles. How glorious
is their interest in his person, his righteous^ess, honor, and fullness. How
highly they esteem; tenderly they love; ardently they desire; humbly they serve
him; and hardly do they bear his frowns! How mutual is their joy and rejoicing
over one another! How mindful are both of their marriage contract, the covenant
of peace! By distinguished fellowship with him, they become fruitful in the
works of righteousness. Openly, before angels and men, shall their nuptials, at
the end, be celebrated. Then shall they enter into the palace of the King, and
shall abide. "Blessed are they, who are called to this eternal marriage-supper
of the Lamb;" and who^ the Lamb himself makes ready. -- Blessed for ever be
the Lord, that neither meanness, nor guilt, nor vileness, nor infamy, nor
devils, nor death, could stop, or can break my marriage to him! He betrotked me
to himself for ever; yea, betro^hed me to him, in righteousness and in
judgment, in loving kindness and in mercies. Ye sinful, ye unprofitable, ye
infamous Rev. xix. 7. Song v. 1.
men, whosoever will, let him come to the marriage.

23. They are compared to RETURNING PRODIGALS Luke xv. 10. -- 24.
. Receiving from God many noble endowments, time, talents, opportunities, how
they rush into apostasy from him! and waste these gifts in soul-runing
fellowship with Satan and his agents! When by trouble, and by sharp conviction,
they are forced to consider their case; nothing spiritually good they have, or
can do. No more pleasure in sin, or in creatures, can they s^nd. Now the most
urgent necessity, accompained with an attractive persuasion of God's
all sufficiency and readiness to help, determines them to attempt an humble
return to him as their Savior and Master, and a candid confession of their
sin, and earnest supplication f^r mercy. How the all-gracious Father, his
bowels of compassion, yearn toward them! How, in their distant, their
loathsome, their dreadful condition, he in mercy runs to meet them! With what
arms of mercy he embraces them! with what kisses of forgiving love he melts
their heart, and determines it to a truly gospel-repentance, and confession of
sin! By the ministry of the word and Spirit, how graciously he decks them with
the best robe of imputed righteousness; adorns them with the gold-ring of his
everlasting favor, Spirit, and grace; feasts and nourishes their soul with
the sweet, the tender, the all-fattening flesh and blood of his sacrificed Son!
What unending joy now commenceth among divine persons and holy angels; that
fallen men, utterly lost, as to safety, happiness, or usefulness, are
recovered! those dead in trespasses and sins are quickened, and espoused to
Christ!

24. Peevish saints much resemble the prodigal's ELDER BROTHER Luke xv. 25. --
31.
. Being DIVinely preserved from the more scandalous crimes, and serving God
from their youth, in a tender and unbleameable practice; how sinfully they
sometimes fret at JEHOVAH'S sovereign conduct, in giving newly-converted
profligates surprising measures of grace, surprisingly familiar intimacy with
himself; while he rarely bestows on themselves, such sensible experience of his
love, as exhilarates their heart, and determines them with pleasure to talk of
his goodness! Alas! ye froward, when will ye grow wise? should your eye be
evil, because God is good? Do you well to be angry, that "where sin abounded,
grace did much more abound?"

25. The saints are compared to JUDGES 1 Cor. vi. 2. 3.
. Endowed with wisdom, power, and authority, they set themselves for the
defense of the heavenly statutes. By self examination they judge themselves,
that they be not condemned with the world. By their sound principals, and holy
lives, they condemn the world that lies in wickedness. At last they shall sit
as assessors with Christ in the ^^al judgment of evil angels and wicked men. --
Shall this, Lord, be my honor, who have so often yielded to Satan, and defiled
myself with his wicked agents on earth!

29. They are called WITNESSES Is. xliii. 10.
. Having tasted that the Lord is gracious; having heard his voice, seen his
glory, and his mighty deeds; they bear witness, that he is God all-sufficient,
possessed of every perfection, and suited to every case. Having seen the Son,
believed on him, and handled the word of life, they testify, that he is the
DIVinely-sent, the able, the everready and compassionate Savior of the world.
Having seen an end of all perfection, and felt the unsolidity and evil of the
world, they declare, that "vanity of vanities, all that comes is vanity and
vexation of spirit." Having felt their heart, and seen their life, they attest
the former to be "deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked;" and the
latter, in its best estate, but ^ilthy rags. Having felt the virtue of Jesus'
word, they testify, that his "law is the truth; his gospel the power of God
unto salvation; his commandment spiritual, holy, just, and good." Faithfully
they bear witness, even against themselves. Boldly they often finish their
testimony, resist unto blood, striving against sin." -- Abide, my soul, by the
truth, and the truth shall make thee free.

27. They are compared to RICH MEN and NOBLES Rev. iii. 18. Psalm. xlv. 16.
. How honorably begotten of the "everlasting Father, possessor of heaven and
earth!" Christ, and all things in him, are their wealth, their treasure. How
glorious their apparel of his righteousness and grace! How ornamented with his
Spirit, his love! How liberally educated at his school, and taught to profit!
How pompous their riding in his new covenant chariot, on his white horses, his
evangelical promises, and in company with him their KING! They indeed love to
work righteousness; but live not by their labors, but on God, as their
inheritance, their portion; on the delicate provision of Jesus' fiesh and
blood. How goodly their dwelling! the Most High is their habitation. How
numerous their attendants; angels and men! How readily every thing works for
their good! What burdens of labor, difficulty, and trouble, they can sustain,
without being rendered wretched or miserable! How well they can forbear their
full portion, till the end of time! How exalted their fellowship with DIVine
persons; with angels and saints! How the view of their wealth emboldens them to
approach the throne of grace; the communion of saints; and the mansions of
bli^s! and roughly to resist temptations from sin, Satan, and the world! --
What am I, or what is my father's house, that God has brought me hitherto;
raised me out of the dunghill, and made me to sit with princes!

28. They are called POOR or POOR IN SPIRIT Psalm. lxviii. 10 Matthew. v. 3.
. Not only are they generally poor in worldly circumstances; and all, in
themselves, destitute and despicable before God; but how unworthy, wretched,
and polluted, in their own eyes! What students of contentment with a low
condition in the world! With what humility, they look on all their
righteousness as loss and dung; reckon themselves less than the least of all
God's mercies; less than the least of all saints; and the chief of sinners!
With what cheerful pleasure, they live solely on the free, the sovereign grace
of God in Christ; and reckon it their great honor and happiness, to be the
eternal dyvors thereof! -- Let greedy swords fight on for wealth; I can be
poor: but, Lord, I beg to sit, and sup, and smile with thee.

29. They are compared to four and twenty ELDERS, crowned and surrounding the
throne of God (c); because Rev. iv. 4. and v. 8. 9. 10.
of their gravity, their wisdom, their power, and authority. They are a people
near unto God, and employed in the most humble and unceasing adoration of him.
And is not their faith founded on the doctrine of the "prophets and twelve
apostles of the Lamb?" Thrice blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the
crown of glory, the kingdom of heaven!

30. They are compared to HARPERS harping with their harps, and singing a new
song, which none but themselves can learn Rev. xiv. 2.
. How skilfully; how sweetly they sing of mercy and judgment! Knowing that all
things flow from redeeming love, and work for their eternal advantage; in ev^^y
thing they give thanks. How cordially; how pleas^ntly they praise their loving,
their eternal FAIR; their endless ALL; in sine, their GOD! -- Am I redeemed;
redeemed to him; redeemed with blood DIVine? O may I lose my useless tongue,
when it forgets to praise!

31. They are compared to MERCHANTS Matthew. xiii. 46. Rev. iii. 18.
. Christ the pearl of great price, the sin^ gold, the treasure hid in the field
of revelation, they seek out, buy, deliberately accept of, as their own; the
gift of God to them. The truth they buy; deliberately credit; and, at the
hazard of every thing dear in a world, retain. The time they redeem, they
carefully improve, because the days are evil. With wisdom, with care, with
pleasure, with desire, and hope of endless advantage, they deal in spiritual
and heavenly things. With knowledge and deliberation, they commission them by
prayer; bring them home by faith; and receive them them with much affection,
and joy of the Holy Ghost. Cheerfully they give their bill, their determined
purpose, in his strength, to render unto God thanks for all his mercies. Grace,
glory, God himself, in all his fullness, is the subject of their traffic.
Freely, without money and without price, is the heaven fixed rate of every
commodity. Christ is their factor in the far, the heavenly, country. Prayers
and supplications, with strong cries and tears, are their letters of trade.
Exceeding great and precious promises are their invoice; their bill of lading.
DIVine ordinances are the port, the exchange, the market, where they carefully
attend. Faith in the promise is the ship, the porter, which brings home their
goods to their soul. A conscience purged in Jesus' blood is their accomptant.
Their understanding and memory are their journal and ledger. Self-examination
is their inventory of their stock, their stating of accounts. Improving of
grace received, in holy and beneficent exercises, is their sale. Carefully
ought they to keep distinct records of the true state and frame of their soul,
and of God's mercies to them, and their sins against him. Speedily ought they
to pay their vows, their bills of gratitude. As their trade prospers or
languisheth, they ought to rejoice, or mourn. -- Learn, my soul, this gainful
business; this trade, making many, making all its users rich; this trade, that
can never be hurt by the number of sharers; this trade, for which
disappointments, straits, poverty, and guilt, may be improved, as a
qualification.

32. They are compared to SOLDIERS Ephesians. vi. 1^. -- 19.
. In the day of power, they are enlisted under Jesus' banner; brought into the
bond of his covenant; clothed with the livery of his imputed righteousness, his
implanted grace, and of an holy conversation; and armed with the whole armor
of God, with the girdle of truth, the breast plate of righteousness, the shoes
of settled gospel-principles, the shield of faith, the helmet of the hope of
salvation, the inspired sword of the Spirit, and the artillery of all prayer;
which they are to keep undamaged, and ready on every occasion. It is theirs to
distinguish themselves from others; to moderate their affections and care about
worldly things; to cease from their former sinful and legal labors; and, with
singleness of heart, with prudence, patience, submission, courage, care, and
activity, to follow the Captain of their salvation in their respective
stations; to know his word; without hesitation obey his command; endure
hardship; espy the stratagems, watch the motions of spiritual enemies; improve
every advantage against them; show no pity to any of them; but, by means of
Jesus' death, believed with application, resist Satan; crucify and kill the
body of sin, with its affections and lusts. Ye soldiers of the Lamb, be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might; encourage yourselves in your
leader; in the certainty of your victory; and the reward of your warfare. Never
desert your DIVine, your gracious commander; nor his standard of truth. Never
yield to a spiritual foe; resist the devil, and he will flee from you; resist
unto blood, striving against sin: count not your life dear unto you, that you
may finish your course with joy; fight the good fight of faith; lay hold on
eternal life. Though your enemies be many, be strong, and lively, there are
more with you, than with them: stronger is he that is in you, than he that is
in the world. -- Be then the day of war, the season of my soul.

33. They are compared to WATCHMEN Psalm. cxxx. 5. 6. Prove. vi. 23.
. In their respective towers and stations they wait upon, and watch for God,
more than they that watch for the morning. Carefully they observe the approach
of spiritual danger, and cry to the Lord for relief. It is yours, ye ransomed,
to watch unto prayer, and other duties; to wait, to prepare for, and lay hold
on every opportunity thereof; to watch in duty, keep your heart, in its
disposition and aims, because out of it are the issues of life; and to watch
for the answer of prayer, and fruit of good works. It is yours, to watch
against the roaring lion, and his serpentine agents: to watch with Jesus as
your Lord, your defense, pattern, companion, and guide: to watch for him,
coming in the Spirit, and in the clouds; for blessed are they, whom, at his
coming, he shall find watching. -- Listen, my soul, the Master comes; the
Judge stands at the door; gird up thy loins; watch and be sober: watch with
him thy one hour of life: watch and pray, that thou enter not into temptation.

34. They are compared to WRESTLERS Ephesians. vi. 12.
. Being anointed with the Holy Ghost, and sisted in the view of angels and men,
they wrestle with profane persons, testifying against, and opposing their
wickedness, and patiently enduring their reproach and persecution. They wrestle
with persons heretical and erroneous; watching against their snares, refuting
their error, and endeavoring to censure them on its account: They wrestle with
evil angels, and sinful lusts: hating, resisting, crying for deliverance from
them, and studying to have every inward corruption utterly destroyed. In humble
and earnest supplication, they wrestle with God: taking hold of his strength,
pleading his promise, and relying on the blood and intercession of his Son,
they insist for his favors, and refuse to let him go till he bless them. -- Be
thou, my soul, "strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus." Let no
discouragement drive thee from his mercy-seat. Fill thy mouth with arguments,
even with thy need, thy guilt, thy perverseness; order thy cause before him.

35. They are compared to WALKERS Zech. x. 12.
. Being DIVinely brought into Jesus the way of holiness, in which the
wayfaring man shall not err, in the sight, in the company, under the awe, and
with a regard to the glory of God; in the continued application of a Redeemer's
blood; in the strength of the grace daily received out of his fullness; under
the constraining power of his love; they, -- with great pleasure and
healthfulness, follow his pattern, obey his law, make progress in
gospel-holiness, distance from sin, Satan, and an evil world, meetness for, and
nearness to the celestial glory. Being brought at last into the mansions of
happiness, they, with unceasing pleasure, peace, purity, honor and triumph,
for ever attend the Lamb of God, in all his glorious discoveries of himself. --
My soul, having "received the Lord Jesus, walk in him; walk up and down in his
name; walk humbly with thy God;" at last thou shall walk with him in white; for
in him thou art worthy.

36. They are compared to RUNNERS of a race Heb. xii. 1.
. Encompassed with so great a cloud, a multitude of witnesses; animated by the
example of Christ, and his now glorified followers; excited by the view of God,
angels and men; they, in the most exact, thoughtful, laborious, and diligent
manner, begin, prosecute, and finish their course of holy exercise. To succeed,
my soul, begin it, as early as possible. Put on the light, the pliant robes of
Jesus' righteousness and grace. Be thou wholly, chiefly thy joints, thy
principles of action, anointed with the Holy Ghost. Lay aside every weight of
guilt, anxious care, and sinful affection. And particularly, thy evil heart of
unbelief and thy predominant lusts. Beware of "surfeiting and drunkenness; be
not highminded, but fear." Ever fix thine eye on Jesus as thy way, thy pattern;
on his law as thy rule; on his Spirit as thy guide; on death as thy goal; on
endless felicity as thy prize. Stumble at no temptation, affliction, reproach,
presecution, desertion, or inward weakness; but with integrity, vigor, and
unwearied diligence, proceed in thy course; daily apply a Savior's blood; grow
in grace; abound in the work of the Lord.

37. They are compared to PILGRIMS or TRAVELERS 1 Pet. ii. 10.
. Finding no rest for their soul on earth, they, at first, carefully consider
the cost, the difficulty, the danger of their journey to heaven; wisely they
put on the light, the new, the defensive, and unwasting garments of salvation;
and take to them the whole armor of God, for their safety against foes. Wisely
they receive Jesus and his fullness, as their gold, their treasure, to bear
their expense. They receive his Father for their companion; his Spirit to be
their guide; his word to be their director and compass; his love, his power,
and promise, for their supporting staff. Carefully they ask for the good old
way of holiness; and continue walking therein: sweetly they drink out of its
wells of salvation; and refresh themselves, but not tarry in the inns of
ordinances built thereupon. How DIVersified is their condition! Now, their duty
is pleasant and easy; anon, it is rugged and difficult. Now, they enjoy fine
weather of peace and prosperity; clear views of Jesus countenance, wide
prospects of his loveliness and love; clear discoveries of the vanity of this
world, of the happiness of their present, and of the glory of their future
state: anon, they are distressed with cold winters of trouble, storms of
temptation, dark nights of desertion and disorder, that they know not what to
do, or whither to go. How often fearfully pinched for provision! How often the
wells of promises seem dry, and inns of ordinances are found empty! How often
are they exposed to the gazing, ridicule, and malice of carnal men! How often,
by Satan and their lusts, harassed and robbed of their grace, or its evidence!
How often tempted to turn back! But, through every tribulation, they push
forward to the city, the celestial kingdom, of God; and with so much more
cheerfulness, if they enjoy the company of eminent saints. -- May I "go from
strength to strength, till I appear before God in Zion."

38. They are called STRANGERS and SOJOURNERS with God on earth Psalm. xxxix. 12.
. How strange to carnal men, is their state of union and communion with Christ!
How strange their birth from above! their having God their Father! Christ their
husband! glorified saints their principal people! In what strange; what
celestial country, are their portion, their inheritance, their hopes, their
affections, their thoughts, their desires! With what strange robes of DIVine
righteousness, implanted grace, and gospel-holiness, they are decked! What
strange armor of God they have put on! How strangely they speak the spiritual
language of prayer and praise! pour out their hearts, behave as becomes the
high calling of God! walk with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whom the world see
and know not! feed on the strange provision of Jesus' person, righteousness,
and benefits! How employed in the much-unknown labor of numbering their days;
of considering their last end; of ploughing up the fallow-ground of their
heart; of sowing to themselves in righteousness; of buying without money and
without price; of denying and loathing themselves; of warring with
principalities, powers, and spiritual wickedness; of renouncing the profit,
pleasure, and honor of this world; of extracting good from evil, and sweet out
of bitter; of loving their mankind-enemies, and rendering them blessing for
cursing! How unsatisfactory their outward enjoyments! What a gazing stock to
the men of this world! And how despised, reproached, and harassed by them! --
Be content, my soul, it is enough that God has sworn, "I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee." In all, my straits, he is a present help. In all my
affliction he is afflicted, so he is my Savior.

39. They are called BUILDERS Jude 20.
. According to the rule and line of God's inspired word, they, by faith, lay
themselves and their whole salvation upon Christ, the foundation laid in Zion;
and in his strength, build up themselves, in their most holy faith and gospel
conversation; adding one degree of grace, one good word and work to another:
and build up the church, by elucidating DIVine truths; winning souls to Christ;
spreading abroad the savor of his name; and lifting up his praise. -- So
build, my soul, and thou shall be able to finish.

40. They are compared to THRESHERS, or THRESHING INSTRUMENTS Is. xli. 15. 16.
. In Jesus' strength, and by repeated acts of faith and hope, of repeutance and
love, of humility and self-denial, they, by little and little, conquer their
spiritual enemies, and bring down the mountains of wicked men, evil angels,
sinful corruptions, manifold dangers and difficulties, which stand in their way
of serving the Lord, or enjoying fellowship with him. Astonishing! shall worm I
beat them small as dust? Let me then rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the holy
One of Israel.

41. They are compared to STEWARDS Luke xvi. 9. -- 12
. To their peculiar care has God committed the vineyard of their own heart,
and station in the world and church. A variety of gifts, graces, ordinances,
and opportunities has he bestowed upon them, to be improven according to the
rule of his word. Solemnly has he charged them to be faithful, and to study
the welfare of others; quickly he will call them to account for their conduct;
and righteously will he reward them according to their works. -- How quickly,
my soul, shall he cause me give an account of my stewardship; for I must be no
longer steward! Are all my accounts clear, and balanced with Jesus' blood?

42. They are compared to SERVANTS Rev. vii. 3.
. How solemnly are they engaged! How deeply obliged to serve the Lord Christ,
in whatsoever he shall command them! With what lowliness of mind, what
faithfulness, gratitude, and evangelical respect to the recompense of reward,
are they to do the will of God in all things! It is yours, ye redeemed, to
remember that all your gifts, your graces, are from God, and to be used to his
glory; and to resolve upon giving him an account thereof. -- Bore mine ear, O
JEHOVAH, to thy door-post, that I may serve thee for ever. In, and after,
keeping thy commandments, there is an exceeding great reward.

43. They are called INHABITANTS OF THE GARDENS Song viii. 13.
. Being associated into particular congregations and worshipping assemblies,
they make an open, a continued, a steadfast profession of Jesus' truth; and with
constancy, delight, and diligence, they attend upon, and improve his
ordinances; and are chiefly busied in keeping and cultivating their heart and
conversation.

44. They are compared to FARMERS OF VINEYARDS Song viii. 12.
. To them has God, in a subordinate respect, committed the vineyard of their
own heart and of his church; and to their advantage the fruitfulness thereof
greatly redounds. It is therefore theirs, carefully to keep their vineyard; to
watch over themselves and their work; to labor earnestly, in denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts; and in living soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world. It is theirs to study regularity and distinctness in their
religious course. It is theirs to improve every event, every faculty, and gift;
to prune off every luxuriance, mortify every lust, avoid every doubtful and
dangerous practice; and by a believing dependence on the tree of life, in the
midst of the paradise of God, to prop every good word and work. It is theirs to
promote the purity, peace, and prosperity of the church, and to render unto
Christ, the principal, the supreme glory of all they are, and do:

45. Saints are compared to SLAVISH KEEPERS of other men's vineyards, to the
neglect of their own Song i. 5.
. How often are they, by their mother's children, their indwelling corruptions,
and hypocritical professors, forced and decoyed into a base submission to human
impositions, in the service of God; to sinful and carnal courses; to too eager
interfering with worldly affairs, or with spiritual things in a selfish and
carnal manner! How often, is their watchfulness over their heart, their
resisting and mortifying of their lusts, their due cherishing and exercising of
their grace, hereby sinfully and shamefully prevented! How often does their
being in public office, in church or state, occasion much sinful neglect of
personal piety!

46. They are represented as CARRIED ones Is. xlvi. 3. 4.
. Being lame in themselves, Jesus apprehends them, takes them up, and in the
chariot of his covenant and church, and on the white horse of his
gospel-promise, and in the hand of his providence, and on the shoulder of his
power, and in his bosom of intimate fellowship, and in his heart of endeared
affection and care, notwithstanding their manifold filthiness, provocations,
and infirmities, bears them up under every burden; bears them out against every
opposition; bears them on in the course of their duty; bears them in to the
throne of grace; and home to their eternal rest.

47. They are represented as HIDDEN ones Psalm. lxxxiii. 3.
. How unknown to the world, and even to themselves, is their excellency; their
gracious state; their spiritual seize: and especially their future glory!
How hidden, -- how secret favors, are their election, their regeneration,
their pardon, acceptance, adoption, and inward comfort! How secretly; how
mysteriously and safely are their persons, their state, their life, their
portion, and treasure, laid up in the word, the heart, the hand, the life, the
honor of Christ, and of God in him!

48. They are represented as SEALED ones Rev. vii. 3.
. By electing love, by effectual calling, by their justification, and by the
daily influence of his Spirit, they are highly honored of God, and
appropriated and confirmed to his use; and distinguished from the world. Safely
hid and preserved in Christ Jesus, how graciously are they enabled to make an
open confession of his truth! How often protected from common calamities! How
marvellously saved amidst eminent troubles!

49. They are called UPRIGHT ones Song i. 4.
. How their heart, their affections, tower toward God, and heavenly things!
With what candor they study to be what they seem! and to live without allowed
guile! to be universally sincere in their behavior toward God and men!

50. They are called WISE MEN Psalm. xciv. 8. 12.
. Being instructed by Christ, they make the best choice, choose for their
portion the whole fullness of God; pursue the best course, follow after the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. They walk in Christ, the best
way; and with God, the most excellent companion. They espouse Christ the best
husband; and live on his flesh and blood, the most wholesome and nourishing
provision. Being acquainted with the mysteries of God's word and providence,
taught of God to profit, made wise unto salvation, and learned in every state
therewith to be content, they intend the most noble end of his glory, and their
own happiness; and prosecute it in the best manner, and by the most proper
means. -- Have thou, my soul, so learned Christ?

51. They are compared to STRONG men Ephesians. vi. 10.
. Being strengthened in and by the Lord Jesus, they can bear heavy burdens
without repining; can walk in God's way without wearying; run in the path of
his commandments without fainting: can attack and conquer the strongest
corruptions; resist the devil; overcome the world; and bear rule over their own
spirit. -- Rejoice, my soul, I can do all things through Christ strengthening
me.

52. They are represented as CARNAL men Romans vii. 14.
. Alas! what power has their remaining carnal corruption over them! How much
they fulfill their sinful lust! How compassed with fleshly infirmities! How
sadly are their hearts attached to worldly things! What envy, strife, and
contention, too often abound with them! -- Truly the law is spiritual; but I am
carnal, sold under sin.

53. They are represented as FOOLISH Luke xxiv. 25.
. Alas! how often they mistake their way; neglect their duty; act contrary to
God's honor, and their own interest; grieve their friends, and please their
enemies! How often they act without thought; complain of, or praise, what they
know not! How often have I been brayed in the mortar of adversity; yet has not
my foolishness departed from me!

54. They are represented as CAPTIVES, sold under sin Romans vii. 23. 24.
. How often do Satan, and their lusts, prevail over them; drag them from God
and their duty, and into the slavish service of sin! How they buffet them for
the least refusal! How they abuse and maltreat their soul! -- Blessed be the
Lord, who brings back his captives, even when, with stupidity and unconcern,
they are like men that dream. Quickly, O my soul, shall the prey be taken from
the mighty, and the lawful captive be delivered.

55. They are represented as PRISONERS Psalm. cxlii. 6.
. How often are they shut up and confined in the prison of trouble; of
prevailing corruption; of fearful temptation; of dark desertion! How are their
shameful crimes evidenced; and their souls connected with the basest
companions! How are their light, their liberty, their honor, their happy
fellowship, their spiritual warmth and comfort taken from them! Is it not
thine, O Jesus, to bid us go forth and show ourselves? Is it not thine, with
the key of thy promise, and by the power of thy grace, to open our
prison-doors, and bring us forth, that we may glorify thy name?

56. They are compared to KILLED and CRUCIFIED men Romans viii. 17. 36.
. O the killing providence! the destructive, rage of inward corruption! the
violent temptations of Satan! the persecutions of the world, with which they
are trysted! They are crucified with Christ; in his death he represented them;
and by the application of his atonement to their conscience, is their old man,
their inward corruption, gradually and painfully mortified. They are crucified
to the world, and it to them. Gradually, and not without paln and shame, are
they weaned from the world as a portion, or any necessary part of it, and as
dead malefactors are they despised by the men of it.

57. They are compared to DYING and DEAD men Romans vii. 4. 6.
. Not only are they worthless in themselves, mortal in their bodies, and
plagued with an inward body of death; but by the application of Jesus'
righteousness and grace, their relations to the broken law, as an husband and
governor; to Satan, as a prince and father; to sin, as a pleasure and trade;
and to the world, as a portion and treasure; are destroyed, and finally cut
off. Hence they cease from sinful works; and from going about to establish
their own righteousness: and are buried together with Christ; share the sweet
repose that flows from his death; in consequence whereof they rise to newness
of life.

58. They are represented as LIVING men Gal. ii. 20.
. O the mysterious inward motions of their heart! O their agreeable breathing
and desiring after Christ, and living by faith on him! O the sweet light,
liberty, pleasure, and other enjoyments of which they are made capable! How
manifold their frames! How various their relations to Christ and to one
another! And how they work out their salvation with fear and trembling! --
Lord, may I live and praise thee.

59. They are called a REMNANT Is. xi. 16.
. How few in comparison of the rest of mankind! How often they chiefly consist
of the poor and dregs thereof! How often are they wonderfully preserved, when
the wicked are cut off!

60. They resemble ISSAC Gal. iv. 28.
. They are the spiritual, the promised seed of Abraham; the special, the
distinguished seed of Heaven, the offspring of Jesus' intercession. By means of
the promise, and notwithstanding insuperable-like difficulties, they are
spiritually conceived and born. How delightful a joy and rejoicing to God their
Father, and to their mother the church! Being mercifully recovered from death,
by the slaughter of God's provided burnt-offering, they love not their lives in
opposition to his will. How fadly harassed by their bastard brethren! But being
heirs, they at last enter in to possess all the fullness of God.

61. They are compared to JACOB Zech. xii. 8.
. Being freely chosen to salvation, they strive to enter in at the strait gate
of union to Christ, and renovation of their nature; and struggle for glory,
honor, immortality, eternal life. Being blessed in the robes of Christ, their
elder brother's imputed righteousness; guarded of angels; highly esteeming
their spiritual birthright and blessing; they wrestle with God, and also
prevail: and through manifold tribulation and death, go to the everlasting land
of promise. -- Call thyself, even now, my soul, by the name of Jacob: subscribe
with thine hand unto the Lord; and surname thyself, by the name of Israel.

62. They are compared to DAVID Is. xliv. 5
. Being exalted from the lowest degree, they sit with the Prince of the kings
of the earth. Wisely they conduct themselves: though striplings and weak in
themselves, they are strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; and
notwithstanding fearful guilt, and difficulties innumerable, they are more than
conquerors through him that loved them.

63. They are like unto LAZARUS in the parable Luke x^i. 19. -- 26.
. How generally poor and contemptible, in the view of the great men of the
world! How often the brutal creation work together for their good! At death,
how readily angels convey their souls to the heavenly mansions, where the
damned inhabitants of hell have access to know their glory, and fruitlessly
wish the least share of it!

64. They compare themselves to BEASTS Psalm. lxxiii. 20.
. For, O the stupidity, earthliness, filthiness, perverseness, mischievousness,
unsightliness, which they discern in themselves! -- Lord, what a monstrous
beast, a wretched system of beasts, am I before thee! "Nevertheless I am
continually with thee; thou hold me by my right hand: thou will guide me
with thy counsel while here, and afterward bring me to thy glory." O let thy
robes of salvation remove my unsightliness; thy blood wash out my filthiness;
thy instruction remove my ignorance and folly; thy Spirit undo my earthliness
and carnality; thy love shed abroad in my heart, root out my stubbornness and
malice!

65. They are compared to FOWLS OR BIRDS Ezekiel xvii. 23. Song. ii. 12.
. How DIVersified are their cases and frames! The conversation of some, how
tender and comely! Of others, ah, how carnal and unsightly! How, being
supported by the air, the influence of the Holy Ghost, they mount and move
among heavenly things! How exposed to storms and wants! By what amazing
instinct, they take up, and return to, their rest in the person, the offices,
relations, righteousness, and love of Christ, the tree of lise, the unconsumed
bush, and the rock of ages! Under the shadow of his protection and promise, how
sweetly they sometimes sing! -- O when shall the sweet singing of birds, the
ransomeds full concert, of Hallelujahs and Hosannas, come!

66. They are compared to EAGLES Is. xl. 31. Psalm. ciii. 5.
. How glorious; how royal their spiritual dignity among men! How solid their
knowledge of the most dazzling, the most deep, and distant things! Renewing
their strength and beauty after spiritual decays, and carried by Jesus their
parent, how unweariedly, on wings of faith, of love, and holy desire, they
mount up toward God; comfort themselves in him; make him, the munition of
rocks, their habitation, from whence they overlook clouds and storms of
trouble! How earnestly they espy and desire the presence, and feed on the slain
Lamb of God! grovel no more, my soul; arise fly away to Jesus, to the crag of
the Rock which is higher than I.

67. They are compared to DOVES Is. lx. 8.
. How weak and timorous in themselves! but being justified in Jesus'
righteousness, and sanctified by his grace, how comely! How pure in their new
nature and spiritual feeding! How harmless, loving, and affectionate! How
chaste their desire toward Christ! How fruitful in good works! How great their
delight in fellowship with him, and his people! How tenderly they weep over his
death! How inconsolably thy mourn for his absence! How diligently they
endeavor to gain others to his cause! How swift; how high; how heavenly, their
motions of faith, love, and holy conversation! how sweet; how safe their abode
in the secret place of Jesus' purpose, promise, righteousness, power, and love!
How they fly to him in every time of danger! -- May my life, my last end, be
like theirs! May I be "a dove in the valley, mourning for mine iniquities."

68. They compare themselves to OWLS Psalm. cii. 6.
: because of their uncomeliness in themselves; their love to darkness; their
mournful and unpleasant cries; and because they are so forsaken, contemned, and
hated by others in the world. -- On earth, Lord, am not I as a pelican of the
wilderness, and owl of the desert? O when shall I be with thee! be like thee,
by seeing thee as thou art!

69. They compare themselves to a SPARROW on the house top alone Psalm. cii. 7.
. For alas! how weak and insignificant in themselves! How solitary and
unsettled their condition! -- Be, Lord, what I will; let thy house be my
habitation.

70. They compare themselves to chattering CRANES and SWALLOWS Is. xxxviii. 14.
. How mournful their lamentations! How broken their notes of praise! How
strangely varied their speech! Sometimes like cranes they roar; anon like
swallows they peep, and speak as it were out of the dust. -- Lord, who know
my brutal language, my whisper, my roaring, let my groans, my cries, come up
with acceptance on thine altar; for how can I sing thy song in a foreign land!

71. Saints are compared to CHICKENS Matthew. xxiii. 37.
. How weak and insufficient in themselves! How exposed to danger, contempt,
treading down, and destruction! But, how kindly called, warmed, comforted,
protected, and provided for, by the Son of God! How sagaciously they discern
his voice, and follow him! How sweetly they eat and drink out of his fullness!
and lift up their heads and hearts in his praise!

72. They are compared to LIONS Mic. v. 8. Prove. xxviii. 1.
. How great their influence in the world; their spiritual royalty; their
strength; their boldness and courage; and their conquest of sin, Satan, and the
world! How eminent their gratitude, and their mutual affection! How
compassionate to penitent and submissive sinners! And how often dreadful to the
spirits of wicked men! -- Invested with thy righteousness, O Jesus, let me
toward God, angels, and men, be "bold as a lion, that turns not away for
any: let me tear the arm, and the crown of the head," of every indwelling lust
and sinful practice.

73. They are compared to a COMPANY OF HORSES in Pharaoh's chariots Song i. 9.
. Being chosen from among men, to everlasting honor and happiness, they are
bought with the infinite price of Jesus' blood; they feed on the fruit of the
earth, the finest of the wheat; on his person, righteousness, and benefits; on
all the fullness of God. By JEHOVAH, by his angels, and ministers, they are
cared for, and attended. How richly ornamented with his righteousness and
grace! How comely; how stately; majestic; strong; courageous; and esteemed of
their Lord! How tamed, and broken in heart, by his Spirit! In the easy yoke of
his law; in the chariot of his church; and with the bands of his love; how
beautifully and regularly yoked together! And with what order, harmony,
cheerful alertness, and speed, do they honor him; running a race of holy
obedience, fighting his battles with Satan and their corruptions; and being the
means to spread his fame, and enlarge his conquests on earth! Art thou, my
soul, the Lord's goodly horse in the battle?

74. They are compared to HEARTS or HINDS Psalm. xlii. 1. and xviii. 33.
. In their new man, how pure, lovely, pleasant, loving, and grateful! How
exposed to danger and trouble! How inveterate the enmity between them and the
old serpent, and his seed! How fearfully these fasten upon their soul, amidst
carnality, and spiritual sloth and deadness! And how hardly they get rid of
them! When hunted by these persecutors, how ardent is their desire of spiritual
refreshment from Jesus' fountain of life! In his strength, and as swiftened by
his grace, how gloriously they overleap, and overcome every tribulation, every
difficulty! How JEHOVAH'S voice assists them in bringing forth their good
works, and young converts!

75. They are compared to OXEN and CALVES, fatted in the stall; or of the yoke
Mal. iv. 2.
. How richly they seed on Jesus fullness in the ordinances of his grace! How
harmoniously they unite in bearing and obeying his law, and promoting his
service! How patient, hardy, and laborious! Under his distinguished influence,
how fresh, comely, and abundant their grace! How beautiful, edifying, and
cheerful their conversation! Shine forth, O Sun of righteousness, on my soul:
so shall I grow up, be fat, and full of sap; and ay be flourishin.

76. They are called Christ's SHEEP and LAMBS John xxi. 15. 16.
. Being chosen, purchased, formed, fed, and owned by him, how noted their
righteousness; their purity; patience; innocence; and usefulness! On what
wholesome pastures of God's truth and fullness they ordinarily feed! How they
know and obey Christ's voice! rest under his shadow, in the noontide of
trouble! follow his example! mutually love, and, in the fold of his church and
worshipping assemblies, associate together! And how fruitful in good works! and
in winning others to him! How exposed to danger, diseases, and storms! How apt,
of themselves, to feed on the rot-grass of sinful corruptions, and carnal
enjoyments! How apt to follow bad example, and go astray from the pastures, and
paths of their great Shepherd! -- Lord, give to me eternal life; and suffer
none to pluck me out of thy hand.

77. They are compared to LOST SHEEP RECOVERED Luke xv. 4. -- 7. Psalm. cxix.
176.
. Finding them by nature afar off, and wandering from God on mountains of
iniquity, of vanity, and worldly enjoyments, Jesus, by the conviction and
illumination of his word and Spirit, seeks them out, lays them on the shoulders
of his power and love, and with great joy, brings them into his new covenant
state. When afterward they wander into sins and snares, he sends forth his
light and his truth, to find out, lead, and bring them back. By repeated
reproofs, corrections, convictions, and displays of his glory, he seeks them
out and apprehends them; and in his arms of mercy, and bosom of love, he bears
them home to himself; and at last to the mansions of bliss. -- Lord, when I
have wandered till I know not where to find myself, do thou seek and find me;
recover, lead, bear, and carry me.

78. They are compared to a newly washed FLOCK OF GOATS, on mount Gilead;
whereof every one bears twins Song. iv. 2.
. Notwithstanding their remaining corruptions, how beautiful are they, as
washed in Jesus' blood! On what rich, high, and heavenly pasture of his
promise, person, and fullness, they feed! How marvellously they travel
heavenward! and climb to God's throne in quest of their provision! How even
shorn, having put off the old man with his deeds! What living, reasonable, and
acceptable sacrifices to God through Jesus Christ! And how useful and medicinal
to men is their holy conversation!

79. Young saints are likened to KIDS Song i. 8.
. Whatever liveliness and beauty appear about them; yet there are sad remains
of filthiness, weakness, folly, ignorance. -- To remove this, my soul, feed
thyself, besides the shepherds tents, in the gospel ordinances of Christ.

80. They compare themselves to DOGS Matthew. x^. 27.
. What insignificancy; filthiness; mischievousness; useless, and hurtful noise;
and readiness to relapse into sins once repented of, they discern in
themselves! -- "Truth, Lord, I am a dog: but do not even the dogs eat of the
crumbs which fall from their master's table?"

81. They are required to be wise as SERPENTS Matthew. x. 16.
. Carefully ought they to watch against every danger; turn away their ear from
all flattery and temptation; seize every opportunity of assaulting their
spiritual foes; wisely secure their head and heart from every imminent hazard;
and forcibly vomit up, by repentance, their sinful poison, when they go to
drink out of God's refreshful wells of salvation.

82. They compare themselves to TOSSED LOCUSTS Psalm. cix. 23.
. How inconsiderable in themselves! How few their months! How short their
mortal life! How often employed in evil! How toffed to and fro with blasts of
trouble! -- When, Lord, shall my five months of sin and woe be gone, and never
dying glory come!

83. They are compared to WORMS Is. xli. 14.
. How earthy in the origin, the residence, the food, and the return of their
body! In their own view, how mean, weak, insignificant, and earthly-minded are
they! their belly and soul cleaves to the earth: and how exposed to suffering
and contempt! -- Thrice strange! are worms redeemed by blood DIVine, and to be
for ever filled with all the fullness of God!

84. They are compared to GOOD FISHES Matthew. xii. 47. -- 50.
. In the sea of this world, their outward man lives and moves; -- their new
man in the sea of Jesus' love: for scales they are adorned and protected with
his imputed righteousness and imparted grace; by their sins of faith and love,
they balance their motions, and swim against the tides of corruption and
trouble: and how vigorously, even now, they press toward heaven their native
abode! The end comes, when, while others are taken in an evil net, and cast
away into unquenchable fire, they shall be gathered together, and by angels
carried into Jesus' palace; that they may be to him a subject of everlasting
pleasure and joy.

85. They are compared to TREES Ezekiel. xlvii. 12.
. Being planted in the soil of the new covenant, rooted and grounded in Christ,
watered by the river of his love, his Spirit, his word, and ordinances; in what
comely, high, and flourishing manner they grow up, and become fruitful in
unsading leaves of profession, and uncorrupting fruit of good works! How they
tower heavenward, and are a protecting shadow and fence to the rest of the
world! They are trees of righteousness, immoveably rooted in Christ, as the
Lord their righteousness; from whom proceeds their fruits of righteousness, to
the praise of his glory.

86. They are compared to the CEDARS of Lebanon Psalm. xcii. 12.
. Being deep and firmly rooted in the rock Christ, and his unchangeable
covenant, how full they are of spiritual sap! How high their growth toward
heaven! How ever-flourishing, precious, fragrant, comely, and strong in the
Lord! How useful materials to erect the invisible church, the true temple of
God! How protecting a shade, to the sinners around, from the temporal judgments
of Heaven!

87. They are compared to OAK and TYLE trees Is. vi. 11. 12. 13.
. How strong, lasting, useful, and fruitful in their kind! Suppose the
winter-storms, the scorching drought of temptation, desertion, prevailing
corruption, heavy trouble, and bloody persecution, sadly wither their outward
condition, their conversation, or even their gracious exercise, yet, a
substance of grace and seed of glory remaining in them, they shall, in the
springtide of renewed DIVine visits, of death, and of the resurrection, revive
and flourish as an herb.

88. They are compared to FIR and PINE trees Is. lv. 13. and lx. 13.
. Out of what barren soil of a natural state, do they originally spring! And in
what a barren world, they here stand! Yet how upright! how tall! how comely in
Christ! How free from knotting corruptions, and scandalous crimes! How useful
and refreshing their shadow and influence! How unfailing! how plentiful their
gracious sap, which renders them verdant, in the winter of trouble and death!

89. They are compared to BOX-trees Is. xli. 19.
. In respect of their new man, how excellent and useful! How savoury their
conversation! How protecting and refreshful their shadow! their insluence!

90. They are compared to SHITTAH-trees or shittimwood Is. xli. 19.
. How rare! how excellent! how substantial, stable, and persevering in grace!
Their hearts are an ark, a repository for God's law. Their persons are altars
of incense; on which the sacrifices of prayer, praise, and good works, are
through Christ offered up unto God.

91. They are compared to WILLOW-trees Is. xliv. 45.
. Being planted by the rivers of water, having a fixed communion with the love,
the blood, the Spirit, the promise of God, how quickly, how pleasantly they
grow up in grace, as his influences are plentifully enjoyed! Without these
indeed, they could but wither and fade; but with them, how steadily they
continue in their holiness and profession, while, by the storm or drought of
persecution, temptation, trouble, and death, hypocrites wither and perish!

92. They are compared to PALM trees Psalm. xcii. 12. Ezekiel. xi. 26.
. At first, how weak is their faith! their hope! their love! Yet how straight,
bending upward to heavenly things! How mysteriously their vital juice is
reposited in Christ their head! How delicious their fruit! their
gospel-holiness! The more high and heavenly they become, the more abundant is
their good fruit; and their refreshful shadow and influence. In mutual love,
and conjunct profession of truth, how they cleave one to another! never do they
utterly fade, nor cast their leaves of an holy profession, and outward
Christian conversation; but when eminently warmed by the Sun of righteousness,
watered by the river of life, and loaded with manifold troubles, how mightily
they flourish and grow! How useful in building the church! and in the peace and
victory obtained for them by Christ, how shall they, as with palms, with
emblems of conquest and peace, in their hands, for ever triumph!

93. They are compared to MYRILE-trees Zech. i. 8.
. In their spiritual condition and attainment, how DIVersified! The persons and
conversation of all, how fragrant! how precious and excellent! How they prosper
in the fat soil of fellowship with God and his saints! and in the low bottom or
valley of self abasement, and trouble! How infallibly they retain the sap of
grace, and leaves of profession, till the end! How choice their fruit of love
to God and their neighbor! Is it not from thee, O blessed Man among the
myrtle-trees, that our sap, our fruit is sound*

94. They are compared to POMEGRANATE-trees Song vii. 12.
. How rarely to be found! and only in Christ's garden, the church! How
DIVersified their condition, and degrees of grace! How upright, and heavenly
minded! How abundantly do, especially some, bring forth the sweet, the
pleasant, refreshful, and nourishing fruits of holiness!

95. They are compared to ^IG trees Song ii. 13.
. How early! how abundant and excellent are their fruits of faith, hope,
repentance, love, humility, resignation, self-denial, zeal! How extensive and
comely their leafy pro^ession, that flows from, and follows their principal,
their inward fruit! How necessary are cutting convic^ions and trouble, to
forward the ripening of their product! The longer they are plunged in waters of
adversity, how often they bear up the better!

96. they are compared to Olive Trees Hos. ^iv. 6.
. Upon the blessed mountain, upon Christ, his church, and his ordinances, how
beautifully they grow in grace! How choice, verdant, and durable! How richly
laden with the wholesome, the sweet, the gracious and useful fruits of
holiness; which make their face to shine!

97. They are compared to VINES Song ii. 15.
. Weak and useless in themselves, but leaning on Christ their supporter, to
what distinguished height, of holiness and profession, they grow! What
pleasant, exhilarating, and nourishing fruits of righteousness, and which must
be fitted by pressing troubles, do they bring forth! -- Have thou, my soul,
this fruit, that "cheereth the heart of God and man?

98. They are compared to INGRAFTED BRANCHES John xv. 2. -- 5.
. Being powerfully cut off from the corrupt and killing root of fallen Adam, as
their covenant-head, they are, with DIVine care and wisdom, united to Jesus
Christ as their root, that on him the whole weight of their persons and
salvation may depend. By him they are supported in all their trouble. From him
they receive all that grace and glory, which render them holy or happy. -- By
the most intimate and constant fellowship, abide in him, my soul; so shall I
bring forth much fruit. Let me never cleave to him, as an ivy, by mere outward
profession, lest he pluck me away, and cast me into eternal fire.

99. They are compared to PLANTS Song iv. 13.
. In Christ and his new covenant they are sown, and planted in the likeness,
and by sharing the virtue, of his death; and from the seed of the Spirit and
promise, sown in their heart, does their grace proceed. How often, and how
easily are they injured! How quickly trodden down and ruined, if exposed to
Satan and their corruptions! Being tender and weak in themselves, how carefully
must Jesus and his ministers wait on, water, and hedge about them, to promote
their spiritual growth!

100. They are compared to FLOWERS, OR PLOURISHING HERBS Is. lxvi. 14.
. Rooted and grounded in Christ, partaking of his nourishing virtue, warmed
with his solar heat, watered by his Spirit, they, under his shadow, grow up,
appear fresh, fragrant, and beautiful; increase in grace; and perfect holiness
in the fear of the Lord. O their delightful comeliness, in the morning of
conversion, of renewed manifestations, of entrance on the eternal state, and of
rising from the grave! -- Let thy dew, adored Jesus, cause me grow up as the
lily, spread my roots, and cast abroad my smell, as Lebanon.

101. They are compared to LILIES among thorns Song ii. ^.
. Amidst wicked men, that daily molest them; amidst troubles, that daily ha^ass
them; how delightfully they, weak in themselves* do, by multitudes, spring from
Jesus their root! How pure, comely, quick grown, and tail in grace! How open
toward heavenly, and shut toward earthly things, is their heart! How fruitful
are they in good works! and in converting others! What a sweet savor of Christ
in the world! The higher their spiritual growth, the more they hang down their
heads in humility, self denial, and holy blushing. When arrived at their glory,
how quickly they disappear, plucked by death!

102. They resemble MANDRAXES Song vii. 13.
. How meek, cool, and pacific, their spirit! How beautiful, savoury, and
acceptable to Christ and his Father! By fervent prayer, by earnest desire, how
they promote the discov^ries of his love! By their lively and fruitful
conversation, how they provoke one another to love, and to good works!
Nevertheless, if left to themselves, how slothfully they sleep, and sinfully
sleepen one another!

103. They are compared to GROWING CORN, or WHFAT Hof. xiv. 5. Matthew. xiii. 27.
30.
. Amidst tares of wicked men and vile corruptions, how, seeded with the grace
and good word of God, watered with his blood and Spirit, and warmed with his
redeeming love, they gradually grow up, bearing precious fruits of
righteousness, to the glory of God and the profit and support of men! By
mortification of their lusts, how carefully ought they to be weeded and purged!
How capable, through Christ, to endure winters and sto^ms of affliction! When
ripe, how solid in knowledge! in experience! How their roots loose from the
earth! and their heart hangs downward in selfabasement, and resignation to
death! How cut down by his sharp sickle! By what sin-mortifying influence of
the Spirit; by what threshing and winnowing troubles are they purged from their
chaff! their soul separated from the body, that this may be sown in the grave,
and in the resurrection spring up a glorious body for Christ. Are they not the
glory, the excellency, of the earth? and the immediate reason of God's
benevolent care and labor about it?

104. They are compared to an ORCHARD OF SPICES Song iv. 13. 14.
. The graces that grow in their heart, the good works that appear in their
life, how various! how precious! how fragrant, perfuming, and medicinal!

105. They are compared to NUTS Song vi. 11.
. In the covering of Jesus' righteousness; in the love, the purpose, the power
of God, how hid and secured are their persons and graces! How impossible to be
lost, hurt, or destroyed! What coarse shell of a mortal body lodges their
invisible, their precious soul! Amidst despicable outward appearances, how
precious, useful, and glorious are they within! How tenaciously they cleave to
Christ, and to one another in love! How hardy under pressing afflictions! How
readily their grace is discovered, by breaking rods and afflictions!

106. They are compared to GOOD FIGS Jer. xxiv. 2.
. How abundant their fullness of spiritual sap! What an useful medicine and
refreshment to a land! How delightful and savoury to Christ and his people! --
When, Lord, shall they be very good!

107. They resemble an HEAP OF WHEAT set about with lilies Song vii. 2.
. Conceived and born of the church, how numerous, comely, solid, substantial,
and precious! And how surrounded with lily-like saints, promises, graces, and
good works!

108. Saints are compared to LIGHT Ephesians. v. 8.
. How excellent, useful, and desirable! How powerful and clear their spiritual
knowledge! How shining and illuminating their profession and practice! What a
plague for a land, to be deprived of them! How darkness and wrath seize upon
it; and the wicked have none to put them to shame! -- Be thou, my soul, "as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day."

109. They are compared to the MORNING Song vi. 10.
. Small at present, but hopeful, pleasant, and gradual, is the increase of
their light, knowledge, grace, and good works. How sweetly bedewed from above!
How refreshful their state, and wholesome their air! While their graces go
forth to their work, and labor of love, how fast the wild beasts of infernal
fiends, and sinful corruptions, hide themselves in their dens! How quickly
shall the sun of endless vision rise upon them! -- Hasten, my soul, unto the
perfect day of the Lord.

110. They are compared to the SUN Matthew. xiii. 43.
. How heavenly their state! their affections! their conversation! In Jesus'
imputed righteousness, his imparted grace, and the good works proceeding
therefrom, how brightly they shine! And next to himself, enlighten, adorn,
warm, and refresh the world! Nor here, is their glory fully understood; nor
their restful condition believed: but the time comes, when they shall for ever
rest, and shine in the kingdom of their Father. Jesus shall change their vile
body, and fashion it like unto his glorious body, brighter than the sun shining
in his strength. -- Ah! how am I turned into darkness, become black as
sackcloth of hair! But I know that when HE shall appear, I shall also appear
with him in glory.

111. They are compared to the MOON Song vi. 10.
. How far inferior to Christ the Sun of righteousness, from whom they borrow
all their glory and luster! How sully, direct views of his countenance, makes
them to shine! How inconstant are their frames and conditions! How spotted with
corruption, their heart and life! How, during the night of time, they enlighten
this world! How great their influence in the rise and fall of nations, in its
troubled sea!

112. They are compared to STARS 1 Cor. xv. 41.
. How pure, numerous, and useful! How high their station! How bright their
eternal glory! How DIVersified their case and form! How heavenly and regular
their motions! None thrusts himself into the place of his fellow. Yet there is
room. How they now adorn the militant church! But comes not a day, an
eternity, when unseen heavens shall burn with all their fires! their stars
redeemed! when all the corners of heaven shall reflect our borrowed luster! --
When I have obtained that meridian, how shall my views of this earth, as
insignificant, be lost! But how wide! how clear, shall be my views of Godhead!
I shall see him as he is.

113. They are compared to CLOUDS If. lx. 8.
. What a collection of particular saints unnumbered! In Christ how high is
their state and dignity! How heavenly-minded in heart! How close and mysterious
their connection among themselves! How useful are they to overshadow, protect,
refresh, and water the world! Moved by the influencing gales of the Holy Ghost,
how quickly! how marvellously they fly to Jesus, in the exercise of grace, and
practice of holy duties!

114. They are compared to DEW and RAIN Mic. v. 7.
. Their natural birth is of the earth and sea of this world; their new is from
above, of the Father of lights, and owing wholly to his sovereign and
attractive grace. How heavenly the state and temper of their soul! How readily
attracted to things above! How great their number! How beautiful their form!
How pleasant, refreshful, quickening, and fructifying the influence of their
prayers and holy conversation, on those around! chiefly on young professors!
When, my Lord, shall we fly as a cloud, to meet thee in the air?

115. They are a SPRING shut up; a FOUNTAIN SEALDD Song iv. 12.
. In them, the Spirit is a well of water springing up to everlasting life. How
unfailing their grace! How sealed their persons and concerns; marked out by the
Holy Ghost, and set aside for Christ, as solely his property! My soul, admit
none but Christ; he is mine, and I am his: nor can you fiends, you corruptions,
retake your ancient possession; the Lord has shut me up for himself; and there
is no opening.

116. Saints falling before the wicked are like a TROUBLED FOUNTAIN, and
CORRUPT SPRING Prove. xxv. 26.
. How uncomely! how hurtful! how disagreeable and shocking the sight! -- Yet.
"rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit
in darkness, the Lord will be a light unto me."

117. Saints are called the APPLE OF GOD'S EYE Zech. ii. 8.
. How dear to him! How carefully defended and preserved by him! How deeply he
sympathizeth with them! How highly is he provoked with such as injure them!
Lord, am I, a worthless sinner, so dear to thee! What then should THOU be to
my heart!

118. They are called God's JEWELS Mal. iii. 17.
. How rare; precious; comely; excellent; and useful! How carefullysought out by
God! and polished for himself! How highly he valueth; how safely he preserves;
and how publicly he will at last exhibit them in their brightness! How signally
he adorns, and glorifieth himself by them!

119. They are compared to GOLD Job xxiii. 10.
. How precious, useful, comely, and durable! How the furnace of affliction
purges away their corrupt dross; but makes their golden graces to shine! When
melted by his love, how easily God moulds their heart as he pleases! How
carefully he preserves; and how highly he esteems them, as his portion, and
wealth! How often, Lord, when thou have tried me in thy furnace, have I come
forth as dross rather than gold!

120. They are compared to a LOST PIECE OF SILVER RECOVERED by sweeping the
house Luke xv. 8.
. Being lost in Adam, and lost amidst their own corruptions, God, by sweeping
judgments; but chiefly by the preaching of the glorious gospel, which sweeps
away error, idolatry, and superstition; and by conviction and illumination,
which sweeps away self-confidence, legal righteousness, ignorance, hatred of a
Savior, -- finds them out, and by his grace renders them beautiful, useful,
pure, and precious.

121. They are represented as God's TREASURE, PORTION, INHERITANCE, CROWN,
DIADEM Psalm. cxxxv. 4. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 9. Is. lxii. 3.
. He chose and redeemed them to himself. By the infinite price of his Son's
blood; by the almighty conquest of his grace, he obtains them. How greatly he
values, delights in; rejoiceth over; and boasts of them! How gloriously his
choice, his pardon, acceptance, adoption, sanctification, and glorification of
them, demonstrate his riches of grace; his power and sovereignty! Nor shall
ever any of them be hurt, lost, or alienated.

122. They are represented as a TEMPLE and HABITATION for God Ephesians. ii. 21. 22.
. Upon his Son as the Lord their ^^ghteousness and strength, he founds them.
With his Spirit and grace he furnishes them. With pleasure and constancy, he
resides and operates in them, to will and to do. He is inwardly worshipped by
them, in spirit and in truth. It is thine, O Jesus, to fill their understanding
with thy instructive light and knowledge; to fill their conscience with thy
cleansing blood, pardoning grace, and directive law; to fill their will with
thy melting love, thy unmatched excellency; to fill their affections with thy
ravishing goodness and beauty; to fill their memory with thy various truths,
thy mighty works. -- So let thy glory fill my heart, that neither hell, nor
earth, may dare to enter in.

123. They are like unto an ORNAMENT Prove. xxv. 12.
. With their grace, their good works, how remarkably they adorn their
profession! deck their country; and beautify their church! honor their race
and family; and glorify their God! -- Make me, O Lord, a faithful, a wise, a
successful reprover; so shall I be more useful, esteemed, and glorious, than an
ornament of choice gold.

124. They are an EVERLASTING FOUNDATION Prove. x. 25.
. How fixed for ever, on the Rock of ages, are their persons! How immovable
their new covenant state! How unfailing their graces! How perpetual their
remembrance! What a structure of displayed grace and glory, God builds on them!
And is not their seal, The Lord knows them that are his! and, Let him that
names the name of Christ depart from iniquity! -- The Lord is at my right
hand, is in my heart; on him depends all my hope; therefore I shall not be
moved.

125. They are LIVELY STONES 1 Pet. ii. 5. 6.
. Being dug out of the quarry of their natural state, quickened by the
Spirit of God, united to Jesus Christ as their foundation, they constitute the
structure of the invisible church: they enter on a state of everlasting life;
become quick, lively, and active in holy duties: In respect of their profession
and practice, they are in Christ made strong, fixed, and durable. But how often
stumbling blocks to carnal men; who, for their outward meanness and often
infirmities, despise them, and so ruin themselves!

126. They are SIGNS and WONDERS Is. viii. 18.
. In their new covenant state, and work, they deserve the admiration of all
around them. But because they are unknown in the world; unlike to the men of
it; enemies to the way of it, and reprovers of the deeds of it; they are often,
by carnal men, held, as monsters of folly, villainy, hurtfulness, pride, error,
novelty, melancholy, dullness, ingratitude, spite, hot-headedness, babbling.

127. They are compared to BRANDS plucked out of the fire Zech. iii. 2.
. When they were burning in the fiery curse of the broken law; when burning in
the fire of their own lusts, their enmity against God; when they were ready to
be cast into the everlasting burnings of hell, how powerfully! how seasonably!
how kindly, Jesus apprehended them by his grace! quenches them in his blood
and Spirit! formed them into his image; and constituted them heirs of his
glory! Shall I here also look after him, who thus saw, and saved me!

128. They are compared to PILLARS OF SMOKE Song iii. 6.
. How burning their desire toward Christ! How upright and steady their
heavenly affections and conversation! How cheerfully they offer up themselves,
living, reasonable, and sweet smelling sacrifices to God, as perfumed with all
the spices of our glorious Merchant! And in what obscure and uneasy condition
are they often, upon earth!

129. Weak saints are likened to SMOKING FLAX Is. ^lii. 3.
. How small degrees of heart-inflaming grace have they attained! Or, how sadly
they lose that which they once had! How fearfully they forsake God; leave their
first love; and possess small spiritual warmth! How, with their noisome and
untender conversation, they become troublesome and hurtful to those around! --
Lord Jesus, I am such; lay a live-coal from the altar on my heart.

130. Weak saints are compared to BRUISED REEDS Is. ^lii. 3.
. How weak, insufficient, and worthless in themselves; in their own view; or in
the estimation of carnal men! How unfit to tower heavenward, or bear heavy
burdens of work, or warfare! How often are their hearts broken and bruised by
convictions, desertions, temptations, prevalency of corruption, and outward
troubles! -- Blessed Jesus, thou will not break me; wilt not destroy, but help,
strengthen, and comfort me. When I breathe my native air, with pleasure, I my
bruises sing! By death, I long to break, and burst, and see my God.

131. Saints are called VESSELS, BOTTLES, POTS, B^WLS Romans ix. 22. 23.
. By election they are chosen and appointed; by justification, regeneration,
adoption, and sanctification, they are fitted to receive and retain God's
fullness of Spirit, of grace, and glory, bestowed upon them. They are vessels of
mercy, formed and preserved by God's mercy, to be for ever filled with mercy
and kindness. How often like OLD BOTTLES, unfit for new wine, for eminent
manifestations of God, or hard service in his way! How often, like bottles in
the smoke, withered, rent, and narrowed by perplexing trouble and affliction!
-- Lord, make me a bowl before the altar; ever near to a crucified Jesus, and
to God in him. If I am a distressed, a broken pot, my rents cause let my glory
in.

132. They are compared to SALT Matthew. v. 13.
. Being interested in the everlasting covenant of salt, they have the
perpetual, incorruptible, and purifying word and grace of God, in their heart.
They are a vexation, and uneasy burden to wicked men; but an useful mean of
preserving nations and churches, from universal corruption and ruin.

133. They are the SUBSTANCE of a land Is. vi. 13
. They alone, are therein valuable. They are the useful means of averting
wrathful judgments; os procuring mercies; of preventing and expelling
iniquities; and of prompting the other inhabitants to their proper duty.

134. They are like unto PURPLE HAIRS on the head Song iv. 1. and vii. 5.
. They are weak and insignificant in themselves, ready to be tossed to and fro;
but being deep rooted in Jesus, the head of the church, they derive their
security and nourishment from him; are carefully preserved by him; and rendered
an ornament to him, and to his body the church. Being DIVinely washed in his
purple blood; how royal is their new covenant dignity; and manifold their
suffering for his sake!

135. They are like unto a SEAL on Christ's heart and arm Song viii. 6.
. How constantly loved, valued, protected, and remembered by him! His eye, his
care, is ever on them. How well grounded, and firm, is their assurance of his
affection! How near him they live! see his face, and feel his love working on
their heart!

CHAP. VIII. Metaphors respecting wicked men.
1. WICKED men are called DEVILS John vi. 70.
. Having fallen from their first estate, they are become false accusers of God
and his people; malicious, constant, and cruel enemies to them. How they
delight to do evil! to lie, murder, and to the utmost of their power, tempt
others to sin! How forsaken, and abhorred of God! How fast ripening for
everlasting punishment! -- How justly, Lord, may thou address me; "Get thee
behind me, Satan, for thou favourest not the things that be of God; but the
things that be of men!"

2. They are compared to a HUMAN BODY. Their head denotes their power and
authority. Their lifting up of their head signifies their proud exerting of
their power Psalm. lxxxiii. 2.
. Shaking the head, imports derision and contempt Job xvi. 4.
. A whore's sorehead, a brow of brass, denotes shameless boldness in sinning
Jer. iii. 3. Is. xlviii. 4.
. Their having ears that hear not, and eyes that see not, imports their not
knowing, believing, and receiving with their heart, the DIVine truths which
they outwardly hear and see Is. vi. 10.
. An evil eye, is one employed in espying occasions of wickedness, and tempting
others to it; particularly one employed by a churlish, covetous, and malicious
heart Mark vii. 22. Prove. xxiii. 6.
. Eyes full of adultery, are those exceedingly given to wanton and lascivious
looks 2. Pet. ii. 14.
. Ensnaring eyes or eye lids, are such as harlots employ in amorous glances to
entice men to lust after them Prove. vi. 25.
. Losty eyes and eyelids, or high looks, import pride, and contempt of others
Prove. xxx. 13.
. Winking with the eye, imports derision of others, or secret enticing them to
sin; which brings sorrow to the injured; and wrath to the injurer Prove. x. 10.
. Their teeth being spears and arrows, knives, swords, imports their malicious
using of their power and language, to pain and hurt others Prove. xxx. 14. Psalm.
lvii 4.
. Their being smitten on the cheek-bone, and having their teeth broken, imports
their feeling some fearful judgment, by which their power to hurt others is
taken away Psalm. iii. 7.
. Their tongue being a fire, a sharp sword, and their having a sword in their
mouth or lips, imports the mischievous and murderous tendency of their
unchaste, profane, passionate, reviling, and fraudulent speech Psalm. lvii. 4.
Prove. xxv. 18.
. Their rolling sin as a sweet morsel under their tongue; having mischief and
vanity, or the poison of asps under their tongue, imports their delight in
wickedness; their readiness, on every occasion, to utter mischievous and vain
language; which however pleasant for a time, slowly, imperceptibly, and
infallibly, tends to the ruin of every one infected by it Job xx. 12. Psalm. x.
7.
. To smite with the tongue, is to reproach and revile: to backbite with the
tongue, is to speak to our neighbor's prejudice in his absence Jer. xviii. 18.
. A tongue walking through the earth, implies impudent boldness, in every where
blaspheming God, ridiculing and reproaching our neighbor Psalm. lxxiii. 9
. Sharpening of the tongue like a serpent, implies activity and contrivance, in
belching forth the most destructive and poisonous discourse Psalm. cxl. 3.
. The words of the wicked are sharp arrows, are to lie in wait for blood, are
the piercings of a sword; and these of tale-bearers, deep wounds; as they tend
to murder men's fouls, bodies, and characters Psalm. lxiv. 3. Prove. xii. 6. and
xxvi. 22.
. The perverseness of their tongue, is a breach in the spirit; shows a
disordered spirit in them; and tends to vex and disturb the spirit of others
Prove. xv. 4.
. A lying tongue is but for a moment; truth will quickly discover herself, and
put falsehood to shame Prove. xii. 19.
. A flattering tongue or speech, resembles smooth batter, oil, honey dropping
from the womb, for its apparent kindness, innocence, and love Psalm. lv. 21.
Prove. v. 3.
. The mouth of a harlot or strange woman, is a deep pit; her lascivious and
enticing words, ensnare men into endless, and unfathomable misery Prove. xxii.
14.
. Burning fire in one's lips, denotes malicious, passionate, provoking, and
lust-inflaming speeches Prove. xvi 27.
. Burning lips like a potsherd, covered over with silver-dross, signify wicked
discourse, embellished with elegant language, and fine elocution Prove. xxvi. 23.
. The mouth of the wicked being full of cursing and bitterness; of fraud and
deceit; and their throat being an open sepulcher, imports their constant
readiness to pour forth abundance of angry, reproachful, blasphemons, noisome,
infectious, false, and ruinous language Romans iii. 13. 4.
. Their mouth being near destruction; being filled with gravel; covered with
violence; and their soul eating violence, imports, that for their hatred,
oppression, malicious and blasphemous language, God shall quickly punish them
with ruin; oppression; shame; vexation; and torment Prove. xx. 17. and x. 11.
. Their feeling no quietness in their belly, and vomiting what they had
swallowed up, imports their inward anguish of mind; their having no solid
pleasure in, and being quickly deprived of what they had fraudulently obtained
Job xx. 15. 20.
. Fatness and hardness of heart, imply their stupidity and obstinacy Is. vi. 10.
. Their hands being full of bribes or blood, imports their being much given to
bribery and murder Is. xxxiii. 15. Ezekiel. xxiii. 45.
. Their feet swift to shed blood, imports their inclination to, and activity in
hurting and ruining others Romans iii. 15.
. Their speaking with their feet, and teaching with their fingers, imports
their artful and indiscernible methods of exciting others to sin Prove. vi. 13.
. Thorns and snares, i. e. manifold troubles and temptations, are in their way,
awaiting and attending them: destruction and misery, done by, or awaiting them,
are in all their paths of life and conduct; and the way of peace, Christ and
his commandments, and a pacific conduct toward others, they have not known.
Cursing is their garment, that cleaves close to them on every side; and enters
into their bowels like water, deluging their soul with DIVine wrath Psalm. cix.
18.
. P^ide and wickedness, like a chain or ornament, compasset^ them about; as
they boast and glory of it Psalm. lxxiii. 6.
. Their crafty enticements to sin, by which they catch others, and the snares
they lay to ruin others, are their net Psalm. x. 9.
. Their table, the gospel ordinances, and their outward enjoyments, become a
snare and trap to them: are occasions of their stumbling into deeper ruin, and
being hardened in their wickedness Psalm. lxix. 22.
. -- Am not I filled with all unrighteousness, pride, debate, deceit,
malignity, hatred of God? And yet did the son of God love me, and give himself
for me? O how his love occasionally enhanceth my guilt! And yet my guilt gives
place to the exceeding greatness of his love!

3. Wicked men are called CHILDREN of the devil, of disobedience, of wrath John
viii. 44. Ephesians. ii. 2. 3.
. By Satan's agency they became sinners, and daily wax more and more sinful. In
the wickedness of their heart and practice, they bear his express image:
cheerfully they obey his will: readily they imitate his example: greatly they
delight to enjoy fellowship with him, in his temptations. Alas how they are
filled with, and given to disobedience, to wrath, and emnity against God! And
how condemned to, and infeoffed heirs of everlasting punishment! -- Was I such?
and has grace made me "a child, an heir of God, and joint heir with Christ!"

4. They are represented as the SOLDIERS and angels of Satan Rev. xii. 7.
. Enlisted under his banner, by voluntary consent to his service; wearing his
livery of sinful practices; equipt with his armor of ignorance, enmity, and
manifold lusts; they, at his direction, to the everlasting hazard of their
soul, fight against the strivings of God's Spirit, in their conscience; and
with deceit and violence oppose, persecute, and seek to ruin his cause and
interest in the earth; and have for their present wages, the profits and
pleasures os sin, which are but for a season; and hereafter everlasting
punishment, with the devil and his angels. -- Blessed Jesus, at what expense of
love, of blood of life, have thou bought me off from this service!

5. They are represented as HUNTERS and FOWLERS (...)
. With the outmost vanity, craft, and cruelty, they tempt and force one
another, into sinful, into soulruining courses. How often they wickedly
undermine their neighbor's character, property, station, or life! How they
hunt and persecute the people of God!

6. They are represented as MURDERERS (...)
. By sin they destroy themselves: they ruin their friends and neighbors; they
attempt to assassinate their maker: many of them crucify the Son of God afresh.
nor, without shedding of his blood for, and application of it to them, can
their sin be forgiven. -- How, Lord, have thou apprehended me, thy betrayer and
murderer, and washed me from my sins in thy blood! How kind my remission!
Grace, grace, unto it!

7. They are represented as LIARS and DECEIVERS (...)
. How deceitful above all things, is their heart! How early they go astray
speaking lies! How they delight in, and promote false temptations, and errors;
"sporting themselves with their own deceivings!" With what vain hopes, and
empty shadows of virtue, they beguile themselves and others! In their religious
profession purposes, and acts, what do, they, but compass God about with lie^;
the temper and bent of their heart, being the very reverse of their profession
and pretenses! Lord, remove far from me, the way of lying.

8. They are compared to DRUNKARDS (...)
. With what care, desire, and delight, they seek after the pleasures of sin;
embrace every opportunity to obtain them; and count nothing, no not the
salvation of their soul, too dear a price, to purchase them! How often, after
being sensibly hurt thereby, or pained with inward terror and conviction on
their account, do they, as greedily as ever, return to their sinful course! How
vainly merry! How stupid, outr^gious, and careless, about their great business,
they are thus rendered!

9. They are compared to SO^OMITES, and like UNCLEAN persons (^) Contrary to
the decency of things, contrary to the natural dictates of conscience, they
burn in "the lusts of the flesh, and of the mind;" abuse themselves with the
vilest whoredom and departure from God; and draw on themselves his tremendous
and fiery vengeance. -- Ah! how long, has my life been among the UNCLEAN!

10. They are compared to THEIEVS and ROBBERS Mal. iii. 8. 9.
. How craftily, cruelly, and shamelessly, though often secretly they waste
their time and strength; and risk their eternal savation, in robbing God of his
due honor, love, esteem, worship, reverence, and time; in depriving their
neighbors of their due regard and property; and themselves of their solid
happiness and comfort! And how dreadfully are they taken at last, arraigned,
condemned, imprisoned, and tormented in hell!

11. They, chiefly hypocrites, are called BASTARDS and MOTHERS CHILDREN Heb.
xii. 6. Song. i. 6.
. Though they be the children of God by creation and common providence; or by
outward profession; they are not born from above They have no indwelling
principle of faith in, or love to God; nothing of his moral image in them. Only
from* a principle of slavish fear or legal hope, do all their appearances of
obedience proceed. They hate the true children of God, and are without all
title to the promised inheritance of everlasting felicity. Hypocrites are
children of the church, but not of Christ the husband thereof.

12. They are represented as PRODIGALS Luke xv. 10. -- 16.
. How quickly; how sinfully; how unreasonably, they waste their time, their
talents and opportunities, to the abominable purposes of dishonouring God, of
defiling their neighbor, and of ruining their soul! And so at, or before
death, reduce themselves to terrible straits and inward torments; and not
seldom to outward misery and want! Ah, amidst these pinches, to what slavish
service of Satan, to feed his swinish lusts, have I hired myself! But blessed
be the Lord, who made me outrun my service; and fly to his offended, but
gracious self, as my sole relief.

13. They are represented as FOOLS and SIMPLE Prove. i. 22.
. They have no true knowledge to direct their course; they hate it, and despise
the means of it: they prefer the husks, the dung, the dust, the spider's web,
the wind of self-righteousness, of sinful pleasure and worldly enjoyments, to
God, to Christ, to his righteousness, grace, and glory. They heartily mock at
sin; at every thing of eternal moment; and ridicule what they know not. Readily
they fret at every thing like to be truly useful to them: thoughtlessly they go
on in their course; they prefer their body to their soul, time to eternity; and
choose to provoke and dishonor God rather than man: headlessly they ensnare
themselves in Satan's temptations; and, to avoid momentary fancied evils, rush
into infinite and everlasting misery.

14. They are represented as MAD, and POSSESSED of the devil Luke xv. 17.
Matthew. xii. 43.
. In their heart, Satan and his angels reside, and render them deaf, incapable
to hear God's voice in his word and providence; dumb, unfit to pray to, and
praise God; outrageous scoffers and despisers of DIVine things; rebels against
God, their best friend; rejecters of his righteousness and salvation; furious
haters of such as would instruct and admonish them; employed, in wounding and
murdering their own souls, and these of others; and in improving Christ and the
gospel, as occasions of their deeper damnation. -- Lord, my name is LEGION; but
do thou, with authority, command the unclean spirits to come out.

15. They are represented as POOR and WRETCHED Rev. iii. 17.
. By sin they have lost every thing good: they have no spiritual provision of
their own, to live upon: no money of good qualities or works, to procure any:
no robe of righteousness to cover them: no habitation to yield them a
residence, or shelter from the storm of God's wrath: no true friend in the
creation, to assist or comfort them: they owe infinite debt, and have nothing
to pay it: they are polluted and mischievous; cannot cease from sin: nor are
they one moment unexposed to inexpressible and endless woe. -- Astonishing
"grace of our Lord Jesus, that though he was rich, yet, for our sakes, he
became poor; that we through his poverty might become rich!"

16. They are represented as DEBTORS Matthew. xviii. 24.
. Never do, nor can they, in the least degree, render unto God, the debt of
perfect obedience, which they owe to his law; nor even the debt of gratitude
which they owe, for his mercies; hereby they fall under a debt of infinite
satisfaction to his offended justice. Ah! how they deny, excuse, or extenuate
their debt! How they hate their all-glorious Creditor! How they abhor; how they
study to shift, and forget, their account; and the future, the solemn, seasons
of reckoning; their death; their eternal judgment! How ready every moment to be
clapped up in the prison of hell! And yet, alas! how merciless to those who
injure them! -- Lord, have thou forgiven me ten thousand talents! shall not I
love thee much! And for thy sake love, and do good to, such men as hate and
injure me.

17. They are represented as WEAK and WITHOUT STRENGTH Romans v. 6.
. They cannot think a good thought; cannot speak a gracious word; nor perform
an acceptable deed: they cannot work out their own happiness: they cannot cry,
nor breathe, nor look to Jesus, for his purchased salvation: they cannot take
hold of his strength, and make peace with him: they cannot receive it, when
offered, nor even cease from rejecting it: in fine, they cannot cease to do
evil, or learn to do well. Lord, without thee, I can do nothing; let my
sufficiency be of God.

18. They are represented as BLIND Rev. iii. 17.
. They see not the light of life; discern not the Sun of righteousness; have no
true knowledge of spiritual objects: nothing is nearer them than God and his
unspeakable gift, and there own heart; yet nothing is less known to them. Ah,
how often they stumble and fall into sin, without any proper cause! How
constantly they wander out of their proper course, and mislead those that
follow them! How useless is the clearest dispensation of the gospel to them!
How utterly destitute are they of all true comfort! How often given up to
judicial and eternal darkness! -- Lord, open thou mine eyes, that I may see
wondrous things out of thy law.

19. They are represented as NAKED Rev. iii. 17. 18.
. They have no law-fulfilling righteousness, to cover them before God; no
inward grace; no holy conversation to adorn them; no spiritual armor to defend
themselves from their foes. Hence, how perpetually exposed to the cold, the
tempest, the stroke of DIVine wrath! to the stings of their own conscience! to
the injuries of sin, of sinners, of devils, and death! How shamefully the
filthiness of their heart daily discovers itself in their practice! How unfit
they are for every holy duty; for every honorable company! -- When I was thus
naked, how, Lord, did thou array me in "fine linen, clean and white, which is
the righteousness of the saiuts!

20. They are represented as SLOTHFUL SLUGGARDS Prove. vi. 6.
. How averse to their proper work! How prone to delay it, and excuse themselves
from it, with very trifles! How averse to have their conscience awakened and
excited by the word, the Spirit, or the providence of God! How they waste
precious time, in doing nothing, or worse! Wise indeed, they are in their own
conceit, and faintly desirous of happiness, as they fancy it; but their languid
attempts never issue in the change of their nature and state: Their hearts they
neither keep nor cultivate: their talents and opportunities they never improve
for the glory of God, or their own real good: and how often by mere shadows and
fancies of difficulty, are they discouraged, from following out the appearance
of any thing substantial! -- Lord, how often have I, while starving, hid my
hand in my bosom; and would not bring it to my mouth, with the offered fullness
of thy Son!

22. They are represented as CARNAL and FLESHLY 1 Cor. ii. 14
. Alas! how they prefer the momentary concerns of their body, to the eternal
ones of their soul! How they attempt to nourish and satisfy their soul, on
outward enjoyments! How fixed under the reigning power of indwelling sin; and
given to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof! How given
to fleshly lusts, that they know nothing, enjoy nothing, love nothing, seek
nothing, but the things of the flesh! They are in the flesh; fixed in their
corruption, as a state, and prison. They walk after the flesh; act from carnal,
corrupt principles, motives, and ends; and in a carnal, corrupt manner; taking
delight in wickedness, and proceeding from evil to worse. They war after the
flesh; by carnal inclinations, their zeal and their contention are influenced
and directed; and by carnal methods they prosecute their purpose. -- No wonder,
they "that are in the flesh cannot please God."

22. They are called STRANGERS Ezekiel. xliv. 9.
. They are strangers to God; to the true knowledge of him in Christ; to the
fear and love of him; to his converting grace, and saving fellowship. Strangers
to Christ, in his person, natures, offices, righteousness, and work: strangers
to the way of peace, life, and salvation through him; to faith in, love to, and
fellowship with him: strangers to the Holy Ghost, in his person; in his work of
regeneration, sanctification, and comfort; in his graces of hope, humility,
repentance, resignation, zeal, self-denial: strangers to themselves, to their
own hearts and the sinful plagues thereof; to their own lives, and the defects
and abominations thereof: strangers to the nature, the exceeding sinfulness,
the deceitfulness, and ruinous consequences of sin; and to the only method of
atonement and puricfiation from it: and, in fine, strangers ^^ the gospel, the
truths, the ways, and people of God. -- Let me bless the Lord, who took the
stranger in; and let me acquaint "myself now with him, that thereby good may
come unto my soul."

23. They are represented as UNCIRCUMCISED in heart, in flesh, and ears Ezekiel.
xliv. 9. Acts vii. 51.
. Never were they pricked to the heart for sin; never was its filthiness
discovered, or hardness removed; never were they filled with shame and
self-loathing on account of it: never did they renounce their own
righteousness, or put off the body of sin: never, were they taught by the grace
of God to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; to abstain from fleshly lusts
that war against the soul; but continue carnal, savouring and minding the
things of the flesh, walking and warring after it; trusting in carnal and
outward privileges, never were their ears spiritually opened to hearken and
hear, that their soul might live. -- Circumcise my heart, O Jesus, to love
thee: To hate thee is my saddest hell.

24. They are represented as OUTCASTS, and FAR OFF from God Is. lvi. 8.
. Naturally they are rejected by him; driven from his intimacy, favor, and
protection. They are sustained as abominable; exposed to all evil and danger,
no man cares for their soul. The multitude of their sinful inclinations and
acts, do more and more separate them from communion with, and conformity to
God. -- Let the Lord that gathers the outcasts of Israel, gather me to
himself.

25. They are compared to newborn INFANTS, cast out, and lying in their blood
Ezekiel. xvi. 4. 5.
. In their earliest moments, they are rejected of God, as altogether guilty and
loathsome in his sight. How universally unpitied; unhelped! How unable to help
themselves, or to ask for relief! How covered with the guilt! how stained with
the filth of sin! How they wallow in their own blood, in the mire of filthy
lusts! their heart, their mind their conscience, their whole course, being
defiled. How devoid of the salt of grace! What strangers to the purifying
influence of Jesus' blood and Spirit! How destitute of the warming, the
adorning, the strengthening, the protecting robes of his righteousness! --
Thrice stupendous time of love, when he found me lying in my blood, quickened
me by his Spirit, decked me with his garments of salvation, and espoused me to
himself!

26. They are represented as LOST and READY TO PERISH Luke xix. 10. Is. xxvii.
13.
. How destitute of every agreeable privilege! of every useful qualification,
which can tend to the glory of God, or their own felicity! How incapable of
every good and useful work! How they wander in the wilderness of vanity! of
danger and misery! Ah! how they drown themselves in the floods of the DIVine
curse! in the pit of corruption! and are on the very point of dropping into
eternal fire! -- On thy head, O Jesus, for ever come the blessing of one ready
to perish; for I obtained mercy.

27. They are represented as SERVANTS of sin John viii. 34.
. For the wretched hire of carnal honor, favor, pleasure, or gain, how
willingly they sell themselves to commit wickedness! How they choose; they
delight in it! and make it their daily trade, and darling employ! How
constantly they are under the reigning, the enslaving power of it! With what
unwearied vigor and care, they daily promote the lusts of it! How they
entangle their seed, and debase themselves to fulfill the lusts of it! And in
the end they receive death and damnation, as their wages. -- O Son of God, make
me free; and I shall be free indeed.

28. They are represented as REBELS Psalm. lxviii. 18.
. Contrary to their duty, and to their most solemn engagements, they rise up
against God; at their own inexpressible hazard oppose his interests, attempt to
undo his glory and authority, and to oppress and ruin such as are faithful to
him. Alas! how many of them rebel against the light, fight against their own
conscience, despise his pardon, and crucify his Son! Did he nevertheless
receive gifts for men! yea for the rebellious! Is the gift of God, to
rebellious me, eternal life, through Jesus Christ my Lord!

29. They are called CAPTIVES and SLAVES Is. xlix. 24.
. How destitute of all spiritual liberty! How conquered and reduced to bondage,
by sin, Satan, and the world! How sold into their hand, by their own
inclinations, and by the awful justice of God! How wrathfully stripped of every
true privilege! of all spiritual armor! of every decent robe! How loaded with
the yoke of a broken law! of oppressive guilt! of tyrannizing corruption! and
of wrathful afflictions! How constantly employed in the vile drudgery of
fulfilling abominable lusts! -- Lord, may the prey be taken from the mighty,
and the lawful captive be delivered.

30. They are represented as PRISONERS Zech. ix. 11. 12.
. Alas! how the offended justice of God, the curse of his broken law, the
ruinous power of sin and Satan, the deceiving influence of an evil world, fix
them in their sinful, their miserable estate! How shamefully their condition
marks their infamous guilt! How bound with the cords of iniquity! deprived of
the light, the warmth of the Sun of righteousness; and of every true comfort!
How shamefully lodged with malefactors! with devils! with infamous men! How
devoid of all true honor, rest, or fresh air of DIVine influence! How charged
with guilt! Their iniquities testify against them, and procure their
condemnation to hell. In what terrible torment, darkness, and perplexity are
they, if mercy prevent not, to be for ever shut up! Nor are their present
enjoyments here any more, but the accursed bread of the condemned. -- As for
me, has God, by the blood of the covenant, brought me out of the pit wherein
there is no water!

31. They are represented as SICK and DISEASED Is. i. 3. -- 6.
. Under what shocking plagues of hardness of heart; of ignorance, of unbelief,
legality, pride; of worldlymindedness, covetousness, coffeehouse; of envy,
malice; of stupidity, vain conversation, and wretched estate; they lie
insensible of their maladies, and unconcerned about Christ the physician of
souls! -- Let him who has power over all plagues heal me; for I am sore vexed.

32. They are represented as DEAD Ephesians. ii. 1.
. By the power of sin, how destitute are they of spiritual life! of all holy,
all inward warmth of DIVine love! How devoid of every heavenly, every gracious
sensation! How incapable to see the glory of Christ, hear his voice, handle his
person, taste his goodness, breathe in prayer, speak to his praise, or move in
his way! How uncomely, loathsome, and unsavory! How solemnly condemned to, and
ripe for hell! Nor can any thing, O JEHOVAH, but thy almighty power, recover
and quicken them who are dead in trespasses and sins. Ah, how my wandering out
of the way, has made me to remain in the congregation of the dead!

33. They are compared to ETHIOPIANS J^r. xiii. 23.
. How scorched with the wrath of God! How altogether black, vile, and
unsightly, before him! How deep stained with sin! How incapable to wash
themselves into purity! to change their nature! How often, by self-righteous
attempts, have I washed myself into vileness! O Jesus, wash me in thy blood,
and make me white as snow.

34. They are compared to CANAANITES Zech. xiv. 21.
. For the sin of their progenitor, they lie under a grievous curse. For their
wickedness against God, they are devoted to ruin. For carnal gain, how often
disposed to deceive others, nay to put on an appearance of piety! Ah! how they
seduce, hate, and harass the people of God, and seek to extirpate them from the
world!

35. They are compared to PREGNANT WOMEN Psalm. vii. 14.
. Alas! how they conceive, carry about, nourish, and with inexpressible labor
and hazard, bring forth sin, that child of the devil! How wretchedly they
conceive chaff, and bring forth stubble, -- what is altogether unsubstantial,
and may conduce to their eternal torment! -- Conceive vanity and mischief, and
bring forth falsehood! Conceive rebellion against God, and bring forth to
themselves endless destruction! -- Alas! alas! how labored is their way to
ruin! How their cursed offspring are for ever like to waste and torment the
mother that brought them forth!

36. They are compared to BEASTS ENSNARED in a pit or net Psalm. vii. 15. Is.
viii. 15.
. How often are they caught by the net of temptation, that they cannot recover
themselves! How often ensnared and ruined by the projects which they contrived
and executed to undo others! How often caught by God in the net of affliction,
where, though they roar and rage, they do but the more entangle themselves!

37. They are compared to RAVENOUS BEASTS Is. xxxv. 8.
. The wilderness of a natural state is their residence. The wilderness of this
world is their beloved country. How untamed by Jesus' love! How delighted! how
employed in hurting and destroying one another, but chiefly the people of God!
Their horns, their teeth, their paws, and mouth, signify their power, and the
instruments of their mischief.

38. They are compared to EAGLES Lam. iv. 19. Mic. i. 16.
. How highminded! How ambitious; filthy; subtle! How cruel; contentious;
uncomely! How unacceptable the voice of their prayer, their praise! their vain
and wicked converse! How terrible their abuse of their power! How great their
haste to shed blood! to feed on their neighbor's torn character and property!
and to do mischief! But though they exalt themselves as eagles, God shall bring
them down: and by stripping them of what they have, shall enlarge their
baldness as the moulted eagle.

39. They are compared to OWLS, and other hateful birds Is. xliii. 20.
. Alas! how the darkness of ignorance, the night of their natural state, is the
delight of their soul! How abominable to God are their persons, appearances,
and speech! How detested of holy angels and men!

40. They resemble SILLY DOVES without heart Hos. vii. 11. and xi. 11.
. Under trouble and conviction they have no solid hope of deliverance. They
cannot seriously think of, or care for their true interest. How often they
build their nest, their hope, where disappointment formerly deprived them of
their fruit! How easily decoyed into sinful snares! By forsaking God their
proper residence, how they expose themselves to danger! And how shall they
mourn sore like doves amidst endless woe!

41. They are compared to PARTRIDGES, that hatch not their eggs Jer. xvii.
. What unsubstantial imaginations that never succeed, they devise! What hopes
of happiness never enjoyed, they conceive! What hard gained possessions, profit
them nothing, in the day of trouble and death! How are they hunted by the
vengeance of God, and taken in an evil net! -- Ah, what bubbles of felicity
has my fancy formed, which perished with the touch! Sure an immortal spirit
was never made for work like this!

42. They, chiefly tyrants, are compared to LIONS Song iv. 8.
. How potent! proud! crafty! cruel! How fierce and insatiable in opposing the
interest, and harassing and destroying the people of Christ! How they affect
their earthly, their sinful dens! How outragiously they roar in proud boasting!
in murmuring against God, and in reproaching and threatening his people! Lord,
tame me, and make me lie down with thy lambs, and eat straw, feed on thy word,
as thy ox-like patient, and laborious saints.

43. They are likaned to LEOPARDS (a). How spotted with various corruptions,
are their heart and life! How subtle, pitiless, and expeditious, are they in
doing Ibid. mischief! especially in persecuting and ruining innocent sai^^s!
How they wait for them! swallow them up! chop their bones in pieces, and tear
off their flesh! -- Break thou their teeth, their means of injuring, O God.

44. They are likened to REEMS, which our version renders unicorns Psalm. xxii.
z1.
. How great are their power, courage, craft, and activity in destroying others!
O Jesus, did such surround, push, and devour thee, that my soul might be for
ever rescued! that in every pinching strait, God might hear me!

45. They are called BEARS; BOARS; and wild beasts Prove. xvii. 12. Psalm. lxxx.
14.
. How unsightly is their appearance before God! What a terror they are to good
men! How sleepy and slothful; but hard to be tamed! How they delight in the
cold desert of distance from God and his people! Whatever seeming regard they
sometimes have for one another; how outragiously they hate God, maliciously
tear his name, his ordinances, and people, and waste the vineyard of his
church! How enraged, when they are bereaved of their darling enjoyments; or
defeated in their beloved projects! Better meet a bear bereaved of her whelps,
which can only tear the body, than meet a fool in his solly.

46. They are compared to DRAGONS Is. xliii. 20.
. How they snuff up the wind of vain imaginations! How they love the wilderness
of an evil world, and unregenerate state! How cruelly they hate, bite, and
devour the people of God! How maliciously, chiefly in the night of desertion,
affliction, persecution, apostasy, they, by their breath of false doctrine, and
sting of poisonous example, ruin and destroy the fouls of men! And how terrible
shall be their wailing in hell!

47. They are compared to HORSES, and FED HORSES Jer. v. 8.
. How great is their pride and vanity! With what outrageous boldness, and
unconcern, they hastily rush upon infinite danger! How governed; how enraged by
their various and open fleshly lusts! In prosperity, how wantonly they kick at,
and rebel against God! How shamelessly they neigh, and invite others to
abomination!

48. They are compared to WILD ASSES and DROMEDARIES Jer. ii. 23. 24.
. How pleased with the mountains of vanity, the deserts of alienation from God!
How given to snuff up, and delight in vain fancies, unsubstantial
selfrighteousness, and airy delusions! How hard to be tamed in spirit! How
swift! how crooked and unsearchable their motions! -- But, Lord, in thy season,
thou can find us; till which, ministers and parents do but weary themselves,
in quest of our soul.

49. They are compared to BULLS; FAT BULLOCKS; WILD BULLS; BULLS or KINE of
Bashan Psalm. xxii. 12. Ezekiel. xixiv. 20. to 23. Amos iv. 1. 2. 3.
. How often they enjoy great power and prosperity, which they abuse, to render
themselves proud, stupid, wanton! How often they strive to be ringleaders in
sin! Being governed by furious lusts, how they push with tongue and hand, with
side and shoulder, with all means in their power, at these around; chiefly the
saints and poor, that they may harass and destroy them! How unaccustomed to
submit to, and walk under the yoke of God's law! How fearless in doing evil!
How necessarily, but unwillingly restrained by his providence! How they rage,
or remain unconcerned, when he smites them! How hard to be tamed by conviction
or distress! And how ready and fit for the slaughter of his wrath! Ye wicked,
lift not your horn of power and authority on high: God is judge, he pulls down
one, and sets another up.

50. They are compared to SHEEP Psalm. xlix. 14.
. How stupid! how thoughtless! how improvident! how exposed to danger! how
destined for the slaughter of DIVine wrath! They are lost sheep, which having
wandered from God, cannot return to him; and for whose soul no man cares;
ready to be torn to pieces, or to be overwhelmed with the hail-storm of God's
wrath. They are like BURIED SHEEP; without answering the end of their rational
nature, they die in multitudes amidst hoplessness and carnal unconcern, that
death and damnation may devour and feed upon them. Nor does their unhappy exit
more awaken, or impress their hardened relations and neighbors, than that of
sheep.

51. They are called GOATS Matthew. xxv. 32.
. How unclean, nauseous, and abominable! How covetous, mischievous, and
insatiable! Upon what poisonous lusts and pleasure, they feed! Ah, how they
injure Christ's sheep, and spoil the pastures of his ordinances! Now, indeed,
they herd with the saints; but quickly shall they be separated, and condemned
to eternal fire.

52. They are compared to SWINE 2 Pet. ii. 22.
. How unclean their nature and practice! How dull, stupid, and insatiable they
are! How incapable of chewing their cud; -- of spiritual meditation on DIVine
things! How mischievous to the garden and church of God, and to his plants and
children therein! How averse to be stirred up from their spiritual sleep and
sloth! How powerfully inclined to wallow in sinful practices and carnal
pleasures! and to return to them after they have been convinced of, and
purposed to leave them! How constantly they look to, and seek after earthly
things! How wickedly they trample on Jesus, and his precious blessings! How
hideously they murmur, and sometimes roar, when God afflicts them!

53. They are compared to DOGS Rev. xxii. 15.
. How base; filthy; foolish! How idle; unruly; fierce! How cruel; greedy,
gluttonous, -- of sinful and carnal pleasure! How often they bark out angry
words and reproachful language! How unseasonably they bite and injure their
neighbors soul, their body, and interest! How they deceive them by fawning
flattery! How slavishly they trudge in attendance on Satan their master! How
often they return to those very abominations, which, with remorse, they once
vomited up! How often God restrains them from their inclined mischief! How
wisely he employs them to correct, awaken, and gather his people to himself!
How wrathfully he excludes them from his chambers of spiritual fellowship; and
at last from his heavenly mansions of bliss! -- In what riches of grace, have
thou* Lord, looked upon such a vile, a dead dog as I am!

54. They are compared to FOXES Luke xii. 32.
. How cruel, crafty, and bold in transgression! How proud, stupid, and hardened
under affliction! They cry not, when he pierces and binds them. How they
trust, delight, and repose in earthly things! How unsavory, and unacceptable,
their person and work! How crooked and irregular their paths! How wickedly they
hate, and seek to devour, the sheep of Jesus' pasture! How sadly they spoil the
vineyard of his church, by DIVerting and stopping the sap of gospel truth, by
digging up the roots of inspired doctrines, and otherwise injuring his tender
saints!

55. They are compared to VIPERS; ASPS; SCORPIONS; SERPENTS; and what our
version renders COCKATRICES Matthew. iii. 7. Psalm. lviii. 4. Is. xi. 8.
. They are the genuine seed of Satan the old serpent: they delight in, and are
filled with the poison of sin; underneath their tongue is mischief and vanity.
How they love, esteem, and cleave to earthly happiness, as their portion, their
ALL! However beautiful, some of their outward appearances be; how wicked and
mischievous are they within! With what violence they bite and devour others!
Or, with what flattery they sting and seduce them to their eternal ruin! In
trouble, chiefly in hell, how shall their voice go forth as a serpent, in angry
hissing, and desperate wailing over their misery! O may grace rectify my
dreadful nature!

56. They are compared to SPIDERS Is. lix. 5.
. How aspiring and ambitious! How weak, and easily crushed! How full of
envenomed corruption! What crafty ensnarers of others to their lasting ruin!
How unprofitably employed, to spin out of their own bowels, their vain
imaginations; their self-righteousness; or their unsolid, unblessed, earthly
enjoyments! What, Lord, am I, that with my hands of faith, I should take hold,
and live in thy royal palaces!

57. They are likened to BAD FISHES (a). How numerous! how stupid! useless!
unsavory! how mischievous, and hurtful! Even in outward life, how unsightly
some of them! How irregular their moral course! How Matthew. xiii. 47. 48. 49.
anxious to bring up their seed like themselves! Now, they range through the
wide sea of this unsettled world; but quickly shall they be drawn out, by the
net of God's wrath, and cast into endless fire.

58, They are likened to TREES, and TREES OF THE WOOD Rev. vii. 3. Song ii. 3.
. Whatever height of profession, power, or prosperity, they attain to; they
still remain in the cold, the uncultivated, barren soil of their unregenerate
state. How much less cared for by God, than the saints! What a fearful haunt of
wild lusts, and mischievous fiends! How barren of good works! Their deeds, how
sour, sinful, unprofitable, and poisonous! How easily are they blown and tossed
by temptation, delusion, persecution! Ah, twice dead! Naturally dead in
trespasses and sins; dead with habitual and presumptuous rebellion, and the
hardening and condemning curse, annexed to it! At last, by the axe of death,
how wrathfully cut down, and cast into hell fire!

59. They are likened to GREEN BAY-TREES Psalm. xxxvii 35.
. How mightily they flourish and spread their influence on earth! But, because
devoid of useful fruit, how quickly cut down by mortality, and cast into the
furnace of God's wrath!

60. They are likened to BARREN FIG TREES Luke xiii. 6. -- 9.
. However extensive their leaves of profession, their pretenses to holiness,
be, where is their fruit of true piety? Whatever pain and patience God
exercises toward them, they are but plagues to the earth, and cumberers of
the church. Lord Jesus, how many years did thou come seeking fruit on me, and
find none! Yet how did thou still let me alone, and dig and dung about me!

61. They are compared to an OAK, whose leaf fades Is. i. 30.
. However tall, strong, and deep rooted on earth, they may seem; however they
attempt to monopolize the sap of the ground, the smiles of providence, how
quickly shall their glory wither and fade; quickly shall they perish and decay!
-- Be thou, my soul, planted in the Christ, in the courts, of God; so in old
age, when others sade, shall thou flourish; the flames shall never kindle upon
thee.

62. They are like unto WILD OLIVES Romans xi. 17.
. Upon what cursed root, and in what wild desert, of distance and alienation
from God, they grow! Amidst their blossoms of prosperity, or profession of
holiness, where is their good fruit! How long, ye Gentile nations, were you as
a wild olive, amidst shows of morality and devotion, living in gross ignorance,
superstition, idolatry, profaneness; without true knowledge, revelation,
righteousness, without Christ, without God, and without hope in the world!

63. They are compared to EMPTY and BARREN VINES Hos. x. 1. Ezck. xv.
. Notwithstanding innumerable mercies received, they living destitute of any
good fruit of grace, or work intended to the glory of God, are altogether
unprofitable; fit only for everlasting fire. -- Alas! what an empty vine am I,
bringing forth fruit to myself; seeking my own honor, ease, wealth, or
pleasure, in almost all that I do! After all the pains which God has been at
with me, in softening my stony heart, in hedging me about, with his law,
providence, and love; in building a wine press of a gracious nature in me; and
in watering me with the dew of heaven; still, what four grapes of abomination I
yield!

64. They are likened to BRAMBLES; BRIERS; and THORNS Is. l^. 13. Son, ii. 2.
. The barren soil of this world, and of an unconverted state, is their beloved
residence. How naughty! how cursed of God, are they, and their work! How they
spoil, corrupt, and trouble the world! How low and grovelling their
disposition! However God, for a while, make hedges of them to his church, yet
in the end he will cast them into the tremendous fire of his wrath.

65. They are represented as TARES Matthew. xii. 25.
. Being sown by Satan, in the night of time, chiefly of carnal security, among
the people of God, in the field of his church, and world, how often are they
somewhat like them! How sadly the mixture of hypocrites mar the growth of
saints! How impossible, now, to separate them exactly; but at the end it shall
be done, and the tares cast, by multitudes, into eternal fire prepared for the
devil and his angels.

66. They are compared to FLOURISHING GRASS, or GRASS on house-tops Psalm. xcii.
7. and cxxix. 6.
. How quickly they grow up! How often they flourish in prosperity! In succesa
in sin! nay, sometimes, in religious profession! But how quickly cut down and
ruined! Amidst their lofty and fair pre^ences, how unsubstantial! How
insignificant in the hand of the all-cutting mower, DEATH! How quickly the
Hasting wind of affliction, or the flames of Tophet, shall wither and consume
them! Being planted in Christ, rooted and grounded in him, grow, my soul, as
grass by the watercourse. So shall I never fade; death shall fill his hand
with me: They that go by, shall bless me.

67. They are compared to a ROOT OF BITTERNESS Heb xii. 15.
. How firmly; how secretly fixed in their sinful state! In what bitter soil of
a broken covenant, an estate of sin and wrath, they stand! What bitter juice of
corruption is within them! How disagreeable are their qualities and
dispositions! what bitter; what gall and wormwood-like fruit! What destructive
and damning works are produced by them! How many are poisoned, vexed, or
tormented, by their means! -- O Jesus Christ, with what surpassing sweetness,
have thou sweetened me, the bitterest of all my race!

68. They resemble BAD FIGS Jer. xxiv. 2.
. How corrupt; disagreeable; useless! -- Yielding neither pleasure nor honor
to God; nor profit to men!

69. They are compared to a SWEEPING RAIN Prove. xxviii. 3.
. What a plague to the world! How they disturb the inhabitants, and destroy the
mercies thereof! How suddenly shall they themselves be hurried, and hurry one
another, into the ocean of infinite wrath!

70. They are compared to WATERS; FLOODS; a FOUNTAIN; the SEA; the TROUBLED SEA
Psalm. xviii. 4. Rev. vii 3. Is. lvii. 21.
. How great their multitude! their power! their disorder! their pride and
arrogance! their restless disquiet! their noisy rage, and threatening to devour
others! their perpetual casting forth of abominable practices, monstrous
opinions, unhallowed societies, and horrid forms of government!

71. They are called the WORLD John xv. 18. 1 John vi. 19.
. To mark their numerous multitudes; their combination in folly and wickedness;
and that they are wholly inclined and devoted to this world, and the vanities,
lusts, and sinful customs of it.

72. They are called the EARTH, and men of the earth Rev. vii. 3.
. How carnally minded! In this world, they have their portion, and upon it
their heart is fixed. Whatever they do is from carnal and earthly principles,
and to carnal and earthly ends.

73. They are compared to MOUNTAINS and HILLS Is. xli. 15.
. How fixed are they in wickedness! How often apparently firm their state on
earth! How they abound in power and pride, that Omnipotence alone can lay them
low! How barren and unfruitful! How vain refuges, to such as trust in them! How
they stand in the way of God's coming to bless the earth! How disagreeable to a
spiritual eye, they render it at last! how overturned by the earthquake,
enflamed by the fire, and overwhelmed by the flood of Almighty wrath!

74. They are represented as dry ground, and a GARDEN without water Is. i. 30.
. Alas! how dry! how hardened! how withered their soul! How barren their heart
and practice! how the seed of inspired oracles, and the warming rays of
prosperity, are lost upon them, and become to them a savor of death unto
death! -- Lord Jesus, am not I such, except thou water me every moment?

75. They are compared to MARSHES or MIRY PLACES Ezekiel. xlvii. 11.
. What mixtures of souring corruption and filthiness are in them! How dangerous
trusting to, or close intimacy with them! How unfit are they for receiving the
word and Spirit of God! How sour, disagreeable, and hurtful, is all that they
produce! How often are they finally given up to the salt of a reprobate sense;
and of endless damnation!

76. They, chiefly harlots, are compared to SNARES, NETS, PITS, and DITCHES
Prove. xxiii. 27.
. How dangerous is fellowship with them! How they entice to ruinous crimes! How
hardly can these, who are ensnared into familiar intimacy with them, recover
themselves; but wallow in wickedness; and sink toward everlasting misery!

77 They, chiefly hypocrites, are compared to WHITED sepulchers, or WALLS
Matthew. xxiii. 27. Acts xxiii. 3.
. What splendour, and pretense to purity, may appear in their outward station
and conduct! But what base; what uncomely; what abominable, and pestilential
iniquity, reigns in their secret practice and heart!

78. They are represented as God's HAND; ROD; SWORD; AXE; HAMMER; BOW Is. x.
and xiv. Psalm. xvii. 13. 14.
. By them, how often; how fearfully he corrects his people; and punishes his
enemies! how absurd, for those instruments of his vengeance, to lift up them
themselves to his dishonor! And how often; after his work is performed by
them, does he cast them into temporal and eternal misery!

79. They are compared to BRASS, IRON, TIN, LEAD Ezekiel. xxii. 18. Is. i. 22.
. In different degrees, how they abound with corruption! How hardened in
wickedness! How worthless and naughty! How proper to be cast into the furnace
of infinite wrath! Lord, melt me in thy love; and remove all my naughtiness!

80. They are compared to DROSS and SCUM Ezekiel. xxi. 18. and xxi. 13.
. Are they not altogether unworthy? The filth; the pollution; the disgrace of
mankind; of nations, cities, churches, and families? As what an abominable and
naughty thing, shall God cast them out of his sight, into the pit of
everlasting destruction, after separating them from the godly!

81. They, chiefly hypocrites, are compared to LUKEWARM WATER, and a CAKE not
turned Rev. iii. 16.
. How often they mingle the true religion with a bad! have a profession,
without true grace or good works! Being warmed and roasted with his favors and
judgments, they turn not to God, nor consider their ways. Hence how nauseous to
him! and to every truly exercised saint!

82. They are compared to FIREBRARNDS; things SET ON FIRE; a FI^RY OVEN Prove.
vi. 27. Psalm. vii. 4. -- 7.
. How much given to strife, and contention! How the fire of malice and lust
rages in them! what means are they of kindling the the wrath of God, on
nations, churches, and families! How often his judgments torment, and burn them
down to the lowest hell! How, there, shall his wrath kindle, and burn them for
ever! What flames of hatred, strife, and passion, do contentious persons
indulge in themselves, and kindle in others! How harlots, with their lustful
dalliances, inflame their companions, and burn them quick to everlasting fire.

83. They are assimilated to BURNING FAT of lambs Psalm. xxxvii. 20.
. What sudden, terrible, and near destruction, awaits them! And shall not all
their earthly abundance and felicity, promote and enhance their ruin?

84. Unconverted men are compared to DRY BONES Ezekiel. ixxvii.
They have no spiritual sap, no remote source of grace, no hope of eternal
life; no might to revive and recover themselves: nor can any creature assist
them herein. -- But, Come from the four winds, O breath, O DIVine Spirit, in
thy DIVersified influence; quicken them; bring them out of their graves of
lust, condemnation, and misery.

85. They are compared to TOW Is. i. 31.
. How weak and insignificant! How easily crushed! How readily enflamed, and
consumed by the fire of God's wrath! Stupendous! am I, notwithstanding, plucked
out of the burning!

86. They are likened to a MOTH-EATEN GARMENT Is. li.
. How quickly; and by what contemptible means, are they rendered useless,
unsightly, abominable! How crushed before the face of the moth! How easily the
judgments of God waste their person and property! How easily death gnaws them
out of life; cuts them off! and they are no more! -- Fear them not, my soul; be
not afraid of their reviling; for the moth shall eat them.

87. They are compared to CHAFF Psalm. i. (...)
. While on earth, they grow up with, and closely adhere to the saints. How
worthless; how light, unsettled, and unconstant they be! How fearful do
temporal troubles toss them! How quickly shall death and judgment beat them
off, and blow them into hell!

88. Unfaithful friends are like a BROKEN TOOTH; and a FOOT OUT OF JOINT Prove.
xxv. 19.
. They deceive, pain, vex, and torment him, who depends on, or is connected
with them.

89. Deceitful friends are like a BROOK, whose waters dry up Job. vi. 15.
. What ever assistance and comfort, we expect from them, disappoints us in the
time of need. Thrice blessed new covenant Friend, never shall thou pain or
disappoint me; but be legs to the lame; and river of water in a weary and dry
land.

90. A false witness is compared to a MAUL, and SWORD Prove. xxv. 18.
. Ah, how he stabs, wounds, and murders his neighbor, in his person,
character, or property! -- Lord Jesus, how often am I such to thee!

91. He that rules not his own spirit is like a CITY BROKEN DOWN, without
walls Prove. xxv. 28.
. How exposed to temptation, and danger! How full of confusion, corruption and
fear! It is better, my soul, to rule thyself, to keep quiet thy conscience,
with the application of Jesus' blood; to govern thy heart by his Spirit; to
order thy conversation by his word; to defend thyself by his strength; than to
take a city, or DIVide the spoil. Hereby shall thou conquer Satan, the world,
and thy corruptions; and obtain solid satisfaction and peace; procure
unspeakable and endless advantage.

CHAP. IX. Metaphors respecting faithful ministers.
1. FAITHFUL ministers are compared to ANGELS Rev. i. 20.
. How distinguished their spiritual comeliness! their knowledge and wisdom!
their dignity, power, and authority! By them God executes his will, and
publishes his mind to men. With what pleasure, activity, readiness,
submission, and faithfulness, they unweariedly fulfill his commandment, praise
his name, attend his throne of grace, pry into the mysteries of redemption,
watch over and comfort the saints; and excite, and in their station concur with
the other DIVine executors of God's judgments against Antichrist! But at their
peril, do men expect, that they should resemble angels, in living on earth
without fault, or without food.

2. They correspond to WINGED SERAPHIMS, attending an enthroned Redeemer, while
the train of DIVine excellencies and influences fill the temple of his human
nature, and purchased church Is. vi. 1. -- 7.
. They are fiery ones, are the light of the church, and burn with zeal for the
glory of God. Their being on, above, or near to the throne, signifies their
living near Jesus Christ, in spiritual fellowship with him, and possessing the
office next to him in the church. Their six wings, import their eminent
readiness, alacrity, and speed in his service. Their covering of their face and
seet, imports their insufficiency to comprehend tho bright glory of his person,
office, and work; and their being ashamed of their best services, in his sight.
Their constant crying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, imports, that the
great end of a gospel ministry, is to display the holiness of God, and promote
holiness among men. The moving of the posts, at the sound of their cry, denotes
the shaking of nations, trembling of conscience; and melting of heart, which
attend the preaching of Christ. The taking a live coal from the altar, and
laying it upon the mouth of the convicted prophet, for the purging away of his
sin, implies, that Jesus' atonement applied, by means of the gospel ministry,
quiets the conscience, and sanctifies the heart.

3. They resemble the FOUR BEASTS in John's, and the CHERUBIMS, and LIVING
CREATURES in Ezekiel's vision Rev. iv. 6. -- 9. and vi. 1. -- 7. and xv. 7.
Ezekiel. i. and x.
. Their number FOUR, imports the sufficiency of them in every age, to answer
the purposes of God in all the ends of the earth. Their fullness of eyes within
and without, imports their having a deep insight into spiritual cases, into the
plagues of the heart, and the operation of the DIVine Spirit in it; and into
what God has said to, has done, does, and will do, for the church; and into
her duty and danger in every case. It too, especially their eyes in their hands
and wings, imports the wisdom and circumspection of their behavior. The four
faces, import, that, like men, ministers are to be comely in their
conversation, affectionate, sympathizing, meek, prudent, sagacious; like lions,
bold, courageous, and terrible to evildoers; like oxen, tame, patient, hardy,
laborious; and like eagles, intelligent, heavenly-minded, and active in their
work. Their straight feet, and soles like those of a calf, denotes their
upright gospel-conversation, and fitness to tread out the corn of God's word,
for their hearers. Their having hands under their wings, imports the
correspondence of their practice, with their solemn professions and
engagements. Their wings being stretched upward, implies their dependence on
Christ for furniture and direction. Their covering of their bodies and feet
with their wings, imports their blushing at themselves and their work before
God. Their appearance like lamps and coals of fire, marks their zeal for the
glory of God, and their communicating light and knowledge to men. Their running
straight forward as a flash of lightning, imports their integrity, quick
progress, and majesty in their work. Their going along with the wheels, implies
their constant connection with, and attendance on the rolling churches; the
same spirit is in both; and as they are dull, or active, so ordinarily are the
churches. Their voice like many waters extending to the outer court, imports
the powerful and extensive spread of the gospel, chiefly among the Gentiles.
Their warning people to come and see, when the seals are opened, implies, that
the gospel preached; tends to cause men consider the word and providence of
God. The man in the firmament above them, incircled with fire and a rainbow, is
Christ, as the glorious and majestic head of the church, and of the new
covenant, inspecting, helping, upholding, and governing them. The voice from
the firmament when they stand or let down their wings, is Christ's quickening
and encouraging them to their work. The taking out fire from between them, to
cast upon sinners, implies that contempt of Christ, and his gospel ministry,
especially hastens, and enhanceth flaming vengeance upon a land. One of these
beasts giving the seven vials to be poured on Antichrist, implies, that
according to their word, and by their means, shall that man of sin be hastened
to his ruin.

4. They resemble the PRIESTS in Ezekiel's vision of the gospel-temple Ezekiel.
xlii. 1. -- 18. and xliii. 19. -- 27. and xliv. 9. -- 31. and xlvi. 20.
. Their being the sons of Zadok, not of the Levites that went astray, implies
their being true and blameless children of Jesus Christ, the righteous; and
faithful preachers of his atonement, as the great substance of the gospel; and
that such as have fallen into scandal, are not rashly to be admitted to the
ministry. Their eight day's consecration, implies their entrance on their work
with much deliberation, abundant application of Jesus' blood, and vigorous
study of gospel-holiness; their having distinct chambers for themselves,
imports that their office is strictly circumscribed by the DIVine law; and that
none are to interfere with their work or benefice, but such as are truly sent.
Their highest chambers being most straitened, imports, that the most eminent
ministers in the church, are ordinarily most hated and exposed to trouble on
earth. Their being "clothed with linen, not with wool, or any thing that
causes sweat," imports their being clothed with Jesus' righteousness, and not
with their own fatiguing and and defiling works; and that their doctrine must
be pure, not erroneous and unsavory; that their conversation must be holy, not
offensive, stupid, or slothful; nor their ministry their burden. Their linen
bonnets and breeches, denote their gravity, their modesty, their chastity, and
freedom from Antichristian whoredom. Their laying aside their fine robes; and
wearing others before the people, imply that though they must only appear
before God in the righteousness of his Son; yet, by their holy conversation,
they must recommend holiness to their hearers and neighbors. Their "not
sactify-the people with their garments," may imply that they must not allow the
people to usurp their office; nor pretend, by their holiness, or their bodily
apparel, to convey any sanctity, merit or safety to them, as Antichristians do.
Their "not shaving their heads, or suffering their locks to grow," imports
their abstaining from Popish superstition, and from worldly pride and
wantonness. They must beware of being intoxicated with drunkenness and carnal
care. They must marry such women only, as are of good report. They must teach
the people of God, and compose differences betwixt them. They must avoid
immoderate sorrow for deceased friends. And plentifully they must nourish their
souls on Christ and him crucified. And plentifully are they and their families
to be maintained by their people. Their boiling of the sin-offering and
trepass offering, denotes their digesting gospel truth in their heart and
judgment; and their preparing of their discourses before they preach them.

5. They are called RULERS Heb. xiii. 7. 17.
. How eminent their excellency, usefulness, and authority in the church! Being
chosen by their people, it is theirs wisely, meekly, kindly and carefully, to
govern her members and matters, according to the laws of Christ, her king; and
duly are they to be loved, obeyed, honored, prayed, and provided for, as his
vicegerents.

6. They are represented as AMBASSADORS 2 Cor. v. 18. 19. 20.
. Sent by King Jesus to propose and negociate with sinful men a treaty of peace
with God, of marriage with himself, and of traffic with his fullness; with all
authority, earnestness, wisdom, singleness, and faithfulness, they must adhere
to their instructions; and study, by their candid and honorable deportment, to
promote it. Deeply must they be affected and grieved, if it do not succeed.
Always ought they to be in readiness, to render an account of their conduct to
God. With the utmost heartiness and humility, ought the children of men to
receive them and their message. If their person be despised, their character
injured, or their embassy rejected, to what DIVine vengeance it exposes the
guilty! And what a fearful presage of approaching wrath, is God's calling them
fast off from their work!

7. They are represented as WITNESSES John xv. 22. Rev. xi.
. With fidelity, distinctness, boldness, and impartiality, they testify to men,
that which they have seen and heard concerning Jesus Christ and his truths; and
according to the word of their testimony, shall you nations be acquitted or
condemned at the judgment seat of Christ. Under Antichrist they are two
witnesses; few, but sufficient, powerful with God; but clothed in sackcloth,
mourning and distressed,

8. They are compared to PARENTS 1 Cor iv. 15.
. How great is their dignity and authority in the visible church! With what
ardent love, earnest desire, fervent prayer, and laborious ministration of the
gospel, they promote the spiritual birth, instruction, reproof, safety,
nourishment, and rule of the saints! How tenderly they care for, sympathize
with, and exemplify godliness, to churchmembers! How mightily grieved with
their miscarriages! And how tenderly to be loved, esteemed, and revered, by
them! What a loss to be deprived of them!

9. They are represented as WOOERS; and FRIENDS of the Bridegroom John iii. 29.
2 Cor. xi. 2.
. By Christ's appointment, and with a single regard to his interest, and to the
souls of men, they propose to them an offer of spiritual marriage with him.
With every gaining consideration of their necessity, and of his excellency,
honor, riches, beauty, and love, they prudently, faithfully, and earnestly
enforce the proposal. To him they return an account of their diligence. With
what sorrow their hearts are filled, if the treaty succeeds not! With what joy,
if it do! How delighted to hear the Bridegroom's voice! And how averse to be
loved in his stead!

10. They are called WARRIORS 2 Timothy ii. 3. and iv. 8.
. Being solemnly enlisted under Jesus' banner of truth and love, distinguished
with the livery of his call to, and furniture for their work, clothed with his
righteousness and grace, armed with the whole armor of God, nourished with his
influence and provision, in face of difficulty and danger, they employ
themselves in the vigorous defense of his church, ordinances, and truth.
Skilfully they must wield and push the sword of the Spirit, and of church
discipline and government, launch the spear and dart, and the arrows of DIVine
truth, against every spiritual enemy. Never must they entangle themselves with
worldly business, carnal offices, or temptations; but vigorously make war on
the kingdom of Satan; pull down his strong holds of sinful lusts, abominable
errors and hateful practices; and endeavor to conquer sinful men to Jesus
Christ, the Savior. So shall they obtain a crown of righteousness, and reward
of eternal life.

11. They are called WATCHMEN Heb. xiii. 17. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 7.
. Being placed by Jesus Christ in an high and important station; it is theirs
faithfully, and impartially, to watch over the souls of church members; to
observe their state, their case, and walk; to watch over the truths and
institutions of Heaven, that none be corrupted or lost. It is theirs to notice
the variation of the times and providence of God; to observe the motions and
approaches of every spiritual enemy, that, during the night of distress, and of
time, they may give us distinct, early, and full warning of our duty and
danger. Of what infinite importance is their work to the souls of men! What
labor and danger attend it! But if they desert it, give up themselves to
negligence and sleep in it, how guilty are they of the blood of souls! and how
exposed to the most tremendous vengeance of God!

12. They are represented as TRUMPETERS Is. lviii. 1.
. Divinely authorized and qualified, how sweetly; how loudly; how courageously;
how plainly and skilfully they proclaim the offices, the approaches, the
spiritual feasts, the promises, the pardons, the laws, the threatenings of King
Jesus to men! And call them to attend the ordinances of his worship! With what
undaunted boldness and distinctness, they warn them of their faults, and their
danger; direct and encourage them in their spiritual conflict with their
indwelling sin, with Satan, and with a present evil world! and show themselves
patterns of bravery and diligence therein!

13. They are represented as LEADERS and GUIDES 1 Cor. xi. 1.
. How extensively; how eminently acquainted with the truths of God! with the
duties of religion! with the temptations of Satan! and with the snares of the
world! With what distinguished care and patience, they lead men into the
knowledge of DIVine mysteries! into the practice of holy duties! into the
exercise of fighting with, and pursuing after spiritual enemies! -- and conduct
them safely, through this world, in the way that leads to eternal life!

14. They are called PASTORS; SHEPHERDS; BISHOPS; or OVERSEERS Ezekiel. xxxiv. 4.
Acts xx. 28.
. They are DIVinely appointed, and solemnly engaged, carefully to lead the
flock, the members of Jesus' church; tenderly to feed them with his truths and
ordinances; oversee, watch over, defend, and keep them together; and to
separate from among them the scandalous and openly wicked. And from their flock
ought they to receive a proper subsistence. From Jesus shall they receive an
everlasting reward.

15. They are called BUILDERS 1 Cor. iii. 11.
. Being DIVinely instructed and appointed by Jesus, the sovereign Architect of
the church, they must clear off the rubbish of false doctrine, and sinful
customs. Every doctrine, instruction, and example which they exhibit, they must
establish on Christ the foundation, and his sure and immovable word. The
corner-stones and pillars of fundamental truths, they must especially confirm;
and must closely connect their whole doctrine, and conduct therewith. Carefully
must they attend the rule of inspiration in all that they do. Incessantly,
skilfully, and earnestly, they must promote the conviction, the illumination,
the union to Christ, the justification, sanctification, comfort, and endless
felicity of their hearers. Were not you, prophets and apostles, wise
master builders, concerned in laying the foundation, and principal matters of
the church of God?

16. They are represented as FISHERS OF MEN Ezekiel. xlvii. 10. Matthew. iv. 19.
. With what labor, care, skill, and exposure to danger, they cast the net of
the gospel, into the sea of this world, and spread it upon sinners, that they
may draw them to Christ! It being adapted to their various conditions, some are
hereby caught in reality; others only in appearance. -- When, O Jesus, will thou direct them to cast the net on the right side of the ship, that a
multitude may be enclosed! When shall the whole dead sea of this world be
covered with these fishers! When shall the souls they catch be, like the fish
of the great sea, countless in number; and exceedingly DIVersified in case!

17. They are compared to PLANTERS; to KEEPERS OF A VINEYARD; to VINEDRESSERS
Song viii. 11. 1 Cor. iii. 6. 7. 8.
. It is theirs to found and plant churches; to water them with gospel-oracles
and ordinances; to watch over and defend the doctrines, and members, from
spiritual hurt. It is theirs to take the foxes; to call false teachers to
account; to refute their error, censure and reject such as are obstinate in
evil ways. It is theirs, to promote the gracious implantation of sinners into
Christ; to reprove, refresh, comfort, enourage, and direct the saints, who are
the beloved, the darling vineyard, and garden of God.

18. They are compared to STEWARDS 1 Cor. iv. 1. Luke xvi. 1. -- 1.
. Being entrusted by Jesus with the charge of his oracles, his ordinances, his
house and family of the militant church, and the souls of men pertaining to it;
it is theirs, carefully to oversee whatever is done; to assign each member his
proper business; and, in due season, give him his proper provision, his portion
of promises, threatenings, reproof, censure, encouragement, or comfort. To
Jesus they must give an account of their conduct. And how terrible their
condemnation, if they corrupt or conceal DIVine truth! if they disorder,
pollute, or break the peace of the church! if they waste their time, their
talents, their opportunities, to sinful or insignificant purposes! Or, if they
beat, despise, reproach, or unjustly censure their brethren and fellow servants.

19. They are represented as SERVANTS and LABORERS Matthew. ix. 37.
. Being solemnly engaged to, and hired by Jesus, to occupy in his church; it is
theirs, by every proper method, however base or difficult to the carnal eye, to
promote his glory, and the spiritual edification or men. Always, and in all
places, they are to be very diligent, humble, obedient, single, and faithful,
in their work. Always they are to exert their whole power and skill; and seize
every opportunity; that, by the public or private dispensation of the gospel,
they may be instrumental, in plowing up the fallow-ground of men's hearts; in
plucking them as brands out of the burning; in hewing them off from their
oldc-ovenant root; in gathering them to Jesus; and promoting their heavenly
course. Patiently they are to bear whatever burden of work, of trouble, or
persecution, God may lay upon them. In so doing, however unsuccessful their
labors be on earth, -- how glorious and lasting shall be their heavenly reward!

20. They, as the ancient prophets, are MEN or GOD 1 John iv. 6. 1 Timothy vi. 11.
. By God they are chosen, called, and fitted for their work. Near him they
stand in their office. Near him they live in their holy conversation; and are
his deputies, his distinguished representatives, and peculiar property on
earth. He is the subject matter, and the obvious end of their work. The
injuries done to them, he will sharply resent. For he that despises them,
despises him that sent them.

21. They are like a FLOCK of newly washed, even-shorn, and twin-bearing sheep
Song iv. 2. and vi. 6.
. How numerous! How kindly connected! How washed in person, by Jesus' blood!
sanctified in nature, by his cleansing Spirit! How harmless, pure, holy,
patient, and useful! -- How rich their pastures of inspiration! How noted their
harmonious affection! How equal their power and authority assigned them by
Christ! How earnest their endeavors, and happy their success, in winning souls
to him! It is theirs, like he-goats, to go before the flock! and be examples of
the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity.

22. They are like two YOUNG ROES, that are twins, and seed among the lilies
Song iv. 5. and vii. 3.
. How lovely, active, and pure! How tender their affection to men's souls! How
stated and strong their enmity to the old serpent, and his seed! How grievous
and hurtful their attacks from them, especially if they indulge themselves in
sloth! How often small, though sufficient to bear witness, is their number! How
harmonious their affection! How equal their power and authority in the church!
By what delightful study and meditation, they feed on the scriptures, on
gospel ordinances, in happy fellowship with Jesus, the Lily of the valley, and
his people!

23. They resemble DOVES EYES Song i. 15. and iv. 1.
. With what meekness, purity, sincerity; with what singleness of heart, chaste
affection to Christ and his people, do they pry into the gospel of peace, and
make it known to men; pleasantly watch over the church; warn her members of
danger; and direct them to Christ and his way!

24. They are compared to OLIVE-TREFS Rev. xi.
. How comely and flourishing their office and conduct! In them the oil of
gospel truth is lodged; and by them it is communicated to others. By them the
gospel of peace is preached, and its all healing spirit and influence, offered
and brought near to men.

25. They are called the GLORY OF CHRIST 1 Cor. ix. 23.
. On them his image and authority are stamped. In what they do, his glory and
honor is intended. And by them are his glorious excellencies published and
declared.

26. They are a sweet SAVOR OF CHRIST unto God 2 Cor. ii. 14.
. Having received from Christ their grace, their gifts, their office, how
pleasant to God are they, and their evangelical ministrations! By them how
sweetly are declared the riches of his grace, and manifold other excellencies,
in them that believe! and the abundance of his wisdom, power, holiness, and
equity in them that perish! Dreadful thought! Ye sinners; shall God; shall a
Savior be exalted in your endless damnation, if you refuse him?

27. They are represented as a SPECTACLE to angels and men 1 Cor. iv. 9.
. How exposed to open view, on the theater of this world! Ah, what SIGNS,
against which the contempt, the obloquy, the malice, the persecution of men,
and rage of devils, are especially discharged! How often held as weak; as
foolish; as wicked; for Christ's sake! How often a ga^ing-stock, every where
spoken against!

28. They are compared to LIGHT Matthew v. 16.
. What a distinguished measure of truth, of spiritual knowledge, they possess,
and communicate to others for their inward refreshment, instruction, and
comfort! What blessed means of discovering men to themselves: showing them the
plagues of their heart, or the grace that has been given them! What means of
discovering to men the excellencies of Christ, and the glory of God in him! how
unhappy; how devoid of spiritual light and consolation; the places where they
are not! How dreadful when this light is turned into darkness; and ministers
are ignorant, or replenished and clouded with error!

29. They are compared to STARS Rev. i. 20.
. In the firmament of the church Jesus has planted them, and furnished them
with DIVersities of gifts and graces, for the adorning of it; and for
refreshing, quickening, instructing men; for leading them to himself; for
guiding them, -- while, amidst this bewildering world, they wander in the night
of trouble and time; or, amidst the swelling seas of manifold temptations and
trials, they sail to the home and haven of endless felicity! How they are held,
supported, and directed, by Jesus, in his right hand! How high in their station
and office! How near to God and heavenly things are their motions and course!
How easily beclouded their glory! How readily; how wide-discovered their
shameful blots! -- O when shall the eternal day break; that stars may
disappear, shadows flee away, and Christ be ALL IN ALL!

30. They are compared to CANDLES and LAMPS Matthew. v. 15.
. In themselves how insignificant! But being formed, and, from the sire of
Jesus' light and love, lighted by the Holy Ghost, with gifts, office, and
grace; how useful, during the night of time, to enlighten a dark world! How
necessary, that they should appear, and shine publicly! How generously they
spend themselves in illuminating others! How often moved from one nation and
place, to another! When, Lord, shall candles be extinct, and never-wasting
glory shine!

31. They are compared to CLOUDS Is. v. 6.
. Receiving their gifts, their grace, their office, from the ocean, the fullness
of Christ; what appointed means of conveying the rain, the dew, of DIVine
truths and influences, to men! Nor can they be useful, but as God pleases. Are
they not a kind of vail interposed between weak-sighted mortals, and his
dazzling brightness! How exposed to observation, and to tempests of trouble!
How supernatural and speedy their motions! How heavy the judgment, when they
are removed from a land, or their usefulness DIVinely restrained!

32. They are like to the FISH-POOLS by the gate of Bath-rabbim Song vii. 4.
. How clear their insight into DIVine things! How plentiful their fullness of
the gospel! How great their quietness and constancy! What a blessing to the
multitudes which attend their ministry! By their means, what numbers are made
to know their own spiritual features; and are nourished up to eternal life!

33. They resemble PILLARS; POSTS; and BEAMS Song i. 17. and iii. 10. Gal. ii.
9.
. How strong in gifts and grace! How well fixed, and founded on Christ! How
usefully they support, and connect the members and structure of his church! How
plainly they exhibit his laws to men!

34. They resemble the TOWER of David builded for an armoury, or the TOWER of
Lebanon, that looked toward Damascus Song iv. 4. and vii. 4.
. For the security and glory of his church; for the observation of his
principal foes, they are erected, and strengthened by Christ, and on him as
their sure foundation. How high is their station! How upright, heavenly, firm,
and constant, ought they to be in it! How abundantly furnished with spiritual
armor! and ready, by dispensing the gospel, to confer it to others! They are
especially to watch against, and oppose, their most dangerous spiritual
enemies. And like a tower of ivory; how pure; how comely; how self consistent,
and firm, are their doctrine and conversation!

35. They resemble CHARIOTS Zech. vi. 1. -- 8.
. How glorious, curious, and costly, their erection and office! By them, in
gospel-ministrations, Jesus' name is carried before the Gentiles; and he, in a
royal and majestic, a quick, easy, and triumphant manner, rides through the
world; subdues, and shows his glory, and love to his chosen; conquers his
spiritual opposers. -- In their bloody suffering, and flaming zeal, they
resemble a chariot with red horses. In their abject outward appearance, their
self-denial, their insight into spiritual mysteries, they resemble a chariot
with black horses. In their holy lives, their pure doctrines, and spiritual
conquests, they resemble a chariot with white horses. In their DIVersity of
gifts and graces, they are like to a chariot with grizzled and bay horses. In
the apostolic age, they resembled the first chariot. In the Antichristian
period they resemble the second. In the millennial period, they shall resemble
the third. In the last days, they may be compared to the fourth. In every form,
and period, they issue from between mountains of brass; appear according to the
settled purposes of God, and notwithstanding manifold oppositions.

36. They are called EARTHEN VESSELS 2 Cor. iv. 7.
. In themselves, how frail; base; contemned; and troubled! But God fills them
with the treasure of gospel truths, to convey it to others; that thus the
excellency of its powerful influence, may appear to be of him.

37. They resemble a ROUND GOBLET full of mixed liquor Song. vii. 2.
. How distinguished is their capacity and perfection! How abundant their
fullness of evangelic gifts and grace, for purifying themselves! And for
administering conviction, direction, and comfort to others!

38. They are compared to SALT Matthew. v. 13.
. By their holy conversation; by their faithful dispensing of gospel doctrine,
worship, discipline, and government; they check corruption, and error; they
preserve persons and churches from rottenness, unsavouriness, apostasy, and
ruin; they preserve nations from general profaneness, and desolating strokes.
How incorruptible and lasting their office! How calculated to prepare the
redeemed for the feast of their God! How carefully they search men's wounds, for
the healing of them! Hence what an eye-fore and trouble to the wicked and
scandalous! But if, by carnality, unholiness, or sloth, ministers lose their
own savor, none are more hopeless; none more useless; none more ripe for
eternal fire.

39. They resemble SCARLET THREADS Song. iv. 3.
. In themselves, how weak; frail; and inconsiderable! yet how comely! How
exposed to trouble and persecution! And is not the source, the substance, and
end of their ministry Christ; and him, as bearing our guilt, and crucified for
our crimes?

Wherein they resemble a human nose, eyes, lips, neck, breasts, navel, feet.
See chap. XI. No 2.

CHAP. X. Metaphors respecting false teachers, and unfaithful ministers.
1. FALSE teachers are represented as MESSENGERS and SPIRITS OF DEVILS 2 Cor.
xi. 15. Rev. xvi. 14.
. By Satan they are sent, excited, directed, and actuated. His honor and
interest they promote and maintain. And in filthiness, in pride, in malice, in
slander of the saints, in active wasting of the church, and in ruining men's
souls, they imitate his example.

2. They, chiefly some principal ones, are called ANTICHRISTS 1 John. ii. 18.
. They oppose Christ in his person, his office, his righteousness, his
intercession, his instruction, his laws, his conquests, his government, and the
end of his work.

3. They are represented as FALSE PROPHETS and APOSTLES, and some of them as
false Christ's 2 Pet. ii. 1. Matthew. xxiv. 24.
. Pretending a commission from God, and often a distinguished one; sometimes to
be the Messiah, they, in his name, publish their false doctrines; attempt to
erect false churches; claim uncommon power; pretend distinguished gifts and
grace; prophesy of future events; promise to themselves and their followers
liberty and peace, when swift destruction comes upon them.

4. They are represented as MURDERERS Zech. xi. 5.
. By neglecting to warn the wicked of their evil ways, and to promote their
repentance, by false doctrines; by wicked example; and by unfaithful dispensing
of DIVine ordinances, they destroy the cause and interest of truth; crucify
Jesus afresh; and ruin the souls of men.

5. They are represented as PIMPS, and WHORISH WOMEN Rev. ii. 20.
. With the utmost impudence, craft, and carnal enticement, they decoy
multitudes to go a whoring from God and his ways, and to defile themselves,
"fulfilling the lusts of the flesh and of the mind."

6. They are represented as angry MOTHER'S CHILDREN, and OUTRAGEOUS WATCHMEN
Song i. 6. and v. 7.
. Being originally members of the church, but never born of God, they hate his
true children. With their enslaving errors and will worship, they go about to
oppress and hinder them from their proper work. Sadly they harass and wound
them, reproach their conduct, expose them to injury, and attempt to rob them of
their all-covering vail, Christ and his righteousness.

7. They are represented as Christ's COMPANIONS or rivals Song i. 8.
. Whatever love to, and connection with him, they pretend; they heartily hate
him; set themselves on a level with him; seek to undermine his interest, and
despoil him of his subjects, his bride. Never, O Jesus, permit me, whorishly
and wickedly, to turn aside by their numerous flocks.

8. They are represented as THIEVES and ROBBERS John x. 1.
. Without any regular mission from Christ, or call from his people, how often
they rush into the ministerial function! How often they rob the Redeemer of his
due honor, as ruler, as priest, or prophet of his church! How wickedly they
rob the saints of their spiritual privileges, and confer them upon others! rob
men of their gospel-provision! and attempt to sell them into the slavery of
Satan!

9. They are called DECEIVERS and SEDUCERS 2 Timothy iii. 13.
. They deceitfully mingle the gospel of Christ with their own inventions; and,
having thus corrupted it, impose it upon their hearers for pure and genuine
truth. Under high pretenses to friendship, to piety, to peace, to knowledge, or
zeal, they decoy men into corruption and error; and bring on themselves and
their followers sudden destruction.

10. They are represented as BLIND WATCHMEN; BLIND GUIDES Is. lvi. 10.
. Being destitute of the saving knowledge of Jesus, and his truth, they
presumptuously pretend to direct the principles and practice of others; and
with them fall into sudden ruin.

11. They are represented as IDOL SHEPHERDS Zech. xi. 17.
. They are but the shadows and images of true and faithful ministers. Their
followers, they seduce into the pastures of vain imaginations, and paths of
spiritual, or gross idolatry, and alienation from God.

12. They are called HIRELINGS John x. 12.
. Not from genuine affection to Jesus or his people, do they labor in the
ministry; but to procure carnal favor, honor, pleasure, or gain. And in times
of persecution and trouble, how readily they desert their flocks, and the
doctrines of truth!

13. They are represented as FOOLISH BUILDERS of hay and stubble 1 Cor. iii. 12.
. How light, empty, and worthless are the false doctrines, the corrupt
practices; which, with great care, and apparent skill, they establish, preach,
and promote, as if founded on the person and authority of Christ! And how
incapable to abide the trial of his word!

14 They are represented as DAUBERS with untempered mortar Ezekiel. xii. 10.
. By their false and inconsistent tenets and conduct, they exert themselves to
confirm the wicked in their sin; in their dependence on self-righteousness; and
to shake, to raze, the hopes of the saints founded on Jesus promise, person,
and blood But speedily shall their management be exposed to their shame; and
issue in their, and their followers, everlasting ruin.

15. They are represented as CANAANITES and MERCHANTS Zech. xiv. 21. 2 Pet. ii.
3.
. Sprung from a cursed root, with what fraud and covetousness, they, for carnal
advantage, reject, corrupt, and misapply the oracles of God! How often they
dispense his sacred institutions to unfit persons, or in an improper form! How
often they pretend to confer spiritual favors! And by other like methods,
unnumbered, deceive and ruin the souls of men!

16. They are compared to ROARING LIONS Ezekiel. xxii. 25.
. With what boldness, fierceness, and cruelty, they roar out their errors and
curses; vent their persecuting threatenings, and malice against the faithful!
And spread terror and destruction among men!

17. They are called WOLVES Matthew. x. 16.
. Alas! how they love the darkness of ignorance, and shun the light of God's
word! What a terror to watchful, or walking saints! How greedily, cruelly, and
craftily, they destroy the church of God, and the spiritual lives and interests
of men!

18. They are called FOXES Song ii. 15.
. How unclean; noisome; abominable! How subtlely they shun the light of
inspiration or conviction! With what amazing greed, covetousness, cruelty, and
craft; and with what shifts, evasions, and self-inconsistencies, unnumbered,
they, especially in the night of persecution, trouble, or carnal security, --
spoil God's vineyard! unsettle weak and young professors! ruin men's souls! and
promote Satan's interests; till they be restrained by providence, checked by
faithful censure, or cut off by death! And ah, how often are they proudly
stupid under these checks!

19. They are represented as LAZY, GREEDY, DUMS DOGS Is. lvi. 10. 11.
. How filthy; ready to return to the abominations which they once seemed to
recant and abhor! How malicious their enmity against Jesus Christ, his
ministers, and people! How ready to bite and devour the souls of men; to raise
a noise of persecution and reproach against the cause of God, and its
adherents! How slothful in every thing truly good and expedient! How covetous
of some carnal enjoyment! How ready to hurt him, that puts not into their
mouth! How negligent to reprove and warn the unruly! Nay, how ready to connive
at, and flatter them; chiefly if powerful and rich!

20. They, chiefly the Antichristians, are likened to SCORPIONS Rev. ix. 3. 5.
6.
. What distinguished seed of the old serpent! How easily provoked to the most
outrageous fury against God and his church! with what pretenses of piety and
peace they vail and cover their error and wickedness! How subtlely; how
incessantly, they smite their opposers with the vilest reproach; the cruellest
persecution; and the heaviest censures! With what quickness and craft, they
instill the poison of error and abomination into their followers! And how
DIVinely are they restrained from poisoning and ruining the saints!

21. They, chiefly the Antichristians, are marked out by the LOCUSTS in the
apocalyptic vision of the fifth trumpet Rev. ix. 3. 7. -- 10.
. From the infernal smoke of ignorance and error, they derive their origin. How
quickly they multiply and swarm! United under one head, the angel of the
bottomless pit, the devil, and pope! -- How harmonious, courageous, and active
are they, in spreading error and corruption! How marked with outward grandeur;
with usurped authority; and superstitious reverence of the mob! How noted their
plausible pretenses to piety; their affected courtesy; their lustful
effeminacy; their fawning flattery and smoothness; and their enticing of
multitudes to spiritual whoredom! How distinguished their cruelty and fraud in
destroying the souls, the bodies, and the estates of men! How breast-plated
with hardness of heart, searedness of conscience, and with civil and
ecclesiastic laws and immunities in their favor! And with what noisy novelty,
terror, curses, persecutions, anathemas, do they proceed in their infernal
course, till the period assigned them by God, come to an end!

22. They are called FROGS Rev. xvi. 13. 2 Timothy iii. 6.
. How filthy are their heart and life! How foolish their talking! How they
delight to wallow in mires of abominations! And, especially, amidst
summer-showers of fat benefices, to creep abroad; to insinuate themselves into
the families and hearts of men; into the chambers and secret councils of the
wealthy and great.

23. They are called BARREN TREES, whose fruit withers; trees twice dead,
plucked up by the roots Jude 12.
. However firm be their outward securities; however high their profession and
office; yet no good fruit of connected gospel truth, or genuine
gospel-holiness, do they ever produce. How quickly their apparently good
doctrines, labors, and followers, discover their naughtiness! To what a
terrible and hopeless condition, does their natural death in trespasses and
sins, with their voluntary and obstinate apostasy from God, reduce them at last!

24. They are called WANDERING STARS, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever Jude 13.
. With what a shining blaze of profession, and of pretense to knowledge, piety,
and zeal, they restlessly move in the firmament of the visible church! and
unceasing, bewilder themselves and others, into the perplexed mazes of error,
and dreary, hopeless state of endless woe!

25. They are represented as FALLEN STARS; as WORMWOOD, embittering the rivers
and fountains of water Rev. xii. 4. and viii. 11.
. How many of them are originally sound in the faith; but, by Satan's seductive
temptations, are drawn away into grovelling apostasy and error, which are
bitter to men at last; and embitter and poison to them, the promises and
ordinances of the gospel!

26. They are called CLOUDS without water Jude 12.
. How great their towering pride, and self-conceit! How often their power in
the church is eminent! What darkness, ignorance, error, and corruption, they
produce on the earth! How unsettled is their vain mind! How restless their
contentions! How ready to comply with every novelty; every temptation!
Appearing full of refreshing, fructifying influence, how infallibly they
deceive such as expect any good from them! How incessantly they forbode the
storms of God's wrath on churches and nations!

27. They are called RAGING WAVES of the sea Jude 13.
. What pride; what noisy disorder; frothy vanity; unsettledness; and
fierceness, abound with them! How often they threaten to carry all before them!
How they foam out their own shame; cast forth their monstrous doctrines, vain
and shameful practices, and vile reproaches, against their opposers!

28. They are called WELLS without water 2 Pet. ii. 13.
. Whatever high pretenses to piety, learning, or zeal they make; whatever sweet
and useful advantage they promise to their followers, there is nothing in them,
but slimy, earthly-mindedness, miry filthy lusts, hurtful frauds, errors, and
vanity.

CHAP XI. Metaphors respecting the true church.
1. THE church, in connection with her head, is called CHRIST 1 Cor. xii. 12.
. Jesus is her head, husband, and all in all. From his love, his blood, his
intercession, and Spirit, she wholly proceeds. To him, as proprietor, she
wholly pertains. To his person every true member is united. And to his honor
do all her saints, her laws, her ordinances, and offices tend.

2. She is compared to a HUMAN BODY, or WOMAN Song i. 5. 8. 9. 10. 11. 13. and
iv. 1. -- 5. and vi. 5. 6. 7. and vii. 1. -- 5. and v. 2. Rev. xii. 1.
. She is united to Jesus as her Lord and head, whence her honor, her laws, her
ordinances, her nourishment and life are derived. She consists of innumerable
members, all closely connected with him, and with one another; who feel one
another's affliction, sympathize with one another's infirmities, care for one
another's welfare, and are in constant readiness to serve one another.
Gradually she increases in strength and extent; till she attain the perfect
stature of the glorified state. Like a woman, she is subject to manifold
weakness and trouble on earth. Christ himself being her head, her eyes may
signify her illuminating doctrines founded in him; or her ministers, who, being
rooted and grounded in him, signally adorn her appearance, observe and direct
her members, watch against her enemies, express her sorrows, and pry into the
mysteries of the gospel. Her hair may signify her converts, especially young
ones, who, however weak and easily tossed, are by faith fixed in Christ; like
locks, knit to one another in love, and are an ornament and honor to Christ,
and his church. Her nose, may represent ministers in their spiritual
discerning, and relish of DIVine things; in their exposure to danger, and their
watching against enemies; and who, while the church is sound, are a pleasant,
refreshing, and apple-like savor of Christ to others; and by them her breath
issues forth, toward God, in prayer and praise. Or may not her nose, signify
her slately and majestic ordinances, awful to her enemies, ornamental and
savoury to saints? Her temples, may signify her rulers, who, by humble and
prudent management of her discipline and government, add to her comeliness. Her
cheeks, may denote her whole outward and visible appearance. Her scarlet lips,
may represent preachers and their gospel-ministrations, chiefly versant about
Jesus Christ, as bearing, and crucified for, our iniquities. Her teeth, may
denote ministers as chewing, as meditating on, the bread of life, and rendering
it fit for use to the very weakest members. Her neck, may represent them as
immediately subject to Christ her head, as adorned with golden gifts and
graces; and as the useful means of exalting him, and conveying nourishment from
him to us: or it may denote the inspired oracles, which, adorned with
connected, durable, and precious doctrines, laws, and promises, unite us to
him; and, from his fullness, convey breath and nourishment into our soul. May
not her breasts signify her pastors and teachers; her two inspired testaments
of heaven; her two sorts of ordinances, ordinary and solemn; her two
sacramental seals of the new covenant; which adorn her form and appearance, and
convey the sincere milk of DIVine truth and gospel-influence, to nourish the
infantile children of God? May not her navel denote ministers, as placed in the
midst, in the principal station of the church; as mightily conducive to her
health and strength; and the distinguished means of nourishing her children in
their spiritual formation? Her belly may signify the word and ordinances of
Jesus Christ, in which his chosen are DIVinely conceived and formed into new
creatures: or it may signify her saints, who are the substance in the midst of
her. May not the joints of her things, signify her curiously formed young
converts, running in the ways of holiness? Or may they denote sound standards;
or the all-covering robes of Jesus' righteousness? These mightily tend to
promote her regular and comely management. May her feet, beautiful with shoes,
denote her pastors, as fixed in the faith of the gospel, and boldly, readily,
and beautifully running to and fro, to publish it? or her private members, as
well instructed, and powerfully influenced by the glorious gospel, and readily
running in the paths thereof? Her being black, but comely, fairest among women,
implies, that however she be deformed by hypocrites and persecutions, yet, as
ordered by, and conformed to Jesus Christ, she is truly beautiful and glorious.
Her sleeping while her heart waketh, implies all her members, except a few
choice ones, fallen into carnal security, and sad ignorance. Her crown of
twelve stars, implies her open and honorable profession of the doctrines of
the prophets and twelve apostles of the Lamb. Her chains of gold, rows of
jewels, borders of gold, and studs of silver, may represent her various and
well-connected laws, doctrines, promises, ordinances, gifts, and graces, which
are bestowed upon her, by her husband Christ. Her clothing of the sun,
signifies him as her righteousness, protector, and glory. Her vail taken from
her by outrageous watchmen, may signify her intrinsic power and government; her
civil protection from the state; or her useful doctrine of Jesus' imputed
righteousness. Her having the moon under her seet, implies her renouncing
Jewish ceremonies, and contemning earthly customs and portions.

3. The church is compared to a VIRGIN Is. lxii. 4. 5.
. How pure in her doctrine! her ordinances! How abhorrent of whorish idolatry
and will worship! How chaste her adherence to Christ and his law! How dearly
beloved by him! and how comely in her order, offices, and institutions! -- O
virgin daughter, why have thou become to him as an whorish woman!

4. She is likened to a WIFE Jer. iii. 14.
. She is solemnly espoused to Christ, by outward profession, and by
participation of the sacraments; and thus brought into fellowship with him, and
a general interest in his person and benefits. Hereby, how highly she is
exalted and secured against total ruin! In her, his will is manifested; and all
her true members have special union and communion with him. And is it not the
indispensible duty of every one, to obey and please him in all things; to
desire his presence with her; and to be exceedingly grieved, when he is
dishonored and provoked?

5. She is compared to a MOTHER Mic. v. 3. Gal. iv. 26. Rev. xii. 2.
. Christ himself was born in her; became a member of her; and is by her crowned
with numbers of converts, with unfading honor, and endless praise. Being
married to him, and obtaining his presence in ordinances, she, travailing in
birth, by the painful labors of ministers and others, brings forth a
generation of saints; nourishes them with the sincere milk of the word;
instructs them in the found principles of truth: dearly she loves, tenderly
she pities them, and the more as they resemble Christ: their proper work she
assigns them; from danger she defends them: highly she reckons herself honored
by their good behavior; and by spiritual censure she corrects them, when
unruly. The Gentile world was long a barren woman, which brought forth no
children to God; but now produces more than the Jewish, which was long the
Lord's espoused bride. The gospel church is a free mother, freed from the law
as a covenant, and from the yoke of ancient ceremonies: she travails in pain by
spiritual pains, and endurance of manifold trouble and persecution: the man
children brought forth by her, are Jesus, with his honored agent Constantine,
the first Christian emperor, and his other bold and resolute saints: these are
caught up to God, and to his throne; Christ exalted to his right hand;
Constantine to the imperial throne; the primitive saints to the celestial
mansions; or specially honored and protected on earth. Satan and his agents,
particularly the heathen empire of Rome, are the dragon, which waits to devour
her children, and to persecute herself. Her place, DIVinely provided for her in
the wilderness, is her afflicted state under Antichrist, in which God protects
her for 1260 years.

6. She is compared to an ARMY with banners Song vi. 4.
. Having private saints for her common soldiers, spiritual rulers for her
officers, Christ for her Captain general, his person, his truth, and love, for
her banner, to gather, distinguish, direct, and encourage her bands; they,
being armed with her graces and ordinances, resist, conquer, and spread terror
among her spiritual foes.

7. She is represented as a NATION Is. lx. 21.
. She is a durable, numerous, well regulated, protected, and enriched society.
Jesus is her king; angels and ministers, her guards: Jesus' word is her history
and laws; his new covenant and its blessings are her inheritance; receiving out
of his fullness, and improving it in holy exercises, her trade; DIVine
ordinances her houses and tents. The two armies to be seen in her, are hosts of
DIVine perfections, and angelie spirits, standing in her defense; hosts of
inward graces and lusts conflicting in her true members; and hosts of zealous
saints and untender hypocrites opposing one another. -- O when shall a nation
be born at once! a little one become a strong nation! the righteous nation,
that keeps the truth, enter in to the heavenly Canaan!

8. She is compared to a CITY Is. xxvi. 1.
. Upon himself, as her foundation, Jesus Christ has built her: curiously he
formed her plan, and exactly he executes it: with the wall of his power, his
protection and laws, he surrounds her: He has appointed all her regulations
and customs: himself is her chief magistrate; her officers are his deputies:
what an innumerable company, that no man can number, are her inhabitants! and
how active; laborious; high fed, and richly clothed, are her true members! how
DIVersified and rich these privileges, in which they have all an equal, an
everlasting interest! In freely receiving the fullness of God, from the land
that is afar off, consists her gainful trade: in the midst of her, in the
channels of ordinances and promises, runs the all-adorning, all-protecting
refreshful, cleansing, healing, and commercial river of life: in her, Christ,
his Father, and Spirit, reside: he, his angels, and ministers, watch over and
defend her; that the gates, the powers of hell, shall not prevail against her.
-- O how much were it for her advantage, that her inhabitants tenderly loved
and and clave one to another, as her adversaries daily besiege her, by
temptation and persecution! But alas! while on earth, what a mixed multitude of
treacherous hypocrites remain in, and plague, and pollute her!

9. She is compared to a FAMILY or HOUSEHOLD Gal. vi. 10. Matthew. xxiv. 45. and
xxv. 15 -- 30.
. Being separated from the rest of the world, God is her father; Christ is her
elder brother, glory, and manager; angels and church officers are her servants
and stewards. In her are saints, young and old; weak and strong: to each is
DIVinely appointed his proper work, station, and privilege; and how comely,
when with order, harmony, skill and delight, they apply themselves thereto! How
DIVinely are all her members instructed, aparelled, defended; and, on every
proper occasion, called to worship their God. She is like to a family of
servants: how orderly hired, admitted, and connected, are, or ought her members
to be! All of them are subject to Jesus' authority, and bound to advance his
honor: To them, in very different degrees, he intrusts the talents and pounds
of office, opportunity, gifts, and graces, that they may occupy therewith, till
he come again: Such as improve them, shall be proportionally honored and
rewarded: such as do not, but, as it were, hide them in a napkin, shall be
self-condemned, and cast into eternal ruin. How deeply are all indebted to
Jesus! but finding they have nothing to pay, how ready is he frankly to forgive
them! How absurd then for them to revenge petty injuries upon one another! If
he forgive me my ten thousand talents, what torment, what damnation I deserve,
if I resent on my my neighbor the petty wrong, which his tongue or hand have
done me! If while my Lord delayeth his coming, I beat, reproach, unjustly
censure, or persecute my fellow servants, shall not I have my portion with
hypocrites? -- Pray, my soul, for this family of God; for they shall prosper
that love her.

10. She is compared to a DOVE Song i. 15.
. How great her purity! her simplicity! her innocence! her comeliness! her
chaste affection toward Christ her head! how single her adherence to his
truths and ordinances! How she flies to him in distress, and mourns for his
absence! How pleasant the consociation of her members! How noted her
fruitfulness in young converts! How eminent her weakness in herself; and her
exposure to enemies!

11. She is compared to a THRESHING OX Mic. iv. 13.
. By her shall God subdue and break in pieces all her enemies; and render the
whole earth servants to him, and to his Christ. Her iron horns, and hoofs of
brass, are the power, authority, courage, and vigor, wherewith he shall endue
her, and make her terrible to all her opposers.

12. She is compared to a FLOCK of sheep or goats Ezekiel. xxxiv. xxxvi. xxxvii.
Song i. 7. 8.
. How great the usefulness, purity, fruitfulness, unity, and affection of her
true members! Of themselves, how weak to oppose! how unwatchful against their
spiritual enemies! How tenderly loved, cared for, protected, healed, led, and
nourished by Jesus! Ah! how often infection spreads among them! most being
readier to follow example than precept. How beneficial are good patterns! and
how hurtful are bad! Her ews with young are persons distressed in mind, are
ministers travailing in birth, till Christ be formed in men's hearts. Her lambs
and kids, are young converts, or professors, who are to be fed besides the
shepherds tents of ordinances. She is Christ's flock; all her true-members he
chose, purchased, gathers, conquers, feeds, protects, and cares for: and how
many rich favors do even her nominal professors receive from his hand! She is
one flock, wholly united in her one head, Christ; a beautiful flock, adorned
with his word, his ordinances, righteousness and grace; a little flock, small
in comparison of the rest of the world; a flock of slaughter, exposed to
fearful persecution and trouble. Her watering troughs, high mountains, to feed
on, and green pastures, are the lofty, the ever refreshing, and delightful word
and ordinances of Christ. Her still waters, are the deeps of his everlasting
love, meritorious blood, and DIVine influences, which run in the channels, and
among the hills of DIVine ordinances. Her fold, is church fellowship, DIVine
ordinances; and gracious communion with himself. The footsteps of the flock,
are the pattern of former saints; or the ordinances in which they walk.

13. She is compared to an OLIVE TREE Hos. xiv. 7. Romans xi. 17.
. How perpetual her verdure and sap! How good and abundant her fruit! How
delightful her spiritual comeliness, grace and light; and the peace, with God,
with conscience, with creatures, which is exhibited and enjoyed in her!

14. She is compared to a VINE Hos. xiv. 7.
. Being planted, pruned, watered, and preserved by Jesus' power, she, in
herself contemptible, weak, and useless, in him abounds with spiritual sap of
DIVine truths and influences, spreads in the world, and brings forth the
well-joined, the useful, and refreshing fruits of holy men, of spiritual graces
and good works, to the praise and glory of God! And, alas! how these particular
assemblies and members which remain unfruitful, dishonor God, provoke his
wrath, and hasten their own disgrace and ruin!

15. She resembles a BUSH BURNING, and not consumed Exodus iii. 1. -- 6.
. To carnal men, she appears insignificant and contemptible: in this world, she
is ordinarily low and exposed to afflictions: to such birds of mankind, as flee
to the Lord Jesus, and sing to his praise, she is the common receptacle:
notwithstanding of, nay, often amidst the fireiest trials and presecutions, she
flourishes with holy persons, graces, and exercises; painfully, though
innocently, she pricks and plagues those who injure her.

16. She is compared to a LILY Song ii. 2.
. How comely and useful in her author, her laws, ordinances, and real members!
Though weak in herself, how rooted in Christ! How glorious and great in him, as
her head! How fruitful in the production of saints! How high and heavenly her
nature and tendency! To what heights of perfection shall she attain! How
delightful and diffusive her favor, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall
come in, and the whole earth be filled with the knowledge of the Lord! And
though now she be among thorns, exposed to troubles and evil men; yet how
quickly shall she be transplanted to the celestial paradise of God!

17. She is called the FULLNESS OF CHRIST Ephesians. i. 23.
. Her true members are his mystical body, through which he becomes a complete
mediatorial head and husband, and in whom he fully manifests his mercy,
kindness, and love. -- Surprising! am I for ever to have Jesus for my fullness!
and to be the fullness of him, who fills all in all!

18. She is called HEAVEN Rev. viii. 1. and xi. 12. 15. and xiv. 6.
. She is the gate of entrance to heaven. In her, God, and his holy people
reside; and the latter are fitted for the paradise above. Her laws, ordinances,
and privileges, are of a heavenly origin, nature, and tendency. Christ and his
oracles are her sun; his instituted ordinances her moon; HE, her morning star;
ministers and saints, her connected constellations.

19. She is compared to the SUN Song vi. 10.
. How constant and abiding! the gates of hell cannot prevail against her. How
delightfully the wonders and mysteries of God are displayed in her! How
glorious her spiritual appearance! Nor is any saving light communicated to the
world, but by her means! Her complex frame is clothed with the laws and
ordinances of Jesus, the Sun of righteousness; and her true members with his
righteousness and grace.

20. She is compared to the MOON Song vi. 10.
. From Jesus Christ she receives all her light of inspiration, ordinances, and
grace. Amidst various changes of outward circumstances, amidst unnumbered spots
and imperfections, she, during the night of time, communicates the light of
life to our darkened earth. How mavelous her influence upon the rise and fall
of nations, in the SEA of this world! As Jesus' face shines upon her, so is the
measure of her light: but when carnal schemes and politics interpose between
her and him; how is her glory eclipsed! how many witness her shame!

21. She resemblesh the MORNING Song vi. 10.
. How pleasant and refreshful, though imperfect, her light! How gradually from
the beginning to the end of time, shall it increase, till it issue in the
noontide blaze of everlasting brightness! But, my soul, did not the church
look forth as the MORNING, in the patriarchal age? Did she not appear sair as
the MOON, when clothed with the numerous, moon-ruled, and fading ceremonies of
the Jewish dispensation? Did she not in the apostolic, -- and shall she not in
the millennial, and the eternal period, appear clear as the SUN?

22. She resembles a SHIP Is. live. 11.
. How curiously built and furnished by Christ, for conveying his people through
the sea of this world, and of manifold troubles, to the haven of glory! How
skilfully ought she to be directed and managed, according to the compass of
inspiration! How necessarily influenced, by the gales of DIVine influence!
Alas! how often bewildered with the mists of delusion; and tossed by waves and
storms of persecution, DIVision, temptation, and trouble! What numbers, who
once entered by a formal profession, are shaken out of her, by storms and
death! Nor do any, but God's chosen and sanctified ones, by her means, arrive
safe at the heavenly harbor.

23. She is compared to a NET Matthew. xiii. 47. -- 50.
. How mean her materials! but how curiously connected her members, ordinances,
and forms! With what labor and skill, Jesus and his agents cast her into the
sea of this world, to catch and draw men to himself! And how often they remove
her from one place to another! What multitudes are sometimes, by his direction,
therein apprehended! some of whom are real saints, good fishes; others
hypocritical and bad! Quickly, in the last judgment, shall she be drawn to the
shore of the eternal state; where the good shall be gathered to Jesus'
mansions; and the bad thrown away into the furnace of his wrath.

24. She resembles Solomon's CHARIOT of the wood of Lebanon Song iii. 9. 10.
. Of men, rendered precious, fragrant, strong, comely, and durable, by his
grace, has our glorious King Jesus, our prince of peace, formed her.
Ministers, shining in useful gifts and grace, are her silver pillars. The
excellent, glorious, and everlasting person of Christ, is her bottom of gold.
Her covering of purple, implies her being washed in his blood, clothed with his
righteousness, royally dignified by his kindness, and exposed to bloody
suffering for his sake. Her being paved with love, implies, that his love is
exhibited and applied in her; and that his people walk in love toward him, and
toward one another.

25. She resembles the WHEELS in Ezekiel's vision Ezekiel. i.
. How great her excellency and usefulness! how noted her moveableness from
place to place! Through men's opposition, what a noise do her motions make in
the world! May not their roundness import her perfection in her kind? their
four faces imply knowledge, heavenliness, courage, and patience in labor? the
dreadful beight of their rings denote majesty, extent, and awfulness to
opposers? May not their color of the sea, or beryl, mark out her fluctuating
condition upon earth; and the excellency and beauty of her true members? their
not turning as they went, represent her progress toward perfection, and the
gracious perseverance and growth of her saints? May not their appearance as a
wheel within a wheel, imply her curious structure, with respect to the
particular worshipping assemblies, comprehended in her? May not the crying to
the wheels import the necessary awakening and exciting of the church, by the
word and Spirit of God? and the moving of the wheels by the Spirit of the
living creatures, imply, that the churches must be animated to their
progressive work, by the zealous diligence of ministers, and the influences of
the DIVine Spirit, who is in them?

26. She is called a SPRING SHUT UP; a FOUNTAIN SEALED Song iv. 12.
. How remarkably is she often protected by God! All her true members are
graciously separated and preserved for him, as his hidden ones, and peculiar
property! All her inspired oracles, DIVine ordinances, and valuable blessings,
are safely reposited and secured in her. Nor are they bestowed on, or made
known to the rest of the world.

27. She is compared to a MOUNTAIN or HILL Is. xxx. 6. Song iv. 6. and viii. 14.
. How immoveably rooted in Christ! How impossible to destroy her! How
distinguished her excellency! How amazing her height, and extensive her
prospect, into divine, deep, and distant things! With what contempt do her
saints overlook every thing without her, as low and trifling! In her spring the
instituted wells of salvation, and runs the river of life. In her grow God's
chosen plants, trees of righteousness and life, and fruitful vines. In her he
is worshipped in spirit and in truth. In her, his ransomed flocks richly feed,
on the pastures of gospel ordinances! How safely preserved and sheltered by the
Rock of ages! She is a mountain of myrrh, and hill of frankincense: mountains
of spices. How fragrant, precious, purifying, and perfuming the virtue of her
ordinances, blessings, graces, and good works! How Jesus delights in her! and
bestows on her true members sweet communion with himself

28. She is compared to CARMEL; LEBANON; and SHARON Is. xxxv. 2. and lxv. 10.
. Jesus, the tree of life; and his Spirit, the water of life; are in her: the
Rock of salvation, the Rose of Sharon, and Lily of the valley, are enjoyed in
her! What fragrant and lasting verdure; what pleasant pasture, amiable
prospect, and delightful rest, he, in her, creates for the souls of men! -- In
her, what plants of God; what flowers of grace, smell sweetly, blossom, and
bring forth fruit!

29. She is a little LITTLE STONE cut out of the mountain without hands, which
breaks to pieces the kingdoms os the world, and becomes a great mountain,
filling the whole earth Dan. ii. 34. 35.
. Christ her Head, in his manhood, was formed by the transcendent power of the
Holy Ghost. Wonderfully, not by human force, is she raised up in the world. By
the sovereign power, and free grace of God, are her true members dug from
their natural state, and brought from among the residue of mankind. Implored by
her fervent prayers, shall the righteous Lord bring terrible destruction upon
her opposers. When wealthiest empires are overturned, she, however small and
despised, shall continue, and gain ground by their ruin. In the last days, when
the Chaldean, Persian, Grecian, Roman, and Tartarian empires, are no more; she
shall extend to all the kingdoms of the earth; and in her lofty ordinances
shall all flesh see the salvation of God.

30. She is compared to a GARDEN; ORCHARD; VINEYARD Is. v. 1. -- 5. Song iv.
13. 14. and viii. 11. 13. Is. xxvii. 2. 3. Matthew. xx. 1. -- 16. and xxi. 33. --
44.
. At infinite expense of love, of power, and blood, Jesus purchased her from
the justice of God. The heart of her chosen members he plows up; removes their
stony hardness; and every other bar in his way. Regularly he plants her with
his saints, his ordinances and grace. By the hedge of government and
discipline, he defends and separates her from the rest of the world. By the
shining of his countenance, and the application of his love, he warms and
nourishes her. With the river, the rain, the dew of his word and Spirit, he
waters her every moment. With his truths and blessings, he fattens her. By his
angels, his ministers, his providence, he watches over, and keeps her night
and day, lest any hurt her. How dear is she to him! and how he delights to walk
in her! What officers and members he hires to labor in her! No feed, but that
of his word, he allows to be cast into her. To none, but the choice seed of his
saints, he allows access to her fealing ordinances. By a faithful
administration of his institutions, and by manifold persecutions and
afflictions, he weeds and prunes off her corruptions. Every plant, or member is
required to bring forth much fruit. And to what distress, spiritual drought,
and everlasting danger, does their want of it expose them! How often, for
cumbering his ground, for living unprofitably and wickedly in his church, does
he cut down professors, and cast them into endless sire! How often, for their
spiritual barrenness, and noxious corruptions, he unhingeth particular
churches! takes away their hedge of protection and government! gives them up to
Heathenish, and other abominations! and suffers the wild beasts of wicked men
to waste and deform them at pleasure! Nowhere are such noxious weeds, such
corruptions produced, as in an uncultivated church. How quickly the nettles and
briers of heresies, hateful practices, and wicked men cover her face, and
render her a lodging of Satan, and his serpentine seed! The church is indeed
smaller, but more useful than all the rest of the world. For, like a vineyard
of red wine, amidst bloody persecutions, she produces persons and works, which
cheer the heart of God and man: Like an orchard of pomegranates, spikenard, and
all the chief spices, she produces saints unnumbered, precious, savoury, and
useful, and in seize and conditions, very DIVersified. These bring forth
the rich, fragrant, and medicinal spices, and fruits of holy graces and good
works. The keepers and husbandmen, to whom Christ lets out his vineyard, are
her officers, who are to cultivate her, and return him proper revenues of
honor for the talents, opportunities, and charge affigned them. How miserably
did God destroy the Jewish keepers, who abused his prophets and servants, and
murdered his Son; and gave the vineyard to the Gentiles! Christ's having her at
Baal-Hamon, imports, that now the access to her is large; and multitudes enter.
His having a thousand, and the keepers two hundred, implies that he is to have
the chief glory; and his ministers their respective subsistence and honor. His
hiring laborers to work in her at the third, the sixth, the ninth, and
eleventh hour, implies, that in different ages of the world, as the
patriarchal, ceremonial, apostolic, and millennial; and in very different
seasons of life, his chosen are converted, and made to labor in his work; and
at the end, all of them shall receive the penny, the enriching, the gracious
reward of eternal life. From her various worshipping assemblies, she is
sometimes represented as gardens, or vineyards.

31. She is compared to a SOWN FIELD Matthew. xiii. 1. -- 8. 24 -- 30.
. Jesus, her proprietor, sows her with the good seed of his word. Some of it
falls on hearers, stupid, careless, and exposing themselves to every
temptation, as a way side; and, by Satan and his agents, is quickly devoured,
and snatched from their memory and affection. Some of it falls upon hearers
hard in heart as stony ground: who, though at first they receive it with joy
and affection, and seem to commence a flourishing profession and practice, yet
being scorched by persecution or trouble, they quickly wither. Some of it falls
upon carnal worldlings, whose thorns, whose earthly cares and lusts, choke and
render it unfruitful. Some of it falls upon renewed hearts, who, in very
different degrees, bring forth fruit unto God. In her grows up the good wheat,
the saints sown by Jesus Christ; and the tares, hypocrites, and seducers, sown
by Satan in the night of ignorance, indifferency, trouble, or time. Nor men,
nor angels, can, or are now DIVinely warranted, fully to separate the tares
from the wheat. But, at the last-judgment, a full, a final separation shall be
effected; the saints being gathered into God's heavenly storehouse, and the
wicked cast into unquenchable fire.

32. She is compared to a THRESHING FLOOR Matthew. iii. 12
. Here the corn of precious saints, and the chaff of hypocritical dissemblers
are mingled together in her; nay, the corn of grace and chaff of corruption
cleave close to one another; and by threshing influences, troubles, and
persecutions, her ordinary attendants, must the chaff be gradually separated
from the wheat. In her, how quickly one generation passes away, and another
comes in their stead! Blessed Boaz, it is thine to lodge on this thy floor,
which thou have chosen, purchased, and prepared. It is thine to purge it with
the fan of thy word, of thine influences, and of stormy providence. What
chaffy multitudes of rebellious Jews, and apostate Christians, have thy fanning
judgments hurried into fearful destruction! What millions shall thy trying
procedure at the last day blow into endless ruin! -- Be thou, my soul, solid
grain, that no trouble, nor death, nor the eternal judgment, may blow me away
from Christ and his saints.

33. The gospel church resembles the INHERITANCE OF ISRAEL, in Ezekiel's vision
Ezekiel xlvii. and xlviii and xlv. and xlvi.
. All her borders are exactly circumscribed in the purpose, the covenant, and
word of God. In her the true Israelites, his chosen people, reside. How noted
the regularity and harmony of their respective stations and conditions! How
often do Danites, distinguished and early sinners, become the first, and the
most highly privileged saints! What equal access for Jews and Gentiles to her
fellowship! What shares of common gifts and grace, sojourning hypocrites often
obtain! How regularly is their proper work, provision, and honor, assigned to
her officers, her priests, and Levites! With what equity do, or shall those
rulers execute her government and laws! How active and successful shall they
be, as fishers of men in the dead sea of this world! How glorious are her
watering and fructifying truths, institutions, and influences, which, issuing
from the temple, and through the death of Jesus our Lord, do, in different
periods, gradually increase, and on every hand produce multitudes of trees, of
lively, flourishing, and fruitful saints! How deplorable their end, who reap no
benefit thereby! They shall be cursed into sourness, into barrenness, and
endless ruin! In her how high the honor; how abundant the portion of her
prince and Mediator; at whose expense, her feasts, her ordinances, are
observed! In midst of her dwells JEHOVAH, and shares the centrical portion, the
supreme honor and glory of all.

34. She, especially in the latter days, resembles the NEW JERUSALEM in John
and Ezekiel's visions Rev. xxi. and xxii. 1. 2. Ezekiel. xl. 2. and xlviii. 30. 10
35.
. Her descending from God out of heaven, marks her heavenly, her DIVine
erection, nature, and tendency. Her situation on the south side of an hill, may
denote her freedom from the chilling blasts of persecution and trouble; and her
eminent enjoyment of the influences of her all-warming Sun of righteousness.
Her appearance as a jusper-stone, imports her purity and comeliness. Her high
wall round about, is her DIVinely-prescribed laws and government; and her
DIVinely-bestowed salvation and protection from woe. Her twelve gates of pearl,
three toward each airth, mark out Jesus as equally accessible to finners from
every end of the earth. Her twelve foundations of different precious stones,
represent him, and his glorious truths, declared by his apostles, as suited to
support sinners in every case. Her sour-square form, signifies her stability,
comeliness, and order. Her being eighteen thousand measures round about, and
having twelve thousand furlongs on every side, import her numerous members, and
vast extent. Her having no temple in her, denotes the abolishment of the Jewish
ceremonies. Her having no need of the sun, the moon, or the light of a candle,
signifies her having no need of temporal power, worldly pomp, and dim
ceremonies. Her river of life in the midst, is the gospel and Spirit of Christ.
Her tree of life is Christ himself. Her streets and broad ways are his
ordinances. Her light is the Lord God and the Lamb. Into her shall multitudes
come, and obtain divine light, knowledge, joy, and happiness; and from her
special fellowship, shall wicked and scandalous persons be carefully secluded:
and this shall be her name, her renown, the LORD IS THERE; there DIVine persons
delightfully reside; there DIVine perfections are signally displayed, and
DIVine gifts and graces bountifully conferred.

35. She, especially in the latter days, corresponds with the TEMPLE in
Ezekiel's vision Ezekiel. xl. to xliv.
. How surrounded with the strong wall of DIVine perfections, of love, and
power! of salvation and government! How exactly every thing in her is measured
according to the line and reed of God's purpose and word! Its stairs of ascent
at the thresholds, signify our gradual increase in gifts and grace; and our
gradual entrance into the visible and invisible church, and to fellowship with
God; and the various means of obtaining it. The courts may represent the church
as visible; the sanctuary, in her invisible state, or the outward court, may
signify her visible, and the inner court her invisible state. The sanctuary her
eminent fellowship with God in Christ. And the separate building at the west
end, the eternal state of glory, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard; nor
has it entered into the heart of men to conceive of. The side-chambers of the
temple and court, may signify particular churches, worshipping assemblies, and
instituted ordinances, where Jesus resides, and reveals his mysteries; protects
and allows intimate fellowship to his people. The enlarging of the upper
stories of some of these chambers, by their jutting into the principal wall,
implies, that the more holy, heavenly, and dependent upon God, churches and
persons are, in attending ordinances, the more extensive is their
gospel-liberty. The priests chambers in the outward court toward the north,
may mark their distinct functions in the church; or the Protestant churches in
Europe and North America. Their narrowing as they ascended, implies their being
the more exposed to persecution, according to their eminency; or that, in the
Protestant churches, there shall be great decays, as to number and quality; and
that in the second, and especially the third age after the Reformation, few
eminent members or ministers shall be therein found. The void places between
and before the chambers, may represent the abundant access there is to
Christian churches and ordinances; the light, liberty, and wholesome air of
influence there enjoyed; and that our whole life is to be an improving of
ordinances past, and a preparation for these in view. The equal size of the
chambers, exhibits the equal privileges, power, and authority of churches and
ministers; and the substantial identity of ordinances. The posts and pillars in
this temple, may represent fundamental truths, evangelical promises, faithful
ministers, and zealous saints; which establish and strengthen the church.
Cherubims and palm trees alternately mixed, may represent ministers and saints
attended by angels; and all prying into the mysteries of redemption, stying in
the active service of God, or patiently bearing loads of labor and trouble,
and obtaining victory over spiritual enemies. The foundations and pavement may
represent Christ, and his inspired oracles, as the foundation of the church,
and of every true member, grace, and good work, therein. The large gates,
doors, and porches, signify Christ as the means of our abundant access to God.
But the porch of the sanctuary may exhibit him as a supporter, hiding place,
and house of prayer, for his people: and the appropriation of the east gate to
the prince alone, may signify, that he alone approaches straight forward to
God, by his own merit; and is the Head of the church, who may go in and out
from his people and ordinances, as he pleases. The windows may represent
ministers and ordinances, by means of which we share the light and air of life.
The identity of things, and measures on various sides, exhibits the identity of
Christ, and his word and ordinances; and the similarity of his people in every
part of the world. The altar of burnt-offering, represents Jesus in his
all-purchasing blood and righteousness. That of incense represents him in his
all-procuring intercession. The chamber for washing the sacrifices, may denote
the ordinance of baptism, in which the saints, these spiritual oblations, are
washed by the blood and Spirit of the Lamb. The eight tables of hewn stone,
with the knives on them, may signify the DIVinely appointed, the standing, and
often-dispensed sacrament of the Lord's supper, in which Christ crucified, and
our sins, the cause of his death, are affectingly presented to our spiritual
view. And may not the flesh-hooks denote the promises and ordinances of the
gospel, as exhibiting and bringing near to us, our crucified Redeemer? May not
the singers and Levites signify true Christians, who rejoice in, bless the
Lord, and labor in his service? May not the priests signify ministers, who
present Christ to us; and saints, who by faith present him to God, and
surrender themselves to his service? May not the five hundred reeds of measure
on every side of the court, signify the extent of the church in the
latter-days; and the considerable distinction to be kept up between her and the
world? Does not the whole limit thereof round about, being most holy, import,
that all her ordinances are holy and spiritual, not ceremonial and carnal; and
that holiness ought to be the shining quality of every member in her?

36. She is compared to an HOUSE or PALACE Prove. ix. 1. -- 5. Is. live. 11. 12.
Rev. iv. 6. and xv. 2.
. Curiously Jesus contrived her whole form. Upon his own person, word, and
righteousness, he lays her foundation. With his chosen, his lively, and
precious stones, hewn out of the dark quarry of nature, by his Spirit;
quickened, formed, and polished by his grace; and, cemented together by
himself, his love, his blood, and ordinances, he rears her up. With sacred
statutes, with provision of gospel truth, with unsearchable blessings, he
richly furnishes her. What a place is she of secrecy, safety, rest, devotion,
and spiritual feasting! To prevent her decay and ruin, how frequently is she
repaired with new generations of saints, and supplies of grace! Her being
founded on the tops of the mountains, and exalted above the hills, implies,
that, remaining for ever founded on Jesus Christ, the Rock of salvation, she
shall be most firmly and conspicuously settled in the world, that multitudes
may flow unto her. Her foundation of sapphires, is Christ, infinitely pure,
precious, glorious, and durable; and his truths. Her pavement of fair colored
stones, is him as the all glorious foundation of our holy walk; or, it is
saints of the lowest order beautified in him. Her windows of agates, may
signify painful and successful ministers, who convey light and knowledge to
her, from her glorious Sun of righteousness, and her oracles of inspiration.
Her doors and gates of carbuncles, are Jesus in his awful authority, fiery
sufferings, and glorious exaltation, as the means of our access to God; or they
are a love-working and zeal-inflaming faith, by which we join ourselves to him
and his church: and may they not also represent the zealous endeavors of
ministers to try persons, and admit to sealing ordinances only such as are
visibly saints, and faithful? Her borders of pleasant stones, are her precious,
her comely, well fixed, and durable saints, ordinances, discipline, and
government. Her cedar beams and pillars, are the fragrant, firm, and lasting
ministers, saints, promises, and ordinances, by which she is adorned and
supported. Her rafters and galleries of fir, are her shadowy, refreshful, and
comely ordinances of DIVine grace, in which we apprehend, retain, and walk with
Christ. Her chambers represent her ordinances as the means of secret, sweet,
and satisfying communion with Christ; and of his blessing us with his peculiar
protection and presence. Her wine-cellar, hanqueting house, and bed, are the
scriptures, the covenant of grace, and especial fellowship with Christ; by
which we are sweetly refreshed, strengthened, satisfied, delighted, instructed,
and rendered fruitful in good works. Her table is the ordinances of God, on
which his fullness is exhibited to us. Her throne of grace, is Jesus, as the
fulfiller of all righteousness, in whom God is for ever well pleased and rests.
The sea of glass before the throne, mingled with fire, on which the saints for
ever stand, and are bold before God, is Jesus' all cleansing, all-supporting
blood, as flowing from his flaming love, and applied by his Spirit of burning;
or it is the gospel applied by the Spirit to our conscience, for encouraging us
to bold appearances, and servent supplications before God.

37. She is compared to an INN Luke x. 34.
. For accomodating and refreshing the people of God in their heavenly journey,
she is erected. In her, ministers are appointed to wait on the traveling
saints, and afford them medicine, milk, or strong meat, as their case requires.
Are not the two inspired Testaments; are not ministerial gifts and graces, the
two pence bestowed by our kind Samaritan upon these hosts on earth, for the
assistance of his people? And is not everlasting glory their additional reward?
-- Beware, my soul, of resting in ordinances or seize; but hasten forward
to thy long home, the better country above.

38. She resembles a CHAMBER and BANQUETINGHOUSE Song i. 4. and ii. 4.
. How richly furnished with every thing comely and useful! with all the
nourishing fullness of God! In her, how sweetly Jesus manifests himself to his
people! feasts them with his goodness! allows them his intimate fellowship!
reveals to them his secrets! and protects them from their enemies!

39. She resembles a GREEN and WELL-GUARDED BED Song i. 16. and iii. 7. 8.
. What sweet communion have the saints here with Christ, and with one another!
How sweetly here be dwells, and rests in his love! With what amazing pleasure
he here declares it to us, and makes us to enjoy its endearing fruits! Is it
not here, that saints and graces are begotten; are born; are nourished; and
appear with constant verdure, glory, and freshness! What armed guard of
infinite perfections, of holy angels, and faithful ministers, surround her on
every side; all determined, during her night of trouble and time, to protect
her in safety, and to execute vengeance on her enemies.

40. She is compared to a WALL Song viii 9. 10.
. Being established in the faith of his word, cemented by his person and blood,
and by their mutual love and spiritual fellowship, her true members are built
on Christ the foundation. In them, and in her whole form, she is erected
straight heavenward. How strong in him! and what an useful means of protecting
men from the storms of temptation and wrath! What a separator between professed
saints and profane sinners! Her towers are the oracles, ordinances, and
ministers of God; by which she opposes her spiritual enemies, when they come
in like a flood. The silver palace built upon her, implies her being the
honored habitation of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and that, by her means, we
ascend to the celestial state.

41. She is compared to a DOOR Song viii. 9.
. In her, Jesus the door, the way, the truth, and the life, is exhibited; and
the door of faith, the door of gospel offers, and of men's hearts, is opened.
She is the door of passage to the inner-chambers of endless felicity. Nor ought
any, but visible saints, to be admitted into the chambers of her sealing
institutions. And is she not DIVinely enclosed with the cedar-boards of
ordinances, providence, and graces!

42. She is compared to a GOLDEN CANDLESTICK Rev. i. 20.
. How great her beauty and value! From Christ the light of life her gifts and
graces are lighted; and by her doctrine, discipline, and holy conversation, she
communicates the light of instruction to others. Her situation in the world is
often varied; and in the morning of endless glory, her present form shall be
laid aside. Her oil is the gospel and grace of God. The pipes of conveyance,
are faithful minstrations of truth. The "two olive trees, that empty the oil
out of themselves," may signify ministers, who communicate gospel truth to
others; or Christ's natures and offices, by which the Holy Ghost is
communicated to men.

43. The church is like unto a FIRE Obid 18.
. In her dwells the Spirit of judgment and burning. In her, the word of God is
like unto fire, inflaming and melting the hearts of men. In her, what
multitudes are refined from their drossy corruptions! How terrible and
destructive is she to her enemies!

CHAP. XII. Metaphors respecting Antichrist, and other false churches.
1. CORRUPT Churches are called FLOCKS of Christ's companions Song i. 7.
. In mighty numbers they are gathered, nourished, directed, and governed by his
opposers and the doctrines, and laws to which they attend, and their customs
and conduct, are the reverse of those that are appointed by him.

2. They are called SYNAGOGUES OF SATAN Rev. iii. 15. 16. Hos. viii. 8.
. In them he dwells; and by them he is worshipped. In them his doctrines are
believed; his laws observed; and his ordinances attended; and his followers
assemble for fellowship in error, delusion, and wicked practices.

3. They resemble LUKEWARM WATER, and a CAKE NOT TURNED (e). Pretending some
regard to DIVine truths and ordinances, but wanting the love of them, Rev. ii.
9.
they mix idolatry, and other corruptions, with some remains of God's true
worship; they fear him, and serve their own god's; and so render themselves
abominable to him and his people; and are in the utmost hazard of being spued
out of his mouth, into everlasting ruin.

Why they are compared to old men with gray hairs without knowing it; and to
roaring lions; rapacious birds; corrupt carcases; barren vineyards; and empty
vines. See in Jews, chap. xiii. 2. No 1.

4. The Antichristian state, or Papacy, is called a MAN OF SIN a These. ii. 3.
. How wonderfully it is connected in its parts! How marvellously all of them
sympathize with, and support one another! What pretense it makes to reason, and
to the advantage of mankind! The Pope, who overseeth, directs, and governs, is
the head; his submissive and wickedly-active clergy are the hands, and their
common subjects the feet. And how monstrously sinful and wicked is the whole
system of his doctrines, laws, worship, miracles, offices, officers, and
courses!

5. Antichrist is called the SON OF PERDITION 1 Thessalonians. ii. 3. 2 Timothy iii. 1. --
7.
. By the destructive vengeance of God on men, for not receiving his truth in
the love of it, was the rise thereof permitted. The Pope, and his thorough
paced agents, go about, seeking whom they may devour. Their doctrine, their
laws, and example, effectually tend to the everlasting ruin of multitudes.
Their beloved, their habitual labor, is to destroy the souls and bodies of
men. The period of their power is a perilous time; for they have consciences
seared as with a hot iron, ignorant, and stupefied; they speak lies in
hypocrisy; promote doctrines of devils, forbidding to marry, and to enjoy meats
which God has prepared for use; they are lovers of themselves, covetous,
proud, blasphemers disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, intemperate, fierce,
heady, high minded, despisers and haters of those that are good.

6. Antichrist is compared to a WHORE Rev. xvii. See Morning Exercises; and
discourses of Episcopalian DIVines, against Popery; CALVINUS MINOR. Bell's
Standard of the Spirit: and my Oracles of Christ, and Abominations of Popery,
-- Antichrist.
. With what amazing craft, filthiness, and flattery do the Pope and his
factors, seduce multitudes into error, idolatry, will worship, and other parts
of spiritual whoredom with them! For this end, how they deck up their offices
and cause, with the most plausible pretenses to piety and reason! How they
delude men with the most engaging outward appearances of earnal pomp and
splendour! Under pretense of chastity, how they decry marriage, and yet wallow
in all manner of uncleanness! The scarlet-colored beast, with seven heads and
ten horns, upon which she rides, is the blasphemous and bloody empire of Rome,
which had seven different forms of government; and is now DIVided into ten
principal sovereignties, over which the Pope did, or does exercise his power.
The many waters on which she sits, are the noisy multitude of people,
subject to her authority. Her purple and scarlet clothing, marks out the purple
livery of her cardinals; her amazing pride; her high pretenses to more than
royal sovereignty; and her bloody presecution of the saints. The golden cup,
full of filthiness, in her hand, is the unhallowed means which the takes to
ensnare and defile the souls of men. Her name on her forehead, Mystery, Babylon
the great, the mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth, imports her
high pretenses to lying wonders, and her astonishing impudence in the filthiest
crimes. Her being drunk with the blood of saints, implies her cruel and bloody
persecution of them, her delighting to murder and massacre them. The burning of
her flesh with fire by the ten kings once subject to her, implies their angry,
utter, and fearful destruction of the Papal constitution, power and revenue, in
the time appointed by God.

7. Antichrist is called SODOM Rev. xi. ^.
. What pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, are with her
numerous devotees! What shocking bestiality, Sodomy, fornication, adultery, and
every other fleshly and mental impurity, prevail in Popish countries! Do not
you, Antichristian clergy, for a pitiful price, allow men to practice the
vilest abominations? What numbers of licensed stews are at Rome? Are you not
lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God? How often you creep into men's
houses, to defile their spouses and daughters with your whoredom and error!
Past feeling, how you abandon yourselves to all uncleanness, to work it with
greediness! And shall not you, and your followers, like Sodom, be set up as
monuments of wrath, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire?

8. Antichrist is called EGYPT Rev. xi. 8.
. How terrible is the Popish oppression of, and murdering the saints! How
fearful their destruction of the souls of men! How shocking and cruel, the
slavery of their subjects! How absurd their superstition! How base their
idolatry in worshipping waxen wafers, images of a cross, relics of dead men,
pretended or real, old rags, or chips of wood, etc.!

9. Antichrist is called BABYLON THE GREAT Rev. xvii. 5.
. How astonishing and wide-spread the Popish power and dominion! How did their
agents captivate and enslave the nations and people of God! What magic,
idolatry, superstition, persecution, and murder, abound among them! And shall
not this state and system be overthrown by the special providence of God! and
Rome, its principal seat, be reduced to a lasting ruin! The tenth part of this
city ruined by an earthquake, is a part of the Romish state, perhaps Italy,
overturned by the fearful judgments of God.

10. Antichrist is compared to a BEAST Rev. xiii.
. What stupidity, absurdity, and ignorance, prevail in his doctrines, laws, and
members! Its rising out of the sea, imports his obtaining of power amidst times
of trouble, confusion, perplexity; and over multitudes of unsettled subjects of
the Roman empire. Its seven heads, signify seven forms of government used at
Rome, and issuing and concentering in the Papacy. Its ten horns, are the ten
kingdoms subject to Popery. Names of blasphemy in the forehead, imply open
reviling of God and his truths; and of Christ, in his office and work. Its feet
of a bear, imply excessive cruelty; firm retention of votaries; and outrageous
murder of men, in their soul, body, and name. Its appearance of a leopard,
imports craft, cruelty, and being spotted with abominations unnumbered. Its
mouth of a lion, imports the roaring forth of frightful threatenings; and the
powerful exercise of devouring influence. The healing of one of its wounded
heads, implies the restoration of power to the city of Rome in the person of
the Pope, after the Heruli and others extirpated the imperial; or the restoring
to him the power which he lost at the Protestant reformation. This first beast
represents Antichrist in his civil influence. His rising from the earth in form
of another beast, may denote the rise of his power ecclesiastic, from
obscurity, by carnal means, and to promote earthly and carnal ends. Its being
like a lamb, imports his pretense to innocence, purity, and usefulness; and his
usurpation of Christ's office as a Surety and Priest. Its two horns, denote his
connected civil and ecclesiastic power and authority; or his power of order and
doctrine, bniding and loosing, in the church. Its speaking like a dragon,
imports his terrible curses, censures, excommunications, and interdicts against
his opposers. His causing men to make and worship an image of the first beast,
may signify his obliging them to reverence the poor shadow of authority
restored to Rome by the Popish clergy. His mark in men's hands, implies their
swearing to, or practicing his abominations. His mark on their foreheads,
implies their bold and daring profession of his errors, idolatry, and
superstition. Six hundred threescore and six, the number of his name, marks out
the Latin church, whose Latin service was appointed in A. D. 666. The letters
of this number from LATEINOS and ROMIITH, that is, Latin and Romish. The
apparently regular construction of this number, may denote the seeming
regularity of the Antichristian system of doctrines, offices, officers. Or
(twenty five) the square-root of this number, may point out the articles of the
Popish creed, and their multitude of other matters regulated by twenty-five.

11. The Antichristian state is represented as a HABITATION OF DEVILS, A CAGE
OF EVERY UNCLEAN BIRD Rev. xviii. 2.
. In her Satan and his angels reign. Her principal members are a kind of devils
incarnate. Her whole system is constituted of unclean doctrines, worship,
offices, officers, customs. Shall it not at length appear so to men? Shall not
Rome, the revered seat of her dignity, become an unsightly desolation?

12. The Antichristian state is represented as a VISIBLE WORLD Rev. xvi.
. Her earth may signify her fundamental articles of the pope's supremacy,
infallibility, etc. Her sea, the honor and gain made by that religion. Her
rivers and fountains, her learned men, and their writings in her defense. Her
sun, the civil authority that animates and supports her. The seat of the beast,
her general constitution; or the dwelling of the Pope. Her mountains and
islands, her deep rooted remains of doctrine, worship, discipline, and
government, together with her monasteries and consecrated dignities. Or may the
earth signify Germany and Poland, these inland countries? the sea, Portugal,
France, and Spain, which are almost surrounded with sea? the rivers and
fountains of water, the north parts of Italy, which abounds with rivers? the
sun, the Emperor, or King of France, the seat of the beast, the middle part of
Italy, perhaps the same with Aarmageddon? the islands and mountains, Sicily,
Malta, etc.? The vials poured out thereon, and the Hail and earthquakes, are
the terrible harassing, and overturning judgments of God, sent to destroy her.

13. The POPE is compared to a GOD 2 Thessalonians. ii. 4.
. By adding to, or taking from the word and worship of God; by pretending to
pardon sin, or indulge men in it; by usurping Christ's headship over his
church, and opposing his person, office, and grace; by usurping authority over
the civil magistrate, enthroning and deposing him at pleasure; and by working
pretended miracles to confirm their abominations, he and his agents set
themselves in the room of, and exalt themselves above God.

14. The Pope is called the ANGEL of the bottomless pit, whose name in Hebrew
and Greek is a destroyer Rev. ix. 11.
. Being sent, excited, and directed by Satan, he promotes the interests of
hell; ripens multitudes for its everlasting destruction; and with amazing craft
and vigor, persecuteth the saints, who oppose his designs; and is a fearful
stumbling block to the Jews, and ruinous plague to the Gentiles.

15. He resembles the KING in Daniel's vision, who does according to his will,
magnifies himself above every God, etc. Dan. xi 36. -- 39. Rev. xix. 19. -- 21.
. Making his own pleasure his sole supreme rule of conduct, he exalts himself
above magistrates, angels, and the true God; blasphemes his Maker; -- at once
contemns the idols of the ancient Heathen, and the God of the primitive
Christians. Lawful marriage he vilipends, and prohibits to his clergy. Instead
of, and together with the true God, he honors the images of angels, the relics
and pictures of saints; offers them rich presents; and, for gain, pretends to
assign them their respective countries, cities, occupations, and cases, in
which they are to oversee, protect, and bless. He rules over great multitudes,
which being assembled by him, do, with him, fight against the Lord Jesus
Christ; but, in the end, shall be wrathfully overcome, and ruined, and the
followers of Jesus enriched with their spoil.

16. He resembles the LITTLE HORN in Daniel's vision, which had eyes, spoke
perverse things and subdued three horns Dan. vii. 8.
. His power was inconsiderable at first, but he quickly made himself master of
three sovereignties, the dukedom of Rome, the exarchate of Ravenna, and the
region of Pentapolis. With amazing craft and circumspection; with numerous
spies, prying into the councils of men; with terrible blasphemy, boasting,
perfecution, and curses, he did and does promote his unhallowed interests.

CHAP XIII. Metaphors respecting nations, armies, samilies, and their adjuncts;
which being almost innumerable, but generally more restircted in their
signification, and less edifying; no more is here intended, than such an
explanatory swatch, as may serve for a key to the rest.
SECT I. FIRST Metaphors respecting nations more generally considered.
1. ALL nations are represented as the TWO SONS of a family Matthew. xxi 28. --
32. Luke. xv. 11. 32.
. The Jews are the ELDER, the Gentiles the YOUNGER. The former, God, by his
word, required to work in the vineyard of his church. Fairly they engaged, and
readily they promised, to serve him; but quickly broke their engagement. Long
the latter lived in open rebellion; but, at last, influenced by his converting
grace, they repented and complied with his call. Long, like prodigals, they
deserted their Father's family and church, till deep sense of their spiritual
need brought them to themselves, and made them enquire what they should do to
be said. How readily then did JEHOVAH meet them in mercy! embraced them with
love! arrayed them with the best robe of his sons righteousness! feasted them
with his flesh and blood! adorned them with his ordinances and influences! But
why, ye Jews, did you repine at his honoring them above you, who had long been
his peculiar children and servants! Was it not meet, that there should be an
abundant display of heavenly bounty and gladness, when God's so-long lost
children were found? when your solong dead brethren were made alive? -- Rejoice
ye Gentiles, with his people, for to him we seek; in him we trust; and his rest
shall be glorious.

2. All nations are compared to the SMALL DROP of a bucket, DUST of the
balance, and NOTHING before God (a). How small, insignificant, unsubstantial,
(b) Is. xl. 15. 17. worthless! How easily tossed, troubled, and ruined! What
then, Lord, am I, one man, the dregs of my race, that I should possess the
GREAT UNKNOWN! the INFINITE ALL!

3. The Gentile nations, before the spread of the gospel, are called a LITTLE
SISTER without breasts Song viii. 8.
. Though many of their progeny were chosen by, and in the purpose of God united
to Christ; yet they made no appearance as a church, had no breasts of inspired
oracles, DIVine ordinances, or gospel ministers, wherewith to edify the souls
of men.

4. Perhaps the Gentile nations are compared to a BARREN, DESOLATE, and refused
WOMAN Is. live. 1. 4. 6. and lv. 1.
. And they are called a NATION which Christ knew not. Before his death, they,
for many ages, produced almost no children to him. They were deserted and
rejected by him. He took no peculiar notice of them; brought them into no
church-relation to him. But, blessed be the Lord, more have now been the
spiritual children of this barren woman, than ever were of the Jewish church.
-- But perhaps this barren woman, signifies the church during Christ's personal
presence with her on earth. And the children of the desolate being more than
they of the married wife, Implies, that after Christ's withdrawment to heaven,
the converts to him should be most numerous.

5. The Gentiles, before the spread of the gospel among them, are called
FOREIGNERS Ephesians. ii. 20.
. They were without visible interest in, or connection with God in Christ; and
destitute of the offers of his grace, the doctrines of his word, or the laws of
his kingdom. They had no spiritual fellowship with his holy nation; no claim to
his covenants of promise; no hope of a Messiah, or salvation by him, or of a
resurrection to eternal life; but were destitute of the knowledge, the image,
the fear, the worship, and saving fellowship of God. Thrice happy! that those,
who were once afar off, are brought nigh by the blood of Christ! But ah! what
multitudes of persons and nations still remain in that wretched condition!

6. Nations without the church, before, or after the death of Christ, are
compared to a DESERT WILDERNESS Is. xxxv. 1. 6. 7.
. How barren and unprofitable to God, and to one another! Not plowed with his
influence; nor fown with his word, ordinances, or grace; nor hedged about with
his special government and protection: no way of holiness that leads to life;
no flocks of converted men, nor their footsteps; no sweet fruits of holy men,
or truly righteous works; no wells of salvation; nor green pastures of
evangelic institutions; no bread of life, were, or are there to be found. --
But alas! what evil beasts! what wicked angels and men! what perplexity and
unsettledness of mind, how to satisfy an immortal soul! what surrounding
hazards of eternal consequence! what blasts of conquering temptation, and
wrathful calamity! what mists of ignorance, idolatry, profaneness, delusion,
and will worship abound!

7. Particular nations are compared to the UNIVERSE Is. xxiv. Mark xiii. 24.
25. Psalm. lxxxii. 6. Romans xiii. 4.
. The more glorious part of their members and laws are the heavens, and
luminaries thereof; and the rest the air, the earth, and the rivers. The
magistrates are represented as God, as children, as ministers of God; because
in his name, they rule over, and are revered and obeyed by their subjects. The
sword, which they bear not in vain, is their power and authority to protect the
innocent, and punish the offenders.

8. Particular nations are represented as FAMILIES Psalm. cxxxvii. 8. 9.
. The country as the mother; the magistrates as fathers, who cherish, govern,
protect, and provide for the people; who are the children, the sons, or
daughters. -- Sometimes the principal city is represented as the mother; and
the lesser cities, suburbs, or villages, are termed the daughters. -- Sometimes
for likeness of manners, natural relation, etc. one nation is designed the
sister of another.

9. They are compared to HARLOTS Is. xxiii. 15. 16. Nah. iii. 4. Ezekiel. xvi. and
xxiii. Jer. iii.
. What deceitful and base methods they often take to promote their trade, their
power and authority! How often they boast of, and seduce those around to,
idolatrous and whorish departing from God! How justly God execueth upon them
the judgment of whorish women, stirring up their friends to hate and harass
them; and by openly destroying them in the fire of his wrath!

10. They are compared to TRAVAILING WOMEN Is. xxiii. 4. Jer. vi. 24. Hos.
xiii. 12.
. How often! how suddenly! how terribly pained, and tormented, with DIVine
judgments! How often pained, in attempting to perform their purposes! How often
they travail, without bringing forth any deliverance! How often they bring
forth wickedness! Ye nations, how gracious are you when pangs of adversity come
upon you! Then perhaps you return, and enquire right early after God; but how
often then are you rejected by him!

11. They are compared to animal bodies Is. vli. 14. 15. and i. 5. 6. and vii.
20. and xvii. 4. and xxix. xi. Lam. iv. 20.
. Magistrates and honorable persons are the head, which adorns, directs, and
manageth them. False teachers, and the low mob, are the tail and seet; most
useless and contemptible. No soundness from the sole of the foot to the crown
of the head, implies the sinful corruption, or the distress of all ranks, high
and low. The head sick, and the heart faint, implies, that the rulers, and most
active and animating persons, are corrupted, perplexed, and discouraged. To
shave off the hair of the beard, the head and feet, is shamefully to cut off,
and carry captive, both great and small Fatness, implies abundance of men,
wealth, or prosperity. Leanness, imports fewness of persons, and poverty of
condition. Paleness, implies shame and confusion. To wax old, is to lose
courage, vigor, strength, or authority. -- Magistrates are the breath of their
nostrils, by which their life, vigor, and influence are maintained.

12. They are represented as systems of BEASTS of the field, air, or sea Dan.
iv. 12. Ezck. xxix. and xxxi.
. And magistrates are represented as the principal animals of those kinds, as
lions, bears, eagles, dragons, leviathan. Sometimes for their refreshful,
protecting, and supporting influence, magistrates are represented as trees, on
which their subjects do nestle; or under which they shelter themselves.
Sometimes horns denote their kings, who defend their own subjects, and harass
others.

13. They are compared to HERDS and FLOCKS Jer. xxiii. Ezekiel. xxxiv.
. The country is their fold and pasture. Magistrates are their shepherds, who
watch over, protect, govern, and provide for their subjects. Great men are
their rams, he-goats, bulls, kine; and if in prosperity rendering them
conspicuous and strong, they are represented as fat or fed.

14. They are likened to HEIFERS Is. xv. 5. Jer. xlvi. 20. and xlviii. 34.
. Fair and fat heifers represent them in their glory and prosperity. Heifers
taught, represent them as accustomed to subjection. Backsliding heifers,
represent them as perversely apostatizing from God. To cry, or lift up the
voice, liks an heifer of three years old, is to cry and wail very bitterly and
outrageously.

15. They are compared to the FIRMAMENT, for their conspicuous appearance and
glory Rev. vi. 12. 13. 14. and viii. 10. 12.
: for their distinguished brightness and influence; rulers and great men are
represented as the sun, moon, and stars.

16. They are compared to a COUNTRY Psalm. lxxii. 3.
. And their magistrates and great men are likened to mountains and hills; which
overtop, overshadow, and protect the rest. The constitution of government is
the foundations. And DIVine judgments are represented as storms, droughts,
earthquakes.

17. They are compared to a SEA, or WATERS rushing Is. xvii. 12. Jer. xlix. 23.
Rev. vii. 1. Is. lx. 5. Lam. ii. 23.
; because of their numbers; their noise; their unsettled state; their haughty
threatening, and actual overwhelming of the nations around; and sometimes
because dwelling on the seacoast. -- A breach like the sea, de notes a very
wide one.

18. They are likened to a FOREST Hos. ii. 12. Ezekiel. xx. 46.
; because of the multitude of persons, cities, and villages. And magistrates
and great men are represented as tall trees, top-branches; and those of low
condition, as low trees.

19. They are represented as VINEYARDS Is. xvii. 6. -- 11. and xxiv. 13. Jer.
vi. 9.
. Hedged about with government, kept, and cultivated by rulers, how great the
order, and advantage of their connected state! Cities are the boughs and
branches. Multitudes of people are the fruit. Two or three berries left,
signify a small remnant saved in the vintage of desolating judgments. -- A
forsaken bough, is a desolate city. To glean, and turn the hand into the
basket, is gradually to destroy, or lead captive the remnant left at the first.
To plant the vineyard with strange slips, is to bring in foreign people,
doctrines, or customs into a nation. -- Lord, how easily can thou plant or
pluck up, destroy branch and rush, in one day!

20. They are likened to HEATH Jer. xvii. 6. and xlviii 6.
, to represent their barrenness; witheredness, and contemptibleness; and their
not profiting by the means of prosperity or grace.

21. They are likened to a CROP of corn Is. xvii. 5.
; for their multitude of persons; their comeliness; glory; and promising
usefulness. Gleaning of ears, implies the care of a conquering enemy to kill,
or carry captive, the whole nation.

22. They are likened to STUBBLE Psalm. lxxxiii. 13. Is. xlvii. 14. Jer. xiii.
24. Nah. i. 10.
, to denote, that they are brought to the utmost contempt; are trodden down by
their enemies; or have only an insignificant remnant left. They are represented
as dry stubble, to imply their ripeness for the judgments of God, and nothing
else. They are represented as stubble before the wind, to mark how easily and
quickly they shall be driven out of their place.

23. They are compared to CHAFF, or chaff of the mountains Is. xvii. 13.
, to represent how insignificant they are; how readily exposed to storms, and
changes of lot; and that the higher they rise in pomp and greatness, the more
obnoxious they are to ruin. How easily, O Most High, can thou, by thy wind of
destruction, chase and toss the mightiest nations, from place to place! How
readily can thou rebuke them! and with the breath of thy providence, make
them flee far off, and hurl them out of the world!

24. They are compared to HORNS Zech. i. 18. Rev. xiii. and xvii.
, because of their conspicuousness, their power and authority to defend
themselves, or harass and ruin others. The four horns that scattered Judah, are
the Samaritans, Ammonites, Arabians, and other nations who harassed them, after
the captivity. Ten horns upon one beast, signify ten kingdoms or sovereignties
formed out of the Roman empire.

25. They are likened to a POTTER'S VESSEL Jer. xviii. 1. -- 10.
. It is thine, O JEHOVAH, to form them as thou please; thine to appoint them
to honor or dishonor. How base are they in themselves! but how curious thy
formation of them! How impossible to refit them, if once they be marred in the
hand of thy providence.

SECT. II. Metaphors respecting the Jews, Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans,
Persians, Greeks, Romans, Tyrians, Turks, with their adjuncts.
FIRST, Metaphors respecting the Jews.
1. THE Jews are likened to an ELDER SON Luke xv. 11. 26. -- 32. Matthew xxi. 28.
. They were God's firstborn; first of the nations, he distinguished them in
his favor: readily they professed the highest regard to the DIVine law, and
came under the most solemn engagements to obedience; yet after continuing many
ages in peculiar relation to God, they wilfully despised his counsel, and
rejected the Messiah; sinfully they fretted, and many of them blasphemed,
because, under the gospel, the Gentiles were more highly favored of God than
themselves.

2. They resemble the RICH MAN in the parable Luke xvi. 19. -- 31.
. Glorying in their wealth, their numerous rites and traditions; their relation
to God, and their pious ancestors; they contemptuously rejected the debased
Savior; while unclean publicans, harlots, and Heathens, received him.
Notwithstanding all their pomp, the flaming vengeance of God came upon them.
Terrible and hopeless were the torments and miseries into which they were
plunged; nor could the covenant made with Abraham their ancestor yield them any
relief; nor could their desperate wishes obtain further evidence of Jesus
Messiahship, for themselves, and their various sects; or for their brethren of
the ten tribes.

3. They are likened to an INFANT lying in blood; vile, unpitied, unassisted of
men, but quickened, furnished, adorned, and espoused of God Ezekiel. xvi. 1. -- 15.
. Not for their righteousness' sake, but for his name's sake, he raised them up
from an idolatrous, polluted, and despicable origin. Marvellously he preserved
and multiplied them into a nation in Egypt. Though they were contemned and
hated of all around, he honored them with his peculiar favors and laws;
entered into solemn covenant with them; supported their arms of power and
influence, and taught them to walk in his law; gave them a pleasant land
flowing with milk and honey; formed them into the then only church; and into
one of the most honorable kingdoms that ever existed.

4. They are likened to a DELICATE WOMAN Jer. vi. 2.
. How proud of their distinguished privileges! How unprepared for, and unable
to endure adversity, when they were exposed to it by the Chaldeans!

5. They are represented as a MOTHER AND FAMILY IN BONDAGE Gal. iv. 25.
; to mark out their subjection to the ceremonial law; their lying under the
power of sin, Satan, and the broken law; and their exposure to sad distress and
slavery for their rejecting of Christ.

6. They are likened to an HARLOT Ezck. xvi. and xxiii. Jer. iii.
. Contrary to equity, to decency, and to solemn covenant with God, they forsook
his law, worshipped idols, and polluted themselves with every abominable
course. Treacherously they distrusted and rejected the Lord, imitated the
idolatry, and relied on the assistance of the Egyptians, Assyrians, and
Chaldeans. For a while, these of Judah and Benjamin condemned the enormities of
Sodom and of the ten tribes; but, though warned by their destruction, they at
last surpassed them in wickedness, and so justified their conduct. They had a
whore's forehead, rushing impudently on sin; and of their own motion, and at
their own expense, seeking after sinful connection with the Heathen, and
communion with them in their false worship. Long God hired them with a goodly
land, and favors innumerable, to be for him and not for another; but, provoked
with their treacherous crimes, he punished them by the hand of those nations
which they had so fondly relied on, and imitated: he cast them out of their
church relation to him, and refused to show them mercy. But rejoice, you feed
of Jacob, you shall be as though you had not been cast off. In the wilderness
of adversity God shall speak unto your heart; and make you return to your
former husband, with whom it was better with you than now. "Though the vision
tarry, wait for it; for at the end it will speak, and will not tarry."

7. They are represented as a WOMAN cast into the midst of an ephah, with a
talent of lead above her, and carried by winged women to the land of Shinar
Zech. v. 5. -- 11.
; to denote, that after filling up the measure of their iniquity, God should
cause them to feel the fearful weight thereof, and by his blast of wrath, and
instruments thereof, should carry them out of Canaan, and for many ages fix
them in a state of dispersion, unsettledness, and fearful misery.

8. They are likened to a person with GRAY HAIRS, without knowing it Hos. vii.
9.
. What tokens of weakness and guilt! what signs of approaching ruin were among
the ten tribes before their captivity! What multitudes of prevailing
abominations! What furious contentions! What murdering of kings and nobles!
What multitudes of lesser judgments unsuccessful, none of which were laid to
heart!

9. They are likened to a person HALF STRIPPED of her clothing Jer. xiii. 22.
to 26.
. When the Chaldeans invaded their country, and led them captive, how was their
land stripped of her inhabitants! and they stripped of their wealth, their
honor, their safety! How exposed to shame and disgrace! And what abominable
filthiness was revealed by their punishment!

10. They are compared to the men of SODOM and GOMORRAH Is. i. 10.
. How abandoned to unnatural lust! How shameless in sinning! How ready their
people to commit, and their rulers to protect the vilest crimes! In the
Assyrian harassment, and Chaldean captivity, how justly exposed, as public
monuments of DIVine wrath!

11. They are likened to a SPECKLED BIRD, against which all the fowls around
assembled Jer. xii. 9.
. How distinguished from others, by their ordinances, laws, and customs! And
how hated, and sought for to destruction, by the nations around! And, alas! how
spotted with their own corruptions! But the word rather signifies a TALONED
RAPACIOUS FOWL, and represents them as ready to persecute God's saints; ready
to abuse his mercies, by flying in his face, breaking his laws, and tearing his
honors; on which account, he gathered the nations against them, to destroy
them.

12. They are represented as LIONS, as ROARING LIONS Mic. v. 8. Jer. xii. 8.
Ezekiel. xix.
. In their ancient glory, and in the time of the Maccabees they did; and, in
their return from their present dispersion, they shall boldly encounter and
surmount every difficulty, subdue every opposer, strike terror and dismay into
all around. But in the days of Jeremiah, how outrageously they roared against
God, his prophets, his ordinances, his word, and providence! Their state is
likened to a LIONESS. After Josiah's death, she furnished the throne with
Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jeheiachin, and Zedekiah; who, for their outrageous
oppression of their people, their roaring against God and his servants, and the
like, are called lions; and by the kings of Egypt, and Babylon, were
successively taken, removed from their station, and disqualified for injuring
their subjects.

13. They are likened to WILD ASSES and DROMEDARIES Jer. ii. 23. 24.
. Refusing subjection to the yoke of God's law, they vainly wandered after
their own fancies, snuffed up the hurtful and unsubstantial idolatries and
delusions of the Heathen; lustfully traversed all their ways, unsettledly
following now, one idol and wicked course; anon, another.

14. They are likened to a THRESHING OX, with horns of iron, and hoofs of brass
Mic. iv. 13.
. In the time of the Maccabees they did; in the beginning of the millennium,
they shall, by the assistance of Heaven, push off, resist, and tread down their
opposers.

15. They are likened to WILD BULLS in a net Is. li. 20.
. How filled with perplexity and rage, when God brought them into the
entangling bands of the Assyrians and Chaldeans! With what brutish stupidity,
they poured forth their roaring complaints! How effectually every attempt to
rescue themselves, entangled them more and more! -- Ah! how like my soul under
trouble!

16. They are likened to an HEIFER Hos. x. 10. 11.
. God taught them, by giving them his laws. He passed over their fair neck, by
encouraging them with prosperity, or by alarming them with adversity. He made
Ephraim to ride, by strengthening the ten tribes against Judah in the days of
Jeroboam the second, and of Pekah the son of Remaliah; or made them to be rode
upon, by giving the Assyrians power to captivate and oppress them. Judah's
ploughing, and Jacob's breaking his clods, may import the Jews slavery in
Chaldea. Their ploughing wickedness, reaping iniquity, and eating the fruit of
lies, imply their proceeding from evil to worse, and receiving at last the due
reward of their crimes; when like backsliding heisers, they had long persisted
in obstinate apostasy from God.

17. They are represented as abused, lost, and scattered sheep Ezekiel. xxxiv. 16.
Jer. l. 6. 7.
. Ah how abused, oppressed, and misled, by their wicked rulers and false
prophets! How, in their captivity, driven from their pasture in the promised
land! scattered one from another! exposed to injuries unnumbered! destitute of
order, and without solemn assembling to worship! Once, what a beautiful flock,
a comely church and nation, cared for, nourished, and protected of God! But,
especially since the death of Christ, what a flock of slaughter and misery!

18. They are likened to VIPERS; SERPENTS; SPIDERS Is. lix. 5. 6.
. How full of deathful malice and corruption! How desperately set upon, and
crafty in doing mischief! Their idolatrous courses, and labored schemes of
self-preservation, were a weaving of spiders webs; might entangle others, but
were insufficient for every good purpose. Nay, as cockatrice eggs, breaking
forth into vipers, infallibly procured their ruin.

19. Particular tribes of Israel are likened to particular ANIMALS Genesis xlix.
Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 17. 21. 22.
. Judah to a LION, because of their distinguished royalty, power, and furious
destruction of of their enemies. Joseph's seed to a YOUNG BULLOCK, because of
their glory, their strength; and their royalty among the ten tribes. Ah, how
changed, when, like silly doves without heart, without hope, wisdom, or care,
to avoid the destruction and ravage of the Assyrian bands! Issachar to an ASS,
for their strength, patience, and labor in husbandry. Dan to a LIONS WHELP and
SERPENT, for their daring courage in war, and their craft in destroying their
enemies. How like a lion's whelp, when leaping to the borders of Bashan, to
take Laish! How, in Samson, did they, like a serpent, bite the horse heels, and
make the Philistines on their temple, and otherwise, to fall backward! Benjamin
to a ravening WOLF, for their warlike courage, and their readiness to take the
prey from their enemies. Naphthali to a HIND let loose, because of their kind
and lovely behavior, their bravery in war, and their expedition in business.
Gad to a LION, because of their daring boldness, and their safe dwelling beside
enemies. -- Ah, how sin changed the condition of those Jews! made them under
trouble roar like bears; mourn sore like doves; hiss as serpents; wail as
dragons; and enlarge their baldness as eagles!

20. They are likened to the HAIRS of a man's head Ezekiel. v. 1. -- 4.
. How weak and insignificant! The shaving or cutting them off, imports the
killing or carrying them captive; or the unhinging of their church and state by
the Chaldeans. The third part burnt in the midst of the city, pourtrayed by
Ezekiel on a tyle, represent about a third part killed by famine and pestilence
within Jerusalem, during its siege by the Chaldeans. The third part smitten
about with a knife, represent them who were slain by the Chaldeans. The third
part scattered in the wind, represent them who were taken captive; a sew of
which being left in the land, and by their going down to Egypt, and thus
bringing upon themselves the suspicion of having murdered Gedaliah,
Nebuchadnezzar's deputy, provoked the Chaldeans against their brethren, and
became a source of fiery plagues and trials to them.

21. They are likened to FLOURISHING BOUGHS; ^IGN-ALOES; GREEN OLIVES;
CEDAR-TREES Numb. xxiv. 6. Romans xi. 16. 17. Jer. xi. 16.
. Being planted by God, their nation was long powerful, delightful, useful, and
glorious; but, for their sin, how given up at last to his withering and fiery
judgments. You flourishing kingdoms, be not high-minded, but sear. You
wild-olive Gentiles, who are graffed into God's church in their stead, take
heed lest he, who spared not these natural branches, but cut them off, should
also not spare you.

22. They are likened to BARREN FIG TREES Luke xiii. 6. -- 9. Matthew. xxi. 19.
Jer. xxiv.
. Amidst their fair, flourishing, and wide-spread leaves of profession, how
destitute of good works, even when Jesus was among them! For forty years after
his death, his intercession procured the sparing of them, till by his gospel,
and lesser strokes, he had dug and dunged about them. But continuing barren,
they were, by the axe of the Roman troops, cut down, and quickly withered away
under his curse. In more ancient times, were not those carried captive with
Jehoiachin as good figs, acceptable and useful? and these who continued behind,
bad ones, unprofitable and hateful!

23. They are likened to a VINEYARD and VINE Is. v. 1. -- 6. Ezekiel. xv. Deuteronomy.
xxxii. 32. 33.
. God gave them the fertile land flowing with milk and honey. The stony and
stubborn Canaanites he dug out from before them. The wall and hedge of his
protection and law he assigned to them. The wine press of his tabernacle,
temple, and ordinances, he built among them. With the rain of his oracles, the
dew of his favors, he watered them. Originally they were a right seed; a
choice vine; the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, God's friends, who
commanded their households to walk in the way of the Lord; but how sadly they
degenerated into the plant of a strange vine; became like the Heathens around!
When much fruit might have been expected from them, they became an empty vinc;
without good fruit, and so only fit for, and exposed to the fiery vengeance of
God bringing forth fruit to themselves, seeking their own carnal ends, not the
glory of God, in whatever they did. They became a vine of Sodom; eminent for
pride, luxury, uncleanness, bringing forth wild grapes of idolatry, murder, and
every other wickedness; sour grapes, that set the teeth on edge; bitter
clusters; grapes of gall; wine, the poison of dragons, and cruel venom of asps;
sinful courses, infinitely disagreeable to God, hurtful to others, and in the
issue ruinous to themselves. -- Ye Protestant churches, consider these things,
and be afraid.

24. They are likened to DEW, and represented as a BLESSING amidst the nations
Mic. v. 7. Is. xix. 24.
. In the apostolic age, the gospel went out from them; was spread among the
Gentiles by them. Then, and in the last days, what blessed means were, or shall
they be, of refreshing the nations, and converting many to Christ!

25. They are likened to STICKS or STAVES Ezekiel. xxxvii. 16. -- 19. Zech. xi. 7.
10. 14.
. The joining of two sticks, denotes the uniting of the posterity of Judah and
Benjamin, after their Chaldean or present captivity, with the other ten tribes.
The staff of beauty is the blessed gospel granted to them; or the glorious
constitution of their church and state. The staff of bands denotes their mutual
affection and harmony. The breaking of these two staves, imports God's
depriving them of the gospel, and of their ecclesiastic and national state, and
giving them up to furious contentions and disorder. The instruments of a
foolish shepherd, denote the ruinous devices of their leaders and pretended
Messiahs; or the oppressive measures of the Romans and others toward them. --
Lord, these who despise thee, shall be utterly ruined and contemned.

26. They are represented as a CARCASS gathered to by the eagles Luke xvii. 34.
. Being separated from God, the life of their soul, and church; having
apostatized from his quickening truths; and being destitute of his enlivening
grace; how overspread with loathsome and noisome corruption! How detestable to
God and his people! How surrounded, sought out, murdered and ruined by the
eagle-bannered Roman armies!

27. They are likened to DRY BONES in a valley, revived by means of prophecy
Ezekiel. xxxvii. 1. -- 14.
. During their Chaldean captivity, they lived in a low plain country; they were
reduced to a most abject and debased condition. The appearance, the hope, and
the desire of their restoration, were almost extinct But by Cyrus'
proclamation, and the influence of Heaven, their graves of distress were
opened; the impediments in their way were removed; their spirits were animated
to return to their country, and resettle their nation. At present their
condition is still more wretched, and apparently hopeless; but by the wind of
the Holy Ghost, and the favorable breath of smiling providence, shall God
recover them from it. Lord, hasten thy work, that we may see it.

28. They are represented as REPROBATE SILVER Jer. vi. 30.
. In Jeremiah's time, and at present, amidst all their fair pretenses, how
useless and unworthy! Rejected by God and abhorred by men! Not purged from
their dross of corruption in the furnace of trouble; but becoming worse and
worse!

29. They are likened to BOTTLES filled with wine Jer. xiii. 12.
. By the Chaldean troops God filled them with calamity, perplexity, and
astonishment. And ah! what broken bottles; whose breaches God alone could heal
and repair!

30. They are represented as a VESSEL, wherein is no pleasure Hos. viii. 8.
. How wretched, base, and shameful, their captive state! How were they defiled
with the dung of reproach, contemned, abhorred, and counted as the offscouring
of all things!

31. They are likened to an EARTHEN VESSEL marred in the hand of the potter
Jer. xix.
. How mean their orgin! How curiously God framed them into a church and nation,
on the wheel of his providence! How awfully he at last broke them to pieces in
his wrath!

32. They are represented as a LINEN GIRDLE MARRED, lying in a hole by the
river Euphrates Jer. xiii. 1. -- 11.
. By special covenant care, and worship, God had caused them to cleave to him,
as his peculiar people; but for their sin, he gave them up, to be carried to
Chaldea, or the banks of the Euphrates, where their glory was marred, and their
public worship mostly disused, and even impossible to be performed.

33. JERUSALEM, their principal city; and Samaria, the metropolis of the ten
tribes, are represented as MOUNTAINS or HILLS Zech. viii. 3. Amos vi. 1.
; because they were built on hills; and were conspicuous in glory and wealth.

34. Jerusalem is represented as a city pourtrayed on a tile Ezekiel. iv. 1. -- 8.
; to signify its contemptible and weak condition before the Chaldeans took it.
The iron pan surrounding this protrait, signified God's determinate purpose to
punish the inhabitants; and the Chaldeans fixed rage against, and their safe
and determined siege of the city. Ezekiel's "lying three hundred and ninety
days before this portrait on his left side, and forty on his right to bear the
iniquity of Israel and Judah," signified that in the Chaldean destruction of
Jerusalem, God would have an eye to the Jews continuance for three hundred and
ninety years, in approving the sin of the ten tribes; and their having
grievously rebelled themselves, during forty years of Manasseh's reign, or from
the thirteenth year or Josiah, to the eleventh of Zedekiah.

35. She is compared to a FOUNTAIN Jer. vi. 7.
. Ah how herinhabitants cast forth and diffused wickedness, through every part
of their conduct! and spread evil courses into the cities and country around!

36. She is compared to a FURNACE Is. xxxi. 9. Ezekiel. xxii. 20. 22.
. How the flaming wrath of the Lord raged against her inhabitants! In her, how
he tried and purified his people, and consumed drossy multitudes of wicked men!

37. She is compared to a BOILING POT or CALDRON Jer i. 13. Ezekiel. xxiv. 3. --
14. and xi. 3.
. In her dwelt the principal wicked men of Judah; and were tormented by the
fiery wrath of God, and fury of the enraged Caldeans. Ah what a scum of wicked
persons and prevalent crimes was in her! The face toward the north, implies,
the Caldeans coming against her from the north. She was not the caldron to
these carried into captivity, or slain without the walls.

38. She is called a CUP OF TREMBLING and BURDENSOME STONE to her enemies Zech.
xii. 2. 4.
. What terror and overthrow did the Maccabees spread among her besigers and
enemies! How happy, firm, and fixed, shall be the Jews millenial state! With
what oppressing trouble, madness, astonishment, and ruin, shall God smite their
opposers, who attempt to exclude them from their ancient land!

39. The JEWISH PRINCES are likened to LIONS; and their judges to RAVENING
WOLVES Mic. iii. 2. 3. Zeph. iii. 3.
; because of their fraud, their tyranny, and cruel oppression and murders,
especially of the poor and godly. Their "eating the flesh of God's people;
flaying off their skin; breaking their bones in pieces," imply, their taking
every method to oppress and deprive them of their substance. Their not gnawing
the bones in the morning, imports their voracious delight in cruelty; and
speedy execution of it without delay.

40. The Jewish governors are likened to a HEARTH OF FIRE among wood; and a
TORCH OF FIRE in a sheaf Zech. xii. 6.
. In the time of the Maccabees, and in the beginning of the millennium, what
terror, havoc, and ruin, they spread among their opposers!

41. Uzziah and Hezekiah are represented as FURIOUS SERPENTS Is. xiv. 29.
. With what fury and dispatch did their troops attack, terrify, and destroy the
Philistines!

42. Zedekiah is called the BREATH of the Jews nostrils Lam. iv. 20.
. Him they expected to be a distinguished means of their preservation and
comfort, whether in Judea or Babylon. But ah how disappointed, when he fell a
fugitive into the hands of the Chaldeans! -- On every earthly thing, write, my
soul, disappointment, vanity, and vexation of spirit.

43. Pekah king of Israel, with his ally Rezin King of Syria are called the
TAILS of smoking firebrarnds Is. vii. 4.
, to represent their weakness; the vanity of their impotent fury and purposes
against Judah; and near approach of their ruin.

44. Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, and other rulers and helpers of the Jews; are the
four laborious, though mean-like CARPENTERS, that frayed away the HORNS Zech.
i. 20. 21.
, the Samaritans, Ammonites, Arabians, Syrians, and others, who harassed the
Jews after their return from Babylon.

SECONDLY, Metaphors respecting the Egyptians.
1. The EGYPTIANS are compared to a FLY Is. vii. 18.
; alluding to the swarms of flies in their country; and for their number, their
swift march, and their troublesome annoyance.

2. They are likened to a FAIR HEIFER Jer. xlvi. 20.
. In the days of Pharaoh-necho, how glorious and flourishing was their kingdom,
consisting of twenty thousand cities! how great their prosperity and wealth!
but how quickly destruction came! Pride goes before destruction, and an
haughty spirit before a fall.

3. They are likened to FISHES Ezekiel. xxix 3. -- 5.
. Among the streams of the river Nile they resided; great was their number,
their stupidity, and their readiness to oppress their inferiors. Their sticking
to their king's scale's, imports their faithful cleaving to his interest in
peace and war; or perhaps, their obstinate rebellion against Pharaoh-hophra.

4. They are likened to SERPENTS Jer. xlvi. 22.
; to denote the abject state to which the Chaldeans, and their own civil war in
the reign of Pharoah-hophrah, reduced them; and their mournful howling over
their condition.

5. They are likened to a FOREST Jer. xlvi. 24.
. How surprising the number of their cities; and of the inhabitants! How
flourishing a long time their prosperity! How exposed to, and at last consumed,
by the fire of God's wrath!

6. They and their kings are likened to BROKEN REEDS Ezekiel. xxix. 6.
. How insufficient and untrusty helpers! Instead of assisting the Jews against
the Assyrians or Chaldeans, according to promise and expectation; they rather
ran into their hand, by promoting their ruin.

7. Their country is called an IRON FURNACE; and HOUSE OF BONDAGE Jer. xi. 4.
Exodus xx. 2.
. What terrible torment, cruel slavery, and murder, the Hebrews here sustained!

8. Their king is represented as an EAGLE with great wings and many feathers
Ezekiel. xvii. 7.
, because of his extensive power and dominion over many tribes. Zedekiah king
of Judah entering into a league with him against the Chaldeans, "is the vine
turning toward him, to be watered by him."

9. He is represented as a DRAGON; a LEVIATHAN; a CROCODILE Psalm lxxvi. 24. Is.
xxvii. 1. Ezekiel. xxxii. 2.
. Among, and about the streams of Nile, haunted by these creatures, he ruled.
And how distinguished was his terribleness, cruelty, and power to defend
himself, and hurt others!

10. Pharaoh-necho is represented as a NOISE passing at the time appointed Jer.
xlvi. 17.
. Notwithstanding of his haughty boasting, noisy preparation, and furious march
against the Chaldeans at Carchemish, by the Euphrates, he and his mighty host
were quickly routed, and put to a most shameful slight.

THIRDLY, Metaphors respecting the Assyrians.
1. The ASSYRIANS are compared to EAGLES Hos. viii. 1.
. With what rapidity, malice, and fury, did they come up, to ruin the ten
tribes! and to harass and waste the kingdom of Judah!

2. They are likened to LIONS Is. v. 29.
. With what noise, terror, irresistible force, and bloody cruelty, they, under
Pull, Tiglath-Pileser, Shalmanezer, Sennacherib, and Esarhaddon, wasted,
conquered, and murdered, the nations around them!

3. They are compared to BEES Is. vii. 18.
; alluding to the multitude of bees in their country; and because of their
number, their noise, their desperate rage, and tormenting cruelty; and their
readily answering the Lord's invitation to punish the nations.

4. They are likened to an EAST WIND Hos. xii. 1. and xiii. 15.
. From the east they invaded the nations. What deceitful and unsubstantial
helpers! but what sweeping, blasting, and destructive enemies to men!

5. They are called the WATERS of the river, strong, and many Is. viii. 7. 8.
. On the banks of Euphrates, and Hiddekel, or Tigris, they resided. How
numerous, noisy, powerful, and prevalent! Their passing through the breadth of
Immanuel's land, and reaching even to the neck, signifies their rendering
themselves masters of the whole kingdoms of Israel and Judah; Jerusalem alone
excepted, which was left alone in the midst of the land, as a cottage in a
garden of cucumbers.

6. They are compared to a CEDAR and CHESNUTTREE Ezekiel. xxxi. 2.
. For some ages, how great and flourishing the glory and wealth of their
empire! how high and soaring their power and pride! what multitudes of nations
and persons lived under the wide-spread shadow of their authority and
protection!

7. The Assyrians, or other nations, enemies of Israel, are likened to a SHIP
or GALLEY Is. xxxiii. 21. 23.
. They are curious in their form; move on the sea of this world; are tossed by
the storms of adversity. Kings and other chief rulers, are the masts and
mariners; princes and inferior rulers are the tacklings; their armies are the
sails and ^ars. The Assyrian army had their tacklings loosed, when most of
their commanders were cut off. They could not strengthen the mast, by assisting
their king Sennacherib. They could not spread the sail, the most of their
troops being cut off before Jerusalem.

8. They are called God's ROD and AXE Is. x. 5. 15.
. By them he scourged and cut off many kingdoms. By them he cut down the barren
tribes of Israel, and carried them into captivity; and severely corrected the
hypocritical ones of Judah and Benjamin. How unreasonably they magnified
themselves against God their manager, and ascribed their conquests to
themselves!

9. They are called an hired RAZOR shaving the beard and the feet Is. vii. 20.
. With rich spoils, God hired them, to punish and destroy the sinful nations:
and by them, especially in Israel and Judah, he cut off multitudes, small and
great.

10. They are likened to FUEL Is. xxx. 21. -- 33.
. Having by them punished the nations, God cast them into the destructive
flames of his vengeance, till their nation was consumed; and by a fiery plague
he cut off Sennacherib's army before Jerusalem.

11. That army is likened to a DREAM, and NIGHT-VISION Is. xxix. 7. 8.
. Amidst their expectations to do mighty things, God's wrath discovered their
insignificancy, and reduced them in an instant to almost nothing.

12. Perhaps Sennacherib their king, is called LEVIATHAN; that strong and
piercing serpent Is. xxvii. 1.
. For his distinguished pride, power, and terrible appearances. But is not
rather the Egyptian king, or Antichrist, there spoken of?

FOURTHLY, Metaphors respecting the Chaldeans.
1. The Chaldean empire is likened to a DESTITUTE WIDOW Is. xxvii.
. At last, how her glory faded! How mournfully was she bereaved of her kings,
armies, power, and wealth! How was the city Babylon burnt, harassed, enslaved,
and finally reduced to a desert!

2. It is compared to a LION, with eagles wings Dan. vii. 4.
; because of their noise, their bloody cruelty, their irresistible boldness,
fury, and might; and for their rapid success in conquering the nations around.
What terrified multitudes readily submitted, and craved their shadowing
protection, till the Medes and Persians ruined it.

3. It is perhaps compared to a CHARIOT with RED horses, issuing from between
mountains of brass Zech. vi. 1. 2.
. Notwithstanding difficulties unnumbered, their forces, according to the
settled purposes of God, extended their power; and, by bloody conquests,
destroyed and enslaved the nations.

4. It is called a GOLDEN HEAD, and GOLDEN CUP: and Babylon its metropolis, a
GOLDEN CITY Dan. ii. 32. Jer. li. 7. Is. xiv. 4.
. How astonishing was the glory, wealth, and power of it. How wide-spread their
dominion! By them, how fearfully God measured out the wine of his wrath to the
sinful nations around! and caused them to drink it!

5. It is called God's BATTLE-BOW, or AXE; the HAMMER of the whole earth Jer.
li. 20. and l. 23.
. By these Chaldeans, God fought against, conquered, and broke in pieces, the
most of the then principal nations on earth.

6. It is called God's THRESHING; and the CORN of his floor. Is. xxi. 10.
. What fearful vengeance seized it, by the Medes and Persians! Where is now
their glory and power! is it not threshed out? Mighty Babylon, destroying
mountain, conspicuous and overwhelming destroyer, how art thou now threshed to
the dust! razed to the foundation! rendered a burnt mountain! a heap of
rubbish! and habitation of wild and venomous beasts!

7. The Chaldean troops under Nebuchadnezzar, are likened to WATCHERS of a
field Jer. iv. 16.
. Carefully they watched at the siege of Jerusalem; apprehended such as fled
from the city; and executed judgments upon them.

8. They are represented as FISHERS; HUNTERS; and FOWLERS Hab. i. 15. 16. 17.
. How earnestly they labored for the destruction of men! hid snares, dug
pits, and pursued for their life! and ah! how they sacrificed to their own net;
imputing their warlike success, not to God's providence; but to their own
crafty plots, and their vigorous efforts!

9. They are represented as SIX MEN armed with slaughter-weapons, and directed
by one clothed in linen Ezekiel. ix.
. Armed with Jesus righteous permission, and with weapons of war, they, under
his direction and rule, entered the Jewish temple, slew the princes and rulers;
but spared most of the godly, who mourned over the sins of their people.

10. They are compared to SERPENTS Jer. viii. 17.
. How noted their craft! inveterate their rage! cruel and certain their murder!
-- Ah! how has sin changed men, into the likeness of the old serpent, the
devil!

11. They are likened to an EAST WIND; a DRY WIND from the wilderness; and a
WHIRLWIND Hab. i. 9. Jer. iv. 11. 13.
. From the regions eastward of Judea they issued; and with astonishing
rapidity, and irrefistible force, they spread trouble, blasting, and ruin,
among men.

12. They are likened to CLOUDS Jer. iv. 13.
. How numerous their body! how exalted their power! how rapid their march, and
terrible their aspect! what dreadful means of DIVine wrath to the nations
around!

13. NEBUCHADNEZZAR, their distinguished monarch, is likened to a great EAGLE
with long wings, and full of feathers Ezekiel. xvii. 3. -- 6.
. How great his power! How extensive his authority! how distinguished his
ability; to protect his subjects! His various colors, denote the DIVersified
laws and customs of his empire. His "coming to Lebanon cropping off the top of
a cedar, and carrying it into a land of traffic, and city of merchants,"
signifies his invading Judea by the way of Lebanon; and carrying off
Jehoiachin, and other princes of Judah, to Babylon his wealthy metropolis. His
"taking of the seed of the land; planting it by great waters; and making it a
vine of low stature, bending her branches toward him;" signifies his taking
Zedekiah, causing him to swear subjection, and constituting him his tributary
deputy, or king of Judah.

14. He is likened to a LION, WOLF, and LEOPARD Jer. v. 1. -- 9.
; because of his power, authority, courage, craft, covetousness; and his
terrible and barbarous harassing and murdering of the nations.

15. He is compared to a large and shadowy TREE, cut down by order of the
heavenly watchers Dan. iv. 10. -- 17
; Great indeed was his glory, power, and authority. Multitudes of men submitted
to him, and shared his protection. But, after long prosperity, how wrathfully
cut down by God for his wickedness! -- seven years deprived of his reason and
government!

16. The Chaldean-monarch is represented as the LUCIFER, or morning star,
sallen from heaven Is. xiv. 12.
. How bright the glory of Nebuchadnezzar! how powerful his influence on earth!
At first, how splendid the power and brightness of Belshazzar! but alas! how
wretched his last end! how deprived of his dignity, his authority and grandeur,
and cast out as an abominable and base person!

FIFTHLY, Metaphors respecting the Persian empire.
1. The Persian empire is likened to a BEAR raising up himself on one side,
having three ribs in his mouth, and bidden to arise, and devour much flesh Dan
vii. 5.
. Though less wealthy, strong, and glorious at first, than the Chaldean; yet
with much craft, sagacity, and bloody cruelty, was it settled and maintained.
Multitudes of nations were torn, conquered, and reduced by it. Toward the
west side, it especially raised and exerted itself; conquering and spoiling the
three wealthy kingdoms of Lydia, Babylon, and Egypt.

2. It is represented as a two-horned RAM, pushing northward, southward, and
westward, till furiously destroyed by a he-goat Dan. viii. 34.
. Consisting of the two kingdoms of Media and Persia, it made extensive
conquests toward the airths mentioned, and became an empire, containing an
hundred twenty and seven provinces, till the furious Greeks overturned and
ruined it.

3. It is perhaps represented as a CHARIOT with black horses, issuing from
between mountains of brass Zech. vi. 3. 6.
. According to the purpose of God, and maugre all opposition, it was
established. -- At first, the Persians were strong, and warlike; under Cyrus,
terrible to the nations; under Cambyses, and some others, troublesome to the
people of God. Their going out into the north country, may denote their
conquest of Chaldea northward of Judea; and of Lesser Asia; and their
invasions of Greece. In this they quieted God's spirit, as they executed his
judgments, and made his wrath to rest on Babylon.

4. It is compared to a BREAST AND ARMS OF SILVER Dan ii. 32.
. With distinguished prudence, alert activity, noted bravery, and no small
humanity, did Cyrus found it; and render it noted for wealth and grandeur, the
power of the Medes and Persians being united in it.

5. King Cyrus is represented as a RAVENOUS BEAST from the east Is. xlvi. 10.
. From the east he, with a golden eagle for his banner, marched against
Chaldea; and with amazing terror and success, ravaged and conquered the
nations, to the west of this country.

6. He and Nebuchadnezzar are called God's SERVANTS Is. xlv. 1. Jer. xxvii. 6.
. Signally he raised them up, and employed them to execute his work among the
nations; and with the spoil, he richly rewarded their labor.

SIXTHLY, Metaphors respecting the Grecian empire.
1. The Grecian empire is represented as a winged and four-headed LEOPARD Dan.
vii. 6.
; to denote the craft, rapidity and violence, with which Alexander founded it;
and to mark out the DIVision of it, after his death, into the four principal
kingdoms of Egypt, Syria, Asia the Less, and Greece.

2. It is represented as a horned HE-GOAT, that, without touching the ground,
ran, trod down, and stamped to pieces, a two horned pushing ram Dan. viii. 5.
-- 14.
; to mark the rapidity and force with which the Greeks, under Alexander,
marched into Asia; attacked, conquered, and broke to pieces, the proud and
pushing Medo-Persian kingdom. This goat's notable horn between his eyes, is
Alexander the Great, as attended with his prudent and sagacious generals. This
being broken, four came up in its stead; he cut off by an untimely death; his
empire was DIVided into four principal sovereignties; and himself succeeded by
four chief princes, Ptolemy in Egypt, Seleucus in Syria, Antigonus is Lesser
Asia, and Cassander, in Macedonia and Greece. "The little horn which sprang
from one of these, and waxed great and strong toward the south, east, and
west, and magnified himself against God and his saints," is Antiochus
Epiphanes, a descendant of Seleucus, a very contemptible person who craftily
got into the throne of Syria; defeated the Egyptians on the south; subdued the
Medes, Persians, and Armenians on the east; and reduced part of Lesser Asia,
with Judea, on the west; and finally insulted the Jewish temple, abolished the
daily sacrifice, set up an image of Jupiter in the sanctuary, commanded the
Jews to eat swines flesh, and murdered such as refused; till, at last, he was
fearfully destroyed by the immediate hand of God.

3. It is perhaps represented as a CHARIOT, with white horses, going after the
black horses Zech. vi. 3. 6.
; to denote Alexander's kindness to the Jews; his rapid victories and
conquests, while he attacked and pursued the Persians, and took from them the
very countries which they had wrested from the Chaldeans.

4. It is compared to a BELLY and THIGHS of brass Dan. ii. 3.
. Without distinguished wealth, the Greeks were exceedingly courageous, hardy,
brave, and invincible, but too often intemperate and drunken. Soon after
Alexander's death, it was formed into the two thigh like sovereignties, of
Syria on the north, and Egypt on the south; between which there were manifold
bickerings, till, as related by Daniel, chap. xi. both were swallowed up by the
Romans.

SEVENTHLY, Metaphors respecting the Roman empire.
1. The Roman empire is represented as a DRAGON; as an exceeding TERRIBLE
beast, very different from others, having iron teeth and brazen nails; treading
down and devouring every thing it sound Dan. vii. 19. 20.
. Not in the form of an absolute monarchy, like the Chaldean, Persian, and
Grecian, but of a common wealth, it was settled; and with astonishing, terror,
force, cruelty, craft, and murder, it conquered and enslaved the most part of
the then known world.

2. It is represented as a BEAST with seven heads and ten horns Rev. xvii. 3.
. It had, successively, seven forms of government, of kings, consuls,
dictators, decomvirs, tribunes, emperors, popes. Its metropolis was built on
seven hills; and at last the empire was DIVided into ten kingdoms.

3. It resembles a CHARIOT, with grizzled and bay horses, going toward the
south Zech. vi. 3. 6. 7.
. They especially pushed their conquests southward, into Asia and Africa;
ravaged and conquered the promised land; and from the north did the Goths,
Huns, and Vandals, march to and fro, in ravaging and ruining this empire.

4. It is represented as LEGS OF IRON, with sent and toes of iron, mixed with
miry clay Dan. ii. 33.
; to denote their lasting courage, strength, and warlike success; its division
into the eastern and western empire; and its final DIVision into ten
sovereignties; which being composed partly of Romans, and partly of Barbarians,
never rightly incorporated together; nor could display their ancient vigor and
might.

EIGHTHLY, Metaphors respecting Tire.
1. Tire is called the CROWNING CITY Is. xxiii. 8.
. How astonishing her wealth! how honored and powerful her merchants! what
amazing pomp, grandeur, and ornaments, were used by the inhabitants!

2. Their king is called a covering CHERUB Eack. xxviii. 13. 14.
. He was the glorious and royal protector of his subjects. He had been in Eden
the garden of God; had lived amidst the utmost plenty, pleasure, and safety. He
was covered with precious stones, walked up and down among stones of fire. He
had his crown, his clothes, his palace, most richly adorned with precious and
sparkling jewels. Amidst all this glory, O Jesus, how much was he inferior to
thee!

NINTHLY, Metaphors respecting the Saracens.
1. The Saracens resemble the LOCUSTS and SCORPIONS in the vision of the fifth
Apocalyptic trumpet Rev. ix. 1. -- 11.
. Sprung from the smoke of the bottomless pit, animated by the most absurd
delusion, and under the standard of Mahomet, that infernal and destroying
agent, they, especially for an hundred and fifty years, or five prophetic
months, from A. D. 612 to 762, spread the most shocking ravage, torment,
desolation, and delusion, through many of the most populous countries on earth,
and rendered the lives of multitudes their burden; but were not permitted to
undo any of God's chosen saints, or ravage Savoy and Piedmont, where many of
them were hid. Or even take Constantinople, where many of them lived.

TENTHLY, Metaphors respecting the Turks.
1. The Turks are likened to FOUR ANGELS once bound, but under the sixth
trumpet loosed from the river Euphrates, that for a year, a month, a day, and
an hour, they might destroy the third part of men Rev. ix. 13. -- 20.
. Restrained by God; restrained, for about 200 years, by the warlike
expeditions of the European Christians to the Holy Land, their four sultanies,
or kingdoms, long subsisted near to the Euphrates. Terrified by the invasion of
the Tartars under Jengiz Chan, Soliman-Shah, the founder of the Othman race,
with his three sons, attempted to pass that river to the westward. He was
drowned, and two of his sons returned. Ortogr^l, the third, with his three
sons, sometime after passed it, and settled in Armenia. In 1281, he began his
conquests on the Christians, in the taking of the city of Kutah in Asia. Thence
forward, for 391 years, ^ll the taking of Caminick from the Poles, in 1672,
they, with a multitude of cavalry, and terrible firearms, made fearful havoc
of apostate Christians, and others, in Asia, Africa, and Europe.

2. The Turkish and other Mohammedan powers, are likened to the river EUPHRATES
Rev. xvi. 12, Is. xi. 15.
. At present, they impede the conversion of the eastern nations to Christ; but
in a little, they shall be dried up; shall have their power brought low, and
their delusion abolished; that the kings and kingdoms of the east may be turned
to the Lord.

SECT. III. Metaphors respecting armies and their officers.
1. ARMIES are compared to EAGLES, or ravenous fowls Deuteronomy. xxviii. 49. Luke
xvii. 34.
; because of their far, their swift, and destructive marches; their delighting
in ravage and blood; and their sagacious discerning, and careful improving of
opportunities, to do mischief.

2. They are likened to LIONS, and similar wild beasts Jer. li. 38.
. How dreadful their noise! their power! their terrors! How furiously they
seize on, and destroy, whatever comes in their way! and how terrible the
yelling of their wounded!

3. They resemble SWARMS OF BEES Psalm. cxvi. 12.
. How easily excited to their enterprise! How regularly they obey and follow
their commanders! How desperately they sting, torment, and trouble their
opposers! How madly disposed to hazard their life, to revenge a trifling
injury! And, sometimes, how easily routed!

4. They are likened to swarms of FLIES; LOCUSTS; GRASSHOPPERS; CATERPILLARS
Nah. iii. 15.
. How numerous and annoying! How sadly they waste and harass the countries
which they invade! How wide and quickly they spread torment, havoe, and ruin!

5. They are compared to FLOCKS or HERDS Jer. vi. 3.
; because of their number, their order of marching, and their wasteful
influence. Their officers are the shepherds, who lead, govern, and provide for
them. Lazy and enriched soldiers, are the fat bullocks.

6. They are likened to a FOREST Is. x. 18. 19.
, for their visibility and multitude. Their captains are the choice trees, and
top-branches. How often is the destructive fire of divine wrath kindled among
them, to burn many of them out of life, and into the lowest hell!

7. They are compared to FLAMES of fire Jer. xlviii. 45.
. How terrible and furious! How hard to be resisted! How unmercifully they
spread horror and ruin! How rapidly they invade a country, consume its product,
and murder its inhabitants!

8. They are likened to WIND; WATERS; RIVERS; FLOODS Is. xxviii. 2. Dan. xi. 22.
. How powerful! terrible! mischievous! numerous! and hard to be resisted!

9. They are represented as a WING Dan. ix. 27.
. How rapid their march! How sweeping their influence! And how protecting their
power and favor!

SECT. IV. Metaphors respecting families, and their members.
1. A Family is called a HOUSE; a TABERNACLE Prove. xiv. 1. 11.
. Here we dwell together in houses or tents. Like houses, they often need new
repairs. One generation comes, and another goes away. Like tabernacles, they
are easily destroyed or changed.

2. In our translation, a HUSBAND is represented as a COVERING of the eyes Genesis
xx. 16.
, as he protects the person, chastity, and concerns of his wife. But might not
the words rather be translated, to suggest, that the thousand pieces of silver
given to Sarah by Abimelech, were to buy veils for her and her maidens? Truly,
O Jesus, it is thine to cover my eyes, my conscience, and my all:

3. A good WIFE is represented as a BUILDER of her house Prove. xiv. 1.
. Not only she readily builds it up with children; but in every respect,
promotes the welfare and prosperity thereof. But the foolish plucketh it down;
mars its peace and prosperity. Thrice happy, that my hands cannot pluck down
the Lord, who is my habitation!

4. A wife is represented as a FRUITFUL VINE Psalm. cxxviii. 3.
. Though frail, and subject to many infirmities, she brings forth an amiable
increase of children. Her cleaving to the sides of her husband's house,
implies her keeping at home; not given to idle gadding, or wasteful DIVersion;
nor to creep into her neighbors houses, as a busy-body. -- Lord Jesus, how far
am I from so cleaving to my proper work!

5. A wife is likened to a LOVING HIND, and PLEASANT ROE; a HEIFER, a LAMB
Prove. v. 19.
; because of her agreeable comeliness; loveliness; kind affection; and
delightful company.

6. She is compared to a FOUNTAIN Prove. v. 18.
. What a pleasant, source of comfort and usefulness to her family, is a good
wife! And what an agreeable mother of children, that, like streams, may be
dispersed abroad!

7. She is a GOOD THING Prove. xviii. 22.
. An eminent blessing to her husband, children, and servants; and he that has
a good wife, has obtained a signal favor of the L^^d.

8. She is called the DESIRE OF THE EYES Ezekiel. xxiv. 16.
; because of the delight which men take in seeing, and in connection with,
their beloved wives. -- Surprising! O Jesus, are thy heart and eyes on me
continually!

9. A good wife is represented as a beautiful ORNAMENT Prove. xii. 4.
. She brings credit and honor to her husband and family -- O were I such to
Christ!

10. A bad wife is likened to the WIND Prove. xxvii. 16.
; because of her unsettled humor; her noisy, boisterous, and troublesome
conversation: and as the wind, and the ointment on a man's hand, will discover
itself; so, notwithstanding her husband's care, will she discover her infirmity
and shame.

11. A contentious wife resembles a CONTINUAL DROPPING Prove. xix. 13.
. She will be perpetually harassing her husband and family with her scolding
and strife. Better dwell in a corner of the wilderness, than live with her in a
palace.

12. A bad wife^ is ROTTENNESS to her husband's bones Prove. xii. 4.
. Either she wickedly seduceth him, to sow to the flesh corruption, and so pine
away in his iniquity: or her troublesome behavior burdens his spirit, and
hastens his natural death. -- Thrice happy, O Jesus, that wicked as I am, I
cannot be rottenness to thee!

13. CHILDREN are likened to PLANTS, and OLIVE PLANTS, around their father's
table Psalm. cxxviii. 3.
. How pleasant, when they keep their due order! What a promising appearance of
joy, honor, and support, to their parents! But ah, how often death quickly
cuts down the plants! or sin withers them!

14. Children are compared to a LAMP or COAL 2 Samuel xiv. 7.
. Being lighted into life by means of their parents, how they tend to the
comfort of families; and the promoting of warm affection! How, with their
shining light, they are a lasting honor and renown to their parents!

15. They resemble STREAMS of water dispersed in the streets Prove. v. 14.
. How delightful and comely to see them in the streets at their lawful
employment, or even innocent DIVersions! -- Alas! O Fountain of living waters,
how often they run, and twine about our heart, and steal away our love from
thee!

16. They are represented as ARROWS of strong men Psalm. cxxvii. 4.
. What a protection and defense to their parents and families! But let my great
armor be of God.

17. They are represented as the HERITAGE and REWARD of God Psalm. cxxvii. 3.
. He bestows them upon parents; and to him should they gratefully dedicate them
as his property, and train them up in his service.

18. they are represented as a CROWN to their fathers Prove. xvii. 6.
. How honorable to be the regular means of producing instruments to glorify
God, and vessels to receive his redeeming mercy! -- Lord, may mine be such!

19. Daughters are represented as polished CORNERSTONES Psalm. cxliv. 12.
. What comeliness and beauty they often possess! What useful means of order and
connection between families they are! -- Am I a daughter of heaven's King, all
glorious within, and my clothing of wrought gold!

20. BRETHREN are born for adversity Prove. xvii. 17.
. Chiefly in trouble, they ought to sympathize with, counsel, comfort, assist,
and support, one another.

21. Brethren offended are like to a WALLED CITY Prove. xviii. 19.
. because of the difficulty there is to reconcile and appease them. And their
contentions are like the bars of a strong castle, not easily broken up, and
removed.

BOOK III. Metaphorical representations of things.
CHAP. I. Metaphors respecting God's purpose, and providential execution of it.
I. Metaphors respecting God's purpose.
1. GOD's purpose is represented as a counsel Is. xlvi. 10.
. O the depth of DIVine wisdom that shines in it! Without deliberation, such as
ours, how exactly are all matters, means, and ends, therein connected!
Surprising! did JEHOVAH consult for the endless welfare of thoughtless, wicked,
worthless me!

2. It is called his PLEASURE, and good pleasure Ephesians. i. 11.
. His sovereign will is the cause and rule of it. And O his ever-fixed delight
in the thoughts of his heart! -- Were thy delights, O JEHOVAH, with me! and
shall mine not be with THEE!

3. It is represented as a DETERMINATION and DECREE Acts iv. 27. 28.
. By his absolute authority are form, circumstances, and limits, immutably
fixed in it, for every person, property, and event.

4. It is represented as KNOWLEDGE, FOREKNOWLEDGE Acts xv. 1^.
. Therein, before creatures had any existence, God had the most exact view of
their nature and circumstances.

5. It is represented as MOUNTAINS OF BRASS, from between which four chariots
issue forth to move in the earth Zech. vi. 2. -- 7.
. How firm, unchangeable, infallible, glorious, and pure! And from it do all
the cha^^ots of ministers, angels, monarchies, and providence, go forth, to
execute its contents.

6. It is represented as a FOUNDATION 2 Timothy ii. 29.
. How wisely laid! How sure, fixed, and immovable! How it supports, regulates,
and adorns all God's works! What endless structures of creation and providence
are built upon it! Hail, my happy soul, amidst all thy fleeting changes, thy
foundation, laid by the wisdom and love of God, stands sure, having this seal,
The Lord knows them that are his. Let me, therefore, who name the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity.

7. It is represented as a BOOK Psalm. cxxxix. 16.
. There every creature's form and case, every event, is orderly and
particularly fixed. Every person's eternal state is particularly ascertained.
The purpose of election is a book of life; in which the persons, means, matter,
and end, of men's everlasting life, are fixed. It is called the Lamb's book;
because we are chosen in, and saved by Christ. -- O to see my name written in
heaven!

8. The DIVine purpose, respecting angels and men, is called a PREDESTINATION
or FORE-APPOINTMENT 1 Thessalonians. v. 9.
. Therein each is personally and immutably appointed to everlasting happiness
or misery, before the foundation of the world; and every mean conducive to
these ends, is so wisely and infallibly fixed, as no way interferes with their
own free will.

9. The DIVine purpose, as relating to men who are appointed to everlasting
life, is termed a FOREKNOWLEDGE, ELECTION, or CHOICE Romans viii. 29. and xi. 5.
. In themselves, they were equally mean and unworthy as others; but God, in his
mere sovereignty, took notice of them, favored, acknowledged for his, and
separated them from others, to be a peculiar people to himself.

II. Metaphors respecting God's providence.
1. Providence is represented as God's FACE Jer. xxi. 10.
. Therein he discovers his glory. By prosperity he lifts up his countenance,
and smiles. By heavy judgments, he frowns, and causes men to perish at the
rebuke of his countenance. By his watchful care, his eyes run to and fro, to
show himself strong in the behalf of such as fear him. By the breathing of his
powerful influence, he quickens and restores; and by the angry blast of his
nostrils, are men consumed.

2. It is represented as God's WAY; PATH; GOINGS; and FOOTSTEPS Psalm. lxxvii.
19.
. Herein with pleasure he displayeth his power, and gradually fulfils his
purpose. He comes to men, to relieve, comfort, and punish them. He turns away
from men, by desertion, or by forbearing to punish. His way is in the sea, and
his footsteps not known; when it is hard to understand the nature and tendency
of his providence; or see his perfections displayed therein. His paths drop
down fatness, when providence concur to our comfort; or when the clouds pour
down their refreshful and nourishing dew and rain. To look after God; or see
his goings, is, with reverence, attention, and delight, to observe, consider,
and remember the works of God.

3. God's providence is compared to CLOUDS Is. xix. 1. Psalm. xcvii. 2.
. How lofty; mavelous; and incomprehensible! How pregnant with events! How
swift and DIVinely directed the motions of it! To the wicked, how terrible the
influence, and sometimes the appearance! To the saints how refreshful and
fructifying! -- When I see the most black, dismal, and louring providence of
God, gilded with the rainbow of his covenant, or his Sun of righteousness, how
reviving and restoring it is to my heart! THEN am I also among the prophets;
know that all things shall work together for my good. Providence is compared to
a white cloud, to denote its purity, righteousness, glory, and comeliness; to a
thick or dark cloud, to represent its mysteriousness, terribleness, and
perplexing influence.

4. It may be compared to CHARIOTS Zech.
. In it. God, with pleasure and pomp, as it were, traverseth the world; orders
affairs; defends, bears, and supports his people; treads down, and triumphs
over his enemies. It resembles four chariots, as it reaches to every
circumstance, in every end of the earth. That with red horses, may denote its
awful, bloody, and destructive seenes; that with black, its terrible,
confounding, and perplexing dispensations; that with white, its smiling
dispensations, as succeeding the most awful; that with grizzled and bay horses,
walking to and fro in the earth, its mixed dispensations of mercy and judgment,
observable in every place and circumstance. -- What if the first relate to the
period of persecution after Christ; the second to the Antichristian; the third
to the Millennium; and the fourth to the lukewarm period before the last
judgment?

5. It may be compared to WHEELS Ezekiel. i.
; to represent the quick and easy motion; and the mysterious nature, and
frequent changes of it. How quickly it humbles the lofty, and exalts such as
are low! Like the wheels of a machine, how exactly it regulates all things in
nature! These wheels having four faces, may mark out providence, as respecting
all the ends of the earth; and as exercised with great tenderness, patience,
knowledge, and power. Their uniform likeness, imports the uniform tendency of
providence. Their appearance as of a wheel within a wheel, imports its
mysterious and intricate conduct. The height of their rings, and their being
full of eyes, may signify the tremendous nature of, and the infinite knowledge
discovered in, providence.

6. It resembles DEEP FLOODS Psalm. xxxvi. 6.
. How mysterious and unsearchable! How powerful and irresistible! What an
inexhaustible comfort to the godly! What a bottomless gulf of misery to the
wicked!

7. In respect of the righteousness therein displayed, it resembles great
MOUNTAINS Psalm. xixvi. 5. 6.
. How firmly! how conspicuously God displays and prosecutes equity and
holiness, in every part of it! How justly he therein lays bars in the way of
his enemies! and affords agreeable pasturage; prospect, and shelter to his
chosen sheep! His saithfulness therein reaches the clouds; every dispensation
fulfilling his word, what clear, extensive, and ofty discoveries are made
thereof!

8. It resembles a LADDER, reaching from heaven to earth, with the Lord at its
top, and angels ascending and descending its rounds Genesis xx^iii. 12.
. Being managed and inspected by God, it extends to all things above and below;
and angels are employed to execute many, if not most, of its dispensations.

CHAP. II. Metaphors respecting God's covenants with man.
I. Metaphors respecting the covenant of works.
1. THE covenant of works made with Adam, and all his seed in him, is called a
LAW Romans iii. 19. 10.
. It comprehended the whole duty of man; was enforced with DIVine authority;
was not an agreement betwixt, equals, but enjoined by God to man as his
subject. It is called a fiery law. Amidst fiery flames, it was published from
Sinai; it occasions fiery rage in our heart against God; and works for us, a
fiery and everlasting ruin. It is a law weak through the flesh, as by reason of
our corruption, it cannot justify or save us. It is a law of sin and death, as
by it the offense abounds; and sin reigns unto death, temporal, spiritual, and
eternal.

2. It is represented as a RIGID MASTER Romans vii. 8.
. How extensive and hard are its requirements of us! Without affording or
allowing us any spiritual strength, or nourishment, it demands that we should
perfectly fulfill its precepts, holy, just, and good, spiritual, and exceeding
broad; and satisfy its unbounded penalty for our past offenses. If we continue
not in all things commanded; if we keep it not constantly in every point and
degree; it curses us to endless misery; and employeth our conscience to
eondemn, lash, and torment us. -- Alas! O Jesus, how long I foolishly preferred
this hard bondage to thy easy yoke and light burden!

3. It is represented as a HUSBAND Romans vii. 1. -- 4.
. We were solemnly married to it in Adam. Heartily we approve the match, going
about to establish our own righteousness; and, notwithstanding its rigor, and
the danger attending our connection with it, how desperately we cleave to it,
live under it, and pretend attempts to fulfill it, till Jesus, by applying to
our conscience his law-magnifying righteousness, renders it dead to us,
destitute of all power to condemn or hurt us; and us dead to it, freed from
relation to it, love of it, or delightful attempts to serve it! -- Better, O my
foul, dwell with a brawling woman in a strait house, than with this husband in
a wide palace of outward prosperity. Flee therefore to Jesus; tarry not, lest
thou be consumed. Avoid this broken law; pass not by him; never glean in his
field; come not near the door of his house.

4. It is represented as a PREGNANT WOMAN gendering children to bondage Gal.
iv. 24.
. As many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse of slavery to
Satan, the world, and their sinful corruptions. A^ their coarse provision; the
husks of sinful and sensual pleasures! their wretched apparel; the filthy rags
of self-righteousness, and curse of Almighty God! their hard servitude; weary
and heavy laden, serving Diverse iusts, and laboring in the fire for very
vanity! Ah! their sorry wages! To them is reserved the blackness of darkness
for ever! Yet the slavery being natural, how is it loved and followed!
Notwithstanding all that God has done for my soul; notwithstanding his
changing and emptying me from vessel to vessel, what remains of this mother's
blood runs still in my veins! How my comfort ebbs and flows with my frame! the
challenges of my conscience mar my believing assurance! the prevalence of sin,
or pride of grace, cheeks my exercise of faith on Christ! my defects in duty
mar my peace! Alas! how I undervalue Jesus person and blood! How straitened am
I in religious exercises! How discouraged and fretted in almost every
condition! How ready to go straight from duties to the service of lusts!

5. It is called the STRENGTH OF SIN 1 Cor. xv. 16.
. From the strictness of its precept, and severity of its penalty, discovered
to the conscience, indwelling sin takes occasion to rage more violently
against God, Its curse condemns us to lie under the power of spiritual death in
trespasses and sins. And thus, as it were, enableth our indwelling sin to
command, work in war against, wound, condemn, and slay us. O tremendous
mystery! The holy law condemning us to a death in sin! to a lying under the
power of sinful corruption, as the chief branch of our punishment! O horrid
monster sin! which takes occasion from the holy, just, and good commandment,
to work in me all manner of sinful concupiscence! O mad legalist, to seek
liberty and salvation by the mother of bondage! to seek purification by the
strength of sin! Wonder no more, my soul, that the preacher of our good works,
as the ground of acceptance with God, renders people licentious in their life.
The curse of the Almighty is upon it; how can it then bear good fruit! How can
the strength of sin reform the world? How can the source of hell open heaven
for us?

II. Metaphors respecting the covenant of grace.
1. The covenant of grace is compared to a RAINBOW Rev. iv. 3. and x. 1.
. As a token that he is well pleased in Christ, and that floods of vengeance
shall no more return to destroy his people, God has established and exhibited
it. How sweetly it comprehends all, and more than all, the beauties of
creation! reflects the glory, the heavenliness, the refreshing virtue, the
royal majesty, and bloody suffering, of my Sun, my Shield, my incarnate God!
and gilds all the clouds of providence with his redeeming love! Here I behold
him ALL IN ALL, even of my gloomy cross! Here I see JEHOVAH'S bow inverted; his
wrath turned away from me, and pointed against the prince of the power of the
air, and my other enemies. Blessed covenant, how high! but how condescending to
men of low degree! How near! how wide-stretched thine arms to receive us men,
earthly, sensual, and devilish! Him that comes unto thee, shall in no wise be
cast out. Short-lived, indeed, are our sensible views of thy brightness; yet
how pleasant presages these, of an abundance of rain! of times of refreshing
from the presence of the Lord! Arise, my famished, my scorched, my withered
soul, eat and drink; there is a sound of abundance of ^ain; tomorrow shall
thou be for ever deluged with the loving kindness of God. Blessed agreement, by
Jesus' sacrifice wast thou established, and for ever do thou encircle his and
his Father's head; they are ever mindful of thee; and regulate all their work
by thee. O darling of my soul, shall not then my heart and eyes be for ever
fixed on thee!

2. It resembles Solomon's CHARIOT of the wood of Lebanon Song iii. 9. 10.
. Herein Jesus manifests his infinite royalty, power, and wealth; hereby he
conveys his chosen to his heavenly country; and conquers, and captivates every
opposer. How precious, durable, firm, and fragrant its whole frame! Its pillars
of silver, are its solid, substantial, shining, precious, and unchangeable
promises. Its bottom of gold, is the infinitely pure precious, and everlasting
perfections of God, and person of Christ. Its covering of purple, is his
bleeding righteousness, the condition of it. Its mid pavement of love, its
source, heart, and substance, is the unbounded love, grace, and mercy of a God
in Christ. -- In thee O blessed chariot, how sweetly; how safely; how quickly I
ride to glory! How I overleap every mountain of difficulty in my way! How, all
along the passage, my heart melts with love to him; that so loved me, and gave
himself for me! and my tougue shouts the Redeemer!

3. It resembles a BED, guarded in the night by threescore valiant men of
Israel Song iii. 6. 7. 8.
. Instated in this, O Jesus, we sweetly rest with thee, and mutually embrace
one another, and are by thee rendered fruitful in good works. Here all we the
chosen children of God are begotten, nourished, and warmed. To guard us during
the night of trouble and time, we are attended by thy powerful perfections,
mighty angels, and faithful ministers.

4. It is represented as a BUILDING and BANQUETING HOUSE Psalm. lxxxix. 1. 2.
Song ii. 4.
. O thrice glorious structure of grace and mercy, whose soundation is Jesus'
person, and JEHOVAH'S love! whose covering is the righteousness of an incarnate
God! whose store is all the fullness of God! Here, embannered with everlasting,
with all-attracting, all-conquering love, you ransomed drink of the spiced wine
of the juice of his pomegranates; receive out of his fullness grace for grace,
till there be no more room to receive it; joyfully feed on his flesh, which is
meat indeed, and his blood, which is drink indeed.

5. It is represented as a TESTAMENT Heb. vii. 22.
. Here God dispones all things into Christ's hand; and he hequeathes them to us
sinful and unworthy men. By his blood and death it is confirmed; and all its
promises are, in him, yea and amen, to the glory of God. Nor can any disannual
or add thereto. -- O thrice-honourable title to eternal life! Be it "all my
falvation, and all my desire, though he make it not to grow."

6. It is represented as God's OATH Psalm. cx. 4. and lxxxix. 3. 35. Ezekiel. xvi.
10.
. Therein he has pledged to Christ, and to us in him, his existence, life,
glory, and perfection, for the full accomplishment of every promise thereof. O
rich charter; sure title to eternal bliss! God has spoken; has written; has
sworn in his holiness, I will rejoice. In believing expectation, I will DIVide,
I will commence the enjoyment of, my unbounded felicity. God has sworn, that
my Christ is a priest for ever; that he has no pleasure in my death; that he
will not be wroth with me, nor rebuke me; that, Surely blessing he will bless
me, and multiplying will multiply my everlasting satisfaction and bliss. -- Is
there any conveyance, any charter like mine, mine enemies themselves being
judges! O how rich, comprehending all the fullness of God! how sure! a covenant
of peace, that cannot be broken! -- how safe! that neither thieves can steal,
fire burn, floods drown, or time waste! how free! dispensed in gracious
promises, sweeter than honey to my taste!

CHAP. III. Metaphors respecting the word of God in general.
1. GOD's word is compared to an INSTRUCTOR, COMPANION, and COUNSELOR Psalm.
cxix. 24. 98.
. It contains the whole revelation of his mind to us. In teaches us every
useful truth; abides with us in every case; comforts us in every grief; directs
us in every perplexity. -- Blessed counselor, let me commit myself wholly to
thee; depend on thee; and readily receive thy dictates. When I lie down, speak
thou to me. When I rise up, and walk by the way, talk thou with me.

2. It resembles the NECK of a human body Song i. 10. and iv. 4.
. Thereby the church is joined to Christ; her life maintained; her food
conveyed from him; and her spiritual breath of prayer, praise, and preaching,
transmitted. Adds not this greatly to her comeliness! and is it not chained
about with golden promises, ordinances, and blessings?

3. The scripture resembles a mother's BREASTS Song i. 14. and iv. 5.
. It consists of two sacred testaments, between which, as the meeting center,
Jesus lodges during the night of time. How these adorn his mystical body; and
convey the spiritual milk of saving knowledge, and gracious influence to her
members!

4. It is represented as a mother's BELLY Song vii. 2.
. By its influence are saints and graces begotten, quickened, and nourished, in
this their weak state; and hereby are they hid and protected from danger. --
Till my glorious birth into the heavenly state, may I lie and feed here!

5. It resembles two TWIN-ROES feeding among lilies Song vii. 3.
. How fresh, comely, and glorious, are its two inspired testaments! How
harmoniously connected! How they feed, or dwell, upon Christ and his people!
How thick planted with lilies of precious promises. -- My soul, let them to be
thee, as the loving hind and pleasant roe; let their breasts satisfy thee at
all times, and be thou always ravished with the love of Christ in them.

6. It is called STATUTES Psalm. xix. 8.
. By God's infinite wisdom, it is framed; by his sovereign authority, it is
ratified and published; and is indispensably obligatory on our conscience.

7. It is called a LAW Psalm. xix. 7.
. Every article of it is stamped with the authority of the one lawgiver, able
to save alive, or destroy. It sufficiently teaches, directs, and binds us to
an holy practice. To our unspeakable advantage, we conform to it; and to our
inexpressible hurt, we walk contrary to it.

8. It is called JUDGMENTS Psalm. xix. 9.
. O the wisdom and knowledge of God displayed therein! -- By it he now judges
our actions; requires us to judge ourselves; and by it he will judge us at the
last day.

9. It is called TESTIMONIES Psalm. xix. 7.
. Solemnly and faithfully it declares to us every momentous truth concerning
God, concerning Christ, concerning ourselves and our neighbor; and it is
attested by the sacred oath of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

10. It is represented as a TESTAMENT Heb. ix. 11.
. It is the last will of our crucified Redeemer. It is immutably confirmed and
ratified by his death; and therein he has graciously and distinctly bequeathed
to us all his inestimable blessings, his fullness of righteousness, grace, and
glory; and left us all the important rules of our conduct.

11. It is compared to LIGHT Psalm. ^^ix. 50. 105.
. How heavenly its origin! How mavelous its nature and influence! How
astonishing and numerous its mysteries! How pure! how glorious, pleasant, and
comfortable, its truths! How penetrating, purifying, quickening, discovering,
and directing, its virtue! -- While I have this light, let me walk in it, lest
darkness come upon me. Do thou, Jesus, open mine eyes, that I may see wondrous
things out of thy law.

12. It is compared to a LAMP Psalm. cxix. 105.
. Lighted by the inspiration, and shining by the oil-like influence of the Holy
Ghost, it irradiates dark places of the earth, and dark corners of our heart.
How different the degrees of its brightness, as it is more or less carefully
snuffed and preserved from alteration or misinterpretation! How ealy and often
removed from one place to another! How often do ministers therewith light up
Jesus' friends to their celestial chambers, and return themselves to the
blackness of darkness! It is a light only suited to the night of time, and
small in comparison of the bright vision and glory to be revealed. -- It is a
lamp ordained, DIVinely set up, to publish the excellency, and draw men to
Jesus, God's anointed. -- May it be a light to my feet, and a lamp to my paths!

13. It is compared to a FIRE Jer. xxiii. 20.
. How absolutely necessary in our cold earth! How powerfully it penetrates
into, illuminates, warms, melts, softens, quickens, comforts, and purifieth our
heart! burns up our inward corruption, and conforms us to its own likeness! Ye
ministers of God, keep it not back from your people, lest it be in your bowels,
as a tormenting, a burning fire. Ye sons of men, meditate and muse thereon,
that its fire may seize you; cause your heart to burn, while Jesus opens to
you the scriptures. Quench not its influence by bloody crimes, by presumptuous
rebellion against God; nor by wallowing in sin, and drinking up iniquity; nor
by earthly mindedness and sensuality; nor by neglect to administer due fuel, in
the exercise of reading, hearing, meditation, and prayer.

14. It is compared to RAIN and DEW Deuteronomy. xxxii. 2.
. How heavenly and DIVine its origin! How gradually and irresistibly it is
revealed to the church, and applied to the heart! How numerous its articles of
history, prophecy, promise, threatening, doctrine, and law! How seasonably it
descends, in the night of time and distress, or morning of gracious
opportunity! How pleasant, comely, refreshful, restoring, softening, and often
insensible its application to our soul! -- Let thy doctrine, O Jesus, drop as
the dew, and distill as the rain; so shall we revive as the corn, grow as the
lily, and cast forth our roots as Lebanon.

15. It is compared to WATERS Is. lv. 1. Zech. xiv. 8. Psalm. xxiii. 2. and
xlvi. 4.
. It, chiefly its promises, being furnished with the Father's love, the
fullness, merit, and grace of the Son, and the unbounded influence of the Holy
Ghost, powerfully sound, and run into our heart; bear down all sinful
opposition; spread into all our inward powers, and outward practice; and among
all the various nations of men. How suitable to the case of every one, sinner
or saint! How effectually it cools our burning lust! quenches our carnal
desires! purges off our filth! beautifieth our heart and life! refreshes,
nourishes, strengthens, heals, mollifies, quickens, and fructifieth our foul.
Christ's sprinkling us with this water, imports his gradual, close, careful,
and plenteous application thereof to our heart, and conscience; to purge us
from dead works, to serve the living God.

16. It is represented as SEED, or GOOD SEED Mark. iv. 1. -- 20.
. How precious, useful, and necessary! With what care and skill, does Jesus,
its producer and sower, in every age and case, delightful, or stormy, cast it
into his church, and the hearts of his people! that it may bud and grow up, it
must be hid in our heart; dwell in us richly; and be covered with meditation
and prayer: nor, immediately after it is sown, must we expect, sensibly to
perceive and enjoy its good fruits. The frost of affliction and temptation is
useful, to deepen its root, and kill the weeds of corruption, that
spontaneously spring up in our soul in order to choke it. But chiefly, the
warmth of the Sun of righteousness, the rain and dew of the blessed Spirit, and
the influences of the moon of instituted ordinances, concur to promote its
growth. If it be early and abundantly sown, and if the earliest buds of
corruption be carefully nipt, it prospers the more: if superficially received,
either Satan and his agents, quickly catch it away; or our promising
appearances quickly wither; or the thorny cares of a present life, choke the
word, and render it unfruitful. What abundant fruit did an handful hereof, sown
by the apostles, on the barren mountain of our Gentile-world, produce!

17. It is compared to WHEAT Jer. xxiii. 18. Song vii. 2.
. How noted its value! its purity and solidity! its duration and power to
endure storms! How wholesome, healing, and nourishing its influence! Is it not
an heap of wheat set about with lilies? How large its fullness, and DIVersified
its truths! How surrounded with fragrant, flourishing, and medicinal promises;
and with ransomed men, feeding thereon! Do not all its truths center in Jesus,
the lily of the valley? -- What then, is the unsubstantial chaff of vain
imaginations to this wheat, says the Lord!

18. It is compared to FOOD Matthew. iv. 4.
. How absolutely necessary to support our inward, our spiritual life! How
plentifully provided by God! How all-suiting! how nourishing and strengthening
to our heart! How naturally the children of God turn to, and seek after it! and
with what frequency and pleasure they receive it! -- Was it, my soul, ever
found, and eaten by thee? Was it the joy and rejoicing of my heart? Do I live,
not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God!
Do I more carefully, more frequently, attend the repast of my soul, than of
this mortal worm, my body? Happy I, that though the meat be cut off from the
field, there is enough in my Father's inspired granary, and to spare. Eat, my
soul, that which is good, and delight thyself in fatness. Bread shall be given
me, and my water shall be sure. No drought nor heat can smite; no east wind can
blast the field of his promises. No poverty, idleness, or guilt, can break my
title to his provision. Work not therefore thy own works, but believe, eat,
drink, and be merry; for thine eternal TOMORROW shall be as this day, and much
more abundant

19. It is compared to HONEY Psalm. xix. 10
. How glorious its origin! Here, by the amazing skill, care, and labor of an
incarnate God, the quintessence of creation, of more than ten thousand
creations, of Godhead, is prepared for us! How ravishing its sweetness!
delightfully sickening my heart, and rendering even troubles sweeter than honey
to my taste! How effectually it softens our inward powers! searches and heals
our spiritual sores! recovers from inward consumptions! purges and nourishes
our soul! Yet ah! how lothed by many, who have access to it! -- John's little
book was sweet in his mouth, but bitter in his belly. With pleasure he received
the knowledge of future events; but was grieved to think of the foreseen
adversities of the church of God. -- Be thou, my soul, a busy be, gathering
honey from every inspired flower; so shall that which is set on my table be
full of fatness; full of ravishing sweetness. For ever, I shall feed on pure,
on redeeming Godhead, as my ALL IN ALL.

20. It is compared to MILK sincere and uncorrupted 1 Pet. ii. 1. Heb. v. 12.
. O its purity and sweetness! its nourishing, restoring, healing, and purifying
influence! How much desired and valued by the saints! how proper food in their
earthly and infantile state! what noble remedy under their spiritual
consumptions! O the abundance! Here, for abundance of milk, every one may eat,
may wash his steps in butter. Butter and honey shall every one eat, that dwells
in our new covenant-land, that they may know to refuse the evil, and choose the
good. -- The more plain truths of God's word are likened to milk, while the
rest are compared to strong meat. The weakest saints can spiritually
understand, receive, and digest, the former; while only those, who are grown in
grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, can understand, feed on, and
improve the latter. Lord, I must feed, with the weakest, on thy plain promises.
And O how plain! plain! pleasant, they are to my heart?

21. It is compared to GOLD; FINE GOLD Psalm. cxix. 72.
. How pure, precious, solid, and durable! How glorious, useful, enriching,
adorning! How substantial and weighty, containing much in few words! How
thoroughly tried, amidst flaming persecutions, fiery trials of enraged
opposers; and in the fiery-like experience of the saints! What a sovereign
medicine to heal our running sores of corruption! What a sovereign cordial to
revive, and re store a drooping spirit! Covet earnestly, my soul, this best
thing, this gold, that shall keep me; and shall, in all cases and countries,
pass current, between me and my God.

22. It is compared to SILVER TRIED in a furnace, and seven times purified
Psalm. xii. 6.
. How pure, precious, shining and useful! O the sevenfold flames of trouble
and persecution that it has endured! And was it not, O blessed Jesus, refined
to the highest in thy fiery death? -- Did thou, my soul, ever find dross in
him, or his word?

23. It is likened to a RICH SPOIL and TREASURE, a HERITAGE Psalm. cxix. 162.
. It is the fruit of Christ's victory over sin, Satan, and the world. It
contains an inexpressible fullness of grace and glory; all the fullness of God,
sufficient to enrich millions of destitute sinners. How highly valued, and
safely secured by Christ, and his people! He hides it in his hand; and they
hide it in their heart. Evermore, Lord, let me follow thee, to DIVide this
spoil; to share this inheritance, as an heir of Christ.

24. It resembles a PLOUGH Hos. x. 12.
. Being DIVinely applied to our heart, it breaks up the fallow-ground, breaks
the roots of corruption, and prepares us for receiving the good feed of grace.
The more obdurate our heart, the more powerful, deep, and close must the
application of the word be. How proper for its more effectual operation, is the
winter of adversity, and the springtide of youth! How necessary that every
application be attended with the rainy influences of the Holy Spirit!

25. It is compared to a ROD and STAFF Psalm. xxiii. 4. and xlv. 6. and cx. 2.
. By it Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, hints his will, draws, directs,
supports; and comforts his people. When I walk through the troublous valley of
the shadow of death, let this rod and staff comfort me; so shall I fear no
evil. -- It is the rod of Christ's strength, and his SCEPTER of righteousness.
By it he displays, his power, equity, and finished righteousness, in the
conviction, conversion, and sanctification of his people; and by it he displays
his sovereignty, authorizeth his ordinances, and testifies his kindness to his
people; and orders destruction for his enemies.

26. It is compared to an HAMMER Jer. xxiii. 29.
. By it God beats and breaks our hard hearts; fastens in them the nails of
convincing influences, of regulating precepts awing threatenings, sanctifying
and encouraging promises. -- When thy words, O Master of assemblies, are by
thee fixed in my soul, I am pricked to the heart; all my powers cry out, What
shall I do to be saved? Give me Christ, or else I die.

27. It is compared to a SWORD, and called ^e sword of the Spirit Psalm. xlv. 3.
Ephesians. vi. 22.
. It was the Spirit, who framed and en^ited it; and, by applying it to our
soul, he wounds our conscience, slays our lust, pierces and subdues our heart.
How excellent its metal and form, for the spiritual warfare. By managing it
aright, we, through the Spirit, convince or silence the erroneous, defend our
soul, overcome our spiritual enemies, subdue the slavish-fear of death, mortify
our lusts, glorify God, and promote ourselves to everlasting honor.

28. It is likened to BOW and ARROWS Psalm. xlv. 45.
. By means thereof, God powerfully, suddenly, and often somewhat imperceptibly,
convinces, converts, and subdues sinners to himself. -- Lord, cause the arrows
of thy truth and influence, stick fast in the heart of thine enemies, to make
the people fall in subjection under thee!

29. It resembles the TOWER of David builded for an armoury, whereon hang a
thousand shields of mighty men Song iv. 4. and vii. 4.
. How strong, invincible, and glorious! How richly furnished with all the
armor of God! Here is the sword of sufficient arguments against every
temptation and error; the shield of God himself, and of faith in him, to avert
every fiery dart, or deathful push; the girdle of faithful promises and DIVine
truths, to fortify and encourage our heart; the breast plate of imputed
righteousness, and sanctifying grace, to secure our soul; the helmet of a well
grounded hope of salvation, the shoes of gospel-principles, and the artillery
of manifold prayers. Choose, O my soul, thine armor from hence: there is none
like it; Lord, give it me.

30. The scriptures resemble a BANQUETING HOUSE, where the guests are
embannered with Jesus' love Song li. 4.
. By bringing us into the spiritual knowledge thereof, what stores of reposited
blessedness he discovers to us! How sweetly he feasts, refreshes, strengthens,
and animates, to the spiritual warfare, with his love, which is better than
wine!

31. They are compared to Solomon's green and guarded BED Song i. 16. and iii.
7. 8.
. What sweet rest in, communion with, and sanctifying and fructifying
influence, do we therein receive from Jesus Christ, while DIVine perfections,
holy angels and vigilant ministers, unnumbered, do guard and defend us, till
the cold, dark, and dangerous night, of trouble and time, come to an end!

32. God's word is compared to a WAY or PATH 3 John. 4.
. Planned by the wisdom of God, owned by the King of kings; it points out the
way to obtain the heavenly country and city. It supports the saints, who with
pleasure and progress follow one another, in attending to, depending on, and
walking therein. -- Here walk, my soul, so shall I never be ashamed. Nor let me
have greater joy, than to see Zion's children walking in the truth, more and
more receiving it into their heart, and practicing it in their life.

33. It is compared to a RULE, REED, or MEASURINGLINE Ezekiel. xl. etc.
. It is indeed contemned by a carnal world, but is the exact, the useful, the
DIVinely appointed standard of all the forms and ordinances of the church, and
of every part of our conduct; and by which we shall be judged at last. --
Always, therefore, my soul, enquire what says the Lord.

34. It is compared to a GLASS 2 Cor. iii 18.
. Through it, we behold our own insufficiency and filthiness, the glory of God
in Christ, the momentous reality of eternal things, and the true path of
holiness that leads to eternal happiness. Behold in this glass, my soul,
thyself, and be humbled; behold the glory of Christ, that thou may be
changed into the same image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.
Nor be thou a forgetful hearer, that quickly forgets what manner of appearance
he saw.

CHAP. IV. Metaphors respecting law and gospel; which are the two principal
parts of God's word: The law teaches us what duty God requires of us; and the
gospel, what blessings be freely gives to us.
1. Metaphors respecting the law.
1. THE law is represented as a SCHOOLMASTER to bring us to Christ Gal. ^ii. 14.
. The moral law shows us our need of him, for by it is the knowledge of sin; it
demands of us that righteousness which we can only find in him; charge us to
embrace him, as soon as he is revealed and offered; and prevents our quiet
resting in any thing till we find him. Darkly the ceremonial law pointed out
the mystery of Christ, and by hard services, and carnal ordinances, led to his
person, righteousness, and grace, as the fulfilling end of its types and
shadows.

2. The law is called a KILLING LETTER 2 Cor. iii. 6.
. No law of itself, can give us any life; but kills our vain hopes and
imaginations. Sin takes occasion from it, to abound, and promote our spiritual
death. The moral law as a covenant, condemns us to all manner of death in sin
and woe. Simply considered, the ceremonial law consisted of lifeless rites and
services, which, used without respect to Christ, entailed curses and death upon
its subjects, as they led them away from the fountain of life, to their own
righteousness; by which they could not live. Howbeit, God's punishing Israel,
by giving them statutes that were not good, is not to be understood of the
ceremonial law, but of God's giving them up to obey the sinful edicts of
Jeroboam, and his idolatrous successors.

3. It is called a LAMP and LIGHT Prove. vi. 23.
. It plainly points out our duty, and blemishes in heart and life. And how
pleasant to be directed by it in Christ's way!

4, It is called a PATH and WAY Psalm. cxix. 32.
. Being planned by God, and plain in itself; we are to exercise ourselves in
it, by making progress toward the city of God. How peaceful! Great peace with
God, and with their own conscience, have all they who love and walk in it; and
when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. How plain! nothing shall offend them, who walk therein. How pleasant
to walk together in unity, with DIVine persons, and fellow saints! How holy,
just, and good! None but holy persons, the redeemed of the Lord, walk there;
nothing but holy exercises is a walking therein. How spiritual! unseen but to
the spiritual man, and walked in, by serving God in the Spirit, rejoicing in
Christ Jesus, and having no confidence in the flesh! How strait! excluding
every unregenerate person, and every sinful thought, word, or deed. How
exceeding broad! requiring duties unnumbered, in every circumstance of heart
and life. How safe! the wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not err therein.
It is a way of life; walked in by the living in Jerusalem; a way wherein life
is ever communicated and which leads to life as an eternal, but gracious
reward. It is above, is heavenly, in its origin, nature, and tendency; and by
it we depart from hell which is beneath. Here, let me ever run, when God
enlarges my heart.

5. It is compared to a HEDGE Eccles. x. 18.
. Thereby God limits our motions, and points out, whether we may, or may not
go. To what hurt in his work, and what punishment in the issue, does the
breaker of it expose himself! The old serpent, the devil, the serpent of a
stinging conscience, and the serpent of God's judgments, shall bite him.

6. It is represented as a YOKE; BANTS; CORDS Psalm. ii. 3.
. By DIVine authority, it restrains our sinful liberty and madness; and keeps
us to our station and work. How galling to our corrupt nature and lusts! and at
what endless peril, we attempt to shake it off, by refusing obedience to it!
The law as a rule, in the hand of Christ, is an easy yoke and light burden; it
is lined with his redeeming love, sweetened with his pattern, attended with
communication of his strength, and enforced with a glorious and free reward, to
the weakest attempt, if sincere, to draw therein. -- Why then, my soul, art
thou as an unruly bullock unaccustomed to this yoke? Why so many criminal
attempts to shake off the yoke, and burst the bands? why this resisting of the
Lord, and struggling to evade his authority? Is it not HE, who lays my meat, my
life, my all, to me? The law, of ceremonies, and as a covenant of works, is a
yoke of bondage: the former chained down to burdensome services innumerable;
and the latter rigorously demands what we can never perform.

7. It is called the LAW OF LIBERTY Psalm. ii. 3.
. To obey it as a rule, is the privilege of those only whom God's (c) Jam. i.
25. Son has made free indeed. The obedience of love to it as a rule, springs
from our freedom from the law as a covenant, and is the very quintessence of
our honorable and delightful liberty. -- Lord, my true freedom from sinful
slavery lies in being thy filial subject. Truly I am thy servant, I am thy
servant; thou have loosed my bands.

8. It is called the ROYAL LAW Jam. ii. 8.
. Being established by God, the universal Sovereign, it extends to all his
rational subjects; nor, without high treason, can it be broken. It is not made
for a righteous man, is not made to curse and condemn him. Nor have the truly
righteous nation any immediate connection with it, as a covenant, it being dead
to them, and they to it, by Jesus Christ's fulfilling it in their stead.

9. The law of the wise is called a FOUNTAIN of life Prove. xiii. 14.
. The DIVine law, which every wise man attends to, as his rule, and the
instructions which wise men give to others, are means of exciting them to apply
to Christ, the resurrection and the life; means of quickening, reviving, and
restoring spiritual life; means of men's escaping the second death, and
preparing for life eternal.

10. The ceremonial law is called CARNAL ordinances, and a CARNAL commandment
Heb. ix. 10. and vii. 16.
. It prescribed carnal and fleshly rites; and carnal or natural descent
entitled to the privileges thereof.

11. The ceremonial law is called a PARTITION WALL Ephesians. ii. 14. 15.
; because of the great distinction which it made between the Jews and Gentiles;
nor, till Jesus removed and abolished it by his death, was any considerable
number of Gentiles brought into the church of God.

12. The ceremonial law is called ENMITY Ephesians. ii. 14. 15.
. The sacrifices therein required, manifested God's indignation at sin, and the
enmity between him and sinful men. Its burdensome services occasioned the Jews
hatred of God to increase more and more. The distinction it put between Jews
and Gentiles, occasioned enmity between the two.

II. Metaphors respecting the gospel.
1. The gospel is called the SPIRIT that gives life 2 Cor. iii. 6.
. It contains spiritual blessings and promises. It comes from, is attended by,
and is the great means of conveying the Spirit of God to us. It effectually
penetrates our soul and spirit. By it the Holy Ghost quickens dead sinners,
shows them their way of life by Christ; heals their deadly, their sinful
wounds; works a lively faith in their soul, to look to, and live upon him. It
is the food that supports the spiritual life; the cordial, that revives and
restores the heart under every drooping circumstance.

2. It is represented as the WHITE HORSE, upon which Christ and his people ride
Rev. vi. 2. and xix. 14.
. O its purity, glory, and comeliness! By it Jesus proclaims peace to men, and
subdues them to himself. On this, in the apostolic age, he went forth
conquering; and in the Millennium he shall go forth, more eminently, to conquer
the hearts of his people. Then, in accomplishment of, and as animated,
supported, and dignified, by gospel-promises, shall multitudes follow him, and
promote the destruction of Antichrist.

3. It resembles Solomon's CHARIOT of the wood of Lebanon Song iii. 5. 10.
. Being framed by Jesus, for the safe, the easy, and honored conquest, and
conveyance of his people to heaven; how pure, precious, glorious, fragrant, and
lasting! Its pillars of silver, are its comely, useful, and enriching truths
and promises. Its bottom of gold, is its substantial and precious
foundation-truths, or the infinitely precious person of Christ, and God in him.
Its covering of purple, is the doctrine of justification through Jesus' blood;
and of the cross endured for his sake. Its inward pavement of love, is the
unmatched kindness and mercy of God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, running
through every truth and promise therein contained.

4. Its promises are like LILIES Song ii. 7. and vii 2.
. O their pleasantness, glory, fragrancy, and height! How fruitful of
everlasting blessings! How full of medicinal virtue, for the healing of our
soul! How condescendent, and suited to our low, our wretched condition! --
Blessed field of inspiration, how these every where abound! How they bend their
blessed head toward mean, debased, earthly, sensual, devilish me! How they
refresh mine eyes, and rejoice my heart! How rank they smell of Jesus, the Lily
of the valley! And truly, as lilies among thorns, so are they to my soul,
amidst her troubles, and her created comforts.

5. It is called the GRACE of God that brings salvation, and GREAT SALVATION
Tit. ii. 11. Heb. ii. 3.
. It flows from, discovers, and includes the rich, free, and undeserved favor
of God, and the blessed fruits thereof. It publishes, brings near, offers, and
is the means of applying, a costly, extensive, and everlasting salvation to
men. -- Trust thyself, my soul, to this word of his grace, fail not of this
grace, nor receive it in vain; let it enter and captivate my heart; so shall I
never be a root of bitterness, bearing gall and wormwood, whereby many are
defiled.

6. It is called the POWER of God unto salvation Romans i. 16.
. By it, God displays his amazing power, in the contrivance, in the purchase,
and application of our redemption. Thereby he exerts the exceeding greatness of
his power, in convincing, in converting, in forgiving, sanctifying, and
comforting his people. By means of it our rebellion is quashed; our enmity
slain; Satan dislodged; corruption subdued; bars of iron, and gates of brass,
strong impediments, broken and removed; nations reformed; men, furious as
outrageous beasts, tamed; and deep-rooted and earnestly-held abominations,
abolished. Come, blessed day of power; come forth, blessed rod of Jesus'
strength, then shall the people be willing; God shall raise children out of
worse than stones to Abraham. Nothing is too hard, when his power is present to
heal them.

7. It is called the WISDOM of God in a mystery; the manifold WISDOM of God 1
Cor. i. 7. Ephesians. iii. 10.
. How manifold its doctrines and promises! How manifold the instances and rays
of DIVine wisdom in each! and the various times and seasons in which, and
persons to which, it is displayed! It discovers how wisely JEHOVAH acted, in
choosing the persons, in whose redemption grace would peculiarly shine; in
founding his choice upon his own mere love, that the promises might be sure to
all the seed; in laying our help upon one that is mighty, that it might never
fail; in bringing about our salvation in a way, that produces glory to himself
in the highest, peace on earth, and good will toward men; in a way, by which
Satan is shamed, sin condemned, sinners saved; the ungodly justified, and
ungodliness destroyed; iniquity forgiven, and full vengeance taken on our
inventions; in a way, by which our redemption is all of mercy, and all of
justice; all of merit, and all of grace. O sweet mystery! beyond archangels
comprehensive ken!

8. It may be called the KISSES of Christ's mouth Song i. 2.
. From him, its doctrines and promises proceed; and bear the stamp of his
authority. How sweetly they attest his peace and reconciliation! declare and
vent his love! How effectually they delight our soul! ravish our heart! and
excite our affection and love to him! -- Let Jesus kiss me, with one, with all
the kisses of his mouth; apply one, apply all his promises to my heart, to
kindle it wholly into a flame of love to himself!

9. It is called a LAW Is. ii. 1. 2. Rev. vii. 2. and iii. 27.
. It is the will of a sovereign God, proclaiming his edicts of peace and
pardon. It engages him to bestow his blessings on us; and binds and determines
us to receive his grace, and obey his commands. Nor shall it ever be repealed,
because Jesus has an unchangeable priesthood. It is the law of the Spirit of
life in him, as by it, the Holy Ghost, as dwelling in, sent by, and taking of
the things of Christ, to show them to us, begets, preserves, restores,
increases, and perfects our spiritual life; secures us of, and prepares us for
eternal life. It is the law of faith, the seed, the means, the ground and
standard of our faith. It comes forth out of Zion and Jerusalem; flows from
Christ as the temple and habitation of God; and from Jerusalem did its
New Testament dispensation proceed, and spread among the Gentiles. -- O may I
meditate on this law, day and night; may it be better to me, than thousands of
gold and silver!

10. It is called good TIDINGS of great joy Is. iii. 8. Luke ii. 10.
. O the necessary, the useful, the suitable, the important, the delightful, and
ravishing news which it brings from heaven to sinful men! Tidings of
righteousness, pardon, and acceptance, to the guilty! Tidings of purification
to the polluted! of health to the diseased! of liberty to the enslaved and
imprisoned! of clothing to the naked! of food to the hungry and starving! of
light to them that sit in darkness of distress and ignorance! of riches to the
poor, comfort to the mourner, peace to the traitor, life to the dead, and
salvation to the lost! How often have these good news from the far country been
as cold water to my thirsty and weary soul! It is called the gospel, or good
tidings of God; it proceeds from him, declares his love and loveliness;
promotes his honor, and brings men to him: It is called the gospel of Christ,
as he is the principal preacher, the substance and end of of it, in whom all
the articles of it are yea and amen to the glory of God: It is called the
gospel of ministers, as they preach and publish it. It is the gospel of peace,
as it proclaims the peace of God to us, and the means thereof; and reconciles
our heart to him, and to one another in love. It is the gospel of salvation, as
it proclaims, brings near, offers, exhibits, and is the means of applying, the
great, the everlasting salvation, to our soul. It is an everlasting gospel, as
it shall be dispensed till the end of time; and its fruits shall remain for
ever. It is the gospel of the kingdom of grace; and which brings men, who
believe it, to the kingdom of glory.

11. It is called a MYSTERY Ephesians. iii. 9. 1 Timothy 3 iii. 16. Matthew. xiii. 11.
. O the incomprehensible truths which it reveals! That there are three persons
in one Godhead, or DIVine essence: That the Son of God was manifest in the
flesh; suffered the just for the unjust, that he might bring sinners to God;
died for our offenses, and rose again for our justification; was exalted as a
Prince and Savior, to give us repentance and remission of sins; sent to bless
us, make us the righteousness of God in him, and dwell in our hearts by faith;
that being crucified with Christ, we might live by faith on him, and have the
world crucified to us, and we to the world. Is not every doctrine thereof an
unsearchable deep, shown only by the Spirit of God, and which even a wise man
cannot find out to perfection! O the height, the depth, the length, and breadth
of the love, the wisdom, and knowledge of God, included therein! It is the
mystery of godliness, which founds and promotes conformity to, and reverence of
God; holiness in heart and life. The mystery of the kingdom, known only in the
kingdom of grace and glory. Pant thou, my soul, for the fellowship of this
mystery of Christ; with angels, desire to look into it.

12. It is likened to a TRUMPET Is. xxvii. 12.
. With great skill it ought to be preached. How majestic and pleasant its
joyful sound! its agreeable declarations! How sweetly! how loud it proclaims
the approaches of King Jesus to men! and their deliverance from sin and wrath
by him! Of what unbounded importance are its declarations! and how distinct! It
warns us to flee from the wrath to come; invites us to Jesus, the Savior and
great One. -- Quickly may it be blown over all the earth; that such as are
ready to perish, may come and worship before the Lord of hosts.

13. It is compared to RIVERS of living, and all-quickening water Ezekiel xlvii.
1. -- 4. Joel iii. 18. Zech. xiv. 8. Psalm. xlvi. 4.
; because of its freeness, fullness, purity, perpetuity, and patency to all; and
for its cleansing, beautifying, protecting, refreshing, and enriching virtue.
By it Jesus begets, preserves, restores, promotes and perfects, the spiritual
life of his people, and brings them to eternal life. This river proceeds from
the temple, and runs by the altar of God; flows from his love, and through the
blood and sacrifice of his Son. Gradually it increases from a bubbling drop to
an unpassable sea. Before the flood, it was very small in appearance; but
gradually it increased by new revelations, till, in the apostolic age, it
became like a river. Before Jesus' resurrection, it was inconsiderable, in
respect of its appearance in the apostolic and millennial age. It runs into the
dead sea, and valley of Shittim; spreads among dead and barren Gentile nations,
and into cursed, barren, and lifeless hearts. It makes every thing to live
whithersoever it comes; had, and shall have, an amazing success in quickening
dead sinners, and reviving dying saints; but heals not marishy places of
reprobate men. The flourishing and fruitful trees growing on the side of this
river, are Jesus the tree of life, and his comely and useful saints. The
multitude of fishers from Engedi even unto Eneglaim, and the multitude of
fishes caught by them in the dead sea, when this river has run into it, are
ministers preaching, and multitudes hearing and receiving the gospel, through
the world, from one end to the other. Its running both in summer and winter,
implies its being constantly preached and applied, whether in times of
prosperity or trouble, with the church, or any particular member thereof It
makes glad the city, the church of God, by its streams of declarations,
offers, invitations, and influences.

14. It is a WELL, or wells of salvation Is. xii. 3.
. O the depth of its doctrines and promises! Without faith, I can draw nothing
from them. O their perpetual fullness of influence! of blessedness and
salvation! How sweetly calculated to delight, refresh, nourish, restore, heal,
quicken, and fructify my heart! And is not salvation their sum, their all in
all?

15. The gospel is compared to a NET Matthew. xiii. 47. 48. 49.
. How curious its frame and contexture! How base and despicable in the view of
carnal men! What an occasion of trouble and disturbance, in the sea of this
world! With what skill, care, and vigor, it must be cast and managed, in the
preaching of it! To what fatigue and storms, are its constant, its faithful
preachers exposed! How seldom, they, at first, perceive their success in
preaching it! It is the stated means of drawing sinners out of their natural
and worldly state, to Jesus Christ. Fishes small and great, sinners less or
greater, persons poor or rich, are caught therein. Teach thy ministers, O
Jesus, to cast this net on the right side of the ship, that a multitude may be
enclosed; it is impossible the net can break. Quickly, my soul, shall JEHOVAH
draw it to land; the mystery of God shall be finished; the gospel no more
dispensed. Then shall the good fish, such men as were caught by the heart, be
conveyed to the paradise of God. These, who were only caught by a heady
illumination, and outward profession, shall be cast into endless fire.

16. It is compared to a GRAIN of mustard seed, which grows up into a very
large stalk Matthew. xiii. 31. 32.
. At first, its discovery and dispensation were small and despised; but it
has, or will, overspread the whole earth. To what multitudes is it the means
of refreshing and comfort! What numbers shall profess subjection to it! How
increasing its influence in our heart! At first, perhaps scarce discernible, it
quickly fills the whole. What multitudes of graces are refreshed! What good
works are brought forth, under the overshadowing influence thereof!

17. It is compared to LEAVEN Matthew. xiii. 33.
. However unpleasant and despicable it be to carnal men; yet being inlaid in
the world, it continues to spread its influence, till the whole earth be
filled with the knowledge of the Lord. Being inlaid in men's heart, it spreads
its virtue, enlightening the mind, purifying the conscience, renewing the will,
softening the heart, inflaming the affections, and fixing the memory, till the
whole be thereby sanctified.

18. It is compared to LIGHT, and a GLASS Is. lx. 1. 2 Cor. iii. 18.
. What ravishing, though imperfect views of JEHOVAH, in his greatness and love;
of Jesus in his comeliness, office, relations, righteousness, power, and grace,
do we here obtain! What prospect of life and immortality! We look not at the
things which are seen, which are temporal; but at the things which are not
seen, which are eternal; we see, that henceforth is laid up for us a crown of
righteousness; that we shall awake with Jesus' likeness; and shall be for ever
with, and like him; for we shall see him as he is.

19. It resembles the TREASURE hid in the field Matthew. xiii. 44.
. How inestimably precious, containing all exceeding great and precious
promises, comprehending all inestimable benefits, all the unsearchable riches
of Christ! When possessed, how it enricheth, felicitates, ennobles, and
emboldens toward God! encourages and enables to resist wicked lusts, angels,
and men! In the field of inspiration it lies hid, and must be dug up by
careful search, meditation, and prayer. And for its sake, are the oracles of
Heaven worth ten thousand worlds to my heart.

20. It resembles CHAINS OF GOLD, ROWS OF JEWELS, BORDERS OF GOLD, and STUDS OF
SILVER Song i. 10. 11.
. How well connected! how comely, precious, firm, durable, enriching, and
adorning, are its doctrines and promises to the scripture and church; and to
every true member thereof! How they strengthen and adorn the neck of my faith!
render my cheeks, my countenance, my blushing graces, beautiful and comely! and
make my conversation-garments, show splendid and glorious!

21. It is compared to SHOES Song vii. 1.
. It supports our soul, our grace, our walk; influenceth our affections; marks
our liberty, and our royal greatness. The more fixed we be in the faith
thereof, the more pleasantly, safely, and swiftly, we proceed in our spiritual
journey; and tread Satan, the old serpent, and his agents, under our feet.

22. Its leading truths resemble a FOUNDATION 2 Timothy ii. 19.
. Being fixed on the testimony of God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, it is
impossible that they can sink or fall. How gloriously they support and
embellish the whole remaining oracles of God! And on them build my soul; build,
you saints, your whole hopes of eternal felicity.

CHAP. V. Metaphors respecting the gospel dispensation, and ordinances thereof.
Metaphors respecting the gospel dispensation.
1. THE dispensation of God's grace, especially under the New Testament, is
called the KINGDOM OF GOD; the KINGDOM OF HEAVEN Mark i. 14. and Matthew. xx. 1.
. O the majestic sovereignty, state, and royalty of God therein manifested! O
its beautiful order, strength, and duration! and the honorable privileges
therein conferred! What multitudes are thereby connected, and united under
Jesus their head! God is the deviser, the establisher, the manager, and his
glory the end of it. It is heavenly in its origin; it resembles heaven in
holiness, comeliness, and order; and prepares men for entrance into the
heavenly inheritance of the saints in light. The New Testament dispensation is
more God-like and heavenly than the Old; holiness is the universal law of the
house; and its privileges are more spiritual and sanctifying.

2. The gospel dispensation in the apostolic age is represented as a
MARRIAGE-DINNER; and that chiefly in the glorious Millennium, is called the
MARRIAGE SUPPER of the Lamb Matthew. xxii. 1. -- 14. Luke xiv. 15. -- 24. Rev.
xix. 7. -- 9. Matthew. viii. 11. 12.
. The former is indeed toward the end of time, but nearer its middle than the
other, which shall but take place before the last judgment. God has killed his
oxen and satlings; has slain his own Son, to he our provision; has prepared
all possible blessings; and invites every sort of sinners to espouse his Son,
and accept of his fullness. From trifling and carnal motives, the Jews, when
first invited, refused to receive this mercy and favor; For this they were
excluded from the church, and the ordinances thereof; themselves massacred by
the murdering Romans, and by one another; and their city burnt with fire. But
thrice happy! God extended his invitations to the destitute, the wicked, and
infamous Gentiles, in whatsoever city or nation they are found! O now our rich
provision! our amazing joy and happiness! our honorable fellowship with God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; with angels, ancient patriarchs, and eminent
saints, while the Jewish children of the kingdom are cast out! How fitly our
entertainment prepares us for our work in the end of the world! qualifieth us
to lie down in our dusty beds of the grave! and to enter into our eternal rest!
How great JEHOVAH's earnestness to have his house filled with destitute
sinners! Upon his invitations what multitudes have entered, and yet there is
room. By setting before us the sinfulness and misery of our natural state,
Jesus' excellency, ability, and readiness to save, and using every method to
persuade our conscience, he requires his ministerial servants to compel us to
come in, that his house may be filled. But dreadful shall be our endless
misery, if we live in his church, without putting on his Son, as our
righteousness and sanctification!

3. It is represented as the letting out of a vineyard to husbandmen Matthew.
xxi. 33. -- 43.
. In the ceremonial form thereof, God gave it to the Jews, and sent his
prophets to demand, that they should give him the glory due to his name; these
being injuriously maltreated, he sent his Son, whom, it might have been
expected, they would reverence and regard; but they murdered him, that they
might live as they listed. For these things God miserably destroyed the Jewish
nation, and gave the gospel to the Gentiles, that they might bring forth fruits
of good works, answerable to it.

4. It is compared to the hiring of laborers at different hours, to work in a
vineyard, and giving all equal wages Matthew. xx. 1. -- 16.
. In the morning of the patriarchal, in the noontide of the ceremonial, at the
ninth hour of the apostolic age, in the eleventh hour of the future Millennium,
or thousand years reign of the saints, multitudes are DIVinely invited, and
brought to Christ, and to his work in the church. Nor shall the eternal
blessedness of the former exceed that of the latter. Murmur not, ye Jews, who
bore the burden of eremonial rites, and the heat of laborious service; murmur
not, ye primitive Christians, who bore the burden of troublesome work, and the
heat of scorching persecution; may not JEHOVAH do with his own as he pleases?
Is not the whole reward of sovereign grace? Let not your eye be evil, because
his is good. In the early morning of life, are not some; in its middle or noon
are not others; in its evening of old age, are not others, though more rarely,
called and drawn to Christ? May not a sovereign God impart to all an equal
share of his endless bliss; his gracious reward?

5. It is compared to a great man's giving pounds or talents to his servants,
as he departs to a far country, that they may occupy till he return, call them
to an account, and render them rewards, according to their respective
improvement Matthew. xxv. 14. -- 30. Luke xix 11. -- 27.
. Ascending up on high, to receive for himself a kingdom, Jesus committed to
men, the precious and useful pounds and talents of DIVine scriptures, of gospel
ordinances, of manifold opportunities of grace and happiness, of holy offices,
gifts, and graces; to some in a greater, to others in a lesser degree. These he
requires them to improve, always abounding in the work of the Lord. At the end,
he will come, and reckon with them. Such as having real grace, have improven
their talents, shall be highly and proportionally rewarded with everlasting
honor and joy. Such as, having no real grace, through hard thoughts of Jesus,
have not improved their gifts, offices, and opportunities, shall be
self-condemned, and cast into endless misery.

6. In the end of the world, it is like to the calling of wise and foolish
virgins to meet the Bridegroom Matthew. xxv. 1. -- 13.
. Though, church members be like virgins in outward purity, in blamelessness of
life, and soundness of principle, and in apparent modesty, and self-denial; yet
alas how many of them are not wise unto salvation! What multitudes foolishly
name the name of Christ, without receiving him into their heart! At the end of
time, how dreadful shall be the sloth and security, of both saints and
hypocrites! Ere they are aware, Christ shall summon them to judgment. Happy
then, those, who have oil of true grace, attending their lamps of profession!
their glory shall be brightness; their lamps trimmed; their grace perfected;
and themselves shall enter into immediate and everlasting fellowship with
Christ! but oh unhappy these, who have lamps, but no saving grace! None can
then be given them; no creature shall be able or willing to help them. They
shall be irreversibly excluded from the fellowship of Christ; and shut up in
everlasting torments, where there shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of
teeth.

7. The gospel-state of the New Testament church is represented as a REST Heb.
iv. 3.
. How fully is our free and complete justification through the blood of Jesus
therein displayed! and how powerfully applied! how happily we are therein
liberated from that servile frame of spirit, which was so common to the Jews,
in their worship! The yoke of troublesome ceremonies is no more imposed; nor is
our conscience burdened or perplexed, concerning the punctual observance
thereof. But the spiritual and easy institutions of the gospel, attended with
gracious freedom, strength, and assistance, are come in their room. Blessed
rest of heaven! blessed form of worship, never to be changed in time, and
wherein JEHOVAH manifests his rest in Christ, and in his love toward us!

II. Metaphors respecting gospel ordinances.
1. GOSPEL ORDINANCES resemble a woman's BREASTS Song. viii. 1. 10.
. They are of two kinds; ordinary and sealing: and these last are now two;
baptism and the Lord's supper. How delightfully they adorn the church; and
nourish her true children, to everlasting life, with the sincere milk of God's
word! How delightfully, during the night of time, Jesus lies between, and is
found in them!

2. They resemble TWIN ROES feeding among the lilies Song. iv. 5.
. How harmonious! how well connected! how comely, pleasant, and pure! how
opposite and ruining to the old serpent, and his agents! and how often attacked
and wrathfully injured by them! How delightfully maintained! and as it were sed
among the promises, and doctrines of the glorious gospel! -- And thine it is, O
Lily of the valley, and thy lilies among thorns, with pleasure to feed therein.

3. They resemble CHARIOTS; LITTERS; and HORSES Is. lxvi. 20.
. In a swift, majestic, and glorious manner, Jesus therein approaches to our
heart; and triumphantly rides through, and appears in the world. And by them he
easily and honorably transports his chosen people through it, to their better,
their heavenly country.

4. They resemble MANDRAKES, or DUDAIM Song vii. 13.
. How savoury, medicinal, cooling, and refreshing to our soul! How comely and
delightful to our spiritual eye! How effectually they enkindle our love to
Jesus and his people! and render us fruitful in good works! Yet alas! how many,
by means thereof, lull themselves into such spiritual sleep, as nothing but the
flames of hell can awaken them!

5. They resemble SPIKENARD Song i. 12.
. However low and contemptible they seem to carnal men; yet to saints how
precious, fragrant, and useful! How they warm our heart, comfort our soul,
strengthen our appetite, and cheer our spirit! And truly, O King of kings, it
is thy sitting with me at thy table, in intimate fellowship, that makes this
spikenard send forth its smell, and refresh my soul!

6. They resemble WATERS; and WELLS of salvation Is. lv. 1. and xii. 3.
. How easy, unhampered, and free is my access to them! How effectually, by
them, Jesus purifies my conscience, and nourishes my heart! refreshes all my
inward powers! cools my lust! and satiates my desire! When I am enabled to
enter into their spirit, would I, for ten thousand worlds, forsake their
cold-flowing waters, which come from another place?

7. They are compared to MOUNTAINS and HILLS Song iv. 6. Joel iii. 18.
. How hard to ascend them aright! In them, how wide is our prospect of eternal
things! How they exalt us above the grovelling world! and bring us to the
confines of heaven! What noble shadows and wells of spiritual refreshment we
find in them! What a glorious forest, Christ the tree of life, and his
unnumbered trees of righteousness growing up under his shadow! What blessed
river of JEHOVAH and his love, of Jesus and his blood, and of the DIVine Spirit
and his influences, that makes glad the city of our God! -- What pleasant and
wholesome air of DIVine breathings! What rich pasture for Jesus' chosen flock
is here to be found! What need, carefully to descend from them to worldly
concerns, lest we fall, stumble, and be broken, snared, and taken! They are
mountains of myrrh, and hills of frankincense. What fragrant, medicinal,
quickening, and refreshful truths, and breathings of heaven, we there enjoy!
But take heed, my soul, even there the serpents lurk. How often you
corruptions, you fiends, have I seen you! have I felt your deadly influence, at
the very top! in the highest ordinance, and in the best frame! But when felt I
these mountains drop with new wine, ever fresh, redeeming love; and these hills
flow with milk, of heart-warming and restoring grace; and these channels flow
with the water of life, and the fountain come out of the house of the Lord, and
water the valley of Shittim; -- water my debased, earthly, barren heart?

8. They may be called the PATHS of Christ's flock Song i. 8.
. In them the saints, as they have access, walk with pleasure and progress
toward the heavenly country.

9. They are likened to SHEPHERDS TENTS Ibid.
. In their outward appearance, they are but coarse and despicable. They are
easily removed from place to place; they are only calculated for the wilderness
of this world; and to them, ye ministers of Christ, ought constantly to attend.

10. They are represented as the COURTS; the HOUSE; the TEMPLE; TABERNACLE; and
ALTAR of God Psalm. lxxxiv. 10. and xliii. 3. 4.
. There his glory is seen, his presence enjoyed, and his benefits conferred,
through Christ, as crucified for us; and in them we offer ourselves spiritual
sacrifices to him.

11. They are called STREETS and BROAD WAYS Song iii. 2.
At the infinite expense of Heaven, they are prepared for men. How carefully to
be kept pure and entire! How beautiful and straight! How useful to lead us to
the palace of the mighty King! And what multitudes have free access to walk and
trade therein!

12. They are represented as TOWERS Song viii. 10.
. How high and heavenly! How strong and useful for assisting the saints to
defend themselves against sin, Satan, and the world! How richly furnished with
all spiritual armor!

13. They are likened to CHAMBERS Song i. 4.
. Here Christ and his people dwell together. Here they rest, and are refreshed;
here he secures and defends them. Here he comes to, and is familiar with them;
manifests himself, and makes known the secrets of his covenant. Here they
secretly pour out their hearts; worship the Lord of hosts; eat meat which the
world knows not of; and labor not in vain in the Lord.

14. They are called a BANQUETING HOUSE, or HOUSE OF WINE Song ii. 4.
. What rich stores of everlasting love, and DIVine consolations, are contained
in them! And how often therein, are the saints refreshed and ravished with the
fullness of God!

15. They resemble RAFTERS of fir Song i. 11.
. How straight, comely, and self consistent! How heaven-pointed, permanent,
flourishing and refreshful! How usefully and delightfully they support and
connect the church, and establish her true members, in their most holy faith,
and their gospel-conversation!

16. They may be compared to GALLERIES. Song vii. 5.
. Are they not the pleasant, the magnificent, lightsome, and lofty means, in
which King Jesus walks, and converseth with his people? is held in their
spiritual embrace? and feasts them on his infinite fullness?

17. But the word rendered galleries and rafters, signifies also
WATERING-TROUGHS Is. lv. 1.
, to which gospel ordinances may be compared, because therein Jesus waters and
refreshes his followers, his flock, with his water of life, drawn from the
deeps of his everlasting love. -- So, Lord, evermore refresh my soul.

18. They are represented as MARKETPLACES at the WATER; as PLACES OF
CONCOURSE; as GATES; and DOORS Prove. i. 21. and viii. 1. 2. 3 4.
. In them Jesus stands and invites multitudes of sinful men to receive his
benefits. In them he distributes his prepared goodness to the poor, sells
without money and without price. In them we are to wait for him; and, by them,
we enter into fellowship with him, and go into the heavenly mansions.

19. They are compared to WINDOWS and LATTICES Song ii. 9.
. By them the church is beautified, enlightened, and refreshed. In them we
enjoy the light of life, which comes from above; obtain the prospect of
spiritual and eternal things; and are refreshed by the north and south breezes
of the Holy Ghost.

20. They are compared to KEYS Matthew. xvi. 19.
. By a proper use of Christ's doctrine, discipline, and government, the church,
nay, heaven itself, is ministerially opened to, or shut against, the sons of
men.

21. They resemble a GREEN and well-GUARDED BED Song i. 16.
. Being surrounded by DIVine perfections, and holy angels; attended by saithful
ministers, what safe and sweet rest and fellowship with Christ may we enjoy in
them! O how our hearts are warmed with his love! How we recruit our strength!
and renew our youth even as the eagles! How sweetly we enjoy the sleep of God's
beloved! do cease from our sins, our self-righteousness, and worldly labor!
and are rendered fruitful to God in the works of holiness!

22. They are compared to a TABLE Song i. 12.
. To display his munisicence, Jesus framed them; and furnishes them with all
the blessings of his new covenant. With delight and pleasure, he continues ever
present in them, to meet with, speak to, and feast his people with his flesh
and blood. Truly, that which is set on it is full of fatness. For in this
mount, on this table, does the Lord of hosts make for all people, saints and
sinners, Jews and Gentiles, a feast of fat things, full of marrow, of wines on
the lees well refined; JEHOVAH, in all his fullness and love; Jesus, in his
person, offices, righteousness, and grace; and the blessed Spirit in all his
characters, operations, and influences. -- Lord, may this table never become
our trap; let never DIVine ordinances tend to the hardening of our heart.

23. They resemble ROWS of JEWELS on the cheek Song i. 10.
. How mysterious their order, and DIVine their connection! How they adorn the
church's outward form! and make the saint's face to shine!

24. They resemble CHAINS OF GOLD about the neck Ibid.
. How precious, durable, and firmly, connected! How closely they adhere to, and
illucidate the scripture! warm, support, and protect our faith!

25. They resemble BORDERS OF GOLD, with STUDS of SILVER Song i. 11.
. How precious all! but some more important than others! How comely and
durable! How enriching to the saints, and ornamental to the church! How
attended by, and productive of, well-tried, honorable, and precious gifts and
graces!

26. They are represented as a DIGGING and DUNGING about sinful men Luke xiii.
8.
. Being attended with convincing providence and influences, they import and
manifest the most astonishing patience, pains, and care, of the Most High
toward men; and render us inexcusable, if, notwithstanding, we continue in our
spiritual barrenness.

27. Gospel truths and ordinances are represented as a TRUST committed to men 1 Timothy vi. 20.
. How solemnly! How DIVinely, and with proper gifts attending, are they
committed and entrusted to ministers and private Christians, that they may be
preserved pure and entire, from generation to generation! And at the peril of
our honor and life, do we betray or lose any of them.

CHAP. VI. Metaphors respecting God's favor, and the saving benefits flowing
from it, which are manifested and conveyed through the new covenant, the
gospel, and the ordinances of it, to men.
1. Metaphors respecting God's favor.
1. GOD's free favor and grace is compared to a KING Rom v. 21.
. Where sin reigned unto death, it reigns through righteousness unto eternal
life by Jesus Christ. With what amazing glory and sovereignty, it acts; and
does whatsoever it pleases! Every DIVine person, perfection, purpose, and
providence, concurs to promote its honor. Every creature is employed to
advance its designs. It conquers every foe; subdues to itself every chosen
sinner of mankind; rules with absolute dominion in every saint; and receives
from him a tribute of endless praise.

2. It is likened to an overflowing SEA or RIVER Ephesians. iii. 18. 19.
. O its height, depth, length, and breadth! It passes knowledge. It reaches
from eternity to eternity; from hell to heaven! It bears down all opposition;
washes away every stain; covers every mountain of guilt and misery; spreads
into every person, power, and concern, of an elect world, and makes glad the
whole city of our God. -- Blessed river! boundless ocean! be thou the sole
source of my happiness. Let all my well-springs of promises and ordinances be
in thee; and cause every thing whithersoever thou come, even my dead heart,
to live.

II. Metaphors respecting the change of our state.
1. The change of our state is represented as a CALLING Heb. iii. 1
. By Jesus' gospel-invitation, we are therein powerfully called, and drawn from
Satan to God; from darkness and ignorance to God's mavelous light; from sin
to purity and holiness; from misery to happiness; from earth to heaven; in
fine, from the fellowship of the law, and our lusts, to the fellowship of God's
Son. -- Arise, my soul, the Master is come, and calls for thee.

2. The change of our state is represented as Christ's SEEKING and FINDING us
out Matthew xviii. 11. 12. 13.
. With amazing love, care, and skill, he pursues us by his word and
providence. By his servants, he sends forth his word, that, in various forms
and expressions suiting every case, it may run speedily; and, through the
Spirit, hit our particular condition, touch our conscience, and draw our heart.
Having thus apprehended us, he brings us to his presence, instates us in his
favor, and restores to us the felicity and usefulness of which sin had
deprived us. -- Lord, when I know not were to find myself, do thou seek and
find me.

3. It is called a MARRIAGE, or ESPOUSALS Song iii. 11.
. In consequence of our Redeemer's preparing himself for us, by undertaking our
cause, assuming our nature, clothing himself with wedding robes of finished
righteousness, fulfilled in our stead; in consequence of his preparing a place
for us, by blood and intercession; and of his wooing us by the word of his
gospel, he, in the predestined moment of power, and his time of love, breaks
our natural union and affection to the broken law; to Satan and our corrupt
inclinations; and by his Spirit enters and dwells in our heart; and enableth us
to accept of him, as our only, our everlasting husband. As such, he has
fellowship with us in bearing our guilt; and in our infirmities and
afflictions; in our grace and exercise; and we with him in his righteousness,
strength honor, and work. Mutually he and we dwell with, esteem, love, desire,
delight in, rejoice over, and manifest our mind one to another. -- O blessed
marriage! the joy of Jesus, and of my soul.

4. It is represented as an IMPLANTING or INGRAETING Rom vi. 5.
. It is by the amazing patience and labor of God, we are cut off from the
stock of the fallen Adam; are closely united to, rooted and grounded in Christ;
made partakers of his death and resurrection; and so revive, and bring forth
fruit unto God. -- Here being planted, O my soul, thou shall cast forth thy
roots as Lebanon.

5. It is represented as a CONQUEST Psalm. xlv. 3. 4. 5.
. Finding us the subjects of the law, and of Satan, the world, and our lusts,
filled with rage and enmity against him and his people, Jesus Christ, with
infinite power, wisdom, and patience, attacks our soul with the sword of his
Spirit, -- his word; fastens in us the arrows of convincing and heart-drawing
influences; slays our enmity, by his powerful promises and bleeding love;
constrains us to yield our souls, take his easy yoke upon us, and consent to be
his willing, affectionate, and obedient subjects. -- So, Lord Jesus, conquer
multitudes; conquer me.

6. It is represented as a LIBERATION Zech. ix. 11. 12.
. Finding us in a most wretched, shameful, and slavish captivity, to Satan and
our sinful corruption, and in the unclean, unwholesome, unhappy, cold, dark,
disgraceful, and confining prison of our natural state; Jesus powerfully
overthrows the dominion of our enslavers in us; loses the chains of our
guilt, by the application of his all pardoning blood; breaks the fetters of our
lust, ignorance, and enmity, by the power of his grace; and bestows on us the
most glorious freedom, honor, and rest. -- Out of prison, I come to reign.

7. It is represented as a DEATH Gal. ii. 19. 20.
. Herein we partake of the influence of Jesus' death. Our old man receives his
mortal wound, of which he afterward dies daily. In it our hopes of happiness
by our own works, our relation and love to the law as a covenant, our universal
study to serve it, our superlative regard to sinful and earthly things,
painfully expire. -- So may I die, that I may live unto God.

8. It is represented as a BURIAL Col. ii. 12.
. In it, we partake of the virtue of Jesus' death and burial; and are conformed
to him. We commence God's hidden ones, whose glory does not appear; and are
rendered contemptible and disagreeable to carnal and worldly men, Sweetly we
rest from sin; and self-righteousness; from the overwhelming terrors of the
law; of death and hell; and from every sting of trouble and adversity. -- So
let me be buried with Christ; so come, my soul, and see the place where the
Lord lay.

9. It is called a RESURRECTION Ezekiel. xx1vii 1. -- 14.
. Being by nature in the most earthly, withered, dry, lifeless, and loathsome
condition, Jesus, by his Spirit of life, quickens us; causes us to pass from
death to life; brings us from our graves of condemnation and lust; clothes us
with the white robes of his righteousness and grace; and qualifieth us to work
and walk with God, angels, and good men. -- So let a poor sleeper in the dust,
awake and sing.

10. It is called a CREATION Ephesians. iii. 10.
. Unassisted by any creature, Jesus, by his almighty power and word, forms the
ever-abiding structure of grace, the new creature, out of nothing. His work he
commenceth in the forming of spiritual light and knowledge. Daily he adds new
ornaments thereto, till, against the Sabbath of eternal rest, it be fully
perfected. -- So, Lord, create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit
within me.

11. It is called a RENEWING of the Holy Ghost Tit. iii. 4 ^ Cor. v. 17.
. Therein God forms a new creature, directly opposite to our indwelling
corruptions, of ignorance, unbelief, enmity, and the like; makes all things
new. He furnishes our mind with new light, thoughts, and designs. He imparts
to our conscience, purity, penetration, softness, tenderness, activity. He
bestows on our will, new inclinations and desires. He sets our affections on
new, spiritual, and heavenly objects. He fixes in our memory new treasures of
DIVine truths and gracious experience. In fine, he gives us a new heart; and
makes his new Spirit to dwell within us. By his grace he disposes us to relish
and choose new companions; and to lead a new, holy, humble, self-denied
conversation, of charity and love, out of a pure conscience, and from faith
unfeigned.

12. It is represented as a SECOND, a HEAVENLY BIRTH John iii. 3. 5.
. Of the incorruptible seed of his word and grace, Jesus, our spiritual Father,
begets us again to a lively hope. Curiously and wonderfully, we are conformed
to his image! Without our preparation or asfistance, there is formed a
mavelous contexture of grace, a new man. We are made partakers of a DIVine
and heavenly nature. By his painful sorrow and suffering, by ministers painful
labors, and with our own painful experience, we are born and brought into the
new, the heavenly world, of a new covenant state, and become related to God,
angels, and saints.

13. It is called a CIRCUMCISION, not of the flesh, but of the heart Col. ii.
11. Deuteronomy. xxx. 6.
. Therein God, by his word and Spirit, sharply pricks and wounds our heart and
conscience; exposes to us our spiritual nakedness and guilt; cuts off the
reigning power of indwelling corruption; prevents our after pollution;
manifests and confirms our interest in his covenant; and gives us a constant
and abiding mark of our relation to him. And without it, we are exposed to
endless destruction.

14. It is called BAPTISM Matthew. iii. 11.
. Therein we are graciously received into covenant with God, and entitled to
the privileges of his people. Therein, washed in Jesus' blood, and purified by
the influence of his Spirit, we solemnly receive God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as our Parent, Savior, Sanctifier, and all in all; and cheerfully
dedicate ourselves to his service. -- My soul, has Jesus baptized me with the
holy Spirit, and with his fiery and sin-purifying influence?

15. It is called a TURNING or CONVERSION Jer. xxxi. 18.
. Therein we are DIVinely turned from the paths of hell to the ways of heaven;
from darkness to light; from guilt to righteousness; from sin to holiness; from
slavery to freedom; from poverty to wealth; from rebellion and enmity, to
favor, acceptance, and intimate friendship with God; from distance to
nearness; from sinful sickness and weakness, to spiritual foundness and
strength. So turn me, Lord, and I shall be turned.

16. It is called a TRANSLATION into the kingdom of God's dear Son Col. i. 13.
. By his grace Jesus lays hold upon us; bears us in the arms of his power and
love; carries us into a new covenant state; in which we are only subject to
him, and not to the broken law, raging devil, or reigning lusts.

17. The work of grace in men's heart is called the KINGDOM OF GOD Luke xvii. 20.
. In the day of his power, Jesus invades and enters our heart; by his word and
Spirit, he overthrows the strong holds of inherent corruption; overturns the
reigning power of Satan and our lusts; conquers every faculty of our soul;
fixes his palace and throne, and writes his law in our inward parts; erects
the judicature of a purged, enlightened, and tender conscience: he entitleth us
to all his fullness and treasure; enters us into league with his omnipotent
perfections, mighty angels, and useful creatures on earth. Storing our inward
powers with his DIVine armor, he disposes and enableth us to wage war with
sin, Satan, and the world. Thrice blessed kingdom, consisting not in meat and
drink; but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost! -- Thrice happy
and honored is my soul, if this kingdom, that cannot be removed, be within me!

18. The change of family herein is called ADOPTION Gal. iv. 5. 6.
. Finding us children of the devil, and heirs of wrath, God, in infinite mercy
and kindness, puts us among his children of angels and saints; and gives us an
undoubted and everlasting title to all the privileges of sonship. His name he
puts upon us; his Spirit in us; and his image on us. His angels he appoints to
guard, and his ministers to inspect and instruct us. Our prayers he hears, our
requests he grants, and allows us familiar boldness and intimacy with him. He
teaches, directs, feeds, clothes, arms, protects, comforts, and corrects us.
Irreversibly he bequeaths to us the everlasting, the pleasant land, and goodly
heritage of the hosts of nations, the whole fullness of God. O astonishing! when
guilt, pollution, and enmity, might have justly provoked his endless
detestation, he said to my soul, Thou have spoken and done evil things as thou
could; will thou not front this time cry unto me, My Father, thou art the
guide of my youth? When, as an infernal fiend, I replied, What have I to do
with thee? Art thou come to torment me before the time? powerfully he rejoined,
Thou SHALL call me my Father, and SHALL NOT turn away from me. I WILL be to him
a Father, and he SHALL be to me a son. How could my enmity, my inward rock,
withstand such melting love! -- Straight all my powers cried out, My Father; my
Guide; my God; my ALL.

19. Our new covenant state is called a REST Matthew. xi. 28.
. Here, in Jesus' blood, as the means of protecting our soul, and appeasing our
conscience; in his power, as an antidote against every fear and danger; in his
love and loveliness, as the all-satisfying object of our desire; in his
faithful promise, as our infallible security for glory, honor, immortality,
eternal life; we rest safe from every wrathful event and enemy. There is no
condemnation to us. No evil can befall us. God and his creatures are in a
covenant of peace with us. In this happy state too we rest from slavish service
to the broken law; and from our sinful fulfillment of the lusts of the flesh and
of the mind.

III. Metaphors respecting the pardon of sin.
1. Pardon of sin, which is often put for the whole of our justification, is
represented as God's being merciful to our unrighteousness Heb. viii. 12.
. It is entirely of his free, rich, and sovereign grace and mercy, that he does
not avenge, but forgive our unrighteousness of heart or life. O grace, grace
unto it!

2. It is represented as a COVERING of sin Psalm. xxxii. 1.
. By the imputation of Jesus' righteousness for our robe, our guilt is so hid
and covered, as no more to expose us to God's revenging wrath; nor can it
justly annoy our conscience with legal horror.

3. It is called a REMISSION or FORGIVENESS Acts v. 31.
. Therein God most fully acquits us of the charge of our crimes; secures us
against the avenging and wrathful punishment thereof; and removes every legal
bar, that obstructs our hope, our happiness, or comfort.

4. It is represented as God's NOT REMEMBERING our sin Is. xliii. 25.
. Having pardoned it, God no more continues to charge or punish it upon us; but
allows us as eminent friendship, familiarity, and fullness of blessings, as if
we never had sinned. How often, my soul, has he taken me into his bosom, as if
I had been an innocent angel!

5. It is represented as his BLOTTING OUT of sin Psalm. li. 1. 9.
. Upon the imputation of Jesus' blood to our person and conscience, our sinful
debts, and the demands of satisfaction for them, are so dropped from the book of
God's judicial remembrance, that neither he, nor the broken law, nor our
conscience, have the least remaining ground to charge them upon us, in order to
require satisfaction for them.

6. It is represented as his casting our sins behind his back, or into the
deeps of the sea; and his putting and removing it far from us Is. xxxviii. 17.
Mic. vii. 19. Psalm. ciii. 12.
. For when it is pardoned, he neither will, nor can charge it upon us; nor
suffer any wrathful punishment to come near us. Our sins are buried the deeps
of JEHOVAH'S love and Jesus' blood; nor ought fears of DIVine curses or
condemnation in the least to dismay us. Jesus has taken away the handwriting
of law-charges of guilt, as well as of ceremonial ordinances, that was against
us, and has nailed it to his cross, from whence it can never be loosed.

7. It is represented as a PURGING away of sin, through the sprinkling of, or
washing us in clean water Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25.
. By the saving application of Jesus' infinitely pure and purifying blood, the
legal guilt of our sin is completely removed from our conscience; and a
sufficient foundation is laid for purging away its moral filth, by the Spirit
of sanctification.

8. It is represented as God's making our scarlet and crimson-coloured, our
hideous crimes, white as snow and wool Is. i. 18.
. By the imputation of Jesus' blood and righteousness, all their terrible
appearances do, as it were, evanish; and purity, peace, righteousness, and
rest, succeed in their room.

9. It is compared to the dispelling of a cloud, or thick cloud Is. xliv. 22.
. Hereby, God alone removes the guilt of our numerous, our innumerable, and
frightful crimes; removes the ground of our gloomy apprehensions of his
threatened vengeance, which, by nature, hangs over our head; gives us access to
see himself in mercy, and comfort; and to obtain delightful views, and
well-grounded hopes, of the heavenly glory.

10. It is represented as the giving us a white stone, with a new name written
on it Rev. ii. 17.
; in allusion to an ancient custom of the Greeks, their voting sentences of
absolution, by casting into a vessel white stones, whereon was sometimes
written the name of the person absolved. God gives us our sentence of pardon,
in the pure, peaceable, glorious, and everlasting promise of the gospel,
directly pointed and applied to our heart. Has God done so to me? Then let me
never be merciful to any iniquity; let me never cover my transgressions as
Adam; let me never forgive my wicked self; let me remember my evil ways, and be
ashamed and confounded for all that I have done; let my sin be ever before me.

IV. Metaphors respecting sanctification.
1. Sanctification is represented as a LIFE Gal. ii. 20.
. It is the immediate effect of Christ's living in us by his Spirit; it is a
mysterious, pleasant, and profitable mercy, maintained by the constant, the
quickening influence of Heaven, the daily application of Jesus' flesh and blood.

2. It is represented as God's WASHING us in water, and PURIFYING us in fire
Is. iv. 4.
. By the continued application of Jesus' word, his blood and spirit; and by
manifold troubles, temptations, and persecutions, he gradually, skilfully, and
powerfully purges out our sinful corruption, till we become like gold tried in
the fire; whiter than snow; without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. --
Having these exceeding great and precious promises, O my soul, cleanse thyself
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit.

3. It is represented as God's SUBDUING our iniquities Mic. vii. 19.
. By the application of the blood of the Lamb, by the Almighty Spirit, and the
all-conquering word of his grace, applied to, and working in our heart, he
gradually weakens, and puts out our inward nations of lusts, enableth our
graces to tread upon them, and occupy their room in our heart, our speech, and
behavior.

V. Metaphors respecting fellowship with God.
1. Comfortable fellowship and intimacy with God in Christ, is represented as a
being in his HOUSE, his CHAMBER, or PRESENCE Song. i. 4. and ii. 4.
. Being DIVinely drawn and admitted, we therein, with secrecy and safety, enjoy
eminent familiarity with him; are refreshed and nourished with his delicate
provision; are enabled and encouraged to utter all our complaints into his
bosom; and have the secrets of his covenant and promise, and sometimes of his
purpose and providence, unfolded to our soul. -- "O send forth thy light, and
thy truth; let them lead me; let them bring me to thine holy hill; then will I
go to God's altar, to God mine exceeding joy."

2. It is represented as a SEEING of God, a WALKING in his light, and having
his countenance lifted upon us Is. ii. ^. Psalm. iv. 6.
. O the clear, the near, and intimate discoveries we there enjoy of his
perfections, promises, relations, words, and works! With what pleasure we
therein behold his excellency and brightness! understand his illucidating
truths, and thereby make progress in our heavenly journey, causing the light of
our holy conversation shine before others, that they may take knowledge of us,
that we have been with Jesus!

3. It resembles a GREEN and well GUARDED BED Song i. 16. and iii. 7. 8.
. O the profound rest we there enjoy, in the person, the righteousness, and
love of Christ! How sweetly we cease from our sinful, legal, and carnal labor,
and delight ourselves in the embraces, the familiar discoveries of Godhead! How
complete is our safety from evil! How familiarly we converse with the Most
High! How melting and fructifying are his influences to our heart!

4. It is called the KISSES of Christ's mouth Song i. 2.
. By his various promises, how sweetly are his everlasting kindness, mercy, and
grace, manifested to our soul! How powerfully this testifies and assures us,
that though he was angry, his anger is turned away, and he comfort us! With
what delightful influence it animates and enhanceth our love to him!

5. It is compared to LIFE Psalm. xxx. 5.
. How agile, alert, and active, it renders our soul in the work of God! How
pleasant! how mysterious and useful! -- Life, O Jesus, lies in thy favor;
natural life is but a death, a hell, without thy presence and love. I live, if
I stand fast in the Lord.

6. It is likened to INEBRIATION Song v. 1.
. How abundantly we therein drink out of God's wells of salvation! drink of the
wine of his loving kindness, receiving it by faith into our heart! How
effectually are we thereby encouraged and strengthened! How sweetly our hearts
forget their former misery, and our lips open in his praise!

7. It is a CUP OF SALVATION; a CUP RUNNING OVER Psalm. cxvi. 13. and xxiii. 5.
. How delightful; how refreshing; how ravishing our believing views of our
redemption! How transporting to possess, and know myself a possessor of that
salvation, which, from eternity, employed the thoughts of God to devise it; and
which comprehends the enjoyment, the endless enjoyment, of all the fullness of
God!

8. It resembles an ANOINTING 2. Cor. ii. 21.
. Plentifully, therein, the Holy Ghost bestows his grace, applies his
influence, and renders us fresh, comely, alert, and active, in our spiritual
warfare and work. -- O to have an unction from the Holy One, that I may know
and do all things!

9. It is compared to a SEALING Ephesians. i. 13.
. Therein the blessed Spirit of all grace impresseth his image on our heart;
sets us aside from the world to his service; and consirms to us our hopes of
everlasting salvation. Jesus sets me as a seal upon his heart, and as a seal
upon his arm. O happy they, who, after they have believed, are thus sealed with
the holy Spirit of promise!

10. It is represented as a SITTING under Christ's shadow, and FEASTING on his
sruit; -- a SUPPING together with his Father and him Song ii. 3. 4. Rev. iii.
20.
. Being protected and refreshed by Jesus' power, righteousness, and love, we
thereby, in sweet familiarity with DIVine persons, with pleasure and joy,
believe and acquiesce in the glory to God; and abundantly embrace the peace on
earth, goodwill to men, and rich fullness of grace and glory, which he, by his
mediation, purchased and precured for us.

11. Earnest desire after this fellowship with Christ and the inward comfort
flowing from it, are represented as a LOVE-SICKNESS Song v. 8. and ii. 5.
. In the first, what a painful pressure of mind; a trouble, a sinking of heart;
a burning desire after Christ; a detestation of all wordly things, that offer a
shadowy comfort, is occasioned by his absence! In the last, what a ravishment,
a transport, an inward burning of love to a Redeemer, is produced by his
presence! -- When I deeply taste a Savior's love, when I lie basking in his
warming rays, how am I ravished with joy! how sick! how overcharged with bliss!
how all inflamed with love DIVine! -- How I detest the sweets of earth! -- Get
hence, you ministers of darkness, you enjoyments of sense, you polluted
pleasures of sin; my soul abhors your dainty meats. -- Get hence, thou body of
sin and death, thou hated clog of error, guilt, and corruption. -- Get hence,
thou mortal life, thou circle of repeated woes, vanities, and vexations of
spirit, where, since sin and folly entered, happiness was never seen. -- Ye
flowery varieties of earth, ye sparkling glories of the sky, now let me shut
mine eyes on you, and open them on brighter! -- O far brighter seenes! -- On
God! my GOD! my JOY! my LIFE! my LOVER! and my ALL! -- How delightfully my
thoughts, with reason, rave on my loving, dying, living Lord! Beyond creation's
utmost line, how fast! how far, my wishes fly! O how my heart languisheth for
the habitation, the embrace, the bosom, of the Most High! How she longs to
behold my almighty Lover, in all his pomp of majesty, and bloom of beauty! How
she pants for the FAIR ORIGINAL of all that is lovely! for beauty yet unknown!
for intellectual pleasure yet untasted! -- By what almighty; what enrapturing
attraction he now draws my heart! How Jesus' lovely form meets every thought!
fills every view! Beside him, I behold nothing; beyond him, I desire nothing. O
sweet burning thirst, to be quenched by nothing but the unfathomed ocean of a
fully enjoyed God of love! Is this my sickness? what then that endless health
above! To this, swift be my passage, short my road: Let me but shut my eyes,
and see my God.

CHAP. VII. Metaphors respecting saving grace, as inherent in, and exercised by
us.
I. Metaphors respecting grace, as a general principle.
1. THE inward principle, or implanted habit of grace, is called the SPIRIT
Gal. v. 1^.
. It is formed by, and resembles the Spirit of God. It resides in the whole
soul, in all the spiritual powers of man; and it disposes to mind, savor,
delight, and labor in spiritual things.

2. It is called a MAN Ephesians. iv. 24. and iii. 16. Song iv. 1. to 5. and vii. 1.
-- 5. 1 Pet. iii. 4.
, for its glorious dignity, its mavelous contexture, its eminent prudence and
sagacity. It spreads through our whole man, soul, body, and spirit. It has
what answers to the distinguished parts and powers of a human body, and
faculties of the human soul. Hope, that mounting grace, is its head as Carmel,
or crimson; spiritual thoughts and good works are the hairs growing thereon.
Faith and spiritual knowledge are its eyes, by which we see the Son, and his
invisible realities; see ourselves in our vileness, and the world in its
vanity, and bring forth tears of godly sorrow, and melting of heart: and its
ears, by which we hear Jesus' voice, and discern it from the voice of a
stranger: and its nose, to smell the savor of his good ointments, and
sagaciously to prescent the approach of spiritual foes; and to discover the
inward frame of our heart. Humility and self denial are its blushing and
beautiful cheeks. Faith, by which we taste that the Lord is gracious, handle
the word of life, receive Jesus as the gift of God, are joined to him, and feed
upon him, as the bread of life, and nourishment of our soul, is its mouth,
hand, and neck. Affectionate desires toward God, are its lips and breath.
Believing embracements, ardent affection and desires, are its bosom and
breasts. Love and compassion are its belly, bowels, and heart; spiritual
strength, resignation, and patience, are its back. Holy principles, and a
gospel-conversation, are its thighs, legs, and feet. See Book I. chapter VII. No 5.
It is called a new man. It was not originally in our heart; all things
pertaining to it are new, directly opposite to the old man of indwelling
corruption; a new heart, a new spirit, new light, life, liberty, new love,
affection, memory, and conversation. It is called the inner-man of the heart;
for though it produce an outward holy profession and practice, it chiefly and
formally consists in the frame, temper, and disposition of our heart, our
understanding, conscience, will, and affections. It is called an hidden man; it
is hidden from Satan, that he cannot destroy it; from the world, that they
cannot understand it; from other saints, that they cannot certainly discern it.
When we walk in spiritual darkness, and are deprived of the shining of God's
countenance, we ourselves can scarcely observe it. And how safely is it laid
up, sealed and secured in Christ!

3. It is represented as an ARMED WARRIOR Ephesians vi. o. -- 18. 1 Thessalonians v. 8.
. Dreadless of danger, secure against death, it continually seeks the ruin of,
-- and by earnest desire after holiness, by warm opposition of inward lust, by
resistance of temptation, and study of disconformity to carnal men, it fights
against sin, Satan, and the world. It is armed with the girdle of DIVine truth,
which being applied to the heart, renders it strong and active; with the girdle
of inward truth and sincerity of soul, which girds up the loins of the mind,
and makes it candid and sober; with the breast plate of imputed righteousness,
which repels the horrid accusations of Satan, secures from condemnation and
death; and of faith and love, which render our soul courageous and safe. Armed
with the shoes of gospel truth, a firm establishment in the principles of
which, qualifies to run alertly, regularly, and fearlessly, in the field of
spiritual warfare: with the shining, solid, and impenetrable shield of faith,
especially of the DIVine persections, as embraced and improven by says, to
defend the whole man, and to repel and return on Satan himself, his fiery,
fearful, swift, flying, and dangerous darts of seduction: with the helmet of
salvation, and hope thereof, to ward off deadly, stupifying, and confounding
blows of temptation or trouble. Armed with the mail-coat, and armor of
universal holiness and righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left, to
damp the heart of every opposer: with the artillery of all prayer and
dependence on God, and with the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
by which our conscience is convinced; our corruptions wounded; temptations,
errors, and heresies, solidly refuted and ruined.

4. It is represented as a DIVINE NATURE, and image of God 2 Pet. i. 4.
. By him it is conferred on, and produced in us; and by it we are permanently
conformed to him in every imitable perfection, in knowledge, wisdom, power,
holiness, justice, goodness, and truth; are inclined to live on him as our
portion, with him as our friend, and to him as our last end. O when shall I be
perfect as my Father, which is in heaven, is perfect! When shall I be like him,
by seeing him as he is!

5. It is called an HEART Psalm. li. 10.
. It is the residence of Christ and his Spirit, as the life of our soul. In its
several graces of knowledge, faith, love, repentance, it answers to, and fills
the several powers of our soul.

6. It is called an HEART OF FLESH; fleshly table of the heart Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26.
2 Cor. iii. 3.
. How softened by the love! how readily impressed with the word and providence
of God! how readily it bends under his influence; and resigns to his sovereign
will!

7. It is called LIFE 1 John v. 10.
. By the breathing of his word and Spirit, God alone forms it. How pleasant,
precious, and honorable is it! and how comely and active in serving God, and
in promoting our own happiness, it renders our foul!

8. It is called LIGHT Ephesians. v. 8.
. To us, how mysterious and incomprehensible is its nature! From the Sun of
righteousness it wholly proceeds. And how pure, penetrating! -- how active,
refreshful, enlightening and directing to our soul! What a blessed prelude and
earnest of everlasting felicity!

9. It is INCORRUPTIBLE SEED conveyed into our heart by the word of God 1 Pet.
i. 23. 1 John. iii. 9.
. Being, with DIVine labor and wisdom, planted and sown in our heart, watered
with the rain and dew of the holy Spirit, and warmed with the love, the rays,
of the Sun of righteousness, it never rots, or consumes; never gives place to
sinful lust; but flourishes as corn and trees; and, though in different
degrees, brings forth fruit into everlasting life.

10. It is a ROOT Matthew. vii. 17. 18. and xii. 33. and xiii. 21. Mark. iv. 28.
, into which the word of God is spiritually ingrafted; and which, being of an
abiding and fixed nature, produces many Christian tempers, and gracious
exercises, and grows up very gradually.

11. It resembes a GRAIN of mustard seed Matthew. xiii. 31. 32.
. From the smallest beginnings, it grows up, till it be exceeding strong,
visible, and useful, for the seasoning and improvement of providence, and for
the protection of our soul. How sweetly this less than handful of seed, cast
into the tops of mountains, into our rocky barren heart, shakes with fruit! O
how the particular graces flourish! how the good works abound!

12. It resembles an HEAP OF WHEAT set about with lilies Song vii. 2.
. O the excellency; the abundance; the variety of particular graces! the
purity, permanency, and solidity thereof! No wind of temptation, nor fan of
persecution, can drive it away. What delightful nourishment to Christ and his
people! How orderly surrounded with lily-like promises, and evangelical good
works!

11. It is compared to SPIKENARD Song i. 12.
. How low and contemptible, in the view of carnal men! but how precious and
fragrant to Christ and his saints! How effectually it warms, nourishes,
preserves from corruption, strengthens and refreshes our heart! When Jesus,
our King, is sensibly present, how sweetly it sends forth the smell thereof, in
heavenly desire, and holy exercise!

12. It may be compared to MANDRAKES Song vii. 13.
. In every form, how delightful, fragrant, and comely! How powerfully it cools
our indwelling lust; our fiery perturbations of soul! heals our spiritual
maladies! attracts our affections to Jesus! and renders us fruitful in good
works!

13. It resembles all pleasant fruits, and chief spices of camphire, calamus,
saffron, etc. Song iv. 12. 13.
. What a flourishing, fragrant, and delightful garden of God, it renders our
wilderness soul! How DIVersified its various forms of faith, of hope, of love,
repentance, humility, patience, resignation, and the like! How rare, precious,
and pleasant! How effectually it cheers our heart! preserves from spiritual
corruption and rottenness! How ever green, incorruptible, and growing! How
wholesome and medicinal to our soul! And do not some particular graces, of
faith, hope, love, like calamus, camphire, and myrrh, ascend on high, mount
toward Jesus and heavenly things; while repentance, self denial, patience,
resignation, like spikenard and saffron, couch beneath?

14. It resembles all manner of PLEASANT FRUITS, new and old, laid up at our
gates for Christ Song vii. 13.
. O the abundance and variety of particular graces! How constantly they receive
new supply from Jesus' fullness! and add to their former growth! And for his
pleasure and honor, their whole exercise in DIVine ordinances, and
manifestation to the world, is designed and calculated.

15. It is compared to GOOD GROUND Matthew. xiii. 8. 23. Luke viii. 15.
, on which the good seed of God's word being sown, brings forth abundance of
fruits of holiness, to the honor of God, and the advantage of our soul.

16. It is compared to all the POWDERS of the merchant, or apothecary Song iii.
6.
. How DIVersified and various the particular graces of it! How rich and costly!
purchased by Jesus' blood; compounded by his skill; and received out of his
fullness; how effectually they perfume our nature and work! and render it
amiable to God and his people!

17. It is compared to SALT Mark ix. 50.
. It is of a durable and purifying nature. It pricks, pains, and puts away our
corruption. It preserves us from becoming rotten, unsavory, and noisome in our
disposition and practice. It heals our soul; and testifies our friendship and
reconciliation with God. Be you, my heart, my speech, my work, always seasoned
with it.

18. It is compared to LEAVEN Matthew. xiii. 33.
. However weak, and inconsiderable at first, it gradually, powerfully, and
often insensibly, conquers and transforms our whole heart and life, into its
likeness and image!

19. It is compared to a CHAIN OF GOLD about the neck Song i. 10. 11.
; consisting of the precious, solid, lasting, and DIVersified links of
knowledge, hope, humility, meekness, love, repentance, zeal, thankfulness,
contentment, sincerity, etc. beautifully connected. It flows from, and depends
on our spiritual neck of the promise, and word of God, and surrounds, adorns,
and strengthens the neck of our faith.

20. It resembles ROWS OF JEWELS on the cheek; BORDERS OF GOLD with STUDS OF
SILVER Ibid.
. How distinguished the value, the purity, the adorning and enriching virtue of
these various graces! In what comely order, and beautifying influence, they
appear in an holy, humble life! How agreeable, when these golden borders are
attended with silver gifts, and holy fruits, of the Spirit!

21. It is called a GOOD TREASURE Matthew. xiii. 52. and xii. 35.
. It is very precious, useful, and enriching; and by means of it, we are
enabled to give much glory to God, and do much good to men.

22. It, with its attending benefits, are like GOLD TRIED in the fire Rev. iii.
19.
. How precious, pure, substantial, satisfying, and durable! No fiery oracles of
heaven, no furnaces of fiery troubles, can destroy them; but discover their
distinguished value. May I ever lay up this gold as the dust; and as the stones
of the brook.

23. It is compared to a ROBE Ephesians. iv. 24.
. Skilfully it is framed by the power and wisdom of God. Effectually it warms,
adorns, and protects our heart. My soul, be thou clothed herewith. Let it adorn
my inward powers, and shine forth in my conversation.

SECT. II. Metaphors respecting particular graces, knowledge, faith, hope,
love, repentance, zeal, humility.
I. Metaphors respecting knowledge.
1. SPiritual knowledge is a FOUNTAIN OF LIFE Prove. xvi. 22.
.

It shows us the nature of life, spiritual and eternal, and the means of
attaining it. It refines and sanctifies our, natural life; is the means of
spiritual; and the means, beginning, and earnest of eternal. It teaches and
engages our heart to receive Jesus, the resurrection and the life, into our
heart; and it is eternal life to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
he has sent.

2. Saving knowledge and true faith resemble EYES and EARS Song vii. 4. Is. lv.
3.
. Thereby our souls are adorned and beautified. Thereby we discern the truth;
behold the person, and apprehend the work of Christ, and his Father. We espy
our path of duty, avoid dangers, and obtain exactness in our work. We attend
to, and hear the voice of the Son, the word, the providence of God; hear, that
our soul may live; hearken and hear, for the time to come; are led out, to
realize, and prepare for, an eternal state.

3. They resemble DOVES EYES Song i. 15. and iv. 1.
, because of their purity, their clearness, their loveliness, meekness,
singleness; their chaste affection to Christ, and quick discerning of wholesome
provision to our soul.

4. They may be compared to the FISH-POOLS of Heshbon, by the gate of
Bathrabbim Song vii. 4.
, because of their beauty, their perspicuity, their unmoveableness, their
abundant supply from Jesus, the Fountain of living waters: and for their
tendency to discover ourselves to us; that we may thereby be induced to hearty
repentance, holy modesty, cordial humility, and eminent self-denial.

5. Spiritual knowledge, prudence, and faith, resemble the NOSE Song vii. 4. 8.
. By them we relish the fragrancy of spiritual things; discern the noisome
nature of sin, the dangerous approach of our spiritual enemies, and the
unsavouriness of created enjoyments. By these is our religious appearance
exceedingly beautified. By the exercise thereof, do our apple-like smelling
breath of holy desires and endeavors, mark the inward soundness of our heart.

II. Further metaphors respecting faith.
5. Faith is our spiritual MOUTH Psalm. lxxxi. 10.
. Thereby we taste and see that God is good: we receive Jesus as the food of
our soul: we express our mind to God in prayer and praise; and to our
neighbors, in holy and edifying converse; for whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin.

6. It is our spiritual TEETH Song vi. 6.
; by which we chew the bread of life in holy meditations, heavenly desires, and
assured persuasions of his being the all-suited, the all-comprehending, and
unspeakable gift of God to us.

7. It is our spiritual NECK Song i. 10. and vii. 4.
; which joins us to Jesus our glorious Head; is the means of our correspondence
with, and receiving nourishment from him; supports our towering grace of hope;
and renders us stately and glorious.

8. It is our spiritual HANDS and ARMS Song v. 5.
; by which we receive and embrace the all-glorious Redeemer; hold him fast by
his promises, work out our salvation with fear and trembling; war against, and
conquer our spiritual foes; and how pleasantly it drops with the sweet smelling
myrrh of Jesus' influence, when he graciously opens and draws out our heart!

9. It resembles a newly-washed, even-shorn, and fruitful FLOCK Song iv. 2.
. How self-consistent, are its various acts! all washed in a Savior's blood
and Spirit! all fed in the pasture of his word; and bringing forth abundaut
fruits of holiness to the honor of God!

10. It is like the TOWER of David, builded for an armoury Song. iv. 4.
. How inexpressibly high, firm, and impregnable! and useful to defend our
souls; or annoy their foes! How richly stored with all the armor of God! Like
a tower of ivory, how self-consistent, precious, comely, and strong! And like
the tower of Lebanon looking toward Damascus; it, with our spiritual knowledge
and prudence, chiefly watches against, and opposes our unbelief, our pride, our
legality, and other Syrian-like principal enemies of our soul.

11. It is compared to a SHIELD Ephesians, vi. 16.
. Depending on, and improving God in Christ as our Shield, and our exceeding
great reward, it turns every way, and eminently contributes to protect our
inner-man, from all the fiery darts of the devil.

12. It is compared to GOLD TRIED in the fire 1 Pet. i. 7.
. How pure, precious, durable, and useful! How tried in the fire of God's
probatory word! and in the fire of temptation and trouble! It is much more
precious than gold. It is the purchase of Jesus' blood; the distinguished gift
of JEHOVAH's hand. It adorns our soul, conforms us to the image of God. It
furnishes us with spiritual life, liberty, health, nourishment, and glory,
from the fullness of Christ. Nor can thieves, or any creature, deprive us of it.

13. Faith and loveresemble two towering BREASTS Song viii. 10.
. How near and comely their connection! What mutual and affectionate embracers
of Jesus, the beloved! All the night of trouble and time, he lies in their
midst. -- What an abundant source of edification to others around! How sure a
token of our ripeness for the celestial marriage with Christ, is their eminent
growth in our soul.

14. They resemble TWIN ROES feeding among lilies Song i. 3.
. What harmony, loveliness, and vivacity are in them! What opposition to Satan
and his serpentine seed! What sad harassment and trouble, they, especially in a
day of carnal security, receive from those! But how glorious and surprising,
though difficult, are their conquests! How delightfully they dwell in the heart
of lily-like saints, and are nourished among the lilies of gospel truth!

15. They resemble WINGS Is. xl. 30.
. In the exercise thereof, by the breathing of the Holy Ghost, we fly above
this world, and its earthly concerns; above the clouds of ignorance, guilt, and
affliction; and ascend to Jesus, our exalted Savior, and the things above.

16. They are compared to a BREAST PLATE 1 Thessalonians. v. 8.
. Constantly and effectually they protect our heart from Satan's temptations,
or the hurt thereof; and from the hurt or horror of trouble.

III. Metaphors respecting hope.
2. Hope resembles a HEAD Song vii. 5.
. Supported by faith as a neck, it mightily tends to preserve us from sinking
amidst waves of adversity. It is an especial seat of our spiritual vivacity,
courage, and beauty. And, when lively, it produces an unnumbered multitude of
good works.

3. It resembles CARMEL Ibid.
. How heavenly its height, foundation, and object! How wide its prospect of the
promised land! and of the sea, the ocean of endless duration! How noted its
fragrancy and fruitfulness.

4. It resembles CRIMSON Ibid.
. Christ crucified is our hope, the author, foundation, and object of it.
Through his bloody death, we obtain a good hope, are begotten through his
resurrection to a lively hope; and to be with him for ever, is the sum, the
all, for which we hope.

5. It is an ANCHOR sure and steadfast, entering into that within the vail Heb.
vi. 19. 20.
. Through well-grounded hopes of heaven our souls are secured, that no weight
can sink our spirit; no storm of temptation can drive us away; no floods of
tribulation can hurt or dismay us. Fix, my soul, thy anchor, thy hope, to a
strong faith within thee; cast it forth of thyself. Fix it in Jesus, the
immovable rock, and the unseen scenes of a distant, a celestial world.

6. It is compared to an HELMET 1 Thessalonians. v. 8.
. What signal protection and safety it affords to our soul! How terrible it
renders us to our spiritual enemies! How bold and undaunted in fighting with,
resisting, and attacking them!

IV. Metaphors respecting love; four of which are joined with those of faith.
5. Love is compared to DEATH and the GRAVE Song viii. ^^
. It conquers our heart, and every opposer: renders us dead to our lusts, our
righteousness, our wisdom, our will, our carnal profit or honor. It disposes
us to die for the honor and testimony of Jesus, and for the spiritual
interests of his people. Like the grave, it separateth us from the world, and
insatiably hungers and thirsts after the fullness of Christ.

6. It is compared to COALS OF FIRE, that have a most vehement flame: and zeal
for Christ is likened to a consuming fire which eats us up Song viii. 6. Psalm.
lxix. 9. and cxix. 139.
. Our love being fixed on a known, though unseen Redeemer, how it melts our
heart! inflames our desire after him! purifies our soul from the dross of
corruption! insatiably presses after further fellowship and conform^ty with
him! Nor can floods of ungodly men, of persecution, affliction, temptation,
desertion, corruption, or law-terrors, quench or destroy it. True zeal burns
up, not these around us, with carnal contention, and angry reviling; but our
own heart, with grief and concern that Jesus is dishonored; and with earnest
desire and endeavor to have him exalted.

7. Love and harmony among brethren in nature, office, or profession, is like
OINTMENT and DEW Psalm. cxxxiii. 1. 2. 3.
. How it refreshes, exhilarates, beautifies, and spiritually fructifies
themselves and others around!

V. Metaphors respecting repentance.
1. Repentance is represented as a BROKENNESS and RENDING of heart Psalm. li.
17. Joel ii. 13.
. How, therein, the hammer of God's word and providence breaks our heart to
pieces! How our whole soul is pressed and pained with views of her own
sinfulness! How ready to be melted with Jesus' love, and formed as he pleases!

2. It is represented as an ACCEPTABLE SACRIFICE Psalm. li. 17.
. While looking on a crucified Christ, we mourn, and in his name request
forgiveness, how highly God regards our exercise! how readily he grants our
petitions!

VI. Metaphors respecting humility.
Humility is represented as an ORNAMENT and ROBE 1 Pet. iii. 4. and v. 5.
. Eminently ought it to appear in our whole conversation, which is thereby
rendered valuable, comely, and glorious, in the view of God, angels, and men.

SECT. III. Of the exercise of grace.
1. OUR exercise of implanted grace, is called a DYING Romans vi. 6. 7. and viii.
13.
. Thereby our love to, and our activity in the service of sin, Satan, and the
world, do, by virtue of Jesus' death applied to our heart, and through the
painful exercise of repentance, gradually weaken, abate, and cease. May I die
to sin daily. May I, through the Spirit, mortify the deeds of the body.

2. It is represented as a LIVING Gal. ii. 20.
. Proceeding from God the fountain of life, how pleasant, honorable, active,
and useful it is; for advancing his glory, and our own and others eternal
advantage! Christ, in his person and fullness, is the food which we receive by
faith. God is our dwelling. He, his angels and saints, are our companions. Holy
desire, prayer, and praise, are our spiritual breath. Obedience to Jesus' law,
is our motion and work.

3. It is represented as a CALLING; an OCCUPATION; VOCATION; or BUSINESS John
vi. 26. Phil. ii. 13.
. To proceed therein, we must know the mysteries of the gospel, concerning
Jesus, in his person, his offices, relations, benefits, and ordinances; and
concerning ourselves, in our state, our qualities, and duties. We must have a
stock of imputed righteousness, implanted grace, and exceeding great and
precious promises. We must understand the nature and worth of spiritual and
heavenly things. We must daily attend to the exercise of holiness, as our
great, our important work. We must carefully abide at home, keeping our heart,
watching over, and ordering our conversation. Frequently, by self-examination,
we must distinctly state our business, our accounts; and clear them by
application of Jesus' blood. Our stock being his, his glory is to be intended
in every thing we do. Always ought we to thrive in grace, and know that we do
so. No labor or pains are to be spared, that we may perfect holiness in the
fear of God. How signally do quick returns of prayer, and eminent
communications of grace, increase our stock, and animate our diligence! And how
rich shall this blessed occupation render us, in our last end! Godliness with
contentment is great gain, having the promises of this life, and of that which
is to come. Apply to it, my soul, in every branch thereof; so number thy days
that thou may apply thy heart unto wisdom, and learn God's truth; plough up
the fallow ground of thy heart, accepting his rod and word for thy conviction
and contrition. Deny thyself; awake, shake off thy drousiness and sloth; beware
of prodigal wasting of JEHOVAH'S bounty; whatsoever things are needful,
whatsoever things are lovely, and of good report, buy, freely and deliberately
receive, out of the fullness of Christ; and, together with God, work out thy
salvation with fear and trembling.

4. It is represented as a WALK or JOURNEY Col. ii. 6. Romans viii. 14.
. With hope and earnest desire to obtain the better country, we therein choose
Jesus and his law for our way, and with pleasure proceed from one degree of
grace, or act of holiness, to another, till at length we appear before God in
the heavenly Zion. It is a walking in Christ, a practical abiding and
increasing improvement of his person, righteousness, and fullness: it is a
walking after the SPIRIT; directed and influenced by the Holy Ghost; it is a
walking with God; beholding, loving, trusting in, receiving all from, and
resting satisfied in him. It is a walking humbly and mournfully with him, in
the faith of his presence with us, as our God, our Father, our Friend, and our
Guide; daily loathing, and mourning over our corruptions and offenses done to
him. It is a walking before him; with reverence of, and as in his immediate
prefence, and in hope of direction and reward from him. It is a walking in his
name, as his servants, influenced by his power and promise, directed by his
law, and intended to his honor. It is an upright walk, our purpose and
practice uniformly concurring to advance the glory of God. It is a walking
circumspectly, redeeming the time; attending to every circumstance of our
practice, that we may regulate it, by the DIVine law; that we may value time as
a precious jewel, and under a deep sense of former sinfulness and sloth, exert
our whole care and might to improve our present opportunities, to the glory of
God. It is a walking with the wise; making those who are taught of God our
patterns and companions in every good word and work.

5. It is called a RACE set before us Heb. xii. 1. 2.
. In the word of God, is the way, the troubles attending, the method of course,
the pattern, and prize, set before us. The race plot, is this present world;
the prize, the heavenly glory; the path, Jesus and his law. Being supported by
and looking to him, as our forerunner and pattern, we must labor and suffer
for him; and with agility, readiness, cheerfulness, vigor, and patience, press
forward, from one degree of grace to another, till we become perfect, as our
Father which is in heaven is perfect.

6. It is called a GOING UP through the wilderness leaning on the beloved Song
viii. 5.
. Finding no rest, ease, or satisfaction, in this desert world, or in the
barren bewildering state of sin, or condition of estrangement from God, we must
turn away our desire, our delight, and expectation therefrom; and in a state of
union to, exercise of intimacy with, and dependence on Jesus' person,
righteousness, and strength, walk-in him, and his word, as our way; and with
assiduous labor, vigor, and prudence, surmount every towering impediment of
ignorance, unbelief, of temptation, persecution, desertion, of terror and
guilt; following on to know the Lord, till we are set down on his right hand.

7. It is represented as a LUSTING and WARFARE against the flesh Gal. v. 17.
Ephesians. vi. 10. -- 19. 2 Timothy iv. 8.
. In it our new man of inward grace, like a strong and active spirit, wills,
chooses, and follows after, the things which tend to the destruction of sin.
Therein is our whole man, soul, body, and spirit, with skill, courage,
patience, and preseverance, to oppose, fight against, and by all possible
means, seek the destruction of indwelling lust; to fight against Satan,
resisting and laboring to overcome his temptations; to fight against the
world, trampling on its alluring enticements, despising its frowns, opposing
its wicked errors, and abominable practices; and against multitudes of
afflictions, patiently enduring them. It it a good fight. It is for the good
cause of God and truth; under a good captain, Jesus Christ; it is to be
performed in a good method, according to the law of God, with the good armor
of God, and in the good and well-grounded hope of a good victory and spoil, an
inestimable crown of glory, life, and righteousness. It is a fight of faith,
fought to maintain the doctrine of faith once delivered to the saints; and by
the grace of faith, is standing, and victory therein signally obtained.

8. It is represented as a KEEPER and EXALTER of a nation Prove. xiii. 6. and
xiv. 34.
. What a blessed means of preserving it from sin and danger, are wisdom and
knowledge, -- real religion and righteousness! How gloriously they exalt the
characters of persons! increase and establish their prosperity and happiness!

9. It is compared to the GROWTH of persons, herbs, and trees Ephesians. iv. 15. Hos.
xiv. 5. 7.
. Notwithstanding our frequent sickness, and sad blasts of temptation, and
frost-like prevalency of indwelling lusts, the daily application of Jesus, as
our bread of life, and of the watering and warming influences of his Spirit and
love, make holiness in heart and life pleasantly and insensibly to revive and
increase, till we be ripe for everlasting glory, having attained the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ.

10. True godliness is called the FEAR of the Lord Psalm. cxi. 10.
. With a reverential fear of, and love to him, are all its exercises and
blessings attended. And truly this is the beginning of wisdom; a beginning to
choose the better part, never to be taken away.

11. It is called WISDOM Prove. ii. 2.
. Hereby we choose the best friend, companion, husband, and portion; discern
the things that differ; follow after righteousness, peace, charity; and run in
the way of God's commandments. And by improving Jesus Christ, as our
righteousness and strength, take a proper method to perform gospel holiness,
and obtain the DIVine acceptance thereof.

12. The path of the just is represented as SHINING LIGHT, shining more and
more unto the perfect day Prove. iv. 18.
. From small beginnings, their knowledge, their holiness and comfort gradually,
mysteriously, and pleasantly increase, till they be swallowed up in the
noontide brightness of eternal glory. Nor can any cloud overtake them, which
shall not be quickly removed. Surely then their path is pleasant, plain,
clearly laid down in God's word, and without these snares and stumbling blocks
which lie in the way of the wicked. Surely this is a way above, wherein
heavenly things are chiefly attended. A way of life, marking life spiritual,
and preparing for life eternal.

13. Holy exercises resemble LILIFS Song vii. 2.
. Numbers of them spring from one root or principle of faith. How pure! comely!
high! and heaven bending! the better they are, the more humility and self
denial are mixed with them.

14. Holy exercises, real religion, and true wisdom, are a TREE OF LIFE Prove.
iii. 18. and iv. 13.
. They show a heart quickened by the Spirit of God; and do bring forth the good
fruits of spiritual liveliness here, and of life eternal, hereafter.

15. Holy exercises are called the GREEN FRUITS of the valley; and the BUDS or
FRUITS of the saints, these trees of righteousness Song vi. 11.
. In consequence of our implantation into Christ, and union with him, they
gradually, one after another, appear in our life, and are but imperfect, while
we continue on earth.

16. Holiness of life is called a SOWING in righteousness; a SOWING in tears,
and to the Spirit Prove. xi. 18.
. In practicing it, we, in the solid hope of eternal glory, carefully work
righteousness; -- amidst grief and sorrow, we follow the dictates and operation
of the Holy Ghost; and act as influenced by, and to the advantage of our new
nature. And O what mercy, joy, and immortal happiness, we shall reap in the
final, the eternal harvest!

17. The fear of the Lord is a FOUNTAIN of life Prove. xiv. 26.
. How refreshing its influence! What endless glory! In what immortal life will
it break forth at last! From thee, O fountain of living waters, is my life, my
fruit found.

18. Wisdom, or real religion, is represented as an ORNAMENT; and righteousness
as BRIGHTNESS Is. lxii. 1.
. How precious in itself! how dearly purchased with Jesus' blood! How notably
it adorns our nature and life! makes our face and conversation to shine! and
will issue in the brightness of everlasting glory!

19. Experimental knowledge of real religion is like HONEY and the HONEY COMB
Prove. iii. 13. -- 16.
. How sweet and ravishing! Nor can any one know the excellency thereof, without
tasting it; strangers do not intermeddle with the saints joy.

20. True religion is compared to SILVER, and an HID TREASURE Prove. ii. 4.
. How comely, precious, and enriching! How unknown to most of mankind! With
what diligence it is to be sought for! With what joy the finding of it fills
our soul, and in what happiness it ends.

21. Prayer is represented as MEDITATION; SUPPLICATION; INTERCESSION; CRYING
Psalm. 4. 1. 1 Timothy ii. 1.
; to denote the solid judgment, deep humility, familiarity, and earnestness,
therein to be exercised.

22. It is represented as a pouring out of the heart; lifting up of the soul to
God; breathing and panting for him Psalm. lxii. 8. and xxv. 1. Lam. iii. 56.
; to denote the inward fervency proper therein.

23. It, with some other religious worship, is called a standing, a kneeling, a
bowing, a falling down before the Lord Psalm xcv. 6. and cxxxiv. 1.
; in allusion to the gestures therein used; and to denote the reverence proper
to attend it.

24. Praising of God is represented by SHOUTING; and by SOUNDING or PLAYING on
musical instruments Is. xii. 6. Psalm. cl.
; in allusion to the service of the Jewish temple; and to mark the solemn
sweetness and joy of heart included in this exercise.

25. Humiliation for sin is represented as a putting on SACKCLOTH; as an
ABHORRING of one's SELF; a lying, or ROLLING one's self in the DUST; a putting
our MOUTH in the DUST Joel. i. 13. Job xlii. 6. Lam. iii. 29.
. To denote the shame, the sense of unworthiness, the fear and blushing before
God, included therein.

26. Beneficence to others is called a WATERING them; a SCATTERING; a CASTING
BREAD upon the waters Prove. xi. 24. 25. Eccles. xi. 1.
; to mark, how it refreshes and nourishes the poor object; how liberally, and
without prospect of requital, it is to be exercised.

CHAP. VIII. Metaphors respecting sin, the opposite of grace, in its nature,
its state, course, kinds, temptations.
I. Metaphors respecting sin in general, or as inherent.
1. THE indwelling sin of our nature is compared to a KING and MASTER Romans v.
21.
. With great force and authority, it rules in, and over the wicked. Their
heart is its palace and throne; devils, wicked men, and worldly things, are its
armies and guard; every method of opposition to God is its law. By an amazing,
powerful, and constant urgency, it mightily compels its unregenerate subjects
to do whatsoever it lists, however vile or slavish; nor can any created power
subdue and conquer it.

2. It is compared to a WARRIOR Romans vii. 23.
. Armed with the curse of the broken law, delivering us up to spiritual death,
it, with the utmost subtlety, aversation, opposition, enmity, and violent rage,
fights against God, his Son, his Spirit, his word, and grace; and, with
restless violence and crafty stratagems, always exerts its influence, to subdue
our whole man into an entire slavery to itself.

3. It is compared to a MAN Ephesians. iv. 22.
. It spreads through every part of our soul and body; fills our heart with all
unrighteousness, unbelief, pride, debate, deceit, malignity, high, vain, and
vile imaginations and affections. In our mind, it is ignorance, vanity, pride,
error, and craftiness; in our conscience, it is searedness, partiality, or
rage; in our will, weakness, aversion, and enmity to every thing good; in our
affections, it is earthliness, filthiness, disorder. It fills our mouth with
cursing and bitterness; renders our ears open to error and filthiness; our eyes
apt to behold vanity, lifted up, and full of adultery; our hands apt to
perpetrate evil; and our feet swift to shed blood. It is an old man. It is in
us from our conception; and is always pre-existent to our grace. And however
crafty, peevish, and proud it be; yet in the saints, it is in a weakened and
languishing condition.

4. Indwelling lusts may be called our MOTHER's CHILDREN Song i. 6.
. By our mother we are conceived and born in them. They have no origin or
allowance from God our heavenly Father. Alas! how they grow up with us from our
birth! What a cursed intimacy is between them, and our soul! Alas! how they
render us the keepers of the vineyards! how they entangle or force us into the
most base and servile courses, to the neglect of our own heart, practice,
office, or interest!

5. It is represented as a WITNESS or WRITTEN TESTIMONY Jer. xiv. 7. and xvii.
1.
. How deeply it is engraven on our heart! How irrefragably its reign there, and
our habitual voluntary commission of actual transgressions, testify before God,
and our awakened conscience, that we are unregenerate enemies to our Maker!
children of Satan! incapable to recover ourselves! unripe for heaven! rich
deservants, and infeoffed heirs of endless misery! -- and testify, that God is
righteous in correcting and punishing us!

6. It is represented as an uncommon DECEIVER (d). It deceives and renders
deceitful all mankind; renders our heart deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked; renders it more deceiving to us, than Satan himself. It
promises us pleasure and profit in offending God; and makes us imagine that
we enjoy them, while we are consumed by it; and that we procure wealth, while
we lose our soul, and every thing good or useful, and pierce ourselves through
with many sorrows. How often it persuades us that we obtain liberty, while we
enslave ourselves into the cruellest bondage! that we are men of wisdom, while
we wax blind and ignorant! that we make religion our great business, while we
wallow in sin, heartily loathing, and detesting every thing good! that inward
wickedness is of small account! that sin may be repented of, and turned from,
at pleasure! -- How often it hurrieth us, from one extreme to another! How
strangely it adorns the vilest abominations with specious names, fair
pretenses, and honorable appearances; Heb. iii. 13. Jer. xvii. 9.
and makes them pass for duties and virtues! How often it employs us in
attempting to deceive God, and compassing him about with lies, in our
profession, our prayer, our praise, and other religious exercise! How
effectually it renders us deceivers of ourselves; the wicked to their
everlasting ruin; and the saints, notwithstanding their saving illumination,
solemn resolution, and drawing love, to a woeful perverting of their way,
dishonouring their God, and wounding their soul!

7. It is compared to a THIEF Luke x. 30.
. How it robbed all mankind in Adam of their honor and happiness! How craftily
it steals away our time, our opportuities, our concern for eternal happiness!
How insensibly, or violently, it robs us of our peace, honor, riches, and
rest! Alas! how it carries us out of God's way! wounds our soul! binds us hand
and foot! and renders us incapable to pursue after it, raise an outery against
it or cry to God, for just vengeance on it! It is the common impoverisher and
murderer of mankind, and the terror of every saint, who, being possessed of
spiritual treasure, desires in all things to live honestly. How numerous, the
false names of virtue, which it assumes! and in the night of ignorance, of
delusion, temptation, desertion, how effectually it attempts, and succeeds in,
its unhallowed and shameful work!

8. It is compared to a WHORE James i. 13. 14.
. Ah! how cunningly it enticeth and leads us from God, to comply with our
lusts! how it conceives and brings forth actual crimes! and so conceives and
brings forth our enhanced ruin. Cursed be she, in her basket, and in her store,
and in the fruit of her womb. Blessed be he, who takes her little ones, her
first motions, and dasheth them to pieces. May iniquity, in every form, stop
her mouth; hide herself as ashamed: may her partisans stop their mouth; and
with grief and blushing confess themselves guilty before God.

9. Sin is compared to an EVIL-DOIR, nailed to, and crucified on a cross Romans
vi. 6.
. In the saints, not only God, but the man himself, condemn it; and take
vengeance upon it for its murderous, its thievish crimes: and, through the
death of Jesus applied to their heart, it is, in a shameful, lingering, and
painful manner, condemned and mortified: nor shall it ever save itself, and
come down from this cross: It shall die, and not live, for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it. -- Shameless robber, wicked murderer of my God, why have
my heart strings so long lapped thee round! why have I so long attempted to
hide, and protect thy guilty head!

10. It is called a BODY OF DEATH Romans vii. 24.
. O the variety of lusts which are therein marvellously compacted; and mutually
subordinated to the support and tendency of one another! Alas, what cursed
members of atheism, pride, envy, malice, unbelief, ignorance, legality,
covetousness, lasciviousness, intemperance; are comprehended in it! Ah! what a
noisome and infectious system of death is it, in itself! How it renders us
spiritually dead! and exposes us to temporal and eternal death! Wretched man,
that I am, who shall deliver me from it!

11. Indwelling lusts are FOXES that spoil the vines of Jesus' church and
people Song ii. 15.
. How secretly they lodge! how are they connected with earthly things! how
noted their craft and deceit! the crookedness of their paths! their desperate
stubbornness under trouble and conviction! their friendship with the old
serpent, and his seed! Alas! how filthy, noisome, and abominable! how readily
they pretend to be graces, virtues, or innocent things! how insatiably
voracious! how unweariedly set upon mischief! how hurtful to saints, chiefly
weak ones, and their tender graces; by attempting to unsettle, or root them
out; or by depriving them of their sap! Alas! how they peel God's choice vine!
strip his trees of righteousness! tread them down! gnaw off their blossoms of
holiness! and mar them with earthly cares! what inexpressible care, and
persevering labor, it takes to hunt out and destroy them! -- Lord Jesus, take
for me, these foxes, even the little foxes; hunt them out, with thy good
Spirit: starve them in their dwellings: let me make no provision for the flesh,
to fulfill the lusts thereof. Catch them in the trap of thy promises; hide thy
word in my heart, that I may not sin against thee. Deluge, my soul, their
horrid den, with a plentiful application of thy blood and grace: inflame my
heart with thy love: on these foxes cast burning coals, and indignation strong:
persecute and destroy them from under these heavens; thy curse unto them.

12. Sin is called WITCHCRAFT Gal. iii. 1.
. In what fearful league with Satan, it enters and fixes our soul, and
enticeth us to worship him! With what infernal influence and envy, it
deceives, wastes, and ruins our whole man! When convinced of our wickedness,
and danger, how unable and unwilling it rendereth us to escape! What diabolical
opposition and objections it raises against the faith and honor of God's
truth! And how effectually it excites and teaches heretics to subvert our
souls, and seduce us from the truth as in Jesus!

13. It is called REBELLION 1 Samuel xv. 23.
. How opposite is it to the law and authority of God, our rightful Sovereign,
and our solemn vows to be his! What fearful disorder it makes in the world!
What a daring attempt to dethrone the Almighty! to put down his laws and
dominion! to deprive him and his chosen friends of their life! and to set up
its own, and the throne, laws, and government, of Satan! -- Alas! vile
rebellion, as the sin of witchcraft! But, O Jesus, who receivedst gifts for
men, even for the rebellious, that God the Lord might dwell among them, why
should my soul continue to rebel against thee, my Savior! to commit high
treason against my God! Why expose herself to endless woe? Shall neither mercies
melt, nor terrors awe? Why should I revolt from under thy yoke? O forgive me,
for I know not what I do.

14. It is called a WANDERING and STRAYING from God Psalm. lviii 3.
. Thereby we lose our first estate; go out of our proper way; do, we know not
what, or why; go, we know not whither; turn our back on the Most High; lose his
favor, presence, and blessing. Alas! to what inexpressible danger we are
exposed! How ready to hearken to false guides! How hard, nay impossible for us,
to return to God, of our own accord! -- Lord, bring me back from Bashan hill,
and from the deeps of the sea!

15. It is called WHOREDOM Jer. iii. 1.
. Thereby we break our covenant-marriage with God; admit Satan, the world, and
our lusts, into his room; by whom we conceive, and bring forth the infernal
progeny of sinful desires, and wicked courses. How base and shameful in its
nature! Ah, how it takes away, hardens, and stupisieth our heart, making us
refuse to be ashamed, when we commit abomination! What wretched pleasure we
take therein, while our strength is thereby insensibly wasted! and we exposed
to poverty, infamy, and endless death!

16. Indwelling sin is called LUSTS James iv. 1.
. What a variety of sinful inclinations and dispositions, are therein
comprehended! How restlessly and unweariedly it chooses! how violently,
unreasonably, and secretly, it pusheth us into the most sinful and shameful
acts! In the saints, how it lusts and warreth against the grace of God! In
others, how often it renders them like fed horses, dogs, or swine, with the
impetuous violence of fleshly lust! -- When it speaks fair, believe it not;
there are seven abominations in it.

17. It is called a LAW OF SIN in our members Romans vii. 23.
. Ah, its power and authority over us! How it obliges and forces us to study
conformity to its dictates; and to fulfill its lusts, employing the powers of
our soul, to commit sinful acts! -- O were I but fully dead to this law, that
I, might live unto God! When I would do good, how sadly is evil present with me!

18. Sin is called INIQUITY or UNRIGHTEOUSN^SS Romans vi. 19.
. It is the very reverse of the righteous nature, and holy and just law of God.
It is an universal robbery and fraud; by it we rob God of his due honor, love,
obedience, and regard; ourselves of our holiness and felicity, and of every
proper means to regain it; -- our neighbor, of all true love, esteem, and
regard; -- and the very creation of its proper ease, use, and honor.

19. Sin is called WICKEDNESS and ENMITY Zech. v. 8. Romans viii. 7.
. Ah! the inveterate, unreasonable, and fixed malice, against God, and the
welfare of creation, which is contained in it. Nor can it be transformed into
any other shape. Lord though enmity cannot be changed, yet slay it, and change
my heart! Alas! is hatred my return for thy redeeming love! -- Why, my soul,
art thou proud! why art thou at ease! Enmity against God is all thou can
directly call thine own! Long, long my sin, thou have dwelt too near my heart!
Hence, to eternal distance, flee!

20. It is called UNCLEANNESS; an ABOMINABLE THING; an ABOMINATION; an HORRIBLE
THING Zech. xiii. 1. Jer. xliv. 1.
. It is the very reverse of the beauty, comeliness, and purity of God; it is
the murderer of Jesus Christ: it defiles every thing it touches; renders the
plowing and prayer of the wicked an abomination: it spreads through our whole
man; renders our person, heart, and practice, ugly and noisome to God, that, in
our natural state, he cannot look toward us without the utmost abhorrence; nor
can his angels or saints delight in, or behold us with pleasure. -- Direful
monster, may I never look upon thee, without detestation and horror! Far may I
flee from thy presence, and loathe myself for thy sake! O the omnipotent virtue
of that blood which cleanses from all sin! that can wash the Ethiopian into
comeliness! the loathsome, the worse than wallowing sow, into purity!

21. It is represented as a FOLLY and MADNESS Psalm. xiix. 13. and lxx ii. 19.
20. 21.
. How stupid and unteachable! How unreasonable, cruel and mischievous to
ourselves and others, it renders us! By it we reject God the chief good; rage
against the Almighty; presumptously rush on his neck, and upon the bosses of
his buckler. How effectually it transforms us into proud and prating fools! Ah,
how destitute of delight in wisdom! it is too high for, and hated by us. How we
despise a God, a Father's instruction! How Christ crucified, the power of God,
and the wisdom of God, and every spiritual thing, are foolishness to us!
neither we can by nature know them; for they are spiritually discerned! So fast
is folly bound up in our heart, that even rods of manifold correction drive it
not far away. Our heart is at our left hand set upon earthly and sinful
objects; its proper resolutions are saint, and ill put in practice. Its eyes,
its thoughts, and desires, are in the ends of the earth, set upon vanity, or
things we have no concern with. Though deceitful above all things, how fondly
we trust it! Alas, how we hate reproof! how we rage and are confident, in
proceeding from evil to worse! How right in our eyes is our evil way! What a
sport to many, to do mischief! What anger against God, against a gracious
Savior, and blessed Spirit, against our neighbor, rests in our bosom! is,
with pleasure and delight, lodged and entertained in our heart! What outrageous
wrath and passion, heavier than the sand, is often rouzed in our breast! In the
multitude of our words, how manifest our folly! In our mouth, how unseemly are
parables and excellent speech! How unconcernedly uttered! and how inconsistent
with our practice! In our mouth, what a rod of proud boasting, and arrogant
calumny! How readily our lips enter into contention, meddling with strife, with
vain jangling, and idle disputes not pertaining to us! Alas! how often our
mouth seeds upon, takes pleasure in, and in the most plentiful manner pours
forth and proclaims foolishness, vain, empty trifles! How wickedly it utters
slander; casts abroad arrows and death in bitter words; and says, Am I not
in sport? Alas! how often the instruction given by our lips and our life is but
absurd folly! How often is our mouth the means of destruction to ourselves and
others, How often we answer a matter to God, or to men! before we hear,
consider, or understand it! By our prating, how often we fall into snares! What
a perverting of our way is our whole practice! What a mad running to the
correction of stocks! How then, can honor be seemly for, or God take pleasure
in us! How often we die for want of wisdom! and have shame given us for our
promotion! How often our prosperity hardens, and tends to destroy us! How
rarely do hundreds of stripes make any proper impression upon us! Nor, though
brayed in a mortar of adversity, does our foolishness depart from us! Alas,
what an heaviness! what a grief! what a calamity! what wasters! what banishers,
it often makes us to our natural parents! our churches, or families! and
chiefly to our God, and his faithful pastors set over us!

22 It is represented as SLOTH or SLUGGISHNESS Prove. vi. 6. -- 11.
. It makes us delight in standing all the day idle. It renders us averse to act
for our souls! for the glory of God, or the good of our neighbor. Lord, how
sluggish! how inactive, to possess the promised land; is my soul! What thorny
hedges of difficulty, and bears and lions of unavoidable danger, do I often
imagine in the most clear, plain, and safe paths of duty! How often hide I my
hand in my bosom, and refuse to put it to my mouth, with the all-nourishing
bread of life! How often my empty desires kill and starve me! I desire, and
have not, because my hands refuse to labor. Next to nothing have I to roast,
which I took in hunting; shall not then my slothful soul suffer hunger? shall
not my slothfulness cast me into a deep sleep? Shall not the building of my
grace, profession, or practice, decay and drop through? Shall not the vineyard
of my heart and conversation be overgrown with thorns of iniquities, and
nettles cover the sace thereof; and the stone wall of vigilance be broken down?
Shall not my sloth lay me under the basest slavery and tribute; and drousiness
cover me with rags? Go to the ant, thou sluggish soul, consider her ways, and
be wise; gather thy meat in the summer, and prepare thy food in the harvest,
that thou starve not in the eternal state. Plough up thy fallow-ground, that
thou be not for ever wretched. Be thou no more as a smoke to the eyes of the
God who made, who sent thee into life. Say no more, A little sleep, a little
slumber; a little folding of the hands to sleep; for so shall thy eternal
poverty come upon thee as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man,
suddenly and irresistibly.

23. Indwelling sin is represented as a HA^^ and STONY heart Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26.
. In renders our soul barren. ^sensible, rough, and impenetrable, at a rock or
(...) stone While under the reigning power of it, the rain of divine
ordinances, and seed of inspiration, are lost upon, and harden us. Ministers,
who are sent to hew us, with the hammer of God's word, and troubles, make no
proper impression upon us, till Jesus break our heart with his power, and melt
it in the fire of his Spirit and love. -- Lord, am I such hell-hardened steel,
that mercy will not melt me! No; overcome by bleeding love, I dissolve, I melt
beneath the crofs.

24. It is called FLESH Romans viii. 1.
. It is of a bafe, vile, worthless, and putrefying nature. It is conveyed to us
with our body; and is much influenced, modified, and exerted thereby. It
renders us carnal and fleshly; make us to mind, love, think of, and chiefly
care for, the things of the flesh; to dwell in the flesh, under its absolute
power and authority; to walk after it, according to its dictates and
inclinations; and to war after it, from sinful ends and motives, and in a
carnal, malicious, and passionate manner.

25 Sin is called a STRONG HOLD 2 Cor. x. 4. 5.
. How advantageous is its situation, and deep its foundation in our heart! How
dreadful its impenetrableness! uncleanness! extent! steepness! and height! How
numerous the deep pits of its entangling snares! How abundant its provision for
a sinful life; and its fullness of infernal armor! How many and secret its
means of communication with Satan and the world! He is the governor; our
predominant lust is the citadel; our actual transgression the outworks. Lord
Jesus, demolish it; raze, raze it, to the foundation; heap up mounts of
redeeming grace, and take it.

26. It, with the law-curse attending it, is Satan's ARMOR Luke xi. 21. 22.
. Thereby he fights against the DIVine Savior, when he is coming to rescue and
deliver us. Ignorance and slupidity are his helmet; unbelief and legality his
shield; pride, unconcern, obstinacy, and despair, his breastplate; enmity and
error his sword. -- Lord, spell him of this armor, wherein he trusts.

27. It is called LEAVEN, and OLD LEAVEN 1 Cor. v. 7. 8.
. How ^our and disagreeable in its nature to God, good angels, and men! How its
influences spread into, and infect all our powers, and work! The former it
renders full of, and ready instruments of iniquity unto iniquity. The latter,
our ploughing and prayer not excepted, it renders abomination to the Lord. Nor,
like old leaven, is sin good for any thing, but to defile.

28. It is compared to POISON Psalm cxl. 3.
. It inflames our heart with enmity, malice, and rage, against God and men.
Quickly it infects and corrupts our whole man. It begets an infatiable thirst
after sinful and earnal pleasure and profit. Like the poison of asps, how
effectually it lulls us asleep! And, however pleasant and taking it be at
first, it becomes painful and mortal at last. Being of itself contrary to their
new nature, it is painful to the saints. Being agreeable to the nature of the
wicked, these venomous beasts, it breeds them no pain, but in its consequences;
nor can it be expelled, but by the convincing, illuminating, and sanctifying
oil, or influence of the Holy Ghost.

29. It is compared to loathsome VOMIT Jer. xlviii. 16.
. How uncomely, disagreeable, and detestable! How conviction makes us throw it
up by vexation, confession, or true repentance! How shameful and wicked, by
returning to sins formerly paining, resolved against, or repented of, to
swallow down that which was once thrown up!

30. It is compared to a STING 1 Cor. xv. 56.
. From the old serpent, the devil, it proceeds; and renders afflictions, death,
and every thing in the system of nature, hurtful and deadly to us. How
infectious its poison, spreading into, and corrupting all our powers, and
poisoning every act and enjoyment in our natural state! At first, its wounds
feel pleasant; but, in the end, how painful and tormenting! Nor, without faith
in the slain Redeemer, exalted on the pole of the gospel, can they be healed,
or the corruption rooted out. -- Thrice blessed HE, who sucked the venom of my
wounds into himself, bearing mine iniquities, that I might obtain health and
cure; might have death, trouble, and every thing else unstinged to my soul; and
might safely tread on dragons and serpents of the pit!

31. It is compared to a WOUND Psalm. xxxviii. 5. 8. 9.
. It is the effect of the bite, the sting of the old serpent. And ah, how
inveterate! how envenomed! how deep, spreading, and extensive! How filthy,
noisome, and infectious! How painful, shameful, and deadly a wound! Alas, how
it weakens our soul! mars and withers our beauty! how it hinders our proper
exercise, and pollutes all that we do! -- Lord, heal my loathsome disease, my
painful wounds, that stink, and are corrupt: my folly makes it so.

32. It is a PLAGUE and LOATHSOME DISEASE, 1 Kings viii. 38. Psalm. xxxviii. 2.
. It is the corrupt humor of our soul; and a heavy judgment on mankind. How
mysterious in its nature and source! How quickly it overspreads our whole
nature and life! How shameful, nauseous, and of itself desperate, the disease!
How abominable it renders us to God and good men! and mars our fellowship with
them! Alas! by its influence, how is our soul pined away, and weakened! Our
heart swells with pride and self conceit. Our voice, our converse, our prayer,
our praise is disagreeable. Our breath stinks with idle and corrupt
communication. Our bowels burn with desire after sinful pleasures, and carnal
enjoyments. Our inner man is dead while we live; and daily casts forth the
putrid stuff of abominable actions!

33. It is compared to SICKNESS Matthew. viii. 12.
. Sprung from the eating of forbidden fruit, how it affects our heart; and
thence spreads into our whole man, and every concern! How it extends to our
whole race, and sickens the lower part of the creation for our sake! How
gradually it weakens our soul! hastens our eternal death! restrains and unfits
us for our work! How dangerous, if it be long continued in! When felt, how
grievous to be borne! But ah! what multitudes lying under it, are in a
perpetual rave, or moonstruck madness, till everlasting burnings bring them to
their senses! -- My soul, when I see my sickness, and my wound, let me call
Jesus the physician of value; let him, by conviction, by effectual calling, by
justification and sanctification, make me whole! Quickly may he bring me to
that happy place, where the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick.

34. It is represented as a DEATH Ephesians. ii. 1.
. Hereby our happy relations to God and his creatures are broken and dissolved.
Hereby we are rendered incapable to desire, think, or act, to any good purpose.
Hereby we lose our beauty and freshness. Our whole man is turned into a repose
and repast of infernal vermin, of fiends and corruptions. We forget God, and
our everlasting concerns; are altogether loathsome and abominable; and bring
forth fruit to eternal death. -- Alas! how this death works in me! Not often,
but always I am in it; not a step betwixt my soul and it! Who shall deliver me
from so great a death! Who but thee, O Jesus, who quickenest the dead, and
eallest things that are not, as though they were!

35. It is compared to a FIRE Is. ix. 18.
. How fearfully it inflames our heart with lust, with enmity, and rage against
God! How furiously and effectually it consumes our soul! How impossible for
any creature to withstand or quench it! How terrible to such as are graciously
awakened! But what millions are devoured by it in their sleep! How often on
earth it burns up thorns and briers of wicked men! and consumes forests, whole
nations and armies, with flaming destruction! How it burns the reprobate world
into endless fire! Lord Jesus, quench it in me, in thousands, with thy blood.

36. It is compared to a CLOUD and THICK CLOUD Is. xliv. 22,
. Ah, how innumerable, as the particles of a cloud, are its lusts and acts! How
it interposeth between us and our God, and our heavenly glory! What terrible
shadows of destruction it casts over us! How fearfully it threatens us with
thunderbolts, and sweeping deluges of DIVine wrath! Ye saints, how it damps
your spirits! forebodes storms of chastisement! While under the cloud, how
often your hearts quake with the voice of thunder! What darkness and shadow of
death are over your soul! By thy forgiving grace, by thy shining rays, by the
gracious wind of thine influence, do thou, Jesus, dispel the cloud, and give
day to my inward powers.

37. It is compared to a MOUNTAIN or HILL Is. lxiv. 1. Song ii. 8.
. How fixed it is in our heart! How dreadful its height! How fearful and
inconceivable its weight! If it fall on us, by conviction or punishment, how it
crusheth and sinks our soul toward the lowest hell! How fearfully it
interposeth between God and us! What noxious spirits and curses do, as it were,
reside therein! Almighty Savior, who wast once willingly crushed under its
weight, in mercy come leaping over it to my soul; melt it down with thy love;
touch and waste it away by thy grace; remove, overturn it; cast it into the
deeps of forgetfulness, the deeps of thy precious blood. O to see thy bleeding
love prevail, till the highest mountains of my guilt and corruption be covered!
O for a firm faith, effectually to bid this mountain remove, and be cast into
the deeps of the sea!

38. It is compared to a VINE Ezekiel. vii. 10. and xviii. 2. Jer. xxxi. 30.
. Alas how it flourishes and spreads its branches! what clusters of
abomination and misery it produces! how sour, hurtful to all, disagreeable to
every sensible soul, are its grapes! its actual transgressions! In the issue,
how fearfully they set the teeth on edge! fill us with anxiety and pain! How
often wickedness grows up as a tree, is had in reputation! and pride buds! But
the blossom shall go up as dust; the fruit is unto shame and death; the tree,
with its fruits, hastens us to eternal ruin. -- Ah! how its roots are fastened
in me, as with a band of iron and brass! Lord Jesus, lay the axe of thy word
and rod thereto! Blessed earthquake, blessed storm of death, make haste,
dissolve my frame, tear up my sin by the root, let my wickedness be broken, and
cut off as a tree.

39. It is compared an EVIL TREASURE Matthew. xii. 35.
. Its great residence is the hidden cabinet of our heart. How carefully we keep
and conceal it as a sweet morsel under our tongue! Ah! how we daily live upon
it! How many are proud of, and reckon themselves enriched by it! How
inexhaustible its fullness! with what mad haste do many laboriously increase it,
adding sin to sin, till the measure of their iniquity be full! and treasuring
up for themselves, wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God!

40. It is represented as a DEBT Matthew vi. 12.
. It includes our neglect of that obedience we owe to God's law; it involveth
us in the obligation of infinite satisfaction to his justice. The longer we
continue therein, the debt the more. increases. And ah! how fearfully it
occasions our hatred of God, our creditor! our aversion to self-examination!
our abhorrence, and sometimes terror, of death and judgment, our times of
account! How it exposes us to the arrest of conscience, the prison of hell,
and the endless fury of an angry God! O awful, unbounded debt, which God alone
can pay! nor he, but at the expense of his wealth, his blood, his life? O his
grace in forgiving me, his enemy, my ten thousand talents! Let not me continue
in sin, because grace does abound.

41. Sin is called a REPROACH Prove. xiv. 34.
. How clearly it manifests our base birth, that we are of our father the devil!
and our base heart, that it is little worth, and set upon mischief! It exhibits
us as treacherous, liars, haters of God, murderers of ourselves, filled with
all unrighteousness, abominable, and unclean. It exposes us to the contempt of
God, angels, and men. May I never account it mine honor!

42. It is represented as a CORRECTOR and ^ COURGE Jer. ii. 19.
. What strokes! what lashes of conscience and providence, our iniquities bring
upon us! How often their lustful motions harass and disquiet us? How often our
sinful methods of relief and happiness involve us in further trouble! How often
are our sins plainly marked on our judgments! or we are given up to our lusts,
to punish us for our former wickedness!

43. It is represented as a WEIGHT and BURDEN; and perhaps as a TALENT of lead
in an ephah Psalm. xxxviii. 4. Zech. v. 7.
. How dreadful its impression! How heavily it hangs upon sinners! unfits them
for running their spiritual race, or working out their salvation! What
multitudes it sinks to the deeps of DIVine judgments, and of the lowest hell!
How it crusheth the hearts of persons convinced! bruifeth and breaks their
bones, and makes them weary of their life! What an oppressive load to the
saints! None but thee, O Jesus, could sustain its weight; nor thou, without
sweating, groaning, and dying, under its guilt; nor can any other remove it
from my soul!

44. It is compared to a BOND; BAND; CHAIN; YOKE Is. lviii. 6.
. Ah! what crimes it supposes or includes! what slavery it imports! what
punishment it forebodes! How effectually it confines our soul, and restrains
her from acting or moving in the way of holiness! How it binds men to Satan's
door-posts! fixes them in his prison; causes them to draw in his plough; and
dig up mischief! Ah! how many reckon these chains of darkness, ignorance, and
misery, their honor; a chain and ornament of grace to their neck!

45. It is compared to GARMENTS Col. iii. 9.
. How fully the habits and acts of sin encompass our whole nature and life! How
often they plainly mark what, and whose we are! How they contribute to warm our
inward lust! How fearfully they are lined with the DIVine curse! How sadly they
protect our heart from God's arrows of conviction; and prevent our penitential
shame! Though our best deeds be but filthy rags, how often we take pleasure in,
and glory of them! -- Lord Jesus, remove these filthy garments, and give me
change of raiment.

46. It is compared to a SPOT in garments, or the like Deuteronomy. xxxii. 5.
. It is altogether vile and unsightly. It mars all the beauty of our heart, and
spoils the robes of our conversation. It defiles our best duties: nor can it be
washed out, but by Jesus' blood and Spirit. -- By his mercy and truth applied
to my soul, and his causing me to imitate him therein, may my spots be washed
out: and by fearing him, may I depart from evil.

47. It is compared to the CRIMSON and SCARLET color of wool or garments Is.
i. 18.
. What horrid murder of our God, our Savior, ourselves, our neighbor, it
includes! How fast it cleaves to our nature and practice! How visible and
terrible to behold! and what a shocking mark of God's warfare with us; and
presage of his shedding the blood of our soul! -- Lord, what profit is in my
blood, that I should go down to the pit! By the application of thine, make my
deep-dyed crimes white-as snow; fully forgive and purge them away.

48. It is represented as FILTHY NAKEDNESS Is. iii. 18.
. How shameful and odious is it to God, angels, and saints! What shocking
impudence, to be unashamed of it or to be careless of having Jesus'
righteousness spread over us, to cover it!

II. Metaphors respecting a sinful state or condition.
1. A state of sin is called the GALL OF BITTERNESS Acts viii. 23.
. While one continues in it, no property is in him besides sin, that infinitely
bitter thing. Nothing he enjoys that is not poisoned and embittered to him. It
exposes him to the bitterness of DIVine vengeance, of eternal death. Lord, to
how many is even bitterness sweet!

2. A sinful state, or a condition of estrangement from God, and of prevalent
corruption, resembles a WILDERNESS Song viii. 5.
. In it, how sad the wandering from God! how many the byepaths! how eminent the
dangers! how numerous the wild beasts, of evil angels and sinful inclinations!
what want of proper provision and companions! how violent the storms of
trouble! -- May I go up from it, leaning on my Beloved! by him alone, as my
guide, my way, can I escape out of it.

3. It resembles a DEEP and PIT Psalm. xl. 2. and cxxx. 1. Zech. ix. 11.
. What sinking ^ears and discouragements! what increasing entanglement and
perplexity! what nearness to hell! what defilement and despair, abound therein!
How little water of consolation to refresh our fainting heart! Out of the deeps
have I cried unto thee, O Lord.

4. It resembles a PRISON Is. lxi. 1.
. How shameful to be in it! how evidential of guilt! how unhappy; unhealthful;
and restrictive of liberty! How destitute of spiritual warmth, rest, water, or
wine of consolation! In what momentary hazard are we, of being brought forth to
further shame and trouble! -- O bring my soul out of prison, that I may glorify
thy name.

5. It resembles DARKNESS Ephesians. v. 8.
. How horrid and disagreeable! What idleness, perplexity, confusion, disorder,
fear, and danger, attend it! O Lord Jesus, turn my darkness into light.

6. It resembles a WINTER Song ii. 11.
. What clouds of guilt interpose between God and our soul! How great our
distance from Christ, the Sun of righteousness! What mists of darkness and
ignorance confound our mind! To what storms of temptation, trouble, or wrath,
are we exposed! How hard and frozen our hearts, that neither word nor
providence of God can impress them! How barren of every good word and work! How
destitute of inward warmth of love to Jesus' person, covenant, cause,
ordinances, or people? How unclean, slippery, difficult, and dangerous our
paths! How are both heart and way deluged with floods of corruption, to the
marring of our spiritual fellowship with God, and with one another! How
unflourishing and unsightly is our whole appearance! -- O my soul, is this
winter past, and the rain over and gone!

7. It resembles DEATH and the GRAVE Ephesians. ii. 1. 5.
. Alas, how it separateth us from our true friends! How unsightly it renders us
to God and his servants! How, therein, we are shut up to our lusts! how buried
in stupidity, forgetfulness, and filthiness! hid, amidst earthly and sinful
cares and pleasures! nor can any besides thee, O Resurrection and Life, quicken
and bid us go forth.

III. Metaphors respecting a stated course and practice of sin.
1. A wilful course of sin, is represented as a TRADE and OCCUPATION 1 John
iii. 8. 9.
. With what deliberation, activity, constancy and delight, do unregenerate men
commit iniquity, in every thought, word, and deed! As of the devil, they attend
constantly to this very thing; commit sin, weave spiders webs, waste their
time, thoughts, and substance, in that which may ensnare others, but cannot
profit, nor cover themselves; hatch cockatrice-eggs, do mischief to themselves,
and all around. Ah! why not rather choose, and labor for, the better part,
that shall never be taken from them!

2. It is a WARFARE after the flesh 2 Cor. x. 3.
. With what craft, rage, and vigor, we therein oppose God, his truths, his
ordinances, and people, and seek to injure them! -- How long, my foul, have
thou served day and night, winter and summer, in this horrid campaign!

3. It is a WALKING in and after the flesh Romans viii. 4.
. With what deliberation, pleasure, and progress in evil, do we therein follow
our indwelling lusts as our guide! and take Satan's will, and the pattern of an
evil world, for our way! move gradually toward destruction, always acting
under the influence of sinful and carnal principles, motives, and ends! --
Lord, against me stop the way.

4. It is compared to the RUNNING OF A RACE Is. lix. 7.
. With vain hopes of reward, do wicked men set out therein; and with what
amazing activity, they, at their eternal hazard, contend with one another, in
doing evil! And ah how quickly, if mercy prevent not, shall they attain the
goal of endless ruin!

5. It is compared to DRUNKENNESS Jo^ xv. 16.
. With what pleasure, greed, strong desire, do evil men drink up iniquity,
drink up scorning, follow after, and commit sin! indulge themselves in
blasphemous scosfs, till their conscience be thereby stupefied, their heart
distracted and enraged! -- O may I, for ever, drink of the well of Bethlehem,
of the Fountain of living waters, and streams from Lebanon.

6. It is compared to a WALLOWING in the mire 2 Pet. ii. 22.
. How altogether absurd and shameful! How therein our best works do more and
more defile us! -- Lord, when will thou pluck me out, and carry me home, that I
may wallow no more!

7. It is represented as a GROWTH in sin, a FILLING up the MEASURE of iniquity
Matthew. xxiii. 32.
. Therein wicked men flourish and increase in wickedness, grow worse and worse,
more bold and active in it, till they attain that height and measure, at which
God has determined to cut them off.

8. It is called a CROOKED WAY Psalm. cxxv. 5.
. How unsightly! self-inconsistent! grievous! and inconstant a course of
wickedness! And how contrary to the even rule of the DIVine law! How often,
Lord, are my ways so crooked, that none but thee can know them!

9. It is called a FIRE Jude 23.
. How terribly it increases our enmi^y and rage against God! How inexpressibly
dangerous, burning us up, and hurrying us to the vengeance of eternal fire! --
Lord, save from this Taberah; this infernal burning.

10. It is compared to DARKNESS Prove. iv. 19.
. Nothing in it is instructive, comfortable, or edifying. It perplexeth,
blinds, and occasions spiritual stumbling to all around.

IV. Metaphors respecting particular courses or acts of sin.
LESSER SINS are compared to MOTES in the eye, and to GNATS, while greater are
likened to BEAMS and CAMELS Matthew. vii. 3. and xxiii. 24.
. The very least are hurtful and blinding, and will be painful to the saints;
but others are more obvious and aggravated.

1. IDOLATRY, or FALSE WORSHIP, is represented as a compassing God about with
lies and deceit Hos xi. 12.
. It fals^ly supposes the DIVinity of idols: It deceitfully gives them the
honor due unto God. Does not my drawing near to God with my mouth, and
honoring him with my lips, while my heart is far from him, falsely suppose him
a blind idol, and d^ceitfully flatter him?

2. It is called a sowing of the wind Hos. viii. 7.
; to mark its vanity, unprofitableness, and hurtful influence. Alas! how many
thereby reap the whirlwind of DIVine judgments!

3. It is called a hewing out of broken cisterns, that can hold no water Jer.
ii. 13.
; to denote, that the hardest labor therein, will bring no true advantage or
comfort.

4. It is called a feeding on ashes Is. xliv. 20.
. How vain, base, and hurtful! And what a manifest token of inward corruption
and plagues!

5. It is represented as WHOREDOM Ezekiel. xvi. and xxiii.
. Thereby the Hebrews and others did, or do break their marriage-covenant with
God, as his church; and admit idols into his room, as the darling of their
heart, and object of their religious honor.

6. It is represented as a setting up idols in the heart Ezekiel. xiv. 4.
; to signify, that inward love to, and esteem of idols, are the spring of the
worship given them.

7. Idols are represented as VANITY, they can do no good: as CARCASES, because
without life, and detestable to God: as STUMBLING BLOCKS, as they occasion men's
falling into sin and danger: as upright like the palm tree, without any motion,
they remained fixed in their erect posture: as DUNG GODS, because altogether
contemptible and abominable: as TORMENTS, because they bring their worshippers
to misery Jer. x. 15. 5. Ezekiel. xiv 4. Is. xlv. 16.
.

1. APOSTASY from God is called BACKSLIDING Jer. iii. 22.
. How absurd and contrary to light and reason! How gradual, and often
insensible! In the issue, how dangerous! If any man draw back, God's soul will
have no pleasure in him.

2. It is called a leaving of first love Rev. ii. 4.
. It implies an abatement of former esteem, regard to, and desire after God,
and his Christ.

3. It is called a dealing treacherously Mal. ii. 11.
. It is transacted contrary to solemn vows, and under fair pretenses of
friendship.

4. It is called a revolting from God Is. xxxi. 6.
. By it we cast off his authority and law; withdraw from him our subjection,
and revenues of honor; and bestow them upon ourselves, upon Satan, and the
world.

CARNAL SECURITY is compared to a BED; a SLEEP; a SLUMBER; and DROWSINESS Song
iii. 1. and v. 2.
. How careless, languid, thoughtless, ignorant, and insensible it renders our
soul! How averse to bestir ourselves in quest of any spiritual good! or to be
awakened! How we lean on the pillows of our seize and self-righteousness!
How we lose our time, and expose our spiritual nakedness! How fondly we amuse
ourselves with empty dreams and imaginations, of the excellency and happiness
of our state! and how readily we quarrel with God's providence and ministers,
who attempt to rouse us up!

1. HERESIES, and their attending abominations, are called DEPTHS OF SATAN Rev.
ii. 24.
. By his agency, their authors cunningly frame them; and pretend that a great
deal of knowledge, wisdom, and unsearchable mystery is contained in them.

2. False doctrines are compared to a CANKER or GANGRENE 2 Timothy ii. 17.
. How insensibly and gradually they waste and devour the churches of Christ,
and souls of men! How effectually they wear out the vitals of religion; and
even the form of godliness! How difficult of cure! But is there any thing too
hard for the Lord?

3. They are called VAIN BABBLING 2. Tim. ii. 16.
. How noisy and foolish! how unsubstantial and unprofitable! Feed not thyself,
my soul, with these, but with Jesus' words, which are spirit and life.

1. Secret sin, especially WHOREDOM, is compared to STOLEN WATERS, and bread
eaten in secret Prove. ix. 17.
. What pleasure and delight men take in it! how they exert themselves to obtain
it! and what endeavors they use to hide it!

2. Whoredom is compared to COALS OF FIRE, and a HOT OVEN Prove. vi. 27. 28.
. From the inward burning of absurd and outrageous lust it proceeds. How great
is the danger of the most distant approaches to it! Can a man take such fire
into his bosom? can he go upon these burning coals, and not be hurt, not be
hastened toward hellfire?

3. It is represented as a BART striking through one's liver Prove. vii. 23.
. How quickly, how unexpectedly it ruins the: powers of the soul! and the
inward constitution of the body, of those who are given to it!

4. Unclean lust is compared to the RAGE OF a STALLION Jer. v. 8.
. How brutish, shameless, furious, and commanding its force!

1. OPPRESSION of the poor is called a panting after the dust on their head
Amos ii. 7.
. Thereby the oppressors incline to rob them of every thing, and crush them to
the dust of death.

2. It is represented as a selling them for a pair of shoes Amos viii. 6.
; to mark how lightly the oppressor esteems them; and for how little he is
disposed to ruin them.

3. It is called a crushing and treading upon them Amos v. 11.
; to signify the grievous, afflictive, and debasing tendency of it.

4. It is called a staying of them; a chopping their bones; a frighting and
tearing them in the manner of lions, wolves, or bears Amos viii. 4. Mic. iii.
2. 3.
; to denote the inhuman cruelty contained in it, and the utter ruin effected by
it.

5. It is represented as a building of houses and cities by blood Hab. ii. 12.
; because oppressors rear these structures with the wealth extorted from
others, to the endangering of their life.

6. It is called an eating of God's people as bread Psalm. xiv. 4.
; to mark the pleasure and greed with which wicked men persecute the persons,
ruin the character, and consume the substance of the godly.

PREVAILING SINS, with their attending judgments, are called GRAY HAIRS Hos.
vii. 9.
. They manifest their subjects to have enjoyed their best days, and to be old
in sin, and withered, weak, and feeble, in their spiritual condition, and that
their death and ruin hasten apace, if mercy prevent not. And ah, how often have
men these symptoms without knowing it!

FALSE HOPES and joys are likened to a RUSH; a FLAG; a SPIDER'S WEB; a house
built on the sand Job viii. 11. -- 14.
; to mark how unsubstantial they are; and how incapable to endure the storms of
trouble, conviction, or death.

VAIN SPEECHES and imaginations are likened to the EAST WIND Job. xv. 2.
; to signify how unsubstantial, noisy, blasting, and hurtful they are.

SELF RIGHTEOUSNESS resembles a SPIDER'S WEB, and FILTHY RAGS Is. lix. ^. and
lxiv. 6.
. How worthless, vile, unconnected, and shameful is it before God, and every
convinced conscience!

PERVERTING of judgment is compared to HEMLOCK growing up in the surrows of the
field Hos. x. 4.
; to denote how bitter, grievous, poisonous, hurtful, and wide-spread it was.

V. Metaphors respecting temptations to sin.
1. Temptations to sin are represented as TRAPS; SNARES; PITS Josh. xxiii 13.
Prove. xxii. 14.
. Unawares they seize us; firmly they retain us; and tend to promote our
present and future ruin! O Jesus, open mine eyes to discern them; guide my feet
in the way of peace. Break the snares, that I may escape.

2. They are represented as STUMBLING BLOCKS Ezekiel. iii. 20.
. Alas! how Satan and his agents lay them in our way! To our own and others
hurt, how heedlessly we rush upon them! and sinfully stumble and fall in our
conversation!

3. They are represented as DEVICES and WILES 2 Cor. ii. 11.
. With what craft do Satan and his agents devise and lay them before us! How
well they are suited to our nature, tempers, and circumstances! How cunningly
are sins therein represented to us as virtues; as small sins, that can be
easily repented of, and may be readily forgiven! How craftily we are dissuaded
from duty, as if unseasonable, unimportant, unplain, or dangerous! -- Attend,
my soul, be not ignorant of these devices.

4. They are represented as a BUFFETING ROD; and THORN in the flesh 2 Cor. xii.
7.
. Ah! how they harass, oppress and grieve some; chiefly saints! and render them
weary of their life! My soul, what time thou art pricked or buffeted, have
recourse to Jesus, that his grace may be sufficient for me.

5. They are represented as a SIFITNG Luke xxii.
. Alas! how Satan, by them, troubles, tosseth, and tries the saints! But,
blessed Redeemer, thou have prayed for them, that their faith fail not. None
shall shake them out of thy hand; nor shall the smallest stone of their number
fall to the earth.

6. They are represented as a WRESTLING and WARFARE Ephesians. vi. 1^.
. How closely, how furiously, how craftily, do Satan and his agents therein ply
the saints! endeavor to trip up their heels! overturn and ruin their soul! but
God shall make them stand.

7. They are represented as FIERY DARTS Ephesians. vi. 16.
. From what distance they may be cast! to heavenly souls, how terrible their
appearance! how suddenly, and from what unexpected airths they strike! how
fearfully they kindle the corruption of our heart! -- May I continually bathe
myself in the fountain of a Savior's blood, and in the river of his Spirit,
that I may readily quench all the fiery darts of the devil.

CHAP. IX. Metaphors respecting prosperity, spiritual or temporal.
1. PROSPERITY is compared to LIFE Psalm. xxxi 5.
. What usefulness and aptness for work attend it! If my gold or silver abound,
be thou, my soul, lifted up in the ways of the Lord; do thou good to others;
and run in the way of his commandments, when he enlarges my heart.

2. It resembles the having the head anointed with oil Psalm. xxiii. 5.
. In the enjoyment thereof, men do, or ought to appear comely, lovely, and
cheerful.

3. It is represented as a sitting under our own vines and fig trees, and a
beating weapons of war into instruments of husbandry Mic iv. 3. 4.
; to mark the pleasure, the property, the refreshment, the peace, satisfaction,
and safety therein comprehended -- Sit, my soul, under Jesus' shadow, with
great delight; let his fruit be sweet to my taste. Thus, though the fig tree
should not blossom, and no meat be in the vine, and the labor of the olive
fail; yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful in the God of my salvation.
With detestation shall I cast away the weapons of my rebellion against him; and
improve the remembrance of my wickedness, to render me active in gospel
holiness.

4. It is represented as a LIFTING UP Job xxii. 20.
. It prevents contempt and oppression; renders us more visible to mankind;
exalts us to honor, authority, pleasure, and more abundant usefulness -- May I
be raised up together with Christ: so, when men are cast down, I shall say,
there is lifting up, and he shall save the humble person.

5. It is represented as HEALTH and FATNESS Jer. xxziii. 6. Prove. xii. 4.
. Thereby pain, trouble, and poverty, are removed, and pleasure, strength, and
extensive influence, abundant fullness, honor, and power, succeed in their
room. -- Be thou, O Savior, the health of my countenance, and my God.

6. It is represented as a TREE OF LIFE Prove. xiii. 12.
. What pleasure, courage, comfort, and vivacity it affords! -- Blessed Jesus,
how often have my deferred hopes of fellowship with thee made my heart sick!
but when thou come, thou art a tree of life; because thou live, I shall
live also.

7. It is compared to a flourishing FIELD or GARDEN Is. lviii. 11.
. How pleasant and refreshful to behold! and how promising of what is better!
-- Lord, render my soul as a watered garden, whose springs fail not!

8. It is compared to LIGHT; to the SUN; the MOON; to a LAMP: a CANDLE Is. lx.
20. Psalm. xviii. 28.
. By means thereof are men noticed, and regardfully distinguished; and have an
opportunity of active usefulness. How pleasant and delightful it is! Yet how
fast all outward prosperity hastens to its final period! and the brighter it
shine, its duration is ordinarily the shorter. -- May the Lord be my
everlasting light, and my God my glory.

9. It is compared to a SPRING TIDE; a MORNING, or DAY Is. xxxv. 1. 2. and xxi.
12.
. Therein our enjoyments bud, and promise much increase; every thing in our lot
seems fresh and smiling, and calls us to activity and labor. Therein we are
warmed with pleasure and fullness; sing for joy, and walk abroad with airs of
gaiety and cheerfulness. But how quickly does the winter and night of death
succeed!

10. It is compared to MOISTURE and DEW Psalm. xxxii. 4. Job xxix. 19.
. How refreshing, pleasant, and useful! and therein ought we, like a dew from
the Lord of hosts, to refresh and do good to others.

11. It is compared to WATER; a FOUNTAIN; a RIVER Is. lxvi. 12.
. How pleasant to behold, or enjoy it! What extensive usefulness, apparent
security, and continuing duration, it seems to promise! But how often it
proves brooks of Tema; is quickly dried out of its place.

12. It is compared to a TABLE; a FEAST; a CUP OF WINE; or MILK Psalm. xxiii. 5.
Is. lxvi. 11.
. It is DIVinely set before us, and measured out to us; it is pleasantly and
greedily embraced by us; and cheerful and merry it rendereth us. -- But art not
thou, endless nuptial-feast of the Lamb, thou new wine in the Father's kingdom,
thou milk, not of the Gentiles, but of Jesus, ten thousand times sweeter than
honey to my taste!

13. It is called a CROWN Lam. v. 16.
. What glory, respect, and authority attend it! But alas, how tottering! how
easily it falls from our head, because we have sinned!

14. The rich man's wealth is his STRONG CITY Prove. x. 15.
. He trusts and depends on it for safety; and is by it protected from various
insults and dangers.

15. Riches are likened to EAGLES Prove. xxiii. 5.
. How quickly they often fly away from men, never to be regained! and mount
toward heaven, to accuse their owners to God, for abusing them!

16. They are called the MAMMON of unrighteousness Luke xvi. 9.
. What a numerous collection and multitude! How often the object of much
unrighteousness in procuring and keeping them! -- What others sinfully gain or
use, let me lawfully get, and lay out in works of piety and charity, that I may
be rewarded in the heavenly, the everlasting habitations.

17. Saints count all but LOSS and DUNG to win Christ Philip. iii. 8. 9.
. In comparison of him, they reckon every other thing contemptible, useless,
unsavory, and vile.

CHAP. X. Metaphors respecting adversity.
1. SORE troubles are likened to a troop of HORSEMEN; and represented as the
TERRORS of God set in array against one Jer. xii. 5. Prove. xxiv. 34.
. O the irresistible force! the impossibility of fleeing from them! and the
fear, perplexity, astonishment, and often hopeless stupidity, of men under them.

2. Affliction is called the BLAST and BREATH of God, SMOKE out of his nostrils
Job. iv. 9.
. How easily he inflicts it upon us! and thereby, how are we toffed, fanned,
unsettled, and perplexed! Amidst my trouble, Lord, breathe on me, and cause me
to receive the Holy Ghost.

3. It is compared to LIONS; BEARS; and SERPENTS Amos v. 19. Eccl. x. 8.
. What terror and ravage it spreads in the world! In desolating judgments, how
unmercifully are men torn and stung in their persons and enjoyments!

4. It is likened to an ALMOND TREE Jer. i. 11.
; to mark its speedy approach, and its lasting duration. How quickly violence
rises up into a rod of wickedness! How quickly pride buds, and brings forth
punishment!

5. It is compared to a thorn hedge; a surrounding wall of hewn stone; a wall
of gall and travail Lam. iii. 5. 7.
. It stops our course and enterprise; shuts us up from liberty and escape. How
often our attempts to remedy it, do but prick us, and embitter our condition
more and more!

6. It is represented as a feeding on gravel, and four grapes; and having the
teeth set on edge Lam. iii. 16. Ezekiel. xviii. 2.
. How debasing and unpleasant! How bitter it renders life, and the enjoyments
thereof! Lord, sweeten all my troubles with thy love shed abroad in my heart.

7. Sore trouble is represented as a treading down; a cutting down; a drying
up; a covering with ashes Is. xxii. 5.
; to denote the violent debasement and oppression, the painful agony, the
deprivation of comfort, and of the hope of it, therein contained.

8. It is called a licking of the dust like serpents; a moving in the holes of
the earth; a sitting in the dust Micah vii. 17.
; to mark the dreadful debasement, the shame, and the difficulty of obtaining
necessary provision, contained in it. And how often do sinners then wail as
dragons, and hiss and murmur as serpents!

9. It is called a breaking in the place of dragons, and with breach upon
breach Psalm. xliv. 19. Job xvi. 14.
. How often it is inflicted by instruments cruel and unmerciful, who scarce
allow the least hope of outgate! How often is one painful and debasing judgment
added to another! How effectually they break our spirits, deprive us of joy,
vigor, and courage! break our bodily constitution! break off our purposes!
break to pieces our worldly enjoyments! break asunder families, churches, and
nations. -- O Jesus, heal our present breaches, which are wide like the sea.

10. Adversity is compared to a VOICE, or sounding of trumpets Micah vi. 9.
Rev. viii. 5. -- 13.
. Often God warns men of it; and by it he solemnly calls us to consider our
ways, and with whom we have to do; to repent of our sin, and flee to Jesus,
from the wrath which is to come. O may I distinctly know what is spoken and
sounded!

11. Fearful affliction is represented as a scattering of brimstone upon one's
habitation Job. xviii. 5.
; alluding to the overthrow of Sodom; and to mark how wrathful, disagreeable,
and hopeless, it renders our condition.

12. God's judgments upon Antichrist are represented as the pouring out of
seven vials Rev. xvi.
; to mark how wisely, gradually, and completely his vengeance shall overtake
that abominable state. Yet how sparingly, in comparison of the full floods of
his wrath in hell!

13. Affliction is called a TRIAL Ezekiel. xxi. 13.
. By it God calls us to the bar of our conscience, to examine and consider
our ways; and he manifests to ourselves, or the world around, what tempers and
dispositions we are of.

14. It is compared to the scorching HEAT of the sun, or NOONTIDE Rev. xvi. 8.
Song i. 7.
. In it how vehemently do an angry God, prevailing corruptions, wicked angels
and men, disquiet our souls, our bodies, and deprive us of our rest,
refreshment, comfort, and glory! How is our duty thereby hindered, or rendered
hard to perform! -- Under such trouble, let me flee under Christ's shadow, and
live as one planted in, and watered by him.

15. It is compared to an EVENING or NIGHT Is. xxi. 12. Zech. xiv. 7.
. It succeeds a morning of prosperity, opportunity, or life. In it, Christ, the
Sun of righteousness, and other sun-like comforts, are withdrawn; and only
moons of instituted ordinances, stars of ministers, and such like lesser
comforts, are left behind. How often does our sun go down at noon! our comforts
forsake us, when we least expected it! In trouble, how heartless; cold;
painful; and dangerous to live! What delusive meteors of vain fancies, and
flattering temptations, blaze abroad! What wild beasts of hurtful inclinations
range around, seeking whom they may devour! How slowly time seems to move! How
drowsy and stupid our souls often become! And how often is the darkness and
danger greatest, before the dayspring of deliverance appear!

16. It is compared to DARKNESS Lam. iii. 2.
. It is a judgment DIVinely inflicted, and occasioned by the hiding of God's
face; by his removal of the sun and lamp of prosperity; by his depriving us of
his word and ordinances; and by his cutting off the great men of a church or
state. How unpleasant and unactive it renders our life! What wandering and
stumbling it occasions! How different its degrees, though it can still become
worse! How grievous, especially to those who have tasted the pleasures of an
opposite lightsome prosperity! How often it is such a mixture of mercy and
judgment, that it is hard to say which prevails in it! Yet, let me reverence
it; it is the doing of the Lord, let it be wondrous and acceptable in mine
eyes; It is his pavilion and secret place; let me therein behave as in his
immediate presence; let me feel after him; though clouds and darkness be round
about him, judgment, mercy, and truth, go before his face.

17. Afflictions are compared to CLOUDS Psalm. xcvii. 2.
. How great their variety, how numerous their ingredients! how often they
suddenly come upon us! how signally they obstruct our light and comfort; and
render us dull, heavy, cold, and careless! Yet does not God ride thereon? Is
not he present in them? and is it not his alone to remove them?

18. They are compared to RAIN; DEW; and DROPS of the night Song v. 2. Matthew.
vii. 25.
. How numerous their ingredients! how grievous; and for the present, seemingly
hurtful to the distressed! Yet afterward, how often profitable to render us
fruitful in the works of righteousness! Blessed Savior, what countless drops
of DIVine wrath fell on thine head, thine heart! O thy amazement and heaviness
under the weight thereof! but how delightful and numerous the fruits of glory
to God, and felicity to men, thereby produced!

19. They are likened to WINTER Song ii. 11.
. God appoints and limits them. The withdrawment of his smiling countenance,
the removal of his warming and illuminating word and ordinances, or of outward
prosperity, occasion them. How painful to endure! how often they kill such as
are not rooted and grounded in Christ! how they nip the weeds of corruption in
the saints; and cut off the vermin of earnal professors from among them! How
effectually they render difficult our way to the heavenly kingdom; and,
proportional to their severity, sweeten the springtide of glory, when it
comes! Adored Jesus, how tremendous was thy winter of suffering! thy soul was
troubled, amazed, and very heavy, sorrowful even unto death. O shocking winter
that bestormed, that pained, that froze to death, him who is the Almighty God!
But rejoice, my soul, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; Jesus has
suffered, and entered into his glory. The winter of my unregeneracy is past;
quickly shall all my winters of raging corruption and trouble be finished, and
one eternal spring ensue.

20. They are compared to storms of WIND; HAIL; and RAIN Is. xxviii. 17. Matthew.
vii. 25.
. By the abounding of iniquity; by the want of humiliation under former trials;
by the death of godly men; by inspired hints applied to the conscience, and the
like, they are often foreboded. Out of God's treasures of indignation, they are
brought forth; and by his power and wisdom, they are governed; devils and
wicked men being no more than his instruments. How swiftly they pursue! how
suddenly; how terribly and irresi^^ibly they seize upon mortals! what
desolations they make in the earth! how wretched, perplexed, and painful, is
the case of those under them, who are without Christ! how the storm sweeps away
their lying refuges of vain imaginations, self-righteousness, and sinful
methods of deliverance! how this whirlwind binds them up in its wings, and
hurls them into eternal ruin!

21. They are compared to WATER-SPOUTS; BROOKS; OVERFLOWING STREAMS; and
SWELLINGS OF JORDAN Psalm. xlii. 7. and cx. 7. Jer. xii. 5.
. How various the instruments and ingredients thereof! how they run in our way
to the celestial bliss! in what high degree; and how suddenly, successively,
violently, and irresistibly, they often attack us! How loud, how terrible their
message from God to our conscience! how muddy and disagreeable to our taste!
What havoc they make in families, nations, and enjoyments! How effectually
they carry off into eternal woe, these who are not anchored, rooted, and
grounded in Christ!

22. They are compared to DEPTHS and DEEP MIRES Psalm. lxix. 1. 2. and xl. 2.
. How often they gradually increase and overwhelm us! how fast they retain, and
refuse to let us go! In them, how wretched, cold, perplexed, and dispirited our
soul! how incapable are we to recover ourselves from them! How often, my soul,
are the deeps like to swallow me up! how often am I deprived of the smiles of
Jesus' love! perplexed with ingratitude to him! afraid of his just wrath!
oppressed with his judgments! harassed in conscience with fears of utter
rejection? with temptations of Satan, and prevalency of inward corruption! --
But rejoice, Jesus was nights and days in the deep, that he might pave my deeps
with his everlasting love. His way is in the sea, and his path in the mighty
waters; and from all my great deeps shall he draw me out. Though now deep call
unto deep; all his waves and billows go over me; yet his loving kindness will
the Lord command in the daytime. The name of all my deeps is, The Lord is
there.

23. Trouble is compared to a WILDERNESS Hos. ii. 14.
. How difficult to live in it! how exposed to enemies, snares, and temptations!
how hard to discern our state and condition; or find a way of escape! how many
are our wants! how rough our way! -- While I am here, may JEHOVAH feed me with
his hidden manna; lead, humble, and prove me; and do me good in my latter end.

24. It is called a VALLEY; a BOTTOM; a VALLEY of the shadow of death Zech. i.
8. Psalm. xxiii. 4.
. Therein, how debased is our condition! how ready are we to be trodden upon!
What preludes of death! What terrors often surround us therein! -- Yet in this
low valley has not my soul ordinarily most moisture? and is she not most
fruitful? Let me then never fear trouble or death, while I have a Christ with
me.

25. It is compared to PITS; NETS; SNARES; STUMBLING BLOCKS Psalm. vii. 15. and
x. 9.
. How wickedly do Satan and his agents often prepare them for us; and draw us
into them! How unprepared and suddenly, do we often fall into them! How often
are we so entangled, that endeavors to extricate ourselves do but inveigle us
more and more! How often we rage as wild bulls in a net! How often we are
overthrown, hurt, and bruised by them! How sadly they stop our way, and render
us unsightly!

26. Is is compared to a PRISON; STOCKS; or CHAIN Psalm. cxlii. 6.
. It restrains our liberty; marks our guilt; promotes our shame, fear, pain,
disquiet, and often connection with bad companions. It is thine, O supreme
Judge, to cast us into, and deliver us from it. Our attempts to escape at our
own hands, do but add to our misery. -- My soul, quietly bear thy shame; accept
the punishment of thine iniquity; be still, amidst thy trouble, till God
himself bring thee out.

27. It is compared to a BED Rev. ii. 22.
. Our spirit it confines; our activity it restrains. Under it, how sick,
uneasy, unsightly, lean, destitute of courage or comfort are we!

28. It is compared to a FIRE; a FURNACE; FLAMES; an OVEN Zech. xiii. 9.
. How often it breaks forth suddenly! how quickly it spreads! how terrible its
alarms! how hard to stop, and painful to endure it! As good substance, the
saints are only melted and purified; as stubble, the wicked are destroyed, and
hastened to eternal fire. It makes men's faces like flames; fills them with
reddening terror and rage. It makes them blacker than a coal; deprives them of
their joy, their glory, and honor. It renders them like bottles in the smoke,
quite unsightly, and almost useless. -- When I pass through the fire, be thou,
Jesus, with me; so shall I not be burnt, nor the flame kindle upon me.

29. It is compared to ARROWS; to a SWORD; and other weapons of war Job. vi. 4.
. Afflictions are launched from the bow of God's providence, and managed and
directed by his hand. How numerous and well-aimed! How often do they secretly
and unexpectedly strike, wound, pierce, and pain our body or soul! -- How
often, O Lord, have thine arrows stuck fast in me, and thine afflicting hand
pressed me sore! how often have the poison thereof, the torment and fear
arising therefrom, exhausted the joy, courage, and ease of my spirit!

30. It is compared to a ROD or SCOURGE Job. ix. 34.
. What a painful and grievous consequence of sin! It is sent to cause us
consider our evil ways, and turn to the Lord: Kindly we ought to receive it,
and carefully to improve it. How often it proves beneficial to promote our
conviction, and conversion to God! Such as being often corrected, harden their
neck, shall be suddenly destroyed, and that without remedy. -- Correct me, O
Lord, but in measure; and let thy rod drive all my sin, my foolishness, from my
heart.

31. It is compared to a WOUND; DISEASE; LEANNESS Is. i. 6. and xxiv. 16.
. How sharply it pains us? how sadly it confines, and abridgeth our liberty!
spoils us of our glory and fullness; and renders us weak and unsightly! Alas! by
neglect to receive and digest my spiritual provision; by sinful anxiety; by
immoderate care about earthly things; by taking satisfaction in carnal and
sinful pleafures; by manifold diseases of sin and sorrow, what a lean, a
deformed skeleton am I! My leanness, my leanness! woe unto me.

32. It is represented as a thing CROOKED Eccl. vii. 13.
. In the inward or outward case of our person; in the case of our family, our
friends or enjoyments, how uneven, dissimilar, disagreeable, and uncomely, it
renders our lot! O the unnumbered crooks of mine! By thy favor, blessed Jesus,
thou liftest me up; and by thy rebukes thou castest me down: but eternity shall
make even all. -- Let not then my soul endanger herself, essaying to make
straight, what be has made crooked.

33. It is called a CROSS Matthew xvi. 24.
. Like the ancient crosses, to which malefactors were fixed, it stretches,
pains, and exposes us as shameful malefactors in God's sight. It crosses our
hopes, desires, designs, and attempts: we look for good; but evil comes: we
seek light; and behold it is darkness. -- May all my trouble be the cross of
Christ

34. It is compared to a BURDEN and WEIGHT Is. xxx. 27.
. It oppresses and sinks our spirits; it lowers our circumstances. It renders
us uneasy in life, and unsit for extensive action. If burdens be imposed, if
plowers plow upon my back, it is the grief, the load which the Lord has
appointed me: let me therefore patiently bear it; be dumb because he does it.
Jesus bare my griefs, and carried my sorrows: he has borne and carried; and
even to old age he will bear, and he will carry, and he will deliver me. Be
thou, my soul, a follower of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
promises.

35. It is called a YOKE Is. x. 27.
. How closely it cleaves to us, and joins us together! firmly we are fixed
therein; sadly is our spirit often galled thereby. Nevertheless it obliges us
to follow the course appointed for us, in the providence of God. It is a yoke
of transgression wreathed about our neck, by our iniquities; for though hand
join in hand, the sinner shall not go unpunished.

36. It is called a HOOK; and BRIDLE Is. xxxvii. 29.
. By applying it to men, and painfully tormenting them therewith, God, at his
pleasure, restrains them from their intended purposes; drags them through the
world, and the DIVersified circumstances thereof; and at last draws them into
the eternal state.

37. It is compared to a FAN; and SIEVE Jer. xv. 7. Is. xxx. 28.
. Thereby God tries and discovers what we are; tosseth us up and down;
separates sinners from the saints in the church; for what is the chaff to the
wheat? Hereby ho fans and sifts our hopes; for what is the chaff of vain
imaginations to the comfortable oracles of Christ! Hereby he scatters families
and nations before him, lighter than the small dust of the balance. It is a
sieve of vanity, as God therein shows men's emptiness; sets them one against
another; and spreads destruction among the nations. -- Lord, sift thy chosen as
thou will, none shall be lost.

38. It is compared to GALL; and WORMWOOD Jer. iv. 15.
. How bitter and disagreeable to nature! But, being mixed with mercy, how
profitable it is to the saints! It kills our inward vermin of corrupt
inclinations; it brings down our pride; purges off our filth; cures our
spiritual barrenness and deadness; and enlarges our appetite and desire after
Christ. -- O the height, the depth, of the wisdom and knowledge of God, who by
gall and wormwood ushers in sweet Jesus, and his glory, to my heart!

39. It is compared to a CUP, full of liquor Jer. xxv. 15.
. God exactly measures it out to men; and every one must take his share. How
often it makes us stagger as drunken men, not knowing what to do; nor whither
to go? How often it renders us stupid and enraged! How often it causes us
vomit up our shame, confessing our wickedness, parting with that which we had
sinfully gained; or pouring forth our blasphemous rage against the DIVine
Manager of all plagues! How often it is a cup of fury, proceeding from the
revenging wrath of God! making men drunk with their own blood; stupefied with
their miseries! How often it is a cup of trembling and astonishment, making us
quake and faint at the thought of receiving, or of continuing to drink it! --
Adored Redeemer, what a cup was thine! a cup of trembling, filled with wine of
astonishment! a cup full of the fury of the Lord, full of thine own blood! a
cup deep as hell, and broader than the sea! O how my heart is wonder-struck!
How melted to hear thee cry of it, The cup that my Father gives me, shall I
not drink it? to see the wring out the bitter dregs thereof, and drink them out
for whom! for ME.

40. The afflictions of Christ and his people are called their BAPTISM Matthew.
xx. 22. 23.
. Through these they are dedicated to God; put off their connections with sin,
and the mortality that attends it. How, Jesus, wast thou straitened, till thy
baptism was accomplished! How thy bowels heaved within thee, to find a vent in
love, in sighs in groans, in blood, in death, for men! for ME! -- Heave all my
powers; burst thou mortal frame with love; with longing for my Christ.

41. The overthrow of nations or churches is represented as a rolling together
the heavens; a turning the sun into blackness; and the moon into blood, and
causing the stars to fall Matthew. xxiv. 29. Rev. vi. 12. 13. Is. xiii. 10.
; to mark the shocking and fearful manner in which their frame is dissolved and
broken to pieces; their luminaries perish; their idolatrous objects of worship
are disgraced; their magistrates and ministers ejected, and barbarously
murdered; their ordinances, laws, and statutes, are abolished. -- These, my
Lord, shall perish; but thou shall endure: they shall be changed! but thou art
the same, and thy years have no end.

42. The overthrow of nations and churches is compared to an EARTHQUAKE Rev.
xi. 13.
. How terrible and destructive! How it makes men's hearts to fail and quake for
fear! How dreadfully it rends asunder the whole frame of government! How
furiously and suddenly are magistrates, ministers, and great men, these exalted
and overtopping mountains, private persons, these plain fields and useful
rivers, thrown out of their respective stations and enjoyments!

43. The overthrow of a nation or church is likened to an HARVEST and VINTAGE
Joel iii. 13. Rev. xiv. 15. 20.
. Men being ripe in, and having filled up the whole measure of iniquity, which
DIVine patience intended to bear with, God cuts them off from their standing.
The wicked he casts in bundles, or multitudes, into hell-sire: the saints he
either preserves in life, or by death carries them home to himself. Ah! what
pricking thorns, and blasting whirlwind, do many then reap, as the punishment
of their crimes!

44. Civil punishment is called a WHEEL brought over the wicked Prove. xx. 26.
; Alluding perhaps to some ancient method of torture; and in order to represent
its easy execution, and bruising influence.

45. Church-censure is called a ROD 1 Cor. iv. 21.
. It is intended to correct men for their sin, and to reclaim them from it to
Christ; and it is to be applied with tender affection, meekness, equity, and
prudence.

46. Lets and impediments in the way of performing an enterprise, are called
mountains; gates of iron and brass; the sea; the river Euphrates; and streams
of Egypt Is. xl. 4. and xlv. 2. and xi. 15. Rev. xvi. 12.
. Because they signally stop and hinder the execution of designs. But lie what
will in the way of performing the promise, thy power, O Jesus, shall remove it,
in the time thereof: mountains shall leap aside; seas and rivers shall dry up,
at the rebuke of thy countenance.

CHAP. XI. Metaphors respecting human life.
1. HUMAN life is compared to a POST Job. ix. 25.
. Night and day, it swiftly passes forward; nor can any thing stop its
progress one moment. Ye sons of men, improve every moment thereof. Rise early
in the morning of it, to follow hard after God. Rest on no present enjoyment.
If you come not up to Jesus, in due time, your eternal life must go for it.

2. It is compared to the FLIGHT of an eagle hasting to her prey Job. ix. 26.
. With the utmost swiftness it passes away, scarce leaving the marks where it
has been. What years I have lived, are not lived, but lost. What but vestiges
of folly and guilt are to be seen behind me!

3. It is compared to a FLOWER, or GRASS Job. xiv. 2. James i.
. In our infancy and youth, how fair and beautiful! At JEHOVAH's pleasure, how
quickly are we cut down by untimely death! or withered by old age! -- But shall
not my life, hereafter, revive as the corn, and grow as the lily?

4. It is compared to a WAY and JOURNEY Matthew. v. 25.
. How much trodden! how constantly pursued! how quickly ended! My soul, while
thou art in this way, agree with God. Let my whole way point toward eternal
bliss.

5. It is compared to a FEAST 1 Cor. v. 8.
. In it God gives some a cup of consolation and prosperity; to others he
gives bread of affliction, a cup of adversity and woe. Whichsoever my Father
gives me, let me cheerfully drink it. If I am in Christ, my life is a
continual feast.

6. It is compared to a valuable MERCHANDISE to be redeemed Ephesians. v. 16.
. Eternal and unbounded felicity or misery depends on every moment of it. By
the enjoyment of God, every moment may be rendered more valuable than the whole
earth. Sensible of its importance, deeply concerned that we have lavished so
much of it on Satan, the world, and our lusts, we are to be doubly careful in
improving the rest. -- My soul, how has time lien heavy on thine hand! How
often have thou been straitened how to dispose of it! How often by unnecessary
sleep, by idle converse, by vain and wicked devices, have thou murdered its
most sacred moments! are its few years too long to love Christ! too long, to
prepare for eternity! too long, to secure the salvation of an immortal soul!
Hear thou, my soul, what murdered moments witness against thee? Must my life
go, for theirs! O dear-bought sleep, if it cost me a restless eternity in hell!
O costly hour for drinking a bottle, if rapid with an eternal drinking of of
unmixed wrath! O ill purchased hours for a ball, horse race, or stage play, if
they cost me everlasting fellowship in fire with the devil and his angels! O
dear bought opportunity of an idle visit, or onedifying chat, if it cost me
endless weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth! Will the momentary enjoyment
of a sensual pleasure, common to me with the beasts, countervail the damage of
unceasing torment? Should I, by giving my heart, my care, my time, to the
world, gain the whole of it, what will it advantage me, if I lose my soul?

7. It is compared to SWIFT SHIPS Job. ix. 26.
. How quickly it passes away, and carries us into the ocean of eternity! And
how many in it imagine every thing moving but themselves! How often bestormed,
and brought to the brink of ruin!

8. It is compared to a SHPEHERD'S TENT If. xxxviii. 12.
. Eternity apart, how mean it appears! how easily our lot therein is changed!
How easily is life itself dissolved and finished!

9. It is compared to a WEEK or DAY Job. vii. 10
. Therein we are to be laboriously occupied, securing our present and future
felicity. Its duration is fixed; and, at the end thereof, we shall enter on the
restful sabbath of everlasting happiness, or fearful night of unceasing misery.
My soul, do I pass my days in the wrath of God? or in his fear?

10. It is compared to YESTERDAY, and a WATCH of the night Psalm. xc. 4.
. Quickly, and often amidst darkness, perplexity, and trouble, it passes away,
and cannot be recalled.

11. It is compared to a SPAN and HANDBREADTH Psalm. xxxix. 5.
. How short its measure! how precisely fixed by God is its duration! and ought
not its brevity and uncertainty to be ever before us!

12. It is compared to a TALE that is told Psalm. xc. 9.
. How little useful impression it makes upon our minds! To how little purpose
has the past been spent! How little abiding sense we have of what we do in it!

13. It is compared to a SLEEP Psalm. xc. 9.
. How short and empty! How sadly past, before we are rightly sensible of
enjoying it! To how little purpose are we either pained or pleased in it! What
multitudes therein never think a serious thought, nor bestir themselves to one
good work!

14. It is compared to a DREAM Job. xx. 8.
. How filled up with idleness and vanity! How many in it are employed in they
know not what, nor for what end! How are their minds stuffed with empty
imaginations, that they are, or shall be happy! that they are Christians
indeed, and are employed in good works! yet how all turns out vanity and
vexation of spirit!

15. It is compared to the WIND Job. vii. 7.
. How unsubstantial! how swiftly, insensibly, and irresistibly, it passes
away, and returns no more!

16. It is compared to a weaver's SHUTTLE Job. vii. 6.
. With what rapidity do its moments run along! and at last, as a web, we are
cut out of the world, by death!

17. It is compared to a CLOUD Job vii. 9.
. Notwithstanding its promising appearances, how quickly is it spent! and to
how small account! How much driven away by the blast of DIVine wrath! It never
returns; and with what terror, may many look thereat!

18. It is compared to a VAPOR James iv. 14.
. It, as it were, rises out of the earth. How extremely weak, frail, and
fleeting! How tossed to and fro with the least breath of DIVine providence! How
quickly it expireth almost as soon as it exists!

19. It is compared to a SHADOW Eccles. viii. 13.
. O its emptiness and uncertainty! how quickly it goes away, and never
returns! I hear of a time to be born, and a time to die; but of none to live.
Why, Lord, should I then boast of it?

20. It is called NOTHING Psalm. ^^xix. 5.
. It bears no proportion to the eternity of God; nor to the future eternity of
men. -- Be thou, O time, as nothing in mine eye; but let eternity be all in
all. Look not, my soul, at the things which are seen, which are temporal; but
at the things which are not seen, which are eternal.

CHAP. XII. Metaphors respecting opportunities of obtaining or doing good,
which are the best part of human life.
1. OPPORTUNITY, or the season of God's doing much for a person or people, and
giving them eminent access to receive his benefits, is called an HOUR John. v.
25.
. Its period and duration are precisely fixed by God. O how short, when
compared with eternity! And, at our infinite hazard, do we lose a moment
thereof, in vanity or wickedness.

2. It is called a DAY Heb. iii. 7.
. How fixed and short! Only during the continuance thereof, the sun of
prosperity, or of sacred inspiration, shines upon us. Its morning is, when the
mercy signally commenceth: Its noon is, when at its greatest brightness: Its
evening is, when it is at its finishing point; Ah, how is the day of
gospel-opportunity detested by multitudes, who hate its light because their
deeds are evil! How often is it bestormed with trouble and persecution! and
beclouded with the rise of error and delusion! When it draws to a period, how
the warming influence of the Sun of righteousness, and his word, abates! what
shadows of error, ignorance, and empty forms of religion increase! what
faithful, laborious, and shining ministers, are cut off, and succeeded by
naughty ones! What dewy drops of DIVine judgment, spiritual and temporal, begin
to fall! What spiritual drowsiness! what cooling and abatement of love to God,
and to one another! what weariness of religious exercise and spiritual
watchfulness takes place! What contentious and bloody appearances do showy
professors, these empty clouds, make in the church! What mountains of guilt,
offenses, and separation, interpose between us and our all-glorious SUN! How
gradually the light of knowledge and truth decreaseth! how the windows of
DIVine ordinances are shut, and disregarded as useless! How eminent saints,
these birds of paradise, drop their notes, and retire to their heavenly rest!
and profane owls, and other doleful creatures, men wicked and erroneous,
boldly appear! To these tokens, what fearful night of woe succeds! When Jesus,
our blessed Sun, withdraws himself, how bulks the moon like world in our heart!
starry ministers, with their artificial light of gifts and modes, are all in
all. How fall these stars, and become earthly, senfual, devilish! What
deceitful pretenders, as blazing meteors, fly! What dark ignorance; what
bemisting delusion; what works of wickedness abound! what idle sloth; what
still stupidity; what wandering and stumbling prevail! How unused and
inffectual is the glass of God's word! How bolted are men's hearts to Jesus the
Lord! -- O my soul, while it is called to day, hear his voice; harden not thine
heart. Now is the accepted time; now is the day of salvation. Alas! the day is
far spent, the night comes, wherein no man can work. In Zion, a night is come;
behold, it is come.

3. It is called a MORNING and DAY BREAK Is. xxi. 12.
. How pleasant, and for a time growing, the shine of providential smiles or
scripture light! How refreshful the falling dew of God's favor, word, and
Spirit! How kindly blow the cooling breezes, the north wind of conviction, and
southern gales of heavenly comfort! How boldly walk abroad the children of God,
and early seek after him; while, as ashamed, the wicked hide themselves in
obscurity, or put on masks of dissimulation!

4. It is compared to a SPRINGTIDE Song ii. 11. 12. 13.
. Then Jesus the Sun of righteousness approaches to us, in the offer and
influence of his grace. Saints, those fragrant and beautiful trees of
righteousness, grow and flourish. The savoury and medicinal flowers of grace
and holiness spring up in their heart and life. How sweetly the Holy Ghost, the
celestial turtle, bespeaks our heart in the ordinances of the gospel! How
sweetly the redeemed birds of paradise sing forth the excellencies of redeeming
love! Blessed period, when the winter-dispensation of Jewish ceremonies was
finished; when thousands at once were gathered to their risen Lord; had their
heart melted with his love; their darkness and shadows banished; and were made
to blossom as the rose, and bring forth fruit unto God! Blessed period, when
the winter cold and storms, the floods, barrenness, and darkness of Heathen and
Popish abominations; of general security and unconcern; or of legal fears of
DIVine wrath, or awful feeling of his rod, are removed and finished!

5. It is compared to a SUMMER Prove. vi. and x. 5.
. How comely, fragrant, flourishing, and effective, professors and ordinances,
then appear! How fast the redeemed, and their graces, ripen for the harvest of
death, and the wicked, with their sins, for endless ruin! This, this, my soul,
is the principal season of time. In it work out thy salvation with fear and
trembling. Work the work of God, by believing on his Son; or, at the end, be
exposed to everlasting shame and contempt.

6. It is compared to a HARVEST Matthew. ix. 37.
. How plainly calculated to relieve starving sinners with spiritual provision!
How actively ought every man to bestir himself in faith and holiness! How
carefully is every moment of it to be seized and improven! Christ's faithful
laborers being few, how often, especially when an apprehended storm renders
them more earnest to gather sinners to Jesus, before it break; is their work
heavy and laborious! In different periods, how different are the appearance and
duration of this opportunity! How often, in this harvest, is the increase much
smaller than was at first expected! -- If I waste it in vanity and sloth, what
starving winter of unceasing vengeance awaits me!

7. It is called a YEAR; and the year of God's redeemed Is. lxiii. 4.
. Every circumstance thereof is regulary fixed in the purpose of God; and
various are his appearances therein. Now he causes his chosen to walk through
winter, trouble, darkness, and perplexity; anon the spring tide from on high
visits them. Now they bask under the summer-rays of the Sun of righteousness;
anon they are cut down, and gathered to the heavenly garner. O the wonders of
love, grace, and mercy, therein wrought for God's redeemed, in purchasing,
exhibiting, and applying redemption to them! Lift up thine head, my soul, these
honored periods of time are but the beginning of months. The everlasting day
and year of my redemption draws nigh.

N. B. Most of the emblems in this chapter might be particularly applied to the
apostolie, the reformation, and the millenial period of the church in general;
or to the particular season of spiritual deliverance, to a person or land.

CHAP. XIII. Metaphors respecting death.
1. DEATH is called the KING OF TERRORS Job. xviii. 14.
. Relentlessly and irresistibly, and as at pleasure, it cuts off mankind, small
and great, poor and rich. What a terror to mighty potentates! to bold
miscreants! and not seldom to tender saints! The gates of death are near
approaches to it. The first born of death is a stinged or painful exit,
exhibiting or importing a double portion of its force or terror. If death seize
me unprepared, there remains nothing but a fearful looking for of judgment,
and fiery indignation. What though, through ignorance, stupidity, and
selfconceit, I should have no bands in it, I launch forth into eternal fire! I
fall into the hands of an angry God! I leap blindfold into the horrors of
damnation! -- But, am I in Christ? Return then, O death, that I may look upon
thee; where is now thy terror and thy sting? To me, how deeply dipped! how richly
decked in blood DIVine? Sweet angel of my Father's love, sent to convey me to
his arms! Tasting a Savior's love, I could launch successive souls into
eternity fast as the moments fly!

2. It is compared to a WOLF Psalm. xlix. 14.
. How it preys upon mankind; cuts them off; and consigns their bodies to the
grave, to be the prey of vermin!

3. It is called a WARFARE Eccl. viii. 8.
. With what arrows of pain and fear, it attacks mankind! With what perplexity,
what struggling of nature, thy use to oppose it! Nor is there any discharge in
this warfare; no escaping of death. "It is appointed for men once to die, and
after that the judgment." -- Boldly war, my soul; it is with a conquered foe.

4. It is called a DEPARTURE Phil. i. 23. Eccl. xii. 3 -- 6.
. By it we leave our worldly friends, and stations; and enter into the unseen
state of endless misery or happiness. We leave our younger and equals on earth;
and are gathered to our fathers; you ransomed, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
nay, to God the Judge of all, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant;
and you wicked, to your father the devil, and his angels. Chiefly in old age,
the progress of this exit is as follows: the hands and arms, these keepers of
the house, become weak, and tremble; the once strong legs bow themselves, and
bend under the weight of the body, the teeth, which grind and bruise our food,
rot, fall out, and lose their power of chewing; the eyes, which as it were,
look out at windows, become dim, and darkened; the jaws close; the voice and
breath become so low, as to be scarce discernible; foundness of sleep ceases,
every thing disturbs it; the ears become dull; nor does any ability or relish
for music remain: the ssightest labor becomes difficult and terrible; every
thing, though light as a grasshopper is a burden; at last the nerves shrink; the
veins, the arteries, the brain, and even the heart, that fountain of life,
forbears to circulate the blood, that vital juice. Thus man goes to his long
home, the grave; and where is he!

5. It is compared to SOWING of seed 1 Cor. xv. 36.
. By it our bodies are reduced to the earth; and, after a proper interval,
shall they be raised up in the resurrection; then, you saints shall flourish as
an herb, and the earth shall cast out her dead.

6. It is represented as the DISSOLVING of a house or tent 2 Cor. v. 1.
. Therein the earthly tabernacle of our bodies are, and often gradually,
demolished; and what pain and fear often attend the downfall! Ah! how many have
this house falling about their ears, while they know not whither to go! have no
house eternal in the heavens!

7. It is compared to a FLOOD Psalm. xc. 5.
. Gradually, speedily, violently, irresistibly, and often to their great
terror, it carries men into the ocean of ETERNITY. Ah! how many have their
sandy foundation, their ill-founded hopes of everlasting happiness, overturned
by it, and are carried into the depths of hell! Blessed Jesus, thou art my sure
hope; no floods of death, no gates of hell, can prevail against thee; thou have
swallowed up death in victory.

8. It is compared to REST Job. iii. 13. 17.
. It finisheth men's enterprises; makes them cease from their worldly employ;
and how sweet and refreshing to the laboring saint! Hasten, my soul, to this
rest, that the Lord may deal bountifully with thee. Thrice easy death! thrice
easy grave, if I lie in his arms! There shall I rest from my sins, my burdens,
my labors; there shall every wicked one cease from troubling, and tossed I, as
a ship at anchor, lie at rest.

9. It is compared to SLEEP 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14.
. Thereby the bodies of the saints rest in hope, while their souls are occupied
in the high praises of our God; the bodies of the wicked rest from labor in
the prison of the grave, while their souls are tormented in hell. Lo! how these
die in the midst of their work! those not till it be ended! These, sore against
their will! those, cheerfully! These multitudes, on the brink of Tophet; those,
in Jesus' arms, far from danger. None shall for ever continue under the power
of natural death, but in the resurrection be awakened; "some to everlasting
life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt."

10. It is compared to DARKNESS Job x. 21.
. It hides men from the view of the world. And alas! what terror, perplexity,
and confusion often attend it! How many it conveys to infernal and utter
darkness, where there is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth!

11. It is compared to SILENCE Is. xv. 1.
. It finisheth our converse with men; husheth all our noise and bustle on
earth; makes our remembrance to cease in this world, -- My soul, be now silent
before the Lord; be still and know that he is thy God: so shall I with joy
descend to the house of silence. -- When death has lost his sting, how kind!
how soft his cold embrace! how gladly would I rush into his arms!

12. The death of the wicked is represented as a DRIVING or HURLING AWAY Prove.
xiv. 32.
. How violently, involuntarily, and with infinite danger, are they forced from
their present enjoyments, and furiously cast into everlasting damnation! and
alas! driven away in their wickedness, reigning in them, and charged upon them,
to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire!

CHAP. XIV. Metaphors respecting the resurrection.
1. THE resurrection is compared to a MORNING, and DAYBREAK Psalm. xlix. 14.
Song ii. 17.
. It succeeds the cold dark night of time and death. How much desired and
expected by watchful saints! What darkness of carnal security will immediately
precede it! With what striking tokens will it be ushered in! What full
discovery it will make of our thoughts, words, and deeds! How undesired and
terrible to wicked angels and men! How gladly would they hide themselves, and
flock to their dens; but cannot! How brightly shall Jesus, our eternal Sun,
arise in the clouds! How alertly shall mankind leap from their sepulchral beds!
How sweetly sing the saints, these birds redeemed! How glorious the aspect of
the earth! How wide our prospect, from eternity to eternity! -- Watch for it,
my soul, more than they that watch for the morning.

2. It is compared to an AWAKENING out of sleep Dan. xii. 2.
. Then shall the loud trump of God rouse the nations from the sleep of death;
cause them arise and come to judgment. Then shall every dream of error and vain
imagination appear, in its emptiness and vileness. Then shall mankind be struck
with universal concern. Then shall some awake with joy and gladness; others
with trembling and horros. -- How precious, O Jesus, are the thoughts thereof
to my soul! for what time soever I awake, I shall be with thee: I shall behold
thy face in righteousness, and be satisfied with thy likeness. How often I now
awake with naught, but sin, but earth, in all my thoughts! But then my faults,
my lusts, shall wake no more. I shall waken full of glory, full of God. Hark,
my soul, the trumpet sounds, Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.

3. It is compared to the REVIVING and FLOURISHING of vegetables in the spring
Is. xxvi. 19.
. O the then blessed influence of the Sun of righteousness! His visage shall be
no more marred; nor his virtue intercepted. Not one bewintered careless heart
shall be found in creation; thousands long dead, shall now revive, spring up,
and appear in their proper form. How Jesus, and his flowery nations, deck the
earth! How our bones shall flourish as an herb! No more shall his temple, our
body, lie withered, and in ruins; but rise in the superexceeding bloom of
beauty, like unto his glorious body.

4. It is compared to the QUICKENING of very dry bones Ezekiel. xxxvii. 1. -- 14.
. By the breath of the Almighty, shall the dry dust, the rotten carcases, and
withered bones of all generations, be, with DIVine care, collected, each
particle to its proper body, quickened, reanimated, brought out of their
graves, and sisted at the judgment seat of Christ. May I now have part in the
first resurrection, that over me the second death may have no power. May I,
like Jesus, be declared a son of God with power, in my resurrection from the
dead.

CHAP. XV. Metaphors respecting the day of judgment.
1. THE season of the last judgment is called a DAY 2 Pet. iii. 10.
. It is a DIVinely fixed period. What amazing discoveries of God's perfections
purposes, and word; and of the dispositions, states, and lives, of angels and
men, shall be then made! What important and extensive work shall be thereon
performed! The dead shall be raised, the living changed, the world judged; the
wicked shall depart into everlasting punishment, and the righteous into life
eternal; the earth, and the works therein, shall be burnt up! -- O great day,
honored with the appearance of the great God! O great center of eternity!
great joy of saints! great terror of reprobates! O dark, gloomy, and terrible
day to the wicked! What lively bright horror shall stare through their
eyelids! What screams to the hills and mountains shall proceed from their now
prayerless lips! for the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able
to stand.

2. It is compared to a REAPING TIME; a HARVEST-DAY Matthew. xiii. 39.
. What great and important business shall be done thereon! How universally
shall all nations be gathered, and settled on a new bottom! How completely
shall the wicked be separated from the righteous and by multitudes cast into
hellfire, to reap the fruit of their wickedness! With what enrapturing
pleasure and gladness shall the redeemed reap the fruit of JEHOVAH's promises,
and receive the all-gracious reward of every good work! How triumphantly shall
they enter into God's barn of everlasting glory and rest! It is thine, O Jesus,
and thine, O saint, to go forth weeping, bearing precious seed, and to return
rejoicing, bring your sheaves with you. Go, my soul, into the house of
mourning, rather than the house of mirth. They that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy.

3. It is compared to a DAY OF ASSIZE or ACCOUNT Matthew. xxv. 30. -- 46. Rev.
xx. 11. 15.
. Pompously then shall Jesus, our appointed Judge, sit down on his awful bench,
call, and in proper order sist before him all nations, and exhibit the most
exact representation of their case. The saints being acquitted, shall be his
assessors in judging others; the wicked shall be arraigned, and their guilt
fully evinced. Then every thought, word, and deed of the children of men, must
be accounted for; and upon clear manifestation of their state and conduct,
shall just sentence and immediate execution proceed. -- Great Judge, I kiss my
lips, that I can give a right answer; It was exacted, and thou answerest it:
all my faults were thine.

4. It is compared to a MARRIAGE-DAY Rev. xix. 7. Psalm. xlv. 13. 14.
. After spiritual betrothing in the council of peace, and in effectual calling;
after extensive preparation, and abundant longing for the event, shall Jesus,
with all his ransomed, in the highest raptures of joy and love, in all the pomp
of glorious apparel, before angels and men, be solemnly declared espoused one
to another; and in consequence thereof, for ever obtain the most splendid
feast, on all the fullness of God, on the new wine of everlasting love, and the
mutual enjoyment of one another. -- Write on thy heart, my soul, Blessed are
they which are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb. O when shall the
union of mingled elements be dissolved, that my relation to Jesus may be all in
all!

5. It is compared to a DAY of COROMATION and TRIUMPH 2 Timothy iv. 8.
. The enemies of Christ and his people being now fully subdued, he shall
publicly appear, wearing his many crowns of glory and honor; and oblige his
enemies to confess his universal and rightful authority. Thus shall it be done
to the man whom God, whom my soul, delights to honor. Then shall you,
redeemed, be DIVinely proclaimed kings and priests unto God, and with joy and
shouting, crowned with endless glory, life, and righteousness. -- Run, my soul,
to receive this incorruptible crown. In fighting the good fight of faith, be
thou faithful unto the death, and he shall give thee a crown of life. O how my
heart springs forth to meet his burning chariot-wheels, and longs to see
creation all in flame!

CHAP. XVI. Metaphors respecting this world.
1. THE world is compared to a WOMAN Romans viii. 19. -- 22. Psalm. xcvi. 11. 12.
Its astonishment and grief, denote the fearful wickedness committed, or
judgments executed in it: Its groaning and travailing in pain, and expectation
of the glorious liberty of the sons of God, mark how dreadfully the irrational
creatures are abused by sinners, and how they suffer for our sake. Their
clapping hands, shouting, singing, or rejoicing, denote the glorious works of
God done on earth, and the abundant reason which saints have to express their
joy and gladness.

2. It is compared to a SEA Matthew. xiii. 47.
. What noise, disquiet, disorder, and danger prevail in it! What rocks! what
whirlpools! what snares abound! what multitudes of unreasonable men live and
devour one another! O the storms that blow on it, and daily wash out its
inhabitants upon the shore of ETERNITY! What mire and dirt it daily casts
forth! What ebbing and flowing of our circumstances are observable in it! It is
but a dead sea. Its human inhabitants are dead in trespasses and sins; nor can
all its enjoyments be one morsel, to a living, a heavenly soul.

3. It is compared to a WILDERNESS Song viii. 5.
. How solitary, destitute of the comfortable presence of God! How barren!
affording nothing to nourish or refresh our soul! How dangerous! the most
pleasant inviting places and conditions, resembling Lebanon, Amana, Shenir, and
Hermon, are but lions dens, and mountains of leopards; the lodging of Satan,
and his destructive snares and agents. How often thunderstruck, and bestormed
by the judgments of God! How devoid of a right way to happiness! and filled
with false and dangerous paths! How overspread with briers and thorns, of
wicked men, and of sinful entanglements! How bemisted with fogs of ignorance,
perplexity, delusion, and crimes! How unsettled, troubled, and fearful their
case, who dwell therein! and have it for their portion! Blessed be the Lord,
who has caused rivers of gospel ordinances and influences, to break out in the
wilderness, and streams in the desert; has therein planted his ransomed trees
of righteousness; has opened a high way, a way of holiness, Jesus and his law,
for the redeemed to walk in; has caused an handful of corn, a little of his
word, sown on tops of mountains, upon most unpromising places and persons, to
bring forth abundance of good fruit; has built a city, whose citizens abound;
and who will make the wilderness to blossom as the rose; to possess the
excellency of Carmel and Sharon; the whole earth being filled with the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

4. It is compared to a FIELD Matthew. xiii. 38. -- 43.
. How extensive and large its boundaries! What persons and things, most
DIVersified in form and circumstances, grow up in it! How intermixed are saints
and sinners! JEHOVAH owns and inspects it; many useful providence and
ordinances he bestows upon the people of it; and at last reaps it by death and
judgment. How exposed to inroads of Satan! Ye saints, it is your field of
battle, where you war with the dragon, and fight with principalities and
powers. Any part of it being rendered a "portion of foxes, a habitation of
dragons, of wild or solitary beasts, or a place of breeding of thorns and
nettles," denotes. that it is bereaved of its human inhabitants, and turned
into a desert.

5. It is compared to an INN Eccl. i. 4.
. Here we have no continuing city, no fixed property. One generation comes,
and another goes away. Expect nothing in it, my soul, but mere necessaries;
having food and raiment, let me be therewith content.

CHAP. XVII. Metaphors respecting the state of glory in heaven.
1. IT is called an INHERITANCE Acts xxvi. 18.
. We receive it, not as purchasers thereof by any work of ours, but as heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Christ; as the sons and daughters of Jesus, who
purchased it with his blood. And oh all comprehending, pleasant, incorruptible,
and undefiled inheritance of the saints in light, in which we inherit all
things! are filled with all the fullness of God! enjoy Godhead, in the face and
person of Jesus Christ, to the utmost stretches of our wish! But will God in
every deed make me, an unmatched heir of wrath, meet to be a partaker of the
glory of his inheritance in the saints! Was it purchased with the blood; is it
disponed in the testament, and ratified to me by the death of the Son of God!
Has he, by his intercession, sued out my right to it! Has he, by his Spirit,
infeoffed me therein!

2. The heavenly state is called a BETTER COUNTRY Heb. xi. 16.
. O its vast extent! O its rich product! its manifold accommodations! its
unnumbered inhabitants! Nor sin, nor Satan, nor trouble, nor any bad thing of
this world, is there found; but every thing good is for ever enjoyed in its
highest perfection! There God shall be our sole monarch; Jesus our sole
minister of rule and direction! DIVine persons, holy angels, and just men made
perfect, our sole companions; Jesus' palace and throne, our only residence;
JEHOVAH's everlasting fullness, and love, our sole fountain and sea; the DIVine
Spirit, with his immortal joys, our only rivers and streams; Jesus our ever
present all accessible, and all bearing tree of life; unblasted, ten thousand
fold glory, our only crop; God and the Lamb our only light, our unclouded, our
unsetting sun; the unvailed face of an incarnate God, our only oracle and
ordinance; God in him, our only provision, our only treasure; full conformity
to God, our constant attainment, our common aspect; basking in the rays of his
love, and rapturous acclamations of praise, our only employ; DIVine
righteousness, brightest glory, denoting purity, victory, peace, and
priesthood, our white, our only raiment; endless honor, life, and
righteousness, our untottering crown. O happy land, where is no sickness,
sorrow, pain, death, or curse! but holiness reigns, felicity overflows, and God
is all in all! Am I to be for ever there! Are these eyes, now so intent on
vanity and vileness, for ever to see God as he is! my God, and mine exceeding
joy! Are these feet now so swift to shed blood, for ever to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes! Is this mouth, now so full of cursing, and bitterness,
for ever to be filled with the high praises of him that loved me, and gave
himself for me! Is this heart, now so filled with all unrighteousness, to be
for ever extended, and filled with all the fullness of God! Am I, now altogether
as an unclean thing, to lie for ever in the immediate embraces of Godhead, and
be perfect as my Father which is in heaven is perfect!

3. The heavenly state of glory is compared to a KINGDOM; a PALACE, and THRONE
James ii. 5. Psalm. xlv. 13. 14. Is. lxvi. 1.
. Here JEHOVAH, Jesus, and his ransomed ones, in their proper order, for ever
reign! angels are the honorary retinue! they and saints the celestial hosts!
Perfect holiness in every will, is the law; unceasing hosannas, the mirth. Here
God, the universal monarch, is immediately enjoyed; the victories of his love
for ever celebrated, and his unsearchable riches laid out to common use. Here,
for ever reign inexpressible glory, honor, harmony, order, peace, and liberty;
and all things and persons are filled with God, as their ALL IN ALL. The face
of God's throne is the visible heaven, which, as a curtain, vails from mortals
the unseen glory thereof.

4. It is called a CITY which has foundations; and the NEW JERUSALEM Heb. xi.
10. Rev. xxi.
. How DIVinely built! How astonishing its order, compactness, comeliness,
safety, government, and privileges! How numerous, and joined in love, the
inhabitants! What vision and perfect possession of peace and happiness are
there! God and his salvation are the precious, durable, and defensive wall
thereof. His perfections, purposes, and the person and office of his Son, as
exhibited by the apostles, are the twelve jewelly foundations thereof. Christ,
the pearl of great price, as preached to all the ends of the earth, is the
twelve gates thereof. Its foursquare form denotes the self consistency,
comeliness, and duration thereof. God's perfections and purposes are the
supporting golden pavement thereof; and the saints holiness is the pavement
which they, by undervaluing, tread under their feet. God and the Lamb are the
sun, light, and temple thereof. The sea of glass, mingled with fire before the
throne, is Jesus' bleeding love, his heart-inflaming and supporting
righteousness. The seven lamps besore the throne, and the river of life, clear
as crystal, proceeding out of it, are the Holy Ghost, in his DIVersified,
illuminating, and refreshful influence. The tree of life, on either side of the
river, is the everywhere present Jesus, as the source of our happiness and
vigor. Nothing shall enter into it that defiles; but there DIVine persons sit
enthroned; and thither the tribes of God, the saved nations, go up to celebrate
their endless festival: thither these kings carry all their glory; their grace
attends, and their good works do follow them. -- O when shall I enter in, by
the gates, into the city!

5. It is called PARADISE, and compared to the garden of Eden Luke xxiii. 43.
. Being DIVinely planted, it affords all things good for food, and pleasant to
the eye. Here is Jesus, the Rose of Sharon, and Lily of the valley, the Plant
of renown, the unforbidden tree of knowledge, and unguarded tree of life. Here
runs the blessed river of life, that for ever refreshes and ravisheth angels
and men. Here flourish all the promises, and all the ransomed plants of the
Lord. Here no serpents lurk; there is no freedom of will to evil. And we are
without spot and blemish, faultless before the presence of God, with exceeding
joy. -- This is my rest, here will I stay, for I have desired it.

6. It is represented as a HOUSE eternal; not made with bands; and a GARNER 2
Cor. v. 1.
. Being DIVinely erected, framed, furnished, and prepared, it endures for
ever, and comprehends the most abundant safety, secrecy, glory, and happiness.
Thither will thou, O Jesus, transport all thy good wheat, thy ransomed friends,
and preserve them uncorrupted, ravished, and comely.

7. It is called a TREASURE Matthew. vi. 20.
. How inconceivably rich and valuable! in time how unknown! But how
comprehensive! how supporting! emboldening! and heart-attracting, to him who
has it! My soul, cover earnestly this best thing; dig for it more than for hid
treasures: and where my treasure is, secured by the promise, by the care of
JEHOVAH, there let my heart be.

8. It is represented as PEACE and REST Is. lvii. 2. Heb. iv. 9.
. O the profound and unceasing quiet thereof! Peace, harmony, and love, reign
in every breast. Here the covenant of peace, and its restful blessings, are
enjoyed in the highest perfection. Toilsome labor is no more; but our endless
employ of contemplation, love, wonder, and praise, is unmixed pleasure. Here
want is neither felt nor feared; no enemy is to contend with, or danger to come
near us. But the work of Jesus' righteousness is peace, and the effect of it.
quietness and assurance for ever. His people shall dwell in a peaceable
babitation, and in quiet resting-places. Hasten, my soul, to this rest, that
remains for the people of God; for the Lord shall deal bountifully with thee.

9. The heavenly felicity is called GLORY; and an EXCEEDING WEIGHT of glory 2
Cor. iv. 17.
. O its brightness and dazzling excellency! What glory is within! what glory
on! and what glory all around us! What views of God in his brightness! of Jesus
in the glory that the Father has given him! How shall we be wrapped up, and
transformed into glory, when our vile-body is made like to his glorious body;
when the Lord is our everlasting light; and our God our glory! -- Stop, my
soul; floods of glory check my thought; bright rays of holiness, of wisdom, of
justice and mercy, beat sweet confusion on my view! -- O how contrary this to,
and far exceeding our deserts! how far it exceeds our present hopes and
conceptions! Nor, without transcending addition to our strength, could we
subsist under its ravishing pleasure and brightness! -- My God, is it THIS
which my afflictions work for me? send me then, as many, and as heavy ones, as
thou will.

10. It is called the JOY of the Lord Matthew. xxv. 21.
. There God is the matter of our joy; and our gladness approaches as near as
possible to his; and especially to that of Christ as Mediator. With what
transporting pleasure, shall we think of the hell which we have escaped! of the
troubles and temptations which we have overcome! of the holiness and
everlasting felicity which we have obtained! With what pleasure shall we behold
our blessed companions, and hear the unceasing hallelujahs! With what joy shall
we recount the deeds, and behold the glory of our DAY'S-MAN, that MIRACLE of
wonders! that COMPEND of all things! that BEAUTY, HONOR, and TRIUMPH! nay,
ECLIPSER of the glory of creation! that MARROW of our love! LIFE of our joys!
FOUNTAIN of our comfort! and CENTER of our hearts! that RAVISHMENT of angels
and men! that DELIGHT of JEHOVAH! and BRIGHTNESS of the Father's glory! that
everlasting EXCELLENCY and JOY of all generations. O could my soul leap out,
and drop her duller clay! scarce should a harp above aim at a sweeter or a
higher song. -- Hosanna to the Son of David; Hosanna in the highest.

CHAP. XVIII. Metaphors respecting hell.
1. HELL is called a LAKE that BURNS with fire and brimstone Rev. xx. 10.
. Here men, like the ancient Sodomites, are constituted monuments of DIVine
vengeance. Here every power of their soul, every member and sense of their
body, is tormented in the flames! Here, ye children of disobedience, shall your
lusts for ever rage in desire, and find nothing to satisfy them! no not a dry
morsel; no not a drop of water to cool the tip of your tongue. When the arrows
of the Almighty stick fast in you; when the lashes of conscience torment you;
when devils insult, and conscience upbraids you, for throwing away your
heavenly birthright, your God, and your glory; for incurring the vengeance of
eternal fire, for an empty sip of polluted joy; with what anguish shall you
bewail the infinite, the irrecoverable loss! with what horror shall you behold
the frowns! with what envy, hatred, and malice, shall you tremble under the
hand of an angry God!

2. It is compared to TOPHET Is. xxx. 33. Matthew. v. 22. Cr.
, a valley near Jerusalem, where the Jews burnt their children to Molech, and
the angel slew 185,000 Assyrians in one night. How near to the heavenly
Jerusalem is the state of the damned! with what infuriated rage, madness, and
anguish, they behold the happiness which they once despised! How terrible their
torment! how horrid their outcries! -- Alas! who shall live when the Lord does
this!

3. It is compared to a BURNING FIERY FURNACE, that cannot be quenched Matthew.
xiii. 42.
. How terrible its appearances! How exquisite and universal its torments! how
painful and penetrating! And O shocking thought, FOR EVER! Ye sinners in Zion
be afraid; let fearfulness surprise the hypocrites. Who among you shall dwell
with devouring fire! who shall dwell with everlasting burnings! While there is
hope, flee, flee from the wrath to come. New is the accepted time; now is the
day of salvation. God having raised up his Son Jesus, sends him to bless you,
in turning you from your iniquities. But if he is rejected, how shall every
offer of him, like oil, enrage the flames upon you, and, like serpents, for
ever inwardly sting you!

4. It is compared to a PRISON 1 Pet. iii. 19.
. Here transgressors are for ever shut up to the fury of Almighty God; are
exposed to the most shocking disgrace and contempt; sink under guilt and
condemnation; have no rest, day nor night, but are tormented with the devil and
his angels. You minions of gaiety, consider the issue of your madness; FOR
EVER, if mercy prevent not, God's unmixed wrath shall be your drink, your food;
the howlings of the damned your music; enraged fiends your inseparable
companions.

5. It is called a BOTTOMLESS PIT Rev. ix. 11.
. How inconceiveably dreadful, and durable, is the misery thereof! Amidst what
inexpressible consternation and despair, do its inhabitants for ever sink into
deeper scenes of torment and misery.

6. It is represented as UTTER DARKNESS; and BLACKNESS OF DARKNESS Matthew. viii.
12.
. In it there is no glimmering of patience, mercy, or hope; but endless
wickedness, perplexity, anguish, torment, and terror. -- Kiss now, my soul, the
Son of God, lest he be angry, and I perish from the way.

7. It is compared to a STORM Psalm. xi. 6.
. O the violence, irresistibleness, and unsupportableness of DIVine wrath,
raining upon them snares, fire, brimstone, and an horrible tempest! Ah! how
their souls tremble at the thunderclaps of vengeance! and are tossed by the
fury of Almighty God!

8. Infernal torments are compared to SALT Mark ix. 49.
. Ah! how painful, penetrating, and permament! How powerfully are the damned
supported in existence under them! How exquisite their sensation of them! But
stop, my soul, these doleful ideas; -- How great his LOVE, who bore my hell for
me! Being shed abroad in my heart, let it be a killing salt to every lust; a
consuming fire to every corruption. God forbid, that sin which dug, which
kindled, my Savior's hell of woe for me, should be my pleasure, or my jest!

FINIS

