THE LUCUBRATIONS OF Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire

By W. H -- n Esquire Dr. S -- t, A. H -- y Esquire deceased; and several other Hands.

VOL. V.

LONDON, Printed for John Morphew, near Stationers' Hall. MDCCXII.

TO THE READER.
THE following Papers were published, and several of 'em written, by a
Gentleman now Abroad. Many of 'em came from the same Hands which contributed to
the other Volumes, several of which (I fancy) will easily distinguish
themselves to have been the Productions of a Gentleman lately dead; one who, to
the Advantages of a large Estate and good Education, had acquired Learning and
an exact Knowledge of the best Sort of Men both at Home and Abroad; and withal,
was Master of so much Wit and Humor, that there are few People whose
Conversations could be more desirable. His Friends and the Public equally
regret his Loss, since he was serviceable and agreeable to 'em both in a very
eminent Degree. The rest of these Papers are to live upon what Commendations
they can give themselves, and perhaps may be thought not altogether unworthy of
the Honor of serving as a Supplement to the former Volumes.

THE [No 1. TATLER:
BY Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
VOL. V.
Quis ergo sum Saltem, si non sum Sofia? Te interrogo.
Plaut. Amphitruo.
Saturday, January 13. 1710.
IT IS impossible perhaps for the best and wisest amongst us, to keep so
constant a Guard upon our Temper, but that we may at one Time or other lie open
to the Strokes of Fortune, and such Incidents as we cannot foresee. With
Sentiments of this Kind I came Home to my Lodgings last Night, much fatigued
with a long and sudden Journey from the Country, and full of the ungrateful
Occasion of it. 'Twas natural for me to have immediate Recourse to my Pen and
Ink; but before I would offer to make Use of them, I resolved deliberately to
tell over a Hundred, and when I came to the End of that Sum, I found it more
advisable to defer drawing up my intended Remonstrance, till I had slept
soundly on my Resentments. Without any other Preface than this, I shall give
the World a fair Account of the Treatment I have lately met with, and leave
them to judge, whether the Uneasiness I have suffered be inconsistent with the
Character I have generally pretended to. About Three Weeks since, I received an
Invitation from a Kinsman in Staffordshire, to spend my Christmas in those
Parts. Upon taking Leave of Mr. Morphew, I put as many Papers into his Hands as
would serve till my Return and charged him at parting, to be very punctual with
the Town. In what Manner he and Mr. Lilly have been tampered with since, I
cannot say, they have given me my Revenge, if I desired any, by allowing their
Names to an idle Paper, that in all humane Probability, cannot live a Fortnight
to an End. My self, and the Family I was with, were in the Midst of Gaiety, and
a plentiful Entertainment, when I received a Letter from my Sister Jenny, who,
after mentioning some little Affairs I had entrusted to her, goes on thus: "The
enclosed, I believe, will give you some Surprise, as it has already astonished
every Body here: Who Mr. Steel is, that subscribes it, I don't know, any more
than I can comprehend what could induce him to it. Morphew and Lilly, I am
told, are both in the Secret. I shall not presume to instruct you, but hope you
will use some Means to disappoint the ill Nature of those who are taking Pains
to deprive the World of one of its most reasonable Entertainments. I am, etc."

I am to thank my Sister for her Compliment; but be that as it will, I shall
not easily be discouraged from my former Undertaking^ In Pursuance of it, I was
obliged upon this Notice to take Places in the Coach for my self and my Maid
with the utmost Expedition, lest I should, in a short Time, be rallied out of
my Existence, as some People will needs fancy Mr. Partridge has been, and the
real Isaac Bickerstaff have passed for a Creature of Mr. Steele's Imagination.
This Illusion might have hoped for some tolerable Success, if I had not more
than once produced my Person in a crowded Theater; and such a Person as Mr.
Steel, if I am not misinformed in the Gentleman, would hardly think it an
Advantage to own, though I should throw him in all the little Honor I have
gained by my Lucubrations. I may be allowed, perhaps, to understand Pleasantry
as well as other Men, and can (in the usual Phrase) take a Jest without being
angry; but I appeal to the World, whether the Gentleman has not carried it too
far, and whether he ought not to make a public Recantation, if the Credulity
of some unthinking People should force me to insist upon it. The following
Letter is just come to Hand, and I think it not improper to be inserted in this
Paper.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
SIR,
I Am extremely glad to hear you are come to Town, for in your Absence we were
all mightily surprised with an unaccountable Paper, Signed, Richard Steel, who
is esteemed by those that know him, to be a Man of Wit and Honor; and
therefore we took it either to be a Counterseit, or a perfect Christmas Frolic
of that ingenious Gentleman. But then, your Paper ceasing immediately after; we
were at a Loss what to think: If you were weary of the Work you had so long
carried on, and had given this Mr. Steel Orders to signify so to the Public,
he should have said it in plain Terms; but as that Paper is worded, one would
be apt to judge, that he had a Mind to persuade the Town that there was some
Analogy between Isaac Bickerstaff and him-Possibly Possibly there may be a
Secret in this which I cannot enter into; but I flatter my self that you never
had any Thoughts of giving over your Labors for the Benefit of Mankind, when
you cannot but know how many Subjects are yet unexhausted, and how many others,
as being less obvious, are wholly untouched. I dare promise, not only for my
self, but many other abler Friends, that we shall still continue to furnish you
with Hints on all proper Occasions, which is all your Genius requires. I think,
by the Way, you cannot in Honor have any more to do with Morphew and Lilly,
who have gone beyond the ordinary Pitch of Assurance, and transgressed the very
Letter of the Proverb, by endeavoring to cheat you of your Christian and
Surname too. Wishing you, Sir, long to live for our Instruction and Diversion,
and to the defeating of all Impostors, I remain,

Your most obedient humble Servant, and affectionate Kinsman, Humphry Wagstaff.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas the TATLER has been omitted for some Time, by the Neglect of those
who had the Care of it in the Absence of Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire And whereas a
Gentleman was pleased to publish a Paper, insinuating himself to have been
Author of the TATLER, and to have now laid it down; And lastly, Whereas several
spurious Papers have since come out under the said Title: The said Isaac
Bickerstaff declares, he is a perfect Stranger to the said Gentleman, and does
hereby give Notice, That he had no Intention to discontinue the said Paper,
which shall be published every Tuesday and Saturday: Only as a Mark of his
Displeasure, he has thought fit to change his Printer and Publisher. It is
therefore desired, that all Letters be from henceforward directed to Isaac
Bickerstaff Esquire at Mrs. Baldwin's, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.

The TATLER. [No 2.
Alios Viri Reverentia, vultusque ad continendum populum mire formatus: Alios
etiam, quibus ipse interesse non potuit, Vis scribendi tamen, and Magni Nominis
autoritas pervicers. Tull. Epist.
From Saturd. Jan. 13. to Tuesd. Jan. 16. 1710.
I Remember Menage tells a Story of Monsieur Racan, who had appointed a Day and
Hour to meet a certain Lady of great Wit whom he had never seen, in order to
make an Acquaintance between them. 'Two of Racan's Friends, who had heard of
the Appointment resolved to play him a Trick. The first went to the Lady two
Hours before the Time, said his Name was Racan, and talked with her an Hour;
they were both mightily pleased, began a great Friendship, and parted with much
Satisfaction. A few Minutes after comes the Second, and sends up the same Name;
the Lady wonders at the Meaning, and tells him, Mr. Racan had just left her.
The Gentleman says it was some rascally Impostor, and that he had been
frequently used in that Manner. The Lady is convinced, and they laugh at the
Oddness of the Adventures. She now calls to Mind several Passages which
confirms her that the former was a Cheat. He appoints a Second Meeting, and
takes his Leave. He was no sooner gone, but the true Racan comes to the Door,
and desires, under that Name, to see the Lady. She was out of all Patience,
sends for him up, rates him for an Impostor, and, after a Thousand Injuries,
flings a Slipper at his Head. It was impossible to pacify or disabuse her; he
was forced to retire, and it was not without some Time, and the Intervention of
Friends, that they could come to an Eclaircisement." This, as I take it, is
exactly the Case with Mr. S -- le, the pretended TATLER from Morphew, and my
self, only (I presume) the World will be sooner undeceived than the Lady in
M^nage. The very Day my last Paper came out, my Printer brought me another of
the same Date, called the TATLER, by Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire and, which was still
more pleasant, with an Advertisement at the End, calling me the Female TATLER:
It is not enough to rob me of my Name, but now they must impose a Sex on me,
when my Years have long since determined me to be of none at all. There is only
one Thing wanting in the Operation, that they would renew my Age, and then I
will heartily forgive them all the rest. In the mean Time, whatever Uneasiness
I have suffered from the little Malice of these Men, and my Retirement in the
Country, the Pleasures I have received from the same Occasion, will fairly
balance the Account. On the one Hand I have been highly delighted to see my
Name and Character assumed by the Scribblers of the Age, in order to recommend
themselves to it; and on the other, to observe the good Taste of the Town, in
distinguishing and exploding them through every Disguise, and sacrificing their
Trifles to the supposed Manes of Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire. But the greatest
Merit of my Journey into Staffordshire, is, that it has opened to me a new Fund
of unreprov'd Follies and Errors that have hitherto lain out of my View, and,
by their Situation, escaped my Censure. For, as I have lived generally in Town,
the Images I had of the Country were such only as my Senses received very
early, and my Memory has since preserved with all the Advantages they first
appeared in.

Hence it was that I thought our Parish Church the noblest Structure in
England, and the 'Squire's Place-House, as we called it, a most magnificent
Palace. I had the same Opinion of the Almshouse in the Churchyard, and of a
Bridge over the Brook that parts our Parish from the next. 'Twas the common
Vogue of our School, That the Master was the best Scholar in Europe, and the
Usher the Second. Not happening to correct these Notions by comparing them with
what I saw when I came into the World, upon returning back, I began to resume
my former Imaginations, and expected all Things should appear in the same View
as I left them when I was a Boy: But to my utter Disappointment I found them
wonderfully shrunk, and lessened almost out of my Knowledge. I looked with
Contempt on the Tribes painted on the Church Walls, which I once so much
admired, and on the carved Chimney-Piece in the 'Squire's Hall. I found my old
Master to be a poor ignorant Pedant; and, in short, the whole Scene to be
extremely changed for the worse. This I could not help mentioning, because
though it be of no Consequence in it self, yet it is certain, that most
Prejudices are contracted and retained by this narrow Way of Thinking, which in
Matters of the greatest Moment are hardly shook off; and which we only think
true, because we were made to believe so, before we were capable to distinguish
between Truth and Falsehood. But there was one Prepossession which I confess to
have parted with, much to my Regret: I mean the Opinion of that native Honesty
and Simplicity of Manners which I had always imagined to be inherent in Country
People. I soon observed it was with them and us, as they say of Animals; That
every Species at Land, has one to resemble it at Sea; for 'twas easy to
discover the Seeds and Principles of every Vice and Folly that one meets with
in the more known World, though shooting up in different Forms. I took a Fancy
out of the several Inhabitants round, to furnish the Camp; the Bar, and the
Exchange, and some certain Chocolate and Coffee-houses, with exact Parallels to
what, in many Instances, they already produce. There was a drunken quarrelsome
Smith, whom I have a hundred Times fancied at the Head of a Troop of Dragoons.
A Weaver, within two Doors of my Kinsman, was perpetually setting Neighbors
together by the Ears. I lamented to see how his Talents were misplaced, and
imagined what a Figure he might make in Westminster Hall. Goodman Crop of
Compton-Farm, wants nothing but a Plumb and a Gold-Chain to qualify him for the
Government of the City. My Kinsman's Stable-Boy was a gibbing Companion that
would always have his Jest. He would often put Cow-itch in the Maids Bed, pull
Stools from under Folks, and lay a Coal upon their Shoes when they were asleep.
He was at last turned off for some notable Piece of Roguery, and when I came
away, was loitering among the Alehouses. Bless me, thought I, what a
prodigious Wit would this have been with us! I could have matched all the
Sharpers between St. James's and Covent Garden, with a notable Fellow in the
same Neighborhood, (since hanged for picking Pockets at Fairs) could he have
had the Advantages of their Education. So nearly are the Corruptions of the
Country allied to those of the Town, with no further Difference than what is
made by another Turn of Thought and Method of Living.

Many more Grievances, though not of equal Importance, have been laid before me
from several Parts of this Kingdom, which, as they fall not under any ones
Cognizance so properly as my own, oblige me to a speedy and effectual
Regulation of them. When I was prevailed upon to, act as Censor of Great
Britain, I did not enough, consider the Extent of that Province, nor how,
difficult it would be to make my Authority understood in the remoter Parts of
this Island; for most of the Natives being Strangers to Literature, I cannot
hope my Lucubrations should meet with a general Reception amongst them; and
therefore I have now resolved on an Expedient, which I shall explain by the
following Order.

Saturday, January 13. 1710.
To all and every one of the Churchwardens and Sidesmen, in their respective
Parishes, throughout the Kingdom of Great Britain, Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor
of the said Kingdom, wishes Health, and many happy New Years.
Gentlemen,
WHereas I have from many Parts of the Kingdom, as well Villages as Country
Towns, received credible Information of several Innovations, Abuses, and
Offenses, lately crept into them, much derogating from their Honor, nor less
pernicious to the Quiet of Society, and at the same Time not punishable by any
Law, Common or Municipal, as yet in Force; and whereas my Age, growing
Infirmities, and necessary Residence in this Place, will not give me Leave to
come in Person, and put a Stop to these Evils: I do hereby charge and require
you, and every one of you, within Five Days after Receipt of this, to repair
forthwith to the Vestry, or what other Place shall to your Wisdom seem most
proper; there to choose, elect, and nominate, some candid, sober, and
understanding Person, being not above the Dignity of a Squire, nor under that
of Clerk of the Parish, aged Fifty Years at least; whom so chosen, elected, and
nominated, I do hereby authorize and depute, under the Title of a Rural Censor,
to remark, examine, and take Cognizance of all such Offenses; provided always
that he does not presume to pronounce Sentence, or make any final
Determination, not having first communicated to me, by Letter, the Persons,
Quality, Circumstances, etc. or not having received my Instructions therein.

In Witness whereof, I have set my Hand the Day and Date above: Isaac
Bickerstaff.
Signed KIDNEY, Clerk of the Court, during the incapacity of Charles Lilly,
whose Petition relating to his Suspension, is referred to the next Court-day.
In the mean Time, all Letters and Advices are to be directed to Mrs. Baldwins.

This Day the Case of John Morphew came on: He was indicted for having made
many scandalous Reflections on the Censor, as likewise for Breach of Trust; and
being found guilty of the same, was sentenced to continue printing
Sham-Tatlers, and one or two more such Papers. Six other Causes were heard
afterward, which it is not thought proper to make public, many noble Persons,
yet alive, being concerned therein.

The TATLER. [No 3.
Sie teneros animos aliena opprobria sape Absterrent vitris.
Hor.
From Tuesd. Jan. 16. to Saturday Jan. 20. 1710.
WHen I left the Town, as I said before, I did not only make a sufficient
Provision for the Continuance of my Lucubrations, till the Time I had fixed for
my Return, but took Care to substitute one, who in case my Stay should happen
to be longer than I designed, would much better have furnished out the usual
Entertainment the Public expected from me. Sam Trusty, of whom I made Mention
in a former Paper, was the Person I pitched upon to execute that Office. Fifty
Years and upwards we have lived in so strict an Intimacy, in so perfect an
Union, that neither Times, Interest, Passions nor Opinions, have ever been able
to make the least Flaw in our Friendship. I am not ashamed to own I have
received more Advantage from his Conversation, than from all the Academick
Exercises; it is to his Instructions I owe the Improvement of my Understanding,
to his Precepts and Example the forming of my Manners; and to his Observations,
the principal Remarks I have made upon the several States and Conditions of
Mankind. As his Genius at our first setting out in the World, was much above
mine, so he has ever since maintained the same Superiority. His Words were
always few, his Arguments weighty, his Reflections just, his Intentions
sincere, and his Connexions were mixed with such an agreeable Mirth, that I
have often taken Pleasure in putting my self in the Wrong, on purpose to excite
him to so delightful a Reproof. A' sudden Indisposition defeated me of his
Assistance, and has exposed me to the Difficulties I have been under in
reinstating my self in my former Authority. However, that he designed to serve
me effectually, will appear by the ensuing Discourse, which he intended to
publish the Day after my Departure; where in his ludicrous Way he has pursued
the Directions I left him, as he takes Notice himself in his Introduction. I
was unwilling the World should be deprived of one Line of his Writing, and
consequently could not well omit what the Excess of his Affection prompted him
to say in my Favor, and which is perhaps the only Instance that can be given
of his Partiality.

My very good Friend Isaac Bickerstaff, being indispensably obliged to visit
some Relations in the Country these Holy Days: That there may be no
Interruption of Justice in his Absence, has deputed me to officiate for him
till his Return; and his last Instructions were, to have a particular Regard to
the Interest of the Fair Sex, of which he has all along shown himself a
professed and constant Admirer. I am sensible how unequal my Talents are for so
important a Task, nor are our different Sentiments upon that Subject a less
Obstruction to the Performance of what he has enjoined me, than my Want of
Abilities to fill the Place of so worthy and great a Person. But to proceed to
the Business in Hand.

If we were to ^ake Mankind's Character from one another, there never could
have been so seasonable a Time to exercise the Office of Censor with the utmost
Severity; because there never was a Time, by universal Consent, when the
Iniquities of the Age were so full blown, and consequently the World stood so
much in Need of Correction. It has ever been thought natural to People advanced
in Years, as I am, to declaim upon the Vices of the Age they live in; but I am
far from believing we are half so wicked as we say we are; and being a pretty
strict Enquirer into Humane Nature, and endeavoring to trace all Things up to
their original Causes, I am fully persuaded, that a malignant Love of
Detraction is the reigning Vice of our Times; and could we but eradicate the
pernicious Practice of Railing and Defamation, we should appear to be much upon
the Level with our Predecessors, and not worse than the Nations round about us.
Zeno, the Founder of the Stoic Philosophy, had so little Indulgence for the
Frailties and Infirmities of Mankind, that he esteemed the minutest Deviation
from the Rules of Reason and Justice, to be of equal Weight with the most
horrid Crimes, and grossest Impieties; so stealing an Apple, by his Account,
was as great a Sin as committing Sacrilege; and the throwing at Cocks on
Shrove-Tuesday would have been reckoned as heinous an Offense, as murdering
ones Father in cold Blood. We seem to pursue his Principles in the Judgments we
make of other Peoples Actions. Every little Error, the most harmless
Irregularities, are subject to have Names of Infamy affixed to them, and ranked
among Deeds of the blackest Complexion.

Jenny Filch is a lamentable Instance of this barbarous Custom. They have
lately set upon her Reputation at my Lady Swaddles, the general Rendezvous of
reverend Female Elders, consisting of Antiquated Prudes, Superannuated Belles,
and Coquets of Fifty Five. Her Ladyship stroaking the downy Honors of her
Chin, with a hoarse masculine Voice, pronounced her guilty of Incontinency,
cheating at Play, Theft, and drinking to Excess: What an Accumulation of
Enormities! How severe are these Reflections upon the Reputation of a young
Lady? And had she not a Greatness of Mind superior to their Malice, which some
no doubt will ascribe to Impudence, I cannot see how she could dare show her
Face. But I who have known her from her Infancy, think it incumbent on me to
vindicate her Character, and make no Question, in very few Words, of convincing
all impartial Judges, how innocent she is of what they lay to her Charge. Jenny
Filch was brought up at a Boarding-School, where Children of both Sexes were
promiscuously received. From a Girl she hated a Sedentary Life; so little
Progress was made in the Sampler. Her Humor was brisk and jovial, her
Constitution sanguine and vigorous, which led her to delight in robust
Diversions; such as Trap-ball, Juggle-cat, British-hoppers, Nine-pins, and
Whipping Tops. To share in their Sports, she was fain to be much among the
Boys; she grew from thence to love their Company extremely, and has gradually
continued the Affection ever since. I am forced to explain this Matter very
particularly, because she has been often twitted by the Ladies for liking to be
with the Fellows rather than with them. As she is a very little Observer of
Forms, she seldom could endure to be under the Restraint of a set Dress, but
rather choose, with some one Friend, to go in a Mob, and a Mask, into the Pit at
a Play, than to sit in a Box. The Vivacity of her Wit, and the Smartness of her
Repartees, drew constantly all the young Beaux about her. This Humor of hers
it seems took mightily; and she would often prevail upon those Ladies of her
Acquaintance, whose Husbands were beyond Sea, purely out of Compassion, rather
than to sit moping and melancholy at Home, to go along with her; and in short,
did all she could to procure them such Diversions, as might make them less
sensible of their 'Spouse's Absence. When the Play was near done, no Body was
more nice in choosing some of the most civil and harmless Men to lead them to a
Coach; and because Hackney-Coachmen are often very rude and imposing, they
would now and then for Protection permit them to step in, and perhaps drive to
Phillips's, just to refresh their Spirits. Sometimes, if they were very well
assured of the Gentlemen's Behavior, they would in a Frolic venture to ear a
Frigasee at Pontacks, but never failed to be back by Twelve. I remember there
was a great Pother about Two or Three of her Companions, who at their Husband's
Return, were very near increasing their Family. But how she is to blame all
this while, no Body can say 'twas her doing; let every one answer for their own
Follies: And this is all I ever heard alleged against her upon the first
Article.

Now, as to cheating at Play, I suppose, what mislead them into that Opinion,
was her great Skill and Dexterity in all Tricks at Cards: For having very fine
Fingers, she took a great deal of Pleasure in learning whatever the famous High
German could teach her in that Art, wherein she grew so great a Proficient,
that in a short Time she out-did her Master. Twice or Thrice a Week (merely for
Amusement) she would pass the Evening at Langteral^; and truly 'twas very
entertaining for any Standers by to observe what a superior Genius she had in
handling the Cards above the People she played with. She would make nothing of
showing Three Loo's in Five Deals, to the great Wonder and Surprise of all the
Company. But as this was only done for Diversion, she chose to play so low,
that she seldom carried off above Four or Five Pounds, just to pay her Chair,
and buy clean Gloves; what they mean by Theft, I cannot imagine, unless 'twas
slipping now and then a China Cup into her Pocket at an Indian House, to adorn
her Cabinet. This, it seems, is a hereditary Piece of Furniture she is very
fond of; it came from Italy long ago, the Inside is curiously painted, wherein
are represented the Loves of Endymion and the M^, Cupid and Psyche, Venus and
Adonis, with several other fabulous Stories. She ever loved to have Things neat
about her, and only wanted some few Pieces of China to place upon the Top of
this Cabinet, but being a notable Housewife, she could not endure to squander
away her Money upon such Baubles; so when she went with any of her Acquaintance
to Shops that deal in th^se Things, she would pick up in one Place a Cup, in
the next a Saucer, in a Third something of another Sort, either China or Japan,
just as it came to Hand, and by Degrees got as complete a Collection together
as any Body: In short, there never was a more agreeable Variety, for no Two
Pieces were alike in the whole Parcel. It Is ten to one some scrupulous People
will be apt to call this Pilfering; but let them consider, no Body ever more
exactly observed the Rules of Justice, in all the Measures she took, to supply
her self with those Conveniences. Every Shop contributed but barely its Share,
and the Burden being equally laid, (so far from giving Occasion of Complaint)
the Loss was scarce felt by any Body; besides, she made them ample Amends by
commending their Goods, and bringing them Custom. I may add in her Behalf, that
what she did was merely in Conformity of the Fashion: Every Lady's Cabinet was
covered with China; she could not well afford to buy it, What should she do? It
has been a received Saying, One had as good be out of the World, as out of the
Fashion; from whence we may conclude, those Things are as necessary as Meat and
Drink; and no Body was ever accounted a Criminal for taking as much as would
suffice Nature, let it be at whose Expense it would. Indeed, had this been done
in any b^e View, for filthy Lucre, and to sell again, I readily grant she were
to blame; but in her Case it is no more than stealing the Custom of Wine for
ones own Table, and we all know how commonly that is practiced by People of very
tender Consciences.

What remains to be spoken of, is, Her immoderate Love of Wine; nor will she be
less clear in this, than in all the rest. Jenny has a voluble Tongue, and loves
to exercise it, that I cannot but own she often talks her self into a Heat, and
that causes Thirst; sometimes by an Absence of Mind, pretty incident to her,
she will call for Glass after Glass, without remembering, she drank but the
Minute before. Now, this may prove she has a short Memory indeed; but how to
infer the Love of Wine from hence, I cannot see. The Mistake however is easy to
be accounted for. The Negligence of her Dress, her fluster'd Complexion, her
great Loquacity sometimes, and her incoherent Answers to others, when her
Thoughts are wandering, often concur to make her look as if she were actually
in Drink: But is this an equitable Way of Judging? If once we suffer our selves
to be imposed on by Appearances, farewell all Hopes of having Truth established
among us in our Generation.

Before I dismiss this Subject, I cannot but express a sincere Concern for a
Multitude of injured Women who have suffered in their Characters, for want of a
Champion to defend their Cause; and I will take upon me to affirm, as much
might have been said for a Hundred about this Town who have been basely abused,
as I have done for Jenny Filch. But I refer their Justification to my Friend
Isaac, to whom that Province does most properly belong.

The TATLER. [No 4.
-- Tibi luditur: effluis amens
Contemnere. --
Per.
From Saturday Jan. 20. to Tuesday Jan. 23. 1710.
Channel-Row, January 20.
LEaning out of my Window this Morning, I observed a Young Gentleman pass under
it, whose Face I was sure to have seen, but could not presently recollect his
Name. The Oddness of his Figure helped to disguise him; for, though otherwise
decent enough, he had a Napkin-Cap on his Head; and at the same Time, by the
Negligence of his Air, gave one to understand, that he thought himself dressed
for the whole Day. In this Manner he walked on to the End of our Lane, then
turned short upon his Heel, and hurried back again with the utmost
Precipitation. By this Time I had made a shift to remember, that this was the
same Young Gentleman whom I formerly made Mention of, in order to recommend a
Play of his to the World. There was Merit enough in that Performance to make me
a Well-wisher to the Author, and as much Wit as might make him capable of an
odd Turn in his Understanding.

I was sorry to see him thus exposed, and beckoned him up to me; he came in
great Confusion, and without giving me Time to ask any Questions, told me, he
was particularly ashamed to be seen by a Man of my Character, in so heedless a
Way, that indeed he had come out in some have, and forg^t his Hat and Perriwig.
By his awkward Manner of excusing himself, I soon found the Cause of his
Disorder; that it was purely Artificial, and lay rather in his Heart than his
Head. 'Twas with great Indignation I heard his Apology, and had not I been
strongly prejudiced in the young Man's behalf, I should hardly have afforded
him the Favor of a Rebuke. After some Enquiry, I found by him, that this
Inadvertency had cost him much Pains and Industry to acquire, and that by long
Use, it was now improved into a Habit.

He freely owned, that this was a Method he had often took to distinguish and
recommend himself as a Wit, and that he had hitherto met with good Success. I
was a little pacified with the Frankness of this Confession, and encouraged him
to proceed in it. -- 'To tell you the Truth, Sir, says he, I was led into this
Error very young, and the Occasion of it perhaps may give you Diversion. 'Twas
a Custom at the Great School where I was bred, frequently to call over the
Names of the Boys, in the Presence of the Master. This happened one Day, just
after the Public Prayers were over, and when it came to my Turn to say Adsum,
through Mistake I answered, Amen. Would you believe, Sir, that from this very
Moment I came immediately into Vogue? I was cried up for a Boy of great Parts,
and of a wild, but extraordinary Genius. As I grew more careless, I was still
more admired, and by a Thousand little premeditated Blunders. I at last
established a Reputation. When I came to the University, I expected to be
laughed out of my Fooleries; but instead of that, I was every Day more
confirmed in them. There was hardly a Man of Distinction, but was, as they call
it in the University Cant, a Sh^t and a Rattle. To be a very great Sloven in
Dress, was some Degree of Merit, and I particularly remember one of the Beaux
Esprits, that valued himself upon being the dirtiest Fellow that ever writ a
good Line. 'Twas a Matter of Emulation amongst us, whose Rooms should be worst
furnished, and lie in the greatest Disorder, so that with a little wresting of
the Sense, we might have writ over our Doors, -- Hic vivimus ambitiosa
Paupertate. --
Harry Heedless, whose Works you may have heard of, has lately taken an
Allegorical Inventory of his Goods, in Heroic Verse; suffer me, Sir, to put it
into your Hands, and to beg a Place for it in your next Lucubrations." Here the
young Gentleman took his Leave, and thanked me for my Friendship, with an Air
of Sincerity that could not be dissembled. His Readiness to understand his
Error, and his Resolution to reform it, have indeed convinced me, that in
Matters of this Kind, a Man of great Parts may repeat more in half an Hour,
than one of ordinary Capacity can in many Years. But I must not omit the Verses.

Where C -- C -- Towers in pompous Pride are dressed;
Sublime and far Superior to the rest,
Over distant Piles, presides a Garret high,
That braves the Gods, and borders on the Sky:
Within whose jutting Walls and vaulted Roof,
DISORDER, Frantic Goddess, dwells aloof;
Banished the Court, despairing to be Great,
The wretched Exile flies to this Retreat.
Pensive and sad she sits, with ragged Grace,
On tottering Chair, the Tripos of the Place;
In muddy Ale, there wastes the lingering Day,
Or in Mundungus Clouds, whiffs Care away.
At Night's Approach, on Bed unmade she lies,
Whose Softness with the polished Marble vies:
Not stuffed from Fowls at Lordly Banquets dressed,
(They made for Luxury, their Plumes for Rest.)
But from those Flocks that feed by harmless Swains,
On Hampshire Downs, or Wiltshire's spreading Plains.
Mean while the Winds a dreadful Consort keep,
And with h^rse Music lull her fast asleep.
I cannot help adding a Word or Two upon this Humor of setting up for a Wit,
by personating a different Conduct from others, in the Common Actions of Life.
The rather, because within the Compass of my own Observation, it has deprived
the World of many useful Persons, and eclipsed many valuable Qualifications. It
has certainly been the Misfortune of several Great Men, to have had something
singular in their Gate, their Diet, and even in their Conversation it self.
They who have followed the profounder Studies, appear often to have their
thoughts distracted, as it is particularly observed of Mathematicians, their
Minds being so steddily fixed, that they cannot easily unbend them.

Hence it is that others, imagining the Merit lies in the Singularity, are glad
to find it so easy a Matter to distinguish themselves; the Desire of doing
which I take to be the Root of all Affectation. To say Truth, the Men of Wit
have, naturally, their Share in these Imperfections. For as more severe Studies
require a very close Application, theirs perhaps engage it too little, and
their Spirits are too volatile to give a long and constant Attention. This
Absence of theirs, if I may so speak, my Cousin Humphry calls a Tax upon great
Genius's, and says, he thinks it a Happiness, when a Man of eminent Parts has
nothing Particular to be known by, either when he walks the Street, or appears
in Company. For which Reason, in talking over the Characters of Ingenious Men,
I am frequently offended to hear People dwell upon some odd Circumstances in
their Behavior. A certain Author about Town is much celebrated for writing all
his Works upon Backs of Letters, and Scraps of Paper. Another writ the best
Part of his Poem upon old Cards, and had like to have lost Ten of the finest
Lines in it, upon an Ace of Diamonds, which he had unluckily misplaced. A
Third, of Immortal Memory, was wont to lie in his Perriwig, and caught a Cold
that destroyed him, by washing his Hands. These and many other Singularities
observable in Men of extraordinary Talents, might, for ought one knows, be
natural to them. But when Papilio studies for Incoherent Answers to every
Question that is asked him, and makes Appointments on purpose to forget them;
it is a Question amongst the Curious, Whether the Humor be natural or affected?
I think it the most favorable Opinion, that there is a Mixture of both. I have
often with great Pleasure considered the Character of my Friend Urbanus, whose
great Wit and Learning are indeed accompanied with Singularities, such as are
altogether Natural, but will, I doubt, meet with few Imitators: I mean his
excessive Candor, Modesty and good Nature. The Affectation of these Qualities
would sufficiently distinguish any one that would be at the Pains to transcribe
them, and the Consequences of it would be of Service to the World. But to copy
the Infirmities only of Great Men, and to quote their Example in our Defense,
is making Precedents of them, where they least desire to be so, and perverting
their Authority to give a Sanction to Folly.

The TATLER. [No 5.
-- Laceratque, trahitque
Molle pecus. --
Vir.
From Tuesday Jan. 23. to Saturday Jan. 27. 1710
AMongst other Severities I have met with from some Critics, the cruelest for
an Old Man is, that they will not let me be at quiet in my Bed, but pursue me
to my very Dreams. I must not dream but when they please, nor upon long
continued Subjects, however Visionary in their own Natures; because there is a
manifest Moral quite through them, which to produce as a Dream is improbable and
unnatural. The Pain I might have had from this Objection, is prevented by
considering they have missed another, against which I should have been at a
Loss to defend my self. They should have asked me whether the Dreams I publish
can properly be called Lucubrations, which is the Name I have given to all my
Papers, whether in Volumes or Half-sheets: So manifest a Contradiction in
Terminis, that I wonder no Sophister ever thought of it: But the other is a
Cavil. I remember when I was a Boy at School, I have often dreamed out the
whole Passages of a Day; that I rode a Journey, baited, supped, went to Bed,
and rose the next Morning; and I have known young Ladies who would dream a
whole Contexture of Adventures in one Night large enough to make a Novel. In
Youth the Imagination is strong, not mixed with Cares, nor tinged with those
Passions that most disturb and confound it, such as Avarice, Ambition, and many
others. Now as old Men are said to grow Children again, so in this Article of
Dreaming, I am returned to my Childhood. My Imagination is at full Ease,
without Care, Avarice, or Ambition to clog it, by which, among many others, I
have this Advantage of doubling the small Remainder of my Time, and living Four
and Twenty Hours in the Day. However, the Dream I am now going to relate, is as
wild as can well be imagined, and to please these Refiners upon Sleep, without
any Moral that I can discover. It happened that my Maid left on the Table in my
Bedchamber, one of her Story-Books (as she calls them) which I took up, and
found full of strange Impertinences, fitted to her Taste and Condition; of Poor
Servants that came to be Ladies, and Serving-Men of low Degree, who married
Kings Daughters. Among other Things I met this Sage Observation, that a Lion
would never hurt a true Virgin: With this Medly of Nonsense in my Fancy I went
to Bed, and dreamed that a Friend waked me in the Morning, and proposed for
Pastime to spend a few Hours in seeing the Parish-Lions, which he had not done
since he came to Town; and because they showed but once a Week, he would not
miss the Opportunity. I said I would humor him; though, to speak the Truth, I
was not fond of those cruel Spectacles, and if it were not so ancient a Custom,
founded, as I had heard, upon the wisest Maxims, I should be apt to censure the
Inhumanity of those who introduced it. All this will be a Riddle to the waking
Reader, till I discover the Scene my Imagination had formed upon the Maxim,
that a Lion would never hurt a true Virgin. I dreamed, that by a Law of
Immemorial Time a He-Lion was kept in every Parish at the common Charge, and in
a Place provided, adjoining to the Churchyard; That, before any one of the
Fair Sex was married, if she affirmed her self to be a Virgin, she must on her
Wedding Day, and in her Wedding-Cloaths, perform the Ceremony of going alone
into the Den, and stay an Hour with the Lion let loose, and kept fasting Four
and Twenty Hours on purpose. At a proper Height, above the Den, were convenient
Galleries for the Relations and Friends of the Young Couple, and open to all
Spectators. No Maiden was forced to offer her self to the Lion; but if she
refused, it was a Disgrace to marry her, and every one might have Liberty of
calling her a Whore. And methought it was as usual a Diversion to see the
Parish-Lions, as with us to go to a Play or an Opera. And it was reckoned
convenient to be near the Church, either for marrying the Virgin if she escaped
the Trial, or for burying the Bones when the Lion had devoured the rest, as he
constantly did.

To go on therefore with the Dream: We called first (as I remember) to see St.
Dunstan's Lion, but we were told they did not show to Day: From thence we went
to that of Covent Garden, which, to my great Surprise, we found as lean as a
Skeleton, when I expected quite the contrary; but the Keeper said 'twas no
Wonder at all, because the poor Beast had not got an Ounce of Woman's Flesh
since he came into the Parish. This amazed me more than the other, and I was
forming to my self a mighty Veneration for the Ladies in that Quarter of the
Town, when the Keeper went on, and said, He wondered the Parish would be at the
Charge of maintaining a Lion for nothing. Friend, (said I) do you call it
Nothing, to justify the Virtue of so many Ladies, or has your Lion lost his
distinguishing Faculty? Can there be any Thing more for the Honor of your
Parish, than that all the Ladies married in your Church were pure Virgins? That
is true, (said he) and the Doctor knows it to his Sorrow, for there has not
been a Couple married in our Church since his Worship has been amongst us. The
Virgins hereabouts are too wise to venture the Claws of the Lion; and because
no Body will marry them, have all entered into Vows of Virginity. So that in
Proportion we have much the largest Nunnery in the whole Town. This Manner of
Ladies entering into a Vow of Virginity, because they were not Virgins, I easily
conceived, and my Dream told me, that the whole Kingdom was full of Nunneries,
plentifully stocked from the same Reason. We went to see another Lion, where we
found much Company met in the Gallery, the Keeper told us, we should see Sport
enough, as he called it; and in a little Time, we saw a young beautiful Lady
put into the Den, who walked up toward the Lion with all imaginable Security
in her Countenance, and looked smiling upon her Lover and Friends in the
Gallery; which I thought nothing extraordinary, because it was never known that
any Lion had been mistaken. But however, we were all Disappointed, for the Lion
lifted up his Right Paw, which was the fatal Sign, and advancing forward,
seized her by the Arm, and began to tear it: The poor Lady gave a terrible
shriek, and cried out, The Lion is just, I am no true Virgin, Oh! Sappho,
Sappho. She could say no more, for the Lion gave her the Coup de Grace, by a
squeeze in the Throat, and she expired at his Feet. The Keeper dragged away her
Body to feed the Animal when the Company was gone, for the Parish Lions never
used to eat in Public. After a little Pause, another Lady came on toward the
Lion in the same Manner as the former; we observed the Beast smell her with
great Diligence, he scratched both her Hands with lifting them to his Nose, and
clapping a Claw on her Bosom, drew Blood; however he let her go, and at the
same Time turned from her with a So^t of Contempt, at which she was not a
little mortified, and retired with some Confusion to her Friends in the
Gallery. Methought the whole Company immediately understood the Meaning of
this, that the Easiness of the Lady had suffered her to admit certain impudent
and dangerous Familiarities, bordering too much upon what is Criminal; neither
was it sure whether the Lover then present had not some Sharers with him in
those Freedoms, of which a Lady can never be too sparing.

This happened to be an extraordinary Day, for a Third Lady came into the Den,
laughing loud, playing with her Fan, tossing her Head, and smiling round on the
young Fellows in the Gallery. However, the Lion leaped on her with great Fury,
and we gave her for gone; but on a sudden he let go his Hold, turned from her
as if he were nauseated, then gave her a Lash with his Tail; after which she
returned to the Gallery, not the least out of Countenance: And this, it seems,
was the usual Treatment of Coquets.

I thought we had now seen enough, but my Friend would needs have us go and
visit One or Two Lions in the City. We called at Two or Three Dens where they
happened not to show, but we generally found half a Score young Girls, between
Eight and Eleven Years Old, playing with each Lion, sitting on his Back, and
putting their Heads into his Mouth; some of them would now and then get a
Scratch; but we always discovered, upon examining, that they had been hoydening
with the young Apprentices. One of them was calling to a pretty Girl of about
Twelve Years, that stood by us in the Gallery, to come down to the Lion, and
upon her Refusal, said, Ah, Miss Betty, we could never get you to come near the
Lion, since you played at Hoop and Hide with my Brother in the Garret. We
followed a Couple, with the Wedding Folks, goint to the Church of St.
Mary-Ax's. The Lady, though well stricken in Years, extremely crooked and
deformed, was dressed out beyond the Gaiety of Fifteen; having jumbled
together, as I imagined, all the Tawd'ry Remains of Aunts, Godmothers, and
Grandmothers, for some Generations past: One of the Neighbors whispered me
that she was an Old Maid, and had the clearest Reputation of any in the Parish.
There is nothing strange in that, thought I, but was much surprised when I
observed afterward that she went toward the Lion with Distrust and Concern.
The Beast was lying down, but upon Sight of her, snuff'd up his Nose Two or
Three Times, and then giving the Sign of Death, proceeded instantly to
Execution. In the midst of her Agonies, she was heard to name the Words, Italy
and Artifices, with the utmost Horror, and several repeated Execrations: And at
last concluded, Feel that I was, to put so much Confidence in the Toughness of
my Skin!

The Keeper immediately set all in order again for another Customer, which
happened to be a famous Prude, whom her Parents after long Threatenings, and
much Persuasion, had with the extremest Difficulty prevailed on to accept a
young handsome Goldsmith, that might have pretended to five Times her Fortune.
The Fathers and Mothers in the Neighborhood used to quote her for an Example
to their Daughters. Her Elbows were rivetted to her Sides, and her whole Person
so ordered as to inform every Body that she was afraid they should touch her.
She only dreaded to approach the Lion, because it was a He one, and abhorred to
think an Animal of that Sex should presume to breathe on her. The Sight of a
Man at Twenty Yards Distance made her draw back her Head. She always sat upon
the farther Corner of the Chair, though there were Six Chairs between her and her
Lover, and with the Door wide open, and her little Sister in the Room. She was
never saluted but at the Tip of her Ear, and her Father had much ado to make
her dine without her Gloves when there was a Man at Table. She entered the Den
with some Fear, which we took to proceed from the Height of her Modesty,
offended at the Sight of so many Men in the Gallery. The Lion beholding her at
a Distance, immediately gave the deadly Sign; at which the poor Creature
(methinks I see her still) miscarried in a Fright before us all. The Lion
seemed to be surprised as much as we, and gave her Time to make her Confession,
That she was Four Months gone, by the Foreman of her Father's Shop, that this
was her Third big Belly; and when her Friends asked, why she would venture the
Trial? She said, her Nurse assured her, that a Lion would never hurt a Woman
with Child." Upon this I immediately waked, and could not help wishing, that
the Deputy-Censors of my late Institution were indu'd with the same Instinct as
these Parish Lions were.



The TATLER. [No 6.
Juvenumque prodis
Publica Cura.
Hor.
From Saturday Jan. 27. to Thursday Febr. 1. 1710.
Channel-Row, January 29.
I Have ever professed my self an Admirer of the Virtuous, and the valuable
Part of the Fair Sex. I have asserted their Privileges, extenuated their
Failings, and extolled their good Qualities. What more can be expected from a
Man of my Years? To sooth them in their Follies, or suffer them in their Vices,
were doing my self no Pleasure, and them the greatest Disservice imaginable.
This may be some Apology for my last Paper, which I should not have apprehended
to need any, but that the very Evening after it was published, I received the
following Letter.

To Isaac Bickerstaff, Esquire Censor of Great Britain.
SIR,
I Have just now read your Tatler of this Day, in which (let me tell you) you
have highly disobliged great Numbers of Ladies and Gentlemen, by endeavoring
to debar them of many Freedoms with each other, before thought allowable. For
my own Part, if I were a Man or a Woman, I would either cut your Throat, or get
you poisoned for it. As I am neither, I judge impartially, and write this
without Passion.

Castraccio Bellechantini.


I am to understand by this, that both Sexes are up in Arms against me, and
that the Signior is inclined strictly to observe a Venetian Neutrality.

To comfort me under this Misfortune, the same Post brought me the Appearance
of a Compliment; though to say Truth, I don't know how far to depend upon it.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire The humble Address of as many Virgins as could be
conveniently assembled to that Purpose, from all Parts of the City of London.
May it please your Honor,
'WE whose Names are underwritten, being honest Maids and true, and not
fearing, upon a good Occasion, to look the hungriest of your Lions in the Face,
though all of us, as appears by the Parish-Books, turned of the Age of Twelve,
do hereby give you Thanks for the Exemplary Justice you have done in this Days
Paper on the Prudes, Sappho's, Coquets, etc. who by their Evil Courses have
drawn just Satyr on themselves, and undeserved Scandal on others. It were to be
wished indeed, that the Expedient your Honor was pleased to dream of, could
actually and immediately be put in force throughout every Parish in this
Kingdom, to the Confusion of all such Offenders, and the Justification of those
who abhor their Practices. In the mean Time, placing a great Confidence in the
Truth of the ancient Tradition, by you mentioned, as well as in our own
Innocence, we humbly beg Leave to propose to your Honor, that as many of them
and us, as to your Wisdom shall seem proper, may forthwith be ordered to the
Dens in the Tower." In witness whereof, all here present have set their Names
as follow:

Saturday Night. Given at the Hall belonging to our Company.
Ordered, That a Committee of the said Virgins do attend Mr. Bickerstaff, on
the subject Matter of this Address, to Morrow in the Evening, between the Hours
of Six and Ten.
Signed, KIDNEY.

Thus, as I before hinted, the best Part of my Time is set apart for the
Service and true Interest of the Fair. Many sleepless Nights, and Days of
Anxiety, they have cost me. Yet for all this, I do not find that I have any
Degree of Interest in their Persons, or any Restraint upon their Conduct. Not a
Furbelow has been sunk, nor a Yard of Whalebone parted with, to oblige me. Even
my most gentle Corrections and Penny-Post Intimations, have met with Neglect,
Scorn and Defiance. Bellaria is a provoking Instance of this Kind; it has in
good Earnest stood me in Threepence to reform her, and I do not find that she
is One Farthing the better for it. She is young, it is true, and may live to be
wiser: As her Beauty goes off, Prudence perhaps will grow upon her; but to be
discreet in the Height of her Charms, would be a much greater Merit. She knows
the Faults I have charged her with, and must thank her self if she should
hereafter oblige me to be more open and particular. Sempronia, with the same
Aggravation, continues to be haughty, insolent, and unnatural. She is the
Mother of Five beautiful Children, the eldest not above Seven Years Old, whom
she never speaks to, but with a Design to teize them, and uses worse than any
Animals that belong to her. Going to her Coach the other Day, she observed Two
or Three of them diverting themselves in the Hall, and turning to her People,
asked the Reason why those Brats lay litt'ring about the House. Miss Molly was
severely whipped within this Week, for calling her Mother behind her back; and
Master Neddy taken from Table, for seeming only to want his Dinner before the
Italian Greyhound had been fed.

I have met with a Case yet more extraordinary, and which has given me much
Uneasiness; Though I cannot say of so Criminal a Nature as the latter. Taking a
Turn in the Park about a Month since, I saw a Paper lie upon the Ground, which
I had the Curiosity to stoop for, and found to be a Recipe.

For Clorinda.
Vineagar of Squills, Verjuice; Of each Five Ounces. Oil of Vitriol, as much as
is sufficient. Six Spoonfuls of this Mixture to be taken every Morning; Plain
Coffee, or Water Gruel, for common Drink.
R. B. A. C.


I was very much surprised at so odd a Prescription, and having formerly had
the Honor to know the Lady for whose Use it was intended, could not help
inquiring into the Occasion of it: With some Difficulty I informed my self,
that Clorinda, whom all the World admired, was very lately displeased with her
own Person. Some good natured Friend, it seems, had put it in her Head that she
was growing too fat, and in a little Time would be out of all Shape. This
sufficiently alarmed her, and from a Gaiety of Temper, that was peculiar to
her, she fell into Spleen, Vapors, and a Thousand imaginary Disquiets. There
was no Absurdity so gross that her Fears did not impose upon her. As she passed
the Streets in her Chair, she expected every Moment that the Fellows would sink
under their Burden, and would often say to her self, Bless me, how the poor
Creatures blow! My Lady Kill-Chairman's Shape was become the Object of her
Envy, as it had formerly been the Subject of her Ridicule. In short, a
Consultation of the most eminent Physicians was resolved on, and a Course of
Acids, Cum Regimine, was, it seems, the Result of it. As soon as this came to
my Knowledge, I sent Clorinda a Letter, full of such pressing Remonstrances, as
the Occasion suggested to me. I conjured her with all the Tenderness of a
Gallant, not to suffer so much Beauty to be lost to the World, by being
overcurious to preserve it; nor that Bloom to wither through an irreligious
Mortification of her self.

After taking so much Pains, to see my Advice neglected, and other Measures
pursued, has, I own, sensibly touched me, both as an old Man, and a graduate
Physician. However, it is yet in the Power of Clorinda to retrieve what is
passed: She has nothing more to do than to eat, drink, and sleep, to make her
self again the Joy of her Friends, the Desire of Mankind; and what is yet
greater, (without Vanity be it said) to be heartily forgiven by the Censor of
Great Britain.

The TATLER. [No 7.
His Lachrymis Vitam damus, and miserescimus ultro.
Virg.
From Thursd. Febr. 1. to Saturd. Febr. 3. 1710.
From my own Apartment, February 2.
IT IS a common Mistake, though of very ill Consequence, that many Failings and
Infirmities are too closely woven into our Constitutions ever to be removed by
any Pains or Application of our own. Had I suffered my self to believe this, I
had been now one of the peevishest old Fellows, as I was formerly one of the
most passionate Youths, in the World. Till the Age of Sixteen I was never in
good Humor two Hours together. I thought my self affronted by every one I met,
and grew into a Proverb for the Violence of my Resentments. I no sooner came to
the Use of my Reason, but I began to cool apace, and have ever since preserved
such an Evenness of Temper as is not easily ruffled, and which, under the
greatest Difficulties and Distresses, has made me superior to them all.

I remember one Thing of my self in the Days of my Minority that was pleasant
enough: Whenever any Body had done me an ill Office, I used, in the Bitterness
of my Heart, to wish my self Parson of the Parish for their Sake. He, I
observed, had once a Week the Privilege of speaking his Mind in public, and of
telling his Parishioners their own. This, I thought, was a mighty Relief to his
Spleen, and indeed the Doctor made Use of it as if he had been of the same
Opinion. He had a particular Felicity in finding out Texts to his Purpose, and
no one Offense could be committed against him, that did not appear the next
Sunday to be literally forbidden in Scripture. The Top Gentleman in the Parish
having one Day made him a Visit in a striped Nightgown, he looked upon this
Dishabilee as a Mark of Contempt; and the very next Time the Pulpit was his
own, giving a Side-Glance toward the 'Squire's Pew, he pronounced with a loud
Voice, Stripes are for the Backs of Fools, etc. A poor Tailor had cabbaged some
black Cloth that was put into his Hands, and the Text chosen for his Reprimand
was, Hell and Destruction are before them; though toward the End of the
Discourse it was allowed, that a Remnant should be saved.

This petulant Humor of prostituting a public Capacity to particular
Resentments, is what I have industriously avoided throughout the whole Course
of my Lucubrations. After the many Observations I have made upon humane Nature,
it is, I confess, some Pleasure to communicate them to the Public in the
Manner I have chose to do it: But, unless in Cases where my Reputation has been
openly attacked, I have never once interested the World in any Disputes
relating to my self. Every Body knows what Provocations Mr. Powell gave me, and
in how crowded a Theater, before I would descend to take any Notice of him.
When I did, it was in such a Manner, I thought, as all Controversy ought to be
managed between Scholars and Gentlemen. Mr. Morphew and Mr. Lilly obliged me
to draw my Pen against them by a Piece of Ingratitude that is hardly to be
matched in History. I had always treated those Persons with a Respect due to
their Characters, and as our Interests were mutual, I flattered my self that
our Affections were so too. I know I shall suffer in the Opinion of some
unforgiving People, when I make it known, that after such repeated Indignities
I have again taken them into Favor. But as the following Petition was
introduced to me by some of the first Quality in this Kingdom, I can deny
nothing to their Commands, nor indeed to the Dictates of my own Humanity.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire undoubted Censor of the Kingdom of Great Britain.
The Petition of John Morphew, Stationer, and Charles Lilly, Perfumer,
Humbly shows,
THat whereas during your Honor's late Retirement in the remoter Parts of this
Kingdom, we the said Charles Lilly and John Morphew, by and through the Means
of evil and clandestine Practices, Insinuations, and Instigations, set on Foot
by the avowed Enemies of your Person and Authority, were unhappily moved and
seduced to forfeit the Duty we owed to Both, by printing, publishing,
dispersing, and causing to be dispersed, several false, spurious, and
illiterate Papers, as well as by affixing your Honor's Name thereunto: We do
hereby humbly crave Leave to throw our selves at your Feet, in such Manner and
Posture as you in your Wisdom shall judge most suitable to our late Offenses:
Further craving, That we your Petitioners may be restored to our former Places,
together with all the Fees, Profits, and Perquisites thereof. In order to
which, we, in the most humble Sense of our Crimes, and filled with a deep and
hearty Sorrow for the same, do beg for our selves and for each other, That the
Suspension now lying on the said Charles Lilly, as also the late Sentence of
Deprivation pronounced on the said John Morphew, may be cancelled and reversed,
in full Form, Order and Method, pursuant to the Rules and Statutes of the Court.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
And the said Petitioners were restored, etc. according to the Tenor and
Meaning of the abovewritten Petition.

Signed, Charles Lilly.

It was an infinite Pleasure to me the Day after I had reinstated the
Petitioners, to see the Faces of my old Officers about me. However, I would not
have Mr. Kidney be in the least discouraged. The little Time he has been in
Employment has raised in me a just Esteem for his good Qualities; and it is for
his Sake that I give the following Advertisement a Place in this Part of my
Paper:

At St. James's Coffeehouse is to be spoken with a young Man, who can give a
good Account of himself, and has by long Pains and Study, acquired many useful
Qualifications. He perfectly understands the Art of making all Sorts of warm
Liquors, has made great Proficiency in Geography, Politics, and Arithmetic,
writes several good Hands, and can toss up a Ragoo, if Occasion be. He can
shave, dress, tie up a Periwig, or take the Distance of Places. He is willing
to go abroad and see the World with any young Gentleman that travels next
Spring, or to be a Tutor in a Man of Quality's Family. Before I conclude, I am
to acquaint my Readers, That as I have again received my old Servants, I have
likewise renewed my former Resolution of continuing this Work three Times a
Week; so, advising Mrs. A. Baldwin to use great Industry in her Business, I bid
her heartily Farewell.

N. B. Having commissioned my Printer to distinguish this Paper by what Number
he thinks proper, I must observe, That from Jan. 2. those only of Numbers 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, belong to this Set, in order to complete the Fifth Volume of these
Lucubrations.

The TATLER. [No 8.
-- Negotia centum
Per Caput, and circa saliunt Latus.
Hor.
From Saturday Febr. 3. to Tuesday Febr. 6. 1710.
From my own Apartment, February 5.
THat Activity or Restlesness of Thought, that Desire of doing something, which
is natural to almost every Body, does, when rightly applied, give Birth to many
great and noble Enterprises; but when it falls under the Direction of a
fantastical Judgment, it becomes troublesome and ridiculous to all the World.
On one Side, it contributes to the Characters of the greatest Generals, and the
wisest Statesmen; and on the other, it furnishes public Conversations with
Busy Bodies and Buffoons. I have observed Will Worthless for a long Time about
this Town laboring under a prodigious Impatience of being distinguished as a
Man of some Sort of Figure or other. At his first coming from the University,
he set up for a great Unbeliever; for which Reason, as likewise because he was
afraid to be in a Room by himself, he spent most of his Time at the Grecian.
But not arriving to any great Eminence in Infidelity, he turned himself with
great Application to the Calling of a Virtuoso. To equip himself for this, he
traveled twice into Italy, from whence, at great Expense, he brought back a
solemn Face, with the Reputation of knowing as much as he did when he went out.
Being now greatly accomplished for the Service of his Country, he thought it
was high Time to take Care of the Constitution; and to that End, without Fear
or Wit, leaped at once over Head and Ears into public Business. From that Time
to this he has lived in a professed Course of Gravity. I have had more frequent
Opportunities of conversing with him than I could have wished. For taking me by
my Age to be a Man for his Purpose, he has in a Manner forced himself upon my
Acquaintance. He has told me with great Frankness, That he thinks it below a
reasonable Man either to laugh or drink Wine, and that he has laid down some
Rules to himself as essential to the Character he affects: "To preserve a
steadfast Countenance, to whisper in Coffee-houses, to shave but twice a Week,
and to wear but one Loop to his Hat; to read nothing but the Votes, and to keep
Company with his Father. He has sometimes said with as much Pleasure as his
Face is capable of, Well, Mr. Bickerstaff, nothing sure is so solid a
Satisfaction as Business -- For my Part, I love it so well, that I cannot like a
Proposal the worse for having been rejected;" and to do him Justice, he has
been a true Friend to distressed Projects, and as good as a Father to Bills in
Disgrace. He receives more Petitions than a First Minister, and solicits the
Affairs of all the mad Beggars about Town. Monday last I was obliged upon some
Business to go to his Levee. I found with him, over Bohea and Bread and Butter,
Justice Upperside and Sir Paul Marmalade. Upon my coming in, Mr. Worthless, who
sat next the Fire, rose up and forced me into his Chair. The Justice, with an
innocent Smile in his Face, and his Cane at his Mouth, said, "Mr. Bickerstaff,
you can tell us; Pray, Sir, what are all these Insurances upon Births and
Marriages, will they come to any Thing or no? Before I could answer, he went
on, Why really, Sir, I would be glad Gentlemen would consider, every Nation
consists chiefly of Men and Women. How! says Sir Paul, do you make nothing of
Children?" The Justice, shaking his Head, said, "My good Friend Sir Paul, you
don't take me; but what I would offer, is this, If Marriages are hindered,
Procreation in a legal Way will cease, and the Consequence of that every one
knows. However, if no Body else takes Notice of it, I am sure I shall not -- It Is
not my Business to find Faults' -- Mr. Worthless stopping him short, cried,
"Pray take me along with you; for unless the Persons marrying be equal to the
Persons married, where is your Balance? For I take it, a Nation may be over as
well as under married." "Well, says Sir Paul, I don't love disputing in
Company, but you would have a hard Matter to make that out." This weighty
Conversation was interrupted by Captain Mystery, who came in from his Round of
Levees, with a Face of great Hurry and Importance: "Gentlemen, says he, you
little think where I have been this Morning -- Hark you Mr. Worthless, a Word
in your Ear. All out -- Ships -- Command -- A Blockhead and a Coward, and all
their Hands to it -- It Is a little hard though that neither Side should take any
Notice of one' --

This was all I overheard of his Whisper, when a Servant came and told Mr.
Worthless, there were several People at the Door who desired to speak with his
Honor. Leave of Audience being given, the first that entered was Don Cavaliero
de Tristo Figure. The Solemnity of his Air, joined with the miserable Habit he
was in, was a most exquisite Burlesque upon the Humor of his Country. He had
in his Hand a Bundle of Papers, much obscured with Filth, and of a Fragrancy
not to be endured. These he presented to the Patriot, who gave me to
understand, that they contained a short and easy Expedient to settle the House
of Austria on the Throne of Spain, whispering at the same Time, that he verily
believed this Gentleman to be of the Blood Royal.

The next, as I understood from him, was one Mrs. James, a little ancient
Gentlewoman, in a Pair of very high Pattins, who, with much Anxiety and Hunger
in her Countenance, desired his Honor, with a low Voice, and in a Language
that I hardly understood, "To attend her Business in the House, for that it was
now just ready to come on;" and it seems it has been in the same Forwardness
for these Thirty Years past. She withdrew with great Humility, and repeated
Courtesies, to make Room for a Third. Mr. Worthless took me aside, and told me,
"That this was a Gentleman who in his younger Days studied the Law; but having
failed in that, had now put himself into the fantastical Habit I saw, and under
it was one of the deepest Heads in the World. He has attended me, says he,
these Three Years, with a Project to save England, and I know not yet whether I
shall bring it to bear." I was by this Time heartily tired, and in proper Form
took Leave of the Company, not knowing whether I ought most to commiserate the
Misfortunes of these poor Wretches, or contemn and expose the Follies of their
Patron.

The TATLER. [No 9.
Hanc tua Penelope --
Ovid. Epist. In nova fert Animus mutatas dicere formas
Corpara --
Ovid. Met.
From Tuesday Febr. 6. to Thursday Febr. 8. 1710.
From my own Apartmen in Channel-Row, Febr. 7.
I Have prefixed Two Motto's, as they call 'em, to this Paper; not so much to
show my Learning, as to apprise the Reader, that I pretend to no Connection or
Uniformity in it. I had indeed prepared another for the Press, but about an
Hour before the Printer called upon me, I chanced to look into a little
Coffee-house in our Row, where I found lying open upon the Table the following
Epistle, a Steel Ring of Keys, and a Brass Seal with an Anchor engraved on it
on one Side, and a short Piece of dirty Sealing-Wax on the other. I was so
pleased with the Style and Orthography of it, that I could not but wonder at
the Carelessness of the Person who, as I supposed, after writing an Answer, had
left so valuable a Piece behind him; and knowing no readier Way to put it into
his Hands again, resolved to make it public by the first Opportunity.

Brandford. Loving Hub,
I Hop you got safe to Town, for they says there are Rouges upon the Rode. I
long till you come back, for it is vary unked to ly alone. The Childern be all
very well; but Biddy have a sad fore I. Pray by a Neklase at the Quld Exchang
for Fanny: Her Gooms swell, and she is very teechy and froard; may hap it may
make her cut her Teeth. Mr. Snag's Child had one, and she was born, as I take
it, about last Pescodtime, and yet have all her Teeth amost, thof some be
forwarder than others, so it does not follow. Nikin has deadly Kibe Heels this
could Wether; so that he cannot go to Skole. His Mistress was here last Night,
and says how that he comes on finely: He has got as far as of aready, and have
been but ten Weeks at Skole: It Is Pity he should lose his Larning. I promust
Dilly a fine Plaything. I would have something baut that will cost but a
Shillun. I believe you may have the Man that plays upon the Music with the
Hounds and Stag for that Money. Pray don't forget the Seven Pound of
Gingerbred; and if you could get but the two first Letters of my Name in Gold
upon it, it would look well. Remember to buy the Cradle, the Go-Cart, and the
Magpy-Cage, of all Love: They may be braut by the Choch, if you wool promise
the Man a Full Pot at the Packhorse. Give my Service to my Cousin Mevis, and to
Alse Snorsdale, and remember my kind Love to Mr. Thornaby and his Wife. You
forgot your Woolen Sox, your quilted Cap, and your Showing Horn. You shall be
sure to have them; which concludes all, being,

Dear Hubby, Yours till Death, Judith Corkin.
Pray send me Word what Day of the M^ it is: There is a Wagar between my
Neighbou^ Pocklinton and I of a Tankard of Buttered A^ about it. I says it is
the Third of Febry, she say^ it is the last of Ge^ry, and that our Aumina^ don't
go well, and yet 'twas bran nu but Tw^ Year ago.




To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Consor of Great Britain, Student in Physic, etc.
Wadham College, Oxon, Febr. ^ SIR,
THough I happen to be descended from a Melancholy Father, and a Hypochondrix
Mother, I was not till my Fortieth Year made sensible that Infirmities of this
Kind are communicated from Parents to their Children. 'Twas about that Time
that the College Clock running mightily in my Head, I could not help fancying
my self to be so nearly related to it, that I was obliged not to speak but when
that struck. My Cousin, the Clock happening soon after to be down with a
Disorder, I heard nothing of him for a Week together, during which Time I could
not be prevailed upon to speak one Syllable; and it being my Turn to read a
public Lecture, I was forced to send my Excuse in Writing.

This Fit going off, I was my self for Half a Year afterward; but sitting much
by the Common-Room Fire, I had a strange Fancy that I was a Poker, and if any
Body talked of filling a Pipe, I immediately moved off for fear they should
make Use of me to light it. Upon the least Indisposition, I had no Notion of
going to any Body but the Smith to be mended. After this, I took my self for
the College Gate, and lay under a constant Apprehension of being severely
thumped at all Hours of the Night. Would you think it, Sir? At last this Whim
went so far, that I verily believed my self to be your Paper, the Tatler, Then,
though I had sometimes the Pleasure of thinking that I was mightily commended,
at others I had inexpressible Fears. I fancied, that a Friend of mine who had
taken Physic, was looking for me high and low on a very unworthy Occasion, and
was wonderfully delighted when my Brother, the Gazette, was made Use of in my
Stead. I was often vexed at my Heart to be hung almost all over with
Advertisements of Insurances, Morning-Gowns, Lap-Dogs, and Lottery Tickets, and
now and then had terrible Uneasiness for having made bold with my Betters.
Being at length pretty well recovered of this Fit, I thought it advisable to
come to London and take Care of my Health: But as I was going to the Coach, to
my great Surprise, I found my self turned into a Football, and at the Mercy of
a Pack of Scoundrels, who, without any Regard to the Dignity of my former
Characters, kicked me from one End of the High Street to the other. During this
last Misfortune, I have been made the unwilling Instrument of breaking many
Windows, and once of flying in the Face of a Civil Magistrate. For this Reason
I am, as you may very well imagine, ashamed to show my Head; and being from my
Spherical Figure incapable of Writing my self, I have begged a Friend to
consult you in my Name upon this my deplorable Condition, and to tell you, that
I hope in some Time I shall be able to assure you of my being my own Man, and

Your most obliged, And most humble Servant, Peter Proteus.


Recipe Caballum, [Anglice] take Horse.

This Day about Twelve in the Forenoon, the new Company of Upholders, the
Company of Linen-Drapers, together with the true and trusty Society of Hawkers,
introduced by John Morphew, presented to Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire by the Hands of
their Foremen their several Addresses of Congratulation on his Return to Town,
and Reassumption of his Office, which Addresses the Censor received very
favorably, and will shortly cause to be printed.

Whereas Mr. Bickerstaff has just now received three Letters, signed, D. P. W.
C. M. M. offering to make Discovery of several Enormities, as Cascades, double
Cascades, oblique Ogles, and other indirect Practices, very lately carried on
in the Palace of St. James's, to the great Scandal and Provocation of as many
as were Eyewitnesses of the same: The said Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire does hereby
declare, That he will in no wise intermeddle therein; further declaring, That
he does not presume, either by himself or his Officers, to exercise any Power,
Authority it Jurisdiction, within the Verge of the said Court.

Signed, Charles Lilly.

The TATLER. [No 10.
Haec data Poena diu viventibus, ut renovata
Semper Clade Domus multis in Luctibus inque
Perpetuo Maerore, and nigra Vest senescant.
Juv.
From Thursday Febr. 8. to Saturd. Febr. 10. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 9.
ONE or two of my last Papers having made it known that I am removed from by
old Lodgings in Sheer-Lane, I have on that Occasion received Letters from two
Correspon^ents of very different Sentiments. One of them wishes me Joy of a
clearer Air, and more ^leasing Situation; the other is so free as to ^all me a
restless, unquiet old Fellow, and a ^ain Pretender to Philosophy. Hard Fate of
those who happen to have distinguished themselves in the World, that their
minutest Actions ^ust be discanted on, and every little Motion ^hey make be
publicly accounted for! If the ^entleman who is so severe upon me would ^o me
the Favor of a Visit, he would be con^nced that I have changed for the better.
I ^ave from hence a Prospect filled with such a ^ariety of Entertainments, that
I am almost ^mpted in my old Age to turn Poet for the ^ke of it. As a Lover of
my Country, it is a ^nsible Pleasure to me, from the Nobleness of the River,
and Magnificence of the Structures, to measure the Wealth and Grandeur of the
British Nation. In the Capacity of Censor, I consider this huge Mass of
Buildings as my own Province, and am in a Manner directed by my Eye to the
Execution of my Office, as I apprehend this or that Part of the Metropolis to
stand in Need of Correction. But these, alas ^ were not the principal
Inducements that brought me hither. Old Age, and an unhealthy Winter, have
taken from me most of my Friends in the other Part of the Town, whom Time (...)
a long Acquaintance had rivetted into my Esteem, and made almost necessary to
my Way of Living.

They were not Men indeed whom I ever admired for a ready Turn of Wit, or the
Vivarity of their Conversation, which, to say Truck are but the Embellishments
of a good Understanding, and serve rather to divert and (...) than to indear us
to one another. It is for this Reason, that, in the large Commerce I have had
with Mankind, it has been my Way to prefer Men of steady Judgment, even
Tempers, cool and indolent Complexions, to those of excessive Smartness,
Humor, and Repartee; there being something in the constant Society of the
latter, that loosens and unhing^ the Mind from the more serious Offices of
Life, and at the same Time keeps it upon (...) Stretch in idle and unprofitable
Pursuits. (...) Trusty, on this as well as many other Accou^ has ever preserved
the first Place in my Affections. Living himself in this Neighborhood, be in a
great Measure determined (...) to the Choice of it; and to him I have left the
Naming of Two or Three Companions, wi^ whom I may, in an innocent Cheerfulness
(...) the Remainder of my Time. The first he introduced to me is a Clergyman of
about Sixty, who, it seems, has passed Thirty Years of his Life on a moderate
Preferment in the Country, without ever soliciting or desiring a Removal. His
Children are grown up, and by his good Management provided for. He has been for
some Time a Widower, and being very much worn with the constant Duties of his
Function, was with Difficulty prevailed on to leave a Curate on his Benefice,
and come up to Town, where his eldest Daughter is settled, and with whom he now
lives. My Friend tells me, That he was never known to have a Law Suit or
Difference with any of his Parishioners; That he was ever making up Quarrels,
and doing good. Offices in the Neighborhood; That he had been often left sole
Guardian to Orphans, and discharged his Trust with the utmost Fidelity; That he
constantly visited the Sick, and having some Knowledge in Physic, and the
Composition of Medicines, had assigned Part of his Income to that Use. When he
came first to the Place, there was a Conventicle hard by, which had drawn away
most of the People from the Church; but by the Exemplari^ess of his Life, his
great Hospitality for so ^lender a Fortune, and the Gentleness of his Nature,
joined with the Force of his Perswa^ons, the People returned by Degrees, the
Dissenting Minister went off, and the Barn ^hey met in was applied to its
proper Use.

I was pleased with the Figure of the Man as ^e came into my Room, somewhat
tall, incli^ing to be lean, his Hair gray, of a fair but flo^d Complexion, with
a certain Sweetness and ^mplicity in his Countenance.

In our Conversation he seemed to show that Sort of Diffidence which usually
attends Men of the best Sense, after having passed their Lives in Retirement.
Upon all Occasions he submitted with great Deference to me, as one who had
studied Humane Nature, and atta^ed to a perfect Knowledge of the World. After
an Hour's Talk, having industriously led him through several Subjects, I found
him to be of an excellent Understanding, cultivated by the Knowledge of the
best Author of Antiquity, and of a perfect good Taste to point out their
Beauties. Amongst the rest, he showed me many Instances of the Sublime in the
Holy Writings, which I had not heard any one before observe; so that upon the
Whole, all the Difference I could find between us both in Point of knowing the
World, was, that he had been chiefly conversant with the best Part of it, and I
with the worst.

This Day Sevennight in the Morning Mr. Trusty presented me another new
Acquaintance: "Mr. Bickerstaff, says he, this is Dr. -- I know you will be
pleased with one another." Having never heard the Name before, I concluded him
not very eminent in his Profession. He had no Haste in his Countenance, and
sat with me above two Hours without any visible Impatience to be going. He
appeared to have Abundance of good Nature without the sneaking mercenary
Affectation of it, and mentioned with Honor as many of his own Profession as
are allowed to deserve it. He received no Message all the while we were
together; and I observed particularly, that he discoursed often as if he
believed Revealed Religion. We dined together, and he carved up a Pullet
without reading a Lecture of Anatomy upon it. He seemed to be of a facetious
Wit, and after a few Glasses of Wine would now and then let off a Quibble,
without thinking it any Disparagement to his Understanding. I took the first
Opportunity to enquire of my Friend into the Character of this Gentleman, whose
Account was, That he had many Years belonged to the Faculty, that he was an
admirable Scholar, and very knowing in his Profession; but being born a
Gentleman, and to a competent Fortune of his own, he disdained the servile Ways
of making Court to Nurses and Apothecaries, and therefore his chief Practice
lay among the Poor. He never valued his Reputation equal to the Life of a
Patient, and often preserved the latter, though by transgressing against Form
and Method. He was once coming into Business, but lost it by persuading his
Patients they were not sick, and refusing their Fees.

The other Mr. Trusty has recommended to me, is a young Gentleman under Twenty,
and a Nephew of his own. His Person is graceful, his Eyes quick and lively, the
Tone of his Voice agreeable, his Look open, affable and serene, his
Constitution vigorous and sanguine, his Air, Dress and Behavior, easy, modest
and unaffected. He has been bred under the Care and Direction of his Uncle,
who, I remember, often used to say to me, "I will undertake, Isaac, to make
this Boy have as much useful Knowledge at Nineteen, as you or I have at Fifty."
This he has effected beyond what I could possibly have conceived, and the
Methods he has taken to do it, shall hereafter in one or more of these Papers
be communicated to the Public. In the mean Time, it is an infinite Delight to
me to find this young Man frequently making such just Observations as are in
others the Result of long Experience; to hear him reason closely without
Prejudice, Passion or Conceit; at other Times to see him gay, cheerful and
entertaining, without running into indecent Liberty, or straining for the
Character of a Wit; and upon all Occasions to observe in him a generous
Detestation of every Thing that is base and unworthy, an Integrity founded on
good Sense, and superior to every Temptation. What inexpressible Pleasure must
arise from the Reflection of having furnished the World with so extraordinary a
Person? who, if his Merit does not hinder him, may, for half a Century, in the
highest Stations, and most honorable Employments, be of public Importance to
the World.

The Letter from Drumstick and Trencher, of Edinburgh, is received, and shall
shortly be taken into Consideration.

The TATLER. [No 11.
From Saturd. Febr. 10. to Tuesd. Febr. 13. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 12.
SItting last Night over a cheerful Fire, and a Glass of Spanish Wine, with my
Friend Samuel Trusty, I happened to say, with a Freedom peculiar to our Manner
of Conversing, that I could not but admire our mutual Constancy in the
Friendship that had so long been between us. "Why, it is right, Isaac, says he,
and I hope we may look upon it as an Argument of Virtue on both Sides. For my
own Part, I do not remember that I ever wished my self from you when our
Affairs would give us Leave to be together." But this Agreement, says I, is so
far from being common in the World, that if the Institution at Dunmowe were in
Favor of Friendship, as it is of Matrimony, I am confident there are few
besides our selves would have any Right to the Pramium. "No, (says he) and I
remember a Story of two pretty remarkable Friends of our own Time that you
remind me of on this Occasion. They had lived some time about Town, and being
weary of mixed Company, Noise, and Impertinence, agreed to retire where they
might without Interruption enjoy one another. Nottingham was the Place resolved
on; but they had not continued there a Week in close and constant Conversation,
before they grew insufferably sick of each other. Some Third Person must be
engaged into their Relief, and being accidentally lodged in a House next the
Gaol, where a Cup of good Liquor was to be had, they sent a Message to the
Jailer, to tell him, if he was at Leisure, there were two Gentlemen that were
alone would come and smoke a Pipe with him. Being otherwise employed, he sent
his Excuse. Upon which they went in Person, and asked him, If there was never
an honest Highwayman in the House that would be glad of Company? He told them
he was quite out at present, and that if it was to save their Lives, he had no
Body but an old Woman that was under Sentence of Death for exercising the Black
Art, and he was sure they would not take up with her. He happened to be
mistaken, for they immediately obtained Leave to go down into the Dungeon, and
there solaced themselves with Ale, Brandy, and the Society of this poor
unfortunate Creature, till within two Hours of her Execution.'

What a Levity of Mind is this, that will not suffer us to acquiesce in the
most reasonable Enjoyments of Life? What a Want of Principle, Reflection, and
ordinary Resolution? As one every Day sees the wretched Effects of this
viciated Taste in Conversation, Dress, and Behavior; I for my own Part am made
more particularly sensible of them in the Prosecution of this Work. To say as
much as is proper on the same Subject, is wearing it out, as they call it; and
a Half Sheet without Four or Five Breaks has a dull heavy Look, and is
offensive to the Eyes of curious Readers; so that for their Relief, more than
my own, I am forced sometimes to diversify my Paper, by dating it from several
Parts of the Town; or else, which is my present Case, to call in the Assistance
of such Correspondents as come first to Hand.

To Mr. Isaac Bickerstaff, alias -- --
Saturday, Two of the Clock. SIR,
I Think it not of much Consequence whether your Isaacship be real or assumed,
much less whether the Papers you publish are your own, or chiefly raised by
Contribution from able Hands. As to the first of these Objections, I confess
for my own Part, that I am not the less diverted or instructed by a Fable for
knowing that it is such, but have often found my self bettered and entertained
by the imaginary Conversations of Chanticleer and Reynard the Fox. For the
other, if you are as little fond of Praise as a good and wise Man ought to be,
you will content your self with being, in any Sort, the Instrument of doing a
Service to Mankind, without expecting or desiring their Applause for it: Though
perhaps it may hereafter reflect some Honor on your Name, that in an Age when
Wit and Learning were at a great Height in this Kingdom, you were admitted to a
Degree of Intimacy with the Top Genius's of it, and at the same Time had so
much Regard to the Public, as always to prefer their Writings to your own. To
tell you the Truth, I am at present more sollicitous about the Existence of
another Person than that of Mr. Bickerstaff, and would enquire very seriously
of you, Whether there be really any such young Gentleman in the World as is
described in the Tatler of this Day. I confess my self very much enamored with
the Copy, (if I may so speak) and will venture to offer my eldest Daughter, who
is young, beautiful and virtuous, with Eight thousand Pounds Sterling, for the
Original. Rather than fail, I would stretch hard for the other Two; but I
conjure you, Sir, not to make this Letter public, which if you answer
privately, and to my Satisfaction, by the Penny-Post, I will afterward meet
either your self, or wh^ you shall depute, to talk further on this Affair. My
true Name shall be a Secret till I hear from you. In the mean Time give me
Leave to be

Your most humble Servant, (Under that of) W. Wealthy.
Please to direct to me at Lindert's Chocolate-house in King Street, near
Bloomsbury-Square.




The Alias on the Cover of this Letter, the Omission of my Title on the same,
as well as some Passages in the said Letter, leave me at full Liberty to treat
both that and the Writer of it in what Manner I please: And I do hereby give
Notice, That I will hereafter neither answer, read, open nor receive, nor
suffer to be answered, read, opened nor received, any Letter or Packet
otherwise directed than to Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire etc. according to the Order by
me formerly issued on that Behalf.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Charing Cross, Febr. 1710. SIR,
I Am a Gentleman of the Broad Sword, and desire to be heard before your Honor
touching a Point that nearly concerns mine, which is this: Being in Company
this Evening with a Youth of more than ordinary Fire, he observed my Nose to be
somewhat larger than his; upon which he took a Dislike to my Face, and toward
the End of the Night could not forbear telling me, that he thought it an
Affront to thrust the said Nose into civil Company. Without giving me Leave to
answer for so inoffensive a Member, he instantly drew, and took off a Piece of
it at once, that reduced it to the Size of his own. This I returned with so
sound a Blow, that swelled his to the Bigness of mine before its Amputation.
Now, Sir, the Question is, Whether I may not in Honor cut off his Nose in its
present Circumstances, for the same Reason he did mine before? A speedy
Decision whereof will oblige me to be for ever,

Your most obedient Servant, Tho. Huff.


Ordered, That a Caustic be forthwith applied to the Nose of the Defendant,
there to remain for the Space of Four Hours, and that the Plaintiff do attend
the Operation; three Days after which, he the said Defendant is hereby summoned
to appear in Court, there further to answer for the Offense by him committed
before his Peers of the Horse-Guards.

The TATLER. [No 12.
-- Praetextatos referunt Artaxata Mores.
Juv.
From Tuesday Febr. 13. to Thursd. Febr. 15. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 14.
IT is now something more than three Weeks since I issued forth my Order for
the Election of Rural Censors throughout every Parish in the Kingdom of Great
Britain. This, in most Places, has been punctually observed, and with great
Regularity and Order; but in others it has produced Discord, Division, and
Tumult. The last Post brought me an Account from Smallworth, Wiltshire, That
there were actually Two Censors chosen for the ^me Parish, who, upon all
Occasions, unavoidably clash and interfere with each other. At Bri^ewell in
Hampshire very indirect Practices have been made Use of, and a Person elected
that had not lived Two Days in the Place. A bad Effect this of a most useful
Institution! If Churchwardens and Sides-men are thus open to Corruption, where
is Justice and Integrity to be found? The Love of Power is without Doubt very
natural to us all, and there are many Temptations in the Office of a Censor to
justify the Desire of attaining to it: But to pursue this Ambition through
unwarrantable Means, is in my Opinion no less absurd than criminal, because it
defeats the very Purpose we have in View, and at once disqualifies us for the
Employment we affect. It is a Violence to my Nature to act any Thing that is
rigid and severe; but I very much question whether I shall not be shortly
obliged to do exemplary Justice on the aforementioned Account. I have now under
Consideration a great Number of Complaints from several Parts of the Kingdom,
which in due Time shall be laid before the Public. As for those Gentlemen who
have been duly elected to so weighty a Post, I shall always treat them with a
Regard due to their Character; and as the following Remonstrance came first to
my Hands, it does of Course claim Precedence of all others.

Fatland, Febr. 1. Honored Sir,
YOur Order, dated the 13th of January, came to Hand the 18th of the same
Month; and within the Time by you limited, the Churchwardens and Sidesmen of
this our Parish of Fatland repaired to the Vestry thereunto belonging; and
having debated for the Space of Three Quarters of an Hour, without Eating or
Drinking all that Time, they did then and there choose, elect and nominate me
John Heart Gent. to act in full Power and Authority as Rural Censor of the said
Parish, and did notify the same to me by Jeremiah Solfa, Clerk of the said
Parish, who, by Order of the said Church wardens and Sides-men, having first
washed his Hands and Face, attended me to the Vestry in Form and Manner by them
prescribed; where being introduced, and the Door shut, they did unanimously
vote, pronounce, and declare me the said John Heart to be from and after the
Time then being Rural Censor for the said Parish of Fatland, and accordingly
entered this their Act and Deed in a Book provided for that Purpose.

I am very sensible, Honored Sir, how unworthy I am to represent so great a
Man as your self in so high a Station, having little more to brag of than the
Honesty of my Intentions, and a hearty Desire to be serviceable to my Country.
I will be bold to say, that no Body shall outdo me in those Points, whatever
they may in some others. Since I have come into Employment, it has been my
whole Business to observe and remark carefully the Behavior of my Fellow
Parishioners, which is for the most Part as I could wish. I was always well
esteemed among them, but upon this Preferment I am in a Manner worshipped. I
have already been invited to Two Christenings, and several Junketings, which I
hope will be no Reflection upon my Character, having heard, that you your self,
Sir, will take a chirping Cup upon Occasion. I shall endeavor to imitate you
in all Things, though I am apt to think I shall hardly ever write so well as
you do; not but I have had some Education, and might by this Time have been a
pretty Scholar, if my Father had not wanted me in the Stables, and for that
Reason taken me from School. As I was saying, Sir, I am mightily respected at
present, and very often dine with the best Gentleman in the Parish, in whose
Family I have observed some Matters which I think it my Duty to acquaint you
with. His eldest Daughter, Mrs. Susan, and his second Son, Mr. B^naby, who had
before lived altogether in the Country, have been up at London Three Weeks of
this Winter, and by the Improvements they have made there, are become a Trouble
to the whole Neighborhood. The young Lady takes upon her to laugh at every
Thing, and every Body that comes in her Way, and is ever and anon twitting the
good Lady her Mother with having never seen any Thing of the World. I believe,
if the Truth were known, she has invented Fifty Fooleries in her Dress, on
Purpose to bring 'em into Fashion, and in Process of Time make the whole County
ridiculous. The very Heels of her Shoes are laced, her Head not above an Inch
high; she has Stuff enough in her Petticoat to cloth all her Brothers and
Sisters, and at the same Time is naked her self half Way down her Back. I
observed the other Day a little Spoon in her Snuff Box, and could not help asking
her, Whether she hid it there upon a Report we had lately about calling in the
Plate?

The young Gentleman is to the full as bad in his Way: His Clothes are
intolerably apish and fantastical, and he will face us down, that a Thousand of
the same Make were seen on Her Majesty's Birthday. He has brought down a Set
of new Words, to the great Confusion of common Conversation, and pretends, that
he had them from the Top Wits of the Age. He talks of Plays, Opera's, and
Assemblies, as he calls 'em, to every Farmer he meets; and, instead of the
Queen and Church, makes all his Father's Tenants toast the charming Duchess of
-- upon their Knees. These and many other Grievances of the same Kind, are, in
these young Gentlefolks, the Effects of having seen the World; which, as in
Duty bound, I humbly offer to your Consideration; and remain,

Honored Sir, Your most Obedient, And most Dutiful, Deputy and Servant, John
Heart.


The TATLER. [No 13.
Non possum far Quirites
Graecam Urbem.
Juv.
From Thursd. Febr. 15. to Saturd. Febr. 17. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 16.
IT is certain that most of our Errors, whether in Conversation or Conduct, are
owing to Want of Reflection, and a right Way of Thinking. The Privilege of
applying our Faculties that Way, is the noblest Distinction of our Nature, and
of the last Consequence to the Regulation of our Lives. This I do not offer as
a new Observation, but only as the general Neglect of it, and at the same Time
the Importance of its being rightly understood, make it necessary to be put
often in our Way. Whatever Improvements or Acquisitions we make without this
Foundation, are but superficial and Ornamental at best, and will never support
us through any Figure or Character in the World: For which Reason, when the
Business of the Day, and the innocent Entertainments of the Evening are at an
End, I constantly set apart an Hour at least to descend into my self, to weigh
and examine my past Behavior, and the Principles I have acted upon. The little
Leisure I thus steal from the Public is returned to them, by endeavoring to
become more perfect in the several Relations I bear to Mankind.

In this Manner I was employing my Thoughts some Nights ago, when going toward
my Window. I heard a Watchman in the Street cry, Past Twelve of the Clock, and
a Moonlight Morning. Another, who came just after him, called the same Hour,
and a cloudy Morning. He who had declared himself first, thinking his Veracity
in Question, turned round in some Anger, and in a low sullen Voice gave the
other the Lie. Words were multiplied upon it, and Blows followed. I immediately
threw up my Sash, and had Authority enough to part them. For my own Part, I
looked upon it to be a very bright Sky, and therefore gave the Fellow a
Reprimand that had pronounced it otherwise: But when he assured me, that at the
very Instant he did so, a Cloud was just coming over the Moon, the Cause was
puzzled, and I did not know justly where to lay the Blame. However, having made
up the Matter, I pulled down my Window, and retired to Bed. Before I fell
asleep, I could not help reflecting on the Oddness of this Dispute, and to make
it of some Use to my self, resolved I would never more engage in Controversy
with Mr. Powell or any other Person.

Soon after I happened to have some Trial of my Temper, for amongst other
Letters, I received that which follows from my old Adversary Mr. Powell.

SIR;
I Presume you will be convinced by this, that in attacking me you have
ventured upon one who is something more than your Match, having lately had the
Honor to furnish the House in the Haymarkes with half a Dozen of my Seas
tacked together, and a Sail of weather-beaten Ships, for the Opera of Et^. This
I had never mentioned, but that the Persons, concerned therein, have had the
Assurance to make frequent Use of Four hundred Yards and upwards of my old
Waves, without so much as quoting me in the Margin.

Your humble Servant, -- Powell.


I could not but be much surprised at so extraordinary an Account, and doubting
the Truth of it, went incognito the next Night to the House, where I found my
Correspondent had but too good Grounds for triumphing over me in the Manner he
had done.

After being heartily tired with the First Act, I had Leisure to consider the
extraordinary Reception of these Foreign Entertainments, and the Discouragement
of our own Music. I could no otherwise account for it, than by having Recourse
to a certain Journal that had a little before fallen into my Hands, in which I
find, that on the First of November last the House of Ladies came to this
Resolution: Resolved, That Mr. Waller never writ a good Song, That Mr. Clayton
cannot set one, no^ Mrs. Tofts sing one.

In this Debate, I am told they all spoke, and all at once; so it being
impossible for them to know what each other said, I could never learn the
Reasons that induced that honorable House to pass so cruel a Vote. Two are
chiefly alleged without Doors to justify this Severity. The First is, That our
Language is so uncooth as not to be endured, and calculated only for Acts of
Parliament. The Gentleman that made this Objection, appeared at my Court
Yesterday, where being tried for Slander, after having made a smooth Defense in
the English Tongue, he was found guilty, and sentenced to speak no other Words
than Otway and Waller for the Space of Nine Days; as likewise to translate the
Mira of Mr. G -- ^ into High Dutch.

The Second Reason, which is, the Want of Performers, has been pressed to me
with all Assurance of Success: But the Persons who presumed so far, upon a very
solemn Trial, were found guilty also by a very fair Jury, sentenced to beg Mrs.
Tofts's and Mr. Leveridge's Pardon upon their Knees, and fined One thousand
Pound each for the Use of the Queen of Cyprus, whose Treasures are exhausted,
and her Territories invaded. I, who am advanced in Years, and have neither
Leisure nor Application for the Attainment of a Language I as yet know little
of, have more than ordinary Reason to be apprehensive of its encroaching too
far upon us. Should it universally prevail, I am in a Manner debarred the
Commerce of Mankind, and my Lucubrations of Course fall to the Ground. I could
wish it were further considered, how great Sufferers a considerable Part of my
Fellow Subjects would be, if we took away only the Use of a few Words, and
whether any that can be substituted in their Stead, would make Amends for the
Loss. As for Instance, you deprive the Lover of Angel, Goddess, Cupid, Charms,
Darts, Flames, Fire, Sigh, Die: It Is plain he is undone for ever. Take from the
Critic, Delicacy of Thought, Turn of Words, Propriety of Speech, Diction,
Image, Genius, Sublime: The peevish Man will have very little left. Rob the
Politician of Balance of Power, Limited Monarchy, Hereditary Right, Church,
State, Ministry: Most of the Coffee-houses would break, and even that of St.
James's be very thin.

After all, I am credibly informed by some of the Royal Society, that there is
something in the Formation of a Tramontane Ear, that will not suffer it to
relish the Softness of Italian Airs; and further, that Sound it self, at so
many Degrees Northward, was never known to come to perfect Maturity: Only that
of Drums, Trumpets, Hautboys, and here and there as much of the Vocal as will
serve to keep a private Family in Order, being of our own Growth, and agreeing
tolerably well with the Climate.

For my Sentiments of Music in General; fitly introduced, and in its proper
Circumstances, I leave them to be expressed by Shakespeare, wanting Words of my
own for that Occasion.

Antonio, in the Jew of Venice, speaks thus to Bassanio: O Bassanio!
There sits a Heaviness upon my Heart
Which Wine cannot remove: I know not,
But Music ever makes me thus.

Bass. The Reason is, your Spirits are attenti^:
For do but note a wild and wanton Herd
Or Race of skittish and unhandled Colts,
Fetching mad Bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
If they but hear by Chance some Trumpet sound,
Or any Air of Music touch their Ears,
You strait perceive 'em make a mutual Stand,
Their savage Eyes turned to attentive Gaze,
By the soft Power of Music: Therefore the Poet
Did feign, That Orpheus melted Stones and Rocks;
For what so hard, so stubborn, or so fierce,
But Music for the Time will change its Nature.
The Man who has not Music in his Soul,
Or is not touched with Concord of sweet Sounds,
Is fit for Treasous, Stratagems, and Spoils,
The Motions of his Mind are dull as Night,
And his Affections dark as Erebus.
Let no such Man be trusted --



N. B. Mr. Bickerstaff does not by this Paper (...) to interest himself in Mr.
Armstrong's Challenge this Day advertised; but does hereby declare, that he is
utterly averse to such violent Proceedings.

The TATLER. [No 14.
-- Quid prodest, Pontice, longo
Sanguine censeri, pictosque ostendere Vultus
Majorum? --
Juv.
From Saturd. Febr. 17. to Tuesd. Febr. 20. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 19.
IT is observable of Men of base Extraction and low Education, that when they
have any Thing in them of what the World calls good Sense, they turn it wholly
to the getting of Money. They have but that one Point in View, and consequently
overlook all either difficult or indirect Ways which lead to it.

If they attain their End, and become rich toward their middle Age, before they
decline in Years, and decay in Strength, and that their Appetite of Getting is
not yet turned into an Avarice of Hoarding, if they have any Fire remaining,
they commonly feel themselves warmed with a Kind of Ambition of being Somebody,
as well as Something. They find a Want of that Respect which they observe to be
paid to such who are called Gentlemen, and Persons of Condition, though of
small Fortunes. They would give any Consideration to be of an honorable
Descent, and alter the Spelling of their Names to bring them on as near as
possible to some Name or Seat of Antiquity. If that cannot be brought about,
they push for a Knighthood, or an Alliance with some Family of Name or Title,
whose Follies or Misfortunes have reduced them to match themselves or Children
to Money, however basely lodged, or infamously obtained.

I fell into this Reflection after a Visit made me some Days since by one whom
I remember to have known a Link-Boy, and who has often lighted me formerly from
the Green-Dragon in Fleet Street to my Lodgings in Sheer-lane. We used to call
him Foundling, a Name given him by his Godfather the Parish, and which he has
not yet been able to part with, or vary, though he has found the Secret to be
worth very near what they call a Plumb, and upon 'Change has obtained the
Appellation of a good Man. He came to me with much Frankness, owning both his
past and present Circumstances; but what made me, smile, was, the Request he
made me to accompany him to a House in our Row, where lives one Randall (as he
called him) a Creature Merchant. This Person is a great Virtuoso, and deals in
Birds and Beasts, though not either as a Butcher or Poulterer; for he nourishes
nothing that is eatable, nor ever utters any Commodity but while it is alive.

As we walked toward this Virtuoso's Habitation, which I may call an
Abridgment of the Ark, my Friend Foundling told me, "He had purchased a fair
Seat in the Country, That he had a Mind to appear well in the World; and since
he had a Gentleman's Estate, he would endeavor to have every Thing suitable to
it; That he had bargained already with the Herald's College for a Coat of Arms;
and that his present Errand to Randall's was, from among his Variety, of
Animals to fancy himself a Crest, in which he mightily desired my Assistance
and Approbation." I was delighted with the Folly and Frankness of the Man; but
it happened he saw nothing that pleased him. As we returned, I advised him to
an honest homebred Crest out of his own Farmers Yard, which was a Cock's Head
untrim'd, with the Gills and Comb entire. This he approved, and took his Leave.
I was about to reflect on what had passed, when suddenly returning he called to
me, and coming nearer, told me, he would let me into all his Project, and
desired I would step with him to a Waterman's House hard by, where he had
lodged a Set of Ancestors, which were to go up next Tide to his Seat upon the
River. He desired my Judgment of the Choice he had made of Three Generations to
furnish his Parlor. I went with him, not readily comprehending what he meant,
till we entered the House, where he explained to me, that at Fleet-Ditch he had
bought the Pictures of Three Men and Three Women, which were suited well enough
to each other, and were to personate his Family up to his Great-Grandfather and
Great-Grandmother, which he thought was pretending far enough for one who was
in Truth related to no Body that he knew of in the World. As I was extremely
diverted with the Oddness and Extravagance of the Man's Fancy, I was no less
satisfied with his Judgment in the Choice of the Pictures; the Habits and
Dispositions of the Figures being suited to Three different Periods and
Fashions of Time, and concluding, or rather beginning, in the Great-Grandfather
and Great-Grandmother, with a Pair of Trunk-Hose, a Ruff, and a Farthingale. I
pleased him with my Approbation, and took Leave of him, entertaining my self
often since with the Reflections which naturally arise from the Contemplation
of Vanity, Wealth, and titular Happiness. I have since heard there is a
Marriage likely to be concluded betwixt his Daughter Mrs. Priscilla Foundling
and the eldest Son of the Lord Mortgage.

Will's Coffee-house, February 19.
When my other Affairs will give me Leav^ I now and then saunter unobserved
about the Town, and am infinitely entertained with the Variety of Persons,
Humors, and Circumstances, I meet with in my Walks. Returning Home the other
Evening after a Tour of the Kind, I stepped in here, and having hung up my
Cloak, and called for a Dish of Tea, joined my self to the Company at the Long
Table. I could not but be surpised to find Se^rus, who has himself an
admirable Taste (...)Learning, and a good Insight into Politic^ surrounded with
a Set of vain and empty P^tenders to both. Amongst the rest, I took p^ticular
Notice of one whom I had formerly (...) his proper Capacity made honorable
Mention of. It Is true, he affected little of the State^man, but in all Matters
relating to Poetry seemed to consider himself as the ultimate Judg^ and with
great Volubility of Speech dictated (...) all about him. He had a perfect
Command (...) that Critical Cant I mentioned in my last, (...) applied it, in a
very Magisterial Manner, to several Passages of Shakespeare, Johnson, and
Dryden. I sat some Time at the Table before (...) offered to take any Notice of
me, and he did (...) at last with such an Air of Superiority, as (...) he
imagined his Name had done Honor to (...) Paper, instead of receiving any from
it; or (...) ^f it had been a Piece of Condescension in one ^f his Figure to
own an Acquaintance with the Censor of Great Britain. From his Usage of me he
gave ^e a fair Occasion of calling him ^side, and telling him of what other
Faults I ^ad observed in his Behavior.

Sir, (says I) it is a real Grief to me to find that the Praises bestowed upon
you have in a great Measure turned your Understanding. I did not mean them for
your Ruin, but Encouragement -- I said, you were a good Player, not an
excellent Critic; pray don't mistake me -- Let me advise you to learn better
Behavior of your Friend Mr. Penkethman, he is diverting enough upon the Stage;
but off it, understands his Situation in Life, and is a very dull inoffensive
Kind of Man. I am informed you have great Power in your Hands as to our
Theatrical Entertainments; make better Use of it, or resign it quickly. The
Town is as weary of your Tyranny as those under your Command. To the great
Injury of both, you suppress Powell, Booth, and Pack, because they are better
Players than your self, or any of your Friends -- Let me hear no more of it. --
Good Night to you. The TATLER. [No. 15
-- Tu dignus and Hic, and quisquis Amores
Aut metuet dulces, aut experietur amaros.
Virg
From Tuesd. Febr. 20. to Thursd. Febr. 22. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 21.
WIthin this half Year, I have with wonderful Delight read over the History
(...) Don Quixote in the Original Language, no^ much approving any of our own
Translation^ except the old one, which is now hard to b^ met with. One finds in
this excellent Piec^ very masterly Strokes of Ridicule upon all Occasions; but
as it was calculated for a People in Point of Gallantry, the most Romantic in
the World, the Passion of Love, under all the fantastical Forms and Dresses it
wore in that Age and Nation, is severely treated, and inimitably exposed,
throughout the whole.

A Work of this Nature was no less necessary to the Spaniard, than it afterward
proved successful; and whoever will be at the Pains of entering into the Humor
that reigned among them, cannot fail of being infinitely entertained with so
fine a Satyr upon it. But a Reader merely English, who never took it in his
Head to buckle on a Helmet, or mount a Palfrey, for the Fair, to encounter
Giants, besiege moated ^astles, or rescue imprisoned Damsels from ^chantment,
nor yet has any Notion of the ^eroes who did so, will very little relish a
Bur^sque on the Feats of Chivalry. And, to say ^e Truth, as these illustrious
Knights, by the ^ower of a warm Sun, were transported to ^e Extreme, we, from
the Coldness of our ^tuation, are no less exposed to another. They ^d Spirits
enough to support them through ^ng and tedious Pursuits, ours flag upon the
^hace, and one Way or other die almost as ^on as they are born. Instead of
refining, as ^ey did, upon our Amors, till we lose the and of them, we hurry
on to That, and over^ok many agreeable Paths that indirectly lead (...) it.
This I am willing to charge upon our Climate; but I question whether there be
not ^ome Affectation at the Bottom. I know not (...) short how it happens, but
whilst we give a ^oose to all our other Passions, that of Love, in ^he proper
Sense of it, is made the Subject of Ridicule, and in a great Measure laughed
out of Countenance by the Gentlemen of Wit and Pleasure about Town. Bellaria in
vain is ^oung, beautiful and Genteel; Cleora of an ^dmirable Temper, an easy
modest Behavior, and a Person perfectly agreeable. The Success of their Charms
is no more than to be ogled at the Opera, toasted at the Tavern, and forgotten
the next Morning. This is an elegant Enjoyment of Life, as we call it, and a
right Taste of Happiness. Colin is almost the only one of my Acquaintance that
has formed a right Judgment upon the Business of Love, and has Courage enough
to avow it upon all Occasions. He is a Man excellently qualified for the
highest Employments, his Way of Living is rather too abstemious; but to that he
owes a clear Understanding, and many uncommon Speculations. He has a peculiar
Simplicity of M^ners, and through his whole Character gi^ one some Traces and
Images of humane Nature in its original Purity. Having never s^fered himself to
be tainted with the Bitterne^ of a Party, he preserves an universal Cand^ and a
Profusion of Benevolence for Mankind (...) general.

This Gentleness of Nature has sometim^ put him into the Power of the Fair Sex,
(...) whom therefore we are obliged for the be^ Pastorals in our own Tongue,
and such as (...) hardly inferior to those in any other. H^ Conversation on the
same Topic is no less delicate and entertaining. In an easy and unaffected
Manner he leads one through the mo^ delightful Scenes, and furnishes them with
all the Pleasures of a luxurious, but refined, Imagination. He appears all the
while to be thoroughly touched with what he says, and to be placed in a Form of
Happiness superior to the common Level of the World. The same Turn of Mind lays
him open to an infinite Tenderness and Compassion for the Misfortunes of
others; and if the Distress of the following Letter be real, as it is not
impossible it should, I shall expect his Approbation at least for giving it a
Place in my Paper.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
OH Mr. Bickerstaff! If your Name, Person, Authority, and the good Nature
expressed in some of your Papers, are not all one Fiction to amuse and impose
upon the World, give me Leave, in Behalf of a poor despairing Creature, to beg
your most serious and tender Consideration. My Sister, the unfortunate Fidelia,
the best, the softest, and the fairest of her Sex, is even now on the Brink of
Distraction. Her Perplexity is beyond all Example, and indeed the Occasion of
it very extraordinary. It is now Three Years and upwards since Two young
Gentlemen of Birth and Fortune, who had lived together in the strictest
Friendship, became Rivals on her Account. Both so equally merited her Esteem,
that for some Time she knew not on which to bestow her Love. The one was of an
open Behavior, warm in his Pretensions, but not over constant in his
Application; the other close, assiduous, and importunate. However it happened,
she was at last determined in Favor of the latter; and, with a Heart never
before engaged in an Affair of this Kind, gave at once into all the Softnesses
and Indearments of it. Polydor (if I may so call the neglected Lover) now found
himself but coldly received; yet, with an unexpected Evenness of Temper,
continued still to visit my Sister; upon the Foot of a Friend, a Platonic, or
what else she would please to call him. In the mean Time, the Father of
Castalio, his Rival, had some Intimation given him of his Intrigue, and that he
intended to marry Fidelia, whose Fortune, though better than Six thousand Pounds,
was by no Means answerable to what he proposed for his Son. Without taking any
further Notice, he sent for him, and having a considerable Estate at Fort St.
George, in the East Indies, made the Care of that a Pretense for dispatching
him thither. In short, Fidelia and he were forced to part, with a Flood of
Tears, and the usual Vows to each other. Two Years almost past before any Thing
was heard of him; then came the News of his Death, confirmed by so many Hands,
and such particular Circumstances, that there was no Room to doubt the Truth of
it. Polydor all this while had gone on in the same Road of an innocent
Acquaintance with my Sister, and as she ever preserved a good Respect for him,
now, under her Affliction, she found the Use of his Friendship. Who could so
properly condole with her the Loss of Castalio, as the Man who had loved him
beyond his own Quiet and Happiness? To whom could she so freely communicate her
Grief, as to one who knew her Weakness, and had long since forgiven her the
cruelest Effects of it? Thus, Sir, by mingling their Sorrows, they fell
insensibly into a Tenderness for each other. His Flame revived with greater
Violence than ever, and she on a sudden wondered at the Progress she had made,
before she well knew where she was. Considering her self as a Kind of Widow,
she resolved to continue such till a Twelvemonth was expired. She did so, and
having appointed Thursday last for her Wedding Day, just as she was going out,
she was met by Castalio at the Door. In the midst of Joy and Confusion, she
flew to him, and fainted in his Arms. What Measures, good Mr. Bickerstaff, can
be taken in this Affair? Polydor raves like a Madman, walks the Streets with
his Sword drawn, and in case he is disappointed, threatens Destruction to all
about him. Castalio bewails Fidelia and himself, commiserates his Friend, and
upbraids his Father that had intercepted his Letters, and purchased of several
Irish Men the Report of his Death: But my Sister -- she alas! is lost to all
Reason; and if she were not, the Truth is, I have none to offer upon this
Emergency. Instruct me, dear Sir, but to mitigate her Afflictions, and you
shall find me from that Moment a more cheerful Correspondent, and upon all
Occasions,

Your most Obedient, Most Humble Servant, Fidelio.


The Case of Fidelia, as well as that of the Pretenders to her, is indeed very
deplorable; and the more so, because having carefully perused the Records
belonging to the Court of Honor, I cannot from thence inform my self how to
proceed, or in whom to vest the Right of her Person. However, if necessary, a
Special Verdict may be had without much Trouble or Expense. In the mean Time,
to speak upon it in an extrajudicial Way, if the Lady happens to be of the
Romish Persuasion, I advise her to a Nunnery; if not, and she be qualified as
her Brother has represented, I know a certain old Gentleman who will be well
enough pleased to take her off with all her Misfortunes and Infirmities about
her. By having frequent Opportunities of instilling the Precepts of Philosophy,
he may in Time alleviate her Disquiets; at least under the Protection of such a
one, she may; as many others do, enjoy all the convenient Privacy, without any
of the Confinement or Severities of a Monastic Retirement.

The TATLER. [No 16
-- Aestuat ingens
Imo in Cord Pudor, mixtoque Insania Luctu,
Et Furits agitatus Amor, and conscia Virtus.
Virg.
From Thursd. Febr. 22. to Saturd. Febr. 24. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 23.
THERE is no Consideration of more Moment, or which more respects the present
or future Good of Mankind, than a severe and nice Attention to the natural
Bent, Genius or Disposition of Children. It Is through a Neglect of this, that
we see so many Professions, Functions and Vocations so ill executed and
supplied. I have often preached this to Major Matchlock, who himself had been
an Oliverian, and could neither write nor read, and but scurvily set his Mark.
His Consciousness of his Want of Learning made him run mad upon making his Son
a Scholar. The Lad, who had an hereditary and unalienable Dullness, was utterly
incapable. Nevertheless to the Charter House he went, where after having been
for Four Years under a good Discipline, he was (if possible) more stupefied by
Correction, and returned again, like a leaden Shilling, upon his father's
Hands. Soon after, by my Advice, he was put to a Banker in Lombard Street, is
now a Common-Councilman, will shortly be Deputy of the Ward, and may in Time
bid fair for the Chair. This is one Instance, and every one who reads this,
cannot fail, from his own Knowledge, of recollecting many more. On the other
Hand, a great Genius is sometimes overlooked, and a Youth tied down to mean
Applications by having a Mechanic to his Father, whose natural Fire, and
Greatness of Spirit, make frequent vigorous Attempts; by which he at length
sallies from behind the Counter, breaks through his Indentures, quits his
opprobrious Apron, and flourishes in Arts or Arms. We read, that Wolsey was but
the Son of a Butcher, his Servant, the great Cromwell, and who perhaps was as
great a Man, the Son of a Blacksmith. An eminent Person of later Times was
reproached by one of better Birth, though of meaner Parts, for having formerly
been a Carrier. His Answer, for his Temper and excellent Judgment in it, is not
to be forgotten, which was, "That if he who reproached him had once been a
Carrier, he would have been a Carrier still." To descend yet to a more modern
Instance, my Friend Uriah Pattern, by Profession a Salesman in the Strand, who
sold me my last Purple Bays Gown, has a Son whom he bound to himself, that he
might learn to make Clothes; but he, it seems, was only born to wear 'em. I
cannot say that he appears addicted by Nature either to Arts or Arms, being of
the Beau Species, and giving daily Indications of a Smart Fellow. The Symptoms
broke out early upon him, in red Heels, wrought Clocks, Agate-headed Canes,
Lispings, Patches, Contortions in Bowing, Oaths, Shrugs, Smiles, white Gloves,
with a perpetual Propensity of stretching out his Hand to lead Ladies, not only
from his Father's Door, but from Pews, Pit, Box, or Gallery. It was also
observable of him, that when upon any Emergency he was forced to attend the
Shop, he handled his Ell, and unrolled the Callicoes, with a particular Air of
Scorn, Regret and Indignation. What the Catastrophe of this Character will be I
am loath to determine, but there seems to be some present Malignancy in his
Stars. His Mother, good Woman, came to me the other Day with Tears in her Eyes,
and told me, that on the 6th of February last he went out, to all Appearance,
well in the Morning. He had indeed disguised himself in a rich Suit, by Means
of which he was as much observed, as he was unknown, at Court; that he returned
very late at Night, extremely disordered, and has raved ever since. His
Imagination being filled with the Idea's of what he saw there, he frequently
breaks out in Exclamations on Basset, Drawing Room, Balls, Rigadoons, Minuets,
etc. He talks of Dutchesses, Countesses, and Yeomen of the Guard. A poor
Country Woman called in to buy a Yard of Flannel, and he cried, Stand by. A
Servant Maid came just afterward for a Callicoe Gown and Petticoat: Asking him
how much would serve, he told her, she must take so many Yards extraordinary,
for he presumed she would have it with a Train; then offered to lead her to her
Pattins, which she had put off at the Door, and wished her Grace a good Night.

A Person of less Penetration than my self, may easily see to the Bottom of Ned
Pattern's Case. To speak Poetically, he has, like Prometheus, stolen Fire from
bright Eyes that roll in an Orb too far above him. It is highly probable that
he knows not the great Lady that has given him the Wound, and utterly
impossible that from her he should ever obtain any Cure. If he can be informed
of her Title and Habitation, I would advise him to entertain humble Thoughts,
to aim at being introduced into the Presence, and by Degrees into the Favor,
of her Abigail, the Possession of whom, though not as a principal Remedy, may
yet as a Succedaneum prove effectual to his Recovery; a Method very familiar to
us in our Practice of Physic: And who knows, but the old Clothes and tarnished
Habiliments, together with the cast Airs and Second-hand Simagreex, of the
original Beauty, may have a Virtue in them like that said to have been in
Achilles Spear, the Rust of which never failed to heal the Wounds it had made^
This is what I think proper to advise for the present, though if this should
not have the desired Effect, for the Sake of my old Friend Uriah, I shall take
Nea's Case into further Consideration, and save him (if possible) from a Bed of
Straw and a dark Room.

Mr. Bickerstaff having Room in this Paper, which he has been straightened for in
some others, thinks himself obliged, in good Manners, to take Notice of Two or
Three of his Correspondents. The Dissenter living near Taunton has no just
Grounds for his Remonstrance, nor the Gentleman at Oxford for applying the
Character of Peter Proteus to himself. Philalethes must explain himself farther
upon the Match he proposes. The Censor refuses absolutely to meet Chloe,
according to her Request, unless she will give him Leave to bring a Third
Person, his own Maid, or some other discreet Body, along with him. The Verses
inscribed to him are not thought proper to be published with his Lucubrations;
and therefore shall be reserved for the next Miscellany.

Whereas it has been reported, That Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Censor of Great
Britain, did lately, on a public Occasion, to the great Scandal of as many as
beheld him, appear in a Scarlet Cloak trimmed with Gold, and a smart
narrowbrim'd Hat, bound with an Edging of the same: These are to certify, that
the said Report is no less groundless and malicious than ridiculous and absurd,
he the said Mr. Bickerstaff having no Cloak but of Ash-colored Camlet, lined
with a deep Blue; nor any other Hat but a broad Horizontal Beaver, both which
have served him off and on these Dozen Years and upwards.

The TATLER. [No 17.
-- Ubi se a Vulgo and Scena in secreta remorant
Virtus Scipiadae and mitis Sapientia Laeli,
Nugari cum illo, and discincti ludere, donec
De^queretur Olus, soliti. --
Hor.
From Saturd. Febr. 24. to Tuesd. Febr. 27. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 26.
MY Landlady has a little Boy about Five Years old, with whose Conversation I
often divert my self when I have taken my afternoon's Nap. I was yesterday,
with my Spectacles on, cutting out for him the Figures of Kings, Milk-Maids,
Trees, and the like, in Paper. We happened to be in warm Debate upon some
important Circumstance in our Business, when Will Moody came into my Room, and
seemed to wonder how a Person of my Age and Gravity could descend to such
Trifles. He made me so tedious a Visit, and was so very disagreeable in it,
that I longed till he was gone, and young Master and my self had resumed our
Entertainment, having a King to finish, who wanted only his Crown and a Pair of
Hands. I have since reflected with some Contempt on those who think that Wisdom
consists in a constant Tenor of Gravity, and that they can never put off their
Seriousness without breaking into their Character. How ill Judges such People
are of humane Nature may be determined, not only from the Opinions of Poets and
Philosophers, but from the Practice of the wisest and greatest Men. Socrates,
who, I think, may be reckoned in the first Rank of Mankind, was at Fourscore
taken by some of his Scholars in the Fact, Whistling and Dancing by himself.
Scipio and Laelius used to amuse themselves with gathering Shells on the
Seashore, and Augustus to play at Cobnut with some favorite Boys.

As all Exercise, whether of Body or Mind, requires some Relaxation, so we may
observe a Sort of Analogy or Agreement between Men's several Employments, and
the Amusements they fall into. Thus the Labourer, after the Toil of the Day,
refreshes himself in the Evening with Wrestling, Dancing, or flinging the Bar:
The dull Plodders in Business, as soon as they are disingaged from it, fall
insensibly asleep, or doze over a Pint: Men of great Genius naturally fall into
these Trifles which, at the same Time that they give Ease and Respite to the
Faculties, serve to enliven in some Degree, and keep them in a gentle Motion.
This I take to have been the Ease of those great Men whose Examples I have
produced; and I am so far gone in this Opinion, that I believe every Person
understands the Art of Trifling agreeably, in Proportion to his Share of Wit
and good Sense; those who are defective in either, being as incapable of doing
it themselves as of relishing it in others. The only Inconvenience is, when Men
in great or grave Stations are not cautious enough to distinguish before whom
they give themselves a Liberty this Way.

Will Moody, amongst many others, has furnished me with this Observation. After
much formal Advice against doing Things unsuitable to my Age, and telling me
how much it would have reflected upon me if any but a Friend had come in, he
added, That he was mightily shocked some Time ago by a Person of Reputation for
Learning and Virtue, that had entertained him for half an Hour together with
the Particularities of a Puppet-Show, which he carried his little Grandson to
see the Night before. The Truth is, such sow and grovelling Spirits as these
have some Reason for their Censure, who possessing no good Qualities able to
gain or to raise Esteem, should not presume to act a Part that would serve only
to make 'em ridiculous. A Man who hopes to establish his Character and Fortune
by the Solemnity of his Countenance, would be in the Wrong to part with it upon
every slight Occasion. Should he once deviate from the Road he is in, he knows
not where it might end, nor how to recover his Mistake. Even a Smile might be
of dangerous Consequence, and therefore he arms himself with an impregnable
Gravity against all the Fooleries and Gaieties that may happen in his Way.

Democritulus is equally a Coxcomb, though of a very different Mould. He laughs
for Laughing's Sake in the wrong Place, and is a Trifler upon all Occasions. In
Pursuit of this Humor, he regards neither Time, Person, nor Circumstance, but
lays about him without Distinction, and is a Kind of Drawcansir in
Conversation. His nearest Acquaintance, and their tenderest Concerns, are the
Subjects of his Wit and Ridicule; and he seems to value himself for nothing
more, than for having got the better of Modesty, good Manners, and Humanity.
How an Inclination to Raillery may betray one into Offenses of this Kind, I
must produce my self as an Instance; and as the following Letter has awakened
in me a Sense of my Error, my Willingness to insert it here, will, I hope, in
some Measure atone for it.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
AS I take it, all Vices are altered by their Circumstances, and more or less
affect the Multitude, in Proportion to the Character of the Person that commits
them. This Consideration obliges me (though with all due Respect, and humble
Submission, to the Authority of the Censor of Great Britain) unwillingly to
charge Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire with ridiculing the Misfortunes of those who were
properly the Objects of his Care and Compassion. 'Twas with the greatest
Satisfaction I read Fidelia's Letter, and the Introduction to it, in your
Tatler of the 22d. The Case of that unhappy Fair is so moving in it self, and
so well described, and her Brother so earnestly and passionately entreats your
Assistance, that I cannot without Indignation reflect on your barbarous Insults
under the Cover of your Court of Honor and a Nunnery; but what is yet
infinitely worse, to aggravate her deplorable Condition by tendering your
Flannel Corpse to supply the Place of her beloved Castalio, or the unfortunately
successful Polydor, is Inhumanity, and the Result of detestable Avarice, the
darling Vice of an old Man, who, for a Prospect of 6000 l. can forget those
many good Instructions a certain Author used to abound in, especially relating
to the Choice of Companions for Life, and the Government of our prevailing
Passions. Example and Precept are the best Comments on each other, and he that
acts inconsistently, seems not in the least to be affected with what he says.
Mr. Bickerstaff, your Lucubrations tell me, you understand humane Nature too
well to think, that an old Man, or Philosophical Precepts, will either raise or
alleviate the Misfortunes of a young Lady, especially under Fidelia's
Circumstances. Therefore to be consonant with your self (which you know is a
prime Excellency) you are obliged either to vindicate your Proceedings, or make
a public Acknowledgment of your Mistake; according to the Consequence of which
I shall continue, or cease to be,

SIR, Your Admirer, And humble Servant.


From the excessive Tenderness I have for the Fair Sex, I was inclined to hope
that the Distress of Fidelia was not real, else I had applied thy self to the
Consideration of it in a more serious Manner. I could wish, my Correspondents,
for this Reason, would make use of a secret Mark, understood by them and my
self only, to let me know when I am drawn upon for my Advice in earnest, and
when not; it being otherwise impossible but that some merry Wags should Bite
both me and my courteous Readers, as often as they in their great Wit and
Wisdom shall think fit so to do.

The TATLER. [No 18.
Animum mutant qui trans Mare currunt.
Hor.
From Tuesday Febr. 27. to Thursd. March 1. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, February 28.
THE Relation between Masters and their Servants, would, if rightly improved,
contribute a great deal to the Happiness of both. Seneca places the latter in a
lower Rank of Friends, and imputes the vile and abject Treatment they usually
meet with, to the Pride or Ignorance of those who have the Power in their
Hands. For my own Part, I have ever had a Kind of Tenderness and Regard for the
few I have entertained in my Service: I have at proper Times bestowed suitable
Advice upon them, and to the best of my Power improved both their Morals and
Understanding. By this Means they have gradually commenced humble Companions,
and served to amuse me with a Kind of low Conversation, at the same Time that
they were doing the little necessary Offices about my Person. My Maid, who is
now turned of Fifty, is of singular Use in this Way: As she is warming my Bed,
she tells me a Hundred Stories of Spirits without Heads, black Dogs, and
several Kinds of Apparitions, that have for sarten been seen in the Parish
where she was born. In a Morning, when she brings me my Candle, she acquaints
me how the World goes, and entertains me with her simple Remarks on the most
considerable Men, and most important Affairs in it. This is making the most of
her Capacity: But Pacolet, my other Servant, was a much greater Genius, and
adorned with many excellent Qualities the high Station of Premiere Ministre to
the Censor of Great Britain.

As the Public has been frequently obliged to his Intelligence for the
Detection of several secret Enormities, I cannot think it improper to give some
Account of him here, of his Absence for Six Months past, and his late Return to
these Parts. About the latter End of August last he came to me, and after
talking over some Affairs I had employed him in, he told me in short, he was
grown weary of acting altogether within the narrow Limits of this Kingdom, that
if I would please to allow him a Salary, and send him abroad with a Character,
he would in a short Time visit all the Courts of Europe, and bring from thence
many Secrets and Curiosities worthy of my Knowledge and Acceptance. My
Correspondents being numerous, and the Accounts they sent me very faithful and
material, I could the better spare Pacolet at that Time. Accordingly, Mr.
Lilly prepared his Credentials, in which he was styled Legate a Latere from
Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Astrologer, Student in Physic, and Censor of the Kingdom
of Great Britain. He set out soon after, and having made the promised Tour with
an Expedition peculiar to his Way of Traveling, he arrived again at Sheer-Lane
(from whence he was directed to Channel-Row) the 22d Instant. I received him
with much Pleasure, together with the many Presents, Letters, etc. he brought
me from Connoisseurs, Great Princes, and Writers of Almanacks. I find by him
that my Predictions first introduced me to their Knowledge, and laid a
Foundation for the Fame of my succeeding Lucubrations. He was, it seems,
particularly well received in the North; the contending Powers in those Parts
alternately persuading him to declare in my Name for their Interest; which he
prudently declined, alleging for his Excuse, that he had particular
Instructions from the Censor, his Master, not to meddle in those Affairs.
Amongst other Things, he produced from his Portmanteau Two large Folio's, each
of which, he told me, contained an Account of his Travels, the same in
Substance, but differing in Style and the Manner of Writing. He added, "That
which I approved should have the Preference, and shortly be made ready for the
Press." In the first Place therefore he read as follows: " August 22. 1710.
This Morning, having taken Leave of my Master, I mounted my Flying-Horse at the
lower End of Sheer-Lane, and without observing much the Roads I passed over,
soon arrived at Amsterdam. I baited there at the Cat and Fiddle, and after
kissing my Lanlady's Daughter in the Cellar, proceeded on my Journey to the
Court of Vienna, which I reached about Noon the same Day." Very well, Pacolet,
says I. "Ah Sir! replies he, this is but a plain Narration." -- Then taking up
the other Volume, he begun thus: 'The Vehemence of the Summer Solstice was now
much abated, when, invited by the agreeable Temperature of the charming Season,
I resolved to make an Excursion into remote Climates. Accordingly having by
long Premeditation determined the Time of my Departure, I applied my self to
that illustrious Person I have the Honor of appertaining unto, and having
obtained a gentle Indulgence for my intended Peregrination, I gave Orders for
my winged Palfrey to be brought to the Extremity of Sheer-Lane, where, amongst
other noble Pieces of Architecture which salute the wondering Eye, that
vulgarly distinguished by the Denomination of Temple Bar, is by no Means
inferior to any round about it. It consists of a noble Arch, through which, as
through a mighty Channel, gay, gilded Chariots, obsolete Coaches, and rumbling
Dray-Carts, are backwards and forwards incessantly disembogued; whilst on
either Side of it Foot-Passengers, like silent Streams, glide smoothly on, and
divide themselves afterward into numberless Rivulets through all Parts of the
Metropolis.'

Here I started up in some Disorder, and snatching the Book out of his Hand,
told him he should never more see my Face if he did not that Moment go his Ways
and sleep till he had recovered his Understanding. After he had left me, I
could not forbear running my Eye along the Margin of his Manuscript, which
pointed out some of the Contents in the following Order.

A Description of Autumn. Another of Temple Bar. Strange and pleasant Fancies.
Moral Reflections. Love Affairs should be kept Secret. A Kissing Custom.
Revenge no new Passion. A Proof from History that we are all mortal.
Whilst I was thus entertaining my self, my Sister Jenny came into my Room,
with unusual Disorder and Resentment in her Air and Countenance. Then throwing
an opened Letter upon my Table. "Here (says she) take this, you can expose the
Sappho's of our Sex, pray do not overlook the Corydon's of your own. In the
Chair that brought me hither I found this Billet, and if you are in earnest an
Enemy to Vice, you will publish it in your next Paper.'

Tuesday Morning, Six of the Clock.
IT is not to be expressed with what Uneasiness I bore the Disappointment I met
with last Night from my dear Alexis. I stayed at my own Lodgings till Nine,
with all the eager Impatience that young Strephon expects his insipid Chloe. A
last I resolved to go and find my charming lovely Youth: I went to our old
Haunts, but in vain: I was doomed to pass the Night with all the Pangs that
tortured Love and Jealousy could inflict. I write this in my Bed -- It Is scarce
Light. I cannot defer chiding my soft tender Boy for using me at this Rate. The
Loss of your Company was not the only Misfortune that attended me; for in that
mad disappointed way I went to my Lady Betty^ It was no small Penance to sit
with that nauseous Sex. They all rallied me for being very insipid. Caelia
seemed to be most touched with the Neglect I showed, and put on ^ Thousand
Airs, which would have engage^ a Number of tastless Fops. I often sighed^ and
muttered over your dear Name. I punished my self in this Company till Twelve ^
Clock, and then came Home; where the only Pleasure I had, was wrapping my sel^
in the Cherry-colour'd Gown which has s^ often been worn by you, and so well
becomes you. I kissed it a thousand Time^ and blamed your Neglect of me. I have
much to say: Meet me at White's at Seven^ where we'll agree on spending our
Evening^ Till then I am,

(With great Impatience) Yours, Corydon


The TATLER. [No 19.
-- Praemia vobis
^ta manent, Pueri, at Palmam movet Ordine Nemo.
Virg.
From Thursd. March 1. to Saturd. March 3. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, March 2.
THE Desire to appear pleasing and agreeable is very natural and prevailing,
al^hough the Art of being so is little understood. ^her by Affectation we
overshoot the Mark, (...) by Remissness fall short of it. But nothing (...)
effectually defeats us in this Pursuit than ^ wrong Estimate of our selves,
either in Point ^f the good Qualities we pretend to, or of the ^tuation in Life
that Fortune has assigned us. ^ Want of due Attention to either of these
Circumstances will unavoidably betray us into ^requent Miscarriages in our
Conduct; some^es lay us open to Envy, at others to Con^empt, and in the End
eclipse even that Merit (...) are really Masters of. From this Conside^tion,
when I was a very young Fellow, how^er desirous I might be of being
distinguished (...) the World, I kept a strict Guard upon my ^anity, resolved
to content my self with pas^ng through the ordinary Forms and Methods ^f rising
into Repute, and at due Distance of Time took my several Degrees in
Conversation. At first setting out, it was my constant Rule to pay a Deference
to as many as had any Pretense to it, to smile modestly when they were pleased
to be facetious, and often stand their Raillery, without offering to return it.
It was not without some Difficulty that I got this Mastery of my self, in
Spite of which, toward the latter End of an Evening, I now and then made an
imprudent Sally, and endeavored to be as sprightly as my Betters; but as it
happened, I never said a good Thing over Night that was invidiously remembered
the next Morning: The Truth is, the Smallness of my Fortune laid some Restraint
upon my Genius. I seldom rightly enjoyed my self till the Reckoning was paid,
and by this Means my Gaiety begun when that of other People was at an End. At
length, by an habitual Dullness, and other innocent Arts in my Behavior, I
worked my self into the Esteem of my Acquaintance, and in something more than
four Years was allowed to be one of the Company. Then it was that I began to
exert my Talents, and by assuming every Day more and more, at length
established an indisputable Authority in the World. Though the Impatience and
Fire of Youth may suggest otherwise, these are certainly the Steps that lead
safely to consummate Greatness, in whatever Form or Profession we aspire after
it.

I am indeed of Opinion, that some Years of our Lives are in a Manner thrown
away and lost by Means of a wrong Education; which nothing has more effectually
convinced me of, than the great and early Improvements that my Friend Sam
Trusty's Nephew, mentioned in one of my former Papers, has made under the
particular Care and Direction of his Uncle: But till the same Method can be
brought into general Practice, we must even take the World as we find it; we
must submit to the Rules universally received, and instead of weighing our own
Merits abstractedly, consider them as they are placed in Relation to, and
Dependence upon, those about us. Amongst other Gradations necessary to be
observed in Life, there is one which, for the Benefit of those who come
Strangers to this City, I cannot but take Notice of; that of Coffee-houses I
mean, the Violation of which may otherwise lead them into many Inconveniences
and Indecorums. The following Letter, which came to Hand this Evening, has
partly occasioned this Re^ection.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Friday Morning. SIR,
I Came to Town with my Sister last Night by the Reading Coach, and having both
of us a great Longing to see Colonel --, who quartered formerly at my Father's
House, we prevailed upon the Coachman to drive directly to White's
Chocolate-House in St. James's- street, which was the Place he told us to
enquire at for him if ever we came to London. We both alighted and went in;
it is true I was somewhat ashamed to see so much fine Company, and the more so,
because my Sister, who is always sick in a Coach, had but a little before
pewk'd upon my Clothes. However, the Place I suppose is free for any Body, and
for all their Silver and Gold Lace, perhaps I had as much Money in my Pocket as
the best of 'em. They were civil enough to her, that is true; but they all
laughed out at me, and an ugly lame Rogue there was ready to shove me out at
the Door, and told me, I was mistaken in the House. If you think this to be
good Manners, I have no more to say; if not, I don't see why you should not
take Notice of it. You have put foolisher Things in your Paper; but whether you
do or no, I am resolved I Will go thither every Day whilst I am in Town, and show
'em that I am not so much a Put but that I can say bo! to a Goose.

W. L.


There seems to be a true English Spirit in the Resentment of my Correspondent;
but if I might advise, he should let this Matter rest for the present. In less
than three Winters I will undertake he shall be able to look the Enemy in the
Face, provided he lives regular, and takes the Measures I prescribe. There is
scarce any Part of the Town so destitute, where he may not find out a little
Coffee-house to drink a Cup of Sage in every Morning, and peruse the Tatler as
often as it comes out. Here I confine him for Two Months: If in that Time he
can compass to have a Place kept for him by the Fire, to talk without being
contradicted, and to read my Paper to the Company, he shall then, by Virtue of
a Pass from Charles Lilly, be allowed the Liberty of the Rainbow near
Temple Bar; there to continue till the Booksellers thereabouts have found him
out for a Wit, and employed him in some Libel against the late or present
Ministry. He will of Course pass afterward to the Grecian, and may (if he
thinks fit) call in at Tom's in Devereux-Court. It will by this Time be proper
that he should make himself a new Suit of Clothes. I could wish they might not
be too gay, which will by no Means become a Person whom I am conducting through
the World. According to the best Calculation I can make, he will, by December
the 18th, Anno Domini 1712. arrive at Will's, where, if he is capable of
further Improvement, he may soon furnish himself with good Sense, Politics,
and good Manners enough to carry him through the rest of his Journey, and set
him upon an equal Foot with the Inhabitants of St. James's Coffee-house,
White's, or the Cocoa-Tree.

N. B. If Mr. W. L. will please to acquaint the Censor where he may be spoken
with, Charles Lilly, to prevent his being imposed on, shall be ordered to wait
on him with a Table containing the several Prices of warm Liquors in an about
this Town, together with the Variations of the said Prices according to the
Difference of the Air under which the Liquors are prepared, with many other
Philosophical Remarks upon the same.

The TATLER. [No 20.
-- Ingenuas didicisse fideliter Arts
Emollit Mores. --
Ovid.
From Saturday Mar. 3. to Tuesday Mar. 6. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, March 5.
THose inferior Duties of Life which the French call les petite Morale, or the
smaller Morals, are with us distinguished by the Name of good Manners or
Breeding. This I look upon, in the general Notion of it, to be a Sort of
artificial good Sense, adapted to the meanest Capacities, and introduced to
make Mankind easy in their Commerce with each other. Low and little
Understandings, without some Rules of this Kind, would be perpetually wandering
into a Thousand Indecencies and Irregularities in Behavior, and in their
ordinary Conversation fall into the same boisterous Familiarities that one
observes amongst them when a Debauch has quite taken away the Use of their
Reason. In other Instances it is odd to consider, that for Want of common
Discretion the very End of good Breeding is wholly perverted, and Civility,
intended to make us easy, is employed in laying Chains and Fetters upon us, in
debarring us of our Wishes, and in crossing our most reasonable Desires and
Inclinations. This Abuse reigns chiefly in the Country, as I found to my
Vexation, when I was last there, in a Visit I made to a Neighbor about Two
Miles from my Cousin. As soon as I entered the Parlour, they forced me into the
great Chair that stood close by a huge Fire, and kept me there by Force till I
was almost stifled. Then a Boy came in great Hurry to pull off my Boots, which
I in vain opposed, urging that I must return soon after Dinner. In the mean
Time the good Lady whispered her eldest Daughter, and slipped a Key into her
Hand. She returned instantly with a Beer Glass half full of Aqua Mirabilis and
Syrrup of Gillyflowers. I took as much as I had a Mind for, but Madam vowed I
should drink it off, (for she was sure it would do me Good after coming out of
the cold Air) and I was forced to obey, which absolutely took away my Stomach.
When Dinner came in, I had a Mind to sit at a Distance from the Fire; but they
told me, it was as much as my Life was worth, and set me with my Back just
against it. Though my Appetite was quite gone, I resolved to force down as much
as I could, and desired the Leg of a Pullet. Indeed, Mr. Bickerstaff, says the
Lady, you must eat a Wing to oblige me, and so put a Couple upon my Plate. I
was persecuted at this Rate during the whole Meal. As often as I called for
Small Beer, the Master tipped the Wink, and the Servant brought me a Brimmer of
October. Some Time after Dinner I ordered my Cousin's Man who came with me to
get ready the Horses; but it was resolved I should not stir that Night; and
when I seemed pretty much bent upon going, they ordered the Stable Door to be
locked, and the Children hid away my Cloak and Boots. The next Question was,
what I would have (...) Supper. I said I never eat any Thing at Nigh^ but was
at last in my own Defense obliged t^ name the first Thing that came into my
Head^ After Three Hours spent chiefly in Apology for my Entertainment,
insinuating to me, "Tha^ this was the worst Time of the Year for Provisions,
that they were at a great Distance from any Market, that they were afraid I
should be starved, and they knew they kept me to my Loss", the Lady went, and
left me to her Husband (for they took special Care I should never be alone). As
soon as her Back was turned, the little Misses ran backwards and forwards every
Moment, and constantly as they came in or went out, made a Courtefie directly
at me, which in good Manners I was forced to return with a Bow, and, Your
humble Servant pretty Miss. Exactly at Eight the Mother came up, and discovered
by the Redness of her Face that Supper was not far off. It was twice as large
as the Dinner, and my Persecution doubled in Proportion. I desired at my usual
Hour to go to my Repose, and was conducted to my Chamber by the Gentleman, his
Lady, and the whole Train of Children. They importuned me to drink something
before I went to Bed, and upon my refusing, at last left a Bottle of Stingo, as
they called it, for Fear I should wake and be thirsty in the Night. I was
forced in the Morning to rise and dress my self in the Dark, because they would
not suffer my Kinsman's Servant to disturb me at the Hour I had desired to be
called. I was now resolved to break through all Measures to get away, and after
sitting down to a monstrous Breakfast of cold Beef, Mutton, Neats Tongues,
Venison Pasty, and Stale Beer, took Leave of the Family; but the Gentleman
would needs see me Part of my Way, and carry me a short Cut through his own
Grounds, which, he told me, would save half a Mile's Riding. This last Piece of
Civility had like to have cost me dear, being once or twice in Danger of my
Neck, by leaping over his Ditches, and at last forced to alight in the Dirt,
when my Horse, having slipped his Bridle, ran away, and took us up more than an
Hour to recover him again.

It is evident that none of the Absurdities I met with in this Visit proceeded
from an ill Intention, but from a wrong Judgment of Complaisance, and a
Misapplication of the Rules of it. I cannot so easily excuse the more refined
Critics upon Behavior, who having professed no other Study, are yet
infinitely defective in the most material Parts of it. Ne^ Fashion has been
bred all his Life about Court, and understands to a Tittle all the Punctilio's
of a Drawing Room. He visits most of the fine Women near St. James's, and upon
all Occasions says the civilest and softest Things to them of any Man
breathing. To Mr. Isaac he owes an easy Slide in his Bow, and a graceful
Manner of coming into a Room. But in some other Cases he is very far from being
a wellbred Person: He laughs at Men of far superior Understanding to his own,
for not being as well dressed as himself, despises all his Acquaintance that
are not Quality, and in public Places has on that Account often avoided taking
Notice of some of the best Speakers in the House of Commons. He rails
strenuously at both Universities before the Members of either, and never is
heard to swear an Oath, or break in upon Morality or Religion, but in the
Company of Divines. On the other Hand, a Man of right Sense has all the
Essentials of good Breeding, though he may be wanting in the Forms of it.
Horatio has spent most of his Time at Oxford. He has a great deal of Learning,
an agreeable Wit, and as much Modesty as serves to adorn without concealing his
other good Qualities. In that retired Way of Living he seems to have formed a
Notion of humane Nature, as he has found it described in the Writings of the
greatest Men, not as he is like to meet with it in the common Course of Life.
Hence it is, that he gives no Offense, that he converses with great Deference,
Candor, and Humanity. His Bow, I must confess, is somewhat awkward; but then he
has an extensive, universal, and unaffected Knowledge, which makes some Amends
for it. He would make no extraordinary Figure at a Ball; but I can assure the
Ladies in his Behalf, and for their own Consolation, that he has writ better
Verses on the Sex than any Man now living, and is preparing such a Poem for the
Press as will transmit their Praises and his own to many Generations.

The TATLER. [No 21.
Dii Majorum Umbris tenuem, and sine Pondere Terram,
Spirantesque Crocos, and in Urna perpetuum Ver,
Qui Praeceptorem sancti voluere Parentis
Esse Loco. --
Juv.
From Tuesday Mar. 6. to Thursday Mar. 8. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, March 7.
THE Concern I have for the Errors of Mankind in general, does sensibly abate
or increase in Proportion to the Rank and Quality of those who fall under my
Observation. For this Reason I can never suffer a Coronet to pass me without
enquiring whom it belongs to, and whether it be worn in a Manner suitable to so
honorable a Distinction. I can say with a great deal of Truth, that I am
commonly answered to my Satisfaction: When it happens otherwise, I carry my
Enquiry yet further, and inform my self with the greatest Exactness imaginable,
whether the Misfortune of Complexion, or that of Education, has chiefly
contributed to eclipse the Luster, and defeat the Advantages, of a high and
noble Descent. Many Failures I find chargeable on the former, but they are not
so numerous, nor of so dangerous a Nature, as those which result from the
latter, being only such Tendencies of the Mind as, by early Care and proper
Application, might have been cultivated and improved into useful and generous
Qualifications. It is therefore of the last Importance, as well to the future
Happiness of our young Nobility, as to that of a Nation in great Measure
depending on them; that their Genius should be nicely observed, their Capacity
improved, and a right Turn given to their Understanding. To effect this, I have
sometimes had it in my Head to write a Treatise with Directions to Tutors or
Governors in the Discharge of so weighty an Employment; but being credibly
informed that they were a Sort of People who had little Opinion of any Body's
Wisdom but their own, I was discouraged from that Undertaking, and obliged to
pursue other Measures. I have within this Twelvemonth made a Coffee-house
Acquaintance with as many of them as I could, and now and then over a Dish of
Tea enquired into the Schemes and Methods they have laid down for the
Management of their Pupils. The first I happened upon, is a grave, sober, and
discreet Person, turned of Fifty, his Countenance somewhat formidable, and his
Conversation extremely rigid and severe. He has by some Means or other seen the
Outsides of most of the Courts in Europe, and got a Smattering in the
Languages; but having no Taste of polite Learning, nor any Insight into humane
Nature, he is much better qualified to wait in an Ante-room, or keep the
Accounts of the Family he belongs to, than to conduct the Hopes of it into the
World. He has often told me with great Pride and Satisfaction, "That he has his
young Lord in as much Subjection as a Footboy, That he of Course denies him
every Thing he has a Mind to, and that in the Midst of his Diversion he can
make him tremble with a Frown." Such is the Love of Tyranny in mean and narrow
Spirits, even in the lowest Circumstance of Power. Another of them sets up for
a fine Gentleman, and is a Pedant in taking Pains to be otherwise. He has a
Notion that Letters are but a poor Accomplishment for a Man of Quality, that a
good Air, and being furiously of a Party, are sufficient Distinctions for one
that is born to many others; and therefore indulges the Youth under his Care in
an immoderate Love of Dogs, Horses, Plays, Gallantry, and all Manner of
Entertainments. At Leisure Hours he flatters him with an Opinion of his
Superiority to the common Level of Mankind, and strictly cautions him against
entertaining the least Regard for the Scum and Dregs of the People. What a
Patriot, Hero, and Counselor, may we hope for from so extraordinary an
Education! A Third, whom I suffer indeed to visit me now and then, seems to
have a better Sense of his Duty in this Station than either of the others.
Knowing that I am a great Lover of Children, he one Day brought his Pupil, who
is very young, to my Lodgings. He had long promised him, I found, that he would
carry him to wait upon Mr. Bickerstaff; and I do not remember, that I was ever
so well pleased with being pointed at in Public, as I was with the particular
Survey this little Boy took of me. After this Curiosity was pretty well over,
he seemed willing to enter into Conversation, in which he acquitted himself
with the utmost good Manners, and a manly Turn of Wit very disproportioned to
his Years. I could perceive he had a great Mind to be talking of the Tatlers,
and I on Purpose led him into it. He made some very surprising Remarks upon
several of them, and with an agreeable Freedom asked me the Meaning of others
that he did not understand. I begged his little Lordship to accept of the
Volumes I had by me, and in Return he desired my Leave to be a Subscriber for
the next. Ever now and then I had my Eye upon his Tutor, and could perceive in
him an inexpressible Pleasure for the good Behavior of his Charge.

I could not help taking him aside soon after, and telling him, that I almost
envied him the Happiness of having so fine a Genius in his Hands: "Go on Sir,
says I, to cultivate and improve it, and by that Means be an Instrument of
public Good to your Country. You will never, perhaps, have it in your Power to
act in a more meritorious Capacity. Think only what a Pleasure it will be to
you, to see this young Gentleman hereafter at the Head of an Army, or managing
a Debate in the most illustrious Assembly in the World. Believe me, you will in
a great Measure partake his Glory, and act as it were by Proxy in whatever
Station his Merit shall advance him to If I can form any Judgment of him at
these Years, you will from his future Gratitude and Esteem receive the Fruits
of the utmost Pains you can bestow upon him. He will consider you almost in the
highest Relation, and next to the Persons that gave him Life, will love and
honor one that pointed out to him the Use and End of his Being.'

The TATLER. [No 22.
When shall we Three meet again.
Shakespeare.
From Thursd. Mar. 8. to Saturday Mar. 10. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, March 9.
THough I seldom eat out of my own Lodgings, I was prevailed on the other Day
to dine with some Friends at the Rummer in Queen Street. A Physician, who was
engaged to be of the Party, staying somewhat beyond the Time, Sam Trusty would
needs have me go with him into the Kitchen, and see how Matters went there. I
would have excused my self, fearing lest the Heat of the Place, and the Steam
of the several Dishes, should have taken away my Stomach; but he assured me,
that Mr. Brawn had an Art (beyond other Cooks) of making his Customers more
hungry by the Sight of his Kitchen. I was indeed very much pleased and
surprised with the extraordinary Splendour and Economy I observed there, but
above all, with the great Readiness and Dexterity of the Man himself. His
Motions were quick, but not preeipitate: He in an Instant applied himself from
one Stove to another without the least Appearance of a Hurry, and in the Midst
of Smoke and Fire preserved an incredible Serenity of Countenance. By thi^ Time
the Doctor was come, and made a Thousand Apologies for being so late. He
assure^ us, by the great Powers above, that nothin^ should have kept him but
the extreme Dange^ of Two or Three of his Patients. We easil^ believed him,
knowing his uncommon Te^derness for those under his Care, and (...) the same
Time the Multiplicity of his Pr^ctice, without the least Affectation to make ^
Show of it. This Gentleman, after we h^ dined, was obliged to give Audience to
severa^ Apothecaries, that came to him with differen^ Cases from all Parts of
the Town. Havin^ some Knowledge of Physic, I took the Libert^ of looking over
his Bills as he writ them which he did with wonderful Quickness, an^ seeming
Inadvertency, entertaining us all the while with an incoherent, but agreeable
Co^versation. Notwithstanding the great Numbe^ of Distempers, the infinite
Variety of their Symptoms, and the Ignorance of those who represented them, he
entered into them all with an incredible Penetration, and without omitting one
Drug that was proper, or inserting one that was otherwise, dispatched more
Prescriptions to the Purpose in Three Quarters of and Hour, than Dr. Ebony has
done in Twenty Years of his Life. It being now toward S^ of the Clock, it was
proposed that we should go and see Love for Love, which was to be played that
Night in Drury Lane. I cannot say but this excellent Comedy was tolerably well
performed; but I shall be very cautious for the future how I bestow any
Commendations on this or that particular Player, since I find by Experience
they have not Judgment enough to support the Weight of them: One, whom I ^owed
to be an admirable Buffoon, having ^on that Foot set up for a Critic; and
ano^r, from being encouraged by me, to attempt ^e Part of Othello, having ever
since considered ^mself and very lately acted, in the Capacity (...) a Hero. I
sat with great Attention during ^e whole Entertainment, and could not but
^serve, notwithstanding the great Diversity of ^aracters that are blended in
it, how exactly ^e Distinctions of each were preserved through ^e whole, and that
no one Person, from the ^ginning to the End, spoke a Sentence that ^uld
properly have been put into the Mouth of ^y other. As soon as the Play was
over, I ^apped my self warm in my Cloak, and wal^d directly to my Lodgings. As
I was recol^cting how I had spent the Day, it came into ^y Head that there was
a very great Analogy (...) Resemblance between the necessary Qualifi^tions of a
Physician, a Cook, and those of a ^ramatick Writer. For the first of these, if
we ^nsider him in the Hurry of his Business, with ^s Head full of Materia
Medica, hard Names (...) Distempers, and unspeakable Terms of Ana^my, in these
whimsical Circumstances, I say, (...) what fatal Consequence might the least
Over^ght prove? For Instance: Should he chance (...) prescribe Catechu,
Calaminaris, and Ostiocolla, ^stead of Fenugreek Seed, and Treacle of
Andro^achus, to one in an Erisipelatous Fever; in^ead of Compound Bryony
Water, and Langius's ^ntiepileptick, a Decoction of Bist^rt^, or an
^uthropapaverous Cataplasm, in the Paroxysns ^f an Apoplexy, the Patient is
lost, and what (...) much worse, his Reputation ruined for ever. ^he Province
of a Cook is no less difficult and ^erplexing; heated as he is, and confounded
^ith the manifold Demands of those about ^m, he must be sure not to mistake his
Ingredients, nor the exact Proportion of them. N^ he must dip in Pepper, now in
sliced Pipp^ then in Pritaches, Troufles, Morelles, Gooseberri^ Spinach, or
Barberries: One Moment he atte^ on Olio, the next on Oysters in Staffado, Eggs
^ la-Hugenotte; and in the Midst of all these A^fairs, must be at Leisure to
give proper and ^rect Answers to Fifty Questions at once. (...) no less
necessary that he should have a gre^ Command of the Terms of his Art: He bre^ a
Deer, rears a Goose, ^aches a Curlew, all^ a Pheasant, splays a Bream, sides a
Haddock, t^ a Barbel, tranches a Sturgeon, barbs a Lobster, etc The Poet
remains to be considered: He inde^ composes at Leisure, and is less open to
f^quent Interruptions than either of the for^ But then the Tastes and
Constitutions he is (...) consult are no less Difficult, and his Work of ^ more
refined and delicate Nature. The infi^ Variety of his own Thoughts, is to him
what ^ Crowd of People are to the others. He fin^ himself engaged, perhaps,
with a Dozen (...) Fourteen Persons, in a great Measure the Creatures of his
own Imagination, each of which (...) is to furnish with what is exactly proper
to their Character, and no more; and to conduct them in the same Figure and
Station to the End of his Design. This requires a ready Genius, and a close
Attention, otherwise he will fall into gross Errors, and often apply his Wit
and Humor in the wrong Place. It is for this Reason, that I, for my own Part,
would as soon propose to eat luxuriously in a Cellar, or apply my self for a
Cure to Dr. Ebony in a dangerous Illness, as hope to be entertained to my
Satisfaction by most of our modern Dramatick Performances.

The TATLER. [No 23.
O! Major tandem parcas Insane Minori.
Hor.
From Saturd. Mar. 10. to Tuesd. Mar. 13. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, March 12.
DOctor Proteus, of Wadham College in Oxford, whose Letter I inserted in the
Tat^er Numb. 9. is at last come to Town. The Whim of the Football went off
upon the Breaking of the Frost, when that violent Exercise natu^ally ceases.
The poor Man is mighty sensible of the Condition he has been in, and is so far
from being proud of the Spleen, that he is resolved to leave no lawful Means
untried to get rid of it. He looks very ill indeed, and I fear ^t will be next
to impossible to effect a perfect Cure, since by the Account he gives me it has
run in the Family for some Time. His Father had this Misfortune so very young,
that he was a Kit when he was a mere Stripling, and afterward became in his
riper Age a very grave and worthy Hum-drum, or Bass-Viol; in which Capacity,
(or rather Case) he served his Country (being at the same Time a Justice of the
Peace) for several Years, and at last died in it. Of Seven virtuous Ladies that
were his Aunts, Six lived and died Virginals. However as Art finds Means,
according to the Observation of the most ingenious Author of the Plaster for
Corns, I told the Doctor, if he would apply himself to the famous Aesculapius,
(...) should be very glad of joining with him, in order to re-establish his
Health. Accordingly he went Yesterday to wait upon him. But I was very much
surprised when, upon his coming to me again in the Evening. I found he had not
received the Satisfaction we both expected from the Assistance of so celebrated
a Physician. ' Mr. Bickerstaff, (said he to me with a dejected Countenance) I
have been to see my old Friend Aesculapius. I found with him a young Man whom I
took at first to have been a Patient; for he looked sadly. At his going out, I
heard the Doctor say, Either forbear to use those Powders, or see my Face no
more. Ah! old Friend, said he, upon Sight of me, this extravagant Boy will
certainly undo me. Have I walked up so many Pair of Stairs to get a little
Money together, to have this young Fellow spend it at Twopence a Day for Powder
for his Hair? Come sit down, let me know what it is brings you to Town. I told
him my Case in as few Words as I could, to which he answered with a melancholy
Look, That he was not at all surprised at it, since he was but too sensible of
his having formerly been a Football himself; and to let me know what strange
Impressions the Mind of Man is capable of, he assured me, That a certain
Gentleman in this Town me long ago took his Face for a Spitting Pot. I was no
less startled at what he said, than at what I afterward observed. We were no
sooner seated, but looking on his Watch, he started up again, and cried, Adso!
we must think of Dinner: Then stepping into the next Room, he fetched from
thence a String. Having fastened one End of it to a Nail over his Chimney, he
tied a Leg of Mutton to the other, and giving it a Twirl, began a long
Complaint of the melancholy Circumstances he found himself in. He told me,
Every Body thought him vastly rich, but they did not know what the Expenses of
Life were. Then giving his Mutton another Twirl, It Is true, says he, I have
Fourscore Thousand Pounds in the Funds; but if a Man did not take Care to dress
hit (...) Dinner, he might be poisoned for all that. So desiring me to reach
him the Flower-Box, Doctor, says he, What do you think gilding a Chariot might
stand me in? Sir, said I, What need you trouble your self about that? All the
World knows -- All the World may know what they please, replied he, but you
will see me want before I die. However, says he, I think it would do no Harm if
we had a Dripping-pan now; Pray give the Box a shake, Doctor, whilst I step and
fetch it. You must not take it ill that I put you upon these Offices, there are
but few Friends I can trust to do them for me. He went on, Do you love French
Wine? I believe you may; I did once my self: But let me tell you, That White
Port is not only the cheapest, but the best Wine now about Town. Here I
interrupted him, and desired he would think a little of my Case. Why, suppose,
says he, you went to the Bath? I have been there formerly. Or what if you took
a Lodging about Hammersmith? Or else met me at Tom 's to Morrow? I perceived it
was much the same which of the Three I did, or whether I did any of them or no;
so I even took my Leave, and came away. Judge you, Mr. Bickerstaff, whether
this Gentleman is able to do any Good, as the Case stands between him and me.

As I was preparing to make some very s^ous Reflections on the fantastical
Humors (...) this great Man, a Porter knocked at my Do^ and told me, I must by
all Means come (...) to the Royal-Oak in Essex-street, and at the s^ Time
delivered me the following Letter:

From the Oak, Two of the Clock Dear Isaac,
THough we know it is a busy Day wi^ you, we are resolved to have your Company;
and for that Reason have sent you the enclosed Verses, which, if you like them,
will furnish out most Part of to Morrow's Paper. You will find them to be a
Town Eclogue, and that the Scene is laid in the Royal Exchange. We are

All very much yours, L. B. W. H. J. S. S. T.


Cor. Now the keen Rigor of the Winter's over,
No Hail descends, and Frosts can pinch no more,
Whilst other Girls confess the genial Spring,
And laugh aloud, or amorous Ditties sing,
Secure from Cold their lovely Necks display,
And throw each useless Chasing dish away,
Why sits my Phillis discontented here,
Nor feels the Turn of the revolving Year?
Why on that Brow dwells Sorrow and Dismay,
Where Loves were went to sport, and Smiles to play?

Phil. Ah Corydon! Survey the 'Change around,
Through all the 'Change no Wretch like me is found:
Alas! the Day, when I, poor heedless Maid,
Was to your Rooms in Lincoln's- Inn betrayed,
Then how you swore, how many Vows you made?
^ist'ning Zephyrs, that over heard his Love,
^t the soft Accents to the Gods above.
^s! the Day; for Oh eternal Shame!
^d you Handkerchiefs, and lost my Fame.

Cor. When I forget the Favor you bestowed,
(...) Herrings shall be spawned in Tyburn Road,
^etstreet transformed become a flowery Green,
^d Mass be sung where Opera's are seen.
(...) wealthy Cit, and the St. James's Bean,
^ll change their Quarters, and their Joys forego;
^k jobbing This to Jonathan's shall come,
(...) the Groom Porter's That play off his Plum.

^il. But what to me does all that Love avail,
^hilst I doze at Home over Porter's Ale,
^h Night with Wine and Wenches you regale?
(...) live-long Hours in anxious Cares are past,
^d raging Hunger lays myBeauty wast.
(...) Templers spruce in vain I Glances throw,
^d with shrill Voice invite them as they go.
^s'd in vain my glossy Ribands shine,
^d unregarded wave upon the Twine.
(...) Week flies round, and when my Profit's known,
^rdly clear enough to change a Crown.

Cor. Hard Fate of Virtue thus to be distressed,
(...) fairest of thy Trade, and far the best!
(...) Fruitmen's Stalls the Summer-Market grace,
^d ruddy Peaches Them; as first in Place
(...)-Cake is seen over smaller Pastry Ware,
^d Ice on That; so Phillis does appear
(...) Playhouse and in Park, above the rest
(...) Belles Mechanic, elegantly dressed.

Phil. And yet Crepundia, that conceited Fair,
^idst her Toys, affects a saucy Air,
^d views me hourly with a scornful Eye.

Cor. She might as well with bright Cleora vie.

Phil. With this large Petticoat I strive in vain
(...) hide my Folly past, and coming Pain;
It Is now no Secret; she, and Fifty more,
Observe the Symptoms I had once before.
A Second Babe at Wapping must be placed,
When I scarce bear the Charges of the last.

Cor. What I could raise I sent; a Pound of Plums
Five Shillings, and a Coral for his Gums:
To Morrow I intend him something more.

Phil. I sent a Frock and Pair of Shoes before.

Cor. However, you shall home with me to Night,
Forget your Cares, and revel in Delight.
I have in Store a Pint or Two of Wine,
Some Cracknels, and the Remnant of a Chine.
And now on either Side, and all around,
The weighty Shop-beards fall, and Bars resound;
Each ready Sempstress slips her Pattins on,
And ties her Head, preparing to be gone.


The TATLER. [No 24.
O Lycida, vivi pervenimus, Advena nostri
(Quod nunquam veriti sumus) ut Possessor Agelli
Diceret, Haec mea sunt, veteres migrate Coloni.
Virg.
From Tuesd. Mar. 13. to Thursd. Mar. 15. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, March 14.
THE Dignity and Distinction of Men of Wit is seldom enough considered, either
by themselves or others; their own Behavior, and the Usage they meet with,
being generally very much of a Piece. I have at this Time in my Hands an
Alphabetical List of the Beaux Esprits about this Town, Four or Five of whom
have made the proper Use of their Genius, by gaining the Esteem of the best and
greatest Men, and by turning it to their own Advantage in some Establishment of
their Fortunes, however unequal to their Merit; others satisfying themselves
with the Honor of having Access to great Tables, and of being subject to the
Call of every Man of Quality, who upon Occasion wants one to say witty Things
for the Diversion of the Company. This Treatment never moves my Indignation so
much as when it is practiced by a Person, who though he owes his own Rise
purely to the Reputation of his Part^ yet appears to be as much ashamed of it,
as ^ rich City Knight to be denominated from t^ Trade he was first apprenticed
to, and affec^ the Air of a Man born to his Titles, and consequently above the
Character of a Wit, or ^ Scholar. If those who possess great Endowments of the
Mind would set a just Value upon themselves, they would think no Man's
Acquaintance whatsoever a Condescension, no^ accept it from the greatest upon
unworthy o^ ignominious Terms. I know a certain Lord that has often invited a
Set of People, and proposed for their Diversion a Buffoon Player, and an
eminent Poet, to be of the Party; and which was yet worse, thought them both
sufficiently recompensed by the Dinner, and the Honor of his Company. This
Kind of Insolence is risen to such a Height, that I my self was the other Day
sent to by a Man with a Title, whom I had never seen, desiring the Favor that
I would dine with him and half a Dozen of his select Friends. I found
afterward, the Footman had told my Maid below Stairs, that my Lord having a
Mind to be merry, had resolved right or wrong to send for honest Isaac. I was
sufficiently provoked with the Message; however I gave the Fellow no other
Answer, than that I believed he had mistaken the Person, for I did not remember
that his Lord had ever been introduced to me. I have Reason to apprehend that
this Abuse has been owing rather to a Meanness of Spirit in Men of Parts, than
to the natural Pride or Ignorance of their Patrons. Young Students coming up to
Town from the Places of their Education, are dazzled with the Grandeur they
every where meet, and making too much Haste to distinguish their Parts, instead
of waiting to be desired and caressed, are ready to pay their Court at any Rate
to a great Man, whose Name they have seen in a public Paper, or the
Frontispiece of a Dedication. It has not always been thus; Wit in polite Ages
has ever begot either Esteem or Fear: The Hopes of being celebrated, or the
Dread of being stigmatized, procured an universal Respect and Awe for the
Persons of such as were allowed to have the Power of distributing Fame or
Infamy where they pleased. Aretine had all the Princes of Europe his
Tributaries, and when any of them had committed a Folly that laid them open to
his Censure, they were forced by some Present extraordinary to compound for his
Silence; of which there is a famous Instance on Record. When Charles the Fifth
had miscarried in his African Expedition, which was looked upon as the weakest
Undertaking of that great Emperor, he sent Aretine a Gold Chain, who made some
Difficulty of accepting it, saying, It was too small a Present in all Reason
for so great a Folly. For my own Part, in this Point I differ from him, and
never could be prevailed upon, by any valuable Consideration, to conceal a
Fault or a Folly since I first took the Censorship upon me.

Having long considered with my self the ill Application that some make of
their Talents, I have this Day erected a Court of Alienation, by the Statutes
of which the next a Kin is empowered to beg the Parts and Understanding of any
such Person as can be proved, either by imbezelling, making a wrong Use, or no
Use at all of the said Parts and Understanding, not to know the true Value
thereof: Who shall immediately be put out of Possession, and disqualified for
ever; the said Kinsman giving sufficient Security that he will employ them as
the Court shall direct. I have set down under certain Heads the several Ways by
which M^ prostitute and abuse their Parts, and from thence have framed a Table
of Rules, whereby the Maintiff may be informed when he has a good Title to
eject the Defendant. I may in a following Paper give the World some Account of
the Proceedings of this Court. I have already got Two able Critics for my
Assessors upon the Bench, who, though they have always exercised their Pens in
taking off from the Wit of others, have never pretended to challenge any
themselves, and consequently are in no Danger of being engaged in making
Claims, or of having any Suits commence against them. Every Writer shall be
tried by his Peers, thoroughly versed in that Point wherein he pretends to
excel; for which Reason the Jury can never consist of above half the ordinary
Number, I shall in general be very tender how I put any Person out of his Wits;
but as the Management of such Possessions is of great Consequence to the World,
I shall hold my self obliged to vest the Right in such Hands as will answer the
great Purposes they were intended for, and leave the former Proprietors to see
their Fortune in some other Way.

Will's Coffee-house, Wednesday Night.
I am informed here, that upon what I said in my Paper of Saturday last,
relating to the late Performance of a Play called Love for Love, it will be
again represented to Morrow. I have formerly done this Comedy the Honor of my
Presence in a very public Manner, and therefore in Respect to my self, as well
as to the Merit of That, do strictly command that there be a full Audience both
now, and as often as it shall hereafter be played.

Notice is hereby given, from the Profitable Office of Insurance on Births and
Marriages in Palsgrave-Head-Court, next Door to the Black Swan without
Temple Bar, That the Directors thereof, at the Request of many of their
Subscribers, have obliged themselves to take into Pay some able Proficient in
Poetry, who shall article and agree with the said Directors to furnish them on
all proper Occasions, for the Use of their Subscribers, with something in his
Way, allowing for each Epithalamium, Two Shillings; for Verses on the Birth of
a Son, ditto; on that of a Daughter, Purpence; and for the Posie of a Wedding
Ring, if new, upwards of Sixpence; otherwise, Sixpence and no more.

N.B. Callipaedia, or the Art of getting handsome Children, having been twice
translated; the Authors of those Versions are invited to appear as Candidates
on this Occasion, as likewise the tall Gentleman who writ the last new Epilogue
for Mr. Powell's Opera, which we hear was received with great Applause by most
of the Nobility of this Kingdom.

The TATLER. [No 25
-- Hinc vos,
Vos hinc mutatis discedite Partibus.
Hor.
From Thursd. Mar. 15. to Saturd. Mar. 17. 1710.
From the Court of Alienation holden in Channel Row, before Mr. Critic Snap,
and Mr. Critic Wordy, Assessors; Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire Judge of the said
Court, being absent by Reason of a sudden Indisposition. March the 15th, 1710.
Nine in the Morning.
THE Court being seated, Silence made, etc. Mr. Critic Wordy, rising slowly
from the Bench, spoke in the following Manner:

Gentlemen, I am commissioned by the Censor, whose Place and Authority my
Brother and my self, however unworthy, are at present obliged to represent and
supply: I am commissioned, I say, to speak a few Words, as well in Relation to
the Institution of this Court, as to apprize all such who shall be concerned
therein, what they are to expect, and in what Methods to proceed. As to the
first of these Heads, I shall have Occasion to speak the less upon it, the
Censor himself having lately in Writing communicated the Motives that induced
him to erect so wise and necessary an Institution. No one sure can be so
entirely a Stranger to the World of Literature, as not to be sensible of the
many Abuses that have lately crept into it, which, unless a speedy and
effectual Remedy were applied, would in Process of Time bring no small Scandal
on the most refined Part of Mankind, and end perhaps (which I tremble to think
of) in the utter Extirpation of Letters amongst us. Poetry it self, the
Attainment of which (with Submission be it spoken) I look upon to be one of the
great Ends of our Creation, would in an Age or Two, it may be sooner, faint,
languish, and die away. Ex illo ruere, and retro sublapsa referri.
I am in the next Place to acquaint you as briefly as possible, and as near as
the Variety of contingent Circumstances will permit, what the general Issue
will be of Causes depending before us. As for Instance: Si quis condiderit in
quem mala Carmina, Jus est
Judiciumque --
That is to say, in this Case Qu^ the Plaintiff laying an Indictment against
Quis the Defendant, --

Here Mr. Critic Snap interrupted him, and said, In short, Brother, let us
proceed to Business: Every Body that comes here knows what he has to do.

Then an Indictment was read against Jere^ Wrangle, Bachelor of Arts, for that
he the sa^ Jeremy did some Nights ago take upon him, in the Company of several
Officers of Her Majesty's Foot-Guards, to deny many plain and undeniable
Consequences, under Pretense that the Arguments were not brought in Mood and
Figure, and that he could not find in them either Major, Minor, or Conclusion.
The Plaintiff said, 'He had brought the Business into that Court as having no
other Way of doing himself Right on one that professed to be a mere Scholar. As
for Majors or Minors, why the Gentleman should twit him with them, he could not
imagine, that he had served, and at that Time had his Commission for
Lieutenant Colonel in his Pocket."The Court, upon a fair Hearing, ordered Mr.
Wrangle to be divested of his Logic, which was bestowed on one Mr. Smart, an
Ensign, nearly related to the Defendant, and then appearing in Court to put in
his Claim. There was in an Instant a visible Alteration in each of their Faces:
Jeremy's Pedantick Gravity disappeared, and his Cousin, the Soldier, walked out
of Court with a becoming Seriousness in his Gate and Air.

Tobias Sternhold was next produced in Court by his Relations, who had obtained
a Writ of Captias against him. They alleged, That having a Wife and large
Family, which he might have maintained comfortably by his Industry, (he being a
very good Clerk) he had nevertheless given himself up wholly to the making of
Things with Rhimes at the End of them, which he called Verses; and that he was
come to that Pass at last, that he frequently writ his Orders and Warrants in
that Way; insomuch that the Commissioners had threatened to turn him out, which,
if it should happen, would ^e to the utter Ruin of himself and poor Fami^y:
Therefore they prayed the Assistance of the Court. He pretended to justify
himself, by saying, That one Genius, by Name, had drawn him into it, and quoted
the Examples of Ovid and Spencer, that could not resist the Instigation of
Poetry, producing likewise some Instances of Rich Poets still living. Mr. Snap
took him up short, and bad him not trifle with the Bench, telling him, "If they
writ Verses, it was in their own Coaches, or when they had nothing else to do."
Then Sentence was passed upon him, "That he should be Huskanaw'd, and his
Penmanship put into the Hands of his Wife.'

She immediately took down the Proceedings of the Court in Writing; upon which
he fell into a violent Passion, and such a Torrent of Words followed, as
plainly showed they had exchanged Faculties with each other.

Then the Court was adjourned till the First of April next, which falling on
Easter Day will be kept the Monday following.

From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, March 16.
When this last Sentence was brought to me for my Confirmation, I very readily
approved of it; and though I was aware that the Term of Huskanawing being a
Word unknown in any of the Courts of Westminster, it might seem an Hardship
upon a People jealous of their Rights and Liberties, to impose a new Sort of
Punishment upon what has hitherto been scarce accounted a Crime: Nevertheless,
out of the Plenitude of my Power, and of my own mere Motion and certain
Science, I do ratify and confirm the said Sentence. But as I shall never extend
the Prerogative of Censor of Great Britain to any unreasonable Bounds, nor use
it at all, but for the Good of the People; so for the Quieting of their Minds
from any Doubts which might arise concerning this new Word, I have thought it
convenient to explain to them what it means.

It is a Custom amongst the West-Indians that border upon Virginia, for the
Priests of the Country to elect a certain Number of the hopefulest young Men,
and of the best Families, to make the Operation of Huskanawing upon. When they
have gathered together Thirty or Forty of 'em they retire with them into the
most inaccessible Parts of the Woods, where they build a large Stove, in which
they sweat the young Men. They keep 'em to a very strange Diet, and their Drink
is an odd Composition of Indian Corn, and Juices of poisonous Herbs, which has
such an Effect upon them, that they lose their Hair, their Nails, their Skins,
and half of them their Lives, before the Process be half over. They that have
Strength enough to hold out till Thirty Days, are brought Home in great
Triumph, and these are looked on as the Top Patriots of that Country. This
seems to me to be a very wise Institution, and fit to be introduced in my own
Country; for the Sweatings, Diet, Drugs and Drink which they have been used to,
quite renovate the Men, so that they come out without any Remembrance of their
Parents, Country, Loves, Language, or even of their own Names. These are their
Heroes, these their Counselors, these their Ambassadors, these have the
Management of all their Public Affairs, and are maintained at the Public
Charge. I must not omit, that it is almost impossible they should, after this
Operation, retain any Regard for their former Studies, or in the least desire
to return to them: If they should, they durst not own it, for Fear of being
taken and Rehuskanaw'd.

The TATLER. [No 26.
-- En quo Discordia Cives
Perduxit miseros! --
Virg.
From Saturd. Mar. 17. to Tuesday Mar. 20. 1710.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, March 19.
A Writer who has the World under his Direction, cannot better employ his
Interest and Authority, than in cultivating a good Correspondence between Men,
and endeavoring to make them agreeable to each other. Notwithstanding the
Pains I have taken this Way. I have Reason, from an Accident I met with, to
believe I have not yet thoroughly effected so great and necessary a Work.
Walking the Streets this Morning, I met a Gentleman of my Acquaintance who has
the Honor to serve his Country in a very useful Capacity. Oh Mr. Bi^kerstaff,
says he, you are luckily met; I w^ your Advice upon a very extraordinary
Occasion. You may command me, answered I, to the best of my Understanding; but
it is a Rule with me, neither to talk nor look wisely in the Street. Please only
to walk into the next Coffee-house -- By no Means, Sir, replied he, starting
back^ don't you know that some of the rankest -- in Great Britain come thither?
-- Not I in good Truth, Sir; but if they do, I suppose there may be Room for us
-- Ay marry, (says he) and so there may be in the Dens at the Tower; for my
Part I would as soon venture into one as the other. I immediately laughed out
in his Face; upon which he turned away in great Indignation, and left me to
reflect on so extraordinary a Behavior.

I went on, and having a Curiosity to see these strange Creatures my Friend had
spoke of, called in at the Place beforementioned. I was indeed surprised at my
Entrance to observe the Eyes of the whole Herd turned upon me, a full Stop put
to their Conversation, and their Dishes for some Time suspended in Mid-Air at a
little Distance from their Lips. Turning to the Gentleman at the Bar, I asked
in a soft Tone for a Dish of Tea. There is none made, said he, in a very surly
Manner -- Pray then will you help me to a Dish of your Coffee? -- You must stay
till it is settled, replied he, if you will have any -- I did so, and called
for the Tatler -- A pert Boy looked in my Face, and told me, They did not take
it in since it had left off lashing the Party; I might have the Review,
Observator, or the Spectator, if I pleased -- In the mean Time the grave People
round the Fire had a ^ittle recovered their Confusion, and by their ^hispering
to each other, and then staring at me, gave me to understand that I was looked
upon as a Spy, or at least an Intruder into select Company. One of them, more
bold than the rest, seemed prepared to speak to me, and collected himself in a
resolute Posture in order to it; but his Courage ^iling, he sunk down into his
Chair again, ^d suffered me to pass unmolested to a Seat ^ext the Chimney. A
surly-looking Fellow, who seemed to be one of those who do not care a Farthing
for any Body, sat opposite to me, and fixing his Eyes steadfastly upon me,
threw out Three or Four of his main Principles in a Breath, expecting, as I
supposed, either my Dislike or Approbation of them. A young Gentleman next him,
who, I observed, filled his Pipe, and reached the Tobacco-Tongs for him,
assented with a Smile to what he said, and could not but wonder, that any
Person should be so proposterous as to think otherwise, or so insipid as to
conceal his Thoughts if he did.

The Calmness and invincible Silence with which I received all this Raillery,
had like to have brought me into some Peril; for in less than a Quarter of an
Hour the whole Fireside was up in a Passion: Upon which I rose deliberately
from my Chair, laid a Couple of Pence without Noise upon the Bar, and stole out
in the same State of Neutrality that I came in. I take it for granted, if I had
followed my Friend to a Coffee-house of his choosing, I should have met with the
same Treatment, only softened a little perhaps by the lucky Circumstance of
being introduced by one of the same Society.

A Humor so absurd needs not any Animadversions. Follies of this Stamp are too
glaring in their own Nature to suffer any Satyr or Illustration upon them; to
which, with some Alteration, may be applied those excellent Lines: When Actions
unadorned are faint and weak,
Cities and Countries must be taught to speak:
Gods may descend in Factions from the Skies,
And Rivers from their ouzy Beds arise.
Marlbro's Exploits appear divinely bright,
And proudly shine in their own native Light:
Raised of themselves their genuine Charms they boast,
And they who paint them truest, praise them most.


In like Manner the Embellishments of Ridicule are thrown away in Cases where a
plain Narration does more effectually serve the Ends proposed by it.

I must not omit mentioning a good whimfical Business that I accidentally met
with in this Adventure. The Boy of the Coffee-house having put one or two of
his politic Papers into my Hand, the Title of the Spectator, which I had never
before seen or heard of, induced me to read it over in such a cursory Manner as
that Kind of Writing requires. Toward the End of the Paper, I found a Letter
subscribed C -- L --. After perusing it, I could not without Tears in my Eyes
consider the deplorable Condition of this poor Man. The Case of Ned Prattin,
Salesman, and that of this unfortunate Perfumer, bear some Resemblance; and I
have but too much Reason to fear will both terminate in the wretched
Circumstances of Straw and a dark Room. Whether it be owing to the great
Quantities of Snuff he has taken, or to Pride of Heart from the Encouragement I
formerly gave him, it is certain that the latter has not for some Time been
right in his Mind. His unaccountable Usage of me when I went last into the
Country, was the first Sally of his Distemper, which is now broke out into
manifest Phrenzy. However unwilling I am to expose him in so public a Manner,
I must hereby warn all Persons whatsoever concerned about him not to trust a
Penknife in his Hands, nor any Instrument wherewith he may do himself or others
a Mischief; that his Maid do every Night take off his Garters, and remove them
far out of his Reach; that he be not permitted to drink out of a Glass, lest he
should eat it; nor to feed on Fish, (although it be Lent) lest he should
industriously choke himself with the Bones.

I would by no Means be misunderstood, as if what I here say were meant as any
Reflection on Mr. Buckley's Paper. Any Gentleman in his Way may insert such
Letters as come first to Hand, and I verily believe That I speak of to be
Charles's own Writing. Only I cannot help cautioning Mr. Buckley against
suffering his Correspondents to direct any of their Advices to the said Mr.
Lilly; for who knows but in his mad Fit he may set up a Daily Paper upon that
Foot, and, by giving it out in his Bills that he sells Three Thousand a Day,
come into as much Reputation as the Spectator himself? For my own Part, as I
observe some little Glimmering of a Genius in that Writer, I shall be very
willing to encourage him in his Studies. For the present, let him make Use of
the following Motto's, as he shall find Occasion, and I will hereafter take
Care that he shall want for nothing that is fit for him. Que tam seposita est,
quae Gens tam barbara, Caesar,
Ex qua Spectator non sit in Urbe tua?
Mart. Spectatorem potui fecisse Catonem.
Mart. Spectatum veniunt, veniunt Spectentur ut ipsi.
Ovid. Exanimat lentus Spectator, sedulus inflat.
Hor. Spectent Juvenes quos clamor and audax
Sponsio, quos culta decet assedisse Puellae.
Juv. Solus ego in Pallanta feror, soli mihi Pallas
Debetur, cuperem ipse Parens Spectator adesset.
Virg. -- Audite o mentibus aequis
Aeneadae, neve haec nostris Spectentur ab Annis,
Quae ferimus. --
Virg.

The TATLER. [No 27.
Multa Dirceum levat Aura Cygnum,
Tendit, Antoni, quoties in altos
Nubium tractus: Ego Apis Matinae
More Modoque
Grata carpentis Thyma per Laborem
Plurimum, circa Nemus, uvidique
Tiburis Ripas operosa parvus
Carmina Fingo.
Hor.
From Tuesd. March 20. to Thursd. March 22. 1710.
From Young Man's Coffee-house, March 21.
THE Humor of Duelling having lately very much obtained about Town, I have
taken more than ordinary Pains to put a Stop to it. To this End, I have been
obliged to appear frequently at most of the Gaming-houses, both the Theaters,
and at Punch's Opera. At the latter of these Entertainments, notwithstanding my
Presence, there happened one Evening some Advances toward a Quarrel, when
Punch, with great Resolution of Body, coming forwards upon the Stage, asked the
Gentlemen, If they were not ashamed to commit such Disorders before himself and
the Censor of Great Britain; For which Instance of Respect, I shall ever honor
and esteem that incomparable Player. At the Request of my good Friend Mrs. Man,
I sit here now and then for Two or Three Hours together to keep the Peace, and
shall continue to do so till the Officers are gone over; the Value of whose
Lives I understand much better than they do themselves, and therefore am
resolved to preserve them, though I should incur their Displeasure by doing it,
for the Service of their Queen and Country, and the common Interest of Europe.
Spending so much of my Time at this Place, I shall be obliged now and then to
date my Paper from hence, and my Correspondents may, if they please, for a Week
or Ten Days direct their Letters hither.

That which follows has lain in my Hands some Time, though, for the great
Candor and good Nature expressed in it, I ought to have taken Notice of it much
sooner.

New-College, Oxford, March 15. Dear Sir,
I Return you Thanks, in the Name of this University, for your Town Eclogue,
which we look upon to be a very extraordinary Piece of Ridicule. I am
commissioned to tell you at the same Time, that those who were your
Contemporaries knowing you to have a happy Talent in Poetry, it is expected you
should oblige the World oftener in that Way: You shall want no Assistance this
Place can afford. I am making a Collection of the best Verses that are stirring
for your Service. Mr. Y -- g tells me, he has left his Poem, entitled, The
Last Day, in your Hands, to make what Use of it you should think proper. There
is in that excellent Work a Nobleness of Thought, as well as Strength of
Expression, which I have not met with in any of our modern Writers. The same
Gentleman, I hear, designed a Tragedy for the Stage this Winter, which was
entirely approved by Five or Six of the best Judges in the Kingdom; but Mr.
Cibber happening to dissent from them, the Town was disappointed of that
Entertainment. You shall hear from me again very soon, and I hope then to give
you some further Assurance of my being

Your most humble Servant, T. L.


My best Way of answering this Letter, is to insert Part of the Poem mentioned
therein, more of which shall hereafter be published in this Paper.

WHile others sing the Fortune of the Great,
Empire and Arms, and all the Pomp of State,
With Britain's Hero set their Souls on Fire,
And grow Immortal as his Deeds inspire,
I draw a deeper Scene; a Scene that yields
A louder Trumpet, and more dreadful Fields;
The World alarmed, both Earth and Heaven overthrown,
And gasping Nature's last tremendous Groan;
Death's ancient Scepter broke, the teeming Tomb,
The Judge Triumphant, Man's eternal Doom.
The destined Labor great, nor small his Praise
Whom Force of Genius to the Theme shall raise.
I faint -- Yet, Mighty Queen, auspicious shine,
I Will boldly meditate a Flight not mine:
While You propitiate, we of naught despair,
Of from the Muse, or in the doubtful War;
All great Achievements from your Favo^ spring
Your Smile as well can raise the Poet as the King
But chiefly Thou Eternal and Supreme,
Whence ANNA's Self; whence the Sun's glorious Beam,
Exalt my Voice! If Angels strike the Lyre
To Thy Great Name, Oh! all my Soul inspire^
If at Thy Nod, from darksome Womb of Night^
Sprang Beauty, and you Sparkling Worlds of Light^
Vouchsafe me Numbers sweet, sublime, and strong^
Thy Greatness, Goodness, Wisdom, fill my Daring Song.
Man bear thy Brow aloft, mark every Grace
In God's Great Daughter, beauteous Nature's Face;
View Spring's gay Bloom, and golden Autumn's Store,
See Earth's Array, and hear dread Ocean roar.
Leviathan but heaves his cumbrous Mail,
It makes a Tide, and Wind-bound Navies sail.
Here Forests crown tall Mountains awful Pride,
Here Rivers measure Climes, and Worlds divide;
There Valleys frought with Gold's resplendent Seeds,
Hold Kings and Kingdoms Fortunes in their Beds.
On Eminence sublime their Towers ascend,
And cast their Shadows into distant Land.
^ere Ships oppress the Sea, and toil the Wind,
^here the shook Center owns the Battle joined.
^iew Cities, Armies, Fleets, of Fleets the Pride,
^e Europe's Law in Albion's Channels ride:
Mark all below that is Glorious, Great, and Good;
Mark Britain, and the World is understood.
Then shall the Heavens your Admiration claim,
Her Midnight Splendors, Her Meridian Flame;
Learn how each Planet constant to its Sphere,
Calls forth the Seasons, and controuls the Year;
So bright, with such a Wealth of Glory stored,
So like in Luster Nature's Sovereign Lord,
'Twere Sin in Heathens not to have adored.
They shine through Time, and with unaltered Ray
See This grand Period rise, and That decay^
Those Lights that cheered unforfeit Ed^'s Bowers,
Now gild the proud Augusta's rising Towers;
How Great, how Firm, how Sacred all appears,
How worthy an immortal Round of Years!
Yet all must drop as Autumn's sickliest Grain,
Earth, Air, and Firmament be sought in vain,
The Tract forgot where Constellations shone,
Or where Great Stuarts blessed an Earthly Throne,
Time shall be slain; Days, Months, Years, all swept by,
All drown in fathomless Eternity,
And Heaven and Hell alone the mighty Void supply.
The Old World's Prophecies aloud proclaim,
And Sacred Authors seal the Heaven-born Fame,
Sooner or later, in some future Date,
Fixed, but locked up in the dark Book of Fat^
When Scenes are changed on this revolvi^ Ear^
And ancient Falling give new Empires Birth;
When other Bourbons rule in other Lands,
And (if Man's Sin forbids not) other ANNE^
When Crowns perhaps shall gild a Sulta^ Frow^
And Turbant's nod on European Throne,
While Arts and Arms move on, and Pride a^ Gai^
And Lust bind Mortals in their ancient Chain^
While the still busy World is treading over
The Paths they trod Five thousand Years before
Thoughtless as those who now Life's Man ru^
Of Earth dissolved, or an extinguished Sun;
Thick Globes of Darkness shall arise on Day,
In sudden Hell all Earth's Dominions lay;
Deep Night invade the Circle of the Sun,
And bloody Horrors blot the Silver Moon;
From inmost Heaven continued Thunder roll,
Whilst the strong Echo bounds from Pole to Pole^
Then a vast Trump (one Half in Cloud concealed,
One Half to Man's astonished Race revealed)
Shall pour a dreadful Note: The piercing Call
Shall rattle in the Center of the Ball;
Earth's deepest Bowels glow with darting Pain,
And her huge Body throb through every Vein,
The solid Mass with fierce Convulsions shake,
The Living die with Horror, Dead awake.
Oh powerful Blast! to which no equal Sound
Did ever the tortured Ear of Nature wound;
Though Rival Clarions have been strained on high,
And kindled Wars immortal through the Sky;
Though Gods whole Engin'ry discharged, and all
The Rebel Angels bellowed at their Fall.
The TATLER. [No 28.
Morte carent Animae; semperque priore relicta
^ede, novis Domibus vivunt habitantque receptae.
^pse ego (nam memini) Trojani Tempore Belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram --
Ovid. Met.
From Thursd. Mar. 22. to Saturd. Mar. 24. 1710.
From my own Apartment, March 22.
MY other Correspondents will excuse me, if I give the Precedence to a Lady,
whose Letter, amongst many more, is just come to Hand.

Dear Isaac,
I Burn with Impatience to know what and who you are. The Curiosity of my whole
Sex is fallen upon me, and has kept me waking these Three Nights. I have
dreamed often of you within this Fortnight, and every Time you appeared in a
different Form. As you value my Repose, tell me in which of them I am to be

Your Admirer, SYLVIA


It is natural for a Man who receives a Favor of this Kind from an unknown
Fair, to frame immediately some Idea of her Person which being suited to the
Opinion we have of our own Merit, is commonly as beautiful and perfect as the
most lavish Imagination can furnish out. Strongly possessed with these Notions,
I have read over Sylvia's Billet; and notwithstanding the Reserve I have had
upon this Matter, am resolved to go a much greater Length than I yet ever did
in making my self known to the World, and in particular to my charming
Correspondent. In order to it I must premise, That the Person produced as mine
in the Playhouse last Winter did in no wise appertain to me. It was such a one
however as agreed well with the Impression my Writings had made, and served the
Purpose I intended it for; which was to continue the Awe and Reverence due to
the Character I was vested with, and at the same Time to let my Enemies see how
much I was the Delight and Favorite of this Town. This innocent Imposture,
which I have all along taken Care to carry on as it then was of some Use, has
since been of singular Service to me, and by being mentioned in one of my
Papers, effectually recovered my Egoiety out of the Hands of some Gentlemen who
endeavored to wrest it from me. This is saying, in short, what I am not: What
I am, and have been for many Years, is next to be explained. Here it will not
be improper to remind Sylvia, that there was formerly such a ^losopher as
Pythagoras, who, amongst other ^ctrines, taught the Transmigration of Souls,
^ich, if she sincerely believes, she will not (...) much startled at the
following Relation:

I will not trouble her, nor my other Rea^rs, with the Particulars of all the
Lives I ^ve successively passed through since my first ^trance into mortal
Being, which is now man Centuries ago. It is enough that I have in ^ery one of
them opposed my self with the ut^st Resolution to the Follies and Vices of the
^veral Ages I have been acquainted with, that ^ave often rallied the World into
good Man^s, and kept the greatest Princes in Awe of ^y Satyr. There is one
Circumstance which I ^all not omit, though it may seem to reflect on ^y
Character, I mean that infinite Love of ^hange which has ever appeared in the
Dispo^d of my Existence. Since the Days of the ^mperor Trajan I have not been
confined to the ^me Person for Twenty Years together; but ^ve passed from one
Abode to another much ^icker than the Pythagorean System generally ^lows. By
this Means I have seldom had a ^dy to my self, but have lodged up and down
^herever I found a Genius suitable to my own. (...) this Manner I continued,
some Time with ^e Top Wit of France, at another with That of ^aly, who had a
Statue erected to his Memory (...) Rome. Toward the End of the 17th Cen^ry I
set out for England; but the Gentleman ^ came over in dying as soon as he got
to ^ore, I was obliged to look out again for a ^ew Habitation. It was not long
before I met ^ith one to my Mind, for having mixed my self ^visibly with the
Literati of this Kingdom, I ^und it was unanimously agreed amongst ^em, That no
Body was endowed with greater ^alents than Hiere^s; or, consequently, would be
better pleased with my Company. I slip^ down his Throat one Night as he was fa^
asleep, and the next Morning, as soon as (...) awaked, he fell to writing a
Treatise that w^ received with great Applause, though he had t^ Modesty not to
set his Name to that nor to an^ other of our Productions. Some Time aft^ he
published a Paper of Predictions, which were translated into several Languages,
an^ alarmed some of the greatest Princes in Europ^ To these he prefixed the
Name of Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire which I have been extremely fon^ of ever since,
and have taken Care that mo^ of the Writings I have been concerned (...) should
be distinguished by it; though I mu^ observe, that there have been many
Counte^feits imposed upon the Public by this Mean^ This extraordinary Man
being called out of t^ Kingdom by Affairs of his own, I resolve^ however to
continue somewhat longer in ^ Country where my Works had been so we^ received,
and accordingly bestowed my se^ with Hilario. His natural Wit, his lively Tu^
of Humor, and great Penetration into h^mane Nature, easily determined me to
the Choice, the Effects of which were soon afte^ produced in this Paper,
called, The Tatler. ^ know not how it happened, but in less tha^ Two Years Time
Hilario grew weary of m^ Company, and gave me Warning to be gon^ In the Height
of my Resentment I cast m^ Eyes on a young Fellow, of no extraordina^
Qualifications, whom for that very Reason^ had the more Pride in taking under
my D^rection, and enabling him by some Means (...) other to carry on the Work I
was before e^gaged in. Lest he should grow too vain upon this Encouragement, I
to this Day keep hi^ under due Mortification. I seldom reside wi^ ^m when any
of his Friends are at Leisure to ^ceive me, by whose Hands however he is du^
supplied. As I have passed through many ^cenes of Life, and a long Series of
Years, I ^oose to be considered in the Character of an ^d Fellow, and take Care
that those under my ^fluence should speak consonantly to it. This ^ccount, I
presume, will give no small Conso^tion to Sylvia, who may rest assured, That
^aac Bickerstaff is to be seen in more Forms ^an she dreamed of; out of which
Variety she ^ay choose what is most agreeable to her Fan^y. On Tuesdays, he is
sometimes a black pro^er young Gentleman, with a Mole on his left Cheek. On
Thursdays, a decent well looking Man, of a middle Stature, long flaxen Hair,
and a florid Complexion. On Saturdays, he is somewhat of the shortest, and may
be known from others of that Size by Talking in a low Voice, and passing
through the Streets without much Precipitation.

The TATLER. [No 2^
Quas dederis solas semper habebis Opes.
Mart
From Saturd. Mar. 24. to Tuesd. Mar. 27. 171^
From my own Apartment, March 26.
TO be sensibly touched with the Distres^ and Misfortunes of other Men, is such
^ Weakness, if it be one, as I would not pa^ with to be Author of all the
Refinements the Mr. Rochefaucaut has made upon it. Instead (...) stifling this
tender Disposition of the Mind, ^ have ever cherished it in my self, and cann^
forgive the Want of it in any one else. Ph^sicians and others, whose constant
Business li^ amongst the Infirmities or Disasters of huma^ Nature, seem to have
the best Plea for the Deficiency in this Point; a long Course (...) Practice in
that Way naturally wearing out (...) Impressions that at first arise from it.
Hipp^crates however, as he is the greatest Man (...) his Profession, excels no
less in Humanity, a^ an insuperable Compassion for the Pains a^ Misery of his
Patients. This I admire him f^ as well as for many other good Qualities. E^pir^
who has little Employment, and l^ Understanding, gives himself an Air of Negl^
and Disrega^d for the severest Tortures tha^ D^temper and his own Mismanagement
o^ ^an inflict. He speaks of a Man in his last ^oments, as of one that was
going to take the ^r in Hide-Park, and talks over the Convul^ons of a fine
Woman with more Indifference ^an he would mention her last Appearance in ^e
Boxes; for which, and being an Atheist, ^e expects the Applause of the Company.
This Affectation of Inhumanity is no less shocking when applied to other
Circumstances of Life; and yet I am well satisfied, that some Persons are at
more Pains to make themselves Masters of it, than others to arrive at the
highest Pitch of Virtue, Generosity, and good Nature. It were otherwise
impossible that an easy Fortune, a happy Constitution, and in short all the
Advantages of Life, should strip Men of those Qualities, which, at the same
Time that they were highly beneficial to the rest of Mankind, would reflect the
truest Honor; and the most exalted Satisfaction on themselves. Amongst the
many Refinements upon Pleasure which this polite Age has produced, it is a
Wonder to me that so few have hit upon that of Relieving the Poor. This may
sound very harsh in the Ears of a fine Gentleman, but most certain it is, that
the least Reflection would furnish him with the same Observation. Were it
possible for such a one to enter into all the disinai Circumstances of Want,
Poverty and D^ress, and to consider how far it may be in his Power to remove
them, he would be content perhaps to part with some of his present Enjoyments,
or rather, to ^xchange them for those of a more exquisite Nature.

The immediate Occasion of my speaking on this Subject, is a Family that I
happened upon in my Walks about Two Days (...) Pa^g through an Alley in the
City, I (...) the ^ry of some little Children, which was so v^ y loud and
importunate, that I could not forb^ looking in at the House where it was. (...)
biggest of them immediately running to (...) Door, fell upon her Knees, and
entreated (...) God's Sake that I would give her something (...) keep her
Mother from Starving: Upon whi^ I stepped in, and found, that this poor Wom^ was
the Parent of Seven Children, who (...) stood about her, and as many of them as
w^ capable of any Impression, seemed more sol^citous for her Relief than their
own; though ev^ry one of them appeared faint with Hung^ and ready to drop upon
the Spot. The Fath^ it seems, was very lately dead, and the Expe^ces of his
Sickness and Funeral had stripped the^ poor Creatures of the few Necessaries he
h^ left behind him. I have since recommend^ their Case to a Lady of Quality,
whose extr^ordinary Goodness makes her esteem an Offi^ of that Kind the
greatest Obligation that c^ be laid upon her. Distresses of the same So^ are
more frequent than is generally believe^ In order to redress which, I must
first of a^ apply my self to the Fair Sex, and beg the^ for that Purpose, to
retrench many of their u^necessary Expenses, which I shall otherwise (...)
obliged to expose in a very public Manner.

So bright an Example will not fail to infl^ence the rest of the World, and
when the great Work is in any Measure effected, the Thanks of many Thousands
shall be solemnl^ returned them by the Hands of Isaac Bicke^staff Esquire

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
SIR,
THE Fame of your Writings, the Gra^deur of your Office, and the never-fai^ing
Delight your incomparable Essays give me, have with much Pleasure brought me to
Town. It was so much my Ambition to see the Great Bickerstaff, that the
Diversions of the Country, and a cheerful Fireside, had not Charms enough to
keep me at Home. Soon after my Arrival, the Tailor, Sempstress, and
Periwig-maker, equipped me for my intended Visit. In Channel Row I enquired for
the Censor of Great Britain -- The good People thought I banter'd them, and at
best gave me but an uncertain Account. I then went to White's and Will's, where
my Information was no Way satisfactory. -- But at length, after I had spent
several Evenings at the Grecian in the Room on the Left Hand, I verily thought
I had found the Censor. There was a grave elderly Gentleman, who, I observed,
was exact to his Time of entering the Room, and who with great Formality put off
his Cloak, and hung it up, with his Sword and Hat, filled his Pipe, stirred the
Fire, and called for the last Mail. These were the Appearances that had seduced
me into some Hopes that this Person was the Gentleman I had been in search
after; but to my greater Surprise. I soon found him to be a perfect Stranger to
you Lucubrations, and your Art and Power of Silence; for his Blood he could not
hold his Tongue -- He continued his Chat even in Despite of your Chair; so I
left him. As I went by the Ba^, I asked who this honest Gentleman was, and they
told me, Sir Thomas Lalos -- Being now fully satisfied by your last Tatler,
that Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire is no where to be found but in his Weekly Papers, my
Curiosity is at an End, and I have taken a Place in the next Day's Coach, but
with this Comfort, that my Journey might be of some Use to the Wo^ if you will
please once again to expose this tal^tive Evil, which will particularly oblige,

SIR, Your humble Servant, F. ^


Whereas Polycrates, Tyrant of Samos, di^lately throw a Ring of considerable
Value into the Sea at Mr. Thurmond's Masquerade, and where^ several Mackarels,
Old Wives, Maids, Thor^backs, Sharks, and Dabs, were seen nibbling about the
said Ring; These are to give Notice to all Fishmongers, that if any such Ring
should come to their Hands, they are desired to stop it, and upon returning it
to his Samian Majesty, they shall be rewarded as formerly.

N. B. In regard to the natural Taciturnity of the said Fish, if any of them
shall think fit to restore the said Ring themselves, no Question shall be asked.

The TATLER. [No 30.
-- Quis tam, Lucili Fautor, inepte
Ut non hoc fateatur? At idem, quod Sale multo
Urbem defricuit, Charta laudatur eadem.
Hor.
From Tuesd. Mar. 27. to Thursd. Mar. 29. 1710.
From my own Apartment, March 28.
IT is certainly very unreasonable that a Man, because he has some Wit, should
set up for having more than all the rest of the World. Besides the Folly of
such a Presumption, there is an Inconvenience which naturally attends it: When
one Man seems to grow into a great Estate in Fame from Nothing, other People
are apt to enquire into his Title. The discerning Part of Mankind will be
allowed upon such an Occasion to take from him what is not his Due without the
Imputation of Detraction. Let Hilario be pleasant, and let some of his Friends
have Wit; But does it naturally follow from thence that he is a Philosopher?
And that it is the Effect of Envy not to allow him all those Excellencies he
and they think he has?

Envy is a Vice of such a detestable and pernicious Nature, that I would have
it not only rooted out of our Breasts in Speculation, b^ (which would be much
more for the real Goo^ of Society) I could wish, that our Behaviou^ one toward
another might be actually and entirely freed from those Ma^ks of it which a^
every Day too visible. For my self, I can safely say I am contented with that
Condition Providence has placed me in: My own little Fortune is sufficient for
my Necessities, my Friend^ are as many as supply all my Conversations^ and that
small Portion of Fame I have got, will give me as much Distinction in my
Life-time^ and as much Reputation with Posterity, as I desire. For this Reason
I was never an Enemy to any Man's growing into the good Opinion of the World. I
could with all the Indifference of an Idle Spectator sit still, and see my own
old Wit every Day put to new Uses by other People. One dumb Man retails my
judicial Astrology in Drury Lane; and another of the same Sort, who owns he
lives somewhere or other, new vamps my cast Lucubrations, and cries my old
Morals about the Street every Day in the Week. This is what some People may
think a pretty fai^ Way of turning the Penny; let it be so, I allow it them.
But when honest Dumb forgets his Name and his Nature so far as to set up for a
Dictator, when he assumes the Magistrate, and prescribes Laws so Manners; in
short, wh n he arrogates to himself the Authority of Censor of Great Britain, I
think it Time to assert my self, and put a Stop to Encroachments of such a
Nature. For this Reason I think fit to admonish that Pe son, whoever he may be,
not to interfere with my Jurisdiction, unless he can prove himself to be me, an
Enterprise of so vain and ridiculous a Nature, that I hope I need not go about
to convince my Readers of the Folly it would be to attempt it. From my first
Considerations upon Envy, I am naturally led to reflect upon some little ill
Offices which have been lately done me. My Maid, who takes the Privilege of an
old Servant to talk to me in an Evening while she is warming my Cap, setting my
Slippers, and turning down my Bed; as she was in her usual Employment last
Night, I believe, Sir, (said she) I should make your Worship laugh if I should
tell you a comical Thing that happened to me the other Day. As our Neighbor's
Maid and I were standing at the Door together last Sunday in the Afternoon,
there comes by a young Woman; I thought to my self I should know her -- So she
comes up to me -- Laud! says I, Mrs. Ann! I profess I did not know you -- And
who should this be but the Widow Gentlewoman's Daughter that lived at the next
Door to where we lived before -- How do you do Mrs. Mary? says she. Very well,
says I, Mrs. Ann, How do you? And how does your Master do, says she -- Very
well, says! -- Laud! says she, we heard at our End of the Town how an as if he
should have given over his Business -- Laud! says I to her again, Who should
tell you so? Nay, says she, 'twas one told me so; whereupon thought I to my
self, says she, if it be so, and if Mr. Bickerstaff should leave off his
Business, and go into the Country, why, perhaps, Mrs. Mary may be to seek for a
Place; and so truly I was resolved to come and see whether 'twere so or no --
Thank you for your Love, said I, Mrs. Ann, my Master is a good Master to me,
and I don't think of parting with him yet -- Well, says she, as brisk as could
be up again to me, if your Master be a good Master, a better will do you no
Harm: You Would find another guess Sort of a Man if you were to live with our
Gentleman -- Pray, says I, and who is your Gentleman? Laud! says she, how
strange you make it! As if you did not know our Gentleman that lodges at my
Mother's -- Well but, says I, has your Gentleman no Name? No matter for that,
says she, that argues neither here nor there; but if you have a Mind to have
your Wages raised, I can tell you something more of the Matter -- Ay, thought I
to my self, is that your Business! so, Sir, I was resolved to take no Notice --
So (says the to me) but Mrs. Mary, What makes you like to live so with an old
Man? I am sure, if your Place had been so good a Place as you talk of, Mr.
Lilly would have hardly come away from your Master -- Mr. Lilly, said I! Laud
help your Head, as if my Master could not do without Mr. Lilly; Mr. Lilly is
no Rule for me, my Master was but too kind to him; and if I had a Mind to have
served Mr. Lilly a dirty Trick -- My Master knows him well enough, and if he
had not gone away as he did, my Master had turned him away the Thursday after
-- Nay Mrs. Mary, says she, if you are in a Passion, (and indeed I was as red
as the Fire) good Night to you. Good Night to you, says I, and clapped the Door
after me.

Though I was tired with the Wench's Story, I could not help being pleased with
this uncommon Mark of her Fidelity: And at the same Time it was with some
Indignation that I reflected upon the little mean Arts that were made Use of to
entice away my Servant. I could hardly have believed another Instance of be
same Nature, if I had not been assured by ^e whole Neighborhood, that they had
ob^rved Two famous known Dogstealers watch^g about my Door for several Days
together. from all these Things put together, I cannot but ^magine, that the
Person who has a Mind to ^ome into my Place before I am willing to go ^ut of
it, thinks he cannot absolutely qualify himself for it unless he robs me of my
Domestics. To endeavor at being witty and moral is a laudable Design, and the
better Part of the World will always approve and encourage it: But if a Man
cannot be witty without Mr. Lilly, nor moral without stealing my Dog, I believe
he had better be contented with a common Portion of Fame, and submit to be
thought neither wiser nor better than his Neighbors.

The TATLER. [No 31.
-- Secernite Sacra Profanis.
Hor.
From Thursd. Mar. 29. to Saturd. Mar. 31. 1711.
From my own Apartment, March 30.
IT is in my Opinion no small Reflection on the Theatrical Entertainments of
this Town, that the intermission of them should be looked upon as a Kind of
negative Preparation to Duties of the last Importance. This amounts to a tacit
Acknowledgment that they are, in general, calculated for our Diversion, without
Regard to our Improvement; that they amuse only and unbend the Minds of an
Audience, instead of filling them with great and noble Idea's; and serve rather
to sink the Dignity of humane Nature, than to raise in us any just Sentiments
about it. Were it otherwise, the Stage would have good Reason to remonstrate
against so peculiar a Mark of Infamy, as that of being denied to the World at
the Approach of any Religious Solemnity, and forced by that Means to confess an
irreconcilable Enmity between the Pleasures of the one, and the Obligations of
the other. Notwithstanding all this, I confess, for my own Part, that I receive
many Advantages from going to the Playhouse sometimes. There is, besides the
Play it self, something in the Circumstances of such an Assembly, that gives me
a new Turn of Thinking, and furnishes me with Observations out of the common
Road. I have a Pleasure more than I ever observed in any one else on that
Occasion, in seeing so great a Variety of Faces, as well beautiful as others,
and in tracing their several Tempers, Humors and Opinions in their Looks, Air
and Behavior. To sit Three Hours in a Crowd, is in my Opinion a severe Trial
of a Man's Understanding, and from his Deportment there I can generally form a
Judgment on his whole Life and Conversation. Amongst others, I have ever
avoided making an Acquaintance with any Person of either Sex who talked loud,
or labored by any Means to be distinguished from the rest of the Audience. My
Friend Sam Trusty exceeds me in Penetration. He and I commonly sit together,
and between the Acts entertain our selves with reading over as many People as
lie within our Kens. He enters not only into their Dispositions, but the
minutest Circumstances of their Fortunes, can cast up their Monthly Accounts,
knows how their Rooms are furnished, what they eat and drink; and in short, is
at first Sight of their Persons let into the Secrets of their respective
Families. In taking a Survey of the Front Boxes, we are from thence furnished
with many serious Speculations, whilst the more youthful Part of the Company
are entertaining themselves on the same Subject after a very different Manner.
We examine coolly and without Danger the Symmetry and Proportion of a fine
Face; and from the Bloom of a Complexion, are led perhaps into Reflections upon
Light and Colors. We were engaged in a Conversation of this Sort some Evenings
ago at the Opera, when Sam Trusty breaking abruptly, "Well, Isaac, (said he) I
could find in my Heart to weep, as Xerxes did, over this Multitude of Mortals:
You and I remember when the House in Dorset-Garden was thronged with Women as
beautiful as those we now behold here. I remember when Clarissa leaned upon her
Hand, and looked with the same Indifference on her Train of Admirers as
Bellaria does at this Instant. Where, Isaac, where is now that desirable
Person, those Eyes, that Neck? Carry but your Imagination to the Vault where
she lies, and from thence instruct those lovely Creatures before you, how much
of their Beauty will be transmitted to the next Generation.'

The following Letter, which is just come to Hand, diverts me at present from
further pursuing the Intention of this Paper. The Writer of it may, perhaps,
please himself with his Raillery. I do assure him, it has given me no other
Uneasiness than what I have from a Sense and Commiseration of his Folly; and to
show I am in perfect Charity with him, shall make immediate Use of his Present.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
I Am, pious Isaac, in Spite of your canting Lucubrations, a Free-Thinker; and
shall continue to be so to the End of the Chapter. However, since it is expected
from you this good Time to entertain your Friends with some Holiday Cheer, I
have sent you the enclosed Verses, which I have transcribed from Milton. If you
don't like 'em, I will make Rhymes to 'em, slice 'em into Parcels, and present
'em against Christmas to the Bellman of our Ward. I am neither

Your Friend, Admirer, Nor humble Servant.

' Thee Father first they sung Omnipotent,
' Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
' Eternal King; Thee Author of all Being,
' Fountain of Light, Thy self invisible
' Amidst the glorious Brightness where Thou sit'st
' Throned inaccessible, but when Thou shad'st
' The full Blaze of Thy Beams, and through a Cloud
' Drawn round about Thee like a radiant Shrine,
' Dark with excessive Bright Thy Skirts appear,
' Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim Eyes.
' Approach not, but with both Wings veil their
' Thee next they sang of all Creation first,
' Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
' In whose conspicuous Countenance, without Cloud
' Made visible, the Almighty Father shines,
' Whom else no Creature can behold; on Thee
' Impressed the Effulgence of his Glory abides,
' Transfused on Thee his ample Spirit rests.
' He Heaven of Heavens and all the Powers therein
' By Thee created, and by Thee thrown down
' The aspiring Dominations: Thou that Day
' Thy Father's dreadful Thunder did not spare,
' Nor stop Thy flaming Chariot Wheels, that shook
' Heavens everlasting Frame, while over the Necks
' Thou drov'st of warring Angels disarray'd.
' Back from Pursuit Thy Powers with loud (...)
' Thee only extolled, Son of Thy Father's (...)
' To execute fierce Vengeance on His Foes,
' Not so on Man: Him through their Malice fall'^
' Father of Mercy and Grace, Thou did (...) doo^
' So strictly, but much more to Pity incline.
' No sooner did Thy dear and only Son
' Perceive Thee purposed not to doom frail M^
' So strictly, but much more to Pity enc^'d,
' He, to appease Thy Wrath, and (...) the (...)
' Of Mercy and Justice in Thy face discerned
' Regardless of the Bliss wherein he fate
' Second to Thee, offered himself to die
' For Man's Offense. O unexampled Love,
' Love no where to be found less than Divine!
' Hail Son of God, Savior of Men, thy Name
' Shall be the copious Matter of my Song
' Henceforth, and never shall my Harp thy Praise
' Forget, not from thy Father's Praise disjoin.


The TATLER. [No 32.
Ubi Temperies, and C^li mobilis Humor
Mutavera Via^ --
Vertuntur Species Animorum.
Virg.
From Saturd. Mar. 31. to Tuesday April 3. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 2.
I Cannot better show the Concern I have for the Belles Letters, than in making
such a Provision for those who are turned that Way as may best conduce to their
Proficiency in it. The different Seasons of the Year are proper for different
Sorts of Performances, which I don't remember any of my Fellow Laborers in
Astrology to have observed in their Yearly Almanacks. This indeed is a very
gross Omission; and I question not, if Mr. Partridge were alive, but he would
readily embrace the Hint, and hereafter improve upon it. Suppose, for Instance,
in a Work of this Kind one were to write Observations on April. This Month sow
Hemp and Flax, pole Hops, set and sow all Kind of Garden Herbs; restore the
Liberty of the laborious Be by opening her Hive, bark Trees for Tanners, and
let good Hous^ives mind their Gardens, and begin to think of their Dairies.

In Gard'ning never this Rule forget,
For to sow dry, and to set wet.


Subjoining afterward: This Month also lay the Plots of Plays, and design the
Models of Heroic Poems. Set and sow the Seeds of all Kind of Poetry, restore
the Liberty of the laborious Muse by opening her Commonplace Book. Cut out
Work for the Booksellers. Let extravagant Poets look before them, and begin to
think of Bargaining for their Copies. Their Interest they does rightly measure,
That writes for Profit more than Pleasure.


What follows from my Brother Rider is very good. The Use of Physic becomes
now seasonable, and also Purging and Phlebotomy. Abstain from Venery; many
Diseases will be taken thereby, to the undoing of many. In Cases of Extremity,
pray to God for a Remedy. Hei mihi quod nullis Amor est medicabilis Herbis!


And I think the Regimen would have been perfectly adapted to Writers of
Poetry, if he had added that ancient Aphorism, In Poetry never this Rule forget,
To rise dry and set wet.


I shall not pursue this Thought through all the Months in this Paper but
reserve that to my next Almanac. A present it will not be amiss to range the
several Speci^ of polite Writers under their proper Quarters of the Year.

Those concerned in Pastorals I have elsewhere considered. To proceed
therefore: As soon as the glorious Planet Sol peeps through the Horns of the
Celestial Ram, Matrimony then coming in Season, I would advise the lesser Sort
of Poets to get their Epithalamiums ready. The Diversions of New Market
likewise approaching, let those who can write neither Verse nor Rhyme scrub up
their Rindaricks. The Haberdashers of Songs and Sonnets will do well to
frequent Lambeth, Islington, and Richmond-Wells, and be prepared to celebrate
any Phillis that should have the good or ill Fortune to be over-turned in the
Park on a Sunday Night. Being informed that the Town is disappointed of an
excellent Comedy by an ingenious Trader's employing his Stock another Way, I
believe I may put the Success of the rest of the Comic Writers into Easter
Term without crowding them.

For the Summer Quarter, any one who has unfashionable Wares lying dead upon
his Hands, as tawdry Panegyricks, or faded Satyrs, which neither please the
present, nor hurt the past Ministry, is advised to seek out some Plantation or
Colony of civil Indians, where perhaps they may barter them for Ale, Rum, and
Tobacco; and if they should fail there, to proceed on a trading Voyage to the
Bath, where, by altering the Names, without changing the Substance, their Goods
will become Lampoons, and undergo a Fate reverse to that of Asa Foetida, which
sets out a Perfume from Surat, and arrives a Stink at London. In one Place it
is eat for Sauce, and in the other cures Hysteric Fits. For my self, and
others who study in a great Measure for the A^ment of Mankind, (...) Veniam
peti^sque Da^sque (...),
to be a little negligent at this Time; for (...) would be Impudence to pretend
to put the in good Humor that are left in Town, an^ we must be downright
stupid to put the out of Humor who are rioting in Peach^ Figs, and Melons in
the Country, and who, (...) prognosticate, will every Day be revived wi^ some
good News or other from Abroad.

In September the Streets ring with Oyste^ and Elegies. Some old Men will
certainly (...) and some young Men may perhaps cease (...) live. In either Case
the Heir will succeed (...) the Estate at Quarter-Day, which is worth the
Poet's Consideration. Since by the Inclemency of our Climate, the British
Vintage usually succeeds this Month, the Dithyrambick Poets may not improperly
celebrate the Manufacture of that Juice, which, as Mr. Dryden has it, makes the
Britons bold, and congratulate the Return of Patriots to their Cares and
Watchings for the good of their Country.

As I was meditating in this Way, I fell into a Sort of Enthusiasm: I seemed to
behold a Chariot, that had painted upon the Doors of it a Snake with the Tail
in its Mouth, which being the Hieroglyphick of the Year, as well as the Ensign
of the Divinity of Physic, I was at a Loss what to make of it. Till observing
it was corteged by broken Printers and Apothecaries, I enquired who the Person
was I saw fitting in the Chariot, and what he could be writing. I was answered,
That it was the Genius of Heroic Poetry, a ^r of the First Magnitude in that
Science, ^ich generally rose toward the Winter Sol^ice. I went up to him,
methoughts, and said, O thou Antimonarchical Praiser of Princes and Heroes!
Shall their Glories never be suffered to pass uncommended by thee? When will thou learn how unequal to this Task even the best are in the most abstracted
Retirement? The Jolts and Rumblings of thy Chariot must needs affect any
Verses, and make them unfit to express the Smoothness and Steadiness of this
Hero's Conduct and Successes.

I recovered this Delirium as the Bell-man went about with an annual Sort of
Poetry, which I had like to have forgot, though I have for many Years with Joy
observed it to be a Forerunner of Mince-Pies and Plum-Porridge.

The TATLER. [No 33
Tam venerabile erat Praecedere. --
Juv.
From Tuesday April 3. to Thursday April 5. 1711
From my own Apartment, April 4.
THE Desire of Superiority is very natural or at least, through the Weakness of
humane Nature, has universally obtained in the World. This Disposition, in
Persons of a public Capacity, produces it self in an Affectation of Tyranny
and arbitrary Power. In private Conversation the Effects of it are equally
disagreeable, though less extensive, and serve to give one a Taste of Slavery in
Cases of a higher Concern. A Man who has taken this Ambition in his Head, sets
up for a Kind of Dictator amongst his nearest Acquaintance, and will suffer
them to give into no other Sentiments or Inclinations than what are entirely
consonant with his own.

It is worth observing, that every Set of Company does naturally, and without
designing it, fall into a Form of Monarchical Government, and pay such a
Deference to one amongst them as se ves to keep the rest in good Order. The
Abuse of this Power is indeed very frequent, but without some such Regulation
many great Inconveniences would follow. The Diversions ^f the Evening would be
often at a Stand for Want of a proper Leader: Weighty Disputes ^ould have no
End, or perhaps a very bad one, ^f there were no decisive Judge to determine
them. In a Word, a President would be mis^ng on the most important Occasions:
And in ^ome Years the laudable Practice of Toasting would be forgotten, or very
aukwardly carried on. The Business of Precedence is of so great Consequence,
that the Ladies themselves have not thought it unworthy of their Consideration.
Many of them, I dare say, have kept themselves waking for the Peace of Society
on this Subject. At Balls, Assemblies, and in Visits, what Confusion would
unavoidably arise if this Point were not maturely and properly adjusted? Every
Body knows the famous Case of Lady Formal, how she whirled out of the Room in a
Passion, went Home and burned a ^ew laced Head, not to say any Thing of the
Correction she bestowed on her Domestics, as ^er Husband, her Woman, and her
Lap-dog, ^or no other Reason, but because Lady Betty ^rt was placed in a Chair
above her.

It is with great Satisfaction I consider the ^ains that are taken to settle
the same Point in ^ll Orders of Men amongst us, from those who wear
Shoulder-Knots, to the Masters who im^ose that Distinction of Servitude and
Depen^ance. I am credibly informed, that the Foot^en about this Town are very
exact in Matters ^f Punctilio, that the Generality of them have ^r this Purpose
made a good Proficiency in ^eraldry, and can perfectly blazon the several Coats
of Arms they belong to. Tippling Jack ^as never known to commit an Indecorum in
^ Cellar, or at the Door of a Chocolate-house. (...) former of which he always
drinks first (...) the Person next himself in Dignity, and at the other, never
offered, in the most rai^ Night, to take a Coach or Chair from his Be^ters.
Idle Tom was not without great Difficu^ty prevailed on to appear for Speaker in
the (...) Mock Parliament against roaring George, Cand^date for the same, and
having lost it by a (...) Majority, behaved himself with the utmo^ Decency
under that Misfortune. In the Pai^ed Chamber Things are carried yet high^ The
common Disorders of Gaming are effect^ally provided against, and no Quarrel
suffer^ to come to any Height without the Approb^tion of the first Lacquey of
Quality that presid^ at the long Table. The Use of Swearing i^ i^deed
promiscuously allowed there, which ^ know not how to account for. I am my s^ an
Eye and Ear Witness of the proper Disti^ction which is observed amongst such as
(...) their several Sorts of Merchandise about (...) Streets of this City. The
ancient Woman w^ repeats Brickdust Nine and twenty Times in ^ Breath,
constantly gives the Wall to anoth^ that in a Musical Voice recommends Jerusal^
Artichokes. The Fellow that fings Perfumes a^ Washballs, keeps a due Distance
from the T^ders in Oranges and Lemons; and the Haw^ers of Daily Courants and
Spectators pull (...) their Hats, or drop a Courtesy, to those co^cerned in the
Tatlers.

I remember two facetious Gentlemen of (...) Acquaintance, who had employed
their Tale^ in different Kinds of Writing, were engaged (...) be of a Party:
The one, as a Writer of Co^dy, declined the upper End of the Table; a^ the
other, having been very successful in T^gedy, was adjudged to have a Right to
(...) This Determination was thought highly eq^table, and has ever since been
carefully comp^ed with. Whether it be taken from this H^ (...) some other, the
Players themselves, I under^nd, have thought it advisable to proceed af^r much
the same Manner. A Hero, by the ^les of the House, goes out of a Room before ^
fine Gentleman; as Alexander the Great ^ight reasonably be supposed to take
Place of ^r Harry Wildair, or Julius Caesar of Dorimant. ^ose who have acted in
a double Capacity, ^ink two Glasses in a Hand, or help them^lves twice to
whatever Dish they like best. A ^eoman of the Guard is in all Points considered
before a Valet de Chamber, and an Elbow-Chair ^es Place of a Joint-Stool.
Amongst the Fe^les of the Stage there is no less Order pre^rved; Ophelia, in
Consideration of her vari^us Abilities, has a proportionable Allowance ^f
Ceremony, or whatever else she likes best. (...) Prue takes the Liberty of
giving her self ^cy Airs to all that approach her; and when ^e comes to be an
Empress, may expect to ^ave her Privileges increased.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas it is commonly reported, That Adver^ements for this Paper are taken in
by Charles ^lie, This is to certify, that no Advertisement ^ill be received but
what is directed to John Mor^ew near Stationers' Hall; the aforesaid Mr. Lil^e
being at present indisposed, and incapable of ^ecuting his Office.

The TATLER. [No 34
Hae Tibi erunt Arts.
Virg.
From Thursd. April 5. to Saturd. April 7. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 6.
THE Letter which immediately follows, I make public for my own Sake; that
which concludes this Paper, for the Entertainment of others.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
HAving a great Honor for your Performances, I think it my Duty to acquaint
you with the unworthy Treatment many of your Papers have lately met with. It is
my Custom in an Afternoon to saunter from one Coffee-house to another; and as I
was the other Day thus rambling about, a Couple of odd Fellows entered the Room
where I was; one of them in his own short black Hair, with an uncommon
Smartness in his Face; the other a thin meagre Person, having much Hunger and
Discontent in his Countenance. Whilst the former of these engaged the Man of
the House in a brisk Conversation, the latter, I observed, slipped the Tatler
into his Pocket, and dropped two Spectators in the Place of it, in order, as I
suppose, to stifle the one, and introduce the other. They immediately
afterward went out, and upon following them in a careless Manner to three or
four other Houses, I found them putting the same Stratagem in Practice. At last
I laid hold of one of them, and resolved to bring him before you, when giving a
sudden Spring, he broke loose from me, and with his Accomplice made the best of
his Way up the next Alley. I leave it to your Wisdom to take some effectual
Measures for the Defeat of these and all other your Enemies, who am, for my own
Part,

Your most faithful humble Servant, F. Y.


To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
-- Longa est Injuria longae
Ambages, sed summa sequar Fastigia Rerum.
Virg.
April 4. 1711. SIR,
THE Extent of your Lucubrations being such, as to take in whatever may be
seriously instructive, or innocently diverting, I presume the following
Relation may come within the Compass of them, and therefore venture to lay it
before you as it accidentally occurred.

Happening to visit last Night an old Acquaintance, whose Hours of Retirement
have been spent in uncommon Contemplations and Experiments, he showed me under
a large Glass, Hermetically sealed up, a spreading Plant, in its full Verdure,
strong and lively to the Eye, which he assured me he had raised from its own
Ashes in a few Moments. This naturally led him to a Rational Discourse on the
Refurrection, which, though succinct, was managed with that Perspicuity, as to
answer to Demonstration all the Objections brought against it by its most
formidable Opponents, those perfect Masters of Reason's and of Nature's Laws,
though very imperfect Christians, Moralists, or Men. But to return to the
Plant: It bore the Figure of that Indian Weed (if it be lawful to call it one)
that more than half the World hold in so great Esteem; and my Friend growing
less serious, desired, that (while I smoaked my Pipe) he might take Aesop's
Liberty, and let the admired Vegetable give its own History in the following
Words:

Our Extract is of ancienter Date than that of Mankind, flourishing in the
World before the Days of Adam. Our Parents, though widely distant from each other
as Heaven and Earth, yet always kindly concurred in our Generation and
Production, raising us higher in their Favor than any of our Sister Plants. As
our Birth was for many Ages spontaneous, so was our Life uncontrouled; and
while we saw our Neighbors devoured all by Reptiles, Brutes, or Men, our
selves securely ranged the American Woods unexposed to their voracious
Appetites; for as we were Objects of their Love, so neither were they of our
Fears. How did the Sun each Morn smile on us with Paternal Rays, and deck us
with its clearest Gems, while the Gignatick Trees around (as our Life-Guards)
protected us from the Fury of insulting Winds, and only suffered the Fans of
gentle Zephyrs to refresh us. Thus for long Tracts of Time did each reviving
Spring cherish our Infant Days, and Summer's Heat mature us, disclosing all
their various Beauties to us, and ever ill-boding Winter, that mortal Foe of
annual Plants, frowned on us, we in a good old Age retired to endless Rest
within our Mother's Bosom.

But alas! those happy Times are now no more! For a malicious Indian (for what
Cause we know not) committed (some Ages since) a grave Ancestor of ours to the
devouring Flames, the Odors of whose Death procured us all the Injuries we have
since received; for we no longer lived or died in Peace, but fell an easy and
defenseless Prey to numberless Tortures, invented by the barbarous Nations
round, to ravish from us all our new discovered Sweets and Virtues,

This was not long our Case before the Inhabitants of an unknown World came,
and inflicted on them as many Deaths as they on us; a just Return for their
inhumance Treatment of us poor Innocents! But these too proved, alas! as
merciless as those, and have ever since forced us into Life by their malicious
Art and cruel Care, to be untimely torn from our Mother's Breast, then left to
scorch with Thirst and pine away, and instead of a kind Burial in our Native
Soil, transported us to far distant Regions, where our withered Flesh stripped
from our shrivel'd Bones, was cut in a Thousand Pieces by Engines of a dire
Invention.

Nor are these last Complaints unjust, for though when plucked from Earth our
Vegetation ceases, yet do we still retain our Spirits in full Strength, and so
are never released from Pain till totally consumed in Flames.

To enumerate the Qualities I have been famed for, the Usage I have met with,
and the various, and sometimes contrary Effects ascribed to my powerful
Operations, would be an endless Task; I shall instance therefore only in some
few.

At first I was the Prisoner of the meanest Sort, confined in greazy Pouches,
and visited with them my native Fields and Hedges: But I soon got the Esteem of
those who kept me in a nearer, though a stronger Prison, and so was introduced
to Shops and Taverns. Then the learned Faculty began their curious Searches
into my hidden Virtues, and could not long conceal their good Opinion of me,
which quickly exalted me to the sublimest Heads, so that the Statesman, Lawyer,
and Divine, admitted me to their Closets and their Studies; and I have often
since been the obstetrical Assistant of many a teeming Brain. How often have I
created a keen Appetite to him that before had none; and, which is stranger, as
often filled a hungry Belly? Many a Time have I received the Thanks of the
Scholar at his Books, the Trader at his Accounts, and the Soldier in the Camp,
for the Thoughts I have inspired, the Composedness I have occasioned, and the
Refreshment I have administered. The Sick have praised my Cures, the Healthy my
Preventions, the Solitary my Amusements; and thus have I gratified the greatest
Part of the Male World, but generally been the Aversion of the Fair.

I was once indeed the private Favorite of a Maiden Lady, but unfortunately
discovered by her Admirer, by being forgotten to be thrust behind the Hangings;
and he, not able to brook so disgustful a Rival, immediately dismissed his
Suit, which produced a Shyness between the whole Sex and me in my ancient ^orm
ever since.

But since I have been refined by the new Mode of crushing me to smallest
Atoms, instead of being kept Prisoner as before to expire in Flames, I have had
all the Riches of the East bestowed in fitting up Apartments for me, and am
become the constant and beloved Companion of the most celebrated Wits and
Beauties. I freely visit now the Church, the Court, the Mansions of the Great,
the Tea-Table, and the Closet, and every Resort of highest Quality.

Nay, I Am not refused the Virgin Bed, but often dwell at Midnight on the
sweetest Lips, and wake the chastest Fair with Longings to embrace me. By this
new Art I gain a free Admission to the Brain too, and am as it were
immortalized by being almost mixed with Thought it self. But what I value more
than all is, that I am the richest Jewel in the British Diadem.

So concluded my Friend and Pipe, and so concludes,

Your most Obedient, Most Humble Servant, Pixidicula.


This is to certify whom it may concern, That Mr. Dighton, Perfumer, in
Fleetstreet, upon the Misfortune of Mr. Lilly, having, amongst many other
Candidates, made humble Application to the Censor to succeed him in his
Employment, the said Mr. Dighton is appointed First Secretary to Isaac
Bickerstaff Esquire and is now preparing and drawing up a Proclamation for the
apprehending and taking of those Persons mentioned in the former of the
foregoing Letters, together with such as shall hereafter be found making Use of
the same indirect and clandestine Practices, as likewise for removing all
Persons disaffected to the Power and Authority of the Censor Ten Miles distant
from the Cities of London and Westminster.

The TATLER. [No 35.
Dulcis inexpertis Cultura potentis Amici
Expertus metuet --
Hor.
From Saturday April 7. to Tuesd. April 10. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 9.
HAving, as I formerly observed, passed through an infinite Variety of Scenes
in humane Life, I cannot better employ the Reflections I have made upon them,
than by instructing those in the Paths they ought to pursue whose Youth and
Unexperience would otherwise betray them into a Thousand Mistakes. Of all
others I have a tender Regard for such as apply themselves to those Arts and
Sciences which gave me some Reputation in the Days of the Emperor Trajan. I was
esteemed the greatest Wit of that Age; but, by a Misapplication of my Parts and
Learning, came to an ignoble End. This is a reigning Misfortune amongst the
Genius's of the present Age, but has indeed prevailed much more in some
foregoing Reigns. It is with the utmost Indignation that I see many great
Capacities prostituted to the most unworthy Purposes, and the World in a Manner
corrupted and debauched by Persons whose Talents seem intended for the Ornament
and Reformation of it. Next to the Want of Morality, I bewail the Narrowness of
Fortune which too often presses Men of a liberal Education, and which perhaps
is one Step toward leading them into the former. A young Fellow who is uneasy
in his Circumstances, is naturally betrayed into those Follies which recommend
him to Company, and give him Hopes of making an Acquaintance that may one Time
or other turn to his Advantage. With this View he gives into many Fooleries
that he secretly despises, and at last is hardened into Vices which he formerly
abhorred. The Students of both Universities are on this Account in a peculiar
Manner the Objects of my Care and Concern. As often as I see a new Face about
Town, that promises much good Understanding, and a lively Imagination, I
conclude it came up by the last Coach from Oxford or Cambridge. I am
immediately upon the Rack to consider the many Difficulties such a one must
encounter, the Attendance he must pay to insolent Greatness, the frequent
Shocks he will receive from the Promotion of inferior Merit, from the
Dissimulation of some, and the Envy of others; and at last, from the mean
Reward he is likely to meet with for a long Course of Slavery and Dependence.

The following Letter has partly suggested to me this Way of Thinking, which
seems to be written rather in Confidence than with a Design to have it
published, but that the Postscript does more fully explain the Intention of it.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Sheer-Lane, April 9. SIR,
IF the Distresses of Mankind do really fit so near you as we are given to
understand by your Paper of the 27th of the last Month, I have but too just a
Right to your Compassion, and the most tender Advice you can bestow upon me.

It was not long since my good Fortune to be a Member of -- College in Oxford,
where I spent Four Years in a Manner perfectly innocent and agreeable to my
Temper. Good Part of my Time was spent in Reading, the rest in such Amusements
as the Place afforded. I was generally well esteemed by the few I was known to,
and being not much turned to Gallantry, made a Shift to be easy without the
Company of Ladies, which, every Body knows, are scarce in those Parts. During
this Retirement, I happened to write a Copy of Verses which alarmed Two or
Three of the Top Booksellers in this Town, and gave them Hopes of me for a
future Author of some more considerable Work. Whether they employed my
Acquaintance to flatter me on that Occasion I know not, but, to my utter Ruin,
I received incredible Applause for my Performance. Soon after, I took it in my
Head that the University was too narrow a Sphere for me to act in. I formed to
my self great Notions of my Reputation at London, and thought it would be taken
amiss, if I did not go and visit my Friends and Admirers there. I made a
Journey accordingly, and had the Honor to be introduced to some Persons of a
considerable Figure. Now, thought I, my Fortune is made; I have seen the
greatest General, and the best Poet in Europe. My old Friends in the mean Time
whom I had left behind me, sent frequent Letters of Congratulation upon the
Prospect I had of coming into the Ministry, which I received, and answered with
the Air and Style of one that was already in Employment. I affected, for
Instance, a new Way of writing my Name, of making up my Paper, and of
subscribing my self according to the Forms received in the Offices about
Whitehall. The great Civility and good Manners of many whom I was presented to,
had like to have led me into some Mistake: Through my great Ignorance, and Want
of Breeding, I believed every Word they said to me; and when they assured me,
they would do me any Service that lay in their Power, that they had a great
Opinion of my Merit, and only wanted an Opportunity to show it; I had no more
Complaisance than to take them at their Words, and look out for Occasions of
trying their Friendship. In the mean while my slender Fortune run out apace;
the Spleen succeeded, and I am now, in every Essential, as errant a Wit as any
about Town. Words cannot express the Shame, Scorn, and Regret I have for my
past Indiscretion, which I can no otherwise atone for than by laying it open in
this Way for the Good of others, and applying at the same Time for Advice to
Mr. Bickerstaff with Regard to my future Conduct. I am,

SIR, (With great Respect) Your most Obedient, Most humble Servant, W. H.
P. S. I shall hope to see this in your next Paper.




This Case shall be taken into Consideration, and the Censor's Opinion
delivered upon the same.

The Verses subscribed H. G. are received, and many Thanks returned for them,
as likewise for the Letter from Philanthropos.

Mr. Twining, at Tom's Coffee-house in Devereux-Court, a Man eminent for his
great Probity and indefatigable Industry, is appointed Under-Secretary to Mr.
Dighton, and will wait at the Bar of his own House this present Tuesday in the
Evening to receive the Compliments of his Friends upon the same.

The TATLER. [No 36.
Nescio quod, certe est, quod me tibi temperat Astrum.
Pers.
From Tuesd. April 10. to Thursd. April 12. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 11.
IN taking a Survey of Mankind, one cannot but observe an universal Pursuit of
what they call Pleasure, and at the same Time the grossest Mistakes about the
Notion of it. Not to enter into more Particulars, let it suffice, that in the
Catalogue of Things conducing to this End, Friendship is generally omitted, and
either not at all considered, or else exploded and laughed out of Countenance.
The Truth is, our Vanity seems to have got the better of our Reason, and choose
rather to appear happy than be so. Hence it is, that instead of cultivating an
Intimacy with a few, we make a superficial Acquaintance with all that offer,
and are more desirous of being seen by a Multitude, than rightly known and
understood by any. The Want of Virtue is at the Bottom of all this: Having no
true Principles of Honor, Generosity, or good Nature, we naturally avoid being
too strictly enquired into, and therefore are cautious that those about us
should not take any Freedom beyond what a mixed Kind of Conversation will
allow. It is suf^cient that a Set of unthinking young Fello^ can meet over a
Bottle, and make a Shift (...) pass the Time with trifling and indifferent
T^picks, without ever entertaining the least m^tual Regard, or examining into
the Merits (...) one another. It will be difficult to perswad^ such Men that
they have not yet tasted one (...) the most exquisite Enjoyments that the Soul
(...) capable of, or that they have it in their Power to open to themselves a
more delightful Wa^ of Living than they have hitherto been acquainted with.
Talking the other Day with ^ very young Gentleman on this Subject, I could not
help asking him, "Whether, amongst the many Affairs he had made with the
Ladies, he had never yet happened to have one of an honorable Nature upon his
Hands?" He frankly confessed he had; and upon being further pressed, "That he
found more Satisfaction in the Pursuit of That, than from all the Successes he
ever met with in those of another Kind." "Believe me then (said I) there is no
less Difference between the idle Amusement of a common Acquaintance, and the
refined Endearments of an intimate Friendship." I insisted the more on this
Point with a Person who was as yet in a great Measure a Stranger to the World,
because it is very certain, that the sooner this Notion is received, the more
advantageous it proves, and is a Means of preventing many Miscarriages in our
Behavior. For my own Part, amongst a Thousand other Obligations which I owe to
my Parents, I must particularly acknowledge that of instilling an early
Benevolence to Mankind in general, and a Desire of fixing my self in the
Affections of one or more who should appear best qualified for so near an
Alliance. Sam Trusty, whom I have often mentioned in these Papers, was almost
my first Choice, and has preserved me from many Errors which Youth and
Indiscretion would otherwise have led me into. I am infinitely obliged to my
Cousin Humphry Wagstaff on the same Account, as well as for the great
Assistance he has given me in the Prosecution of this Work. My Conversation
with each of these Gentlemen is a Kind of elegant Retirement from the World, as
it furnishes me with the justest Remarks upon the several Occurrences in it.
Our Sentiments are communicated without Reserve, insomuch that our ordinary
Discourse is by the latter styled Thinking aloud. In this happy Situation of
Life we stand less exposed than others commonly are, either to the Strokes of
Fortune, the Ill Nature of our Enemies, or any Calamity that can befall us. In
the mean Time all our Enjoyments, by being shared amongst us, are heightened
and improved in Proportion to the Pleasure that every Individual receives from
them.

In order to make Mankind happy in the Relish of so refined a Commerce with
each other, I could wish our present Writers of Plays, instead of filling their
Works of that Sort with the Business of Love, would sometimes diversify them
with the Distress of Friends, their Heroic Behavior under it, with all the
beautiful Incidents that History can furnish, or a warm and noble Imagination
suggest upon that Model. I am sensible how great a Genius is required to this
Task; but whenever the Prudence of our Superiors shall think fit to deliver the
Stage from the State of Slavery and Mismanagement it now labors under, I shall
not despair of seeing this and many other excellent Designs happil^ put in
Execution.

An humble Retainer to the Theater havin^ made the following Application to me,
I t^ this Occasion of making it public, and of a^suring the Person concerned,
as well as others who may hereafter fall into the same Misfortune, that neither
the corrupt Dealing o^ Charles Lilly, though a Lunatic, nor the Insolence of
those who support him in it, sha^ pass unnoted, or unpunished, by the Rightfu^
Lawful, and Undoubted Censor of the Unite^ Kingdom of Great Britain.

SIR,
I Am the Poor Woman that has had the Misfortune to be always in the Way when
Don John, in the Play called The Libertine, sends his Footman out for a Whore;
by which Means, I believe I may venture to say, I have, modestly speaking, been
ravished upwards of Five hundred Times. By this Employment, and that of
Lightner to the Opera's, I have made a Shift to get a comfortable Livelihood:
But since there is a worthy Gentleman who has taken upon him to regulate our
Stage; and that, if I should be turned out, I am too old to turn my Hands to
any other Business, I must humbly implore your Honor's Protection, and that
you would be pleased to do therein as to your great Wisdom shall seem fit.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray. E. G
SIR,
All the Women of our Stage have made a Party against me upon the Account of
this Accident in the Libertine, and say, that another such Instance of Chastity
might ruin them; for which Reason, and because I have no Money to make an
Interest with Mr. Lilly, the other Gentleman's Agent, I shall be undone, unless
your Honor will pity my Case.



The TATLER. [No 37.
Cuncti adsint, merit aeque expectent Praemia Palma.
Virg.
From Thursd. April 12. to Saturd. April 14. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 13.
I Know not how it happens, whether through a Misrepresentation from my
Enemies, or a Misunderstanding in some of my Readers, an Opinion has lately
obtained; that I allow no Body to have any Share of Wit or Humor but my self;
that I industriously suppress the Attempts of others in that Way, and will not
so much as suffer a young Writer to thrive under my Shade. These and a Thousand
Calumnies of the same Nature have by some Means or other, though with the
utmost Injustice, been spread amongst Persons well affected (...) my Interests,
who have thought themselv^ obliged, by Letters and other Ways, to gi^ me
repeated Notice of such unhandsome Pr^ceedings. If I can promise any Thing for
^self, it is, that I have no greater Ambition tha^ to improve, cultivate and
encourage a promising Genius wherever I meet with it, and no^ only to refine
the Morals of Mankind, but t^ make even their Studies and Productions mo^
entertaining and agreeable to one another. I must confess indeed, that ever
since my fir^ entering upon the Censorship, I have been very tender of suffering
any Encroachments to be made upon the Dignity of that Office. I have now and
then shown the Error of those who offered to invade a Province so peculiarly my
own, and by a seasonable Rebuke put a Stop to many growing Inconveniences. At
a Time when we are engaged in a just and necessary War Abroad, of what fatal
Consequence might it have proved to make a new Division at Home? Which must
unavoidably have risen, had I suffered any further Competition for so great an
Employment. A Man must have little Regard for the Interest of Europe, who can
be tempted by any Consideration to embroil his Country in Quarrels and Disputes
at so critical a Juncture. What I have said therefore in any of my Papers upon
this Occasion, will by all Persons of Candor and Discernment be considered
rather as an Instance of my Care for the Public, than of any View to my own
Authority and Advantage. If others have been unhappily provoked by it to make
rash and indiscreet Reflections upon me, I am heartily sorry for their
Misfortune, and wish that their Passion had not made them incapable of
receiving Advice from their truest Friend, upon that Subject. I shall only say
at present, ^t as it is evident they have embarked in a ^ong Bottom, they will
do well to give off as ^on as possible; for, next to the Honor of a ^ccessful
Engagement, is that of a handsome ^treat.

To vindicate my self yet further from t^ ^putation I before mentioned, as I
have late^ assigned the proper Seasons of the Year for ^erent Kinds of Writers,
I shall hereafter (...) something more material for the Encou^gement of their
Labors. In an Age where^ the Generosity of Great Men extends even (...)
Opera's and Puppet-Shows, I cannot but ^lieve they will be easily persuaded to
en^urage such Entertainments as tend to the ^egulation of Manners, and the
Improvement ^f our Understandings. For this Purpose I ^ave already formed a
Scheme, wherein pro^er Prizes are allotted for several Sorts of ^erformances,
those of the Drama being first ^nsidered, and the rest in proper Order. The
^rticulars shall be communicated to those ^ho are professed Patrons of polite
Learning, without Regard to Party, and because their ^umber is but small, their
Subscriptions must ^ecessarily be the larger. I do not despair of ^eing my self
a Contributor, having deter^ined to assign a considerable Part of the ^rofits
arising from my own Lucubrations to^ards so useful a Project. I must premise
(...) general, That no Comedy will be admit^d without a Moral, nor any Tragedy
that ^rns wholly upon Love, as likewise that ^rces are wholly excluded. In
Epick Poems, ^e fewer Machines the better: Heathen Gods (...) Goddesses will
not be suffered; nor any ^igned Names to introduce either the past or ^esent
Ministry. If a Peace should intervene, nothing on that Topic shall be received
t^ was written before the Preliminaries w^ signed.

That the Beauties of each Performance (...) be clearly discerned, and their
Blemishes ^covered, I shall in the mean Time take O^sion to print a Treatise
separate from my ^ther Papers, formed upon the best Rules (...) Antiquity, and
the approved Sentiments of (...) present Age, entitled, Mr. Bickerstaff's
Sp^cles; by the Assistance of which, the Jud^ on this Affair shall be enabled
to disting^ rightly upon Thoughts, Diction, Turn, ^cule, Style, Spirit,
Natural, Sublime, (...) and all the other Circumstances of Wri^ which I have
mentioned elsewhere, that (...) come before them. This Manual, (for it (...)
not exceed that Compass) I will order to (...) left at White's Chocolate-house
Gratis, together with a Spelling-Book for the Help (...) Learners. At Will's it
will be taken in (...) Course, and may from thence, perhaps, receive many
proper Additions and Amendments.

I shall conclude with acquainting my Readers, that although I do not pretend
to ingross to my self all the Wit, Humor, and Learning in this Kingdom, yet I
shall by no Means suffer any other Person to set up for an ultimate Judge in
Matters of that Nature Mr. Lilly escapes very well that a Statute (...) Lunacy
is not yet taken out against him; and others, his Abettors, that one of Idiocy
has not yet been occasioned by their idle and unreasonable Proceedings.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas Mr. Bickerstaff has received certain ^vice, That one John Mackstaff,
of the City of ^enburgh, in North Britain, has taken upon (...) the Character
of Censor, and thereby delu^d many of the Good People from their Duty ^d
Allegiance to the said Mr. Bickerstaff, He ^th hereby charge and require the
Magistrates (...) the said City of Edinburgh, upon Pain of his ^ispleasure, to
seize and apprehend, or cause to (...) seized and apprehended the said John
Mack^aff as an Imposter and Enemy to his Power and ^uthority, and to detain him
in strict Ward and ^ustody till further Orders. Signed,

Robert Dighton.
And underneath, Thomas Twining.

The TATLER. [No 38
Sic positae -- suaves miscetis Odores.
Virg.
From Saturd. April 14. to Tuesd. April 17. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 16.
HAving received lately several Letters from my Female Correspondents, I shall
communicate some of the most important of them to the Public in the Order I
received them.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Winchester in Hants, April 7. 1711. SIR,
I Came hither about a Week since, being forced from London, where I spent the
Winter, by the Commands of my Mother, who took it in her Head that I grew too
fond of that Place, and was in Danger of throwing my self away upon some idle
young Fellow or other. It is not to be expressed how melancholy I am here: My
Heart aches at this Instant as if it would break; I look upon no one Object with
Pleasure. The Fellows whom I liked well enough Half a Year ago, appear silly
and awkward, and even the Cathedral Church, of a Sunday, affords me no
Entertainment. What shall I do, dear Mr. Bickerstaff, to remove the Heaviness
that sits upon my Heart? How shall I divert my self in this wild and solitary
Retreat? Formerly indeed I could spend whole Days and Nights in turning over my
Romances; I could with infinite Pleasure rove about the Wilderness, in our
Garden, and charm the Rival Nightingales with the Music of my Flute. How often
have I there unbound my Silver Locks, and given them to be the Sport of wanton
Zephyrs? Young ruddy Damsels waited round me, and decking me forth with all the
Pride and Beauty of the Spring, proclaimed me Goddess of the Place -- Oh cursed
Damon -- That dear dissembling Youth! He, alas! has robbed me of my Innocence,
and with it, of all the pleasing Errors that made Solitude delightful, and
gilded over these Silvan Scenes --

He in short, Sir, has turned my Notions another Way, and given me a new Set of
Desires and Inclinations. If you will bestow some Advice upon me, I will
endeavor to follow it, and give you a constant Account of the Success it has
with me. If I at all understand my own Case, I am by my present Circumstances
very well qualified for a Rural Censor, and can see no Reason why Women should
be excluded that Office. I promise you to have a very strict Eye upon my own
Sex, and may perhaps let you into some Secrets relating to them that have
hitherto escaped your Censure. The faithful Execution of this Employment will
be a Means to divert my own Spleen, and may perhaps conduce to the
Gratification of yours, and that of many Thousands more. I will in all Things
act as becomes the Substitute of so great a Person, and one who has a Desire to
approve her self,

Your most humble Servant, Belinda.


The Case of Belinda is in my Opinion very deplorable, and would, if fully
considered, give Occasion to many useful Reflections. At present I shall only
observe upon it, that the Blemish she has received in her own Character is by
no Means a Step toward a Power and Jurisdiction over the Conduct of others. I
am not unwilling to admit some of the Fair Sex into the Employment she
sollicits for, having in general a great Opinion of their Capacities, as well
as of their earnest Desire to reform the Manners of those about them. It may
not however be amiss to give the Electors in this Point a short Abstract of the
Qualifications requisite to a Female Censor, lest any Mistakes should happen
upon so weighty an Affair: As first, That she is indeed with an habitual
Silence; Secondly, That she has a known Hatred to Scandal and Detraction;
Thirdly, That she neither pays nor receives any impertinent Visits; Fourthly,
That she is a constant Reader of the Tatler; And Fifthly and Lastly, That she
has, besides other Books, a huge (...) of Receipts.

The following Billet is of no less Consequence than the former.

SIR,
I Have a great Quarrel to Mr. Jervoise, and at your Hands demand immediate
Justice upon him. He has lately done a Picture of me, which is allowed to be
extremely like, and no less beautiful, though at the same Time my Face is but
very indifferent. By this Means he has raised the Expectation of all who have
seen the Piece, to my great Disadvantage in the Disposal of my Person. Every
Body allows that he has shown himself an admirable Painter, and secretly wish,
that Nature had been as kind as Art has been indulgent to me. For my own Sake
therefore, and that of many others in the ^ame Circumstances, I humbly move the
Court for speedy Sentence on so notorious an Offender.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray.

Ordered, That Mr. Jervoise be fined a Half-Length of the Censor, done after
the same Manner as is mentioned in the above-written Complains, and that he be
in Readiness to receive him on Wednesday next, between the Hours of Nine and
Ten in the Morning.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Honored Sir,
I Have examined your Lucubrations with the utmost Care and Diligence, but can
find nothing relating to my present Case. Whether your Thoughts have been
employed on more useful Subjects, or whether Circumstances so entirely alter
the Nature of Things that it is impossible to define them; but if so it
happens, that the Importunity which a Man should use in the Recovery of his Own
has wholly escaped you, I could read a Dissertation of yours upon Dunning with
more Pleasure than I ever looked at a new-fashioned Toy. You only can direct us
how far a Gentleman may be decently pressed, and whether Personally or by
Billet is the more proper Method.

If you knew how much I was interested in this Affair, I persuade my self, your
Concern for the Sex would hasten your Resolution. I cannot look at poor
Charles's Face without bathing it with a Flood of Tears. Had he sold Cast Work
for Hammered, or Horn for Tortoise-Shell, I could moderate my Resentments; but
to be kicked, disabled, and caned like a Stockfish for only demanding his Due,
is an Indignity not to be suffered in a free Country.

Good Mr. Bickerstaff, take a distressed Woman into your Protection, and give
me such Redress as you in your great Wisdom shall judge suitable to the
Offense, and believe my Application to the Censor of Great Britain to proceed
only from the Equity^ I have observed in all your Determinations. I am

Your most Devoted, Humble Servant, Sarah Bubbleboy.


Ordered, That Mr. Dighton and Mr. Twining do enquire, whether the Kicks and
Blows given were by Neats or Calves Leather, Jambees or Dragons; after which
Mr. Bickerstaff will proceed accordingly.

The TATLER. [No 39.
Torva Leaena Lupum sequitur, Lupus ipse Capellam,
Florentem Cytisum sequitur lasciva Capella,
Te Corydon, O Alexi, trahit sua quemque Voluptas.
Virg.
From Tuesd. April 17. to Thursd. April 19. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 18.
ONE great Design of this Paper is to reconcile Men to their several Stations
in Life, and to remove that Uneasiness which commonly arises from the supposed
Advantages of those about them. Unless this be in some Measure effected, it is
in vain to expect any great Success from Precepts of another Kind; a Person who
is out of Humor being as incapable of receiving Advice as bestowing it on
others. The Stake chiefly contended for is Power, and this, if I mistake not,
is more equally divided than we commonly imagine. The executive Part of it
seems indeed to be pretty much engrossed by Men of great Fortunes and large
Possessions. They, it is true, carry about them all the Distinctions of Grandeur
and Superiority, they are attended by Maces, adorned with Ribands, and crowded
by a numerous Train of Dependants. In the mean Time it must be no small
Satisfaction for a Man who is inclined to envy them such pompous Appearances,
to make a strict Enquiry into some other Circumstances which are not altogether
so much exposed to the public View. He will by this Means discover that these
great Machines are informed, turned and directed by the most minute Springs and
Movements; that in many Instances, a menial Servant has the Management of their
highest Concerns, and disposes of their Actions as he in his great Wisdom shall
judge most convenient for them.

As my Cousin Humphrey and my self were taking a Walk in the Park the other
Day, a Person of Note passed by us with an Air of Insolence and Contempt,
attended by a very magnificent Equipage. He, with his usual Freedom, taking me
aside, desired me to observe that fine Thing, and to give my Opinion of him.
Observing me a little reserved upon the Matter, " Isaac (says he) with some
Indignation, You are the greatest Coward in the World: Had I put the same
Question to you upon Fifty others of Five hundred Times the Worth of inferior
Rank, you would have made no Scruple of speaking your Sentiments. I will tell
you then; That Gentleman you see there, is one Way or other in Subjection to
every one of those Fellows that dangle after him. I happen (continued he) to be
well acquainted in his Family, in which there is a Chain of Interests carried
on after the following Manner: The Steward, who is an old Servant, and has
cheated his Master Time out of Mind, has the entire Government of him. The
Housekeeper has a Hank, as they call it, over the Steward, and makes singular
Use of him in all impertinent Affairs. The Page has no less Interest in the
Housekeeper, at the same Time that he is himself in Love with the Chambermaid.
Rose, for that is her Name, professes a Passion for T^ the Footman, who is
deeply smitten with dirty Moll the Kitchen Wench. The latter of these has in
Conclusion a great Sway in whatever Cases she thinks fit to exert her Interest,
which, if she were made sensible of it, would undoubtedly afford her no small
Comfort under the constant Hurry and Fatigue of her painful Occupation.'

Having but little Knowledge of great Families, I was not before aware that
this Scheme of Government was received amongst them; but in the Compass of my
own Acquaintance I have seldom seen it otherwise. Old Major Matchlock, I
remember, was a very blustering Fellow over a Bottle, and withal made a good
terrible Figure at the Head of a Company; but within his own Doors he behaved
himself with great Pusillanimity, and paid the utmost Subjection to an ancient
Maid, whom in less than Forty Years he had raised from raking in a Heap of
Cinders, to the Superintendancy over all his domestic Affairs. I am not in my
own Nature much addicted to Fear, yet I cannot but confess that I stand in Awe
of my old Servant Mary. She happens to be of a mild Disposition, which makes
her Authority fit the more easy upon me; but if it were otherwise, I do not
presume that I should have Courage enough to make Head against her. As she has
few other Favorites or Companions than my Dog and tabby Cat, there is no
Danger of her leading me into any Absurdities on their Behalf.

I am very much obliged to the Person who sends me the following Letter, and
shall comply with the Instances made therein to the utmost of my Power.

From the West, April 13. SIR,
AT this Distance from other Entertainments, I am not a little beholden to that
which your Paper affords me; insomuch that I drink your Health in a Bumper of
Manufacture every Day of my Life, and next in Order to those of very great
Consequence to the Nation. Two or Three of my Children who are learning to read
have their Lessons set in your Tatler, though I had some Difficulty to carry
that Point from their Governante, who stickled hard for the Primmer. I have had
Two or Three Quarrels with my Wife's Woman for putting Thread in your Paper,
and had like to have turned away my Butler for setting up Candles in it. In a
Word, Sir, I pay all imaginable Respect to your Works, and would be glad to
have Opportunity of showing it to your Person. I flatter my self therefore,
that you will give me Leave, after these Professions of my Esteem and
Veneration for you, to make a Request in Behalf of my self and many other your
Admirers in these Parts. We find our selves every Post-Night involved in such a
Multiplicity of Newspapers, that we know not which to consult first, nor at
last which of them to give any Credit to. The Tatler was formerly wont to
determine our Choice in this Matter, by giving us a Summary of the most
material Occurrences in a clear and intelligible Style, which, except in the
Gazette, is now not to be had for Love nor Money. It is therefore our humble
Petition, that you would renew this so laudable a Practice, which, if you
please to comply with, I venture to assure you in the Name of the whole
Neighborhood, that we will at our next Meeting hold a Day of Thanksgiving on
that Account, and conclude the Evening with a Bonfire of Dawks's, Dyer's, and
Post-Boys. I am,

SIR, (With the truest Respect) Your most Obliged, And most Obedient, Humble
Servant, J. E.


St. James's Coffee-house, April 18.
Last Night Captain, Powel came Express from the Lord Raby, with an Account,
That the Emperor died on the 17th, N. S. of the Smallpox. On the 16th he was
in so fair a Way of Recovery, that they judged him to be out of Danger;
whereupon Prince Eugene set out for the Hague, and was got two Days Journey on
this Side of Vienna, before the News, which was dispatched the next Day, could
overtake him.

The TATLER. [No 40.
Nec Vox Hominem sonat.
Virg.
From Thursd. April 19. to Saturd. April 21. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 20.
THere is nothing more shocking to a generous Mind, than to see his Labors
rendered vain and fruitless. I once flattered my self with the happy Effects of
my Censorship, and thought the Influence of Isaac Bickerstaff had so generally
obtained through the United Kingdoms of Great Britain, that there was nothing
remaining but the Fruits and Glory of the Conquest. But such is the Misfortune
of a public Character! I have no sooner routed and disarmed the Enemy in one
Quarter of my Dominions, exposed the Vice and Folly of Mankind in one
Particular, but I find my self engaged in a fresh Dispute; as if my Authority
was not so universally received as I imagined, as if the People of this Island
thought me only de Facto, and not de Jure, Censor. By my Age and Experience I
have hitherto put a Stop to the growing Evil: But there is a Race of Creatures
sprung up (by their Frame and Complexion resembling Men) which are as far above
my Understanding, as they are real Objects of my Concern. It grieves me to see
the Bull, the Bear, the Lion, stalking in a humane Form. I am in Pain to find
something so like my self sending forth nothing but Brutal Accents, as if all
Joy and Grief consisted in the Quantity of Sound, and there was no Way to
express the Dictates and Sentiments of Nature but by being tumultuous. These
Men, if I may be allowed to call them so, seem weary of being at the Fag-End of
the Rational Species, and think they shall make tolerable good Figures under
another Character. I will refer the Examination of this Particular to another
Paper, and insert the Letter which gave Occasion to the Reflection.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
SIR,
AMong the many Benefits which Mankind has received from your Lucubrations,
that of improving and polishing our Conversation has been none of the least.
Your distinguishing the different Characters of Men by the Instruments of
Harmony, has given most an Inclination to be musical; each preparing and hoping
to appear in a better Class. This innocent Ambition has had an Effect even on
the lowest Kind, and I have known some Drums, despairing of ever getting a
finer Note, content to be silent; a great Negative Blessing to those unhappy
Gentlemen who were sometimes condemned to be Part of their Audience! But, Sir,
there is Need of a farther Reformation, there are some People who have formed
to themselves a Sound that comes under no Denomination you have yet imparted to
the World; indeed there are not many of this Sect, nor should I take any Notice
of them, but that I have very lately observed they begin to get Converts. These
noisy Men have their Fits come upon them very constantly, and with very little
Intermission, yet they can be sometimes articulate; but then I don't observe
those Tokens of Mirth which they show at the End of the Paroxism. I have seen
one of them jump out of his Chair, and suddenly getting his Legs from the
Ground five or six Times, make such a Noise as Nature gave us not Ears to
receive, which has ended in about Seven Minutes in a strong loud Laugh,
accompanied with the rest of the Sect, if there be any present, (for the Fit
often takes 'em among Strangers) who join in the Chorus. I have seen your great
Masters of Noise, Foxhunters, Bombardiers, Gunners of all Kinds, Sailers, who
are Judges of Storms, amazed at their prodigious Vociferation. I should take
them to be something Enthusiastical, but there is no Show of Religion among
them. The Hottentotts, (a Free People) as the Dutch Travelers tell us, come
near them in Sound, but with less Impetuosity. From their Agitation they may
pass for French Prophets, but I think they deserve neither Toleration nor
Indulgence. There have been Arguments used by Men of Wit, and God knows of
Probity, to support all the Follies that have appeared in the World. Mr.
Herbert, an old solemn Bard of our own, a Defender of Joking to the last
Extent, has observed, That every Thing is big with Jest, and has Wit in it, if
you can find it out. I neither doubt your Power Physically, Astrologically, or
Mathematically; yet if you can reduce these Sounds into any Compass, if you can
form any Figure to express something inarticulate, though the Disquisition may
not entertain the Multitude, do the fair Thing, and forgive a Friend, who begs
of you even to make our Monsters agreeable.

Dear Isaac, Yours, etc.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Dr. Proteus of Wadham-College has, with the greatest Humanity, owned the
Mistake he made upon Aesculapius's Roast. He was something perplexed and
pleased to find himself a Cylinder after the warm Season, when he had so long
been a Globe. He owns the Doctor's ambulatory Jack, Spit, Dripping-Pan, and is
ready to subscribe to any Satisfaction that Aesculapius shall demand in Latin
or English.

N. B. It is thought they will not pretend to commune in Greek.

The TATLER. [No 41.
Regum aequabat Opes Animo.
Hor.
From Saturd. April 21. to Tuesd. April 24. 1711.
From my own Apartment, April 23.
I AM obliged to visit my old Friend Hortensius every April, when his
Auricula's are in Blossom. He tells me, he should be as much disappointed if
his Friends did not come and see him while his Garden is in its Pride, as a
fine Lady would be on her Day, if no Body came to admire how well she was
lighted up.

I went down on Monday last to his House. It was almost dark when I arrived,
and I found my Friend watering his Pots with his own Hand, and covering the
choicest of them with Glasses, lest the Inclemency of one Frosty Night, in so
uncertain a Climate as ours is, should shorten the Duration of a Pleasure which
is but too Transitory even in its longest Continuance. He bid me welcome to his
Hermitage, and conducted me with Aude, Hospes, contemnere Opes, to an elegant
little Supper, a good Part of which was the Product of his Garden. After the
Cloth was taken away, 'Mr. Bickerstaff, said he, I fancy you look with a good
deal of Contempt upon our Country Amusements: Is it not very odd to find me
doing the same Thing to Night, that I did Forty Years ago? Not at all, replied
I, I don't think Individuals either grow better or worse after One and Twenty;
and I am no more surprised to find you diverted with an agreeable innocent
Employment Forty Years together, than I should be Forty Years hence (if it were
possible I could live so long) to find those who are now young Fops to be grown
old ones, or those that are young Knaves to be grown more experienced: For
since People don't grow weary of their Faults, I see no Reason why they should
grow weary of their Pleasures, at least of such Pleasures as don't grow weary
of them. Ah! dear Isaac, said my Friend, there is the Point, to find out some
Entertainment that will not find out that we grow old, and such a one I believe
I have made Choice of. By that Means I converse daily with the g^wdiest Part of
the Creation; for since there is no Body here to tell it again to the Toasts, I
must own to you, that I think Nature has been no where so lavish of her
Beauties, as amongst the Birds and Flowers. Harmonious Voices, sweet Breaths,
fine Complexions, blooming Youth, and then for Constancy, (one of my poor
Turtles is dying of a Widowhood) Where will you match me these in the rest of
the World? You durst not talk at that Rate, replied I, nor I hear you, but at
the Age of Seventy, though it is natural for every one to give as much Dignity
as he can to whatever he is fond of. Dignity! interrupted Hortensius a little
warmly, we want no Dignity, or at least we need not strain a Point for it.
Pray, Friend Isaac, when Man was made little lower than the Angels, what was
he? A Prince, a General, or a Great Minister? Neither. He was a Gardener. Pray
what is it that distinguishes Man from Beasts? Why all Philosophers say,
Reason. Philosophers are Puppies; if Man were distinguished from the rest of
the Creation by Reason, would he not be distinguished by the noblest Operation
of Reason; the cultivating a virtuous Mind? But how is that? Ask any of these
Philosophers for Examples of Cruelty, Lust, of Avarice, of Disobedience to
Parents, of Rapine, of Ambition, of Treachery, of Cowardice, of any Vice they
shall bring you Instances of all these from Kings, Queens, Generals, Popes, and
even Philosophers themselves: But talk to them of Fidelity, they quote you the
Dog; of Piety to Parents, the Stork; of Industry, the Ant and the Be; of
Meekness, the Lamb; of Courage, the Lion; and of Constancy, there my poor
Turtle comes in again. Oh! Reason is a dainty Thing; I love that noble
Distinction mightily: It Is almost as good as Risibility. Hold, dear Hortensius,
said I, pray let us be distinguished some Way or other, or let us go naked as
they do, and save Tailors Bills; or rather let us get Hair and Feathers on our
Skins, for I doubt I should not like to walk about pulled neither." He smiled
upon me, and went on, "I design to distinguish for you too: The true
Distinction between Man and Beast, and which soli Homini convenit is Gardening.
Homo est Animal Horticolum: Upon that Condition you may differ from Beasts as
much as you please, and be as distinct a Species as you can. But if you design
to take the Advantage of this Proposal, you must begin by going to Bed early,
that we may be up to Morrow to enjoy the Sweets of the Morning, and therefore
I Will wait on you to your Chamber." The next Morning was so like one in a
Romance, that if it would not make this Paper too long, I could be content to
describe it: About Seven a Clock my Friend came into my Chamber, and told me I
was going to be very Happy as soon as I had drank my Chocolate, for every Thing
conspired to make our Walk so pleasant, that, what with the Perfume of the
Flowers, and the Harmony of the Birds, he questioned whether I would regret
either the Smoke or the Noises of London. There were Two Parterres on either
Side of the House, which were separated by a neat Espalier from the rest of the
Garden. These were destined for the Reception of the Flowers of Quality, such
as Auricula's, Tulips, Anemonies, Ranunculus's, and Carnations, who lived here
removed from the Commerce of the People of Flowers which inhabit the Remainder
of this vegetable Kingdom. My Friend was pleased to see me surprised with the
Beauties of his Benches of Auricula's. He made me take particular Notice of
Number I. which he told me was honored with the Name of a Great Princess, and
the rest of the Confederacy stood in their proper Places after her. The next
Series my Friend enlarged more upon, finding I begun to taste the Entertainment,
and made me remark a Flower which was a little overblown; but he told me it had
been wonderfully fine in its Time, and whispered me in the Ear the Lady's Name
it went by: "And what I value it for exceedingly, said he, is, That I have
raised those Four Seedlings which stand next her from this Flower. There was a
Fifth, but I could not preserve it: If we had not such Losses, we should be too
happy." In short, he went on with above Fifty fine Ladies one after another,
and I believe would never have given off if I had not interrupted him, by
asking him how his Flowers came to be all of a Party, and saying that I did not
think to have seen that Matter carried so far. "Why, said he, I don't know how
that comes about, but we endeavor to fit our Flowers to our Faces and
Characters, and this is done in a Manner by Election: But no Body need be
without their Flower, for the Daffodil and Piony Kind stand empty for any
Ladies that please to take them; and as any new ones come out amongst our
better Flowers, if they will stand Candidates for them, I shall be very
impartial. But we cannot do so well by the Generals; they must have a Campaign
in their Bellies, and cannot be provided for till next Spring, and then they will
stand as fair as others." We took our Walk on through the rest of the Garden,
at the lower End of which there was a little Trout Stream, with Benches by the
Side of it. Here we sat down, and Hortensius asked me if I was not tired with
such a sauntering Country Life. I assured him no, and wished I had it in my
Power to invite him to such another Place. "Why really my Friend, said he, I
passed a good Part of my Time in what the World calls Pursuit of Pleasure and
Honor, and have found at last, that all those Things are nothing more than
what I have in this little Brook, Noise and Motion.'

The TATLER. [No 42.
Tua Res agitur Paries cum proximus ardet.
From Tuesd. April 24. to Thursd. April 26. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, April 25.
I WENT Two or Three Nights ago to Brown's Coffee-house to smoke a Pipe, and
talk of the Affairs of Germany, with my old Friend Mr. Solomon Million. As we
were discoursing of Funds and Politics, I observed a tall genteel Man come in,
who made a very respectful Bow to Million, and stood at a Distance, but looked
as if he had something to say to him. I made him take Notice of it. He tweer'd
at him a little, and said, "Friend, would you speak with me? Fray what is your
Business?" He approached and whispered him, and then Million cried, "Why ay,
and so I did; but we could not carry it for you: And so look'ee you must be
contented. You lost it in good Company, that I must needs say; but it is not
always' -- Here he coughed, and I, who had not recollected the Gentleman till
then, perceived it was Don Diego. He had a Paper in his Hand, which he
delivered Million, who looking upon it, shook his Head, and said, "This is not
in our Way; but my worthy Friend Muster Bickerstaff (^ may be allowed to name
him on this Occasion) may do you a Kindness, if so be he will recommend it to the
World, which I hope he will for my Sake." The Paper was as follows.

To all Lovers and others within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the
Liberties thereof.
WHereas there have been great Complaints at all Times of the Inconstancies,
Indiscretions, Inabilities, and Exorbitances of the several Lovers within the
Bills of Mortality, and whereas the same do still continue, notwithstanding the
several Statutes in those Cases had, made and provided, so that often those who
have gone to Bed in a substantial, happy and reputable Condition, have perhaps
the next Morning, by some sudden unforeseen Accident, found themselves stripped
of all that was near and dear to them, their Pleasure and Reputation: For the
preventing of which fatal Misfortunes for the future, it is humbly proposed,
That as Office of Insurance for Lovers be erected, after the Manner of the
Amicable Society; where all Persons subscribing the Policies, (which will be
ready by the First of May next, at which Time the Books will likewise be opened
at the Sign of the United Hearts in St. Martin's-Lane) may be entitled to the
following Advantages:

I. Any Lover may be insured ad Val^rem for any Term of Years, or for Life, if
required, for a reasonable Praemium, to be settled by the Majority of the
Subscribers at their First General Court, which is to be held as soon as One
hundred thousand of either Sex have entered themselves of this Society, which,
it is humbly presumed, may be in less than Twenty four Hours after the Books
are opened.

II. After such Subscription, and the Name entered in the Company's Books, the
Persons who take a Policy, will be insured by the Sum of (...) That their Lover
shall neither deceive, forsake, nor betray them; and in case of Decay in
Affection, which it is hoped will seldom happen, such Losses shall be made good
by all the Members of this Society, who, upon due Notice, are to pay in their
Quota to any such Claim within Eight Days at farthest.

III. The Society will stand to all Repairs of the Persons subscribing they
having in Pay the best Artists of all Kinds for that Purpose, some of whom have
been bred up at the Court of France, and procured the most valuable Cosmeticks
there at a vast Expense; by which Means they will be able at a Minute's
Warning, and in Two Hours Time, to scaffold up and new Point any Lady that
apprehends falling to sudden Decay, and make her tenantable without Loss of
Time, or Hindrance of Business.

IV. Young Men of Quality, and Officers of the Army, must be insured at pretty
high Rates, they being liable to Bragging and Inconstancy; but Citizens.
Seamen, and Country Gentlemen, will come at little or nothing.

V. The Pleasures and Profits of this Society to be equally divided betwixt the
Adventurers.

VI. Any married Woman shall in this Office be deemed and taken as a Femme
Sole, and may subscribe and enjoy to her own Use and Behoof such Policy or
Policies, notwithstanding her Coverture; and in case of any Trouble from her
Husband, or if any Divorce should be attempted, the whole Society are obliged
to use their Interest against it, either in the Commons, or otherwise.

VII. Any Adventurers in this Society, may by mutual Agreement, with the
Consent of the Governor and Governess, and the Majority of the Four and twenty
Directors, transfer their Right and Title in any Policy to any other Member of
this Society.

VIII. All Persons, at their Admission, to take an Oath to stand by and
mutually assist each other against all malicious and censorious Tongues, who
are always raising ill Reports, and misconstruing the most innocent Looks, to
the great Disquiet of civil Families.

IX. There are to be Sworn-Appraisers of both Sexes, who are to take a Survey,
and certify upon Oath, the true Values of the Persons subscribing.

Though I am far from taking this for a perfect Scheme, yet I think it does not
deserve to be rejected at the first Reading; for perhaps something may be added
in a Committee to make it of great Use.

I do therefore refer it to a Committee of the whole Town, who are to examine
the Allegations, and report their Opinion; for I cannot but think that if
something of this Kind could be done, it would be of universal Advantage, and
might go a great Way toward extinguishing those Heats and Animosities which
are amongst us, and put an affectual Stop to those wicked Emissaries that are
continually busied in stirring up Jealousies and evil Reports among Her
Majesty's loving Subjects.

The TATLER. [No 43
-- Prisca redit Venus.
Hor.
From Thursd. April 26. to Saturd. April 28. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, April 27.
ONE great Inducement to me in removing to this End of the Town, was for the
Benefit of the Air in St. James's Park, where I usually take one Turn in the
Morning, and (...) it be any Thing like Weather, another as soon as my Pipe is
done after Dinner. In my Walk the other Day I met with so odd an Adventure,
that I cannot help being particular in the Relation of it; especially since, in
Regard to Posterity, it may serve to clear up one of the most important
Passages of my Life. Just by the Cockpit, at the Privy-Garden Door, there
stepped up gently to me an ancientish Woman, in a little black Hood, a Whisk
Band, and a Crape Gown, and in a soft low Voice calls to me, " Sir. I could
never think it Charity to relieve your Street-Beggars: What little I do in that
Kind, is chiefly to Charity-Schools, and decayed Housekeepers. So on I walked,
and she after me. 'But, Sir, says she again with a respectful Whisper, I am a
Gentlewoman. Gentle or Simple, said I, that is nothing to me; Prithee, Woman, be
gone about thy Business: This is not a Place for you." When she had got me to
answer her, she proceeds, "Sir, you look like a Gentleman; and my Case is
really such, that if you knew but Half -- I don't desire to know a Quarter,"
said I. But the Woman was so very civil, and withal so very importunate, that I
could not help turning about to her; and with that she pulls Two or Three dirty
torn Papers out of her Stays, and offers them me to read. "Pray Mistress, said
I, what is it you would have of me? This is not a Place to read Papers in: But
my Name is so, I live in such a Place, and if you think it worth your while to
come to me when I have more Leisure, I Will hear what you have to say.' I
observed she changed Color upon hearing my Name, and coming up closer to me,
told me, "Nothing but the greatest Necessity could have brought her to this:
Her Education, it was well known, had been above any such Thing, till the
Frowns of Fortune had reduced her to this Condition. Why it is a strange Thing,
said I, Mistress, that you will not take an Answer. I tell you again that I have
not for you, and let that suffice. Ah! dear Sir, said she, there was a Time
when one of your Name would have given me a kinder Answer." This brought a
Thousand confused Imaginations into my Head, and I felt something awakening
within me that I could not account for. I stole a Look over my Shoulder, and
saw her wiping a Pair of Eyes, that I thought I should not be a Stranger to,
with a greasy Glove, and the Lappet of her Hood. 'I have no small Money about
me, said I, but I Am just at Home, and made what Haste I could to my House." As
I was going into my Parlour, I heard my Maid disputing the Door with her. "
Mary, said I, let the Gentlewoman come in." As soon as we were alone, ^ fixed
my Eye upon her, and asked her, "Pray what may your Name be? Ah! Mr.
Bickerstaff, she replied, Is it possible you should have forgot me? But indeed
the Troubles I have gone through since you and I danced together at the Mayor's
Feast at Litchfield, would have altered a better Face than I could ever pretend
to. Whatever Changes Time and Trouble may have made in you, said I, I Am sure it
has not made so much in me, but that I am mightily concerned to know what has
happened to you, since I am now assured you can be no other than Mrs. Olivia
Darkin, for whom once I passed so many uneasy Minutes. Well, Mr. Bickerstaff, I
must own -- But pray sit down, said I -- And Mary, Do You hear? Bring me a Pint
of that Sack in the Corner, and bake a Toast. Well, pray go on. Why truly, Sir,
as I was saying, I did perceive you had a Kindness for me; but alas! What could
you expect of a giddyheaded young Thing as I was in those Days? For you must
know, Sir, that Mr. Mac-Carrot, that you saw at our House, had engaged my
Affections before I came from the Boarding-School; but I am sure I have lived
to repent it every Vein of my Heart that ever I crossed the Seas with him. In
short, Sir, we were no sooner married, but he carried me over with him to the
County of Kerry, where he had Relations who were well enough to pass, and what
with their Assistance, and that little we had of our own, we made a pretty good
Shift for some Years, 'till the War breaking out in Ireland, my Husband was too
zealous for the Popish Interest, and entered into the Service of the late K --
J -- s. I told him over and over what would come of it. He gave me no Answer,
but that it was his Opinion, and he would stand and fall by it; and Child, said
he, you are a Fool if you don't turn Catholic. Never talk on it, said I, I Will
die a Thousand Deaths before I Will change my Religion, and so he never pressed
me any more about it. But as I had foretold, so it happened, he was killed at
the Siege of Limerick, and our House plundered; I may safely say they did not
leave me the Value of this Rag to wind about my Finger." And ^en she burst out
a Crying. "Ha! said I, this is a melancholy Story indeed; come, here is to you,
I Will promise you it is a Glass of good Sack: But pray did his Relations do
nothing for you? Relations! Ah Lord! said she, they were his Relations, not
mine; and when he went, all went with him: You must think, Sir, I went to 'em,
but they looked as coldly upon me as if I came to take the Bread out of their
Mouths. At last, they agreed among 'em to take one of my Girls off my Hands,
and gave me Five Pounds to carry me over to England. But when I came there, I
was never the near, for I had angered all my Friends in Marrying; and I dare
say some of 'em were glad to see me in such Necessity. At last an Aunt of mine
sent me Word I should be welcome to her in Staffordshire, where, being a Widow,
and old and infirm, I was serviceable to her in the Nature of her Housekeeper.
It pleased God she died in about Two Years after, and left me in Money and
Goods to the Value of Four hundred Pounds. Upon this I plucked up a good Heart
again, and had several Offers made me from substantial Farmers of good Repute
in the Neighborhood; but it was a Sort of Life I did not care for, and having
no Thoughts of altering my Condition, nothing would serve me but I must come up
to Town here; and having a Stock of Linen, and other good Things that my Aunt
left me, I hired a handsome House, and took Lodgers. Well, why this put you in
a good Way again, said I, interrupting her. Yes indeed, Sir, said she, I had
several Parliament Men and other very good Gentlemen in my House, and lived as
creditably as any Body in my Employ; so that in a few Years I thought I should
be able to do very well for my Children. Pray what Children might you have,
said I, besides the Girl you were mentioning in Ireland. I had a Son and
Daughter, said she, and as hopeful they were, though I say it, as any Woman
would wish to be Mother of. But there was a Gentleman in my House who belonged
to the Army, a civil Man to my thinking, as ever came under any Body's Roof. I
never heard an Oath come out of his Mouth, he paid me punctually every Monday
Morning, and was so easy and contented, that I thought I could never do enough
for him. It seems, as I found afterward, he took a Liking to m^ Betty; and I
believe there was no Love lo^ for I observed the Girl would go mopin^ about the
House, and I would often s^ to her, What Is come to you, Child? Methin^ you take
no Pleasure in any Thing you do^ She would make me no Answer; but on^ Day, as
we were alone, I put it Home (...) her, and then she up and told me the whole
Story, that she had been over-pe^suaded by the Captain, and was so far gon^
that it was in vain to conceal it any long^ Soon after she was delivered of a
fine Bo^ and as soon as she was up, Well, Mother, says she, I will not live
here to be a Disgrace to you, I Will try my Fortune in the Indies. So I agreed
with a West India Captain of my Acquaintance, since the Girl had such a Mind to
travel into foreign Parts; but the first News I had by the Return of the Ships
was, that she died of the Distemper of the Country. Still I was in Hopes my Son
Joseph would do well; but he was got in with an idle Gang, who would send for
him at all Hours in the Night. I was fond of him, and sed him with Money till I
was almost reduced again, in Hopes to reclaim him by fair Means: At other Times
I would talk to him seriously, and tell him he had had another Sort of an
Education: But nothing would do; I found I was but a Woman; he would give me
the Hearing, and then away to his Comrades. But one Day above the rest, there
was a great Noise of a Robbery and Murder that had been committed upon
Bagshot-Heath, and my Son, among others, was taken up and carried to Newgate.
Upon his Trial, he confessed he was among them, and was found guilty; but he
declared with his last Breath, he was not concerned in the Murder. I was with
him every Day after his Condemnation. He told me all along he was willing to
die; but I did what I could with Money and Friends, till I had nothing left, to
get his Pardon; and a Gentleman who belonged to the Court, and had formerly
been my Lodger, gave me Hopes to the last, and bid me fear nothing, ^o that my
Son should not suffer. To keep him in Heart, I told him we should get a
Reprieve: But when he found he must go into the Cart, he fixed his Eyes
steadfastly upon me, and only said, Mother, is it come to this? I repented
afterward that I had deluded my poor Child with vain Promises; for he relied
so much upon them, that I am afraid he did not make so good an End as he should
have done. It was a bad End indeed, said I, for an only Son; but Children, you
know, are certain Troubles, and uncertain Comforts: However, what is past cannot
be recalled. I am sorry for your Misfortunes; but pray tell me, Do you want any
little Assistance that I can give you? Sir, said she, I Will conceal nothing from
you; I want for nothing: I have between Six and Seven Hundred Pounds by me,
which I have picked up in this Way, and hope that will put me above Dependence
for the rest of my Life." I drank again to her to renew our old Acquaintance,
and so we parted. She left me so full of Reflections upon the Escape I had had
when I would have married her, that I could not sleep a Wink that Night.

The TATLER. [No 44.
Sunt quos curriculo Pulverem Olympicum
Collegisse juvat; Metaque fervidis
Evitata Rotis, Palmaque nobilis
Terrarum Dominos evehit ad Deos.
Hor.
From Saturd. April 28. to Tuesd. May 1. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, April 30.
EVER since I have taken upon me the Office of Censor of Great Britain, it has
been my principal Care to guard my self against all Manner of just Reproaches,
which might depretiate those wholesome Maxims which I every Day distribute to
the Public, and to fence against all those Vices which render old Age
contemptible. And it is wholly owing to this that I have never fallen into that
common Weakness of finding Fault with the present only for an Excuse to cry up
the last Age. I must own I have had a great Itch to do it, but as I weigh every
Thing before I attempt doing it, I find upon mature Deliberation, that
generally speaking the Age is virtuously inclined, and that what Faults it has
proceed chiefly from excellent Principles, and might be made Virtues with a
very little Trouble. For, in the first Place, I observe that Part of Mankind,
where one would least expect it, to be wonderfully inclined to Economy; I mean
the Young and the Fair of Quality. No Frost, Snow, no^ East Wind, can hinder a
large Set of People from going to the Park in February, no Dust nor Heat in
June. And this is come to such an intrepid Regularity, that those agreeable
Creatures that would shriek at an hind Wheel in a deep Gutter, are not afraid,
in their proper Sphere, of the Disorder and Danger of Seven Rings. But as the
City does generally value it self upon out-doing the other End of the Town in
these Matters, so I have long observed, with infinite Satisfaction, a certain
Coach, which I esteem particularly. It belongs to a worthy Trader in or near
Well-Close, and no Disparagement to Charles's- Wain, it keeps its Course as
regularly as any Fixed Star of 'em all. The Family to which this wondrous
Automaton belongs, goes to Dinner as soon as Morning Service is over, they set
out in the Cool of the Noon, about Half an Hour after Twelve, and, according to
the Rule of discreet Travelers, make the Coachman drive slowly at first, by
which they have Two Advantages; one, that they see all the Company go to Church
in the City, and the other, that their Horses have Time to empty themselves. At
Charing Cross they stop and give the Cattle a Mouthful of Hay, have a cool
Tankard, or the like, and any of the Gentlewomen that have Occasion step out of
the Coach. By the End of Suffolk-street they mend their Pace, and get into a
tolerable Trot, which brings them so happily to the farthest Part of their
Journey, and in such good Time, that they are there as soon as the best of 'em.
I remember last Year I was over against Northumberland House when this Caravan
reposed there; they were Five of the Fair Sex, Three pretty fat ones, one very
fat, and a lean one. They were all sure of the Thousand Pounds a Year in the
Lottery, and almost fell out about their several Ways of Disposing of it. The
fattest of them said, "If it should please God to take away her Master, she
would not change her Condition though she should get the Thousand Pounds a Year,
but would lay it up to make her Children love her; but if they should prove
undutiful, she could not tell how far she might be prevailed upon; but an't
please God she would never marry a Seaman again, she would have no more Frights and
Twitters at every puff of Wind." The next in Size to her Ladyship said, "Laud
Mother, Why to be sure, Forsooth, you will not have it; you will have enough without
it. Child, said her Mother, Will you never leave off that ugly Trick? Cannot you
call a Body, Madam? I would to God I had sent you to Chelsey instead of
Stepney, but 'twas such a great Way off. Prithee, Sister, don't fright your
self, says another, I shall have it mun; for I was adreamed, and so methought
there came a fine Gentleman to me, in a Cinnamon-colour'd Coat and Gold
Buttons, and a long Wig, and a Gold Chain about his Neck, and so he ax'd me to
go with him to his Country House at Grinitch, and methought he had my Lord
Mayor's Bage and Tisdale, and the City Music, and he said as how 'twas because
I had a great Forti^. The Third said, she was sure she should have it, because
she had a Mind to it; and if she got it, she would come away immediately to that
very Coffee-house yonder, and send for one of those young Officers out, and
marry him immediately; and then, Madam, I Will come and wait upon you in my Glass
Chariot, and pass my Time like a little Queen. Ah, Mal! said the old one, thou
art a mad Girl; thou would think on it twice -- Ay so I shall Forty Times, said
she; till the Lottery is drawn, I shall do nothing but think on it: But Sister
Rachel says nothing. Why, says the lean one, I Am satisfied none of you will
have it, for it is come into my Head just now that I shall have it my self; and
I Will take a House in Devonshire-Square, and get a Set to play all Day long at
Lue, and never marry, but despise Mankind; though now I think on it, if any of
you have a Girl to my Mind, perhaps I may breed her up, and when I die, leave
her all I have, and then she may be married to a Lord: Look'ee there now." It
grieved me mightily to see the Coach drive away at this Period, and I could not
but make this Reflection: How Five People could be sanguine enough to expect
the great Lot, which was One hundred and fifty thousand to One whether either
of them had it, and of the many Thousand Owners of Coaches in and about this
great City, not one of them was afraid of having their Necks broke at the Park,
where the Odds are not above Two hundred at most; nay, Folks are glad to borrow
a Chance for being crippled. I concluded with my self, that those who come from
the wary Part of the Town, had perhaps had the Precaution to insure in
Exchange-Alley, without which I thought it impossible Ladies should venture to
travel so far to run such Dangers; for we may perceive by the Number of Offices
now in Town, that it is no longer in Fashion to ride Post to Sieges: But the
Mystery was soon explained as to these Well-Close Pilgrims; for that very
Evening my honest Friend Faber would needs take me from St. James's Park with
him to eat a cold Chicken and Sallad, and drink a Flask of Flurrence, as he
calls it; and as we were looking out at Window in the Pall Mall, and seeing the
Coaches going to the Park, I saw my Lady and her Daughters return. I had an
Inclination to smile at first; but upon Reflection, I could not but admire the
Sagacity of those People, who (having a great Way to go) come out of the Park
when others are going in, for by that Means they see all the Company, and avoid
all the Danger.

The TATLER. [No 45.
Potanda ferens Infantibus Ubera magnis.
Juv.
From Tuesd. May 1. to Thursd. May 3. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, May 2.
I Cannot without Admiration behold the forward Pretensions of the Youth of
this Age, wherein we daily find Boys exerting the very first Operations of
their Minds in the most abstruse Parts of Learning; so that one would th nk the
Souls of their Great Grandfathers had transmigrated into them. This praecocious
Wit, as it is very unbecoming in the Presence of a Man of my Years, so is it
likewise very ominous to the Persons who are possessed with it; for they are
generally short-lived, and give Occasion to their Mothers to say, The poor
Child had too much Sense to live long. It is therefore my Opinion, That this
great Vice takes its Beginning entirely from taking Children too soon f om the
Breast, and admitting them so early to the Use of a luxurious Variety in their
Food, which forces an Understanding before its due Time. I have therefore, from
a long Observation amongst young Fellows, as I find them in their Conversation,
and according to the Subjects which they handle, been able to tell the very Day
when the Nurse applied the bitter Drug to the Nipple, to give them an Aversion
to Sucking. There was a Law among that wise People the Romans, That no Man
should kill above Thirty Asses at a Time for a Banquet; and the Reason was,
that they being a Creature then esteemed a great Dainty, and a vast Consumption
of them, there was found at length a great Defect of their Milk for the
Education of the Offspring of the Commonwealth, to the unspeakable Pain and
Labor of the good Women, who were otherwise obliged to suckle their Children
till they should be fit to carry Arms in Defense of their Country. I have
therefore, out of a due Respect to such an excellent Example, and to prevent
the Inconveniences of these too early Essays in Things of sublime Science,
ordered the ingenious Mr. Charles Bubbleboy to get made for the Use of the
Public, from Time to Time, a sufficient Number of Sucking-Bottles, which all
young Fellows under the Age of Twenty are to hang with a Chain about their
Necks. And I likewise ordain, That when any Person under the Age above written
shall presume to launch out of his Depth in Theoretical Learning, it shall be
in the Power of any By-stander to apply the Bottle to his Mouth, and make him
suck.

I hope by this Simplicity of Diet in some reasonable Time so far to reform the
Manners of Youth in Conversation, that no one under the Age aforementioned
shall presume to exceed the Limits of Grammatical Learning in Discourse; and
likewise to augment the Strength and Stature of my Countrymen, a^ well as their
Understandings.

It has ever been the Custom of our Family to bring up their Children without
endeavoring to improve their Minds till their Bodies were grown to a full
Maturity, and we were suffered as it were to lie fallow without any
Cultivation, till the Soil was rich enough to give a full Vigor and Extension
to the Seed that should be sown in it. For this Reason I was looked upon as a
mere Idiot all the Time of my Childhood, and lived in a State of Admiration to
an Age wherein others are wont to exert egregious Signs of Wisdom. I remember
very well, that I sucked my Mother till I was able to carry my Cradle on my
Back, and could not speak a Word till I was Ten Years old, being a perfect
Pythagorean by Nature, and always more inclinable to hear than talk, till I
grew so full of Conceptions, that at last I was obliged to give Vent by
Writing, as my Thoughts oppressed me, the Delivery of which has had that
wonderful Effect as to make me arrive at the Dignity of being Censor of Great
Britain.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
In Consideration that my Sucking-Bottles are to be of General Use, and adapted
to the various Fancy of Youth; as to the ornamental Part, I have given my
Friend Charles full Liberty to indulge every one in their Humor as to the
Materials which they shall be made of, provided they held full Quarts each; and
he has promised me on his Word and Honor, that he will be contented with a
living Profit, out of an entire Respect to the Public Good.

Arthur Rattle and Jack Feather, (Two young Heroes just entered into a Course
of Town-Gallantry) will attend as usual, Three Times a Week, at Sadlers-Wells,
to perform the Parts of complete Rakes, just after the Cobbler is acted. They
also show the best Method to make quick Dispatch of the Fortunes both of an
elder Brother deceased, and of an Infant under Guardianship; the one soon
after, the other before, he be in Possession; and that without the tedious Way
of doing it reputably.

N. B. They hope speedily to be qualified for Master Actors in the said Comical
Society, having already learned, and performed (in public) the Cobler's Song,
with great Applause.

The TATLER. [No 46.
Dii Majorum Umbris tenuem, and sine Ponde^ Terra^
Spirantesque Crocos, and in Urna perpetuum Ver,
Qui Praeceptorem Sancti voluere Parentis
Esse Loco. --
Juvenal.
From Thursday May 3. to Saturday May 5. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, May 4.
MY Curiosity led me the other Day to be present at the Election at Westminster
School, where I met with an Entertainment of Juvenile Exercises suitable to my
Expectation, and observed with great Satisfaction those pretty Velitations of
Wit, which may be called the politer Parts of Grammatical Learning, and are the
promising Preludes of future Perfections in the sublime Sciences. Those little
Epigrammatical Flowers, in which you behold Poetry in her Spring, very various
in her Array of Colors, but not daring yet to shoot high from the Earth, which
were then offered up as Fi^ Fruits to the Great Harlaeus, as they show their
own Inability of soaring high enough, yet they do in some Measure point at that
immense Height of Praise, which should be equal to the Subject commended, and
which ought to be the particular Province of an Epick Poet.

When I first entered the School, I was struck with a becoming Awe and
Veneration to so sacred a Place, and the Dignity of the Person presiding in it,
not without a due Regard to the Fasces, which are the Symbol of his Authority.
I could not then forbear taking the Person and Office of a Schoolmaster into a
nearer Consideration, and to propose him to my Mind in the Abstract, with a
View of what he teaches.

A Schoolmaster is a complete Treasury of chosen Words from Classick Authors,
the very Composition of whose Body does not seem to owe it self so much to the
Four Physicical Elements, as to the Four and twenty Letters of the Alphabet;
and yet with so little Confusion in his Contexture, that he shall be able, as
it were, to unravel his whole Substance into Idioms, Proper Diction, Golden
Sentences, Verses, Themes, and Declamations. You would think the Economy of
his House was directed entirely according to the Three Special Rules, and that
the Book of Tenses served for a Clock to it. His proper Business is to teach
Grammar, which he distributes as sound Aliment to his Scholars, giving every
one such a Portion for a Meal, and with that Impartiality, that no one
complains of having too little.

Whilst I was amusing my self with these Thoughts, which to some may seem too
ludicrous on so grave a Subject, (though I profess ^t is far from my Intention
to lessen the Idea of ^o excellent a Function) I was diverted from ^urther
prosecuting the Character, by being obliged to take Notice of Three or Four
spr^ young Fellows, that walked about the Scho^ and seemed to affect an Air of
Thoughtlesne^ They twirled round their Gloves with great ^difference, looked
serene, wore Bob-Wigs, cle^ Sleeves, and their Coats were generally abo^ six
Inches too short, and seemed not at all (...) give Attention to the excellent
Things the were spoke. These I found to be young S^dents lately returned from
Oxford, who wou^ not condescend to be pleased with such Trifl^ exerting at the
same Time several Lines (...) their Faces to signify a superior Excellence
(...) versifying, and looking down with a Sort (...) Pity on those that admired
the present Perf^mances.

Interspersed here and there in several Co^ners of the School, you might have
seen so^ Fellows of the same Stamp, but something a^cienter Date, with a very
profound Look, b^ting their Thumbs, and scratching their Head^ Others with
their Faces lifted up horizontal^ to the Sieling; and here and there a Man the
required only, for the Assistance of his Inve^tion, a Bit of Packthread, or a
Pin to play wit^ between his Fingers.

These Fellows, I found, were endeavourin^ to revive their Muse long since
extinct, and d^sirous of being caught in a Posture of inten^ing something for
the Use of the young Ca^didates. These Rogues I could not bear wit^ for that I
feared they might defraud the youn^ Gentlemen of their due Praise, by a false
Op^nion that might be conceived of their Service^ whereas it is very natural to
think, that Exe^cises of this Nature are proper only to Youth^ who by a
peculiar Heat and Vivacity are re^der'd capable of that Quickness of
Apprehension which is necessary to produce those extemporaneous and amazing
Flights of Fancy.

I left the School with some Indignation, and came down into the Cloisters,
where I surprised the Great (though unfriendly to the Muses) Johannes Kellaeus,
just descended from the Room where the Company had dined, stuffing into his
Pockets the Leg of a Lobster, the Carcass of a Green Goose, and a great Lump of
Pudding.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Ordered, That the abovesaid Johannes Kellaeus, as a Punishment to be inflicted
on him for his said Contempt of the Muses, be forthwith required to suck again
for a Twelvemonth, and that Charles Bubbleboy do with all Speed provide him a
Sucking-Bottle that shall hold Two Quarts, void of all Ornaments.

The TATLER. [No 47.
Sic Canibus Catulos similes. --
Virg.
From Saturday May 5. to Tuesday May 8. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, May 7.
WHEN I was last at Oxford about Seven or Eight and twenty Years ago, I had
struck up a great Friendship with Two very brisk Sportsmen, Fellows of
All Souls College, Charles Oppian and Gratius Faliscus. They each of them kept
their Brace of Geldings. We used to hunt Three Times a Week with Dr. Hammond's
Hounds, and generally passed the Evenings together. We kept a Correspondence
very regularly for some Months after I left the University, but by little and
little it dwindled away, and I thought they had been both dead, till upon
publishing my Papers our Acquaintance revived again, and they often send me a
Hare or a Pike to put me in Mind ^f the happy Moments we formerly enjoyed at
^l. Harding's. This which follows came with ^ Present, and may serve as a
Specimen to show the World what an odd Way of Think^ng a Man of very good Sense
may contract, ^ho has no Commerce with any Thing but ^is Books, and his own
Imagination.

To Isaac Bickerstaff Esquire
Oxford, April 30. from the University Library. SIR,
YOU were pleased some Time since to make several Parts of Mankind the
Instruments of much Mirth to the Town, and to debase humane Nature so low, as
to enclose several Persons in Viols and Harpsicords, for no other End but to
play upon them. I would be glad one Part of the World could be diverted without
the other's paying the Expense of it, and I have such a general Good Will to
every Thing that has Life, that I cannot see any of my Fellow Creatures abused
without a very sensible Concern. The ill Usage of Dogs (notwithstanding their
Fidelity, which ought to have gained them the Esteem of all honest Men) is so
notorious, that it is become a Proverb; and I have long had a Design of
vindicating these Animals in a regular Treatise, in which I would oppose them
to several Ranks of Men, and impartially examine the Merits on both Sides, and
decide according to Justice: But as my Business at present will not permit me
to enter into so large a Field as that Disquisition, I have sent you up some
Heads, which I would be obliged to you if yo^ would be pleased to recommend
them (...) the learned World, in order to stir up some abler Pen to prosecute
and finish this de^rable Work.

I observe first, That Bear-Dogs are a stay'^ Sort of grave dull Animals, and I
fancy no^ much inferior to some Country Justices.

Bull-Dogs, though they have neither Fea^ nor Wit, yet being apt to fall upon
any Thing that is tied to a Stake, and to make their Teeth meet when they have
any, might be usefully employed as Executioners of Justice against public
Mismanagers.

French Spaniels, who generally profess the Doctrine of Passive Obedience,
would make as good Courtiers as Setters; for they will lie still while a Net is
drawn over them, though they are caught themselves in it, and will not stir, in
Hopes of having a dead Bird flung to them to mumble.

There are many Curs of all Denominations, that allow Resistance in the
extremest Necessity: These are called Mad Dogs by the other Whelps, in hopes
to get 'em knocked on the Head; but People don't rise upon them,
notwithstanding the Outcry, because they do not take 'em to be Driv'lers.

Turnspits. An industrious short-legged Race of Puppies, that run round in a
Ring to get an honest Livelihood, are the Mechanics; and by their Spinning
support the Roastmeat-Manufacture.

Greyhounds, that are good for nothing but to tumble Beds, lie by the Fire, or
divert themselves, I take to be Dogs of Quality.

Fop-Dogs are Italian Greyhounds, Dutch Mastives, and Shocks. These are the
Beaux, Smarts, and Dappers.

Fox-Hounds and Beagles are the Militia, who pursue their Enemies very eagerly,
provided they run away from 'em.

Peasants. Vide Four Dogs in Drury Lane that ploughed an Acre of Ground, quoted
by Dr. King.

There are a progging, dexterous, insinuating Sort of Dogs, that are very prone
to come over a Stick, and to do whatever they are bid, called Danish Dogs:
These excel all the rest in Understanding, and if it were not for one Fault,
would make admirable Ministers of State; but unfortunately, they are honest.

N. B. As there is neither Immorality nor Money amongst these Animals, there
are no Dogs of the Long Robe.

I would not have any of the several Professions I have spoke of take it ill
that I have ranked these Creatures with them, nor think it any Disparagement if
I declare it to be my Opinion that I have done them a very great Honor; for
there is a Dignity of Nature among Dogs which Men must not pretend t^ And I
appeal to you, Mr. Bickerstaff, and (...) every Body else, whether they have n^
known some of all Professions that have pass'^ for very Great Men, who in
Reality were b^ very Sad Dogs. I am,

Your most humble Servant, Gratius Falisc^
Your old Friend, honest Oppian, is sti^ alive, and desires you to send him the
Game Act as soon as it is printed. You should n^ have called Sharpers, Dogs.




The TATLER. [No 48.
-- Facies non omnibus una est,
Nec diversa tamen. --
Ovid.
From Tuesday May 8. to Thursday May 10. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, May 9.
WHen I was formerly an Oxford Scholar, I had the Honor of being Mace-bearer
^o the Club of Ugly Faces for several Years together; and I remember it was of
very great Use to me in those Times, for as I had never any Money in my Pocket
to spend, so neither ^ad I any Occasion for it, it being a standing Rule in the
Club, always to run away without ^aying the Reckoning; as it was also, that we
should never come to the same House twice. I ^emember several excellent
Discourses had in that Society in Praise of Deformity: It was ^enerally defined
to be a sportive Deviation of nature, when she exercised her Plastic Facul^y
in the Formation of Man, to distinguish her ^avourites from those of a common
Concern. The Two general Divisions ran upon Redun^ancies and Defects, as they
related to the par^cular Parts of a humane Body. Redundan^es comprehended
Carbuncles, Hair-Lips, Wattles on the Nose, Coalition of Eyebrows, Elevations
of Back and Breast, etc. Defe^ were, Pigs Eyes, Tup Noses, short Necks,
^vernous Cheeks, flat and sharp Scalps, etc. T^ several Members of our Society
were each (...) them dignified with some one or more of the^ respective
Qualifications; insomuch that, wh^ we sat down together over our Eleemosyna^
Cups, we made a very good Symmetry in (...) Appearance, by an artful
Disposition of our ^dies in a proper Place and Light, whereby (...) seemed to
transfer from one to another wh^ might be defective or superfluous, and by
^tual Applications obumbrate our common Failures and Excesses. It was the
customary Business of the Night to make Panegyrical Orations on our natural
Features, which were indeed of that wonderful Structure, that neith^ the Tongue
of Demosthenes could describe, the Chissel of Polycletus carve, nor the Pencil
(...) Apelles paint, with all those proper Graces the ought to be expressed in
such elegant Subjec^ I remember Anthracius, then Steward of the Club, had a
Carbuncle on his Nose of the fir^ Magnitude, not unworthy the Crown of (...)
Oriental Monarch, which did not use to shi^ in its full Luster till Midnight.
Then it w^ that the divine Phoxus, with his acumina^ Crest high towering in the
Air, conceived (...) Oration in Words to this Effect: "Most noble Anthracius, I
am not ignorant how (...) it is above the Power of my Eloquence s^ciently to
commend the indulgent Benigni^ of Nature, who has placed that effulge^ Fungus
of massy Light, on the utmost Promontory of thy lovely Visage: See how (...)
diffusive Rays dazzle his languid Peepe^ and spread a lambent Fire over the
who^ Surface of his Jowls and Chuckles. Thri^ happy Insects! Who, now in Egg,
are lodg^ in the benign putrid Cells of so foecund an Ovary, expecting to be
called forth to the perpetual Day which always surrounds it: How will you then
flirt your flitting Wings, and buz within the Verge of that glowing Vortex."
The Oration was received with universal Applause, and Anthracius about to
answer; but the Proctors coming in, we were obliged to defer the Hearing till
next Night.

I am resolved, in Imitation of this wise and excellent Constitution, to
establish another Club here in London, where I shall not despair of a Number
sufficient to make our Complement, and have already sent me from Oxford the
true and genuine Impression of the Mace, taken in Clay at a general Meeting of
that excellent Society, and have sent it to my Carver, intending to open with
the first Meeting at Fern's, at the Rose in Catherine-street next Monday Night,
where any Person may be admitted that is duly qualified, after having passed an
Examination by my faithful and watchful Secretary Mr. Henry Dighton, in
Fleetstreet, whom, for his great Sagacity and Judgment in the Mathematical
Proportion of Faces, I do depute thereunto.

P. S. Since my finishing this Paper, the following Letter came to my Hands
from the Club at Oxford, which I thought fit to insert here.

Mr. Bickerstaff,
WE are all here very much pleased that you are upon so useful a Work as
establishing a Club of Ugly Faces at London, being well assured that you cannot
want Company enough, but are much surprised to find a Person, going by the Name
of The Spectator, so audacious as to style himself a Member of our Society
here, and printing Letters as from us to prove his Admittance, and thereby gain
him a Reputation in the World. We therefore, whose Names are underwritten, do
assure you, that those Letters are merely fictitious, and that we do disown him
for a Member of the said Society accordingly.

Witness our Hands, Will. Wainscote, Steward. Tom. Ronchus, Secretary.



Ordered, That the Spectator make his personal Appearance between this and
Monday next before Secretary Dighton, in order to be examined.

Ordered also, That none presume to come to the Club with Faces distorted on
Purpose to gain Admission, or with Vizard-Masques to dissemble an
Accomplishment.

N. B. In case of Non-Attendance, I shall summon from Time to Time all those
who shall out of Contempt absent themselves, or whose Modesty will not suffer
them to lay Claim to their being received in the Society.

The TATLER. [No 49.
From Thursd. May 10. to Saturd. May 12. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, May 11.
LOng have I labored, and much have I traveled, for the Improvement of my
Fellow Subjects. I have not been wanting by my Speculations to show the easy
and pleasant Ways to Virtue; nor have I been less severe in censuring Vice
wherever I met it, which I find every where increase, and come on apace, while
Virtue slowly creeps up, meets with continual Opposition, and seldom, very
seldom comes to that Perfection as to dare to look Vice in the Face; but then
it easily looks such false Courage out of Countenance. It was most amazing to
me, when I was Yesterday at St. James's Coffee-house, to see a forward Youth,
well dressed and powdered, whom I knew not only to be of very mean Extract, but
of more despicable Parts, lay his extraordinary Chin over a Duke's Shoulder,
and as familiarly ask him impertinent Questions, as if his Equality or Intimacy
entitled him to disturb that noble Peer, who, when he was delivered from the
Weight of his Chin, enquired who he was. How easy had it been for me to have
told the Company, that that Place was indeed very fit for him, but in another
Capacity? However I only privately informed the Master, who, in Respect to his
Brother CoffeeMan, desired the Count to know himself, an^ not be so familiar
with those that he did no^ know. From that Place I came to Tom's at
Devereux-Court. I have a singular Respect for that courteous Man, and find,
that if he permits Doctor Sal-vo -- to lay aside the Man in that violent Man,
and with an Indignation (greater than can be admitted to any Orator) retire
into the Third Sphere, and talk Things indeed not fit to be heard, I assure my
Under-Secretary, that as Curiosity at present doubles his Customers at the
Doctor's Eloquence, in a short Time, as no Body else now can be heard, there
will be no Body to hear.

Ordered therefore, That unless the said Doctor will condescend to be on the
Level with Common Sense, his Tea be always Two Degrees under Proof; That he be
allowed no Tobacco, nor the Use of his own S. V. O. both too conducive to
Agitation; but after having paid his Penny, you show him the Situation of your
Door.

What made me in some Measure excuse the Doctor's Vociferation was, that I did
not see as usual the Newspapers, of which none could give Account, till in
about Half an Hour's Time I saw a Man come out of the Yard with a Handful, yet
enquiring most thirstily for the Post-Boy; till he had that, he would not
deliver the rest. Upon Enquiry, I found him to be my old Friend the Upholsterer
revived in a North-British Barber, who is so great a Patriot, so good a
Politician, so sollicitous for the Grand Alliance in General, and so tender of
the Interest of every particular Court, that for them he neglects the more
trifling Cares of domestic Concerns, and appears early and late in a tattered
Gown. "Sir, (says he to me) by your Leave, there is one Paragraph of very great
Importance which has escaped me." And having directed me to it, (for I would
not again part with it out of my Hand) desired I would read it, which I did in
a direct Line through the whole Paper, without Regard to the Distinction of
Columns, and was as follows: Yesterday the Empress Regent appeared for to be
changed, and arrived at the Place appointed. Her Majesty is Daily in Council in
order to resume the Function of the Auditor of the Rota. And for the Security
of the Empire and Finances Has been arrived some Days ago at Marli.

'Ay Sir, said he, How can that be? Surely Sir -- Nay, look'ee Sir, said I, If
you don't like my Reading, if you will stay so long for it as you have made
others, you may have it again; but he retired.'

ADVERTISEMENT.
Upon the Reprimand which Count Coffee received Yesterday, he begins to abate
his Pride, and being apprehensive of being excluded from all Society, has
petitioned to be admitted into my Ugly Face Club. I do therefore order my
Secretary Henry Dighton to enrall him without Examination, being truly
qualified, for Affectation is all over Ugliness.

The TATLER. [No 50
-- Dii tibi formam,
Dii tibi Divitias dederant, Artemque fruendi
Hor.
From Saturd. May 12. to Tuesday May 15. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, May 14.
DIscouraged and wearied by the ill Success of my Endeavors to reclaim this
obstinate Age f om its Vices and Follies, I have often had it in my Thoughts to
quit my Office. My Friends all importune me to it, and one of them, whom in
January last I had desired to continue this Paper during a necessary Avocation
of mine, actually tried to lay it down handsomely for me. Nothing has hindered
me from complying with their Requests, but a strong Benevolence I have always
had toward Mankind, and an ardent Desire of doing some Good in my Generation.
These alone have supported me under my Disappointment, and now prompt me to put
in Execution a new Scheme, which is to abate something from the Grandeur of my
Enterprise; and, since I cannot attain a greater Good, to attempt a less, no
longer endeavoring to ease Men of their Follies, but in their Follies; nor
striving to make Men supportable to each other, but each one to himself. This
Thought arose in me the other Night at the Play, upon observing several
Difficulties that many of our Nobility and Gentry labored under. A pretty
young Gentleman tore his Breeches, and broke his Sword, by getting over the Box
into the Pit, that he might have that Opportunity of exposing to Sight his
Pearl-coloured Stockings and red-top'd Shoes. Another, who had a very fine Wig,
and a Feather in his Hat, was forced to sit covered all the Time, and spoil the
Wig to show the Feather. A Third, lest his fringed Gloves should not be seen,
underwent the Pain of leaning forwards for a whole Play together upon the fore
Part of the Box, setting his Arms upright upon his Elbows. A Fourth, who was in
low Circumstances of Stature, every now and then with great Labor heaved into
Sight a rich Sword-Knot: And many others were variously hampered and perplexed
in displaying their several Fineries. To remedy which Inconveniences, I at
first thought it might be proper to advise the Owners of the Playhouse to
appropriate each Division of the Side-Boxes to a several Dress, and to
distinguish them by Inscriptions over them in large Letters in these and the
like Words: Red-top'd Shoes. Sword-Knots. Feathers. Fringed Gloves. Gold
Snuff-Boxes. Dressed at all Points.


By which Means the whole Audience would at one Glance be appriz'd of the
particular Ornament of every Person in that Division.

But reflecting since that this Invention would be of too narrow an Use, (it
being likely to extend only to the Playhouse, and perhaps a Cathedral or two)
I have applied my self to find out something that may be of general Ease to the
Beau Monde; proceeding in this Manner; I considered what might be the Rise or
Cause of all that vast Variety of Fashions which we Yearly see. This I found to
be solely the Oftentation of Riches; for upon this Accoun^ it is, that People
have no sooner one Sui^ brought Home from the Taylor's, but (to show that their
Purse is not exhausted) they bespeak another, which (that it may appear to the
most careless Eye to be a late Purchase) must differ from the former, not only
in Matter, but in Form. This in the present Course of Things will be an eternal
Occasion of the Mutability of Fashions, and as a Man has but one Way of being
in the Right, and Ten thousand of being in the Wrong, so there can be but one
Dress commodious, and as soon as we deviate from that, we shall find all the
rest troublesome. I therefore thought, that if a Medium could be invented by
me, whereby both the Fair and the Foul. Sex might at once be rid of the
Encumbrances of the Mode, and be continued in the Reputation of Profuseness, I
should do an acceptable Piece of Service to my Country, and procure to my self
Peace of Mind in a Consciousness that I had not lived in vain. This I hope I
have at last happily effected by the following Project:

An Office shall be ^ed by the Name of The Equivalent Office. In this Office,
any Person shall be admitted to pay down such Sum or Sums of Money as he or she
shall be desirous to expend in any particular Ornament or Ornaments. Upon the
Payment of such Sum or Sums, and Intimation given what Piece of Finery it is
designed for, there shall be made out a neat Ticket or Credential (in the
Language of the Office) to be worn in the most conspicuous Part of the Body,
certifying to all Men, that the Wearer thereof has actually laid out so much
Money as would have purchased such an Ornament therein described, and requiring
them to deem, esteem and repute the said Wearer as ipso facto wearing the said
Ornament, any Thing in outward Appearance to the contrary notwithstanding. The
Advantages that will arise from this Office are innumerable. I shall only hint
at a few, which will put the Reader into a Way of discovering many more.

By Virtue of proper Credentials, Gentlemen may wear Wigs of such Size and
Color as shall best suit with their Features and Complexions, and yet have the
Credit of Light Full-Bottoms. Thick Legs may be diminished by black Stockings,
and Spindle-Shanks enlarged by white, yet both be reputed as Scarlet Silk.
Corns may be avoided by keeping the Feet in easy old Shoes, and yet the Owner
maintain the Reputation of having a new Pair every Day. Ladies, by these
Credentials, may yet farther enlarge their Petticoats, which in their present
Method is impossible to be done. They may make their Head-Dresses
proportionable to their Petticoats, and they may patch their Faces with
Diamonds without Disparagement to their Eyes.

I am not insensible how highly beneficial this Scheme might be in raising
Money for the Public; but a former Project of mine having been rejected with
Scorn when I offered it, and Two Years after made Use of with good Success, but
without any Acknowledgment of or to the Inventor, I am disgusted from making
any more Proposals of that Nature. I had once a Mind to apply the Profits to
Charitable Uses; but then I thought again, that doing Good with the Money would
be so prodigious an Alteration in the Application of it, that it would create
an insuperable. Objection against the whole Undertaking in those who were
likely to be my Contributors; so that I have at last resolved to apply it
wholly to my own Benefit.

The TATLER. [No 51.
-- Hae Nuga Seria ducunt
In Mala, derisum simul exceptumque sinistri.
Hor.
From Tuesday May 15. to Thursd. May 17. 1711.
From my own Apartment in Channel-Row, May 16.
IT is impossible to describe Wit by Generals: We must descend to Particulars,
and trace it Part by Part. For Wit is like Beauty: We may admire the Air, the
Symmetry, the whole Collection of Charms; but we cannot express it without
running over the Lip, the Neck, the Eye, the Breasts, and every individual
Feature. At present I shall examine that Sort of Wit we call Turns. These
appear to Advantage in some Parts of Poetry, which make their proper Province,
but lose their Luster when misplaced, and have nothing to excuse them, but an
unbounded irregular Fancy. The Ornaments of Poetry, like those of Dress, owe
their Ecclat in a great Measure to their Situation. A Turn, that would have
given Life to an Epigram, will make an Image in Heroicks parti-colored and
ridiculous; as the same Jewel which adorned the Ear or the Neck, would in the
Nose look monstrous and rueful. This Misapplication then is a Species of False
Wi^ and has a large Share in the Degeneracy (...) our modern Writers. I should
be apt to distinguish the Muse that inspired this Sort (...) Wit from the
Divine Calliope, as I would a C^quet from a Fine Woman: One is all Air an^
Affectation; the other refines upon good Sense^ yet converses in proper Words
and Sentiments. A Turn is the Creature of Fancy, that after it is born, is put
under the Tuition of the Judgment, which is to assign it a proper Station, and
to stint its Extravagancies. When it depends upon the Words or Style, great
Care is to be used that it may not dwindle into P^ and Jingle; and when it
consists chiefly in the Thought, the same Diligence is required that it may not
sink into any of those Flowers of the School, or Common-Places of Youth, by
which they gradually ascend to this Attainment. Both the Real and Verbal Turn
owe their Beauty to Novelty; for there is no greater Perfection in these
Witticisms, than what arises from that sudden Surprise they make upon the
Imagination. They seem to take their Name from their Nature; for they consist
mostly in advancing a Thought or Expression, and then making what follows, play
upon it in an agreeable Way, either by retracting what went before, or wittily
perverting it, or comparing it with something that hits the same Fact or Idea
to any Degree of Exactness, or giving some surprising Reason for it when it
seemed a Paradox. Indeed, the Variety of Turns is so great, and their Beauty so
entirely owing to this Variety, that it is almost impossible to fix them to any
stated Rules. A Turn being the Product of Fancy, it is unnatural to use it but
in those gayer and more airy Parts of Poetry, where the Fancy is at Liberty to
wanton and gambol. In the Epick, in Tragedy, or in that Sort of Elegy which has
Distress for its Subject, it would be ridiculous and trifling; for here the
chief Business belongs to the Judgment, and the Fancy is only concerned in
ranging for Images and Ideas equal to the Grandeur of the Subject. A Hero in a
Passion, might as well express the high Sentiments of his Soul by laughing at
one of the Plumes out of his Helmet, as by playing with a Turn or a Double
Entendre. A Lover, lamenting the Rigor of his Mistress, or a Poet the Loss of
his Friend, in this sportive Way, would make as awkward a Figure as the
resigned Ardelia, when she laughs at the Mischiefs committed by her Monkey,
though the Loss of her China wrings her very Soul; or an Irishman, in his
Country Way, singing at a Funeral. The Ancients had Abundance of this Sort of
Wit, and used it more discreetly than the Moderns. The Greeks indeed appear
perfect Strangers to it: They had other Ways to improve that Mirth which was so
natural to them. Anacreon and Aristophanes write in a Way where Turns are a
Beauty, and yet it is very difficult to find so much as one Expression of that
Sort in their Works. Homer, Hesiod, Theocritus, and Musaeus, have nothing like
it in their Poems. It seems to have begun at Rome, when Epigrams became the
common Entertainment of their best People. After Supper, or over a Bottle in a
cool Retreat, it was their Custom to divert one another with reciting or
composing three or four Distichs, that were usually pointed with one of these
Turns, in which they were smart upon some of the reigning Coxcombs, Coquets, or
Humors of that Age. Modern Lampoons were introduced as a Third Course at the
Tables of great Men in Imitation of this Custom. A good Part of Martial's
Epigrams seem (...) have been made at some of those Conversations; whence we
may account for the great Inequality in his Works, which himself acknowledges
-- Sunt bona, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt mal^ plura.
For we may imagine, that the Grave Pieces were made just upon the Whet, the
Bright after the first Bottle, and the Smutty after a full Dose. The Applause
that followed upon these smart Things, tempted the Fraternity to mingle them
with their most Serious and Pathetick Works. Ovid, whose great Fault was
Redundante, ran early into a palpable Extravagance this Way. In his Exile,
amidst Cold, Hunger, Solitude, and Distress, he indulges this awkward B^dinery
very feelingly. Imagine a generous Fellow, touched with the Loss of a Fine
Woman, and could he find Leisure for so egregious a Turn as -- Tu non Inventa,
Reperta es?


Narcissus is turned into a Flower, and well deserved it for playing with his
own Misery, and making Flowers of his Misfortunes. When he bursts forth in the
most wanton Merriment, with -- Inopem me Copia fecit.
Vellem, quod amamus, abesset.
Roger: Anne Rogem? Quid deinde rogabo?


You would think he were varying at Wertminster, and not preparing himself for
a real Transformation.

Virgil, the most judicious and correct Writer in the World, has studiously
avoided every Temptation to this Error. His -- Ignoscenda quidem, scirent si
agnoscere Manes.
Is the only Thing that looks like a Turn. How carefully does he avoid it in
that fine Complaint of Gallus -- Tu procul a Patria, nee sit mihi credere,
tantum
Alpinas, Ah Dura! Nives?


There is all the Beauty of the Analagy in two Words, which Ovid would have
wiredrawn into two Lines at least: For a Professor of Turns can never forbear
exerting himself when he happens to bring a Scornful Mistress into the Company
of Cold and Frost, till he has made the Lady a perfect Winter-piece; and it is
all one if Fire had made a Third Person in the Conversation. I remember a very
celebrated Epigram, which begins thus: -- Me Nive candenti petiit modo Julia --
Where the Author submits to be pelted with Snow-balls by his Mistress for
Eight Lines together, on Purpose to take the Benefit of this Melting Allegory.
It would set up an ordinary Critic to take the Moderns to Task upon this
single Article, the Misapplication of Turns. The Time may perhaps come, when I
may in Person summon our great Alexander, Theodosius, Brutus, Anthony, Caesar,
T^, Appius, and Osmyn, to answer their Extravagancies this Way, and out of
their own Mouths shall condemn them. I do not mean for little harmless Turns
made in their Res^eries, their cool Soliloquies, or in snip-snap Dialogue with
a Priest or a Gentleman Usher; but for Turus i^ Fits of Love and of Madness;
for Turus spoken in the very Face of Death, and of the Gods themselves; nay, in
the very Face of their Mistresses: And I am not mistaken, if they have not
sometimes raised the inordinate Appetite of Wit to the horrid Outrage of a
downright Quibble.

The TATLER. [No 52.
From Thursday May 17. to Saturd. May 19. 1711.
A Lover's Meditation on his Mistress.
MADAM,
THE Hours to me are Ages of Misery; they must be insupportable to a Wretch who
can never know what Joy is but in her Presence. Love may well be defined a
restless Impatience to be with those we adore. What a miserable Constraint then
must I live under, who make it my Business to avoid the Mistress of my Soul?
Where my Heart, my Wishes, my Thoughts are eternally, there I must never be.
Did she but know what I suffer, and how much a Discretion as exact as mine
makes one miserable; but alas! they must love like me that are to guess at my
Torments. I hardly know I live, but by what I endure for her. O! Nothing can
touch my Soul; there is no Harmony in Words, unless she speaks-them; there is
no Bliss, but in her Smile; no Terror, but in her Frown; nothing worth living
for, but her Esteem. There is this Comfort in an Affliction like mine, no other
Thing can give me a Moment's Uneasiness. She prevents all other Grief, she
prevents all other Pleasure. If the whole World should change its Place, and
she not concerned, I should hardly perceive it. Whether Peace or War, what
Party prevails, whose Ruin is near, all these Things are now indifferent, they
employ not my Thoughts. My only Impatience is to increase her good Opinion, my
only Care not to forfeit her Esteem. This Thought brings me into one of those
terrible Fits of Fear which often seize them that adore her. I know I am not in
positive Disobedience; and a little Equivocation, if so much practiced in
Religion, may be indulged in Love. I neither write nor send to her; I dare not
disobey. Sure if there be any Thing like a Fault in this, I am safe. Who is it
is to accuse? Who is guilty? And I hope I may say, What is the Crime? This
Letter is sent to you, meant to her, and it came from him; but, Who are these?
In this Dress, it is to every Body, it is to no Body. How will you draw up my
Indictment? However let me not be condemned unaccus'd, unheard; save me from
being criminal, if you can think me so. Burn this, and there can be but a
single Evidence against me, your self; and there never shall be another. This
is the plotting Way of your Servant, who with less Fear would engage in Treason
than in what might offend her too scrupulous Niceness. I confess I tremble,
though I can say (if this be one) it is a new Kind of Sin, against which there is
no Law.

Her Eyes were not more fatal to me the first Time that I saw them, than my own
have been false to my Heart ever since, if they have (...) told her a Thousand
Times that I die for (...) Alas! How many Tears will that Happin^ cost them?
They have gazed upon her, the have confessed a Passion; and should not (...)
Hand declare, my Tongue endeavor to describe it, that she might know my Love
(...) as it ought to be? The Adoration that I (...) her is such, and no other
but what we shou^ all pay the Gods were their charming Attributes so visible. I
was prepared for their ^tal Influence before I saw her Eyes, I was bewitched by
her Siren Tongue before I heard it. I loved the Spring from whence she came,
and my Soul follows the enticing Stream with Pleasure. I knew there must be Wit
and Fire before I heard so, and I found more than was spoken of. Thus I was
struck by Prepossession, and the Poison first instilled into my Heart before I
saw or knew her, can never be removed from thence by all that I shall ever see
or know. I would not profane a Confession as sincere as ever was a dying Man's
with the least Augmentation of Truth. I will not pretend that I have not
endeavored to remove, by any other Object, a Stroke of Fate (as I may call it)
that has given and will give me such Uneasiness. Were I to make a Wish for a
Friend, he should have many Half-Passions, but none such as I have felt for her.

O! This would content me alone, that she might know how long I have struggled
against her Charms in vain.

As the Beginning of my Fate was extraordinary, I think all the Steps of it
have been and will be out of the common Road. The Foundation of a common
Passion is a Desire to please ones self, but the Aim of mine is only to please
her I adore.

Could it be more Satisfaction to her to have ^e wretched than happy, I should
choose the ^rst, and find some Satisfaction in Misery: But what I cannot endure
is to be indifferent to ^er; to be eternally thinking of her, and never ^hought
of by her. Heavens preserve me from ^his, and I willingly in every Thing else
sub^it to Fate.

O how I fear her Wit, her Judgment, that Distinction that lets no Folly
escape! I fear her ^ut upon this Score, for sure I am, all her Pe^etration can
never discover the least Contra^iction, the least Deceit in any Word, the least
Want of Respect in any Action. Sure I am, no Time can ever discover the least
Diminution in ^y Zeal, and must I nevertheless fear this most ^dored Lady
should employ that Over-Stock of Wit she has to ridicule the Sufferings of a
^reaking Heart, so faithful, so submissive, so ^incere? O! How shall I express
my self? What shall I say? Or is it possible to be silent? There (...) a
distracted Language she does not under^tand; the Dialect is particular to them
that love; and the cruel Lady will find no Sense in (...), because she is
insensible. She must not then play the Critic too severely, if she should
chance to hear my Complaints. She must excuse my accusing her of Ignorance.
What is it she does not understand but Love? Vows, Curses, Melancholy, Madness,
Hopes, Despair, Shunning, Pursuing, Passion, Discretion, Impatience,
Resignation; all these in one Letter, she would call a romantic Heap of
Contradictions shuffled together; yet they do all agree in me, and work at once
in my distracted Mind. If the greatest Wit had put them together with the
utmost Art and Passion, they would express less than I feel: The Thoughts would
be below my Love, and not above the Truth.

Who can teach me to write to this terri^ Lady, that ignorant of the Fatality
of (...) Charms, might suspect the Effects of the^ and when they are but
faintly painted, wo^ think the Colors fierce? What can I have (...) course to
but Plainness and Sincerity? S^ then without Offense I may tell this Tr^ What
can the Admiration of her Wit, the ^dence of her Generosity, and Truth added
(...) these, that charming Agreeableness in eve^ Word, in every Look, in every
Action? W^ can all these produce, but Love with the ut^ Passion? O there the
Criminal Word is (...) and yet she cannot be displeased, though (...) without
Virtue, without Wit, with little ^putation, might pretend to be angry.

Were it too much for a Man she has broug^ to the Brink of Despair, for a Man
that wo^ die a Thousand Deaths to serve her, to who^ Life is a Burden unless
she make it easier (...) him? O were it too much to beg Leave, wh^ he scarce
ever sees her, when he dare ne^ speak, that he might sometimes ease his So^ in
a respectful Line! Has not every Body ete^nal Opportunities of speaking to her?
And (...) I, that suffer more than ever Man did, not da^ almost to come near
her? I cannot doubt b^ you will judge impartially upon this Occasion Is it
possible, after having gazed upon tho^ searching Eyes, to escape their Power?
Is i^ possible to hear her Words, and cease adorin^ her? Is it possible to love
to the Distractio^ that they do who know her, and not langui^ eternally after
the Sight of her? Is it possible, when there is no Hopes of seeing her, to
support the cruel Absence without writing to her? I know what you would say for
you^ self. Think then what is the miserable Condition of him who struggles with
all these seeming Impossibilities; but to live near her, and be as far from her
as the Antipodes! And if I never see her only for some hasty Moments in an Age,
and in these Separations not permitted to give the least Ease to my distracted
Soul, O were not Dying preferable to this restless Life! For I fright my self
if I write what I never intend to send, and I awake in Terrors if I but dream
of her. My hard Fa^e condemns me to adore her in all the opposite and most
torment^ng Circumstances of Love, with a Distraction ^eading to Madness, yet
with a Reservedness that would shame Philosophy, and with a Respect might
suffice a Deity; with an Impatience that gives an eternal Rack to my Soul, yet
could I wait Hours, Days, and Weeks, for one Moment's Sight of her. O the false
Fires with which the persecuting Fops afflict your Sex! Every Way false! They
are not such as warm my Breast. Though I could leap through Flames to come to
her, and not feel more Heat; though I could swim through Seas, and not quench
the Flame; yet I love with that Coolness and Temper, with that Command over my
Passion, that, rather than bring her to the least Inconveniency, I would
renounce the utmost Happiness if it were in my Reach. One would think this were
enough to be allowed the most passionate, the most miserable of Men. Misery
beyond this is hardly to be conceived. This seems Torment enough in Love to
drag an afflicted Heart through so many distracted Fears for such an Eternity:
But to have lived accused of having deserved her Anger, to think I was
accounted Criminal, that knew the tender faithful Passion of my Soul; to live
thus for Ages, for many Months without obtaining one happy to be justified,
without doing any Thing rash or indiscreet to show my Innocence: This you will
sure allow to have been Torment and Discretion beyond any Example.

But I eternally find Fault with the faint D^scriptions I make of what I
suffer, and shou^ have an eternal Task indeed, were I to begi^ again till I
could satisfy my self in what I say (...) her I love. This, and this alone,
justifies (...) forbidding the Attempt, since she only forbi^ what
Impossibility prevents; for were my Pa^sion to be described, it would not be
unfit (...) her to hear. Not to complain, and endure (...) much, is impossible;
but to hope for C^ without being able to describe the Disea^ seems Madness;
therefore, alas I ask, I see^ I hope for none. Let her but give me Opi^ to
allay my Grief, and only help me langui^ out Life in less painful Love. What
Word^ what Language can express my passionate R^spect, or give the least Idea
of the Distracti^ of my Soul? She methinks, and she alone the is capable of
creating it, might conceive i^ O were it but conceived, I should not wholl^ be
left unpitied in the wretched Impossibility (...) one Moment's Happiness or
Quiet! She wou^ think with some Conscience, that from the fir^ Moment I saw, I
heard her speak, I have la^guished out my Life in never-ceasing Uneas^ness.
Racks are forbidden for our Bodies b^ our Laws, and is it lawful for her to
torme^ and crueify my Soul? Against the happy M^ment that I see her next, may
some genero^ Friend advise her to consult that Heart of her^ which would show
more Compassion where i^ were less necessary: Let her consider, whethe^ there
is nothing due to that faithful Slave, wh^ at all Times, in all Places lives,
but dying for her.

The End of the Fifth Volume.
AN INDEX TO THE TATLERS.
VOL. V.
A.
ACademick Fops. Page 234 Achilles's Spear, the Rust of it cured the Wounds it
made. 85 Adventure of St. James's- Park. 216 Advice to Dramatick Writers. 185
Affectation of being thought of a Family. 73 -- A false Guide in our Conduct.
97 -- All over Ugliness. 247 Alienation Court. 123, 126 Almanac, Poetical.
136, etc. Analogy between a Physician, a Cook, and a Dramatick Writer. 113
Anthracius, Steward of the Club of Ugly Faces, hi^ famous Carbuncle. Page ^
Aretine, his great Influence over Princes. ^ Asses, the Roman Law against
killing them. ^
B.
Bear-Dogs ^ Bean, his Qualifications. ^ Bickerstaff (Isaac), his Journey into
Staffordshire ^ -- His Dream. ^ -- Wishing himself Parson of the Parish out of
Revenge. 35 -- His Care to avoid Reproaches. 223 -- How he arrived to the
Censorship of Great Britain. 230 -- His disagreeable Entertainment in the
Country. 103 Brawn the Vintner's Economy in his Kitchen. 111 Bull-Dogs. 238
C.
Callipaedia, or the Art of getting pretty Children. 125 Castalio and Polydor,
their unhappy Amors. 78 Cavaliero de Tristo Figuro (Don). 42 Charity
handsomely recommended to the Fair Sex. 149, etc. Clorinda, Recipe for her
Vapors. 33 Coffee (Count). 247 Colin. 77 Country, its Corruptions. 8
Creature-Merchant. 72
D.
Danish Dogs. Page 239 Darkin (Mrs. Olivia), an old Acquaintance of Mr.
Bickerstaff's. 218 -- His happy Estate in not marrying her. 222 Defects of
Nature. 241 Desire of doing something. 40 Difference between a fine Woman and a
Coquet. 254 Dighton, Mr. Bickerstaff's Secretary. 178 Discretion, the Want of
it the Perversion of good Manners. 102, etc. Distinction of several Sorts of
People. 170 Divisions of the Side-Boxes in the Playhouse appropriated to
several Dresses. 249 Dogs, a Disquisition on all Sorts of them. 237 Dogs of the
Long-Robe. 239 Dresses, a commodious Project for them. 250 Duelling, handsomely
reprimanded. 137
E.
Town-Eclogue. 118 Education, when misapplied. 82 Empericus, the Atheistical
Quack. 149 Expectation of the Thousand Pounds a Year Lot in the Lottery, by the
Well-Close Quality. 225
F.
Faber, Mr. Bickerstaff's Friend. 227 Faliscus Gratius. 236 Fasces of
Westminster-School. 233 Fashion (Ned.) 105 Feather (Jack), a complete Rake. 231
Filch (Jenny) her Character. 13 Flowers of Quality. 209 Fop-Dogs. 239 Foundling
the Tavern Boy. Page ^ Fox-Hounds. ^
G.
Garden and Country Retirement, their Description. 206, etc. Generous Mind, its
greatest Shock. 202 Genius. 129 Great Men, their little Amusements. 87, 88
Greyhounds. 239
H.
Heedless (Harry), his Inventory of his Goods in Heroic Verse. 20 Hippocrates
very Humane. 148 Horatio, a well-bred Gentleman. 106 Hundred, the Humor of
telling it. ^ Huskanawing, what it means. 148
I.
James (Mrs.) 43 Idle (Tom). 170 Infirmities, not always natural to
Constitutions. 35 Insuring of Necks. 227
K.
Kellaeus (Joannes). 235 Kill-Chairman (Lady). 34 Kidney. 32, 38
L.
Letters -- -- Judith Corkin to her Husband. Page 45 -- Isaac Bickerstaff to
all Churchwardens and Sidesmen. 9
Letters to Isaac Bickerstaff from -- Humphry Wagstaff. 3 -- Castraccio
Bellechantini. 30 -- Peter Proteus of Wadham. 46 -- Will. Wealthy. 57 -- Tho.
Huff. 59 -- John Heart. 61 -- Powell. 67 -- Fidelio. 78 -- On the same. 89 -- W.
L. 99 -- T. L. of New College, Oxon. 138 -- The Answer. 139 -- Sylvia. 143 --
The Answer. 144 -- F. B. 150 -- The Free-thinker. 161 -- F. Y. 172 --
Pixidicula. 173 -- W. H. 180 -- E. G. 186 -- Belinda. 192 -- An unknown Hand.
194 -- Sarah Bubbleboy. 195 -- J. E. 200 -- An unknown Hand. 203 -- Gratius
Faliscus. 237 -- The Club of Ugly Faces at Oxford. 243 -- From Corydon to his
Boy Alexis. 95
Love for Love, the Comedy. 112, 124 Lovers, an Office of Insurance for them.
212 -- Proposals for it. Page 213, etc. Lover's Meditation on his Mistress. ^
M.
Mac-Carrot an Irishman. ^ Marmalade (Sir Paul). ^ Martial, good at Turns of
Wit. ^ Masters and Servants, the Relation between the^ ^ Matchlock (Major), an
old Oliverian. ^ Mean Extraction, its Vices. ^ Meanness of Spirit betrays Men
of Parts. ^ M^ll^on (Solomon). ^ Misapplication, a Species of false Wit. ^
Moody (Will.) 87, ^ Mo^ale les Petite. ^ Morphew (John) indicted. ^ -- His and
Charles Lillie's Petition. ^ Music, its Effects. ^
N.
Nature (Humane), ill Judges of it. ^ Nature's Favorites. ^
O.
Office equivalent. ^ Old Age, a Sort of Childhood. ^ Opera ( Powell's). ^
Oppian (Charles). ^ Oxford Gentleman's Letter for the Benefit of (...) Public.
^
P.
Pacolet, Primiere Ministre to the Censor of Great Britain. Page 92 -- his
Expedition. 93 -- Some Contents in the Margin of his Book. 95 Painted Chamber.
170 Parish Lions. 24 -- Covent Garden Lion. 25 -- St. Mary-Ax's Lion. 27
Party-Society. 132, 133 Peasants. 239 Philalethes. 85 Phoxus, his Oration on
Anthracius's Carbuncle. 242 Pleasing, the Desire of appearing so natural and
prevailing. 97 Pleasure, the grossest Mistakes about it. 183 Polycrates, Tyrant
of Samos, his throwing a Ring into the Sea wittily advertised. 152 Power, its
Division. 197 Prejudice hardly shaken off. 7 Prostitution of public Capacities
to private Resentments Petulancy. 37 Proteus, (Dr. of Wadham Coll. Oxon. 115 --
His ridiculous Life. 117 -- His Recantation. 205 Pulpit Reflections, their
ridiculous Deformity. 36 Pythagoras, a merry Conceit of him. 145
Q
Quixote (Don), his Character. 76
R.
Racan (Monsieur), Menage's Story of him. 5 Rattle (Arthur) a complete Rake.
Page ^ Redundancies of Nature. ^ Reflection, the Want of it the Cause of Errors
i^ Conversation and Conduct. ^ Regulation of Manners, the Tatler's End. ^
Reproof for a proud Critic. ^ Resolution of the House of Ladies. ^
Rochefaucaut's Refinements on the Distresses and Misfortunes of Men. ^ Rummer
in Queen Street, Mr. Bickerstaff's Entertainment there. 111 Rural Censors
instituted. 60, 61
S.
Sal -- Vol -- (Dr.) 246 Schoolmaster's Character. 233 Seneca's Opinion of the
Relation between Master and Servants. 91 Severity, the cruelest on an old Man.
22 Severus, a canting Critic. 74 Smart (Mr.) 128 Snap, a Critic. Ibid.
Socrates, catched Whistling and Dancing by himself. 87 Spaniels (French.) 238
Species, every one at Land has one to resemble it at Sea. ^ Spectacles (Mr.
Bickerstaff's), a Treatise for the present Age, formed upon the Rules of
Antiquity. 190 Spectator reprimanded. 135 Sternhold (Tobias) indicted for
Rhiming. 128 Sucking-Bottles for all under the Age of Twenty. 229 -- Where to
be had. 230 Superiority, the Desire of it natural to all. Page 168 -- The
Necessity of it on the most important Occasions. 169 -- Instances of it in
inferior Degrees. 170, 171
T.
Talents ill applied. 123 Tatler, a merry Conceit of its Original. 145 --
Discontinued. 2 -- A Pythagorean, and frequently transformed. 178 -- When
misunderstood. 187 Tatler-Female. 6 Tax upon great Genius's. 21 Temper lies
open to Strokes of Fortune and Incidents unforeseen. 1 Temple Bar, Pacolet's
Description of it. 94 Theater, its Usefulness. 158, 159 Tippling (Jack). 169
Tobacco, its Original. 174 -- Its Transplantation. 175 -- Its ill Treatment,
and great Use. 176 -- Its Refinement into Snuff. 177 Tromantine Ear, its
Formation. 69 Trusty (Sam.), Mr. Bickerstaff's Friend. 11 -- His Character. 51
-- His Friend Dr. -- 52 -- His Nephew, an accomplished Youth. 53 Turns, a Sort
of Wit highly valuable. 253 -- When improperly applied. 255 -- Their proper
Distinctions. 256, etc. Tutors value no Man's Wisdom besides their own. 108 --
Their imperious and severe Menage condemned. 109 -- Their wrong Notions of
Qualifications. Ibid. The good Tutor justly applauded by Mr. Bickerstaff. 110
Twining, Under-Secretary to Mr. Dighton. Page ^
V.
Ugly Faces, their Club at Oxford. ^ -- Set up at London. ^ -- Summons to it. ^
Virgin's Address to Isaac Bickerstaff. ^ Virtue, its slow Improvement. ^
Upperside (Mr. Justice). ^ Uriah Pattern the Salesman. ^ -- His Son turned
crack-brain'd. ^
W.
Well-Close Coach. ^ Well-Close Pilgrims. ^ Westminster-School Election. ^ Wit,
but the Embellishment of a good Understanding. ^ -- Its Dignity and Distinction
seldom (...) understood. ^ -- Cannot be described by Generals. ^ --
Praecocius's Wit, its Ruin. ^ Wits, their Way of recommending themselv^ 19, ^
-- Justly distinguished. ^ Wordy (Mr. Critic). ^ Worthless (Will). ^ Wrangle
(Jeremy), A. B. indicted and punis^ ^ Writer, his Duty. ^ Writing, its
Circumstances. ^
Y.
^ng Fellows mistaken in spending their Time. Page 184
Z.
^no the Stoic. 13
FINIS.

