A Learned Dissertation ON DUMPLING; Its Dignity, Antiquity, and Excellence.
With a Word upon PUDDING. AND Many other Useful Discoveries, of great Benefit
to the Public.

Quid Farto melius?
Huic suam agnoscit corpus energiam,
Suam aciem men's: --
-- Hinc adoleverunt praestantissimi,
Hi Fartophagi in Reipublicae commodum.
Maeb. de Fartophagis, lib. iii. cap. 2. LONDON, Printed for J. Roberts in the
Oxford-Arms-Passage, Warwick Lane; and Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. 1726. [Price 6 d.]

TO Mr. BRAUND.
SIR,
LET Mercenary Authors flatter the Great, and subject their Principle to
Interest and Ambition, I scorn such sorbid Views; You only are Eminent in my
Eyes: On You I look as the most Useful Member in a Body-Politic, and your Art
far superior to all others: Therefore, Tu mihi Mecaenas Eris!

O BRAUND, my Patron! my Pleasure! my Pride! disdain not to grace my Labors
with a kind Perusal. Suspend awhile your more momentous Cares, and condescend
to taste this little Fricassee of Mine.

I write not this, to Bite you by the Ear, (i. e.) flatter you out of a Brace
or two of Guinea's: No; as I am a true Dumpling-Eater, my Views are purely
Epicurean, and my utmost Hopes centered in partaking of some elegant Quelque
Chose tossed up by your judicious Hand. I regard Money but as a Ticket which
admits me to your Delicate Entertainments; to me much more Agreeable than all
the Monkey-Tricks of Rival Harlequins, or Puppet-Show Finery of Contending
Theaters.

The Plague and Fatique of Dependence and Attendance, which call me so often to
the Court-end of the Town, were insupportable, but for the Relief I find at
AUSTIN's your Ingenious and Grateful Disciple, who has adorned New Bond-street
with your Graceful Effigies. Nor can he fail of Custom, who has hung out a Sign
so Alluring to all true Dumpling-Eaters. Many a time and often have I gazed with
Pleasure on your Features, and traced in them the exact Lineaments of your
glorious Ancestor Sir JOHN BRAND, vulgarly called Sir JOHN PUDDING.

Though the Corruption of our English Orthography indulges some appearance of
Distinction between BRAND and BRAUND, yet in Effect they are one and the same
thing. The ancient Manor of BRAND's, alias BRAUND's, near Kilburn in Middlesex,
was the very Manor-House of Sir JOHN BRAND, and is called BRAND's to this Day,
although at present it be in the Possession of the Family of MARSH.

What Honors are therefore due to One who is in a Direct Male Line, an
Immediate Descendant from the Loins of that Great Man! Let this teach You to
value your Self; this remind the World, how much they owe to the Family of the
BRAUNDS; more particularly to YOU, who inherit not only the Name, but the
Virtues of your Illustrious Ancestor. I am,

SIR, With all imaginable Esteem and Gratitude, Your very most Obedient
Servant, etc.

Page 5. line 15, etc. for Barnes read Brand.

A Learned Dissertation ON DUMPLING; Its Dignity, Antiquity, etc.
THE Dumpling-Eaters are a Race sprung partly from the old Epicurean, and
partly from the Peripatetic Sect; they were brought first into Britain by
Julius Caesar; and finding it a Land of Plenty, they wisely resolved never to go
Home again. Their Doctrines are Amphibious, and composed Party per Pale of the
two Sects beforementioned; from the Peripatetics, they derive their Principle
of Walking, as a proper Method to digest a Meal, or create an Appetite; from
the Epicureans, they maintain that all Pleasures are comprehended in good
Eating and Drinking: And so readily were their Opinions embraced, that every
Day produced many Proselytes; and their Numbers have from Age to Age increased
prodigiously, insomuch that our whole Island is overrun with them, at present.
Eating and Drinking are become so Customary among us, that we seem to have
entirely forgot, and laid aside the old Fashion of Fasting: Instead of having
Wine sold at Apothecaries Shops, as formerly, every Street has two or three
Taverns in it, least these Dumpling-Eaters should faint by the Way; nay, so
zealous are they in the Cause of Bacchus, that one of the Chief among 'em has
made a Vow never to say his Prayers 'till he has a Tavern of his own in every
Street in London, and in every Market Town in England. What may we then in Time
expect? Since by insensible Degrees, their Society is become so numerous and
formidable, that they are without Number; other Bodies have their Meetings, but
where can the Dumpling-Eaters assemble? what Place large enough to contain 'em!
The Bank, India, and South Sea Companies have their General Courts, the
Free-Masons and the Gormogons their Chapters; nay, our Friends the Quakers have
their Yearly Meetings. And who would imagine any of these should be
Dumpling-Eaters? But thus it is, the Dumpling-Eating Doctrine has so far
prevailed among 'em, that they eat not only Dumplings, but Puddings, and those
in no small Quantities.

The Dumpling is indeed, of more ancient Institution, and of Foreign Origin;
but alas, what were those Dumplings? nothing but a few Lentils sodden together,
moistened and cemented with a little seeth'd Fat, not much unlike our Gritt or
Oatmeal Pudding; yet were they of such Esteem among the ancient Romans, that a
Statue was erected to Fulvius Agricola, the first Inventor of these Lentil
Dumplings. How unlike the Gratitude shown by the Public to our Modern
Projectors!

The Romans, though our Conquerors, found themselves much outdone in Dumplings
by our Forefathers; the Roman Dumplings were no more to compare to those made
by the Britons, than a Stone-Dumpling is to a Marrow Pudding; though indeed, the
British Dumpling at that time, was little better than what we call a
Stone-Dumpling, being no thing else but Flour and Water: But every Generation
growing wiser and wiser, the Project was improved, and Dumpling grew to be
Pudding: One Projector found Milk better than Water; another introduced Butter;
some added Marrow, others Plumbs; and some found out the Use of Sugar; so that,
to speak Truth, we know not where to fix the Genealogy or Chronology of any of
these Pudding Projectors, to the Reproach of our Historians, who eat so much
Pudding, yet have been so Ungrateful to the first Professors of this most noble
Science, as not to find 'em a Place in History.

The Invention of Eggs was merely accidental, two or three of which having
casually rolled from off a Shelf into a Pudding which a good Wife was making,
she found herself under a Necessity either of throwing away her Pudding, or
letting the Eggs remain, but concluding from the innocent Quality of the Eggs,
that they would do no Hurt, if they did no Good. She wisely jumbl'd 'em all
together, after having carefully picked out the Shells; the Consequence is
easily imagined, the Pudding became a Pudding of Puddings; and the Use of Eggs
from thence took its Date. The Woman was sent for to Court to make Puddings for
King John, who then swayed the Scepter; and gained such Favor, that she was
the making of her whole Family. I cannot conclude this Paragraph without
owning, I received this important Part of the History of Pudding from old Mr.
Lawrence of Wilsden-Green, the greatest Antiquary of the present Age.

From that Time the English became so famous for Puddings, that they are called
Pudding-Eaters all over the World, to this Day.

At her Demise, her Son was taken into Favor, and made the King's chief Cook;
and so great was his Fame for Puddings, that he was called Jack Pudding all
over the Kingdom, though in Truth, his real Name was John Barnes, as by the
Records of the Kitchen you will find: This John Barnes, or Jack-Pudding, call
him which you please, the French have it Jean Boudin, for his Fame had reached
France, whose King would have given the World to have had our Jack for his
Pudding-Maker. This Jack Pudding, I say, became yet a greater Favorite than
his Mother, insomuch that he had the King's Ear as well as his Mouth at
Command; for the King, you must know, was a mighty Lover of Pudding; and Jack
fitted him to a Hair, he knew how to make the most of a Pudding; no Pudding
came amiss to him, he would make a Pudding out of a Flint-stone, comparatively
speaking. It is needless to enumerate the many sorts of Pudding he made, such
as Plain Pudding, Plumb Pudding, Marrow Pudding, Oatmeal Pudding, Carrot
Pudding, Saucesage Pudding, Bread Pudding, Flower Pudding, Suet Pudding, and in
short, every Pudding but Quaking Pudding, which was solely invented by, and
took its Name from our Good Friends of the Bull and Mouth before mentioned,
notwithstanding the many Pretenders to that Projection.

But what raised our Hero most in the Esteem of this Pudding-eating Monarch,
was his Second Edition of Pudding, he being the first that ever invented the
Art of Broiling Puddings, which he did to such Perfection, and so much to the
King's likeing, (who had a mortal Aversion to Cold Pudding,) that he thereupon
instituted him Knight of the Gridiron, and gave him a Gridiron of Gold, the
Ensign of that Order, which he always wore as a Mark of his Sovereign's Favor;
in short, Jack Pudding, or Sir John, grew to be all in all with good King John;
he did nothing without him, they were Finger and Glove; and, if we may believe
Tradition, our very good Friend had no small Hand in the Magna Charta. If so,
how much are all Englishmen indebted to him? in what Repute ought the Order of
the Gridiron to be, which was instituted to do Honor to this Wonderful Man?
But alas! how soon is Merit forgot? how impudently do the Vulgar turn the most
serious Things into Ridicule, and mock the most solemn Trophies of Honor? for
now every Fool at a Fair, or Zany at a Mountebank's Stage, is called Jack
Pudding, has a Gridiron at his Back, and a great Pair of Spectacles at his
Buttocks, to ridicule the most noble Order of the Gridiron. But their
Spectacles is a most ungrateful Reflection on the Memory of that great Man,
whose indefatigable Application to his Business, and deep Study in that occult
Science, rendered him Poreblind; to remedy which Misfortune, he had always a
'Squire followed him, bearing a huge Pair of Spectacles to saddle his Honor's
Nose, and supply his much-lamented Defect of Sight. But whether such an
Unhappiness did not deserve rather Pity than Ridicule, I leave to the
Determination of all good Christians: I cannot but say, it raises my
Indignation, when I see these Paunchgutted Fellows usurping the Title and
Achievements of my dear Sir John, whose Memory I so much venerate, I cannot
always contain my self. I remember, to my Cost, I once carried my Resentment a
little farther than ordinary; in furiously assaulting one of those Rascals, I
tore the Gridiron from his Back, and the Spectacles from his A -- e; for which
I was Apprehended, carried to Pye-powder Court, and by that tremendous Bench,
sentenced to most severe Pains and Penalties.

This has indeed a little tamed me, insomuch that I keep my Fingers to my self,
but at the same time let my Tongue run like a Devil: Forbear vile Miscreants,
cry I, wherever I meet these Wretches? forbear to ascribe to your selves the
Name and Honors of Sir John Pudding? content your selves with being Zanies,
Pickled-Herrings, Punchionellos, but dare not scandalize the noble Name of
Pudding: Nor can I, notwithstanding the Clamours and Ill Usage of the Vulgar,
refrain bearing my Testimony against this manifest piece of Injustice.

What Pity it is therefore, so noble an Order should be lost, or at least
neglected. We have had no Account of the real Knights os the Gridiron, since
they appeared under the fictitious Name of the Kit-Kat Club: In their
Possession was the very Gridiron of Gold worn by Sir John himself; which
Identical Gridiron dignified the Breast of the most ingenious Mr. Richard
Estcourt that excellent Physician and Comedian, who was President of that Noble
Society.

Quis talia fando temperet a Lachrymis? What is become of the Gridiron, or of
the Remains of that excellent Body of Men, Time will, I hope, discover. The
World, I believe, must for such Discoveries be obliged to my very good Friend J
-- T -- Esquire who had the Honor to be Doorkeeper to that Honorable Assembly.

But to return to Sir John: The more his Wit engaged the King, the more his
Grandeur alarmed his Enemies, who increased with his Honors. Not but the
Courtiers caressed him to a Man, as the first who had brought Dumpling-eating
to Perfection. King John himself loved him entirely; being of Cesar's Mind,
that is, he had a natural Antipathy against Meagre, Herring-gutted Wretches; he
loved only Fat-headed Men, and such, who slept of Nights; and of such was his
whole Court composed. Now it was Sir John's Method, every Sunday Morning, to
give the Courtiers a Breakfast, which Breakfast was every Man his Dumpling and
Cup of Wine; for you must know, he was Yeoman of the Wine-Cellar at the same
time.

This was a great Eyesore and Heartburning to some Lubberly Abbots who loung'd
about the Court; they took it in great Dudgeon they were not Invited, and stuck
so close to his Skirts, that they never rested 'till they Outed him. They told
the King, who was naturally very Hasty, that Sir John made-away with his Wine,
and feasted his Paramours at his Expense; and not only so, but that they were
forming a Design against his Life, which they in Conscience ought to discover:
That Sir John was not only an Heretic, but an Heathen; nay worse, they feared
he was a Witch, and that he had bewitched His Majesty into that unaccountable
Fondness for a Pudding-Maker. They assured the King, That on a Sunday Morning,
instead of being at Mattins, he and his Trigrimates got together Hum-jum, all
snug, and performed many Hellish and Diabolical Ceremonies. In short, they made
the King believe that the Moon was made of Green-Cheese: And to show how the
Innocent may be Belied, and the best Intentions misrepresented, they told the
King, That He and his Associates offered Sacrifices to Ceres: When, alas, it
was only the Dumplings they eat. The Butter which was melted and poured over
them, these vile Miscreants called Libations: And the friendly Compotations of
our Dumpling-eaters, were called Bacchanalian Rites. Two or three among 'em
being sweet-tooth'd, would strew a little Sugar over their Dumplings; this was
represented as an Heathenish Offering. In short, not one Action of theirs, but
what these Rascally Abbots made Criminal, and never let the King alone 'till
poor Sir John was Discarded. Not but the King did it with the greatest
Reluctance; but they had made it a Religious Concern, and he could not get off
on it.

But mark the Consequence: The King never enjoyed himself after, nor was it
long before he was poisoned by a Monk at Swines-head Abbey. Then too late he
saw his Error; then he lamented the Loss of Sir John; and in his latest Moments
would cry out, Oh! that I had never parted from my dear Jack Pudding! Would I
had never left off Pudding and Dumpling! I then had never been thus basely
Poisoned! never thus treacherously sent out of the World! -- Thus did this good
King lament: But, alas, to no Purpose, the Priest had given him his Bane, and
Complaints were ineffectual.

Sir John, in the mean time, had retired into Norfolk, where his diffusive
Knowledge extended it self for the Good of the County in general; and from that
very Cause Norfolk has ever since been so famous for Dumplings. He lamented the
King's Death to his very last; and was so cautious of being poisoned by the
Priests, that he never touched a Wafer to the Day of his Death: And had it not
been that some of the lessdesigning part of the Clergy were his intimate
Friends, and eat daily of his Dumplings, he had doubtless been Made-away with;
out they stood in the Gap for him, for the sake of his Dumplings, knowing that
when Sir John was gone, they should never have the like again.

But our facetious Knight was too free of his Talk to be long secure; for a
Hole was picked in his Coat in the succeeding Reign, and poor Sir John had all
his Goods and Chattels forfeited to the King's Use. It was then time for him to
bestir himself; and away to Court he goes, to recover his Lands, etc. not
doubting but he had Friends there sufficient to carry his Cause.

But alas! how was he mistaken; not a Soul there knew him; the very Porters
used him rudely. In vain did he seek for Access to the King, to vindicate his
Conduct. In vain did he claim Acquaintance with the Lords of the Court; and
reap up old Civilities, to remind 'em of former Kindness; the Pudding was eat,
the Obligation was over: Which made Sir John compose that excellent Proverb,
Not a word of the Pudding. And finding all Means ineffectual, he left the Court
in a great Pet; yet not without passing a severe Joke upon 'em, in his way,
which was this; He sent a Pudding to the King's Table, under the Name of a
Court-Pudding, or Promise-Pudding. This Pudding he did not fail to set off with
large Encomiums; assuring the King, That therein he would find an
Hieroglyphical Definition of Courtiers Promises and Friendship.

This caused some Speculation; and the King's Physician debarred the King from
tasting the Pudding, not knowing but that Sir John had poisoned it.

But how great a Fit of Laughter ensued, may be easily guessed, when the
Pudding was cut up, it proved only a large Bladder, just closed over with
Paste: The Bladder was full of Wind, and nothing else, excepting these Verses
written in a Roll of Paper, and put in, as is supposed, before the Bladder was
blown full: As Wind in a Bladdere ypent,
is Lordings promise and serment;
sain what hem lust withouten dread,
they been so double in her falshede:
For they in heart can think ene thing,
and sain another in her speaking:
and what was sweet and apparent,
is smoterlich, and eke yshent.
and when of service you have need,
pardie he will not rue nor read.
but when the Symnel it is eten,
her curtesse is all foryetten.


This Adventure met with various Constructions from those at Table: Some
Laughed; others Frowned. But the King took the Joke by the right End, and
Laughed outright.

The Verses, though but scurvy ones in themselves, yet in those Days passed for
tolerable: Nay, the King was mightily pleased with 'em, and played 'em off on
his Courtiers as Occasion served; he would stop 'em short in the middle of a
flattering Harangue, and cry, Not a Word of the Pudding. This would daunt and
mortify 'em to the last degree; they cursed Sir John a thousand times over for
the Proverb's sake: but to no Purpose; for the King gave him a private Hearing:
In which he so well satisfied His Majesty of his Innocence and Integrity, that
all his Lands were restored. The King would have put him in his old Post; but
he modestly declined it, but at the same time presented His Majesty with a Book
of most excellent Receipts for all kinds of Puddings: Which Book His Majesty
received with all imaginable Kindness, and kept it among his greatest Rarities.

But yet, as the best Instructions, though never so strictly followed, may not be
always as successfully executed, so not one of the King's Cooks could make a
Pudding like Sir John; nay, though he made a Pudding before their Eyes, yet they
out of the very same Materials could not do the like. Which made his old
Friends the Monks attribute it to Witchcraft, and it was currently reported the
Devil was his Helper. But good King Harry was not to be fobb'd off so; the
Pudding was good, it sat very well on his Stomach, and he eat very savourly,
without the least Remorse of Conscience.

In short, Sir John grew in Favor in spite of their Teeth: The King loved a
merry Joke; and Sir John had always his Budget full of Punns, Connundrums and
Carrawitchets; not to forget the Quibbles and Fly-flaps he played against his
Adversaries, at which the King has laughed 'till his Sides cracked.

Sir John, though he was no very great Scholar, yet had a happy way of Expressing
himself: He was a Man of the most Engaging Address, and never failed to draw
Attention: Plenty and Goodnature smiled in his Face; his Muscles were never
distorted with Anger or Contemplation, but an eternal Smile drew up the Corners
of his Mouth; his very Eyes laughed; and as for his Chin it was three-double,
a-down which hung a goodly Whey-colour'd Beard shining with the Drippings of
his Luxury; for you must knew he was a great Epicure, and had a very Sensible
Mouth; he thought nothing toogood for himself, all his Care was for his Belly;
and his Palate was so exquisite, that it was the perfect Standard of Tasting.
So that to him we owe all that is elegant in Eating: For Pudding was not his
only Talent, he was a great Virtuoso in all manner of Eatables; and though he
might come short of Lambert for Confectionary-Niceties, yet was he not
inferior to Brawnd, Lebec, Pede, or any other great Masters of Cookery; he
could toss up a Fricassee as well as a Pancake: And most of the Kickshaws now
in vogue, are but his Inventions, with other Names; for what we call
Fricassees, he called Pancakes; as, a Pancake of Chickens, a Pancake of
Rabbets, etc. Nay, the French call a Pudding an English Fricassee, to this Day.

We value our selves mightily for Roasting a Hare with a Pudding in its Belly;
when alas he has roasted an Ox with a Pudding in his Belly. There was no Man
like him for Invention and Contrivance: And then for Execution, he spared no
Labor and Pains to compass his magnanimous Designs.

O would to Heaven this little Attempt of Mine may stir up some Pudding-headed
Antiquary to dig his Way through all the moldy Records of Antiquity, and bring
to Light the Noble Actions of Sir John! It will not then be long before we see
him on the Stage. Sir John Falstaff then will be a Shrimp to Sir John Pudding,
when raised from Oblivion and reanimated by the All-Invigorating Pen of the
Well-Fed, Well-Read, Well-Pay'd C -- J -- Esquire Nor would this be all; for the
Pastry-Cooks would from the Hands of an eminent Physician and Poet receive
whole Loads of Memorandums, to remind 'em of the Gratitude due to Sir John's
Memory.

On such a Subject I hope to see Sir Richard Outdo himself. Nor Arthur nor
Eliza shall with Sir John compare. There is not so much differenee between a
Telescope and a Powder-Puff, a Hoop-Petty-Coat and a Farthing-Candle, a
Birch-Broom and a Diamond-Ring, as there will be between the former Writings of
this pair of Poets and their Lucubrations on this Head.

Nor will it stop here: The Opera Composers shall have the other Contest, which
shall best sing-forth his Praises. Sorry am I that Nicolino is not here, he
would have made an excellent Sir John. But Senesino, being blown up after the
manner that Butchers blow Calves, may do well enough. From thence the Painters
and Print-sellers shall retail his goodly Phiz; and what Sacheverel was, shall
Sir John Pudding be; his Head shall hang Elate on every Sign, his Fame shall
ring in every Street, and Cluer's Press shall teem with Ballads to his Praise.
This would be but Honor, this would be but Gratitude, from a Generation so
much indebted to so Great a Man.

But how much do we deviate from Honor and Gratitude, when we put other Names
to his Inventions, and call 'em our own? What is a Tart, a Pie, or a Pasty, but
Meat or Fruit enclosed in a Wall or Covering of Pudding. What is a Cake, but a
Baked Pudding; or a Christmas-Pie, but a Minc'd-Meat-Pudding. As for
Cheese-cakes, Custards, Tansies, they are manifest Puddings, and all of Sir
John's own Contrivance; for Custard is as old if not older than Magna Charta.
In short, Pudding is of the greatest Dignity and Antiquity. Bread it self,
which is the very Staff of Life, is, properly speaking, a Baked Wheat-Pudding.

To the Satchel, which is the Pudding-Bag of Ingenuity, we are indebted for the
greatest Men in Church and State. All Arts and Sciences owe their Original to
Pudding or Dumpling. What is a Bag-Pipe, the Mother of all Music, but a Pudding
of Harmony. And what is Music it self, but a Palatable Cookery of Sounds. To
little Puddings or Bladders of Colors we owe all the choice Originals of the
Greatest Painters: And indeed, what is Painting, but a well-spread Pudding, or
Cookery of Colors.

The Head of Man is like a Pudding: And whence have all Rhimes, Poems, Plots
and Inventions sprang, but from that same Pudding. What is Poetry, but a
Pudding of Words. The Physicians, though they cry out so much against Cooks and
Cookery, yet are but Cooks themselves; with this difference only, the Cooks
Pudding lengthens Life, the Physicians shortens it. So that we Live and Die by
Pudding. For what is a Clyster, but a Bag-Pudding; a Pill, but a Dumpling; or a
Bolus, but a Tansy, though not altogether so Toothsome. In a word; Physic is
only a Puddingizing or Cookery of Drugs. The Law is but a Cookery of Quibbles
and Contentions. The Cat run away with this part of the Copy, on which the
Author had unfortunately laid some of Mother Crump's Sausages.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * is but a
Pudding of * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *. Some swallow
every thing whole and unmixed; so that it may rather be called a Heap, than a
Pudding. Others are so Squeamish, the greatest Mastership in Cookery is
required to make the Pudding Palatable: The Suet which others gape and swallow
by Gobs, must for these puny Stomachs be minced to Atoms; the Plums must be
picked with the utmost Care, and every Ingredient proportioned to the greatest
Nicety, or it will never go down.

The Universe it self is but a Pudding of Elements. Empires, Kingdoms, States
and Republics are but Puddings of People differently made up. The Celestial
and Terrestrial Orbs are decypher'd to us by a pair of Globes or Mathematical
Puddings.

The Success of War and Fate of Monarchies are entirely dependant on Puddings
and Dumplings: For what else are Cannon-Balls, but Military Puddings; or
Bullets, but Dumplings; only with this difference, they do not sit so well on
the Stomach as a good Marrow-Pudding or Bread-Pudding.

In short, There is nothing valuable in Nature, but what, more or less, has an
Allusion to Pudding or Dumpling. Why then should they be held in Disesteem? Why
should Dumpling-Eating be ridiculed, or Dumpling-Eaters derided? Is it not
Pleasant and Profitable? Is it not Ancient and Honorable? Kings, Princes, and
Potentates have in all Ages been Lovers of Pudding. Is it not therefore of
Royal Authority? Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests and Deacons have, Time out
of Mind, been great Pudding-Eaters: Is it not therefore a Holy and Religious
Institution? Philosophers, Poets, and Learned Men in all Faculties, Judges,
Privy-Councellors, and Members of both Houses, have, by their great Regard to
Pudding, given a Sanction to it that nothing can efface. Is it not therefore
Ancient, Honorable, and Commendable?

Quare itaque fremuerunt Auctores? Why do therefore the Enemies of good Eating,
the Starve-gutted Authors of Grubstreet, employ their impotent Pens against
Pudding and Pudding-headed, alias Honest Men? Why do they inveigh against
Dumpling-Eating which is the Life and Soul of Good-fellowship, and
Dumpling-Eaters who are the Ornaments of Civil Society.

But, alas! their Malice is their own Punishment. The Hireling Author of a late
scandalous Libel, entitled, The Dumpling-Eaters Downfall, may, if he has any
Eyes, now see his Error, in attacking so Numerous, so August a Body of People:
His Books remain Unsold, Unread, Unregarded; while this Treatise of Mine shall
be Bought by all who love Pudding or Dumpling; to my Bookseller's great Joy,
and my no small Consolation. How shall I Triumph, and how will that Mercenary
Scribbler be Mortified, when I have sold more Editions of my Books, than he has
Copies of his! I therefore exhort all People, Gentle and Simple, Men, Women and
Children, to Buy, to Read, to Extol these Labors of Mine, for the Honor of
Dumpling-Eating. Let them not fear to defend every Article; for I will bear
them Harmless: I have Arguments good store, and can easily Confute, either
Logically, Theologically, or Metaphysically, all those who dare Oppose me.

Let not Englishmen therefore be ashamed of the Name of Pudding-Eaters; but, on
the contrary, let it be their Glory. For let Foreigners cry out never so much
against Good Eating, they come easily into it when they have been a little
while in our Land of Canaan; and there are very few Foreigners among us who
have not learned to make as great a Hole in a good Pudding or Sirloin of Beef
as the best Englishman of us all.

Why should we then be Laughed out of Pudding and Dumpling? or why Ridiculed out
of Good Living? Plots and Politics may hurt us, but Pudding cannot. Let us
therefore adhere to Pudding, and keep our selves out of Harm's Way; according
to the Golden Rule laid down by a celebrated Dumpling-Eater now defunct; Be of
your Patron's Mind, whatever he says:
Sleep very much; Think little, and Talk less:
Mind neither Good nor Bad, nor Right nor Wrong;
But Eat your Pudding, Fool, and Hold your Tongue.
PRIOR.

The Author of these excellent Lines not only shows his Wisdom, but his
Good-Breeding, and great Esteem for the Memory of Sir John, by giving his Poem
the Title of Merry Andrew, and making Merry Andrew the principal Spokesman: For
if I guess aright, and surely I guess not wrong, his main Design was, to
ascertain the Name of Merry Andrew to the Fool of a Droll, and to substitute it
instead of Jack Pudding; which Name my Friend Matt. could not hear with Temper,
as carrying with it an oblique Reflection on Sir John Pudding the Hero of this
DUMPLEID.

Let all those therefore who have any Regard to Politeness and Propriety of
Speech, take heed how they Err against this Rule laid down by him who was the
Standard of English Elegance. And be it known to all whom it may concern, That
if any Person whatever shall dare hereafter to apply the Name of Jack Pudding
to Merry Andrews and suchlike Creatures, I hereby Require and Empower any
Stander or Standers by, to Knock him, her, or them down. And if any Action or
Actions of Assault and Battery shall be brought against any Person or Persons
so acting in pursuance of this most reasonable Request, by Knocking down,
Bruising, Beating, or otherwise Demolishing such Offenders; I will Indemnify
and bear them Harmless.

FINIS.
Namby Pamby: OR, A PANEGYRIC on the New VERESIFICATION Addressed to A -- P --
Esquire
Nauty Pauty Jack-a-Dandy
Stole a Piece of Sugar Candy
From the Grocer's Shoppy-shop,
And away did Hoppy-hop.
ALL ye Poets of the Age,
All ye Witlings of the Stage,
Learn your Jingles to reform;
Crop your Numbers, and conform:
Let your little Verses flow
Gently, sweetly, Row by Row:
Let the Verse the Subject fit;
Little Subject, Little Wit:
Namby Pamby is your Guide;
Albion's Joy, Hibernia's Pride.
Namby Pamby Pilli-pis,
Rhimy pim'd on Missy-Miss;
Tartaretta Tartaree
From the Navel to the Knee;
That her Father's Gracy-Grace
Might give him a Placy-Place.
He no longer writes of Mammy
Andromache and her Lammy
Hanging panging at the Breast
Of a Matron most distressed.
Now the Venal Poet sings
Baby Clouts, and Baby Things,
Baby Dolls, and Baby Houses,
Little Misses, Little Spouses;
Little Play-Things, Little Toys,
Little Girls, and Little Boys:
As an Actor does his Part,
So the Nurses get by Heart
Namby Pamby's Little Rhimes,
Little Jingle, Little Chimes,
To repeat to Little Miss,
Piddling Ponds of Pissy-Piss;
Cacking packing like a Lady,
Or Bye-bying in the Crady.
Namby Pamby never will die
While the Nurse sings Lullabye.
Namby Pamby's doubly Mild,
Once a Man, and twice a Child;
To his Hanging-Sleeves restored;
Now he foots it like a Lord;
Now he Pumps his little Wits;
Sh -- ing Writes, and Writing Sh -- s,
All by little tiny Bits.
Now methinks I hear him say,
Boys and Girls, Come out to Play,
Moon does shine as bright as Day.
Now my Namby Pamby's found
Sitting on the Friar's Ground,
Picking Silver, picking Gold,
Namby Pamby's never Old.
Bally-Cally they begin,
Namby Pamby still keeps-in.
Namby Pamby is no Clown,
London Bridge is broken down:
Now he courts the gay Ladee,
Dancing over the Lady-Lee:
Now he sings of Lick-spit Liar.
Burning in the Brimstone Fire;
Liar, Liar, Lick-spit, lick,
Turn about the Candle-stick:
Now he sings of Jacky Horner
Sitting in the Chimney-corner,
Eating of a Christmas-Pie,
Putting in his Thumb, Oh, fie!
Putting in, Oh, fie! his Thumb,
Pulling out, Oh, strange! a Plum.
And again, how Nancy Cock,
Nasty Girl! besh-t her Smock.
Now he acts the Grenadier,
Calling for a Pot of Beer:
Where Is his Money? He Is forgot:
Get him gone, a Drunken Sot.
Now on Cock-horse does he ride;
And anon on Timber stride,
See-and-Saw and Sacchry-down,
London is a gallant Town.
Now he gathers Riches in
Thicker, faster, Pin by Pin;
Pins a-piece to see his Show;
Boys and Girls flock Row by Row;
From their Clothes the Pins they take,
Risque a Whipping for his sake;
From their Frocks the Pins they pull,
To fill Namby's Cushion full.
So much Wit at such an Age,
Does a Genius great presage.
Second Childhood gone and past,
Should he prove a Man at last,
What must Second Manhood be,
In a Child so Bright as he!
Guard him, ye Poetic Powers;
Watch his Minutes, watch his Hours:
Let your Tuneful Nine Inspire him;
Let Poetic Fury fire him:
Let the Poets one and all
To his Genius Victims fall.
PROPOSALS For Printing by Subscriptions, THE Antiquities of Grub-street: With
OBSERVATIONS Critical, Political, Historical, Chronological, Philosophical, and
Philological. By JOHN WALTON and JAMES ANDREWS Gent.
This WORK will be Printed on a Superfine Royal Paper, in Ten Volumes, Folio:
Each Volume to contain an Hundred Sheets; besides Maps, Cuts, and other proper
Illustrations.

The Price to Subscribers is Fifty Guinea's each Set: Half Down, and Half on
Delivery.

No more to be Printed than what are Subscribed for.

Subscribers for Six Sets, have a Seventh gratis, as usual.

The Subscribers Names and Coats of Arms will be prefixed to the Work.

For those who are particularly Curious, some Copies will be Printed on Vellum,
Ruled and Illuminated, they paying the Difference.

IT is not doubted but this Great UNDERTAKING will meet with Encouragement from
the Learned World, several Noble Persons having already Subscribed.

SUBSCRIBERS are Taken-in by the Authors, and most Noted Booksellers in London,
etc.

N.B. The very Cuts are worth the Money; there being, inter alia, above 300
curious Heads of Learned Authors, on large Copper Plates, engraven by Mr.
Herman van Stynkenvaart, from the Paintings, Busto's, and Basso-Relievo's of
the Greatest Masters.

ADVERTISEMENT To all Gentlemen Booksellers, and others. At the House with
Stone-Steps and Sash-Windows in Hanover-Court in Grape-Street, vulgarly called
Grub-Street, Lives an AUTHOR,
WHO Writes all manner of Books and Pamphlets, in Verse or Prose, at
Reasonable Rates: And furnishes, at a Minute's Warning, any Customer with
Elegies, Pastorals, Epithalamium's and Congratulatory Verses adapted to all
manner of Persons and Professions, Ready Written, with Blanks to insert the
Names of the Parties Addressed to.

He supplieth Gentlemen Bell-Men with Verses on all Occasions, at 12 d. the
Dozen, or 10 s. the Gross; and teaches them Accent and Pronunciation gratis.

He takes any side of a Question, and Writes For or Against, or both, if
required.

He likewise Draws up Advertisements; and Asperses after the newest Method.

He Writes for those who cannot Write themselves, yet are ambitious of being
Authors; and will, if required, enter into Bonds never to own the Performance.

He Transmogrifieth alias Transmigrapheth any Copy; and makes many Titles to
one Work, after the manner of the famous Mr. E -- C --

N.B. He is come down from the Garret to the First Floor, for the Convenience
of his Customers.

Pray mistake not the House; because there are many Pretenders there-abouts.

No Trust by Retale.


