PASTORALS. After the simple Manner of THEOCRITUS.

By Mr. PVRNEY.

(...) Theoc. LONDON: Printed for J. BROWN, at the Black Swan without
Temple Bar, and R. BURLEIGH, in Amen-Corner. 1717. Price One Shilling.

ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the LANGUAGE.
MR. Dryden much admires Shakespeare's Tempest; In that Comedy, new PERSONAGES
are introduced; for whom, he thinks, the Poet has invented a Language equally
uncommon. True it is, that such is the ^recept of a CRITIC, in no small
repute. Be (...) Language, says Quinctilian, always suited to the Matter. True
it also is, that See DION. HALICARN: who admires him on that Account.
Homer used the most rustic Words, drawn from the Beotians; Virgil, from
Ennius, in his HEROICKS, rendered his Language uncommon; Milton, Shakespeare,
Spencer, and our contemporary Pastoral Writers, by reviving the antiquated
English terms, by choosing and culling the finest Words of our Glorious
ANCESTORS. In the Steps of these, our Swain has ventured to tread; and where
the Phrase in use was not suited to the softness and simplicity of his
CHARACTERS, as he is acquainted with the Dialect of most Counties in England,
has from thence drawn the tenderest Expressions, as he thought, and best
adapted to the simplicity of his sentiments. Induced, I suppose, to take these
Liberties in Pastoral, by what that excellent Judge of Poetry Mr. Addison, has
laid down on that Poem. How beautiful, says he, is the old Pastoral BALLAD,
beginning thus, See Guardians. N: 22, 23, 30 and 40.
RAGER go vetch tha Or Cows.
Kee, or else tha Zun
Will quite be go, be vore c'have half a don.
And into Language how much finer than the Author's, has he turned a Thought of
Virgil. And what that hight, which girds the Welkin sheen,
Where twelve gay Signs in meet array are seen.
This great Man adds, that by imitating the rusticity of the Dorick, by the
help of the old obsolete Roman Language, Virgil might have attained as much of
the Air of Theocritus, as Phillips has that of Spencer, by using the
antiquated ENGLISH.

Fewer Old-words, indeed, has our present Writer admitted, than are found,
either in Spencer, or the incomparable Pastorals of Mr: Phillips: But in
return, has often made use of those once introduced. As his CHARACTERS are
particularly simple and tender, much also has he imitated Spencer's manner, of
changing the vulgar dress, as 'twere, of his Words, yet leaving the Main Body
so as to be known. Homer's manner of performing this Aristotle shows in the 21
Chap. of his Poesy: He used for (...), (...); and for (...), (...), etc.
Virgil did it, by changing ILLI into OLLI, and the like. Milton by altering
HERMIT into EREMITE; ENTERPRISE into EMPRIZE, etc. And Spencer by affixing y
and a before, and en, et, ie, after his Words; which gives an inexpressible
softness to, without hiding the Language.

This Liberty every good heroic Writer has taken; And well knew Spencer, that
Pastoral still more required it. He has given us, in his Fairy-Queen, a new
Language: The reason must be, because his Scene lies in a new Place. But how
much more has he done it in his Pastorals.

Among other places, in the Preface to her HOMER.
D'acier, and many Frenchmen, complain of the penury and stiffness of their
Language, through the want of this. And Mr. Addison observes, that the ancient
Romans did the like. Yet must I confess, that even among the Pastoral Writers,
no one but Theocritus, Spencer, and our present British Swains, durst ever
venture themselves in this Pastoral Path, being afraid and unwilling to forgo
that Honor which either a refined Language or a sublime one procures: But then
must we add, that from thence it is, that no Critic, but who dares not stir a
step without Leading-strings, as Scaliger, Rapin, etc, has ever allowed any
else to be Pastoral Writers.

But is any One dissatisfied with our rural STYLE, read he a full Vindication
of one much more so: such he will find before Folio Edition.
Spencer's Pastorals; and by his Friend Mr. Harvey. For who knows not, that his
Language was equally uncommon in his Day, and in Our's; Our TONGUE receiving no
visible Alteration in one hundred Years. This appears from Ben. Johnson,
Hooker, Our Common Prayer Book, etc.

The Reader will observe I here only bring some few Authorities; The reason
that I my self decline laying down any thing concerning the true Pastoral
Language is, because we shall see, I believe, a Discourse in a short time on
the Nature of this kind of Poetry. Where that TENDER in the Language, which is
agreeable to Pastoral, will be considered; and distinguished from the TENDER
which is suitable to the Epick, and that which the Tragic Poem requires.

Conclude we then with what the Learned Basil Kennet says, in his Life of
Theocritus, after speaking of his rustic Style. As for our selves, SAYS HE,
the SCOTCH-SONGS, which pass with so much Applause, show, that it is not
impossible to revive this old Conduct among Us with Success.

POSTSCRIPT.
AS for the MORAL and ACTIONS in each of the following Pastorals, (for Action
is the only Unity to be kept in that Poem) they lie obvious to every Eye. But
as the Pastoral does not paint the CHARACTERS so lively as the tragic or epick
Poem, those of our Shepherdesses are specified in the Arguments. And this for
the ease of the SOFT-SEX, whose Favor and Approbation our young SWAIN seems
particularly desirous of.

ARGUMENT.
CUBBIN, the Writer so called, was acquainted, with PAPLET and SOFLIN. All
Young was PAPLET and ignorant of Love; SOFLIN more experienced, but equally
tender and innocent. The first eager to be let into the Nature and Manner of
Lovers and the other SEX; The other of a Temper particularly free and
inclining. These, as CUBBIN was informed, were at Evening gone out to a BUSH of
a sweet and pleasant Situation to tattle of Love, and of COLLIKIN SOFLIN'S
Lover. In pain is CUBBIN, least the gentle PAPLET should fall in Love with him
too, and goes forth to skulk near the BUSH to hear if it indeed was so. There
does the latter part of their Discourse, which alone he hears, confirm the
hearsay. When the gloom of Night draws on, they go to bath and cool 'em in
EDEN Brook. There is PAPLET solitary and musing; and thence, ignorant of her
Ail, returns alone, by Moonshine to the BUSH: For there COLLIKIN, that Morn,
had loll'd with his LOVE. CUBBIN soon discovers her uneasiness; forsakes hit
Covert to attempt her relief; But endeavoring to divert her thoughts from
COLLIKIN, is chid from her sight. So being averse to her Cure, she falls
entirely in Love.

The time, in this PIECE, is from Noon to Night; The Season Summer; and the
Scene on the Banks of the Brook Eden; which runs out of the Medway, some Miles
West of TUNBRIDGE in Kent.

PAPLET:
OR, Love and Innocence.
PASTORAL the I.
(...) Bion. 2.
A Gentle Swain yfed in Kentish Mead, Line 1. YFED. a, and y (pronounced as e)
before Words, and en, et and ie, after, are for softness of sound.

The gentlest Swain that ever
Flock did feed.
Soft he beside the Stream of
EDEN lay,
And grazed abie the Banks of fair MEDWAY.
Up with the Morn, as lith as Lark, he would rise;
And Cubbin he, so said him Shepherd Boys.
So as he sat, with LASS or toys the YOUTH;
Or soft he sooth's, for soft can Cubbin sooth.
There sweetly oped each Flower the little Lip,
Fresh Honey-dew and Evening Air to sip.
Was, when his CADE he would kiss, and pretty play: Cade. Or, Cade-Lamb.

Or bath in Brook, then roll on tender Lea. Lea. Or, Green.

Sooth! would too RHIMES go make as loose he lay,
(Though God-wot, to make RHIMES small Wit had he.)
And wont out-scrawl and print 'em on the Sand,
All as he lay along with Crook in Hand.
Poor Pen, you will say: -- Ay and poor Poet too!
But 'lack, must do what Heaven will have Us do.
Yet happy he, in time, found means to mark
His witless Tattle on a MAPLE's BARK.
But ah, how should he, poor Boy, 'ere find out,
Lines near enough to deck his TREE about.
Forced was he Swains o'rehear behind some balk,
Then on his TREE go print the tender Talk.
Late he abie a Place of Pleasure lay,
All fairly decked in Sweets of fairest MAY.
Where silkie Thighs in Dew Grass-hoppers bathed;
And merry cherruping, so rosy breathed.
Ye Surrey Swains! and Surrey Swains have bliss;
I dare Ye show so soft a SHADE as this!
Atween the dewie Leaves as Air was blown,
The dewie Leaves yquivered every one.
The why he came here was all for two Maids,
He thought, were chatting nigh, of Love and Lads.
He came the one to warn, that Youngling-breast
The less did know of Love, did love the less.
Pitied her the soft Swain: to warn he strove,
Lest the young HEART might hap to fall in love.
Foreby him sat these Maids in loose Array,
As fair and fresh as Summer Eve might see.
Sweet gay-green Flowers, so pretty put anear,
The Pink and Pancet pretty put anear.
Soflin and Paplet they; (ah dainty THEY!)
That ripe as Rose, this a soft-aged MEY. Line 12. A soft-aged MEY. or MAY; the
D left out; is here used for one younger than we commonly mean by the Word
MAID, suppose a Lass of 13 or 14 Years old. Though Chaucer uses it indifferently,
as it has not the vulgarness of Maid, and is of a sound particularly sweet and
simple.

Both lith as Youngling Roe, all-tender too
As Ladybird that lives on twinkling Dew.
Paplet, a CHRISTIAN's and a JEWES's Child, Line 3. Paplet, a Christian's, etc.
She would have discovered their Marriage, and occasioned the JEWES's Death by
their Laws.

Scarce five Year old, was laid, to starve in Field;
For that the BABE 'they could no longer hide:
But all by hap an anciant SIRE it spied;
Just starving; for the tender Teeth been broak,
As twould crack Nutt: It smiled when up he took*
Oh sweet my Father reach that bough of HIPS!
What must I do, ah how I Have scratched my Lips!
He tookt to's Cave; and pulled the Thorns all out
Her pretty Feet; they bled with walk about.
There brought her up with Florey fresh his Son,
Who hunts wild Beasts, it is what they live epon.
Now sick if Sire or Son, she moans him meet,
Soft tend's, with cheary Chat, and soothing sweet
These gentle HEARTS small thought were Cubbin lay;
In sooth some halfendeal undeckt they be.
Honey-lip Gales soft breathed on their Hair,
Waved their Clothes, and did their Bosoms bare
And well Iwis, as bare their bosoms, all Line 7. And well Iwis, etc. The
Words, WIS, WEET, and WEEN, all signify to think or imagine.

The Flowerets out that decked 'em did fall.
A Willow on the bank upheld their Heads,
(Oh happy Tree, to hold such lovely Maids!)
A soothing shade the rosy Sweetbreer gave;
Where sang the Bird that sings so soft at Eve. i. e. The Nightingale.

Believe Me now, thus showed they; by my fay
As lovely showed, as Lilly on the Lea!
But sure that Paplet was the tenderest Lass!
Well ween I Cubbin lay at little Ease.
So soft she seemed! By Heaven seemed more
than soft!
Her Lip to touch he wished him, O how often!
Now soothly Paplet was the tenderest Mey!
Ah God! I small ween'd could so tender be!
Some-deal her Paps been pufft, that sooth might
seem
The LITTLE LIFE now just of Love began dream?
Now say me, Shepherds, who could help have
strove,
To save so sweet a HEART from pain of Love?
Love is a gentle pain, a pretty pain:
He came to keep from loving Soltie's Swain.
Soflin was fair as Morning DROP is fair,
And Paplet tender as the Evening Air.
When chatted they, so sweet their chatting were!
Oh I could hear, methought, for ever hear!
On FELLOW first, then TREE, they pretty loll,
Quiver their little Lips, their Eyes roll.
Sooth, ever and anon, as Soflin spoak,
Paplet in ecstasy would hide her LOOK.
Then asken more; yet shamed to asken more,
(Of MEN and LOVE) but longed to know so sore.
Sometimes she would fling her self epon the Grass:
Then up, and catch in Arms her Fellow-lass.
Why may not we Men, yquoth the youngling MEY,
And why may not we grasp them? Us graspen they*
So pleased she was, and eager still to know,
In sooth so pleased, she knew not what to do.
But ill I say how sweet the Lasses sat,
Oh that you would seen 'em,, I Would give any what!
This sooth I say (for sooth the Shepherds say)
Soft simpering thus said the YOUNGLING MEY.
The meaning of the MEY no whit I ween.
I Am sure, when near I came, just thus she sain.
Paplet. NOW much I marl: It Is pretty; if tell Truth!
But say; Ha, Ha! Be HE so soft in sooth?

Soflin. My gentle MEY, he is of gentlest mood.
Oh that he were my BROTHER! sure I would
Taken his Hand and tender lead him in,
Whenso he to the distant Field had been.
There pretty stroke his Hand, Ne have it said
See Soflin there, O see! A fawning Maid!
In his soft Bosom I my Hand would slip,
And hang epon the sweetness of his Lip.

Paplet. Don't, Soflin, don't! how can talk so? Lips sweet;
How meanest sweet? How done know be sweet?

Soflin. All as a-green I walk with Collikin,
The lovely'st Lad that ever walked a-green.
If be I Am fray'd by Flood, by Boar or Bull,
He sooth's me soft, and calls me softest Soul.
Be it not pretty? b'lieve me, Pap, he does!
And holds me 'neath his lilly Arm now sooth!
And sweet the Swain my Hand in his will nip,
Then kiss me with the kisses of his Lip.
So save me, SWEET, as truth I tell, when say
(Why tarest the Flowers so fierce, my pretty MEY?)
But hear me, CHICK! I seemen often be fray, fray. Or, afraid.

When I be not: But MAIDS should seem they say.

Paplet. And so; why but -- and pretty'st be it then Maid,
Be lip'd when frayed art? I Will be afraid!

Soflin. Prettier? Oh prettier, CHILD, than may be thought,
You may not hug Men. if be you fearen naught:
But sure, so sweet it is, so hug in Arms!
Skuttle to DEAR, and have him hide from harms!

Paplet. No more, but then? Yet kind be Swains, you said;
How kind? May Not kiss, Would kissing kill 'em, Maid?
But soft! meseem'd -- oh I Would have heard for naught
Our simple Chat, for ours is simple Chat!

Soflin. Set still SWEET! Wind might wag: Or LEVERIT rush,
With Cock-up Ears: don't go! or Bird from bush.

Paplet. That Cubbinet I fear, for whom the MEYS
Late joined, and bought a PIPEIT; all I guess
To busy him, and keep from kissing so.
The Swain that whispers us in Ear, you know,
That he can sing, then snatches a quick kiss;
Sooth, as the Mey suspecteth naught amiss.
Now the poor HEART's so pleased with his Pipe!
Fore GREAT ONES he cannot hold, but lay'th to's lip.

Soflin. I know the Swain, a tender Swain is he!
Fear him not Paplet, fear him not SWEET MEY.
I know the Swain, Who sooths so soft as he!
Believe me Lass, he will never harm SWEET MEY.

Paplet. Oh, but he often skulks a-hind a balk,
To hear the harmless Shepherdess in talk.
Then tells the Chat to SPARKS at the great-Town,
Who maken Mock at Speech of simple Clown.
Ne strange, I trow; for say me. SWEET, is it fit Ne. Or, Nor.

Our weetless Tittletattle weren writ?
Unkindly Cubbinet! untoward boy!
Else, by my fay! he is a GENTLE BOY.

Soflin. Sooth is he, but to kissing he is so given!
He Will kiss till he is odd, and then kiss to come even.
He Will kiss at the Hedge, and he will kiss at the Gate;
He Will kiss if the chattering Magpie but prate!

Paplet. But how must do if Swain should ere kiss me?
He Will put my Arms around him, did not say:
Oh! -- if to put my hands a-hind he goes:
May strive pull 'way, and that will pull him close!

Soflin. Be sure look tender, when to lip he go:
But, sooth if say, Thou can not help look so.
That dainty dimple in thy little Cheek,
So soft thee show's, so modest, and so meek!

Paplet. Worst is, if ever YOUNGLING cast to lay
My hand in's bosom, 'twill so pretty be,
Not I know how, O I shall not help the fault,
But blush, poor son! how Soflie must I not?

So Paplet, softest Paplet, as she said,
Her sweet-dew Lips on Soflies Bosom laid.
Soflin. No help, I ween; what will be, best let be.
But bad in thee, my CHICK, more bad in me.

Paplet. Yet STRIPLIN CHEEK look pretty so, meweet;
(All as the Rose in bed of Lillys set.)
For Florrey late to the great-town have been;
But oh, when first me saw, how blushed the Swain!
Cause why; the sweetlip boy then cast to kiss;
Yet say me soft, be that so much amiss?

Soflin. If be but why, small harm ybe I weet.
Colly and I late roved, Nuts to get.
I witless was so bonny and so brag,
( Paplet beware not be with Love so wag)
I scratchen Chin; ah luckless Lass the when!
See here but, Paplet! I all scratched my Chin!
The Wound he wiped, and kissed it 'ore and 'ore;
Why sooth now, Paplet, else 'twould been a sore.
Whatso I could to bar my blush, I did;
Yet ween not whether somedeal looked not red.
But 'twas allfor his Eyes so soft did seem:
While Honeybreath epon my Neck would steam.
And oh, his ringlet-locks too, where they fell
Tittled my breasts! and I was 'shamed to tell.

Paplet. Why 'shamed? I would have stroak'd 'em off his Face:
And sooth now so, had felt how soft it was!
Oh pleasant! how you have lived! Did not though
Out's Bosom take his LOCKS, when in did blow?
Do let me lie A-LEA with ye, now wo't?
For often ye setten so, Lass, do ye not.

Soflin. This Morn sweet sat we 'neath this sweet Maybough;
Ye Kentish Swains, no softer seat ye know!
The Flowers sucked Honey-dew (O dainty draught!)
Soft for the Bees to sip that sip so soft.
Under my head a hand fair laid the Boy;
Then sinking down yclosen sleepie Eye.

Paplet. Ay? say in sooth? and then -- why do not say?
Was it not lovely, when so loose he lay?
Meseems I should have pleased with tender Tongue
Or soothed, the while, with softness of a Song.
So as she said ( and who so sweet can sain)
Her little Leg would in her Fellow's twine.
Then dainty'd droppen Hand in Soflie Breast:
Ah dainty Hand! how Cubbin yearn'd to kiss't!

Soflin. Oh soft I lulled him, soft as I could lull;
And in my Bosom put his Head to loll!
Sweet glowed the while, his pretty rosy Cheek;
Smooth lay elong his Limbs, so slim and slieke.
Fair fed I on the fairness of his Face;
O Paplet, did but ween how pleasant 'twas!

Paplet. I Have heard' it is dainty lie along with Ene Ene. Or, One.

We love; say Soflie, be it so dainty then?

Soflin. Dainty? Ay dainty more than heart may weet
Don't look at me, Pap, and I Will tell thee what.
I putten hand in's bosom now that be's,
So silkie soft! then gently gave't a kiss!
Soft simpering saiden this the lovely Maid.
While Paplet 'tween her twey her hand fair had;
Who often would turn and shift, as ill at ease:
Cubbin did too to see it. Ah careful Case!

Paplet. Stay, Soflin, list! Heard I not some one sneeze
'Twas among the SEDGE; fast by those murmuring Bees!

Soflin. Poor CHICK, how thou do quake! prithee leave quake.
Sooth 'twas some Bird but chirp'd in th'bushie brake*

Paplet. Much Wonder give it me, my gentle DEAR!
Thou naught, ne any one, suspectest 'ere.

Soflin. Why would have fear? I wonder why do warn!.
When I have wronged, then I to fear will learn.
^ure Soflin none will harm; if Soflin none;
And well I ween, I never any one.
But look, ah me! how Flowers be blown out hair;
And bosom too! -- But LOVIE likes it bare.

Paplet. Then do Lads like in sooth, or seemen they?
^ve heard say, YOUNGLING SWAIN will harm YOUNG MEY.
Yet Florrey looks so pretty and so pert,
Naught I know how, fancy he could not hurt.
And Collikin, O me! but Collikin,
Of all the Swains, for me -- he is the Swain!

Soflin. O simple he is of Cheer, and meek of Mein;
All-fine his Flesh, and sooth as soft his Skin!
So prettily his Words slip off his Tongue,
With a little waggish Lisp among!
But when he sooths too pleasant it is to bear!
He kisses, I ask if a rosy be near!
But see there! Lallet's CADE! how that cam^ there?
Sure by the Lamb the Lassie should be near!
Oh! Well beween'd! We bath in Brook this Eve*
You see where SPRAYS so sweet a shadow give.
You're one; and Lallet Lass so heavenly hewn;
And Poppit maiden ripe as Rose in June.
This Florey loves; and Fauney fresh love that;
Cuddleit say some. Up Lass! mayhap they wai^

THEY go: Their BOSOMS open to the Evening Air:
And dip their blooming BEAUTYS fresh and fair:
They pretty play and paddle in the Wet:
And strew with fairest Flowers the Streamulet*
But Paplet wistful was; On bank she set,
Siping the Honeysukles juicie SWEET.
But ah, her mind elsewhere! alas on love!
Oh Soflin, thou have wronged a tender DOVE!
When parted All; and All hied home; she made
As if she too; but silent by Moonshade,
Stale back to the BUSH; with hands in bosom laid,
(Those hands all fair as flower) and hanging head.
Mayhap (soft said she) now HE goes to Bed.
I wonder how HE lies when there he is laid!
Besure HE mind's not me when among the Swains.
O could I touch HIM but, just touch meseems!
Yet looked she at Moonshine on the Stream;
That twinkled fair, and strove not think on him.
Mused too on the varying FIGURES made on Grass,
By the Light, that 'tween the waving Trees did pass.
Where fancyeth she depainten this and that,
(But all of Love) atill to the BUSH did get.
There blushed when first it saw to think that she
Should so steal back to the place where Colly lay.
And am I then? And am I grown, she sain,
(With that began pretty finger put in Eyes).
So sly and false? Oh Heaven! don't see! or do,
Forgive! -- small weeneth Soflin where I now.
So saying on the bank adown she laid.
Just where the Swainet leaned, as Soflin said.
Then, smiling, thus: MAYHAP his head was put
Where mine is now: Who knows? O happy ROOT!
This gentle Cubbinet did see and hear,
Waiting abie, the pretty HEART to cheer.
He went to sooth her soft, and warn her how
She thought on Collikin. All would not do.
Soon as she saw, she started from her seat:
Ne would she hear him Pipe, ne talk awhit.
So that he made as if went strait away;
But went no farther then before he lay.
The dainty-limbed Lass, as soft to see,
As springing Flowrets in the Month of May,
Smooth laid her slender Features down again,
All on the sweetness of the Flowrie Plain.
Ah gentle HEART! ah HEART of prettiness!
Where is the Dalliance, and the tender Kiss?
Then sighed out this the rosie-liped Lass,
Soft as her Eye on Heaven yfixen was.
WHAT aileth, O what aileth thee, my Heart;
Now sooth meseem's thou be'st not as thou were.
Be Collikin (ah would he other was!)
Far fairer than the fairest Lad or Lass,
Yet what have I to do with Collikin?
Let me not be, e're be for Soflie's Pain!
Though, methinks, were he not here is, I could well
Wish he were mine, Oh me, how wish him well!
Thus sat the YOUNGLING MEY, till far the Night
Was spent, and sooth the Moon nigh lost her light.
Then up began rise; but 'ere she 'gan up rise,
Tucked up her Hair, and wiped her dewie Eyes.
The SOFTHEART SWAIN (for Swainets all are so)
Staid till he wept, and when he wept did go.
Unhappy Soflin! Now there love's with thee,
The sweetest Mey that ever Sun did see.
All he had seen or heard, in head kept he,
To cut on Crook, or mark upon his Tree.
For sure there is not who can envy that;
Not one, I ween, can envy LASSE's CHAT.
But why so fond of LASSES CHAT, say you.
Oh, had you seen 'em, you would have been so too!
Ye gentle YOUTHS! who rove where led by chance*
If be on Paplet's grief your Eye should glance,
Think the poor Lass mishap enough has had;
Ah don't you add, by hating what she said!
Ween, if ye maken mock at it, ye make
At Paplet mock; don't so, for Pappie's sake!
End of the first Pastoral.
ARGUMENT TO THE Second PASTORAL.
FAuney and Lallet had an equal Value for each other. Fauney was Young, and of
a most taking Aspect: Lallet beauteous and particularly tenderhearted. These
walk together to a GROVE at hand; to taste the pleasance of the Season, and the
sweets of each othe's talk. There long they bay themselves in the soft Delices
of the Morn; the harmless Swain and gentle Shepherdess. Lallet, at length,
leaps up to gather STRAWBERRYS for her Lover; while he, for her, sat plaiting
Flowery Gyrlonds, and wishing her return. Long he sat, and long he wished. But
she, to raise his Love, delayed her return. Fauney, as she was about to
surprise and joy him with her sight, rises and runs to Paplet to enquire for
her. Then it is that Lallet's softness of heart appears. With watery Eyes she
rambles through the GROVE; and accuses her self of Cruelty. There find her
another Lad and Lass, endeavor to allay her Grief, and sing a cheerful SONG
for her Diversion. At length, Cubbin begs her to go home with him. She declines
it, lest it might occasion a second Uneasiness to Fauney; and resolve's to
punish her self by staying where she was. She does so. Till Fauney, at length
does come. He skulks behind the CAVE she sat in, and hears how uneasy she was
for making him so. Anon he surprises her with his sight, drys up her Tears and
conducts home in the height of GOOD HUMOR.

As for the Time, though it begins in the Morning, the main of this Pastoral is
in the EVENTIDE, and the Moonlight Night that succeeds. The Season
Midsummer-Day. And the 1 Scene, a delightful Grove near Lynheath.

LALLET:
OR, The Tender Shepherdess.
PASTORAL the II.
(...) Theoc.
FAuney and Lallet, this as fair
As Flower, that fresh as Evening Air;
One HOLY-MORNING had in hsead,
To trip to Lynheath roie Mead.
He one hand laid in Bosom bare:
Her Clothes fast fluttered in Air.
Sang he and whistled ore the SWEARD: Sweard. Or, Grassplatt.

She limber leaped, as blithe as Bird.
O dainty Violet! said he,
Simp'ring, and stooping on the LEA,
Thee little Lass, ah happy thee!
Adown her Bosom letten be.
Then, for he would give a MEY the Flower,
The Stripling kissed it over and over.
Lallet was meek and sweet of Mein;
Tender as Evening Air ybeen.
Soothly, a-frosty Morns she will set
Her WINDOW open, and much of Meat:
Then, oh how she will cherrup fair,
The gentle BIRDS out eager Air.
Thus merry the two triped it:
I can but smile to think how sweet!
Strait Fauney stepped before, to see
The where the softest Seat might be.
Abie Lin-heath yspread's a BOUGH,
The sweetest sure the Be does know.
There use the Shepherds fresh yfare,
To bay their Bosoms in cool Air;
And sip the Dew off SWEET-BREER ROSE:
There often Cubbinet too goes.
Now, sweet the Swain here lay at ease;
Waiting the Lilly-footen Lass.
She, slim-made PRETTY ONE, her hied
Over the Green, as brisk as Bride.
Her fine Dew-laping VEST, with Care,
One Hand did hold; one Flowerets fair
A-bosom put, soft Paps among,
As soft, as Drop on Hawthorn hung.
The Shepherd saw her far away;
And sweet she sliggar'd by my Fay!
Then simpering said, as came anigh;
Oh what a merry Lass am I!
He Will pick 'em all out, when does see,
While I with his RINGLET HAIR may play!
He Will say I Am sweeter, pick each Flower;
So I shall play amost an Hour!
Well was it ween'd now by my Fay;
O what a merry Lass am I!
But she off Fauney was so far,
That he no whit of this might hear.
Now they are together set so sweet,
How shall I say how soft and sweet!
The Swainet ope's his BREAST to the Air;
And calls his Love to fan it fair.
Then for her Pains her Lip soft smack's,
And right's and smooth's her HONEY-LOCKS.
Sooth, now the Lass began like a Kiss;
But claps her dimple Cheek to his,
And whisper's soft, MUCH Marl I how,
Fauney, thou can love kissing so.
Thus lovely lay the gentle PAIR,
Soft as the Midday Gossamer:
Strait Lallet rises, and will hie
To gather STRAWBERRYS abie.
I prithee, said she, smiling sweet,
Stay here, and here I Will see thee strait.
She goes: The Shepherd ill can brook,
To lose the Pleasance of her LOOK.
But rose anon; and Flowers began pick,
Aside a Spring, her Breast to deck.
Then down again sat on the SOFT;
And looked for Lallet often and often.
O me! How fine a Flower is this;
Sooth she shall not have it without a Kiss!
Elig'ring he said; and pleased himself,
That he should please his darling ELF.
Thus long he sat; still wondering why
She came not; but she then was by;
The Lass stood by; stood 'hind a BOUGH;
Laughing, to think what he would do,
When found the came not. Now, she sain,
Had I the Heart to give him Pain!
Emey I Have heard say, I know not,
Love dearer be the dearer bought.
A little whit however I Will wait;
'Twill pain him but a little whit.
The gentle Shepherd easeless was;
Turning and shifting on the GRASS.
When Paplet saw he, YOUNGLING-LASS,
Soft of Heart and fair of Face.
Full far away he saw, and ran
To know if Lallet she had seen;
And walked awith her, grieved sore,
Till his own DEAR could see no more.
When Lallet saw, a-thro' her BOUGH,
The fair-framed he to Paplet go;
Ah God, how yearn'd the harmless Heart!
How grieved, that she should give him smart!
But when he out of sight did go,
Alas, she knew not what to do.
For shamed after him to run,
Thinking he now was angry grown.
With pretty carefulness in Face,
Walked, ne knew where, the dainty Lass.
Naught minding now her little CADE;
Though It stopped her, as before her played.
Ne when she made Mouth bleed with kick,
Left it, but soft her Footen lick.
Poor FOOL! It stay her would, though whipped;
Mayseem it lacked so sore be lip'd.
For It used lie in LAP elong,
And touch her Bosom with the Tongue.
Thus roved the dainty-leged Lass,
All till the EVE drew on apace.
Then down she laid her Limbs so sliek;
And to the cold Ground clapped her Cheek.
Oh I hard Heart! I worse than Wolf!
(Then said) to pain so gentle ELF!
Ah how could I, how could I though
Go harm poor HEART? He worked no Woe! --
But here do let me stop, for why,
I want to wipe my tearie Eye.
Scene 2. A GRASS-PLAT half enclosed by a Streamulet.

The Swain so soft (for soft be Swains)
Who pipes so pretty on the Plains;
I need'nt tell ye who he is,
The Lasses know him by his KISS.
At Eve did come, with YOUNGLING MEY.
A-to the Grove where Lallet lay.
The why he hither came was this;
Paplet he won to take a Kiss:
I Will have, quoth she, a SONG for the Kiss;
Thou shall, quoth he, and one for this.
So here they came, as did befall,
To sing elong with NIGHTINGALE.
Here Violets ypicketh he,
To deck the bosom of the MEY.
When lo! he hear's a murmuring tone;
May seem some Young Lass made her moan.
Never will I, full well ywis,
Give pain again! I Have paid for this.
Oh, if he leaven love, ah god!
How shall I name a thing so bad?
Oh, if he leave to love farewell,
Farewell for ever, ought but Ill!
Heaved the Swain's Breast for pity often,
Unhappy Swain to be so soft!
Ached his Heart, to hear her smart,
Unhappy Swain to have such Heart!
Ynethered he creeps anear,
Still as a Spirit or as Air.
But could not well tell where she lay,
Amongst many a Breer and many a Tree,
Which dusk'd in GLOOM Moon's waining Ray;
Ah Lallet, how there can thou lay!
A Stream half closed a Plat of Grass;
And made a sweet a pleasant Place.
Here (woe-the-worse!) as nigh drew he,
He saw what made him sad to see.
A gentle Lass a-neath a BOUGH:
Should gentle Lass be laid so low?
Twey Lips she had, now sooth I say,
Like CHERRIES, and as soft as they.
A dainty Blush on Cheek was too,
The prettiest Blush, no MEYS blush so.
The harmless Shepherd to her sped,
And took in Arms the harmless Maid.
But oh! when took in Arms the Lass,
Witness me God, how woe he was!
And is it then? and is it quoth he,
Lallet, the gentle Lall I see?
The dainty Daughter of the GLEN?
Help me, ye Heavens, to speak my Pain!
He stroak'd her Locks, all wet with Mist,
Out Bosom, then her Bosom kissed.
Why sooth 'twas soft, as Bird in Bush,
He kissed so soft, and bad not blush.
Ysoothing breathed the sweet-lip'd Air
On pretty Paps, and waved her Hair.
In VEST her Face she wimpled.
On tender Bosom hung the Head.
Tell me, ye gentle STRIPLINGS tell!
If suiten Lass so lovely wail?
O tell me! should she, ay or on,
Letten the Air her VEST yblow?
Her slender VEST the Air so blew,
That might see lilly Limbs athro'.
Cubbin was grieved, ye cannot think how,
To see her soil her Beauty so.
Her Beauty fresh began Bloom, and 'ope
Its bashful Bosom to the DEW-DROP.
Her pretty Paps, like clustring Grapes,
A-thro' her VEST soft showed their Shapes.
Then did the Swain, so fair and fine,
Ywipe her Tears out pretty Eyes.
Set her more soft, and soothing sweet,
Asked her how could so fair CHEEKS wet?
He chears; but ah! she will no cheer;
Down drops her Head on Bosom bare.
Chiding the gentle NIGHTINGALE,
That sang so soft its softest Tale.
Then Paplet asked het this and that;
Who gave her grieve? Why so she sat?
The sloe-eyed SWEET ONE noted none;
But looked at the waining Moon.
Though little SPARROW with her was,
And soft it sat in Neck of Lass.
Sooth, in her lilly Face 'twould look,
A pretty fliggar when she spoak.
See the sweet FON, quoth YOUNGLING-MEY;
I prithee turn and with it play!
Alack the Day! quoth Lallet fair,
The lovely Lad will love elsewhere!
And clapped her Face to the dewie Grass,
The fairest Face that ever was.
The sweet Balm-breathing Paplet cheered,
Soft as the Song of EVENING BIRD.
Then stroaked up the Locks of the Lass;
And spoak her thus as gave a kiss.
Paplet. Poor DEAR! It gives me pine with pain,
To see poor DEAR so wondrous wain.
Ah wo-a-way! Come gentle Maid,
In Paplet's Bosom loll thy Head!
Come, soft thy careful Case CHILD tell.
And can a Lover give such wail?

Lallet. Oh, had I pained but my self,
Instead of him, poor harmless ELF!

Paplet. See, Lass! that pretty Springlet fair!
Hark, how sweet chirp's the GRASSHOPPER!
There set we, SWEET! There may thou tell,
On softest Flowers, thy tender Tale.

Lallet. Ah what are Flowers or Spring to me:
Oh good! how fair my LAD would lay!
How loose we leaned the livelong Day!
How wont I with his Bosom play!

Her dainty CHEEK, with that same Word,
From off the Green she pertly reared.
But as began think what she had done,
Poor HEART down flapped it again.
The dabling DEW fell all among,
Her buding Breasts so fair and young;
Her buding Breasts, that bloomie grew,
Soft shrinked at the dabling DEW.
At lenth, however, the tender Twey
Won her to rise from off the LEA.
Quoth Cubbin, Prithee to my COTT,
Let Us go; refresh thee there awhit.
Oh no, said she, I late did pain
The loveliest Lad, the sweetest Swain:
Not for the World! might he not now,
To know I Am there, be grieved too?
But through the Grove she trip'd it, and
The Shepherd lead her by the Hand.
Scene 3. A CAVE in middle of the Wood.

The gentle Lad, and Lass so fair,
Thus soft did sooth, for soft they were:
His Lips began bloom with tender Hair,
Her Paps ysprouted fresh and fair.
At lenth the wailing SWEET ONE they
Bring where she safe and loose might lay.
A Cave there is by IDLEHILL,
Ye know the Place where Shepherds loll:
There Fauney often goes; I guess,
To hear the Lark, or toy with Lass.
A SWEETBREER dainty over it spread;
That Roses bore, and cast a Shade.
Abie it ran a Rivolet;
Painted with Sky and Flowers so sweet.
To this the lilly-finger'd Lass,
Soft wailing, pointed as did pass.
May seem she wished to set in the CAVE;
Her Love might thither hap to rove.
Thither the Silver-shapen Lass,
Soft triped it with easy Pace.
The SHRUBS before her sprinkled Dew;
As easy Air atween 'em flew.
Through Boughs the MOONLIGHT fair beseen,
Sweet checkered the Grassie Green.
Cubbin went first to make the way;
And after trip'd the fine-limb MEY.
First began open Lip the little Lass,
The sweetest Lip that ever was.
See, gentle WAILER; See, my SWEET!
I Have crop'd a Rose and Violet.
Here let me stick it in thy Breast!
She stuck it there, and then it kissed.
Well were, quoth Cubbin (all elong
Laying him soft) we had a SONG.
Paplet shall shrill some lovely Lay;
And Paplet's sweet as Musk in May.
Then first the Dew-eye'd Wailer reared,
Her hanging Head as quick as Bird.
She lacked 'em sore to sing, I weet,
Of Fauney; yet was shamed to say it.
Agreed, quoth sweet-lip'd Paplet quick;
But thou thy UNDERSONG shall make.
And sure we so shall Lallet please.
You lie on that side I on this.
Paplet. Paplet (...) Cubbin's Song to Lallet.
Arise my FAIR ONE, come away!
Fresh be the Flowers the Groves as gay.
Early arise, e're LARK gin's sing!
We'll see how well the VIOLETS spring.

Cubbin. Come FAIR ONE, be thou like the Roe!
That leaping over the HILLS does go.
Come down the Gardens, to the Grove!
We'll hear the TURTLE in his Love.
Then FAUNEY sang they, what he was;
And could such Lad 'ere leave his Lass?

Paplet. Fauney does rove like airy ROE;
Armed with a Quiver and a Bow.
In every SHADE he soft does set;
And bay's in every STREAMULET.

Cubbin. Fauney's the Joy of every Lass;
All meek's his Mind as fair his Face.
Fauney is fresh as EVENING-SKY;
With small red Mouth and twinkling Eye.
Then soft they sang to show the Lass,
No slight Mishaps made Love the less.

Paplet. Once clomb I for MAYBOUGH, by hap,
Cuddleit, the while, abie did trip.
He helped me down, and soothed me sweet;
Shrew me if w'ont again up get!

Cubbin. Once Soflin tript, and fell elong;
I spied her lie sweet Flowers among:
A KISS I gave her as she lay;
Then lift her up and went away.

Thus sang the TWEY their tender Tale;
Sweet as the Breath of NIGHTINGALE.
While the fair Wailer lowly laid,
And hung adown her pretty Head.
Then Cubbin took the Hand of the Lass,
And said, soft-smiling in her Face.
I prithee Lallet go with me!
Why Fauney's far enough away!
Oh, kind my Lad! Leave ask, quoth she;
Or bid go lie on yon wet LEA!
Could I have Heart to pain poor ELE*
And shall not I have to pain my self?
She said; small thinking how the while
Fauney was near: Soft did he smile,
To hear the gentle-hearted Lass*
In VEST she wrapped her lilly Face.
Forth crep he soft, of lovely Look;
Pleased as the hunted HEART at Brook.
Cubbin and Paplet beck'ned first;
Then claspt his Arms round Lallet's WASTE.
So loose her held the rosy Boy,
That she not dreamed any nigh.
Anon adown her self she threw,
And began to weep and wail anew.
Ah God! but how she looked then!
Is it? and is it my gentle SWAIN?
Like started Hare she leaped aloft;
Like easy Sleep he seized her soft.
Together through the WOOD they pass;
With eachen Lad his pretty Lass.
Merry as Lamkins on the LEA,
And well ye know how merry they.
So, all is well again then now,
Lallet's as pleased as Bird on Bough.
Then what remains, ye STRIPLINGS, now;
But that you smile and be so too?
More blessed to make's alone in you;
Can ye dislike what LASSES do?
Much Woe has had the fairfaced DEAR,
Do, pity her because she is fair.
The End of the Second Pastoral.
N. B. THE Writer of these Pieces, has several of the like by him. His Friends
were very importunate for their attending these into the World. But he thought
if he could find Pardon for thrusting two upon the TOWN, 'twould be Honor
enough. Nor had he consented so far* but through their representing to him, that
Innocence and Simplicity were here set in an engaging Light. And would any one,
through this slight Attempt, have a kinder Thought of that harmless Modesty in
our CHARACTERS; or be hereby induced to desire our Age might, in some measure,
resemble those drawn; our young Swain would think his first Step not entirely
taken amiss.

FINIS.

