A SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS: A PASTORAL.

Price Two-Shillings and Sixpence.

Hannah More*
portrait of Hannah More

A SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS: A PASTORAL. In THREE DIALOGUES.

By a YOUNG LADY.

To rear the tender thought,
To teach the young idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh instruction over the mind,
To breathe th'enliv'ning spirit, and to fix
The generous purpose in the Female breast.
THOMPSON. BRISTOL: Printed and sold by S. FARLEY, in Castle-Green: Also sold
by T. CADELL, Bookseller, in the Strand; CARNAN and NEWBERY, Booksellers, in
St. Paul's Churchyard, London; and W. FREDERICK, Bookseller, in Bath.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT has been so hackney'd a practice for Authors to pretend that imperfect
copies of their works had crept abroad, that the writer of the following
Pastoral is almost ashamed to allege this as the real cause of the present
publication. This little poem was composed several years ago (the Author's age
eighteen) and recited at that Time, and since, by a party of young Ladies, for
which purpose it was originally written; by this means, some mutilated copies
were circulated, unknown to the Author, through many Hands.

TO Mrs. GWATKIN.
DEAR MADAM,
AS the following little poem turns chiefly on the danger of delay, or error,
in the important article of Education; I know not to whom I can, with more
propriety, dedicate it, than to you: as the subject it inculcates, has been one
of the principal objects of your attention, in your own family. Let not the
name of dedication alarm you; I am not going to offend by making your eulogium.
Panegyric is only necessary to suspicious, or common characters. Virtue will
not accept it. Modesty will not offer it.

The friendship with which you have honored me from my very childhood, will, I
flatter myself, be exerted in my favor on this occasion, and induce you to
pardon me for venturning, without your permission, to lay, before you this
public testimony of my esteem, and to assure you, how much I am,

Dear Madam, Your obedient, and obliged humble Servant, The AUTHOR.

The introductory ADDRESS;
Spoken by EUPHELIA. WITH trembling diffidence, with modest fear,
Before this gentle audience we appear.
Ladies! survey us with a tender eye,
Put on goodnature, and lay judgment by.
No deep-laid plot adorns our humble page,
But scenes adapted to our sex and age.
No haughty female's passions here described,
Nor chamber-maids by jealous husbands bribed;
Simplicity is all our author's aim,
She does not write, nor do we speak for fame.
To make amusement and instruction friends,
A lesson in the guise of play she sends;
She claims no merit but her love of truth,
No plea to favor, but her sex and youth:
With these alone to boast, she sends me here,
To beg your kind, indulgent, partial ear.
Of critic man she could not stand the test,
But you with softer, gentler hearts are blessed:
With him she dares not rest her feeble cause,
Too low a mark for satire, or applause.
Ladies, protect her -- do not be satyric,
Spare censure, she expects not panegyric.

The Characters of the Pastoral.
Four Young Ladies of Distinction in Search of Happiness. FLORISSA, PASTORELLA,
LAURINDA, EUPHELIA,
URANIA, An ancient Shepherdess Her Daughters. FLORA, ELIZA,
FLORELLA, A Young Shepherdess.
(The above Characters were represented by young Ladies from eight, to fifteen
Years old.)

A SEARCH after HAPPINESS: A PASTORAL, in Three Dialogues.
DIALOGUE I.
SCENE, A GROVE. FLORISSA, PASTORELLA, LAURINDA, EUPHELIA. FLORISSA. WELCOME,
ye humble vales, ye flowery shades,
Ye murmuring fountains, and ye verdant glades!
From all the gilded misery of the great,
From all the dull impertinence of state;
From scenes, where daring guilt triumphant reigns,
It Is dark suspicions, and it is hoard of pains;
Where pleasure never comes without alloy,
And art would varnish over fallacious joy;
Where folly crowns the day, excess the night,
And dull satiety succeeds delight;
Where midnight vices their fell orgies keep,
And guilty revels scare the phantom sleep;
Where dissipation wears the name of bliss;
From these we fly in search of Happiness.

EUPHELIA. And lo, at length, propitious to our view,
Behold the spot our anxious hopes pursue!
These branching oaks, which old as time appear,
Proclaim URANIA'S dwelling to be near.
And see -- observe the low-roof'd cottage rise;
Not regal domes so grateful to my eyes.

PASTORELLA. How the description with the scene agrees!
Here lowly thickets, there aspiring trees:
The hazle copse excluding noon-day's beam,
The tufted arbor, the pellucid stream:
The blooming sweet-briar and the hawthorn shade,
The springing cowslips and the daisied mead:
The wild luxuriance of the full-blown fields,
Which spring prepares and laughing Summer yields.

EUPHELIA. Here simple nature strikes the raptured eye,
With charms which wealth and art but ill supply;
The genuine graces, which, without, we find,
Display the beauty of the owner's mind.

LAURINDA. Yes, be assured, this grove contains the cell
Where sage URANIA and her children dwell.
FLORELLA too, if right we have heard the tale,
With them resides -- the lily of the vale.

FLORISSA. But soft, what gentle female form appears,
Which, rosy health, and softest beauty wears?
Some Angel, sure, commissioned from above,
Or else the smiling genius of the grove!

Enter FLORELLA, who speaks. What do I see? -- ye beauteous virgins, say,
What chance conducts your steps this desert way?
Do you pursue some favorite lambkin strayed,
Or do you alders court you to their shade?
Declare, fair strangers, for, if right I deem,
No rustic nymphs of vulgar rank you seem.
FLORISSA. No cooling shades allure our eager sight,
Nor lambkin lost our searching steps invite.

FLORELLA. Or is it, happily, yonder branching vine,
Whose trunk the woodbine's fragrant tendrils twine:
Whose spreading height with purple clusters crowned,
Attracts the gaze of every nymph around?
Or does the juicy pear your eyes invite,
Whose rich delicious ripeness tempts the sight?
Say, is it this, or ought I have beside,
FLORELLA'S fruits, her flowers, her fleecy pride?

EUPHELIA. FLORELLA! our united thanks receive,
Sole proof of gratitude we have to give!
And since you deign to ask, O courteous fair,
The motive of our unremitting care:
Know then, our wishes terminate in this,
And what we seek and crave is -- Happiness.

FLORISSA. Long have we searched throughout this bounteous isle,
With constant ardor and with ceaseless toil:
The various ways of various life we have tried,
But peace, sweet peace has ever been denied.
We Have sought in vain through every different state,
The rich, the poor, the lowly, and the great:
Does she with Kings in palaces reside,
Or dwells obscurely, far from pomp and pride?
To learn this truth, we have bid a long adieu
To all the shadows blinded men pursue.
-- We seek URANIA, her whose virtues fire
Our virgin hearts to be what we admire.
Report has blazoned her accomplished mind
The spotless mansion of the graces joined;
For though with care she shuns the public eye,
Yet worth like here is, can never obscurely lie.

LAURINDA. On such a fair and faultless model formed,
By prudence guided and by virtue warmed;
Perhaps, FLORELLA can direct our youth,
And point our footsteps to the paths of truth?

FLORELLA. New as I am to life's all varying scene,
Scarce knowing yet, what vice and virtue mean;
Unskilled in points which sage experience shows,
I dare not solve the question you propose;
But would you know the way to perfect bliss,
(Which virtue and the virtuous never miss:)
The Dame you seek inhabits yonder cell,
In her, united worth and wisdom dwell:
Poor, not dejected, humble, yet not mean,
Cheerful, though grave, and lively, though serene:
Benevolent, kind, pious, gentle, just,
Reason her guide, and Providence her trust.
If Heaven, indulgent to her little store,
Adds to that little, but a little more:
With pious praise her grateful heart overflows,
And sweetly mitigates the sufferers woes.
Her labors for devotion best prepare,
And meek devotion smooths the brow of care.
Two lovely daughters make her little state,
The dearest blessings of propitious fate.
Under her kind protecting wing I live:
She gives to all -- for she has much to give,
Since Heaven has blessed her with an ample heart,
A liberal soul which would to all impart;
But, wise in all it is operations, joined
A narrow fortune to a noble mind.

PASTORELLA. Her bright perfections charm my listening ear!
Elate with hope, we come to seek her here:
To ask the way to virtue and to bliss,
Of her who boasts supremest Happiness.

FLORELLA. Doubtless, fair nymph, from her you may receive
Advice and prayer, the whole she has to give.

LAURINDA. Lead, fair FLORELLA, to that humble shed,
Where peace resides, from courts and cities fled.

End of the First DIALOGUE.
DIALOGUE II.
SCENE, a COTTAGE in the GROVE. FLORISSA, PASTORELLA, EUPHELIA, LAURINDA, and
FLORELLA at a little Distance. URANIA, FLORA, and ELIZA come out of the
Cottage. URANIA. YE tender objects of maternal love,
Ye dearest joys URANIA ever can prove:
Behold another blessed morn arise,
Behold the Sun, all glorious, mount the skies!
Say, can you see this animating sight,
Without a fervent, pious, strong delight?
Does not that Sun, whose all-prolific ray
Inspires each object to be light and gay:
Does not that vivid power teach every mind,
To be as warm, benevolent and kind:
To burn with unremitted ardor still,
Like him to execute their Maker's will?
Then, let us, Power Supreme! thy will adore,
Invoke thy mercies and proclaim thy power;
Shall thou these benefits in vain bestow?
Shall we forget the source from whence they flow?
Teach us, through these to lift ourselves to Thee,
And in the gift the bounteous Giver see:
To view Thee, as thou art, all good and wise,
Nor let thy blessings hide Thee from our eyes:
From all obstructions clear our mental sight,
Pour on our souls thy beatific light:
Teach us thy wondrous goodness to revere,
With love to worship, and with reverence fear:
In the mild works of thy benignant hand,
As in the thunder of thy dread command.
In common objects we neglect thy power,
Nor find a miracle in every flower;
Yet neither hurricanes, nor storms proclaim
In louder language, thy Almighty Name.
-- Tell me, my first, my last, my darling care,
If you this morn have raised your hearts in prayer?
Say, did you rise from the sweet bed of rest,
Your GOD unprais'd, his holy name unblessed?

FLORA. With pious thoughts, with holiest notions fraught,
By those pure precepts you have ever taught:
By great example, more than precept strong,
Of prayer and praise we have tuned our matin song.

ELIZA. And now we come, with duteous joy, to attend
Our best exemplar, our maternal friend.

FLORELLA, (aside to the Ladies, who advance.) See how the goodly dame with
pious art,
Makes every thing a lesson to the heart!
Observe the attentive listeners, how they stand!
Improvement and delight go hand in hand.

URANIA. But where is FLORELLA?


FLORELLA. Here Is the happy she,
Whose dearest blessing, next to Heaven, is thee:

URANIA. But what are these, in whose attractive mien,
So sweetly blended, every grace is seen?

FLORISSA. Lo! humbly to the earth thy servants bend.


URANIA. Rise, fair ones, and command your willing friend.
Speak, my FLORELLA, say the cause why here
These beauteous damsels on our plains appear?

FLORELLA. Invited hither by URANIA'S fame,
To seek her friendship, to these shades they came.
Straying alone at morning's earliest dawn,
I met them wandering on the desert lawn.
I courted their's, nor did they shun my love,
I Have brought them here, your piety to prove.

URANIA. Tell me, my fair, the real reason tell,
Which brings such guests to grace my lowly cell;
Ask what we have to give -- it is not our's,
Heaven has but lent it us to make it yours.

FLORISSA. Your counsel, your advice is all we ask,
And for URANIA that is no irksome task.
It Is HAPPINESS we seek: O deign to tell
Where the coy fugitive delights to dwell?

URANIA. Ah, rather say, where you have sought this guest,
This lovely inmate of the virtuous breast?
Avow the various methods you have essayed,
To court and win the bright, celestial maid.
But first, though harsh the task, each beauteous fair
Her taste and temper must with truth declare.

EUPHELIA. Bred in the regal splendors of a court,
Where pleasures, dressed in every shape, resort:
I tried the power of pomp and costly glare,
Nor ever thought, nor ever formed a prayer;
In different follies every hour I spent,
Reflection always on some errand sent,
Without reflection whence could rise content?
My hours were shared betwixt the Park and play,
And music served to waste the tedious day;
Yet softest airs no more with joy I heard,
Soon as some sweeter warbler was preferred.
The dance succeeded, and succeeding, tired,
If some more graceful dancer was admired.
No sounds but flattery ever soothed my ear,
Ungentle truths I knew not how to bear.
In drawing-rooms my dull pale vigils spent,
With ardor sought, but found not there Content.
The Siren mocked me with delusive charms;
I grasped -- the shadow fled my eager arms.
The scorpion envy goaded still my breast,
Some newer beauty robbed my soul of rest;
Or if my elegance of form prevailed,
And, happily, her inferior graces failed:
Yet still some cause of wretchedness I found,
Some barbed shaft my shattered peace to wound:
Perhaps her gay attire exceeded mine --
When she was finer how could I be fine?

FLORA. Pardon my interruption, beauteous maid!
Can truth have prompted what you just have said?
Do you believe it possible, that dress
Can lessen, or advance your Happiness;
Or that your robes, though splendid, rich and fine,
Possess intrinsic value more than mine?

ELIZA. Is nature then to folly so allied,
That what makes human shame makes human pride?
Or moves mankind by custom's slavish rule,
And is it fashion constitutes the fool?

FLORISSA. Another source my melancholy draws,
The effect's the same, though different is the cause.
I sighed for fame, I languish'd for renown,
I would be praised, caressed, admired, and know.
On daring wing my mounting spirit soared
And science through her boundless fields explored;
I scorned the salique laws of pedant schools,
Which chain our genius down by tasteless rules.
I longed to burst these female bonds which held,
By passion prompted, and by fame impelled;
To boast each various faculty of mind,
Thy graces, POPE! with JOHNSON'S learning joined:
Like SWIFT, with strongly pointed ridicule,
To brand the villain and abash the fool:
To judge with taste, with spirit to compose,
Now mount in epic, now descend to prose;
Steal flowers from BURKE at once sublime and sweet,
From MASON numbers, and from COLMAN wit;
Thy talents, MELMOTH, HUME, thy polished page!
All HAMMOND'S softness, and all DRYDEN'S rage.
I pined for passion, sentiment, and style,
To weep with OTWAY, and with GOLDSMITH smile:
With poignant STERN, now laugh the hours away,
Or court the muse of elegy with GRAY.
With LANGHORNE fancy's fairy walks to range,
And please, like LANGHORNE, howsoe'er I change;
Abstruser studies soon my fancy caught,
The poet in the astronomer forgot;
NEWTON and LEIBNITZ now my thoughts inspired,
And numbers less than calculations fired;
DESCARTES and EUCLID shared my varying breast,
And plans and problems all my soul possessed:
Less pleased to sing inspiring Phoebus' ray,
Than mark the flaming comet's devious way:
The pale moon dancing on the silver stream,
And the mild luster of her trembling beam,
No more could charm my philosophic pride,
Which sought her influence on the flowing tide;
No more could sylvan beauties strike my thought,
Which only facts and demonstrations sought,
"Let common eyes, I said, with transport view,
"The earth's bright verdure, or the heaven's soft blue,
"False is the pleasure, the delight is vain,
"Colors exist but in the vulgar brain."
I now with LOCK trod metaphysic soil,
And searched the microscopic world with BOIL;
Sighed for their fame, but feared to share their toil.
The laurel wreath, in fond idea twined,
To grace my learned temples I designed.
These were my notions, these my constant themes,
My daily longings and my nightly dreams;
The idol fame my bosom robbed of rest,
Too small the mansion for so great a guest.

PASTORELLA. To me, no joys could pomp, or fame impart,
Far softer thoughts possessed my virgin heart.
No prudent parent formed my ductile youth,
Nor pointed out the lovely paths of truth.
Left to myself to cultivate my mind,
Pernicious novels their soft entrance find:
Their poisonous influence led my mind astray,
I sighed for something, what, I could not say;
I died for heroes who have never been,
And fancied virtues which were never seen;
I sicken'd with disgust at sober sense,
And loathed the pleasures worth and truth dispense;
Contemned the manners of the world I saw,
Fiction my nature, and romance my law.
Strange images my wandering fancy fill,
Each wind a zephyr, and each brook a rill.
I found adventures in each common tale,
And talked and sighed to every passing gale;
Conversed with echoes, woods and shades and bowers,
Cascades and grottoes, fields and streams, and flowers.
Folly within my heart her empire found,
My passions floating and my judgment drowned;
Reason perverted, fancy on her throne,
(My soul to all my sexes softness prone;)
I neither spoke, nor looked as mortal ought,
By sense abandoned and by fancy taught:
A victim to imagination's sway,
Which stole my health, and rest, and peace away.
Professions, void of meaning, I received,
And still I found them false -- and still believed:
Imagined all who courted me approved,
Who praised, esteemed me, and who flattered, loved.
Fondly I hoped, now vain those hopes appear!
Each man was faithful and each maid sincere.
Still, disappointment mocked the lingering day:
Still, newborn wishes kept my soul in play.
When in the rolling year no joy I find,
I trust the next; the next will sure be kind;
The next, fallacious as the last appears,
And sends me on to still remoter years:
They come -- they promise, but forget to give:
I live not, but I still intend to live.
At length, deceived in all my schemes of bliss,
I joined these three in search of Happiness.

ELIZA. Is this the world of which we want a sight?
Are these the beings who are called polite?

FLORA. If so, oh gracious Heaven! hear FLORA'S prayer,
Preserve me still in humble virtue here!
Far from such baneful pleasures may I live,
And keep, O keep me from the taint they give!

LAURINDA. 'Till now, I Have slept on life's tumultuous tide,
No principle of action for my guide;
From ignorance my chief misfortunes flow,
I never wished to learn, or cared to know;
With every folly slow-paced time beguiled,
In size a woman, but in soul a child;
In slothful ease my moments crept away,
And busy trifles filled the tedious day;
I lived extempore, as fancy fired,
As chance directed, or caprice inspired:
Too indolent to think, too weak to choose,
Too soft to blame, too gentle to refuse;
I took my coloring from the world around,
The figures they, my mind the simple ground:
Fashion with monstrous forms the canvas stained,
'Till nothing of my genuine self remained;
My pliant soul from chance received it is bent,
And neither good performed, or evil meant:
From right to wrong, from vice to virtue thrown,
No character possessing of it is own.
Though not by nature to a vice inclined,
A drear vacuity possessed my mind;
Too old to be with infant sports amused,
Unfit for converse, and to books unused:
The wise avoided me, they could not hear
My senseless prattle with a patient ear.
Disgusted, restless, every plan amiss,
I come with these in search of Happiness.

FLORISSA. United thus by some uncommon fate,
Resolved on virtue if not yet too late:
We formed a friendship which through life shall last,
And vows and choice and love have bound it fast.
We laid our elegant attire aside.

EUPHELIA. EUPHELIA thought it hard to put off pride.


PASTORELLA. Each left her title and exchanged her name,


FLORISSA. An act FLORISSA hopes will merit fame.


URANIA. Your candor, beauteous damsels, I approve,
Your foibles pity, and your merits love.
How few, O sacred virtue! can acquire
That heartfelt transport thy pure flames inspire!
But ere I say the methods you must try
To gain the glorious prize for which you sigh,
Your fainting strength and spirits must be cheered
With a plain meal, by temperance prepared.

FLORELLA. No luxury our humble board attends,
But love and concord are it is smiling friends.

( They retire into the cottage.) End of the Second DIALOGUE.
DIALOGUE III.
SCENE, the Inside of the COTTAGE. A RURAL ENTERTAINMENT. URANIA, FLORA, ELIZA,
FLORELLA, PASTORELLA, EUPHELIA, FLORISSA, LAURINDA. During the Repast FLORELLA
sings the following SONG. I.
HOW kind is that power who has first sent us meat,
And then has with appetites blessed us to eat!
Let the rich, and the great, and the vain, and the gay,
Still ridicule wisdom and all she can say;
II.
In beautiful nature no charm can they find,
The pleasures they follow a sting leave behind.
Can criminal passion enrapture the breast
Like virtue protected, or innocence blessed?
III.
O would you, ye great ones, her impulse attend,
No longer at luxury's shrine would you bend.
Our mornings are cheerful, our labors are blessed,
Our ev'nings are pleasant, our nights crowned with rest.
IV.
Our water is drawn from the clearest of springs,
And our fruits are as ripe as yours, or your King's.
Of how little use then to us were your wealth,
When without it we purchase both pleasure and health!

They rise and come forward. URANIA. Thus pass the tranquil hours of rural ease,
Where life is bliss, and pleasures truly please!

LAURINDA. With joy we view the dangers we have past,
Assured we have found felicity at last.

FLORELLA. I weep to think how greatly you mistake,
But youth will ever rash conclusions make.
Judge no man happy by his outward air,
All may within be bitterness and care;
Though the full heart with agony be rent,
Prudence will wear the semblance of content:
Seclude it is anguish from the public sight,
And feed on sorrow with a sad delight:
Fly every eye to cherish darling grief;
This fond indulgence it is supreme relief.
To show contentment treads not human ground,
Nor can in any state of life be found:
Know, that URANIA, that accomplished fair,
Whose virtues make her Heaven's peculiar care:
Even she, (who merits every joy to know,)
Has deeply drained the bitter cup of woe,
With those sad eyes she weeps a husband dead,
With those poor hands she earns her infants bread.
In affluence born, and bred in splendid state,
She feels the cruellest extreme of fate;
Yet noble, and superior to distress,
She knows the hand which wounds, has power to bless;
Instead of murmuring at his sacred will,
Grateful, she bows for what he leaves her still.
Remembers Who to erring man, did spare
One SON, exempt from sin, but none from care.

PASTORELLA. Blessed be that power divine who brought us here!


URANIA. Dear to my arms, and to my heart most dear!
Of all the various evils which infest
The human mind, and rob it of it is rest:
Our highest happiness and heaviest woe,
From good, or evil education flow;
And hence, our future dispositions rise,
The ill we fly from, or the good we prize.
Mistaken damsels! could you hope for bliss,
The slaves of errors, you yourselves confess?
EUPHELIA sighs for flattery, dress, and show,
The too, too common source of female woe!
In beauty's sphere pre-eminence to find,
She slights the great improvements of the mind.
I would not rail at beauty's charming power,
I would but have her aim at something more;
Beauty with reason need not quite dispense,
And coral lips may sure speak common sense;
Beauty makes virtue most divinely rare,
Virtue makes beauty more than mortal fair!
Confirms it is conquest over the yielding mind,
And those your beauties gain, your virtues bind.
Would you, ye fair, the bright example give,
Fired with ambition, men like you would live:
Would choose for merit, and esteem for sense.
And taste the solid transports these dispense.
No more would rakes disdain the shackled life,
Nor scorn that poor neglected thing -- a wife;
But shunning each delusive path of sin,
All joy without, all sweet content within,
Would rouse at virtue's and at honor's voice,
And love from reason, whom they liked from choice.
Then marriage would with peace go hand in hand,
And Concord's temple close to Hymen's stand.
Each might be blessed, would each in turn submit,
Nor man affect control, nor woman wit.
Discord begun, how seldom does it cease?
It Is the first difference breaks the chain of peace!
Abhor beginnings -- always dread the worst:
Admit a doubt and you're completely cursed.
It Is follies, more than vices, that destroy,
Not sin, but weakness, taints the nuptial joy.
Let woman then her real good discern,
And her true interests of URANIA learn:
Her lowest name -- the tyrant of an hour,
And her best empire, negligence of power;
By yielding, she obtains the noblest sway,
And reigns despotic when she seems to obey.

EUPHELIA. I find how those mistake the way to bliss,
Who in externals look for Happiness!
Tutored by thee, no more the men shall find,
The power of flattery over EUPHELIA'S mind:
It Is the weak avenue, the unguarded part
Which lets in vice directly to the heart.

URANIA. I pity PASTORELLA'S hapless fate;
By nature gentle, generous, mild, yet great;
One false propension all her powers confined,
And chained her finer faculties of mind.
How all the virtues might have triumphed there,
With early culture and maternal care!
If good we plant not, vice will fill the mind,
And weeds despoil the space, for flow'r's designed.
The human heart never knows a state of rest,
From bad to worse; from better on to best.
We either gain or lose, we sink or rise:
Nor rests poor struggling nature 'till she dies.
It Is the disease most fatal to the soul,
To stop the race, before we have reached the goal:
For naught our farther progress can preclude,
So much as thinking we are already good.
Then place the standard of fair virtue high,
Pursue and grasp it, even beyond the sky.

PASTORELLA. I mourn the errors of my thoughtless youth,
And long with thee to tread the paths of truth.

URANIA. Learning is all the fair FLORISSA'S aim,
She seeks the loftiest pinnacle of fame.
Would she the privilege of man invade?
Learning for female minds was never made;
Taste, elegance, and talents may be our's:
But learning suits not our less vigorous powers.
Learning but roughens, polished taste refines,
Dacier less lovely than Sevigne shines.
Know, fair aspirer! could you even hope,
To speak like STONHOUSE, or to write like POPE:
To join, like FERNEY'S, or like HAGLEY'S sage,
The historic, ethic, and poetic page;
With all the powers of wit and judgment fraught,
The flow of style and the sublime of thought;
Yet, if the milder graces of the mind,
Graces peculiar to the sex designed,
Goodnature, patience, sweetness void of art,
If these embellished not your virgin heart:
You might be dazzling, but not truly bright,
A pompous glare, but not an useful light:
A meteor, not a star you would appear,
For woman shines but in her proper sphere.
As some fair violet, loveliest of the glade,
Sheds it is soft perfumes on the lonely shade:
Withdraws it is modest head from public sight,
Nor courts the sun, nor seeks the glare of light;
Should some rude hand profanely dare intrude,
And bear it is beauties from it is native wood:
Exposed abroad, it is languid colors fly,
It Is form decays, and all it is odors die.
So woman, born to dignify retreat,
Unknown to flourish, and unseen be great:
To give domestic life it is sweetest charm,
With softness polish, and with virtue warm:
Fearful of fame, unwilling to be known,
Should seek but Heavens applauses and her own:
No censures dread but those which crimes impart,
The censures of a self-condemning heart;
With Angel-kindness should behold distress,
And meekly pity, where she cannot redress;
Like beaming mercy, wipe affliction's tear,
But to herself not justice so severe;
Her passions all corrected, or subdued:
But one, the virtuous thirst of doing good:
This great ambition still she calls her own,
This best ambition makes her breast it is throne.

FLORISSA. Confused with shame, to thy reproofs I bend,
Thou best adviser, and thou truest friend!
From thee I Will learn to judge and act aright,
Humility with reading to unite;
The finished character must both combine:
The perfect woman must in either shine.

URANIA. LAURINDA'S dark, untutored mind may show
What ills from want of education flow;
Wisdom and virtue no dominion keep
Over passions, not rein'd-in, but fast asleep.
Passions are treasures, if they are managed right,
And make the lamp of reason burn more bright.
How growing virtues fortify by time!
And how ill-habits strengthen into crime!
Those squandered hours which nothing can replace
Might have enriched her soul with every grace.
Accomplishments by Heaven were first designed
Less to adorn, than to amend the mind:
Each should contribute to this general end,
And all to virtue, as their center, tend.
The acquirements which our best esteem invite
Should not project, but soften, mix, unite:
In glaring light not strongly be displayed,
But sweetly lost and melted into shade.

LAURINDA. O that important time could back return,
LAURINDA then should have no cause to mourn!
Accept, just Heaven, my penitence sincere,
My heartfelt anguish, and my fervent prayer!

URANIA. FLORELLA shines with more than human grace,
Her heart all goodness, as all charms her face.
Reason in her to pure religion tends,
Subservient only to the noblest ends.
True piety's the magnet of the soul
Which upwards points, immortal bliss the pole.
Above the wretched, and below the great,
Kind Heaven has placed her in a midd'ling state:
From rich and poor, at equal distance thrown,
The smile invidious, and the insulting frown.
The Demon, fashion, never warped her soul,
Her passions move at reason's wise control:
Her eyes the movements of her heart declare,
For what she dares to be she dares appear.
Unlectur'd in dissimulation's school,
To smile by precept and to blush by rule.
No pain she knows, for guilt she never knew,
To friendship faithful, and to honor true.
She smooths the path of my declining years,
And looks, with me, beyond this vale of tears.
Her thoughts are rational, her virtue pure;
-- A virtuous mind is Happiness secure!
No accident can ever make it less,
Nor any outward circumstance increase.
CONTENT alone in VIRTUE we can find,
And HAPPINESS exists but in the MIND.

FLORISSA. Let Us join to bless that power who brought us here,
Adore His goodness, and His will revere!
Assured that health, content, and peace of mind
Are all the blessings man on earth can find.

FLORELLA, and a Chorus of Nymphs sing this SONG. WHILST beauty and pleasure
are now in their prime,
And folly and fashion expect our whole time:
Ah! let not these phantoms our wishes engage,
Let us live so in youth, that we blush not in age.
Let us try to get charms which will never decay,
Nor listen to all that deceivers can say,
How the tints of the rose and the jess'mine's persume,
The eglantine's fragrance, the lilac's gay bloom:
Though fair and though fragrant, unheeded may lie,
For that neither is sweet when FLORELLA is by.
I sigh not for beauty, nor lauguish for wealth,
But grant me, kind Providence, virtue and health:
Then, richer than Kings, yes, and proud too as they,
My days shall pass sweetly and swiftly away;
For when time shall admonish, that youth is no more,
And age, wrinkled age, threatens loud at my door:
What charm then in beauty, or wealth should I find?
My treasure, my wealth is a sweet peace of mind.
Reflexion's a Heaven which on earth we enjoy,
To look forward is transport and backward is joy!
Thus virtue and wisdom shall warm the cold scene,
And sixty shall flourish as gay as sixteen.
And when long I the burden of life shall have borne,
And death with his sickle shall cut the ripe corn,
Resigned to my fate without murmur or sigh,
I Will bless the kind summons, and lie down, and die.
URANIA. Now strike with sprightly airs, the violin:
And, Virgins, now the festive dance begin.
( Music and a rural Dance.)
THE END.
PROLOGUE to HAMLET, Spoken by the late Mr. POWELL on his Benefit-Night, at the
Theater at Jacob's-Well, in 1765.
WHEN genius flourished, and when SHAKESPEARE wrote,
When Plays nor wanted wit, nor Prologues thought:
Phoebus, to crown a merit so confessed,
Decreed this boon to make his darling blessed;
Two beauteous daughters of immortal JOVE,
(Enchanting virgins, formed alone for love,)
He brought, and both beside the Poet placed,
Who, each admired, and each by turns embraced;
He knew not which to leave, nor which to choose,
This was the Comic, that the Tragic Muse;
Now, Comedy, blithe, buxom, debonair,
Seemed all his wish, ambition, pride and care;
Then, sweet MELPOMENE his soul possessed,
She was the gentlest, softest, loveliest, best;
To strains harmonious each attunes her lyre,
With solemn sweetness, or with living fire.
Perplexed -- the charmed, divided Poet stood,
Transported, lost -- alternately subdued.
Phoebus the wavering of his soul descried,
And passed his leave to make each fair his bride:
The God -- strange sentence! 'tho' 'twas given on high,
For this one time allowed Polygamy.
The enraptured bard unites each jarring wife,
And, wondrous tale! adores them both for life.
Tonight, for your applause, my dearest fame,
I bring an offspring of the Tragic Dame;
No thundering hero angry JOVE defies,
Nor impious lover storms against the skies;
To draw the generous, sympathetic tear,
The filial virtues shall tonight appear;
A flame so holy, and so chaste a zeal,
As Heaven might look on, or as Saints might feel:
Beauties on beauties strike the dazzled eyes,
New beauties still on former beauties rise:
Oh nature! whence this powerful, magic sway,
That from our bosoms steals our souls away?
If, to draw characters most justly bright,
To contrast light with shade and shade with light:
To trace up passions to their inmost source,
And greatly paint them with uncommon force:
If these, obedient still to nature's laws,
Excite our wonder and exact applause,
Be these, immortal SHAKESPEARE! ever thine,
To feel, to praise, and to adore them, mine:
Engrave thy genuine feelings on this breast,
Be all my bosom with thy stamp impressed!
Pardon this tribute Weeps.
-- nature will have way,
To SHAKESPEARE nature must her tribute pay.
Nor think presumption claims too large a part,
If I aspire to boast a grateful heart.
Oh gratitude! thou deity confessed,
Thou angel passion in a human breast,
Forgive, if dearer to my soul than fame
I steal one ray of thy celestial flame:
With honest transport bring the spark divine,
And offer it, as incense, at this shrine. To the Audience.

A PROLOGUE, Spoken at the Theater in King Street, Bristol, by the late Mr.
POWELL, to the Tragedy of KING LEAR, to introduce Mrs. POWELL, who appeared in
the Part of CORDELIA.
WITH grateful joy, with honest pride elate,
See, a Triumvir The Theater was conducted by three Managers, of which Mr.
POWELL was one.
of our little state.
In ancient Rome, by custom 'twas decreed,
That civic crowns should be the victor's meed;
Let victor's wear the gift of public laws,
-- My noblest civic crown is your applause!
Thou, at whose shrine we nightly sacrifice,
Thou God of pathos, soul of SHAKESPEARE, rise!
Teach me thy melting, thy persuasive art,
To wake the tenderest feelings of the heart.
Blush not, ye good, ye grave, to shed a tear,
It falls from virtue if it falls for LEAR;
No wild licentious picture shall excite
The kindly dew-drops of your eyes tonight:
By no false coloring drawn, no lawless plan:
It Is not the KING demands them, -- it is the MAN.
Let meaner bards, uncertain of success,
Cloth their thin thoughts in all the pomp of dress:
When mighty Kings appear, let meaner bards
Place royalty in trappings, state and guards;
Our SHAKESPEARE scorns such paltry, futile arts,
He, whilst he charms you, meliorates your hearts:
Rouses each nobler feeling of the mind,
His volume nature, and his theme mankind;
For this, eternal honors grace his name,
And never-dying laurels crown his same!
The hoary monarch of tonight, aspires
To kindle pity's lamp at nature's fires.
Weakness and passion, tenderness and rage,
The fire of youth, the frowardness of age,
With filial cruelty's acutest sting,
Rend the sad bosom of a wretched King:
Unworthy, 'till by crushing woes distressed,
Greatest when fallen, and noblest when oppressed.
Now let me, trembling, lift an anxious eye,
And touch each chord of soft humanity;
Let me, in each kind face, read sweet applause,
Whilst I presume to plead a woman's cause;
Tonight -- the second era of my life,
I venture here my pupil, more -- my wife!
Imagine all her doubts, and all her fears,
Her soft alarms, her apprehensive tears;
No sanguine hope her aching bosom fires,
No fancied fame her timid soul inspires;
Indulge her with the sunshine of your praise,
A frown would kill her, as a smile could raise:
The fearful blossom will, with joy, expand,
If kindly nurtured by your fost'ring hand.
Come then, CORDELIA, come! for sages tell
It Is worthy praise but to endeavor well;
Thus, hand in hand, to the same point we'll tend,
Nature our means, morality our end.
If modest hope be crowned, if sweet success
Her humble wish, her rising efforts bless:
She Will think'twas here her trembling steps first moved,
And be more grateful as she is more approved;
You she will esteem her friends, her fame, her fate,
And from this hour her future fortunes date;
Then sinile, propitious smile, and make for life
One grateful Husband, and one happy Wife.

