CLEMENTINA, A TRAGEDY.

A NEW EDITION.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

CLEMENTINA, A TRAGEDY, As it is Performed with universal Applause at the
Theater Royal in COVENT GARDEN.

A NEW EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for EDWARD and CHARLES DILLY, in the Poultry, And T. CADELL,
in the Strand.

MDCCLXXI.

TO GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire
DEAR SIR,
WHEN I inscribe this Tragedy to you, I mean to pay myself a very high
compliment; the utmost I could possibly say of you, would by no means extend
your Reputation; but it will do me much honor to declare, that so celebrated a
writer has distinguished CLEMENTINA with the most essential attention; and that
so valuable a man has given me leave to sign myself, what I truly am,

DEAR SIR, His most faithful and most obliged humble servant, The AUTHOR.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author of this Tragedy has printed several lines for the Closet, which, in
the Representation, were omitted for the sake of brevity. -- The chief business
of this advertisement, however, is to acknowledge his obligations to the
inimitable performance of Mrs. YATES, and to thank Mr. BENSLEY, Mr. SAVIGNY,
and Mr. WROUGHTON, for their great goodnature, in undertaking their respective
characters at the short notice of a week, when Mr. Ross unexpectedly returned
the part of Anselmo This circumstance obliged Mr. B^^^^^Y, who was cast for
Palermo, to undertake Mr. SAVIGNY'S part, which was originally Granville -- Mr.
SAVIGNY taking Anselmo, and Mr. WROUGHTON, Palermo.
, which had been in his possession above a fortnight, and left it no more than
barely possible for the utmost diligence of these Gentlemen, to exhibit a
piece, which the public have since been kindly pleased to honor with the most
generous approbation.

PROLOGUE,
By GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire
Spoken by Mr. BENSLEY.
IN these, our moral and religious days,
Men dread the crying sin of writing Plays;
While some, whose wicked wit incurs the blame,
However they love the trespass, fly the shame.
If, a new holy war with Vice to wage,
Some preacher quits the pulpit for the stage,
The Rev^rend Bard, with much remorse and fear,
Attempts to give his Evening-Lecture here.
The work engendered, to the world must rise;
But yet the father may elude our eyes.
The parish on this trick of youth might frown,
And thus, unown'd, it is thrown upon the Town.
At our Director's door he lays the sin,
Who sees the Babe, relents, and takes it in;
To swathe and dress it first unstrings his purse,
Then kindly puts it out to You -- to nurse.
Should some young Counsel, through his luckless star,
By writing Plays turn truant to the Bar.
Called up by you to this High Court of Wit,
With non inventus we return the writ.
No latitat can force him to appear,
Whose failure and success cause equal fear,
Whatever fees his clients here bestow,
He loses double in the Courts below.
Grave solemn Doctors, whose prescribing pen
Has in the trade of Death killed many men,
With venurous quill here tremblingly engage
To slay Kings, Queens, and Heroes, on the stage.
The Great, if great men write, of shame afraid
Come forth incog. -- and Beaux, in masquerade.
Some Demireps in wit, of doubtful fame,
Though known to all the town, withhold their name.
Thus each by turns ungratefully refuse
To own the favors of their Lady-Muse;
Wooed by the Court, the College, Bar and Church,
Court, Bar, Church, College, leave her in the lurch.
It Is yours tonight the work alone to scan;
Arraign the bard, regardless of the man!
If Dullness waves her poppies over his play,
To Critic fury let it fall a prey;
But if his art the tears of Pity draws,
Ask not his name -- but crown him with applause!

Dramatis Personae.
ANSELMO Mr. SAVIGNY. GRANVILLE Mr. BENSLEY. PALERMO Mr. WROUGHTON. ADORNO Mr.
GARDNER.
CLEMENTINA Mrs. YATES. ELIZARA Miss PEARCE.
CITIZENS, GUARDS, etc.

SCENE, VENICE.

TIME -- The Time of Representation.

CLEMENTINA, A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
An Apartment in ANSELMO's Palace. Enter CLEMENTINA and ELIZARA. CLEMENTINA.
DISTRACTION! here so soon?

ELIZARA. This very hour --
Your good, your noble, yet misguided father,
This moment chilled me with the hated tale;
Then seizing eagerly my trembling hand,
"Tell Clementina, tell your stubborn friend,"
Cried he, in accents positive and stern,
"That brave Palermo, just returned from chains,
"Chains greatly purchased in his country's cause,
"Must now receive such welcome, such affection,
"As suits her virtue, and Anselmo's daughter. --
"Tell her, my word's irrevocably given,
"And bid her guard the honor of her father."

CLEMENTINA. Why let the storm exert its utmost rage,
And burst in thunder on my wretched head!
Let this severe, this unrelenting father,
Cast me a houseless wanderer on the world,
Yet shall my soul with unabating firmness
Deny her sanction to Palermo's claim.
O Elizara, you who know the cause,
The endless cause of Clementina's tears,
Who saw the awful, though the secret rite
That gave this hand, now widowed, to Rinaldo;
Is there, in all the various rounds of woe,
A curse so great, a pang so exquisite,
As this poor breast is singled out to feel?

ELIZARA. Indulge not thus a painful recollection!

CLEMENTINA. Oh memory! even madness cannot lose it!
Mangled with wounds, amidst unnumber'd foes;
My hapless husband for his country fell!
Yet, the sad story of our loves concealed,
I was allowed no privilege of tears,
But doomed to hide the anguish of my heart. --
And now, in all the fullness of despair,
To have another forced upon me! horror!
It is not to be borne! -- But I Am resolved,
And will devote the remnant of my life
To lost Rinaldo's memory, or die
Some little hour before my griefs would end me.

ELIZARA. Alas, I feel the sorrows of your bosom,
With all the ardent sympathy of friendship;
And know how souls so delicate as yours,
Must spurn the idea of a second lord.
Yet blame no more the sternness of Anselmo;
The ancient hate too long, too idly cherished,
Between your angry father and Rinaldo's,
First urged the measure of a private union.
A stranger therefore to your grief, Anselmo
Claims but the right which custom, and which nature,
Have long given parents over their children's hearts.

CLEMENTINA. What claim, what right, misjudging Elizara,
Can tyrant custom plead, or nature urge
To force the free election of the soul?
Say, should affection light the nuptial torch,
Or should the rash decision of a father
Doom his sad race to wretchedness for ever?
No, Elizara; custom has no force,
Nature no right, to sanctify oppression;
And parents vainly tell us of indulgence,
When they give all but happiness to children.

ELIZARA. True -- yet a cruel crisis in your fate,
Has much to offer for the good Anselmo.
He fondly thinks his daughter disengaged;
Believes too, fondly, that Palermo's merit
Must touch the gentle bosom of my friend:
If then determined to reject his choice,
At once throw off constraint -- at once be open,
And seal his lips for ever on the subject,
By a frank mention of your fatal story.

CLEMENTINA. What! and expose my dear Rinaldo's kindred
To all the fury of enraged Anselmo,
The now acknowledged ruler of the state;
Who, though renowned for wisdom and for justice.
Yet in the points, the cruel points of honor,
Is rigid, stern, and fatally severe?
No, Elizara; though these fading eyes
No more must hope to gaze upon Rinaldo,
Though the soul-swelling language of my woes,
Falls unregarded on the silent tomb,
And boasts no power to call my slaughtered hero
From the dark, dreary mansions of the dead;
Still let me guard whatever he held dear,
Nor pluck down added ruin on his house!

ELIZARA. Anselmo's justice will overcome his hatred --
Were he inclined to make his will his law,
Or wished for means to gratify resentment,
He has the power already; but his mind,
Superior ever to the thought of wrong,
Can feel no passion to disgrace his virtue.

CLEMENTINA. The best may err, nor will I tempt his rage;
The mighty measure of my woe is full --
Why then, when fate's unmerciful decree
Has cursed me up to such a height of ill,
Why should I shudder at the gathering storm,
Or seek for shelter in another's sorrow?
I now have no asylum but the grave:
Though did peace court me from the bowers of bliss,
My soul would scorn to hear the charmer's voice,
If she required me to perform a deed,
That either shocked my justice, or my honor.

ELIZARA. Then summon all your firmness, Clementina!
For here Anselmo comes, and brings Palermo;
O that your terrors for Rinaldo's kindred,
May stiil subside, and hear the voice of reason!
Your soul is ill adapted to disguise;
And without cause to disappoint his views,
Must be as fatal as to tell him all.

CLEMENTINA. They Are here -- let us retire -- Palermo's presence
Is now a thousand deaths -- and though prepared
With fortitude to act -- still, Elizara,
While I can shun the conflict, let me spare,
Spare even the feelings of a cruel father! [Exeunt.

Enter ANSELMO and PALERMO. ANSELMO. Gone so abruptly! -- gone at our approach!
--
And yet, my son, the crimson hue of virtue
Will always deepen at a lover's sight,
Who comes to ask his certain day of transport,
And knows the hour of apprehension over.

PALERMO. It Is just, my lord -- But still however lovely,
The soft emotion of these gentle terrors,
Spreads in the blooming daughters of perfection,
Still Clementina might have kindly given
A long lost lover welcome from his bonds;
And nobly told him that his ruined fortunes
Were even deemed merit with Anselmo's daughter.

ANSELMO. Think not, Palermo, of your ruined fortunes;
My Clementina, with her father's eyes,
Regardless looks on dignity and wealth;
And holds the mind pre-eminent in both,
That boasts a bright pre-eminence in virtue.

PALERMO. When sharp adversity has stung the mind,
It makes us doubly conscious of neglect:
And sure a soul less sensible than mine
Had room to start at Clementina's coldness.
Judge then by all that headlong fire of youth
Which once swelled up your own impassioned breast,
If I could let indifference pass unnotic'd?
He never loved that bore a slight with temper,
Nor ever merited a worthy heart,
Who meanly stooped, contented with a cold one.

ANSELMO. No more, my son! -- This day rewards your sufferings,
For Clementina shall today be yours;
And while love courts you with his ripest roses,
The golden sun of honorable greatness
Shines out to crown you with his warmest beams --
Our native land -- but what exceeds all price,
Our native liberty shall soon be ours;
And soon Palermo nobly shall revenge
On haughty Ferdinand, that scourge of earth,
The wrongs ill-fated Venice has sustained,
The wrongs which heedless of a soldier's glory
The imperial plund'rer on my son himself
So poorly, meanly, infamously heaped,
When in a base exaction for his ransom,
He seized his all, nor left the indignant warrior
A home to rest in from the weight of chains --
Our French ally, the nobly-minded Lewis,
This hour dispatches an ambassador,
To give our country renovated being,
And burst asunder every yoke of Spain.

PALERMO. The glorious news o'erpays an age of bonds!
O for a curse, a quick dispatching curse,
To blast the ruthless tyrant on his throne,
And mark him out through all succeeding ages,
A dread example to despotic kings!
But say, and bless me with some certain hope;
On what foundation does the royal Lewis,
Bid us thus boldly, considently look
For instant vengeance, and for instant freedom?

ANSELMO. That I am yet to learn. -- But noble still
I ever found him in our various treaties;
And therefore cannot, will not, doubt him now.
Sunk by his late distresses, Ferdinand
Now mourns his dreams of universal empire,
And shrinks in secret at the arms of France.

PALERMO. Eternal praises to the God of battles!
Yes, sceptered savage, we may reach you yer,
And boldly tell you in the face of nations,
That royal robbers from unerring justice
Demand a double measure of perdition! --
The needy ruffian, in his hour of hunger,
Has some excuse for prowling on his neighbor;
But when the arm, the mighty arm of kings,
That should protect all mankind from oppression;
Is stretched to seize on what it ought to guard,
Then heaven's own brand, in aggravated fire,
Should strike the illustrious villain to his hell;
And war in mercy for a groaning world.

ANSELMO. Oh, nobly said! -- Our cause is just, and heaven
Fights on our side: for late, the Spanish troops
In two great fields were wholly overthrown,
And filled the plains with myriads of their dead.
Our navies too, though some Venetian cities
Lie humbled still beneath the tyrant's yoke,
Fill Spain with constant and with just alarms;
For such a blaze of unexampled glory
Has crowned the fleets entrusted to my care,
That though deprived of more than half our realm,
We still remain a formidable foe,
And rule triumphant over the boundless wave.

PALERMO. How the bright prospect bursts upon my view,
And lifts me up in fancy to the stars!
O did the fair, the matchless Clementina,
View me with eyes less rigidly severe,
This one blessed hour had madden'd me with rapture.

ANSELMO. Again, Palermo? -- But I cease to chide,
And go, my son, to end your doubts for ever. --
If I know aught of Clementina's heart,
'Twill beat in honest unison to mine,
And give an added welcome to your claim,
Because you have now, an added need of fortune.

PALERMO. Too generous Anselmo!

ANSELMO. Nay, no thanks!
The man who bears not to a friend distressed
A double will to ratify engagements,
Stands self-convicted at the bar within,
The base assassin of his native honor. [Exit.

PALERMO alone. Why did I wound his venerable bosom,
With any doubt of Clementina's truth?
And yet disquiet hangs about my heart;
A secret voice incessantly suggests,
That Clementina was not born for me:
But let me not anticipate misfortune!
When fate has struck, it is time enough to feel;
And he is best prepared against the blow,
Whose conscious virtue never has deserved it. [Exit.

Scene changes to CLEMENTINA'S Apartment. CLEMENTINA alone. Now, Clementina, --
now the trial comes --
Call up the inherent greatness of your soul,
And show Anselmo; show this rigid sire;
That his own firmness animates his daughter!
What, does he think that force can move my temper?
No; sacred spirit of my dear Rinaldo,
It kindly hovering round your wretched wife,
You still observe her in this world of woe,
Look, and applaud her in an hour of terror!
Look, and behold, how faithful to her vows,
She braves a sure destruction for your sake;
Braves all the stings of poverty and scorn,
Her father's fury, and her house's hate,
To live the ceaseless mourner of your fall!

Enter ANSELMO. ANSELMO. Well, Clementina, -- Have I yet a daughter?

CLEMENTINA. Say rather, Sir -- if I have yet a father?

ANSELMO. Yes, Clementina, an unhappy father,
Who now implores compassion from his child:
I see, I see with infinite regret,
Your scorn, your fixed aversion to Palermo;
And though I came, determined to exact
A strict, a rigid instance of your duty,
My aching soul, quite melted at your tears,
Rejects the sterner sentiment of force,
And bends the weeping suppliant to a daughter.

CLEMENTINA. O could the secret volume of my heart,
Be laid this moment openly to view,
My father there, would read my pride to please him.
Let him ask all from Clementina's duty,
Which wretched Clementina can perform;
Let him do this, and he is at once obeyed.
But when he asks her to direct her wishes,
To turn the mighty current of the mind,
And join the streams, the ever-warring streams
Of boundless love and limitless aversion;
There he exceeds her utmost stretch of power,
And only gives occasion for her tears.

ANSELMO. Look round on all the accomplished sons of Venice,
And say who shines superior to Palermo?
Take then his hand, and bless your doting father! --
Let us not now in poverty desert him,
Nor aid the arrow of a galling need,
With the keen dart of disappointed love!
No, Clementina, let us nobly claim
A great alliance with his ruined fortunes,
And give a bright example to our country,
That worth is all things, with the truly worthy!

CLEMENTINA. Palermo's merits, and Palermo's wants,
Alike receive my praises, and my pity;
But, venerable Sir, if ever my peace,
My soul's dear peace, was tender to your thoughts,
Spare me, O spare me, on this cruel subject!
Let the brave youth, so honored with your friendship,
Partake your wealth, but do not kill your daughter.
Do not, to give him a precarious good,
Doom me to certain wretchedness for ever!
I have an equal claim upon your heart,
And call as much for favor as Palermo.

ANSELMO. A little time, sweet soother of my age,
Will charm that gentle bosom into rest,
And even return Palermo love for love.
Then, Clementina! O my soul's whole comfort,
Refuse a kneeling father if you can. [Kneels.
Here at your feet, the author of your being,
Who never stooped to aught before but heaven,
Begs for compassion -- Must he beg in vain?

CLEMENTINA. O mercy, mercy! Will you kill your daughter?
Rise Sir, O rise, and save me from distraction!

ANSELMO rising. My word, my child, has never yet been broken. --
Do not in age expose me to dishonor! --
Save your poor father at the verge of life,
O nobly save him from the guilt of falsehood!
In this reversal of Palermo's fortunes,
The sland'rous tongue of all my house's foes,
Will mark me out to universal shame;
And tell the world his poverty alone,
Has lost the daughter of the base Anselmo.

CLEMENTINA. No more -- I yield -- and am a wretch for ever.

ANSELMO. O say not so, my heart's supreme delight!
Applanding heaven shall bless your filial virtue,
And give your heart that joy you give your rather.
My transport grows too mighty to be borne --
O let me hasten to the brave Palermo,
And raise him from despondency to rapture! [Exit.

CLEMENTINA alone. Rinaldo's widow, wedded to Palermo!
Where shall I now find refuge from reflection,
Or how root up the agonizing thought,
That brings this horrid marriage to my view?
I was prepared for all a father's fury,
But was not armed against a father's tears,
How could I see him weeping at my feet,
Tossed in a whirlwind of contending passions,
And yet retain the purpose of my soul?
Even if the sainted spirit of my husband,
From the bright mansions of eternal day,
Beheld the anguish of his struggling heart,
It must have kindly prompted me to pity. --
O this Palermo! -- This detested union! --
Married to him? -- The widow of Rinaldo? --
Give me, ye blessed ministers of peace,
Some instant portion of that soothing stream,
Which pours a deep oblivion on the mind,
And drowns the sense of memory for ever!

ACT II.
An Apartment in ANSELMO's Palace. Enter GRANVILLE and ELIZARA. ELIZARA. AND is
it possible? Do I once more
Behold Rinaldo? --

GRANVILLE. Yes, my Elizara;
Yet oh take heed, sweet maid, alone to know me
For what I seem -- The ambassador of France.
As such alone Anselmo has received me,
And such my king confirms me. -- But declare,
How fares my Clementina? -- How does she
Support the often proclaimed, the general tale,
That now six moons has ranked me with the dead?

ELIZARA. She bears it like a wife that truly loved --
But by what miracle again restored
Acquaint me! -- for concurring multitudes
Beheld your fall in battle, and reported,
That in a pile of greatly-slaughter'd heroes,
A Gallic squadron bore you from the field.

GRANVILLE. I fell indeed amidst the general carnage,
And lay some hours among the honored dead;
For whom the vanquished, France's generous sons
Made one bold effort to obtain a grave:
Here a brave youth of that exalted nation,
Close by whose side with emulative fire
I sought for Venice on that hapless day;
Beheld the man he deigned to call his friend,
And by a kind of miracle restored me. --
Then to the king in terms of warmest weight,
Proclaimed my fancied merits. -- Royal Lewis
Received the story with a gracious ear,
And poured profuse, his favors on Rinaldo.

ELIZARA. Why then, O why, distinguished thus, thus honored,
Did not Rinaldo sooth his sorrowing friends,
And ease the torments of a wife's despair?

GRANVILLE. O Elizara! how my soul has felt
For all the anguish she was doomed to suffer,
That heaven, which knows the greatness of my love,
Alone can witness. -- But the conquering arms
Of widely wasting Ferdinand, cut off
Our commerce with the world -- and had not fate,
In two late fields propitious smiled upon us,
Rinaldo yet, distracted and forlorn,
Had dragged a chain of miserab'le being;
Nor known, as now he shall, the extatic bliss
Of speaking peace to weeping Clementina.

ELIZARA. But whence this transformation? -- Why concealed
Beneath the garb of France, does brave Rinaldo
So closely seek to hide himself in Granville?

GRANVILLE. For ends of moment. -- If the charge I bear
Meets, as I hope, and as I think it ought,
A warm reception from Anselmo -- Then
I come determined to avow my marriage;
And gracious Lewis will, I trust, remove
The fatal feuds that shake our angry houses.

ELIZARA. But should Anselmo disapprove your charge,
What measure then remains to be pursued,
And what becomes of weeping Clementina?

GRANVILLE. There my disguise is suited to assist me;
Should he refuse to join the views of France,
My orders are that instant to return,
And my design, to bear off Clementina.

ELIZARA. You talk, Rinaldo, with an air of triumph;
Think you the first of our Venetian daughters,
Can in a moment thus be borne away;
Borne from her palace compassed round with guards,
Surrounding virgins, and a watchful father?

GRANVILLE. My name concealed and all my train instructed,
My king's credentials bearing but the title,
Which he himself has given me, and which yet
Has reached no ear of Venice but your own,
Can there exist a doubt of my success?
Unknown -- unnotic'd -- unsuspected quite,
A trusty friend shall lead her to the beach,
If Clementina, like myself, disguised
Will venture aught to bless her faithful husband.

ELIZARA. Rinaldo should pursue a different course,
A course more suited to his worth and honor.
Now independent, now so raised in France,
What can you dread from Venice or its leader?
Your fortunes now are equal to your birth.
Should then your embassy displease Anselmo,
Act like yourself! -- throw off this dark disguise,
And nobly claim your wife. -- You know his justice,
And know besides he cannot hate you farther.

GRANVILLE. Fain, gentle maid, would I pursue this counsel,
And in the face of day assert my right;
But if the purport or my public business,
Which heaven avert! should raise Anselmo's anger,
My life, once known, must expiate my crime.
I come, I hope, to blese the state of Venice,
But I come also, with a foreign ruler --
This, you know well, is death by law declared,
Nor could the ambassador of France, preserve
The offending subject from the stroke of justice.

ELIZARA. May heaven indulgent smile upon your hopes!
But oh! I dread, I dread a disappointment.
And see, impatience frowning on his brow,
Hither Anselmo comes. -- Let me fly hence,
And bless my friend, with tidings of her lord! [Exit.

Enter ANSELMO, with Papers. ANSELMO. Well, Sir, the views of Lewis are at
length
Revealed; and here, I see, he speaks them plainly.

GRANVILLE. Why, sage Anselmo, this offended brow?
I trust my master's offers have deserved
Your highest approbation; for they breathe
Naught but attachment, and regard for Venice.

ANSELMO. Is this the basis of his love for Venice?
Has he stood forth a champion for our freedom,
Merely himself to tread us into slaves?
And saved us from the arm of haughty Spain,
To make us bear his own oppressive yoke?
Go tell your king, and tell him from Anselmo,
That France and Venice can be friends no more;
Tell him, to us, all tyrants are the same;
Or if in bonds the never-conquer'd soul
Can feel a pang more keen than slav'ry's self,
It Is when the chains, that crush us into dust,
Are forged by hands from which we hoped for freedom.

GRANVILLE. And what idea does my business raise,
Of slaves or tyrants, servitude or chains?
It Is true, the gracious Lewis has proposed
To take the state of Venice to his care,
If sage Anselmo, her illustrious leader,
Approves the scheme of well-concerted empire --
He sees with deep, with nobly-minded sorrow,
How, still exposed to every powerful neighbor,
You fall a victim to alternate spoilers;
Hence, with paternal tenderness, he wishes
TO enroll your sons among the sons of France,
And make the subjects of his different realms,
One equal, common, and united people.
If this be slavery --

ANSELMO. It Is the worst of slavery,
Tamely to bend Our necks beneath the yoke,
And suffer fraud, to talk us out of freedom. --
If we must yield before superior force,
Let us at least deserve the name of men;
Let us fall nobly, if we are to fall,
And give the world in characters of blood,
Eternal causes to lament our fate,
But never one occasion to despise us!

GRANVILLE. Far from my bosom be the abject thought!
To stoop the servile minister of greatness,
Or crouch the advocate for lawless power:
The heir myself of heav'n-descended freedom,
I wish the same bright heritage to all.
And inly scorn a brotherhood with slaves.
Yet sure, some form your government must know;
The reins of state must somewhere be devolved;
And he who holds them, name him as you please,
Must be your prince, and you must be his subjects,
Why then, if Lewis solemnly shall swear,
To hold your rights inviolably sacred;
Still to maintain the spirit of your laws,
And never know another line of action;
Why should you turn indignantly away,
And slight the offer of a mighty monarch,
Who knows that form of government is best,
Which best secures the welfare of the people?

ANSELMO. Because your monarch, in this very offer,
Seeks to subvert our glorious constitution;
Seeks to erect hereditary rule,
Where virtue only, gives superior rank;
And where the genius of descended Rome,
Has levelled all distinctions but in goodness.
What is his promise to maintain us free?
Sir, we'll maintain that freedom for ourselves;
And to maintain it, we reject your master.
The power, so safe in his benignant hand,
Is safer still, retained within our own;
We know the worth of liberty too well,
Ever to cast the blessing basely from us,
Or still more basely to survive our honor.

GRANVILLE. You need not cast the mighty blessing from you. --
The king my master, wishes for no more,
Than such mere title to the realms of Venice,
As to his subjects and the world may warrant,
A warm exertion of continual care
For this his dear ally. -- And mark, my lord; [shewing a paper.
The moment Venice owns him for her sovereign,
This instrument confirms the viceroy's office,
With all the active rule, to great Anselmo
And his heirs for ever. --

ANSELMO. Am I awake?
Or can I trust my reason? -- Patience -- Patience!
Are all the bright achievements of my life
Unable now to save me from disgrace?
Thus to the winds I give the vile proposal: [tearing the paper.
Thus tear the record of imputed shame;
Nor let succeeding ages be informed
That mortal man has dared to doubt my honor!

GRANVILLE. No more, my lord! my king I see has erred,
In offering peace and happiness to Venice.
Yet let me mourn for you, her wretched race!
Her slaughtered sons, and violated virgins;
For you, her shrieking matrons; and for you,
O ye unconscious, wnoffending babes, --
Driven from your humble yet your cheerful homes,
To timeless graves, or everlasting exile!
Anselmo dooms you to this dreadful fate,
And spurns the friendship offered to preserve you.

ANSELMO. Eternal curses on the baleful friendship,
That seeks to cheat us of our native justice!
And did your mean, your poorly-thinking prince
Suppose Anselmo would betray his country,
Hang up his name to everlasting scorn.
And sell the brightest birthright of a people,
To gain a robber's portion of the plunder!
What could repay me for internal peace,
Or give distinction where I sold my honor?
The wildest prodigal the world can know,
Is he who madly casts away his virtue;
And though he gains a scepter in return,
He Is still a wretched loser by the change --

GRANVILLE. Enough, my lord; we end our conf'rence here. --
Venice, it is true, admires the good Anselmo,
And trusts her present safety to his wisdom; --
Yet if his fellow-citizens shall hear,
How light their happiness is held, when weighed
In glory's grand, though too romantic scale,
Well may they mourn this honorable madness,
This dread, through bright, delirium of the mind,
Which seeks for safety in assured destruction,
And blindly murders nations to preserve them.

ANSELMO. Whenever they show such turpitude of soul,
Make them again an offer of your chains! --
But now, the purport of your business over,
And public character thrown wholly off,
In the plain province of a private man,
Let me salute the noble lord of Granville;
And beg, while Venice boasts of such a guest,
He Will not disdain the dwelling of Anselmo!

GRANVILLE. My lord, with equal gratitude and pleasure,
I meet your kindness for my little stay;
My scarce furled sails must quickly court the wind,
And bear me back to my expecting master.

ANSELMO. The assembled senate now requires my presence --
My lord, farewell! -- I treat you as a friend. --
I never dealt in ceremony yet; and you will excuse
The unpolished manners of Venetian sailors.

GRANVILLE. The generous frankness of your temper here,
Bespeaks a native honesty and wisdom,
That makes me doubly anxious for the state,
And doubly mourn your harsh reply to Lewis.

ANSELMO. Mourn not for us, my lord! -- a freeborn people
Can have but two bright objects of ambition;
A life of honor, or a death of glory:
And when for virtuous liberty they fall,
They share at least the second greatest blessing
Which heaven ever poured in mercy on mankind. [Exit.

GRANVILLE alone. How I admire his fortitude of soul,
And love his pride, though adverse to my wishes!
Once my own bosom vehemently flamed
With all the phrenzy of his noble zeal,
And looked on death more eligible far,
Than even a government of certain bliss,
Beneath the reign of any foreign ruler. --
But I now wake from all this glittering dream
Of fancied virtue and ideal honor --
My Clementinal --

Enter CLEMENTINA. CLEMENTINA. My long-lost Rinaldo!
It Is he -- it is he, and Elizara erred not!
The grave has given him back. -- All-seeing heaven,
In kind compassion to a wife's despair,
By some benignant miracle has raised him;
And these transported arms again enfold
The best beloved, the most deptor'd of husbands.

GRANVILLE. My life's great bliss! here let me grow for ever.

CLEMENTINA. It is too much -- I shall run wild with rapture --
How are you saved, and wherefore thus disguised?
Yet do not answer -- partly Elizara
Has told me of your views -- and it is enough
I see you safe -- That providence be praised!
Whose mercy sent you at an hour of dread,
To snatch me from destruction! --

GRANVILLE. O my love!
I cannot tell you half of what I feel;
Words are too poor. -- Yet say, my chiefest good,
Say, do you love with such transcendent truth,
That if the kindness of indulging fate,
Should point out ways of flying with Rinaldo,
To some secure, some hospitable coast,
Alike propitious to our peace and fortune;
Would Clementina, would a wife prefer
The fond, the ardent bosom of a husband,
To the stern mansion of a ruthless father?

CLEMENTINA. Would she prefer? -- O quickly let him lead her
Through dreary wastes, and never-trodden wilds,
Where heat, cold, famine, in their dread extremes,
At each new footstep strike an added horror;
Through the noon-blaze of fierce autumnal suns,
Over burning deserts instantly conduct her;
Or where the stiff'ning nations of the night,
In more than winter freeze beneath the pole;
Through these bear off your faithful Clementina;
And though a filial anguish drowns her eye,
At what her poor, her reverend father feels,
O never question if she loves Rinaldo!

GRANVILLE. Thus let me press you to my grateful bosom,
Thus speak the raptures of my swelling heart!

CLEMENTINA. O I have much to tell you of my sorrows. --
But what are sorrows now? -- The gracious being,
Who from a precipice of guilt and woe,
In this dread crisis, snatched me by your hand,
O'erpays me tenfold for my past afflictions,
And all my tears were ministers of joy. [Exeunt.

ACT III.
ANSELMO' S Palace. Enter ANSELMO with a Paper, and ADORNO. ANSELMO. FROM
Ferdinand himself. --

ADORNO. From Ferdinand!

ANSELMO. From him, Adorno. -- But observe his words! --
"Touched with the various miseries of Venice,
The first of Europe's kings salutes the senate;
And offers peace, nay friendship to their realms,
Peace uncondition'd, and eternal friendship."

ADORNO. What! has the royal ruffian been informed
That France has sued us to become her subject;
And does he, fearful of our base assent,
Fearful his rival should obtain our homage,
Give up his own despotic claim upon us,
And rather choose to set us wholly free,
Than see his foe acknowledged for our master?

ANSELMO. Too plain. -- Perdition on his recreant head!
His motive may be seen. -- Too plain, his fears
Would now usurp the guise of high-soul'd virtue:
But though we know the source of this proposal,
Though we are certain that his late defeats,
Joined to his dread of our receiving Lewis,
Have dragged the trembling tyrant from his throne,
To dastard supplication -- still his offers
Demand our prompt acceptance -- he consents
To yield up all our towns -- our captive sons --
To cease for ever his detested claim,
And treat us henceforth, as a separate nation,
A dear ally, but independent people.

ADORNO. But say, my lord, what minister he sends,
To sign these terms of unexpected peace?
Fraud and the royal hypocrite are one;
Nor can we trust securely to his word,
When once his interest urges him to break it.

ANSELMO. That very interest is our hostage now --
And here too, conscious of our glad concurrence,
He speeds his Alva to confirm the treaty;
Who comes beneath safe conduct from Colonna,
(Supplying now my absence in the fleet)
And will arrive at Venice ere the eve.

ADORNO. So soon?

ANSELMO. So says the letter. -- But, my friend,
Haste hence! -- Convene the senators -- the people! --
Within an hour I Will meet them at Saint Mark's;
There, when our peace is happily restored,
They shall receive their government again,
And find a subject in their present ruler. [Exit ADORNO.
Enter PALERMO. Joy to my son! -- to Venice boundless joy! --
O my Palermo! I have news that asks
An angel's tongue. --

PALERMO. And I have news, that howled
In deepest hell, would make the demons tremble. --
Clementina --

ANSELMO. Ha! what of her, Palermo?

PALERMO. Is false, persidious --

ANSELMO. How?

PALERMO. Doats on another!

ANSELMO. Beware, Palermo, this capricious temper!
Doubt seldom lodges in a noble mind;
And he scarce merits to be treated justly,
Whose jealous soul, on light foundation, questions
The unsullied luster of another's virtue --
Retract then quick this hasty accusation,
And kindly say my hapless child is dead,
But dare not once to tell me she is worthless!

PALERMO. On light foundation did I doubt, my lord,
This sharp reproach had been indeed deserved;
But if incessant coldness, if contempt,
If open insult for protesting love,
And even a noonday fondness for a stranger,
Are honest grounds of rational suspicion,
Then have I cause for rage and indignation --

ANSELMO. By heaven, it is false! nor shall my child be wronged
By any coinage of a dotar^'s madness;
Her soul, superior to the sland'rous charge,
Has proved its worth to more than Roman greatness;
And if she meant not to accept your vows,
Her sense -- her pride -- her virtue had repulsed them
-- Fond of a stranger -- Tell me, Sir -- what stranger,
What mighty object has alarmed your fears,
And kindled hell's most fiercely blazing fire,
The fire of groundless jealousy within you?

PALERMO. Why will Anselmo treat me with contempt,
And wound the wounded with the darts of scorn?
Think you I rave, or that my restless brain,
Ingenious, seeks out sources of misfortune?
But what if hid within yon secret arbor
You should yourself detect them -- what if there
You knew them long concealed? What if you saw
Her alabaster arm, as I have seen it,
O damning sight! thrown round the happy villain,
Would you not then with me conclude her lost,
And think this ample evidence to prove
The plain perdition of her monstrous falsehood?

ANSELMO. And were you, Sir, like me, a father,
Like me, a doting father -- had your child
Through life maintained an unsuspected honor,
And rose in virtue as she rose in beauty;
Would you believe, at reason's full meridian,
A maid thus pure, thus eminently spotless,
Could plunge at once in infamy eternal,
And set fame, fortune, happiness at naught,
Through instant passion for a total stranger?

PALERMO. My Lord, I come not with an idiot's tale,
Or wish Anselmo in an angry mood
Should, as an insant, chide a thoughtless daughter:
No; I disdain the thought -- I come to guard
No less his honor than my own -- to show
Our mutual danger -- and advise, that Granville
May be this moment ordered to his France --
As yet, though highly erring, Clementina
Cannot be completely guilty -- Send, then,
Her newfound favorite instantly from Venice --
She still is undestroy'd; and Granville,
Though thrice my sword avengingly was drawn,
Safe from this arm, enjoys the law of nations.

ANSELMO. Rash -- desperate youth, forbear to urge my temper --
Or, by yon heaven, the friendship which I hold you,
No more o'erlooks this treatment of my child --
She false -- She shameless -- Kneel, blasphemer, kneel,
Fall at her feet, and own you have lost your reason;
For naught but madness can excuse the wound,
Which virtue feels in injured Clementina.

PALERMO. They Are in the arbor yet -- convince yourself --
And see how far I wound the cause of virtue,
In this report of faithless Clementina.

ANSELMO. I will this instant -- But remember, Sir,
Unless your charge proceeds from some mistake
Of probable appearance -- unless it springs
From some plain source of obvious misconception,
The purposed union never shall take place --
I prize my child's repose too dearly, Sir,
To trust it with a madman -- Nor will she
Be ever prevailed on to receive a lover;
Who dares to think her capable of baseness. Exit.

PALERMO alone. To think her base -- O that I could not think it --
What though her person spotless and unsullied,
May vie with Zembla's now-descending snows,
What though her error is ideal yet,
And actual guilt has stamped no sable on her;
Is not her mind, that all-in-all of virtue,
Polluted, stained, nay prostitute before me?
Do I not take, O torture! to my arms,
A mental wanton, in the rage, the madness
Of flaming will, and burning expectation?
Will not this fiend, damnation on him, Granville,
Will he not dart like lightning to her memory,
And fire her fancy even -- O hold my brain --
Let me avoid the mere imagination --
It stabs -- it tears -- On love's luxurious pillow
It blasts the freshest roses, and leaves scorpions,
Eternal scorpions only, in their room. [Exit.

Scene changes to the Arbor in the Garden. Clementina and Granville
discovered. CLEMENTINA. No more, my love! -- it is time we reach the palace --
But remember, if aught adveise should arise,
Which heaven forbid, to intercept our flight,
On no account reveal yourself; Teflect,
Our law is death to all Venetian subjects,
Who dare propose a government of strangors!

GRANVILLE. Fear not, my Clementina: -- with strict prudence,
A prudence rendered doubly nice by love,
The whole shall be conducted. --

CLEMENTINA. For my sake
Let it -- Revealed, your public character
Would now destroy, and not protect you; jealous,
To fury jealous for their antiont oustoms,
The multitude, with all my father's rage,
Would burn -- and O, thus wonderfully saved,
Again my love, I cannot, must not lose you. [Embracing him.

Enter ANSELMO. ANSELMO. Death to my sight!

CLEMENTINA. Ha! I behold my father!

ANSELMO. Yes, blushless girl, you do behold your father. --
And you, O base, inhospitable lord!
You too, behold the much-abus'd Anselmo. --
But hence to France, the native nurse of wiles:
This moment hence to France, or know the next
Is big with fate, and teeming with destruction!

GRANVILLE. What is my crime, and wherefore should I go?
Is it a crime to dote upon your daughter?
If that, my Lord, is deadly in your sight,
I am indeed a criminal most guilty:
But sure my rank, my fortune, and my fame,
Are no way less, than your approved Palermo's.

CLEMENTINA kneeling. O Sir, O Father, O revered Anselmo!
By every name of tenderness and duty;
By the dear memory of that sainted matron,
Who gave me birth, and from her well-earn'd heaven
Beholds me prostrate at your feet for pity;
Break off the cursed engagement with Palermo. --

ANSELMO. Kneel not to me, ungrateful, kindless girl!
I have been prostrate at your feet in vain.
Ask not my pity, yet deny your own;
Nor think a father's fond forgiving heart,
While deeply bleeding, monster! at your shame,
Can quite forget this base capricious falsehood,
Forget the vow scarce cold upon your lip,
To wronged Palermo, your affianc'd Lord,
And give its sanction to this guilty change --
A wanton's passion for a slave of France.

CLEMENTINA. A wanton's passion!

GRANVILLE. Wanton! -- hear, Anselmo --

CLEMENTINA. No, let me speak; and let me here assert
The equal rights of justice and of nature;
A wanton's passion -- I Am your daughter, Sir,
But am not therefore to be deemed a slave;
I bear you all the reverence, the regard,
That can inform a filial bosom -- yet
My heart is free, and must consult its feelings; --
I cannot teach these feelings what you wish,
I cannot rush, deep perjured, to the altar;
Nor in the presence of attesting heaven,
Profess to honor, what I now despise,
And swear to love the object of my horror.

ANSELMO. Shameless deceiver, peace! -- You, Sir, to France!
The impatient winds are swelled to fill your sails;
Hence then, and fly the fury of Anselmo!

GRANVILLE. Flight was not made for soldiers, nor befits
The ambassador of kings -- I claim protection
From the known law of nations -- Mark, my lord! --
And think in time, I represent a monarch,
Who will not bear the shadow of an insult.

ANSELMO. Dare you assert the sacred law of nations,
To screen deceit, or sanctify dishonor?
I spurn all customs opposite to truth,
And own no rule, but what is owned by virtue. --
A guard there strait!

CLEMENTINA. Yet force him not away.
Behold these tears, my father -- O look back
On all the past transactions of my life!
Have I not ever walked with innocence,
And held one course of unsuspected honor?
Strong as appearances may speak against me,
Think, kindly think, there may be yet a cause --
What would I say -- Distraction! Murder Granville?
And must Anselmo's bosom bleed? -- O misery!
What shall I say? -- Indeed -- indeed, my father,
I am not criminal -- and O believe
At once I cannot be entirely worthless!

ANSELMO. O impudence of guilt! -- when my own eyes,
With shame have witnessed your licentious fondness!
Naught but that proof could ever have convinced me;
For O I loved you with such wild excess,
And held your purity in such opinion,
That had an angel told me of this change,
This rapid, dire transition into vice,
I still had wanted occular conviction.
What ho! a guard! -- And can this be my child?
O nature, nature! this my Clementina?
And can she thus desert me after all?
In the cold evening of my age desert me,
For this once-seen, this host-betraying ruffian?
Who, gracious heaven! O who would be a father!
Enter a Guard. Arrest that lord! -- and bear him to his ship.

GRANVILLE. Stand off, ye slaves! by heaven, he dies that stirs.

CLEMENTINA. Oh mercy!

ANSELMO. Strike, if madly he resist you!

CLEMENTINA. Strike here then! pay obedience to your chief,
And kill his child, his wretched child, before him.
Dispatch us both, or let us both depart;
We go together, or together fall.

GRANVILLE. And must I live to see you ravished from me?
To think perhaps another -- that Palermo --
O snatch me, snatch me from the horrid thought!
It breaks, it rends me on a thousand wheels,
And any death is ecstasy to this. --

CLEMENTINA. And do you judge so poorly of my love?
O know me better, and be quite at rest!
This arm, if it must come to that, shall free me. --
Yet, while our hope supplies one glimmering ray,
Let us not urge our fate, before it is needful;
Conceal your name and quality with care;
And recoiled it is time enough to die,
When every means of living is denied us?

ANSELMO. What shallow air of mystery is this?
Trifle not, guards, -- but execute your orders!

GRANVILLE. Off, barbarians, off!

CLEMENTINA. You shall not part us. --

ANSELMO. I Jew them asunder!

GRANVILLE. O my Clementina! [Borne off.

CLEMENTINA. It is too much. [Faints.

ANSELMO. She faints. --
Enter ELIZARA. Assist her, quick?
Yet why assist her? O my breaking heart!
Should it not now in mercy be my wish,
To close her eyes for ever on her shame,
And end her being and her crime together?

ELIZARA. Patience! she is innocent; and see, my Lord,
See, she revives!

ANSELMO. O gentle Elizara,
Could the bright luster of her mind revive,
I might again behold her as I have done;
But that is set in one eternal night,
And now my dream of happiness gives way
To sure disgrace, and aggravated anguish.
Ye fathers, tear the feelings from your hearts!
Ye mothers, drag your infants from the breast,
Dash them remorseless on their kindred flint,
And kill the embryo savageness within them.
They Will else blast all the comforts of your life,
And, viper-like, with death return your fondness --
O nature, nature, can this be my child!
Lost Clementina; wretched, cursed Anselmo! [Exit.

ELIZARA. How does my Clementina? -- Look, O look,
And see your truest friend! --

CLEMENTINA. Where have I been?
And why am I restored? -- It Is Elizara. --
Say, O say kind maid -- where is my husband?
Where is he hurried by his brutal guard?

ELIZARA, Are you a stranger to your father's order?

CLEMENTINA. No -- no -- I rave -- I know it but too well --
O this relentless, this unfeeling father!
Yet why do I exclaim? -- His cause for rage
Is just -- He only acts as virtue dictates;
And his poor heart is torn for my offense. --
It Is fate alone that marks me out for woe,
And I shall never see Rinaldo more.

ELIZARA. Persist not thus in unavailing grief;
But praise the goodness that preserves your husband.
Even now the headstrong multitude, enraged
At Granville's embassy to change the state,
Throng round the palace, and in thousands threat
A quick and public measure of revenge.
Had he but stayed another hour, a moment,
Perhaps Anselmo's, even your father's power,
Had been too weak, though exercised, to save him.

CLEMENTINA. What does this do, but aggravate my sorrows?
But show how cursed, how doubly cursed my fate,
My cruel fate, has mercilessly made me?
Concealed, my husband falls a dreadful victim
To popular resentment. -- If acknowledged,
His country's justice leads him to the scaffold --
And flying, gracious, and immortal powers!
Anselmo, burning at my seeming crime,
Presses that fell Palermo to his bed. --
Why this is woe, it is thick substantial woe,
And shall behold a breast unshrinking here --
Burst from your cells ye demons of despair!
Ye furies clad in tenfold snakes arise!
Yawn quick ye graves with all your timeless dead!
Ye cannot now strike terror to my soul;
Rinaldo's lost, and I can fear no farther!

ELIZARA. Why this distrust in heaven's unending mercy?
Has it not now poured blessings on your head,
And worked an actual miracle to save you,
From the wide horror of a double marriage?
What is there now but to refuse Palermo,
To slight the man you meant this morn to slight,
And end a suit you can receive no longer?
Hope therefore still, and think the gracious hand,
Which led your lord at such a crisis here,
Will crown your truth with happiness at last.

CLEMENTINA. Go talk of hope to wretches at the stake,
To shrieking mothers over their insants dead --
Go bid the murderer, while his hands yet reek
With unoffending blood, hope to regain
His former peace of mind, or ever know
A tranquil thought, a tranquil slumber more! --
O, I could curse this base deceiver, hope,
Till echo thundered execration back,
And rent the air with imprecating phrenzy. -- [A shout,
What means that shout? Ha! my fears inform me.
Perhaps even now the savage multitude
Have seized my husband; and perhaps they now
Glut their fell vengeance on his quivering limbs.
Shout.] Again -- it must be so -- Barbarians, stay --
For me, for me he falls -- 'Twas Clementina --
'Twas I who led him to your fatal shores --
Wreak then your vengeance on his wretched wife,
But spare, O spare Rinaldo! [Runs out wildly, Elizara following.

ACT IV.
Scene ANSELMO's Palace. ANSELMO and PALERMO. ANSELMO. WELL, my Palermo -- this
unlook'd-for riva^
Ploughs back his way to France.
I saw his canvass whitening on the breeze,
As well to know him certainly departed,
As to restrain the fury of the people,
Who, fired with honest, though misguided zeal,
Forgot his sanctity of public character,
And raved for vengeance on a foe to freedom.

PALERMO. The people's voice, however it sometimes errs,
Means always nobly, and is raised by virtue;
Their very faults, illustrious from their motives,
Demand respect, nay, ask for admiration,
And soar, at least, half sanctified to justice --
There -- hear their voice -- it is now swelled up with rapture,
Alva, the welcome minister of peace,
Excites their joy, and every order hails
The white-wing'd moment, that preserves the state,
And crowns the generous labors of Anselmo.

ANSELMO. He comes, even earlier than my utmost hope,
And proves how much his sovereign was alarmed
At the now lucky embassy from Lewis --
Come, my Palermo, let us hasten hence!
And show due honor to the noble Alva!

PALERMO. Fain would I greet him; but alas, my gloom
Would chill the pleasure which it meant to grace.

ANSELMO. Remain then here -- I would not have it said
That aught could wound a citizen of Venice
Who lived to see his liberty restored.
I am the father of that wretched girl,
Who clouds your brow with grief and disappointment;
I am, and feel her conduct like a father:
But when I think upon the countless millions,
Which this unlook'd-for providence of heaven
Designs to bless, I cast away my griefs,
And in my country, strive to lose my daughter.

PALERMO. Your spirit fires me -- I adopt its justice,
And will attempt, if possible, myself
To loose all memory of this sweet deceiver.

ANSELMO. Do -- and be dearer to my heart than ever --
Your worth first made you mine; the same, that worth,
Shall keep you -- Clementina now is sunk
Below your thought; to wed her would be baseness.
Despise her, therefore, as you prize my friendship,
And know I Would scorn to give a shameless woman,
Though ten times mine, to any man of honor. [Exit.

PALERMO. He Is right -- he is right -- I were a slave indeed,
A soul-less slave, to prostitute a thought,
A single thought, on such a woman longer --
Were she as fair as luxury has painted
The nymphs of Paradise to Eastern minds,
I ought to spurn her now -- Her heart is lost --
It Is all debased by this licentious passion,
And he who weds the object of his scorn,
May boast of love, but never talk of honor -- [Exit.

Scene changes to St. Mark's. Enter ADORNO, Senators, Citizens, Guards, etc.
ADORNO. Now is the time, my friends, to press him close,
And make him wholly sovereign of the state;
Which his great talents and unequal virtue
Have thus so happily, so nobly saved --
The nations round us, owe their chiefest strength
To regal government -- How were we torn
With jarring interests till the rule supreme,
To one great arm was trusted -- to Anselmo!
France -- Ferdinand -- and every powerful neighbor,
May still divide us with their separate factions:
But if we choose a monarch of our own,
His and the public welfare must be one. --

First CITIZEN. Is he acquainted with our views, Adorno?
Have you informed him of our grateful purpose?

ADORNO. No -- For I feared his stern disapprobation,
And only hope the people's general voice
Will now induce him to accept a throne.

Second CITIZEN. See where he comes. --

Enter ANSELMO attended. ANSELMO. Well, my brave countrymen!
I once more see you free; the solemn league
Is happily concluded; and to heaven
Our deepest thanks we gratefully must pour
For life, for peace, for liberty immortal!
Here now my labor and commission end.
This sacred sword, the badge of sovereign power,
Which in the storms and perils of the state,
Your general voice entrusted to my care,
And bade me carry as your common leader,
'Till death or freedom finished my command,
This sacred pledge becomes your own again --
Here to your use I solemnly resign it,
And sink with transport, to a private station;
More proud the subject of a freeborn state,
Than if I ruled a universe of slaves --

ADORNO. My lord Anselmo, your applauding country
Gives back the sword to that experienced hand,
Which crowns her sons with liberty and peace:
Through me she offers you a crown, a throne,
And hails her monarch, in her great preserver.
Start not! -- with me the general voice cries out,
Long live our king -- long live the good Anselmo. [A flourish.

ANSELMO. Shall I with thanks, or deep-struck indignation,
With grateful heart, or justly kindled ire,
Receive this flattering instance of your favor?
Warm to the voice of virtuous approbation,
I feel a joy beyond the power of words,
To find my actions honored with your praise:
But in the rising raptures of the man,
The honest citizen must do his duty;
He must refuse, resentingly refuse,
The unthinking bounty, which to pay his service,
Would plunge his country in immediate bondage.

ADORNO. This self-denying dignity of soul,
Serves but to show the wisdom of our choice,
And proves how safe a confidence reposed,
Will lodge in hands so worthy as Anselmo's.

ANSELMO. Long, my brave friends, against the Spanish tyrant,
Have the exalted citizens of Venice
Fought the great cause of justice and mankind:
And will you now, triumphant over force,
From downright gratitude embrace a chain?
What has your glorious, fortitude effected,
If in the full fraught transport of your souls,
You lift the man you fondly call deliverer,
To sovereign rule, and crown him for your master?
In such a case your blessing is your, bane,
And Spain, a foe less deadly than Anselmo.

ADORNO. Does not the use which you have made of power,
Proclaim how much, how amply we should trust you.
Have you employed it, but for public good,
Or wished to keep it, when that good was answered?
Hear then your grateful countrymen, and know
Adorno speaks the wishes of the people,
The people's wishes joyfully convened,
Who with one voice now offer you a kingdom.

ANSELMO. I scorn the kingdom that can court a tyrant,
And while I live my country shall be free.
If then my voice deserves the least attention,
Let me exhort, nay, shame you from your purpose.
I fought to save you from despotic power,
Not, giddy men, to be myself your lord:
You may forget your duty to the state,
But I Will remember mine, and keep all equal,
Though I myself am singled out for master.

First CITIZEN. We'll urge the point no more.

ADORNO. I never had urged it,
But for the public welfare, from belief,
That all rewards were properly his due,
Whose arm and wisdom had preserved our freedom.

ANSELMO. Rewards, Adorno! talk not of rewards --
The man is half a traitor to the state,
Who only serves it from a sordid motive --
Yet, if too warm, too rude in my refusal,
I give offense to any son of Venice,
Here I abjure the intention of offending,
And beg my kind, my too indulgent friends,
May now disperse, and seek their several homes --
Who most loves freedom, will keep order most;
And know, the best way each can serve his country,
Is to hold tumult in a deep abhorrence,
And labor closely in his private station.

ADORNO. Long live Anselmo -- long live great Anselmo. [Exit. Adorno, Citizens,
etc.

ANSELMO alone. Lo there -- the phrenzy of a nation's virtue!
Who could abuse their elevated weakness?
Curse on the despicable slave that could! --
Curse on the slave, however he possesses
A nation's confidence, whose groveling interest,
Or abject pride, can tempt him to betray it!
The more his weight, his merit with a country,
The more he is bound, by every tie of honor,
To guard the laws; and he is a double villain,
When once he vilely turns that very power,
Which he derives from popular esteem,
To sap the bulwarks of the public freedom.
Enter an Officer. What means this haste?

OFFICER. To tell my lord Anselmo,
That Granville's vessel, which so late you forced
To sea, has unexpectedly borne back,
And seems to steer directly for the point
Which bounds the palace-garden from the surge --

ANSELMO. Where is my daughter? -- Where is Clementina?
I Have scarcely left a soldier at the palace,
Sole though it stands, and separate from the city --
Hence quick, and seize on Granville, if he lands.
Take ample force -- My soul forebodes his purpose -- [Exit Officer.
Yet should he dare -- by heaven's high host he dies --
No character can sanctify such outrage --
The laws -- the laws shall vindicate themselves,
And teach the ministers of neighboring kings,
To look for safety, only in their justice. [Exit.

Scene changes to an Apartment in ANSELMO's Palace. Enter PALERMO, followed by
CLEMENTINA. CLEMENTINA. Nay, for your own sake, give me up, Palermo;
Give me again my former peace of mind,
Give me again, my father's dear regards,
Of which your fatal passion has deprived me:
O prideless lord, though dead to my repose,
At least reflect and tremble for your own.
What peace, what comfort ever can you hope
From one, not only sickening at your sight,
But hear, and fly me -- doting on another --
To madness doting --

PALERMO. O, I know it well --
Your once-seen Granville, light capricious beauty!
And seen too, while your plighted vow to me
Was yet all warm, and flying up to heaven!
For him you trampled on your sacred promise;
For this light Frenchman, in a single moment,
Broke every rosy nicety of sex,
And at a word, a glance -- nay, without either --
Lost a whole life of innocence and honor. --

CLEMENTINA. Licentious railer -- therefore give me up!
Naught but contention, wretchedness, and shame,
Can wait a union circumstanc'd like ours:
Through life our fiend-like fury to each other,
Must make our home the dwelling of despair;
And after death, our still opposing spirits,
If after death our enmity can live,
With those in story of the Thaeban brothers,
Will shun all commerce, and as hating here,
Diffuse their hate throughout the whole hereafter. --

PALERMO. Swell not the picture with a needless horror,
Nor once imagine that my soul requires
Such striking pleas to shun an obvious baseness --
Think you I mean, persisting in my claim --
To seize a hand that justice bids me scorn;
No: I despise the meanness, and intend
Not to assert my title, but resign it;
I am a lover, -- yet I Am still a man;
Acquainted therefore with the blotted mind,
I turn affrighted from the faultless person,
And wed distraction sooner than dishonor.

CLEMENTINA. Blessed may you be for this exalted scorn,
This noble warmth of manly indignation,
Dearer to me than all the melting strains
Which song ever fancied for protesting love --
My soul is now securely at her ease,
And glows with grateful reverence for Palermo.

PALERMO. Deem not unjustly, Madam, of my feelings;
You may betray, but never shall despise me --
I come no whimp'rer of a tragic story,
To shield beneath an angry father's sanction,
And act the legal ruffian on aversion.
False, therefore, Clementina, you are free --
Take back your vows -- take your engagements back --
And though I own this heart must bleed profusely,
For still, O still your image triumphs here:
Yet know, I Would sooner tear it from my bosom,
Than once be rivall'd in the woman's thought,
Who made my wife, should think alone for me.

Enter GRANVILLE. GRANVILLE. Where, where is Clementina?

CLEMENTINA. Granville again!
Yet here again in danger.

GRANVILLE. My love! away --
Fly hence -- Escape is certain now.

PALERMO pushing him away. Vile Franc,
Stand off, it is death, it is death again to touch her --

GRANVILLE. Forbear, rash man, to tempt my greedy vengeance.
Wild with my wrongs, its appetites are raging --
There is not now a coward guard to call;
My friends make prisoners of your paltry force,
And ever a band superior can arrive,
That lady will be safe on board -- Dare not,
Therefore, to withstand us -- her heart is mine --
So shall her hand be, though yours grasped the thunder.

PALERMO. Heaven's own red bolt will not be then more deadly --
For know, injurious lord, though I despise
The hand and heart, that can descend so low;
Yet while I wield this sword, my noble friend
Shall not be basely plundered of his daughter:
Draw, Granville, boldly then, and prove which arm
Can best protect its master.

CLEMENTINA. Hold, O hold
Your dread destructive swords -- For my sake, Granville,
Plunge not thus in blood -- And O Palermo!
If the bright flame of honor fires your soul,
As sure it does, from sentiments so noble,
Restrain your rage -- The man whose life you seek --

GRANVILLE. No more, my Clementina -- Why entreat
Where we command with absolute dominion?
Without there, friends --
Enter a Rarty of Guards. My spirited companions,
Secure thar headstrong lord -- I join you on the instant.
Treat him, however, with a just respect!
I know him noble, though he is my foe,
And even admire him for his very hatred --

PALERMO. Coward, is this your boasted resolution,
Is this the way you dare me to the fight,
And raise your merit with your peerless mistress?

GRANVILLE. And thinks Palermo that I fear his sword,
Or use this method to elude his fury?
No -- once escaped from this oppressive state,
Demand your reparation, and receive it --
The fate of many hangs upon me now,
And honor bids me rather bear you hence,
Than take your life in vengeance for your virtue.
Lead him away.

PALERMO. O infamous assassin.
Now more than ever worthy of her heart --
But let your murd'rers bind me down securely:
For if I once can rush upon your throat,
These hands, unarmed, shall do a noble vengeance,
And tear you piecemeal, instantly before her.

GRANVILLE. Lead him away -- [Palermo is carried off.

CLEMENTINA. O say, my dear Rinaldo,
Say while surprise and joy have left me words,
By what blessed accident again I see you?
Heaven sure exhausts its mercy on our heads,
And all its wonders are reserved for love!

GRANVILLE. The time will scarce admit sufficient answer --
In brief know, therefore, that when torn from hence,
I heard Anselmo's order to the troops,
To line the spacious quarters of St. Mark's;
Some angel then inspired me with the thought
Of steering back, and forcing to my love,
Left now unguarded in a palace, distant
From instant aid, and dreaming not of danger;
The event, how happy! justified the action.
My brave attendants caught my honest flame,
And, heaven-assisted, easily acquired
A bloodless conquest over your people. [A Shout without, and a clashing of
swords.

CLEMENTINA. Ha!
What means that shout, this sudden clash of arms?

GRANVILLE. Stand firm, my friends; I fly to your support.
[Exit.
ANSELMO without. Seize him, seize Granville.

CLEMENTINA. O almighty heaven!
We Are lost again -- again undone --

ANSELMO without. Palermo,
Send off his bravoes to the common dungeon.

CLEMENTINA. Some mountain fall on my devoted head,
And shield me from, the fury of Anselmo! --
My dear Rinaldo! How shall I preserve him!
O that the daughters of indulgent sires
Could know my sorrows, know my anguish now!
They Would fly from disobedience, and would shudder
In downright prudence, to admit a thought
That madly tended to deceive a Father.

Enter ANSELMO, GRANVILLE, Guards, etc. ANSELMO. And now conduct the hero to
his prison.
His monarch master, though in prison here,
Should not unpunished violate our laws,
Nor offer such an outrage to Anselmo.

GRANVILLE. Why all this pomp of needless preparation?
I know my crime, and dare your instant sentence.
Bring forth your knives, your engines, or your fires --
Next to succeeding in a noble cause,
The generous mind esteems to suffer noblest.
Bring forth your racks then, witness to my triumph,
And be yourself, obdurate Lord, the judge,
Which is most brave, the torturer or tortured.

CLEMENTINA. Stop not with him -- Prepare your racks for me --
I am most guilty, and to heaven I swear,
Whatever his fate is, that is Clementina's.
Yet, my dear Granville, if we are to fall,
We'll vindicate our fame; and though offending,
Assert at least the honor of our loves.
Let us inform this venerable chief,
It is a son he hurries to the block,
And that my fancied spoiler is my husband.

ANSELMO. Your husband, traitress! -- infamous evasion,
To varnish over your unexampled baseness,
And snatch, if possible, this foreign caitiff,
This foul offender, from the stroke of justice.

GRANVILLE. Take heed, reveal not all, my Clementina.
Fate's worst is done, and dying undiscovered,
Guards those I prize much dearer than my life.
Remember this; and O remember too,
Known, or unknown, that equal death awaits me.

CLEMENTINA. My father, hear me -- Yes, he is my husband.
However strange, mysterious, or unlikely --
I must no more -- But time, a little time,
Will prove it all -- Then, gracious Sir, distress
No longer an unhappy pair, whose hands
High heaven has joined -- Allow the wretched wife
To gain her wedded lord; and judge, O judge,
If aught but this, the first of human duties,
Could tear her thus from Venice and her father.

ANSELMO. Your husband -- married -- when -- by whom, and where?
Away, degenerate, infamous deceiver,
Away, and from the world hide quick
That guilty head -- Your minion dies this hour --
The next, a cloister shuts you in for ever.
Take him from hence --

CLEMENTINA. And take me with him.

GRANVILLE. Unman me not with this excessive softness,
My life's sole joy; but let me meet my fate
As may become a soldier -- Where Is my dungeon?
Perhaps Anselmo, when a little calmer,
May think my blood sufficient expiation,
And let my guiltless followers escape,
Whose only crime is duty to their leader.
Gracious heaven compose her -- [Borne off.

CLEMENTINA to the Guard preventing her. Off -- let me go --
Is this a time to drag me from my husband?
Will not his blood suffice your utmost rage,
But must he, in the bitter hour of death,
Lose the poor comforts of a wife's attendance?
Where is the mighty freedom of your state,
Where your strict love of liberty and justice?
Why, say, O why, ye too benignant powers!
Did you from ruin snatch this barbarous realm,
Where even our virtues are considered crimes,
And soft compassion's constituted treason --
Revoke, revoke your merciful decrees;
From your dread stores of everlasting wrath
Hurl instant fury down, and blast those laws
Which talk of freedom, yet enslave the mind,
And boast of wisdom, while they chain our reason!

ANSELMO. Blaspheming monster -- stop that impious tongue,
Nor thus provoke me longer, to commit
Some dreadful deed of honorable phrenzy:
Already driven beyond a father's patience,
I scarce can spare the very life I gave.
Hence from my sight then, execrable wretch --
To urge me farther, is to rush on death,
And add new horrors to the fate of Granville.

CLEMENTINA. Do strike at once -- behold my ready bosom --
Yet spare, Anselmo, my unhappy husband:
He is not what he seems -- O Sir -- he is --
My brain -- my brain -- When, when shall I have rest?
My father, be consistently severe,
Wreak not this cruel murder on my peace,
And think that nature sanctifies my person.

ANSELMO. He is not what he seems -- Declare who is he?
How loss of truth attends the loss of honor!
Abandoned girl, your arts are all in vain,
Are all unable to prevent his fate.
At my request, the assembling senate now
Prepare to hear his crime, and will pronounce
His doom directly -- Nay, this wretched tale
Shall even give vengeance wings -- accelerate
His fall; and, like the dreadful whirlwind, sweep
Him to destruction. [Exit.

CLEMENTINA. Stay, Anselmo, stay --
He is -- but that is also certain death,
And I myself prepare the horrid axe
If I reveal him -- Which way shall I act?
The laboring globe convulsing to its base,
Is downy softness to my mad'ning bosom:
I Am all distraction -- Reason drops her rein,
And the next step is dreadful desperation. [Exit.

ACT V.
Scene a Prison. Enter GRANVILLE in Chains. GRANVILLE. WHERE shall I turn --
they have me now secure --
Was I however singled out alone,
To bear the utmost malice or the stars,
I could, unshrinking, look upon these chains;
But when I think what Clementina suffers,
When in the eye of agonizing fancy,
I paint my wife all weltring in her blood,
Or what more deeply damns me in reflection,
Suppose her dragged to hot Palermo's bed;
My heart faints instantly with apprehension,
And almost dies at bare imagination;
Yet, gracious fountain of unbounded mercy!
Let one blessed drop from your exhaustless, source,
In pity fall, and save my Clementina;
Save her, O save her in the hour of peril,
And teach the world that --

CLEMENTINA within. Hear me, O Anselmo!
I conjure you hear me --

GRANVILLE. She Is now in danger --
The slaves now tear their victim to the altar.
She is my wife -- Barbarians, hear you that!
These chains -- these chains -- damnation on these chains --
The prison blazes -- Hell yawns quick before me --
Where does this lead? No matter where -- Despair
Is prudence now --
[Exit.
Scene changes to an Apartment in ANSELMO's Palace. Enter ANSELMO and PALERMO.
ANSELMO. And yet, my good Palermo,
My secret soul inclines to hear her too.
O did you mark her undissembled anguish?

PALERMO. I did -- I did -- and felt it most severely --
Her burning eye expanding into blood,
Stood desperately fixed, while on each cheek,
Each pallid cheek, a single tear hung quivering,
Like early dew-drops on the sickening lily,
And spoke a mind just verging into madness.

ANSELMO. I Will see her once again -- for when I weigh
All the nice strictness of her former conduct;
When I reflect, that to this cursed day,
She looked, as if her person, wholly mind,
In Dian's breast could raise a sigh of envy,
I cannot think her utterly abandoned:
Abandoned too, in such a little space!
Despise me not, Palermo -- for the father
Still rushes strongly on my aching heart,
And fondly seeks for argument to save her.

PALERMO. Check not the tender sentiments of nature,
But see her -- make her, if possible, disclose
Who Granville truly is, since she affirms
He is not what he seems, and is her husband --
That he is a Frenchman, and of noble rank,
Appears too plainly from his high commission --
But still some secret strongly heaves her soul;
And hid beneath this mystery of woe,
Who knows how far that secret may not merit
Compassion, or excuse --

ANSELMO. I Will try at least --
I Will act as fits the fondness of a father;
Forgive, as far as honor can forgive,
And if her guilt exceeds a father's mercy,
I Will beg of heaven the firmness of a man -- [Exit.

PALERMO. Unhappy, generous, excellent old man!
I could not quench his little ray of hope,
And tell him all I thought of Clementina.
She is indeed distressed -- But pride alone,
A disappointed pride, and lawless love,
Now harrow up her soul -- Had she an honest,
Rational excuse -- a tale that could behold
The light -- ere now she had discovered it --
This seeming mystery, is wholly art,
To save this new-made husband -- Monstrous -- monstrous!
Shame rises upon shame, and each fresh guilt
Out-damns the former with its deep'ning blackness --

Enter GRANVILLE, bursting from the back Scene. GRANVILLE. I Have forced a way --
Infernal villain, turn!
Chained as I am, you shall not fly me now.

PALERMO. Why this exceeds my utmost expectation --
This is revenge that pays an age of torture.
Yes, fraudful lord, this meeting gives me transport;
And long ere now my vengeance had you felt,
But that the perjured partner of your crimes
Appeared most guilty, and to justice seemed
Less the seduced, than infamous seducer --

GRANVILLE. Talk not of justice, O consummate coward!
Talk not of justice, little-minded spoiler!
When, dead alike to sentiment and shame,
You seek by force -- by force, inhuman ruffian!
To drag a helpless woman to your bed;
And though despised -- detested -- execrated --
Attempt, assisted by her savage father,
To make her yours, through actual rape and murder.

PALERMO. Ere I reply to this injurious charge,
Let me, though fate hangs over your guilty head,
On equal terms, allow you room to answer.
Here I unloose your chains -- Now hence with me,
And fight the cause of this abandoned woman.
Palermo dares you forth to single combat:
Palermo too, shall arm his vanquished foe,
Nor even, while Venice dooms him to the axe,
Once name his crimes, to shun the claims of honor --

GRANVILLE. Hence -- With the promised sword alone I Will answer;
For though my soul through all her enmity,
Feels a kind something for this gallant anger,
In blood alone she will speak her obligation. [Exeunt.

Scene changes to a Chamber. Enter CLEMENTINA. CLEMENTINA. He Will see me --
endless blessings on his head --
Yes -- Elizara's counsel was most just:
There is no other way to save my husband --
If I persist in hiding who he is,
He dies beyond a doubt -- whereas revealing
The fatal secret, though replete with horror,
May wake the father in Anselmo's bosom;
And when he finds his daughter still unsullied,
The sudden torrent of surprise and joy,
May lead him yet to pity and forgiveness --

Enter ANSELMO. ANSELMO. I come at last, unhappy girl, to hear
If there is indeed, in this mysterious conduct,
Aught that can have pretensions to excuse?
I come even hoping ardently for motives
To justify an offer of my pardon;
For O! I wish, I wish to find you guiltless --
Speak then at once, I earnestly conjure you:
Give me but room to exercise my fondness,
And come again securely to my heart --

CLEMENTINA. O Sir! restrain, restrain this wondrous goodness!
It pierces like a dagger through my heart,
And shows me doubly, what a wretch I was
To wrong so good, so excellent a father.
Had I at first revealed my wretched story --
Had I but said who Granville truly is,
I see, 'twere possible to hope for pity.

ANSELMO. Deserve that pity, and receive it now --
Prove that you are not lost -- prove that this Granville
Is not the vile seducer of an instant,
Show me but this -- and leave a partial father,
If you can wipe away the charge of shame,
To overlook the crime of disobedience.

CLEMENTINA. How could I be a monster so depraved,
As once to forfeit tenderness like this
O Sir -- if you can graciously forgive
One fault -- one fatal fault -- wretch as I am,
We may be happy yet; and long, long days
Of future joy o'erpay these hours of sorrow --
Know then that Granville --

ANSELMO. Well.

CLEMENTINA. Is not of France.

ANSELMO. Proceed.

CLEMENTINA. He is a citizen of Venice --

ANSELMO. What citizen?

CLEMENTINA. Rinaldo --

ANSELMO. Ha! confusion!
Son of my foe -- nay more, a foe to freedom!

CLEMENTINA. He Is not your foe, Sir, nor a foe to freedom;
Our hearts were just united, when the fatal
Quarrel, between his sire and you, took place;
I need not mention how he fought for Venice;
You saw him fall, and saw his country weep:
A train of wonderful events has since
High-rais'd him in the court of France, and duty
To an indulgent, to a royal master,
Joined with his wishes to behold your daughter,
Has led him to this dangerous embassy:
O save him then, my father -- I know
His life is forfeit to the laws -- But sure,
As your unequalled virtue has preserved
The state, the state will readily preserve
Your hapless son.

ANSELMO. It Is hard, it is hard at once
To conquer our resentments -- Hard to take
Those to our hearts, whom we have hated deadly:
But it is such bliss to find you still unspotted,
That what before had fired my soul to madness,
Brings rapture now, and cancels disobedience.

CLEMENTINA. How shall I speak the feelings of my heart!
How, sacred Sir, repay this wondrous goodness!

ANSELMO. I have a daughter still -- Rinaldo never
Was lost to worth, though I abhorred his father;
Nor shall his country, for this first transgression,
Forget the merit of his former service.
Now you're my child again -- your husband lives;
Thus, thus I bury your offense for ever, [Embracing her.
And fly to bring Rinaldo to your arms. [Exit.

CLEMENTINA. O teach me, heaven! O teach me to express
The strong sensations of my swelling bosom!
Do not oppress me with this weight of mercy,
And yet destroy my feeble power to thank you:
But my Rinaldo, my delivered lord,
Shall speak our mutual praise -- Joy, boundless joy
And gratitude absorb my little sense
Beyond the reach of recollection -- and
Transport grows too exquisite for words.

Enter GRANVILLE, leaning on bis Sword, pale and bloody: entering he falls
against the side of the Scene, where be continues some time. CLEMENTINA. My
husband -- horror -- welt'ring in his blood!
O who has raised his arm against your life?

GRANVILLE. Behold I come even in the pangs -- support me,
Clementina -- of death to save my love,
To prove my right -- and guard her from dishonor.

CLEMENTINA. Ye heavenly ministers -- O say if this,
If this is all my happiness at last!

GRANVILLE. My Clementina -- But it will not be --
The hand of fate is on me -- and Palermo
Triumphs after all -- O had I given him
Blow for blow -- I could enjoy these pangs -- But
Thus, thus to fall -- [Falling down, Clementina kneeling over him.

CLEMENTINA. Well now what farther business
Have I with life? --

GRANVILLE. My dearest Clementina!

CLEMENTINA. What says my love?

GRANVILLE. They have not yet undone you?

CLEMENTINA. Am I not yet alive -- let that convince you --
Anselmo too is reconciled -- And O!
I looked for years, for long, long years of joy:
But what is reconciliation now?
Or what is joy? -- From dreams of heaven I wake,
To added woe, to aggravated torture --
And must we part, Rinaldo?

GRANVILLE. O for ever!
Life ebbs apace, and all is darkness round me,
Save Clementina -- Save my gallant friends --
They Are yours -- my father too -- farewell One look,
One last dear look -- farewell -- farewell for ever. [Dies.

CLEMENTINA. Here too my sun eternally shall set --
Rinaldo -- friend -- companion -- lover -- husband --
Hard as our doom is, it is kind in this,
And joins us now, to sever us no more!

Enter ANSELMO. ANSELMO. Palermo has acquainted me with all --
And is he gone so soon? -- O hapless girl!
But yet Palermo's not to blame -- Rinaldo
Provoked his fate -- He urged him to the combat,
And the survivor, conscious who has fallen,
Deplores most deeply the disast'rous blow.

CLEMENTINA. Hence with his more than crocodile complaining,
Hence, to the inferior monster of the Nile,
Let him teach tears of yet unfancy'd falsehood --
There lies my husband slaughtered by his hand,
Heaven's worst of woes -- Heaven's worst of woes upon him!
And thinks he now with founds of lamentation,
To charm down griefs of magnitude like mine?
No, here I shake off wretchedness and life;
Here I attend my dear Rinaldo's spirit,
And leave the world to beings like Palermo. [Stabs herself.

ANSELMO, O Clementina -- O my child -- my child!
Had you no pity for a weeping father?
Was I not cursed enough, enough a wretch,
Without this blow to rend my breast asunder?

CLEMENTINA. I scarce know what I act -- my reason totters;
Yet while an interval of sense remains,
O see me, Sir, with less endearing goodness --
Wretched no less as daughter than as wife:
In life's decline I mark you out to woe,
And here I murder my unhappy husband:
It Is time the grave should hide so foul a monster!
My brain, my brain, my brain -- Who Is that -- Palermo -- [Raving.
Again -- There, savage -- there, that blow is ample vengeance --
Look down -- look down, Rinaldo -- see your wife!
There lies the murderer slain by Clementina!
Prepare to meet my spirit in the skies!
Prepare to meet me in eternal morning!
Elysium spreads upon my raptured view,
And I die blessed, since dying I revenge you -- [Sinks.

ANSELMO. O when I cast a retrospective glance
On all the graces of her infant years;
When I reflect how, ripening into beauty,
My eager eyes would strain in transport on her,
Her faults, her follies vanish from my view,
And naught remains but tenderness to torture.

CLEMENTINA. Where am I? -- O I shall remember soon --
That is Anselmo -- that my reverend father:
O Sir, forgive me -- beg down mercy on me,
And in the grave unite me to Rinaldo. [Dies.

ANSELMO. She Is gone -- she is gone; (...) lily there lies blasted,
No more to know returning spring -- no more
To blossom in the pride of beauty. -- Where,
Where shall I fly to lose my recollection?
The world is now detestable to thought,
Since all that once delighted me is lost.
O wretched child -- O miserable father!
But let me not blaspheme: good heaven -- good heaven!
I yield submissive to the dreadful stroke,
And only ask that this unhappy story,
To future times, may forcibly point out
The dire effects of filial disobedience.
[Exit.
THE END.
EPILOGUE,
By GEORGE COLMAN, Esquire
Spoken by Mrs. YATES.
FROM Otway's and immortal Shakespeare's page
Venice is grown samiliar to our stage.
Here the Rialto often has displayed
At once a bridge, a street, and mart of trade;
Here, treason threatening to lay Venice flat,
Grave candle-snuffers often in Senate sat.
Tonight in Venice we have placed our scene,
Where I have been -- lived -- died -- as you have seen.
Yet, that my travels I may not disgrace,
Let me -- since now revived -- describe the place!
Nor would the Tour of Europe prove our shame,
Could every Macaroni do the same.
The City's self -- a wonder, all agree --
Appears to spring, like Venus, from the sea.
Founded on piles, it rises from the strand,
Like Trifle placed upon a silver stand:
While many a lesser isle the prospect crowns,
Looking like sugar plums, or floating towns.
Horses and mules never pace the narrow street,
Where crowded walkers elbow all they meet:
No carts and coaches over the pavement clatter;
Ladies, Priests, Lawyers, Nobles, -- go by water:
Light boats and gondolas transport them all,
Like one eternal party to Vauxhall.
Now hey for merriment! -- hence gries and sear!
The jolly Carnival leads in the year;
Calls the young Loves and Pleasures to its aid;
A three-months jubilee and masquerade!
With gaiety the thronged piazza glows,
Mountebanks, jugglers, boxers, puppet-shows:
Masked and disguised the ladies meet their sparks,
While Venus bails the mummers of St. Mark's.
There holy friars turn gallants, and there too
Nuns yield to all the frailties -- "Flesh is heir to."
There dear Ridottos constantly delight,
And sweet Harmonic Meetings every night!
Once in each year the Doge ascends his barge,
Fine as a London Mayor's, and thrice as large;
Throws a huge ring of gold into the sea,
And cries -- "Thus We, thy Sovereign, marry thee.
Oh may thou never, like many a mortal spouse,
Prove full of storms, and faitbless to thy vows!"
One word of politics -- and then Pve done --
The state of Venice Nobles rule alone.
Thrice happy Britain, where with equal band
Three well poised states unite to rule the land!
Thus in the theater, as well as state.
Three ranks must join to make us blessed and great.
King, Lords, and Commons, over the nation sit;
Pit, Box, and Gallery, rule the realms of wit.


