THE Grumbletonians: OR, THE DOGS without-Doors. A TALE.

Envy does Merit as its Shade pursue,
But, like the Shadow, proves the Substance true.
Pope. LONDON: Printed for J. PEELE, at Lock's- Head in Paternoster Row. 1727.
Price Six Pence.

THE Grumbletonians; OR, THE DOGS without-Doors.
A Wealthy Farmer in the West,
With Life's Enjoyments amply blessed,
A Man esteemed both far and near,
Who in his House kept special Beer;
Twelve Children eke around his Table,
All lusty, lively, brisk and able:
He carried wondrous well his Age,
His Wife was Housewifely and Sage;
They throve, and picked up Wealth apace,
And none at Church of them took Place.
Two Mastiff Dogs he kept, to guard
His House, his Poultry, and his Yard;
With Offal from the Meat he killed,
Their hungry Paunches well he filled:
All sleek they were, and in good Case,
And showed the Plenty of the Place.
But in the House they durst not enter,
My Dame her Crock'ry would not venture;
For she had Tea-Table, and China,
And held her Head as high as any:
Her House was kept too nice and neat
For Dogs to traipse with dirty Feet.
For many Years these Currs were quiet,
Nor grumbled at their Bounds or Diet,
Would bark at Beggar or at Stranger,
And make much Noise at little Danger;
But, to the Comers too and fro,
No Marks of Surliness they would show.
A Hound the Farmer had beside,
A Hound! His Hearts delight and Pride;
Peerless he was of all his Kind,
So fleet! he would outstrip the Wind,
The best that ever followed Game,
Frolic he was, and FLY his Name.
Carest and loved by every Soul,
He ranged the House without Control;
This made the angry Mastiffs jealous,
FLY should be raised above his Fellows:
Keep his Nose warm and lick the Plates,
While they stood shivering at the Gates.
They grudge each Bit that goes beside 'em,
And vow Revenge what ever betide 'em;
In short so wondrous fell they grew,
At Friend and Foe they fiercely flew.
These ugly Currs kept such a Rout,
That no one durst stir in or out;
To quiet them their Master tried,
But they his Threats and Him defied:
Their Fury would not be abated,
They barked the more, the more he rated;
And made such a confounded Din,
He thought 'twas best to let 'em in:
For why, their Noise disturbed the Head
Of my good Dame, now sick a-bed;
So, rather than her Head should ache,
He let 'em in for Quiet's sake.
But lest their Rage on him should fall,
He wisely raised his Plowmen all,
With Prong, and Fork, and Bill in Hand,
These furious Creatures to withstand;
But for this Caution was no need,
As by the Sequel you may read:
For soon as ever the Door was open,
They both into the Kitchen crope,
Wagging their Tails, all tame and mild,
As harmless Lamb, or sucking Child.
These Currs who were so fierce before,
Now crouch and wriggle on the Floor;
Fawn at the very Servants Feet,
And tremble lest they should be beat.
Next they traverse the Kitchen round,
To see what Prog is to be found;
Where, having fed to Hearts desire,
They stretched themselves before the Fire,
Content and snug they lay till broad day Light,
The House was still, my Dame slept well that Night.
EXPLANATION.

Our Fable has a Moral, and no doubt,
You all have Wit enough to find it out
. Shakespeare.
Now in the Press, and will speedily be published,

Cat-in-Pan: Or, an occasional Conflict between the Author of Terrae Filius,
and the Compiler of the Craftsman, in a Letter to N -- A --, Esquire a Friend of
both Parties.

FINIS.

