THE TRAGEDY OF Sir THOMAS OVERBURY.

(Price 1 s. 6 d.)

THE TRAGEDY OF Sir Thomas Overbury: As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL in
Drury Lane, BY HIS Majesty's Company of Comedians.

Written by RICHARD SAVAGE, Son of the Late Earl Rivers.

Obsequium Amicos, Veritas Odium, parit!
Terent. O faelix Hominum genus!
Si vestros Animos Amor,
Quo Coelum regitur, regat.
LONDON; Printed for SAMUEL CHAPMAN, at the Angel in Pallmall. M.DCC.XXIV.

TO HERBERT TRYST Esquire OF THE City of Hereford.
SIR,
I Have been told, it is a Custom to ask Permission for such kind of Addresses;
but, there is something so very mean in this Civility, to ask your Pardon for
neglecting it, were to deserve your Indignation.

If Merit ought to be preferred, to what the World calls Greatness; if, a Sense
of past Favors should be considered, before future Views; You, Sir, have the
justest Title to this Dedication from me, were the Play a Performance more
worthy Your Acceptance.

Had other Authors the Knowledge and Experience of your Virtues that I have, I
should find many Rivals, when I beg leave to subscribe myself,

SIR, Your Devoted, Humble Servant, Richard Savage.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Importunity of the Publisher being very pressing, I omit the Preface which
I intended, wherein I proposed (by way of Essay) a Discourse on TRAGEDY: The
Subject being too copious to treat of, in this short Time, I defer it, either
to publish it single, or to join it with some other Work.

But, my Gratitude prompts me to declare the Obligations I have to my Best and
Dearest Friend Mr. Aaron Hill, for his many judicious Corrections in this
Tragedy. On that worthy Gentleman (whose Mind is enriched with every noble
Science, and in whose Breast all the Virtues of Humanity are comprised) it will
be my Pride, to offer my Sentiments, in a more distinguishing Manner hereafter.

I think it my Duty also, to return Thanks to the Town, for their favorable
Reception of this Play; and for the Applause their Indulgence bestowed on the
Performance of the Young Actors: Particularly for my own Success, in a double
Capacity, as Actor, and Author; I shall ever publicly confess their
Generosity, as it will ever prove my secret Satisfaction.

Notwithstanding the Disadvantage this Play may have received, in the
Representation, I cannot omit acknowledging a Debt of Gratitude to Mr.
Theophilus Cibber, who was very careful in the Management of the Rehearsals,
and endeavored to instruct every one concerned in the Play; a Mechanism, which
my Inexperience, as an Actor, made me incapable of.

Though an Author knows the Meaning of his Scenes, he may be unacquainted with a
Theatrical Method, of setting 'em in the most advantageous Appearance. Example
enforces Precept: and therefore Mr. Cibber junior, took the noblest Method, to
improve others, by doing Justice to his own Character; and, though he labors
under the present Disadvantage of small Stature, I cannot help concurring with
the Opinion of many others, that, in Action, and Elocution, he is certainly a
Prodigy.

PROLOGUE,
Written by AARON HILL Esquire
Spoken by Mr. CIBBER Jun. NEW to the Stage -- By no past Praises fired,
Young, and unfam'd, and, but, by Hope, inspired:
Raise us to reach that Hope's ambitious Call,
Or, with soft Pity; break our threatened Fall.
Small, though our Merit be, your Minds are Great,
And undeserved Applause may Worth create.
Sweetness sits, smiling, where the Heart beats true,
And they praise most, to whom most Praise is due.
Low let me court ye, to befriend our Cause!
If Justice pleads not, generous Pity draws.
In a full World, our Author lives, Alone!
Unhappy -- and, of Consequence, unknown;
Yet, amidst Sorrow, he disdains Complaint:
Nor, languid, in the Race of Life, grows faint.
He swims, unyielding, against Fortune's Stream,
Nor, to his private Sufferings, stoops his Theme:
Adopts the Pains, which others undergo;
And, for your Pleasure, feels not his own Woe.
They should, themselves, be pleased, who love to please;
And he, who fears not Misery, merits Ease.
Oh! -- save unfriended Virtue from Distress --
It Is the Divine Prerogative -- to bless!
Sad, for the Tragic Scene, your Hearts prepare,
Where Love kills Friendship, and awakes Despair;
Where cherished Mischiefs tower above Control,
And warring Passions rend the tortured Soul!
Taught by the pictured Woes, which weep, tonight,
Let long-weigh'd Caution guide your Wishes right;
Slow, through your Eyes, give smiling Ruin Way;
Love, by That Pass, but enters to betray!
Beauty fades fast -- nor will its transient Grace
Sooth the sick Bosom, when the Thought takes Place.
But, when Twin Souls each other's Transport claim,
And pant, and burn, and twist their struggling Flame,
Safe, let 'em meet, by no false Fears oppressed;
Formed to be one, and, till rejoined, unblessed!
EPILOGUE,
Written by AARON HILL, Esquire
Spoken by Mrs. BRET, in the Character of Isabella. WELL! -- it is a shameful
Breach, in Honor's Laws,
To court the Credit, and betray the Cause!
But, faithful to my Sex, -- Pray, Ladies! hear me --
And, if the Poet murmurs, smile, and clear me.
He bids me say, Sir Tom was Just -- Brave -- Witty!
Troth! he was even too good for Woman's Pity --
I find, by Hist'ries of the Poor Soul's Life,
He wrote that frightful Poem, called -- The Wife.
There, with Cold Rules, he damps the Glow of Beauty:
And fetters freeborn Will, by sneaking Duty!
His Husbands are mere Tyrants -- (and no Wonder! --)
They Have Natural Right, he says, to keep us under.
Pleased -- or not pleased -- we must, it seems, lie quiet:
And rather starve to Death than mend our Diet!
Prompt, in Obedience, wait the Sovereign's Motion,
And do, or suffer, with resigned Devotion!
It Is a fine Lesson, truly! -- Blast Sir Thomas --
Or -- Keep the galling Yoke of Wedlock from us!
Could Wives but once such Passive Grace inherit,
Bless us! -- what Active Husbands would they merit!
This the fine Overbury! whose just Fate
You Have seen, to Night, dressed out, in Tragic State!
He make a Hero! -- He attract Compassion!
Heaven keep these witty Husbands out of Fashion!
Had he been mine, I Would paid him for his Poem:
And made him feel, what Thanks we Women owe him!
Though Lovers please -- and mine is a stark New one,
My feigned Sir Thomas suffers, for the True one:
Blessed be the Dose, by which our Match miscarried;
Heavens! -- how I Would hated him, had we been married!
As to my Errand, -- Ever your Smiles I pray,
Thus, make him mend the Moral of his Play:
Trust not repenting Somerset's Opinion,
Nor strive to shake our Sex's fixed Dominion.
Woman does, even in yielding, Conquest gain,
And Man, however contending, toils in vain!
Learn, ye lost Things! for Disobedience, hated,
To what sure Sufferings rash Men's Lives are fated!
Wisely, be ruled: -- move on, the Way we draw ye --
And let due Sense of Power superior awe ye!
Else, will your Every Woe be still kept waking,
And your proud Hearts, waste half an Age in breaking:
Care shall corrode your Thoughts -- Despair invade ye!
Dangers rise round! -- And Horns want Power to shade ye!
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Earl of Northampton, Mr. Bridgwater. Earl of Somerset, Mr. Cibber, Jun. Sir
Thomas Overbury, Mr. Savage, the Author. Sir Gervas Elloways, Mr. Keith.
WOMEN.
Lady Frances Howard Niece to the Earl of Northampton, formerly Wife of the
Earl of Essex, divorced from him, and afterward married to the Earl of
Somerset, Mrs. Campbell. Isabella, An Orphan, under the Guardianship of the
Earl of Somerset, in Love with Sir Thomas Overbury, Mrs. Bret. Cleora,
Confident to the Countess of Somerset, secretly a Friend to Isabella, Mrs.
Davison.
Officer, Guards, and Attendants.
SCENE LONDON. The Reader is desired to correct the following Errors.
PAGE 3. lin. 23. for short, r. soft, P. 8. l. 27. for Shade, r. Stalk. P. 9.
l. 9. for Sky, r. Sun. P. 12. l. 14. for Lightning, r. Lightnings. P. 13. l.
12. for part, r. pant. P. 15. l 24. for the smiling, r. her smoking. P. 16. l.
27. for Men, r. They. The last three Lines of that Speech should be omitted,
being printed before in the first Scene. P. 24. l. 16. for Followers, r.
Follower. Ibid. l. 17. for haunt, r. trace. P. 41. l. 8. after me, add to.

THE TRAGEDY OF Sir THOMAS OVERBURY.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Earl of Northampton and Sir J. Elloways, Nor. HOW cheerfully has this Day's
Light broke forth!
The new-risen Sun, dressed rich in Orient Beams,
Beholds, with Triumph, the late Wife of Essex
Transplant her Beauties, from his barren Shade,
To flourish by the Heat of Love and Somerset.

Ell. Never shall I forget the tempting Bride!
Such dazzling Luster sparkled from her Eyes,
That the proud Gems she wore shone dim beneath 'em;
Inviting Warmth glowed lovely on her Cheeks,
And from her Tongue flowed such melodious Sounds,
That listening Rage grew gentle as her Accents,
And Age was Youth again by looking on her.

Nor. Yet, though her Features are as soft as Air,
Strong Passions urge her Mind to manly Daring!
Worked up by Nature with unusual Strength,
Vengeance, Ambition, and the Warmth of Greatness
Swell in her Soul, and lift her above Woman.

Ell. That Overbury who opposed this Marriage,
Will frown on its Conclusion -- He Is your Enemy!
When corresponding with the Court of Rome,
'Twas he who intercepted dangerous Letters.

Nor. He did, nor think that I forget he did it:
My Genius, baleful as a Comet's Blaze,
Hangs over his Head, and burns with red Revenge!
Nay, he is my Rival too! -- That fiery Thought
Glows in my Breast; and as I weigh my Wrongs,
I swell like Aetna, when her sulfurous Rage
Bursts over the Earth, and rolls in Floods of Fire.

Ell. Your Isabella, Somerset's fair Charge,
Is sure an Abstract of divine Perfection!
While Overbury's Love, like a black Cloud,
Cuts off, and intercepts the glittering Prospect.

Nor. Oh! name it not -- It must not, shall not be!
Old as I am, I Will snatch the Pleasure from him;
And Love and Policy shall join to crush him.

Ell. You know her Charms are Somerset's Disposal.
Warm in the Luster of our late Queen's Graces,
It Is strange to mark the Power of Time to change us,
Her Father shone the Favorite of the Court;
But when his Day of Hope at length declined,
Drove by his Enemies, he fled to Scotland,
Pine'd there, and chilled with Sorrows, died an Exile.

Nor. It Is well -- But I have News more worth relating!
Wade the Lieutenant of the Tower's displaced.

Ell. May I remind your Lordship of a Promise?

Nor. Thou need'st not, Ell'ways, I so truly prize thee,
That were my Mind big with my Country's Fate,
With Plots, which, known, would blast my Life and Honor,
I should, I think, unfold 'em to thy Friendship --
Of that hereafter -- See the Bride approaches!
[Ex. Ell.
Enter the Countess of Somerset. Nor. Hail to those Charms that smile upon the
Morn,
And sweetly gild it, like a milder Sun!
May Joys, in Circles, dance away your Days!
And Length of Years sustain your Bridal Pleasures!
Fair Somerset! now happy too, and great!
Blessed with Perfection to the height of Thought!
The Worth that could deserve Beauty like yours,
Insures soft Bliss, and heaps long Life with Pleasure.

Count. Thus -- while a Lover, talked my Somerset,
His Words fell short like hovering Flakes of Snow,
And in cold Tremblings melted on my Bosom!
But now alas --.

Nor. You cannot, sure, suspect him.

Count. He has alarmed
A Pride that catches the first Spark, and kindles!
To be forsaken, is a Thought of Horror!
Oh! it would grate the Woman in my Soul,
To have my Pride subdued, and make me mad!
Though but last Night our Nuptials fixed him mine!
Starting this Morning from my slighted Arms,
Thought seemed to press his Mind! Sighs heaved his Bosom!
And, as repenting of his Wish possessed,
Full in the blushing Dawn, he rose and left me.

Nor. There is a Damp, I know, that clouds his Joys,
A Vapor which your Warmth might soon disperse.

Count. What points my Uncle at?

Nor. I Will speak it plainly --
Overbury! --
That restless Foe of ours -- your Husband's Friend!
This Morning is expected.

Count. Overbury!
Then aid me, Indignation -- Rage -- and Vengeance!

Nor. Wisely you call on Rage for its Assistance,
Justice would be too slow for your Revenge,
And Conscience bids us give it up for ever!
But what is Conscience? -- a thin empty Name,
That terrifies, like Ghosts, by Fancy raised.
Even the most Brave use Stratagems in War,
And what are Plots against a private Foe,
But Self-Defence! -- the first great Rule of Nature!

Count. My Lord, I see to what your Counsel leads me!
I am a Woman! nay, a Woman wronged!
And when our Sex, from Injuries take Fire,
Our Softness turns to Fury! -- And our Thoughts
Breathe Vengeance and Destruction.

Nor. Spoke like yourself!

Count. Oh! I Am transported with inspiring Heat!
You know I never loved the Earl of Somerset,
'Twas Interest, 'twas Ambition won me to him;
And there is one Thought, I own, has racked my Peace,
The only one I ever concealed from you.

Nor. Instruct me -- It may serve us as a Plan,
From which I Will raise a Pile of towering Mischief,
Shall nod with watchful Horror over his Head,
Till, tumbling, it shall crush him into Ruin.

Count. Know then, with shame I speak it, I have loved him!

Nor. Loved whom? -- not Overbury?

Count. Yes! loved him more than I detest him now!
Each Thought, Look, Gesture has confessed the Folly!
Nay, I have wrote -- Oh Heaven! I know not what!
Reason was fled! -- and every Thought was Madness!
And now he may betray me!

Nor. May! he will --
These Letters must be artfully won from him:
Succeeding, we stir Somerset against him;
Revenge, with Transport then, would sweeten all,
The Rage of slighted Love -- urge that discreetly,
I know the Temper of your Lord -- 'twill fire him --
Touch but that Point, and Jealousy pleads for you --
But mark! he comes, and seems amused and pensive,
It Is fit we part -- anon we'll fix our Scheme.
[Exit Count.
Enter Earl of Somerset. Some. A kind good morrow to my honored Uncle!
Now Fortune seems to smile in earnest on me;
This last Night's Blessing crowned my warmest Wish,
And kindling Fancy from the Thought takes Fire!
Oh! my good Lord! Language gives way beneath it,
The Painter's Colors, and the Poet's Art
Could touch but a faint Image of my Joys.

Nor. And yet, if I mistook you not, at Entrance,
Your Looks were lowering, and your Bosom labored!
Through the gay Smile of your dissembled Joy,
I saw the obscuring Shade which wrapped your Soul.

Some. Sure you mistook! -- I think I was all Rapture!
How I adore your Niece -- be witness, Heaven!
Witness ye soft Desires! that swell my Veins,
And beat but to the Music of her Love --
Dearly I love her! to Distraction love her!
Nor Words can speak -- nor Thought can feel my Passion!
But -- Oh! Northampton!

Nor. Speak.

Some. I have a Friend
Dearer than Life! and, as my Honor, precious!
Our Wishes and our Interests are the same!
Friendship has joined us in so strict a Band,
As if one parcel'd Soul informed us both!
Yet he --

Nor. Let not his partial Hate of her perplex you!
A Wise becomes the truest, tenderest Friend,
The Balm of Comfort, and the Source of Joy!
Through every various Turn of Life the same.
For Men, they are not as they were of old --
Often their Professions are the Arts of Interest!
You Will find the Friendship of the World is Show,
Mere outward Show! It Is like the Harlot's Tears,
The Statesman's Promise, or false Patriot's Zeal,
Full of fair Seeming, but Delusion all.

Some. Not so -- then might I think you not my Friend!
Shall I, because I live in faithless Times,
Distrust a virtuous Man, or should I slight
A faithful Fair-One, 'cause her Sex are false?
If these are Maxims, Ties can bind no more!
All that is humane is for ever lost,
And Brutes are even as we are.

Nor. Come, my Lord!
This Overbury! he is the Thorn that gauls you!
Trust me, I know him well -- He has a Soul
Too harshly formed for such endearing Friendship.

Some. Greatly you wrong him! I have found him tender
As first-made Mothers to their erring Infants,
Firm to his Prince, and faithful to his Country;
A braver Subject England never boasted,
Nor Man a nobler Friend than Overbury.

Nor. Can he be justly called your noblest Friend,
Yet sacrifice your Bliss to private Malice?
Let not a Show of Friendship make you wretched,
Nor break the Bands which Heaven and Love have made.

Some. Know you, my Lord, so little then of Somerset,
That you can wrong him with so poor a Thought?
My Wife! to tell you but how much I love her!
'Twou'd, like Eternity, admit no End.

Nor. I Have done -- your safe Discretion be your Guide.
[Exit.
Some. A Wife! a Friend! Oh! they include all Joys!
And Love and Friendship are so near akin,
They should, like Poetry and Music, join!
Each formed to grace the other -- Why, then, in me,
Why, in my Breast, should Friendship jar with Love?

Enter Sir Thomas Overbury. Some. Fly to my Arms -- Welcome as Ease to Pain,
As Health to Nature, or Relief to Want!

Over. O Somerset! engraft me on thy Bosom!
Each Day of Absence seemed a lingering Age!
But I have hasted even to outstrip Time!
Left the dull Hours behind me as I flew,
And reached the Goal of all my Wishes here.

Some. Friends, who thus meet, possess so soft a Bliss,
That none, but those, who taste, can guess our Joy.

Over. May ours live to the last Verge of Being!
Nay, even in Death! for then, if Thought remains,
Should mine but meet a Soul in Worlds to come,
Whose generous Flame sublimed it from the rest,
I should be apt to call it -- Somerset!
But tell me -- for my Mind has dwelt upon thee,
Has thy fond Heart regained its Liberty?
Does the late Essex yet appear herself?
Or art thou still bewitched with her Enchantment?

Some. Alas! thou know not what a Lover feels.

Over. Have I a Soul for Friendship, not for Love?
There Is one who knows my Softness but too well!
Knows how her Beauty fires! her Virtue charms me! --
Essex, I see, still hangs her Witchcraft round thee.

Some. Would thou but view her with impartial Eyes!

Over. Why, I confess she is fair, and, when she talks,
Enchanting Softness melts upon her Tongue,
And flows in Seas of Mischief! -- She has Beauty,
Which spreads and blooms like a fresh-opening Flower!
But poisonous Adders lurk beneath its Shade;
And from such Briars shoots this lovely Rose,
It wounds the Touch which it invites to crop it.

Some. But, let me beg thee, if thou love thy Somerset,
If Friendship makes my Peace of Mind thy Care,
No more to shock me on this tender Point

Over. 'Twere Flattery all, not Friendship to comply!
The Wound can never be cured that shuns the probing!
Kind is the Hand that wipes the Dust from Virtue,
And Counsel is a Friend's peculiar Office.

Some. Trust me, my Friend, that Counsel comes too late.

Over. Hear me! -- for, as I love thee, I will speak!
What though her outward Charms attract the Eye,
Virtue, the Gem within, is long since faded!
Her Fame, like Flesh, that blackens in the Sky,
Is blown and bloated by the Breath of Thousands.
Now, as a Man, weigh well ever you resolve,
For when a Woman's Reputation's gone,
All that repenting Virtue can inspire,
Can never fix it in its State again.

Some. Cruel Report, I know, has wronged her Worth!
Envy still feeds upon the fairest Fruit,
And spreads its Poison on the Wings of Virtue;
It blinds even Overbury to accuse her.

Over. My Lord, my Lord, I am no Stranger to her!
Her Trial with her late wronged Husband Essex!
Her loose Pretensions for that wished Divorce!
I know it all! -- and, by my Soul, I think,
Dear as I love thee, could thou stoop so low
As to receive that Wanton to thy Arms,
'T would shake my Friendship so -- I could not scorn thee --
But ever I Would see thy Shame -- I Would range the World,
And leave thee to the Ruin you are so fond of!
Should thou! alas! -- what mean those starting Tears?
Big Drops of Sweat -- dead Paleness -- trembling Limbs!
Signs of some strong Confusion!

Some. O my Friend!
I must not -- cannot hide a Thought from thee!
She, from whose Charms your Friendship would dissuade me,
Is now my Wife.

Over. Your Wife!

Some. My much loved Wife.

Over. Oh! what are Men who love! -- My Lord, I Have done!
One Sigh to Friendship only -- and no more!
All those convulsive Starts that shock thy Frame,
Were the prophetic Warners of my Fall.

Some. Said thou! thy Fall! fall first a thousand Somersets.

Over. That I still love thee -- witness this Embrace!
Witness these Tears! -- but from this fatal Hour,
Joined, as you are, to her -- we part for ever.

Some. O stop -- repent -- recall those hasty Words!
What! part for ever!

Over. For ever our Alliance, not our Love.

Some. I fear I have no Friend -- but Overbury.

Over. You have a Wife, and Friendship is her Office!
It stings my Soul to see thee thus betrayed,
And my foreboding Heart even bleeds with Pity!
All that is left me now is to avoid thee,
And not to see, what, but to hear, will kill me.
Farewell, my Lord -- may ceaseless Blessings wait you.
[Exit.
Somerset alone. Some. Sorrow, eternal Sorrow claims me now!
All happy Fortune flies for ever from me!
Whate'er's worth wishing for on Earth, I Have lost,
Life is a Dream, disturbed by constant Cares,
And he, who is not loved, finds Death a Blessing.
Friendship's dear Ties for generous Souls were made,
When they relax, black Woes our Peace invade!
Friendship from every Ill can Life defend,
Our Guardian Angel's but a faithful Friend.
[Exit.
ACT II. SCENE I. continues.
Isabella, Cleora. Cleo. WHY, Isabella, are these Sighs of Sorrow,
While crouding Joys invite your blooming Youth?
Love rears a thousand little tender Fears,
Fate, with a Smile auspicious, bids you hope;
To fear is to distrust a Power Supreme,
The watchful Guard of Virtue in Distress.

Isa. Have I not cause to fear a thousand Ills?

Cleo. No! your loved Overbury comes to cheer you,
Then let weak Malice work up threatening Mischief,
Soon shall the Fairy Structure melt away:
Though Somerset's new Bride tries every Wile
That slighted Love (to Hatred turned) can practice,
Her Soul's chief Secrets she unfolds to me,
As I to you disclose 'em.

Isa. Kind Cleora!
Our Friendship grew and ripened with our Years!
When forced to lose thee at my Father's Death,
How mournful was our Parting? I blessed the Chance,
When I beheld thee, with my Guardian's Bride,
Companion of her Hours.

Cleo. Of me no more;
Now let your Overbury fill your Thoughts,
And every Accent swell with Sounds of Love.

Isa. Oh! my Cleora! he will never be mine,
A dreadful Dream last Night has warned my Soul:
Love had (methought) ordained our Nuptial Rites,
But sudden, while before the Priest we stood,
A lowering Cloud hung over the Temple's Roof,
And, with slow Horror, spread a fleecy Darkness.
From its black Center burst a rattling Shower,
The laboring Air groaned, big with rolling Thunder.
Red, through the gathered Gloom, flashed Lightning broke,
And the rent Veil-let in a dreadful Glare,
Which, with portentous Quiverings, gleam'd upon us!
The Altar tottered -- and the Lights grew dim --
A hollow Wind sighed cold -- and from their Graves
Pale Ghosts stalked shadowy, and scream'd hideous round me.
But Oh! -- around my Love fierce Brightness glittered,
A Fire, triumphant, curled about his Form,
And, winding upward, snatched him from my Sight.

Cleo. Yet he is not lost -- See! where he smiling comes!
Let me not stay to interrupt your Joys.
[Exit.
Enter Overbury. Over. O take me, take me, to thy Heavenly Bosom!
Here let me pour out all my hoarded Thoughts!
Here tower my Joys! my Cares be here dispersed!

Isa. I have a thousand tender things to say!
A thousand Doubts at once to be resolved!
Three tedious Months have heavily rolled on,
And not one Thought, perhaps, has chid thy Stay:
But while thy Voice so sweetly strikes my Ear,
My Joys revive, and melt away my Sadness.

Over. Let my Soul bless the Music of those Words!
My Heart breaks rapturous at the softning Sound!
I feast my famished Eyes upon thy Smiles!
I touch thee -- and am lost in Ecstasy!
A Tide of thrilling Joy flows through my Veins,
I part with Pleasure, and I burn with Love.

Isa. I cannot, if I would, disguise my Thoughts,
Tho it is, perhaps a Fault to look thus kindly:
But, Oh! beware! -- for thou have dangerous Foes!
Beware Northampton, who pretends to love me!
Beware the Woman who deludes thy Friend!
Watchful I strive to counterplot their Mischief,
And guard thy Virtue from impending Danger!

Over. Oh! thou rich Source of everlasting Pleasure!
Virtues rise mixed, and sparkle in thy Soul:
One glittering Charm pursues another's Shine,
As, while I cut those Seas which brought me near thee,
Sweet Sun-reflecting Waves rolled glassy on;
And this no sooner kissed the Shore, and died,
But a new Follower 'rose, and swelled as lovely.

Enter Northampton. Nor. Why start you, Madam? -- at a Lover's Presence,
Unveil your clouded Beauty -- since, this Morning,
A smiling Sun looks gay on our Friend's Nuptials.

Isa. My Lord, I want the Courtier.

Nor. Not the Woman!
I see a too successful Rival near you --
Sir, I should speak you welcome -- You are happy --
But, Madam, since your Charms may be neglected,
For Boys, unskilled, find Gems, whose Worth they know not!
When such your Fortune proves, think of Northampton,
And smile, tho late, on one who lives to love you.

Over. My Lord, this Injury but provokes my Scorn,
The next may move my Anger.

Nor. Am I threatened?
A way -- thou buzzing Insect of the Court!

Over. Reproaches are too mean for brave Men's Anger,
Or I could sting thy Arrogance with talking!
Be wise! nor urge my Sword against thy Meanness,
Worn for a nobler Quarrel.

Nor. Sir, it is well!
When we meet next, what now remains to say,
May be debated.

Over. At your speediest Leisure.
[Leads off Isab.
Northampton solus. Nor. Well, Overbury! -- thou do right to spurn me!
If Plots have Power, if Oaths have force to crush thee,
If there is a Magic Spell beneath the Moon,
Or Poison can be drawn from baneful Plants,
Then Horror, from my Fury, light upon thee!

Enter Countess of Somerset. Count. My Lord, I know not if I Am yet betrayed!
My Foe shot by me with a gloomy Brow,
Nor bowed his Head in passing.

Nor. Saw you your Lord?

Count. I did; and strangely moved!
The usual Sweetness of his Nature's lost,
With folded Arms he traverses the Room,
Now red! -- now pale! big on his watery Eyes
Prompt Tears stand trembling -- speak to him, and he sighs!
Or shakes his Head -- and groans an hollow Answer!
Then, on a sudden, starts! -- and flies Observance!

Nor. Now is the Time to fire him to our Purpose!
Their Friendship broke, I have a further Plot --
Ever Night this Overbury sees the Tower.

Count. Woolsey nor Burleigh ever projected better.

Nor. Haste we to execute Resolves of Weight.
An active Fire should quicken vast Conceptions!
For, when Delay's cold Influence chills our Schemes,
Some adverse Fate comes, like a furious Blast,
And kills 'em ever they ripen into Action.

Count. O! I can match thee with an equal Flame,
Not even the Soldier's Fury, raised in War!
The Rage of Tyrants, when Defiance stings 'em!
The Pride of Priests, so bloody when in Power!
Are half so dreadful as a Woman's Vengeance.

Nor. It Is a warm Thought, and fires the mounting Soul!
Revenge dares strike at every thing --
Rivers of Blood mark out the smiling Way!
And Kingdoms flame to give her Triumphs Luster!
Welcome, dread Vengeance! as I weigh my Wrongs,
I swell like Aetna, when her sulfurous Rage
Bursts over the Earth, and rolls in Floods of Fire.

Count. Let the Priest-ridden Vulgar worship Virtue!
Thou virtuous Overbury, sleep, and dream!
Dream of Philosophy, and puzzling Honor!
Of heavenly Visions, and immortal Shadows!
Till slow Revenge leaps suddenly upon thee,
Then start! -- behold who strikes! and so expire!

Nor. Soft! the Earl comes! -- be on the nicest Guard!
Prove thy Success but vast as are thy Wishes,
Thy Name shall swell on Fame's immortal Voice,
A Wonder among Women --
[Ex.
Count. He comes! -- now aid me, all my Sex's Falsehood!

Enter Somerset musing. Some. Men say, our Thoughts distinguish us from Brutes!
Would I had never thought! -- I had then been happy!
Reflection rivets Woe upon the Wretched!
Thought teaches me to feel a Friend's lost Worth!
When we have Friends, to them we trust our Griefs,
Our Care lies lightened, and the Mind sleeps calm:
To me, that Comfort 's lost! -- I have no Friend!
Oh! I could pine away this wretched Life!
Lean, like a Willow, trembling over a Brook!
Sigh with the Winds! and murmur with the Stream!

Count. His Heart seems pressed with Care. [Aside.] My gentle Lord,
Why leave you thus the Gaiety of Friends?
And why has grinding Grief usurped your Soul?

Some. I found myself disordered, and I left you --
Often am I thus -- Leave me, I Will soon return.

Count. Oh! my dear Lord, I am not soon deceived,
Those care-bent Brows suit not a Bridegroom's Face!
Are folded Arms the Gestures of Delight?
Or these sad Groans the Voice of inward Joy?
No, no -- consider, I am now your Wife!
It Is mine to ease your Cares, and bring you Comfort!
If you have Sorrows, I must claim my Part;
I sink not soon beneath a Weight of Woe --
If you deny me this, you love me not.

Some. Not love thee! say thou? Oh! thou Soul of Somerset,
Could those bright Eyes be turned into my Breast,
There would you see how your Suspicion wrongs me!
Let me look nigh! -- let me gaze here with Wonder!
Where Is Friendship now? Why, Reason yields to Beauty!
What though the Crimes, of which her Foes accuse her,
Glar'd, broad as Daylight, on my startled Soul,
Angels play smiling in her wanton Eyes,
And lend an Awe to Lightness -- Love reigns round her,
And when she speaks -- the softest, sweetest Music
Melts in her Voice, and charms away my Grief.

Count. Oh! with what Art you sooth my fainting Spirits!
Then I am still your dear, your much-loved Wife --
Why do I ask? those Eyes confess I am!
But tell me -- for you should impart your Cares!
Why are you thus?

Some. Oh!

Count. Nay, again you're cruel!
Still when I strive to search the Cause, your Voice
Sinks from the Point, and answers with a Groan.

Some. What Cause? -- I told thee I had been disordered --
Thy Fears are the wild Coinage of thy Fancy,
A subtle Self-Tormentor!

Count. It Is well, my Lord!
I guess to whom I owe my Loss of Power;
You have a Friend can tell you Tales of Honor,
And teach you how to triumph over a Wife,
Who has, indeed, had Faults -- but whose chief Crime
Is loving you, perhaps, with too much Fondness.

Some. What do thou mean? -- what Friend?

Count. Why Overbury!
I know your Tutor chides your faulty Conduct!
Go then, and make your Peace -- be meekly penitent,
Promise to err no more -- and he will forgive you.

Some. Hear me, sweet Tyrant! -- By my Life, I swear
You Are dear to me, as Crowns to the Ambitious!
Dear as these Eyes, which tremble on thy Charms,
Or, as this Heart, which aches with Joy and Anguish.

Count. Then I must tell you, Sir, your Friend's a Villain!

Some. Have a care!
Let not thy Rage transport thee to Detraction.

Count. Oh! were I but to speak his base Attempt!

Some. What base Attempt?

Count. No matter what it is!
I, sure, may be allowed some Secrets too!

Some. Nay, this is wrong! -- to brand him first with Villain!
Then, in a dusky Phrase, elude the Charge!
Truth seldom lies concealed in Mystery,
Clearly to Reason, she reveals her Light,
And Errors vanish, like a Mist, before her.

Count. Why -- what if he designed against my Honor?

Some. Your Honor! it is impossible! --

Count. Form all, that treacherous Guilt would dare to act,
And sum it up in this pretended Friend.

Some. I prithee do not make me mad! -- speak plainly!

Count. Knowing your Passion, he durst urge his own --
He told me you were false! -- designing! -- jealous! --
Tried every Art of Treachery to supplant you;
And when he found his Wiles were unsuccessful,
Attempted Force, and threatened me with Slander.

Some. Force! -- Slander! -- thou have warmed me! -- think once more!
He could not be so base!

Count. He was.

Some. Impossible! --
Ever yet my Fury mounts into a Blaze,
Ever I upbraid him with these black Designs,
I charge thee do not tax him wrongfully;
For thou may open such a Scene of Horror,
'Twill shake thee to behold it!
Dare you confirm it with an Oath?

Count. I will.

Some. Nay, but weigh well what you presume to swear!
Oaths are of dreadful Weight -- and, if they are false,
Draw down Damnation -- those who murder Fame,
Kill more than Life-Destroyers -- Think again!
For, at that Day, when each must stand arraigned,
Their Lots will fall in the severest Fires.

Count. By all my Hopes,
What I have said --

Some. No more -- I must believe you --
Believe you, said I? -- what must I believe?
If you prove false! -- if you traduce my Friend!
And wrong my Faith! may Sorrow blast thy Beauties!
May Conscience rise in all her dreadful Triumph!
Scare every Sense! and strike thee with Distraction!
Yet, sure you are true! those Eyes which shine so sweetly,
Can wear no dusky Stain of barbarous Falsehood! --
What then must Overbury be? Reflection
Sickens with Doubt, and dies in dark Confusion.

Count. My Lord --

Some. Thou need'st not speak -- I said I would believe thee;
Thou art my Life, the Fountain of my Joy!
Yet, let me think! -- Force! -- Slander! -- yes, it is so!
He Is false! he is false! -- Curse on all treacherous Friends!

Count. Nay, but I meant not, thus to fire your Anger!
Forget a Friend's first Falsehood.

Some. Never! never!
No -- tho this Day was vowed to Peace and Love,
Though Crowds of noble Guests have graced my Joys,
Nay, though our King should add his sacred Presence,
My Fury brooks no Stay -- my Fame! my Honor!
Both are concerned, and rouse my Soul to Vengeance.

Enter Northampton. Nor. Why are the Bride and Bridegroom thus retired?
Crowds of all Ranks press in to join your Pleasures!
And every Instrument of Music vies
To sound sweet Notes, and swell the Hours of Love.

Some. Alas, my Lord! even Harmony grows harsh!
Thought 's out of tune, Discord has struck my Ear,
And my Soul jars within me.

Nor. What Is the Cause?

Some. It Is a vile World, Northampton!
The Oaths of Friendship, like those made to Girls,
Are meant but to betray, and broke of course.

Nor. This I knew well before -- but who has wronged you?

Some. The darkest of all Villains -- a false Friend!
But as I am a Man, I will revenge it! --
Oh! what a Change has my poor Heart sustained!
But a few Moments since, this Man's loved Memory
Sat soft, as brooding Halcyons, on my Soul;
Now my roused Rage could hunt him in full Scent,
Till his last Dust were scattered in the Air,
And driven, like Chaff, before the angry Wind.

Nor. My Lord, this seems the Extravagance of Passion!
When Anger rushes, unrestrained, to Action,
Like a hot Steed, it stumbles in its way!
The Man of Thought wounds deepest, and strikes safely;
Premeditation makes his Vengeance sure,
And levels it directly to the Mark.

Some. I cannot, like a Courtier, kill with Smiles!
My Fury scorns to glow, concealed in Embers:
No; it shall blaze abroad with flaming Luster!
If I must fall, why I was born to die,
And fall as a Man should -- If I revenge me,
I right my injured Honor, as I ought.

Nor. My Lord, this Stream must have another Course:
This Overbury --

Some. Said thou Overbury?
Now, by my Soul, there is Magic in the Name,
And my charmed Rage grows still as Midnight Silence!
Why would thou speak it? -- Let me not dwell upon him!
Talk of false Friendship! of abandoned Honor!
Of Hate! Revenge! -- Distraction! --
But spare that Name -- at which my Fury melts,
Or Guilt will smile, like sweet-ey'd Innocence.

Count. My Lord, I wish you could surmount your Anger.
It Is nobler to forgive, than to revenge.

Some. Do thou plead too -- why -- he has wronged thy Fame!
Even to my Ear has wronged it! -- generous Charmer!

Nor. Your Frowns will blast what sprung but by your Smiles.

Some. I Will think a while -- your Counsel shall direct me.
Thou injured Friendship, my grieved Soul inspire
With awful Justice, and vindictive Fire!
Let my Revenge, to match the ungen'rous Wrong,
Be swift, as Eagles; and, as Lions, strong!
Dreadful, as Flames, by furious Whirlwinds driven,
Or, Thunder, bursting from offended Heaven.
[Exeunt.
ACT III.
Northampton and Countess of Somerset. Nor. THE King come here in private! --
then all is right,
And, in good time, we have stirred your Husband's Anger.

Count. The Courtiers are in Overbury's Interest.

Nor. No matter -- they will desert him in his Fall;
Like Persians they adore the Rising Sun,
But, when the Great Man's Glories shrink away,
Shrubs, which grew under him, shoot up ungrateful,
And brave him in Declension -- none assist him,
No kind Hand lifts him from engulphing Ruin,
But all join Strength to press him lower still --
You have not heard, perhaps, that Overbury
Courts Friendship with your Essex.

Count. How! with Essex!

Nor. What if he should betray your Letters to him?

Count. The Villain dares not --

Nor. If he does, you're lost --
What! know you of his Love to Isabella?

Count. Oh! name it not --
It cannot be -- I Have feared, but would not find it.

Nor. Would 'twere a Secret then -- but see this Packet,
These are his Letters to that Isabella!
Their Superscriptions wanting -- happy that!
To tell how I acquired 'em, would be tedious!
Let it suffice, these undirected Papers
Shall bear the Force of Proofs to Somerset,
Most fatal to his Friend. Sir Gervas Ell'ways,
Who bears a weighty Part in this Design,
Is coming toward us -- Please to leave him with me.
I am an Exile from the Royal Presence,
But you, the King expects, should bless his Eyes.
[Exit Countess of Somerset. That he sees Essex I am well informed,
And blew that Spark to raise her to a Flame.
Enter Sir G. Elloways. Let me congratulate my faithful Elloways!
The Tower-Lieutenancy will now be yours,
For Somerset has said it.

Ell. My kind Lord!

Nor. Nay, I have News
That more will please you, if you love Northampton!
The Man I hate will soon be in my Power!
All the proud Steps, by which he climbed to Greatness,
Sink from his Feet, and let him fall to Ruin.

Ell. Can Somerset forsake him?

Nor. He detests him --

Ell. Prodigious Change! -- this News indeed surprises!

Nor. To gain the Unbeliever to my Wishes,
I stirred his Temper with such cautious Art,
That, ever his Judgment could exert its Phlegm,
His Blood took Ferment from a Warmth of Passion:
Then, while his fiery Spirit flamed with Rage,
In its full Heat, I stamped it with Revenge.

Ell. The Depth of Wisdom flows, in all your Actions,
Like a strong Current, which, opposed by Piles,
Works gently through, and saps the Mound unseen,
Till, gathering Force, it pours resistless in,
And the Bank floats before it -- End you there?

Nor. No -- Overbury's Death must crown my Conduct!

Ell. There Is Danger there! --

Nor. Not so -- I Have weighed it well!
Th'assassinating Spanish Way's unsafe.,
Suspicion were its Followers -- and Suspicion
Would, like a Bloodhound, haunt our Steps too near!
What think you of the close Italian's Means?
Sure, silent Poison? -- Dare you be a Friend?

Ell. I dare the worst.

Nor. Know, then, that Somerset
Has noted Overbury as most intimate
With some, whose Zeal is marked against the State:
Now to inflame the King with Jealousy,
An Embassy to Russia will be offered him:
This Love and Policy forbid him taking,
And if he not accept it, all is confirmed;
It speaks him plainly loath to leave his Faction,
And so he comes committed to your Care.

Ell. The rest may be completed easily,
It Is but to change the doubted Officers,
And place such round him as will suit our Purpose.

Nor. No more -- be secret.

Enter Somerset. Some. Good Sir Gervas Elloways!
I greet you, gladly, with your new-giv'n Honor,
Which the King's Pleasure, thus, confirms, by me.
[Delivers a Commission.
Ell. My Lord, you bind me ever to your Service.

Some. Oh -- my Northampton!

Nor. Why that Sigh, my Lord?

Some. I have been thinking, when we lose a Friend,
It Is like an Eye plucked from its bleeding Orb.
No more the other holds the Joy of Sight,
But, ceaseless, weeps till it grows blind with Anguish --
So mourns my widowed Soul for Overbury!

Nor. Why do you name him still thus tenderly?
Methinks your Wrongs should rise against your Weakness,
And sting you with Reflection.

Some. Ay, mention those, and I relapse to Fury!
My restless Thoughts drive round like veering Winds,
Forgetful of their Center -- yet the Soul,
Like a soft Babe, inured to foolish Fondness,
Is hard to wean from wailing -- Oh! forgive me!
It Is the last Struggle of expiring Friendship!

Nor. Your Passions late were winged, like vengeful Whirlwinds,
Now they sink, sighing, to a Gale of Sorrow!
Shame on your Softness -- where is the Soul of Somerset?
Where Is that fierce Fire which used to kindle in you,
And sparkle, from your Eyes, in fierce Resentment?
What! all extinguished?

Some. No; I am still the same!
I Have the King's Orders for this Embassy,
And Overbury's sent for.

Nor. If he refuses,
We place him on the Pinnacle of Fate!
There shall big-gathering Winds sing round his Head,
And whirl him to Destruction -- Ell'ways be ready.
[Exit Elloways.
Some. But, my good Lord, this Treachery startles me,
It Is an unmanly Vengeance.

Nor. Fie, my Lord!

Some. Why, rather, not accuse him Face to Face?
And, with an open Anger, prove the Charge?

Nor. There may be Guilt, you would not wish to prove --
Look on these Letters! sent without Direction!
Artful, and safe, that Caution -- Know you the Hand? --
How soft are the Contents?

Some. Would I were blind!

Nor. Would not he wrong his King who wrongs his Friend!
Come, come, my Lord -- you must be won to Wisdom!
Though the soft Dove brood, gall-less, over your Breast,
Yet let the wary Serpent arm your Mind.

Some. O Heaven! he comes! -- he shocks me with his Presence!

Nor. See! -- Essex leaves him -- had he been your Friend,
He would not thus be seen. My Lord -- farewell.
[Exit.
Some. It Is Death to meet him! -- yet I cannot stir.

Enter Overbury. Over. My Lord, I come, obedient to your Summons,
The Force of Friendship oversways my Griefs,
And I must love you still.

Some. Dissembling Villain!
[Aside. I have a Message from the King, this Morning,
That will, I doubt, surprise you -- it is his Pleasure,
That you prepare yourself, without Delay,
For a short Embassy to Russia.

Over. The Warning's sudden!

Some. The Design is deep!
Perhaps too, not proposed by your best Friends.

Over. Now, my loved Lord, I Will try your Friendship's Faith!
When sickening Reason labors in the Mind,
Advice is the Soul's Cordial -- how shall I act?

Some. If Honesty's your Guide, you cannot stray.

Over. If to be blessed, and honest, were the same,
I should not be unhappy.

Some. He seems innocent.
[Aside. It Is a hard Struggle to dissemble thus!

Over. If your Looks wrong you not, you are disordered!

Some. Have you resolved? I wait for your Reply.

Over. So cool in your Advice! -- nay, now I read you!
Northampton and your Wife! -- Serpent and Woman!
Have turned you against your Friend!
And your plain Mind, unfashion'd for Deceit,
Knows not to veil its Frailty.

Some. Have a care --

Over. What! am I threatened too? -- ungrateful Somerset!
Have I advised you with a Brother's Tenderness,
Pined for your Peace, and made your Cares my own,
To be rewarded thus? -- here end our Friendship!
And, for my Answer, I desire a Pause.

Some. Then I must tell the King, you're not resolved?

Over. That as you please -- I Will serve him till I die,
Till the Reward of Loyalty o'ertakes me;
For Patriots still must fall for Statesmen's Safety,
And perish by the Country they preserve.

Some. It Is dangerous, thus, to tax the Royal Gratitude! --
I see you're rash, and would advise you better --
If, when you touched me in too weak a Part,
I shrunk -- 'twas from quick Sense of aching Pain.
I was to blame -- I knew not what I said! --
Excuse it as a Friend.

Over. Said you, you were to blame? -- if you're sincere,
My Fit of Rage, like Lightning on a Desert,
But flashes -- and is lost.

Some. Can he be false?
And yet I must not doubt --
[Aside.
Over. What! still uneasy?

Some. You know, I Am raised on Fortune's favorite Spoke!
If I grow giddy, I shall move away,
And roll, at once, to Ruin.

Over. Let me guard you --
And, to be near you, not accept this Embassy --
Form some fair Cause, and urge it as my Answer.

Some. I Will to the King this Instant, and attempt it.
[Exit.
Over. This Message, from the King, bears some Design,
But I Am more touched with Somerset's Disorder!
Let me still mark him -- As he passes on,
He starts! -- stops short! -- and ponders in suspense! --
Now he proceeds! -- all this should bode some Mischief!

Enter Countess of Somerset. Count. Now, now, support me, Pride, or I am lost!

Over. Ha! she here!

Count. Why start you, calm, insulting Man?
Is Love a Crime too great to be forgiven?
But thy cold Soul admits no Warmth of Passion:
I, like the Sun, darted too fierce a Blaze,
Yet, thy chill Wishes
Dawned some sick Hope, when Isabella's Eyes,
Like a pale Moon, gleam'd her faint Beams upon thee.

Over. How! knows she that? [Aside.] When Honor lights up Love,
The illumined Soul burns lambent with a Flame,
Pure as the hallowed Altars -- such my Hope!
Such were the Wishes, moved by Isabella.

Count. How I disdain thee! -- yes, I scorn thee! -- hate thee!
Thou, who could stoop to expose a Woman's Weakness,
To taint her Fame, and blast her to the World! --
All my fierce Passions rise with that Reflection,
Inward they rage -- a winding Train takes fire,
The flashy Blaze runs swift through every Vein,
And my Brain splits with Agony.

Over. You wrong me, Madam -- I, with humblest Gratitude,
Thanked, and concealed your Passion -- If your Fame
Is tainted -- your Divorce has caused it -- Modesty
Must guard a Woman's Seemings --
Oh! that my Words, like the Sun's powerful Rays,
Were with Attraction armed -- till, from your Breast,
This Flood of Frailty rose, exhaled in Sighs,
Or flowed away in Streams of soft Repentance.

Count. Upbraider!

Over. I not upbraid your Love, but your wild Passions,
Which would, like envious Shades, eclipse those Beauties,
That else, with Justice, sure, must charm Mankind!
But, Madam, think -- there is not a homely Peasant,
If graced with Innocence, tho nursed in Toil,
But boasts more Glory than a tainted Grandeur.

Count. Preaching Statue!
Where are my Letters? -- thou detain'st 'em poorly,
With Aim, to awe my Anger.

Over. Ever you asked 'em,
Moved by a conscious Hope, to ease your Fears,
Honor induced me, thus to give 'em up.
Now, they are yours again -- But their Effect
Will still live in me, and whenever your Image
Enriches my Remembrance -- the humblest Gratitude
Will teach my Heart new Tenderness.
[Gives Letters.
Count. This generous Act has wakened Love again,
And Pity pleads against me -- What shall I do?
If I continue here, and he thus charms me,
My Scheme, at once, is Air -- Like jarring Elements
My Passions war -- and Thought opposing Thought,
Shakes my whole Frame, 'till I am mad with doubting.

Over. Why are you thus disturbed?

Count. Can I so ill reward his generous Heart,
As to apply these Letters to his Ruin,
Which might have ruined me, had he withheld 'em?
And yet I must -- Fate's slippery Ice has caught me,
And, if I not slide on, I sink for ever.
Let me not stay -- O Wretch! Death hovers over thee!
He grasps a Dart, and, in pale Fury, shakes it
High over thy Head! -- Now, now it falls, and strikes thee!
I cannot bear to see what I have caused.
[Ex. in Confusion.
Over. Or I Am ensnared -- or Madness seized the Countess.
Enter Isabella. My Isabella!

Isa. Oh! let us join as Friends, who meet in Sorrow,
To weep! -- and sigh! -- and mingle mutual Woes!

Over. What would my Love's soft Fears divine of Ill,
That merits this sweet Sadness?

Isa. Oh! I am wild! and say I know not what! --
This will explain.

Enter Sir G. Elloways, and Guards. Ell. Sir Thomas Overbury,
I come to bring you an unwelcome Message;
It Is the King's Pleasure, that you stand confined,
Close in the Tower, a Prisoner to the State.

Over. What have I done, that I should be a Prisoner?

Ell. Has not the Earl of Somerset informed you?

Over. The Earl of Somerset! -- What do thou mean?
The Polar Star shall be no longer fixed,
But turn delusive to the Sailor's Eye,
Sooner than Somerset prove false to me --
May I not see my Friend?

Ell. I dare not grant it.

Over. No! -- that is hard, indeed!
I thought I could have met the worst, unmoved;
[Turns to Isabella. But to see thee, thus pressed with Griefs, not thine,
I cannot bear the Pangs which rend my Soul! --
Teach me some Art, but to assuage thy Sorrows,
And mine are Griefs to smile at.

Isa. The Voice of Music can compose Distraction;
Oh! then, let thine but sooth me into Comfort;
Say something soft and kind -- But whither fly you?
Perhaps to Death!

Over. What Is Death, but losing thee?
Life is a Trifle, where no Love enriches it;
And when the Guiltless die the Death of Traitors,
The Scaffold Steps, but, like the Patriarch's Ladder,
Form an Ascent to Heaven.

Isa. Oh! talk not thus!
There Is Madness in that Thought.

Over. Nay, do not weep!
Thy Grief attracts with such a melting Force,
That my lost Soul evaporates to Air,
Glides in each Breath, and mingles with thy Sighs --
Help, Manhood, or I Am lost! -- lead to the Tower.

Isa. That Place bodes Ruin -- there, the good Sixth Henry,
Clarence, and Royal Edward's Infants fell --
Such secret Death, perhaps, may prove thy Fate.

Over. Why do thou fright thyself at fancied Ills?

Isa. I have a thousand, thousand anxious Fears!
No chearing Hope dawns through the cloudy Woe,
It Is Darkness all -- What will not Malice dare?
But if I must --

Over. Oh! I could gaze for ever!
Thus, when high Seas swell foaming over the Coast,
The Wretch, who treads the dangerous Beach, is lost;
Plunged in his Fate, like me, he strives to rise,
And seeks the swallowed Land with wistful Eyes!
But, as his Arms extend to reach the Shore,
The Waves overwhelm him, and he is seen no more.
[Exeunt severally.
ACT IV.
SCENE The Tower. Northampton and Elloways meet. Nor. ELLW'AYS, be swift, for
Somerset 's unsettled!
The Countess too, who, lately, urged his Death,
Melts in a Fit of Softness, from her Purpose;
Besure the Stream of Ruin, then, rolls rapid,
To bear him down the Tide -- For, if it turns,
'Twill overwhelm us all.

Ell. Now, by my Soul,
The youthful Warrior, flushed with his first Hopes,
Burns not with half that Heat for Fame, and Conquest,
Which fires my Wishes to complete your Will.

Nor. Weston, and Franklin -- are they both resolved?

Ell. They are.

Nor. Have they the Wine the Countess has prepared?

Ell. They have,
And bring it, as a Present, from Earl Somerset.

Nor. Then he, who, late, by Royal Favor shone,
That Favor veiled, shall, straight, be dark again.
So Waters, at hot Noon, aspire in Steams,
And, thin'd by Heat, float, gay, aloft in Air!
But when the Sun's exhaling Power withdraws,
Chilled, by the Cold of Night, they fall in Dews,
And mix with humble Dust, like Overbury.

Ell. See, my good Lord, where Isabella comes,
To visit, in the Tower, her imprisoned Lover!

Nor. My faithful Ell'ways, watch my Rival well;
And, if your Ear catch a suspicious Sound,
Bring me immediate Notice.
Enter Isabella. So, Madam, your proud Hero falls his Plume!

Isa. Is that a Noble's Voice? The Brave, I thought,
Scorned all Advantage over a fallen Foe,
And raised him to be worthy their Revenge.

Nor. Since there is a Storm upon your angry Brow,
I am not armed to meet, I must retire.
[Exit.
Isa. So, Villains, when they gain the Ascent of Power,
Like Ravens, poised before the glorious Sun,
Spread a black Cloud, and darken all beneath.

Enter Overbury, followed by Ell'ways listening. Over. Are you thus kind? blessed
with your lovely Presence,
A Prison is a Paradise -- Sweet Mourner!
Matchless in Joy -- But in thy Grief all heavenly!
In thee, as in a Dew-drop on a Flower,
A thousand mingled Beauties, glittering, play,
Which rise, as the Eye turns, in still new Prospects,
And, in each different Light, refract new Luster.

Isa. Why will thou charm me thus? -- thy tuneful Voice
Floats soft, like Music, melting in the Winds!
A fluttering Rapture fills my trembling Breast,
Swells in each Vein, and pants with every Thought!
Yet do I view thee, with such Dangers round thee,
That even thy Sight is painful!

Over. Were not for thee, my Soul would wing her Flight,
To rest in Realms of Everlasting Bliss!

Isa. How know thou that? -- Weigh first, what is the Soul!
It Is not a Shade, that will dissolve in Air,
Nor Matter, which, by Time, can be consumed!
Oh! then, be cautious, for the Best are frail!
Venture not rashly, on an unknown Being --
Even the most perfect shun the Brink of Death,
And shudder at the Prospect of Futurity.

Over. What means my Soul?

Isa. A Thousand Deaths are hovering round thy Head!
If I have ever deserved thy Love -- Oh! think
Thy Guardian Angel now inspires my Tongue,
And warns thee, if thou can, to 'scape disguised.

Ell. I Have heard enough.
[Exit unseen.
Over. No; safe in Innocence, I Will dare their Malice.
To fly, would be, to leave my Fame unclear'd,
My Fame, much dearer to me than my Life!

Isa. Forgive me, if I err;
It Is but a Fault that springs from too much Love!
Should thou be lost -- Oh! think upon my Griefs,
See me distracted, without Hope of Comfort,
Profaning Heaven, rending the Air with Shrieks,
Bursting with Groans, and raving with Despair!

Over. Why was I born to make thee thus Unhappy?
But see, where one observes!
It Is dangerous, here, to talk -- Tonight farewell,
And if tomorrow blesses me again,
I shall have News to tell you.
[Exit.
Isa. 'Till then, farewell.

Enter Cleora in Haste. Cleo. My Friend, forgive me, if officious Zeal
Forced me to seek you here -- your Foe, the Countess --

Isa. What of the Countess?

Cleo. Flies about, disordered:
So stung with Guilt, no Place can give her Ease:
Wild 'twixt the Sallies of Remorse and Love,
She wrote these Lines, and trusted 'em with me;
I think it not a Treachery to betray 'em.

Isa. It Is pious Treachery that reveals a Mischief;
It Is Justice to yourself, and to the World.
[Looks on the Letter. To Overbury! -- How my Heart beats at it!

Cleo. She, there, repeats, and urges an old Flame,
Proffers him Freedom, would partake his Flight,
And owns the Wiles that have seduced her Lord.
Nay, more -- The Guards are, by her Agents, bribed,
And your Name's used to cover the Deceit,
That, should they fail, she might be still secure.

Isa. Here too, she urges him to feign some Illness,
That, so retired to Rest, and none left near him,
She, in the silent Darkness introduced,
May find him in his Chamber, and instruct him,
What Means may bring him Safety --
Fate sent this Clue to unravel all her Falsehood --
Flatter her artfully with his Compliance,
And, if she comes -- But see, the Earl of Somerset!
Night steals upon us fast -- Be sure you bring her.
[Exit Cleora.
Enter Somerset. Some. My Isabella! -- why that mournful Brow?
Why do those Eyes, that sparkled Gladness round 'em,
Lose their keen Luster now, and look so languid?

Isa. Should I forget, my Lord, that fatal Day,
When my dear Father's trembling Hand pressed yours,
His dying Eyes, wet with paternal Tears,
While agonizing Sweats bedewed his Face,
To you, my Lord, he raised his falt'ring Voice,
And gave me to your Care? Kind was the Thought,
And, pleased, he bade farewell -- and breathed his last.

Some. Have I not used thee with the tenderest Care,
And cheered thy Virtue with the Smiles of Fortune?

Isa. Oh! my good Lord, you have been a Father to me,
And it is for you these swelling Sighs rise sad,
And my Tears flow for Gratitude.

Some. What mean thou?

Isa. If Overbury wronged --

Some. No more of Overbury!
My Child, avoid him, as thou would thy Ruin.

Isa. You are misled --

Some. The Subject's harsh -- farewell.

Isa. You must not go -- thus, on my Knees, I beg you,
For your own sake, but hear me -- you'te betrayed.
Oh! think how dear this Man was to your Soul!
By Friendship joined, you comforted each other;
Joy crowned your Days, your Minds were then serene,
Your Thoughts had Harmony, and you were blessed.

Some. Indeed, I thought so.

Isa. Oh! reflect again!
Why have you cast him thus unkindly from you,
And opened your dear Breast to vile Northampton?

Some. Why do thou injure, thus, my Lord Northampton?

Isa. One, who would undermine an Orphan's Virtue,
Is, sure, unworthy of her Guardian's Friendship.

Some. And could Northampton that?

Isa. I blush to affirm it.
Yet more your Virtue wanders in the dark!
The Countess --

Some. Who? -- I charge thee, name not her!
Should I but hear a Word to taint my Wife,
'Twou'd urge me so, I might forget my Nature,
And use thee harshly.

Isa. It Is Death to undeceive you!
But, in the Cause of Virtue, I am armed
To meet all Dangers boldly -- be prepared,
For I must wound you with such piercing Accents,
That you poor Heart, I fear, will bleed with Anguish!

Some. Suspense is the worst Rack -- speak what thou know.

Isa. Read this -- 'twill speak all for me.
[Gives a Letter.
Some. It Is my Wife's Hand -- ha! to Sir Thomas Overbury!
A strange Direction that! where had it you?

Isa. From one, she trusted as her Messenger.

Some. Sure it is some Mist, which Hell has raised to blind me!
My Eyes belie her -- Let me again peruse it!

Isa. It Is as I thought.
[Aside.
Some. It Is all black Forgery! --
False Isabella!

Isa. Who is false, my Lord?

Some. Why thou art false -- I prithee, own thou art,
For should an Angel charge her with these Crimes,
I fear, I should misname that Angel, Fiend!

Isa. It Is but to wait her Presence, if you doubt it;
Night is already round us, and, ever long,
She comes, concealed, to find him -- Be you Witness,
And, then, who is false, discover --

Some. If thou art so, fly where I never may see thee!
But if you are true, then I Am a Wretch indeed!

Isa. My Lord, retire -- I think, she comes already.
[Exeunt.
Enter Countess of Somerset and Cleora. Count. O my Cleora, whither am I going?
But thou art faithful, nor wilt chide my Frailties!
I go t'attone my Overbury's Wrongs,
To meet my Love -- my Love! -- What Is then my Husband?
Hold Brain -- resist that rushing Rack of Thought --
The Night, now brooding over her gloomy Shades,
Owns not a Spectre, half so foul, as I am.
Oh State of Horror! Oh Despair! O Shame!

Cleo. Yet think --

Count. Fain would I -- but all Thought forsakes me!
My Flame revives! -- each Fit comes stronger on me!
Varying Convulsions torture every Nerve!
I love! I rage! -- hate -- fear -- and love again!
And burn, and die with a whole War of Passions!

Cleo. But, will you see him?

Count. See him? -- Oh! I must --
My Soul will have it so -- the Wrongs, I meant him,
Require Atonement, more than Love can give him!
Come -- guide me, my Cleora!
[Exeunt.
Enter Northampton and Elloways. Nor. Escaping, say thou?

Ell. What I then heard, was little.
But now a trusted Yeoman of the Guard
Betrayed their whole Design of present Flight;
But why have you, thus, led me through the Darkness?

Nor. The Darkness best befits my purposed Vengeance.

Ell. What means my Lord by Vengeance?

Nor. The Poison not yet given -- my Sword shall end him.
Secure the Passage -- bar the outward Doors,
While I resolve, within, where Weston left us.
[Exeunt.
Enter Somerset and the Countess, meeting in the Dark. Count. It Is wondrous
dark! and Night wears double Horror!
Each Step, methinks, I hear my Husband's Voice!
The Creep of distant Whispers damps my Soul!
Hark! how the Thunder rolls! the Wind, too, roars!
Who Is that? my Overbury?

Some. Yet, hold my Heart!
[Aside.
Count. You had my Letter, then?

Some. I had -- Oh Heaven!

Count. Reach me your Hand, and lead me your Chamber!
For I have much to say -- but stay -- Cleora
Waits me hard by -- I Will caution her a Moment,
And find you here again.
[Exit.
Some. Why do I live?
Let me turn wild! -- Or tear out my fond Heart,
That could be thus far wronged, and not discern it!
O thou false Woman! O my injured Friend!
Mad, rash, deluded Somerset!

Enter Northampton from a private Door in the Back Scene; a Light within. Nor.
Now, Overbury, die!
[Draws.
Some. Villain! -- Northampton!
[Draws.
Nor. Save me, some Angel, from this strange Illusion!

Some. View my Eyes well! -- do they not flash with Fury?
And tell thee, that it is Somerset thou look on?

Nor. Northampton was not born to look with Fear,
Though Hell blazed, angry, in the Eyes of Somerset.
My Honor's equal! -- my Descent more noble!
Come, we mistake each other -- as a Friend,
I Would moderate this Rage.

Some. Thou Sycophant!
Thou would, again, betray me to thy Friendship,
To ruin, with more Ease, my Isabella.

Nor. Ha!

Some. But she is Proof against thy base Assaults,
My Wife was easy, and Success there met thee,
And Overbury was to fall your Victim.

Nor. No more -- I can no longer brook this Railing;
Whatever I do, I always dare to answer!
Let this defend it all --
[Fight, Northampton disarmed.
Some. Why art thou living in the Power of Somerset?
I wish thee dead, but dare not kill thee basely;
Give me the Chance once more --
[Offers his Sword.
Nor. No; take my Life;
It Is, now, not worth defending.

Some. Live, and repent! -- and be as cursed as I am!
Go -- save me from the Pain thy Presence gives me!
Now, whither shall I wander?
[Exit Northampton. Going, meets the Countess entering. Death and Confusion!

Count. I heard, or I Am deceived, the Clash of Weapons,
Yet was the Passage barred -- yon Gleam of Light
Shows a drawn Sword bent hither.

Some. Tremble at it -- it is the Sword of Justice!

Count. Ha! let me not betray myself -- it is Somerset.
[Aside. What mean you, Sir? methinks, your Words sound angry --

Some. Traitress! false! foul! fickle -- damned -- lovely Traitress!
Know thou this Letter? -- thou ungrateful Woman!

Count. Now, I am lost, indeed!

Some. What can thy Guilt expect?

Count. You will not kill me.

Some. Not kill thee, say thou! yes, Deceiver! hear me!
Had thou as many Lives, as thou have Crimes,
My Fury would reach all -- wronged Love and Friendship,
With double Cry, demand thy Death in Vengeance.

Count. Oh! do but hear me!

Some. Not one Siren Word!

Count. Oh! by the endearing Softness of that Bosom,
Look but on her you loved so much! so lately!
See how she pants for Life! and begs for Mercy!
Let me die, slow, some lingering Death of Sorrow,
But send me not to the eternal Bar,
With all my Crimes about me!

Some. Do, Crocodile, weep on -- thy Tears become thee!
Think what I suffer! think how thou have wronged me!
Oh! I will stab thee! -- though my Heart Strings burst.

Count. Yet, but a Moment, hear me!

Some. No -- I will not;
Be dumb for ever -- for whenever you speak,
You bring a base Infection over my Anger,
And I, at once, grow sick with Pity -- Off!
Why cling'st thou to me?

Count. O spurn me! -- drag me --
Yet my poor Limbs shall grasp thee to the last,
And even my dying Groans plead soft for Pardon.

Some. Wherefore just Heaven, has Guilt such Power to charm?
Oh! -- rise, and take those mournful Eyes away!
Thy Beauty, and my Love combine to save thee!
And my Sword turns its Point against my Purpose.
I cannot see thee bleed! -- Oh! my torn Heart!
Ungrateful! go --
Fly from my Rage! -- far hence, on some lone Isle,
Safe in thy Frauds, and pleased with Ruin, smile;
But shun these shameful Eyes, which thus deplore
Thy Loss -- yet never must behold thee more.

ACT V.
Somerset solus. HOW have I wandered through a Maze of Errors,
And labored for Destruction! -- Of Mankind,
I had but one true Friend, and him, alone,
Of all Mankind have wronged -- Reproachful Thought!
Oh! Peace of Mind! thou Bosom Balm of Nature!
Thou, that can make the Labourer's Misery sweet,
And cause, even, Smiles, amidst the Pangs of Death,
Where shall I find thee?
Enter Isabella. Come not near me!
Let me not hear thee speak, lest I betray thee,
But fly me as a desperate, dangerous Villain.

Isa. I come, my Lord, to reconcile your Soul
To the sweet Joys of Peace --

Some. Talk not of Peace! -- it is gone! it is fled with Honor!
Honor once lost, can never be retrieved!
My Thoughts are Furies all! -- and turn upon me!
I feel their Whips! -- They lash me with Remorse!
My Brain grows hot! -- Hell glows in my mad Bosom!

Isa. Your Friend yet knows not, how you were misled.

Some. But there is a Sense of Shame that knows it all!
Though Mountains shadowed me, they could not hide it!
My red'ning Cheeks, and my moist Eyes would speak it!
Let me fly, far, as the vast Ocean rolls,
Rather than see the Friend I Have basely injured.

Isa. Fly but to Overbury -- tell him all!
And, once more met in the strict Band of Friendship,
United, rise the Pillars of your Country.

Some. How must he scorn me, when he knows my Treachery!
I cannot bear that Thought!

Isa. Yet the mild King --

Some. For thy poor Father's Sufferings in his Cause,
The Royal Ear will listen to thy Pleadings:
Oh! fly, and swiftly save my Friend from Ruin!

Isa. But, look, my Lord! -- See, where the Countess comes!

Some. What say thou? Ha! -- I cannot bear their Presence!
Oh! for a Whirlwind's Rage, to snatch her from me!
A Hell of Mischief kindles in her Eyes,
And Horrors blaze around her! -- Let Us avoid her!
[Exeunt.
Enter Northampton and Countess of Somerset. Nor. Now, haughty Somerset, I Am
well revenged!
My sullen Genius towers, with Scorn, above thee,
And smiles at Disappointment.

Count. My Lord Northampton,
Though strongly urged, I feel a Woman's Softness!
Revenge, Remorse, and Love divide my Soul,
Like three wild Streams, that rush against each other!

Nor. Yet, still, be resolute,
Summon your Reason to your Passion's Aid!
Think how you're treated by your angry Lord,
Menaced, cast off, and but Revenge can save you.

Count. Now, you have urged the Flint again to sparkle,
And flashed up all the latent Fire within me!
Die, Overbury! -- Somerset! -- die all!
Let the World burn to be my Funeral Pile,
And Nature groan as I do!

Enter Elloways. Nor. What News, Elloways?

Ell. The Deed is done!
So deadly is the Poison he has swallowed,
There Is not a Nerve but has received its Death:
Horror, and Madness shall infect his Brain,
Till every struggling Vital, torn with Pangs,
Must burst at once, and tortured Life forsake him.

Count. Mean thou all this of Overbury?

Ell. Of him -- We brought the Wine which you prepared,
As a sent Pledge of Friendship from your Lord;
Straight, with an eager Haste, he snatched the Cup! --
Give me the Draught, said he! -- then swelled the Brim,
And, through his Lips, he drained it to the last.
And now there is not a Health-restoring Herb,
Which the Sun smiles on, can expel the Infection.

Count. Was it the Wine I sent?

Ell. Madam, it was.

Count. Then shall I never know a Moment's Peace!
Villain, be cursed! -- What have we done, Northampton?

Nor. A Deed, which is not, now, to be recalled.

Count. And do thou think, Heaven will conceal this Murder?
No! -- we shall be pursued with hourly Vengeance!
Dreams will disclose it; or, if Night wants Eyes,
Lightning will flash, and point us out to Justice.

Nor. Will you be mad?

Coun. I will -- you have undone me!
Plunged me for ever in the Depth of Misery!
Hark! -- there is a tell-tale Wind groans hollow under us,
And the Earth heaves with Wonder!

Nor. Her Grief distracts her!

Coun. It Is false! Thy Tongue shall never more delude me!
Ha! -- Murder's shrieked already in my Ears!
Hark! Heaven rings with Murder! -- the red Clouds
Rain a whole Sea of smoking Blood upon us!
Oh! I am stained all over! -- Murder! -- Murder!
[Runs off.
Ell. My Lord, this Fit may prove a dangerous Frenzy.

Nor. Our Lives are set upon this single Cast.
Retire we to some safe Retreat a while,
Where we may watch the Event.
[Exit.
Ell. What shall I do?
Fly from my Post I cannot, -- that pleads guilty!
Poor Overbury comes!
Enter Sir Tho. Overbury. How fares my noble Prisoner?

Over. Why just as noble Prisoners ever fare,
Like Lambs, encompassed by devouring Wolves,
Or, harmless Birds, with Kites and Ravens round 'em.

Ell. I cannot hear him speak -- his Presence pains me.
[Exit.
Over. I know not why, but I am shocked of late!
My Dreams are dreadful -- Be it as it may:
While Virtue arms me, what have I to fear?
This cold Clay Cottage, is but the Soul's Prison,
And Death, at worst, is but a surly Friend,
Who conquers to give Liberty.
Enter Somerset. It Is well, my Lord, you can at last remember me,
But had my Somerset been thus confined,
I had not learnt to shun him.

Some. Oh, my Friend!
I Am not the Somerset, whom once you knew,
I Am altered much, of late.

Over. Ay, thou art married!

Some. That was the fatal Rock we both have split on!
You, like a skilful Mariner, discerned it --
But I, bewitched by the cursed Syren's Voice,
Sailed on, regardless, 'till we struck on Ruin.

Over. Why -- do thou repent it?

Some. Repent it, said you? --
Oh! I could rave! -- but, it is too late a Penitence,
For I have wronged thy Friendship, and undone thee!

Over. Nay, that, I still believe, thou could not do!

Some. Thou do not know, how base thy Friend has been! --
Oh! that fair Devil has ensnared my Soul,
And stained it over with Falsehood -- I, led by her,
Accused thee to the King.

Over. Forbid it, Heaven!
Lest I grow sick of Life -- and curse Mankind.

Some. Oh! -- it is too true! wrought by my faithless Wife,
And cursed Northampton -- I contrived thy Ruin!

Over. Why look thou, then, like Man, who art a Monster?

Some. Yet by the Memory of our dear Friendship!

Over. How dares thy Tonguge profane the Name of Friendship?
Haste to the King! -- clear up my sullied Fame,
Or, may thou always bear some Mark of Traitor,
That every one may know, despise, and shun thee.

Some. Hear me but speak --

Over. Why should thou grate my Ear?
The Bird of Death's shrill Scream -- the Hiss of Serpents,
Are Music to thy Voice! -- my sickening Soul
Faints at thy Presence -- and thy Stay would kill me!

Some. Yet I must stay -- 'till you forgive, or pity me.

Over. Name not Forgiveness -- nor expect my Pity.
Be gone! -- there is Treachery couched in this Delay!
Mean thou to bear more Mischief to the King?

Some. Rather than pierce me with such Words as these,
Strike through my Heart, that bleeds to have done you Wrong,
Here -- take my Sword -- kill me -- but, as I fall,
Reach me thy Hand -- say, but thou have forgiven me!
And I shall die in Peace.

Over. Take back thy Sword -- I would not use it basely,
Thou know, I would not -- go, for ever from me!
And when I hear of an ungrateful Wretch,
A fawning Slave, who smiles, while he betrays --
Then will I think of Somerset.

Some. Distraction!
Can thou? but, peace -- I have deserved it all!
Life's a Disease, which I want Strength to bear,
And wish for Death to cure me -- what was I born to?
Shame on the Guilt, that bids me bear these Scorns,
And not dare think 'em Injuries.

Over. (After a long Pause) -- Oh! Somerset!
[Both stand silent: Overbury observes the Posture of Somerset. Can all this
Grief be real?

Some. What shall I say?

Over. Had any other thus contrived my Ruin,
I could have borne it with a Manly Patience!
But from thy Hand! my Friend! my very Self! --
Such unexpected Wrongs have shook my Soul!
But -- I forgive thee all --

Some. Oh! Joy! Oh, Friend --
Forgive my Softness too! my Tears will flow,
While I rejoin thee, thus, to my glad Breast.

Over. I feel my Heart bound high with throbbing Transport!
And would speak more, but the slow-rising Words
Die in big, unborn Accents on my Tongue!
I feel, even now, a faintish Damp all over me,
And I am sick at Heart -- But here comes one,
Whose Heavenly Brightness, can disperse all Clouds!
My Life! my Isabella!

Enter Isabella, running into his Arms. Isa. Live -- live, my Overbury!
Scarce can I speak my Transport! -- but the King!
The gracious King --

Over. What of the King, my Love?

Isa. Has yielded to my Suit in thy Behalf,
And given thee Liberty!

Over. I thank thy Goodness!
And Blessings crowd about his Royal Head,
Who heard my Isabella's Prayer with Pity.
How my Soul swells with Ecstasy! -- my Friend!
My Isabella! -- Why do you not rejoice?
Rejoice in Love! in Friendship! Liberty!

Some. Live long thus blessed.

Over. Here, in soft Sighs, I Will pour my Pleasures forth --
Gaze! -- 'till I even grow giddy with Delight!
Now, Heaven, thou art too kind.

Isa. Oh happy Day!
So sweet a Calm, as my late Cares are hushed in,
Never yet succeeded such a threatening Tempest? --
But you, methinks, look pale!

Over. No -- say not so;
My Heart is but oppressed, and sick, with Transport! --
Another Start! -- that Rapture was so strong,
It shot quite through, and trembled to my Soul!
Another yet! -- nay, now I scarce support it --
My Spirits sink, exhausted with Delight,
And Nature reels beneath it.

Isa. Oh! help! he faints!

Some. Heaven! a cold Dew,
Like that of Death, o'erspreads his Icy Temples.
Help! who waits there?
[Enter Attendants.
Isa. My Love! my Overbury!
Return to Life -- it is Isabella calls!

Over. Where, where are now my Joys?
All fled at once -- Oh! Somerset! I Am poisoned!

Some. Good Heaven forbid!

Over. The Wine! -- the Wine you sent!

Some. Say, thou, I sent?
Alas! you are imposed on!

Over. Then 'twas thy Wife,
And she disguised it with thy powerful Name.

Some. Ten thousand Plagues overtake her for the Deed!
Oh! if she acted this unnatural Guilt,
May all the Woes of Vengeance be her Portion!
Haunt her, pale Ghosts! eternal Anguish grind her!
Lash her, ye Furies! Adders, twist around her!
And let Despair and endless Torment seize her!

Over. Ha! -- what a Shoot was there! -- my Blood boils in me!
Flames wind about my Breast -- my Brain burns red,
And my Eyes swim in a blue Sea of Sulphur!
Stand off! -- and let me breathe! -- what is that grim Form,
That stalks along! and creeps so pale upon me!
I know the meagre Phantom now! -- it is Death!
He Is gone! -- and now the Heavens all open to me!
A Flight of Angels swoop upon my Head,
And clap their Wings about me!

Some. What a Slave is Man, when Passion masters him?
My Want of Reason is the cursed Source
Of all their Miseries: But I Am trebly cursed!
I feel for him, for her, and for myself.
What Place in Hell is there reserved for me?
Sure that which holds the greatest Share of Pain!

Over. There Is Death again!
What unmoved! beamless! hollow! limy Eyes
The Bone-built Monster stares with! -- there he struck me!
It Is done! -- I mount! -- I rise above the Clouds!
My Brain grows giddy! -- now it is wondrous hot!
The Rays scorch strong -- the Stars spout streaming Fire!
I Will shade me in the Moon's dark Body! -- Hold!
The Sun's Reflection's there -- Oh! help! -- defend me!

Some. What can I do to ease thee?

Over. Who touched me? -- 'twas a cold, and deadly Hand!
It makes me shrink! -- save me! where am I now?
I Am chained in the chill Region of the North!
My Blood's all Frost! -- and, passing my hot Veins,
It hizzes in its Motion! -- The bleak Winds
Dip their broad Wings in Seas of melted Snow,
And sweep whole Winter over me! -- I shiver at it!
My Teeth are turned to Ice, and, as they chatter,
Break in their Striking -- Where Is Friendship now to warm me?

Some. My Friend! -- my Overbury!

Over. Oh, Somerset!
Where have I been? -- my Life is at a Period!
Poor Isabella! -- she is overwhelmed with Grief!
Let me conjure thee, by my dying Friendship,
To comfort all her Sorrows!

Some. Wherefore do I not rave? But Heaven is just!
To lose my Senses, is to lose my Pain.
Oh! I resign me to the impartial Hand
Of Justice, nor dare murmur at my Fate.

Over. Hark! the Wind roars! -- the Seas begin to swell!
The Billows roll! -- now! now they drive upon me!
Oh! save me, or I Am lost! -- what! must I perish!
Is there no Hold? -- not one kind, friendly, Plank!
Helpless indeed! -- thus, in the Gulf, I sink --
Never to rise again.
[Dies.
Isa. Hover awhile, dear Shade, and I Will overtake thee,
Oh! for a Dagger now! -- Death, give me Ease!
He comes! -- I feel him at my Heart already!
He brings me all I wish!

Some. Alas! she swoons!
Be quick, and bear her gently from the Body
But, be sure, guard her with the tenderest Care,
Lest her Distraction should commit Self-Violence.
[Led off. Now, dear, departed Friend -- 'twere just, that I,
The Wretch, whose Crimes have been the Cause of all,
Should, on these Clay-cold Lips, breathe out my last.

Enter Officer of the Guards. Off. My Lord, your Pardon, but you're here a
Prisoner:
Your Wife, has, in a Fit of raving Frenzy,
Confessed the Murder on Sir Thomas Overbury.
Sir Gervas Ell'ways, and the rest impeached,
Are seized, and say, the Wine was sent from you.

Some. Oh! the vile Traitress! -- guard her from my Sight,
But leave me here -- and let me, slow, expire
Close by the truest Friend, and best of Men!
Oh! -- would the World be warned by my Example!
Fly, ye fond Youth, the guilty Fair-One's Arms,
Nor judge their Excellence by outward Charms;
They, who, for faithless Love, true Friends betray,
Choose glittering Toys, and throw rich Pearls away.

FINIS.
Just Published,
A Wife to be Let. A Comedy. As it is acted at the Theater Royal, in
Drury Lane, by his Majesty's Servants. Written by Mrs. Eliza Haywood. Price 1
s. 6 d.
Sophonisba, or Hannibal's Overthrow. By Mr. Lee. Price 1 s. Siege of Damascus,
a Tragedy. By John Hughes Esquire deceased. Price 1 s. The Fair Circassian, with
some Occasional Poems. Price 1 s. The Country Wit, or Sir Mannerly Shallow, a
Comedy. By Mr. Crown. The Revenge, a Tragedy. By Mr. Young. The Spartan Dame, a
Tragedy. By Mr. Southern. Sir Walter Raleigh, a Tragedy. By Mr. Sewell. The
Pastoral Amors of Daphnis and Chloe, a Novel, with nine curious Cuts. Price 1
s. 6 d.
All printed for Samuel Chapman, at the Angel in Pall Mall.


