THE VARIOUS KINDS OF THE HEART OR RATHER STOMACH-PAIN, CONSIDERED BY PETER VON
SARN, M. D. at Northampton.

Nemo tam Divos habuit faventes,
Crastinum ut possit Sibi polliceri.
SENECA, Poeta, 242. NORTHAMPTON:

Printed by CLUER DICEY; and sold by J. Lacy, Stationer at Northampton; John
Gregory, at Leicester; Mess. Fletcher and Hodson, Cambridge; Mrs. E. Rogers and
W. Green, Bury St. Edmunds; W. Chase and Berry, Norwich; W. Eaton and P. Garr,
Yarmouth, etc.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
BEING not a Native of this Country See The Letter to the Impartial, Judicious,
Benovolent. and Candid Reader, concerning The Practice of Physic. Page 5.
[though I have for more than Thirteen Years past been in it] I might have
written the following Treatise with greater Propriety of Style in Latin; but
then, I apprehend, it would not have been so generally understood, and
therefore, I hope the Candid Reader will overlook any Impropriety in the
Language.

A PAIN of the HEART, or rather STOMACH, is a Disorder to which many of the
Human Race are liable; and as it springs from such a Variety of Causes, the
greatest Accuracy imaginable is required in the Composition of those Medicines
that are designed for its Cure.

THE VARIOUS KINDS OF THE HEART OR RATHER STOMACH-PAIN.
SECTION I.
A Pain in the Upper-Opening or Mouth of the Stomach, where the Oesophagus or
Gullet ends, etc. is generally called Heart-Pain, etc.

SECTION II.
THIS Disorder is easily known, but hard to remove, and consequently is none of
the least Evils incident to Human Bodies, being of the Nature of those Diseases
which affect both Mind and Body.

SECT. III.
THE immediate Cause of this PAIN, as it may arise from different Disorders in
the Stomach, cannot so easily be ascertained.

SECT. IV.
AS the Stomach is provided with a Variety of Sinews and Nerves, and so of
exquisite Sensation, a Pain here must greatly affect those Orifices situated
near the Pit of the Stomach; therefore, that the Patient may not be injured by
unskilful Treatment, I shall beg Leave to offer the following Observations,
drawn from a long Practice.

SECT. V.
WHEN after taking any Sort of Poison, a tormenting Pain follows, let it be
drawn off the Stomach as soon as possible by a gentle Emetic, drinking after
the Vomit a Quantity of fat Mutton-Broth.

SECT. VI.
IF the Stomach is overloaded, it may be proper, if Vomiting does not follow,
to provoke it, etc.

SECT. VII.
An accurate Distinction ought to be made, Whether this Pain comes only after
eating and drinking, or whether it was felt before; if the latter, all
Vomiting, either voluntary or by Emetics, is dangerous.

SECT. VIII.
IF a Person eats Things of a soft Digestion, and drinks emollient Liquors, and
yet afterward feels Pain, it is an Evidence that the Cause of that Pain is in
the Stomach, and therefore cannot be cured by an Emetic.

SECT. IX.
UPON the Whole, it is very difficult to find out the immediate Cause of this
Pain, whether it proceeds from taking something of a poisonous Kind, or from
Worms, or some Defect in the Stomach itself, or through acrimonious Particles
prevailing in the Parts thereabout, etc.

SECT. X.
IF a Pain in the Stomach is occasioned by Worms, or if it proceeds from a
Weakness of the Stomach itself, or arises from an acid Acrimony, Vomits cannot
free, but increase the Pain, and however exact and careful a Practitioner may
be, yet he will find it difficult to distinguish them from each other, and
without a proper Distinction, his Prescriptions will be not only ineffectual
but hurtful.

SECT. XI.
IF after too High-living, etc. a Person is troubled with corrupted sour
Risings, followed with an acute Pain, which ceases for a Time, when the sharp
corrupted Matter is discharged, then this Matter, the Cause of it, must first
be carried off by a Vomit, the Stomach strengthened by a Continuation of
corroborating Medicines, and, to prevent a Return, Things hard of Digestion or
overloading the Stomach, avoided.

SECT. XII.
BUT if the Pain is occasioned by an Inflammation, Erysipelas, Ulcerations,
etc. all Vomits and Medicines of a disturbing Nature, must by all means, be
omitted; because they not only augment the Pain, but most certainly prove
mortal, as too often happens by an unskilful Application.

IN the Cases abovementioned, there is a continual Pain in the Stomach,
whether it is empty or full, which increases after eating, etc and if it causes
the Person to vomit, it then becomes so excessive, that fainting away
instantaneously ensues.

HOW judicious and skilful then should the Physician be, to find out proper
Medicines for that Pain which the Patient then labors under?

SECT. XIII.
THOUGH this Pain may proceed from the above different Causes, yet it may
likewise arise from others; for Example: The unnatural Motion of the Stomach,
occasioned by a Fever IN the Year 1486 there was an Epidemic or Endemic
Sweating-Fever, first in England, afterward in other Kingdoms, etc.
terminating within 24 Hours either in Life or Death. The common Symptoms
(called Hydropyretos) of this Disorder were, Sudden Weakness, Anxiety,
Palpitation of the Heart, Headache, Swooning-away, a weak unequal Pulse,
profuse Sweating, also a Heart or Stomach-Pain.
as well as the Matter of the Fever itself, brought to the upper Orifice of it,
causes an intolerable Pain there, which Pain is heightened or diminished
according as the Fever increases or abates; and in regard to the Pain itself at
that Juncture, Vomits and hot Medicines (too often unskilfully given) are not
only ineffectual but prejudicial, augmenting instead of asswaging the Pain, by
causing violent Reachings. In this Case a few Drops of the Tinct. Thebaic, or
Sir. e Meconio mixed in the Febrifuge Mixtures are only serviceable.

SECT. XIV.
THIS Pain is brought also upon Persons of a Delicate and Weak Constitution, by
Fretting, Uneasiness, etc. attended with great Anxiety, Loss of Appetite and
Strength, Strainings to vomit, Difficulty of Breathing, Trembling, a Coldness
of the extreme Parts, Restlessness, etc. when the Stomach cannot then bear any
Kind of Meat or Drink, nor even a common Spoonful of soft Medicines, much less
the Calefacientia, or hot Kind, etc.

SECT. XV.
THIS Pain may likewise arise from a flatulent and windy Disorder in the
Stomach, and continue there for a Time, 'till expelled by the Carminatives
mixed with the Anodines, and though thus expelled, yet it may return after
eating, drinking, or sitting in the Draught of a Door, Window, etc. This Pain
is not dangerous though a Person be subject to it through the whole Course of his
Life.

SECT. XVI.
SHOULD the Rheumatism, which sometimes flies from one Part of the Body to
another, and sometimes takes its Seat in the muscular or membranous Parts of
it, fall upon the Stomach, it may, for a Time, produce a continual but not a
dangerous Pain, because, by proper Application it may be expelled thence to the
adjacent Extremes E. G. under the Breast Bone, Shoulder-Blades, Arms, Wrist,
etc.

SECT. XVII.
WHEN an Arthritic or gouty Pain changes its Seat from the Chinagra the Hands,
Gonagra the Knees, or Podagra the Feet, etc. to the Stomach, leaving then the
extreme Parts free from Pain, the Patient is in immediate Danger of Death,
unless the Pain can be removed back again from the Stomach to the Extremities
of the Body, therefore it is requisite in this Case, to have something to give
always ready at Hand.

SECT. XVIII.
BUT the most uncommon Pain is caused by Convulsions or Spasm, which
communicates its ill Effects through the whole Nervous System, and is discovered
by its well known Symptoms: The Cure must be directed according to the Disease;
Medicines given in small Quantities every Quarter of an Hour, 'till the Pain
ceases, and then proper Means used to prevent a Return.

SECT. XIX.
THUS have I treated the above Disorder in as concise a Manner as possible, as
it may arise from the various and different Causes here subjoined.

Different CAUSES of the HEART or STOMACH-PAIN.
Acrimonious Particles. 9 Convulsions 18 Delicate Constitutions 14 Drinking 7
Eating 7 Erysipelas 12 Fault of the Stomach itself 8 Fever 13 Flatulency 15
Gout 17 High-living 11 Inflammation 12 Overloading the Stomach 6 Poison 5
Rheumatism 16 Soft - digested Eatables 8 Spasm 18 Ulcerations 12 Weak
Constitution 14 Weakness of the Stomach 10 Wind 15 Worms 9, 10
SECT. XX.
I MIGHT have greatly enlarged on this Subject, and interspersed it with proper
Prescriptions, but that would have been incompatible with my present Design;
this, if found necessary, shall be done hereafter.

FINIS.

