page 144



PAMELA. A COMEDY.

As it is Performed Gratis, AT THE LATE THEATER IN Goodman's-Fields.

LONDON: Printed for H. HUBBARD, near the Royal Exchange. 1741 (Price Six pence)

To Her Royal Highness Princess AMELIA.
WHEN Addresses of this Sort are made to Persons of your Royal Highness's
elevated State, it is, I believe usual, previously to supplicate Leave for
their Reception -- But here I presume, it would have been as equally needless
for the author, to have implored your royal highness's name, for protectress in
the Cause of Virtue, as it would be for the Master of the Mint, to petition in
Form your royal Father, for Leave to stamp his Name on our coin to give
Sanction to its Currency.

The Inducements, Madam, to throw this Piece, therefore, under your royal
highness's protection, were solely from considering it as an act of duty, added
to the Pride of having the high honor to subscribe myself,

May it please Your Royal Highness, Your Highness's most obedient, Most devoted
humble Servant, The Author.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by a Gentleman.
AS in the airy Regions of Romance,
The adventrous Knight sets out with Shield and Lance,
Strait his disinterested Valor flies
To helpless Damsels, and to Beauty's Cries;
This only Motive rising in his Breast,
The Godlike Plea -- of Innocence distressed.
Thus dares our Author-Errant of Tonight,
In Virtue's Aid romantically fight;
Sacred to Her, the Champion Pen he draws,
Enough rewarded -- to support her Cause.
Tonight his honest Labor means to prove,
A low-born Virtue worth a great Man's Love;
An honest Pride, where conscious Honor glows;
An artless Innocence -- whence Truth still flows;
A Sense proceeding but from Nature's Light,
(For little Knowledge serves us to be right)
A Merit greatly poor, that far outshines
The Glare of Titles, or the Wealth of Mines.
Such steadfast Honesty should find Success
Over the abandoned Authors of Distress,
Over those who glory to betray a Maid,
Who welcome Guilt, and make Deceit a Trade.
Yet some there are less liable to blame,
Who only want Reflection to reclaim,
Who bend unthinking to the Syren's Voice,
The Reprobates of Custom, not of Choice;
Who deaf to Precept, plead Example still,
And think the Mode indemnifies the Ill.
To such our Author offers this Address,
Not certain, nor despairing of Success;
Amongst this Cast of Men he hopes to find
Some Converts -- for the Honor of Mankind;
On Minds like these his Morals may prevail,
And who escaped a Sermon, feel this Tale.
Dramatis Personae.
Men.
Belvile Mr. Giffard. Jack Smatter A Gentleman. Mr. Williams Mr. W. Giffard.
Longman Mr. Paget. Colebrand Mr. Blakes John Arnold Mr. Dunstall. Andrews Mr.
Peterson. Robin Mr. Crofts. Harry Mr. Julian. Isaac Mr. Vaughn. Benjamin Mr.
Clough. Arthur Mr. Naylor.
Women.
Pamela Mrs. Giffard. Lady Davers Mrs. Bambridge. Mrs. Jervis Mrs. Yates. Mrs.
Jewkes Mr. Yates. Jane Miss Hippisley. Cicely Miss Medina. Hannah Mrs.
Dunstall. Rachael Mrs. Vallois. Annice Mrs. Bishop.
PAMELA.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter ISAAC, HARRY, BENJAMIN, and ARTHUR. Isaac. MERCY on us! why this House
is going to be turned topsy-turvy, to be sure!


Harry. Why did not I tell thee some strange Combustion would happen from my
Dream?


Isaac. Nay, to be sure, Dreams, Dreams are great Prognosticators.


Harry Prognosticators! -- Ay, marry, be they; they never fair'd me yet.


Benj. Nor me -- for ye all know the very next Day after I dreamed I fell into
the Horse-pond, and Arthur here took me out half drowned, and brought me to the
Kitchen Fire, and, methought, being mortal weak, I fell out of the Chair, and
was scorched most fearfully; and to be sure the next Day -- ay -- the very next
Day -- was I taken with the Ague and Fever.


Arth. Why my Book of Dreams gives 'mazing Accounts of Robbers being taken, and
Murders brought to light seven Years after they were done.


Isaac. To be sure -- to be sure -- But, prithee, Harry, tell us thy Dream.


Benj. -- Ay, let us hear it, let us hear it.


Harry. Why last Market Day I came home, as 'twere a little tipsy, and laid me
down in the Stable, on a Truss of Straw, and fell fast asleep; and there, what
should I dream, but that our House was turned into a Windmill.


All. Merciful, Sirs!


Harry. Ay, a Windmill, -- and that Mrs. Jewkes, Master's Lincolnshire House
keeper, was the Miller's Man, and we four, to be sure, turned into Asses -- and
-- murrain take her -- nothing would serve her turn, but she would have us to
draw in place of the Horses; -- but methought we were plaguey resty -- for, to be
sure, never was the like heard of; and jirk us about she did most cruelly. --


Isaac. Ay, they say she is a mortal cross Woman -- Well, well, but so.


Harry. So methought, at a little Distance from the Mill, was good Mrs. Jervis,
our Housekeeper here, and pretty Mrs. Pamela, my late Lady's waiting Woman,
with each a Bundle under their Arms, as if so be they were going to seek their
Fortunes -- And is not all this now plainly made out -- is not the whole House
in a Quandary, and a terrible Uproar? Is not the 'Squire, as it were, turned to
another sort of a Man, and mainly altered for the worse? And are not Mrs.
Jervis and Mrs. Pamela discharged out of their Service, and ordered to gather
up their Things and provide themselves? --


Isaac. Ay, and does not Master Longman, the Steward, say the 'Squire talks of
sending for that same Mrs. Jewkes?


Benj. Ay, and then comes our Share of this woeful Dream. --


Harry. Well, but, my Lads, I have some sweet (...) bitter too -- I overheard
Master Longman tell Mrs. Jervis, the 'Squire was looking out for a Wife, and
that will be a rare Time for Vails, for to be sure we shall have more Comers
and Goers than a Beehive in a Summer's Day.


Arth. Ay, marry, those would be joyful Times, indeed, and I wish, with all my
Heart, the poor dear Souls Mrs. Jervis and Mrs. Pamela were to stay and take
part.


Benj. What a murrain makes the 'Squire in such a Fluster with them though?


Harry. Why you must know Mrs. Pamela, they say, has been a little too bold,
and given Master untoward Answers and you know he is deadly haughty and
passionate but, poor Soul, I wonder how it should chance so, for to be sure I
never heard her give any living Soul in the House a wry Word.


Isaac. Nor I -- she is as gentle as a Lamb.


Benj. No more Gall than a Pidgeon.


Harry. Why so Mrs. Jervis told Master, and talked a little roundly they say,
which made his Honor in such a desperate Passion, that he ordered her to
provide too -- Odsheart, that same Pamela's a dainty Girl -- but deadly shy; I
don't think a Servant in the House durst ever give her so much as a civil
Salute.


Isaac. Well, well, no matter for that, she is a precious good-natured Soul --
Odso, here is the Steward and Mrs. Jervis -- she is giving up her Charge, -- and
'twon't become us to be seen loitering here.


Omnes. Away, away. --

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Mr. LONGMRN and Mrs. JERVIS. Mrs. Jerv. I hope, Mr. Longman, you find
every Thing properly and justly accounted for?


Mr. Long. So justly, good Mrs. Jervis, that I am under great Concern to find
my Master's Warmth of Temper so little consistent with his Interest, to
discharge a Person from his Family who has many Years with such Prudence and
Justice so well acquitted her Trust.


Mrs. Jerv. Your Approbation of my Conduct, Mr. Longman, (next to that of our
Master's) is its best Justification.


Mr. Long. You have more than that, good Mrs. Jervis, the Approbation and good
Wishes of the whole Family, which seldom go hand in hand with a Frugality like
yours, for the good Opinion of the lower Servants in a Family is rarely
obtained but by Indulgencies hurtful to the Interest of its Master -- And I
could wish you would give me Leave (for the Advantage and Pleasure of our's) to
solicit Mr. Belvile for your Continuance.


Mrs. Jerv. Why, Mr. Longman, there are many prevailing Reasons to accept with
Pleasure your kind offer -- And what I am apt to think may induce his Honor
not to reject it, is the Removal of the dear, unhappy, though innocent Occasion
of his Resentment to me.


Mr. Long. The lovely Pamela you mean! Oh, Mrs. Jervis! there is I fear another
Motive which your Discretion and Regard to my Master's Honor has concealed,
that renders his Resentment, as you call it, inexcusable to both.


Mrs. Jerv. But his complying with the good Girl's earnest Request to be sent
home to her Father and Mother, is, I think, a sufficient Proof of his
Resolution no longer to entertain such Thoughts that might (as you but too
justly suspect) prove hurtful to dear Pamela's Virtue and his own Honor.


Mr. Long. It Is true -- and I am heartily rejoiced to find the Temptation will
be removed from both, for 'twou'd be a hard Task, Mrs. Jervis, for poor Pamela,
strong as she is in Virtue, to withstand the artful insinuating Snares of a
handsome wealthy Man, like our Master, and I fear a much harder for him to
overcome his too warm Desire for so tempting an Object, were they to have
constant Opportunities of seeing each other.


Mrs. Jerv. I should have few Fears of her Side, were I certain he would employ
no other Power than Persuasion.


Mr. Long. Why I think the young Creature's almost unequalled, by any of her
tender Years, in the Principles of Piety and Virtue -- And it warms my very
Heart, that one so young should so earnestly prefer sharing the Poverty of her
good Parents, with the Preservation of her Honesty, to all the enticing Baits
of Finery and Grandeur, with the Loss of it -- but, however, it is better as it
is -- But it is now pretty near the Time his Honor ordered me to attend him in
his Closet with your Accounts, and then I Will make bold to tell him my Opinion,
in relation to you. Mrs. Jervis, a good Day to you.


Mrs. Jerv. And to you, worthy Mr. Longman.

[Exeunt.
SCENE III.
BELVILE alone. How weakly founded is the Opinion that Happiness is seated in
large Possessions; though till lately I have had but little Reason to dissent
from that Opinion, and have ever made my Fortune subservient to my Pleasures --
and shall I now suffer a peevish low born Girl to interrupt their Course, and
with the musty Principles of Virtue preach me from my Purpose? -- No! I am
determined not to sacrifice my Pursuits of Pleasure and substantial Joy to her
wild imaginary Notions of Virtue and Honor. -- It Is certainly the first Time
they ever took such deep Root in a Cottage, and I Will yet try if I have not
Force enough to destroy these wondrous rural Battlements, and reduce the
romantic Governor to capitulate.


SCENE IV.
BELVILE and LONGMAN. Belv. Well, Mr. Longman, have you looked over this
insolent House-keeper's Accounts?


Long. Yes, Sir, and find them in every Article just to a Tittle -- and I hope,
Sir, you will not be offended if I presume to say, I fear 'twill be difficult for
your Honor to meet with a Servant with less Insolence and so much Fidelity.


Belv. Why thou imaginest the chief Merit of Servants consists in their Honesty.


Long. I confess, Sir, I think it is so in all Mankind.


Belv. It Is a Sign thou have conversed but little with the gay World. --
Amongst them the strongest Cement of Regard is the mutual Indulgence of each
others Pleasures -- and Morals make up no Part of their Friendships -- but in
Servants it is an absolute Duty, to conform to their Master's Foibles, and show
an implicit Obedience to all his Commands --.


Long. May I take the Liberty, Sir, of giving my Opinion on this Head, though it
differs from yours?


Belv. Ay, freely.


Long. Why then, Sir, were it possible, and I think it hardly so, that your
Honor should impose any Commands on me, which my little Portion of Reason
informed me would prove prejudicial to your Morals, Character, and Reputation,
I should think myself as much bound in Duty to reject such Commands, and use my
weak Endeavors to convince you of their Consequence, as I have thought myself
bound to obey you in all you have hitherto been pleased to honor me with.


Belv. Sure this old Fellow has no Suspicion of my Attempts on Pamela (aside.)
But, Mr. Longman, do you think me capable of imposing any Commands on Mrs.
Jervis that might prove pernicious to my Honor?


Long. Pardon me, good Sir -- You were pleased to mention an implicit Duty
necessary in Servants, and that drew from me my Opinion.


Belv. Perhaps I might -- but as the Sentiments of others, not my own -- and I
am so well convinced of Mrs. Jervis's Regard both to my Honor and Interest,
that now Passion has subsided, were she to make a Concession I would restore
her.


Long. Sir, she makes the humblest, and by me entreats your Goodness to replace
her.


Belv. Did she employ you for that Purpose?


Long She did, Sir; and I hope not in vain.


Belv. Well, she may continue -- but I Will be sworn you have no such Commission
from that obstinate Baggage Pamela.


Long. No, Sir, -- the poor young Creature is so much transported with the
Thoughts of returning, and paying her Duty to her good Parents, she seems
little employed about any other Concern, yet often expresses the most grateful
Acknowledgments for the bountiful Favors bestowed on her by you, Sir, and my
good Lady your Mother.


Belv. You mistake her, Longman -- she is quite insensible to all Gratitude, and
looks upon 'em merely as due to her great Merit.


Long. Merit, Sir! With Submission, I have always observed in her the greatest
Meekness and Humility, and that is the Character the whole Family gives her.


Belv. Ay, she is a very Idol with you all -- but no more of her. -- Order
Robin, my Lincolnshire Coachman, to attend me an Hour hence.


Long. I shall, Sir -- [Exit.


SCENE V.
BELVILE alone. I find, in spite of all my Pride and Resolution, this little
Gipsey is still fluttering round my Heart -- have her I must -- yet I see but
slender Hopes of a Compliance -- and Force is base and brutal -- nor would I
give Sixpence for her Person without her Inclination -- Ah! I am far gone,
that is plain -- heretofore Minds had no Share in my Amors -- 'Sdeath, I shall
turn an errant whining Coxcomb -- Well! -- and perhaps that may sooner bring
Madam about, than the haughty commanding Airs I have given myself -- for she
has a gentle Softness about her.

That Pride will sooner startle than engage,
The soothing Trap's the surest at her Age,
[Exit.
SCENE VI.
JOHN ARNOLD booted, with a Letter. In The Name of ill Luck, how came the
'Squire to pick me out for this untowardly Job -- A murrain on it, to be sure he
read in my face, I was false-hearted -- tho'f I cannot call to mind any foul
play -- save this -- I ever did to the poorest mortal breathing -- and this, --
more out of Fear, than any ill will toward the Parties -- for to be sure they
never deserved it at my Hands -- for to say Truth, there is not a better
well-natured young Body in this County, or the next, than Mrs. Pamela -- and
'twou'd melt a Heart of Stone to see the good old Folks her Parents, take on
about her -- and good notable Folk they are Adod! the old Man would have made a
special Parson! Well! to be sure if any of 'em should do otherwise than well,
for want of these plaguey Letters his Honor has taken from me, I shall never be
able to sleep in a Room by myself -- Hey day! why what a dickens be all the
wenches got together for, I trow -- I Will step aside, and hearken -- [Retires.


SCENE VII.
RACHEL, JANE, HANNAH, CICELY, and JOHN ARNOLD. Rach. Well to be sure, this is
joyful News? --


Jane. By my troth, the best News we have had t'Year.


Han. I should not be more overjoyed at a new Sweetheart.


Cicely. Sweetheart! I fakins, I don't think I should have been half so merry
had I been married.


Rach. May I never be married if I believe thee.


Jane. Nor I.


Rach. For certain, Mrs. Jervis is a mighty good sort of a woman, and we are
all overjoyed she stays; but there is no manner of Comparison between a Man, and
a Woman.


Jane. None at all, none at all.


John. I cant make out what they are in this taking for -- (comes forward) How
now my Lasses! what is all this Merriment about?


Cicely. To be sure he has not heard it.


Jane. Why, where have thou been moping -- not to hear the happiest Tidings,
that ever came to Hall?


John. What Tidings?


All. Why Mrs. Jewkes --


John. Is dead I hope --


All. No, no, no, no.


John. One at a time, good Lasses, one at a time.


Cicely. Why then Mrs. Jewkes -- who put us all in such a dismal Pucker about
his Honor's sending for her thither, is to stay where she is, and Mrs. Jervis
holds her own, and keeps her place.


John. Why marry these are joyful Tidings indeed for that same Mrs. Jewkes
would have made fearful work -- for my part, I Would have looked out for a new
Service.


All. And I.


Cicely. Now if Mrs. Pamela were but to stay too, we should be as happy as the
Day's long.


Jane. Ah! she will never bring her proud Heart down to ask.


Han. Why I wonder, Jane, how it should fall out so, but the poor young Body
never had half so good a Word from thee, as from all the rest of her Fellow
Servants.


John. Why because she is envious, and cannot endure to hear all the Servants
praise the young Woman, her Goodnature, and her featly Person.


Jane. Perhaps there are people who may think others as fearly as she.


Cicely. And if there were, poor soul, I Will be sworn she would bear 'em no malice.


Han. Ay, but you know, Jane has a sneaking kindness for our Harry, and ever
since he praised Mrs. Pamela so hugely one night in the kitchen, Jane could
never endure the sight of her.


Jane. Who told you forsooth, I had a sneaking kindness for Harry?


Han. Why the Fortune Tellers told us all so, for she described Harry to a hair,
and you redden'd up to the Eyes, and was as shameface'd, as if she had told you
you were breeding.


All. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Jane. The Father! why you're all full of your jeers and may hap I could jeer
upon others if I was minded to it.


Han. Say your worst of me, I put you to the defiance.


All. And I.


John. Come, come, Lasses, never wrangle who has a mind to fall too first --
I Will pass my word none of you design to lead Apes in Hell, as they say -- Come,
let us go and take part of the Bowl Master Jonathan, the Butler, has prepared
for us all, to drink a good journey to Mrs. Pamela, and her well-being with her
Father and Mother.

And then, we'll drink, that every Lad and Lass.
Be asked in the Church, before the Summer pass.
[Exeunt.
End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
PAMELA discovered at a Table, folding up a Letter. WELL! my dear Father and
Mother, thank Heaven, this will be the last Scrowl you will be troubled with from
your poor Pamela! and I have no Fears about me, but that I shall return to you,
innocent as your Wishes, and my own -- Though Heaven has been pleased to put me
upon the severest Trials for its preservation -- but let me not repine! No, my
heart should rather overflow with thankfulness at my happy, blessed deliverance,
and my Master's Resolution, in permitting me to return to my dear Parents, with
that Blessing which will cheer their honest Minds, and make 'em shed Tears of
Joy and Gladness over their innocent Child, though almost beat down with poverty
and old Age. [Wiping her Eyes.


SCENE II.
Enter Mrs. JERVIS. Jerv. What still disconsolate, my dear Pamela? I thought
thy Heart had now been easy, and thou had done with Tears.


Pam With all that gave me pain, I hope I have; but these, Mrs. Jervis, fall
from a quite different cause; the reflecting on the comfortable Joy, I shall
both give and receive, in meeting my good old Parents.


Jerv. Well thou art a miracle of innocence and duty, I shall never be able to
bear the House when thou art gone -- 'twill break my Heart -- but let me hear
from thee, my dearest Pamela, and don't forget me.


Pam. Dear Mrs. Jervis, I should have little Title to that Goodness and merit
you have often praised in me, could I be capable of forgetting that tender, and
even motherly affection you have always shown me; and be assured, next the Love
and Duty I owe my dear Parents, you have the largest share in the heart of poor
Pamela, who can only testify her Gratitude by Words.


Jerv. Dearest Child, I want no other Proofs; but my good Girl, why do thou
keep on these Clothes still? are you resolved to go in them?


Pam. Ay, no doubt -- they are the properest; these I can wear without reproach
from my poor neighbors or to myself, at the Fruit of innocence alone, and
honest industry.


Jerv. Why so you may many others, my good old Lady gave you.


Pam. No, they will all appear too fine and flaunting for my humble Station; nor
when they are gone can the circumstances of my poor Parents afford me any like
'em.


Jerv. Thou art a dear prudent Soul -- Well, Pamela, his honor has ordered the
Travelling-Chariot to carry you, and Lincolnshire Robin to drive; but he
directed me to tell you, he must see you before you go and that he has
something particular to advise you about.


Pam What! am I to undergo more persecution? I hoped he would have suffered me
to depart, with that Ease and Quietness of mind into which I had composed
myself.


Jerv. Don't be alarmed, my Dear -- he seems quite changed, and reflected with
great concern upon the injuries he had offered you; and I verily think you
might even venture to stay, which with a very serious, grave Look, he ordered
me to tell you, you might, if you thought fit, without the least apprehensions
of his renewing his Attempts upon you.


Pam. That may be true -- and for his Sake, I hope it is; but staying, I am
sure, would be a strong Inducement to the renewing his Attempts, since that
would give him sufficient Reason to conclude, my resenting his Treatment was,
(what I have heard it called) the little Artifice and Cunning of my Sex -- and
not a determined Resolution to preserve my Innocence.


Jerv. Well, thou art best able to distinguish, and I Will not pretend to give my
Advice, where there is such Prudence and Understanding -- but I think, however,
'twill be right to see him, since he has requested it in such a manner.


Pam. Would he had not requested it, for notwithstanding this Alteration of
Behavior, you describe, my Apprehensions of seeing him, bring back, to my
Remembrance, all his pernicious Plots, and barbarous Usage of me -- and yet, if
I refuse it, he will reproach me with Insolence and Ingratitude, and a Multitude
of Crimes my poor Heart's a Stranger to.


Jerv. Come Come, my dear Pamela, be comforted; I am certain you may see him
safely, and that his Repentance is sincere.


Pam. Heaven grant it may.

But still my Heart is torn with anxious Pain.
And doubts his Power, his Virtue to maintain.
(Exeunt.
SCENE III.
BELVILE alone. If I cannot prevail upon this little Baggage to stay, I shall
have a rare ringing Lecture from my outrageous Sister; she will conclude I have
stormed the Fort, and not finding the Plunder answer my Expectation, have just
carried off what I thought most valuable, and left the commanding Officer to
dispose of what remains in the best Manner she can. -- But it is a Question,
faith, whether the Lady will think fit to do me the Honor of an Interview --
and to confess the Truth, I have given her pretty substantial Reasons to be
alarmed -- O! here comes Mademoiselle la Governante.

Enter Mrs. JERVIS. Well, Mrs. Jervis, did you let Mrs. Pamela know I desired
to see her before she went?


Jerv. Yes, Sir, and she attends without to wait your Commands.


Belv. Bid her come in -- Stay -- I Will go myself. (Exit.


Jerv. Would to Heaven the poor Creature were safe at Home. (Exit.


SCENE IV.
BELVILE aad PAMELA. Belv. Prithee, dear Pamela, what needs all this Ceremony
now? You should no longer look upon yourself in the Character of a Servant.


Pam. It would be the highest Presumption, Sir, to consider myself in any other
Character, and the Remembrance of it will always fill me with the most
grateful, pleasing Thoughts.


Belv. If the bare Recollection can furnish such pleasing Ideas, I should
conclude the Continuance of the Possession might be more desirable -- and that
-- Pamela, wholly depends upon your own Choice.


Pam. Persons in my humble State of Life, Sir, ought very seldom, if at all, to
govern their Actions by their Choice; nay, sometimes even those of high
Condition, are apt to make very fatal Mistakes by a too blind Obedience to
their Choice, in the Pursuit of what they call Pleasures.


Belv. Ha; well said, my little Remembrancer -- I assure you, canted forth with
great Solemnity -- Egad, I fancy the good old Lady my Mother, mistook both thy
Sex and Genius, and instead of teaching thee to raise Paste, and make Cordials,
thou should have been instructed in administering spiritual Comforts -- and a
smart pretty Levite thou had been, God's Death, you Baggage, what Havoc you would
have made among the Maids?


Pam. Mrs. Jervis informed me, Sir, you had something to say to me of a more
serious Sort.


Belv. Why you little wicked Slut, can any thing be more serious than turning
Parson; but I have something very serious to say to thee, it is upon Matrimony,
and if that is not a serious Subject, I am at a Loss to furnish one. In short,
Pamela, I have been thinking to make thee some Amends, for all the Rogues
Tricks I have played thee, by getting thee a good Husband; I have a Chaplain in
Lincolnshire, I have promised to provide for, one Williams, he is a likely young
Fellow, if you will stay, I Will send for him directly, the Parson has Taste, and
I Am sure must be struck with all this Youth and Beauty. (kisses her) --
God's Death, I could almost marry thee myself.


Pam. Sir, I beg you will give me Leave to withdraw.


Bell. You shall not stir, by Heaven!


Pam. Then I must take the Liberty to insist, Sir, upon a different Behavior.


Bell. Well, well, it shall have its own Humor; but what say you to this
Parson, Child?


Pam. I say, Sir, I think the Subject in general of too solemn a kind, to be
treated of, in the light manner you are pleased to express yourself; and as to
my particular Thoughts of it -- I have never yet entertained any, nor could I
suppose you serious in what you say, have I a right to entertain such Thoughts,
without first receiving the Approbation of those, who have an undoubted Power
over my Mind and Person.


Belv. Well, I Will immediately send Word to your Father of my Intention, and, if
he concurs, desire him to come hither directly.


Pam. Sir, in an Act of such Importance, it is certainly my Duty first to make a
personal Application, and 'twill be necessary I should myself have some longer
Time to reflect upon an Act, on which the future Happiness or Misery of my Life
depends; therefore, Sir, I hope I have Leave to pursue my Resolution of
returning home.


Belv. Well, Madam, since my Friendship meets with so ungrateful a Reception,
you are at Liberty to pursue what Resolutions you please.


Pam. I humbly thank you, Sir; but let me entreat you not to think so hardly of
the unhappy Pamela, low as she is, to interpret that ungrateful, which was the
Effect of Duty, and a Desire to enjoy that Liberty which even Slaves are
allowed on such Occasions.


Bell. Come, come, Insolent; I see plainly, under all this Mask of Duty, there
lurks a base arrogant Suspicion of my Sincerity in the Proposal -- but be
assured --


Enter HARRY. Har. Lady Davers, Sir, is just alighted.


Belv. I Will wait upon her. [Exit Harry. The Chariot, Madam, is ready to wait
upon you when you please.


Pam. My humblest Acknowledgments, Sir, for this, and every other bounteous
Favor I have received; I have no Power to express, but by these silent
Witnesses of their Sincerity and Truth. [Exit weeping.


Belv. Certainly, Art and Nature were never so agreeably blended, as in this
Creature; every Moment, I find myself more deeply affected by her, and the
oftener I turn, am but the farther entangled in this Labyrinth -- 'Slife, I had
forgot my Sister -- O! here she comes, and, if I Am not mistaken, in a
Disposition to refresh my Memory a little.


Enter Lady DAVEZS and SMATTER. L. Da. I am extremely sorry, Sir, my
impertinent Visit has broke in upon your more agreeable Amusements, and a
Conversation so polite as that of your Servants must necessarily afford -- but
I only just stepped up, to convince you --


Bell. That you are in a violent Warmth, without one Jot of Reason; prithee,
dear Child, endeavor to subdue these boisterous Passions, and recollect the
Advice I have often given you: Ever to distinguish between the easy
dispassionate Behavior, proper for a Woman of Quality, and the clamorous
turbulent Outrages of the Ladies, who have received their Education about
Covent Garden.


Smatt. I gad! that is a Stinger. Ha, ha, ha! [Aside.


L. Da. By the Company that just now left you, Sir, and the extraordinary
Delicacy in expressing yourself, one might reasonably conclude truly, the
Creatures you mention had engrossed the largest Share of your Conversation.


Belv. Why ay, Child, you know one cannot avoid giving great Part of one's Time
to so near a Relation as a Sister. Ha, ha, ha!


L. Dav. Sir! --


Belv. Nay, nay, my dear Lady Davers, you must be laughed out of these
ridiculous Flights.


Smat. Why, upon my Soul, Sir, --


Belv. Sir, pray excuse me, upon my Word I did not see you.


Smat. Why, 'faith, Sir, I did imagine the lively Brilliancy of my Lady's Fire,
had, as it were, struck upon the visionary Nerves, and obscured me from
Observation.


L. Dav. Insolent Coxcomb! dare thou to affront me with thy saucy Raillery?


Smat. Let me perish, Madam, but it is extremely severe to construe the Effects
of Wit and Genius into an Affront.


Belv. Upon my Word, my dear, this Resentment is most unreasonably founded --
Pamela, who is returning to her Father, just before your Coach stopped was come
to pay her Compliment of Leave, and I was only just giving her a short Lesson
of Instruction for her future Conduct, and --


L. Dav. Yes, yes, I make no doubt, she has received very notable Lessons of
Instruction, which will shortly produce speaking Instances of her Tutor's Care.


Belv. Upon my Honor, you injure both the Girl and me; I think her sincerely
virtuous, and possessed of every other Quality that should compose the amiable
and good, and more particularly so, in her high Sense of Duty to her Parents,
which so remarkably appears, in giving up her advantageous Situation in my
Family, to return to their Comfort and Assistance, who it seems are in a very
advanced and declining Age.


Nay, I promise you I have a much better Opinion of the Girl than you, and if
she has preserved her Innocence, it is wholly owing to her Conduct and Prudence.


Belv. Well, I Will not dispute the Point with you; what think you of a turn in
the Garden before Tea?


L. Da. No, I choose to see the Girl before she goes -- Pray order somebody to
send her to me.


Bell. With all my Heart -- Sir, do you choose walking?


Smat. By all means, Sir, I wait upon you with infinite Pleasure.

[Extt. Bell. and Smat.
L. Da. Notwithstanding this seeming Indifference I am convinced, there must be
some very particular Reasons for this Girl's leaving the Family, more than he
cares I should be acquainted with; my Authority over her may perhaps influence
her, to give me some farther Light into this Affair.


Enter PAMELA. Pam. Has your Ladyship any Commands for me?


L. Da. Ay, Child, my Brother tells me you are leaving the Family, I am
concerned at the Occasion.


Pam. It Is an Occasion, Madam, that to me affords a double Motive for Concern,
the leaving a Family where I have rather been indulged like Child, than treated
as a Servant, and the unhappy melancholy Cause that renders my leaving it
unavoidable.


L. Da. Why, ay, I Am afraid it is an unhappy melancholy Cause indeed -- But,
Child, is it not rather of the latest to reflect upon that now?


Pam. The latest! Heaven forbid!


L. Da. Invoking Heaven is presumptious, while we are apparently under its
Resentment.


Pam. Surely, Madam, it is no Presumption in a Child to supplicate Heaven in the
Defense of its afflicted Parents.


L. Da. Ha! she has her Lesson thoroughly perfect, why that is mighty pretty
truly; but, Child, those little Arts will not do with me, I see through 'em.


Pam. I am sorry, Madam, you think me fallen so deep in Wickedness, to effect a
Sorrow, where the strongest Ties of Duty and Religion enforce the tenderest and
most sincere.


L. Da. You would then really persuade me, that you have no other Motive for
leaving this Family, but Duty to your Parents, forsooth?


Pam. Your Ladyship must think me guilty of the highest Ingratitude and Folly,
to be induced to leave it from any Reasons that arise from Want of Countenance
or Indulgence.


L. Da. No, no -- I Am only afraid you have had too much Countenance and
Indulgence.


Pam. I hope, Madam, that has not appeared in any Part of my Behavior.


L. Da. Then plainly -- I imagine my Brother and you --


Pam. Madam, I must humbly take the Liberty to interrupt your Ladyship, and
prevent a Charge, which nothing but the Guilt of, could so sensibly shock me,
as the bare Suspicion -- and I hope my Innocence will plead for my Presumption.


Enter HARRY. Harry. Mrs. Pamela, Mrs. Jervis ordered me to let you know the
Chariot is ready.


L. Da. Indeed! Exit Harry.


Pam. Madam, I humbly take my Leave.


L. Da. Well, Pamela, I hope my Suspicions are without Foundation; and that you
deserve my best Wishes for your Welfare, which you may always depend upon,
while you maintain your Character of Innocence.


Pam. Madam, your Ladyship's most obedient Servant. [Exit


Lady DAVERS alone. The Chariot! -- This particular Mark of Favor is not
without its particular Motives, I am convinced; and yet in the Girl's Behavior
there really appeared no signs of Guilt -- However, I am determined to make a
strict Enquiry after her Ladyship's Conduct at her Father's, and what Rambles
and Jaunts my good Brother takes -- They shall manage their Affairs cunningly
indeed, if they disguise them from my Knowledge -- And if they do carry on any
secret Correspondence -- I Will take care it shall not long continue so, I warrant
me. [Exit.


Enter SMATTER. Ha, ha, ha! Yonder Is poor Belvile, dying for Love of his own
Maid, and cannot subdue her hardened Heart; Ha, ha, ha! -- What weak trifling
Mortals some Men of Fortune are -- If this Abigail is really coy, she has
certainly seen some more desirable Object -- A Girl, with a Country Education,
may have Taste, and who knows what Effects my frequent Visits may have had upon
her -- I Will pursue the Thought, faith -- But then Belvile is my Friend -- True
-- But then Pamela is warm, young, and tempting; and the Fashion, thanks to the
polite Taste of the Age, will excuse the Consequences; so, my dear Pammy, have
at you -- Ha! here she comes a propos.

PAMELA crossing the Stage, SMATAER meets her. So, my little Pammy! What!
equipped for thy Journey? And art thou really, Child, so extremely stupid, to
leave the Pleasure and Gaiety of this Family, for thy old Daddy's thatched
Hovel, and the comfortable Diet of brown Bread and rusty Bacon?


Pam. My Pleasures, Sir, thank Heaven, have turned more upon the Improvement
and Correction of my Mind, than the Gratifications of my Appetite.


Smat. Harkee Child, what Religion is your Father of? -- A rank Papist I Will
hold fifty Pound! and my little Pammy here intended for a Nun -- for such
Doctrire, Child, is fit only for a Convent, or a stale Maid of five and thirty.


Pam. I think it, Sir, a Doctrine suitable to every Religion and Age; and if
the young Gentlemen of Condition would practice it a little more, they might
often preserve a good Constitution, at the Expense of a very bad Fashion.


Smat. Rat me, Child, but thy Head's stuffed with mighty odd Conceits. -- But,
barkee, Pammy --


Pam. Sir, I must beg Pardon, I am waited for --.


Smat. Egad! if I had you a Month in London, I Would give you a smart Lesson or
two, should quickly convert all this musty Prudery, into the most sprightly
Coquetry that ever showed off at high Mall in the Park.


Pam. I Am better pleased, Sir, with my own homely Behavior -- Your very humble
Servant, Sir. [Exit.


SMATTER alone. Well, thou art a most extraordinary Creature, and such a one,
that has not fallen in the Course of my Acquaintance; if I were to describe
this Girl's odd Principles to the Smarts of the Town, they would swear I only
intended to bam 'em, and could never form the most distant Idea of such an
amazing Composition, as Beauty, Sense, Sixteen, and profound Gravity.

But, Madam, Nature, in a haughty Fit,
Decreed these jarring Qualities should hit;
As those in me, of Modesty and Wit.
[Exit.
Enter BELVILE and ROBIN. Bell. You perfectly understand your Instructions?


Rob. Yes, an't please your Honor.


Bell. Well, discharge 'em properly, and I Will reward you -- but take particular
Care in being punctual to the Time, I have directed you to deliver the Letter
to Pamela.


Rob. I shall, Sir.


Bell. Well, I believe she now only waits for you, be gone. [Exit Robin.


BELVILE alone. This Scheme I think cannot but prove effectual; -- at my
Lincolnshire House, she will be removed from the prying Jealousy of my
inquisitive Sister, and the impertinent Observation of such a Number of
Servants: And, if I Am not mistaken, my Friend Mrs. Jewkes has not altogether so
many Qualms, as the sanctified Mrs. ervis -- Ay -- I think 'twill do -- but the
Pleasure of considering, I shall so entirely have her in my Power, is not a
little disturbed, by reflecting how terribly the poor Creature will be shocked,
at finding that Innocence betrayed, she has so long, and worthily defended --
Ha, -- worthily! and am I endeavoring to destroy that Worth, I cannot Help
admiring? -- To what irrational Lengths does this Passion hurry us? What is
this Medley of Honor and impetuous Inclination,

That thus alternately my Breast alarms,
Which now so sharply stings, and now so strongly charms?

End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Mrs. JEWKES and ROBIN. Robin. WEll, Robert, I profess thou have brought
me a delicate tender Lambkin, and a careful diligent Shepherd, I Will prove to it,
I Will warrant me -- but alack, it does so bleet, and bleet -- as if the little
Heart on it would burst -- ah! the 'Squire, Robert, loves a young Tit Bit; but I
vow he is a sinful Man to undo such a young innocent Body -- let him look to
that, though -- we are but Servants.


Rob. Althouf I am but a Servant, an I had not believed he designed for
Matrimony, I would not have underta'en the Job of bringing her off.


Jewk. Matrimony -- alack a day, Robert, do thou think so fine a Gentleman as
our Master would undervalue his Family so much to marry his Mother's
Waiting Woman? no, no, perhaps he may design indeed to give out they are
married, to quiet the young Woman's Mind a little, but I Will warrant he will never
let the Noose be drawn so tight, but he may slip it whenever he pleases.


Rob. For my Part, if any thing amiss should happen to the poor young Woman, I
shall never be my own Man again -- and she is mortal fearful on it -- poor Soul
it would make one's Heart bleed to see her take on so.


Jewk. I warrant when the 'Squire comes, he will change her Note -- young Girls
are always squeamish and coy beforehand -- I remember I was so myself -- Good
lack! good lack! what a Racket did I keep! and, to say truth, I would I had
been more chary than I was -- for a faithless Wretch I met with -- well! -- he
has a deal to answer for.


Rob. I cod, so he has, if he has all your Sins to answer for. (Aside.)


Enter ANNICE. Jewk. Well, Ann, how did thou leave my little Charge? what in
the Mopes still?


Ann. Why, forsooth?


Jewk. Forsooth! why how now Minks! will thou never be the better for all the
wholesome instructions I have given thee? how often have I told you, that all
we grave Gentlewomen at the Heads of Families are called. -- Madam --


Ann. Why Madam, the young Body is in a fearful Taking -- madam -- she sobs and
cries, and sobs -- Madam -- I Am afraid she will go beside her Wits, for my part,
for she talks to herself a huge pace -- Madam.


Jewk. Well, go you and get the Chamber ready, I Will go in and comfort her.
[Exit Ann. A liitle of my agreeable Chat will revive her Spirits I warrant.
[Exit.


Rob. I Will pass my word she would rather have your Room than your Company, as they
say -- But I mun go and look after my poor Tits, for I drove 'em at a woundy
Rate. [Exit.

PAMELA discovered. Unhappy Pamela! what secret Crime have thou committed
against Heaven, that it should thus provoke its vengeance to afflict thee?
Examine well thy inmost thoughts, it is said, content's the Child of Innocence
-- if so -- some hidden Guilt must surely lurk within my breast, that fatally,
though justly robs me of the blessing; and yet does Heaven afflict thus heavily
for crimes unknown? such I could conceive are almost uncommitted -- but it is
Presumption, in minds best qualified to judge, vainly to search the
immeasurable Decrees of Heaven; what then is thine, thou weak, thou daring
wretch? cease thy complainings therefore; search the cause that thus abandons
thee to Ruin, that robs thee of the promised joys thou fondly hop'st to meet
from thy dear expecting disappointed Parents -- that has betrayed thee to thy
approaching Misery, will utterly destroy thy everlasting Peace -- and sink
their Age with bitterest Anguish to the Grave.


Jewk. Why what Chicken! nothing but sighing and sobbing, to which of the
Bedfordshire Boys have thou disposed thy little Heart, that thus it mopes, and
pants to be with him.


Pam. Whatever, Madam, the Motives are of this unhappy Grief, Solitude will
best assuage, and conversation but indulge and more provoke.


Jewk. Good lack! good lack! my very Case to a Tittle; in my Youth and Days of
Love, I could never endure Company -- but would sit, you, alone upon a Bank by
a Pond-Side for Hours together -- and to be sure, one Day was just upon the
Point of throwing myself in -- but a brisk young Fellow happened to pass by the
Moment I was going to take the fatal Leap, catched me in his Arms, and
prevented me; and I assure you, used such prevailing Arguments with me, I never
thought of Drowning, or my Sweetheart afterward.


Pam. Too, too well, you know the Sorrows that afflict my Heart, and may, if
you are endued with that Regard to Innocence and Virtue your Sex and Years
demand, remove the fatal Cause.


Jewk. Odsbodikins! and will, my Child, I Will take Care thy Innocence and Virtue
shall not be betrayed by ever a Country Booby of 'em all -- I Will preserve 'em safe
I warrant thee.


Pam. All gracious Heaven shower down its choicest Blessings on your Head.


Jewk. Ay, Chicken, never fear, thou shall not fall into such lubberly Hands;
I Will bolt, and bar, and lock, to secure thee -- thou shall not stir a Foot out
of this House, nor the Face of a Stranger peep within the Gates.


Pam. O! you mistake my Meaning much; will you, with Heaven, assist the pious
Act of sending me forthwith to my distressed unhappy Parents, to calm their
Doubts, and quiet all their anxious Fears?


Jewk. Ods my life, why thou mistak'st my Meaning -- send thee; -- No, no, not
for all the Tithes of this Parish and the next, why I must nurse thee, and feed
thee, and cocker thee up Child -- I am ordered to let thee command all the
House, but the Doors, and those remain under my Direction.


Pam. Why did I fondly hope Relief from one grown old in Sin, and hardened in
Iniquity. (Aside)


Enter Mr. WILLIAMS. Will. Mrs. Jewkes, your Servant.


Jewk. My young Levite, I Am glad to see thee; come I Will present you to this
pretty little Stranger -- anon I Will inform you who she is -- Mrs. Pamela, the
'Squire's Lincolnshire Chaplain, Mr. Williams.


Will. Madam, you're welcome to Pleasant-Hall. [Salute.


Pam I thank you, Sir -- but -- [Sighing.


Will. Some heavy Melancholy hangs on her Spirits, she seems affected with a
Grief that rises from no common Cause. (Aside to Mrs. Jewkes.


Jewk. Common to all Girls in Christendom of her Age -- she is in Love, my young
Chaplain.


Pam. Madam --


Jewk. Nay, nay, never mince the Matter -- it is no such mighty Crime -- only a
little ill judged, Mr. Williams, in making an improper Choice -- when she has
it in her Power elsewhere, to make herself the happiest Woman in the King's
Dominions; I Will leave you to give her a little wholesome Advice, while I step to
give some Orders about the Family -- Chicken, I Will be with thee again in a
Twinkling -- in the mean time observe the Doctor's Instructions, my little
Rosebud -- observe 'em I say. (Exit.


Pam. Sure it is impossible he can be made an Agent in this foul Conspiracy. --
No, 'twere an Impiety to Heaven, to suppose that one devoted to its Service by
his holy Office, could be prevailed on to become an Instrument in so black a
Deed.


Will. Pardon me, fair One, if I Am deceived -- but in your looks, methinks,
there seems a kind of doubtful Apprehension of some approaching Danger. --
Emotions rather caused by Terror, than the soft Languishments described from
Lovesick Pains.


Pam. Alas, too well you are acquainted, Sir, with the distressed Condition of
my Heart -- indeed I am beset with Terrors, Terrors that would bespeak a Breast
endued but with the slightest Touches of Humanity in my Behalf; a Grief more
solid than the fantastic Lover's Pain creates, a Violation of the first, the
tenderest Law great Nature from our Infancy directs -- I am divided, torn from
my distressed and most indulgent Parents, forced hither with an impious black
Design to have my Innocence and Youth become the Sacrifice of brutal Violence.


Will. There is an artless Fervor in your Grief, that might awake Compassion
even in the cruel Authors of your Woe -- what then must be its powerful
Influence on Minds that shrink with Horror at the hateful Deed? Minds enlarged
by the engaging generous Sentiments of soft Humanity, confirmed and strongly
rooted in those Sentiments, by the more binding Laws of Duty, and reverential
Love for an all-good dispensing Providence.


Pam. Surely, that Providence, still watchful over injured Innocence, intends
the Merit of its Rescue from your Hands; for I perceive there is an open honest
tender Feeling in your Eyes at the unfolding of my Sorrows, which, when
occasion suffers me more amply to relate, will cherish still, that Softness in
your Soul, to undertake, if possible, my Flight from the approaching Misery
that threatens.


Will. That will require farther Time to deliberate on, than now we can afford;
but be assured, I Am bound to you in every Wish that you can form for your
Deliverance; but pray, is Mrs. Jewkes concerned as an Abettor in this detested
Scheme?


Pam. Chiefly, chiefly -- to her I am consigned by -- I hear her coming; I Will
retire, and wait some favorable Occasion for your friendly Counsel and
Assistance.


Will. Depend on both. [Exit Pamela. This injured Creature's Story, and her
affecting Manner in relating it, awake a tender Softness in my Breast, beyond
the usual Motives to Compassion.


Enter Mrs. JEWKES. Jewk. Well, where is my Chicken? gone! in the Sullens, I Will
lay my Life.


Will. She seemed much disordered, and retired.


Jewk. Disordered! Marry come up, she has much Cause to be disordered indeed,
when such a young handsome wealthy Gentleman as the Squire talks of making her
his Wife -- at least you must not know to the contrary. [Aside.


Will. His Wife! the ^quire! -- meaning Mr. Belvile.


Jewk. Ay. Mr. Belvile -- the Squire! our Master.


Will. Impossible!


Jewk. Pshaw, Pshaw! nothing's impossible in Love, Man; he wants no Money, you
know; and, by my Troth, I see no Reason why a young Man, with such a Heap of
Wealth, should not please his Fancy.


Will. Ay, but People of Condition have a Regard to Family and Blood.


Jewk. Pshaw! a Fig's End of Family and Blood; I know no Difference in Blood,
but what a Fever makes -- and for Family, are not we all descended from the
good old Family of Adam and Eve; but, my young Doctor, concern not thyself
about the Matter, thou may get a new Gown and Cassock by binding the Bargain
-- therefore, Mum, and mind thy Prayers. (Exit.


Will This Marriage is the mere Invention of thy fertile Brain, to palliate and
blind thy base Designs, to me -- for it is impossible the young Creature can be
possessed with such a Thought -- if she were -- her Fears and dreadful
Apprehensions would be groundless -- No, it is all an Artifice; which I will use
my utmost Power to destroy, nor shall the Fear of incurring Mr. Belvile's
Displeasure stop me in so commendable a Pursuit, as the Defense of injured
Truth and Innocence. (Exit.


SCENE, A Garden. PAMELA alone. This Garden, to Minds possessed with easy
tranquil thoughts, would lavishly afford variety of Objects, to indulge a
pleasing Contemplation; but my affections, all overcome by Fear, shrink with
that Coward Passion from their Office, and merely are become but frighted
infants of the Mind; through all the former Shocks I have sustained from this
unworthy Man against my innocence, still has that trembling, ^^^^ning Passion,
alone possessed my Heart, while strong resentment and determined Hate have
seemed to slumber there; is it the D^stance Fortune throws between us, b^^s my
Hatred against the Offender, while I reflect with honest scorn and indignation
on the Offense? Ha, be watchful Pamela, nor let this soft insinuating Passion
steal into thy Bosom, lest angry Heaven, offended at thy bold Pre^umption,
decree thy Innocnce, a victim to thy Pride. But see -- the Instrument it
graciously has sent kindly disposed for my Deliverance.


Enter Mr. WILLIAMS. Will. Madam, the inquietude of Mind I have suffered in
reflecting upon the melancholy Tale, you thought fit to entrust me with, made
me impatient for an Opportunity of asking a few necessary Questi^ns, which when
answered, will immediately confirm, or else remove my Fears in your Behalf --
Pray has Mr. Belvile, in the general of his Conduct, given you any solid
reasons to believe his Designs were honorable.


Pam. Too, too many to convince me they were otherwise, nor could my humble
Heart once entertain a thought so daringly presumptuous.


Will. I did believe indeed, this evil Woman had devised it, only to color her
pernicious Part, in this intended Scene of black iniquity, from me.


Pam. Oh, Sir, it is all Delusson, and too soon, alas, will the destructive Plan
take Place, for every moment my dreadful apprehension is renewed of the
expected, near Approach of this Invader, who doubless will be speedy to execute
his impious Purpose.


Will. Your Fears too much alarm you, the Coachman who brought you hither,
tells me Mr. Belvile intended setting out for London, the Day you left the
House.


Pam. Alas, they are all Confederates in this hateful Scheme, and Falsehood is
their only practice; but Sir, there is another, pressing, tender Motive
heightens my impatience, the anxious Terrors of my deceived, unhappy Parents,
whose Age and sha^p Infirmities cannot sustain the Shock my Danger must alarm
them with.


Will. Are they acquainted with Mr. Belvile's Conduct toward you?


Pam. Yes, Sir, and therefore had commanded my Return to 'em.


Will. And do they know where you are now disposed of?


Pam. Oh, no. I was surprised and basely hurried hither, even on the very Day
their Expectations had been fondly raised, to have received me, still happy in
Possession of the only, but to them inestimable Dowry, my Truth and Innocence.
--


Will And to pr serve 'em still inviolate, I will concert some Means, this
Night, if possible, for your Escape, and make myself, if you approve it, the
Conductor of your Flight.


Pam. I cannot but approve the Guard of one, so strongly influenced, in the
Cause of helpless, injured Virtue.


Enter ANNICE. Ann. Forsooth, Madam says, she fears you will take harm, the Wind
blows so deadly sharp -- it is best you should bide in the House.


Pam. Dissembling Courtesy! soothing while it wounds -- Come -- [Exit Pam. and
Annice.]


Will. Hipocrisy's the eldest born of Vice,
Subtly obedient in its close Disguise,,
To guard its impious Parent from Surprise;
Whose hideous Form, if naked to the View,
Would fright rash Vot'ries from its silken Clue.
[Exit.
End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Mrs. JEWKES and COLEBRAND. Jewk. Ods my Life, Monsieur, I profess you
are come in Time -- Had not his Honor sent you to assist, it is ten to one the
Bird had been Flown, nay, out of the Cage it was, and all so fast, going to
Mate I warrant you, with a sly treacherous Blackbird.


Golb Hay, Vat, vat is dat Blackbird -- Je ne vous pas entens, B^gar me no
understand the Blackbird.


Jewk. Why she was running away with the Parson.


Cole. Oh Parson, De Parson be de Black bird, begar in my Country, de Pa^son be
de grand prodigieuse Black bird, dad fly after all de pretty Girl dear -- and
vila he pretenda, begar, to shelter them under his wing to show them de vay to
Heaven, begar he send them Post to de Diable.


Jewk. Ay Monsieur, but our Parsons are not so wicked, they marry and live
virtuously.


Cole. But begar, your Parson must no marry Mademoiselle Pamela -- upon my
Vard, I must marry her myself -- and den, I sall sell her upon de Vedding day,
for two or tree hundred Pound to Monsieur Belvile, and den I sall go to Paris,
and buy myself de grand Title of de French Marquis.


Jewk. Marry her, and sell her to Mr. Belvile upon the Wedding day, and so cure
all her squeamish qualms: -- well, for a notable Contrivance, let his Honor
alone, I say -- Oh, he is a most ingenious Person.


Cole. Upon my Vard, it is de grand Politic to have de first Night's Lodgment
vid de Bride, and not have de Encumbrance of de Vise. O, Cest fort agreeable.


Jewk. Well, I vow it is a comfortable Thing when a Man of Sense pays his
Devoirs to us, -- A Humdrum Fool now, would have lost you a Score of Girls, and
never have dreamed of such a sprightly Scheme.


Cole. Upon my Vard, Madam, Monsieur Belvile had never arrive at dis grand
Refinement in dis Amor, if he had not live so long in France -- dear de-de-de
-- Vat you call de Blackbird?


Jewk. Oh, the Parson.


Cole Ouy, Ouy, en Verite, de Parson -- de Parson in France, de Parson teach
Monsienr Anglois all de belle Artifice to procure de finest Ladies of Quality
der^ but Begar, it is after they have serve themselves.


Jewk. Odsbodlikins, I had forgot his Honor's Letter -- let me see, let me see
(Takes a Letter from her bosom and opens it) Dear Pamela, undone, undone,
ruined and undone.


Cole. Hay, vat, vat be all dis grand Exclamation?


Jewk. Oh; his Honor has mistaken the Direction of the two Letters, this in my
Hand is for Pamela and that I have sent up to her, is mine -- O miserable
Missortune.


Cole. Miserable, Begar it is nothing at all, it is only her be acquainted vid
the Sentence a little time before de Execution, for Monsieur Belvile will very
soon be here -- et d^ ne l'assaire et faite.


Jewk. Ay, but this Notice will certainly put the young Baggage upon some new
Plot for an Escape; and if she slips through our Hands --


Cole. O impossible he vill be here to Day, and Begar, till he come, I vll
vatch her so close, dat all de Blackbirds in your Country sall not fly away vid
her -- for pardie, if dey should, I lose my Revard and my Vife too.


Jowk. Well, let us be gone, let us be gone --


Cole. O vid all my Heart, en Verite it be very proper, you introduce me to pay
my Compliments -- because it is possible, I fall marry her to Night -- Allons,
Allons.


Jewk. Sir, -- pray Sir, (Compliment for the Door)


Cole. O pardonez moy, Madame.


Jewk. I profess, you destroy me with this Excess of Complaisance.

(Exeunt.
PAMELA alone. Now my Ruin is inevitable, this Discovery of my Attempt to
escape, will double all this evil Woman's Vigilance, and render my Confinement
almost insupportable, and what I am every Moment to expect more fatal, this
shameless Letter has too well informed me, here comes the hateful Monster 'twas
intended for -- and by the futtering Haste she is in, no doubt has found the
Erro^ in directing it. -- Ha, what fellow Fiend is this comes with her?


Enter COLEBRAND and JEWKES. Jewk. So Mrs. Flirt, I suppose yon have read it.
(snatching the Letter from her)


Pam D^ubtless -- it is directed to me.


Jewk. Directed, what of that! within Side you see it is directed to me, and
mannerly Decency should have prevented your Impertinence.


Pam. Decency, indeed, must blush to read such hide us Schemes, against
helpless Innocence.


Jewk. Here Is a Racket indeed, about your flippery Innocence; but this
Gentleman will remove your foolish Qualms, by making you a Wife.


Pam. Heaven protect me, what means she?


Cole. Ouy, Madame, en Verite, I sall teach you de French Politesse, in making
de Grand solemn Engagement, vid no oder View in de Varld, but to break it
immediately.


Pam. You, Madam, I suppose, are able to explain this Jargon.


Jewk. It needs no great Explanation I think, -- but your perverse little Head
will not understand -- so if you must have it explained, Monsieur here is to marry
you.


Cole Ouy, Madame.


Jewk. And when the Ceremony is over, give up all Right and Title in you, to
Mr. Belvile, now you understand me.


Pam. Yes, thou abandoned Wretch; but Heaven be praised, our equal Laws are
free from such detested Wiles -- such base dispensing Powers -- nor arrogantly
aim to force the Will


Jewk. But you will find, Mistress, they give a Husband sufficient Power over his
Wife; and had not I been well acquainted with their having such Power, I had
not lived a single Life till now, and refused such advantageous Offers.


Cole. Upon my Vard it must be de grand Mortification to Mankind, to be robbed
of de Offering of so fine a Lady.


Jewk. O Monsieur, Had I been honored with the Addresses of a Gentleman of
your Merit and polite Behavior, I must have broke through the most obstinate
Resolution.


Enter ANNICE. Ann. O Madam, Madam, my Master's just lighted at the Gate.


Pam. Ha.


Jewk. Bless us, let us be gone, and pay our Devoirs. (Exit. with Annice.


Cole. Madame -- Je suis votre tres humble. (Exit.


Pam. Now, gracious Heaven, assist me, or I am lost. Thy Power alone can stem
this Torrent, and save me from approaching Ruin. (Exit.


Enter BELVILE, JEWKES, and COLEBRAND, Jewk. I am proud to see your Honor at
Pleasant-Hall.


Belv. Mrs. Jewkes your Servant -- how does your Charge, the lovely Pamela?


Jewk. Oh, your Honor, she does not deserve so much Goodness at your Hands --


Belv. What still perverse and sullen?


Jewk. I dread to tell your Honor.


Bell. She Is not escaped I hope.


Jewk. No, if she was, I had not dared to look your Honor in the Face -- but
such Plots, such Contrivances, to bring it about, and then so powerful an
Accomplice.


Bell. Who? what Accomplice?


Jewk. No less than your Honor's Chaplain.


Bell How.


Cole. Upon my Vard, Sir, cest sort veritable -- instead of his marrying me to
Mademoiselle Pamela, as your Honor gave me Direction, he had formed une grand
Design to rob me of my Vife, and marry her himself.


Belv. Insolent Folly! I Will cure his amorous Fever.


Cole. Begar, Sir, if you please, I will let him Blood under de left Breast, and
cure him presently.


Belv. Hence, from my Sight! how dare you harbor such a Thought, and add to
your Presumption, by boldly making me the Hearer -- Be gone.


Cole. En verite, I would only moderate his Passion. [Exit.


Bell. Order Pamela to attend me.


Jewk. I shall, Sir. [Exit.


^elv. And has this little Hypocrite thus long appeared insensible and cold to
every Thought of Love, while I addressed her, and now ever she could well
commence a slight Acquaintance, broke loose even to such Extravagence of
Passion? it is plain the Fire only lay obscured, and wanted but a Breath more
powerful to fan it to a Flame -- 'Sdeath, to be supplanted by a low mean
dependant on me! Despicable! her Person though is still within my Power, and
since she will not gratify the softer Wishes of my Heart, and cherish 'em with
Love -- I Will substitute Revenge -- at least, to cool its warmer Transports --
here she comes --

Enter PAMELA. I Am sorry to hear, Madam, the forward Impertinence of my
Servants interrupted you in the Execution of your late important Scheme.


Pam. Alas, Sir, I wanted not this Triumph over my Disappointment, to enlarge
my Griefs.


Belv. O doubtless, Madam, they must be great, to be excluded from the lovely
Object of our Wishes; is certainly of all others the sharpest Punishment: I can
form a tolerable Judgment of your Pain, since I was myself, but lately, pretty
much in your Situation.


Pam. Why, Sir, will you descend so low, to insult the weak and wretched? --
there is a Pride more suit able to noble Minds -- a Pride that truly is
esteemed a Virtue -- the heavenly Pride of just Compassion.


Belv. O, it is infinitely just, no doubt, I should extend my utmost Compassion,
for the least Impediment your Ladyship meets in your Amors.


Pam. I am as little capable, Sir, to understand these Taunts, as to prevent
'em if I did.


Belv. This insolent Presumption of pleading Ignorance is not to be borne --
You have not, by the Advice and Help of Williams, my Chaplain, attempted your
Escape from hence, and, as a Recompense for his worthy Service, promised to
reward him with your Person.


Pam. That I solicited, and he consented, to aid my Escape, is true; -- but
that he was induced by me, from any other Motives, than the virtuous Merit of
the Act, I solemnly deny.


Belv. I thought, Madam, after the repeated Assurances I had sent you, you
might securely have relied u on my Honor, and banished all your Fears; but
they, I am convinced, were only slight Pretenses, to disguise more solid
Dangers you apprehended from the Loss of this new Admirer.


Pam. I had no other View, than my Removal from this hateful Prison, to shun
the Dangers, Sir, I had but too sufficient Cause to fear from your Arrival here


Belv Be assured, your late extravagant Conduct has made those Dangers
unavoidable, however distant they might before have been; but yet, to palliate
your mighty Scruples, I have determined my Valet de Chamber- Colebrand, shall
marry you, and immediately transfer, his Right to me.


Pam. Remember, Sir, that my Assent to this most previously be had -- and here,
in Heaven's awful face I vow, my Tongue shall rather lose its Office, than I Will
consent to this detested Scheme


Belv. By Heaven, this obstinate Resistance of my Will, but more determines me
to put it into Execution. Retire, I Will give you some little Time to reflect,
whether this peevish Opposition, or the Merit of a compliance, will prove most
advantageous.


Pam. I do, and ever will, contemn every Advantage purchased at the expense of
Truth and Innocence. [Exit.


Belv. H^dst thou not raised this Storm of Jealousy within me, that Truth and
Innocence might still have been preserved, and on conditions too, perhaps,
beyond the bounds of thy Ambition; but since another takes up all your Heart, I
must repay the Sighs and Languishments thou have cost me, at least with the
possession of thy Person -- and yet -- but hence Reflection --

Thy least Advance will damp my purposed Joy.
And all this sweet Revenge at once destroy.
[Exit.
Enter COLEBRAND and JEWKES. Jewk. Well, I vow Monsieur Colebrand, you are a
most engaging Person, and if this young Minx continues her obstinate Airs, and
refuses marrying you -- I have a wife in my Eye for you, with whom you may have
a more considerable Fortune -- though I confess, she does not quite come up to
her in Youth and Beauty.


Cole. Upon my Vard, Madame, de Money comprehend all de charm of Youth and
Beauty, beside, what signify to me all de Charm of Mademoiselle Pamela, begar
it be de same ting as to have de grand Estate in France, and Monsieur le Roy he
take half de Profit.


Jewk Well, well, if this should chance to be a match that I propose -- you
shall stay in England, and preserve both Fortune and Wife, and I warrant we
shall be the Envy -- Bless me -- what did I say -- we! Oh! I die with Confusion!


Cole. Pardie! den it be herself she mean! Oh, de damned ugly Vitch -- but it is
no matter -- begar I will get de Money, and then she may go to her Fader de
Devil (aside.) O Madame, dis Confusion fill me vid Surprise! it be de grand
Honor, it ravish-me vid Surprise. [Taking her Hand.


Jewk. Let me go, let me go, -- I have not Spirits to support the shock! Bless
me who is here? how shall I cover this Disorder?


Enter JOHN ARNOLD Arn. Mrs. Jewkes, his Honor has sent for you high and low
-- he is in main haste to speak with you -- Adod, here he comes himself.


Enter BELVILE. Belv. Mrs. Jewkes, I have an Affair of Consequence to confer
with you upon -- Monsieur withdraw -- our Business requires Privacy.


Cole. (Aside) Privacy: Pardie has he d' Inclination to dis Vife too -- Vid all
my Heart begar. [Exit.


Belv. Arnold, wait without -- I have Directions to send by you to the Attorney
about Williams. Exit Arnold.


Mrs. Jewkes, I find this Creature's absolutely resolved against this intended
Marriage.


Jewk. Fortunate Accident. [Aside.


Bell. Therefore I am determined no longer to let her Sighs and Tears prevail,
but this Night -- possess myself of that Blessing, she fondly had designed
another Prize.


Jewk. By my troth, and I commend your Honor; I think you greatly demeaned
yourself in condescending to humor her Nicety with this Marriage, if she had
consented.


Bell. Do you take particular Care the Servants are all dispatched to Bed
betimes, and, for a reason, tell 'em I am retired to my Chamber indisposed, and
must not be disturbed with any noise.


Jewk. Your Honor need not doubt my Diligence and Care.


Bell. Do you attend below with Colebrand, if they should be alarmed by any
outcry, to prevent their coming up the stairs that lead to Pamela's Bed
Chamber; I Will defer sending Arnold till the Morning, and prsently retire the
back Way; besure punctually observe my Directions. [Exit.


Jewk. I warrant your Honor -- well, I Will go in, and find out Monsieur
Colebrand, and inform him this Wedding's off -- and our's may come on whenever
he pleases -- but hold -- I Will be a little upon the reserve, that I may oblige
him to address me with that polite Softness so peculiar to his Country. Exit.


Enter JOHN ARNOLD. A murrain on thee for an old Beldam; what a plaguey Harridan
it is; if Beelzebub don't lay his Claws upon thee for thy baseness to poor Mrs.
Pamela -- but haud you, haud you, John, have thou deserved much better at his
hands? by my troth but little -- nay thou'st be every whit as bad, if thou do
not let the poor young Body know the dreadful Plot thou have overheard -- but
what will that avail, alack a day, but little -- but may hap if I were to
acquaint Master Williams of it, he might overthrow it by his Learning -- IN the
Name of Goodness, I Will find him out, and disburthen my Conscience to him. [Exit.


Enter COLEBRAND and JEWKES. Cole. Oh, Madame; this News make me all Rapture
it is impossible to keep my passion from Extravagance --


Jewk. O fie, Monsieur if you should offer any thing against the Rules of
Decorum, I should not be able to support it; my Delicacy could never endure a
boisterous Lover; and if hereafter you should prove inconstant, my tender Heart
would pine itself to Death.


Cole. Begar so much de better (aside) Oh; Madame; if you make proper
Estimation of your charm, it is impossible you can have Suspicion of my
Constancy.


Jewk. Well that was most engagingly said; O Monsieur, I find it is impossible
to resist your persuasive Eloquence; I will -- how shall pronounce the Word? I
will, I will be yours.


Cole. Begar, and so fall your Money too (aside) but ven, ven my Charmer fall
be de happy Day, you must not prolong my impatience.


Jewk. Well, I wont my dear irresistible Creature, it shall be done with all
the convenient Haste -- but ods my life, it is time we were at our posts, for his
Honor, I warrant him, is full as impatient as you are.


Cole. Dat is impossible, he has not half de Temptation.


Jewk. Go you naughty Flatterer.


Cole. Upon my Vard, ven I shall have you, I will be even vid you. [Aside.


Jewk. Come, lead me down Stairs, and there you shall give me your Fancy for my
Wedding-Suit.


Cole. O de tout mon coeur -- and begar I hope your next Suir vil be de Coffin.
(Aside)

Exeunt.
PAMELA alone. Why are our giddy Sex so vainly fond of Beauty? would they
reflect upon the various Dangers it involves 'em in, their Prudence would
destroy the little Pride, that glaringly obscures the Ills of Flattery's
soothing Tongue, that certain Bane of an unguarded Innocence. Ha! what can this
mean! my Master here -- O Heaven protect and save me now, or I am lost for ever.


Enter BELVILE. Belv. So, Madam, you are alone it seems.


Pam. Would I were. [Aside.


Belv. I thought I should have found your Lover in your Arms, cursing the hasty
Night that forces him to leave you; but know, ungrateful Girl, I am come
determined now, to be revenged for all the Wrongs you have done my Love -- I Will
beg no more for that which I may seize -- but thus -- [Laying hold of her.


Pam. You cannot mean it, Sir; for Heaven's sake!


Bell. Nay, no coying now, I have you in my Power; this Night shall make me
blessed. [Struggling with her. Come, come, you strive in vain.


Pam. (breaking from him) You cannot surely, nay, I think you dare not mean it
-- Consider, Sir, one Act like this, for ever stains your Honor, and leaves a
Mark of Infamy on all your Race to come --


Bell. Remember who you speak to --


Pam. Sir, do you remember who you speak to -- Had you never sunk beneath the
Master -- I never had forgot the Duty of a Servant; but now, by Nature
prompted, I must exert myself in the Defense of that Innocence, which ought to
be a Guard against your brutal Fury.


Bell. Come, come, no more, I am not to be trifled with, nor preached from what
I Have once determined -- No -- your Sex's little Atts, which you presume upon,
and call 'em by the specious Name of Virtue, are all too thinly covered to
deceive me longer; the Mask is off, and now you stand confessed, like Sin
abandoned by Hypocrisy.


Pam. I Am sorry, Sir, a just Contempt of Infamy is construed into Art and mean
Hypocrisy -- but know, an honest Mind's above 'em both, and cannot voluntarily
act repugnant to itself -- therefore, good Sir, reflect, and think with
Caution, your Passion robs you of your Reason; but when that Passion is
subdued, by what Reason can you then be justified? -- Your Heart condemns
itself -- for Vice will ever be pursued (even in the most abandoned Minds) by
Conscience and Remorse.


Bell. How she disarms my Resolution! -- Come my Pamela -- I own I Have been too
boistrous -- Nay, I Will now lay by Authority, and sue for Pardon too -- forgive
the Folly of ungoverned Passion, and imitating that Heaven you are like, acquit
the Wretch that cannot excuse himself.


Pam. Nay, now, Sir, you descend too low and --


Bell. By Heaven, I cannot, your Beauty makes you equal to the greatest, and
Love like mine throws all Distinction down. Oh! if you knew with what a Warmth,
with how much Tenderness I languish for you, your softning Heart would teach
you to be kind in Pity to the Fate of one, that cannot live without you Come,
come, this Night shall make me happy, and then Tomorrow binds me yours
eternally.


Pam. Why now indeed you throw distinction down in trying to deceive so mean a
thing as me; what: pawn your Honor to your servant, to give the fool a
flattering Pretense to believe you, and then, through customary Pride, abandon
her and Honor too -- No, Sir, my innocence is all the Wealth I have to boast,
and that, I Will be a thrifty Miser of, nor credulously lend it out on Promises:


Bell. By Heaven, this scorn has turned my Love to Rage; and now on my own Terms
you shall be mine my Heart was quick relapsing into fondness, but this last
Folly has recovered me, and ruined you. [Again laying hold of her.


Pem. O: Heaven assist, and help me now.


Belv. You call in vain for Help, there is no protector near.


Enter WILLIAMS from behind and interposes. Will. Behold one here.


Pam. Ha! --


Will. Now, Sir, -- nay, look not angrily -- but rather, thank that Heaven,
whose providential Care, by me, has saved you from a Crime. --


Belv. Confusion! -- What! you have your Paramour! your Bravoe closeted at
Midnight -- O! thou wronged -- Innocence, thou virtuous -- Hypocrise --


Will. Have a Care, Sir, nor meanly take such low Revenge as every common
Wretch employs -- Destraction -- it is poor, beneath yourself, almost as much
as, having done the Deed.


Pam. Good Heaven! How came he here?


Bell. How came he! O! well dissembled ignorance: But my Revenge shall be as
real as my Wrong; no doubt you are impatient for my absence: It is, indeed,
beneath me to rival such a Wretch; I will oblige you: My Love is like a long
forgotten Dream; but yet, by Heaven, its Consequence shall prove fatal. (Going.


Pam. Hold, Sir, you must not leave me with this base aspersion; for know my
honest Heart disdains the foul reproach with which you would sully it:


Bell. Disdains: You mean it fears; for now I find that you can like the Love,
but would conceal the Shame.


Pam. You wrong me, Sir, for had my disposition been inclined to Vice, it is so
tottering a Foundation, it must have fallen to you; you who have used so many
arts to win me to your wicked Purpose -- As for the consequence of your mad
Revenge -- leave me but spotless, and the rest's indifferent to me. (Exit.


Bell. As spotless as you are, I Am sure I shall -- (Going.


Will. Stay, Sir, and hear --


Bell. Your insolent Excuses; no, I have not room for any Thought, but my
Revenge, which I will prosecute --


Will. On whom? -- For what? Alas, Sir, turn your Revenge upon yourself,
chastise your Heart, and call it to a strict Account, for having dared to
entertain a Thought to your Dishonor; there your Revenge is due, and only
there your Punishment is just.


Bell. Why thou dissembling Wretch: How can thou dare to think that I Will be
thus abused -- Go, follow her, and in her wanton Arms try to prolong the last
indulgent Night, you ever shall enjoy together.


Will. Rash Man forbear, nor think the Gifts of giddy Fortune, can license thy
ungoverned Tongue, to wrong the Innocent.


Bell. The Innocent:


Will. Be cautious, Sir, -- nor let your Passion be the mad forerunner of
Repentance; your Power I know can ruin me, but cannot strip my Mind of Honesty,
which, while I wear, though in a loathsome Dungeon, sets me above that Wretch,
who discontented stalks in Palaces, purused by Guilt, and its black Follower,
reflection.


Bell. Can thou suppose this weak Pretense to honesty, this dull scholastic
Pedantry, will save thee from my resentment? God's Death; had I not seen thee break
from thy Concealment, yet I had Proofs before, too strong to leave a Doubt, but
that her mock innocence deceived me. -- A Mistress -- 'faogh -- it is fulsome,
and a rank Satire on your Function.


Will. Your Function, Sir, enjoins Protection to your Servant, and your
Authority, which you have prostituted in undermining Innocence, had better, and
with Justice, been employed in its Defense -- As for me, I am grieved at your
Displeasure, but more at the unhappy Cause.


Bell. Yes, you shall have Cause for Grief, and quickly find the Folly of
intruding on thy Master's Pleasures -- Who waits there --


Will. Hold, Sir, -- you need not call for Witnesses to your Intemperance, one
is too many to so bad an Act; but to preserve your Honor, and my Honesty,
which you have been regardless of, I must presume to call one -- Come forth
there --


Enter ARNOLD from his Closet. Belv. Ha:


Arn. O! Sir, I pray your Honor would forgive me:


Belv. Forgive thee! What:


Arn. O! Sir, I am the Occasion of all this Noise and Anger.


Belv. Thou the Occasion!


Arn. Indeed I Would never have offended your Honor so: but that my Conscience
drove me to it, whether I would or no.


Bell. Why, what have done?


Will. Why, Sir, this Man most fortunately overheard your Directions, to that
wicked Instrument Mrs. Jewkes, and touched by Conscience for his Concern, in
what might happen discovered the vile plot to me, and this was the occasion
(which your Jealousy and Passion has so far mistaken) of my Concealment.


Bell. Ha! Is this Truth?


Arn. Yes, indeed it is, and if your Honor pleases, I Will take my
Bible-oath-on't.


Bell. Well, leave us. (Exit ARNOLD) Heavens! what an Escape Iv'e had from Rage
and violent Desire; to think upon it, is looking down a Precipice, from whence
to have fallen, I must have crushed myself, and all beneath me.


Will. I find he is moved, I hope with just Remorse.


Bell. And then this honest Man: -- How has my ungoverned Passion injured him,
who has snatched me from the Depth of Guilt? How can I look on him?


Will. Sir --


Bell. Mr. Williams, I would ask your Pardon, but that I am too well convinced
what I have done, will not bear Excuse -- therefore


Will. No more of that, Sir; as all the Merit of what I Have done, is in the Deed
itself, so your contrition brings with it an excuse


Bell. Thou excellent Man: What do I owe thee for thy hone^^ help? Not less than
if you would snatched me from the Hands of Death -- Nay, I was dead to Virtue -- but
thus recovered, I must repent -- but first I must repair -- or else my
penitence deceives myself, and is but Mockery to Heaven. (Pauses) It shall be
so. -- Mr. Williams, as you have been so great an instrument of my growing
happiness, I know your honest Nature cannot be more rewarded, than by
completing what you have so generously begun.


Will. How mean you, Sir:


Bell. There Is now no way left me to make amends for all the Wrongs I Have done
the virtuous Pamela, but by making her eternally my own.


Will. Sir, I applaud your resolution, aad may Heaven make yon happy.


Bell. It will not fail -- my heart too prompts me to it -- And then her beauty,
and transcendent innocence, a re a large equivalent to Wealth and Title, and
far outweigh their Worth.

In lawless Pleasures sunk, to Virtue blind,
Thy friendly Care has raised my sinking Mind
No more, by wild impetuous Tempests tossed,
With Horror now I view the fatal Coast;
By gentle Gales, my calmer Passions move,
My Pilot, Thou; my harbor Virtuous Love

End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
A Grove before BELVILE's House. Enter old ANDREWS. EITHER I am deceived, or
yonder is the Prison that confines my Pamela. I scarce have strength to reach
it, and when I have, my Age and Circumstances bring but small Assistance -- And
who, alas? will side with injured Poverty against rich oppression. Suppose I
have recourse to Mr. Belvile himself, and upon my knees beg him to restore my
Daughter to her unhappy Father -- if this imperious Fire of wanton youth has
not wholly consumed his Honor and Humanity, my Tears and Age perhaps may prove
successful Pleaders, and all be saved from Ruin? the Thought transports my
Soul, and gives fresh Vigor to my wearied Body -- Here comes onr may give me
farther information.


Enter COUNTRYMAN. What a plague does that old Fellow there, it is no Road I Am
sure, and none but Rogues would make it one -- I lost some sheep herabouts,
last Midsummer was two years, and ten to one but this is the Man that stole 'em
-- Ecod I don't like his looks, and had I my Gun with me, I Would venture to shoot
at 'en without examination, I would -- but I Will be sharp and find 'en out.


Andr. Pray, honest Friend, is this the Road to Mr. Belvile's House?


Count. (stares him in the Face, and whistles) Eh.


Andr. Is that Mr. Belvile's House, Friend?


Count. Why do you think I Am Fool enough to tell you? Eh?


Andr. You have Humanity enough, I hope, to inform a Stranger, without being
guilty of Folly?


Count. I will not tell you for all that; I am sharp, Mun -- You Will not get any
thing from me, I can tell you but that: But pray you now, what may you want
with 'Squire Beluile's House?


And. I have particular Business there.


Count. I don't doubt it, and every Rogue may have the same Business there for
ought I know.


Andr. I never was used to such Language.


Count. Noa; then you never had your deserts before; He, he.


Andr. You mistake me, Friend, indeed; though I appear poor and unhappy, yet I am
honest. (Weeps.


Count. Ecod, and so he is, I warrant him, may I be hanged if I have not
brought Tears into the Old 'en's Eyes; I Am sorry I have been so harsh; pray
you, don't take to Heart my Merriment; I Am sorry I Have wronged you, Father; but
there are Rogues about, and I am a sort of a Deputy-keeper to the 'Squire, and
examine all suspicious Persons.


Andr. Pray, honest Friend, show me the House, for my Business with Mr. Beluile
is very urgent.


Count. Ay, but be it as urgent as it will, you will find it hard Work to get him
from the Business he is about; there is a tight Lass in the Case, and the 'Squire
is young and lovesome, and when a keen Stomach falls to good Meat, 'twill be
hard to get him from it, till his Belly's full you know.


Andr. Oh, my Fears! Pray explain yourself.


Count. Why, you must know; you're old enough to hold your Tongue, if I should
tell you?


Andr. You may depend upon me.


Count. The young 'Squire has been deeply smitten with one of his own Maids,
and all as he could say or do, the Wench kept her own till Yesterday.


Andr. And what of Yesterday?


Count. Why all was over, I suppose, by the great Change; for she has thrown
away her home spun Country-dress, and is as fine as an Empress; (a bad Sign let
me tell you) and he has thrown away his melancholy Humor, and is as skitish as
a Colt; but she will tame him, eh, eh.


Andr. Enough; Farewell my Life and Cares; Pamela's undone; I Am no more. (Sinks
in his Arms.


Count. What a murrain, is the Man out of his Senses; what, old Friend, you are
not dead sure; I shall be brought into a fine Quandary here, an he dies without
telling somebody I have not murdered him: Hold ye, his Breath comes and goes;
there is Hopes yet.


Andr. When shall I be at Rest? Can I survive my Daughter's Infamy? All
gracious Heaven, let me not linger thus.


Count. There Is something presses him mightily; pray rise, Master, and let me
take you to the Hall, and get you something to comfort you -- Pray do.


Andr. All Help is vain, it is Death alone can give me Peace; but I accept your
kind Assistance (raises him.) If Age and Wretchedness deserve Compassion, your
Charity is well bestowed.


Count. I never was so moved and terrified in all my Life.


Andr. Pray, Friend, direct me thither; and yet I dread to see her! But I must
on, for Doubt but more perplexes and distracts my feeble Mind; if she is
ruined, I shall not long endure the Pain of thinking her Virtue was the last
and only Prop of my declining Age, and both must sink together.

(Exeunt.
Enter PAMELA. Pam. Now, Pamela, guard well thy Mind; let not this sudden, this
amazing Turn of thy despairing Fortune -- the pompous Height to which thou art
raised -- through gorgeous Dress -- let 'em not throw upon thy former State a
darkning Veil to hide its View -- lest Insolence and Pride should banish gentle
Gratitude and fair Humility.


Enter Mrs. JEWKES. Jewk. Good morrow, dear Madam -- Well, if his Honor had
chose out of the Drawing room, on a Birth-night, I Will defy him to have brought
home such a Presence for the Head of his Table -- such a delicate white and
red, such an Air, such --


Pam. Forbear -- nor fondly hope to throw a Gloss upon your former Conduct, by
only changing Hands with Vice, and substituting in the Place of purposed Ruin,
hateful Flattery.


Jewk. Let me entreat your Ladyship to believe, whatever I have done was more
through Fear of disobeying his Honor, than any vicious Disposition.


Pam. The most vicious Disposition is Want of Fear in disobeying Heaven; and
can there rise a stronger Proof of such a Want, than impiously attempting to
draw others in to violate its sacred Laws?


Jewk. Dear Madam, the whole Service of my Life to come, shall be devoted to
deserve your Ladyship's Forgiveness. --


Pam. We'll wave this Subject for the present; and be assured, no proper
Clemency from me shall be ever wanting, that your future Conduct may deserve.


Jewk. I humbly thank your Ladyship -- has your Ladyship any Commands.


Pam. I have this Request -- that henceforth you decline bestowing Titles I
have neither Right or Inclination to -- Supper must be deferred an Hour beyond
the usual Time, for the coming of Sir Simon Darnford, and his Family, whom Mr.
Belvile is gone to invite.


Jewk. I shall observe, Madam. (Exit


Enter ARNOLD. Arn. Odsheart, Madam, here is Lady Davers and her Nephew come --
she is in a main Heat -- and asked for you Madam, as though she were in a
desperate Passion.


Pam. Ha! -- I thank you for this Notice. John -- Conduct her in. (Exit.
Arnold. This somewhat ruffles me -- would Mr. Belvile were at home! I dread
this haughty Woman's Taunts -- I think 'twere best to avoid her, till his
Return -- But wherefore should I fear -- the Guilty only fear; my Innocence is
my Guard, which, if I had lost, Shame, as well as Fear, indeed might justly
have alarmed me.


Enter Lady DAVERS and SMATTER. L. Da. Protect us in the Name of Vanity, what
nave we here? am I awake? Oh! I shall swoon.


Pam. I am proud, Madam, of the Honor of seeing your Ladyship.


L. Da. Oh: support me. (Leaning upon Smatter.


Smat. Rat me, Madam, but I am debelitated with Surprise, equal to your
Ladyship's.


Pam. Is not your Ladyship well?


L. Da. Well, no, I have the Vapors to Extravagance.


Pam. Shall I order your Ladyship any thing?


L. Da. Order any thing, and why not fetch it thyself, Mrs. Pert.


Pam. I hoped, Madam, paying my Duty here might be more agreeable.


L. Da. No, if thou would have me recover, remove thyself in the Name of
Decency, I conjure thee.


Pam. I am sorry, Madam, I should occasion this Disorder -- I Will retire (Going


L. Da. Stay.


Smat. Ay, ay, I beseech your Ladyship let her stay, for now I have recovered
my first Blast of Astonishment, let me perish, but I Will supply the Want of
Salvolatile and Hartshorn for your Ladyshiy, with a few Strokes of Wit and
Humor upon this exotic Figure -- Hearkee, Child, prithee do us the Favor of
taking a turn or two cross the Room, that we may arrive at some Degree of
Certainty, whether or no thou art the identical little Pammy, formerly so
famous for thy melifluous Structures of modern Tarts and Cheesecakes?


Pam. I am sorry, Sir, my Merit or your Capacity is so extremely slender, I
cannot be remembered for any thing more meritorious.


L. Da. Astonishing Insolence, I Am out of Patience, why thou gew-gaw Idiot,
do thou imagine the fine Trappings Belv. has tricked thee up in, -- or the
arrogant Pride of becoming his Mistress -- give thee a Pretense to this saucy
Liberty with his Relations.


Pam. Madam, I equally abhor the Thought of either, and wish this young
Gentleman was as nearly related to Mr. Belvile in his Sense of Decency and good
Manners, as he is by Blood or Marriage.


Smat. Well, throughout the whole Race of female Delinquents, henceforth I Will
eternally celebrate the non-pareil of kept Abigail.


Pam. Remember, Sir, this wanton License, with my Character and Reputation,
equally reflects upon Mr. Belvile's.


Smat. Now that, Child, is what I cannot so readily comprehend -- because, you
must know, we young Fellows think our Reputation's as little concerned in
debauching every Girl we like, as in beating every Drawer or Hackney-Coachman
we do not like. [Apart to her.


Pam. Shameless and abandoned Principles!


Smat. Ay, that may be; but they are the Principles of most of the smart young
Fellows in Town.


Pam. But know, Sir, they are such as Mr. Belvile's Honor and good Sense
detests and loathes.


L. Da. What, what, Madam, are you pleased to insinuate relating to Mr.
Belvile's Sense and Honor -- good Mrs. Forward, none of thy Works of
Supererogation, that is, to come down to the Level of thy Understanding; don't
meddle in Defense of his Honor, till you have a better Right, and are properly
called upon; thy Understanding, Child, as well as thy Person, is in Masquerade.


Smat. Dear Lady Davers, you never were more out in your Life -- the Design of
Masquerades is to conceal Persons, you know -- Now Pammy's Dress is quite the
contrary; for it very plainly discovers who she is, and what she is -- Ha, ha,
ha!


Pam. Why, Sir, what am I?


Smat. As fine a Woman as ever my Eyes beheld; by all that is exquisite, Tom
Belvile's a most happy Mortal, or may I suffer Annihilation.


Pam. Sir --


L. Da. Pretty Dear: I Will assure you it has got a Spirit with its fine Clothes
-- what are you painted too, Cherubim? 'Gads, my life: it is very necessary --
you will be pale and sickly by-and-by -- Qualms, Qualms, my Dear, will soon fetch
out the Ruddiness of your Cheeks -- I beg ten thousand Pardons -- the Roses I
would say.


Smat. Upon my Soul, Lady Davers, I think Pammy has a very pretty Fancy; I
never saw Clothes more Alamode in my Life; the Color, Silk, and Trimmings,
quite genteel -- white, white, you know, is quite apropos for Pammy, and
emblematical -- ha, ha, ha.


L. Da. Ay, ay, the Virgin Color -- I always thought Pamela would die a Vestal
-- she is a very Martyr to Virtue, and the very Picture of Purity --


Smat. Oh fort bien -- fort bien, Madam --


Pam. This Treatment is insupportable. [Bursting into Tears, going.


Enter BELVILE. Bell. My Pamela in Tears? What has disturbed my Love?


Smat. Why you must know, Sir, my Lady here, and I, being enlightened with the
Brilliancy of Pammy's Figure, have been somewhat sprightly in our Remarks upon
her Transmutation -- and she, poor Thing, not used to that Spirit in
Conversing, had no other Hope to extinguish the Fire of our Raillery, but by
Tears -- ha, ha, ha.


Bell. What you term Raillery -- I find was Insolence; for, all thy poor
Attempts toward Wit, her slightest Breath had blasted in their Birth.


L. Da. Brother, Brother, -- I am sorry to find in Relations are thus treated
with Contempt for this worthless --


Bell. Hold, Madam -- By Heaven, the Worth of half your Sex, weighed in the
Balance against here is, is light and inconsiderable --


L. Da. O doubtless, Sir, the Worth of a favorite Mistress is inestimable, in
the Opinion of her Admirer, at least while the deluding Bait of Novelty
continues, and the Nymph's adorable Charms remain in Bloom, and unfaded.


Bell. Though Female Envy must allow the personal Charms of Pamela, yet the
Beauties of her Mind so far exceed 'em, they stand in Rivalship with the most
Correct and truly Elevated of our Sex.


L. Da. Yes, yes, she has given elevated Proofs indeed of a prodigious correct
Mind, in choosing rather to make you Guardian of her Honor and Innocence, than
keep Possession of 'em herself.


Bell. She has, Madam, in the justest Sense, made me Guardian of her Honor: I
am her Husband.


L. Da. Husband.


Bell. Yes, Madam, and prouder of the Name, than all the empty Pomp that
Fortune, Birth, or Title, can bestow.


Smat. Sir, I go Post for London Tomorrow Morning; do you choose Lodgings in
Moorfields, Chelsea, or Bednal-Green?


Bell. Hence, thou Trifler.


Smat. Raving, by Endymion; and positively may be mischievous, therefore it is
prudect to withdraw, tii is fit cools, 'egad. (Aside)

[Exit.
"During this Time, Lady Davers appears greatly disordered, and views Pamela
with great Anger and Contempt -- sits down, takes out a Smelling-bottle, then a
Snuff Box." Pam. My Presence, Sir, I perceive, but more increases the
Indignation Lady Davers is thus suddenly alarmed with; therefore beg Leave to
withdraw, lest I prevent a Reconciliation I most ardently desire.


Belv. Your Prudence and good Sense have only prevented my Request -- that you
might not be disturbed with her outrageous Insolence and Pride -- I Will wait on
you in the Garden immediately, my Life. (Leading her to the door)

[Exit Pam.
L. Da. What! is she gone? You did well to send her out of the Way -- for by
the Infamy she throw^ upon our Blood -- ^ -- ^ --


Bell. Cease your idle Threats -- Virtue and Innocence add Luster to the noblest
Blood.


L. Da. I hope, Sir, our's wanted no such Addition.


Bell. Your Part on it wants Meekness and Humility -- they would make you new,
like me: This lovely Creature's Merit, as it stands enriched by Nature, is
regardless of the Gifts of Accident or Fortune.


L. Da. Provoking Folly; and do you really imagine, Sir, this pretty romantic
Encomium upon Nature, and her fiddle-faddle Gifts, will make any Atonement for
the eternal Blemish thrown on the Honor of our Name and Family?


Bell. I well know you have been fatally misled, by too many Precedents, to
conclude Pride and Haughtiness the chief Charactericks of Name and Family.


L. Da. Yes, Sir, I shall so far persevere in that Error -- never meanly to
acknowledge as my Relation any mean pitiful --


Bell. By Heaven! if you but whisper one the slightest Accent may reflect on her
I have thought fit to share my Name and Fortune with, that Moment is the last
you ever shall be called, or even remembered as a Sister -- Farewell, (Going.)


L. Da. Stay, I conjure you (bursting into Tears) Alas, my Brother, you too
severely load me with the Charge of Pride -- while thus, behold, your warm
Concern, and sharp Resentment, subdues its utmost Force, and change to
Tenderness its boasted Strength.


Bell. Prithee no more; I am convinced those Violences of Temper, that so
frequently break out, are more contracted by Habit and ill Example, than any
natural Tendency in your Disposi ion; and be assured, my Dear, when you are
thoroughly acquainted with Pamela's great Worth and Merit, you will readily
confess I have the fairest Prospect for a continual Series of social Happiness,
the chief Blessing of the married State.


L Da. I have, as well as you, a very high Opinion of Pamela's Merit -- Yet --


Bell. Beware of a Relapse, let me entreat you, follow her into the Garden, and
now your Passion somewhat subsides, I am convinced the Force of her good Sense,
and winning Affability in conveying that Sense, will quickly banish your false
Punctilios of Birth and Family.


L. Da. If they should fail, the tender Wishes I must ever have, to hold a
Place in your Affections, shall henceforth govern all my Thoughts. (Exit.


Enter ARNOLD. Arn. May it please your Honor, Master Andrews is without, and
presses very hard to see your Honor.


Bell. Ha, Mr. Andrews, admit him immediately. (Exit Arn) This good old Man, no
doubt, is come with a heavy anxious Heart, apprehensive of his Daughter's Ruin,
'twere best I think to leave the Pleasure of undeceiving him to her, because
'twill so agreeably increase the Joy.

Enter ANDREWS. Good Mr. Andrews, your Servant; I am extremely glad to see.


Andr. I thank you Sir, -- Pardon my Impatience, Sir, where is my Child?


Bell. I believe, in the Garden.


Andr. She Is well, I hope?


Bell. O never better -- gay as the Spring, and beautiful as ever.


Andr. I am not solicitous to know in what Condition the Beauty of her Person
stands, provided that of her Mind is still preserved unblemished.


Bell. Sure, Mr. Andrews you don't imagine she has any Examples in my Family to
corrupt it?


Andr. I hope there are not, Sir, but pardon me, if the fond Tears of an
indulgent Father struggle against that Hope, and gush with silent Anguish from
my Eyes. (Weeping.


Bell. 'Twere cruel longer to continue him under this Anxiety.

Enter ARNOLD. Let Pamela know I desire to see her.


Arn. She and Lady Davers, Sir, are here. (Exit.


Enter L. DAVERS and PAMELA. Bell. Here Is a Stranger, Pamela --


Pam. My Father; (Running to him and kneeling.)


Andr. (Turning from her) Would I were not.


Pam. Alas, what mean you, Sir?


Andr. View thy own sumptuous Dress -- and tell thyself my Meaning.


Pam. Oh, my loved Father, banish your Fears, nor think your Daughter's
Innocence the hateful Barter for this costly Habit; it is made the Purchase, not
the Exchange: for know, this worthy Gentleman, won by my constant Firmness to
the virtuous Principles your Goodness early taught me, has raised me justly to
the Honor of his Bed; I am his Wife.


Andr. How shall my sudden declining Strength support this sudden Flood of Joy?
O my Child, my Child; (Weeping and embracing her)


Bell. Is not the Power of thus rewarding virtuous Truth, my Sister, the noblest
Pride the Heart can boast?


L. Da. Believe me, Brother, I want no Arguments to enforce its Truth.


Andr. My Surprise and Joy too long prevent my Gratitude -- O worthy Sir, what
Words, what Thoughts sufficiently can pay --?


Bell. The amplest Payment is the Blessing of that honest upright Heart upon
this happy Union. (Takes Pamela by the Hand, and both Kneel.)


Andr. Spare me this Confusion, Sir, receive it in my Wishes, I have not Words.
(Raising 'em, and turning away.


Enter SMATTER with a Paeper. Smat. Ha, ha, ha, by Astraea and her Scales, ha,
ha, ha, the drollest and most consummate Piece of Justice, ha, ha, ha, the
Goddess, Madam, (to Pam.) points you out as her peeuliar Favorite; for she has
not only wrought the Confusion of your inveterate Enemy, but also the
Conversion of your most devoted humble Servant.


Bell. What mean you, Sir?


Smat. Why, in the first Place, Sir, a worthy Gentleman, by giving me the most
prevailing as well as pleasing Detail of this Lady's amiable Conduct and
Qualities, has made me a sincere Convert to Women of Honor and Virtue. And
this Paper, Sir, -- this Paper, left by your Valet de Chamber, Colebrand, will
humourously describe the Punishment so justly inflicted on that venerable
Matron Mademoiselle Jewkes.


Belv. Pray oblige us, Sir, with reading it.


[Here SMATTER reads the Letter. My dear charmante Wife,
I Send a you dis Lettre, to let a you know you sal never see me any more, upon
my Vard -- I do confess I have marie with you, and auci, I do confess dat de
Marriage is a grande Engagement; but I no tink dear is a great Mal to break de
grande Engagement, ven it is very apropos -- I have told a you, p^asieurs fois,
dat you had great Beauti and Temtation about you; which, en verite, vas your
Moan -- And now I have got dat in my Possession, de rest of Madam Jewkes may
allon au Diable -- Dat is more French Politic for you. I have a very good
Wife in my own Country, and tirteen little pretty Enfans, all like myself,
which your good Guinea sal make alive fort bien: If you can persuade any great
Fool to marie you vidout de Portion, you have my Consentiment, de tou mon
Coeur! For, upon my Vard, Madam Jewkes, you are a damned heretic old Vitch,
and are more proper for Monsieur de Devil, dan for

Your tres humble Serviteur, at a Distance, JAQUES COLEBRAND.



Bell. I could wish this evil Woman's Punishment had been accomplished, without
the Addition of another's Crime.


Pam. Give me Leave to intercede, she may not, Sir, be wholly destitute -- lest
Want prevent that Penitence your Clemency may win.


Bell. How exalted is the Mind prefering Mercy to Revenge.


Enter Mr. WILLIAMS. Sir, that I might contribute as much as possible to
enlarge the Pleasure so general in your Family, I have prepared a little
musical Entertainment, in which your Neighbors and Servants have desired to be
employed as Performers, and they now wait your Commands.


Bell. Whenever they please, Mr. Williams.

Dance here. Sir, I am greatly obliged to you, and most particularly so, in
becoming the happy Instrument of discovering to me, the inestimable Merit of
this lovely Woman, which I had before too lightly viewed.

The Indian thus, with wanton Dalliance played
Over the first Diamond, he by Chance surveyed;
But when its hidden Fire, like Day, broke forth,
And blazing proved its fixed intrinsic Worth,
Like me, its latent Beauties he explored,
And what before he prized, he then adored.

EPILOGUE.
Spoke by Mrs GIFFARD.
HOLD, Critics, what is your Sentence e're you go?
Say, is our Bard pronounced an Ass or no?
Or do you wisely nod your Hods, and cry, So, so.
Well, enter nous, I think him strangely dull,
A senseless, stupid, antiquated Fool;
Was ever such another Blockhead seen?
To choose a Servant for his Heroine;
Gad, on our Sex, a general Satire's thrown,
Who love more cheap to part with -- what is their own.
If this should pass, all Womankind must fear,
For none will purchase, if the Sale's so dear.
Unhappy Belvile, what a Wife, protect her,
N^ doubt he would often have a Curtain Lecture.
Besides, a Girl, so over-fond of Grace,
Might be devout in an improper Place;
And pour forth Sermons from her fervent Mind,
When the poor Man's ^uite otherwise inclined.
I promise you, I Have tried my utmost Art,
To wipe these musty Tenets from his Heart;
But he is resolved to give the World the Lie,
And like his Pammy, conquer Vice or die.
So let him fall; unhappy, little Bays.
But first I Will tell you what the Ninny says.
He knew his Judges, and he wished to find
A Theme might justly please a British Mind:
A Tale, which Albion's Sons might deign to hear,
And without Shame, let fall the pitying Tear.
If then these well-meant Scenes have Power t'impart
One Moment's Pleasure to the virtuous Heart;
If humble Truth and Innocence can move
Your Souls, like Belvile's, to reward and love;
His artless Muse in after times shall sing
These noble Topics on a bolder Wing;
And the warm Spark your Breath has helped to raise,
Collect its Fires, and mount into a Blaze.
FINIS

