TRACTS, CONCERNING THE ANCIENT AND ONLY TRUE LEGAL MEANS OF NATIONAL DEFENSE,
BY A FREE MILITIA.

I. The ancient Common Law Right of associating with the Vicinage, in every
County, District, or Town, to support the civil Magistrate in maintaining the
Peace. II. A general Militia, acting by a well-regulated Rotation, is the only
safe Means of defending a free People. III. Remarks concerning the trained
Bands of the City of London. IV. Hints of some general Principles, which may be
useful to military Associations.
LONDON: PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCC.LXXXI.

THE ANCIENT COMMON LAW RIGHT OF ASSOCIATING WITH THE VICINAGE, In every
County, District, or Town, to support the Civil Magistrate in maintaining the
Peace.
THE Ancient Common Law Right OF ASSOCIATING WITH THE VICINAGE, In every
County, District, or Town, to support the Civil Magistrate, in maintaining the
Peace.
MAN being, by nature, a social creature, it is natural for him to associate
with his brethren and neighbors, for common defense against all unjust
violence; and such association being just and reasonable, as well as natural,
we have not only a right thus to associate, but are even bound to do it, by a
branch of the common law, which cannot legally be changed: for it is fixed upon
all men, in their respective districts and countries, as an indispensable DUTY,
by THE LAW OF NATURE AND NATIONS, that we may become assisting (says Cowel,
tit. 2.) both to our parents and country; and REPEL FORCE AND INJURY: and from
hence it comes, (says he,) that whatsoever we do, for the defense of our own
bodies, is adjudged legal. For which he cites Bracton, l. i. c. 6. This c. 6.
seems to be an error of the press, instead of c. 5. number. 7. the proper
reference to Bracton's declaration concerning the NATURAL RIGHT of all men to
RESIST VIOLENCE AND INJURY. -- Hoc autem jus gentium soium hominibus commune
est, veluti erga Deum religio, ut parentibus et patriae pareamus, ut VIM atque
INJURIAM PROPULSEMUS, nam DE JURE hoc evenit, ut quod quis ob sui tutelam
corporis fecerit, JURE fecisse existimetur. Item cum inter homines cognationem
quandam constituit natura, consequens est hominem homini insidiari nephas esse.
But this noble constitution of nature, whereby we ought to esteem all mankind
as brethren, is utterly corrupted by the hardened iniquity of temporal
governments! The laws of nature and sound Policy require every industrious
citizen to be exercised and expert in "Arms of Defense and Peace," for mutual
protection; but these, alas! are too generally discouraged and neglected,
whilst arms of offense and robbery are eagerly preparing in every port! The
unprincipled and abandoned part of mankind, that lay aside all discernment
between right and wrong, are prompted, by royal Proclamations, not merely to
"covet their neighbors goods," but to lay wait for and take them; whereby war
is more notoriously declared, and is infinitely more active against trade, and
the honorable merchants of the world, than against the standing armies and
navies of our enemies! Thus the seas swarm with piratical banditti, carrying
letters of dispensation for dishonesty, and the earth is filled with violence!
Have we not cause to expect some tremendous vengeance to vindicate the
righteousness of GOD; or that the Almighty will once more command the elements
to sweep corrupted man from the face of the earth? We are secured indeed, by
divine promise, from any future general destruction, by a deluge of water; but
the elements of tempest and fire are still reserved to execute the wrath of
GOD, and are frequently mentioned as the instruments of his vengeance. Isaiah
xvii. 13. Psa. lxxxiii. 13-15. cxlviii. 8. Dan. ii. 35. 2 Thessalonians. i. 8. 2 Pet.
iii. 7.
number. 7. So the Author of Doctor and Student, in his second chapter, concerning
the law of Nature and Nations, and the law of Reason, asserts, that, by the law
of reason, it is lawful to repel force with force; and that it is THE RIGHT OF
EVERY ONE (fas est unicuique se tueri, etc.) TO DEFEND HIMSELF AND HIS PROPERTY
AGAINST UNJUST VIOLENCE. Lex rationis permittat plurima fieri, ut scilicet quod
licitum est vim vi repellere, et quod fas est unicuique se tueri, et rem suam
defendere contra vim injustam. Doct. et Stud. c. ii. p. 8.
And again, in his fifth chapter, concerning the first foundation of English
law, Reason, he again repeats the maxim, that it is lawful to repel force with
force for the defense of the body, due circumstances being observed. -- Quod
licitum est vim vi repellere pro tuitione corporis, debitis circumstantiis
servatis. C. 5. p. 14. b.
Now, as the Laws of reason and nature are immutable, Et quod LEX RATIONIS in
cord scribitur, ideo deleri non potest, nec etiam recipit mutationem ex loco
nec tempore, sed ubique, et inter omnes homines, servari debet. Nam JURA
NATURALIA IMMUTABILIA SUNT, ET RATIO IMMUTATIONIS EST, QUOD RECIPIENT NATURAM
REI PRO FUNDAMENTO, quae semper eadem est, et ubique, etc. -- "Et contra eam"
(legem rationis vel naturae) non est praescriptio, vel ad appositum statutum
sive consuetudo. Et, si aliqua fiat, non sunt statuta, sive consuetudines, sed
corruptelae. Doct. et Stud. c. ii. p. 5.
this natural right of associating for common defense and peace, and the
natural right of every individual to repel force with force, in defense of
himself and property, can never be annulled by any act of parliament, but must
ever be esteemed as immutable rights of the common law, and must always remain
in force, unless the government should unhappily cease to be LEGAL, by setting
aside the first foundations of the LAW! Ancient statutes, however, though not
the foundation of these rights, yet bear ample testimony to the exercise or
usage of them: for, what is the power of the county, so often mentioned in the
ancient law and statutes, but an armed association of the vicinage? -- an
association, from which no layman, from 15 to 60 years of age, was exempt. See
Lambard's Eirenarcha, third book, p. 316, title, "Power of the County." --
That the Justices of the peace, Sheriff, or Under-sherife, ought to have the
aid and attendance of ALL the KNIGHTS, GENTLEMEN, YEOMEN, LABORERS,
SERVAUNTS, APPRENTICES, and VILLAINS: and likewise of WARDS: and of other
YOUNG MEN that be above the age of xv. years; for ALL of that age are bound to
have harness The word Harness was used to express all necessary accoutrements
for war, according to the rank of the bearers, and comprehended not only belts
and armor, but likewise arms and weapons, of every sort, that, for the time
being, might be esteemed most useful; so that in the old Dictionary, by
Minsheu, (printed in the time of king James I.) the word is explained by the
Greek plural, (...), which signifies arms, or instruments of war of all sorts
in general; and this is the sense also of the word Armure, as used in the
above cited statute of Winchester, (13 king Edw. I.) which, in the old English
version of it, is rendered Harneis, viz. And further, it is commanded, that
EVERY MAN have in his house HARNEIS, (in the original statute, written in old
French, the word is "Armure," which, by the context, must necessarily be
understood to comprehend Arms as well as Armor,) for to keep the peace, after
the ancient assise: that is to say; (2) EVERY MAN, between 15 years of age and
60 years, shall be assessed and sworn to ARMOR, according to the quantity of
their lands and goods: (3) that is to wit; from L 15 lands and goods, 40 marks,
AN HAUBERKE, A BREAST PLATE OF IRON, ("shapell de far,") A SWORD, A KNIFE,
AND AN HORSE: And from L 10 lands and 20 marks goods, AN HAUBERKE, A
BREAST PLATE OF IRON, A SWORD, AND A KNIFE: (5) And from L 5 lands, A DOUBLET,
A BREAST PLATE OF IRON, A SWORD, AND A KNIFE: (6) And from 40 s. land and more,
unto 100 s. of land, A SWORD, A BOW AND ARROWS, AND A KNIFE: (7) And he that
ha^h less than 40 s. yearly shall be sworn to keep GISARMS, Gisarms, properly
"GUISARME," (cu) PERTUISANE, arm^ militaire fait comme une lance, ou comme une
longue bayonnette.

Dictionnaire du vieux Language Francois, par M. Lacombe.


KNIVES, AND OTHER LESS WEAPONS: And all other that may shall have BOWS AND
ARROWS out of the forest, and in the forest BOWS AND BOULTS, etc. St. ii. c. 6.
A. D. 1285.
by the statute of Winchester. See also, in page 479 of the Eirenarcha, a
farther testimony that the law requires all laymen not only to have arms, but
also to be well exercised therein. See title, "Archerie." "If any man, being
the QUEEN 's subject," (the author wrote in the reign of queen Elizabeth,) and
not have reasonable cause or impediment, and being within the age of 60 years,
(except spiritual men, justices of one bench or other, justices of assise, and
barons of the exchequer,) have not A LONG BOW AND ARROWS READY IN HIS HOUSE,
or have not USED SHOOTING THEREIN; (which is a clear command to be exercised in
arms;) or have not, for EVERY MAN-CHILD IN HIS HOUSE, (between 7 years and 17
of age,) a bow and 2 shafts; and for every such, being above 17 years, a bow
and 4 shafts; or have not BROUGHT THEM UP IN SHOOTING, etc. he loses 6 s. 8 d.
for each month. And, under the same head, he informs us, that, if any man,
above the age of 24 years, have shot at any mark under eleven score yards, (
viz. one furlong, or 220 yards,) with any prick-shaft or flight, he shall "
loose 6 s. 8 d. for every shot." Also, if the inhabitants of any town have not
made and continued their Buts as they ought to do, -- lose 20 s. for every 3
months; (Eirenarcha, 4 book, p. 478, 479;) for which he cites 33 Hen. VIII. c.
9. in which, indeed, the obligation for every man to have arms, and be
exercised therein, is expressed still in stronger terms, viz. -- that butts be
made, on this side the feast of St. Michael the Archangel next coming, in every
city, town, and place, by the inhabitants of every such city, town, and place,
ACCORDING TO THE LAW OF ANCIENT TIMES USED, and that the said inhabitants, and
dwellers in every of them, be COMPELLED TO MAKE AND CONTINUE SUCH BUTTS, upon
pain to forfeit, for every 3 months so lacking, 20 s. And that THE SAID
INHABITANTS SHALL EXERCISE THEMSELVES WITH LONG-BOWS IN SHOOTING AT THE SAME,
and elsewhere, in holy days and other times convenient. And, to the intent that
EVERY PERSON may have bows of mean price, be it enacted, etc. iv. and v. Thus
the law not only permits, but absolutely requires, EVERY PERSON to have arms,
and be EXERCISED in the use of them.

The exercise of the Long-bow was formerly esteemed the most effectual military
discipline for the defense of the kingdom, and is so declared in another act of
parliament of the same year, cap. 6. -- Diverse gentlemen, yeomen, and
serving-men, now of late have laid apart the good and laudable exercise of the
Long-bow, which always heretofore has been the surety, safeguard, and
continual defense, of this realm of England, and an inestimable aread and
terror to the enemies of the same. (Extract from the preamble to the act of 33
Hen. VIII. c. 6.)

Hence it is plain, that gentlemen, yeomen, and serving men, were required, by
law, to be exercised in the use of such arms as were esteemed the best for the
safeguard and defense of the realm.


and, therefore, as the law, at that time, required EVERY MAN to be exercised
in the use of the then fashionable weapons, the reason of the law holds equally
good, to require the exercise of ALL MEN in the use of the present fashionable
weapons, the musket and bayonet.

But even at that time, the use of muskets, or guns, was allowed to the
inhabitants of all cities, boroughs, and market towns, and for the very fame
reason, (the defense of the realm,) by a provisional clause of the
last-mentioned act, vi. Provided always, and be it enacted, etc. that it shall
be lawful, from henceforth, to all gentlemen, yeomen, and serving-men of every
lord, spiritual and temporal, and of all knights, esquires, and gentlemen, and
to ALL THE INHABITANTS of cities, boroughs, and market towns, of this realm of
England, to shoot with any hand-gun, demihake, or hagbut, at any butt or bank
of earth, only in place convenient for the same, (whereby it appears that
proper places for exercise should be appointed in every town,) so that every
such hand-gun, etc. be of the several lengths aforesaid, and NOT UNDER. And
that it shall be lawful, to every of the said lord and lords, knights,
esquires, and gentlemen, and the INHABITANTS of EVERY CITY, BOROUGH, AND
MARKET TOWN, to have and keep in every of their houses any such hand-gun or
hand-guns, of the length of one whole yard, etc. and NOT UNDER, to the intent
to use and shoot in the same, at a butt or bank of earth only, as is above
said, whereby they and EVERY OF THEM, BY THE EXERCISE THEREOF, in form above
said, MAY THE BETTER AID AND ASSIST TO THE DEFENSE OF THIS REALM, WHEN NEED
SHALL REQUIRE, etc. This statute is still in force.

Every temporal person was (formerly) liable to pecuniary penalties; if he have
not (says Lambard) and keep not in readiness, such horses, geldings, weapon,
armor, or other furniture for the wars, as, after the proportion of his
ability, he ought to have and keep. (Eirenarcha, book iv. c. 4, p. 480.) Thus
stood the law so late as the latter end of queen Elizabeth's reign, when the
book last-cited was published; and the general tenor of the doctrine,
respecting the right of Englishmen to have arms, has since been confirmed, by
the Declaration of Rights in the Act of Settlement, (1 Wm and Mary, st. 2, c.
2,) though it seems now to be limited to Protestant subjects, viz. That the
subjects which are Protestants MAY HAVE ARMS FOR THEIR DEFENSE, suitable to
their conditions, and as allowed by law. -- This latter expression, "as allowed
by law," respects the limitations in the abovementioned act of 33 Hen. VIII.
c. 6, which restrain the use of some particular sorts of arms, meaning only
such arms as were liable to be concealed, or otherwise favor the designs of
murderers, as cross-bows, little short hand-guns, and little hagbuts, and all
guns UNDER CERTAIN LENGTHS, specified in the act; but proper arms for defense
(provided they are not shorter than the act directs) are so far from being
forbidden by this statute, that they are clearly authorized, and "the exercise
thereof" expressly recommended by it, as I have already shown. And indeed the
laws of England always required the people to be armed, and not only to be
armed, but to be expert in arms; which last was particularly recommended by the
learned chancellor Fortescue: -- et revera, non minime erit regno accommodum,
ut incolae ejus in armis sint experti. -- Indeed it will be of no small
advantage to the kingdom, that the inhabitants be EXPERT IN ARMS. (De Laudibus
Legum Angliae, c. xliv. p. 106.) And, in the notes and remarks on this book, by
the learned Mr. Justice Aland, we find the following observations to the same
purpose. 'In the Confessor's laws' (says he) 'it is,' DEBENT "All freeman
OUGHT" ( debent, it is their duty) TO HAVE ARMS, and to keep them always ready
for the defense of the kingdom, etc.
UNIVERSI LIBERI HOMINES, etc. ARMA HABERE, ET ILLA SEMPER PROMPTA CONSERVARE
AD TUITIONEM REGNI, etc. "See" (says he) the laws of the Conqueror TO THE SAME
PURPOSE. The custom of the nation (continues this learned judge) has been, TO
TRAIN UP THE FREEHOLDERS TO DISCIPLINE; v. 13 and 14. C. ii. c. iii. and ib.
20. and title, WAR, in the table to the statutes.

Among the ancient constitutions, or ordinances, of the kingdom, recorded in
the Myrror of Justices, chap. i. 3. we read that it was ordained, that every
one, of the age of 14 years and above, should prepare him (se apprestat) to
kill mortal offenders in their notorious crimes, or to follow them from town to
town with hue and cry. etc.

The true purpose and advantage of having all the inhabitants of this kingdom
trained to arms is farther manifested in our old law books and statutes; as in
the Westminster Primer, cap. xvii. on the case when any cattle are unlawfully
taken and driven into any castle or strong hold, etc. -- Le Visc^. ou le
Bailife prise ove luy POYAR DE SON COUNTY, ou de sa Bail, et voile assaier de
fair de ceo repl' des avers a celuy qui les aver prise, etc. That the sheriff
or the bailiff shall take with him THE POWER OF HIS COUNTY, or of his
bailiwick, and shall endeavor to make replevin (or recovery) of the cattle
from him that has taken them, etc. And lord Coke remarks on this: -- Nota,
EVERY MAN is bound by the Common Law to assist not only the Sheriff in his
Office for the Execution of the King's Writs, (which are the Commandments of
the King,) ACCORDING TO LAW; "Commandment of the King, according to Law." Any
commandment of the king, which falls not within this description, is not
binding or valid, in law; for the king's commands ought only to proceed, by due
process of the law, through the king's courts of justice, which are the only
proper channels in which the executive power of this limited monarchy can
legally flow and be exerted; because it is one of the first principles of our
constitution, that the king can do nothing on earth, as he is the minister and
vicar of God, but that only which he may do by the law. ( Nihil aliud potest
rex in terris, cum sit Dei minister et vicarius, nisi id solum quod de jure
potest. Bract. lib. iii. c. 9.) And this teaches us how to understand the trite
maxim, that "the king can do no wrong;" i. e. he has no legal authority to do
wrong; -- Potestas sua juris est, et non injuriae. Bract. lib. iii. c. 9. He
has not any peculiar prerogative, either to do wrong, or to decline from doing
right and justice. NON EST ULLA REGIS PREROGATIVA quae ex justitia et equitate
quicquam derogat. Rot. Parl. 7 Hen. IV. number. 59. But, if any king of this
limited monarchy should, nevertheless, wilfully do wrong, and presume to rule
contrary to the laws and fundamental principles of the ancient constitution, he
ceases to be "the minister and vicar of God," and, in the eye of the law,
immediately commences Minister Diaboli. -- Potestas enim juris solius est Dei,
injuriae vero DIABOLI; et CUJUS opera fecerit, EJUS ET MINISTER ERIT. (Fleta,
lib. i. cap. 17. p. 17.) See also in Bracton, (lib. iii. cap. 9. p. 107.) who,
after reciting the same doctrine, concerning the effect of good or bad
measures, adds, "Igitur dum facit" (rex) JUSTITIAM, vicarius est REGIS AETERNI;
minister autem DIABOLI, dum declinet ad injuriam: and the consequence must be
fatal, even to the temporal state of such an one, because all legal authority
of the sovereign ceases, in this realm, if the king presumes to rule by "will
and pleasure," instead of law! for there is NO KING, where WILL governs and NOT
LAW. Non est enim rex, ubi dominatur voluntas et non lex. (Bract. lib. i. c.
8.) The advisers, therefore, of illegal measures (or any measures that require
an undue influence in parliament to make them pass) are so far from deserving
the title of the "king's friends," that they are really his most dangerous
enemies: they are traitors, whose disloyal councils lead to certain
destruction, as nothing but "righteousness can establish the throne."
but also his Baily, that has the Sheriffe's Warrant in that Behalf, has the
same Authority, etc. (2 Inst. p. 193.)

The attack of a castle or place of arms must require disciplined troops; and
therefore it was certainly necessary that "EVERY MAN," so bound by the
common law to assist, should be trained to arms, in order to fulfill his duty.
And the learned Nathaniel Bacon, in his historical Discourse of the Uniformity
of the Government of England, (1st part, p. 64.) remarks, that the Strength
consisted of the Freemen; and, though many were bound by Tenure to follow their
Lords to the Wars, and many were Volunteers, yet, it seems, ALL WERE BOUND UPON
CALL, UNDER PERIL OF FINE, AND WERE BOUND TO KEEP ARMS, for the Preservation of
the Kingdom, their Lords, and their own Persons; and these they might neither
pawn nor sell, but leave them to descend to their Heirs, etc.

The common law right of the people of England to have arms is also clearly
expressed by the great and learned judge Bracton, one of the most ancient
writers of our common law, who is justly esteemed of unexceptionable authority.
-- ei qui just possidet, licitum erit cum armis contra pacem venientem ut
expellat, cum armis repellere, ut per ARMA TUITIONIS ET PACIS, quae sunt
justitiae, repellat injuriam et vim injustam, et arma injuriae, etc. (Bract.
lib. iv. c. 4.) i. e. -- to him who justly possesses it SHALL BE LAWFUL with
arms to repel him who comes to expel, with arms against the peace, that, by
ARMS OF DEFENSE AND PEACE, which are of justice, he may repel injury and unjust
violence, and arms of injustice, etc.

The late unhappy tumults prove, that these principles of the English
constitution are as necessary to be enforced at present as ever they were; for,
had they not been fatally neglected and disused, the abandoned rioters would
have been quelled and secured by the neighboring inhabitants of Westminster,
etc. in their first attempts; or, in case they had advanced toward the city,
if the proper barriers had been reserved, the citizens would have had time to
get under arms, to support their own magistrates in securing the peace of the
city; for any attack upon the gates or posterns would have justified an
immediate discharge of firearms, or other weapons, against the assailants,
without waiting for the command of a peace-officer: and, as the inhabitants of
each city and county are required to make good the damages sustained on such
occasions by private individuals, it is plain that the inhabitants themselves,
in their collective capacity, do form that proper POWER, from which the law
requires the prevention of such damages, and the support and defense of the
civil magistrates: for, otherwise, the law ought to have directed the damages
to be deducted from the last preceding parliamentary grants to the army.

If it be alleged that there can be no occasion, in these modern times, to arm
and train the inhabitants of England, because there is an ample military force,
or standing army, to preserve the peace; yet let it be remembered, that, the
greater and more powerful the standing army is, so much more necessary is it
that there should be a proper balance to that power, to prevent any ill effects
from it: though there is one bad effect, which the balance (howsoever perfect
and excellent) cannot prevent; and that is the enormous and ruinous expense of
maintaining a large number of men, without any civil employment for their
support; an expense, which neither the land nor trade of this realm can
possibly bear much longer, without public failure!

No Englishman, therefore, can be truly LOYAL, who opposes these essential
principles of the English LAW, One of the articles against cardinal Wolsey, 21
Hen. VIII. was, for that he did endeavor to subvert antiquissimas leges hujus
regni, universumque hoc regnum Angliae legibus imperialibus subjugare. It Is fit
that those who attempt to subvert the laws should, according to the old writ,
be carried ad goalam de Newgate. Merito beneficium legis amittit, qui legem
ipsam subvertere intendit. Mr. Justice Aland's Notes on Fortescue de Laudibus
Legum Ang. p. 75.
whereby the people are required to have arms of defense and peace, for mutual
as well as private defense; for a standing army of regular soldiers is entirely
repugnant to the constitution of England, and the genius of its inhabitants. No
English king before Charles II. had any other guards than his pensioners, and
yeomen of the guard, (first appointed by that great oppressor of his people
Henry VII,) save Richard II. who with the aid of 4000 profligate archers made
himself absolute. The usurper, (Cromwell,) it is notorious, kept up an army in
support of himself and his tyranny, and Charles II. being connived at in
keeping a few (additional) guards, he insensibly increased their number, till
he left a body of men to his successor great enough to tell the parliament he
would be no longer bound by the laws he had sworn to. In the year 1697,
immediately after the conclusion of the war with France, it is well known how
far the soldiery, against king William's inclination and earnest endeavors,
were reduced. On behalf of the court it was then declared that the army was not
designed to be made a part of our constitution, but to be kept only for a
little time, till the circumstances of Europe would better permit us to be
without them. To which it was answered, and reasons given to prove, that these
conspirators against their country were satisfied that their continuance then
was an establishment of them for ever. 'And it was farther obser'ved, that the
very discontents they might create would be made an argument for the continuing
of them: but if they should be kept from oppressing the people, in a little
time they would grow habitual to us, and almost become a part of our
constitution, and by degrees we should be brought to believe them not only not
dangerous, but necessary; for every body saw, but few understood, and those few
would never be able to persuade the multitude that there was any danger in
those men they had lived quietly with for some years. 'And moreover that
without dear bought experience any body may know before hand what will be the
natural consequences of a standing army. From the day you set them up you set
up your masters; you put yourselves wholly into their hands, and are at their
discretion. It is the conquest of the nation in the silentest, shortest, and
surest way. They are able to dispose of your lives and estates at will and
pleasure; and what can a foreign conqueror do more? If after this we live and
possess any thing, it is because they let us; and how long that shall be
neither we nor they themselves know. -- Continued Corruption, standing Armies,
etc. considered, 1768, p. 15-17.


Standing armies were not unknown, indeed, to our ancestors in very early
times, but they were happily opposed by them, and declared illegal. A
remarkable instance of this is related by Sir Edward Coke, in his 7th rep. p.
443, (Calvin's case,) but with a very erroneous application of the doctrine,
(as there are in many other instances of that particular report,) for which the
chancellor or judges, probably, who spoke, and not the reporter, must one day
be answerable. It appears, by Bracton, lib. iii. tract 2. c. 15. fol. 134.
that Canutus, the Danish king, having settled himself in this kingdom in peace,
kept notwithstanding (for the better continuance thereof) great armies within
this realm. [Yet Bracton was more wise and honorable than to conceive or hint
that great armies, so kept by the king, were proper instruments for the better
continuance of peace; for he says no such thing, this being only a disloyal
conceit of some modern judge, concerned in the argument of Calvin's case: but
to return to the words of the reporter.] The peers and nobles of England
distasting THIS GOVERNMENT, BY ARMS AND ARMIES, And every Englishman, that has
not the same distaste, is surely disaffected to the true constitution and laws
of his country, and may justly be charged with disloyalty; for none but freemen
ought to be trusted with arms in a free country, and not men that are enslaved
under martial law, in regular armies, to yield an implicit active obedience to
the word of command, whatever it may be, without distinction of good or evil!
(ODIMUS ACCIPITREM, QUIA SEMPER VIVIT IN ARMIS,) wisely and politiquely
persuaded the king, that they would provide for the safety of him and his
people, and yet his armies, carrying with them many inconveniences, should be
withdrawn, etc. (This would be a proper language and true policy for a free
British parliament to adopt.) "Hereupon" (says the reporter) Canutus presently
withdrew his armies, and within a while after he lost his crown, etc.

Here again the judge, whoever he was that spoke, betrayed a most disloyal
prejudice in favor of a government by arms and armies, which led him into a
notorious falsehood! for, though the former part of the sentence is true, that
king Canute "withdrew his armies," yet the latter part, that, within a while
after, he lost his crown, is totally false; and the judge, by asserting that
groundless circumstance, seemed inclined to insinuate, that the withdrawing the
armies occasioned the (supposed) loss of the crown, which was far from being
the case. The great and noble Canute reaped the benefit of his prudent and
generous conformity to the free constitution of this limited monarchy; for he
enjoyed a long and glorious reign, after he sent back his Danish soldiers;
which, according to Matthew of Westminster, (p. 403,) was in the year 1018; and
he held the crown with dignity and glory to the end of his life, in the year
1035, when he was buried at Winchester with royal pomp ( regio more, ib. p.
409): and his two sons also, who separately succeeded him, died likewise, kings
of England; for they lost not the kingdom but by natural deaths, and the want
of heirs.

Happy would it have been for England, had all succeeding kings been as wise
and truly politic as the great Canute, who feared not to commit the care of his
own person, and those of his foreign friends that attended him, to the free
laws and limited constitution of this kingdom.

The old English maxim, however, against a government by arms and armies, ought
never to be forgotten. -- Odimus accipitrem, quia semper vivit in armis.

( June, 1780.)
A GENERAL MILITIA, ACTING BY A WELL-REGULATED ROTATION, IS THE ONLY SAFE MEANS
OF Defending a free People.
A GENERAL MILITIA, ACTING BY A WELL-REGULATED ROTATION, IS THE ONLY SAFE MEANS
OF Defending a free People.
THE establishment of standing armies is, perhaps, the most dangerous of all
political expedients, and has been fatal to the liberty of every nation upon
earth that has adopted it; and, therefore, though the doctrine of necessity is
generally pleaded to excuse the measure, yet there seems rather a necessity of
absolutely rejecting it; and of forming the national defense upon some other
less dangerous plan.

The service of a national militia may be divided into equal proportions of
attendance, by rotation, so as to inculcate and diffuse a sufficient knowledge
of arms and military discipline throughout the whole body of a nation or
people; and thereby supersede the baneful necessity of keeping regular troops,
or standing armies of mercenaries.

Whenever the public safety demands the assembling and continuance of a large
body of troops in actual service, to watch and resist the motions of any
powerful invader, a regular military Roster of Service, from the whole national
militia, is the safest and best means of forming and continuing such an army in
the field; because it would be, not only, the least burdensome to individuals,
but also less dangerous to the community at large; for, if the regularity of
rotation were duly observed, no man would be so long detained from his ordinary
calling and occupation as to lose his civil capacity and way of livelihood at
home, nor be thereby unwarily drawn into a separate interest from his
fellow-citizens; which was unhappily the case of the Parliament's army in 1647;
for, after having bravely defended the national liberty for some years, this
very army became the instrument of a most hateful national bondage, under a
military tyrant!

The nature of a Roster is well described by General Bland, in his Treatise of
military Discipline, from p. 287 to 312. When a great army is formed by several
nations in alliance, which send into the field, each of them, a different
number of battalions, a Roster is esteemed the best expedient for regulating
and dividing the general service into due proportions amongst them all: and
General Bland has given, in p. 290 of the abovementioned Treatise, the form of
such a Roster general for the detaching of battalions, according to that in
Flanders, in 1708. He has also given Tables of Proportion for detaching private
men, that is, for detaching them from the several battalions in the field, that
the danger and fatigue of the service (especially at sieges) may be equally
divided among them. And, nearly on the same plan, tables might be formed, for
detaching the individuals of a national militia from the several parishes, or
districts, to which they belong, in due proportion to the number of males
enrolled in each of them; whereby the hardship and inconveniences of military
duty for the common safety would be equally divided among the whole nation;
and, of course, the time of actual service would be most profitably diminished
to each individual, whilst the knowledge of arms and discipline would be
regularly circulated into all parts of the country; and with it also such a
sensible perception, to each individual, of his fellowship, or incorporation,
with the whole national community, as would plainly tend to prevent all partial
and undue emulation of particular counties or districts against their
neighbors: for, by such provincial jealousies, the ancient states of Greece
were unhappily disunited, and their attention withdrawn from that true mutual
interest and defense of each other, without which none of them could long
subsist in freedom: whereas, if (on the contrary) they had been inured to the
social duty of serving in one common army, drawn equally from each confederate
state, by a proper "Table of Proportion," and duly changed by rotation, (to
prevent them from becoming mere soldiers,) there would have been no just cause
to be jealous of each other's power (as between the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians, etc.); for all successes, as well as losses, would have been
equally divided among them; so that no particular state could have acquired, by
victory, any enviable advantages, peculiar to itself, to incite the jealousy of
the rest; but every individual, in every part, would, by these means, have been
led to consider himself, not merely as a member of a single petty state or
district, but (with a more enlarged idea of his own social character) as a
member, rather, of the whole community of free citizens throughout all Greece:
for the circulation A Rotation, or general circulation of public duty, may be
compared to those "wheels within wheels," which give life, vigor, and
activity, to a whole community, by enabling it (howsoever extensive and
scattered, with respect to local situation) to move and exert itself as one
united living body, actuated by one spirit, like as the hosts, or armies, of
the commonwealth of Israel are typified by the Cherubim, or four living
creatures, (as represented in the standards of the four principal tribes,)
united in one animated system of action, moving altogether with wheels (or
rotations) and wings, full of eyes within and without.

For, in a state that is perfectly free, (and in such only,) the eyes of the
several individuals of which it is composed are permitted to look forward, with
effect, to the true interests of the community at large; and may well be
considered as the eyes, figuratively represented in the whole body of the
Cherubim, and in all their parts; (their backs, and their hands, and their
wings, and the wheels full of eyes round about;) every eye in that great united
figurative body of the Cherubim helping to enlighten the intention, and thereby
influence the motion or government of the whole.


of the Roster would have been a most effectual bond of union to secure the
connection and communication of the most distant branches of the confederacy;
and, by preserving the general body of the people in their civil capacity and
ordinary occupations, it would also have rendered them less liable to be drawn
from the common interest of the state at large, partially to favor the
arbitrary designs of any usurping commander in chief or petty tyrant: for no
general-officer (had such a confederacy of national union been duly
established) would have been able to assume more power and authority, than what
was fairly delegated by the majority of suffrages, in one great united general
council of chosen citizens from every part.

The general body of individuals, in such a case, indeed, submit themselves to
serve, by rotation, the humble station of private soldiers; but the time of
service being limited, and equal to all men in duration, it would be no great
hardship, especially if each freeman that bears arms was allowed his natural
right of suffrage in the state, his due share of legislative influence, to
control the commanders, and regulate the service.

In a nation consisting of six millions of souls, (which number England is
commonly said to contain,) the number of males capable of bearing arms (and
who, according to natural right, are justly entitled also to a share in the
legislature) would be estimated at a fourth part of that number, according to
the most general mode of estimation, viz. 1,500,000 men; from which number a
Roster of actual service from home, only for one month each man in the space of
a whole year, would supply a constant army in the field of 125,000 men, if so
many were necessary. A continual change every month, or every fourteen days, of
half a battalion at a time out of each district, or still in smaller
proportions, viz. a few companies at a time (or even by half-companies, from
smaller divisions or parishes) would be most advisable, that every part of the
country might always retain nearly the proportion of eleven parts out of twelve
of its own militia, as well for the purposes of guarding it, as to carry on the
ordinary cultivation, and other necessary local occupations, without
interruption. Persons above the common rank might serve in squadrons of horse,
(if they preferred that kind of service,) as equites, or esquires. Those men
whose time of service approached, as being next upon the established Roster,
should be more carefully exercised at home, after the hours of labor, for one
month at least before their time of marching. By these means they would be
prepared for the service; and the very march, if properly conducted, would add
to their discipline. The certainty of returning, when relieved by companies of
their neighbors, in so short a time as one month, (if they lived so long,) or
two months, allowing for the march out and home, would much reduce the anxiety
of parting from their families and friends.

It will probably be objected, that a national militia, which has been
exercised only in small bodies, is incapable of effectual service against an
enemy: but for this a remedy may be found. Let the army be first formed in a
separate encampment, at such convenient distance from the enemy, that they may
not be liable to an immediate attack.

A central situation must, of course, be chosen for this camp of discipline,
where the several companies from the whole nation may be regimented under
proper general-officers, and be daily exercised, in large bodies, for a whole
month (or six weeks, if necessary) before they are brought to face the enemy.
And, for this reason, it would be expedient to require from each individual (I
mean the first time he is entered on the Roster) one month or six weeks
attendance, more than the generally established proportion of time on the
Roster, (which would be only once in his whole lifetime, and therefore no
great hardship,) in order to be exercised with a large body of troops in some
of the principal and most necessary movements and evolutions for the field;
and, after the month or six weeks training in the camp of discipline, an army
of 125,000 men might be marched to the camp or camps of actual service, to do
duty for the time allotted to each upon the Roster against the common enemy;
and the number might be continually kept up by monthly detachments of
battalions from the first camp of discipline, in proportion as the time of
service (allotted to each of the former companies upon the Roster) should
expire. The country would also be guarded by the returning disciplined
companies dispersed in every part; and the knowledge of arms and discipline, by
the time a single circulation of the Roster was completed, ( viz. in one year,)
would be diffused throughout the whole nation; which would thereby be enabled
afterward to exert itself gloriously upon any sudden emergency; for it might
afford to bear even the loss of six such capital armies of 125,000, viz. in
all, 750,000, men, before it would be necessary to increase the time of service
from one month to two months actual service, for each disciplined man, in a
whole year. With so small a portion of time employed in military service, every
man might preserve his ordinary occupation, either in trade or husbandry, and
maintain his rank and situation in life with his family, as a free citizen, in
his own district, at all other times, when the Roster of public service did not
demand his personal attendance from home. But when, by a contrary method, a
national militia is so long continued in actual service, without rotation, as
to inure the individuals to a neglect and disuse of their ordinary employments,
in their respective counties and districts, they gradually lose their civil
capacity, and, from free citizens, are apt to become mere sold-iers, dependent
on their military Sold, or stipend, and the favor of superiors; whereby they
acquire such a slavish submission to COMMAND, be it just or unjust, that they
readily undertake to execute those very measures and designs, which they
themselves, perhaps, have previously condemned; alleging, that a soldier has
no right to judge for himself, (thus indiscriminately applying, to the general
propriety or impropriety of any military undertaking, a principle, which
properly relates only to the necessary discipline and mode of conducting it in
the field, after a man has absolutely consented and engaged to serve in it,)
and that a soldier must go (say they) wherever he is ordered, without any demur
about the propriety or injustice of the service. So that they establish not
only a passive, but an active, obedience to the will of others, which makes the
profession dishonorable! -- dishonorable, I mean, in those who admit this
doctrine of unlimited obedience, which is derogatory to their natural dignity,
as men; for they give up an indispensible quality of human nature, the right of
discerning between good and evil, (which is nothing less than a desertion, or
apostatising, from the duty which every man owes to God and his eternal laws!)
and thereby render themselves and their profession the bane of every state
where they are established, and a disgrace to human nature!

REMARKS CONCERNING THE Trained Bands OF LONDON.
REMARKS CONCERNING THE Trained Bands OF LONDON.
THE Militia, or Trained Bands, of London have never been known to misbehave in
actual service, however despicable they may appear in their annual musters.

Citizens of London, from the most ancient times, were required to keep arms in
their houses. The annual muster is rather a muster of the arms than of the men,
who would probably go out to actual service, if there should be really occasion
for them; but even the meanest of the men, as they now are generally sent out,
(being for the most part substitutes,) if they were exercised for a few hours
three times a week, only for one month, and restrained from the use of strong
liquors during the time of exercise, would be found more serviceable (if there
was any real occasion of public defense) than is generally conceived.

Of this real facts afford the best proof: the irregularity of the Trained
Bands and want of discipline were as conspicuous and notorious, it seems, in
the year 1642, as at present: for, when Capt. Skippon (afterward
Major General) was directed by the parliament to attend them, as a guard, with
two companies of the Trained Bands of London, Lord Clarendon's account of that
matter is expressed in the folloWing contemptuous terms; This man (says he,
meaning Skippon) marched that day in the head of their TUMULTUARY ARMY to the
parliament house. Bk iv. p. 380.
Yet Lord Clarendon himself makes ample reparation to the Trained Bands for
this contempt, when he speaks of their unexpected behavior at the battle of
Newbery; for, though he allows their inexperience both of danger and service,
he expressly attributes to the steadiness of the Trained Bands the preservation
of the parliament's army. No troops in the kingdom had at that time been able
to withstand the spirited charges of Prince Rupert's well-disciplined horse,
till this tumultuary army, (which seems to be an exact description also of
their present musters,) for the first time, compelled them to wheel about.

Rapin speaks of the brave defense of the infantry on that day in very high
terms, but without mentioning what particular troops they were; so that no
reader would suspect that he described the actions of the "tumultuary army" of
the city.

After the Prince had routed the cavalry of the enemy, (says Rapin, meaning the
parliament's cavalry,) he fell upon their infantry, which, though deprived of
the help of the cavalry, received him with so much intrepidity, that he was
repulsed several times, without being able ever to penetrate. Apres avoir mis
en deroute la Cavalerie des ennemis, il alla tomber sur leur Infanterie, qui,
bien que denuee du secours de la Cavalerie, le recut avec tant d'intrepidi^e,
qu'il fut repousse plusieurs fois, sans qu'il put jamais la percer. Rapin, tom.
viii. p. 426.
But Lord Clarendon heartily attributes the glory of the day to those whom he
before despised as a tumultuary army.

"The London Trained Bands" (says he) and auxiliary regiments (of whose
INEXPERIENCE of DANGER, or ANY KIND OF SERVICE, beyond the easy practice of
their postures in the Artillery-garden, men had till then TOO CHEAP AN
ESTIMATION) behaved themselves to wonder; and were, in truth, the preservation
of that army that day. For they stood as a BULWARK AND RAMPIRE TO DEFEND THE
REST; (whereby he attributes to them the chief resistance;) and, when their
wings of horse were scattered and dispersed, kept their ground SO STEADILY,
that, though Prince Rupert himself led up THE CHOICE HORSE to charge them, and
endured their storm of small shot, he could make no impression upon their stand
of pikes, BUT WAS FORCED TO WHEEL ABOUT: of so sovereign benefit and use is
that readiness, order, and dexterity, in the use of their arms, which has been
so much neglected. Bk. VII. p. 347.

Thus the City Pike-men are commended as a standard pattern of military
discipline, (viz. for their readiness, order, and dexterity, in the use of
arms,) by the very same historian who had entitled them a tumultuary army a
very short time before this occasion which extorted his commendation. A
moderate and sufficient discipline, for real service, is more easily and sooner
acquired than people generally conceive; and nothing is wanting to the present
establishment of City Trained Bands but more frequent musters, for about an
hour or an hour and a half at a time, after the hours of labor: for, if they
were allowed this advantage, they would be nearly upon the same footing as the
Militia of New England, Connecticut, etc. which lately conquered the
well-disciplined army of General Burgoyne: they would be nearly upon the same
footing, I say, except in one point; which is, that the New England Militia
have always maintained the ancient constitutional right of choosing their own
officers in the public Folkmotes: which the learned Judge Atkins, by the best
authorities, has proved to be the original constitution of our national
Militia. Polit. Tracts, p. 254.

The present establishment of the county regiments of Militia savours too much
of a standing army, both in discipline, and the effect of the service upon the
common men; who, by being absent too long a time from their families and
ordinary occupations, are apt to become mere soldiers, despising their former
trades and employments, and consequently ceasing to be citizens.

Nothing, surely, can be more dangerous to a free state than such an effect as
this; for the professed soldier generally gives up to superior COMMAND Command
is properly imperium, the essence of empire ^ for, the title of imperator (or
emperor) originally signified nothing more than the commander in chief of the
army: and, though this power of command, was generally delegated, at first, by
the election and appointment of the people, or senate, and of course was
esteemed subject to their control, yet, by the usurpations of successful
military chiefs, (when the forces under their command have been detained so
long in actual service as to lose their civil capacity and become a standing
army of mere sold-iers dependent on their sold, or military pay, instead of
their former civil connections and useful occupations,) it has always been
liable to be changed from a limited command to "merum imperium," or absolute
dominion, which Leopold Metastafius, a learned Roman Advocate, very properly
styles "belluina potestas," a beastly power; a term which most aptly
characterizes the enormity, and consequent illegality, of unlimited monarchy!
And this use of the term, belluina potestas, is strictly legal and justifiable;
because it is the very mark by which the prophets of God have branded all the
arbitrary dominations of mankind, from the Babylonian head of the great and
terrible image of Tyranny down to its very toes, the present divided kingdoms
of the earth, which still exist in power, (and must so continue for some little
time longer,) for the punishment and destruction of depraved man, until it
shall please God, in his mercy, to break them in pieces by his eternal kingdom,
which will then become a mountain, (or earthly establishment of government,)
and fill the whole earth, (Dan. ii. 35. 44.) For all the said temporal empires
and kingdoms are included in the prophetic representation of four great and
terrible beasts; (see Dan. vii.) so that the belluina potestas is undeniably
attributed to all of them; and, that we may more clearly demonstrate that the
term denotes a power, unlimited by law and due popular control, it is
necessary to remark, that the characteristical property of each of these
beastly empires is, " to do according to his WILL;" that is, without limitation
of law, right, or other just control in favor of the people: such unlimited
WILL at is called "absolute;" i. e. "loosed from" all due restraint of the
people, or other obligation whatsoever. This bestial mark of absolute will was
the characteristical property of the first beast, the Babylonian head or winged
lion of the Chaldees; " whom he WOULD" (NAY, the proper Chaldee word for WILL,
both verb and noun) he slew, and whom he WOULD ((...)) he kept alive, and whom
he WOULD ((...) again) he set up, and whom he WOULD ((...) once more) "he put
down:" (Dan. v. 19. So that the will of the monarch was manifestly the only law
of that empire; and the unhappy effects of such unlimited power, even to the
monarch himsself, is strongly marked in the very next verse; But, when his
heart was lifted up, (the natural consequence of such undue exaltation An
excellent antidote against the evil of royal will, or undue exaltation, is
prescribed in Deuteronomy. xvii. 18-20. viz. That the king shall "write out for
himself a copy" (or rather a duplicate, (...)) "of this law" [i. e. those
written laws of God which had twice been solemnly read, not only in the
presence, but in the ears, (or hearing,) of ALL the people; and had as often
been solemnly confirmed, at each public reading, by the voluntary assent of all
the people, saying, -- "all that the Lord has said will we do." Exodus xxiv.
3.7. Thus the divine laws became the regular statutes of that nation]: And it"
(viz. the king's own written duplicate of the law) shall be with him, and be
shall read therein, all the day of his life: that be may learn to fear the Lord
his God, TO KEEP ALL THE WORDS OF THIS LAW, AND THESE STATUTES, TO DO THEM (and
the reason of thus limiting the ROYAL WILL, by laws and statutes, is assigned
in the very next sentence); that HIS HEART BE NOT LIFTED UP ABOVE HIS BRETHREN,
and that he turn not aside from the commandment: (to) the right band or (to)
the left: (which is surely a strict limitation of the regal power; a measure
highly important to the true interst even of the monarch himself: viz.) to the
end that he may prolong (his) days in his kingdom, he and his children, in the
midst of Israel. And in like manner the kings of all Christian nations should
be limited by the same statutes, excepting only those statutes which were
merely ceremonial or temporary. And they should be still farther limited by the
more perfect statutes of the Christian revelation, without being allowed the
least power of WILL, or prerogative, to turn aside from the commandment to the
right hand or to the left; that the declared purposes of the Gospel in behalf
of man (viz. on earth PEACE, good will toward men) may be effectually
established; and that the WILL of our heavenly Father (which is always
righteousness and peace) may "be done on earth as it is in heaven;" for that is
the true effect of the approaching kingdoms of God on earth, which all
Christians are taught to promote by their daily prayers. But the princes of the
world (under the influence of our spiritual enemy, the dragon, which has given
his power to the beast) do openly oppose the effectual establishment of God's
kingdom on earth, by impiously claiming to themselves a royal prerogative to
make WAR or peace without the advice and assent of the people, or congregation;
which is manifestly to LIFT UP THEIR HEARTS ABOVE THEIR BRETHREN, and of course
"the earth it" (once more) "filled with violence," (see p. 7.) whereby the
royal promoters of it are rendered dreadfully obnoxious to the vengeance and
retribution of the Almighty, when his approaching kingdom shall come "to
destroy the destroyers of the earth:" -- (...). Rev. xi. 18. -- But, if kings
would be contented to govern with legal authority, (i. e. authority duly
limited by the uninfluenced representation of each nation, or people, freely
and equally elected for every session of each national council,) and would,
after the example of king Canute, magnanimously rely (under God) on their
national hosts of free armed citizens, (instead of standing armies,) for the
security of their crowns, they would stand clear of the heavy judgments
denounced against the body of the beast, and would have no cause to fear the
approaching kingdom of God, nor the irresistible stroke by which it will break
in pieces the whole image of tyranny, and "cut off all the horns" (or crowns)
"of the wicked" (Psa. lxxv. 6, and lxxvi. 12): for legal kings are effectually
secured by the scripture promises in favor of RIGHTEOUSNESS, -- viz. that "the
horns" (or rather crowns) of THE RIGHTEOUS shall be exalted (Psa. lxxv. 6): so
that they may truly hope to reign with the just, when the kingdom and dominion,
and the greatness of the kingdom UNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN, shall be given to the
people of the saints of the Most High, etc. Dan. vii. 27.
,) and his mind hardened in PRIDE, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and
they took his glory from him: and he was driven from the sons of men, and his
heart was made like the BEASTS, (a notable instance of God's vengeance against
the belluina potestas of royal will and pleasure,) " and his dwelling was with
the WILD ASSES," etc. (Dan. v. 19, 20, etc.) By this very example did the holy
prophet reprove a wicked and unbridled descendant of the same monarch, just
before the total dissolution of his empire, as he had also previously warned
the royal ancestor himself, to break off his sins by RIGHTEOUSNESS, etc. which
would have effectually restored due limitations to his government, and
destroyed the baneful "belluina potestas" which occasioned the warning; but the
counsel was neglected, and, of course, the monarch was humbled, and his empire
ruined! for then were the wings of the BEAST of Babylon plucked, and his
dominion taken away. (Dan. vii. 4.)

Absolute will was also the essential property of the succeeding empire, or the
second beast; viz. the Medo-Persian monarchy, described elsewhere under the
figure of an impetuous ram, which pushed westward, and northward, and
southward, so that no BEASTS might stand before him, neither (was there any)
that could deliver out of his hand, but (the prophet now adds the principal
bestial, or brutal, mark) HE DID ACCORDING TO HIS WILL, and became great. (Dan.
viii. 4.) For, after the Persian monarchs had once acquired the baneful
"belluina potestas," by the establishment of standing armies in every province,
even the once-boasted laws of the Medes and Persians became as vague and
uncertain as the royal will and pleasure to which they were, of course,
subjected, howsoever unchangeable they might have been reputed in the
commencement of that empire.

Neither was the third beast (the cruel four-headed flying leopard of the
Grecian empire) without the same characteristical mark of absolute will, though
it is not expressly annexed to Daniel's description of that compound of Tyranny
in his seventh chapter; but, in the farther description of the Grecian empire,
(chap. xi. v 3.) the same wilful or unlimited dominion is clearly foretold; A
mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, (and then
follows the mark of the beast,) " and shall do according to his WILL."

The king, mentioned in the 36th verse, that shall do according to his WILL,
and exalt himself, and magnify himself above every God, is generally understood
to denote the fourth and last beast, or empire, which still exists; being that
most noxious and tremendous beast with iron teeth, (described in Dan. vii. 21.)
which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet; i. e.
in the most violent and beastlike manner, which is plainly to " do according to
his WILL!" We see then how aptly unlimited command, or merum imperium, is
expressed by the term, "belluina potestas."

The unlimited will of a king is so great an abomination in the eye of the
English Common Law, that the exercise of it in this country is declared to be
an effectual disqualification or abasement from the regal dignity, for there is
NO KING, where WILL governs, and not law. -- Non est enim rex, ubi dominatur
VOLUNTAS, et non lex. (Bract lib. i. c. 8.)

A king of England ceases to be king, when he ceases to be limited by the LAW;
for it is a rule of the common law, that "a king can do nothing" (i. e. by
virtue of his office) on earth, while he is the minister and vicar of God,
except that alone which BY LAW he may. -- "Nihil enim potest rex in terris,"
etc. nisi id solum quod de JURE potest, etc. (See the note in pages 21 and 22.)
And, therefore, when the law is suspended, or set aside, (which is the highest
and most baneful injustice,) the king's power ceases to be "ae jure," for, in
the eye of the law, he is esteemed Minister diaboli, dum declinet ad injuriam;
so that he and his ministers reduce themselves thereby to the common level of
all other bad men; and whatsoever power, or force, in that case they may be
able to exert, has no better foundation than the temporary power of banditti,
which may be lawfully and conscientiously resisted by all men.

A king of England, therefore, though he is supreme, (or sovereign,) in
personal dignity and rank, yet he is not so in will and power; because, in
these, the law (to avoid the belluina potestas of absolute monarchy) requires
that he should be duly limited by the people: a necessary distinction this,
respecting supremacy, of which the unfortunate K. Cha. I. seems not to have
been aware, or he would not, with his dying breath, have denied the people's
right to a share in the government; saying, -- It is not for having share in
government, sir; that is nothing pertaining to them; a subject and a SOVEREIGN
are clear different things, etc. -- and so they certainly are, with respect to
personal dignity, or rank, when compared as individuals; and yet the
sovereignty, or supreme power, belongs of right to the people, i. e. to the
majority of them, or to the majority of their duly elected representatives.
"And therefore," (we may say with that learned casuist, Bp Tailor, in his
Ductor Dubitantium, lib. iii. c. rule 1, p. 522.) it is but a weak and useless
distinction when we speak of kings and princes, (by them meaning the SUPREME
POWER,) to say that some are ABSOLUTE, some are LIMITED in their power. -- That
is, the distinction is weak and useless only when we mean to speak of the
supreme power: this is clearly the bishop's meaning, as the following context
will show; for otherwise the distinction to be made between absolute and
limited "kings and princes" is so far from being weak and useless, that it is
the necessary and proper criterion between the illegal and legal dominion of
kings; the limited alone being legal in this kingdom. For (the bishop adds) it
is true that some princes are so (i. e. are LIMITED in their power); "but then"
(says he) they "are NOT the SUPREME power." (This is directly to the point in
question; and he adds a farther illustration of it:) It is a contradiction
(says he) to say that the SUPREME POWER is limited or restrained; for that
which RESTRAINS it is SUPERIOR to it, and therefore the other is NOT SUPREME.
That a king ought not to have the supreme power is clearly laid down by the
best writers on the English Common Law; and particularly by Judge Bracton, one
of the most ancient as well as the most respectable authorities. Rex sub Deo et
Lege. Rex habet SUPERIOREM, Deum, (scilicet,) item LEGEM, per quam factus est
rex; item CURIAM SUAM, viz. comes, barons, etc. Bract. lib. 2. c. xvi. p. 34.
"Lex fraenum est potentiae," etc.

That such a power of RESTRAINT is vested in the LAW, as well as in the
LEGISLATORS of this limited monarchy, is clearly proved by Mr. Acherley in his
book on free parliaments. He argues from the words of the original writs of
summons to parliament, -- that the determining or decisive power, demanded by
the said writs, ( ad faciendum ea, i. e. the insuperable and urgent businesses
for which the parliament is called,) is derived from the people, and is
independent; and his inference is good; and he gives a remarkable instance of
this independent power in the people; which is their answer to the pope
respecting the banishment of Adomar, Bp of Winchester, in 1258. Ann 43. Hen, 3.
Viz. Si dominus rex et regni majores hoc vellent, COMMUNITAS tamen ipsius
(Adomar) ingressum in Angliam jam nullatenus sustineret. That, if the king and
lords would do this thing, (meaning, if they would revoke the banishment) yet
the commons WOULD NOT SUFFER or bear Adomar's residence in England. And the
commons caused their speaker, Petrus de Montford, 'vice totius communitatis,'
to sign, and he did sign, this answer. p. 9.

From this example, therefore, as well as from a great multitude of other
instances of the power of the English commons, it is manifest that there is no
supreme power in England without the concurrence and assent of the people: not
a general assent, once for all, to throw the supremacy into other hands, but an
especial assent for every new circumstance that may be liable to affect their
interest. For which cause, also, parliaments ought (indispensably) to be newly
elected every session, according to ancient usage, i. e. every year once, and
more often if need be; and that in as equal a proportion of representation as
possible; because, the more equitable in this point it is made, the more
conducive it will surely be to the happiness and true permanent interest both
of king and people.

But if, on the contrary, by the modern innovations of triennial and septennial
elections, reduction of the right of voting, venality of almost depopulated
boroughs, etc. the supreme power should be gradually corrupted, it must become
a supreme evil to the destruction of good government and peace! for, in such a
corrupted state, nothing can thrive under it but standing armies, and that
which always regularly attends their establishment throughout all the branches
of the fourth, or Roman, tyranny, I mean the belluina potestas of imperial will
and command, against which the vengeance of the Almighty is clearly denounced;
so that those persons, who yield themselves instruments to promote either the
one or the other, are guilty of the grossest impiety! A free militia,
therefore, is the only just and legal means of internal national defense.


that indispensible human right of judging between good and evil, which alone
constitutes the distinction between men and brutes; and, through a false notion
of military honor, the soldier is apt to think that his duty requires an
implicit active obedience on all occasions; whereby the standing armies of all
nations are constantly and regularly the tools of despotism, and the bane of
all good and limited government.

A national militia, therefore, ought to be constituted upon principles as
opposite to those of standing armies as possible; and no rules or arrangements
whatever, that may tend to detach men from their ordinary callings and
employments, as free citizens, ought, on any account, to be admitted.

The City-Militia, even upon its present establishment, was always respectable,
when real service was wanted.

HINTS OF SOME GENERAL PRINCIPLES, WHICH MAY BE USEFUL TO Military Associations.
HINTS OF SOME GENERAL PRINCIPLES, WHICH MAY BE USEFUL TO Military Associations.
AS the sole purpose of Military Associations is to support the Civil
Magistrate, and to join the power of the county, when legally summoned by
sheriffs, etc. for common defense, it is necessary that each associated company
be formed, upon principles as opposite to those of standing armies (valor and
good discipline excepted) as can possibly be devised.

The freedom and equal natural rights of individuals, and the preservation of
their civil capacity, must therefore be considered as objects of the utmost
importance and consideration; in order to which the freedom of election in the
appointment of officers, and a frequent renewal of choice therein, are
absolutely necessary to be maintained.

Let the whole corpse of Associators in every neighborhood, or vicinage, divide
themselves into small bodies, of ten persons each, in their respective
districts; and let each ten, or decennary, choose from among themselves a
tithing-man, or sergeant, to superintend the discipline of the ten, and to
receive and communicate to them all summonses from the Civil Magistrate, or
orders from the Committee of Association, and to transact such other business
as the nature of the Association may require: the power of the sergeants,
nevertheless, to be subject to the control of a majority of the ten, who
choose them respectively; and no other military officers should be appointed,
except officers of Platoons for a single day; viz. when the corpse is divided
into Platoons for exercise (agreeable to the mode recommended by General Bland,
p. 66): at which time each platoon ought to choose its own leader, whose power
should cease with that day's exercise. An experienced person must, however, be
chosen at a previous general meeting, to instruct and direct the corpse in the
general maneuvers and evolutions of the field, who should, from time to time,
be appointed Commanding-officer of the day. In times of actual service, the
Lord Mayor, or either of the sheriffs that are present, must be considered as
the legal commander of the association.

As three decennaries, or sergeants guards, will be the proper complement for a
platoon, so two platoons, or six decennaries, (being sixty men,) will be a
convenient number for a company, and ten such companies a sufficient number for
a battalion, or ward division; as it will be equal to two townships or two
county hundreds.

There should be, within each ward, several places appointed for drilling, or
teaching the common exercise to small parties; and also one place, more
spacious, for those that are become expert in handling their arms, to be taught
the platoon exercise, to form themselves into companies, to march, wheel, etc.
But, if a place cannot be found within the ward, sufficiently spacious for such
a general exercise of the whole body, it is probable that two or three places
may be found therein sufficient for the exercise of single companies, or at
least of single platoons, which should be appropriated accordingly; and none of
these places of exercise should be open to the inspection of strangers, as it
must be irksome to gentlemen to be overlooked, before they have acquired some
tolerable knowledge of the military discipline. One place of general rendezvous
should likewise be appointed within each ward, for the neighbors to assemble
in case of any sudden alarm.

To prevent the individuals of the Association from being injured in their
civil capacity, care must be taken, that the times of drilling and private
exercise be appointed both before and after the usual hours of labor; and that
an option be given to the learners of attending either at the morning or
evening exercise, as shall be most convenient to themselves, that no man may be
induced to neglect or injure his ordinary calling or occupation, by which his
civil capacity is maintained: and, for the same reason, the times of public
exercise in larger bodies should not be more frequent than is absolutely
necessary for acquiring a moderate and useful discipline, rather than a
critical nicety in the military maneuvers; which latter would take up more
time than men of business can usually spare; and which must finally have the
bad effect of tiring out many of the most useful members of society: and,
therefore, it is not only necessary to restrain the too great frequency of such
meetings, but also the duration of each meeting, that as little time may be
lost to the individuals as possible; and that those who attend may not incur
the necessity of taking any refreshment whatsoever while they are out on
exercise, or in going or returning, which would otherwise occasion many
inconveniences too obvious to be mentioned, besides an unnecessary expense to
individuals, which ought certainly to be avoided in large promiscuous
societies, because all cannot equally afford it. But, if any man has acquired
so depraved an appetite, that he cannot endure four or six hours exercise (and
a general review, if properly conducted, will not require more time) without
taking food or liquor, he ought to be esteemed totally unqualified for the
Association, till he can cure himself of such an unmanly and disgraceful habit,
which is entirely inconsistent with the military duty even of a citizen.

Single decennaries, single platoons, or even single companies, should not be
permitted to march into the country, with their arms and uniforms, by way of
exercise or amusement to themselves, without an express leave, given by a
general meeting of the associators, nor without due caution to be taken for
preserving good order, by the attendance of a sufficient number of
peace-officers, to prevent any disputes or affrays with strangers, lest the
indiscretion of a few individuals of the corpse, on such an excursion, should
injure the reputation of the whole body of associators. And the third rule,
given by a very ingenious and learned writer, in a tract, entitled An Inquiry
into the legal Mode of suppressing Riots, should be strictly observed; that the
Association should not, UNNECESSARILY, march through streets or highroads, nor
make any the least MILITARY PARADE, but consider themselves entirely as a part
of the CIVIL STATE. And they ought also carefully to observe the caution
referred to by his fifth rule, respecting the use of arms in suppressing RIOTS,
viz. that it is extremely hazardous for private persons to proceed to those
extremities in common cases; and that they should not attend to any private
person that shall PRESUME to raise the power of the county, which is the
province of the sheriff, undersheriff, or magistrate, but let them wait for a
legal summons from those that have the proper authority, before they take their
arms to assist in keeping the peace; though they have certainly a right to
assemble as neighbors, without their arms, to consult, and use all peaceable
endeavors to allay or prevent the ill consequences of any sudden commotion
that has occasioned an alarm.

By the constitution of this kingdom, as well as by many express laws still in
force, apprentices, wards, and indeed laymen, of all ranks and conditions, from
fifteen to sixty years of age, are required to have arms, and be duly exercised
in the use of them, for the national defense. (See p. 9-24.) It would therefore
well become the housekeepers of every ward, and particularly those who are
members of any ward-association, to encourage their apprentices, servants, and
dependents, to learn their military exercise, (with the common militia-arms
belonging to each house,) at such places in the ward as may be appointed for
that purpose; the expense of which should first be defrayed by the respective
ward-associations, until the utility of the measure is rendered obvious to the
wards at large, that the housekeepers at each wardmote maybe induced to adopt
it. For, by these means, the housekeepers might always have a sufficient
number of able and well-instructed substitutes, to serve for them in the
militia, which would thereby be rescued from the opprobrium of incapacity, with
which it has so frequently of late been charged; and the necessity of any new
reform of the City-Militia (which might be attended with very dangerous
consequences to the rights and liberties of citizens) would be thereby
precluded. And if, in case of any more tumults or riots, an armed City-watch
should again be thought necessary, these disciplined Militia-substitutes in
each ward might be enrolled in a Roster for that particular service, under the
proper Militia-officers; and their attendance might be so divided and
diminished, by a due Roster, as to be very little burdensome to the
individuals enrolled; whereby a small stipend to each, for the time of his
actual attendance, would be sufficient to render the service voluntary. Or
Volunteers might be invited, by rewarding a certain adequate proportion of
watch-duty with the freedoms of the city; and by ordaining that no artificer or
journeyman, employed in the city, be molested as a Non-freeman, provided he
enters himself a Volunteer on the watch-roll of the ward wherein he is employed.


The appearance, also, of the City Militia might be rendered more respectable,
by the addition of drill-jackets, with some proper distinction of uniform
facings, to denote the ward or district of each company.

INDEX.
A.
ABSOLUTE WILL of a monarch over his subjects, a mark of the beast, 61, n.
Acherley, Mr. cited, 68, n. Adomar, bishop of Winchester, 68, n. Aland, Mr.
Justice Fortescue, cited, 19, 27. All persons, of all ranks, that are laymen, (
apprentices, servants, laborers, wards, etc.) required to have arms, and be
exercised in the use of them, 9-24, 81. Antidote against the evil of royal
will, 61, 2d n. Apprentices, etc. should be encouraged by the housekeepers to
learn the military exercise, 81. Archery, 11, 12, 13, 14. Armor, 10. Arms of
defense and peace, 6, 17, 19, 24, 27. Arms of offense and robbery, 7, n. Army;
see Standing army. Association. To associate for common defense is a right of
the people, founded on the law of reason and nature, and therefore an immutable
right of the common law, which cannot be annulled by act of parliament, 5-9.
Ancient statutes bear testimony to this popular right of association, and the
being exercised in arms, 9-18. These rights as necessary, at present, as ever,
24. Had they not been fatally neglected, the late rioters would have been
quelled in their first attempts, 25. The purpose of military Associations, 73.
They should be formed on principles as opposite as possible to those of
standing armies, ibid. viz. in preserving the civil capacity of individuals,
and by the freedom of election in the appointment of officers, 74. The choice
of tithing-men, or sergeants, ibid. The lord mayor or sheriff the legal
commander of them, 75. Platoon-exercise recommended, 75, 76. Places for
drilling to be appointed, 76. also a general rendezveous in each ward, 77.
Precautions, that the civil capacity of individuals may not be injured, 77-79.
Small parties should not be permitted to march into the country, without leave
from a general meeting, and due caution for the peace, 79. Associations should
not unnecessarily march through streets or high roads, nor make any military
parade, but consider themselves as part of the civil state; not to use arms in
common cases; not to attend to any private person that shall presume to raise
the power of the county, but wait for a legal summons, before they take their
arms to assist in keeping peace; 80. but may assemble, as neighbors, without
their arms, to use all peaceable endeavors, etc. 81. Atkins, judge, cited, 58,
59.
B.
Babylonian government described, 61-64. Bacon, Nathaniel, cited, 23. Barriers
of the city ought to have been reserved, 25. Beasts are the prophetical emblems
of arbitrary dominion among men, 60-64. Beast of the Babylonian monarchy,
61-64, n. Beast of the Medo-Persian monarchy, 64, n. Beast of the Grecian
monarchy, 64, n. The last, or 4th, Beast, which still exists in power, 65, n.
The law of England guards against the bestial power, by requiring due
limitations in government, 65-69. Belluina potestas: what it is, 60-61. how
introduced, by innovations, corruptions, and standing armies, 69, n. Bland,
general, his description of a roster, 37, 38. His account of the
platoon-exercise, 75. Bows and Arrows, 11, 12, 13. called the continual defense
of the realm of England, 14. Legal distance for shooting with them at a mark,
12. Bracton, cited, 6, 21, 22, 24, 29, 65, 67. Butts, 12, 13, 15, 16.
C.
Calvin's case, reported by lord Coke, contains many instances of erroneous
doctrines, 29. Camp of discipline, 45. Camp of service, 46. Canutus the great;
a notable instance of his virtue and justice, in withdrawing his armies from
this realm, on the requisition of the peers of England: the consequences of
that noble action are misrepresented by the judge who cited it on Calvin's
case, 29-32. Cherubim, a type of the hosts of Israel, acting by rotation, 40,
41, n. Choice of Officers by public folkmotes, 58. by decennaries, 74. by
platoons, 75. by a general meeting, 74, 75. City pike-men, 57. Civil capacity
of individuals, serving in the militia, may be preserved by the regularity of
rotation, and precaution in training, etc. 37, 41, 43, 47, 74, 77, 78. but is
gradually lost by long continuance in service, whereby the national militia are
rendered mere soldiers, 47. Clarendon, lord, cited, 54-58. Coke, lord, cited,
21, 22, 29-31. Command, when not duly limited, is merum imperium and belluina
potestas, 59, n. etc. " Commandment of the king, according to law," 21, n.
Commandment of the king, which falls not within this description, not binding,
21. Confessor's laws, cited, 19. Connecticut, 58. Cowell, Dr. quoted, 6.
Cromwell, the usurper, kept up an army to support himself and his tyranny, 27,
n.
D.
Daniel, quoted, 60, 61. Decennaries should choose their own tithing-men, or
sergeants, 74. Declaration of rights, 17. Defense, against unjust violence, a
natural right of man, 6-9. Devil. He is a minister of the Devil who commits
injustice, 22, n. 66, n. Discipline, (military,) sufficient for real service,
easily acquired, 58. Disloyalty, 30, n. Doctor and Student, quoted, 7, 8.
Drilling and private exercise in arms, 76, 77.
E.
Earth is filled with violence, 7, 62, n. Eirenarcha; see Lambard. Elements of
tempest and fire reserved to execute God's wrath, 7, n. Emperor, the original
signification of that title, 59, n. Englishman. No Englishman can be loyal, who
opposes the principles of the English law, which require the people to be
armed, 27, 30. Executive power of this limited monarchy cannot legally flow
through any other channels than the king's courts of justice, by due process of
the law, 21, n. Exercise, (military,) 11-14, 16, 18, 54, 58, 81. Places for it
should be appointed in each ward, 76. and hours for it, both in the morning and
evening, 77. Public exercise, in large bodies, not to be more frequent than is
necessary for a moderate and useful discipline, 77. No food or liquor to be
taken while out on exercise, 78, 79.
F.
Fire; see Elements. Fleta, 22, n. Force. It is lawful to use force to repel
force and unjust violence, 6-9. Fortescue, chancellor, 18, 19. Freemen. None
but freemen ought to be trusted with arms in a free country, 30, n.
G.
Gisarms; what they are, 11, 2d n. Good and evil. The right of judging between
good and evil indispensible to man, to distinguish him from the brutes, 60-64.
Government, by arms and armies, odious to the ancient English nobility, 30, 32.
Every Englishman, who has not the same distaste, is disaffected to the true
constitution, and may be justly charged with disloyalty, 27, 30, n. Grecian
dominion, or empire, 64, n. Greece. Causes of disunion among the ancient states
thereof, 39, 40.
H.
Harness, 10. Hue and Cry, 20.
I.
Image of tyranny, 60, n. Inhabitants of every city, borough, and market town,
may have guns, and exercise themselves in the use thereof, 16, 17, 18. Ought
all to be armed, and be expert in arms, 18 -- 20. Are themselves the proper
POWER to prevent damages by rioters, 20 -- 25. There is a greater necessity for
arming and training them than formerly, 26. Innovations. Triennial and
septennial elections, 69, n. Inquiry into the legal Mode of suppressing Riots,
cited, 80. Israelites. The Laws of God were to openly tendered to the people,
and by them so amply confirmed by repeated declarations of popular assent, that
they became the regular statutes of that nation, 61, 2d n.
K.
"King can do no wrong;" this doctrine explained, 21, n. Has no prerogative
which may derogate from justice and equity, 21, 22, n. Ceases to be the
minister of God, and becomes the minister of Satan, when he presumes to rule
contrary to law, 22, 66. No legal king, where WILL governs, and not LAW, 22,
61, 2d n. 65, 66. Antidote against royal WILL, 61, 62, 2d n. King should be
limited by the laws of God, and is bound to read therein, that he may "not lift
up his heart above his brethren," 62, 2d n. for, if duly limited, the crown (or
dominion) will not be liable to be broken by the approaching kingdom of God,
63. King is supreme in personal rank, but not in power, 66, 67, n. King has a
superior, viz. God; also the Law, also his Court, (i. e. of parliament, earls,
barons, etc.) 67, n. King Canute, 29 -- 32. King Richard II. 27. King Henry
VII. 27, n. King Henry VIII. 13, 14, 18, 27, n. Queen Elizabeth, 17. King
Charles I. 66. King Charles II. 27. King William, 28, n. Kingdom of God will
destroy the tyranny of all temporal empires and kingdoms, and will fill the
whole earth, 60, n. under the whole heaven, 63, 2d n. Nothing but righteousness
and the due limitation of WILL, by the laws of God and the just rights of the
people, can save any crown (or regal dominion) from being broken to pieces by
this approaching KINGDOM, 63, n.
L.
Lacombe, Mr. 11, n. Lambard's Eirenarcha, cited, 9, 11, 12. Laws of reason and
nature immutable, 8. Those who attempt to subvert the ancient laws lose the
benefit of the laws, 27, n. Laymen, of all ranks and conditions, required to
have arms, and be exercised in the use of them, 9 -- 24, 81. Limitation of
government. The want of it induces the princes of the world "to lift up their
heads above their brethren," whereby they are rendered dreadfully obnoxious to
the vengeance of the approaching kingdom of God, 62, 63. The want of it is an
abomination in the eye of the English common law, 65, n. London. If the proper
barriers had been reserved, the citizens would have had time to get under arms
on the first notice of the late riots, and might have preserved the peace of
the city: an attack upon the gates would have justified an immediate discharge
of firearms, 25. The inhabitants themselves form that proper power, from which
the law requires the prevention of damages from rioters, 25, 26. Long-bow. To
be exercised in the use of it was formerly the duty of every man, 14. The
reason of the law does equally require the general exercise of all men in the
use of the musket and bayonet, 15. Lord Mayor and sheriffs, the legal
commanders of military associations, 75. Loyalty. No Englishman can be loyal,
who opposes the principles of the English law, whereby the people are required
to have arms of defense and peace, 27. nor who does not distaste a government
by arms and armies, 30.
M.
Matthew, of Westminster, cited, 32. Medo-Persian dominion, 64, n. Merum
imperium, 60, n. Metastasius, (Leopold,) cited, 60, n. MILITIA. A general
militia, acting by rotation, the only safe means of defending a free people, 35
-- 49. The militia of England might supply a constant army in the field of
125,000 men, and yet retain, in every part of the country, eleven parts out of
twelve of its strength, duly trained by the rotation, 42, 44, 46. Might afford
to lose six such capital armies, before it would be necessary to double the
time of service on the roster, 46, 47. Militia, without rotation, becomes a
standing army of mere sold-iers, 47. Militia of London; see Trained Bands.
Militia of the counties; the present establishment thereof savours too much of
a standing army, 59. Should be constituted on principles as opposite as
possible to standing armies, 66 -- 68. Militia of New England and Connecticut,
58. A free militia the only just means of internal national defense, 69, n.
Minsheu, cited, 10. Musket and Bayonet. The laws, which required every man to
be exercised in the use of the long-bow, when esteemed the most effectual
weapon, by parity of reason, do equally require the exercise of the present
fashionable weapons, the musket and bayonet, 14, 15. Muskets, or hand-guns,
the right of all the inhabitants of cities, boroughs, and market towns, to be
armed therewith, acknowledged by statute, 15, 16, 17, 18. Myrror of Justices,
cited, 20.
N.
Necessity of rejecting the dangerous expedient of keeping standing armies for
defense, 36. Newbery. Account of the battle near that place, 55-57. New England
militia, 58.
O.
Odimus aecipitrem, etc. an old English maxim never to be forgotten, 30-32.
P.
Parliaments ought to be newly elected every session, 68, n. and in an equal
proportion of representation, which would be most conducive to the true
interest both of king and people, 69, n. People. Their right to associate for
common defense, 5 -- 9. and to repel force and injury with force, 6, 7, 8. To
have armor, harness, arms, 10 -- 13. To be exercised in the use of such arms
as are esteemed the best for the safeguard of the realm, 14 -- 24. Their power
( viz. the power of the commons in parliament) is independent, 68, n. Persian
Government; see Medo-Persian. Petrus de Montford, 68, n. Platoons, 75, 76.
Power of the commons is independent, of which an example is cited, 68, n. There
is no supreme power without their concurrence, 68, 69, n. Power of the county,
9, 20. Power of the king is not supreme, 66 -- 69, n. Prerogative. No
prerogative of the king against justice (...), 22, n. Process of the law,
through the king's courts, is the only proper mode of exerting the executive
power in this limited monarchy, 21, n. and the sheriffs, attended by the power
of the county, must execute the king's (legal) writs, 20, 21. Prot^stant
subjects may have arms for their defense, 17.
R.
Rapin, cited, 55, 56. Reason, the first foundation of English law, 8. The laws
of reason are immutable, ibid. Rendezvous (general) should be appointed in
every ward, in case of sudden alarm, 77. Res^stance against unjust violence
lawful, 6 -- 9, 24. Right of associating, for common defense and peace, a
n^^^ral right, and therefore immutable, 6, 8, 9. R^ght (...) alone can
establish the throne, 22, 63. R^^ters (the late) would have been quelled in
their first attempts, had not the ancient English constitution, respecting the
use of arms, been fatally neglected, 24, 25. Roman dominion, 65, n. 69, n.
Roster, or rotation of service, as proposed for a general national militia,
36-47. A general rotation of public duty may be compared to the cherubim,
representing the hosts of Israel, 40, 41, n. and would preserve the people in
their civil capacity and ordinary occupations, 41. and limit the power of
commanders, without injuring individuals, 42. The proportion of a roster for
England, 42, 43. Roster for the city watch, 82, 83. Rupert, (prince,) with the
choice horse, repulsed by the city trained-bands, 55-57.
S.
Scriptures, (holy,) cited: Exodus xxiv. 37. p. 61. -- Deuteronomy. xvii. 18, 20. p.
61. -- Ps. lxxv. 6. lxxvi. 12. p. 63. lxxxiii. 13-15. cxlviii. 8. p. 7, n. --
Isa. xvii. 13. p. 7, n. -- Dan. ii. 35. p. 7, n. ii. 35-44. p. 60, 61. -- v.
19, 20. p. 63. -- vii. 27. p. 63. -- vii. 4. p. 64. -- xi. 3. p. 64. -- xi. 36.
p. 65. -- 2 Thessalonians. i. 8. p. 7, n. -- 2 Pet. iii. 7. p. 7, n. -- Rev. xi. 18. p.
61. Skippon, (major general,) 54. Sergeants, 74. Servants, etc. should be
encouraged to learn the military exercise, 81. that there may be always a
sufficient number of persons well instructed, to serve as substitutes in the
militia, or armed city-watch, 82. Sheriffs to raise the power of the county, 9,
10, 20, 21. Sold-iers, dependent on their military sold, are apt to acquire a
slavish and dishonorable submission to command, 47-49, 59, 60, n. and to give
up the indispensible human right of judging between good and evil, 60-62.
whereby standing armies are constantly the bane of all good and limited
government, 63, 64. Standing army. The establishment thereof in England affords
no argument against arming and training the inhabitants in general, 26. The
expense of the standing army enormous and ruinous, 26. and the establishment of
it repugnant to the constitution of England and the genius of its inhabitants,
27, 28 Is dangerous and fatal to the liberties of every nation upon earth, 35,
49, 60. as well as to the true permanent interest of legal kings, 63, 2d n. Is
the bane of all limited government, 63, 64. and is the regular means of
introducing the belluina potestas of imperial will, against which divine
vengeance is announced, 69. n. The first appointment of guards, and the
encroachments that ensued, 27-29, n. Statutes, cited, 13-18, 20. Supreme power;
what, 66, 67, n. if corrupted by innovations, venality, and inequality of
representation, will become a supreme evil, 69, n.
T.
Tailor, (bishop,) cited, 66, 67, n. Tempest and fire reserved to execute God's
wrath, 7, n. Tithing-men, 74. Trained-bands of London have never misbehaved in
actual service, 53, 69. Their annual musters are rather musters of arms than
men, 53. The utility of training and exercising them, 54. Attended, as a guard,
to the parliament, 54. Called a tumultuary army, 55. Nevertheless, by their
steady behavior at the battle of Newbery, they repeatedly repulsed prince
Rupert's choice cavalry, 55-57. Recommended as a pattern of military discipline
by lord Clarendon, 57. A moderate and sufficient discipline for them may easily
be acquired after the hours of labor, 58. A new reform of the city-militia
dangerous at this time, 82. Their appearance might be rendered more respectable
by uniforms, 83. Traitors, the advisers of illegal measures, or of such
measures as require an undue influence in parliament, 22, n. 30, 69, n.
V.
Vicar and minister of the eternal King. Such is a king who limits his power by
justice and law, 22, n. 65, n. Voluntary service, in an armed city-watch, or as
militia substitutes; how to be promoted, 82, 83. Voluntas; see Will.
W.
War against trade, 7, n. Watch-duty. Volunteers to it, how to be encouraged,
83. Weapons. Such as are liable to be concealed, unlawful, 18. Will, (or
voluntas,) when it governs, and not law, destroys the legal authority of the
sovereign, 22, n. 65, 66, n. Will, (unlimited,) or merum imperium, is belluina
potestas, a beastly power, the characteristical property of all the figurative
beasts in prophecy, 60-65. See also King. Wolsey, (cardinal,) 27.
THE END.

