POEMS UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.

By Mrs. LEAPOR of Brackley in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed: And Sold by J. Roberts in Warwick Lane. MDCCXLVIII.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of the following Poems was taken from the World at the time when
she first began to meet with Encouragement to print them, and, in Compliance
with her dying Request, they are now published for the Benefit of her Father,
who is desirous to make use of this Opportunity of returning his humble Thanks
to the Subscribers for the Favor they have been pleased to show him.

The short Account which has been given of Mrs. Leapor, with the Proposals for
a Subscription, it is hoped, will sufficiently apologize for the Defects that
shall be found in this Collection. Had she lived to correct and finish these
first Productions of a young unassisted Genius, certainly they would have been
greatly improved, though, as they now appear in their native Simplicity, they
cannot surely but afford an agreeable Entertainment to the Reader, and serve as
a convincing Proof of the common Aphorism, Poeta nascitur, non fit.

Mrs. Leapor from a Child delighted in reading, and particularly Poetry, but
had few Opportunities of procuring any Books of that kind. The Author she most
admired was Mr. Pope, whom she chiefly endeavored to imitate; how far she
succeeded in this, or any other of her Attempts, must be left to the Judgment
of the Public. And indeed if the Poems will not recommend themselves to the
Reader, little Advantage is to be expected from any thing that can be said of
them here; but, in Justice to the Memory of the Author, as well as for the
Satisfaction of all those who have so cheerfully and generously contributed to
improve the best Legacy she could bequeath to her Father, we beg leave to
inform them, that her Conduct and Behavior entirely corresponded with those
virtuous and pious Sentiments which are conspicuous in her Poems. She was
courteous and obliging to all, cheerful, good-natured, and contented in the
Station of Life in which Providence had placed her. The generous and charitable
Spirit that appeared in her was exerted upon all Occasions to the utmost of her
Ability, and was such as would have been ornamental in a much higher Sphere, to
which in all Probability, if it had pleased God to spare her Life, her own
Merit would have raised her.

Some of her Papers, a little time before her Death, were communicated to
several Persons of Rank and of distinguished Taste and Judgment, who were
pleased to express a great Satisfaction in the View they had of promoting a
Subscription for their being printed, and by that means encouraging her to
proceed in a Science so agreeable to herself, and entertaining to them; but her
Friends are now left to lament her Loss, and that so great a Part of a short
and valuable Life was spent in Obscurity.

A LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
A
THE Right Honorable the Earl of Arran. The Right Honorable the Countess of
Arran. Mrs. Mary Adkins. Mrs. Addis. Mrs. Abram. Mrs. Sarah Arm. Miss Adams.
Mrs. Archer. Miss Ackhurst. Mrs. Frances Air. Mr. James Affleck. Rever. Mr.
Gilbert Affleck. Rever. Mr. Adams, A.M. Fellow of Lincoln-College. John
Affleck, Esquire Mr. Daniel Addison. Captain Henry Ather. Mr. William Adams. Edward
Ash, Esquire Miss Elizabeth Ash. Mr. Burrage Angier. Mrs. Martha Arburthnot. Miss
Archer.
B
His Grace the Duke of Bridgwater. The Right Honorable the Lady Amelia Butler.
The Honorable Benjamin Bathurst, Esquire Thomas Bathurst, Esquire Mrs. Bowls. Mrs.
Burton. Mr. Thomas Bowers. Mr. Edward Baylis. Mr. John Bud. Mrs. Salome Bull.
Edward Bacon, Esquire Captain Butler. Mr. Bowls. Mrs. Barker. Mr. Charles Butler,
2 Books Miss Barnadiston. Miss Elizabeth Barnardiston. Miss Blencowe. Mrs.
Barnardiston. Thomas Blencowe, Esquire Mrs. Elizabeth Barker. John Blencowe, Esquire
Mrs. Blencowe. Mr. William Boreton. Mr. James Bradford. Rever. Mr. Burrows,
M.A. Mrs. Boothby. Mrs. Bainter. William Bridges, Esquire Miss Elizabeth Boyce.
Reverend Dr. Bacon. Miss Temperance Blencowe. Mr. Henry Blencowe. Miss Mary
Blencowe. Miss Bellamy. Mr. Blake, 5 Books. G. Bedford, Esquire Captain John
Brownell. Mr. Barnaby Bland. William Brown, Esquire Mr. William Briggs. Mr.
Jeremiah Batley. Stukely Bayntun, Esquire Thomas Barrington, Esquire Lawrence Battin,
Esquire John Benson, Esquire Mr. John Blackwell. William Blackburne, Esquire Pusey Brook,
Esquire Captain John Blake, 2 Books. Mr. John Bleydestein. Mrs. Elizabeth Burton.
Valentine Boyles, Esquire Mr. Ebenezer Blackwell. William Bromley, Esquire Mrs.
Bromley, 2 Books. Mrs. Bowman. Mr. John Bromsal. Mr. Lancelot Burton. Mrs.
Bertie. Mr. Richard Bowling. Henry Brounker, Esquire Mr. William Bayntun. Thomas
Blake, Esquire 6 Books. David Burleigh, Esquire Mr. James Briscoe. Mrs. Blencowe.
Edward Bacon, Esquire William Bodwell, Esquire Miles Barnes, Esquire -- Brooksbanks, Esquire
Thomas Bridges, Esquire
C
The Right Honorable the Lady Cobham. The Right Honorable the Countess of
Clancarty. The Right Honorable the Lady Elizabeth Campbel. The Lady Henrietta
Conyers. The Lady Clark. The Lady Sophia Carteret. The Honorable Mrs.
Chandler. William Cartwright, Esquire 2 Books. Robert Cunningham, Esquire Mr. Richard
Cowper. Mrs. Clayton, 2 Books. Miss Clayton. Mrs. Chancy. Reverend Mr. Clark.
Mrs. Chauncy of Edgcot. Miss Elizabeth Chauncy. Mrs. Frances Cotton. Charles
Cotterel, Esquire Mrs. Cotterel. Mr. Coysgarne. Mrs. Canning. Mrs. Ann Clark. Mrs.
Mary Clark. Mrs. Clark. Mrs. Cotton. Oxwitch Cater, Esquire Henry Cliffe, Esquire Mrs.
Charlton. Mrs. Cliffe. Mrs. Margaret Cliffe. Reverend Mr. Henry Coker. Captain
Loftice Cliffe. Mr. Connibeere. Mr. Clutterbuck. Thomas Causton, Esquire Mr. Joseph
Cotton. Thomas Crispe, Esquire Richard Chandler, Esquire Joseph Cresswicke, Esquire Capt.
Thomas Carver. John Cresswicke, Esquire Mr. Martin Chalice. Mr. Henry Crawley. Mr.
Robert Carey. Mr. James Cunningham. Mr. Miles Cook. Hugh Cane, Esquire Mr. John
Coleby. Mr. Josiah Corthine. Mr. John Colby. Mr. Anthony Cox. Mr. Rooth
Colebran. Thomas Coe, M.D. Joseph Crew, Esquire 3 Books. Miss Mary Crewe. Mrs.
Elizabeth Crewe. Miss Sarah Crewe. William Cowel, Esquire 2 Books Mr. John Carrey.
Thomas Carter, Esquire Job Stanton Charlton, Esquire 2 Books.
D
The Right Honorable the Countess of Dysart. The Lady Dashwood, 2 Books. The
Lady Delves. Sir John Dolben, Baronet. Miss Ann Dolben. Miss Frances Dolben.
Reverend Mr. Daniel. Major John Davison. Henry St. George Dayrell, Esquire Paul
Dayrell, Esquire Mrs. Dod. Reverend Mr. Dod. Dr. Delany. Mrs. Delany. Mrs.
Donnilant. George Denton, Esquire Mrs. Denton. Mr. Dobree. William Dolben, Esquire Mrs.
Dolben. Rever. Mr. Stephen Duck. Mr. Draper. Mr. William Dawson. Mr. Thomas
Davison. Robert Dinwiddie, Esquire Mrs. Merrial Dubourdieu. Thomas Day, Esquire Mrs.
Hannah Dewell. Mr. Albert Devins. Mr. George Dent. Griffith Davies, Esquire Mr.
Isaac Dagnet.
E
John Eaton, Esquire Mrs. Eaton. Mrs. Ennys. Reverend Mr. Ekins. Mr. Thomas Erith.
Edward Emsal, Esquire Reverend Mr. Tho. Eynon.
F
The Right Honorable the Viscount Fitzwilliams. The Right Honorable the Lady
Fitzwilliams. The Right Honorable the Lady Feversham. The Honorable the Lady
Charlotte Finch, 2 Books. The Honorable Henry Finch, Esquire Miss Ann Foley, 2
Books. Thomas Talbot Foley, Esquire Reverend Mr. Fairbrothers. Miss Theodosia
Fisher. Miss Floyd. Mr. Fanshaw. John Fletcher, Esquire Dudley Foley, Esquire Mr.
Furnice. -- Field, Esquire Mrs. Bridget Fremantle, 2 Books. Mr. Robert Forster.
Gilbert Fleming, Esquire Thomas Fanshaw, Esquire Mr. Samuel Freeman. Mr. Samuel
Freeman, 5 Books John Fremantle, Esquire 2 Books Jonathan Forward, Esquire Mr. Peter
Fector. Mr. Jenkin Ferrier. Miss Fuller. Mr. John Hardy Franklyn. Mr. Benjamin
Forward. Thomas Farrington, Esquire
G
The Right Honorable the Earl of Gainsborough, 2 Books. The Right Honorable
the Earl of Granville, 2 Books. The Right Reverend the Bishop of Gloucester.
The Reverend Dr. Gray. Mrs. Gray. Mrs. Gordon. Mrs. Garland. Mrs. Gee. Reverend
Mr. Gill. Mrs. Geckmore. Mrs. Gores. Mrs. Garland. Mrs. Gyford. Mrs. Gunning.
Mr. John Gibson. Mrs. Margaret Gambier. Mr. Hugh Granger. Mr. John Gibbs.
Samuel Gale, Esquire Thomas Gee, Esquire Thomas Gordon, Esquire Mr. Place Green. Mr. Edward
Goodwin, Christopher Gunman, Esquire
H
The Right Honorable the Lady Hertford. The Honorable Mrs. Hume. Lady Holt.
Mr. William Halifax. Mrs. Halifax. Reverend Mr. Hawes. Miss Harriot. Miss
Hiccocks. Mrs. Holford. Sir Thomas Head. William Holbech, Esquire Mr. Charles
Heath. Charles Halstead, Esquire Rever. James Halifax, M.A. Mr. Hind. Mr. Philip
Hyat. Mr. William How. Mr. James Hindman. Mr. Edmund Horrex. Samuel Hunton,
Esquire Mr. Edward Hyat. Mr. William Hawys. Howard Hastings, Esquire 2 Books. Mr. Evan
Hughes. Mr. Isaac Hunter. Mr. John Hudgebout. Mr. William Holloran. Mr. Roger
Hog. William Hinton. Esquire Mr. Harnage, 3 Books. Mrs. Haistwell. Mr. Morins
Hollinberry. Mrs. Haistwell. Mr. Stephen Harvey. John Hill, Esquire Mr. Hiccoeks.
Mr. George Harris.
I
Mrs. Jennens. Mr. Lawrence Jakeman. Miss Isaacson. Lascells Iremonger, Esquire
Mrs. Jeffries. Mrs. Edmunda Isham. Mrs. Jackson. Mr. Thomas Jakeman. Reverend
Dr. Isham. Mrs. Isham. Mrs. Jones. Mrs. Jones of Ramsturg. Mr. William Jones.
Nathaniel Johnson, Esquire William Jackson, Esquire Owen Jones, Esquire Mr. Thomas Jones.
Francis Jackson, Esquire Mr. William Jorden. Mr. Henry Jelly. Richard Jordan, Esquire 2
Books Mr. Thomas Jackson. Mr. William Jones. The Reverend Dr. Jenner. Mrs.
Jenner.
K
Anthony Keck, Esquire Mrs. Keck. William Kinsley, Esquire Mr. John Kirby. Mr. John
Knowles. Mr. Alexander Kerr. Mr. Thomas Kite. Miss Ann Kempthorne, 2 Books.
Miss Charlotte Kempthorne, 2 Books.
L
His Grace the Duke of Leeds. Her Grace the Duchess of Leeds. The Right
Honorable Lord Viscount Lymington. Will. Loveday, Esquire 2 Books. Mrs. Loveday, 2
Books. Reverend Mr. Long. Mr. Langley. Mrs. Leabon. William Le Grand, Esquire Mr.
Love. Miss Lisle. Colonel Littleton. Reverend Mr. Lie. Mrs. Mary Lisle. Mrs.
Harriot Lisle. Mrs. Sophia Lisle. Mrs. Frances Lisle. Mr. Lancaster. Mrs. Ann
Lynn. Peter Leigh, Esquire Gent. Com. of C.C.C. Mr. William Leach. James Lucas, Esquire
Richard Loyd, Esquire Mr. John Lawton. Miss Long. Mr. William Lane. John Law, Esquire
Mr. Lee, 2 Books. Matthew Lord, Esquire William Lockwood, Esquire Mr. Lewis Loyd.
Captain Warren Lisle. William Levinz, Esquire
M
The Reverend Mr. Mabbot. Mrs. Morris. Mrs. Mandeville. Mrs. Moyse. Mr. Edward
Metcalfe. Thomas Matthews, Esquire Mrs. Metcalfe. Mrs. Mitchell. Master James
Mitchell. Master Knight Mitchell. Mr. Joseph Martin. George Medcalfe, Esquire Mr.
James Mechell. Mr. Simons Mercer. Robert Man, Esquire Mr. Matthew Mead. Captain
Robert Martin. Mr. James Maillard. Mr. Samuel Maddock Mrs. Mary Merrick. John
Manley, Esquire Mr. Dennis Maccarty. William Milner, Esquire Capt. Luke Mercer, 2
Books. Miss Moore. Mr. John Matthews. Mr. John Matson. Arthur Mears, Esquire Mr.
John Meylett. Miss Polly Mercer. Major Richard Mercer. Richard Middleton, Esquire
Mr. John Mason. Mr. Patrick Mackfarland.
N
Miss Neve. Rever. Timothy Neve, A.M. Fellow of C.C.C. Mr. Nicholls. Charles
Northcote, Esquire Richard Needham, Esquire Mrs. Nicholls. Reverend Mr. Nixon.
O
Mrs. Oglethorp. John Oxenford, Esquire Colonel Arthur Owen. William Owen, Esquire
P
Her Grace the Duchess of Portland, 4 Books. The Right Honorable the Earl of
Pomfret, 4 Books. The Right Honorable the Countess of Pomfret, 4 Books The
Honorable Mrs. Percival. The Lady Probyn. The Lady Primrose. Sir Francis Pool,
Baronet. Campbell Price, Esquire Miss Pruce. John Pollard, Esquire Robert Pearn, Esquire
Henry Purefoy, Esquire Mrs. Purefoy. Miss Phillis Price, 2 Books. Miss Kitty Price.
Miss Playdell. Reverend Mr. Pead. Master Pearith. Mrs. Powis. Mrs. Purcell.
Mrs. Parsons. Reverend Mr. Pordage. Mrs. Potter. Thomas Pulleyn, Esquire John
Travanion Plowden, Esquire John Parkhurst, Esquire Rever. James Parker, M.A. Mrs.
Parsons. Mr. Robert Parrot. Reverend Mr. Peak. Phil. Parsons, Esquire J. Paterson,
Esquire William Parsons, Esquire Robert Paul, Esquire Mrs. Mary Page. Joseph Pit, Esquire Mr.
Horatio Paul. Mr. Edward Parish. Mrs. Peyton. Mr. Francis Pelham. Rever. Mr.
Thomas Powell. John Powell, Esquire Miss Elizabeth Parish. Henry Peers. Esquire
R
Rysley Rysley, Esquire Miss Read. Mrs. Rich. Mrs. Radcliffe. Miss Robson. Mrs.
Raynsford. Mrs. Raynsford of Brixworth Reverend Mr. Rawbone. Mrs. Robinson.
Hamet Richardson, Esquire Mr. Thomas Reup. William Russel, Esquire Captain Alexander
Ridley. Mr. John Robinson, Junior. Mr. Charles Rayner. Mr. Martin Rayner. Miss
Rickson.
S
The Right Honorable the Countess of Sunderland. The Right Honorable the
Dowager Countess of Shaftsbury. The Right Honorable the Countess of
Shaftsbury. The Honorable the Lady Ann Scott. Lady Strickland. Lady Elizabeth
Smithson. Sir, Thomas Samwell, Bart. Lady Smith. Mrs. Ann Smith. Mrs. Margaret
Sherman, 2 Books. Robert Sharrock, Esquire 2 Books The Honorable Mr. Shirley. The
Honorable Mrs. Shirley. Mrs. Shaw. Walter Shirley, Esquire Mrs. Catharine Shelly.
Miss Penelope Shelly. Mr. Plowden Slaney. Miss Elizabeth Slaney. Mrs. Stanley.
Mr. James Smith. Mr. Edward Short. Doctor Smith. Mrs. Smith. Mrs. Snape. Miss
Spencer. Mr. Leonard Seely. Mr. Thomas Sanders. Thomas Salter, Esquire Mr. Sharp.
Edward Stanley, Esquire Mr. Benjamin Scott. Mr. George Stierndall. Henry Saxby, Esquire
Mr. William Spearman. Mr. William Sarney. Mr. John Sturmey. Mr. William Spyer.
Miss Priscilla Stert. Reverend Mr. Styleman. Mr. Thomas Sharp. Henry Simons,
Esquire Mr. William Solly. 2 Books. Mr. Samuel Simons. Mr. Nicholas Stokes. Mr.
Isaac Samson. Mr. James Samson. Mr. William Smith. George Smith, Esquire Mr. Henry
Sparrow. Mr. Richard Solly. Colonel William Swan. Captain Nathaniel Smith. Miss
Mary Shadwell. Mr. Edward Sadler.
T
The Lady Tent. Sir John Turner, Baronet. Mrs. Margaret Tufton. Mrs. Mary
Tufton. Mrs. Catharine Titley. Mr. William Thomas. Reverend Mr. Troutbeck. Mr.
Tillard. Mrs. Towers. Mrs. Tempest. Fiennes Trotman, Esquire Miss Kitty Torshell.
Mrs. Thomas. Mr. Henry Thornton. Mr. Wheatley Thompson. Mr. Thomas Tooley. Miss
Turner. Mrs. Thornton. Thomas Thornton, Esquire Rever. Mr. Trimnel, Archdeacon of
Leicester. Jacob Tonson, Esquire Richard Tonson, Esquire Mr. Hugh Tomlins. Mr. Joseph
Thompson. Mr. John Titon. Bryan Tailor, Esquire Mr. Anthony Torless. Mr. William
Thomas. Henry Tolcher, Esquire Mr. Oliver Toulmin. Reverend Mr. Tindal. Edmund
Tailor, Esquire George Thornberow, Esquire William Temple, Esquire Thomas Thomson, M.D. Mr.
Tristram Twell. Francis Thirkell, Esquire Mr. John Taver. Mr. Charles Taver, 3
Books. John Thornhaugh, Esquire William Thornton, Esquire Miss Sally Town.
V
The Lady Vandeput. The Lady Vanbrugh. Mrs. Vernon. Mrs. Vernon. Robert
Vincent, Esquire 4 Books.
W
The Lady Wills. The Honorable Colonel Whitworth. Mrs. Whitworth. Mrs. Ward.
Mr. John Watts. Mr. Wisdom. Mr. Samuel Wilkins. Mrs. Wilmot. Mrs. Weston.
Richard Willis, Esquire Miss Watson. Mr. John Whitmore. Mr. Francis Wilkins.
Charles Whitworth, Esquire Rever. Dr. David Williams. Mr. Thomas Whatley. Mr.
Waldoe. Reverend Mr. Walton. Mrs. Catharine Whitlock. Mr. William Wooton.
William Wood, Esquire Charles Wade, Esquire Edward Wyat, Esquire Mr. John Warner. Mr.
Robert Weston. John Whormby, Esquire Reverend Mr. Wyat. Conway Whithorne, Esquire --
Webster, Esquire Andrew Wilkinson, Esquire Kyffin Williams, Esquire Mrs. Wiseman. Mr.
Thomas Watson. Mr. John Watson. Mr. John Wharry.
Y
Mr. Edward Yates. Mrs. Elizabeth Young. Robert Young, Esquire Miss Sally Yeats.
THE CONTENTS.
DORINDA at her Glass. Page 1 Mira's Will. p. 8 The Friend in Disgrace. A
Dialogue. p. 10 An Ode on Mercy: In Imitation of Part of the 145th Psalm. p. 12
The Beauties of the Spring. p. 15 Damon and Strephon. A Pastoral Complaint. p.
18 A Summer's Wish. p. 21 An Hymn to the Morning. p. 23 Colinetta. p. 26 The
Linnet and the Goldfinch. p. 31 The Month of August. Sylvanus, a Courtier,
Phillis, a Country Maid. p. 34 An Epistle to a Lady. p. 38 The Proclamation of
Apollo. p. 41 The Fall of Lucia. p. 48 The Crucifixion and Resurrection. An
Ode. p. 50 The Third Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon. From the First to the
Sixth Verse. p. 52 An Essay on Happiness. p. 54 An Essay on Hope. p. 60 The
Moral Vision. p. 65 A Prayer for the Year 1745. p. 69 David's Complaint, ii
Samuel, chap. 1. p. 72 An Essay on Friendship. p. 74 The Mistaken Lover. p. 81
The Way of the World. p. 90 The Fox and the Hen. A Fable. p. 97 The Headache.
To Aurelia. p. 101 Strephon to Celia. A modern Love-Letter. p. 104 To
Artemisia. Dr. King's Invitation to Bellvill: Imitated. p. 106 The Apparition.
p. 108 The inspired Quill. Occasioned by a present of Crow Pens. p. 111 The
Penitent. Occasioned by the Author's being asked if she would take Ten Pounds
for her Poems. p. 118 Song to Cloe, playing on her Spinet. p. 120 To
Grammaticus. p. 122 The Ten-Penny-Nail. p. 125 The Genius in Disguise. p. 131
Celadon to Mira. p. 136 On Mr. Pope's Universal Prayer. p. 142 The Fields of
Melancholy and Cheerfulness. p. 145 The Libyan Hunter, a Fable. Inscribed to
the Memory of a late admired Author. p. 153 The Temple of Love. p. 162 Advice
to Myrtillo. p. 167 On Discontent. To Stella. p. 170 The Proposal. p. 173 Soto;
A Character. p. 175 The Universal Dream. p. 177 The Sow and the Peacock. A
Fable. p. 179 Florimelia, the First Pastoral. By Mr. Newton. p. 183 Florimelia,
the Second Pastoral. By Mr. Newton. p. 187 Catharina's Cave. By Mr. Newton. p.
192 The Enquiry. p. 196 The Rival Brothers. p. 201 The Question. Occasioned by
a serious Admonition. p. 224 The Sacrifice. An Epistle to Celia. p. 226 The
Power of Beauty. p. 229 The Death of Abel. p. 232 Job's Curse, and his Appeal.
Taken out of Job, Chap. i, and xxxi. p. 238 The Tale of Cushi. From II. Samuel,
Chap. xviii. p. 243 Proserpine's Ragout. p. 247 The Charms of Anthony. p. 249
On the Death of a justly admired Author. p. 252 An Epitaph. p. 255 On Winter.
p. 256 Mira to Octavia. p. 258 The Setting Sun. p. 261 An Epitaph. p. 263 On
Sickness. ibid. To a Gentleman with a Manuscript Play. p. 267 Silvia and the
Be. p. 270 The Cruel Parent. A Dream. p. 271 A Request to the Divine Being. p.
278
POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
DORINDA at her Glass.
DORINDA, once the fairest of the Train,
Toast of the Town, and Triumph of the Plain;
Whose shining Eyes a thousand Hearts alarmed,
Whose Wit inspired, and whose Follies charmed:
Who, with Invention, racked her careful Breast
To find new Graces to insult the rest,
Now sees her Temples take a swarthy Hue,
And the dark Veins resign their beauteous Blue;
While on her Cheeks the fading Roses die,
And the last Sparkles tremble in her Eye.
Bright Sol had drove the sable Clouds away,
And cheered the Heavens with a Stream of Day,
The woodland Choir their little Throats prepare,
To chant new Carols to the Morning Air:
In Silence wrapped, and curtain'd from the Day,
On her sad Pillow lost Dorinda lay;
To Mirth a Stranger, and the like to Ease,
No Pleasures charm her, nor no Slumbers please.
For if to close her weary Lids she tries,
Detested Wrinkles swim before her Eyes;
At length the Mourner raised her aching Head,
And discontented left her hated Bed.
But sighing shunned the Relics of her Pride,
And left the Toilet for the Chimney Side:
Her careless Locks upon her Shoulders lay
Uncurl'd, alas! because they half were Gray;
No magic Baths employ her skilful Hand,
But useless Phials on her Table stand:
She slights her Form, no more by Youth inspired,
And loathes that Idol which she once admired.
At length all trembling, of herself afraid,
To her loved Glass repaired the weeping Maid,
And with a Sigh addressed the altered Shade.
Say, what art thou, that wear'st a gloomy Form,
With lowering Forehead, like a northern Storm;
Cheeks pale and hollow, as the Face of Woe,
And Lips that with no gay Vermilion glow?
Where is that Form which this false Mirror told
Bloomed like the Morn, and should for Ages hold;
But now a Spectre in its room appears,
All scared with Furrows, and defaced with Tears;
Say, come thou from the Regions of Despair,
To shake my Senses with a meagre Stare?
Some stragg'ling Horror may thy Phantom be,
But surely not the mimick Shape of me.
Ah! yes -- the Shade its mourning Visage rears,
Pants when I sigh, and answers to my Tears:
Now who shall bow before this withered Shrine,
This Mortal Image, that was late Divine?
What Victim now will praise these faded Eyes,
Once the gay Basis for a thousand Lies?
Deceitful Beauty -- false as thou art gay,
And is it thus thy Vot'ries find their Pay;
This the Reward of many careful Years,
Of Morning Labors, and of Noonday Fears,
The Gloves anointed, and the bathing Hour,
And soft Cosmetick's more prevailing Power;
Yet to thy Worship still the fair Ones run,
And hail thy Temples with the rising Sun;
Still the brown Damsels to thy Altars pay
Sweet-scented Unguents, and the Dews of May;
Sempronia smooths her wrinkled Brows with Care,
And Isabella curls her grisled Hair:
See poor Augusta of her Glass afraid,
Who even trembles at the Name of Maid,
Spreads the fine Mechlin on her shaking Head,
While her thin Cheeks disown the mimick Red.
Soft Silvia, who no Lover's Breast alarms,
Yet simpers out the Evening of her Charms,
And though her Cheek can boast no rosy Dye,
Her gay Brocades allure the gazing Eye.
But hear, my Sisters -- Hear an ancient Maid,
Too long by Folly, and her Arts betrayed;
From these light Trifles turn your partial Eyes,
It Is sad Dorinda prays you to be wise;
And thou Celinda, thou must shortly feel
The sad Effect of Time's revolving Wheel;
Thy Spring is past, thy Summer Sun declined,
See Autumn next, and Winter stalks behind:
But let not Reason with thy Beauties fly,
Nor place thy Merit in a brilliant Eye;
It Is thine to charm us by sublimer ways,
And make thy Temper, like thy Features, please:
And thou, Sempronia, trudge to Morning Prayer,
Nor trim thy Eyebrows with so nice a Care;
Dear Nymph believe -- it is true, as you're alive,
Those Temples show the Marks of Fifty-five.
Let Isabel unload her aching Head
Of twisted Papers, and of binding Lead;
Let sage Augusta now, without a Frown,
Strip those gay Ribbands from her aged Crown;
Change the laced Slipper of delicious Hue
For a warm Stocking, and an easy Shoe;
Guard her swelled Ancles from Rheumatick Pain,
And from her Cheek expunge the guilty Stain.
Would smiling Silvia lay that Hoop aside,
'Twou'd snow her Prudence, not betray her Pride:
She, like the rest, had once her flagrant Day,
But now she twinkles in a fainter Ray.
Those youthful Airs set off their Mistress now,
Just as the Patch adorns her Autumn Brow:
In vain her Feet in sparkling Laces glow,
Since none regard her Forehead, nor her Toe.
Who would not burst with Laughter, or with Spleen,
At Prudo, once a Beauty, as I ween?
But now her Features wear a dusky Hue,
The little Loves have bid her Eyes adieu:
Yet she pursues the Pleasures of her Prime,
And vain Desires, not subdued by Time;
Thrusts in amongst the Frolic and the Gay,
But shuts her Daughter from the Beams of Day:
The Child, she says, is indolent and grave,
And tells the World Ophelia cannot behave:
But while Ophelia is forbid the Room,
Her Mother hobbles in a Rigadoon;
Or to the Sound of melting Music dies,
And in their Sockets rolls her blinking Eyes;
Or stuns the Audience with her hideous Squal,
While Scorn and Satire whisper through the Hall.
Hear this, ye fair Ones, that survive your Charms,
Nor reach at Folly with your aged Arms;
Thus Pope has sung, thus let Dorinda sing;
" Virtue, brave Boys, -- it is Virtue makes a King:"
Why not a Queen? fair Virtue is the same
In the rough Hero, and the smiling Dame:
Dorinda's Soul her Beauties shall pursue,
Though late I see her, and embrace her too:
Come, ye blessed Graces, that are sure to please,
The Smile of Friendship, and the careless Ease;
The Breast of Candor, the relenting Ear,
The Hand of Bounty, and the Heart sincere:
May these the Twilight of my Days attend,
And may that Evening never want a Friend
To smooth my Passage to the silent Gloom,
And give a Tear to grace the mournful Tomb.
MIRA's WILL.
IMPRIMIS -- My departed Shade I trust
To Heaven -- My Body to the silent Dust;
My Name to public Censure I submit,
To be disposed of as the World thinks fit;
My Vice and Folly let Oblivion close,
The World already is o'erstock'd with those;
My Wit I give, as Misers give their Store,
To those who think they had enough before.
Bestow my Patience to compose the Lives
Of slighted Virgins and neglected Wives;
To modish Lovers I resign my Truth,
My cool Reflection to unthinking Youth;
And some Goodnature give ('it is my Desire)
To surly Husbands, as their Needs require;
And first discharge my Funeral -- and then
To the small Poets I bequeath my Pen.
Let a small Sprig (true Emblem of my Rhyme)
Of blasted Laurel on my Hearse recline;
Let some grave Wight, that struggles for Renown,
By chanting Dirges through a Market Town,
With gentle Step precede the solemn Train;
A broken Flute upon his Arm shall lean.
Six comic Poets may the Corse surround,
And All Freeholders, if they can be found:
Then follow next the melancholy Throng,
As shrewd Instructors, who themselves are wrong.
The Virtuoso, rich in Sun-dry'd Weeds,
The Politician, whom no Mortal heeds,
The silent Lawyer, chamber'd all the Day,
And the stern Soldier that receives no Pay.
But stay -- the Mourners should be first our Care,
Let the freed Prentice lead the Miser's Heir;
Let the young Relict wipe her mournful Eye,
And widowed Husbands over their Garlic cry.
All this let my Executors fulfill,
And rest assured that this is Mira's Will,
Who was, when she these Legacies designed,
In Body healthy, and composed in Mind.
The FRIEND in Disgrace.
A DIALOGUE.
LYCANDER. DAMON, why so cold and serious?
Wherefore that reluctant Bow?
Why so haughty and imperious?
Say, have you forgot me now?
Tho arrayed in coarse Attire,
You may read Lycander's Face;
For it is Him (my gentle Squire)
Justled in a homely Case.
True, no shining Slaves surround me,
And my Brows with Sorrow bend;
Fortune left me as she found me,
Yet let Damon own his Friend.

DAMON. Sir, your Servant, and all that, Sir;
But indeed I am in haste;
Surely (pray keep on your Hat, Sir),
I have somewhere seen your Face.

LYCANDER. Am I grown so great a Stranger?
Yet it is hardly half a Year,
Since you vowed (in every Danger)
Not your Life was half so dear.
Sure the Court is mighty lulling,
(Not the Streams of Lethe more)
Even the Groom and dirty Scullion
Know not those they loved before.
So on that fatal Day you did
The Levee of his Grace attend;
You of your Memory was rid,
I of my Fortune and my Friend.

DAMON. It Is Business, Sir, that fills my Head,
Believe me now I cannot stay;
I Will order half a Pint of Red,
And if you will drink it, Sir, you may.

An ODE on MERCY:
In Imitation of Part of the 145th Psalm.
I
IT IS Mercy calls -- Awake, my grateful String;
Ye Worlds of Nature, listen while I sing;
It Is not his dire avenging Rod,
I sing the Mercies of a God;
Hark, ye Warblers of the Sky,
Rivers glide serenely by;
Or rather in the sacred Chorus join,
Till our united Voices reach the Seats Divine.
II.
Where injured Saints, that used to mourn below,
Find their glad Breasts with Joys eternal glow;
Where thousand Tongues incessant cry,
Glory be to God on high;
Dominion, Power, Praise, and then
Mercy to the Sons of Men.
Heaven hears delighted, and the joyful Sound
Swelled with celestial Music spreads the Regions round.
III.
The Lord, though seated far beyond the Sky,
Yet sees the wretched with a pitying Eye;
That Power knows our secret Fear,
The lonely Sigh, or silent Tear;
He sees the Widows streaming Eye,
And hears the hungry Orphans cry.
Depending Worlds his sacred Bounty share,
All Creatures find a Part of their Creator's Care.
IV.
His Justice next employs the heavenly String,
And hymning Angels tremble while they sing;
The Lord is just and holy, then
O weep ye thoughtless Sons of Men:
For who can from his Anger fly,
Or shun the Frown of God most high?
Yet shall the Sigh, or penitential Groan,
Mount like the Seraph's Wing, and reach the sacred Throne.
V.
Hear this, ye pious but dejected Minds,
Whom Errors darken, or whom Weakness binds;
Lift from the Dust your mournful Eye,
And know the Lord your Help is nigh;
These Sorrows from your Breasts shall roll,
And Comfort bless the humble Soul;
Let cheerful Hope in every Bosom spring,
For boundless Mercy dwells with Heaven's immortal King.
VI.
Come then, ye Worlds, with mingled Voices raise
A Song of mean, but not ungrateful Praise;
Though the dull Numbers rudely flow,
And our cold Hearts but faintly glow,
Our Raptures own a less Degree,
Yet Cherubs sing, and so should we.
The Almighty hears, and gives us leave to call
On him the Judge, the Guide and sacred Lord of All.
VII.
All you that bend beneath the Stroke of Time,
And you whose Cheeks confess their healthy Prime,
Your Maker and Preserver praise,
For early and for length of Days;
The pious and the grateful Song,
Shall lisp upon the Infant's Tongue,
While heavenly Mercy sooths the Mourner's Care,
And bids the Innocent rejoice, the Sinner not despair.
The BEAUTIES of the SPRING.
HALL happy Shades, and hail thou cheerful Plain,
Where Peace and Pleasure unmolested reign;
Where dewy Buds their blushing Bosoms show,
And the coll Rivers murmur as they flow:
See yellow Crowfoots deck the gaudy Hills,
While the faint Primrose loves the purling Rills:
Sagacious Bees their Labors now renew,
Hum round the Blossoms, and extract their Dew:
In their new Liv'ries the green Woods appear,
And smiling Nature decks the Infant Year;
See you proud Elm that shines in borrowed Charms,
While the curled Woodbines deck her aged Arms.
When the streaked East receives a lighter Gray,
And Larks prepare to meet the early Day;
Through the glad Bowers the shrill Anthems run,
While the Groves glitter to the rising Sun:
Then Phillis hastens to her darling Cow,
Whose shining Tresses wanton on her Brow,
While to her Cheek enlivening Colors fly,
And Health and Pleasure sparkle in her Eye.
Unspoil'd by Riches, nor with Knowledge vain,
Contented Cymon whistles over the Plain;
His Flock dismisses from their nightly Fold,
Observes their Health, and sees their Number told.
Pleased with its Being, see the nimble Fawn
Sports in the Grove, or wantons over the Lawn,
While the pleased Coursers frolic out the Day,
And the dull Ox affects unwieldy Play.
Then haste, my Friend, to yonder Sylvan Bowers,
Where Peace and Silence crown the blissful Hours;
In those still Groves no martial Clamours sound,
No streaming Purple stains the guiltless Ground;
But fairer Scenes our ravished Eyes employ,
Give a soft Pleasure, and a quiet Joy;
Grief flies from hence, and wasting Cares subside,
While winged with Mirth the laughing Minutes glide.
See, my fair Friend, the painted Shrubs are gay,
And round they Head ambrosial Odours play;
At Sight of thee the swelling Buds expand,
And opening Roses seem to court thy Hand;
Hark, the shrill Linnet charms the distant Plain,
And Philomel replies with softer Strain;
See those bright Lilies shine with milky Hue,
And those fair Cowslips drop with balmy Dew;
To thee, my Fair, the cheerful Linnet sings,
And Philomela warbles over the Springs;
For thee those Lilies paint the fertile Ground,
And those fair Cowslips are with Nectar crowned;
Here let us rest to shun the scorching Ray,
While curling Zephyrs in the Branches play.
In these calm Shades no ghastly Woe appears,
No Cries of Wretches stun our frighted Ears;
Here no gloss'd Hate, no sainted Wolves are seen,
Nor busy Faces throng the peaceful Green;
But Fear and Sorrow leave the careful Breast,
And the glad Soul sinks happily to Rest.
DAMON and STREPHON.
A Pastoral Complaint.
Damon. SAY, why these Sighs that in thy Bosom rise?
Why from thy Cheek the wonted Crimson flies?
Why on the Ground are fixed thy streaming Eyes?

Strephon. Still let this Bosom swell with aching Woe,
And from my Eyes the streaming Sorrows flow.
But Oh! the Cause -- (See Clouds are gathering round,
And Zephyrs wait to catch the mournful Sound;
The sickening Trees all shed their blooming Store)
Why would thou hear it? -- Sylvius is no more.

Damon. Is Sylvius dead? -- then Phillis rend thy Hair,
And blot those Features that were late so fair.
Thou Sun, forbear to gild this fatal Day;
Nor you my Lambkins dare to think of Play.

Strephon. No more alas! -- no more the tuneful Swain
Shall with soft Numbers charm the listening Plain.
No more his Flute shall greet the dawning Spring;
Nor to his Hand rebound the trembling String.

Damon. Ah cruel Death! would none but Sylvius do?
No meaner Swain amongst the worthy few?
Why did thou take (and leave the baser Tribe)
The Flower of Shepherds and the Muses Pride?

Strephon. None knew like him the heavenly Notes to swell,
And moral Tales in pleasing Numbers tell.
While Sylvius sung, none thought the Day too long;
But all repined at the too hasty Song.

Damon. Ye solemn Winds that whistle through the Glade,
Or rudely bluster in the darker Shade,
Go bear our Sorrows to the distant Shore,
And tell them Sylvius chears our Plains no more.

Strephon. Vain are our Sighs, our Tears as vainly flow,
And each sad Bosom swells with fruitless Woe!
As northern Blasts destroy the Autumn Store,
So Sylvius fell and shall return no more.

Damon. Enough of Sorrow -- now your Garlands bring;
Crop all the Beauties of the early Spring;
Around his Tomb these willing Hands shall twine
The choicest Briers of sweet Eglantine.

Strephon. On his cold Grave a Laurel I bestow,
Which late did in my Father's Garden grow:
This Wreath Amyntas asked to shade her Brow,
But to my Sylvius I resign it now.

Damon. The pensive Swains shall strike their Bosoms there,
And soft-ey'd Virgins drop a gentle Tear:
May some good Angel guard the sacred Ground,
And Flowers unfading shed their Sweets around.

A SUMMER'S WISH.
MY Guardian, bear me on thy downy Wing
To some cool Shade where infant Flowers spring;
Where on the Trees sweet Hony-suckles blow,
And ruddy Daisies paint the Ground below:
Where the shrill Linnet charms the solemn Shade,
And Zephyrs pant along the cooler Glade,
Or shake the Bull-rush by a River Side,
While the gay Sunbeams sparkle on the Tide:
O for some Grot whose rustic Sides declare,
Ease, and not Splendour, was the Builder's Care;
Where Roses spread their unaffected Charms,
And the curled Vine extends her clasping Arms;
Where happy Silence lulls the quiet Soul,
And makes it calm as Summer Waters roll.
Here let me learn to check each growing Ill,
And bring to Reason disobedient Will;
To watch this incoherent Breast, and find
What favorite Passions rule the giddy Mind.
Here no Reproaches grate the wounded Ear;
We see delighted, and transported hear,
While the glad Warblers wanton round the Trees,
And the still Waters catch the dying Breeze,
Grief waits without, and melancholy Gloom:
Come, cheerful Hope, and fill the vacant Room;
Come every Thought, which Virtue gave to please;
Come smiling Health with thy Companion Ease:
Let these, and all that Virtue's self attends,
Bless the still Hours of my gentle Friends:
Peace to my Foes, if any such there be,
And gracious Heaven give Repose to me.
An HYMN to the MORNING.
I.
SEE the lovely Morning rise,
See her Glories paint the Skies,
Half over the reviving Globe
Gaily spreads her Saffron Robe:
See the Hills with Flowers crowned,
And the Valleys laughing round.
II.
Mira to Aurora sings,
While the Lark exulting springs
High in Air -- and tunes her Throat
To a soft and merry Note;
The Goldfinch and the Linnet join:
Hail Aurora, Nymph divine.
III.
See Clione's gilded Car,
See it blazes from afar;
Here the fair One bends her Way,
Balmy Zephyrs round her play;
Now she lights upon the Vale,
Fond to meet the western Gale.
IV.
May this artless Praise be thine,
Soft Clione half divine.
See her snowy Hand she waves,
Silent stand her waiting Slaves;
And while they guard the Silver Reins,
She wanders lonely over the Plains.
V.
See those Cheeks of beauteous Dye,
Lovely as the dawning Sky,
Innocence that never beguiles
Lips that wear eternal Smiles:
Beauties to the rest unknown,
Shine in her and her alone.
VI.
Now the Rivers smoother flow,
Now the opening Roses glow,
The Woodbine twines her odorous Charms
Round the Oaks supporting Arms:
Lilies paint the dewy Ground,
And Ambrosia breathes around.
VII.
Come, ye Gales that fan the Spring;
Zephyr, with thy downy Wing,
Gently waft to Mira's Breast
Health, Content, and balmy Rest.
Far, O far from hence remain
Sorrow, Care, and sickly Pain.
VIII.
Thus sung Mira to her Lyre,
Till the idle Numbers tire:
Ah! Sappho sweeter sings, I cry,
And the spiteful Rocks reply,
(Responsive to the jarring Strings)
Sweeter -- Sappho sweeter sings.
COLINETTA.
IT WAS when the Fields had shed their golden Grain.
And burning Suns had seared the russet Plain;
No more the Rose nor Hyacinth were seen,
Nor yellow Cowslip on the tufted Green:
But the rude Thistle reared its hoary Crown,
And the ripe Nettle showed an irksom Brown.
In mournful Plight the tarnish'd Groves appear,
And Nature weeps for the declining Year.
The Sun too quickly reached the western Sky,
And rising Vapors hid his evening Eye:
Autumnal Threads around the Branches flew,
While the dry Stubble drank the falling Dew.
In this sick Season, at the close of Day,
On Lydia's Lap pale Colinetta lay;
Whose sallow Cheeks had lost their rosy Dye,
The Sparkles languish'd in her closing Eye.
Parched were those Lips whence Music used to flow,
Nor more the Flute her weary Fingers know,
Yet thrice to raise her feeble Voice she tried,
Thrice on her Tongue the fainting Numbers died;
At last revived, on Lydia's Neck she hung,
And like the Swan expiring thus she sung.
Farewell, ye Forests and delightful Hills,
Ye flowery Meadows and ye crystal Rills,
Ye friendly Groves to whom we used to run,
And beg a Shelter from the burning Sun.
Those blasted Shades all mournful now I see,
Who droop their Heads as though they wept for me.
The pensive Linnet has forgot to sing,
The Lark is silent till returning Spring.
The Spring shall all those wonted Charms restore,
Which Colinetta must behold no more.
Farewell, ye Fields; my native Fields, adieu;
Whose fertile Lays my early Labors knew;
Where, when an Infant, I was wont to stray,
And gather King-cups at the closing Day.
How often has Lydia told a mournful Tale,
By the clear Lake that shines in yonder Vale;
When she had done I sung a cheerful Lay,
While the glad Goldfinch listened on the Spray:
Lured by my Song each jolly Swain drew near,
And rosy Virgins thronged around to hear:
Farewell, ye Swains; ye rosy Nymphs, adieu:
Though I (unwilling) leave the Streams and you,
Still may soft Music bless your happy Shore,
But, Colinetta, you must hear no more.
O Lydia, thou, (if wayward Tongues should blame
My Life, and blot a harmless Maiden's Name)
Tell them if ever I found a straggling Ewe,
Although the Owner's Name I hardly knew;
I fed it kindly with my Father's Hay,
And gave it shelter at the closing Day:
I never stole young Pigeons from their Dams,
Nor from their Pasture drove my Neighbors Lambs:
Nor set my Dog to hunt their Flocks away,
That mine might graze upon the vacant Lay.
When Phillida by dancing won the Prize,
Or Colin praised young Mariana's Eyes:
When Damon wedded Urs'la of the Grange,
My Cheek with Envy never was seen to change:
When-e'er I saw Aminda cross the Plain,
Or walk the Forest with her darling Swain,
I never whispered to a Stander-by,
But hated Scandal and abhorred a Lie.
On Sundays I (as Sister Sue can tell)
Was always ready for the Sermon-bell:
I honored both the Teacher and the Day;
Nor used to giggle when he bid me pray:
Then sure for me there is something good in Store,
When Colinetta shall be seen no more.
When I am gone, I leave to Sister Sue
My Gown of Jersey, and my Aprons blue.
My studded Sheep-hook Phillida may take,
Likewise my Hay-fork and my Hazel Rake:
My hoarded Apples and my winter Pears
Be thine, O Lydia, to reward thy Cares.
These Nuts that late were plucked from yonder Tree,
And this Straw-basket, I bequeath to thee:
That Basket did these dying Fingers weave:
My boxen Flute to Corydon I leave,
So shall it charm the listening Nymphs around,
For none like him can make it sweetly sound.
In our Churchyard there grows a spreading Yew,
Whose dark green Leaves distill a baneful Dew:
Be those sad Branches over my Grave reclined,
And let these Words be graven on the Rind:
" Mark, gentle Reader, -- Underneath this Tree,
" There sleeps a Maid, old Simon's Daughter she;
" Thou too, perhaps, ere many Weeks be over,
" Like Colinetta, shall be seen no more.
Here ends the Maid -- for now the Seal of Death
Closed her pale Lips, and stopped her rosy Breath.
Her sinking Eye Balls took their long Adieu,
And with a Sigh her harmless Spirit flew.
The LINNET and the GOLDFINCH.
'TWAS when the Morn disclosed her rosy Brow,
And new-wak'd Heifers in the Pastures low,
When little Songsters in the Gales respire:
To Mira's Shades repaired the woodland Choir;
Perched on a Bough that shone with Morning Dew,
The Linnet thus addressed the feathered Crew.
The LINNET.
Say, my soft Sisters; say, ye tuneful Throng;
Who now demands the Tribute of a Song?
Who called us here? Who gave us leave to rove
And warble in this late forbidden Grove?
Not long ago as Mira, mournful Maid,
All pensive sat beneath the dusky Shade,
Just over her Head I whistled on a Bough,
But Discontent sat frowning on her Brow:
Be gone thou too officious Bird, she cries;
(And turned on Me -- on Me her angry Eyes)
Go from my Bowers, lead the tuneful Throng;
For Artemisia hears no more your Song.
These slighted Shades can please the Fair no more;
Ye Hony-suckles shed your blooming Store;
Ye spreading Trees now let your Branches die;
And ye shrill Warblers from those Branches fly:
She said: -- the Blossoms fell from every Tree,
And we dejected from her Arbours flee;.
We fled all mournful to the distant Plain:
Then say who calls us to these Groves again.
The GOLDFINCH.
By Mira's Order to this Grove we came,
Mira, whose Sonnets please the rural Dame:
'Twas Yesternight she waved her Hand to me,
As I sat whistling on a Chesnut-tree:
Come here (she cried) ye soft aerial Choirs;
My Ear no more your sprightly Music tires:
Now I can listen all the Evening long,
For Artemisia will attend your Song:
She comes: Ye Trees put on your best Array,
And with fresh Odours greet the rising Day.
Breathe sweet, ye Woodbines, and with Heads reclined
Court the soft Whispers of the western Wind.
Ye friendly Zephyrs, dry the dewy Ground;
Shine bright, thou Sun; and laugh, ye Meads around:
Thus Mira spoke. -- Once more the Blossoms glow,
And milder Breezes over the Mountains blow.
The smiling Grove once more renews its Charms,
And Trees embracing twist their curling Arms;
Safely to shelter the expected Fair,
From the hot Sunbeams or the northern Air:
Here we attend, and hop from Spray to Spray,
'Till the kind Fates shall bring the wished for Day.
When She, of whom our Mira daily sings,
Whose Name she whispers to the listening Springs,
Shall bless these Shades -- then, ye melodious Throng,
Let each prepare 'em for the sprightly Song.
Let the shrill Thrush begin her varied Strain,
And the small Wren in softer Note complain.
The piercing Linnet and the Lark agree,
Less loud the Red-breast, Nightingale and me.
Here ends the Goldfinch, and exulting springs;
Her pleased Companions clap their joyful Wings.
The MONTH of AUGUST.
Sylvanus, a Courtier. Phillis, a Country Maid. SYLVANUS. HAIL, Phillis,
brighter than a Morning Sky,
Joy of my Heart, and Darling of my Eye;
See the kind Year her grateful Tribute yields,
And round-fac'd Plenty triumphs over the Fields.
But to yon Gardens let me lead thy Charms,
Where the curled Vine extends her willing Arms:
Whose purple Clusters lure the longing Eye,
And the ripe Cherries show their scarlet Dye.

PHILLIS. Not all the Sights your boasted Gardens yield,
Are half so lovely as my Father's Field,
Where large Increase has blessed the fruitful Plain,
And we with Joy behold the swelling Grain,
Whose heavy Ears toward the Earth reclined,
Wave, nod, and tremble to the whisking Wind.

SYLVANUS. But see, to emulate those Cheeks of thine,
On yon fair Tree the blushing Nect'rins shine:
Beneath their Leaves the ruddy Peaches glow,
And the plump Figs compose a gallant Show.
With gaudy Plumbs see yonder Boughs recline,
And ruddy Pears in you Espalier twine.
There humble Dwarfs in pleasing Order stand,
Whose golden Product seems to court thy Hand.

PHILLIS. In vain you tempt me while our Orchard bears
Long-keeping Russets, lovely Cath'rine Pears,
Pearmains and Codlings, wheaten Plumbs enough,
And the black Damsons load the bending Bough.
No Pruning-knives our fertile Branches teaze,
While yours must grow but as their Masters please.
The grateful Trees our Mercy well repay,
And rain us Bushels at the rising Day.

SYLVANUS. Fair are my Gardens, yet you slight them all;
Then let us haste to you majestic Hall,
Where the glad Roofs shall to thy Voice resound,
Thy Voice more sweet than Musick's melting Sound:
Now Orion's Beam infests the sultry Sky,
And scorching Fevers through the Welkin fly;
But Art shall teach us to evade his Ray,
And the forced Fountains near the Windows play;
There choice Perfumes shall give a pleasing Gale,
And Orange-flow'rs their odorous Breath exhale,
While on the Walls the well-wrought Paintings glow,
And dazzling Carpets deck the Floors below:
O tell me, Thou whose careless Beauties charm,
Are these not fairer than a Thresher's Barn?

PHILLIS. Believe me, I can find no Charms at all
In your fine Carpets and your painted Hall.
It Is true our Parlour has an earthen Floor,
The Sides of Plaster and of Elm the Door:
Yet the rubbed Chest and Table sweetly shines,
And the spread Mint along the Window climbs:
An aged Laurel keeps away the Sun,
And two cool Streams across the Garden run.

SYLVANUS. Can Feasts or Music win my lovely Maid?
In both those Pleasures be her Taste obeyed.
The ransacked Earth shall all its Dainties send,
Till with its Load her plenteous Table bend.
Then to the Roofs the swelling Notes shall rise,
Pierce the glad Air and gain upon the Skies,
While Ease and Rapture spreads itself around,
And distant Hills roll back the charming Sound.

PHILLIS. Not this will lure me, for I Would have you know
This Night to feast with Corydon I go:
To Night his Reapers bring the gathered Grain,
Home to his Barns, and leave the naked Plain:
Then Beef and Coleworts, Beans and Bacon too,
And the Plumb-pudding of delicious Hue,
Sweet-spiced Cake, and Apple-pies good Store,
Deck the brown Board; who can desire more?
His Flute and Tabor too Amyntor brings,
And while he plays soft Amaryllis sings.
Then strive no more to win a simple Maid,
From her loved Cottage and her silent Shade.
Let Phillis never, ah never let her rove
From her first Virtue and her humble Grove.
Go seek some Nymph that equals your Degree,
And leave Content and Corydon for me.

An EPISTLE to a LADY.
IN vain, dear Madam, yes in vain you strive;
Alas! to make your luckless Mira thrive.
For Tycho and Copernicus agree,
No golden Planet bent its Rays on me.
It Is twenty Winters, if it is no more;
To speak the Truth it may be Twenty four.
As many Springs their 'pointed Space have run,
Since Mira's Eyes first opened on the Sun.
'Twas when the Flocks on slabby Hillocks lie,
And the cold Fishes rule the watery Sky:
But though these Eyes the learned Page explore,
And turn the ponderous Volumes over and over,
I find no Comfort from their Systems flow,
But am dejected more as more I know.
Hope shines a while, but like a Vapor flies,
(The Fate of all the Curious and the Wise)
For, Ah! cold Saturn triumphed on that Day,
And frowning Sol denied his golden Ray.
You see I Am learned, and I shew't the more,
That none may wonder when they find me poor.
Yet Mira dreams, as slumbring Poets may,
And rolls in Treasures till the breaking Day:
While Books and Pictures in bright Order rise,
And painted Parlours swim before her Eyes:
Till the shrill Clock impertinently rings,
And the soft Visions move their shining Wings:
Then Mira wakes, -- her Pictures are no more,
And through her Fingers slides the vanished Ore.
Convinced too soon, her Eye unwilling falls
On the blue Curtains and the dusty Walls:
She wakes, alas! to Business and to Woes,
To sweep her Kitchen, and to mend her Clothes.
But see pale Sickness with her languid Eyes,
At whose Appearance all Delusion flies:
The World recedes, its Vanities decline,
Clorinda's Features seem as faint as mine:
Gay Robes no more the aching Sight admires,
Wit grates the Ear, and melting Music tires:
Its wonted Pleasures with each Sense decay,
Books please no more, and Paintings fade away:
The sliding Joys in misty Vapors end:
Yet let me still, Ah! let me grasp a Friend:
And when each Joy, when each loved Object flies,
Be you the last that leaves my closing Eyes.
But how will this dismantl'd Soul appear,
When stripped of all it lately held so dear,
Forced from its Prison of expiring Clay,
Afraid and shivering at the doubtful Way.
Yet did these Eyes a dying Parent see,
Loosed from all Cares except a Thought for me,
Without a Tear resign her short'ning Breath,
And dauntless meet the lingering Stroke of Death.
Then at the Almighty's Sentence shall I mourn:
" Of Dust thou art, to Dust shall thou return."
Or shall I wish to stretch the Line of Fate,
That the dull Years may bear a longer Date,
To share the Follies of succeeding Times
With more Vexations and with deeper Crimes:
Ah no -- though Heaven brings near the final Day,
For such a Life I will not, dare not pray;
But let the Tear for future Mercy flow,
And fall resigned beneath the mighty Blow.
Nor I alone -- for through the spacious Ball,
With me will Numbers of all Ages fall:
And the same Day that Mira yields her Breath,
Thousands may enter through the Gates of Death.
The Proclamation of APOLLO.
MAY Artemisia hear my Strain,
I quote the Sages once again:
And should you ask the Reason why,
" Old Authors fib, and so may I."
Proceed we then -- Old Authors say,
Apollo once made Holiday,
And called the Brethren of the Quill,
To feast upon his tuneful Hill,
From every Nook and every Wind:
They came, for who would stay behind?
Great was the Crowd, as may be guessed:
Side grew to Side, and Back to Breast,
Till the Imperial Prince of Song,
Who fearing something might be wrong,
Sent forth a Troop with Caps and Spears,
Much like Parnassian Granadiers,
With surly Eyes and sour Faces,
To part the Crowd and give 'em Places.
Now I have quite forgot, I fear,
What Names the People gave 'em there
Amongst the Muses -- But I trow
Men call 'em Critics here below.
Now when at last these sage Reformers,
Had drove the Crew to Heaps and Corners,
They called them out by two and three,
And set 'em in a due Degree,
That each his proper Place should know,
On Laurel Benches all a-row.
Now you may think they all were happy,
As Drunkard over his Jug of Nappy,
That every Brow was smooth and clear,
But first I beg you would lend an Ear:
The Queen of Love to grace the Feast,
Had sent a thousand Pipes at least
Of smiling Nectar neat and fine,
To whet the Guests before they dine:
But when the Cups had walked about,
Some surly Bards began to pout,
And wrinkle up their tiny Faces,
And fret and fume about their Places:
Their giddy Brains began to glow,
Each thinking he was placed too low:
This vowed to make all Creatures fear him,
And That could bear no Creature near him.
One seemed to talk with mighty Spirit,
Of baffled Worth and slighted Merit:
Another was in Passion hurled,
And cursed the stupid senseless World,
Till Choler swelled in every Vein,
And each no longer could contain,
But fairly went, as I Am a Sinner,
To Loggerheads before their Dinner.
Apollo was offended quite,
And all the Muses in a Fright:
Then thundered out a Proclamation.
" O Ye -- And all the rhiming Nation,
" Our King commands you to be still,
" And not disturb the sacred Hill.
" If some refusing to be quiet,
" Shall dare to aid this lawless Riot:
" The Statutes of Parnassian tender
" The Stocks to every such Offender.
" At this the Riot seemed to cease,
" And with a murmur sunk in Peace:
" When all was silent to a Man,
" Again the Herald thus began.
" Directed by your Prince I bring
" This Message from the laureled King,
" Who long has viewed with silent Woe
" Your Quarrels in the World below,
" How moral and satirick Wits
" And jingling Pedants -- Rhiming Cits,
" The gay, the empty, and the full,
" The soft, the froward, and the dull,
" Wage endless Wars with one another,
" And every Blockhead hates his Brother.
" But while you take a world of pains
" In pelting at each other's Brains;
" While Envy swells the little Mind,
" You never consider that you find
" (To see you in the Tempest hurled)
" Diversion for the laughing World;
" And so you break all moral Rules
" To grow the Mocking-stock of Fools:
" But now Apollo begs you will
" Suspend your Quarrels, and be still.
" Let Wits shake Hands with one another,
" And every Dunce embrace his Brother,
" From battered Bards with never a Shoe
" To those who strut about with two;
" From Poets doomed to whittle Sticks,
" To Rhimers in a Coach and Six.
" Let none presume to fret and squabble,
" Nor curse the dirty rhiming Rabble:
" For see the Beams of Phoebus strike
" The Meadows, Hills, and Dales alike:
" So shines the Muse on every Creature,
" Who tags his humble Lines with Meter.
He said -- The Children of the Bays
Sent up a Shout of mingled Praise,
Devoutly promising to pay
Obedience to the Prince of Day;
And now they see the Tables spread
With Dainties and Parnassian Bread,
Whose tiny Loaves were nicely white,
And no French Rolls were half so light:
The first bold Course was brought along
In Dishes made of Homer's Song.
Next Virgil on the Table shines,
And then smooth Ovid's tender Lines.
The gay Desert exposed to view,
Of modern Authors not a few,
Heroicks in the midst preside,
With Elegy on either Side:
Here through transparent Sonnets gleam
Whip-Syllabubs and spiced Cream:
There loaded Epigrams appear,
And little Mottos close the Rear.
Now Dinner past their jolly Souls,
Cut Capers to the Nectar Bowls,
Till every Bard had drank his fill,
And then they left the tuneful Hill.
But ere they part, the laureled King,
Extracted from a wondrous Spring
A magic Bath of mighty Power,
Whose Virtues could in half an Hour
Make Proof against sharp Satyr's Pain,
The Fibers of a Dunce's Brain;
And give him Confidence to push
Through the broad World without a Blush.
Apollo next upon the Crew,
Bestowed a Grey-goose Quill or two,
With Ink that into Meter runs,
And charms against the Fear of Duns.
This done dismissed 'em, as before,
With Sirs, your Servant, and no more.
The FALL of LUCIA.
LUCIA was fair and bright as rising Day,
Sweet as Arabia, or the Buds of May;
Fresh as the Winds that sweep the dewy Hills,
Or Beds of Roses washed by healthy Rills:
Whose Soul was softer than a trembling Dove,
Nor knew a Failing till she learned to love.
Nor Fraud nor Scandal to her Lips were known,
And thought each Bosom guiltless as her own.
Thus only armed with Innocence and Smiles,
She fell the Victim of a Tyrant's Wiles.
So lost from Shepherd and its mourning Dam,
Through some lone Desert roves a stragg'ling Lamb;
No Danger fears, but as he idly strays
Round every Bush the heedless Wanton plays;
Till raging Wolves the beauteous Toy surround,
Or foaming Tigers rend the mossy Ground:
Then from his Heart the guiltless Purple flows,
A grateful Morsel to his hungry Foes:
Thus wrapped in Sorrows wretched Lucia lies,
Whose Sighs still answer to her streaming Eyes.
And Damon still -- Ah! faithless Damon cries,
No more those Lips like dewy Roses glow;
Her weary Lids no peaceful Slumbers know:
But left to strike her pensive Breast in vain,
And curse the Author of her lasting Pain.
Her Soul of Ease has took its long Adieu:
Hear this, ye Nymphs; but hear and tremble too,
Ye Fair that lanch in Pleasure's tempting Sea,
Though Fortune crowns you with a calmer Day,
And Joy's soft Gale salutes your nimble Oar:
Where Lucia's Fame was shipwrecked on the Shore,
Yet let Reflection mark your gliding Days,
Nor drink too deeply in the Draught of Praise:
For Flattery is -- "So say the learned Schools,
" The Bane of Virgins and the Bait of Fools."
How happy she whose purer Spirit knows,
No Thought less harmless than a Saint's Repose,
Whose guiltless Charms pursue no greater End,
But to rejoice a Parent or a Friend:
Whose Care it is her Passions to control,
And keep the Steerage of a quiet Soul:
Then this shall grace her monumental Page,
" In Youth admired, and beloved in Age."
The CRUCIFIXION and RESURRECTION.
An ODE.
I.
WHAT means the reeling Earth? O why
These Wonders in the dreadful Sky?
The frighted Sun withdraws its Beams,
Deep Groans are heard and doleful Screams.
O say, what this Convulsion means:
Afflicted Nature with a Shriek replies,
A God expires, a mighty Savior dies.
II.
The conscious Stars their Rays deny.
The Moon receives a crimson Dye.
The Temple conscious of its Fall,
Now shakes its emblematick Wall.
The Ocean stagnates, and the Mountains bow,
And Angels weep that never wept till now.
III.
Still tremble, Earth, and still, O Sky,
Thy ever-chearing Lamps deny:
Amazed still let the Ocean stand,
But what remains for guilty Man?
What Groans? what Sorrows are for him decreed?
For Man whose Crimes have made Perfection bleed?
IV.
But see, O see, the Sun returns!
No more afflicted Nature mourns!
The Stars their vacant Orbs regain!
And the Moon sheds a silver Beam!
While heavenly Voices warble in the Skies,
" Behold your Savior from his Tomb arise.!"
V.
While Saints attend the blessed Morn,
He rose: -- The God in human Form,
A Form not made of vulgar Clay:
Which, though it slept, could not decay!
Hail, Mortals; Hail (transported Seraphs cry)
Redeemed, and favored by the God most high.
VI.
In Heaven let Joys eternal flow,
And Mercy in the Worlds below;
The Penitent shall Peace obtain,
And not a Tear shall fall in vain.
Then join, ye Worlds, in one glad Chorus sing,
Praise to Messiah, and the Almighty King.
The Third Chapter of the Wisdom of SOLOMON.
From the First to the Sixth Verse.
THUS sung the Man, for Wisdom long renowned,
What mean these Tears and mournful Numbers round?
Is Death the Cause? Ah! then restrain your Tears,
That stubborn Monarch nor regard nor hears,
And the blessed Shades for whom you vainly mourn,
To these dim Regions would no more return,
Wrapped in bright Visions they no Ills endure,
From Sin, from Danger, and from Death secure:
It Is past. The parting Struggles are no more,
They now are landed on the blissful Shore,
Where no pale Fears nor sullen Sorrows dwell,
But Joys beyond what mortal Tongues can tell?
Where smiling Hope for ever blooms around,
And growing Pleasures that shall know no Bound.
When thoughtless Mortals by constraint attend
On the last Moments of their parting Friend,
See the changed Features wear a deathful Hue,
The Temples watered with a fainting Dew,
The Limbs that tremble with convulsive Pain:
Then stand aghast the ignorant and vain,
Who shiver at the seeming stern Decree;
But look no farther than their Eyes can see,
The happy Soul glides unobserved away
To Worlds of Glory and eternal Day.
The Pains and Sorrows which the Virtuous know,
Which long had bid the Tears in secret flow,
Shall not be lost nor buried in the Ground;
But serve to brighten their immortal Crown:
From that great Being they shall find their Pay,
Who blessed the rising and the closing Day.
When the pure Spirit from its Prison flies,
How joy the Seraphs in their brighter Skies:
Around their Guest the shining Guards attend,
And heavenly Harps with heavenly Voices blend.
ESSAY on HAPPINESS.
NOTHING, dear Madam, nothing is more true,
Than a short Maxim much approved by you;
The Lines are these: "We by Experience know
" Within ourselves exists our Bliss or Woe."
Though round our Heads the Goods of Fortune roll,
Dazzle they may, but cannot cheer the Soul.
Content, the Fountain of eternal Joy,
Can Riches purchase, or can Want destroy?
No. Born of Heaven, its Birth it will maintain,
No Slave to Power nor the Prize of Gain:
Say, who can buy what never yet was sold?
No Wealth can bribe her, nor no Bonds can hold:
Sometimes she deigns to shine in lofty Halls,
But found more frequent in a Cottage Walls;
Her Flight from thence too often is decreed,
Then Poverty is doubly cursed indeed.
Content and Bliss, which differ but in Name,
Alike their Natures and their End the same,
Fast bound together in eternal Chains.
This as the End -- The other, as the Means,
Will never divide. But who enjoys the one,
Must find the other ere the setting Sun.
Then where? Ah where do these fair Sisters fly?
Beneath the northern or the southern Sky.
Courts do they love? The Senate or the Town,
Or the still Village and the healthful Down.
Say, do they like Humilo's humble Vest,
Or the gay Diamonds on Belinda's Breast.
To none of these, alas, are they confined,
But the still Bosom and the virtuous Mind.
See Glaro feated on his gilded Car,
Whose stubborn Passions wage continual War.
Who cannot call that ravaged Heart his own,
Where Vice and Virtue struggle for the Throne.
See Rage appearing in that hostile Frown:
Now Fears distract him and now Pleasures drown,
Now turns to Heaven with repentant Tears:
But the next Hour at his Chaplain sneers:
This day a Beast, the next a reasoning Man:
Behold him right, then envy, if you can,
Pale Livia too -- Who pants beneath the weight
Of irksom Jewels and afflicting State;
Whose Glass and Pillow do her Time divide,
At once oppressed with Sickness and with Pride.
The shapely Stays her aching Ribs confine,
And in her Ears the sparkling Pendents shine.
Yet not a Joy the tortured Wretch can feel,
Beyond Ixion on his rolling Wheel.
See restless Cloe, fond to be admired,
Of Joy impatient and as quickly tired,
When first her Eyelids open on the Day,
With eager haste she gobbles down her Tea,
And to the Park commands her rolling Wheels,
Yet sighs and wishes for the rural Fields:
Then back to Cards and Company she flies,
Then for the Charms of melting Music dies.
At Eve the Play, Assembly, or the Ball:
She hates them singly, yet would grasp 'em all:
With languid Spirits and appal'd Desires,
She to her Closet and her Book retires.
But Solitude offends the sprightly Fair;
Reading she loathes, and Thought she cannot bear.
Then to her Chamber and her Couch she flies,
Where gilded Chariots swim before her Eyes.
In vain for Sleep she folds her weary Arms,
Who would be Cloe to enjoy her Charms?
In yonder Path Sir Thrifty we behold,
With Beaver drooping and with Garments old;
Whose dirty Linen shows no Mark of Pride,
Nor sparkling Laces deck his slender Side;
Whose heavy Soul a saucy Wit would swear,
Was made exactly to his easy Chair.
Whose tasteless Senses ask for nothing new,
Whose Meals are temperate and whose pleasures few:
" Is this Man blessed? -- He may be so. -- But when?
" Why, when his Thousands rise to number ten,
" From ten to twenty, and from twenty -- Hold,
" To one round Million of bright Sterling Gold;"
Not there we stop, for Avarice will crave
Till it shall meet with its grand Cure, the Grave.
Lavinia's blessed with all that Man desires,
With Eyes that charm and Reason that inspires;
Youth, Wealth, and Friends, to gild her shining Days,
The poor Man's Blessing and the rich Man's Praise.
With Judgment sound and touched by no extreme,
Speech gently flowing and a Soul serene,
For ever pleasing and for ever true,
By all admired, envied by a few:
Then she is happy, though beneath the Sky,
Hold, not so hasty: -- Let her Husband die.
Then who are happy, 'twill be hard to say,
Since undisturbed it seldom lasts a Day:
For who in Smiles beholds the Morning Sun,
May weed before his short-lived Journey's done.
All Pleasures satiate and all Objects cloy;
We crave, we grasp, but loath the tasted Joy:
Nor Wealth nor Beauty, Friend's nor Fortune's Smile,
Can bless our Moments, though they may beguile:
Nor Wit with Happiness can often grow,
A helpless Friend, if not an arrant Foe.
Where then? O where shall Happiness be found?
Say, shall we search the rolling World around,
On borrowed Pinions travel through the Sky,
Or to the Center drive our piercing Eye?
Cease, busy Fool: Is Happiness thy Care?
Pierce thy own Breast, and thou will find it there:
Drive thence the Passions, and the Guilt expel,
And call fair Virtue to the polished Cell.
Call soft Content with all her smiling Train;
Peace for thy Health, and Patience for thy Pain:
Then not till then, O Man, thy Heart shall know
Bliss so adored, but seldom found below.
An ESSAY on HOPE.
TO you who never the willing Verse refuse,
Thus sings an humble but a grateful Muse:
Our Theme is Hope -- but of a different kind,
The Bane or Blessing of the subject Mind;
This dawning Joy that to the Soul was given,
As a short Earnest of its future Heaven:
To blame is not the Purpose of my Song,
But warn our Sisters not to place it wrong.
Shun trifling Hope, that bids your Fancy roll,
The constant Torment of a restless Soul:
For two pale Handmaids are for ever near,
Sick Disappointment and the secret Tear:
It Is this that makes the restless Heart repine,
Beneath the Treasures of an Indian Mine
Much Fortune gives -- Yet, Give us more, they cry,
And some new Prospect lures the dazzl'd Eye:
Like wanton Babes they reach at something more,
And drop the Gewgaws which they held before.
See the puffed Tradesman strut before his Door,
Whose Birth was humble and whose Fortune poor;
Yet you may see his roving Thoughts depend
On some bold Venture or some wealthy Friend,
Till the lost Bankrupt drops into the Jaw
Of pale Discredit and voracious Law.
The grave-fac'd Student better learned than fed
With Store of Logic in his aching Head,
Sees pleasing Pictures in his Bosom drawn,
The Dean's soft Cushion and the Bishop's Lawn:
He dines with Lords and takes the highest Place,
And weds a Countess, Cousin to his Grace.
But soon his Heart the lost Delusion mourns:
And the proud Prelate to a Curate turns
On some dark Dome with thirty Pounds per-ann,
He sips his Liquors in a pewter Cann.
Young Seizum, fated to distract the Law,
Who talks of Men and Books he never saw,
Now struts a Counselor, a Sergeant now,
While the quick Turns elate his scornful Brow.
Behold the Judge in that commanding Frown:
See then: just then he strok'd his Ermin'd Gown.
Cecilia soft, whose pleasing Features shine
Bright in their Wane, and beauteous in Decline,
Still to her eyes recalls the scattered Darts,
Still hopes the Conquest of a thousand Hearts.
Care stalks around: Vexation hovers nigh;
Her Friends bewail her, and her Children cry:
Her wounded Ears their hateful Whinings tire,
Whose Fancy dwells upon a wealthy 'Squire:
Wrapped in soft Visions on her Couch she lies;
Knights, Peers, and Garters swim before her Eyes.
She rides in triumph through her Husband's Fields,
And hears the rattling of her Chariot Wheels,
Till her charmed Senses will contain no more;
Then flies the Vision through its Ivory Door,
See Acamas with Time's sad Burden bow,
Guilt in his Breast and Wrinkles on his Brow;
Yet points out Cloe for his charming Bride,
And fain would tempt her to his frozen Side:
At Chapel where soft Grace and Virtue calls,
And pale Vice trembles at the sacred Walls;
Where Conscience warns the guilty Wretch to pray,
And beg a Blessing on his closing Day.
The Preacher reads: But Acamas the while
Grins at his Cloe with a ghastly Smile.
In their red Orbs his waiting Eye Balls roll,
And Charming Cloe rushes on his Soul:
But Death will teach the silver-bearded Fool
Some other Lesson in his gloomy School.
Blank Disappointment with its Train attends
In Delia's Heart, if Delia's Heart depends
On Silia's Tongue so aptly hung with Guile,
On Cynthio's Friendship or on Clara's Smile:
Such courtly Friends are like the show'ry Bow,
Tinged with false Luster by Reflection glow:
Like its faint Rays they hardly last an Hour,
Lost in a Cloud or melted in a Shower.
If trifling Hope has any room to plead,
It Is that where Nature's simple Dictates lead:
So the wet Hind, who travels over the Plain
Through the cold Mire and afflicting Rain;
Though his low Roofs with trickling Showers run,
May hope next Morn to see the cheerful Sun:
Or when keen Hunger at the evening Tide
Drives home the Shepherd to his rustic Bride,
His honest Reason happily might not stray,
Though he should dream of Dumpling all the way.
See sad Aemilia doomed by fatal Vows
To the harsh Usage of a Tyrant Spouse,
To see his Mistress in her Woes rejoice,
Her Fortune wasted on his guilty Choice,
To bear Reproaches doubled on her Ear,
Yet only answer with a silent Tear.
Though patient Wives must wait the Fate's good time;
Yet she, I think, may hope without a Crime.
But the grand Hope that yields perpetual Joy,
No trifles gave, no trifles can destroy;
With Mercy from the blessed Abode it came,
Its Birth Celestial and its End the same;
That bids our Days in one smooth Tenor roll,
Its task to cheer and harmonize the Soul.
On smarting Want it pours a healing Balm,
Makes Toil seem pleasant and Affliction calm.
The MORAL VISION.
TYRANNICK Winter's Iron Reign was done,
And the soft Twins received the radiant Sun;
The cheerful Earth appeared in vernal Pride,
And the clear Waves did more serenely glide:
Kind Zephyrs played around the waving Trees,
While opening Roses caught the welcome Breeze.
Amid these Scenes beneath a Maple Shade,
Sat careless Mira on her Elbow laid,
While frolic Fancy led the usual Train
Of gaudy Phantoms through her cheated Brain:
Till Slumber seized upon her thoughtful Breast,
And the still Spirits sunk in balmy Rest:
But while her Eyes had bid the World farewell,
Thus Mira dreamed, and thus her Dreams we tell;
A seeming Nymph, like those of Dian's Train,
Came swiftly tripping over the flowery Plain,
Whose smiling Face was as the Morning fair,
A silver Fillet tied her flaxen Hair,
A golden Zone her lovely Bosom bound,
And her green Robe hung careless on the Ground.
Sleep, happy Mortal, with a Smile she cries,
And turned on Mira her far-beaming Eyes.
Still over thy own aerial Mountains stray,
And in bright Visions slumber out the Day;
With gaudy Scenes delude thy dazzl'd Mind,
Yet thou must wake and leave 'em all behind:
Yes, thou shall drop from that enchanted Sky,
And wake to Wisdom with a weeping Eye,
While in a Mist the shining Prospects end;
Then hear, O Mira, thy immortal Friend.
Recall thy wandering Thoughts, and make 'em dwell
In the small Limits of their native Cell.
To thine own Heart confine thy chiefest Care,
For Mira, know, thy Joys are planted there:
And as you manage and improve the Soil,
'Twill punish your Neglect, or pay your Toil;
Here let your Views and your Ambition rest,
To reign the Queen of a well-governed Breast,
This Point secured, let Heaven dispose the rest.
Yet you may ask for what your State requires,
But not the Gewgaws your Caprice desires:
As thus, 'O keep me from the reach of Pain,
' From meagre Famine and her mournful Train:
' Let not Reproach assault my wounded Ears,
' Nor let my Soul behold a Friend in Tears:
' Secure from Noise, let my still Moments run,
' And still be cheerful as the rising Sun:
' Or if a Gloom my trembling Heart invades,
' Ah! may it vanish with the nightly Shades
' Through the crazed Walls: O may not Reason fly?
' But if it does then let its Mansion die:
' Let not Remorse of Guilt the certain Pay,
' Blot my clea^ Sun nor stain its parting Ray:
' Give me a lively but a guiltless Mind,
' A Body healthful and a Soul resigned.
Thus far, O Mira, thou may ask of Heaven,
How blessed the Mortal to whom these are given:
If such thy Lot, let Kings enjoy their Crowns,
Their pageant State and arbitrary Frowns:
Who, though encircl'd by their shining Slaves,
Intriguing Friends and well dissembled Knaves,
Are only wretched Idols placed on high,
To bear the Rage of a tempestuous Sky:
And while the Storms around his Temples blow,
His fawning Servants safely sneer below:
But now the Sun brings on the Noon of Day,
Rise, Mira, rise and shun the scorching Ray:
This said, no more appeared the beauteous Maid,
And Mira waking found a lonely Shade.
A PRAYER for the YEAR, 1745.
ALMIGHTY Wisdom, at whose Nod
The Stars shall cease to shine,
Great Nature's Father, Guide, and God,
O let me call thee mine.
Yet not for me, and me alone,
Thy Mercies I implore:
No, let that Bliss to all be known,
That tremble and adore.
Now Fear, that makes the Sorrows flow
Even from the Infant's Eyes,
O'er-whelms in one promiscuous Woe
The Ignorant and Wise.
Then hear, O hear, thy Servants cry,
We beg thy saving Hand:
To whom but Heaven should we apply,
To raise a drooping Land!
Be thou the Guard of helpless Age,
The wretched Orphan's Friend:
O smooth the Face of hostile Rage,
And spare its purple End.
Restrain the Hand of threatening Pride,
Assuage the cruel Breast:
Teach Mercy to the Victor Side,
And Patience to the rest.
And when the Sword of Conquest shall
The trembling Wretch arraign,
Let Justice guide the equal Scale,
Nor swerve the steady Beam.
Preserve the merciful and kind
From Violence and Pain:
And let the meek and gentle Mind
Rejoice, and not complain.
Nor let the barbarous Steel invade
The Breast of hoary Age:
Nor give the unresisting Babe
A Prey to purple Rage.
Amongst un-number'd Worlds if I
Am worth my Maker's Care,
Then let me live and let me die
Unwounded by Despair.
Though Want or Peril, Pain or Death,
Assault this feeble Clay,
Let Hope attend my latest Breath
And cheer the gloomy Way.
Preserve my Parent and my Friend
From Danger, Guilt or Shame:
In Peace their cheerful Days extend
To praise thy holy Name.
Forgive the Errors of my Youth,
If in my Youth I fall:
Or teach my Age thy saving Truth,
O hear me when I call.
Thou mighty Lord of all above
And all beneath the Sun,
Thy Servant's humble Suit approve;
If not, thy Will be done.
DAVID'S Complaint, ii Samuel, chap. 1.
MOURN, Judab, mourn beneath the silent Sky,
And pierce the Deserts with thy midnight Cry.
See Zion, conscious of her failing Powers,
Heaves from her Base and shakes the nodding Bowers.
For their lost Sires orphan'd Babes complain,
And Matrons strike their widowed Breasts in vain;
From Street to Street the howling Mourners fly,
Fear on their Brows and Horror in their Eye.
For why, her Peers are washed with purple Gore:
Her Princes and her Monarch is no more:
Whom not the sacred Diadem could shield,
But served to swell the Horrors of the Field.
But why, amongst the Heathen doomed to fall?
Is this, alas, the End of mighty Saul?
Mourn, mourn, in Silence lest Philistia hear,
Nor let our Foes behold the streaming Tear.
But O my Friend -- (Ah there my Sorrows swell)
Denied the Blessing of a sad Farewell?
Whose ruddy Cheeks confessed their early Prime,
Nor his smooth Brows had felt the Stroke of Time.
He was my Soul's best Pleasure while alive,
And is he blasted? -- then do I survive?
Ah no, it is Death and aggravated Woe.
O say, my Heart, can thou sustain the Blow?
Ye Nations, mourn -- if such a thing could be,
Till Nature too should learn to grieve, like me:
Ye smiling Dames, your gaudy Robes resign,
And suit your Garments and your Griefs to mine.
Go, hide your slighted Beauties from the Sun,
While down your Cheeks the streaming Sorrows run.
Still let your Eye Balls waste their humid Store,
And still repeat -- Your Monarch is no more!
Be thou, Gilboa, wrapped in endless Night,
Nor let thy Hills behold the Beams of Light.
Let the gay Sun to thee his Rays deny,
While rattling Tempests over thy Borders fly.
There Judah's Chief lay prostrate on the Ground,
And there my Friend received the mortal Wound.
ESSAY on FRIENDSHIP.
TO Artemisia. -- It Is to her we sing,
For her once more we touch the sounding String,
It Is not to Cythera's Reign nor Cupid's Fires,
But sacred Friendship that our Muse inspires.
A Theme that suits Aemilia's pleasing Tongue:
So to the Fair Ones I devote my Song.
The Wise will seldom credit all they hear,
Though saucy Wits should tell them with a Sneer,
That Women's Friendships, like a certain Fly,
Are hatched in the Morning and at Evening die.
It Is true, our Sex has been from early Time
A constant Topic for Satirick Rhyme:
Nor without Reason -- since we are often found,
Or lost in Passion, or in Pleasures drowned:
And the fierce Winds that bid the Ocean roll,
Are less inconstant than a Woman's Soul:
Yet some there are who keep the moderate Way,
Can think an Hour, and be calm a Day:
Who never were known to start into a Flame,
Turn Pale or tremble at a losing Game.
Run Chloe's Shape or Delia's Features down,
Or change Complexion at Celinda's Gown:
But still serene, compassionate and kind,
Walk through Life's Circuit with an equal Mind.
Of all Companions I would choose to shun
Such, whose blunt Truths are like a bursting Gun,
Who in a Breath count all your Follies over,
And close their Lectures with a mirthful Roar:
But Reason here will prove the safest Guide,
Extremes are dangerous placed on either Side.
A Friend too soft will hardly prove sincere;
The Wit's inconstant, and the Learned severe.
Good-Breeding, Wit, and Learning, all conspire
To charm Mankind and make the World admire:
Yet in a Friend but serve an under Part,
The main Ingredient is an honest Heart:
By this can Urs'la all our Souls subdue
Which wanting, this, not Sylvia's Charms, can do.
Now let the Muse (who takes no Courtier's Fee)
Point to her Friend -- and future Ages see
(If this shall live 'till future Ages be)
One Line devoted to Fidelia's Praise,
The loved Companion of my early Days:
Whouse harmless Thoughts are sprightly as her Eyes,
By Nature cheerful, and by Nature wise.
To have them last, the social Laws decree;
We choose our Friendships in the same degree:
What mighty Pleasure, if we might presume,
To strut with Freedom in Arvida's Room,
Or share the Table what supreme Delight?
With some proud Duchess or a scornful Knight,
To sit with formal and assenting Face?
For who shall dare to contradict her Grace?
Our freeborn Nature hates to be confined,
Where State and Power check the speaking Mind;
Where heavy Pomp and sullen Form withholds
That cheerful Ease and Sympathy of Souls.
But yet the Soul whatever its Partner do,
Must lift its Head above the baser Crew.
Celestial Friendship with its nicer Rules,
Frequents not Dunghills nor the Clubs of Fools.
It asks, to make this Union soft and long,
A Mind susceptible, and Judgment strong;
And then a Taste: But let that Taste be given
By mighty Nature and the Stamp of Heaven:
Possessed of these, the justly tempered Flame
Will glow incessant, and be still the same:
Not moved by Sorrow, Sickness, or by Age
To sullen Coldness or distempered Rage.
The Soul unstained with Envy or with Pride,
Pleased with itself and all the World beside,
Unmoved can see gilt Chariots whirling by,
Or view the wretched with a melting Eye,
Discern a Failing and forgive it too:
Such, Artemisia, we may find in you.
Be seldom sour, or your Friends will fly
From the hung Forehead and the scornful Eye:
Nor, like Aurelia, in the Morning kind,
And soft as Summer or the western Wind:
But round ere night her giddy Passions wheel,
She Will clap the Door against your parting Heel.
An even Temper will be sure to please,
With cool Reflection and a cheerful Ease.
But see Armida's unfrequented Rooms,
How vainly spread with Carpets and Perfumes:
All shun her like the Cocatrice's Beams,
And for no other Reason but her loathed Extremes.
Today more holy than a cloistered Nun,
Almost an Atheist by tomorrow's Sun:
Now speaks to Heaven with a lifted Eye:
Now to her Footman, You're a Rogue, and lie.
O say, from what strange Principles begin
These odd Compounds of Piety and Sin?
A sickly Fair may some Excuses find,
(What grieves the Body will affect the Mind)
But not the Creatures who have learned to screen
Their own Ill Nature in the name of Spleen.
What the black Mists afflict the aching Skull,
The Spirits tremble and the Heart be dull:
Have you from thence a License to offend,
Affront a Patron or abuse a Friend?
And ape the Manners of a surly Beast,
Because it is cloudy and the Wind's in the East?
But all have Failings, not the best are free,
Or in a greater or a less Degree.
What follows then? -- Forgive, or unforgiven
Expect no Passage at the Gate of Heaven.
Kind Nature gave, in Pity to Mankind,
This social Virtue to the human Mind:
This gives our Pleasures a more easy Flow,
And helps to blunt the Edge of smarting Woe:
The Soul's Relief, with Grief or Cares oppressed,
Is to disclose them to a faithful Breast;
And then how lovely in a Friend appear,
The mournful Sigh and sympathizing Tear.
When changing Fortune with propitious Ray,
Gilds the brown Evening or the smiling Day;
The pleased Companion shares the welcome Tide,
And wrapped in Joy the happy Minutes glide.
Grave Authors differ -- Men of Sense incline
This Way or that -- Opinions rarely join:
Their Thoughts will vary. Why? Because they are free,
But most in this and only this agree;
That our chief Task is seldom to offend,
And Life's great Blessing a well-chosen Friend.
The MISTAKEN LOVER.
STREPHON the sprightly and the gay,
Loved Celia fresh and fair as May:
None shone so brilliant in the Mall,
The Court, the Assembly and the Ball;
None bare at Will's the laureled Prize,
But Celia with the killing Eyes.
'Twas at the Drawing Room or Play,
(But which our Author cannot say)
As Celia rolled her Eyes around,
This Youth received a mortal Wound.
What should he do? -- "Commence the Beau,
" For Women often are caught by Show."
The wounded Strephon now behold,
Arrayed in Coat of Green and Gold,
(Of which we something might advance)
The Sleeve was a-la-mode de France.
We leave it here -- and haste to tell,
How smartly round his Temples fell
The modish Wig. -- Yet we presume,
More graceful was the scarlet Plume:
Though some rude Soldier (doomed to bear
The Southern and the Northern Air,
And walk through every kind of Weather)
Might jeer at Strephon's scarlet Feather;
And tell us such should never be wore,
Unless you fought at Marston-moor.
His Person finished, now the Care
Is to address and gain the Fair:
He purchased all the Songs of Note,
And got the Lover's Cant by rote:
He bribed her Footmen and her Maids,
And with his nightly Serenades
Her vaulted Roofs and Gardens rung:
For her he ogled, danced and sung;
Was often at her Toilet seen,
With Sonnets to the Paphian Queen:
Then at her Feet dejected lying,
Praying, weeping, sighing, dying.
" Was Celia kind?" It shall be known:
Do You think our Hearts are made of Stone?
Yes, she was kind, and to proceed,
The Writings drawn and Friends agreed:
Grave Hymen's sacred Knot was tied,
And Celia Fair commenced a Bride.
But I shall pass the Wedding Day,
Nor stay to paint the Ladies gay,
Nor Splendour of the lighted Hall,
The Feast, the Fiddles, nor the Ball.
A lovely Theme! -- It Is true, but then
We'll leave it to a softer Pen:
Those transient Joys will fade too soon,
We'll therefore skip the Hony-Moon.
'Twas half a Year -- It might be more,
Since Celia brought her shining Store,
Five thousand Pounds of Sterling clear,
To bless the Mansion of her Dear.
Some tell us Wives their Beauties lose,
When they have spoiled their bridal Shoes:
Some learned Casuists make it clear,
A Wife might please for half a Year:
And others say, her Charms will hold
As long as the suspended Gold;
But that her Bloom is soon decayed,
And withered when her Fortune's paid.
Now which of these was Celia's Case,
(Though all are common to her Race)
I shall not rack my Brains about,
But leave the Learned to pick it out.
This Husband, whimsical and gay,
Loved Music, Masquerades, and Play,
Was one of those most happy Elves,
That dote upon their charming Selves:
Who hating dull domestic Walls,
Fly here and there as Fancy calls;
Still in pursuit of something new,
Nor even to their Vices true.
Mistaken Strephon finds no more
His Celia charming as before:
Her Eyes! -- Why, they have lost their Fire:
The Roses on her Cheek expire.
Her Shape -- It Is altered strangely, sure;
Her Voice no Mortal can endure.
Then to the Park where Claudia rolls
Her Eyes to fish for shallow Souls:
Or at the Play he must appear,
For lovely Lindamine is there:
No mortal Bell so fair as she,
If wretched Strephon was but free.
In The Country he deludes the Morn
With Ringwood and the hunting Horn:
Perhaps may with his Dearest dine,
Then hey for Company and Wine;
Wine that would make an Hermit gay,
With Music intermixed and Play.
For Tables and for Cards they call:
The Dice-box rattles in the Hall.
Now all are happy nor give over,
Till Watches point to Number Four:
Then see the Face of dawning Day:
Here Lucy. "Where Is your Lady, pray?
" She Is gone to rest. -- There let her be,
" Go make the crimson Bed for me."
All this a while in Silence passed,
The Lady's Patience failed at last.
One Morning (so the Fates decree)
Alone was sitting he and she:
Not yet arrived the roaring Band,
Nor Rake nor Coxcomb was at hand.
This blessed Occasion pleased the Fair,
And with a mild and cheerful Air,
She thus began: "My Strephon say,
" Why this dejected Face to day?
" Why art thou always cross and dull,
" Unless the noisy Rooms are full?
" Black Discontent and Anger lies
" Close lurking in thy sullen Eyes;
" Those Eyes that I with Sorrow see
" Disgusted when they roll on me.
Here ceased the greatly injured Bride,
And Strephon with a Blush replied:
" Why, Madam, I must own that you,
" Have Merit, (give the De'l his due)
" And was the Pleasure of my Life,
" Before you wore the Name of Wife:
" But Ma'm, the Reason was, I find,
" That while a Lover I was blind:
" And now the Fault is not in me,
" It Is only this -- that I can see.
I thought you once a Goddess trim,
" The Graces dwelt on every Limb:
" But, Madam, if you ever was such,
" Methinks you're altered very much:
" As first (I beg your Pardon though)
" You hold your Head extremely low:
" And though your Shape is not awry,
" Your Shoulders stand prodigious high:
" Your curling Hair I durst have swore,
" Was blacker than the sable Moor:
" But now I find it is only brown,
" A Color common through the Town:
" It Is true you're mighty fair -- But now
" I spy a Freckle on your Brow;
" Your Lips I own are red and thin,
" But there is a Pimple on your Chin:
" Besides your Eyes are gray. -- Alack!
" 'Till now I always thought 'em black.
" Thus, Madam, I the Truth have told;
" It Is true, I thank you for your Gold;
" But find in searching of my Breast,
" That I could part with all the rest.
He ceased -- And both were mute a while,
'Till Celia answered with a Smile:
" Who would have thought, my Dear, says she,
" That Love was blind to this degree;
" But in my Turn I Will own it too,
" That I Am as much deceived as you:
" From hence let our Example show
" The gay Coquette and sprightly Beau;
" That Love like theirs will never hold,
" Not though it is cemented with Gold:
" Let all the Youths to you repair,
" For Counsel -- and to me the Fair.
" 'Twill help to make our Strephons wise,
" And stop the Growth of tender Lies:
" And more than Plato's moral Page
" Instruct the Celia's of the Age.
" But now, my Dearest, as you see
" In mutual Hatred we agree,
" Methinks it is better we retreat,
" Each Party to a distant Seat;
" And though we value each the other,
" Just as one Rush regards another:
" Yet let us often send to hear,
" If Health attend the absent Dear:
" And though each other we would shun,
" As Debtors do a hateful Dun:
" (Nor mind the crossing of a Street)
" Yet let us be civil when we meet,
" And live in short like courtly Friends:
" They part -- and thus the Story ends.
The WAY of the WORLD.
SOME Herbs there are, whose deadly Juices fill
The Heart with Venom, and directly kill:
Some operate more slowly, but as sure;
The Dart less sudden, but admits no Cure.
Yet there is a Drug, nor Plain nor Mountain yields,
Not Libya's Deserts nor Britannia's Fields,
Destructive more than all the baneful kind;
It Is Flattery called -- the Poison of the Mind.
This, soft Sir Wealthy feeds on all the Day:
This, Delia swallows with her soft Bohea,
To this we owe Sublimo's scornful Eye,
And Thalia's Cheeks that blush with borrowed Dye.
Sublimo once could like his Neighbors walk,
Bow to his Friends, or with his Tenants talk;
Nor had been seized with this majestic Fit,
If subtle Florio had not praised his Wit.
Gray Thalia too would now her Arts give over,
And rest those Eye Balls that must slay no more;
Nor would that Face engross her Morning's Care,
Did not Philander tell her she is fair.
Alcidas tells you with an artful Smile,
That Women's Eyes were given them to beguile:
His Way is cunning and mischievous too,
He Will praise in others what he finds in you.
You hear delighted, nor perceive the Foe;
But drink in Flattery ere you think it is so.
And when he is run the gay Description through,
The smart Conclusion is applied to you:
But turn your Back -- Alcidas with a Grin
Will vow you're ugly as a Sooterkin.
How often you hear from a designing Knave,
Sir, I Am your Servant, Madam, I Am your Slave;
Yet if you're blessed with penetrating Eyes,
You Will in his Features read the Villain lies.
See soft Courtine, whose Hat with Silver bound,
Is so obsequious that 'twill kiss the Ground:
Whose Actions point to some unworthy End,
And never was Patron, Counselor, or Friend:
Whose narrow Views are to himself confined,
Yet he is the humble Slave of all Mankind.
These fawning Rogues are irksom Creatures -- True,
But then a Clown is full as odious too:
The Face unpracticed in the Arts of Guile,
Need not be stretech'd with an eternal Smile:
Nor yet affect the Cynick's awful Scowl,
Screwed like the Visage of Minerva's Owl;
For some reject (and hold it as a Rule,)
The Crab-faced Student for the tender Fool.
The Phrase unstudied flows with graceful Ease,
And careless Gesture never fails to please:
The Heart instructs the Features and the Tongue;
Let that be right, and these will never be wrong.
Ask Cynthio's Judgment in some nice Affair,
He Will praise your Conduct with a charming Air,
Extol your Sense and Prudence to the Skies:
" And sure such Merits were designed to rise."
His candid Eyes can hidden Beauties see,
Even Faults are useful, or they cease to be:
And each no-meaning Cynthio can explore;
But asks his Friendship, and he speaks no more.
But the worst Flatterer that wears a Tongue,
Is him whose Power aggravates the Wrong:
To whose grand Levee Crowds of Suppliants run,
And bow like Persians to the rising Sun:
Where starved Dependents linger out their Days,
Yet proud to share his Snuff Box and his Praise,
Grow stiff with Standing and with Staring thin,
To watch the Dimple on their Patron's Chin:
Who with a Nod can make the Wretch believe,
And smiles on Hunger which he will never relieve.
Surrounded thick with Business and with Gold,
Yet dressed in Smiles Virginius you behold:
The expecting Crowd around his Table stand,
You ask a Favor and he grasps your Hand:
Another comes with an obsequious Air,
He winks and whispers. -- "Leave it to my Care."
Then to the next -- "Oh I Will remember you;
" Sir, trust my Honor, you shall find me true:"
Then bows a third. -- "Good Sir, your Pardon." -- Why?
" I saw you not. -- Forgive my careless Eye.
" Next Tuesday se'en-night, let me see you pray,
" Perhaps you will find it Hundreds in your way."
The meagre Wight departs with happier Soul,
Romantic Visions in his Bosom roll:
He fasts in Rapture, as of late in Sorrow;
For who can eat, that is to be rich tomorrow?
But Tuesday see, the joyful Day is come;
Now to his Patron. -- "But he is not at home.
" Alas! But then tomorrow Morn will do,
" And I Will be early. -- Gentlemen, adieu.
Next Day at Six before the Gate appears,
The Wretch divided by his Hopes and Fears.
The haughty Servants meet him with a Frown.
I Would see his Honor. -- "But he is not come down;
" Your Servant, Sir -- I Will stay then in the Hall:
" But he is sick and cannot be spoke withal.
" I Will wait with Patience till another Day,
" And for his Honor and his Health shall pray.
At last the Knight (his Fate had ordered so)
Was seized and boarded by the lurking Foe;
And wisely thinking 'twas in vain to fly,
Smoothed up his Face and with a leering Eye
Began. "Oh Mr. What-d'ye-call, Is It you?
" I Am glad to see you: Yet I Am sorry too,
" Sure some ill Stars presided over your Fate,
" I could have served you, but you're come too late.
Yet sure, there is whose honest Soul was made
Too grand a Being for the soothing Trade;
Whose Wit can neither flatter nor offend,
A gay Companion, yet a constant Friend;
Willing to please where Honesty may win,
Averse to Slander, though it was no Sin.
With native Manners as with Sense endu'd;
Not soft as Cynthio, nor as Damon rude;
Not basely humble, yet a Foe to Pride:
Whose Tongue never promised what his Heart denied.
Whose Satire charms, nor Mirth offends the Ear;
Though wife not froward, just but not severe;
Not swayed by Interest, nor in Passion hurled:
But walks a calm Spectator through the World,
Whose Breast (where no unmanly Vapors grow)
Can feel Compassion for another's Woe;
Where Courage, Mercy, Justice, Candor lie,
That shine celestial in the speaking Eye.
This Man is great, whatever be his Degree;
O bless him, Heaven, if such a one there be:
May Life's best Comforts on his Days attend,
Blessed in himself, and happy in his Friend:
Far from his Gate fly Poverty and Woe;
Let not a Sigh his quiet Mansion know:
But the fair Dome each roving Eye allure,
With Peace and Plenty smiling at the Door:
Let him soft Days and happy Ev'nings find,
And live still blessed, and blessing all Mankind.
The FOX and the HEN.
A FABLE.
'TWAS on a fair and healthy Plain,
There lived a poor but honest Swain,
Had to his Lot a little Ground,
Defended by a quick-set Mound:
'Twas there he milk'd his brindled Kine,
And there he fed his harmless Swine:
His Pigeons fluttered to and fro,
And bask'd his Poultry in a Row:
Much we might say of each of these,
As how his Pigs in Consort wheeze;
How the sweet Hay his Heifers chew,
And how the Pigeons softly coo:
But we shall wave this motley Strain,
And keep to one that is short and plain:
Nor paint the Dunghill's feathered King,
For of the Hen we mean to sing.
A Hen there was, a strange one too,
Could sing (believe me, it is true)
Or rather (as you may presume)
Would prate and cackle in a Tune:
This quickly spread the Pullet's Fame,
And Birds and Beasts together came:
All mixed in one promiscuous Throng,
To visit Partlet and her Song.
It chanced there came amongst the Crew,
Of witty Foxes not a few:
But one more smart than all the rest,
His serious Neighbor thus addressed:
' What think you of this Partlet here?
' It Is true her Voice is pretty clear:
' Yet without pausing I can tell,
' In what much more she would excel:
' Methinks she would eat exceeding well.
This heard the listening Hen, as she
Sat perched upon a Maple-tree.
The shrewd Proposal galled her Pride,
And thus to Reynard she replied:
' Sir, you're extremely right I vow,
' But how will you come at me now?
' You dare not mount this lofty Tree,
' So there I Am pretty safe, you see.
' From long ago, (or Record lies)
' You Foxes have been counted wise:
' But sure this Story don't agree
' With your Device of eating me.
' For you, Dame Fortune still intends
' Some coarser Food than singing Hens:
' Besides ever you can reach so high,
' Remember you must learn to fly.
' I own it is but a scurvy way,
' You have as yet to seize your Prey,
' By sculking from the Beams of Light,
' And robbing Hen-roosts in the Night:
' Yet you must keep this vulgar Trade
' Of thieving till your Wings are made.
' Had I the keeping of you though,
' I Would make your subtle Worship know,
' We Chickens are your Betters due,
' Not fatted up for such as you:
' Shut up in Cub with rusty Chain,
' I Would make you lick your Lips in vain:
' And take a special Care, be sure,
' No Pullet should come near your Door:
' But try if you could feed or no,
' Upon a Kite or Carrion Crow.'
Here ceased the Hen. The baffled Beast
Marched off without his promised Feast.
The HEADACHE.
To AURELIA.
AURELIA, when your Zeal makes known
Each Woman's Failing but your own,
How charming Silvia's Teeth decay,
And Celia's Hair is turning gray:
Yet Celia gay has sparkling Eyes,
But (to your Comfort) is not wise:
Methinks you take a world of pains,
To tell us Celia has no Brains.
Now you wise Folk, who make such a pother
About the Wit of one another,
With Pleasure would your Brains resign,
Did all your Noddles ach like mine.
Not Cuckolds half my Anguish know,
When budding Horns begin to grow;
Nor battered Skull of wrestling Dick,
Who late was drubb'd at single Stick;
Not Wretches that in Fevers fry,
Not Sappho when her Cap's awry,
Ever felt such torturing Pangs as I;
Nor Forehead of Sir Jeff'ry Strife,
When smiling Cynthio kissed his Wife.
Not lovesick Marcia's languid Eyes,
Who for her simp'ring Corin dies,
So sleepy look or dimly shine,
As these dejected Eyes of mine:
Nor Claudia's Brow such Wrinkles made
At sight of Cynthia's new Brocade.
Just so, Aurelia, you complain
Of Vapors, Rheums, and gouty Pain;
Yet I am patient, so should you,
For Cramps and Head-achs are our due:
We suffer justly for our Crimes;
For Scandal you, and I for Rhymes:
Yet we (as hardened Wretches do)
Still the enchanting Vice pursue;
Our Reformation never begin,
But fondly hug the Darling Sin.
Yet there is a mighty difference too,
Between the Fate of me and you;
Though you with tottering Age shall bow,
And Wrinkles scar your lovely Brow;
Your busy Tongue may still proclaim
The Faults of every sinful Dame:
You still may prattle nor give over,
When wretched I must sin no more.
The sprightly Nine must leave me then,
This trembling Hand resign its Pen;
No Matron ever sweetly sung,
Apollo only courts the young;
Then who would not ( Aurelia, pray)
Enjoy his Favors while they may?
Nor Cramps nor Head-achs shall prevail;
I Will still write on, and you shall rail.
STEPHON to CELIA.
A modern LOVE-LETTER.
MADAM,
I HOPE you will think it is true,
I deeply am in Love with you,
When I assure you the other Day,
As I was musing on my way,
At thought of you I tumbled down
Directly in a deadly Swoon:
And though it is true I Am something better,
Yet I can hardly spell my Letter:
And as the latter you may view,
I hope you will think the former true.
You need not wonder at my Flame,
For you are not a mortal Dame:
I saw you dropping from the Skies;
And let dull Idiots swear your Eyes
With Love their glowing Breast inspire,
I tell you they are Flames of Fire,
That scortch my Forehead to a Cinder,
And burn my very Heart to Tinder.
Your Breast so mighty cold I trow,
Is made of nothing else but Snow:
Your Hands (no wonder they have Charms)
Are made of Ivory like your Arms.
Your Cheeks that look as if they bled,
Are nothing else but Roses red.
Your Lips are Coral very bright,
Your Teeth -- though Numbers out of spite,
May say they are Bones -- yet 'twill appear
They Are Rows of Pearl exceeding dear.
Now, Madam, as the Chat goes round,
I hear you have ten thousand Pound:
But that I as a Trifle hold,
Give me your Person, them your Gold;
Yet for your own Sake it is secured,
I hope -- your Houses too ensur'd,
I Would have you take a special Care,
And of false Mortgages beware;
You Have Wealth enough it is true, but yet
You want a Friend to manage it.
Now such a Friend you soon might have,
By fixing on your humble Slave;
Not that I mind a stately House,
Or value Money of a Louse;
But your Five hundred Pounds a Year,
I would secure it for my Dear:
Then smile upon your Slave, that lies
Half murdered by your radiant Eyes;
Or else this very Moment dies --
Strephon.

To ARTEMISIA.
Dr. KING's Invitation to BELLVILL: Imitated.
IF Artemisia's Soul can dwell
Four Hours in a tiny Cell,
(To give that Space of Bliss to me)
I wait my Happiness at three.
Our Tommy in a Jug shall bring
Clear Nectar from the bubbling Spring:
The Cups shall on the Table stand,
The Sugar and the Spoons at hand:
A skilful Hand shall likewise spread
Soft Butter on the yielding Bread;
And (as you eat but mighty little,
And seem an arrant Foe to Vittle)
You Will cry perhaps, One Bit may do,
But I Am resolved it shall be two:
With you and your Amanda blessed,
Care flies away from Mira's Breast;
Over stubborn Flax no more I grieve,
But stick the Needle on my Sleeve:
For let them work on Holiday,
Who will not be idle when they may:
If I must fret and labor too,
Like Caricus and Lumberloo;
As well I might, like Simoneer,
Be plagued with sixty Pounds a Year.
What Nymph, that is eloquent and gay,
But owes it chiefly to her Tea?
With Satire that supplies our Tongues,
And greatly helps the failing Lungs.
By that assisted we can spy
A Fault with microscopick Eye;
Dissect a Prude with wondrous Art,
And read the Care of Delia's Heart.
Now to the Company we fall,
It Is Me and Mira that is all:
More would you have -- Dear Madam, then
Count me and Mira over again.
The APPARITION.
FROM that inevitable Shore,
Wheer Styx's tremendous Waters roar,
Thus winged with Vengeance lo I fly,
And skim beneath the gloomy Sky.
To you O false, O faithless Fair,
(Yet tremble do -- and wildly stare)
To you this angry Visit's paid,
To you once loved, but faithless Maid,
Perhaps (too thin for mortal Eyes)
You know me not in this Disguise;
I never was numbered with your Foes,
But what I Am now, shall not disclose
My Name (esteemed by one or two)
Was Mira -- while I lived like you,
Till your Unkindness cut the Twine
Of Life, before its stated Time.
And should you ask to know the End
Of her that once you called a Friend?
Whether of Pleurisies she died,
Or in a parching Fever dried?
Or pale Consumption sure and slow?
Or Apoplexy's sudden Blow?
'Twas none of these -- no common Dart,
That struck my unresisting Heart:
The dire Distemper you shall hear,
Then listen with attentive Ear.
Did you not, Ah! did you not say,
That you would come the next fair Day
To Mira's Dome? -- rejoiced to see
At once the Butterflies and me?
But now, Alas! (too late, I find)
The promised Joys of human Kind,
Inconstant as the flitting Wind:
You came not -- That I need not tell.
But then, O then your Mira fell,
That fatal Day expecting you;
I swept my House, and dined by Two,
Took off the Nightcap from my Brow,
(O Pride!) but I repent it now:
(Ambitious her I loved to please)
And, Ah! too straightly laced my Stays;
Then silent sat 'twixt Hopes and Fears,
With beating Heart and listening Ears,
Till the shrill Clock had sounded four;
Then wretched Mira was no more:
Her Cheeks put on a death-like Hue,
Her Eye Balls bid this World Adieu:
And though untouched by Cupid's Dart,
She perished with a broken Heart.
But I have done -- Farewell, for I
From this corporeal World must fly:
So the relentless Fates decree,
Once more Farewell -- Remember Me.
The INSPIRED QUILL.
Occasioned by a Present of CROW-PENS.
TO you, Dear Madam, I complain,
Where Wretches never sigh in vain;
But always find, if not Relief,
At least Compassion for their Grief.
But I should make my Woes appear,
Before I claim a gentle Tear;
My Tale is something odd, it is true;
Yet sure 'twill Credit find with you.
The sage Pythagoras, you know,
Asserted many Years ago,
That when or Man or Woman dies,
The Soul to some new Mansion flies?
If so, Belinda, now so fair
May range the Woods a sullen Bear:
Likewise the courtly Bellamour,
The Lady's Darling to be sure:
Though he in sparkling Laces glow,
The Pattern of a perfect Beau;
When he puts off the human Shape,
May strut a Monkey or an Ape.
For me who now to you indite,
Whose Talent chiefly is to write;
What Form it was, I do not know,
I wore two thousand Years ago:
The Being that I first remember,
Was on a Morning of December;
But not December last (I ween)
No -- many Years have past between;
I found myself a wealthy Squire,
And seated by a Parlour-Fire,
A fine Estate of mellow Ground,
In Cash full Thirty thousand Pound,
Two hundred Oxen in a Stall,
And ten lean Servants at my Call,
An ancient House well built but low,
Behind of Oaks an ample Row,
A Court before -- without much State,
And three Gaunt Mastiffs at the Gate;
All these had I -- a happy Knave
As you may think -- but with your Leave
A wretched Usurer was I,
With hagard Jaws and eager Eye,
That starved amidst unwieldy Store,
And lost my Life in search of more,
This Pluto saw, and bid me go
Into the Carcass of a Beau,
To taste of Pleasure and of Pains,
With slender Purse and shallow Brains,
My Wig behind was smartly tied,
My silver Box with Snuff supplied:
On Books I seldom loved to pore,
But sung and danced, and aptly swore;
Wherever I came the Ladies smiled;
This called me Pug -- and the other Child:
To please and to address the Fair,
Was all my Business and my Care;
But now my Gold began to fly,
And sure Destruction hovered nigh:
At last to Limbo was I led,
From whence the struggling Spirit fled.
Almeria's Lap-dog next I grew,
And wore a Coat of glossy Hue,
Caressed and courted every Day,
At Evening by her Side I lay:
Her Smiles were always bent on me
(The happiest Days that ever I see)
But, Oh, as by a Riverside,
I walked along with short-lived Pride,
A cruel Footboy threw me in,
And laughed as though it was no Sin.
Once more to gain a human Face,
I stepped into a Lawyer's Case:
This Station pleased me wondrous well,
And in a trice I learned to spell,
Could read old Coke with prying Eyes,
Explain, distinguish, and advise,
Talk Latin to a good degree;
As Admittendo Custode,
Eject, Extendi: and my Fee:
It Is true I scorned to rob or kill,
But not to cheat or forge a Will:
In Jointures I could split a Hair,
And make it turn against the Heir:
I spared no Widow for her Tears,
No Orphan for his tender Years:
My Maxim was -- 'Get Money, Man,
Get Money, where and how you can:
Thus through the Stage of Life I run,
(For, Ah! my Race was quickly done)
And still preserved my Ears and Nose,
In spite of venial Sins like those.
My next Disguise too well you know,
Degraded to a simple Crow;
Both Cold and Hunger doomed to bear,
And hover in the limpid Air,
Till on a day a spiteful Hind,
With dreadful Arms and bloody Mind,
Vowed quick Destruction to my Head:
And in a Moment shot me dead:
Then set my ghastly Corse on high
To fright my Fellows from his Rye.
I now grew out of Pluto's Favor,
Who grumbl'd at my late Behavior;
And vowed (when thus his Sentence ran)
I should no more appear as Man;
But that he would confine me still
Within the compass of a Quill.
My Fate is hard, as you may guess,
Yet I could bear it ne'er-the-less,
Would you or Fortune be so kind
To comfort an afflicted Mind,
And take me from the hated Cell,
Where Yesterday you bid me dwell:
For Oh, I guess -- nay more I know it,
That my new Mistress is a Poet;
Then how shall I who still inherit,
A Tincture of the Lawyer's Spirit;
How shall I bear from time to time
To scrawl unprofitable Rhyme?
To live for Years and never behold
The Presence of enchanting Gold,
Yet scribble on -- Besides, alack,
I fear she will quickly break my Back.
Then since my Pedigree you know:
(Dear Madam,) Ah some Pity show,
And recommend me to a Place;
For sure there is Mercy in your Face,
To some Attorney let me go,
For there my Talents suit (you know)
Heroicks I shall write but ill;
But I Am a Doctor at a Bill,
At Flights of Fancy very dull;
But I can form Receipts at full.
The Favor that I ask of you,
(Have pity when the Wretched sue)
Is your good Word or what is better,
A Recommandatory Letter?
And if I Am happy in your Grace,
I think I need not doubt a Place.
The PENITENT.
Occasioned by the Author's being asked if she would take Ten Pounds for her
Poems.
WHEN Parthenissa talked today
Of Profits and of Mira's Lay,
And listening Mira heard the Sound
Of number Ten with added Pound,
The saucy Minx betrayed her Pride,
And turned her scornful Head aside:
You, doubtless, Madam, wondered why,
And hardly could believe 'twas I:
But all have Faults, and 'twou'd be vain
To boast a Heart that is free from Stain.
This Maxim Mira proved was true,
No golden Apples lay in view
Across her Path -- and yet she fell:
The Cause -- have Patience and we'll tell,
You saw not -- no, to my Surprise
It escaped your penetrating Eyes;
The wicked Knot -- 'twas new today,
The Knot -- what Color was it, pray?
So gay, 'twou'd make a Hermit vain;
Then wonder not at Mira's Brain.
But now disrobed -- with dirty Shoes
And Apron ragged as the Muse,
In Nightcap tight and wrapping Gown,
No more is seen the haughty Frown;
The fatal Top-knot laid aside
With its destructive Daughter Pride.
The vain Chimeras all are flown,
And Reason re-assumes her Throne.
Now, could you find an honest Dealer,
(As an Attorney or a Tailor)
Who wants a Muse that is not too dear,
Send him directly you know where:
We for a Trifle shall not part,
Nor from an easy Bargain start,
And that his Purchase may not be hard,
I Will add of Packthread half a Yard,
To satisfy the greedy Lout,
And bind the Papers round about.
SONG to CLOE, playing on her Spinet.
WHEN Cloe strikes the trembling Strings,
Applauding Cupids round her fly;
Exulting clap their little Wings
Bask'd in the Sunshine of her Eye.
The Graces too,
As others do,
In Raptures stand to hear,
Time stays his flagging Wings, and adds,
One Hour to the rolling Year:
Keep off, ye Beaus,
For who but knows
That Cloe's Eyes can wound?
If those you miss -- yet pray avoid
The Danger of enchanting Sound.
Amphion led the ravished Stones
(They say) -- and as he would rise or fall,
Bricks, Pebbles, Slats, and Marrow-Bones
Would form a Steeple or a Wall:
But this, you know,
Is long ago:
We fancy it is a Whim:
O had they charming Cloe heard,
They Would surely not have stirred for him.
The Thracian Bard,
Whose Fate was hard,
(And Proserpine severe)
Had brought Eurydice back -- alas!
But Cloe was not there.
To GRAMMATICUS.
SIR,
MIRA would with Tears atone
For all the Mischief she has done;
Sincerely mourns (believe it true)
The sending of her Rhymes to you.
The Wound my Verses gave your Ear,
Was undesign'd it will appear;
Nor in the least the Fault of me,
As by this Sorrow you may see.
And could I in our Meadows find,
Among the vegetable Kind,
A healing Simple, that would cure
Those smarting Pangs which you endure:
Whose Juice the Matrons well esteem
For Cuts and Bruises that are green,
I Would send it with an Heart most willing,
Though it should cost me half a Shilling:
Yet I can serve you but in Will,
For I Have consulted Doctor Pill,
Who tells me that a Case like yours
Will not admit of common Cures;
For that Incisions made by Rhymes
Are worse than Ulcers fifty times:
He gives a Reason that is clear,
Because they always strike the Ear,
And give un-utterable Pain
To the small Fibers of the Brain:
Yet as the Doctor is my Friend,
His Worship ordered me to send
This grand Receipt which he has known,
To serve in Cases like your own:
It Is true, the Drug is something rare,
And yet I would not quite despair;
But hope the Medicine may be found
Within the Space of British Ground:
This Balsam then I Would have you seek,
No matter for its Name in Greek;
But sure it is called (or I am wrong)
Goodnature in the English Tongue:
The Doctor swears by all his Skill,
If this don't ease you, nothing will;
To either Ear be this applied,
(The better if it is quickly tried)
Then fill the hollow Spaces full
With Aqua-vitoe dropped on Wool:
And take a special Care be sure,
No Poets come about your Door:
For you might keep the Bench of Law,
Or hear the squeaking of a Saw,
More safely by a hundred times,
Than half a Page of modern Rhymes:
But when you gather Strength a little,
Can walk abroad and eat your Vittle?
As you are mighty fond of Verse,
Let some with gentle Voice rehearse:
How Corn grows now where Troy Town stood,
Or else the Children in the Wood:
These gentle Numbers will compose
Your Spirits and your Eyelids close!
Those Slumbers will complete the Cure;
Now, Sir, your Servant, and -- no more.
The TEN-PENNY NAIL.
'TWAS past the Date of sav'ry Noon,
And downwards rolled the radiant Sun,
When all (except us rhyming Sinners)
Had roasted, boiled, and eat their Dinners;
In my great Chair I sat to pout,
And beat my weary Brains about;
About (what did not much avail)
Amanda's Riddle of the Nail The Question was this, Where was the first Nail
struck?
;
When Somnus took me by Surprise,
And put his Finger in my Eyes:
'Twas He, for Poets never nod
Without the Influence of a God:
I dreamed of what -- Why, you shall hear,
Good People all, I pray draw near,
Methought there lay before my Eyes
A Nail of more than common Size;
'Twas one that nails our Garden Door,
And often my Petticoat has tore:
When sudden (it is true, my Friend)
It reared itself, and stood an end,
And though no Mouth I could descry,
It talked as fast as you or I:
And thus began -- As I am told
' You Poets seldom deal in Gold;
' That Is not the Price of empty Songs,
' But to Sir Thrifty Gripe belongs;
' Bright Silver is Sir Wary's Claim,
' And Copper for the laboring Dame;
' If so (that each may have their due)
' We rusty Nails belong to you;
' I therefore ask as my Desert
' (I hope you bear a grateful Heart)
' You write my Life -- and be it shown
' What strange Adventures I have known.
' I must confess I was not made.
' So early quite as Adam's Spade;
' Yet many Ages I have known,
' And double with my Labors grown:
' I occupy'd, the first of all,
' A worthy Post at Gloomy-Hall,
' Where I, with seven hundred more,
' Were hammered in the spacious Door:
' And there had happily stuck till now,
' Had not old Simon broke his Plough;
' Who seeing none but us at hand,
' And knowing us a trusty Band,
' Me with the Pincers sore oppressed,
' And drew me headlong from the rest:
' My lazy Life, alas! was done,
' And now I toiled from Sun to Sun:
' None pity me, and none relieve,
' Till Fortune gave me a Reprieve:
' My Master broke his Plough again,
' And I from thence was dragged amain.
' To Celia's Chamber next I came,
' And bore a Glass with curious Frame;
' To whom the lovely Nymphs repair:
' There Delia spread her shining Hair;
' All smiling there was Claudia seen,
' And Thalia tied her Ribbands green.
' At last my Mistress drew too nigh,
' And some ill Genius standing by,
' Drove me directly in her Eye.
' Then I was banished from her Train,
' Hurled on a Dunghill with Disdain.
' But idle long I did not lie,
' For old Sir Gripus walking by,
' Who held it was a crying Sin,
' To trample over and slight a Pin.
' And that they well deserve a Jail,
' Who proudly scorn a rusty Nail,
' Carried me home, and made secure
' With me -- a stately oaken Door.
' Through the strong Boards he made me go,
' To keep his Daughter from a Beau;
' But she (what is it but Love can do?)
' With Aquafortis eat me through:
' A Cripple now, and useless quite,
' I Am banished from the cheerful Light:
' And all folk despise me that behold;
' At last I to a Smith was sold,
' Who had Compassion on my Pain,
' And brought me to myself again.
' To Jeff'ry Bouze I next belong,
' Where sparkling Ale was clear and strong;
' One Vault, more precious than the rest,
' Was stowed with Hogsheads of the best:
' And having lately lost the Key,
' He fast'ned up the Door with me:
' I stood a faithful Centry there,
' To guard the choice inspiring Beer
' From thirsty Bacchanalian Rage,
' Till his Son Guzzle was of Age:
' At length the Youth an Entrance found,
' Though stoutly I maintained my Ground;
' Yet all my Strength would not avail,
' For how could one poor single Nail
' Maintain a dangerous Post (you know)
' Against whole Legions of the Foe;
' Who well consid'ring Life's a Bubble,
' And drinking is the Cure of Trouble,
' And more -- that he again could brew
' Before the Date of Twenty two;
' While ever that time the present Ale
' Might happen to be flat or stale;
' He came himself with fifty more,
' And wisely drank it out before.
' It would be tedious now to tell
' What to your humble Slave befell,
' Amongst a rude mechanic Band,
' Till Fortune gave me to your Hand:
' Now if a proper Post I knew,
' I Would gladly be of use to you;
' But you resolve to hide no Pelf,
' And choose to walk abroad yourself:
' But, Mira, these are dangerous Times,
' I Would have you fasten up your Rhymes;
' And it is the best thing you can do,
' To nail up Pens and Paper too:
' Do this and get thee gone to spinning,
' Or wisely dearn your Father's Linen."
This said -- a Cart with rumbling Sound
Came by, and shook the trembling Ground;
The Vision vanished from her Sight,
And Mira wakened in a Fright.
The GENIUS in DISGUISE.
AS I Fidelia and my Sire,
Sat musing over a smoky Fire,
We heard a Knocking at the Door,
Rise, something is the Matter sure.
The little Turret seemed to quake,
The Shelves, the Chairs and Tables shake;
Fidelia cries, O, what is the Matter?
And Mira's Teeth began to chatter:
The frighted Door (as what could choose)
Flew open (pray believe the Muse)
A hollow Voice for Entrance calls,
And soon -- Although the dirty Walls
Were stained with Ignorance and Sin,
Yet Mira's Genius ventured in,
Not in a Cherub's Form enshrined,
Nor in the shape of human kind:
But Locks and Hinges round him glow,
In Figure like a neat Buroe;
Like Brambles in a thorny Gap
Stood Mira's Hair beneath her Cap:
Her frighted Senses gone astray,
She bent her Knees in act to pray;
But the presuming Priest drew near,
As void of Piety as Fear,
And by its Side undaunted stood,
And would persuade us it was Wood:
With Reverence then we did presume
To place him in the little Room;
The Priest excluded with the rest,
The Stranger Mira thus addressed,
(Though shaking with Surprise and Fear)
' O say what Power sent thee here,
' Not Fortune, for I never could see
' As yet her Favors bent on me:
' Nor Chance although we often find
' She governs most of human kind;
' Or can, against the Maid's Desire,
' Throw Madam's Caudle in the Fire;
' Can light a Candle, or can miss,
' She never brought a thing like this.
This said, pale Mira gazing stood,
And thus replied the seeming Wood;
' Can thou behold me and not find
' The Picture of the Giver's Mind?
' Behold the Lock and shining Key,
' That never its Mistress shall betray,
' Not blemished with a Spot of Rust,
' And always faithful to its Trust.
' The rest may be to you consigned,
' For in this narrow Space you will find
' No Emblem large enough to fit
' Her Bounty, Judgment, and her Wit.
' But, Mira, since I have begun,
' The Thread of my Discourse shall run,
' Explaining how I am to you
' A Monitor and Table too.
' My hollow Spaces you may fill
' With all your Verses good and ill;
' One small one for your Wit may do,
' But then your Faults will take up two.
' And from the rest I pray exclude
' One sacred Place for Gratitude:
' And what our Patron yours and mine
' Shall to my trusty Care consign,
' For those loved Strangers I Will secure
' The Closet with its tiny Door.
' And now I Have prattl'd long, my Dear,
' Yet you are listening still to hear,
' Expecting that I should supply
' At once Advice and Prophesy;
' But that is not right for me nor you
' To dive so deeply -- though, it is true,
' Without Divining I can see
' You Will never deserve the Gift of me:
' More would you know -- why, may be then
' Within these Mornings nine or ten,
' Propitious Jet may tsudge before,
' And lead his Mistress to your Door;
' And when the Sun (whose distant Wheels
' But faintly warm the icy Fields)
' Shall gild your Cot with brighter Ray,
' I hope to see her every Day.
' But turn away thy steadfast Eyes,
' That stare so ghastly with Surprise:
' Go seek your Pillow and be still,
' And dream of me or what you will.
' This said (which Mira hoped was true)
' The Lid shut up, and cries Adieu."
Then gave a Crack, and spoke no more,
And all was silent as before.
CELADON to MIRA.
TO thee, O Mira, I these Lines commend,
These from thy gentle and immortal Friend,
Though not to thee my airy Form appears,
Yet I Have been often a Witness to thy Tears,
(At Night when, lonely by the Taper's Flame,
In a still Whisper thou have breathed my Name)
And in thy Eyes beheld the rising Woe;
(Ah simple Sorrows when for me they flow!)
Think not, O Mira, not in me to find
A Friend like Vido, or like Rosalind,
Or like Courtine to cheat thy dazzl'a Eye,
And sooth thy Weakness with a well-bred Lie:
These are (as thou will by the Sequel find)
Below a Spirit of the blissful kind:
And was thy Form, as wanton Helen gay,
Or did thy Eyes outshine the Lamp of Day,
These please not me -- Bright Eyes in vain may roll,
I read no Charms but in the purer Soul.
By thy changed Features I too often find
The wild Ideas of thy restless Mind;
All serious now abstracted from the Crew,
No prudent Stoic more serene than you,
Till in your Brain some gaudy Pictures spring,
All gay and careless, then you laugh and sing:
These vanish like a painted Cloud -- and now
Pale Discontent o'er-shades thy mournful Brow:
You form dark Visions and at Phantoms start,
These Woes proceed from an ill-govern'd Heart,
From a too thoughtless or too roving Mind;
For these are Strangers to a Soul resigned.
Can thou presume thy little Bark may steer
From Griefs black Eddy and the Gulphs of Fear?
Or can thou hope to escape the gloomy Land,
Where Disappointments crowd the rocky Strand?
Not so -- nor let thy Vanity pretend
To hope for more than ever blessed thy Friend;
In Life I shone conspicuous over the rest,
While the pure Beams malignant Eyes oppressed;
Sound Judgment, Learning, Wisdom, too was mine,
And piercing Wit superior far to thine;
Yet gaping Rage stood ready to devour,
And Dullness rained on me a leaden Shower:
Now stung with Scoffs, and now with Flattery tired,
Defamed, applauded, envied, and admired:
This Fate was mine -- to hope can thou presume
A milder Passage and more easy Doom?
Deluded Girl! let not a Thought so vain
Elate thy Spirits, nor ascend thy Brain.
But hear, O Mira, nor too late be wise,
From painted Trifles turn thy longing Eyes;
Ask not for what will make thy Prayer offend,
But ask Content, a Parent and a Friend;
Ask Bread and Peace, it is all that Nature craves,
This Kings acknowledge, when they find their Graves.
Say, why thy Features lose their healthful Dye,
And the Tears tremble in the languid Eye?
The mighty Conflict I with pity see,
When thy rude Passions struggle to be free,
And rack thy Breast -- the incoherent Stage,
Where grave and comic jar like Youth and Age;
Now Death appears all horrible and grim:
But the next Moment none so fair as him,
And now you sigh -- Ah, let me calmly die:
Then shrinking, trembling from the Grave you fly,
Such jarring Tumults in your Bosom roll;
(Ah, what so various as a Woman's Soul!)
But thou, beware, and if thy Fate has joined
A sickly Body to a roving Mind;
Be calm nor mourn at the Supreme Decree,
Nor think the Mandate shall be changed for thee,
But meet with Patience what thou can not flee.
Would thou repine to see thy Form decay,
When Spio's Eyelids are forbid the Day!
Might thou with us unbodied Spirits fly,
From Sphere to Sphere and trace the boundless Sky?
Then would the Lives of little Mortals show,
Like empty Bubbles raised of Morning Dew:
All seem as Trifles, whether we behold
A Monarch banished, or a Sparrow sold;
A thoughtless Insect trampled in the Mire,
Or a proud Beauty in her Bloom expire.
More noble Scenes enraptured Spirits view,
But the grand Prospect is too large for you:
A closer Bound best suits thy narrow Mind,
A few Examples of thy fading kind.
Have thou forgot the soft Iphenia's Name,
Whose smiling Face not Spleen itself could blame;
Scarce nineteen Years her dawning Beauties knew,
Ever the young Roses bid her Cheeks adieu;
Yet blessed with all, could please a Woman's Pride:
In this gay Bloom the bright Iphenia died;
Her Sire lifts to Heaven his mournful Eyes,
And her sad Brother fills the Air with Cries:
Her Brother Clodius, who to Grief resigned
To fruitless Passion all his manly Mind.
What simple Sorrow to the dead you pay,
Who soon must follow the same dusky Way.
For ever the Transport of his Grief was over,
Fate gave the Sign and Clodius was no more.
Still Pero lived a yet surviving Son,
A little Space and Pero's Race was done:
Death's icy Hand his youthful Limbs invades,
And bids him mingle with his kindred Shades.
So quickly Pero and Narcissa fell,
Scarce looking round them ever they bid farewell:
Yet dangerous it is to wander here too long;
These went more willing as they fell more young;
But Laura's Name demands thy flowing Tears,
Whose Doubts increasing with her lengthened Years,
Served not to clear but cloud the dusky Way,
And gave new Terrors to her final Day:
The dreadful Moment would have past as well,
At sixteen Years had weeping Laura fell.
Let this, O Mira, cheer thy drooping Mind,
To bear the Sentence past on all Mankind:
I bore the same, whose Life was more desired,
More loved, more known, and justly more admired:
Yet this grand Fear is wove with Nature's Laws;
Is sometimes right, and sometimes has no Cause:
Repent and mend -- these Vapors then will fly,
And the Clouds brighten to a purer Sky;
Still look to Heaven and its Laws attend,
And next the Lines of thy aerial Friend.
On Mr. POPE's Universal PRAYER.
AH Thou! whom Nature and thy Stars designed,
At once the Joy and Envy of Mankind,
To thy loved Memory this Sigh I send;
To thee a Stranger, to thy Lines a Friend:
How blessed the Muse could she like thine aspire,
So smooth her Accent, and sublime her Fire;
With bright Description make the Bosom glow,
Charm like thy Sense, and like thy Numbers flow:
O teach my Soul to reach the Seats divine,
And praise her Maker in a Strain like thine.
Ye careless Ones, who never thought before,
Read this grand Verse, then tremble and adore:
Let stern Enthusiasts here be taught to know,
It Is from the Heart true Piety must flow:
Here Hope, Content, and smiling Mercy shine;
And breathe celestial through the speaking Line:
From the still Mind its guilty Passions roll,
And dawning Grace awakes the fervent Soul.
Let angry Zealots quarrel for a Name,
The good, the just, the virtuous are the same:
Grace to no Sect, nor Virtue is confined;
They blend with all, and spread amongst the kind;
And the pure Flame that warms the pious Breast:
Those cannot merit who condemn the rest.
To the dark Nations when Religion came,
All dressed in Smiles; they saw the heavenly Dame,
Till some stern Teachers of their Office proud,
Chose not to soften but affright the Crowd,
With gloomy Terrors filled the dusky Age,
And veiled her Beauties in the mask of Rage:
Then bid the Handmaids of Perdition rise,
Black Cruelty with fierce and flaming Eyes;
Distraction ravaged on the public Weal,
And Persecution wore the Robe of Zeal:
Deluded Faith espoused the stronger Side,
And conquered Justice gave her Sword to Pride.
This saw the surly discontented Mind,
By Nature haughty and to Vice inclined:
And thence concluded all their Systems vain,
The Cant of Schools and Phrensy of the Brain:
From hence the Sect of Libertines arose,
Who scorn what Reason or the Priests impose:
Who give to Chance the World's that round us roll,
And tear from Man his ever-conscious Soul.
But thou whose Name (immortal as thy Rhymes)
Shall live and brighten through succeeding Times:
(Whose Lines can Wit and Virtue both inspire,
Whom future Ages shall like me admire)
Teach me between the two Extremes to glide,
Not brave the Stream nor swim with every Tide:
But more with Charity than Zeal possessed,
Keep my own Faith, yet not condemn the rest.
The FIELDS of MELANCHOLY and CHEERFULNESS.
STILL were the Groves, and venerable Night
Over half the Globe had cast her gloomy Veil,
When by a Taper's solitary Gleam
Sat musing Mira pensive and alone;
In her sad Breast officious Memory
Revived the Pictures of departed Friends,
Whose pleasing Forms she must behold no more.
Forgotten Woe, that for a time had slept,
Rose into Life, and like a Torrent poured
On her faint Soul, which sunk beneath its Rage:
At length soft Slumber kindly intervened,
And closed those Eyelids that were drenched in Tears;
But restless Fancy that was waking still,
Led my deluded Spirit on the Wing
To pictured Regions and imagined Worlds.
I seemed transported to a gloomy Land,
Whose Fields had never known the cheerful Sun:
A heavy Mist hung in the frowning Sky,
No feathered Warblers cheered the mourning Groves,
Nor blushing Flowers adorned the barren Ground:
I gazed around the solitary Coast,
When lo a Nymph with solemn Air approached,
Whose Dress was careless and her Features grave,
Her Voice was broken and her Hearing dull:
She spoke but seldom, yet at last she told
Me in a Whisper, that her Name was Thought;
And more, she offered, with a friendly Air,
To lead me safely through the dreary Gloom:
We walked along through rough unpleasing Paths,
Over Beds of Nightshade and through Groves of Yew,
Till we arrived within a dusky Wood,
Whose spacious Bound was fenced with shagged Thorn.
The Trees were baleful Cypress; and a few
Tall Pines that murmured to the rushing Wind:
Here dwelt the Natives, (mournful as the Place)
Or sunk in real or imagined Woe;
Complaining Sounds were heard on every Side,
And each bewailed the loss of something dear:
Some mourned a Child that in its Bloom expired,
And some a Brother's or a Parent's Fate:
Lost Wealth and Honors many Tongues deplored,
And some were wretched, though they knew not why.
But as we reached the Center of the Place,
Complaints were heard more piercing than before:
The gathering Fogs grew thicker over our Heads,
And a cold Horror thrilled our wounded Souls,
And thus we traveled, pensive beyond measure,
Through Paths half covered with perplexing Thorns;
At length we found two Rows of aged Firs,
Whose Tops were blasted by unwholsom Winds.
This solitary Vista opening wide,
Disclosed the Palace of its mournful Queen:
Before the Gate was placed a frightful Guard,
Who served as Porters to the gloomy Dome:
Here, stretched upon a miserable Couch,
Lay pining Sickness with continual Groans;
And by her Side, (arrayed in filthy Weeds)
Sat quaking Poverty with ghastly stare:
His Presence seemed to aggravate her Pain,
For when she cast her languid Eyes on him,
She hid her Face and raised a fearful Cry.
There Disappointment like a Statue stood,
With Eyes dejected and with Visage pale:
Her heaving Bosom seemed to swell with Anguish,
And in her Hand she grasped a broken Reed:
Here, in the Garb of Piety, we saw
Proud Error frowning with a Look severe:
Doubt at his Elbow bore a Rod of Snakes,
And held a Cup filled to the Brim with Tears,
By these we passed into the dusky Court,
O'er-run with Hemlock and with gloomy Fern:
Perpetual Night hung over the dismal Walls,
And from the Ground unhealthy Vapors rose;
Through folding Doors of Ebony we came,
Into a winding Passage hung with black,
For ever dark -- possessed by flitting Shades,
By waking Fancies, and by frightful Dreams
This led us to a subterraneous Cell,
Where the sad Empress Melancholy reigned;
The musing Matron sat upon a Throne
Of mouldering Earth -- her Footstool of the same;
And for her Canopy an aged Yew
Spread over her Head its venerable Arms:
Her careless Robe was of a sable Hue,
And on her Shoulders flowed her slighted Hair:
Her Lips were closed with an eternal Silence;
Her Arms were folded and her Head reclined;
On either Side her pale Attendants stood,
Two mournful Maids, Dejection and Despair;
The first (attended with continual Faintings)
Seemed on the Point to close her dying Eyes:
A constant Dew hung on her death-like Brow,
And her cold Bosom half forgot to heave.
Despair (whose Garments by herself were torn)
Was marked with Wounds that Time can never heal:
With desperate Hand she struck her bleeding Breast,
And washed the Ground with never-ceasing Tears;
With ghastly Figures was the Cave adorned,
And in the midst the Effigies of Death.
Shocked at the Place we hasted to return,
And left the horrid Mansion far behind;
Long time we traveled through untrodden Paths,
Where the brown Forests cast an awful Gloom:
At length the floating Clouds began to part,
And left behind them Streaks of cheerful Azure;
Our Path grew smooth and widen'd to the view,
Until it opened on a spacious Field;
A Field whose Charms no Painter ever could reach,
Though he should borrow from the Poet's Heaven;
The Clime was temperate and the Air was still,
The sprouting Turf was of a beauteous Green,
Speckled with Flowers of a delicious Dye.
Here crystal Lakes were bordered round with Trees,
Where Blossoms flourished in eternal Spring;
For here the Groves no blasting Tempests know,
But still are blessed with Fruits that never decay:
Perpetual Sunshine crowned the gaudy Hills,
And the fair Valleys were with Plenty gay.
A Path there was, trod over the spicy Field,
Which led the Wanderer to a blissful Shade,
Whose Fence was made of balmy Eglantine;
Where the fair Plane o'erlook'd the Myrtle Shrub,
And flow'ring Orange that perfume the Air;
Here flew in Throngs the soft aerial Choir,
Whose glittering Necks like polished Amber shone:
We passed delighted through ambrosial Paths,
And Bowers move with Jessamine and Rose;
Joy seized the ravished Spirits, while we breathed
In Gales that tasted of immortal Sweets.
At length the parting Trees broke into Form,
And with a Circle bound a charming Plain,
In The midst of which upon an Ivory Throne
Sat Cheerfulness, the Genius of the Place:
Her Mien was graceful and her Features fair;
Continual Smiles dwelt on her dimpl'd Cheeks,
Her Hair was bound beneath a shining Crown,
Her Robes were Azure bright with golden Stars,
And in her Hand she held a silver Lute.
On either Side her royal Sisters sat,
Both lovely, as herself, though not so gay;
The eldest had a Face divinely fair;
Calm was her Look, with Lips prepared for smiling,
She often raised her thankful Eyes to Heaven;
Her Form was easy and her Name Content:
The other (much the youngest) was arrayed
In Virgin Robes white as unsullied Snow;
Her thoughtless Smiles would tame a Tiger's Rage,
A Lamb (whose Neck was circl'd with a Band
Of new blown Roses) at her Feet was laid,
A milk-white Dove upon her Hand she bore:
Thus ever blessed sat Innocence the fair.
Behind these Sisters stood a shining Train,
As Maids of Honor to the Royal Fair:
Prosperity (the first) was climbing up
A stately Pyramid of painted Marble;
From whose high Top she reached a brilliant Crowd:
Then with an Air that spoke a joyful Heart,
Looked down with Pleasure on the Plain below.
Gay Wealth the next, in her embroidered Vest,
Shone like the Entrails of the eastern Mine;
Her Hair was platted thick with sparkling Gems,
And in her Hand she bore a golden Wand.
Health, like a Sylvan Huntress clothed in Green,
In her right Hand a dapled Palfry held,
Her Air was masculine, and swift her Motion;
A Wreath of Flowers just ravished from the Meads,
Bound up the Ringlets of her sable Hair;
Her Cheeks were ruddy; and her large black Eyes
Confessed the Vigor of her sprightly Soul.
These were the Natives of this happy Land,
The Sight of whom so filled my glowing Breast
With Ecstasy that I awoke: And thus
Their Glories vanished, and were seen no more.
The LIBYAN HUNTER, a FABLE.
Inscribed to the Memory of a late admired Author.
WHEN Merit rises like the Prince of Day,
Pale Envy turns her aching Eyes away;
Then sallow Cheeks with Rage are taught to glow,
And narrow Souls to bloated Furies grow.
Old Story tells us, on an earthly Plain
Once Jove descended wrapped in golden Rain:
Now Fate permits no such familiar Powers,
But Shoals of Critics fall in leaden Showers:
These gaze at Wit, as Owls behold the Sun,
And curse the Luster which they fain would shun;
These Beasts of Prey no living worth endure,
Nor are the Regions of the Dead secure;
Yet shall the Worthy over their Spite prevail;
Here lies the Moral -- follows next the Tale.
Once on a time on Libya's thirsty Land,
Where Showers seldom wet the burning Sand,
Lived happy Sylvius as the Morning gay,
A well-known Favorite of the Prince of Day;
Whose Hand, unerring, to the Mark in view
Sent the swift Arrow from the twanging Yew:
The trembling Panthers from his Fury fly,
When the keen Javelin hissed along the Sky;
Fierce were his Eyes, and dazzling as the Sun;
His raven Looks in mazy Ringlets run,
A well-stor'd Quiver at his Back was tied,
A shining Spear his better Hand supplied:
Thus rudely charming, he was sure to please
With graceful Negligence and careless Ease:
He breathed soft Music from his tuneful Tongue,
And the wild Tiger listened to his Song:
The woodland Nymphs their dusky Shades forego,
And the blue Naiads left the Deeps below:
None guard the Flocks, nor hunt the flying Prey,
Till he had finished the enchanting Lay:
Then Sylvan Dames with Wreaths of Laurel bound,
His cheerful Temples and with Roses crowned.
But grudging Envy heard the just Applause,
And the pale Phantom writhed her hagard Jaws;
Now swelled the Bosoms of repining Swains,
And hissing Scandals flew across the Plains.
At length his Fame the wondering Sky invades,
And reached the Muses in their sacred Shades;
Bright Thalia viewed him with an envious Eye,
And thus addressed her Partners of the Sky:
' Ye tuneful Maids, give over the labored Song,
' Small are the Praises to our share belong;
' Look down and see on yonder sultry Plain,
' Our Voices equaled by a Libyan Swain;
' Give over the Lay, ye too officious Fair,
' Lay down the Lyre and fruitless Hymns forbear,
' Nor hope to charm the partial Prince of Day,
' While heavenly Accents breathe from mortal Clay:
' In vain we keep our radiant Seats on high,
' If rural Swains shall with our Music vie:'
She said: And Rage possessed the beauteous Ring,
Some curse the Youth and some their partial King.
The Dame who saw the infectious Murmurs run,
Rolled her blue Eyes, and thus afresh begun:
' No more the Bays shall to our Share belong,
' Nor charmed Celestials shall attend our Song:
' But all to Sylvius shall their Offerings pay;
' To Sylvius favored by the Prince of Day,
' Shall he exceed the Muses sacred Choir:
' Not while Revenge shall injured Bosoms fire.
' But see, my Sisters: On the Plains below
' Swift Cynthia's Hounds pursue the flying Do:
' Be mine the Task to bear a fraudful Tale,
' To the swift Hunters in the Libyan Vale:
' As how her Herds in vain from Sylvius fly;
' His Darts pursue them, and the Victims die:
' So Delia's Rage shall stop his tuneful Tongue,
' And we no more shall dread the rival Song.
Here ceased the Dame -- the smiling Sisters join:
Their loud Applauses to her sly Design.
Now had the Sun withdrawn his piercing Eye.
And Night assumed the Empire of the Sky:
Lulled in her Lap reposing Nature lay,
And Swains forgot the Labors of the Day:
The Winds were hushed, the Ocean ceased to roar,
And softly murmured by the sandy Shore,
When from Parnassus flew the envious Maid,
To seek the Huntress of the lonely Shade:
The fierce Virago on a verdant Plain,
She found, encircl'd by her sleeping Train;
Where a cool River blessed the fertile Ground,
Its Bank with Trees and bending Ofier's crowned:
Beneath a Shade the lovely Dian stood
With down-cast Eyes, and viewed the rolling Flood;
Whose Waves were bright with the reflected Beams
Of her own Orb that sparkl'd on the Streams.
' Hail, Delia, Hail, (began the artful Dame)
' Lives there a Wretch who owns not Delia's Name?
' Lives there a Slave whose daring Hand defies
' The awful Empress of the nightly Skies?
' Yes, haughty Sylvius triumphs over the Plain,
' Though thy choice Herds are by his Arrows slain;
' The frighted Fauns his wanton Rage would fly,
' But the keen Dart o'ertakes 'em, and they die.
' His shining Spear arrests the trembling Do,
' And groaning Stags the deadly Weapon know:
' But if fair Delia to the Libyan Swain
' Resigns the Freedom of her sacred Plain,
' Let none dispute the License of her Will,
' And I retire to our tuneful Hill.'
With flushing Features and disordered Charms
The angry Goddess seized her deathful Arms;
' Shall Man with me dispute the Plain (she cries,
While kindling Rage inflamed her rolling Eyes)
' This Hand shall well revenge my slaughtered Deer:
She said: And furious grasped the dreadful Spear,
And over her Shoulder flung the shining Bow,
Then breathing Vengeance sought her guiltless Foe.
The Youth beneath a dusky Shade she found,
Thoughtless of Ill and sleeping on the Ground;
A deadly Shaft deluded Cynthia drew,
And to his Heart the feathered Vengeance flew;
The reaking Blood came bubbling through the Wound,
Poured over his Bosom and distained the Ground;
Then the freed Spirit took her airy Way,
To Fields of Pleasure and of endless Day.
The red-cheek'd Morning had now chased away
Night's sable Curtain -- and the dawning Day
Called forth abroad the trusty Bands -- Again
To chase the Tiger over the Desert Plain;
To search the Caves where kingly Lions roar,
And from thick Shades dislodge the bristled Boar:
Sylvius they want, for him they search, they call,
They search the Shades where crystal Waters fall,
His wonted Haunts: Then every Voice they try:
In vain they call, for none, alas! reply:
Hear, Sylvius, hear, they cry, and all around;
Hear, Sylvius, hear, the hollow Rocks resound.
At length a Crew, the basest of the Plain,
Approached, the Covert of the slaughtered Swain
Glad they beheld him breathless on the Ground,
And gazed with Rapture on the purple Wound,
When one began -- Now bless the friendly Hand,
That swept off Sylvius from the gazing Land:
Behold the Day so often by us desired,
Here lies the Swain whom lately all admired.
This Phoebus saw, as from his blazing Wheels,
With his broad Eye he viewed the glittering Fields
Behold the Youth whom he had taught to throw
The feathered Arrow from the bounding Bow,
Beheld his Sylvius, to whose artful Tongue
He taught the Numbers of enchanting Song.
Now cold and breathless on the dewy Plain,
And his worst Foes insulting over the Slain:
Then raged the God that wears the silver Bow,
And his broad Eyes with sparkling Fury glow,
Descended Phoebus in a burning Ray,
His beamy Locks declares the Prince of Day,
And flashing Glories round his Temples play,
Each on his Face the trembling Victims fall,
Their stammering Tongues would fain for Mercy call;
But as all groveling on the Dust they lie,
His Shafts dispatch them to the darker Sky:
Learn hence (he cried) ye impious Men, to know,
And dread the Power that wears the mortal Bow:
For while I rule the blazing Throne of Day,
None wrong my Servants but shall find their Pay;
He said -- and raised his Favorite from the Ground,
Then smiled the Features: And the gaping Wound
Was seen no more. The glowing Cheeks revive,
Shake off the Stamp of Death, and seem alive;
Instead of Cypress and a mournful Shroud,
Apollo wrapped him in a golden Cloud,
And bore him thence: But where, there is none can say,
Unless to his own Regions of the Day.
And from the Ground where Sylvius late was seen,
Where the warm Gore had stained the thirsty Green;
A pleasing Tree arose with slender Stems,
That breathed Ambrosia from its opening Gems:
Those opening Gems the Virgins used to wear
On their fair Bosoms, and their shining Hair:
Now the gay Shrub each happy Climate knows,
By all admired, and it is called the Rose.
The TEMPLE of LOVE.
WHEN lonely Night composed the drowsy Mind,
And hushed the Bosom of the weary Hind,
Pleased with plain Nature and with simple Life,
I read the Scenes of Shore's deluded Wife,
Till my faint Spirits sought the silent Bed,
And on its Pillow dropped my aching Head;
Then Fancy ever to her Mira kind,
Prepared her Phantoms for the roving Mind.
Behold a Fabric rising from the Ground,
To the soft Timbrel and the Cittern's Sound:
Corinthian Pillars the vast Building hold,
Of polished Silver and Peruvian Gold;
In four broad Arches spread the shining Doors,
The blazing Roofs enlighten all the Floors:
Beneath a sparkling Canopy that shone
With Persian Jewels, like a Morning Sun
Wrapped in a Robe of purest Tyrian Dye,
Cythera's Image met the ravished Eye,
Whose glowing Features would in Paint beguile:
So well the Artist drew her mimick Smile;
Her shining Eyes confessed a sprightly Joy;
Upon her Knees reclined her wanton Boy;
On the bright Walls, around her and above,
Were drawn the Statutes and the Arts of Love:
These taught the silent Language of the Eye,
The broken Whisper and amusing Lie;
The careless Glance peculiar to the Fair,
And Vows for Lovers, that dissolve in Air;
The graceful Anger, and the rolling Eyes;
The practiced Blush and counterfeit Surprise,
The Language proper for pretending Swains;
And fine Description for imagined Pains;
The friendly Caution and designing Ease,
And all the Arts that ruin while they please.
Now entered, followed by a splendid Train,
A blooming Damsel and a wealthy Swain;
The gaudy Youth in shining Robes arrayed,
Behind him followed the unthinking Maid:
Youth in her Cheek like opening Roses sprung,
Her careless Tresses on her Shoulders hung.
Her Smiles were cheerful as enlivening May;
Her Dress was careless, and her Eyes were gay;
Then to soft Voices and melodious Sound
The Board was spread, the sparkling Glasses crowned:
The sprightly Virgin in a Moment shines
In the gay Entrails of the eastern Mines;
Then Pride comes in with Patches for the Fair,
And spicy Odours for her curling Hair:
Rude Riot in a crimson Vest arrayed,
With smooth-faced Flattery like a Chambermaid:
Soft Pomp and Pleasure at her Elbow stand,
And Folly shakes the Rattles in her Hand.
But now her feeble Structure seemed to shake,
Its Basis trembled and its Pillars quake;
Then rushed Suspicion through the lofty Gate,
With heart-sick Loathing led by ghastly Hate;
And foaming Rage, to close the horrid Band,
With a drawn Poniard in her shaking Hand,
Now like an Earthquake shook the reeling Frame,
The Lamps extinguish in a purple Flame:
One universal Groan was heard, and then
The Cries of Women and the Voice of Men:
Some roar out Vengeance, some for Mercy call;
And Shrieks and Tumult fill the dreadful Hall.
At length the Specter vanished from my Sight,
Again the Lamps resumed a feeble Light;
But changed the Place: No Splendour there was shown,
But gloomy Walls that Mirth had never known;
For the gay Dome where Pleasure used to dwell,
Appeared an Abbey and a doleful Cell;
And here the sad, the ruined Nymph was found,
Her Robe disordered and her Locks unbound,
While from her Eyes the pearly Drops of Woe,
Washed her pale Cheek where Roses used to blow:
Her blue and trembling Lips prepared to breathe
The Sighs that made her swelling Bosom heave;
Thus stupid with her Grief she sat and pressed
Her lily Hands across her pensive Breast;
A Group of ghastly Phantoms stood behind,
Whose Task it is to wreck the guilty Mind:
Wide-mouthed Reproach with Visage rude and thin,
And hissing Scandal made a hideous Din;
Remorse that darted from her deadly Wings,
Envenomed Arrows and a thousand Stings:
Then with pale Cheeks and with a ghastly Stare,
Peeped over her Shoulder hollow-ey'd Despair;
Whose Hand extended bore a bleeding Heart,
And Death behind her shook his threatening Dart:
These Forms with Horror filled my aching Breast,
And from my Eyelids drove the Balm of Rest:
I woke and found old Night her Course had run,
And left her Empire to the rising Sun.
ADVICE to MYRTILLO.
SINCE you, Myrtillo, will devote your Time
To the lean Study of delusive Rhyme:
Since you're content to slumber out your Days,
To dream of Dinners, but to feed on Praise;
Receive this Counsel, ever your Flights begin,
From one long practiced in the darling Sin.
Now Fame's broad Ocean lies before your Way;
Yet, Friend, be careful; it is a dangerous Sea:
Where (though some few may reach the happy Land)
Numbers are wrecked upon the treacherous Sand:
Then guard your Spirits, as you prize your Ease,
Nor once indulge 'em in a thirst of Praise;
For Fame, like Fortune, (proud, yet wanton too)
Is pleased to fly and make the Wretch pursue;
Frowns on her Slaves, but to the careless Mind
That slights her Favors she is always kind.
Would you the Ladies should approve your Song?
Paint Sylvia's Eyes, or praise Clarinda's Tongue;
Describe the Charms of Cloe's sprightly Air,
Or blooming Daphne more divinely fair;
Or Venus's Son that hurls the flaming Dart,
And tag each Stanza with a bleeding Heart:
Tell them of Rocks where Tears eternal flow,
Dissolved to Fountains by a Lover's Woe:
Of icy Bosoms that in Summer freeze,
And Sighs much stronger than a southern Breeze.
Perhaps the Fair, whom for a Theme you choose,
Must owe her Beauties to your skilful Muse:
Has erring Nature raiss'd her Nose too high,
Sunk down her Cheeks, or drawn her Lips awry?
No matter how the twisted Features stand,
They Will grow divine beneath a Poet's Hand:
Though her dim Eye Balls roll within her Head,
Like two gray Bullets in a Verge of red;
You like Promotheus must their Rays inspire,
And fill their Orbs with more than mortal Fire.
Do you the Levee of his Grace attend,
And (like most Poets) should you want a Friend,
Make not his Worth the Measure of your Song;
But learn his Humor, and you cannot be wrong:
Perhaps this Maxim may offend the wise;
But you must flatter, if you mean to rise:
Observe what Passions in his Bosom roll,
And watch the secret Motions of his Soul:
Mind what false Guard has left a Breach within,
For some choice Folly, or some darling Sin:
These you must hide -- but draw his Virtues nigh,
Lest the rude Picture shock the gazing Eye.
The Heralds-Office you must search with Care;
And look you find no Pimps nor Tailors there:
Bring none to light but honorable Knaves;
Shut up the Peasants in their moldy Graves:
If Knights are wanting in the dusky Breed,
Arthur's round Table will supply your Need.
No more -- for I (as many Teachers do)
Show my own Folly by instructing you;
And you perhaps disdain my wholesome Rules;
So saucy Pupils count their Masters Fools:
But should your Pride the common Track refuse,
You Will find small Pensions for your haughty Muse:
Still you may scribble on; and in the End
Be just as rich as -- Sir, your humble Friend.
On DISCONTENT.
To STELLA.
SAY, dearest Stella, why this pensive Air?
Tell me, O tell thy Sorrows and thy Care;
Why thy Lips tremble, and thy Cheeks are pale?
Why heaves thy Bosom with a mournful Gale?
Let not thy Eyes for distant Evils flow,
Nor rack thy Bosom with prophetic Woe:
Imagined Ills deceive our aching Eyes,
As lengthened Shades appear of monstrous Size,
When setting Phoebus gilds the Evening Skies.
Though pictured Joy deludes our panting Souls,
When round the Heart its smiling Phantom rolls;
The gay Impostor mocks our reaching Arms;
Yet while it lasts, the pleasing Vision charms:
Not so Distrust, her gloomy Forehead rears;
She brings cold Anguish and a crowd of Fears:
Ah lovely Stella! as you prize your Rest,
Expel this Fury from your guiltless Breast.
The wise and mighty Guardian of Mankind,
To each Dividual has their Draught assigned;
And though no Pearls should in our Potion fall,
Let us be cheerful while he spares the Gall:
Unmeaning Transports for a Moment please,
Yet Peace alone can bless your equal Days.
But coldly viewed or quickly thrown aside,
See cringing Merit at the Gates of Pride;
See Wit and Wisdom (that our Fathers prized)
In Youth neglected as in Age despised:
Behold (the Scorn, as late the Dread of all)
The Politician from his Glory fall:
He whose sly Genius could a Kingdom rule,
Shall have his Exit hissed by every Fool:
With aching Bosom and a streaming Eye
The hoary Soldier sees his Honor fly;
Who in his Age must to Oppression bow,
And yield his Laurels to a younger Brow:
Those Laurels shall the proud Successor wear
A while; then strip and leave 'em to his Heir.
If these are wretched let not us repine,
Whose meaner Talents never were made to shine:
Our Good and Ill, our Vice and Virtue falls
Within the compass of domestic Walls:
To those small Limits be thy Views confined,
And bless thy Cottage with an humble Mind.
Look not at Joys that dazzle from afar,
Nor envy Glaro on his gilded Car;
For all Degrees their Days of Anguish know,
And the most happy have a taste of Woe:
Then calmly take what Providence ordains,
He swells the Load who murmurs and complains:
For all things vary: And who sits to day
Half-drown'd in Tears; tomorrow may be gay.
The PROPOSAL.
WITH aching Fingers, twinging Nose,
And vexed, dear Madam, we'll suppose:
(To leave yourself and Parlour-fire)
Trudged Mira to her own good Sire;
Beneath a cold and gloomy Sky
Walked cheek by jole the Muse and I:
The listening Gossip, though unseen,
Had watched the Talk that passed between
Myself and you: And much offended
(It seems) at what was there intended.
' So cries the peevish Maid, (and squinting)
' Methinks I heard you talk of Printing:
' Have I bestowed a world of Pains,
' To spirit up your blockish Brains,
' To get from thence an idle Rhyme,
' That made me blush to call it mine?
' And shall I see the crippl'd Crew
' Discarded from their Seat and you,
' Turned out to skip from hand to hand
' In dirty Gazettes round the Land,
' To grace the Knee of every Sot,
' And catch the Droppings of his Pot,
' While in a Rage the drowsy Swains
' Perhaps may curse you for your Pains,
' Protesting with a Critick's Spite,
' That none since Durfey knew to write?
' But, Mira, if you want a Muse,
' To grace the Page of weekly News,
' The Task is much too low for me,
' Yet I Have a Maid of less Degree,
' (With Spirit suiting to her State)
' Will serve you at an easy Rate:
' Whose Voice, though hoarse, is loud and strong,
' An Artist at a ranting Song,
' Can chaunt Lampoons without much straining,
' Or Epigrams with double Meaning,
' To join the Tavern-Harp or Viol:
' Now if you will take her upon trial,
' To her Deservings suit your Pay,
' And then you take the safest way:
' Perhaps you will prosper in the End,
' I Will say no more: But ask your Friend,
' Here ends the Muse -- Dear Madam, say,
' Shall I reject her or obey?
SOTO. A CHARACTER.
IN Soto's Bosom you may find
The Glimmering of a worthy Mind:
It Is but a faint and feeble Ray,
Imperfect as the dawning Day;
Yet were the jarring Passions tuned,
And the wild Branches nicely pruned,
The Soil from Thorns and Thistles clear,
Some latent Virtues might appear:
In The Morning catch him, (early though
Your Bird will else be flown, I trow,)
Ever he has reached the bowzing Can,
You Will find the Stamp of reasoning Man:
Then see the Wretch whom none can rule,
Ever Night a Madman and a Fool;
The witty Soto then you will find,
Just level with the brutal Kind.
With crimson Face and winking Eyes,
That look like Woodcocks, mighty wise:
See streams a Current down his Chin,
From soft Tobacco lodged within;
Be pleased to steal a Glance or two,
But one may serve to make you --
He fain would walk, but cannot stand,
And see a Palsy in his Hand;
And though his Throat has swallowed down
Two Gallons of October brown,
His greedy Guts impatient roar,
And seem to call aloud for more:
More they shall have: But hark, within
Is heard a rude and lawless Din:
Wind, Ale, and Phlegm their Powers wage,
And Hickups call them to engage;
And now, Ah now! incessant flows
The frothy Tide from Mouth and Nose:
No more is seen the covered Ground,
But a huge River floating round:
Down drops the Youth, his giddy Head
Falls easy on the liquid Bed:
So swam Achilles fierce and brave,
On angry Xanthus's swelling Wave;
And 'scap'd with being wet to the Skin;
For Pallas held him up by the Chin:
So Bacchus saves, by mighty Charms,
His helpless Devotee from Harms:
And Soto sleeps till break of Day,
Then shakes his Ears and walks away.
The UNIVERSAL DREAM.
' GIVE over your Whims, says my considerate Friend;
' Retrieve the fleeting Hours you idly spend:
' Blind to Advice, incorrigible, vain,
' You follow Fancy and her laughing Train;
' Your thoughtless Days in swift Delusion fly:'
So let them go, says unconverted I,
Look round the Globe, my Friend, and then you will see
The drowsy World is slumbering just like me.
See on soft Beds the Hero sleeps secure,
Till War comes thundering at his trembling Door;
In wiser Dreams the Politician prys
Through distant Kingdoms with his half-shut Eyes:
The lulled Projector builds aerial Towers,
And rolls smooth Rivers through enchanted Bowers.
The Chemist slumbers over imagined Gold,
So Delia's Conquests in her Dreams are told.
What monstrous Phantoms in that Trance are born,
Through which Amyntor sees his sprouting Horn?
When purblind Mortals sound the Depths of Fate,
Or some lean Poet aims at an Estate;
Or when the good believing Man depends
On the slight Promise of his courtly Friends;
Should those awake they to their Cost would find,
These are but Shadows of a sleeping Mind.
Few real Pleasures are on Earth possessed,
And Mortals only in their Dreams are blessed;
Then dream no longer, my well-meaning Friend,
That Mira's Follies with her Muse shall end:
Some younger Vanity succeeds the first,
And the last Folly often proves the worst:
No: While the rest in fruitless Cares are hurled,
Let me enjoy my visionary World:
To this glad Bosom hug the dear Mistake,
If Dreams are Blessings, who would wish to wake?
The SOW and the PEACOCK.
A FABLE.
IN Days of Yore, as Authors tell,
When Beasts and Birds could read and spell,
(No matter where, in Town or City,)
There lived a Swine exceeding witty,
And for the Beauties of her Mind,
Excelling all her bristl'd Kind:
But yet to mortify her Pride,
She found at last her failing Side.
Philosophy she had good Store,
Had pondered Seneca all over;
Yet all Precautions useless prove
Against the Power of mighty Love.
It happened on a sultry Day,
Upon her favorite Couch she lay:
'Twas a round Dunghill soft and warm,
O'er-shadow'd by a neighboring Barn,
When lo, her winking Eyes behold
A Creature with a Neck of Gold,
With painted Wings and gorgeous Train,
That sparkl'd like the starry Plain:
His Neck and Breast all brilliant shine
Against the Sun: The dazzl'd Swine,
Who never saw the like before,
Began to wonder and adore;
But seeing him so fair and nice,
She left her Dunghill in a trice,
And (fond to please) the grunting Elf
Began to wash and prune herself,
And from the stinking Wave she run
To dry her Carcass in the Sun:
Then rubbed her Sides against a Tree,
And now as clean as Hogs can be,
With cautious Air and doubtful Breast,
The glittering Peacock thus addressed:
' Sir; I, a homely rural Swine,
' Can boast of nothing fair nor fine,
' No Dainties in our Troughts appear,
' But as you seem a Stranger here,
' Be pleased to walk into my Sty,
' A little Hut as plain as I;
' Pray venture through the humble Door;
' And though your Entertainment's poor,
' With me you shall be sure to find
' An open Heart and honest Mind;
' And that is a Dainty seldom found
' On Cedar Flowers and City Ground.
Thus far the Sow had preached by rule,
She preached, alas! but to a Fool;
For this same Peacock (you must know)
Had he been Man, had been a Beau:
And had (like them) but mighty little
To say: So squirted out his Spittle.
And with an Air that testified,
He Would got at least his share of Pride,
He thus began: 'Why, truly now,
' You're very civil Mrs. Sow:
' But I am very clean, do you see?
' Your Sty is not a Place for me.
' Should I go through that narrow Door,
' My Feathers might be soiled or tore;
' Or scented with unsav'ry Fumes:
' And what am I without my Plumes?
The much offended Sow replies,
(And turns a-squint her narrow Eyes)
' Sir, you're incorrigibly vain,
' To value thus a shining Train;
' For when the northern Wind shall blow,
' And send us Hail, and Sleet, and Snow;
' How will you save from such keen Weathers
' Your Merit? -- Sir, I mean your Feathers:
' As for myself: -- to think that I
' Should lead an Idiot to my Sty,
' Or strive to make an Oaf my Friend,
' It makes my Bristles stand an end:
' But for the future when I see
' A Bird that much resembles thee,
' I Will ever take it as a Rule,
' The shining Case contains a Fool.
FLORIMELIA, the First PASTORAL.
By Mr. NEWTON.
OF Florimelia and her Charms I sing,
Fair as the Blossoms of the smiling Spring;
Whose lovely Temples wore a Myrtle Wreath,
That served to shade her glowing Cheeks beneath:
How would that Brow, which never knew to frown,
Become the Splendour of an awful Crown;
For, by the luster of her shining Eyes,
You Would take her for an Empress in disguise:
Those graceful Limbs though clad in humble Green,
Would suit a Princess, nor disgrace a Queen:
Yet a plain Crook adorned her snowy Hands,
Fair as the Fleeces of her tender Lambs:
Her Task it was, those tender Lambs to lead,
Over the tall Mountain on the fertile Mead:
Where the clear Fountains gently murmur by,
And sounding Grottos to her Flute reply:
Her Flute and Song delude the tedious Day,
And her soft Hours calmly glide away.
In Smiles the Fair One viewed the rising Sun,
In Smiles beheld him when his Race was done:
And when his Beams had bid the Fields adieu,
And the damp Meadows shone with pearly Dew;
Pent in their Fold she leaves her wanton Care,
And to her home returns the happy Fair:
'Twas a low Cottage, humble as their Fate,
Where an old Father met her at the Gate:
This Hind was called Asophus of the Plain,
A Name much valued by each honest Swain:
On whose grave Brow were seen the Marks of Time,
No more his Cheeks confessed their healthy Prime:
Dim were his Eyes: Those Eye Balls that had seen
Full fourscore Springs arrayed in sprightly Green:
Child of his Age was Florimel the Fair;
And she alone his Comfort and his Care.
Their little House was placed beneath a Hill,
Whose Verge was watered by a streaming Rill:
The Stranger here no gilded Spires saw,
For this low Roof was thatched with humble Straw;
Mosaic here nor Fret-work there was none,
Nor Venice Glass to sparkle in the Sun:
Its only Window was of Osier made,
Full South it looked and seldom knew the Shade,
Where by the Sun this careful Peasant knew,
How over his Head the swift-wing'd Minutes flew;
A little Orchard too was planted nigh,
And the cool River rolled its Waters by:
In whose clear Stream the pendent Willows lave,
And the weak Bullrush trembled over the Wave:
Within the Banks soft Watercresses spring,
Where the pleased Heron prunes her dabbled Wing.
Thus dwelt Asophus -- happier far than he
Whose Slaves approach him with a bending Knee;
His willing Eyelids in soft Slumbers close,
No midnight Revels break his loved Repose;
No dark Intrigue for open Vengeance calls,
Nor Envy dwelt within his peaceful Walls:
But his calm Days in one smooth Circle run;
He blessed the rising and declining Sun,
A Stranger both to Sickness and to Sin:
'Twas Health without and Happiness within,
While by his Side his Florimelia sung,
And his fond Soul upon her Music hung:
Like him no Parent loved his darling Care,
No Child like her so duteous and so fair:
Him with crumb'd Milk both Morn and Eve she fed,
And smoothed the Pillows for his weary Head:
With her his Moments gently glide away,
Who dressed in Smiles the Evening and the Day.
Hear this, ye great Ones, whose unwieldy Store
Is still embitter'd with a Wish for more;
Who strive to climb on Fortune's slippery Hill,
And swallow Ruin in a golden Pill.
But learn from hence that Happiness can dwell,
With a plain Peasant in his humble Cell:
She loves the Village and the harmless Hind,
With a clear Conscience and a cheerful Mind;
And the gay Wantons vainly search around,
For Bliss which only is with Virtue found.
FLORIMELIA, the Second PASTORAL.
By Mr. NEWTON,
AS Florimelia watched her snowy Fold,
Soft Florimelia with her Locks of Gold,
Low in a Vale beneath a spreading Shade,
Two ruddy Youths that loved the beauteous Maid,
To please the Fair thus formed the rival Song,
While the Herds listened to each tuneful Tongue.
PHILASTER. This Morn I wandered through a poplar Grove,
Where a lone Turtle mourned her absent Love;
With pensive Coo she well expressed her Woe,
Lulled by her Voice the Brooks more gently flow;
When lo the Partner of her Nest drew nigh
With hovering Wings: And bid her Sorrows fly.
All sprightly now with brisker Note she sings,
Prunes her soft Breast, and spreads her joyful Wings.
No more the Grove is Witness to her Woe,
Such are the Joys that faithful Lovers know.

CHROMIS. As yester'-even, while my Sheep did feed
On a soft Bank, I tuned my Oaten Reed;
'Twas there a single Violet I spied,
That breathed its Odours, drooped its Head, and died;
When from the Root a gay Companion grew,
Fair as the first and fresh as Morning Dew:
Whose fragrant Leaves perfumed the bord'ring Plain;
Then did the first its former Beauties gain,
Pleased with each other side by side they grow,
Such are the Joys that faithful Lovers know.

PHILASTER. As sweet as was the Violet is my Love.

CHROMIS. And I as constant as the Turtle-Dove.

PHILASTER. Soft are the Murmurs of a southern Wind,
And the Complainings of a lovesick Mind;
Soft are the Breathings of an Infant's Sleep,
But she is softer than her harmless Sheep.

CHROMIS. Sweet are the Gales that meet the rosy Morn,
Sweet are the Flowers that yonder Meads adorn;
Sweet are the Banks on which my Lambkins play,
But my loved Nymph is sweet as early Day.

PHILASTER. Where walks my Love -- there opening Roses bloom,
And yellow Cowslips shed a choice Perfume;
When she is gone the opening Roses fade,
The Sun himself laments the absent Maid.

CHROMIS. When smiles my Love, then smile the Groves below;
And the clear Skies with brighter Luster glow:
But when she frowns, those Groves are glad no more,
And the Sky lowers that was bright before.

PHILASTER. While we prefer the Spring to Winter Storms,
Or goodly Cedars to unseemly Thorns;
While Maples keep below the lofty Pine,
Shall my loved Nymph before her Sisters shine?

CHROMIS. As we prefer the Peacock to the Crow,
As Maidens fairer than their Mothers show;
And as my Voice above Philaster swells,
So my loved Nymph each other Nymph excels.

PHILASTER. You sung last Night with more melodious Air,
As you lay plaiting Cloe's yellow Hair;
While the shrill Pipe her slender Fingers plied,
The Pipe you gave her, and your Heart beside.

CHROMIS. 'Twas you I saw beneath a maple Shade;
With blubbered Cheeks you cursed the cruel Maid,
Who broke your Cypress Bowl on yonder Plain,
And sent the Willow to her slighted Swain.

PHILASTER. 'Tell me at midnight where do Mandrakes groan,
And Blood fall dropping from the darkened Moon:
Tell this, and I shall for thy Learning yield,
A coal-black Lamb that sports in yonder Field.

CHROMIS. Tell me, where Oaks have tender Medlars bore,
And Shrubs yield Apples that were Crabs before;
And for thy Knowledge I shall not refuse
To give the best of all my speckled Ewes.

Thus sung the Shepherds while the listening Maid,
Praised both their Songs, and thus their Songs repaid;
Behold this lovely Pineapple, she cried;
And this Twin-chesnut once my chiefest Pride,
These long were mine, and these I give to you;
To both a Prize, a Prize to both is due.
Now nightly Vapors taint the colder Air,
They part the Flocks, and to the Folds repair;
And the black Clouds forbid their longer Stay,
Their Feet unwilling tread their destined Way
At once: Farewell too lovely Nymphs, they cry,
And on the Virgin cast a parting Eye.
CATHARINA's CAVE.
By Mr. NEWTON.
BENEATH a Mountain's solitary Shade
Lived Catharina, then an ancient Maid,
An useful Dame that every Simple knew,
And from choice Herbs exhaled a cordial Dew.
Rude was her Dome, and hid from prying Eyes,
By lofty Hills that seemed to reach the Skies;
Deep in a Rock the winding Cavern run,
A bending Cypress skreen'd it from the Sun:
From its rude Side a Fountain used to flow,
That poured incessant on the Stones below:
This Music lulled the pensive Dame to Rest,
And drew soft Slumbers on her aching Breast:
No Sun was there, nor scarce a dawning Gleam,
No twinkling Stars, nor Cynthia's silver Beam.
There naked Elms and sapless Oaks appeared,
With Age grown rotten, and by Lightning seared;
There perched the Raven and the gray-ey'd Owl,
With his wise Visage and his serious Scowl;
No Flowerets there bedeck the mossy Ground,
But a thick Forest spread its Shade around,
Where the smooth Box and browner Hasel grew,
The solemn Pine Tree and the baleful Yew:
Here no glad Sound was heard nor human Tongue,
Not Colin's Flute nor Blouzelinda's Song:
These gloomy Shades for Grief were only made,
And howling Wolves that scamper'd through the Glade.
Here Catharina spent her irksom Days,
Secluded both from Envy and from Praise.
Not so her laughing Moments used to run,
When her bright Eyes were like a Morning Sun:
When to her Flock repaired the gazing Swains,
Her Flock was then the fairest of the Plains:
And she no less -- with Veins of sprightly Blue,
And Cheeks like Roses wrapped in Morning Dew,
The Loves and Graces round her Features flew.
Her Mind was cheerful as the rising Day,
Mature as Summer and as April gay;
Yet Fate too soon eclipsed her early Joy,
She fell the Victim of the winged Boy,
The winged Boy that bears the fatal Darts:
Henceforth may Virgins better guard their Hearts.
'Twas Celadon, 'twas he that caused her Pain,
The fairest Shepherd of the rural Train;
Whose careless Beauty made her Heart his Prize,
And stole the Slumbers from her wakeful Eyes.
Long time her Pride and cooler Reason strove
Against the Power of encroaching Love,
In vain -- her Cheeks and mournful Eyes declare
The smothered Passion and the secret Care,
While the dull Youth, whom Beauty never could please,
Who sought no more than Indolence and Ease,
Ranged over the Valleys with his darling Tray,
Or near some Fountain slumber'd out the Day:
All Nymphs he strove (but mostly her) to shun,
And to thick Shades and distant Pastures run:
There the soft Flute his nimble Fingers plied,
While his loved Dog sat listening by his Side.
Then wept the Fair with Grief and Rage oppressed;
Strange Passions labored in her pensive Breast;
She lost her Crook -- her Flocks no more were told,
And her Lambs wandered from their nightly Fold,
Till to these Shades she took her desperate Way,
And vowed no more to see the Beams of Day:
Here the gay Roses on her Cheek expired,
And from her Eyes the laughing Loves retired:
No flowery Wreaths her faded Temples knew,
Her Locks uncomb'd upon her Shoulders flew;
No silken Vestments on her Limbs were rolled,
A russet Mantle saved her from the Cold;
A simple Cordage round her Waste she tied,
And a rude Staff her better Hand supplied.
Here learned the Dame the Physic of the Field,
And what the Woods and what the Mountains yield
Of sovereign Balm, to heal a rankling Wound,
Or ripen Swellings where no Sores are found;
To strengthen Sinews, and Catarrhs expel,
And none for Colicks could her Art excel.
With magic Herbs she drew out fest'ring Thorns;
Her Charms could banish Toothache, Cramps, and Corns.
To her repaired from all the neighboring Plains,
The sickly Matrons and the wounded Swains:
Nor to one Species was her Art confined;
Her Skill was known amongst the fleecy Kind,
Her Cordials strengthened the declining Ewe,
And limping Calves her healing Plasters knew.
The ENQUIRY.
IN vain, alas! (do lazy Mortals cry)
In vain would Wisdom trace the boundless Sky,
Where doubled Wonders upon Wonders rise,
And Worlds on Worlds confound our dazzl'd Eyes:
Better be still -- Let Nature rest, say they,
Than err by Guess and with Opinion stray:
Then tell me, why our Eyes were made to view
Those Orbs that glister in the fluid Blue?
Why in our Sight those shining Wonders roll?
Or why to Man was given a thinking Soul?
May I not ask how moves the radiant Sun?
How the bright Stars their pointed Circuits run?
What warms those Worlds that so remotely shine?
And what can temper Saturn's frozen Clime?
Who that beholds the full-orb'd Moon arise,
That cheerful Empress of the nightly Skies;
Who would not ask (could learned Sages tell)
What kind of People on her Surface dwell?
But there we pause -- Not Newton's Art can show
A Truth, perhaps, not fit for us to know.
How great the Power, who gave those Worlds to roll;
The Thought strikes inward, and confounds the Soul;
Fall down, O Man -- Ah fall before the Rod
Of this Almighty, All-creating God:
But hark -- from Heaven there came a chearing Sound;
Now Man revives, and smile the Worlds around:
It Is Mercy -- lo a golden Ray descends,
And Hope and Comfort in the Luster blends.
When from the Stars we turn our aching Eyes,
To Earth we bend them where new Wonders rise;
Where Life and Death the equal Scale suspend,
New Beings rising as the former end.
Who not surprised can trace each just Degree
From the swift Eagle to the peevish Be;
From the fierce Lion that will yield to none,
To the weak Mouse that hides her from the Sun!
How near one Species to the next is joined,
The due Gradations please a thinking Mind;
And there are Creatures which no Eye can see,
That for a Moment live and breathe like me:
Whom a small Fly in bulk as far exceeds,
As you tall Cedar does the waving Reeds:
These we can reach -- and may we not suppose
There still are Creatures more minute than those.
Would Heaven permit, and might our Organs bear
To pierce where Comets wave their blazing Hair:
Where other Suns alternate set and rise,
And other Moons light up the cheerful Skies:
The ravished Soul might still her Search pursue,
Still find new Wonders opening on her view:
From thence to Worlds in Miniature descend,
And still press forward, but should find no End:
Where little Forests on a Leaf appear,
And Drops of Dew are mighty Oceans there:
These may have Whales that in their Waters play,
And wanton out their Age of half a Day:
In those small Groves the smaller Birds may sing,
And share like us their Winter and their Spring.
Pluck off you Acorn from its Parent Bough,
Divide that Acorn in the midst -- and now
In its firm Kernel a fair Oak is seen
With spreading Branches of a sprightly Green:
From this young Tree a Kernel might we rend,
There would another its small Boughs extend.
All Matter lives, and shows its Maker's Power;
There Is not a Seed but what contains a Flower:
Though unobserved its secret Beauty lies,
Till we are blessed with Microscopick Eyes.
When for blue Plumbs our longing Palate calls,
Or scarlet Cherries that adorn the Walls;
With each plump Fruit we swallow down a Tree,
And so destroy whole Groves that else would be
As large and perfect as those Shades we see.
Behold you Monster that unwieldly laves
Beneath the Surface of the briny Waves:
Still as he turns, the troubled Sea divides;
And rolls in Eddies from his slimy Sides.
Less huge the Dolphin to the Sun displays
His Scales, and in the smoother Ocean plays:
Still less the Herring and round Mackrel sweep
The shallow Tide, nor trust the roaring Deep:
How far by gradual numberless Degrees,
The senseless Oyster is removed from these.
Who follows Nature through her mazy Way,
From the mute Insect to the Fount of Day,
(Where now she rises, now her Steps decline)
Has need of Judgment better taught than mine:
But on this Subject we have talked too long,
Where grave-fac'd Wisdom may itself be wrong.
The RIVAL BROTHERS.
CELIA and I, to share the vernal Gales,
One Evening wandered over the dewy Vales;
Still was the Soul, and every Sense was pleased,
And the cool Heart from Care and Business eased:
Arm locked in Arm with heedless Steps we rove,
Round the fair Borders of a blooming Grove;
Reclined at ease within the secret Shades,
A lovely Bower held two fairer Maids,
Soft Flavia one, with Cheeks of rosy Dye,
And Sylvia famous for her star-like Eye.
Sylvia, whose Wit was versed in charming Wiles,
Who often varied her Discourse with Smiles:
Love-tales she told, some fictious and some true,
The Subject various and her Stories new;
Of Innocence oppressed by mightier Wrong,
And many Proofs she drew from sacred Song:
When Flavia thus -- behold the lingering Day
Still paints you Heavens with a silver Gray;
And slothful Night with gentler Pace comes on,
As if she listened to thy charming Tongue:
The Rival Brothers, let my Sylvia tell,
How cross they loved, and who untimely fell:
Her Friend replied, You shall not ask in vain,
Although the Story gives thy Sylvia Pain:
Then on her Cheek her ivory Hand she laid,
And with a Sigh began the lovely Maid.
Long time before our Fathers Lives began,
There lived an ancient and a worthy Man,
Was long the Favorite of indulgent Fame;
For Wretches knew and blessed Clytiphon's Name,
Just without Pride, without Reluctance kind;
For inborn Goodness with soft Pity joined,
To form the Basis of his godlike Mind.
His temperate Soul was never disturbed with Rage,
But graceful bore the reverend Weight of Age:
All bounteous Heaven had to his share consigned:
A moderate Fortune with a peaceful Mind:
His Dwelling seated on a rising Hill,
Was watered round with many a crystal Rill:
Gardens and Groves the smothered Buildings screen,
Which looked the Seat of some retired Queen.
Cythania tossed of the admiring Land,
The fairest Virgin of the shining Band,
Did to Clytiphon's Honor trust her Charms,
And gave her Beauties to his faithful Arms:
But cruel Death, whose Business is to rend
The pale-ey'd Matron from her weeping Friend,
Had torn Cythania from his widowed Side,
And left her Spouse to wail his constant Bride:
Heaven spared one Child to crown his feeble Age,
To cheer his Spirits and his Grief assuage:
Sophinia precious to her Father's Mind,
To her alone was every Wish confined:
Nor did the Virgin less deserve his Care,
Her guiltless Soul was like her Person fair;
For Heaven to form this matchless Beauty joined
Her Mother's Features to her Father's Mind;
Not opening Roses nor the bashful Day,
Blushed half so sweetly as Sophinia gay:
Her Eyes were dazzling and her Temples fair,
And every Feature wore a smiling Air;
For Wit and Learning she out-strip'd her Kind,
Nor could her Sex debase her noble Mind;
In search of Knowledge she would spend the Day,
And Judgment walked before her guiltless Way.
Not many Furlongs from those blissful Plains,
Where good Clytiphon ruled the happy Swains,
There lived a wealthy and a worthy Peer,
Loved by his Friends and to his Country dear;
Laon the great in Valor justly famed,
His Sons Lycander and Polyphon named,
Both noble Youths and by their Friends admired,
And Thirst of Glory both their Hearts inspired:
Lycander's Form was fairer than his Mind;
His Shape was faultless and his Brow sublime,
His jetty Locks in mazy Ringlets run,
And his bright Eyes were like a Morning Sun:
Rays quick and fierce their subtle Lightenings fling,
His Cheeks were fresher than the dawning Spring;
But then as Tempests over the Ocean roll,
Continual Passion tore his boiling Soul;
Disdainful, proud, with an imperious Will,
Headlong he rushed on unsuspected Ill:
Reason in vain opposed her sacred Shield,
And Virtue's self must to the Whirlwind yield:
Polyphon's Soul was of a gentler Kind,
No rugged Storms could shake his easy Mind,
Still calm and pleasant as the Evening Skies:
When not a Breeze through the still Region flies,
No gloomy Frowns a sullen Heart betray,
His Brow was thoughtless and his Air was gay:
These to Clytiphon's did their Sire attend,
The pleasing Mansion of their Father's Friend,
With Lovers Eyes they both Sophinia view,
As with her Years her rising Beauty grew,
With airy Hopes they nursed the rival Flame,
And sought with Gifts to win the smiling Dame;
But she too cautious to be soon betrayed,
Their Merit balanced, and their Tempers weighed:
Lycander's Fortune pleased the lovely Dame,
His Power, Titles and his rising Fame;
And the gay Maid beheld with early Pride,
Laon's bright Heir attending at her Side:
That way would often her Vanity incline,
But then her Reason feared his base Design:
Still at her Heart the sullen Doubt remains,
And put a Period to the golden Dreams:
Polyphon's Image on her Fancy stole
With thousand Beauties in his taintless Soul;
Clear as his Face and sprightly as his Mien;
Soft as his Voice, and like his Brow serene.
Polyphon now the wavering Nymph admires,
Nor thinks of Castles, Towns, and shining Spires;
Her changing Thoughts prefer an easy Home,
And dwell with Patience on a younger Son.
Lycander once her Favorite was, but now
He meets Resentment and a frozen Brow:
In vain to move the scornful Nymph he tries,
With sprightly Oaths and well dissembled Lies:
His Form no more can please Sophinia's Eyes.
Without Concern he met the Fair's Disdain,
Nor could her Frown disturb the haughty Swain:
Conscious of Merit he pursued her still,
And only thought her Tongue belied her Will:
For Impudence, to Vice a trusty Squire,
Who bears her Arms and fans her purple Fire,
Had taught Lycander, that Affairs of Love
Are not regarded in the Realms above;
That Oaths are licensed to address the Fair,
And Vows to Virgins but the Sport of Air;
That Maids are Merchandise, and may be sold
For charming Eloquence and mighty Gold.
II.
A Grove there was, a venerable Shade,
No hostile Iron durst her Boughs invade,
Whose lofty Pines for several Ages grew,
And reverend Oaks a hundred Winters knew:
A crystal River wandered halfway round,
The rest defended with a hasel Mound;
'Twas here to shun Lycander's jealous Eye,
When Sol departed to the western Sky;
The sly Sophinia used to leave her Maids,
And meet Polyphon in the balmy Shades;
While the proud Youth who found himself despised,
His Person slighted and Polyphon prized;
Grew wild with Love and desperate with Despair,
And vowed Destruction to the gentle Pair:
No quiet Hour his surly Spirit knows,
Nor Rest by Daylight or at Night Repose:
Cold to his Friends, and if they ask his Care,
He only answers with a fullen Glare.
One Evening when the sparkling Sun withdrew,
And thirsty Flowers sip'd the grateful Dew;
When this fair Grove had put on all her Charms,
And Zephyrs played amidst her curling Arms;
Sophinia weary of the sultry Day,
To the cool Forest took her lonely Way,
Attentive only to the Linnets Song,
No ill she thought of, and she feared no Wrong:
Pleased with the Glories of the smiling Year,
For guilty Minds are only taught to fear.
The well-known Path her willing Feet pursue
Through the brown Shade, where in the Center grew
A Row of Laurels crowned with lasting Green,
And softer Beech and flow'ring Rose between:
Here in a fatal Hour Sophinia came;
For proud Lycander watched the lovely Dame:
Revenge and Love at once his Bosom fire;
His broad Eyes flash with more than mortal Fire:
Then to his Friends the raging Hero flew,
His Friends a thoughtless and a wanton Crew,
Whose slothful Hands were backward, as their Will,
In Virtue's Cause, but resolute in Ill:
To these the Youth disclosed his rash Design,
His glad Companions in the Adventure join,
That some well practiced in the Ruffians Trade
Should bear Sophinia from the silent Shade:
The Mischief pleased, yet none proposed the Way,
Though short the Time and dangerous the Delay:
In still suspense the listening Heroes stand,
Till with rude Voice Miranthus thus began:
' A Castle has for many Centries stood,
' Within the Confines of the neigh'bring Wood,
' Whose gloomy Arches seem disposed to hide
' Offended Subjects from a Tyrant's Pride.
' And often she has lent her hostile Towers,
' The guilty Refuge of rebellious Powers:
' Here let your Friends this peevish Girl convey,
' And keep her secret from the Face of Day.
' Those Doors with iron Eloquence shall plead
' Your mighty Passion to the scornful Maid:
' You have what my unready Thought designed,
' The hasty Dictates of a rustic Mind,
' A Mind inured to Wars and rude Alarms,
' Unskilled in Love and Beauty's softer Charms:
He ceased -- Applause was seen in every Eye,
And Peals of Laughter rent the troubled Sky;
Two favorite Heroes singl'd from the Crew,
With hostile Feet that sacred Path pursue;
Whose winding Maze betrayed the smiling Bower,
That held Sophinia in a baneful Hour:
The heedless Virgin on a Bank they found,
Where the faint Primrose spreads her Odours round,
And nodding Poppies seemed to kiss the Ground.
With frighted Eyes the trembling fair One sees
Their surly Figures through the parting Trees;
But yet she rose collected in her Fear,
'Twas vain to call and no Assistance near:
Then from the Ground she raised her beauteous Eyes,
And weeping turned them on the pitying Skies:
Assist me Heaven and heavenly Power, she cries.
You Saints that hover round celestial Springs:
O take and wrap me in your sacred Wings,
I see black Violence come frowning on;
But may Lycander mourn the dear-bought Wrong;
Ah hear, Sophinia, in this fearful Hour;
And save, O save me from a Villain's Power.
But now a Slave whom Beauty never could charm,
Drew nigh and seized her by the ivory Arm:
Through untrod Paths they bore the struggling Maid
To those rude Towers where Lycander stayed,
A dismal Dwelling hid by waving Trees;
So thick they scarce admit the healthy Breeze,
On whose black Walls condensing Vapors hung,
Whose lofty Spires hardly knew the Sun:
His Beams never entered here, but in the Room
Perpetual Coldness and eternal Gloom:
Here the pleased Youth his charming Prey secures,
And round his Prisoner shut the plated Doors;
Then left the Virgin to herself, nor stayed
To bear Reproaches from the injured Maid:
Fierce as he was he, like a Coward, flies
The Rage that sparkl'd in her glowing Eyes;
But when he thought the dangerous Storm was over,
Again he sought those Eyes he fled before,
Like some pale Wretch impatient for his Doom,
His fearful Steps approached the hallowed Room:
For rising Conscience now her Task began,
And guilty Blushes through his Features ran:
Unusual Horrors over his Passage hung,
At every Step the sounding Portals rung:
Before the Door he took a silent Stand,
And the pale Taper trembled in his Hand:
A hollow Voice Lycander seemed to call,
And Shadows danced along the gloomy Wall:
His haughty Spirit was at this dismayed,
Lycander trembled, and was once afraid:
Why beats my Heart, my coward Heart, he cries;
And why this Mist before my dazzl'd Eyes?
Sophinia's mine, and I will seize my Store,
If thousand Specter guard the awful Door:
Then rushing in, the lovely Dame he found
In fullen Posture and in Thought profound;
The wonted Roses from her Cheeks were fled,
On her fair Hand reclined her beauteous Head:
With Flattery first he tip'd his artful Tongue,
And strove to palliate and excuse the Wrong:
Let not Sophinia, with a Smile he cries,
Think we have seized her as a hostile Prize;
The Fault we owe to this unconquered Flame,
Love was the Aggressor and be his the blame:
Trust not thy Reason to a haughty Guide,
Nor call that Honor which is only Pride:
Honor a pageant Mistress of the vain,
The Virgin's Tyrant and the Hero's Chain;
If sparkling Wealth can please thy brighter Eyes,
The Mines of Persia at thy Feet shall rise;
And when thy Chariot marks the dusty Fields,
Full thirty Slaves shall grace the shining Wheels:
For thee the East shall yield her spicy Bowers,
And sweeter Baths distill from weeping Flowers;
Then smile my fair One and be timely wise;
The Maid replied, and rolled her scornful Eyes.
Hence, fawning Traitor, why would thou be told,
How much I hate thy Person and thy Gold?
Mistaken Nature with too nice a Care,
In vain has shaped thee in a Mold so fair:
Vice will be Vice however it is polished over,
Thou Villain, dare to meet my Eyes no more.
Those gloomy Birds that love the midnight Air,
And hover round the Mansions of Despair;
When to their Shrieks the hollow Roofs rebound,
And the hoarse Raven aids the dreadful Sound;
Though howling Wolves should with their Voices join,
Are less offensive to my Ears than thine:
Beyond my Hate, if yet a Thought remain,
To make thy Spirit curse the galling Chain;
If with those Thorns that Love's soft Empire bounds,
Successful Rivals give the deepest Wounds:
I love thy Brother, and, if that can be,
With Passion equal to my Hate for thee.
She said -- And Rage possessed Lycander's Soul,
His pale Lips tremble and his Eye Balls roll:
Three times he raised a Dagger to her Breast,
But mighty Love his daring Hand suppressed;
And now shrill Cries invade his wondering Ears,
The noise of Battle and the clash of Spears;
Starting he turned, nor staid to make reply,
Though Fury sparkl'd in his threatening Eye:
To Arms his Friends in mingled Voices call,
And Danger hovered over the frowning Wall.
III.
In that sad Hour, when the frighted Maid
Was drawn by Villains from the mourning Shade,
Polyphon to the appointed Forest came;
He reached the Bower, but he missed the Dame;
Through balmy Paths with infant Roses bound,
Where blushing Daisies strew the painted Ground;
He roved, impatient of the Nymph's Delay,
And often doubted to return or stay:
By chance he turned his mournful Eye, and sees
His Friend Acanthus through the parting Trees:
The Youth drew nearer with an eager Pace
Amazement hovered on his boding Face;
And thus impatient to Polyphon said,
Where is Sophinia, where thy darling Maid,
This Evening restless, though I know not why,
When setting Phoebus stained the western Sky:
To these sweet Shades I took my heedless Way,
To share the Fragrance of declining Day:
Alone and pensive as I wandered here,
A Woman's Voice surprised my listening Ear;
To yon rude Towers I traced the sinking Sound,
Till the stilled Outcries were in distance drowned:
What think you now? I fear some threatening Ill
From headstrong Passion and imperious Will:
I fear Sophinia and yourself betrayed,
I know your Brother loves the beauteous Maid;
Then hear my Vow, the frantic Lover cries,
And turned his Eye Balls on the glimmering Skies:
Hear me, ye Powers whose sacred Hands sustain
These Worlds of Nature in a mighty Chain;
If my fierce Brother has presumed to bear,
And from her Bowers force my injured Fair,
These wakeful Eyelids shall no more be closed:
This Spirit rested, nor these Limbs reposed;
This vengeful Rapier shall be sheathed no more,
Till the rude Traitor shall his Prize restore:
He said, and raging left the gloomy Shade,
Full of Resentment for his injured Maid:
Acanthus summoned to a neighboring Plain
Their Friends a little, but a martial Train:
Twice twenty Youths their Gen'ral's Voice attend,
And share the Quarrel of their injured Friend.
Polyphon pleased to see the assembled Powers,
Led his small Squadron to the hostile Towers:
The frowning Portals well secured they found,
The gloomy Court with Centries guarded round;
Who spite of Reason and their Country's Laws,
Were drawn to combat in a guilty Cause:
The first of these Cyrenus, fair and young,
Whose curling Locks below his Shoulders hung,
Too rashly bold encountered hand to hand,
Fierce Polyarchus of Polyphon's Band:
The pointed Javelin sped beneath his Chin,
And streaming Purple stained his beauteous Skin:
His very Cheeks are washed with deeper Dies,
And lasting Slumber seals his swimming Eyes:
This piteous Sight enraged the vicious Train,
But mostly Iphis Brother of the slain;
Revenge, he cried, and hurled his deathful Dart:
It hissed along, but missed the Hero's Heart,
Despairing, raging, on the Youth he flew,
While down his Forehead rolled the sultry Dew:
Blows answer Blows, and round their Temples sing
The glancing Weapons, and the Bucklers ring:
Aloof they fight, or now in Circles wheeled,
Each thought to conquer; both disdain to yield,
Till Polyarchus with a side-way Blow
Transpierc'd the Liver of his heedless Foe:
He drew the Weapon from his tortured Side,
The gaping Wound disgorg'd a purple Tide:
His Eyes turned upward with a ghastly Roll,
Headlong he fell and sob'd away his Soul:
Now Joy transported the victorious Throng,
With Polyarchus all the Welkin rung:
Applause and Clamor shook the trembling Ground,
Lycander heard and cursed the hated Sound:
Grieved for his Friend he with the foremost pressed,
And all their Lances glitter round his Breast:
But the strong Shield their Points at distance holds,
Where two fair Eagles spread their Wings in Gold;
A weighty Spear his better Hand supplies,
And livid Lightenings sparkle in his Eyes.
Vinario first sustained the Warrior's Rage,
The beauteous Darling of his Father's Age;
His tender Arm the deadly Spear arrests,
And tore his Shoulder from his ivory Breast:
Too late his Friends to his Assistance run,
For his black Eyes no more behold the Sun.
Miranthus next did his bright Lance extend,
A blustering Soldier and Lycander's Friend:
Him Merias met, old Meriander's Heir,
The youthful Husband of Lycosia fair:
Now born untimely from his Father's Side,
His smiling Fortunes and his lovely Bride:
Just at his Hip the Steel an Entrance found,
And tore his Bowels with a ghastly Wound:
Back fell the Youth, his tinkling Arms reply;
Loud Shrieks and Clamours rend the frighted Sky:
Polyphon now with deadly Anguish stung,
His ready Javelin at the Victor flung:
The erring Weapon with a whistling Sound
Flew over his Head, and plough'd the distant Ground:
Enraged to see the bloodless Point descend,
And miss the Vengeance for his bleeding Friend;
His shining Eyes that did with Fury glow,
He turned, and thus defied the stronger Foe:
Hope not for Conquest, mighty Clown, he cries,
From thy stern Visage and gigantick Size:
A little Arm, if Heaven direct the Blow,
May send thee howling to the Shades below:
Slave, cries Miranthus with a stormy Glare,
Go, wash thy Face, and curl thy waving Hair,
Thy coward Heart belies thy daring Tongue;
He spoke and drove his weighty Spear along,
The failing Mischief on the Buckler sung:
Not so Polyphon sent his faithful Dart,
The speedy Vengeance reached the Hero's Heart;
Down fell the Knight, his clanging Arms rebound,
And his proud Soul came rushing through the Wound.
Lycander saw, but turned his Eyes away,
Where in the Dust the mighty Soldier lay;
Then like a Whirlwind rushed the Youth along,
And sought his Brother in the hostile Throng:
Polyphon's Spear his frantic Hand arrests,
And hurled the Weapon at its Owner's Breast;
The missive Death deceived his bloody Hand,
Its thirsty Point lay shivered in the Sand:
Suspense and Horror held the martial Crew,
And the sick Moon received a paler Hue:
The Stars retired from the hated Sight,
And wrapped their Glories in the Clouds of Night.
Polyphon cried, O stay thy hostile Arm,
The Name of Brother wears a potent Charm:
Our Mother did in Youth's fair Bloom expire,
And left us Infants to our tender Sire;
And till Sophinia blew this deadly Flame,
Our Fears were equal and our Hopes the same;
The same our Pleasures and the like our Woes;
We slept together and as fondly rose,
Then let, O let not murderous Rage divide
Our Hearts, but lay those threatening Arms aside:
Let ranc'rous Hate possess our Souls no more,
Thou to her Friends the beauteous Maid restore;
Then let her Voice our rival Cause decide,
And him she favors wed the smiling Bride:
He said; but Rage had stopped Lycander's Ears;
Base Slave, he cried, thou Child of puny Fears,
Not Laon's Son thy Soul disclaim her Race,
My Mother never produced a Thing so base,
Some fairy Elf or treacherous Nurse beguiled
My sleeping Parents of their lawful Child:
Then in his Place her dunghill Offspring laid,
And my young Brother to her Hut conveyed:
This was thy Mother coarser than her Fate,
And thou the Son of her plebeian Mate:
Here ceased the Youth; -- for Actions spoke the rest,
And hurled a Javelin at Polyphon's Breast:
His Shield received it with a smart Rebound,
The missive Weapon trembled on the Ground;
Now hand to hand the rival Youths engage,
Lycander burned with more than mortal Rage:
Black Fury rolled in each relentless Eye,
Both fought to conquer or resolved to die;
But now Lycander, though with Hate inspired,
By fits was fainting and by fits respir'd;
Polyphon's Sword a fatal Passage found,
Beneath his Arm a deep and ghastly Wound;
Stagg'ring he dropped and grasped the bloody Ground.
Yet as he lived, without a Groan he fell,
Nor drew a Sigh, but only cried, It Is well;
It Is well, my Fury with my Life shall end:
Farewell, my Brother and at last my Friend;
By our dear Parent see me quickly laid,
Be thine the Conquest, thine the beauteous Maid;
He paused, and then with feebler Accent cries,
My Friends, Farewell, and closed his swimming Eyes:
The mourning Victor bending over the slain,
Essayed to raise him, but essayed in vain:
His failing Arms resigned their feeble Hold,
And Drops of Horror from his Temples rolled:
From each cold Cheek the blushing Beauty flies,
And the Ground danced before his dazzl'd Eyes;
The weeping Youth, with friendly Force, divide
The gentle Mourner from his Brother's Side;
Then Friends and Foes united gather round,
And lift the bleeding Body from the Ground;
Some raise the drooping Head, and others pressed
Their careful Arms around his manly Breast;
Though with black Dust and hostile Crimson stained,
Its native Fierceness still the Face retained;
Back on his Shoulders fell his graceful Hair,
And the grand Features wore a scornful Air.
Now all too late the rash Adventure blame,
Pale Conquest sighed and loathed her hated Name;
From the black Towers their solemn Steps return,
And both the Victors and the Vanquished mourn.
The QUESTION.
Occasioned by a serious Admonition.
IS Mirth a Crime? Instruct me you that know;
Or should these Eyes with Tears eternal flow:
No (let ye Powers) let this Bosom find,
Life's one grand Comfort a contented Mind:
Preserve this Heart, and may it find no room
For pale Despondence or unpleasing Gloom:
Too well the Mischief and the Pangs we know
Of doubtful Musing and prophetic Woe.
But now these Evils for a Moment rest,
And brighter Visions please the quiet Breast,
Where sprightly Health its blessed Cordial pours,
And cheerful Thought deceives the gliding Hours:
Then let me smile, and trifle while I may,
Yet not from Virtue nor from Reason stray:
From hated Slander I would keep my Tongue;
My Heart from Envy, and from Guilt my Song:
Nature's large Volume with Attention read,
Its God acknowledge, and believe my Creed:
Through Weakness, not Impiety, offend;
But love my Parent, and esteem my Friend.
If (like the most) my undistinguished Days
Deserve not much of Censure or of Praise:
If my still Life, like subterraneous Streams,
Glides unobserved, nor tainted by Extremes,
Nor dreadful Crime has stained its early Page,
To hoard up Terrors for reflecting Age;
Let me enjoy the sweet Suspense of Woe,
When Heaven strikes me, I shall own the Blow:
Till then let me indulge one simple Hour,
Like the pleased Infant over a painted Flower:
Idly it is true: But guiltlesly the Time
Is spent in trifling with a harmless Rhyme.
Heroic Virtue asks a noble Mind,
A Judgment strong, and Passions well refined:
But if that Virtue's measured by the Will,
It Is surely something to abstain from Ill.
The SACRIFICE.
An EPISTLE to CELIA.
IF you, dear Celia, cannot bear,
The low Delights that others share:
If nothing will your Palate fit
But Learning, Eloquence, and Wit,
Why, you may sit alone (I ween)
'Till you're devoured with the Spleen:
But if Variety can please
With humble Scenes and careless Ease;
If Smiles can banish Melancholy,
Or Whimsy with its Parent Folly;
If any Joy in these there be,
I dare invite you down to me.
You know these little Roofs of mine
Are always sacred to the Nine;
This Day we make a Sacrifice
To the Parnassian Deities,
Which I am ordered by Apollo,
To show you in the Words that follow.
As first we purge the hallowed Room,
With soft Utensil called a Broom;
And next for you a Throne prepare,
Which vulgar Mortals call a Chair,
While Zephyrs from an Engine blow,
And bid the sparkling Cinders glow;
Then gather round the mounting Flames,
The Priestess and assembled Dames,
While some inferior Maid shall bring
Clear Water from the bubbling Spring:
Shut up in Vase of sable Dye,
Secure from each unhallowed Eye,
Fine wheaten Bread you next behold,
Like that which Homer sings of old,
And by some unpolluted Fair
It must be scorched with wondrous Care:
So far it is done: And now behold
The sacred Vessels -- not of Gold:
Of polished Earth must they be formed,
With Painting curiously adorned,
These Rites are past: And now must follow
The grand Libation to Apollo,
Of Juices drawn from magic Weeds,
And Pith of certain Indian Reeds.
For Flower of Milk the Priestess calls,
Her Voice re-echoes from the Walls;
With hers the sister Voices blend,
And with the odorous Steam ascend:
Each fair One now a Sibyl grows,
And every Cheek with Ardour glows,
And (though not quite beside their Wits)
Are seized with deep prophetic Fits,
Some by mysterious Figures show
That Celia loves a shallow Beau;
And some by Signs and Hints declare,
That Damon will not wed Ziphair:
Their Neighbors Fortunes each can tell,
So potent is the mighty Spell.
This is the Feast and this, my Friend,
Are you commanded to attend:
Yes at your Peril: But adieu,
I Have tired both myself and you.
The POWER of BEAUTY.
O GODDESS of eternal Smiles,
Bright Cythera the fair,
Who taught Sabina's pleasing Wiles,
By which she won Bellair.
Bellair, the witty and the vain,
Who laughed at Beauty's Power;
But now the conquered humble Swain
Adores a painted Flower.
With Delia's Art my Song inspire,
Whose Lips of rosy Hue
Can never the partial Audience tire,
Though wiser Claudia's do.
Though Claudia's Wit and Sense refined,
Flows easy from her Tongue;
Her Soul but coarsly is enshrined,
So Claudia's in the wrong.
Hark, Delia speaks -- that blooming Fair,
See Crowds are gathering round
With open Mouths: and wildly stare
To catch the empty Sound.
See Lelia with a Judgment clear,
With manly Wisdom blessed;
Wit, Learning, Prudence, all appear
In that unruffled Breast.
But yet no Beau for Lelia dies,
No Sonnets pave her way;
Say, Muse, from whence these Evils rise,
Why Lelia's Teeth decay.
Then, why do reverend Sages rail
At Woman's wanton Pride?
If Wisdom, Wit, and Prudence fail,
Let meaner Arts be tried.
Those Arts to please are only meant;
But with an angry Frown,
The Queen of Wisdom lately sent
This Proclamation down:
Minerva, with the azure Eyes,
And thus the Statute runs,
If you would have your Daughters wise,
Take care to mend your Sons.
The DEATH of ABEL.
WHEN from the Shade of Eden's blissful Bowers,
Its Fruit ambrosial and immortal Flowers,
Our general Mother (who too soon rebelled,)
Was, with the Partner of her Crime, expelled
To Fields less fruitful -- where the rugged Soil
With Thorns and Thistles often paid their Toil;
Where the pale Flowers soon lost their cheerful Hue,
And rushing Tempests over the Mountains flew:
Two Sons the Matron in her Exile bore,
Unlike in Feature but their Natures more;
The eldest Youth for Husbandry renowned,
Tore up the Surface of the steril Ground;
His nervous Arms for rugged Tasks were formed;
His Cheek but seldom with a Smile adorned;
Drops raised by Labor down his Temples run,
His Temples tarnish'd by the midday Sun,
Robust of Body, and of Soul severe,
Unknown to Pity, and the like to Fear.
Not so his Brother, cast in fairer Mold
Was he -- and softer than his fleecy Fold;
Fair were his Cheeks that blushed with rosy Dye,
Peace dwelt for ever in his cheerful Eye,
Nor Guilt, nor Rage his gentle Spirit knew;
Sweet were his Slumbers, for his Cares were few;
Those were to feed and watch the tender Lamb,
And seek fresh Pasture for its bleating Dam,
From burning Suns his thirsty Flocks to hide,
And seek the Vales where limpid Rivers glide.
'Twas ere rude Hands had reaped the waving Grain,
When Plenty triumphed on the fertile Plain,
That to the Center of a pleasant Down,
Where half was Pasture, half a plenteous Brown:
These Youths repaired both emulous of Fame,
And raised an Altar to Jehovah's Name,
With Heart elate and self-presuming Eye,
First to the Pile unhappy Cain drew nigh.
Choice was his Offering, yet no Sign appeared,
No Flame was seen, nor Voice celestial heard:
Astonished stood the late presumptuous Man,
Then came his Brother with a trembling Lamb;
His God accepts the Sacrifice sincere;
The Flames propitious round the Slain appear;
The curling Smoke ascended to the Skies:
This Cain beheld, and rolled his glowing Eyes.
Stung to the Soul, he with his frantic Hand
A Stone up-rooted from the yielding Sand,
Nor spoke -- for Rage had stopped his failing Tongue;
The heavy Death impetuous whirled along:
This Abel met -- his Heart received the Wound;
Amazed he fell, and grasped the bloody Ground.
The gentle Spirit sprung to endless Day,
And left behind her Case of beauteous Clay;
Pale stood the Brother -- to a Statue chilled,
A conscious Horror through his Bosom thrilled:
His frighted Eyes abhorred the Beams of Light,
And longed to find a never-ceasing Night.
Shocked at the Sight of Murder first begun,
Down the steep Heavens rolled the radiant Sun,
Old Night assuming her appointed Sway,
Stretched her black Mantle over the Face of Day:
Now for their Leader mourned the bleating Lambs,
That roved neglected by their pensive Dams;
The careful Parents search the Fields around;
They call -- the Woods roll back an empty Sound.
Within a Forest's solitary Gloom,
Slept gentle Abel in a secret Tomb,
And there (beneath a Cypress Shade reclined)
Cain breathed his Sorrows to the rushing Wind:
That in the Branches made a doleful Sound;
'Twas Silence else, and horrid Darkness round,
When lo! a sudden and a piercing Ray
O'er-spread the Forest with a Blaze of Day,
And then descended on the hallowed Ground,
A Seraph with empyreal Glory crowned:
Afflicted Cain (that knew not where to fly)
Gazed on the Vision with distracted Eye:
When thus the Angel -- Why these mournful Cries,
These loud Complaints that pierce the nightly Skies.
Lie not to Heaven, but directly say,
Where roves thy Brother, where does Abel stray.
He said -- and thus the guilty Wretch returned;
O sacred Guardian, I for Abel mourned:
I never beheld him since the Day began, --
But why this Visit to a simple Man?
Thus the Celestial -- Wretch, can thou presume,
Thy Brother's Blood may slumber in its Tomb:
Or thou may ward off Vengeance with a Lie,
And dare attempt deceiving God most high;
But now thy Doom, O wretched Mortal hear;
The fleeting Hours nor the rolling Year,
To thee nor Joy, nor cheerful Ease shall bring:
Alike to thee the Winter and the Spring,
Still vexed with Woe, thy heavy Days shall fly
Beneath a radiant or a gloomy Sky:
Cursed shall thou be amidst thy vagrant Band,
And cursed the Labors of thy guilty Hand:
He ceased -- But Cain all prostrate on the Ground,
Still in his Ears retained the dreadful Sound:
At length he rose, and trembling thus began;
This is too much -- too much for mortal Man:
The mighty Debt, O let me quickly pay,
And sweep me instant from the Beams of Day:
The yet unborn, that I am cursed, shall know,
And all shall hate me to augment the Blow:
Even my own Sons, if such are given to be
The Death of Abel, shall revenge on me:
Thus he to change the dreadful Sentence tried,
Thus the seraphick Messenger replied;
This Mark, O Cain, I fix upon thy Brow:
And thus by Heaven's mighty Monarch vow,
Who sheds thy Blood, that Criminal shall be
Cursed -- Sev'n times cursed, and wretched more than thee.
Thus be that Mortal who shall tear the Rod
Of scorching Vengeance from the Hand of God;
That Man may learn to fear the King of Kings:
He said -- and waving his immortal Wings,
That instant mingled with the starry Train,
And Darkness wrapped the silent Shades again.
JOB'S CURSE, and his APPEAL.
Taken out of Job, Chap. i, and xxxi.
LET not that Day in circling Moments run,
When first these Eyes beheld the odious Sun:
Let his gay Beams forsake the mourning Fields,
And starting backward roll his flaming Wheels;
Let sulphurous Hail descend in baneful Showers,
And horrid Darkness mix the jumbling Hours;
Let trembling Mortals gaze in vain for Light,
Cursed be the Day and doubly cursed the Night:
Thou my great Judge these Imprecations hear,
And rend her Minutes from the rolling Year;
To the sad Skies be every Star denied;
While scorching Plagues on quivering Meteors ride,
Let the black Air no melting Music know,
But ring with Horror and Complaints of Woe:
Through the grim Shade let grisly Terrors run,
And weeping Sorrows that abhor the Sun:
Let pale-ey'd Specter burst their yawning Tombs,
And dreadful Echos shake the hideous Gloom;
The lowering East pour down a lashing Storm;
Nor through her Gates admit the struggling Morn:
Let the dark Hours no lively breaking see,
Because they gave these ceaseless Tears to me.
As others have, alas! why could not I
Yield my short Being, and an Infant die?
Why was a Mother's Care indulged to me?
And why supported on her friendly Knee?
Why did I in her tender Bosom grow,
A fostered Subject of impending Woe?
Did friendly Death my marble Limbs enchain,
This bleeding Heart would know no smarting Pain;
Then lasting Sleep would seal my shaded Eyes,
Where frozen Pride and conquered Vengeance lies;
There weary Slaves forgotten Rest may find,
And injured Orphans leave their Tears behind;
Tyrannick Rage must in the Grave subside,
Where starving Wretches find their Wants supplyd,
Thrice happy Rest, O why to me denied!
Life still will hover round despairing Slaves,
Who slight her Favors, and would court their Graves;
Death gliding by us, shows his grizly Charms;
But the coy Phantom mocks our reaching Arms:
He flies the Dungeons of entreating Woe,
And strikes the Prosperous with unwelcome Blow:
To blooming Youth his partial Arrows fly,
Over withered Mendicants, that vainly try
To meet the fatal Shaft, and only wish to die.
When Darkness sits as Regent of the Skies,
And round my Bed redoubled Horrors rise,
Till Night grows hideous with my constant Cries:
My tortured Limbs with ceaseless Pangs are torn,
But yet I live to see returning Morn:
The piercing Sun thrusts in a spiteful Ray,
To wound my Eyelids with unwelcome Day.
Tyrannick Death, whom trembling Mortals flee,
The Prince of Ills to every Wretch but me,
Plays with the Torments of my struggling Heart,
And over my Bosom shakes his lingering Dart.
O! sacred Judge, when will thy Wrath be done?
Why do I live to scare the wondering Sun?
Let not thy Mercy spare my wounded Clay,
But strike and sweep me from offensive Day.
My Heart is vexed with consuming Fears,
And nourished only with continual Tears;
Close at my Heels pursue a meagre Train
Of pining Sickness and distorting Pain,
Pale-ey'd Confusion with dishivel'd Hair,
And wild Impatience leading on Despair.
Did I with Crimes profane my Days of Rest?
Did ever Presumption swell my rising Breast?
Did guilty Flame my tainted Soul surprise?
Or Snares of Beauty catch my wandering Eyes?
If ever Injustice swelled my spreading Lands,
If ever Oppression stained my guiltless Hands;
Then let my God his flaming Vengeance throw,
Renew my Plagues, and double every Woe.
Did ever my Servants of their Lord complain?
Did humble Rhetoric ever plead in vain?
In vain to me did helpless Widows cry?
Or at my Gate neglected Orphans lie?
No; their glad Eyes my plenteous Table knew,
And with my own the fostered Infants grew.
Was ever my Portals barred against the Poor?
Did not the Stranger bless my friendly Door?
Though cold and hungry in my Courts he mourned,
Joyful and full the smiling Wretch returned.
When every Good obeyed my lordly Will,
Did I by Fraud my glittering Coffers fill?
Did I by Fraud increase the tempting Store?
Or dote too fondly on the shining Ore?
Did restless Envy in my Bosom roll?
Or lurking Malice blot my tainted Soul?
No -- this fond Heart has bled for distant Woe,
And learned Compassion for a sinking Foe.
Did ever my Soul from its Creator run
To painted Idols, or the beaming Sun?
Or to the Moon my wavering Senses yield,
When her pale Rays adorned the glist'ring Field?
Yet stay, presumptuous Wretch, nor urge too far
Thy doubtful Sentence at the dreadful Bar:
What melting Rhet'rick, or what potent Friend,
At Heaven's Tribunal shall thy Cause defend?
Where smothered Evils, hid from mortal Eye,
Mature and open to Omniscience lie.
The TALE of CUSHI.
From II. Samuel, Chap. xviii.
HOW fares my Son? the trembling Monarch cried,
Why would thou ask? afflicted Cush replied;
A Fate like his may all that hate thee feel,
Whose Blood, alas! has stained the guilty Steel.
He fell beneath the Hand of David's Friend,
But to my Story let my Lord attend.
When the pale Morning showed her languid Face,
And the dim Sun began his usual Race;
Whose sullen Orb received a crimson Dye,
And Tempests hovered in the frowning Sky,
As though the Heavens wept a Mortal's Fate,
And Nature trembled at domestic Hate;
Within the Shade of Ephraim's dusky Wood,
In just Array the meeting Armies stood;
The frowning Hosts with equal Fury glow,
And each to Death defied his meeting Foe;
All tender Thoughts were lost in horrid Rage,
And with a Shout the charging Hosts engage:
Then Clouds of Arrows hide the darkened Sky,
And hissing Lances lighten as they fly:
Dreadful the Sight and horrid was the Cry.
Here groaned a Steed that felt its smarting Wound,
And there a Soldier pinioned to the Ground:
At length, proud Israel began to fail,
Our juster Cause could over their Strength prevail;
The vanquished Army raised a fearful Cry,
And through the Wood their mighty Numbers fly;
There horrid Brambles tore their Wounds anew,
And thousand Deaths their flying Heels pursue:
Then raged our General through the dreadful Gloom,
Pale Terror hovered on his waving Plume;
From his known Spear the shrieking Numbers run,
And from his Fury fled your conquered Son;
Grim Danger urged him on with fatal Speed,
And through black Shades he lashed the weary Steed:
In the dark Center of this Forest stood
A lofty Oak, which overlooked the Wood.
Through its thick Arms he ventured careless in,
They springing caught him by the beauteous Chin;
His curling Locks among the Branches flew;
His Spirit fails him, and his Foes pursue;
Around in vain he cast a mournful Eye,
And wished a Friend; for none, alas! was nigh:
But hostile Shouts invade his frighted Ears,
And soon beneath him shone a Grove of Spears:
Now, Traitor, fall -- our mighty Leader cries:
(While glowing Vengeance sparkl'd in his Eyes)
Then stepped a Captain of the loyal Band,
And vainly strove to stay his fatal Hand.
That cruel Arm impelled the flying Dart,
And the keen Weapon sunk within his Heart:
Then those fair Cheeks resigned their rosy Dye,
Yet Life a Moment struggled in his Eye;
As from so fair a Mansion loath to fly,
Till the red Torrent stained his throbbing Tide;
Then with a Groan the beauteous Rebel died.
Hold, -- "stop thy Story," -- cries the weeping King,
Thy horrid Tale has left a mortal Sting;
My Soul though practiced in the Paths of Woe,
Grows sick and staggers at this mighty Blow:
From its cold Fountain Life forgets to run;
Oh Absalom -- Oh Absalom, my Son,
Eternal Shade has sealed thy cheerful Eyes;
And on the Ground thy breathless Beauty lies:
Cursed be the Hand that all my Hopes beguiled,
And left a Parent to lament his Child:
Without a Tear let none his Story tell,
But curse the Forest where my Darling fell:
While these wan Eyes with lasting Sorrows run,
Lost to the World, and Strangers to the Sun;
Let milder Songs attend his noontide Ray,
For mine will best become the closing Day,
While round my Lyre afflicted Fathers throng,
And Orphans listen to the mournful Song.
PROSERPINE'S RAGOUT.
AS once grave Pluto drove his royal Wheels,
Over the large Confines of the Stygian Fields:
With kingly Port he sat, and by his Side,
Rode his fair Captive, now his awful Bride;
But from the Lakes a sulfurous Mist invades,
And strikes the fainting Empress of the Shades.
The trembling Queen is seized with sickly Yawns,
With griping Colicks and with feverish Qualms.
Back to the Palace was the general Cry,
Before the Lash her sable Coursers fly:
There rests the Dame, and sought her Royal Bed,
Where the soft Pillows raised her drooping Head:
Restoring Lenitives were sought in vain,
To cool her Vitals and assuage her Pain.
On nothing would the peevish Matron feed;
Then useful Mercury was called with speed,
And sent on Earth some curious Dish to frame,
Of light Digestion for the sickly Dame.
To Earth he posted where he quickly found,
Proper Ingredients on our fertile Ground;
Here first he seized as nonsubstantial Foods,
The Courtiers Friendship and the Zeal of Prudes;
The Sighs of Widowers, and blends with those
The Vows of Lovers and the Brains of Beaux;
The Miser's Charity, the Drunkard's Cares;
The Wealth of Poets, and the Tears of Heirs;
Philander's Patience, when his Lord denies
The Frowns of Celia, when her Heart complies:
Then with a Breath along the Air he drives
The Love of Husbands, and the Charms of Wives;
Where Trifles dwell sagacious Hermes knew,
The winged Youth to lordly Senates flew;
From thence Debates and long Harangues to cull,
And steeped them softly in a Statesman's Skull.
And now the frothy Dish began to seem,
A proper Viand for his sickly Queen:
To crown the rest, he met by lucky Chance
The Wit of England, and the Truth of France.
The CHARMS of ANTHONY.
YE Swains, attend; let every Nymph be near;
Be still, ye Rivers, that the Swains may hear:
Ye Winds, be calm, and brush with softer Wing;
We mean the Charms of Anthony to sing;
See all around the listening Shepherds throng;
O help, ye Sisters of immortal Song.
LUCY. Sing, Phebe, sing what Shepherd rules the Plain,
Young Colin's Envy, and Aminda's Pain:
Whom none can rival when he mows the Field,
And to whose Flute the Nightingale must yield.

PHEBE. It Is Anthony -- it is he deserves the Lay,
As mild as Evening, and as Morning gay;
Not the fresh Blooms on yonder Codling-tree,
Nor the white Hawthorn half so fair as he;
Nor the young Daisy dressed in Morning Dew;
Nor the Pea Blossom wears a brighter Hue.

LUCY. None knows like him to strew the wheaten Grain,
Or drive the Plough-share over the fertile Plain;
To raise the Sheaves, or reap the waving Corn,
Or mow brown Stubble in the early Morn.

PHEBE. How mild the Youth, when on a sultry Day
In yonder Vale we turned the fragrant Hay:
How on his Voice the listening Shepherds hung,
Not tuneful Stella half so sweetly sung.

LUCY. Whether he binds the Sheaf in twisted Band,
Or turns the Pitch-fork on his nimble Hand;
He Is sure to win a Glance from every Eye,
While clumsy Colin stands neglected by.

PHEBE. His curling Locks by far more lovely show,
Than the white Wig on Squire Fopling's Brow;
And when the Shepherd on a rainy Day,
Weaves for his Hat a Wisp of flowery Hay,
The scarlet Feather not so gay appears,
Which on his Crown Sir Ambrose Fino wears.

LUCY. For Anthony Meriah leaves her Cow,
And stands to gape at him upon the Mow:
While he (for who but must that Wench despise?)
Throws Straws and Cobwebs on her staring Eyes.

PHEBE. To the Backdoor I saw proud Lydia hie,
To see the Team with Anthony go by;
He slily laughed, and turned him from the Door,
I thought the Damsel would have spoke no more.

LUCY. Me once he met, 'twas when from yonder Vale,
Each Morn I brought the heavy milking Pail:
He took it from my Head, and with a Smile
Reached out his Hand, and helped me over the Style.

PHEBE. As I was dancing late amongst the Crew,
A yellow Pippin over my Head he threw:
Sue bit her Lips, and Barbaretta frowned;
And Phillis looked as though she would have swoon'd.

Thus sung the Maids till Colinet came by,
And Rodrigo from weeding of the Rye;
Each took his Lass, and sped 'em to the Town,
To drink cool Cider at the Hare and Hound:
The Damsels simper like the sparkling Beer,
And Colin shines till Anthony is near.
On the Death of a justly admired AUTHOR.
WHEN pale-ey'd Winter rules the mourning Fields,
And shivering Nature to his Scepter yields,
Dejected Earth is stripped of all her Pride,
And sculking Flowers in her Bosom hide;
Through naked Groves afflicted Warblers fly,
And Storms of Hail come rattling through the Sky:
But when soft April lifts her downy Wing,
And calls the blushing Infants of the Spring,
The verdant Groves their wonted Charms regain,
And laughing Nature paints the gaudy Plain;
Sweet-scented Vi'lets take their usual Blue,
And the fair Primrose drinks the Morning Dew;
Again revive their Beauty and their Smell,
But Man once blasted takes a long Farewell.
Ah silly Muse! thy fond Complaints give over,
Departed Sylvius shall return no more:
No Charms of Verse can win the heavenly Mind,
Back to the slighted Case she left behind;
Not though each Line should make our Bosoms glow,
Like his grand Numbers, and as sweetly flow.
His Name shall last to warm a distant Age,
Nor want the Assistance of a Title Page;
For his bright Lines are by their Luster known,
Even Homer shines with Beauties not his own:
Unpolished Souls, like Codrus or like mine,
Filled with Ideas that but dimly shine,
Read over the Charms of his instructive Pen,
And taste of Raptures never known till then.
Ill Nature listened, and approved the Song;
And blushing Envy checked her burning Tongue:
Happy are those, though Grief their Hours attend,
Whom once he honored with the Name of Friend;
Whose pleasing Thoughts at least may ponder over
The smiling Days, that shall return no more:
Even we condemned at distance to admire,
Bewail the Hopes that with our Guide expire:
Ah! who shall now our rustic Thoughts refine,
And to grave Sense and solid Learning join
Wit ever sparkling, and the Sweets of Rhyme?
Farewell, ye Themes, which none but he can sing,
And sylvan Scenes that wear eternal Spring;
Fair Nymphs, that in his fairer Paintings glow,
And ye smooth Lines that Sylvius taught to flow:
But hush, sad Muse, thy dull Complaint give over:
Hence sigh in secret, and his Loss deplore,
Who never, O never, shall grace our Regious more.
An EPITAPH.
NOW triumph, Death, for here lies slain
More worth than Crowns can buy:
Celestial Zephyrs, waft her Soul
Back to its native Sky.
Who now shall charm, where Flavia once
Her cheerful Smiles bestowed?
When pleasing Candor swelled her Breast,
And in her Aspect glowed:
Now to that Heaven, where Virtue shines
With an eternal Blaze,
Her lofty Soul has winged its Flight,
And left this earthly Maze.
So from the smiling Infant's Hand
We force the costly Gem,
Which he, not knowing how to prize,
Might to the Dust condemn.
On WINTER.
WHAT Pictures now shall wanton Fancy bring?
Or how the Muse to Artemisia sing?
Now shivering Nature mourns her ravished Charms,
And sinks supine in Winter's frozen Arms.
No gaudy Banks delight the ravished Eye,
But northern Breezes whistle through the Sky.
No joyful Choirs hail the rising Day,
But the froze Crystal wraps the leafless Spray:
Brown look the Meadows, that were late so fine,
And cap'd with Ice the distant Mountains shine;
The silent Linnet views the gloomy Sky,
Sculks to his Hawthorn, nor attempts to fly:
Then heavy Clouds send down the feathered Snow;
Through naked Trees the hollow Tempests blow;
The Shepherd sighs, but not his Sighs prevail;
To the soft Snow succeeds the rushing Hail;
And these white Prospects soon resign their room
To melting Showers or unpleasing Gloom;
The Nymphs and Swains their aching Fingers blow,
Shun the cold Rains and bless the kinder Snow;
While the faint Travelers around them see,
Here Seas of Mud and there a leafless Tree:
No budding Leaves nor Honeysuckles gay,
No yellow Crow-foots paint the dirty Way;
The Lark sits mournful as afraid to rise,
And the sad Finch his softer Song denies.
Poor daggled Urs'la stalks from Cow to Cow,
Who to her Sighs return a mournful Low;
While their full Udders her broad Hands assail,
And her sharp Nose hangs dropping over the Pail.
With Garments trickling like a shallow Spring,
And his wet Locks all twisted in a String,
Afflicted Cymon waddles through the Mire,
And rails at Win'fred creeping over the Fire.
Say gentle Muses, say, is this a Time
To sport with Poesy and laugh in Rhyme;
While the chilled Blood, that has forgot to glide,
Steals through its Channels in a lazy Tide:
And how can Phoebus, who the Muse refines,
Smooth the dull Numbers when he seldom shines.
MIRA to OCTAVIA.
FAIR One, to you this Monitor I send;
Octavia, pardon your officious Friend:
You think your Conduct merits only Praise,
But out-lawed Poets censure whom they please:
Thus we begin -- your Servant has been told,
That you, (despising Settlements and Gold)
Determine Florio witty, young and gay,
To have and hold for ever and for ay;
And view that Person as your mortal Foe,
Who dares object against your charming Beau;
But now to furnish Meter for my Song,
Let us suppose Octavia may be wrong:
It Is true, you're lovely; yet the learned aver,
That even Beauties like the rest may err.
I know, to shun, you hold it as a Rule,
The arrant Coxcomb and the stupid Fool:
No such is Florio, he has Wit -- it is true,
Enough, Octavia, to impose on you:
Yet such a Wit you will, by Experience, find
Worse than a Fool that is complaisant and kind:
It only serves to gild his Vices over,
And teach his Malice how to wound the more.
I need not tell you, most ingenious Fair,
That hungry Mortals are not fed with Air,
But solid Food: And this voracious Clay
Asks Drink and Victuals more than once a Day:
Now could your Florio by his Wit inspire
The chilly Hearth, to blaze with lasting Fire:
Or when his Children round the Table throng,
By an Allusion or a sprightly Song,
Adorn the Board, in the twinkling of an Eye,
With a hot Pasty or a Warden Pie,
There might be Reason on Octavia's Side,
And not a Sage could blame the prudent Bride.
Yet (or some Authors often deal in Lies)
Lovers may live on Nuts and Blackberries;
For roving Knights bewildered in their way,
Who in black Forests half a Season stray;
Unless they find Provision on the Trees,
Must sup on Grass and breakfast on the Breeze.
But as you have long been used to nicer Fare,
Your Constitution would but hardly bear
Such Food as this: And therefore I advise
That you would consider (for you're mighty wise)
If sober Dusterandus would not make
A better Husband than your darling Rake,
Grave Dusterandus: He whose steadfast Mind
Is yet untainted, though not much refined;
Whose Soul never roves beyond his native Fields;
Nor asks for Joys but what his Pasture yields;
On Life's dull Cares with Patience can attend,
A gentle Master and a constant Friend;
Who in soft Quiet spends the guiltless Days,
His Servants blessing and his Neighbors praise:
Say, would you, in his happy Mansion, reign,
Toast of the Village and the rural Plain?
With honest Friends your cheerful Days beguile,
While Peace and Plenty on your Table smile:
Or cold and hungry writhe your tired Jaws,
And dine with Florio upon Hips and Haws,
In troth I think there is little room to pause.
In spite of all romantic Poets sing;
This Gold, my Dearest, is an useful thing:
Not that I Would have you hoard the precious Store,
For not a Wretch is like the Miser poor:
Enjoy your Fortune with a cheerful Mind,
And let the Blessing spread amongst the Kind:
But if there is none but Florio that will do,
Write Ballads both, and you may thrive -- Adieu.
The SETTING SUN.
To SILVIA.
SEE, Silvia, see the sparkling Lamp of Day;
From our fond Eyes he draws the trembling Ray:
The curling Clouds pursue his short'ning Beams,
And catch new Colors from the parting Gleams:
From marshy Vales unhealthy Fogs arise,
And gloomy Vapors fill the mourning Skies.
A creeping Mist o'erspreads the silent Field,
And drooping Flowers their Evening Incense yield.
On every Leaf the pearly Drops appear,
And Nature weeps an universal Tear.
So will it be when those fair Suns of thine,
By Fate eclipsed, their cheerful Beams resign:
When the just Heavens remand their beauteous Store,
And Silvia's Eyes must cheer the World no more:
Death may forbid those dazzling Orbs to roll,
But cannot strip the Radiance from thy Soul.
Amid the Stars, in spite of Fate or Time,
The Charms of Silvia shall eternal shine.
An EPITAPH.
A Heart to Mercy as to Zeal inclined,
As well a gentle as a prudent Mind;
Still free to pardon, cautious to offend
A tender Parent and a faithful Friend.
All Parts performed, she willingly withdrew,
Turned from the World, and bid her Friends adieu.
Ah thou! (if Spirits or regard or know
The Sigh of Friendship or a Daughter's Woe)
Mixed with those Tears that wash the sacred Shrine,
Accept the Tribute of a grateful Line.
On SICKNESS.
WHEN Heaven's almighty King prepares,
The angry Shaft to throw;
Even Fortitude itself despairs
To bear the deadly Blow.
Cold Tremors shake each fainting Limb,
That weeps a sickly Dew;
The Features, changed to pale and dim,
Resign their cheerful Hue.
No more soft Eloquence shall flow,
Nor dress the silent Tongue;
But the dull Heart refuse to glow,
Though charmed by melting Song.
Those laughing Eyes, that lately shone
So sprightly and so gay,
Sunk down with Sickness, faint and wan,
Decline the piercing Day.
And scarcely bear a cheerful Beam,
To light the drooping Soul;
While round the weak afflicted Brain
Romantic Vapors roll.
Deceitful Earth and all its Joys
Elude our grasping Hands:
Though Nature all her Skill employs,
To bind the failing Bands.
Death drives us to the horrid Steep;
And while we vainly mourn,
He pointing shows th'unmeasur'd Deep,
From whence we never return.
There the grim Spectre, with a Smile,
His panting Victim sees:
Who fain would linger here a while,
To swallow nauseous Lees.
Who Death's great Empire would dispute,
And hugs the gilded Pill,
Not knowing That his faithful Mute,
Whose Business is to kill.
The lost, the slippery Hold to save,
To lenient Arts we run;
They cast us headlong on the Wave,
And we are twice undone.
The Power who stamped the reasoning Mind,
Its Partner can restore;
There we a lasting Cordial find,
And learn to sigh no more.
But if the slow-consuming Ill
Should lead us to the Grave,
Our Faith persuades us that he will
The trembling Spirit save.
O thou, whose Bounty all things taste,
Whose Anger none can bear;
Revive the melancholy Breast,
Nor let the Wretch despair.
To a Gentleman with a Manuscript Play.
AS some grave Matron bred on rural Downs,
Who at the mention of a Top-knot frowns,
And the proud Minxes of the Market Towns;
Whose humble Senses are not much refined,
But used to Labor with a cheerful Mind;
Clad in plain Coifs and Gown of russet Hue,
With homespun Aprons of a decent Blue;
From the white Curds extracts the greener Whey,
Nor dreams of Fashion, Poetry, or Play;
From wicked Verse she turns her cautious Eyes,
And wonders People can delight in Lies:
At length her Landlord, the right noble Squire,
Takes her young Daughter at her own Desire;
Prefers the Damsel to attend his Spouse,
And she with Joy resigns her brindl'd Cows:
For London now prepares the smiling Dame,
While her sad Mother trembles at the Name:
But O! what Griefs attend the parting Leave,
No Muse can paint 'em, nor no Heart conceive:
In vain her Spouse or friendly Neighbor tries,
To quell the Sorrows in her streaming Eyes:
Rossell she fears will slight her Jersey Gown,
And wear white Aprons in the sinful Town;
On the pure Ghost of Win'fred then she calls,
To guard her Child within its guilty Walls.
So this rude Babe I to your Mercy yield,
Rough as the Soil of some untillag'd Field:
Can Nature please? -- Not 'till she is well refined,
Reforming Art should follow close behind;
But that proud Dame with me disdains to dwell,
And far she flies -- Ah far from Mira's Cell.
What then remains? What Hope for me or mine,
But the kind Silence of forgetful Time?
To save us from the sly buffooning Leer,
The spiteful Grimace, and the scornful Sneer;
The threatening Critic with his dreadful Rules,
The Wit's keen Satire and the Burst of Fools.
The wretched Villain pinioned up on high,
Two Hours pendent 'twixt the Earth and Sky,
With Eggs and Turnips whirling round his Pate,
Is but an Emblem of an Author's Fate.
A dread Example to the rhyming Fry,
So Poets tell me, but I hope they lie:
The World's good-natured, if it is not crossed,
But Wits are often saucy to their Cost.
Though unassur'd, yet not in deep Despair,
I trust this Infant to its Patron's Care:
Ah let your Roofs the simple Vagrants shield,
I ask no more than Charity may yield,
Some little Corner in the friendly Dome,
(Lest the loose Varlet be induced to roam)
Where the cold Storms may hover round in vain,
The chilling Snow or penetrating Rain;
Where the fierce Rat (all dreadful) never climbs,
Nor the sleek Mouse sad Foe to Mira's Rhymes.
But I have done -- for who implores a Friend
With long Petitions, justly may offend:
To no strait Bounds Goodnature is confined;
And who shall dictate to a generous Mind?
Which not content in narrow Space to roll,
Like the broad Ocean spreads from Pole to Pole:
While the glad Nations bless the ample Tide,
And wafted Treasures over its Surface glide:
That still waves on, regardless of their Praise,
As you perhaps of Mira's idle Lays.
SILVIA and the BE.
AS Silvia in her Garden strayed,
Where each officious Rose,
To welcome the approaching Maid,
With fairer Beauty glows.
Transported from their dewy Beds,
The new blown Lilies rise:
Gay Tulips wave their shining Heads,
To please her brighter Eyes.
A Be that sought the sweetest Flower,
To this fair Quarter came:
Soft humming round the fatal Bower,
That held the smiling Dame.
He searched the opening Buds with Care,
And flew from Tree to Tree:
But Silvia (finding none so fair)
Unwisely fixed on thee.
Her Hand obedient to her Thought,
The River did destroy;
And the slain Insect dearly bought
Its momentary Joy.
But now too rash unthinking Maid,
Consider what you have done;
Perhaps you in the Dust have laid
A fair and hopeful Son.
Or from his Friends and Senate wise
Have swept a valued Peer;
Whose life, that you so lightly prize,
Was to his Country dear,
Then, Silvia, cease your Anger now,
To this your guiltless Foe;
And smooth again that gentle Brow,
Where lasting Lilies blow.
Soft Cynthio vows when you depart,
The Sun withdraws its Ray,
That Nature trembles like his Heart,
And Storms eclipse the Day.
Amintor swears a Morning Sun's
Less brilliant than your Eyes;
And though his Tongue at random runs,
You seldom think he lies.
They tell you, those soft Lips may vie
With Pinks at opening Day;
And yet you slew a simple Fly,
For proving what they say.
Believe me, not a Bud like thee
In this fair Garden blows;
Then blame no more the erring Be,
Who took you for the Rose.
The CRUEL PARENT.
A DREAM.
'TWAS when the Sun had his swift Progress made,
And left his Empire to the Queen of Shade;
Bright Cynthia too, with her refulgent Train,
Shot their pale Luster over the dewy Plain:
Sat lonely Mira with her Head reclined,
And mourned the Sorrows of her helpless Kind:
Then to her Fancy Celia's Woes appear,
The Nymph, whose Tale deserves a pitying Tear;
Whose early Beauties met a swift Decay;
A Rose that faded at the rising Day,
While Grief and Shame oppressed her tender Age,
Pursued by Famine and a Father's Rage;
Till too much Thought the aching Heart oppressed.
And Mira's Eyelids closed in silent Rest:
Then active Fancy, with her airy Train,
Composed the Substance of the ensuing Dream.
In a black Shade my wandering Self I found,
A Wood encircl'd by a thorny Bound;
Where Oaks up-rais'd their kingly Heads on high,
And the pleased Linnets through the Branches fly:
There lofty Elms the wondering Skies invade,
And the dark Cypress cast a browner Shade:
Grave Laurels there the humbler Shrubs o'erlook;
There the pale Ash, and there the Poplar shook;
Here pliant Elder whom her Fruits adorn,
And the brown Hasel wove with shagged Thorn:
Rude Briers there their clasping Tendrels twine,
Whose rugged Arms with useless Roses shine.
Beyond the Confines of the dusky Brake,
A Plain was bounded with a putrid Lake,
Where Planks of Timber stretched on mouldering Beams,
Formed a weak Passage over the standing Streams,
Whose slimy Waters to its Arches clung,
Where wrapped in Weeds the clodded Vermin hung,
On this brown Plain surrounded by the Wood,
And the green Lake -- an aged Castle stood;
Whose iron Gates were strictly shut to all,
And frowning Roofs hung over the crumbling Wall:
Here perched Revenge and ever-wasting Care,
And Melancholy with dishivel'd Hair.
Before the Portals wait a grisly Band,
Fraud with a Pencil in her shaking Hand:
Long Scrolls of Parchment at her Feet were laid,
Behind her Shoulder stood her ghastly Maid:
Oppreffion named -- and stretched her filthy Claw,
And next pale Avarice with insatiate Maw;
Two cumbrous Bags his twining Arms infold,
Of cankered Silver and of useless Gold:
Grimly he stands, and by his Side appears
Fierce Cruelty, all drenched in Orphans Tears;
Within (attended by relentless Hate)
Suspicion squinted through the barbarous Grate:
To these rude Doors approached with bashful Mien,
Soft Celia once the brightest of the Plain,
But now the Roses from her Cheeks were flown,
Nor could the Fair One by her Charms be known;
Those Charms are now in sable Weeds arrayed,
Her Arm supported by a mournful Maid:
From her wan Eyes the Tears incessant flow,
And all her Form was Penitence and Woe.
But see Lysegus, her relentless Sire,
Whose Eye Balls sparkl'd with disdainful Ire;
His potent Hand the sounding Locks obey,
With grating Noise the horrid Gates gave way:
Then prostrate at his Feet the Damsel lay.
Three times to speak the lovely Mourner tried;
Thrice on her Lips the fainting Murmurs died;
Sigh follows Sigh, and Tear succeeds to Tear:
At length she cried -- Ah! may Lysegus hear;
If Nature or if Penitence may sue,
Ah! let my Sorrows find Relief from you;
The nightly Stars my constant Wailings know,
The rising Sun is Witness to my Woe:
But who shall paint what wretched Celia feels,
While Shame and Famine hunt her flying Heels:
The Fools deride me, and the virtuous shun,
Then to the Fields and lonely Shades I run;
Yet find no Comfort from the lonely Shade,
At my Approach the Blossoms seem to fade:
I fly to Wilds unknown to human Kind,
But cannot leave my hated Self behind;
And am -- Oh am I -- by my Parent cursed;
Of all my Woes the deepest and the worst:
She said -- Lysegus answered in a Rage,
Hence vile Disturber of my luckless Age:
Think not by Tears this stubborn Heart to win,
Nor jar my Senses with thy hateful Din:
Go learn of Vagrants (fit Companions) go,
Their Arts of Stealing and their Whine of Woe.
Yet when before the Gate of Pride you stand,
And crave your Morsel at the Porter's Hand;
May some stern Slave prevent the coming Prize,
Thrown to the Dogs before thy longing Eyes:
He ceased -- but Celia views no more the Sun,
For now her Sorrow with her Life was done:
Her Eyes no more afford their lucid Streams,
Nor the Pulse struggles in her quiet Veins.
The Tyrant viewed her with a ghastly Look,
His Heart beat heavy, and his Sinews shook;
When lo a Spectre horrible to view,
Rose quick as Vapors of a Morning Dew;
Whose Presence cast unpleasing Darkness round,
A Cypress Wreath his faded Temples crowned:
Strange Forms were painted on his sable Robe,
One Hand extended bore a crystal Globe;
Where the pale Sinner might his Picture find,
Yet not his Features, but his darker Mind:
In vain to shun the faithful Glass he tries,
It plays unasked before his aching Eyes:
His quick left Hand with this performed its Part,
His Right was dreadful with a poisoned Dart:
Then with a loud and horrid Voice he cried,
Lysegus, mourn thy Cruelty and Pride:
From the fair Court of Equity I came,
Called by thy Sins, and Conscience is my Name:
This venomed Dart shall now thy Entrails tear,
And teach thy Eyes to know the melting Tear:
Prepare thy Spirits for their Weight of Woe,
With Celia's Name I arm the dreadful Blow:
He said and struck -- the visionary Dart
Sought the dark Bottom of Lysegus' Heart:
He fell -- and falling raised a fearful Cry;
Then Mira 'woke, and found the Morning Sky.
A REQUEST to the DIVINE BEING.
I.
THOU great and sacred Lord of all,
Of Life the only Spring,
Creator of nunumber'd Worlds,
Immensely glorious King.
II.
Whose Image shakes the stagg'ring Mind,
Beyond Conception high;
Crowned with Omnipotence, and veiled
With dark Eternity.
III.
Drive from the Confines of my Heart,
Impenitence and Pride:
Nor let me in erroneous Paths
With thoughtless Idiots glide.
IV.
Whatever thy all-discerning Eye
Sees for thy Creature fit,
I Will bless the Good, and to the Ill
Contentedly submit.
V.
With humane Pleasure let me view
The prosperous and the great;
Malignant Envy let me fly
With odious Self-conceit.
VI.
Let not Despair nor cursed Revenge
Be to my Bosom known;
Oh give me Tears for others Woe,
And Patience for my own.
VII.
Feed me with necessary Food,
I ask not Wealth nor Fame:
But give me Eyes to view thy Works,
And Sense to praise thy Name.
VIII.
And when thy Wisdom thinks it sit,
To shake my troubled Mind;
Preserve my Reason with my Griefs,
And let me not repine.
IX.
May my still Days obscurely pass,
Without Remorse or Care;
And let me for the parting Hour,
My trembling Ghost prepare.
FINIS.

