DRAMATIC AND OTHER POEMS, LETTERS, ESSAYS, etc.

By W. HAWKINS, M. A. Rector of Little Casterton in Rutlandshire, late Poetry
Professor in the University of Oxford, and Fellow of Pembroke College.

VOL. II.

OXFORD, PRINTED BY W. JACKSON: Sold by R. and J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall; J.
RIVINGTON and J. FLETCHER in Paternoster-Row; and W. OWEN, in Fleet Street,
London; J. FLETCHER and S. PARKER, in Oxford.

MDCCLVIII.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE HENRY EARL of LITCHFIELD.
My LORD,
ADDRESSES of this Nature, which are too often fulsom Offerings to Vanity, or
servile Applications to Power, when made to Persons of real Worth and Honor,
are at the same Time Compliments artfully paid by Authors to themselves.....
While the Writer is descanting upon the high Birth, inflexible Probity, patriot
Spirit, humane Disposition, and the polite and literary Accomplishments of his
Patron, he insinuates himself into the good Opinion of his Reader, as one
favored with the Acquaintance, and honored by the Countenance and Regard of a
Person thus amiable and illustrious..... I shall not pretend, my Lord, wholly
to disclaim all Views of this Kind in the present Address I have the Honor to
make to you; and accordingly should take a particular Pleasure in enlarging
upon the above, and other shining Qualities in your Lordship's Character, did I
not recollect that I have no Right to gratify the Public, or myself, at the
Expense of your Lordship's private and personal Satisfaction.

Indeed it is my present Interest rather to engage your Lordship's favorable
Opinion of the following Performances; and I know nothing more likly to do this
than an Assurance that I have aimed by a suitable Variety to adapt myself to
almost all Sorts of Readers but immoral ones; that in some Pieces I have
attempted to render the Graces of Numbers and the Embellishments of Poetry
subservient to the Interests of Virtue, and Religion; that in others I have
offered such critical Disquisitions as I hope will afford at least a rational
Entertainment to Men of Taste in polite Literature; and that in them all I have
endeavored occasionally to express myself with Dignity, Elegance, and Ease,
which, by the way, are not more the Characteristics of good Writing, than of
the Air, Manner, and Conversation of a certain Nobleman I have the Honor to be
known to..... I look upon myself as apologizing to the Public when I am
speaking to your Lordship, and therefore have said thus much from a perfect
Sense of the Consequence it must be to me as an Author to secure your
Lordship's Approbation of my Writings.

The Dedication of these to your Lordship will after all, I fear, be thought a
trifling Proof of my Respect, and therefore I desire it may however be
considered as a sincere Testimony of my Gratitude for the many Favors you have
been pleased to confer on me; the most material of which have been attended
with this Circumstance of Credit and Satisfaction, that they are to be
attributed to your Lordship's free and unsolicited Kindness, and Condescension.

The Obligations I am under to your Lordship are not of a Nature to be
mentioned here; but this Opportunity of expressing a due Acknowledgment of them
in the most ample and public Manner, is with the greatest Pleasure taken by

My LORD, Your LORDSHIP's Much obliged, Most respectful, and Obedient Servant
W. HAWKINS.

THE THIMBLE.

AN HEROI-COMICAL POEM, IN FIVE CANTOS.

Illustrated with NOTES, Critical and Explanatory, By SCRIBLERUS SECUNDUS.

Virginibus puerisque canto. HOR. The THIRD EDITION, Corrected and Enlarged.

TO Miss ANNA MARIA WOODFORD.
MADAM,
AS the Subject of the following Poem naturally led me to inscribe it to one of
your Sex, I could not but hope, that the Justness of the present Address, from
one who has not the Happiness to be personally known to you, would be a
sufficient Apology for the Presumption of it. But though I may have the
Misfortune to incur your Displeasure, by offending your Humility, I shall, even
under the Sense of your Disapprobation, have the Satisfaction to reflect, that
I have been guilty of a very artful Piece of Impertinence; since, by placing
your Name before my Performance, I have taken the most effectual Method to
recommend it to the Public.

Your Example, Madam, is a Reproach to the present indolent Generation; your
Glory is not established upon the personal Advantages you possess in so eminent
a Manner; which, great as they are, your good Sense assures you, are, at the
best, but the Subjects of present Admiration, and can never be the Basis of a
lasting Fame.

Your Handiwork, Madam, which has very justly a Place among the Curiosities of
that famous University, of which I have the Honor and Happiness to be an
inconsiderable Member, has rendered your Name immortal; and your nice
Management of the Needle, that little, but important Implement of Economy, has
entitled you to the Reputation of the compleatest Housewife in Europe; a
Character, to which all Virgins and Wives should aspire.

You have taught us to acknowledge, that the most minute Utensil of Art may, by
an ingenious Application of it, be made subservient, in the highest Degree, to
the Honor of the Artist: A Pin, or a Needle, in your Hands, are Instruments as
effectual for that Purpose, as the Poet's Pen, or the Hero's Sword.

I am at present, Madam, in a very perplexed Situation of Mind; I have the
Pleasure to consider, that I am now upon a Subject that must be agreeable to
all my Readers, and at the same time have the Mortification to recollect, that
it is distasteful to yourself.

Though therefore all I could say in Commendation of your Merit, the World
would think too little, yet, as what I have said you will think too much, I
find myself under a Necessity of desiring your Pardon for this Liberty I have
taken, and for another in the fourth Canto of this Poem, wherein I have
presumed to put a short Prediction, relating to your amiable Character, into
the Mouth of the Queen of Love. This I need not otherwise have intimated, since
every one must at first Sight perceive, that this Prediction is properly
applicable to none but yourself.

After what I have said, Madam, may I venture to hope you have some Patience in
Reserve for the Poem? 'Twas designed for your Amusement, and, if that Design be
answered, my Ambition is satisfied: And indeed, to say Truth, I have so
thorough a Confidence in your good Nature, that I am persuaded you will look
with a favorable Eye upon the following Performance, though not in Justice,
yet in Pity to,

Your unknown humble Servant, The AUTHOR.

THE PREFACE.
I Have always considered a Preface as an Author's Apology for his Performance;
in which he has an undoubted Liberty of saying as much as he pleases in Favor
of himself: As I cannot therefore but be apprehensive of the Success of the
following Piece, I must beg Leave to take this comfortable Privilege, as well
as my Poetical Brethren. The principal Circumstances I have to urge in my own
Behalf, are, that this Poem is the first Production of a young and
unexperienced Author (excepting a few trifling Pieces in the Magazines); and
that I am so far from bidding Defiance to the Critics, that I address myself to
them in the modest and submissive Terms of, By your Leave,

GENTLEMEN.

As to the Poem itself, I have endeavored, in some particular Passages, to
imitate the Manner of Mr. Pope's Rape of the Lock, upon a Presumption, that
such Imitation would be deemed meritorious in so young a Writer as myself. I
ought likewise to acknowledge, that I had in View the Episode of the Patten in
Mr. Gay's Trivia. How far I have reached the Spirit required in this Kind of
Poetry, must be left to the Reader, to whose Candor and Judgment I submit the
following Poem.

THE THIMBLE. THE THIMBLE, etc.] The Author, by this simple Title of his Poem,
has very judiciously escaped the Censure, which most modern Poets have incured,
by their Affectation of Antiquity in their Title-Pages. This excellent Poem
might, with as much Propriety, have been called The Thimblead, or The
Thimbleiad, as Mr. Pope's was entitled The Dunciad* But such Imitation
appeared trifling and obvious to our Author, and, at best, had been
mal-apropos, and nothing to the Point -- of a Needle. -- I wish, however, I
could as well account for his calling it an Heroi-comical Poem, rather than an
Heroic one; which I take it indisputably to be. It has its Action, its Fable,
its Manners, its Sentiment, and its Diction, which are the constituent Parts of
the Epic Poem. And though, in respect of all these, it may, in some Instances,
differ from the Plan of the Ancients, and the Doctrine of Aristotle, I cannot
think it thereby degraded into a different and lower Species of Poetry. Mr.
Addison himself allows, Aristotle's Rules for Epic Poetry (which he has drawn
from his Reflections upon Homer) cannot be supposed to quadrate exactly with
the Heroic Poems, which have been, or may be, made since his Time. (See Spec.
No. 273.) For this Reason, it would be ridiculous to object to the Action of
this Poem, its Deficiency in Point of Greatness or Importance -- a supposed
necessary Qualification in the Action of the Epopee; and indeed, admitting it
so to be, the Objection is founded in false and improper Ideas of Greatness and
Importance; and in the wrong Impressions made upon Minds of a romantic Turn by
the Exploits of ancient Heroes, and the Manners and Customs of barbarous and
uncivilized Nations. Because what was a proper Subject for Epic Poetry, in the
Days of Homer or Virgil, would be shocking and absurd in so refined and
delicate an Age as this. The Action of this Poem is abundantly important for
these Times of genteel Indolence, and superb Tranquillity; and the Author, all
the while, instead of dropping his Acquaintance with the Ancients, artfully
makes use of it upon many Occasions, without a Possibility of giving Offense to
any fine Lady or Gentleman, by such robust and indelicate Imagery, as that with
which the old Epic abounds. -- We shall occasionally show, in the Course of our
Criticisms, that he rarely in any respect deviates from the ancient Plan
without improving it. -- What has been already advanced will justify likewise
his making a Lady the principal personage in the Poem. -- If female Characters
are respectable, even in the Writings of Homer and Virgil, Decency, sure,
Propriety, and Complaisance, required they should have the first Place in the
Poem before us. -- Thus much we thought necessary to premise in general; we
shall proceed to farther Remarks, as they are suggested by the Poem itself.

CANTO I.
WHAT Art divine What Art divine, etc.] The Moral of an Epic Poem may be either
positively laid down, or virtually couched, in what the Critics call the
Exordium. That of the Iliad of Homer is clearly expressed in the Proposition of
the Action of the Poem; those of the Odyssey and of the Aeneid are implicitly
contained in their respective Exordiums. The Plan of the Thimble, which, in its
Moral, is inferior to neither of them, is formed upon Industry, and its
Rewards; as is sufficiently intimated in these first Lines of the Poem.
the shining Thimble found,
To shield the Finger militant around,
Now first my Verse reveals: Ye Virgins hear,
Attend ye Matrons, and ye Belles give Ear;
For you the Infant Muse essays to sing,
For you she flutters on her tender Wing;
To you the tributary Strains belong,
"Then Pope's New Dunciad, Line 8.
take at once the Poet and the Song."
When Woman's chief Concerns were Love and Play,
And trifling was the Business of the Day;
When few one Hour of precious Time could spare,
To mend an Apron, or to say a Prayer;
Fannia, the fairest of the female Train,
That shone at Court, or blessed the rural Plain,
In the nice Toils of Industry was skilled,
And knew with Art the Needle Spear to wield;
Whether she worked the gayly-blooming Flower,
Or drew in ductile Silk the verdant Bower;
Here glowed the spangled Firmament on high,
And all the Glories of the azure Sky:
Here wide expanded blazed the bright Abodes,
And Jove enthroned, etc.] As this is the first Place, where the Name of a
superior Being occurs in this Work, it may be proper to obviate the
Exceptions, or rather, the Cavils, which a few superstitious or ill-natured
Judges may be apt to make to the Machinery of the Poem, which consists of the
Gods and Goddesses of the old Pagan Theology. It might be sufficient to stop
the Mouths of such, to observe, that Poets are of no Religion, and that, by
Virtue of the Prerogative Poetical, (the Poetica Licentia) an Author may adopt
what System he pleases. It Is true, Mr. Addison banishes the Heathen Deities
from all modern Poetry, except the Mock-Heroic: (Spec. No. 523) But then he
passed this Sentence, at a Time when Christianity was generally, we may
presume, practiced, as well as formally established, among us; a Sentence
therefore that by no Means affects our Author, as Things are now happily
circumstanced. Our Bard will certainly pass for a good Protestant with the
Beau-Monde, and need not fear offending the Religion of his Country, as that
great Critic expresses it; (Spec. No. 267) and indeed, I cannot see why his
Pagan System should not be universally received, as it not only stands clear of
all Popish Errors, but likewise has, in some respects, reformed the old
Theology of Homer himself; which we shall have an Opportunity to show.
And Jove enthroned above his Vassal Gods;
For Pallas' self had deigned to assist the Fair,
And more than human Workmanship was there*
Sometimes she copied from the Earth below,
The spotted Lap-Dog, or the flaming Beau;
Or formed the Bird, or shaped the slender Tree;
A whole Creation in Epitome!
IMITATIONS.
Envy itself was dumb, etc.
Envy itself is dumb, in Wonder lost,
And Factions strive which shall applaud 'em most.
Mr. Addison's Campaign.

Envy itself was dumb, in wonder lost,
And Ladies strove which should applaud her most.
Each Morn she worked, but worked with nicest Care,
To save her Finger from the fatal Scar:
For yet no Armor cased the Flesh around,
But Plaits of Silk, or sev'n-fold Paper bound.
Unhappy Fannia, that was wont to wield
The pointed Spear, without the bossy Shield!
Thrice happy Fannia, in the Gift bestowed,
The Thimble Shield, the Labor of a God!
But now her Charms had swelled the Trump of Fame,
And spread to distant Tea-Tables her Name;
Each cringing Fop around her Smiles implored,
Admired her Genius, but her Face adored:
Each sighed, and wept, and vowed, her Love to gain,
But each had sighed, and wept, and vowed in vain;
For Fannia triumphed in her Beauty's Arts,
And viewed with Scorn whole Hecatombs of Hearts!
Yet most respected, etc.] The Character of Fannia, the Heroine of the Poem,
having been before sufficiently displayed to the Reader, in the Picture of an
industrious Coquet, the Author next proceeds, in a most lively Manner, to
particularize that of her favorite Cynthio, the second Person in the Thimble.
-- Both these Characters are truly Epic; "In the laying down which, the Poet
(as Mr. Pope well observes of Homer) rather studied Nature than Perfection."
(See the Note at V. 155 of Pope's Iliad, B. i.) The Characters of a fine
Gentleman and Lady, though they be not morally beautiful (as the same excellent
Writer observes in regard to the Character of Homer's Hero) are still
poetically perfect.
Yet most respected was a well-bred Lord,
And most respected, as he best adored:
His soft Address the coldest Dame might move;
Smooth were his Words, for every Word was Love:
Loaded with Lace, and decked in silken State,
He strutted, insignificantly great!
Affected Pomp, and Equipage, and Show,
And all the Nothings that compound a Beau;
He danced, and sung, took Snuff, and cracked a Fan,
And, at the best, but bordered upon Man.
Flambeaux perfumed wide blazed his gay Approach,
And wanton Cupids breathed upon his Coach.
IMITATIONS.
O Liberty, thou Goddess heavenly bright,
Profuse of Bliss, and pregnant with Delight!
Eternal Pleasures in thy Presence reign,
And smiling Plenty leads thy wanton Train;
Eased of her Load, Subjection grows more light,
And Poverty looks cheerful in thy Sight;
Thou make the gloomy Face of Nature gay,
Giv'st Beauty to the Sun, and Pleasure to the Day.

O Vanity! thou gaudy, tinsel Queen!
In Courts, in Cities, and in Country seen!
Eternal Fopp'ries in thy Presence reign,
And grinning Folly leads thy wanton Train;
Eased of it is Load, even Dullness grows more light,
And Ignorance looks cheerful in thy Sight;
Thou make the unmeaning Face with Pride to glow,
Giv'st Brightness to the Fool, and Beauty to the Beau!
Gay Cynthio daily kneeled at Venus' Shrine,
And burnt sweet Incense to the Power benign:
Often too he craved Apollo's rhyming Art,
For tuneful Numbers melt the hardest Heart;
The Godhead half-consented to his Prayer,
(The rest the Winds dispersed through Fields of Air)
And gave him Wit enough -- to please the Fair.
And now the enamored Bard, half Wit, half Fool,
Wooes in Love-Songs melodiously dull;
His sweet-tun'd Strains the Fair one's Praise rehearse,
And crow'd all Nature's Beauties in his Verse:
Does Fannia smile? the Sun breaks forth to View;
Does Fannia weep? it is Morning's pearly Dew:
Whenever she breathes, the fanning Zephyrs blow,
And for her Breast the Alps sustain their Snow;
Compared with here is, the finest Tinctures fail,
The Lilly reddens, and the Rose turns pale!
Thus his warm Suit the Beau with Art addressed,
And proudly triumphed to be slighted least:
'Twas Rapture but to gain one balmy Kiss,
And fondly flutter round the Brink of Bliss:
Full of herself his Wishes she denied;
A Woman's ruling Passion is her Pride;
Enough impartial Favors to bestow
On her loved Lap-Dog, etc.] The third (earthly) Personage mentioned in the
Poem, is a Lap-Dog, in respect of which Creature, and the Parrot, etc. etc. it
will be doing Justice to our Author to remark, once for all, that, as the
Subject of his Poem would not, on account chiefly of the Shortness of the
Action, admit of a considerable Variety of human Characters, he was under a
Necessity of introducing some Persons not strictly Epic Mr. Addison has
observed, that none of the Critics, either ancient or modern, have laid down
Rules to circumscribe the Action of an Epic Poem, with any determined Number of
Years, Days, or Hours. (Spec. No. 267.)
. Milton labored under a like Difficulty, and found Means to extricate
himself, by bringing into his Poem Actors of a Nature purely fictitious and
allegorical; and surely, if Sin and Death have been by the Critics esteemed
proper Personages in that Poem, Dogs and Kittens (which are real, though
subordinate Personages) may be allowed a Place in the Company of Gentlemen and
Ladies, with a Proviso, that they do not interrupt Conversation -- After all,
the Apology may be needless; for the present State of the Epopee, agreeably to
the above Representation of it, requires the Assistance of these Animals, as
much as the ancient did that of Horses, etc. etc.
On her loved Lap-Dog, and her favorite Beau!
Thus blessed with every Joy this Life can boast,
The Ladies' Wonder, and the Coxcomb's Toast,
What could the Fair one's Peace of Mind annoy?
What could such solid Happiness destroy?
But ah! no human Pleasures are sincere:
Is there an Eye that never shed a Tear?
Fate rules over all; at whose severe Decree,
Over the rich Gown flow Deluges of Tea;
Fate hurls the Mighty down to deep Disgrace,
And plows with lasting Scars the smoothest Face;
Over all Things mortal acts with lawless Will,
And Fannia was, alas! but mortal still.
When now the Morn, etc.] Here the Action of the Poem properly commences, which
takes up but two entire Days; in which Space of Time, however, are comprised a
Number of striking and interesting Incidents.
When now the Morn had chased the Shades away
(O fatal Morn, and inauspicious Day!)
Fannia arose, and hailed the grateful Light,
Shocked at the horrid Visions of the Night;
Yet still strange Terrors all her Thoughts molest,
And Apprehension labored in her Breast.
Then, Betty, with dejected Look, she cried,
(Three Times on Betty called, and three Times sighed)
Some sad Mischance awaits me, ever the Sun
Once more his Course from East to West shall run;
Fantastic Slumbers, etc. --
Fantastic Slumbers have disturbed my Brain,
And racked my Senses with a wakeful Pain;
And mystic Dreams (as bearded Matrons show)
Are good Prognostics, or the Types of Woe.
Sure at this Hour some baleful Planet reigns:
Did thou not mark, etc.] The Religious of all Ages have laid a great Stress
on Omens, and Presignifications of future Events by Dreams, Flights of Birds,
etc. in Compliance with which ancient and rational Notion, our Author
represents his Heroine alarmed and terrified by very affecting and infallible,
though modern, Appearances.
Did thou not mark, last Night, the Coffee Grains?
Methought the Taper's Flame was tinged with Blue,
And Coals strange-shapen from the Embers flew.
Late as I wandered in a lonely Grove,
Ever yet my Thoughts began to teem with Love;
A withered Gypsy whispered in my Ear,
"Misfortune shall befall thy twentieth Year;"
That fatal Period of my Life is come,
And every Hour swells big with Fannia's Doom.
Yet, O ye Powers! preserve me from Disgrace,
Let me still keep my Virtue, -- and my Face!
O! make my Bosom proof to Love's Alarms,
Protect my Youth, and shelter all my Charms.
Fantastic Slumbers, etc. --
While thus the Maid presaged Disaster nigh,
Great Jove convened the Senate of the Sky;
And, round assembled the celestial Clan,
He strok'd his Mustachoes, and thus began.
Ethereal Powers, behold! in doleful State
Our best-lov'd Fannia moans approaching Fate;
See how she views yon glittering Needle round,
Nor deems her Woe long destined in a Wound;
Shall we avert the Fair one's Doom Today,
Or shall we give the spleenful Fates their Way? While thus the Maid, etc. --
Great Jove convened, etc.] Though a superficial Reader might infer from a
preceding Passage in this Canto, relating to Fate, that all Events are
predetermined by Necessity, it is plain, from Jupiter's Design in convening
this Council, in which he appears willing to interpose his superior Power in
Favor of Fannia, that Fate itself is, by our Author, supposed to be subject to
his Control and Superintendency. Jupiter, in Homer, acts the same Part in the
Cases of Sarpedon and Hector. This Deity, we may here observe, appears in the
Greek Poet, and his Latin Imitator to great Disadvantage, if compared with the
Figure he makes in this incomparable Poem. -- In the first Place, Jupiter
himself betrays great Weakness and Infirmity (See B. xxii. of the Iliad) by his
almost unmanly, but surely ungodly, Lamentation over the Fate of Hector. -- In
the next Place, the Eyebrows, and the Hair mentioned by Homer upon another
Occasion, but omitted by Virgil, those chief Pieces of Imagery, from whence,
Mr. Pope tells us, Phidi^s took the Idea of a Countenance, proper for the King
of Gods and Men, are evidently inferior, in Point of Majesty and
Respectableness, to the Mustachoes of our Author. -- Again, the Juno of Homer,
the Goddess of Marriage, is an eternal Billingsgate, and has entailed, from
that blind Poet's Days, Contempt and Reproach upon the State of Wedlock, which
our Author, in the ensuing Allegory (of which more by-and-by) laudably attempts
to remove.

Of all the Damsels on yon earthly Sphere,
Like Fannia none our Deities revere;
Daily the Maid renews her pious Toil,
And Heaven regales with Steams of fattest Oil;
While yearly as the solemn, etc. -- Two milk-white Kittens, etc.] A much
genteeler Sacrifice, and consequently, more grateful to the Deities, than those
of Oxen, etc. offered by the awkward and nasty Heroes of Homer and Virgil. --
For Proof of this, we might transcribe the Account of the Sacrifice in the
first Book of the Iliad, but forbear to do it, in pure Tenderness to polite
Ears. -- We will venture, however, to subjoin Mr. Pope's Translation, who was a
very clean Writer, and upon this, as well as many other Occasions, has greatly
softened the Indelicacy of the Original.

The Limbs they sever from the enclosing Hide,
The Thighs, selected to the Gods, divide:
On these, in double Cawls involved with Art,
The choicest Morsels lay from every Part. B. i. L. 602.
The Thighs thus sacrificed, and Entrails dressed,
The Assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest.
What gross Ideas does this Description convey? Our Author wisely thought it
sufficient to inform us, that his Heroine yearly offered a Kitten to the Gods,
without officiously entering into the Particulars of the Dissection, or of the
throwing the Fat in the Fire, etc. -- Such is his Regard to Decency.


While yearly as the solemn Rites succeed,
Two milk-white Kittens on our Altars bleed.
So spoke the Sire of Men and Gods above;
And, smiling, thus rejoined the Queen of Love.
Father, it is just, this Pity to the Fair;
A helpless Maid is Jove's peculiar Care;
Bright Fannia shines the first of human Race,
In winning Sweetness, and in Bloom of Face,
Since my famed Favorite Helen's powerful Charms
Roused Heaven and Earth to dreadful Deeds of Arms;
For such a Maid shall Fate Distress ordain,
And spoil such Features with the Rage of Pain?
To whom the Goddess with the silver Bow;
Sister, thy Arts, by endless Proof, we know:
By thee seduced, the fairest Nymphs, among
My huntress Train, have left the Virgin Throng.
Fannia, my Vot'ry late, and chief Delight,
Whose Thought by Day was chaste, and Dream by Night,
Soon, I foresee, will fall thy Victim sure;
I mark her Bosom heave with Sighs impure,
When Cynthio twines her Hair, or twirls her Fan;
For there is Contagion in the Touch of Man!
Let not great Jove his own Decrees abate,
But leave the abandoned Virgin to her Fate.
Then slow uprose the God's majestic Queen;
Unjust, she cried, Diana, is thy Spleen:
Nor, Venus, claim thy softer Arts Applause;
Let Love be subject to connubial Laws;
So Fannia still may shine supremely fair,
Beloved of Gods, and Heaven's peculiar Care:
And Jove, the Horrors of her present Fate,
May, or remove, or kindly mitigate.
Next the great Pallas, blue-ey'd Goddess rose,
Not like the Pallas thundering midst her Foes,
When all-besmear'd with Dust, and Sweat, and Gore,
She bids the furious Voice of Battle roar:
A mild and graceful Air her Looks assume,
As when presiding over the peaceful Loom.
'Twas reasoned well, she cried, and, I beseech,
Thanks may be paid to Juno for her Speech.
Fate will have Way; and who shall stem its Tide?
Great Jove opposed not when his Hector died!
The Wound, the beauteous Artist must endure,
Though cruel Fate inflicts, the Gods may cure.
Venus implored shall due Compassion take,
As well for Cynthio's, as for Fannia's Sake;
And Vulcan's Art a Target shall prepare,
Henceforth to shield the Finger of the Fair;
Thus shall the Perils of the Needle cease,
And Hymen 's Bands, etc.] It has been observed of the Allegories of Homer,
that many of them are forced, and scarce reconcilable to Truth and Morality.
-- In this Respect, the Author of The Thimble has much the Advantage of his
Predecessor. -- In the Allegory before us, we have a tacit, but lively Reproof
of unlawful Love, a Display of the Benefits and Advantages of Matrimony, and a
Declaration of the Wisdom of its Institution.
And Hymen's Bands shall tie the Knot of Peace.
So be it, if so wills Jove. -- The Parent God
Shook his ambrosial Locks, and gave the Nod.
Now sip the Immortals their celestial Tea,
And quaff nectareous Draughts of Ratifia!
Apollo sung a Ballad, and the Nine,
With Tabor and with Pipe, in Concert join.
Young Ganimede, etc.] The Conclusion of this Canto is a happy Imitation, and
Improvement of that of the First Book of the Iliad: -- Whether the spruce young
Ganymede is not a much more proper Waiter for the female Deities, than an old
limping Blacksmith, let the Ladies, the best Judges in this Case, determine.
Young Ganymede his Office dext'rous plies,
And all applaud the Footboy of the Skies.
END of the FIRST CANTO.
CANTO II.
NO sweetly-flowing Tale I now rehearse,
But Scratches, Wounds, and Bloodshed, stain the Verse:
Ye vet'ran Band of Milliners, give Ear,
And every Sempstress drop a pitying Tear!
O! listen to the Melancholy Lay,
While I recount the Horrors of the Day.
O! for his Numbers, etc.] Both Homer and Virgil (as our Author here, in
Conformity to their Practice) renew their Invocation of the Muse, at particular
Periods, and proper Intervals of their Poems.

Tu Vatem, tu Diva moan: -- AENEID. Lib. vii. L. 41.
-- Major Rerum mihi nascitur Ordo,
Majus Opus moveo.

O! for his Numbers, that described the Shield
Of great Pelides issuing to the Field,
Or clad in Arms terrific from afar,
Or rushing dreadful through the Ranks of War!
The Virgin sat deep sunk in pensive Thought;
Betty, my Work, she cried; and Betty brought:
Often have my Morning Labors soothed my Grief;
What Wretch ever found in Idleness Relief?
How blind are Mortals in this hapless State;
We rush to Ruin, and embrace our Fate!
Six Needles, etc.] There is a beautiful Cast of Antiquity in this Passage;
which we only hint to the judicious Reader, desiring him to take this Hint
along with him throughout the Poem.
Six Needles in tremendous Range appear,
Each a dire Emblem of the Warriour's Spear!
A while she viewed them all with careful Eyes,
Then grasped a Javelin of enormous Size;
Next, as impatient for the Toil she grew,
Her shining Scissars from the Sheath she drew,
Her Grand-Dame's Gift (as ancient Memoirs say)
A just Reward for many a well-work'd Day!
With active Haste her nimble Fingers move,
Curl the gay Vine, and form the mimic Grove;
But as her Finger with resistless Force,
Through double Plaits pursued its rapid Course,
The treacherous Needle broke, -- the headless Dart
Deep-gor'd her Flesh, and pierced her -- to the Heart.
The purple Blood distained her Arm around,
And half her Soul came rushing through the Wound;
Then, as her Bosom glowed with sudden Fire,
She spurned her Lap-Dog in her peevish Ire;
Across the Room with furious Speed she flew,
And Tables, Chairs, and Cabinets, o'erthrew;
Her hideous Cries the vocal Walls resound,
IMITATIONS.
Air blackened, roared the Thunder, groaned the Ground.
Dryden's Fables.

Poll chatter'd, scream'd the Kitten, shook the Ground.
So when the Diomed. See the Fifth Book of the Iliad, Line 335. etc.
Greek, that with Immortals strove,
Wounded in impious Rage the Queen of Love;
To Heaven's high Roof the Goddess raised her Cries,
And the harsh Shriek run thrilling through the Skies.
Here lay the Ruins of an ample Bowl,
The Pride and Comfort of her Grandsire's Soul;
This often inspired the loudly-sounding Jest,
And crowned with Jollity the Nuptial Feast;
Unhurt by Midnight Broils, uncrack'd by Age,
It fell the Wreck of Fannia's heedless Rage.
At length, fatigued with Anger, she surveyed
The fatal Massacre herself had made;
Then, as she sat all pensive and alone,
In secret Grief she made her piteous Moan:
So shuns a wounded Bird the feathered Race,
And mournful in some solitary Place,
To Woods and Rocks he tunes the plaintive Lay,
And Echoes waft the gentle Sounds away.
And oh! she cried, Is this the dreadful Stroke,
Which Omens threatened, and which Visions spoke?
Ah! how have I incensed the Powers above,
What Crime provokes the Wrath of angry Jove?
Yearly my loaded Altars blaze in vain,
With plenteous Fat of purring Victims slain,
Doomed as I am to Pangs of endless Pain;
Pale, meagre, ghostlike, how shall I appear,
In bright Assemblies of the Gay and Fair?
Old Maids will triumph with insulting Voice,
And over their flowing Cups, etc.] Justice to the fair Sex requires us to
suppose, the Author by Cups here means Tea-Cups.
And over their flowing Cups the Belles rejoice!
A sad Recluse, no longer must I roam,
But spin a tedious Length of Days at Home!
Even Cynthio, cruel Cynthio, spreads my Shame!
Adieu to Love, to Conquest, and to Fame!
Did I for this my blooming Beauties grace,
And heighten all the Luster of my Face?
For this before my Glass whole Hours beguile,
And heave my Breast, and force the killing Smile?
Or bid my Cheeks with artful Blushes glow?
Or teach the wanton Tresses where to flow?
Could I not Tasks less dangerous undertake?
Refine the Jelly, or compose the Cake?
Or mould the pliant Paste with nicest Art,
And with high Ramparts fortify the Tart?
O blast that Day, ye Powers, with Plagues severe,
When first my Fingers poised the pointed Spear;
Then may no joyful Sounds invade the Skies,
But ravished Maids Complaints, and Widows Cries;
Then be untuned the Music of the Spheres;
Then may no Fiddle glad the Dancers Ears;
No Ballad then be sung with screaming Note,
Nor soft Airs warbl'd in the Eunuch's Throat;
Then may the Sun withdraw his cheerful Light,
Nor pendent Lustres gild the Face of Night!
This said, with Silk her bleeding Flesh she bound,
While every Thought hung brooding over the Wound;
On Poll she cast a sad, desponding Look,
And patted Daphne with a feeble Stroke.
But now bright Lamps began the Midnight Day,
And blazing Flambeaux drove the Stars away;
The Fair expects her Beau with anxious Fears,
When at his wonted Hour the Fop appears.
With conscious Shame her Finger she withdrew,
Nor durst expose the fatal Wound to View:
Long he surveyed (for Love takes all Alarms)
With deep Surprise her disconcerted Charms;
Then, sweet and tuneful as the dying Swan,
In soft, condoling Words he thus began:
What sad Mischance, what unfear'd Danger nigh,
Flushes that Cheek, and dims that sparkling Eye?
Lies some near Friend upon his dying Bed?
Or has the Lightning struck thy Monkey dead?
Has the fell Mercer just produced his Score,
And having trusted long, will trust no more?
Or did thou mark last Evening at the Play,
A richer Virgin, or a Nymph more gay?
Say, does my Fair for brighter Gems repine?
Each India's choicest Diamonds shall be thine:
For thee the East its Treasures shall unfold,
And Earth unbosom all her Hoards of Gold:
O name thy Wants, and tell me thy Distress,
Care shall remove, or Pity make it less.
This said, (and sure his Lordship said enough)
With Elegance he took a Pinch of Snuff.
Then she: No Language can my Grief remove,
Nor all the Powers of Hartshorn, and of Jove;
Cynthio, thy Truth alone can give me Aid,
And skreen from sad Reproach a wretched Maid!
If in each deep-fetch'd Sigh, each falling Tear,
Each solemn Vow thy Heart has been sincere,
By Secrecy thy fair Affection prove;
For Silence is the noblest Mark of Love.
Even Fannia sues this Favor to obtain,
Fannia that never su'd to Man in vain.
She said, and fixed her Eyes upon the Ground,
And with a Blush disclosed the reeking Wound.
Shocked at the Sight of Blood, replied the Peer,
It Is done, and this was Cynthio's greatest Fear;
Often have I seen thy bright Embroid'ry shine,
Often have I cursed the perilous Design:
Thou, born to flourish in the Pride of State,
Idly secure, and indolently great,
Had naught to do with dangerous Feats of Arms;
Such Conflicts suit not with a Lady's Charms:
Domestic Toils the servile female grace,
Enough for thee to glory in a Face!
How rash was she, that grasped the Needle first?
Pernicious Weapon, Instrument accursed!
'Twas Alluding to the Monument in Westminster Abbey, of a Lady, whose Death is
said to have been occasioned by the Prick of a Needle.
this, that once destroyed a British Maid,
Her Needle's Point to lingering Death betrayed;
In those sad Vaults, where Horror spreads her Wings,
Where rest the Bones of Poets, and of Kings,
The hapless Fair in Marble Record stands,
The Victim of her own industrious Hands!
O call to Mind her Life, and Beauty lost,
Dread all edged Tools, but dread the Needle most!
Why down thy Cheek descends the pearly Rill?
Fannia is wounded, but is Fannia still:
The sad Disgrace with patient Heart endure,
Nor Cynthio shall divulge, but wait the Cure:
This Night my Soul shall breathe a fervent Prayer,
And deprecate the Horrors of the Scar;
Thy wounded Finger Venus shall restore,
But, venurous Beauty, trust to Steel no more.
So spoke the Peer, to sooth the drooping Maid,
And his vast Stores of Eloquence displayed:
Lulled by his melting Words her Terrors cease,
And the soft Sounds restored her wonted Peace:
At length, the mighty Theme exhausts his Art,
And emptied all the Nonsense of his Heart.
But now the Tea removed, the Prattle over,
And all the Scandal of the Day before,
The Baron took his Leave, and left the Fair,
And his gilt Chariot rattled over the Square.
Fannia, at length, in Slumbers closed her Eyes,
And Men and Monkies in Delusion rise.
END of the SECOND CANTO.
CANTO III.
NOW all lay hushed Now all lay hushed, etc.] The Poets are fond of giving us
Descriptions of the Morning or the Night -- This excellent Night-Piece of our
Author, we think equal to any Thing of its Kind, in ancient or modern Poetry.
in solitary Night,
And distant Stars diffused a solemn Light;
The World appeared a desert, silent Scene,
And all around was dreadfully serene;
Now ghastly stalked a melancholy Train,
By Knife, by Halter, and by Poison slain;
Whose woeful Mem'ries Grub-street Bards prolong,
In dismal Story, or in doleful Song:
Nor Schoolboys Shout was heard, nor Carman's Roar,
Even Winds were still, and Women spoke no more:
The Sons of Men dissolved in Slumbers lay,
And Slaves, and Kings forgot the Toils of Day.
But wakeful Cares disturbed the Baron's Brain,
And wearied Nature called for Rest in vain;
Anxious to ease the sadly-wounded Fair,
To Venus he addressed his Midnight Prayer:
Great Paphian Queen, bright Deity of Love,
Whom all below confess, and all above,
If ever with Gifts thy Altars I have crowned,
Or decked with flowery Wreaths thy Shrine around;
If I have taught my tender Soul to own
No Powers but thee, and thy all-conqu'ring Son;
If by thy Aid I ken Love's secret Fire,
Each budding Wish, and every fond Desire;
Read in the Virgin's Eyes her inward Smart,
And know each Symptom of a Lovesick Heart;
Renew thy Favors often bestowed before,
And hear me now, or never hear me more.
Behold my Fannia, late a Virgin bright,
As Love can fancy, or as Verse can write;
Now see her sad, dejected, and forlorn,
That once was cheerful as the rising Morn;
With all-consuming Grief she wastes away,
Even She, the Fair, the Witty, and the Gay;
Pensive she moans her wounded Finger's Smart,
And sinks from all her Loftiness of Heart.
O grant my Boon, and ease the Virgin's Pain,
Ease it, to bless Mankind, and me again;
With sovereign Balm the shameful Scar remove,
And teach! O teach her to relent to Love!
So shall each Beau with Spleen and Envy see
The Mistress of the World subdued by me;
The yielding Fair shall every Charm resign,
And Hymen shall our Hearts in lasting Union join.
Thus far with wakeful Zeal the Baron said,
Slumbers ensued, and nods the heavy Head.
Venus with Pity heard the Beau's Request,
And thus the stripling God of Love addressed:
My Son, thy Bow and keenest Shafts prepare;
It Is thine to humble this imperious Fair:
Enough the Maid has seen with high Disdain
The Coxcomb's Anguish, and the Fopling's Pain;
At length, herself shall own Love's powerful Sway
(For all must once the Laws of Love obey)
And slighted Beaux shall bless the Vengeance of this Day.
Cynthio the Bright that yonder sleeping lies,
Whose Fires perpetual on my Altars rise,
In vain, the Force of every pleasing Art
Has tried, to soften that obdurate Heart:
To him the Fair her Beauties shall resign,
His be the glorious Prize, the Conquest thine.
But first some sovereign Medicine must be found,
To ease the Torments of the fatal Wound;
And see! within this Crystal are contained
Drops, which from wholesome Herbs long since were drained;
The wholesome Herbs in Jove's famed Crete.
Island grow,
And flourish fresh on Ida's lofty Brow:
'Twas this my best-lov'd Aeneas. See the Twelfth Book of the Aeneid, V. 420,
etc.
Offspring once restored,
When all Troy trembled for her wounded Lord:
This healing Juice shall cure the Virgin's Pain,
And Fannia's Smiles shall cheer the World again.
Hence, let us quick, my Son, to Earth repair,
This Night shall be fulfilled the Baron's Prayer.
She said, and over her snowy Shoulders threw
A shining Mantle of an azure Hue;
Two silken Knots her flowing Hair divide,
And Cupid armed came smiling by her Side:
Wrapped in a sable Cloud they took their Way,
Like Lightning darting through the Realms of Day;
Swift as they past, Perfumes divine they shed,
And now hung hovering over the Virgin's Bed:
Over the wide Room a Taper's steady Light
Cast a pale Luster, and dispelled the Night:
The lofty Cieling, glorious to behold,
Was carved, and studded over with Stars of Gold:
The ample Walls vast Folds of Tap'stry grace;
Here bright Diana seemed to urge the Chase,
Panting behind her came her Virgin Train,
And the huge Boar ran foaming over the Plain;
Here Daphne sought the Shelter of the Wood,
And here with eager Steps the God pursued:
Pleased Venus saw, etc.] The Author, in this Passage, had his Eye upon Virgil.
See Aeneid, B. i. L. 492, etc.

Se quoque principibus permixtum agnovit Achivis, etc.

Pleased Venus saw; at length herself surveyed,
Fondly lamenting over Adonis dead;
At that sad Scene her Tears began to flow,
And her Breast labored with the former Woe:
She turned aside, new Objects to explore,
Nor durst behold the fatal Image more.
Here a rich Structure's stately Bulk was set,
Whose golden Figures blazed on Plains of Jet;
From India's farthest Coast the Fabric came,
A Lover's Offering to the haughty Dame:
IMITATIONS.
-- Hic illius Arma,
Hic currus fuit. Aeneid, B. i. L. 20.

Here the rich Vest, and sparkling Diamond lay,
All Beauty's pleasing, terrible Array!
The spacious Top whole Groups of China grace,
Of Men and Beasts, a vast promiscuous Race;
Two rampant Lions at each Corner stood,
The dreadful Guardians of the sacred Wood;
Sullen the brittle Savages looked down,
And the terrific China seemed to frown.
The Immortals next the well-wrought Bed surveyed,
Where lay, dissolved in Sleep, the lovely Maid;
Wrapped in sweet Dreams of Conquest, Love, and Play;
Pleased she renewed the Triumphs of the Day;
Disdainful IMITATIONS.
Soothed with the Sound, the King grew vain,
Fought all his Battles over again,
And thrice he routed all his Foes, and thrice he slew the Slain.
Dryden's Ode for St. Cecilia's Day.

even in Slumbers she grew vain,
And practiced all her Conquests over again,
And thrice she vanquished all her Beaux, and thrice she slew the Slain.
Her Watch of Gold hung pendent over her Head,
And decked with glittering Pomp the lofty Bed;
It strikes, as every rapid Hour glides round;
It strikes, Mortality is in the Sound!
Oh! did the Belles, while yet in Beauty's Prime,
Take warning from these Records of their Time;
Think every Year may steal away a Grace,
And prey unheeded on the fairest Face;
Conscious of fading Charms they would lay aside,
Each Art coquetish, and each Air of Pride;
Nor blast their Lovers Hopes by long Delay,
But yield those Beauties, which must soon decay!
Venus, at length, a golden Quill espied,
That once adorned a gaudy Peacock's Side,
(This penned the Fair one's Thoughts with wondrous Art,
And told the soft Emotions of her Heart;
Described her inmost Soul, without Disguise,
And Truths denied to Man's unhallowed Eyes)
Lo! in the sacred Drops the shining Plume
She dies, and heavenly Odours fill the Room;
With this she gently bathed the swelling Wound,
It healed, it closed, and all the Part was sound.
Cupid beheld, and, Be that Glory thine,
He cried, but now behold a Work of mine:
Coy Maids, and haughty Belles revere me all,
Beauty must yield, and Woman's Pride must fall:
For now an inward Pang the Fair shall feel,
Not all the Powers of Heaven and Earth can heal.
He said; he bit his Lip, and drew his Bow,
And viewed exulting the defenseless Foe;
Then, with malicious Zeal, he shot the Dart,
That fatal lodged deep sunk in Fannia's Heart.
Then thrice was heard the wounded Virgin's Groan;
And thrice the Parrot scream'd his hideous Moan;
Thrice barked the Lap-Dog from his downy Bed,
And thrice the Kitten reared her drowsy Head!
Alas! how short-lived is all human Power!
The Pride of Years is blasted in an Hour:
All the gay Plans of Conquest, all the Schemes
The Maid had formed, are fled like Morning Dreams;
The Baron shall possess her Beauty's Store,
And Fanny must insult Mankind no more.
Then Venus thus addressed the sleeping Fair:
O Thou, thrice blessed in Heaven's peculiar Care,
Thou, that can all the Gifts of Nature boast,
Charge of Immortals, and the Mortals Toast;
Revere the Counsels of the Powers above,
Forego thy Empire, and submit to Love;
Here cease the Triumphs of thy conquering Charms,
Decreed by Fate to Cynthio's faithful Arms:
Nor with Reluctance yield; for thou, bright Maid,
Enough have ruled, and Man enough obeyed:
Bless this auspicious Night, nor henceforth fear
To lift with artful Hand the pointed Spear;
Safely the dangerous Weapon shall thou wield,
Thy Finger guarded by a sacred Shield:
Vulcan himself the Target shall prepare,
That arms for Fight the gallant God of War:
So shall thy Needle still extend thy Fame,
And Ages yet to come admire thy Name;
The pleasing Tale shall dwell on every Tongue,
And grace the Numbers of some Poet's Song;
And each bright Virgin, each industrious Fair,
Hereafter fearless of the fatal Scar,
My Name shall high-extol with grateful Praise,
While purrs the Kitten, and the Lap-Dog bays;
While Winds shall breathe, and rapid Rivers flow;
And amorous Sonnets sooth the Lovesick Beau.
But let us hence, my Son, with Speed away,
Ever yet the Morning ushers in the Day;
Next Aetna's gloomy Caverns we'll explore,
Where Vulcan's everlasting Forges roar.
She said; and straight they glided on unseen,
Swift as the filmy Mists that skim the Green.
CANTO IV.
WHERE fabled Aetna's Where fabled Aetna's, etc.] The subterraneous Apartment,
assigned here by the Poet to Vulcan, is, we think, more suitable to his Trade,
than his heavenly Mansion, in the latter Part of the eighteenth Book of the
Iliad, with which the Reader will do well to compare this Canto. -- The Shield
of Fannia could not possibly admit of so copious or so pompous a Description,
as that which Homer gives of the Shield of Achilles. -- In all other Respects,
the English happily rivals the Grecian Poet.
dreadful Summits rise,
Whose fiery Womb with Sulphur taints the Skies,
Deep in the Cave lies Vulcan's dark Abode,
The Dwelling of the great mechanic God:
Scarce can the distant Sun's enlivening Ray,
Pierce the thick Gloom, and shed a doubtful Day:
In this dire Vault he toils with panting Breath,
Reddens the Bolt, and shapes the missive Death,
That from the Hand of Jove in Vengeance hurled,
Roars through the Expanse of Heaven, and shakes the World;
Or brighten's round Minerva's Gorgon Shield,
That blazes to the Sun, and burns along the Field;
The huge-limb'd Cyclops wait his dread Command,
A servile Train, a grim gigantic Band.
His Goods about his Shop in Order lay,
Here the sharp Bodkin, there the crafty Key;
Old rusty Arms around the Walls appear,
The blunted Faulchion, and the pointless Spear;
Here hang the battered Shields, which Heroes wore
In Ages past, at Ilion's fatal Shore:
The massy Relics not ten Beaux could raise,
The gentle Warriors of these latter Days.
To these dark Regions of eternal Night
The mighty Powers of Love direct their Flight;
Ambrosial Zephyrs all around them play,
And gently fan the unwholesome Fogs away:
Soon as they entered, all the swarthy Band
Drop their unfinished Labors from their Hand;
The heavenly Form they viewed with wondering Eyes,
And, in a silent Grin, confessed Surprise.
At length, elate exclaims the limping God,
What drew my Fair one from her blessed Abode?
Why have thou left the peaceful Realms above?
Why to these dreary Mansions do thou rove,
Where foul Contagion hovers in the Air,
And sultry Vapors blast the blooming Year?
Name it, whatever it be, O! name thy Boon,
Nor thou can ask, nor I can grant too soon.
Then thus began the beauteous Queen of Love:
O! thou, that form'st the forked Bolts of Jove;
Whose Art can teach the stubborn Brass to yield,
Point in the Spear, or widen in the Shield;
Thou, that did clad in Steel my Aeneas. See the Eighth Book of the Aeneid,
Line 62.
favorite Boy,
That bravely led the poor Remains of Troy;
An equal Task demands thy nicest Care,
Nor arm the Hero now, but arm the Fair:
I ask not Weapons, such as wont to grace
The valiant Damsels The Amazons.
of the Scythian Race;
A little Target shape with curious Care,
To shield the Finger in the Toils of War;
The Gift to Fannia shall Relief impart,
The first in Beauty, as the first in Art:
Wounded she pines, nor dares again to wield
The Instrument of Blood without a Shield;
This shall secure the Fair from future Pain,
And bless for ever all the female Train.
Then when some Nymph, however that Nymph be named,
For the nice Conduct of the Needle famed,
Like Fannia now, the Pride of Womankind,
In Person equal, greater far in Mind,
Admired by all, yet never vain of Power,
In shining Silk, shall form the lively Flower;
Her solid Shield the Fair one shall survey,
And grateful call to Mind this happy Day.
O! haste then to the glorious Task. She said;
IMITATIONS.
The Chief, the Father, and the Captive wept.
Mr. Addison's Campaign.

The Smith, the Husband, and the God obeyed;
The savage Crew with Emulation strove,
Impatient to oblige the Queen of Love:
With sudden Rage the roaring Forges glow,
And Anvils thunder underneath the Blow;
The God quick deals his Arms, the Clangs rebound,
And the wide Vaults rebellow to the Sound;
The pliant Steel in various Forms they twine,
And elegantly shape the Work divine.
Then Vulcan thus: The animated Steel
The deep Impression of your Tools must feel:
Here let myself, and here let Venus stand,
The new-made Armor blazing in her Hand;
Here let the Virgin's Implements of War,
The ponderous Scissars and the Needle Spear,
And all the bright Artillery appear:
Let Fame above the glorious Work resound,
And Bands of Flowers adorn the Border round.
Soon at their Touch the expressive Figures rise,
And breathe and glitter to the distant Skies.
Behold! he cried, the bright Original,
This future Ages shall THE THIMBLE call!
Happy, thrice happy she, the mortal Fair,
Whose Finger first the sacred Shield shall wear.
Then, with a limping Step, and awkward Mien,
He gave the shining Present to his Queen:
Enamored he beheld her pleasing Charms,
And gently clasped her in his sooty Arms:
Averse, the Goddess turned aside her Face,
And with Reluctance met the foul Embrace.
Then, from the dreary Cave they mount to Day,
And to the Baron's House direct their Way.
Lost in a pleasing Dream the Beau was laid,
And thus the bright celestial Vision said:
Cynthio awake, and seize thy Fannia's Charms,
Take her for ever to thy faithful Arms;
Her outward cured, she feels an inward Pain,
And Love impetuous glows in every Vein;
Give her this Target, made by Vulcan's Art,
To guard her Finger from the Needle's Dart;
Secured by this, undaunted she may rear,
And fearless shake the long tremendous Spear:
So shall far distant Times admire her Name,
And crown her Labors with eternal Fame.
She said, and left the Shield, the Gift bestowed,
And with her Son pursued the heavenly Road.
But now the Morn shot forth a feeble Ray,
And tinged the Mountains with the Blush of Day;
Uprose the joyful Baron, straight he spies
The Thimble Shield, and grasps the shining Prize;
The Work divine with Wonder he surveyed,
And Homage due to Cytherea paid:
With Care he decked his Person out that Day,
Artfully fine, deliberately gay;
Adorned with Gold that shone with gaudy Show,
He traverses the Room a finished Beau!
Then eager to embrace his much-loved Fair,
In stately Pomp he mounts his gilded Car.
Soft on her downy Couch the Nymph was laid,
The Midnight Dream revolving in her Head;
Her blooming Cheeks with conscious Blushes glow,
And her Heart fluttered for her charming Beau:
When lo! he comes: Love flashes from his Eyes,
Unusual Raptures in her Bosom rise!
Then to the Fair he gave the Gift bestowed,
The sacred Shield, the Labor of a God:
Joyful she viewed the Workmanship around,
Healed of her last, and safe from future Wound:
'Twas in that Hour the Beau his Passion pressed,
'Twas in that Hour the Fair his Passion blessed:
Cynthio, she cried, O long in Heart adored,
My faithful Lover, and my destined Lord,
Fannia the Powers immortal shall repay,
With grateful Honors for this glorious Day:
Let the glad Tidings, etc.] The Games of our Author (which constitute a very
entertaining, if not necessary Part of the Epic Poem) seem to be introduced
much more judiciously, than those of Homer or Virgil; for, notwithstanding the
Customs of Antiquity, which may be thought to warrant those Authors, Sports
surely of all Kinds, more properly and naturally precede a Wedding, than they
succeed a Funeral. Of the Games themselves, more in their Place.
Let the glad Tidings spread; proclaim about,
This Afternoon, we hold a solemn Route:
Summon the Belles, the Damsels, and the Dames,
The Beaux and Foplings, to the nuptial Games;
In yon Buffet be placed before their Eyes,
Each Combat's due Reward, and glittering Prize.
She said, and Fame her loudest Trumpet blows,
And in gay Clusters crowd the Belles and Beaux.
Thus have I seen, etc.] Although the Poet has been hitherto sparing of his
Similies (the great Figures, as Mr. Pope calls them) we shall find him, for the
future, displaying his Genius in a Variety of beautiful and apt Comparisons. --
In these he seems to be excelled by none, not even Homer himself; at least, our
Author's are all original, and not translated, like Virgil's, from his Greek
Predecessor.
Thus have I seen in Summer, to the Clang
Of beaten Pot, or shining Warming-Pan,
Soothed and delighted by the powerful Charm,
With cheerful Hum, the Insect Nations swarm.
CANTO V.
HIGH on a rich Settee, the future Bride
Sat with the curled Cynthio by her Side;
Aloft, with Luster graced, divinely bright,
The Thimble shines conspicuous to the Sight:
In comely Rank was ranged each brilliant Guest,
And big Ambition swells in every Breast;
The burnished Kettle on a Tripod stands,
And the plumed Moor expects the Fair's Commands*
Here Piles of snow-capt Cakes are seen, and here
Vast Pyramids of well built Toasts appear.
The Rites of Tea begin; and first, they pour
To mighty Jove, Libations on the Floor,
Two Basins of Bohea, whose fragrant Steam
Scents the wide Hall; and next, two Pots of Cream.
Then Belles and Beaux the rich Repast partake;
In Ruin sinks the Edifice of Cake!
All, over their smoking Cups, reclining sit,
And briskly circles Sugar round -- and Wit.
By turns they sip their Drink, by turns they prate,
Now stir a Tea-Dish, now reform the State.
So, in a lowering Eve, the Ducks and Drakes,
On the green Pool renew their clamorous Wakes;
Now dip their sportive Beaks the quacking Race,
Now undistinguished chatt'ring fills the Place,
-- At length, the Rage of Appetite allayed,
Thus to the Route began the lovely Maid;
O ye, whose Bosoms, etc.] The following Particulars, relating to the ensuing
Games of our Author, are observable -- First, That they are exhibited by the
Heroine of the Poem, as those of Homer and Virgil are by their respective
Heroes -- Secondly, That they are of so inoffensive, though interesting, a
Nature, that Ladies and Gentlemen equally appear as Competitors for the several
Prizes; a Circumstance which renders them perfectly agreeable to the present
System of the Epopee, and gives them a manifest Advantage, in Point of Variety
and Novelty, over the Sports of the ancient Poets. -- Thirdly, That,
notwithstanding this Deviation from Antiquity, the Author has taken Care to
infuse the Spirit of Homer and Virgil, even into these genteel or gentle
Exercises, as will appear from many Passages; the most remarkable of which, we
will occasionally take Notice of.
O ye, whose Bosoms beat for Fame, draw near,
Beaux, Belles, Fops, Foplings, Chiefs and Chieflings, hear, And first they
pour -- To mighty Jove, etc.] This is a polite Improvement of the following
Libation in Virgil.

Hic duo rite Mero libans Carchesia Baccho
Fundi^t humi, duo Lacte novo --


Hear what the happiest of her Sex proclaims,
And joyful celebrate the nuptial Games;
You first, whose Limbs, etc.] The first Game, the Foot-Race, is the only one
the Author has taken from Homer and Virgil; which yet is a Proof how willing he
was to borrow from those great Poets, as far as was consistent with his own
more comprehensive Plan.
You, first, whose Limbs excel in active Race,
Three Times round yon Canal pursue the Chase;
Who measures with most Speed the destined Spot,
Or his, or hers, shall be this Coffee-Pot;
A massy Gift, by Artists richly wrought,
That my great Grandsire's wide-fam'd Bounty bought;
What Time my Father's eager Hopes were sped,
And my chaste Mother climbed the bridal Bed.
The second Chief, in this Pedestrian War,
Shall bear in Triumph home yon China-Jar;
And to the Third, due Honors we decree,
This Muff of Pheasant's Down, once worn by me.
Scarce had she spoke, when foremost of the Beaux,
The gay Fribillio, smooth-cheeck'd Youth, arose,
Him Cloe followed next, swift-footed Maid,
Then spruce Myrtillo, that implored the Aid
Of the Nymph-chasing Pan; along they past,
And Dapperwit and Caelia come the last.
Now warm with Hopes, etc.] With this the Reader is desired to compare the
following Account of Virgil.

Intenti expectant Signum: Exultantia que haurit
Corda Pavor pulsans, Laudumque arrecta Cupido.
Inde ubi clara dedit Sonitum Tuba; Finibus omnes,
Hand mora, prosiluere suis. Aeneid, B. v. L. 137.
Non tam praecipites bijugo certamine Campum
Corripuere, ruuntque effusi carcere Currus.
Nec sic immissis Aurigae undantia Lora
Concussere Jugis, pronique in Verbera pendent. L. 144.

Now warm with Hopes, in Order ranged, they stand,
And wait, impatient of the wished Command;
Then, at the Signal of a loud-crack'd Fan,
All from their Station, in an Instant, ran:
The Floodgates thus uplifted, with full Force
Rush out at once the Streams impetuous in their Course:
Before the rest the nimble Cloe flies,
Fribillio follows eager for the Prize;
Next the swift Caelia scuds it over the Green,
Myrtillo last, and Dapperwit were seen.
Now twice the Compass of the allotted Ground,
The Heroes and the Heroines circled round,
When Caelia, Virgin of a subtle Heart,
Thus to herself, -- "My Fate depends on Art -- "
So spoke, and pressing by Fribillio's Side,
Headlong she plunged him in the miry Tide.
Whelmed and amazed, etc.] Thus Virgil describes the unfortunate Situation of
Menaetes.

At gravis ut fundo vix tandem redditus imo est
Jam Senior, madidaque fluens in Vest Maenetes;
Summa petit Scopuli, siccaque in Rupe resedit.
Illum et labentem Teucri et risere natantem:
Et salsos rident revomentem Pectore Fluctus. Aeneid, B. v. L. 178.

Whelmed and amazed, awhile the Hero lay,
Gasping, and sputt'ring, in the watery Way,
Dropping and faint, at length, he crawled to Shore,
And the Skies burst with universal Roar.
Caelia exulting, in the second Place,
Bounds over the Lawn, and pushes for the Race;
Myrtillo close pursued the panting Fair,
And to his God preferred the secret Prayer;
"Give me at least, etc.] Thus Mnestheus in Virgil.

Non jam prima peto Mnestheus, neque vincere certo.
Quanquam O! sed superent, quibus hoc, Neptune, dedisti.
Extremos pudeat rediisse: hoc vincite, Cives,
Et prohibete Nefas. L. 194, etc.
So likewise Ulysses in Homer succeeds upon his Application to Pallas.

Assist, O Goddess (thus in Thought he prayed)
And present at his Thought descends the Maid.
See Pope's Homer, B. xxiii. L. 899, etc.
"Give me at least this Damsel to outspeed,
"And a young Greyhound at thy Shrine shall bleed."
The God propitious heard; for, sad to tell,
Prone to the Earth the heedless Caelia fell.
Loud shout the Beaux, the frighted Virgins cry;
Myrtillo first, then Dapperwit goes by.
The Goal now reached, the Victors bear away
The well-contested Honors of the Day.
Now to the Hall, for so ordained the Fair,
Again the sprightly Company repair:
When thus the Maid -- Is there a Belle, whose Might
Dares meet a gallant Beau in single Fight?
Such, sure, there is, or Fannia's Hopes are vain,
Quick let the Warriors take the marble Plain;
And, 'till we wake the Voice of yonder Clock,
Contend at Battledoor, and Shuttlecock.
The glorious Victor in the hardy Fray,
This deep-ear'd Lap-Dog nobly shall repay:
Long has he frisk'd it in my Chamber tame,
Never yet polluted with the Blood of Game.
The vanquished too shall thank our generous Care,
Blessed with this Ivory Case, and Tooth-picker.
She said; and light up-sprang, etc.] This Gentleman makes as brave a Figure
here as Epeus in Homer, or Dares in Virgil.

Talis prima Dares Caput altum in Praelia tollit,
Ostenditque Humeros latos, alternaque jactat
Brachia protendens, et verberat Ictibus Auras.
See Aeneid, B. v. L. 375.

She said; and light up-sprang Cosmelius gay,
Trim as the painted Butterfly of May;
With Head and Heart erect, he stalks the Floor,
And proudly brandishes his Battledoor.
Flyrtilla saw, and, "Grant me, Gods, she cried,
To humble to the Ground this Coxcomb's Pride."
Then on the spacious Plain she takes her Stand,
And poises the huge Engine in her Hand*
The sounded Battledoors for Fight prepare,
At once the Drums and Weapons of the War!
Each now the Arm with dext'rous Vigor plies,
Aloft the feathered Cork in Eddies flies;
With quick-repeated Strokes the Drums rebound,
And the arched Roof returns a hollow Sound.
Now in high Curves they deal the wary Blow,
Now whirls the giddy Shuttlecock below.
Thus, over the verdant Surface of the Mead,
The light-wing'd Swallows try their rapid Speed,
Now skim the Ground, now higher Flights prepare,
And, in a thousand Mazes, cut the Air.
Long time the Chiefs, with equal Skill, engage,
And glows the Battle with a dubious Rage;
The Gods, with Wonder, the dread Fight surveyed,
And some the Youth inspire, and some, the Maid.
At length, nice poised, etc.] This Circumstance is happily borrowed from the
Greek and the Latin Poet. See Pope's Homer, B. xxii. L. 271. See Virgil's
Aeneid, B. xii. L. 725.
At length, nice poised Jove holds his golden Scales,
Down sinks the Beau's, the Virgin's Fate prevails:
For lo! unseen, and in the Hero's Way,
The treacherous Fragment of an Orange lay;
And, as he stretched him with exerted Might,
At one swift Stroke, to end the tedious Fight,
Slipped his unstable Foot; flat on the Floor
He fell; the high Arch rings with various Roar,
And the white Pavement, etc.] As this is the only indelicate or shocking Image
in the whole Poem, it may be expected some Apology should be offered for it: It
will be sufficient to observe, that, as Accidents of this Nature are really
inseparable from such Exercises, so there was a Necessity of painting this in
the striking Colors of Poetry. It had conveyed the very same Idea, but yet
would have been below the Dignity of the Epic Style, had the Poet told us --
The Hero's Nose bled.
And the white Pavement floats with spouting Gore.
Quick to his Aid, etc.] We have here a more lively Picture of this unfortunate
Combatant, than the original one of Dares or of Euryalus.

Ast illum fidi aequales, genua aegra trahentem,
Jactantemque utroque Caput, crassumque Cruorem
Ore rejectantem, mixtosque in sanguine Dentes,
Ducunt ad Naves. See Aeneid, B. v.

Quick to his Aid the flippant Fops repair,
Uplift his Head, and yield him purer Air;
His fluttering Soul with gentle Speech compose,
With vivifying Drops regale his Nose,
Then pale and bloody from the Field conveyed,
And softly placed him on the silken Bed.
Flyrtilla, Mistress of the glorious Fray,
Bears in her Arms the much-loved Prize away.
Then Fannia to the Throng -- Once more, attend
My Voice with Heed; not here our Games shall end.
You, that have Strength, and active Slight enough,
Enter the spacious Lists of Blind-Man's-Buff.
Let thrice six Belles and Beaux, a goodly Show,
Their separate Lots in this silk Bonnet throw;
And, as their several Fortunes shall decide,
Of either Sex three Chiefs, in turn, shall hide.
The Chief that soonest shall, with hood-winked Eyes,
Seize in the hot Pursuit, and name the Prize,
Shall wear this Snuff Box, etc.] A happy Expression; for though the Snuff Box
be not an essential Part of Dress, it is, with the Beau-monde, a proper Adjunct
to it.
Shall wear this Snuff Box, turned with curious Art,
In Form resemblant of the human Heart:
Who shines conspicuous in the second Place,
Joyful shall own this studded Tweezer-Case:
To the third worthy in the hardy Strife,
Last we assign this silver-hafted Knife.
She spoke -- the Lots are thrown -- the Chances fall
To short-legg'd Damon, Altamont the tall,
To dimpled Daphne, to Vanessa fair,
Beau Sprig, and Cloris with the golden Hair.
In Row twelve Judges of the Combat stand,
Each with a Watch accordant in his Hand.
Damon advances first; his Eyes are bound;
And, like a Top, etc.] This Simile of the Top is introduced more successfully,
we presume, than that in Virgil animadverted upon by Mr. Addison.
And, like a Top, they twirl him five Times round.
The rapid Motion turns his ringing Head;
He calls the Foe -- the titt'ring Foe is fled.
Long time with hopeless Chase, and Labor vain,
Duck-like he waddled over the stony Plain;
At length, with Grief and Shame, constrained to yield,
To others he resigned the toilsome Field.
Next Altamont, Chief bony, lank, and tall,
Proceeds; like Polypheme, he strides the Hall;
Wide grope his sprawling Hands in Search of Prey;
The frighted Hosts on Tiptoes slip away;
So the lean, hungry Pike, in Quest of Food,
Darts his vast Length across the silver Flood;
Ten thousand Panicks seize the finny Race,
And, in thick Shoals, they scud from Place to Place.
But now the Chieftain grasped Clarinda's Waste,
Her well-known Shriek the Captive Fair confessed:
Clarinda, loud the Beau exulting cried;
Clarinda, loud the vocal Walls replied.
The Judges note the Time -- next Daphne came,
A Nymph alert, and studious of the Game.
Now here, now there, like Quicksilver, she flies
Elastic round, and every Corner tries.
But for hard Fate, the Nymph a Prize had gained,
For, in a sudden Whirl, her Ancle sprain'd.
And now, with watery Eyes, and limping Pace,
Daphne reluctant quits the noble Chase.
Vanessa next the Fate of Combat proves,
The fair Vanessa, Darling of the Loves;
Swift speeds the Maid, swift scuttle the pursued,
Wheel, as she wheels, and all her Arts elude;
Till hapless Flash, a Fopling of high Note,
Tripp'd at Lucinda's trailing Petticoat.
Vanessa caught the Alarm; the Fop she strains
Hard in her Grasp; a solemn Silence reigns:
Beau Flash, I know him by his rich Perfume,
She cried; and Acclamations shake the Room.
Then gentle Sprig fair Fannia thus addressed;
Me Love forbids with Cloris to contest;
So please the Mistress of this glorious Day,
Let the late Victors bear their Gifts away;
For me, to save the Toil of farther Strife,
To Cloris I resign the silver-hafted Knife.
The Fair approved -- The Prizes, all decree
First to the Beau; Vanessa, next to thee:
And tender Cloris, pleased to end the Strife,
Joyful receives the silver-hafted Knife.
The Games now done, the Evening they prolong
With Strains of Music, and the Voice of Song:
The sprightly Tribes the sumptuous Banquet share,
At length, fatigued, to needful Rest repair.
Alike expectant of the coming Day,
Cynthio, and Fannia all-impatient lay.
The Day appears; with mutual Joy they wed,
And genial Hymen, etc.] At length, the Action of this Poem is brought to a
happy Catastrophe; and, upon the whole, we must do the Author the Justice to
acknowledge, that he has produced, what we have long been encouraged to expect
from another Quarter, viz. A Modern Epic Poem, written upon the Model of the
Ancients.
And genial Hymen blessed the nuptial Bed.
THE END.
HENRY AND ROSAMOND.

A TRAGEDY.

Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto major qui peccat habetur.
JUVEN. The SECOND EDITION, CORRECTED.

TO Sir JOHN PHILIPPS, Bart.
SIR,
THOUGH I am happy in your Permission to shelter under your Name a Performance
which stands in much Need of your Favor and Protection, especially as it comes
into the World with some Disadvantage; yet I hope you will do me the Justice to
believe me actuated by a nobler Principle than that of a Selfishness common to
all Authors, in my Choice of a Patron upon the present Occasion.

For, Sir, the following Sheets are with a particular Propriety yours, whether
you are considered as a Person sincerely attached to the University of Oxford,
or affectionately interesting yourself in the Welfare of Pembroke-College; to
the Regard and best Wishes of which Society you have a double Claim, both as an
Ornament, and a Benefactor.

The common Topics of Panegyric are obvious; and I have here a fair and
agreeable Opportunity of taking Notice of those many amiable Qualities, which
adorn you in public and private Life, and for which you are so justly beloved
and esteemed: But my Inclination is corrected by a seasonable Thought, that
most Writers of the present Age have, in this Respect, a considerable Advantage
over me, as it is much more easy to make a Character, than to describe one.

Besides, it would be needless to enter into a Detail of those Praises, which
are already in the Mouth of every Well-wisher to his Country: And therefore I
will only indulge the Impulse of Gratitude, which points to that Part of your
Character, which more immediately affects me; your Goodnature and
Condescension, to which I am indebted for the Honor of your Acquaintance and
Friendship, and for your favorable Acceptance of the following Poem.

Give me Leave to assure you, Sir, that I am principally anxious for the
Reputation of this Tragedy, from an earnest Desire of transmitting to Posterity
a Monument of the Regard and Veneration I have for the Person and Character of
Sir JOHN PHILIPPS. I am,

SIR, Your much obliged, And most humble Servant, WILLIAM HAWKINS.
PEMBROKE-COLLEGE, OXON, March 13, 1749.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE most material Objection to this Tragedy, made by Mr. Garrick, was, that it
is rather a Poem, than a Play. -- A consolatory Octjection at least! as it is
founded only in the Author's acknowleged Transgression of the mechanical Laws
of the Drama. But however reasonable the Objection might be to the
Representation of this Tragedy upon the Stage, it was by no Means thought a
sufficient one to its original Publication; nor consequently, it is presumed,
will be esteemed such against its having a Place in the present Collection. --
Those who are offended at the Liberties taken in it, may, if they please, call
it an Historical Play, and then all Exceptions of this Nature vanish of Course.
-- After all, the Objection will perhaps have less Weight with the candid and
judicious Reader, when he has favored with his Perusal the Essay on the
Ancient and Modern Drama; though he is not to look upon that Essay as written
with a View to the Defense of this particular Play, or to consider this
Advertisement as any Thing like a Declaration of the Author's Right of
Exemption from the common Rules of the Drama, by Virtue of any superior
Qualifications in Himself.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
King HENRY the Second. Prince HENRY. Duke of CORNWALL. Earl of SALISBURY. Lord
CLIFFORD. Earl of LEICESTER. Earl of WINCHESTER. Earl of SURRY.
WOMEN.
Queen ELINOR. ROSAMOND. HARRIANA.
Guards and Attendants.

SCENE in and near CANTERBURY.

HENRY AND ROSAMOND.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter the Earl of LEICESTER. LEICESTER. IF there is that some call Eternal
Justice --
Let not the coward Thought perplex my Soul:
My Bosom entertains two lordly Guests,
Strong-plum'd Ambition, and Hell-gender'd Lust:
The Voice of Conscience, against their wild Domain
Is but a Whisper to the Whirlwind's Blast.
Henry Plantagenet has crossed my Hopes;
I stand the Outcast of his Peevishness,
And disappointed Rival of his Love!
But I have deeply laid my Plan of Vengeance:
I have been long young Harry's Oracle;
His shallow Friends walk in my Leading-strings:
If Fate give him the Crown, I Will bear the Rule,
And through the Gate of Power shall find Access
To Love, and Rosamond. But see Lord Surry.

Enter Earl of Surry. Sur. My Lord of Leicester, have thou seen the Prince?

Leic. No. What of him?

Sur. O he is seeking thee:
Thou have fast wedged thyself within his Heart;
He calls thee valiant, faithful, just, and good:
He now demeans himself as we could wish;
Talks of high Fame, and hardy Feats of Arms:
Thou have inspired his Soul. He swears, the Crown,
Whose Glories fade on Henry's withered Head,
Would better flourish on his youthful Brow:
In troth he is a mettled Youth, my Lord,
And Nature meant him well.

Leic. Ay, or how else
Could we have taught him his own Worth, or ours;
Or hope to raise our Honors from the Dust?
Faint Hearts will call this Treason; but, my Lord,
It Is injured Merit's Cause; and we will work
To turn the Current of our low-ebb'd Fortunes
Into a fuller Channel: But he comes,
And I have joyful Tidings for his Ear.

Enter Prince Henry, and Earl of Winchester. P. Hen. Well, our good Friend, and
trusty Councellor,
What from our Uncle Scotland?

Leic. This, my Liege:
In princely Terms he greets your Royal Highness,
And well approves the Alliance you have offered:
But Words, so please your Grace, in forced Extent,
Are but the Texture of fine Rhetoric;
Plain Action is Sincerity's best Proof:
He has encamped his Troops on English Ground,
A peerless Force of twenty thousand strong.
The Earl of Chester, with your Father's Powers,
Is in full March to meet him.

P. Hen. Say, my Lord,
On what Pretense makes he this Armament?
For we must wait the Issue of a Battle,
Before we can avow ourself his Friend.

Leic. His Claim's distinct from yours. He does demand
Full Restitution of the frontier Towns,
Your Father wrested from him in the Wars:
And thus he seems no Party in our Cause,
While we, as Time shall serve, may back his Quarrel.

P. Hen. Why these are noble Tidings, and befit
Our Royal Purpose. This looks well, my Lords:
I will no longer bend me to the Brow
Of this old King, my Father. Leicester, Surry,
Winchester, Friends, Companions of my Fortunes,
Give me your Hands, your Hearts, and, trust me, Lords,
We bravely shall outface these perilous Times,
Assisted by your Loves.

Sur. My hasty Will
Is on the Wing, mocking Ability,
And Zeal outstrips Performance.

Win. And so, in Honesty of Heart, says Winchester.

P. Hen. Thanks to you both: But, my good Lord of Leicester,
Are these same Scots, our new-contracted Friends,
Such as our Honor may lean safe upon?

Leic. Better never mounted Glory's steep Ascent.
Sir, they are bold as the first Sons of Nature,
Ere Pomp and Luxury debauched the World:
Bred in a Land of Poverty and Want,
They live by free, uncultivated Virtue:
Ease were unnatural to their Iron Hearts;
For Labor is the Business of their Lives:
And, when they are summoned forth to serve their Prince,
Dreadful they march, embodied in the Field,
As the fell Storm, or Death-dispersing Bolt,
That rushes on, and levels all before it.

P. Hen. It Is good, and henceforth will we mould our Person
Into the Attitude of Majesty.

Winch. It fits your Highness well.

P. Hen. Thou'st seen me, Leicester, in the Bloom of Youth,
Amidst the Joys of a voluptuous Court,
Where Folly spread her silken Net before me:
There softening Beauty breathed the amorous Sigh;
There melting Music tuned her Siren Voice,
And the high-flowing Bowl foamed with rich Wines,
Soliciting even Abstinence to taste:
Let me not turn my gallant Thought that Way;
When Virtue's balanced on so nice a Poise,
One Breath of Inclination turns the Scale.
Farewell for ever Pleasure's nerveless Tribe,
Welcome the manly Pomp of crimson War,
The Heaven-scaling Noise of charging Foes,
The piercing Groans of Bravery laid in Dust,
And all the Dangers, all the Sweets of Glory.

Leic. Spoke like a Candidate for this World's Empire.
Old Harry's foremost Boast is only this,
That he is Father to a Prince like you.

P. Hen. Go to; he is weak, he is weak, and peevish,
And yet it is current Conversation here,
That he has well acquitted him in France Leicester,
To martial Chivalry.

Sur. True it is, my Liege,
In open Field, he'as twice overthrown their Powers,
And now returns --

Leic. -- Ay, like a Fugitive,
Rather than Conqueror; the doting Hero
Comes whining like an Infant for his Toy:
O he is worse than distaff'd Hercules!
Where is the Honor of your Saxon House,
If Harlots make a Tool of Majesty?
Fame shall record Harry succeeded Rosamond,
Not Harry Harry.

P. Hen. By the immortal Name
Of my great Ancestors it is too much --

Leic. O give that noble Indignation Room!
Have you not Friends, and Justice on your Side?
Did we not all swear Fealty to your Highness,
Convened in full Assembly by your Father?
Or was it but a Show of Majesty,
A solemn Farce of State for Boys to shout at?

P. Hen. Hold there -- For every Word thy Love has uttered,
Rebukes my tardy Soul -- O it is most true,
As spiritless, and dull-temper'd as I seem,
This Head has born fair England's Diadem:
You all remember 'twas at Winchester,
In Presence of the States of the whole Realm,
The Royal Grant was made; when on this Brow
Rested the Imperial Crown, which should confer
High Dignity, and Share of sovereign Sway:
It was the free Donation of our Father.

Leic. Henry has sure forgotten him of late:
For then your Royal Highness may remember,
He did discharge an Office that became him.

P. Hen. Ay, thou do well remind me of it, Leicester;
'Twas at the sumptuous Banquet then prepared,
I sat enthroned, the foremost of the Feast,
Lord of that glorious Day: 'Twas then my Father
Stepped forth obsequious, like a Vassal-Prince,
Tending my Kingly Board; and sure, he cried,
No Monarch ever was served so honorably.
I whispered in his Ear his Grace of York,
That, born a Prince, I thought me not much honored
By this same Ministry of that Duke's Son.
My Father was no better.

Leic. Nor is now,
But in our foolish Fears. Was that same Crown
You just now spoke of but a May Day Garland,
Bestowed as on an Idiot, in mere Pastime?
Unnat'ral Insult! By the Blood that is in you,
If you have Hand, or Heart, or Sword, revenge,
Revenge yourself, your Country, and your Friends;
Your Friends for you dishonored, slighted, scorned;
Your Country softened by effeminate Rule;
Yourself the stalking Shadow of a King.

P. Hen. Enough, my towering Fancy grasps the Skies:
Hence, give the Word to Fate; gird on my Sword:
Thou faithful Guardian of my wavering Youth,
I Will go where thou and Honor point the Way.
Where are these trusty Scots? Quick let us join them;
I will unfold my Banner to the Sun,
And pour my Vengeance on this Parent-Foe.

Leic. Well said; but I must cool this burning Vein,
Or this mad Youth will hurry us to Ruin. [Aside.
I meant not this: I pray your Grace be calm.

P. Hen. Yes, as the Sea, that quarrels with the Wind!
Who is it can tame the hungry Panther's Rage?
Glory has still an Appetite more keen:
Harry contends not for a vulgar Prize;
It is a Crown: Repeat it to the Heavens,
With the big Mouth of War: It is a Crown:
O you should rush in Fury from my Presence,
And boldly pluck it from the Tyrant's Brow.

Leic. Your Highness knows our Hearts and Duty yours:
But Zeal thus premature were worse than Treason:
Our growing Cause is yet too young to weather
This most tempestuous Time: If Fortune bless
Our good Allies with Victory, the Crown
Is yours by Covenant, and your Right proclaimed
By Scotland's King: Till when lie we in secret,
Like the unseen insinuating Flame,
That creeps while it destroys: Without this Caution,
We are not safe an Hour -- Your Father comes,
And you're withdrawn from Court -- Hah! how sounds that?

P. Hen. As I love Honor, I do fear him not.

Leic. No -- But the less Suspicion's baleful Blast
Breathes on our Counsel, it takes Root the deeper.

P. Hen. What would thou urge me to?

Leic. Come, come, my Lord,
You must yourself to Court to meet the King;
And, when he questions you of your Departure,
Be you not too submissive, nor too high:
We can find Reasons plausible enough
Besides this Disaffection -- as -- do you mark --
The Treatment of your Mother -- the foul Scandal
Of a licentious Palace -- and the like;
All Provocations gross: And, Sir, of this
You shall be more advised anon.

P. Hen. Say so?
I thank thy Penetration -- I was hot,
But thou art wise and brave. Our Craft shall prosper;
The staunchest Hound of State, that ever traced
The wily Doublings of Conspiracy,
In such a Chase as this shall lose his Scent,
And yelp his balk'd Sagacity in Air.

Leic. May Fortune say, Amen.

P. Hen. My Lord of Leicester,
We must dispatch some fresh Instructions strait
For Scotland's King; then for the Court away;
We will pursue this Business, come what may.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter the Earl of Salisbury and Lord Clifford. Sals. Yet hold, good Clifford.

Clif. It Is an old Man's Weakness:
Was it not I that trained him up to War,
That taught his feeble Arm to grasp the Sword,
And pointed out the Paths that lead to Glory?
Was it for this he robbed me of my Daughter?

Sals. Forget it, learn to scorn this Royal Robber,
And be at Peace.

Clif. It is impossible.
Had he reduced me to the Beggar's Lot,
Or stripped me of the Honors of my Race,
I could have smiled at his Ingratitude:
But to deprive me of my greatest Hopes,
To steal away my choicest, sweetest Flower,
To tempt young Innocence with hellish Arts --
It Is more than Pain -- it is -- what is it not?
O it is too much for an old Man to bear.
But can assure me he returns so soon?

Sals. Each Morn expects to see him crowned with Laurels,
And rich with Spoils: Fortune still takes his Part:
Wherever he marches, pale-faced Terror stalks
With Giant Strides, and leads his Van of Battle.

Clif. Let me do Justice to the Man has wronged me:
My Lord of Salisbury, from his Dawn of Youth,
I Have marked the Progress of an active Soul,
Suited for warlike Deeds and brave Achievements:
But then his turb'lent Passions work so strong,
His Character is ever an Extreme;
A Hero, or a Dotard in Excess;
This Day, with a deep Sense of Honor stung,
A Convert to fair Virtue; and the next,
Born by fierce Appetite, a Slave to Vice.

Sals. His generous Temper one Day may prevail;
For Fate still throws Occasion in his Way,
To put his noble Qualities to Proof:
An unexpected Tempest from the North
Hangs lowering over his Head; and the young Prince,
Who breathes a mighty and right Royal Spirit,
Has with some noble Followers left the Court.

Clif. He is ensnared by guileful Leicester's Art:
The King, thou know, has banished him his Presence,
He meditates Revenge in all its Venom;
And since arose the League 'twixt him and Harry.

Sals. Report has said this Lord, on Terms of Honor,
Wooed your fair Daughter's Love.

Clif. He did profess so;
But much I fear me with a vile Design;
For Satisfaction in which Point, this Day
I Have penned a Note, in female Characters,
As from my Daughter, full of Brandishments,
And cordial Invitations from her Love:
If I surprise him at the Place assigned,
I shall detect his Baseness to his Face.
Perhaps I but transcribe the Sentiments
Of her abandoned Heart -- That as it may.

Sals. Think not too meanly of thy beauteous Daughter;
Henry, it is true, engrosses all her Soul,
Yet in her lonely, solitary Hours,
Sad, she regrets her ruined Innocence,
And mourns, like the first Fair, her fallen State.

Clif. It Is superficial Grief: A barren Soil,
Where Reformation never can take Root:
O, that an only Child should be a Curse!
But let us hence; the Thought encroaches on me;
In Pity to myself I would divert it.
Cousin, this Way; I have yet more to tell you,
Of what my Soul is purposed towered the King. [Exeunt.

SCENE III.
Enter Rosamond and Harriana. Har. This Coolness is untimely.

Ros. Harriana,
The unpleasing Thought will sometimes steal upon me:
Great as they seem, all these are dear-bought Pleasures:
Even Henry's Love has cost me many a Pang.
Peace is the glorious Privilege of Virtue.
The harmless Country Maid, that lives retired,
Beneath the Covert of a homely Hut,
And knows no View beyond her daily Bread,
Has more Heart's Ease than I.

Har. Prepost'rous Melancholy!
Is not the World, and its first Master, yours?
Nature, thy Handmaid, still supplies thy Wishes,
Lavish of all her Stock, as who should say,
Thou shall be happy.

Ros. These are mean Suggestions:
Know, I never sold my Virtue, but to Love:
The massy Store of the Wealth-pregnant Earth,
The Pomp, and Eye-attracting Blaze of Courts,
And all the gilded Baits of female Pride,
Were Bribes my Henry's Love disdained to offer:
Such as it is, this Beauty won his Heart;
How he won mine -- I know not -- but he won it --
For him I threw away my Innocence,
And am the Scoff of every scornful Tongue:
For him I Have stained the noble Name of Clifford,
And pierced his aged Soul who gave me Being;
For him, even now, my Heart with Transport beats;
His Presence ever calms my troubled Breast,
Stills each dull Thought, and bids all Sorrow vanish.

Har. Once more he comes victorious from the Field:
O meet him with thy Love's sincerest Welcome.

Ros. Yes, he returns, and Thought adieu for ever:
Hence, I defy that Tyrant of the Mind:
My Love wants not a Plea: Henry, my Lord,
Is great and generous: He Is the Pride of Fame,
And Fortune's Darling: Henry lulls my Soul
In soft unfelt Captivity.

Har. But hark*
Yon Trumpet's Voice proclaims him near at hand.

Ros. O sweetest Music to the ravished Ear:
Now every Thing begins to smile about me;
Bright seems the Season as the newborn Spring,
When every Flower put forth its freshest Fragrance,
And infant Nature breathed her Sweets around.

Har. It Is now thou risest to thy proper Self;
Thy Charms are summoned all, thy Graces dawn,
And every sparkling Beauty beams anew.
But lo, the Royal Hero -- I retire. [Exit Harriana.

Enter King Henry. K. Hen. Take me once more, my Love, into thy Arms;
Thus let me clasp thee to my faithful Breast,
Thus feed my Eyes upon thy glowing Beauties,
And pour my Soul in Transports out before thee.
What, what is Fame, or Victory, to this?
Adieu the Pomp and Pageantry of War,
And Love resume the Empire of my Soul.

Ros. Speak not my Eyes the Language of my Heart?
Or shall I open my rich Hoard of Fondness,
With all the soft Impertinence of Love?
Why has my Lord so long been absent from me?
Methinks I now receive thee in thy Tent,
Dreadfully graceful from the Field of Blood,
The manly Dew still reeking on thy Brow.
O let me sooth my Hero to his Rest,
Then kindly chide his Eagerness of Valor,
And bid him sheath the Sword for Love of me.

K. Hen. To thee I am devoted from this Hour:
I Will give Mankind my loose superfluous Moments,
But Love shall claim my more substantial Care.
No petty Monarchs shall divide us more:
France and her King have felt the Wrath of Harry.
I flew on Wings of Victory to War,
And like celestial Fire consumed the Foe;
Then halted in the mid Career of Glory:
Conquest was Waste of Time: Quick I returned,
And left the Business of the World unfinished.

Ros. Forgive me, Henry, if I shed a Tear;
A Tear, at once, of Pity and of Love.
Gaze not thus fondly on me whilst I speak:
It is a fatal Fondness, and betrays thee.
Possessed of me, art thou not lost to Honor?
Where is the native Greatness of thy Soul?
Thy generous Thirst of everlasting Glory?
O had thou never fixed thine Eyes on me,
Fame, on her brazen Tablet, had displayed
Thy Royal Name, and shown it to the Stars.
But I shall blot thy Memory for ever.

K. Hen. Thy kind Concern is far too nice, my Love:
O Rosamond! it is but the Dream of Pride:
Kings, and their Subjects, all are Nature's Children;
And ermin'd Greatness on the Throne must own it.
What is the Monarch more than other Men?
His Appetites and Passions are the same;
He hates, revenges, hopes, and fears, as they do;
Or does he love, O does he love like me;
It Is Glory, it is Ambition, to pursue
The heavenly Fair, and win her to his Wishes.
Is it not Pride to hang upon thy Smile?
Is it not Triumph to enfold thee thus?
Art thou not All, and is not this World Nothing?

Ros. I could for ever listen to thy Voice:
Whenever thou speak, Reason gives up the Cause,
And Nature whispers, what thou say is right.

K. Hen. Be Love the Theme, and I could talk for ever.

Ros. Be Love the Theme, I could for ever hear thee.

K. Hen. O come, my rural Goddess, to my Arms:
We'll lie upon the Flow'r-enamell'd Turf;
The Garland-Wreath shall be our Diadem;
The Leaf-clad Bower our Canopy of State;
Our Music the sweet Matin of the Lark:
Then bless me with the Sunshine of thy Beauty,
Till I forget my Royal Occupation,
The Task of Greatness, and the Toil of Power,
And every Sense be full of Love and thee.

Ros. How does thy Language charm my listening Ears?
Yet must I dread this Indolence of Thought,
The Scotchmen, and their King, are up in Arms;
And, if Report say true, the Invasion boasts
The Countenance of your Son.

K. Hen. Fear not, my Love:
My better Genius shall protect me still.
Lend me thy Lip -- Danger seems nothing now.
O lead me to some peaceful, close Retreat,
Where all is calm, and gentle as thy Breast,
Let hostile War advance, and Faction rage,
I will not deign to give Mankind a Look,
But safely rest within thy faithful Arms.
So, when the Pilgrim views the Storm arise,
To the kind Shelter of some Grot he flies,
And in that sweet Recess securely lies.
Fearless he hears the dreadful Tempests roar,
And the mad Oceans burst upon the Shore;
The Heaven's in vain their flaming Terrors spread,
And Thunders roll unheeded over his Head. [Ex.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter King Henry, Duke of Cornwall, and Attendants. King Henry. COMES on our
Brother Scotland?

Corn. Yes, my Liege;
He means to give my Lord of Chester Battle.

K. Hen. Be It so: Our Arms shall tame his Insolence*
Where is our Son? His uncurb'd Spirit of late
Gives Cause of some Suspicion: Yet we hope,
In humble wise, he will confess the Fault
Of his abrupt Departure. His new Friends
(No Friends to me; though Foes, I fear them not)
He must abandon; and, mean time, we trust,
A Look of our Displeasure shall control
His heedless Folly, and enforce his Duty.

Corn. My Liege, the Queen.

K. Hen. I would have shunned her; for she awes my Soul:
I know her still a tender faithful Wife,
Wronged as she is: It Is my eternal Guilt,
That love I cannot, where I must esteem.
She comes -- Why starts my Breast? -- I must assume
The cruel Port of Shame-proof Villainy.

Enter Queen. Excuse my Freedom, Madam, if I ask,
What Business has the Queen of England here?
Queen. I come by Virtue of a better Title:
Was Elinor no more than Queen of England,
She had not thus disturbed you with her Presence.
Am I naught else, my Lord?

K. Hen. Ay, you are my Wife;
A Name that sounds offensive in my Ear.

Queen. Why did thou teach me 'twas a pleasing Name,
Importing Peace, and Harmony, and Joy?
You loved me, when you made me what I am;
And yet you loved me but to make me wretched.

K. Hen. Love you have learnt, and so all Women can.
Did thou ever learn Obedience to a Husband?

Queen. Can Malice say I ever failed in that?

K. Hen. I pr'ythee then be dutiful, and leave me.

Queen. This Treatment is unkind. Is that the Voice,
That often has chid me for a Moment's Absence?
Does it displease thee to behold me thus?
Blame not the Weakness which yourself have caused:
It Is Grief's allowed Prerogative to mourn;
For sure it is no Crime to be distressed.

K. Hen. Away! Thy Woman's Tears are lost on me.
Why do thou plead against Necessity?
It was in Spite of me, I loved thee once;
And 'twas in Spite of me, that I forsook thee:
The Tie of Marriage is but personal;
For Love alone's the Cement of the Heart.
Yet grant that Contract good, my Falsehood voids it.
I am no Husband: Why art thou a Wife?
The Bond is cancelled. Be free as I am;
And take thy Heart from this ungrateful Object.

Queen. Can the swift Current to its Spring recede?
Or elemental Fire to Earth descend?
Then only my fixed Thought can turn from thee.
My Love, tho'ill repaid, shall shine a Pattern
Of Faith unmoved, without Reproach, for ever:
Henry, though cruel, yet is Henry still.
What was it, but my Love, that sent me hither?
I thought I durst not come -- but still I came,
Unwelcom'd, slighted Stranger, as I am.

K. Hen. I see thy Virtue, and respect it, Elinor:
But what is Virtue in the Eye of Love?
Fate wrongly joined us, and mismatch'd our Hearts.
Thou art framed tender, innocent, and good,
For private Comfort, and domestic Joy:
My restless Spirit ranges uncontrolled,
As Fancy sways, or lawless Passions guide.

Queen. And yet thou can be true, though not to me:
That restless Spirit Rosamond can rule,
The Mistress of my Property, thy Heart.
Throw that detested Wanton from thy Breast:
The Pride of Woman's Nature sues for this.
O do not wrong me in the Face of Day,
And I will bear thy Hate with Cheerfulness.

K. Hen. Thou rail'st by License of an injured Wife;
Else, let me me tell thee, Elinor, 'twere Treason,
What thou have just now said.

Queen. I ask your Pardon:
I had forgot how dearly Henry loves her;
And it is my Duty to promote his Joy:
Nor justly can I hate even her, my Rival;
Woman is frail, and Henry more than Man:
Be happy then, blessed Pair, while I Am undone:
A jealous Wife no more shall spoil your Loves:
I will not taint your Peace with one Upbraiding,
But lay me down without a Groan, and die.

K. Hen. This Tenderness reproaches me yet more
Than all the just Invectives thou could offer.
O live to scorn the Man has wronged thee thus.
Provoke I not thy utmost Enmity?

Qu. Thou can provoke my Sorrows, not my Hate.

K. Hen. Have I not given thee Cause? Be but my Foe,
I shall enjoy the Sharpness of thy Malice;
But Goodness undeserved, unasked, torments me.
Love, Honor, Pity, tear my laboring Soul. [Aside.

Queen. Life had been happy with thee -- But it is past;
And I submit -- Live, and be happy thou.

K. Hen. By Heaven, this moves my Stubborness of Temper;
And Rosamond and Elinor, distract me.
Must I then ruin one, whom Laws divine,
And my free Choice decreed mine own for ever,
And cooly mark her close her Eyes in Death?
Or can I leave the gentle Rosamond,
That tender Prime of Youth, that Spring of Beauty,
First won by Promise of eternal Love?
Painful Extreme of Madness, either Way!
For either Way I Am doomed to be a Villain.

Queen. Seek not Excuses for thy broken Vows:
I freely give those sacred Pledges back;
Nor shall I ever ascribe the Pangs I suffer,
To Henry's Crime, but Heaven's afflicting Hand.
I know thee great and noble still by Nature.
Thou will hereafter reverence my Name,
And praise the Woman, whom thou could not love.

K. Hen. O Heart, Heart, Heart, why art thou not my own?
Had thou attacked me like a Fiend from Hell,
Armed with keen Malice, and severest Wrath,
I had not shunned the Conflict: But as now
Thou shinest Angel-like, and all-forgiving,
Thou do perforce convict my guilty Soul,
And sink my Thoughts in black Despair for ever.
O Elinor, my Queen! -- But soft, some News.

Enter Guard. Guard. My Liege, the young Prince Henry waits without,
And asks Admission to your Majesty.

K. Hen. He comes in proper Time: Let him advance.

Enter Prince Henry. Well, thou young Man! -- With what a lordly Look
Thou make Approach -- Do thou not know me, Harry?
P. Hen. Yes, Sir, you are my Father, and my King;
Names sacred both: But still more sacred those
Of Faith, and Honor; these are what enroll
The Monarch's Name in Glory's noble List,
And stamp substantial Royalty upon him.
The imperial Robe, the bright-deck'd Diadem,
The lifted Brow, the world-commanding Nod,
Ay, and the loud-tongu'd Voice of Acclamation,
That bears up frail Mortality to Heaven;
These all are Majesty's Appendages;
The Dress, but not the Substance; that disgrace
The Undeserver, and but lift him high
To a Pre-eminence of splendid Shame.

K. Hen. What! art thou come to preach to us, thou Boy?
Are these the obsequious Terms of filial Duty?
But mark, I henceforth warn thee to Obedience;
And therefore satisfy our Royal Pleasure
Why thou did leave the Court?

P. Hen. That Is a plain Question,
My Mother could have answered.

K. Hen. Hah, our Queen!
Thou seem surprised. Is that a Face of Guilt?
Speak, speak; for my shocked Soul has formed a Thought
Too black for Utt'rance.

Queen. By my Hopes of Heaven,
I only know that I am innocent.

P. Hen. I know no more than that, and that is enough.
Shall I beseech awhile your Royal Ear
To give me patient Audience?

K. Hen. Well, I Will hear thee.

P. Hen. Did Henry leave the Court? Not so, my Liege;
For Henry left a Brothel, not a Court:
Loose Riot and Intemperance dwelt there,
Soft-seated Indolence, and female Foppery,
And pampered Jollity, with full-blown Cheeks,
Keeping high Festival, and Jubilee.
Was it for me to trust my Spring of Youth,
That takes Impression like the yielding Wax,
With such licentious Characters as these?
Was it for me to sink in Luxury,
To see a dimpled Harlot's wanton Reign,
While, banished from your House, your Board, your Bed,
The best of Women languish'd Time away,
At once a Widow, and at once a Wife?
I saw her Griefs, I heard her just Complaints,
I left, by her Advice, the unhallowed Roof,
Lest I should seem to abet the Injury,
And triumph over the Woes of her that bore me.

K. Hen. Woman has not her Match on this Side Hell:
Fool! to believe a scorned, abandoned Wife,
Less subtle, or malicious, than the Devil:
Is this the praying, dying Elinor!
Curse on thy fawning, Honey-steep'd Deceit!
What! do Thou practice with my secret Foes
In devilish League? Do Thou foment Rebellion?
Say, Woman, do thou? Hah!

Queen. What shall I say?
Will thou, thou rash, hard-hearted Youth, undo me?
Revoke the impious Slander of thy Tongue,
And save thy Mother's Name from foul Dishonor.

K. Hen. It is too late -- I see confed'rate Mischief;
This stripling Traitor has betrayed thy Counsel:
Thee I had long since hated, now despise.
For you, our sometime Son -- but I disdain thee --
High Majesty is fenced with Adamant,
Proof against Treason's Force -- her fiercest Darts
Recoil and mock the feeble Strength that threw them.
-- The Storm but breathes against the deep-bas'd Tower,
And vainly beats the Surge the solid Shore.

Queen. Will it avail me to appeal to Heaven?
O may its choicest Stores of Wrath consume me,
If ever in Word, or Thought, I urged this Variance!
He has abused thee with a well-feign'd Tale,
Screening some dreadful Purpose.

K. Hen. Peace, I say.
You Have fooled me once, and would you make me mad?
Hah! who shall tame me then?

Queen. O my Son,
The Pain thou gav'st me once, was Ease to this:
Why was thy Birthday hailed with general Joy?
Why did I bless the Sun that saw thee first?
Why did I fondly rear thy feeble Age?
Is thy Heart Flint? O yet unweave thy Craft,
Ere the sad Scheme be ratified above,
And Fate has signed the Warrant.

P. Hen. Let not these Fear-indited Words deceive
The King, while, on my Knee, I call to witness
The guardian Powers that shield the Lives of Princes,
That not in pers'nal Pique, or private Grudge,
Or Peevishness of Appetite restrained,
Or the wild Policy of high Ambition,
I sought this Breach; but in an honest View
Of Duty to a Mother's just Request,
And Hope to reconcile you to her Love.

K. Hen. Thou lie as well as she -- You both meant more.

P. Hen. Abuse fair-spoken Honor, and even Love
Becomes a Malecontent.

K. Hen. Damned Hypocrites!
Ye Homebred Plagues, ye vile intestine Mischiefs!
O had Rebellion bellowed in the Field,
And boldly challenged forth the Lord's Anointed,
I could have calmly met its hottest Battle:
But to reflect on unsuspected Treason,
Most unsuspected, as unnatural,
Spreading its Poison even within my Walls,
Insulting in the sacred Name of Justice,
Or stabbing with the smiling Look of Love;
This grinds my Thought -- Now let Confusion reign,
All Order and Relation be dissolved:
And thou, O Nature, turn aside thy Face,
Crimsoned with Blushes -- All my firm Resolves
Are brittle now, and Patience turns a Fury.
Who Is there? Our Loving Wife, and Loyal Son!

Queen. Thy loving Wife, but most disloyal Son
To me, and thee: Let me appeal, my Lord,
To the fair Judgment of your former Love.
Did I not ever make your Will my Law?
Was I deceitful, treacherous, artful, then?
It Is true, my Wrongs are great; but sure no Wrongs
Can alter Nature, or invert the Mind:
My Wrongs call for Revenge; but sure a Queen
Could well revenge a nobler Way than this.
O take my All, my Liberty, my Life;
But leave me, leave me, my good Name untainted.

K. Hen. Woman, no more. Have I not heard thy Son?

Queen. He is no Son of mine.

P. Hen. What! would the Queen
So poorly yield her well-contested Right?
I know thy Cause, and know my Duty better.

Queen. Take heed, ere yet an injured Mother's Curse
Fix on thy Bloom of Youth.

P. Hen. Her Grief distracts her.
Yet let me quit my Honor to the King:
Wherein is my Complaint unwarrantable?
Is it Rebellion, Sir, to sue for Justice,
Which the poor Country Peasant, if he lose
His Scrap of precious Property, demands?
Is this denied your Son? Be the King sure
I know my Right, and, knowing, dare maintain it.

K. Hen. Thou have no Right to move, to speak, to breathe,
But with our Royal Pleasure: Cease, thou Fool,
To parley with our high Authority:
Thy traitorous Friends have poisoned thy young Ear:
Harry, I know them well: But mark, I charge thee,
Forsake for ever all that Vermin Tribe;
Or know their rotten Counsels will undo thee.

P. Hen. Forsake my Friends? Hear me, all-conscious Heaven,
While I renounce the base unmanly Thought:
Forbid it, Justice! and forbid it, Honor!
Not one of them but lives in my best Love,
Dear as the vital Stream, that warms my Heart:
Great are their Virtues, and their Persons sacred:
Let the whole World be told, my Life protects them:
And here I swear, not all the Powers combined,
Of Earth or Hell, shall drive me from this Purpose.

K. Hen. Hah! Did thou ever see thy King in Wrath?
If my large Weight of Vengeance fall upon thee,
'Twill crush thee, like an Insect, into Dust.
What! am I braved by thee? Shall Henry walk
Within the narrow Sphere of thy Prescription?
Shall He, whose stretch of ample Sway enfolds
The Nations round, be tutored by a Boy?
Be wise in Time, and know, young Counselor,
Our Wisdom pities thy raw Youth; but learn
More low Demeanor, or thou wilt fire my Blood,
And damn thyself for ever.

P. Hen. Words are Wind;
Still noisy, but not hurtful: It Is that Blood,
That Blood of thine, that sparkles in my Veins,
Forbids Capitulation: Could I brook
Terms of high Challenge, I were not your Offspring.
Shall I be frighted, when an old Man storms?
Or fear a peevish Father in my Foe?
Let Majesty shine forth in all its Power,
I dare, unmoved, behold its fiercest Blaze;
And like an Eagle face this burning Sun.
So take thy unregarded Threatenings back.

K. Hen. Still so untamed, young Man! -- What Hoa! our Guard. [Enter Guard.

P. Hen. Stand off, ye Ministers of Tyranny.
Who dares with impious Hand to touch our Person,
I spurn to Hell's black Center. -- Ye vile Slaves,
Be motionless at our supreme Command:
See ye not sacred Majesty about us?
Sir, we well know our sovereign Dignity,
When thus infringed -- The Crown, your Grant bestowed,
With our best Force we will till Death defend.

K. Hen. It is enough -- Hence from our Sight for ever.

P. Hen. A last Farewell to Duty! You're obeyed.
And know, if ever more I greet your Ear,
'Twill be with Thunder, and the Voice of War.
[Exit. Prince.
K. Hen. Impetuous in his Folly, let him go.
This Notice has diminished Majesty.
See you this Night arrest the Earl of Leicester:
[To the Guard. I know him well the Pillar of the Faction.
Our Queen still here! -- in Tears! -- She Is innocent --
Ay, and the Devil's not black -- Away, false Woman
Follow, for Shame, this Hero of thy own,
Or curse thy disappointed Fraud at Home:
O you have vexed my Heart -- But Rosamond
With Love shall heal it -- To her Arms I fly --
What! do I gall thee with that envied Name?
Thank Heaven, my utmost Hate is Justice now:
So, Elinor, farewell; rave, and despair,
Then die, and be thy Name forgot for ever.
[Exeunt King, etc.
Manet Queen. Queen. And shall I then expostulate with Heaven?
Impious, and vain! No rather let me die,
Perish for him, for whom alone I lived;
And, self-acquitted, leave the World in Peace.
The watchful Eye of Providence, that sees
Through Night's most sable Shade, and well discerns
Each dark Intrigue, each Crevice of the Heart,
Shall one Day vindicate my Innocence,
And crown my injured Love with Praise immortal.
Then, when I Am laid in Dust, my cruel Lord
Over my cold Grave shall shed a pitying Tear,
And own I well deserved a happier Fate. [Exit.

SCENE II.
Enter King Henry and Rosamond. Ros. And will you go?

K. Hen. But for this Night, my Fair.

Ros. This Night: How many Hours are in this Night?
How many Minutes in each tedious Hour?
Methinks I dare not trust thee from my Arms.

K. Hen. Thou know, my Love, the solemn Vow I made;
I must do Penance at the sacred Shrine
Of Becket, ere I close mine Eyes in Sleep.
The Holy Father of the Church enjoined it.
If I refuse, I draw upon mine Head
Curses, Anathemas, and Execrations,
And all the Artillery of angry Priesthood.
This once performed, I am thy own for ever.

Ros. O let my Lord excuse my selfish Fears:
For what is Henry's Safety but my own?

K. Hen. Why, we shall live to triumph over both,
This Trait'ress Queen, and fierce hotheaded Son.
But I forget them, while I view thy Beauty;
Sole Comfort adequate to kingly Care:
The soothing Freshness of the vernal Breeze,
The lulling Notes of dying Harmony,
The rapturous Calm of good Men's golden Dreams,
Bring not such balmy Quiet to the Soul,
As thy Sense-stealing Softness.

Ros. Can my Love
Stray but a Moment, even in Thought, from thee,
Joy of my Life, and Sovereign of my Wishes?
Such Sighs as these within your Bosom heaved,
Such lively Fondness sparkled in your Eyes,
Such tuneful Accents trembled on your Tongue,
When first transported at my Feet you sighed,
My Royal Captive, and there swore you loved.

K. Hen. Thy Charms had caught me but some Days before.
Let me look back on that delightful Hour;
'Twas in an Evening of the blooming May;
The Nymphs and Swains, in rural Garb attired,
To the Pipe's woodland Strain, upon the Lawn,
In mirthful Freedom, joined the sprightly Dance;
You shone superior 'midst the Virgin Throng,
Fairest among the Fair: Auspicious Fortune
Had led my Steps that Way: I came, I saw,
And, seeing, loved.

Ros. Love, like a watchful Spy, surprised my Heart,
Well-fitted to receive the soft Impression:
Thy graceful Presence drew my wondering Eyes:
I sighed, but knew not 'twas a Sigh of Love;
I wept, but knew not that I wept for thee;
Till Nature by Degrees informed my Heart,
And something told me I was made for you.

K. Hen. For me, for me alone; those heavenly Charms
Had been dishonored by inferior Love:
Nature designed thee for the noblest Conquest,
And, giving thee such Excellence of Beauty,
Wisely contrived a Blessing for a Monarch.

Ros. And, of all Monarchs, only for my Henry,
Who shines distinguished 'midst a Tribe of Kings,
As they among the vulgar Herd.

K. Hen. Enough:
Be it my Glory to deserve thy Sweetness.

Ros. Be it my Glory to repay thy Truth.

K. Hen. How strong the Tie which Love himself has made!
One dear Embrace, and for this Night adieu!

Ros. I grudge even Saints a Moment of thy Time:
How shall I sigh, and languish, in thy Absence?
How shall I spring to hail thy safe Return,
With a fond Heart full fraught with Love and Joy?
So the poor Bird sits pensive in her Nest,
While tender Fears disturb her anxious Breast:
At length she kens her Mate with piercing Eye,
On rapid Pinions skim along the Sky:
With welcome Notes she chears the vocal Grove,
And fondly chirps, and bills, with most officious Love. [Exeunt.

ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Lord Clifford in Disguise. CLIFFORD. HENRY must pass this Way for
Becket's Tomb:
While thus attired, like a poor begging Friar,
I shall escape his Knowledge: I must win
His Ears to my Discourse; while I relate
The piteous Story of my Sufferings,
And circumstantially describe my Woes,
In Terms so clear, that the Similitude,
Himself portraiting strongly to himself,
Shall strike upon his Soul. With a dim Eye
Personal Guilt is viewed; an Atom Spot
Sharp-sighted Censure sees in other Men:
What though our barren Conf'rence have no Issue?
At least I shall unload my burdened Heart,
And probe his wounded Conscience to the Quick.
But hold -- He comes.

Enter King Henry. K. Hen. It Is much -- What! to submit
To painful Chastisement, and on the Flint
Wear out the slow-paced Night! -- Be we content;
It Is to appease our holy Mother Church --
I like this Cloister's awful Solitude:
It seems the Dewlling Place of Meditation.
Hah! who comes toward us with so sad an Aspect?
Sure he is the youngest Son of Misery.
Lo here a Beggar, and a King! Wide Contrast!
Yet pass one Moment, all Distinctions vanish,
And Majesty incorporates with Dust;
Let Pride go weep: It may amuse my Thought,
To hide the King, and commune with this Fellow.
What hoa, Friend; who are you?

Cliff. Why, who art thou,
That do not know Lorenzo, the poor Friar?

K. Hen. I Am come to pay Devotion to Saint Thomas,
And am a Stranger here.

Clif. I crave your Pardon.
Thou seem of noble Blood.

K. Hen. Well have thou said;
For such I am.

Cliff. Then, Sir, you know King Henry.

K. Hen. Exceeding well. I often attend his Court.
But why's thy Tongue familiar with that Name?

Clif. Because I take a Pride to let thee know,
That, wretched as I am, this Arm has served him.

K. Hen. If well, I trust, that Service was repaid.

Clif. As Avarice could wish: Even to this Day
He is the Idol of my Memory;
I served him in his early Prime of Glory.
His Soldiers loved him all; for all believed him
The best of Kings, his Country's Friend and Father.
O, he was noble, generous, brave, and just;
Powerful, but to protect, and not oppress;
Feared and renowned abroad, and loved at home.

K. Hen. Praise undeserved is Satire's bitt'rest Gall.
[Aside. In Faith thou have described his Highness well:
Methinks there is right Honesty about thee:
Thy talk exceeds the Promise of that Habit.

Clif. Sir, I was once no Stranger to good Fortune. --
But wherefore do I hold this Talk? Farewell.

K. Hen. Yet stay; for thou have moved my Soul* to learn
The Story of thy Life -- Whence, and what art thou?
Why is thy Look thus sad and discontented?
Does not Religion's Garb sit easy on thee?
Say, wherefore did thou leave the Royal Camp,
To live immured within these holy Walls;
Yet now, unmindful of thy Dedication,
Do nauseate the Cup of Poverty
Thyself have sworn to drink?

Clif. Thou do not know
What it is to be distressed -- I could display
A Scene so mournful to thy startled Ear,
Thy Wonder should be swallowed up in Pity.
Can thou lend Patience to an old Man's Prattle?

K. Hen. I will.

Clif. Know then the holy Brotherhood
Combat with more in this religious Warfare,
Than Down-reposing Luxury ever dreamt of.
We Are Men, but yet no Members of Mankind:
This reverend Mansion is to us, our World;
Yon melancholy Cells thou see, our Home;
There every Night, in pensive Meditation,
We watch the Lamp's dull Gleam; and when we sleep,
It Is but what Nature steals from rigid Duty,
Till the shrill Cock, the Usher of the Morn,
Awakes us to the Discipline of Day.
Our homely Meals are low, and regular;
And while we stay the Rage of Appetite,
We starve the dainty Palate: To be brief,
Wealth, Business, Pleasure, Honor we renounce,
And all of us are Wretches by Engagement:
It Is thus we struggle with Mortality,
Rather than live. What think you of our State?

K. Hen. It Is all that Man can do toward earning Heaven;
It is Extremity of Wretchedness.
But yet --

Clif. Ha, ha, ha.

K. Hen. What can provoke thy Mirth?

Clif. Your Ignorance;
For in this Light thou see me to Advantage:
All this is Happiness, to what I suffer:
Was this the mighty Sum of all my Sorrow,
These Eyes should start in Transport from their Orbs,
And my old Heart Strings crack with rising Joy.

K. Hen. Thy Fortune has been merciless indeed,
If this sad Place be Sorrow's Sanctuary.

Clif. What Is this, Sir, to the Poignancy of Woe,
To inward Grief, to vital Agony,
And the keen Pang that gnaws upon the Heart?
Poor though he is, the Man whose Mind's at Ease,
Beneath the Straw-built Roof enjoys his Sleep;
At pinching Hunger's Importunity,
Epicure-like, devours his savoury Fragment;
And, joyous, as the brainsick Reveller,
Quaffs down the unadulterated Stream.
But O! how bitter is the scanty Morsel,
That, feeding Life, but nourishes Despair!

K. Hen. How loudly does the Voice of Grief demand
The social Tear! O what is mortal Man,
That may be brought thus low? 'Twill glad my Soul
To make this Fellow happy. [Aside.

Clif. Stranger, I thank thy Tears; they show thee noble:
Pity flows always from the manly Heart.
Have you a Daughter, Sir?

K. Hen. Say, why that Question?

Clif. O, I had one; so fair, so innocent! --
Excuse my Tears.

K. Hen. Thou seem to speak of her
In pleasing Terms -- So fair, so innocent!

Clif. O she was once the Treasure of my Soul;
Bright as the Morning's fresh-expanded Beam;
And spotless as the white-rob'd Angels are:
When-e'er I taught her Honor's sacred Law,
Her still Attention, and obsequious Look,
Seemed the Certificates of inborn Virtue:
Sometimes I Have traced her Mother in her Face,
Pleased to recall the Springtide of my Days,
And travel over Youth's cheerful Road again.
For her I left the Business of the Field,
Well-pleased I toiled a rural Life away,
And, joyful, saw my golden Harvests rise:
But Plenty, Peace, and Comfort, are no more;
Her coward Virtue stooped to brutal Love.
I could not bear the Shame: I left my House;
The Fugitive of Choice, and not of Fortune:
Sick of this worthless World, at length I sought
This Cloister of religious Poverty;
And here I mean to lay down Life, and Sorrow.

K. Hen. Thy Loftiness of Soul amazes me.
Who was the Villain that abused thy Daughter?
Perdition on his Head!

Clif. That cuts me deep:
My most invet'rate Foe had spared my Fame;
But him that ruined it, I called my Friend:
He was the Man I honored from my Soul:
I thought him honest, gentle, just, and true;
But found him cruel, wicked, false, and base.

K. Hen. What means my Heart? Thou had a Daughter, Clifford. [Aside.

Clif. My hospitable Doors had just received him,
A welcome Guest, a smiling Murderer;
While Confidence in his superior Worth
Made the cursed Work of my Undoing easy.

K. Hen. The Dagger's Point, the Scorpion's deadly bite,
Wound not like these Soul-penetrating Words:
I Am like this very Villain. [Aside.

Clif. You're disturbed, Sir.

K. Hen. No, not at all. Proceed you in your Tale.

Clif. To this Ingratitude he added more:
I had been Guardian to his tender Youth;
And (for I found a warlike Spirit in him)
Trained him to hard Fatigues, and manly Toil;
We served together in the Wars abroad,
And I was still his Pattern in the Battle:
Fame has since then spoke loudly in his Praise:
But, be he ever so great, I made him so.

K. Hen. I stand condemned -- it is -- it cannot be --
Sure he is a Messenger from angry Heaven,
Sent to arraign my Soul. [Aside.

Clif. You are not well, Sir;

K. Hen. A sudden Qualm has seized me: But 'twill off;
It Is a familiar Malady -- Accept
These Alms -- I must be gone -- Again Tomorrow --

Clif. But one Word more; something remains untold,
He further owed a nearer Obligation
To my Heart's Love: For once in Heat of Fight,
When he had broke his Sword, the desperate Foe,
With his broad Falchion, aiming at his Head,
Had levelled him to Earth; when I rushed in,
And disappointed Fate: This wounded Breast,
Bears yet the honest Record of that Service:
Please you, look here.

K. Hen. Give me more Air. Away! [Exit.

Clif. He has it deep: I marked his startled Conscience;
I drove the keen reproach into his Heart:
He shook like a raw Novice in his Guilt.
May Heaven indent the Impression on his Soul! --
This is a busy Evening; at this Hour,
And near this Place, my Letter did appoint
The Earl of Leicester to an Interview.
I am no more a Beggar in Disguise,
But here an open, and avenging Foe. [Exit.

SCENE II.
Enter Queen, and Duke of Cornwall. Queen. Thou have well flattered my
desponding Soul,
That had forgot to hope: O Pain of Doubt,
Next to Despair!

Corn. Let not the Queen distrust
These Means of good Success: I Have wished long since,
TO assist thy Exigence, and, but just now,
Consulted sev'rally the Royal Guard,
That keep the Watch Tonight at her Apartment:
I Have won them to your Interest, on Condition,
No Wrong be offered to the Fair-one's Person.
At Midnight's silent Hour, naught will obstruct
The fatal Visitation.

Queen. My good Lord,
I thank thy Friendship; by my Hopes of Peace,
The Person of my Rival shall be sacred:
'Twill pain me to dissemble Cruelty;
For I have all the Softness of my Sex,
But no Resentment, jealous Rage, and Malice,
That wont to inflame the Breast of injured Woman.

Corn. Hard by yon Hill, where now the Lamp of Day
Sea-ward descends, there stands a famed old Convent.
Never had Religion a more awful House.
A Stream slow-gliding winds about its Borders,
Upon whose Banks stand a long Range of Oaks,
That cast a wide Solemnity of Shade:
Over the high Walls the creeping Ivy climbs,
And in its high-arch'd Vaults no Sounds are heard
But whistling Winds, and deep-ton'd Falls of Water?
Remorse, and Horror, dwell for ever there;
It is the Seat of Penitence and Sorrow.
Thither be Rosamond this Night conveyed;
And, for the rest, trust Heaven.

Queen. This may secure
My wretched Rival; but the King, my Lord!
How shall I face his Anger? For I know --
Alas! I do not know how much he loves her.

Corn. Believe me, every Circumstance shall end
In ample Illustration of thy Virtue.
My Lord of Chester has overthrown the Scots,
So shall you soon stand clear of all Suspicion
Of aiding jointly with your Son the War,
And slandered Innocence again shall triumph.

Queen. Good Omens dwell upon thy pleasing Words,
But let us hence; I must prepare my Heart
For this Night's Enterprise.

SCENE III.
Enter Lord Leicester with a Letter. Leic. Fortune, thou do exceed thy
Vot'ry's Hope;
Fate does my Work herself, and spares my Pains:
How had my Brain been toiling for this Hour?
She wills me meet her here -- the gentle Dame --
Harry, this once I give thee leave to rest;
Night's Mantle, died in blackest Erebus,
Shroud thy unconscious Thought -- Pause, this blessed Hour
The nobler Movements of my busy Soul,
And let me stoop to Beauty's pleasing Lure:
Thus the bold Bird of Prey, the princely Vulture,
Forgets a while his bloody Occupation,
To hold an amorous Parley with his Mate.
Comes she? or -- Hah! -- by Hell it is Clifford's Self.
Unlucky Stars! But, Statesman, to thy Work.

Enter Lord Clifford. Clif. Good Even to my Lord. You seemed in Thought.

Leic. In Faith, my good Lord Clifford, so I was.
I have some certain Smatch of Poesy,
And, walking forth to taste the Ev'ning's Freshness,
My Wit 'gan to be somewhat humoursome:
I fear your Lordship has quite marred my Sonnet.

Clif. What, does the Paper you just folded up
Contain the Substance?

Leic. A short Sketch, my Lord,
My Muse in Miniature; a very Trifle.

Clif. Say, Leicester, is it a Time to trifle now?
Peace to thy Heart, I think the Season's sickly.

Leic. Why, so do I; and, trust me, noble Clifford,
It Is but to cheat away my Melancholy,
I sometimes condescend to be a Fool.

Clif. O I could be a Fool, a very Wretch,
Could rank me with the common savage Crew,
Turn Hireling, drudging Slave, and carry Burdens,
If I could purchase, with this Sum of Care
My wonted Peace of Mind. Sure I Am so wretched,
Fate fixed me for its Masterpiece of Malice.

Leic. Great are thy Wrongs indeed: Yet we all suffer;
It Is epidemical, this State Disorder.
And who can cure the Fever, but ourselves?
We'll be our own Physicians, my good Lord,
And let out this hot Blood.

Clif. I Am not so desperate in my Purposes:
Headstrong Impatience swells beyond its Charter,
And I must tell thee, I Have that Sense of Honor,
That I could bear a Thousand gross Affronts,
That stink even to the Sun, before the Guile
Of artful Villainy, that lurks unseen,
And ruins while it smiles.

Leic. Even so, good Clifford:
Sure a clandestine Traitor is the vilest:
The Devil's most odious Quality is Cunning:
Let us not think your Lordship has such Foes:
Mean time make use of me, and my Soul's Friendship.

Clif. Hah, Leicester, do thou know what Friendship is?
It Is not the fawning Cringe, the studied Smile,
The oil-smooth Speech, big Word, or solemn Vow;
It is a sacred Ray of heavenly Love:
Like that, rejoicing in the Good of others,
It scorns the narrow Bounds of Selfishness,
And knows no Bliss sincere, but social Joy:
Simple and plain, it shines in naked Truth,
And opens all the Sluices of the Heart.

Leic. What means all this?

Clif. I know no double Meaning.

Leic. I thought I had been known, and tried enough,
Not to be troubled with a pedant Lecture:
Let me, my Lord, tell you another Truth;
Distrust is Friendship's Canker.

Clif. Then, I fear me,
Our Friendship waxes towered a Dissolution:
Because sometimes Distrust is kin to Prudence.

Leic. That, as your Lordship thinks. For my own Part,
I know the Man will thank me for my Service;
And so Goodnight.

Clif. Nay, hold; you go not yet:
For I have that to say will make your Heart sick,
Before we part.

Leic. What do thou mean, old Man,
Thee, and thy vile Suggestion I defy.

Clif. Then I demand, in Honor's sacred Name,
As Thou would here make good thy Honesty,
That thou unfold the Purport of that Paper,
The Sonnet that thou talk'dst of.

Leic. Is my Quality
Sunk on a sudden to so low an Ebb,
That I must answer every Fool's Demand,
Which he may make, because his Humour's testy?

Clif. Then my Demand is fruitless, is it not?

Leic. Ay, and injurious too: Thy Age protects thee:
Else on this Side I wear an Advocate,
This faithful Sword, to guard its Master's Honor,
And vindicate his Name from foul-mouthed Slander.

Clif. Come, thy Hypocrisy's a threadbare Cloak:
You Have worn it long, my Lord; and now it is seen through.
If thy Complexion were as black as Hell,
I Would conjure up a Blush into thy Cheeks.
Know then I sent that Scroll.

Leic. Know then, I care not.

Clif. O thou vile Spoiler!
Wherein, or when had I offended thee,
That thou could calmly mean me so much Wrong?
Lost as she is to Henry's damned Enchantments,
My Daughter's not a general Prostitute;
Or, say she was the Play-thing of Mankind,
My Friend would spurn at her, but pity me.

Leic. Thee, Dotard, and whatever else presumes
To thwart my Will, I scorn alike; it is true
You have this once o'er-reach'd me: I confess
Love and fair Rosamond had fired my Hopes:
But for thy Tongue -- rail on -- it hurts not me --
What do thou here? Do thou dissemble too?
By my balk'd Joys, you are Partner in the Trade;
Thou sharest in the Spoil, and stand here,
The Pander of thy Daughter's fulsome Lust.

Clif. Hold -- Let me wait -- for Heaven itself perhaps
Will take my Part, and blast thee on the Spot;
Or does it leave me to revenge myself?
This trusty Sword, that never yet unmasked,
But in the Field of Honor, shall for once
Be stained in single Fight with Traitor's Blood.

Leic. Fortune, and Rosamond, but smile this Hour,
And this shall be the Birthday of my Bliss.
I draw the Sword of keenest Hate: Come on.
[Fight. Clifford falls.
Clif. Leicester, the Glory and the Guilt is thine,
That have opposed thy Wrath to reverend Age:
But Life was burdensome -- and, for this once,
Even Thou art kind -- I pity, and forgive thee.
O Heaven! -- Hah! who are these?

Enter Officer and Guards. Offi. My Lord of Leicester,
I arrest thee here, in the King's Name, for Treason
In holding Correspondence with the Scots.
Secure him, Guard -- What Is here? -- Lord Clifford fallen!
O cursed Deed! -- How fares it with your Lordship?

Clif. Well art thou come to catch my parting Breath;
(For I perceive Compassion in thy Look).
Bear my last Words to gentle Salisbury:
He shall report them, where the Sound shall startle,
And, like the Voice of Heaven, command Attention.
-- Henry was once old Clifford's Royal Friend,
And Rosamond was Clifford's only Daughter --
But Rosamond and Henry more than killed me;
For, O! this mortal Wound is Titillation
To Honor's painful Stab -- Yet witness Friend,
That in this cool, this reconciling Hour,
I steep all Passion in Forgetfulness --
Warn them some Angel; ere Heaven's Wrath be ripe,
To separate their fatal Loves for ever,
That we may meet in Harmony above,
Where Folly, Grief, and Pain, shall be no more -- Dies.
So prays, as for his Soul, the dying Clifford.

Offi. Heaven hear thy pious Wish, thou good old Man!
-- For you, my Lord, but for this last black Deed,
That makes even Pity callous, I could grieve,
To bid you be prepared to die Tomorrow.

Leic. It had been Cowardice to rush on Death,
When Fate had other Mischiefs in Reserve;
Else my own Hands had freed me from the World,
And Henry's idle Spleen: But let him know
I dare defy the utmost of his Power:
Come Death, come Hell, I will be Leicester still.

Offi. Far other Words in this Distress would better*

Leic. Away! I was not born to know Distress;
My Soul, high-tow'ring on her full-fledg'd Wing,
And independent on Contingency,
Hears Fortune's air-spent Arrows hiss beneath her:
Defeated, I still boast in my vast Purpose;
I played a dangerous, but a noble Game:
'Twas Fortitude to venture Life for Glory;
And, next to that, it is Fortitude to die. --
I have but one Request to make -- your Leave
To see the Prince.

Offi. I have no Orders to refuse you that.

Leic. Yet for one Moment my tough Heart must bend,
And Nature shocked confess a transient Pang:
The Dream of Bliss now swims before my Eyes.
Fortune had placed my Happiness in View;
And, when I rushed to grasp the solid Joy,
She marred my Hopes, and dashed them to the Ground.
The Merchant thus the wished for Haven sees,
And chears his Soul with Hopes of future Ease:
But, unforeseen, the threatening Tempests rise,
And Clouds black-lowring gather in the Skies;
Winds roar, Seas swell, his shattered Bark is tossed,
And, in a sudden Wreck, his Mass of Wealth is lost. [Exeunt.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Queen, Duke of Cornwall, and Guard. CORNWALL. THIS is the Way, that
leads to her Apartment:
Fortune now bids thee triumph over thy Rival.

Queen. Alas! I know not how to insult Misfortune;
Yet must I act a haughty Rival's Part,
Affect the high Disdain of Majesty,
The Rage of Jealousy, and Storm of Vengeance,
Ill-suited to my Tenderness of Nature:
But soft Compassion, dressed in Terms of Hate,
Will make more worth the Gift of forfeit Life,
And justify my Name to future Times.

Corn. These shall be near to wait the expected Call.
[Exeunt.
Rosamond sola. Ros. How dreadful it is to commune with one's self!
It is Society that makes Sin pleasing:
Lead-pinion'd Slumber weighs upon the Sense;
But wakeful Conscience knows no Hour of Rest,
And the closed Eyelid cannot shut out Care.
Why tarries Harriana? But she comes.
Hah! I Am betrayed! -- The jealous angry Queen,
And with her a grim Crew of Murderers.
Earth, open wide thy Bosom to receive me!
Night shield me with impenetrable Darkness.

Enter Queen. Qu. Stand you without, and wait our Word of Fate*
Where is this impious and deluded Woman?
Prepare, prepare, to meet my big Resentment,
And satisfy the Vengeance of my Soul.

Ros. Thus self-condemned, how shall I plead for Pardon?
Or stand before offended Majesty?
Yet Heaven accepts, in Part of due Atonement,
Confession of the Crime: Here on my Knees --

Queen. Call'st thou it Merit, to confess a Crime,
Thou dare no more deny, than vindicate?
Strive not in vain to deprecate my Wrath:
Think on the Anguish of an injured Wife;
Think on the Torture of a slighted Lover;
Think on the Hatred of a powerful Rival;
Think on all these; and think on Death.

Ros. O rather,
Think on the Horror of a Wretch, that stands
Upon the Brink of Death, but dares not die.
My Soul is startled at the dreadful View,
And every Weakness takes the sad Alarm.

Queen. Art thou afraid to die? I Would have thee so:
It Is Joy to antedate thy Misery:
To suffering Virtue Death's a Remedy;
To Guilt, like thine, alone, a Punishment.

Ros. Great Queen, relent, and spare my Bloom of Youth.
Compassion on Distress is ever noble;
But, undeserved, it is godlike: O, remember,
Mercy's the sweetest Attribute of Heaven;
'Twill sooth thee in thy last sad Hour to think,
Thou did not plunge me into endless Ruin:
And when thou mountest to thy native Sky,
Admiring Angels shall come crouding round thee,
And own that thou, of all the Race of Men,
Have copied best thy bright Original.

Queen. And do thou think to whine me from my Purpose?
Can a Sigh cool the Sun's meridian Blaze?
Or a Tear quench the Rage of spreading Flames?
Then may this Show of artifical Grief,
Of forced Remorse, appease my angry Soul.

Ros. It Is not in Art to mimic Grief like mine:
Let me conjure thee, as thou art a Woman,
By all the natural Softness of our Sex,
Not in wild Haste to dye thy Hands in Blood.
Much have I sinned -- but O that Sin was Love,
The yielding Weakness of a tender Maid --
Ah! what could Reason urge against the Force
Of Passion kindling in a female Breast?

Queen. If female Passions sway with lordly Rule,
Revenge may glow with Fires as hot as Love.
Shall I forgive thee, and destroy myself?
What, let thee live to triumph over my Folly,
Again to riot in my Henry's Arms,
And in each Fit of wanton Dalliance,
To lisp, and prattle over, the dismal Tale;
Then kiss, and make him swear, It Is pitiful?
By Heaven, it makes Imagination mad.

Ros. Witness the Power supreme, that sees my Shame,
I here renounce for ever Henry's Love;
Though Life itself would thus be dearly bought:
But I Have a fearful Reckoning yet to make,
Much from my Soul is due to injured Heaven:
Will these few Pangs discharge the Debt, or will
A Moment's Sorrow pay for Years of Guilt?

Queen. That as Heaven pleases; but my Anger's urgent,
And now demands an instant Sacrifice.

Ros. Let me but live: Is that so great a Boon?
I Will wander in the World a Vagabond,
Turned loose from Human-kind, forlorn, and wild;
Each scornful Tongue, that hailed my happier Days,
Shall mock my abject Fall: I Will owe my Life
To common Charity; from Door to Door
I Will beg Subsistence, and be proud to feast
Upon the Refuse of gorged Appetite.
And when the Wrath of Heaven is satisfied,
And the full Term of all my Woes expires,
On the cold Flint I Will stretch my wearied Limbs,
And bless thy Name, and die.

Queen. Shame of thy Sex,
Whom can thy Blessings help, or Curses hurt?
Why do I trifle thus? It is resolved:
Inexorable Justice claims her Right.

Ros. It Is Cruelty, not Justice, thirsts for Blood.

Queen. Be It which it will, it must be satisfied.

Ros. What can thou gain by killing me?

Queen. Revenge.

Ros. Will England's Queen avow so poor a Motive?

Queen. Will England's Queen conform her great Designs
To vulgar Rules of Action? Thou shall die.

Ros. Then it is in vain to struggle with my Fortune:
Yes, I will die, and glory in my Passion:
Shall Henry's Mistress fear a Rival's Rage?
His Love shall cheer me in my dying Moments;
It shall deceive thy Cruelty, to mark
With how serene a Brow I meet my Fate;
And thou shall envy Nature's parting Pang.

Queen. So bold? But we shall try this boasted Courage.

Ros. Then be my Blood on thy devoted Head!
My Lord, my Henry, shall revenge my Death:
And when the World shall hear our fatal Story,
Thy savage Rage, and unrelenting Hate,
Shall brand thy Name with Infamy for ever:
My hapless Lot shall find a gentler Treatment,
And Aftertimes, indulgent to the Weakness,
That present Censure magnifies with Malice,
Shall rank me high among heroic Lovers,
That lived Love's Votaries, and died its Martyrs.

Queen. In that poor Comfort go, and lose thy Life.
Advance, ye Instruments of my just Vengeance,
And do the Work of Fate: Bear her to Death.

Enter Guard. Ros. What do I see? It melts my fixed Resolves:
Courage, and Innocence, would shake at this:
What then must Guilt, and feeble Woman, feel?
And must I fall by Ruffians brutal Hands?
O, yet forgive my Rashness; spare my Life;
Spare me at least the Horror of this Sight;
Discharge these ghastly, and grim-featur'd Wretches,
And take my Life with thy own Royal Hand.

Queen. It is beneath me: Hence! Away with her.

Ros. Pause yet one last sad Moment, and I go:
Since Death is sure, let me not die like one
That has no Foresight of a long Hereafter:
Tongue cannot tell the Anguish I now feel;
O may it purchase my eternal Peace!
Thee, mighty Queen, I above Measure wronged:
Yet this is surely Punishment enough;
If it is too much, Heaven pardon the Excess,
And not impute Severity of Justice:
Be thou yet happy in thy Henry's Love,
And, with my Life, let every Discord cease:
Yet let him wet my Tomb with one sad Tear,
And pity her his fatal Love has ruined:
Then may he quite forget our guilty Joys,
And bless the Nations with his Royal Virtues!
Life, Love, and Henry, all Adieu, for ever.
[Exit Rosamond guarded.
Queen. The painful Task is done; and grievous 'twas,
To trace the strong Emotions of her Soul;
This Suffering is enough for all her Crimes.
But, lo! the silver Gleam of Morning breaks.
O thou supreme, all-wise, o'er-ruling Power,
That see the mighty Wrongs of Elinor,
Bless, if it seems good, this honest Art,
And touch with deep Remorse my Henry's Heart:
But if it is fixed, by thy unaltered Will,
That I should still be scorned, be wretched still;
If it is recorded in the Book of Fate,
That I was born to love, and He to hate;
The next sad Boon my wearied Soul shall crave,
Is Rest eternal, and a peaceful Grave. [Exit.

SCENE III.
Enter Prince Henry, Earls of Surry and Winchester. P. Hen. It cannot be: The
Army all dispersed!
And the Scotch King himself taken Prisoner!
This strikes our blasted Purpose to the Root:
Yet do we hold ourself as full of Spirit,
And royal Quality, as when we thought
To seat us in our Father's tottering Throne:
But halt we here, and cease the noble Chase;
Let Glory hide awhile his radiant Head,
Till, bursting like the Sun from Ocean's Lap,
Once more he pours the Beams of Day around.
Say, where is the Right Hand of our Enterprise,
The trusty Leicester?

Sur. May it please your Grace,
By your Command, I went last Night to apprise
His Lordship of our sudden Overthrow:
But he was then gone forth, 'twas said, in private.

P. Hen. Shield him, ye Stars! my ever-faithful Friend,
That nursed my Youth, even like a tender Plant,
One Day to flourish in fair England's Garden.

Winch. Look, where he comes; and, lo! a sullen Guard
Of Officers of State attend upon him;
Death sits in Pomp upon each Countenance.

Enter Leicester guarded. P. Hen. Whence is it, Leicester, that I see thee thus?
I Have known the Time when I had flown to meet thee,
Swift as the fabled Mercury: Methought
I could have grasped thee to my Heart for ever,
And youthful Love's Embrace was cold to mine:
But now forbidding Horrors dwell around thee;
And this first Time I wish thee from my Sight,
Far as quick Magic, or the Stretch of Thought,
Could waft thee hence: Alas! what mean these Bonds?

Leic. I am thy Father's Prisoner; by what Chance,
It matters not: And it is with Joy I tell it,
I shall not be so long; for I Am to die.
This World has trifled with my Expectations,
And I shall leave it with Indifference,
Like a disgusted Friend.

P. Hen. Did thou say, die?
Where is the Power on Earth shall take thee from me
Against my Will? By Heaven, my Heat of Soul
Transports me to the thundering Field of Battle:
Have I no Friends? Methinks ten thousand Swords
With sympathetic Rage should leave their Scabbards,
And, forcing Conquest from the Hand of Fortune,
Rescue thy Life, and my insulted Honor.

Leic. Why do thou spend thy frantic Breath in vain?
Thus ruined as I am, I pity thee.

P. Hen. How steady is thy Heart! Blessed Lot of Virtue!
O had thou closed thine Eyes in Honor's Bed,
The glorious Fate had claimed my Gratulation:
But shall my Friend be led to formal Death,
To shameful, public Execution,
And make a Spectacle for vile Plebeians?
Can I endure all this? -- Can I prevent it?
The mournful Image sinks me into Childhood,
And from my Eyes the Stream of Sorrow flows.

Leic. Weep not; for Tears are Woman's Ceremony.
My Life has been a Hurricane throughout,
And I will raise a Storm at my Departure;
As the fell Lightning strikes while it does vanish.

P. Hen. Thy Talk is wild: Is It possible to save thee?
I will unhinge the vast Machinery
Of Sovereign Greatness, that my Soul had framed,
And be that dull, unthinking Thing I was,
Ere yet, inspired by thy awak'ning Breath,
The Flame of Glory played about my Heart;
For thee I will renounce this Bauble Crown,
Throw myself prostrate at my Father's Feet,
And there solicit for thy valued Life.

Leic. Think not of me; solicit for thyself:
Ask Pardon for the Follies of thy Youth,
And promise better Carriage for the future:
A little Whining will set Matters right,
The old Man kindly takes you by the Hand,
Bids you sit still, and all shall be forgotten.

P. Hen. Still, Leicester, do thou thwart my good Intent,
As if to be obliged were worse than Death?

Leic. Then hear me, hear me, and be lost for ever:
Thou poor misguided Tool, thou Pygmy Monarch,
Thou Froth-made Creature of a Courtier's Guile,
Think not I ever bore Respect to thee,
Further than Show would answer my Design.
Thou, and thy fancied Title, were the Engines
Of my Ambition, and high-crested Hopes:
Had Fate done Justice to my noble Daring,
I Would rioted at Will in lawless Power,
And ever-blooming Love -- O Rosamond!
My Thought still hangs on thee -- But all is past,
And the whole World is now not worth my Notice.

P. Hen. Tell me, good Surry, does not this Man rave?
Or am I here, or who, or what are you?
O, it is too much, too much!

Sur. Accursed Villain!
You're much disturbed, my Lord: You grasp my Hand,
As you would dissolve it, and Convulsions rend
Your struggling Heart, like the last Gasps of Nature.

Leic. Why, surely, 'twill be glorious Funeral Pomp,
When Princes are the Mourners.

P. Hen. It shall be so -- Where is this Son of Darkness?
I will defile my Sword with his Heart's Blood,
And drive his Soul back to the Devil his Master.

Leic. Ay, kill me, do; and I shall die in Triumph.

P. Hen. Hold! Shall I save him from the Hand of Justice,
And honor his foul Treason? -- Drag him hence;
Be sure you grind his Carcass into Dust;
Then send each Particle to hottest Hell,
To suffer separate Pain --

Leic. I leave my Imprecations to you all;
I have disturbed Mankind, and die content.
[Exit guarded.
P. Hen. If there is a Torment yet unfelt below,
Thou will disturb the Damned -- For me what is left
But air-encount'ring Wrath, and sad Despair,
And self-reproaching Shame? -- Are you my Friends?
Give me Credentials of your Honesty;
Smile, cringe, and hug, and swear, and then deceive me.

Sur. Could I unfold the Bottom of my Heart,
Your Grace would see it all your own.

P. Hen. Impossible!
I tell thee, Surry, there is no Faith in Nature:
I Would ride a Bulrush in a stormy Sea,
Ere I would trust a Friend: Ingratitude!
Thou damning Sin of Devils, and of Men!
Our Patriarch-Father, happy in himself,
Enjoyed his solitary Paradise:
But his first Bosom-friend, his Wife, betrayed him.

Winch. My Soul abhors the Falsehood of that Traitor:
For me --

P. Hen. Heaven only knows how much I loved him:
He lay within my Bosom's closest Fold,
And saw the Springs that moved my Soul to Action:
Had one poor Morsel been my Life's Subsistence,
And Leicester's craving Appetite unsated,
He should have shared his Moiety, exact
Even to an Atom's Weight. Ye heavenly Powers!
Is this the Man that has abused me thus?
The brute Beast softens to good Offices:
The churlish Cur frisks at his Master's Feet:
Nay, the great Lion fondles with his Keeper,
And bloody Tigers lick the Hand that feeds them:
Man only of all Creatures is ungrateful.
Heaven too but wastes its Bounty on the Wretch:
Why sheds yon golden Orb his daily Light?
Mark! his meridian Brightness glares unheeded
By thankless Mortals, like a common Meteor.

Winch. Forget what is past -- Awake your wonted Spirit --

P. Hen. Never, my Lord. -- But Yesterday, methought,
Like a full Tide, I spread myself abroad,
While Plenty smiled along my fruitful Shores:
But now Heaven's scorching Wrath has choked my Springs,
My sinking Stream forsakes its thirsty Banks,
And all my Urns are dry -- O! I Am undone.

Winch. Kind Heaven send Peace to your disordered Soul!

P. Hen. Why do thou talk of Peace? Orig'nal Chaos
Was more at Peace than I: If thou would please me,
Drive me into some vast Extremity,
Some Precedent of Horror yet unheard of.
Would I could conjure up a hellish Spirit,
Should rend asunder this Sea-mantled Isle!
Sure I am fit for naught but some damned Deed,
To chronicle my Name a Plague for ever.

Sur. Come, come, my Lord! Youth is a sportive Tale,
That Men peruse, and are not critical.
The King will yet forgive, on Terms of Honor,
The Rashness of us all.

P. Hen. Curse his Forgiveness!
Was I acquitted to ten thousand Worlds,
O! I should damn myself: Has Henry been
The chosen Instrument of Knavery,
Still pliant to a Villain's forming Hand?
Impartial Fame, that registers all Deeds,
Will write this first Page of my History,
In Terms most vile, and insignificant:
Had I the nervous Arm of Hercules,
The ample Sway of Philip's conquering Son,
Proud Caesar's Fortune, or great Arthur's Soul,
Harry, and Fool, would still be joined together.
O Shame eternal, insupportable!

Sur. To err is to be mortal: Where is he,
That falls not in the slippery Path of Life?
But future Conduct cancels Failings past:
All may be yet retrieved; the cloud-wrapt Morn
Is often the Prologue to a glorious Day.

P. Hen. Think thou I bear an ordinary Mind!
Who sets out wrong, ought to forego his Journey:
Hence I Will divorce me from the faithless World,
Step from the Prince, and study to forget
My Royal Sphere, 'till I am reconciled
To low Obscurity, and abject Life,
And every Thought be level with my Fate.

Sur. These deep Refinements seem akin to Madness. [Aside.
Your Highness speaks the Language of Despair.

P. Hen. I speak but what I feel: Methinks, it is done:
By Heaven, I would not stoop to take a Crown;
The Head that wears that shining Burden aches for it*
Who rules too, rules over Men; and I Would not hold
All Earth upon Security precarious,
As is the Weather-changing Faith of Men:
I hold no farther Correspondence with them.
Let the vile Miscreants prey on one another;
While I, on Fortune's mischievous Caprice,
Will diet my Reflection, and refine
To pure Conception my World-weaned Soul.
How happy is the Sage, in his Retreat,
That human Footsteps never yet profaned!
No jarring Passions vex his gentle Breast;
Peace crowns his Days, his Nights unbroken Rest;
Slave to no Interest, aiming at no End,
He neither fears a Foe, nor wants a Friend;
Careless, what Nations rise, what Empires fall,
He hears not wild Ambition's noisy Call:
Wise to shun Pleasure, Fortune to defy;
He only seems to live, that he may die. [Exeunt.

ACT V. SCENE I.
Rosamond asleep. Enter the Earl of Salisbury. SALISBURY. SEE where she lies
asleep; poor fallen Cherub!
The maiden Freshness of the ungather'd Rose
But imitates that Sweetness: Fair to look on,
Why art thou all Deformity within?
Oh! how unhappy is the Fate of Beauty?
It tempts the Ruffian Hand of Violence,
And, like the Diamond, sparkling in the Mine,
With its own Luster lights the greedy Spoiler.
O Rosamond! had but indulgent Heaven
Blasted the early Spring of thy Perfections,
It Is like thy Life had been as innocent,
As that same guiltless Slumber -- But she wakes.
I Will stand awhile apart.

Ros. Have Mercy on me! --
My Fears confound me -- This sad Dwelling seems*
The Antichamber to eternal Darkness:
They left me here to dreadful Meditation,
And wearied Nature since has sunk in Sleep.
Am I to live? Why then that Ceremony,
That dismal Pomp of Death? Or do they mock me,
Staying the Execution of my Fate,
To fright my Apprehension? -- Hah! Who Is there?
It is my Father's Friend, the good Lord Salisbury.

Sals. O Rosamond! I come -- But I must weep first --

Ros. Weep Blood, my Heart, for every Tear he sheds:
Do thou behold me with a tender Eye,
Thou that do Honor to the House of Clifford,
While I, vile Wretch! was born but to disgrace it?

Sals. Believe me, Fair-one, these same falling Tears
Adorn thee more than Beauty's brightest Bloom.
'Twas That betrayed thee to eternal Shame,
And died thy Soul in complicated Guilt;
But Tears shall wash the scarlet Stains away.

Ros. Thy charitable Care, and mild Address,
Bespeak my warmest Thanks -- Say, my good Lord,
Where is my injured Father? May I hope
(For once I knew him of a gentle Nature)
He can have Pity on an only Child,
Wretched, and sad, as Sin and Shame can make her?
For oh! -- Despair will sink me, if I die
Beneath the Terrors of his righteous Curse.

Sals. Alas! my Friend thy Father is no more;
But Yesterday he died by Leicester's Hand.
In his last Moments he remembered Thee,
(Think it an Earnest of forgiving Heaven):
He owned his Daughter in that fatal Crisis,
And blessed thee with the Fervency of Prayer.

Ros. This was my Deed: I killed this best of Fathers;
I drove his hoary Age to Desperation,
And made his Being painful -- So is mine --
For I am now a Burden to myself --
Yet he forgave me -- Ponder that, my Soul;
It Is growing Matter for eternal Thought --
My Lord, thou know my Doom. Am I to die?

Sals. You must prepare to live: Last Night the Queen,
But hypocritical in Cruelty,
Beneath the Mask of Vengeance meant thee Mercy:
That dreadful Guard, that bore thee from the Palace,
As to thy Fate, when they conveyed thee hither,
Fulfilled their whole Commission: in this Convent
Thou must commence the Votary of Heaven,
And bid Adieu to all the World for ever.

Ros. Confess, my Heart, the Hand of Providence,
Plain, though unseen, in all its Acts of Mercy:
Here let me first, in pious Gratitude,
Implore a Blessing on her Royal Head,
Who, though my Rival, was not less my Friend:
May Peace, and Joy, and Love, crown all her Hours!
And, when her Length of Life is fully spun,
Let not Death seem a King of Terrors to her;
But, like a smiling Angel, sent to guide
Her fleeting Soul to Realms of endless Bliss!

Sals. Thy grateful Prayer is just: And now, O think,
Think what a Lesson thou must teach thyself:
Can thou forget the Luxury of Courts,
The softening Joys of Vanity and Ease,
And Pleasure's sweet Enchantment of the Mind?
Say, can thou quench the Fire of youthful Love,
And blot the Name of Henry from thy Heart?
Can thou devote thyself to pious Deeds,
To rigid, painful Holiness of Life;
To Meditation at the Midnight Hour;
To constant Watchings, and long Abstinence?
This is the Physic of a sickly Soul,
The Discipline that Penitence must take.

Ros. O Terms of Life severe, yet merciful!
Will thou, thou good old Man, solicit for me?
Thy pious Intercession well shall speed
My tardy Vows, and bear them up to Heaven.
Hence I give up the World without a Sigh;
The World! What Is that? I give up Henry too:
The Bubble breaks, the painted Scene is closed:
And now the calm, and sadly-pleasing View
Of peaceful Innocence, and purer Joys,
And Virtue, blasted like a beaten Flower,
Shocks my Remembrance, and upbraids my Soul.

Sals. Sense of past Vice is future Virtue's Basis,
And Self-conviction at the Bar of Conscience
More awes the wakened Mind, than the Tribunal
Of solemn Justice, and the Pomp of Law:
Methinks, I hear the Host celestial shout,
And praise the noble Purpose thou have made.
Heaven is not deaf to Sorrow's piercing Voice:
Relenting it beholds the wounded Breast,
And kindly sheds the healing Balm of Mercy.

Ros. Thy Words distill the honey'd Sweet of Peace:
A Beam of Comfort chears my sinking Soul,
And brighter Prospects open to my View:
Folly has sullied my Renown of Youth,
But strict Severity of Thought and Action
Shall change the black Complexion of my Guilt
To Snow-white Purity. Ages to come
Shall hear my Tale with Pity, not Reproach;
And those who curse the shameful Name of Mistress,
Shall bless the Convert, and admire the Saint.

Sals. If the blessed Lot of righteous Men above
Admits of Augmentation, it will glad
Thy Father's Spirit, to perceive this Change,
And give a better Relish to his Heaven.

Ros. From my Example let the Fair be warned,
To shun the pleasing Snares of lawless Love,
As they would fly the Serpent's bitter Tooth:
Its sweetest Pleasures leave a Sting behind:
To virtuous Minds Religion's Path is smooth;
But she that falls like me, like me must tread
The thorny Road of sad Remorse and Sorrow.
Hail, gloomy Mansions! hail! Here will I dwell,
In lonely Cloisters, and a dreary Cell,
A sad Recluse, I Will waste my Youth away,
Steal from Mankind, and shun the Face of Day. [Exeunt.

SCENE II.
Enter King Henry, and Attendants. K. Hen. At length the holy Task is full
performed,
And my freed Soul is clear of Becket's Murder.
Now we may view our Royal State at Home:
Our Brother Scotland is our Prisoner:
If we think good, we seize upon his Crown;
Or bid him reign the Monarch of our Nod.
Let him attend the Sentence of our Will.
For our proud Son; we trust this late Defeat,
And Leicester's Death, shall humble his high Spirit;
Of him we shall think further at our Leisure:
For now more tender Thoughts possess my Soul;
To Love's soft Influence all its Motions yield,
And every Passion owns its sovereign Master.
Queen of my Heart, my Rosamond, I come.

Enter the Duke of Cornwall. Hah! Cornwall, why that Terror in thy Look?
Corn. Pardon, my Liege, the Messenger of Fate,
That brings afflicting Tidings to your Ear:
But what is done, 'twere Folly to disguise.
Then, to be brief: Last Night the jealous Queen --

K. Hen. Hold, on thy Life! Thou do affright Conception:
I could with Patience hear the Knell of Death,
But not thy horrid Tale: Yet let me know it --
Proceed, and tell me naught but Truth, thou Wretch!
But dare not tell me, Rosamond is dead.

Corn. See where she comes herself. I stand discharged
Of my ungrateful Office.

Enter Queen. K. Hen. Can it be?
With how composed a Brow she hides her Guilt!
Dove-like Appearance, with a Serpent's Heart!
May I not hope a Woman will speak Truth
To do a Mischief? Therefore tell me, Elinor,
Without the forced Evasion of a Lie.
Where is my Love, my Life, my Rosamond?

Queen. Would all King Henry's Foes were safe as she,
Poor Wretch! she is fast asleep.

K. Hen. What! do thou mock me?
Do thou with Triumph own thy Cruelty?
My vast Revenge shall tear thee -- Soft, my Soul --
This Rage becomes me not -- Fly hence, thou Tygress,
Lest I forget, in Wrath, myself, and thee,
And stain my Hands ignobly with thy Blood.

Queen. Thy Menaces, great Monarch, fright me not.
What I have done, was but the Deed of Justice.
Did thou believe me then so tame of Soul,
That I could bear my Injuries for ever?
Yet, Henry, in my utmost Pride of Heart,
Let me confess my tender Love for thee:
Cast out that hated Wanton from thy Thoughts,
And I can yet forgive thee all my Wrongs.

K. Hen. It Is well! Thank Heaven, in full Contempt I hear thee.
But, O, Philosophy's no Cure for Love;
This only Way Fate could unman my Soul:
O Rosamond, for ever, ever lost!
My Love was sweeter than the opening Flower,
That trembles with the Morning silver's Dew:
Fair, as the Down of Swans, or Mountain's Snow;
Then she was faithful as the Turtle's Mate,
And harmless as the Smile of Infancy.
Why was I born a Ruler of the World,
First Potentate on Earth, and Lord of Nations;
Yet could not keep one Jewel worth them all?
O Rosamond, for ever, ever lost!

Queen. Triumphant, happy Rival, even in Death!
Does then a Harlot's Fate deserve those Tears?
Had the cold Tomb received me to my Rest,
No Sigh had heaved that unrelenting Breast;
Thou would have blessed the lucky Destiny,
That took away the nauseous Inconvenience.

K. Hen. Time was I did revere thy boasted Virtue.
Now thou have done a Deed that startles Nature.
And would thou still profess thy Love for me?
Can Hell produce Hypocrisy like thine?
Would she, that loves me, stab me to the Heart?
Could thou have formed one tender generous Thought,
Thou had in Pity spared my Soul's first Darling;
Thy Mercy had well proved thy Love unfeigned,
And won my Praise, and Fame's fair Palm for ever.
But now, away! -- Thou do delight in Blood.

Qu. Could I have hoped, my Lord, by gentle Means --

K. Hen. Silence, false Woman! Thou did know full well,
The Temper of my Soul, by Nature, noble;
And now, even now, I mean to prove it so:
'Twas thine to gratify a mean Revenge,
Thy King, and Husband, scorns to stoop so low:
Go hence, and let thy Punishment be Life.
What have I done? Alas! my Rosamond,
Did thou not call upon thy Henry's Name?
Did thou not wish me to avenge thy Death?
Oh, no; thy tender Nature did forgive
The Stroke of Cruelty, and died in Smiles.

Queen. I can no more.
Joy to thy Heart! thy Rosamond yet lives.

K. Hen. Hah! did I hear? Was it an Angel's Voice?
Speak it, O speak again, ye Heavens, in Thunder!

Queen. I told my Lord, that Rosamond yet lives.

K. Hen. Where is she? Let me fly into her Arms,
That I may tell my Heart's full Transport there:
Lost Crowns recovered, sprightly Health restored
To Nature sunk, were Blessings poor to this:
Who saved her precious Life? He Is my best Friend,
And let him take a Kingdom for his Service.

Queen. That Friend was I.

K. Hen. What can thy Malice mean?
Fortune acts underhand, and fools my Soul:
Whom shall I hear, or what shall I believe?
Can none resolve my Doubts? My Lord of Cornwall,
As thou know ought has chanced, I charge thee speak.

Corn. My Liege, the Queen has uttered but the Truth.

K. Hen. O ye immortal Powers! how can this be?

Queen. That I Have this Day abused your Royal Ear,
Thus humbly on my Knee I ask Forgiveness:
It Is the first Time I ever yet deceived you.
Let Actions speak for me; hear, and believe
How I have loved thee, how I love thee still!
Fortune, last Night, gave me sure means of Vengeance,
But, great as thine, my Soul disdained them all.
She lives, my Rival lives, though not for thee;
Happy, though thou shall charm her Eyes no more;
A Convent's sacred Walls secure the Fair,
Where Heaven (I trust) shall with free Grace accept
The pious Tribute of her future Duty.

K. Hen. If this be true -- and sure I feel it is,
I must not, dare not, think how I have wronged thee;
Earth does not bear so black a Wretch as me.
What have thou done? Thou have been wondrous good;
Yet cruel to Excess -- See her no more?
Shine then no longer, Sun -- What! not to part?
Not one kind Word, one Kiss, one last Embrace!
O mournful, sad, eternal Banishment!
Banished? From whence? From a wild World of Folly,
To Virtue's calm Abode; banished to Heaven.
And am I grieved at this, because I loved her?
O sudden, painful Test of Sense and Honor!
Strong is the Voice of Reason, and of Virtue;
But Love pleads too, and Nature will be heard.

Queen. I did not this with any mean Design:
Virtue seeks no Advantage from her Deeds:
Therefore I say not this deserves your Kindness:
The cool Respect of Gratitude I scorn;
My Love for thee was ever from the Heart,
And equal Love alone can make me happy:
Else, though undone, I have discharged my Duty.

K. Hen. I pr'ythee, pr'ythee, leave me, Elinor --
Yet stay -- By Heavens, again she holds me fast,
The lovely Image clings about my Soul!
Hence, dear Illusion, pleasing Phantom, vanish! --
It Is done -- Methinks, yon golden Cloud descends;
And, lo! a heavenly Form, that calls my Love:
And now they glide across the ethereal Plain:
Am I then left behind? For what, just Heaven?
Do I not know for what?
It Is mad to pause, and madder to resolve:
O that for one kind Minute Thought could stagnate?

Queen. Assist his struggling Soul, all-gracious Heaven!

Corn. So please your Majesty, the Prince approaches.

Enter Prince Henry, Winchester, and Surry. K. Hen. A Stranger come to Court --
Well, my young Hero,
What, are your conquering Forces up in Arms?
Or do thou kindly offer Terms of Peace?

P. Hen. Oh, Sir, it is past -- Here, at your Royal Feet,
Behold this Rebel Son, a Penitent.
My haughty Soul, that erst climbed Heaven high,
Is but a Reptile now -- Ambition shrinks,
Even like an empty Vapor vanishing,
Whose Place is seen no more -- I only ask
Pardon, and Peace, for me, and these my Friends.

Queen. Unhop'd for Change! -- O let the King grant both*
Thou art my Son again.

K. Hen. What may this mean?
Harry, I loved thee once.

P. Hen. And if you loved,
May I presume to hope you will forgive too?
Sir, I once flourished in your Royal Smile:
Early my Soul began to pant for Glory:
But as the Seeds of Honor grew within me,
An artful Villain tampered with the Soil,
And spoiled a goodly Crop -- The rest you know --
Fortune, unequal to my daring Cause,
Has opened since my Eyes: I waked indeed;
But only waked to see my Shame and Sorrow.

K. Hen. Can I have Faith in this? Thou have deceived me.

P. Hen. 'Twas in the fatal Day of youthful Folly*
But now the Purpose of Deceit is over;
For I am going hence, to that high Court,
Where Cunning cannot screen, or Darkness hide.

Queen. Alas! my Fears! What did thou say, my Son?

P. Hen. Let me not waste my most important Moments.
I have this Morning drank a deadly Draught.
I feel all-conqu'ring Death advancing on me;
He lays close Siege: My sinking Spirits fail;
My Nerves are slackened all; my Blood runs cold,
And Nature's Outworks yield; though still my Heart,
Like a strong Citadel, resists the Storm.

Queen. Is there no Help? O fatal, woeful Deed!

P. Hen. Why weeps my gentle Mother? What I did,
Was in the Frenzy of extreme Despair;
And Madness, if my Hopes have not been flattered,
Bars not the Gate of everlasting Mercy.
Reason has since resumed her proper Seat,
And all is calm within -- Yet would I take
A Father's Blessing with me to the Grave.

K. Hen. May Heaven forgive thy hapless Youth, as I do!

P. Hen. Then welcome Death! -- And, if in this last Hour,
I have found Grace, O let me recommend
The Queen, my much-wrong'd Mother, to your Love:
She never bore a Thought against your Highness.
Behold! she faints -- Support her, righteous Powers!
For she deserves your Care -- Now, Farewell both --
Let not the busy World be prattling of me --
But write upon my Stone -- "Here lies a Prince,
"That, once misled, could not sustain the Shame." --
It Is dark -- O Mercy! -- [Dies.

K. Hen. Honor, more than Grief,
Is due to Death like this, which has absolved,
By ending mortal Frailty: Mourns the Queen
So bitterly for him, whose hasty Spirit
Aspersed her spotless Name?

Queen. That Name's now clear;
And he that did asperse it, was my Son.
He was my Son indeed -- O there is the Sting!
And is it thus that we are reconciled?
Is Death alone the Peacemaker between us?
Why then I Will follow thee -- Farewell, my Lord;
For, now, this Life has no Temptation left;
Yet, even in Death, my Faith shall be approved,
And my last Breath shall be a Prayer for thee.
It was the Study of my Life to please thee:
That failed, and I have now no farther Care.
That I never meant thee Evil, even in Thought,
By Proof too fatal Providence has shown:
And to die justified is still my Glory.

K. Hen. O, hold, talk not of Death; for I, alone,
Am fit for Ruin -- O, my Elinor,
I tremble at the Thought of what I am!
Can thou forgive me from thy very Heart?

Queen. Can Henry, from his Heart, desire Forgiveness?

K. Hen. I can, I must, I do. The Conflict's over:
I am thy wondrous Virtue's Proselyte.
Receive me in thy Arms, thou Excellence,
Thou Glory of thy Sex -- Here will I hide
My guilty Head, till thy kind Smile shall raise me;
For Shame, and Joy, and Love, so work within me,
That I can only speak them thus and thus --

Queen. O let my Language too, my Lord, be this.

K. Hen. Bear hence the Body; for it pains our Sight.
[Exeunt some with the Body. Cursed that I was to wrong such Innocence!
'Twill be my Shame for ever --

Queen. It is past:
A Moment's Love has made Amends for all;
And I forget, that ever you was false.

K. Hen. When I prove so again -- It Is Sin to think on it.
From this auspicious Day my Soul shall labor
To heal thy Sorrows, to redeem lost Time,
And pay thee all my vast Arrears of Love.

Queen. Thanks to all-bounteous Heaven!

K. Hen. And thy own Virtue!

Enter Salisbury. Welcome, Lord Salisbury! Where Is the good old
It is beneath a King to do Injustice; [Clifford?
But it is more beneath him to defend it.
Will he forgive my Baseness? For, methinks,
All is not right, till he is reconciled.
Sal. That Is spoke indeed like great Plantagenet:
I read Content in every cheerful Face,
And I am grieved to spoil the general Joy:
My Liege, poor Clifford lies a breathless Coarse,
By Leicester slain -- But, dying, he forgave you --
It ever was his Wish to see this Day.

K. Hen. By holy Friendship thou have touched my Soul.
It was but Yesterday I saw him well:
His keen Device did gall me to the Heart.
Clifford, accept these Tears; for Tears are all
The Monarch, or the Friend, can give thee now.
We will do Honor to his Memory,
And shower our Royal Bounty on his House:
O Sal'sbury, let me take thee to my Heart,
Dear as thy Kinsman was.

Sal. I thank your Highness.

K. Hen. From this Day's Fortune, let crowned Heads be wise:
Kings are not privileged to do a Wrong.
The Laws divine bear universal Sway;
Princes are Men, and Men must all obey.
Virtue's the Gem, that decks the Royal State;
And only, to be Good, is to be Great.
[Exeunt omnes*
THE END.
THE SIEGE OF ALEPPO.

A TRAGEDY.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader will probably expect some Account of a Play which makes it is first
Appearance in the World in this Manner. -- He is to know then, that The Siege
of ALEPPO having been refused by the Managers of both Theaters, to one of
which, viz. Mr. Garrick, it was strongly recommended by Lady Caroline Burdet
(who is thereby entitled to my present grateful Acknowlegements), would not
have been offered to the Public, had it not been honored with the Approbation
of several Persons of the first Note in the Republic of polite Literature,
whom I am not at Liberty to mention. -- I am obliged to declare this, in order
to do common Justice to myself, and to obviate the Prejudices which might be
conceived against a Performance that has not had the Credit and Advantage of a
Theatrical Representation. -- But the Play must now speak for itself; of which
I shall say no more than just to premise, that the Fable, and whole
Construction of it, excepting the Reality of the Siege, is purely fictitious:
That the Incidents were designed to be natural, though unexpected, not arising
from commonplace Exigencies, or forced Expedients, (which is too frequently
the Case) but from the predominant Principles of the Characters themselves: And
that for this Purpose I have endeavored to give a new, and something of an
original Cast to the principal Characters, particularly to those of Theodore,
Sophronius, and Ormelia.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
MANUEL, Governor of Aleppo. THEODORE, a Christian Chief. OTHMAN, General of
the Saracens. SOPHRONIUS, Son to Manuel. LEON, Friend to Sophronius. ROMANUS,
Lieutenant to Theodore. IZRAIL, an Officer. MERVAN, Secretary to the Governor.
WOMEN.
ORMELIA, Daughter to Theodore. EUSEBIA, Daughter to Manuel.
Officers, Soldiers, Attendants, etc.

SCENE ALEPPO.

THE SIEGE OF ALEPPO.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE a Piazza. After several Shouts of To Arms, To Arms, etc. Enter
SOPHRONIUS and LEON meeting. LEON. SOPHRONIUS welcome! are our Messengers
returned from yonder Camp?

Soph. Even now, my Friend.

Leon. I ask not the Success.

Soph. Those Shouts may tell you:
Our Overtures of Peace were all received
With Scorn, and Pride peculiar to these Spoilers;
They know no Style but that of Conquerours,
And in the Fullness of their Hearts declare,
The Faithful never take, but give Conditions.

Leon. Perhaps not yet -- I pr'ythee, good Sophronius,
What Terms do these victorious Vagrants offer?

Soph. First, they invite us to embrace their Faith,
And draw our Swords beneath the Prophets Banner,
No more their Foes, but Brethren of the War.
If wedded to our Errors, we reject
This friendly Proposition, (such they call it)
The next Alternative is briefly this,
That we confess the Prowess of their Arms,
By paying yearly Tribute to the Caliph.

Leon. And it was this provoked that glorious Uproar?

Soph. The universal Voice is now for War:
Soon as the impatient Rabble caught the News,
A Thousand Hearts were kindled in an Instant,
And in the Wildness of new Zeal, to Arms,
To Arms they cried, with such a clamorous Shout
As tore the Expanse of Heaven, and sure must strike
Even yon Barbarian Troops with sudden dread,
Though long inured to Terrors.

Leon. Thou have warmed me.
These martial Transports promise well, Sophronius;
Perhaps the wrath divine that long has scourged
Our Follies, Vices, and corrupted Faith,
With iron Rod of War, at length relents,
Nor farther will permit this vile Imposture
To make its Way with Death, and Desolation;
And like a Deluge whelm the Eastern World.

Soph. Alas, my Friend, we seem unfit for Mercy:
The seeds of Jealousy are sown among us,
And should they spread, and ripen to a Crop,
Yon greedy Mussulmen will reap the Harvest --
Our Passions, Leon, fight for Mahomet --
Union alone can save a sinking Land,
And Concord is the strongest Nerve of War.

Leon. Some distant Hints of this have reached mine Ear;
It Is said, the baleful Breath of Whisperers
Has undermined the Worth of Theodore,
And shook his Credit with your Father Manuel:
Are these Suggestions true?

Soph. Too true -- My Father,
Whose Piety, and even paternal Care,
Still anxious for the Welfare of his People,
Raises him high in all Affections,
Has yet the Leav'n of Old Age within him:
(With Reverence let me speak in his Dispraise)
Leon, that Sigh declares too well thou see
His eager Warmth, his Frowardness of Temper
Impatient of Control, and fixed as Death
In all Resolves -- to this, Credulity
Too often unlocks his Ear, and gives Access
To a well-garnish'd Tale.

Leon. Proceed.

Soph. Thou know,
Some Moons have shed their Beams since Theodore
Lodged in our Town his hardy Band of Syrians,
A voluntary Aid: -- The Saracens
Were then upon their March; and Manuel gave
The Honors of our chief Command to him.
Trained from his active Youth a Son of War,
He is no nice Observer of the Forms,
The ceremonious Def'rence, and the Duties
Preeminence expects from all beneath her.
The desperate Fight that Yesterday he pushed,
Unauthoris'd by Manuel, some dark Foe
Has swelled into a dangerous Crime of State.

Leon. It looks not well -- the gallant Theodore,
No Doubt, has noble Worth -- sure, that Presumption
Was but the Effect of Valor's Confidence --
Yet, I have lately noted, our Aleppians
Like not the headstrong Fierceness of his Nature,
That wants more Tincture of Humanity:
Necessity, they say, unsheathed the Sword,
But hot-brained Theodore enjoys their Dangers,
And revels savage in a Field of Blood.

Soph. True -- but a Breach might be pernicious now: --
And yet Sophronius has another Fear --
Leon, how frail at best is mortal Man,
This Compound of Divinity and Passion?
For oh! believe me, midst this general Horror,
While War with hideous Strides stalks round our Walls,
Legions of Evils gathering in his Train,
My Weakness robs my Country of my Thoughts,
And half my Breast admits a private Care.

Leon. Alas! I know that Care -- You woo Ormelia,
The Daughter of the valiant Theodore --
His other Joy, and what he loves next War.

Soph. Ay, Friend, for should this Cloud of Discontent
Once gather to a Storm, will it not blast
Our growing Spring of Love? Love did I say?
It Is true my secret Suit seemed not ungrateful;
But know that glorious Maid adores her Father;
Nor marvel, she is the Daughter of his Soul;
His Spirit, Fierceness, and his Pride of Virtue,
All glow within her Breast, refined and cast
Into a softer Mould -- Hence spring my Fears.

Leon. There is Resemblance in our Lots, Sophronius;
Thou know thy gentle Sister, fair Eusebia,
Smiles on my honest Passion -- Yet thy Father
Vows he will never sanctify her Choice --
It Is true, my ruined Fortunes --

Soph. Pr'ythee Peace;
Thy Birth is noble, and thy Virtue godlike;
These give thee ample Title to Eusebia:
O could I call thee Brother -- soothing Wish --
And yet you are more already -- You Are my Friend. [Embrace.
Wait we the Will supreme! -- but see -- my Sister.

Enter Eusebia. Eus. Brother, the Chiefs are summoned all to Council.
I heard Enquiry made for you, and Leon.

Soph. I shall attend them -- Leon, you will follow. [Exit Sophronius.

Leon. Let me first pay more pleasing Duty here.
Why sighs my Fair? Our Hearts are sure our own:
Those Manuel cannot part -- Oh! why that Tear?
I know it falls for Leon -- cruel Fortune!
Why was I born to spoil Eusebia's Peace?

Eus. I fear we have indulged our Loves too far --
As Children venture in a Calm to Sea,
Regardless of the Cloud slow-sweeping cross
The Vault of Heaven, and big with future Ruin.

Leon. Yet let us not despair -- Heaven often afflicts
For Trial, not Destruction -- Time may come,
When my Heart's Truth, my Service in the War,
And all the virtuous Labors of a Life
Devoted to my Country, and to thee,
Will melt thy Father's Soul; then shall he bless
My Toils, and overpay me with thy Beauties.

Eus. Could he but view thee with Eusebia's Eyes --
Yet something whispers me, we'ave done amiss;
Why was our Love first made a Mystery?
Why covered from the Day, and from my Father?
Who gave me right to fix my Heart on thee?
'Twas Folly, if not worse -- and Manuel's Anger
Perhaps is providential -- for till now
His Fondness still prevented my Desires.

Leon. That Fondness was but Humor -- while he pleased
Thy tender Age, he but indulged himself;
Thou never had a Boon to ask till now --

Eus. Hah! Leon, have a Care; I love thy Virtue; --
That raised, and that must justify my Passion;
Urge not a Thought to shake my filial Duty --
I always held the Name of Father sacred.

Leon. This Rigor, which I know not how to blame,
May crush the Hope that yet supports my Being:
I tremble while I speak -- perhaps, thy Father
Means to compel thy Virgin Heart -- if so --
Where will thy Duty be, or where thy Love?

Eus. Those Fears are vain -- I cannot love another;
Virtue itself forbids it, and my Heart
Flutters, and tells me it is impossible.
My Vows are thine, (oh! spare a Maiden's Blushes)
My every Joy, my every Care is thine --

Leon. O! how shall I requite this wondrous Goodness?

Eus. Once more I will essay my Father's Temper --
If he relents -- it is all the Happiness
I wish on Earth -- if not -- support me Heaven.

Leon. He must, he must -- or Pity's fled from Man:
Who could behold unmoved such weeping Beauty?
Thou fairer than the Morning's cloudless Dawn,
Thou sweeter than the vernal Bloom that decks --

Eus. Away -- I am a Woman, and a Christian;
Cease then these Strains of ordinary Lovers,
That wound our Reason, while they sooth our Pride.
Nor suits thy Fondness with these Times of Danger;
Courtship and Dalliance are mere Treason now;
Thy Country calls thee --

Leon. I obey the Call.
Yet Beauty is the just Reward of Valor.

Eus. But should not be its Hindrance --

Leon. Matchless Wisdom!
There is no longer Merit in those Eyes!
But soft, who comes this Way? Let me conduct thee. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
Enter Romanus. Romans If I see right, Aleppo thou art mine --
If mine, I yield thee to the Saracens --
While Modes of foolish Faith divide the World,
And swarms of hungry Bigots cling to each,
I turn Opinion to Convenience --
For this I Have sometime sworn to Mahomet;
And his Religion pays its Vot'ries well.
Mervan I Have laden full with poisonous Matter,
Which, when infused into old Manuel's Ear,
Will swell his peevish Humor, till it burst
Its Venom on the fiery Theodore;
My Friend, my Patron, and -- my destined Tool*
Rage, Taunts, Reproaches, Discord, Broils ensue;
And Ruin sure is made of such Materials*
Off then Dependence! -- Thou art burdensome;
A Soul like mine disdains to live on Alms.
It Is well -- And shall I pine with fond Desire?
I love Ormelia still -- as Nature prompts --
Sophronius loves her too; -- she slights my Vows
For the pert Lispings of that down-cheek'd Boy;
Should this -- but hold -- the Secretary's here.

Enter Mervan. Mer. What deep in Thought, Lieutenant? clear thy Brow;
Perhaps the wished for Hour of Vengeance comes,
To clip the towering Wing of Theodore.

Romans Give me thy Hand, my Mervan, my best Friend,
My Soul's true Counterpart -- I knew the Business
Would thrive beneath thy Wisdom -- Pr'ythee tell me,
How did the shallow Manuel take thy Tale?

Mer. You Would laugh to see the old Man chafe, Romanus;
Sound but the Name of Theodore, he frets
Like a galled Jade; he blames his sightless Folly,
That never discerned how much the officious Zeal
Of Yesterday, which cost us so much Blood,
Is puffed with Pride, and scorns to own a Master.

Romans Well said -- My Soul foresees much good from this.

Mer. Soon as I found that Prejudice take Root,
I scattered Hints, as was agreed between us,
That Theodore in Letters to our Emperor,
Had often complained of Manuel's Government,
And thrown much Blame upon his wayward Age.

Romans I hope you touched that Point but tenderly;
It surely was a Task for all thy Skill.

Mer. Do I not practice Cunning under thee?
I spoke it not, my Friend, as fit Foundation
To raise a certain Proof upon, but what
Prudent Suspicion guessed; and therefore wished him
Henceforth in Judgment to compare this Notice
With Theodore's Demeanor.

Romans Thanks, good Mervan:
Why what a ready Instrument is Manuel
For Knavery to work withal?

Merv. Why Knavery?
We mean no Ill to him, or to our Country --
But, Sir, my Wrongs cry loudly for Revenge --
I Have been abused by Theodore -- Because
I deal not in his boisterous Trade of War,
He deems me but a Beast that will be tame,
And patient of his Burden -- Curses on him --
Sure I can feel a Smart as well as he,
And Vengeance has more Shapes than one, Romanus.

Romans Which he shall prove: Shortly I hope to see
This fierce, this blustering, this all-conqu'ring Hero,
That has refused us both his bauble Daughter,
With vile Contempt, with Insolence refused her,
Hurled from his airy Pinnacle of Pride,
Turned from his Post, disgraced, marked for a Traitor,
And hooted, like a Nuisance, through Aleppo.

Mer. Let me but see that Day, my Soul's at Ease.

Romans So is not mine -- Thou know not Half my Purpose, [Aside.
Then when the pinching Shame shall gripe him close,
And more than Madness festers at his Heart,
If thou should humbly ask him for his Daughter,
Let him contract his angry Brow, and tell thee,
He scorns Alliance with a paltry Scribe.

Mer. It was his very Answer to my Suit.

Romans I found a like Repulse -- at least it is fit
You think so [Aside] -- Yet, believe me, my Resentments
Burn not so strongly for myself, as thee:
Mine is a common Destiny -- It seems,
We petty Men of War are Slaves by Office.

Mer. But not by Nature.

Romans Thou art right, my Mervan;
And therefore to our Work. Is it not better,
Thus wisely to employ our active Powers,
And set the secret Springs of Mischief going,
Than to bedew our Beards with childish Tears,
And whimper in a Corner for a Toy?

Mer. Romanus, I must ever thank thy Goodness,
That saw me drooping with unmanly Sorrow,
Taught me Revenge, and weaned me from my Follies.

Romans Thy Firmness charms me -- Pr'ythee, honest
When does the Council sit? [Mervan,

Mer. I guess 'ere now.

Romans Then let us hence -- this Morning may afford
Some kind Event, to bless our utmost Wishes. [Ex.

SCENE III.
The back Scene opens and discovers the Council sitting. Manuel, Theodore,
Sophronius, Izrail, Leon, and other Officers in Council. Man. Indeed, the
Progress of their Arms is wondrous;
How has their hungry War devoured our Land,
And, like the dreadful Rage of Pestilence,
Left a sad Track of Ruin in its Course?
Whole Provinces are bent beneath the Yoke,
And Syria's better Half is Ababeker's.

Soph. Yet may we hope, my Chiefs, to save the other;
Our Men are high in Blood, and hot for Action;
Thanks to the Foe for this: Nay all Aleppo
Breathes one heroic Ardour; bending Age
Girds on his palsied Side the weighty Sword,
Brides chase their youthful Husbands from their Arms,
And Mothers trim their darling Sons to Battle.
O! for a Tempest's Blast to drive this Flame,
Till it consume yon Vermin Tribes, like Stubble!

The. Well have thou spoke, Sophronius: Wherefore then
Sit we thus idle and inactive here,
While Boys and Women chide our tardy Councils?
Who dreams again of Peace, I hold him Coward:
We'll plead once more our Cause in yonder Field,
And wear our Reasons on our Weapon's Points.
Up then, and let us issue to the Plain.

Man. Why all this Blaze of Words? Are we not met
To lay the Plan of War, and well consult
How we may best annoy the haughty Foe?
Mean while I hold it meet to tell thee, Theodore,
It ill becomes the Man, that Yesterday
Lavished away so many Christian Lives
In his o'er-fev'rish Zeal, to dictate now
To Men of cooler Heads, and sounder Judgments.

The. Hah! what did Manuel say? -- By all --

Iz. Nay hold;
For this may go too far.

Man. Izrail, take Heed;
His Spleen may choke him else.

The. Now in the Name
Of Honor, and of Arms, what means this Treatment?
Am I reproached because I would have led
Thy dastard Troops the nearest Way to Fame,
And taught them how to snatch a noble Conquest?
Glory's the Soldier's Mistress; to be wooed,
Where Death has planted all his Terrors round her,
Or never to be won -- Had thy Aleppians
Kept firm their Ranks, yon Camp had smoked to Heaven --
But, Sir, they poorly shrunk before the Foe,
And let in Numbers like a Flood upon them --
I hate these puny, half-bred Sons of Mars,
That cooly stalk to fight on even Terms,
But bid them grapple with unequal Fortune,
They stand aloof, and snarl like Curs at Distance.

Man. Mervan, thy Fears were just -- I Will try him further. [Aside.
Say thou, our Troops gave Way? I will presume
To think, they might dislike so blind a Leader:
So, Sir, retrench the License of thy Tongue;
Success had never justified an Action
That wanted the due Sanction of our Will.

Soph. In what, my Leon, will this Discord end?
[Aside to Leon.
The. And have I lived to this? To bandy Words,
To fight a bloodless Quarrel? -- Patience, Heaven!
Thy Will! Had I a Thought to waste on thee,
While I was busied on a bold Design,
Big as my Soul could grasp? -- Was that a Time,
For Forms precise, or Speech quaint-worded thus,
Most worthy Sir, with your good Worship's Leave,
I Will cut yon Villain's Throat? A Soldier's Valor
O'erleaps the narrow Bounds of courtly Rules,
Fit for your supple, ceremonious Slave,
That dares not look askant but by Commission.

Man. I Will not endure this Language -- From this Day,
I warn thee, know me for Commander here.

Iz. Yet be advised, good Theodore.

The. Stand off --
Shall I be lesson'd by a Dotard thus,
Pride-bloated with the Pageantry of Power?
Be thou Commander here, but not of me;
I have no Master but the good Heracleus.
Is not my Service free? What brought me hither?
Not thy Command, but glorious Thirst of Honor,
And Zeal high-beating in my Country's Cause.
I came thy Friend, not Vassal; and as such
Was first received by this ungrateful City:
Have thou forgot, old Manuel, with what Shouts
Of general Joy, what thundering Peals of Transport,
Thy vile Aleppians welcomed my Arrival,
And hailed me like the Genius of the Land?

Man. No more -- I hold not Conf'rence with a Traitor --
Know henceforth I renounce thy vaunted Friendship,
And from this Moment ceases thy Command.
We want no Stranger, Sir, to fight our Battles:
My Son, the Charge of our Aleppian Troops
We do commit to thee; for thou have won
The Soldiers Heart: They Will follow thee to conquest,
And full Success shall prove my Choice was just.

Soph. Worse than my Fears [Aside]. O! would my honored Father
Weigh but the Importance of this Mighty Trust
With my green Years, and yet untaught --

Man. Away;
Am I not Ruler here, at least of thee?
Let not Sophronius cross his Father's Purpose.

The. It Is wondrous well -- O ye immortal Spirits
Of my brave Ancestors, whose laurell'd Deeds
Have swelled the golden Trumpet of loud Fame,
And ranked you with the Caesar's of the World,
Was it for this I taught my Soul to pant
For high Renown, and burn with all your Fires,
To be supplanted by a silken Stripling,
A Boy, that trembles if his Finger bleeds?
O! Blot accursed upon the Name of Soldier.

Soph. Sir, I well know your Merit, and admire it;
I own thee first in Arms, and shall be proud
To emulate thy Valor in the Fight.
Yet let not warlike Theodore esteem
My Virtue of so small, so mean a Size,
But I shall nobly labor to maintain
The Character I sought not for, and sweat,
Boy as I am, to reap my Share of Glory.

Man. Spoke like the Son I love.

The. It is enough:
Joy to the General; to Aleppo Joy:
The giddy Crew will well approve this Change:
Perhaps the Saracens may thank you too:
That as it may; I leave you to your Fortune;
Tomorrow's early Dawn shall light me home:
And mark me, Manuel, by my Wrongs, I swear,
Should this proud City (which methinks I see
Ready to take her fatal Turn of Ruin)
Hereafter court my Aid with Tears of Blood,
I Would give her up to her deserved Destruction.
And know, the Word of Theodore is Fate.
[Exit Theodore.
Man. In what a Heat departs this noisy Chief?
I hope none present disapprove my Deed.

Iz. You could no less -- His Pride demanded it.

Man. Think we no more of him -- Haste thee, Sophronius,
To the glad Troops; prepare them for Engagement;
For thou shall sally forth before yon Sun
Has dipped his Beams in Ocean -- rouse their Souls
To Christian Fortitude; remember them,
Life, Liberty, Religion, call to Arms.
Thou Power supreme, (if yet we may presume
Thy righteous Vengeance has not fixed our Doom)
Relenting, O! behold this wretched Land,
And guide our Battle with thy mighty Hand;
Thy injured Truth to Infidels make known,
And vindicate a Cause so much thy own. [Exeunt.

ACT II. SCENE I.
A Gallery in Theodore's House. Enter Romanus. ROMANUS. AT length the Toils are
set -- and Theodore,
If I can catch so huge a Beast as thee,
It will be Sport indeed -- see where he comes,
And in the sullen Mood I wished to fix him --

Enter Theodore. The. Who Is there, Romanus?

Romans Ay, Lord General.

The. I pr'ythee do not mock me.

Romans By my Soul,
You yet are so to me.

The. Then thou art honest;
Most Friends, like Insects, live but in the Sun,
And now thou see the Winter of my Glory.

Romans Come, Sir, can Fools, or Knaves dishonor Virtue?
Her native Splendor knows not Diminution,
Nor Titles are Additions to her Fame.
So take your Grievance as a Soldier should do;
Work up a noble Tumult in your Breast,
And meditate the Fullness of Revenge.
O! had you seen a Sight that crossed my Eyes --

The. What have thou seen? -- methinks I burn to hear thee.

Romans You, Sir, yourself, my Godlike Theodore,
In villainous Effigies hoisted up
On a high Pole, and born along the Streets
By the licentious Rabble; one attired
In antic Garb, the lewdest of the Tribe,
With solemn Pace headed this Pageantry;
And ever and anon the saucy Crew,
With Bonnets off in mock Obeisance, cried,
All Hail, Lord General, Hail, great Theodore! --
While the wise Citizens, still fond of Change,
Blessed the Conceit, and grinn'd their Approbation. --
I met the vile Procession, and although
Prudence had locked the Organ of my Speech,
Sure they must see a Lion in my Eyes.

The. Ungrateful, senseless, and inhuman Villains!
What! have I faced the Rage of Seasons round,
The Dogstar's Beam, and Winter's frozen Shafts;
Renounced the soft Delights of balmy Peace,
And dashed the honey'd Cup of Pleasure from me;
Have I made Things most terrible to Sense,
Sweet to my Soul, as Sleep to weary Labor;
To be repaid at length with public Scorn,
To be the Sport of Garbage? -- Cursed Day!
Thy Tale has called my Spirits up in Arms,
And all within me pants for vast Revenge.

Romans Why that was bravely said.

The. Yet my Romanus,
What need I thus indulge superfluous Rage?
Sure I may safely leave my Cause to Heaven --
The Saracen will soon avenge my Quarrel,
And this famed City, laid in burning Ruin,
Or bowed to Slavery, ease my tortured Soul. --
Inform yon Army by a Syrian Trumpet,
That Theodore draws off his Power in Peace,
Nor longer will obstruct their rapid War.
Tomorrow march we homewards.

Romans How my Lord?
What! quit the Theater of this great World,
And leave a Part unfinished? there remain,
Or I mistake, more Scenes to bustle in:
And therefore my plain Honesty of Love,
Would turn this idle Current of your Thoughts.

The. What would suggest?

Romans Why, ay, it must be thus -- [Half aside.
And so I see my Patron full revenged,
And lifted to a higher Sphere of Glory.

The. Revenge, and Glory -- Music to my Ears!
What would thou say? something is laboring in thee,
And I well know thy Pregnancy of Brain.

Romans But then the Means -- Nay, these Necessity
Will warrant even to Casuistry -- my Lord --

The. My Lord! What is it thou mutter'st to thyself,
That startles Expectation? -- If thou love me,
Give me thy Soul at large.

Romans I will; attend.
When lately Captive in yon hostile Camp
One Evening I stood musing by myself,
Othman, the Leader of the Caliph's Armies,
Accosted me with many gentle Terms,
And proffered me his Friendship -- it amazed me.

The. As well it might --

Romans At length, my Lord, he strove
With all the well-turn'd Rhet'rick he could urge,
To win me to the Law of Mahomet;
But when he found my Faith was Mountain strong,
He next attacked me in my Honesty;
"If by your Means, he cried, we could surprise
"This stubborn City in the Dead of Night,
"Old Manuel shall resign the Chair of State,
"And the whole Government devolve on you."
And so I trust my Politics it shall. [Aside.
Why what a Bribe was that?

The. Which you abhorred!

Romans Most surely; for in me a Deed like this
Were Fraud, and Treason; -- if achieved by you,
It would be glorious Justice.

The. Do I hear thee?
Is this the Vengeance Theodore should take?
Is this the Glory thou would blot my Fame with?
Perdition on thee for so foul a Thought.

Romans Nay but it is strange -- how this your Passion* shakes you!
You startle at the Outside of a Business,
Which I confess not specious, nor discern
The honest Drift of this.

The. Honest! thou lie --
It savours all of Infamy, and Horror --

Romans Sir, you mistake me much -- You well may put
My Meaning into utmost Execution,
And yet hold Mahomet in stern Defiance.

The. As how? Impossible! still more mysterious.

Romans Say, Sir, I see you govern in Aleppo
Upon the Terms proposed; first, there ends Manuel:
Next, these bold Slaves are humbled to your Mercy;
And at fit Time, my Lord, you shall throw off
The Yoke of Vassallage, once more assert
The prostrate Christian Cause, and purge your Country
By your Herculean Sword, of a cursed Foe
That long has torn her Vitals.

The. Hah! why this
Has Aspect plausible, and asks a Thought.

Romans And thus the Empire shall be one Day freed,
And only Mahomet, and Manuel cheated.
Does not Fame hang to this?

The. No, I Have resolved;
I never traveled the Bypath of Glory;
What! turn Dissembler, practice in the Dark?
It is beneath me; I never did a Deed
But Daylight was the Voucher; Friend, or Foe,
Let the great Soul of Theodore be open.

Romans I Have done -- I own with me it is Daintiness
To weigh my Deeds by Scruples, when the End
Is noble, and well pays me -- this same Trouble
Your Goodness will excuse -- I meant it well --

The. Ay, and I thank thy Love.

Romans As it is, methinks,
'Twere better even be reconciled to Manuel.

The. Never, oh! never. I would risque my Fame
Sooner on thy Device.

Romans Nay, my good Lord,
There is yet one Way, only one Way left
To set these Matters right.

The. Name it, quick name it.

Romans Alliances, some say, best heal Divisions --
The gay Sophronius, our Aleppian General,
Looks with a Lover's Eye on fair Ormelia --

The. Pr'ythee no more -- unite Antipathies!
Perish my Name before I see it linked
To Manuel's House -- Where is this Daughter mine?
If she can lend an Ear --

Romans My gracious Lord,
Your Daughter comes this Way -- He Is moveable --
Romanus, thou shall bend him to thy Purpose --
Thou have more Wiles to try -- [Aside.

Enter Ormelia. Orm. Alas! my Father,
You seem disturbed; may I not ask the Cause?

The. Manuel, Sophronius, and it may be, Thou.

Orm. Hah! how have they, or how have I displeased thee?
Tell me, I pray, Romanus, what has hap'd?
For there is a Fierceness on my Father's Brow,
My Eyes would not encounter.

Romans Briefly, Madam,
Old Manuel, in his Peevishness of Rage,
Has just dismissed your Father from his Post,
And now Sophronius heads the Aleppian Troops,
That are this Instant marshalled for the Battle.

Orm. Is It so? Yield then fond Love, my Virgin Heart,
And nobler Passions warm me; from this Hour,
Sophronius be an Alien to my Soul.
Sir, that I listened to his soft Address,
(For sweetly sure he breathed his amorous Tale)
Thus on my Knee let me bespeak Forgiveness;
And be great Theodore assured of this,
His Daughter knows to scorn the aspiring Youth,
That dares usurp her injured Father's Honor.

Romans So, there is a dangerous Rival well dislodged;
Sophronius gone may make good Room for me. [Aside.

The. Why that is my Child -- I did thee Wrong to doubt thee --
Thou have been ever jealous of my Glory,
And with the Softness of thy Sex have blended
The most exalted Sentiments, well worthy
The gallant Line of Heroes thy Forefathers.

Orm. I would not shame my Race -- you taught me better --

The. Heaven had some Pity left, and gave me thee,
In Recompense for thy dear Mother's Loss,
(Two Stars are not more like than she and thou)
And the vast Weight of my still growing Care.
-- I will retire awhile -- O my Ormelia,
I have a thousand Thoughts to combat with,
And each by Turns directs my wavering Purpose.
Exit. Theodore.
Romans Now to my Lover's Cue. [Aside] Illustrious Maid,
How would those shining Beauties bless the Man,
Thrice happy Man, that could deserve thy Love?

Orm. If thou would merit my Esteem, Romanus,
Talk not of Love to me -- I have renounced
Thy Sex -- It shall not henceforth be in Man
To cost my Heart a Sigh.

Romans Say not so, Lady:
O wherefore must a faithful Lover suffer,
For the rash Crime of one presumptuous Wretch?
I know the Man (could you but see his Pangs)
That takes his Being from Ormelia's Eyes;
That loves her with so bright, so pure a Flame,
It is almost the Fervor of Devotion.
Ah why should such a Man despair for ever?

Orm. Thou would describe thyself -- must I again
Warn thee desist from thy ungrateful Suit,
And pester me no more with nauseous Love?

Romans Desist! Impossible -- Thy Charms forbid it --
Thou have a natural Right to be admired,
And our Heart's Homage is Ormelia's Due.
Firm Perseverance is the Life of Virtue,
The Mark of Bravery, the Stamp of Heroes;
It bears us through the roughest Storms of Fortune,
And is the Gale that wafts us up to Heaven.
Is it a Crime then only when we love?

Orm. If not a Crime, at least it is a Folly --
Think not, fond Youth, to snare my easy Heart
With the romantic Topics of stale Courtship,
Such as you practice to yourselves at home.
-- Your Doctrine is -- All Women may be won;
She that once loved still hugs the fond Idea,
And, tender Maid, sighs for a second Wooer.
Have thou then harbored such coarse Thoughts of me?
Away, and learn to know Ormelia better.

Romans In truth, I own I had. [Aside] You wrong me, Madam:
If Passion most refined, if --

Orm. Cease, be silent,
Or Theodore shall know thy Insolence.

Romans Alas! I own the Weakness of my Claim
In the World's general Verdict -- I was born
Your Father's Creature -- Yet I stand indebted
Less to his Bounty, than his bright Example --
He taught my youthful Breast to beat for Glory,
And stored it well with Virtues all his own --
-- Here rest my Hopes -- with these I woo Ormelia --
Nor need I prove the Greatness of my Soul,
When I aspire to thee -- O would my Fair
Look gently on my Pain, her Father's Will
Would soon --

Orm. No more; thou have abused his Friendship;
Retire, or be assured this Rudeness, Sir --

Romans Must then my virtuous Love --

Orm. Away; be gone. --

Romans Farewell, too cruel Maid -- Insolent Devil;
But I may lower this high Strain of yours.
[Aside, and Exit.
Orm. This Fool could not have urged in a worse Time
His most vexatious Suit -- forget Sophronius!
Have I not set my Heart a painful Task?
Ay; but remember who thou art, Ormelia,
And shame thy feeble Sex -- Yet, say he loves me,
As (if the Eye be Window to the Soul)
I Have seen he does most deeply, may he not
Forego this fatal Honor? -- there is my Refuge;
It Is not too late -- he is here -- assist me Heaven
This dreadful Hour -- his Conduct must resolve me --
I will not seem acquainted with the Change.

Enter Sophronius. Welcome Sophronius; did you meet your Rival?
Even now the bold Romanus parted hence.
Soph. That he admires where I do, can I blame him?
Sure, all that know thy Beauties are my Rivals:
But, till I see the Man that loves Ormelia,
With Passion more unfeigned, more true than mine,
Why should I doubt my Right to her Regard? --
I fear she knows not what has chanced today:
Perplexing Thought! [Aside.

Orm. Well, I will own, Sophronius,
As far as Woman's Modesty will warrant,
Thy Truth has won an Interest in my Heart:
And I can look with cool Indifference
On all Mankind but thee.

Soph. Heart-bursting Rapture!
It is too great for Words -- thus let me thank thee -- [Embraces her.
And now I can reveal with less Regret,
The unpleasing News thou yet art Stranger to.

Orm. What News, what means Sophronius?

Soph. O my Life,
But that I find me rooted in thy Breast,
This Morning saw a sudden Turn of Things,
That might have marred my rising Hopes for ever --

Orm. I understand you not.

Soph. Yet witness Heaven,
How much it grieved me to behold --

Orm. Hah! what!
O speak, and ease my frighted Apprehension!

Soph. Know then, there is a Breach between our Fathers:
It matters not to tell the unhappy Ground
Of this Contention; but the Effect was this,
That Theodore commands no longer here.

Orm. Then, Sir, the Life of Battle is expiring.
It Is well you are not to answer for the Follies
Of thy old doting Sire -- Yet let me spare him --
And rather, tell me what great Son of Fame,
What Thunderbolt of War was named to head
The Troops, my Father is not fit to lead?

Soph. There lies the Circumstance that gives me Pain --
For that unwelcome Honor fell to me.

Orm. To thee? -- it is well -- I joy at least in that --

Soph. Do thou? -- thou Excellence! trust me, my Love,
I never wished to bear this Load of Glory.

Orm. I do believe thee -- therefore my Sophronius
Will eagerly resign a painful Post,
Ill-suited to his unexperienced Youth.

Soph. Confusion! what did my Ormelia say?

Orm. What Reason, Justice, Duty, Nature prompts;
Hence to old Manuel -- fly -- strive to prevent
The Ruin will ensue -- urge him restore
My Father to his Honors -- bid him do it,
In Pity to Himself, his Friends, his Country --

Soph. I might as well preach Silence to the Winds --

Orm. Why then, at least do thou renounce this Charge,
And let some mean, ungen'rous, upstart Wretch
Swell in the Plumage of this ill-got Glory.

Soph. Impossible, romantic!

Orm. How Sophronius?

Soph. Thou can not say thou love me, and ask this --

Orm. Thou can not say thou love me, and refuse it --

Soph. Refuse! Is there a Boon I must refuse thee
This only one there is -- O my Ormelia,
Abate me this, and thy Commands are Favors,
Thy Bidding sacred, and thy dear Requests
My Motives to all Action -- O remember,
The nice Demands, the Tenderness of Honor --
It was my Duty to decline this Station;
Once mine, it is my Duty to maintain it.
I cannot quit my Charge -- Honor forbids;
It Is the first Dictate of my Soul -- it is what,
Thank Heaven, I feel, I love even more than thee.

Orm. My Lord, I needed not thy great Example;
Know too I hold the Honor of my House
Dearer than thee, and all thy Race. Vain Youth,
I see thy Pride; see, and despise it too --
My Heart mistook thee -- I revoke my Love --
Go, trifle with some easy, silly Maid;
Some tenderhearted Nymph, some dove-like Dame;
Make her the Fondling of thy leisure Hours;
But know, Ormelia, spite of all thy Sex,
Will love, or hate, as Reason shall direct.

Soph. Thy Censure's too severe; it may be Pride,
But it is an honest Pride that moves me now --
I would be true to Honor, and to thee.

Orm. No more; -- thou do partake of Manuel's Guilt;
And him, and thee I deem my Father's Foe.

Soph. I am thy Father's Successor, not Foe:
Say, Theodore, or Manuel be to blame,
Sophronius still is innocent, and pleads
The untainted Merit of sincerest Love.

Orm. Love! do thou talk of Love? Hence to thy Charge --
Hark, how yon Trumpet calls you to the Field; [Trumpet sounds.
What! are the Soldiers waiting for their General,
And shall a peevish Girl detain him here?
Leader, farewell; mount the steep Cliff of Glory;
Reach with an Eagle's Wing her topmost Height;
There, while thou baskest in thy Eminence,
Remember this my sole, my last Command,
And never, never see Ormelia more. [Exit Ormelia.

Soph. She Is gone, and with her all a Lover's Hopes-
My conscious Heart foreboded this Event;
I had been happy in a meaner Passion,
But doting upon Excellence am lost.
How nicely virtuous is her high Resentment?
Our Souls are sure akin -- Strange Blow of Fortune!
That strong Similitude of Sentiment
Must separate the Hearts it should unite!
But see my Leon here:

Enter Leon. Alas! my Friend --
Leon. Spare the sad Tale -- I saw the fierce Ormelia;
She glided by me like a fiery Meteor.

Soph. Her Temper, as her Beauty, sure is matchless.

Leon. Come, think no more of her -- the Soldiers wait us --
They breathe the Spirit of a brave Revenge,
That will repair the Loss of Yesterday:
Awake thy better Faculties, my Friend;
For nothing now is wanting but Sophronius.

Soph. Thou do advise me well -- come on my Leon --
I Will strive to shake this Softness from my Breast --
The Din of Arms shall drown the Voice of Love.
Hark, I am called again; [Trumpet sounds] the glorious Summons
Rouses my Soul, and fires it on to Battle.
Thus the bold, generous Steed, that long in vain
Has wooed some haughty Female of the Plain;
If chance he hears the Trumpet's princely Sound,
Inspired with nobler Ardour spurns the Ground;
He snuffs the dusty Tumult from afar,
Collects his mighty Rage, and rushes to the War. [Exeunt.

ACT III. SCENE I.
SCENE the Piazza. Enter Manuel and Mervan. MANUEL. IT is my Heart's first
Wish; for if my Son
Return victorious home, beside the Glory
That will accrue to him, and our whole Cause,
'Twill rescue my late Deed from the Reproach
Of hasty Rage, and Frowardness of Will,
And place it to the fair Account of Wisdom!

Mer. How can we doubt Success, my Lord?
You marked
With what high Joy the Troops went forth to Battle,
As if their favorite Leader had inspired them:
And sure no Hero ever better graced
The noble Front of War, than brave Sophronius;
I saw him mounted on his snow-white Steed,
That moved with Pride beneath the Weight he bore;
His Eye beamed martial Fire; and while the Voice
Of Thousands heaped their Blessings on his Head,
A crimson Blush (the Badge of modest Merit)
Tinged over his youthful Cheek, as I have seen
A setting Sun bepaint the western Sky.

Man. May he exceed our most exalted Hopes,
And silence the proud Spleen of Theodore,
That has misconstru'd to the Emperor
The Scope of all our Councils.

Mer. O 'twas base.
But hark! a Shout, my Lord; -- a Shout of Gladness! [Shout within.
There Is Triumph in that Sound -- and see, here is one
Whose Looks proclaim the happy News he brings.

Enter an Officer. Offi. Peace to Aleppo; and to Manuel Joy,
Great as his Soul ever felt -- My Lord, your Son
Returns triumphant home; he hastens hither
Quick as the thronging Love of Multitudes
Will give him Leave, and best himself shall tell
The Manner, and the Progress of the Fight.

Man. What! have we conquered? Am I justified?
Thanks to kind Heaven; methinks I see this Day
Sacred to future Time; Posterity
Will cite the glorious Actions of my Boy,
And Chiefs, that well have fought their Country's Cause,
Hereafter shall be liken'd to Sophronius.

Enter Eusebia attended by Ladies. Joy to Eusebia, and her gentle Train;
My Child, thy Brother has full well performed
A Son's and Soldier's Part -- Prepare fresh Wreaths,
Ye Virgins of Aleppo, for your Champion,
And with immortal Verdure deck his Brow.
Eus. My Lord, I heard the Peoples Shouts, and came
With eager Steps to hail my Brother's Glory --
But hark! himself and Friends are now approaching.
[Trumpet, etc. sound.
Enter Sophronius, Leon, Izrail, and other Officers. Man. Welcome my Son, my
Captain, my Deliv'rer,
Mine and my People's Boast: How fares my Boy,
[Meets Sophronius, and embraces him. And these thy Friends, and mine? -- I
pr'ythee tell me,
Tell me thyself, Sophronius, for I long
To hear the manly Story of the Battle.

Soph. Sir, to do Justice to Aleppian Valor,
And to brave Leon's Worth this glorious Day,
Were Argument for Rhet'ric's silver Tongue;
Yet briefly as I can, I will essay it.
Soon as we left our Walls, we found the Foe,
In the mid Plain, ranked in full Pomp of Fight;
Sometime we fought beneath a Cope of Arrows,
That shadowed either Host -- but when we met
In horrible Conjunction, then commenced
The Terrors of the Field; then grim-fac'd War
Began his dreadful Game of purple Slaughter,
And, like a wounded Lion, roused his Rage
To Deeds of Desperation -- Two long Hours,
With Resolution mavelous, as though
The Lordship of the World had been at Stake,
The Flame of Battle glowed; while Victory
Stood like a Mistress doubtful where to fix,
When two warm Rivals court her gracious Smile.

Man. There was a Mistress worth contending for.

Soph. At length I chanced to cross the Line of Battle
Where furious Derar fought -- a Name renowned
In yonder Camp -- And, as I meant to greet him
With the full Vigor of a Soldier's Arm,
My heedless Step betrayed me, and I fell;
Ruin hung over me -- when my Friend, my Leon,
Flew like a winged Angel to my Aid,
And on his Spear caught the fierce Derar's Sword.

Man. It was a noble Deed -- and what Reward
He can with Justice ask he shall command.
Mean while pursue thy Tale.

Soph. The Saracen
Retired; but ever he could regain his Tribe,
A Party of Aleppian Horse enclosed him,
And, in mad Rage, impatient of Restraint,
Quenched his high Valor in a glorious Death.
Then first the foremost Ranks gave Way, and soon,
As Fear is most infectious, total Rout
Encumbered all their Bands -- The Word was, Havoc,
And thirsty Vengeance caught it -- ever they reached
The Camp, the Field was loaded with the Slain.

Man. O well-fought Day -- win such another Conquest,
And these Barbarians shall remove their War.

Eus. Though thou wast ever dear to me, Sophronius,
Trust me, I love thee now from nobler Motives;
Thy Sister joys the more in thy Deliverance,
Because her Country's Safety leans on thine.

Soph. The best of us are Instruments, Eusebia,
Moved by unseen Direction to fulfill
The Purposes of Heaven -- there yield thy Praise --
My honored Father, say this Day's Success
Shall sink the Rate of Theodore's high Worth
In his own Estimation -- I could wish
To see him Manuel's Friend.

Man. O he will not stoop
To due Subjection; yet in Proof, my Son,
That I but hold his Insolence my Foe,
Let his proud Soul descend to such Submission,
As Honor, not the Pride of State demands,
My Hand and Heart again are open to him.

Mer. So, we may fall in our own Snare, Romanus. [Aside.

Soph. Sir, it was greatly said: Early Tomorrow
He shall be told the Tenor of this Grace;
Let him divide the Post of Honor with me,
My future Equal, but my Chief no more;
For could we see that Violence of Spirit
Tempered by Councils less impetuous, Envy
Might witness to the World, the best of Causes
Needs not a better Leader.

Man. Be it so;
Yet have thou proved this happy Day, Sophronius,
That we can fight, and conquer too without him.
But Son, thy brave Fatigues demand Refreshment:
You and your Friends retire -- I Will follow you.

[Exeunt Sophronius, Leon, Izrail, etc. Manent Manuel, Eusebia, and her
Attendants. Come near, Eusebia -- I observed but now
Thine Eye took sudden Fire at Sight of Leon,
And conscious Blushes kindled on thy Cheek:
Have thou not smothered yet thy foolish Flame?
Did I not bid thee shut him from thy Heart?
Eus. Speak not thus harshly to me, lest I stand
A sad Exception to the general Joy:
Woman at best is weak -- but when she loves --
Sir, you have seen how poorly I disguised
My artless Passion, and O look with Pity
Upon my Nature's Fault, nor think it mine.

Man. So apt, young Mistress? You have learnt, it seems,
The common Plea, the Subterfuge of Folly:
But I well know a Father's Duty, Girl,
Nor will indulge my Child to certain Ruin.

Eus. My Lord, I live a Debtor to your Care --
Yet now must humbly think no Danger nigh,
But in the Fancy of my Father's Fear.

Man. The fond Presumption of a doting Maid!
This needy Wooer has beguiled thy Heart,
And holds thee in the Bands of silken Slavery,
Enamored not of thee, but of thy Wealth.
Fie on it, it hurts my Thought.

Eus. Your Pardon, Sir --
But oh! I cannot judge thus hardly of him.
Can there be Falsehood in those Heart-fetch'd Sighs,
Those tender Pangs, and that Excess of Passion,
Which I, and all the Host of Heaven have seen?
O then Sincerity has lost her Proofs,
And Love the Vouchers of his Purity.
Besides his virtuous Life --

Man. I Will hear no more --
These Striplings cringe, and whine, and sigh by Rule,
And Woman flattered knows not Art from Virtue.
Why do I loiter here? Eusebia, yet
Thou art my Daughter -- let not thy Perverseness
Soil all the Blessings of this glorious Day --

Eus. Thus weeping, trembling, riveted to Earth,
O let me ask my ever-honour'd Father
When he was disobeyed?

Man. When did I ask
To be obeyed till now? What! thou would plead
The slender Service of thy former Years,
Which Ignorance and Youth, not Duty paid.
Do thou call this Obedience to a Father?
Away, and mark me, I desire Compliance
In Instances of greater Weight, or none.

Eus. This Resolution may undo me, Sir,
But shall not shake my Duty -- I submit --
And yet I could have hoped the hapless Youth
That saved your Son, and saved us all in him,
At length might boast Pretension to your Favor.

Man. How! will thou teach me to reward my Soldiers?
But I perceive thy Stubbornness of Folly:
Thy blind Affection cleaves to Leon still:
And therefore hear a Father's fixed Resolve;
Give me a Proof before Tomorrow's Noon,
Leon no more is Master of thy Heart,
Or quit my Roof, repair thee to a Convent,
And dedicate thy remnant Days to Heaven.
So shall it sooth my Soul, when I reflect
Thou art not mine, to know, thou art not his.
Farewell, and think on this. [Exit Manuel.

Eus. Tell me, my Virgins,
In all the Volumes of recorded Love,
Have you ever read a Destiny like mine?
What Is to be done? -- Can I conceal my Passion?
Ah! 'twill betray itself a thousand Ways.
But to renounce my Heart's best Joy for ever --
My Soul recoils with Horror at the Thought --
Support me, Friends, and with your kindest Counsels,
Oh! save a wretched Maid from double Ruin. [Ex.

SCENE II.
Enter Romanus. Romans Eusebia, and in Tears! What may this mean?
It matters not -- they drop Delight to me,
As Tokens of more Woe -- Let Mischief flourish --
I was to meet dull Mervan here -- I want
To fool him further to my Bent -- till when
My Purpose halts, and thou art safe, Aleppo --

Enter Mervan. But lo! he comes -- Welcome, my worthy Friend;
I need thy Counsel much this fatal Hour;
My Soul is full -- But why that downcast Look?
Things wear a better Face since last we parted.
Mer. They never looked worse, Romanus.

Romans How! my Mervan,
Have thou not seen the Man thou hate most
Thrown from his Orb like Lucifer? -- It Is Joy,
Worth the young Bridegroom's Transport, thus to stand
Safe on the Shore, and view this Wreck of Greatness.

Mer. Who falls may rise -- The Sun that is now descended,
Tomorrow will resume his fiery Function.

Romans Why this School Simile? -- What mean thy Fears?

Mer. I fear not Shadows -- Terms of Amity
Will be proposed to Theodore.

Romans Say so?
Now Heaven or Hell forbid.

Mer. Nay hear my Tale.
Sophronius, still self-diffident, although
His Worth mounts daily in the Scale of Glory,
With Modesty I never might blame before,
Proposed this fatal Evening to his Father,
To share the chief Command with Theodore,
Provided small Acknowledgment were paid,
As is most due, to Manuel's injured Honor.
I am content, cries our old Governor,
And strait commissions him to make the Treaty.
Early Tomorrow Morn they will confer;
If so, trust me, I doubt our Counsel leaks.
For while thou weavest thy Design, Romanus,
Fine as the Spider's Web, there is but a Breath
'Twixt that and Dissolution.

Romans My good Mervan,
This must not be -- I have a Story too
Will shake thy honest Heart -- Hah! Theodore
Directs his Steps this Way -- I must dissemble;
But you, my Friend, insult his fallen Pride --
It Is a Debt due to Spleen -- You shall hear more
Anon -- My Fortune may assist me now. [Aside.

Enter Theodore. The. Romanus, I was seeking thee -- What means
Thy loit'ring here?

Romans We have a trifling Business
That had been soon adjusted -- but I Am ready
To hear my Lord's Commands.

Mer. Indeed, and should;
The General cannot wait his Soldier's Leisure.

Romans For Shame' sake, Peace.

The. What does the Abject prate?
Reptile, my Soul never looked so low as thee.

Mer. Better you had -- it is said your airy Gazers
Stand on a tottering Base -- a Fall may hurt --

The. What does my Virtue come within the Taunt
Of musty commonplace Morality,
Culled from an old Wife's Evening Dialogue?
Peace, good Philosophy, I wage not War
With Saws, and Ends of Reasoning -- pr'ythee Peace --

Mer. I have not learnt what Deference is due
To a disbanded Soldier.

The. Hah! thou Slave,
There Is that perhaps may teach thee better Manners.
[Strikes him.
Mer. Seize me eternal Pungency of Pain,
But I will be revenged, thou brutal Smiter.

Romans Well struck -- and well resented -- for my Purpose. [Aside.
Nay but be pacified -- [To Mervan.

The. How the Cur foams?
Revenge! Why that is the Virtue of great Souls
That struggle with the Pangs of injured Honor --
It is a tender Plant, that flourishes
But in a warm well-cultivated Soil,
Not seen to thrive in cold and barren Ground.
Do thou, thou Lump of earthly Element,
With no more Fire in thy dull Blood than serves
Mere Motion, and not Heat -- do thou presume
To vent Impatience in exalted Terms,
Out of your Sphere of Mutt'ring? Thou revenge!
Go, Fool, to Bed -- Romanus, I would see thee
Within an Hour -- till then farewell. [Exit Theodore.

Romans O Mervan,
My ever honored, and much injured Friend,
But that the Matter asks maturer Thought,
My Poniard should have reached the Villain's Heart.

Mer. Confusion, and Despair!

Romans Nay, no Despair;
For that defeats your Wisdom's Resolution:
We'll have Revenge -- the Public shall have Justice --
The Public, Friend, -- thou know not yet how much
Aleppo's Cause, and thine are interwoven --

Mer. What would Romanus say?

Romans That which might chill
The Heart of Stoutness -- oh! suppose this Night,
It could be said, Aleppo is no more!

Mer. Thou have a horrid Look -- I pray explain it --

Romans Observe me then with Heed.

Mer. Religiously.

Romans Soon as hot Theodore had left the Council,
I hied me to his House; and as I knew him
Apt of Conception desperate, tried to sound
The Fathom of his Thought -- I found him, Mervan,
Churning the Froth of Fury -- I suggested
(Putting the Semblance of fair Friendship on)
Topics of Vengeance to him, nor in vain;
He was soon tractable to Works of Darkness --
I urged him to betray this hated City,
And showed apparent Means of Execution --
He pressed me to his Bosom, hugged my Zeal,
And swore it was Revenge full adequate
To his vile Wrongs -- I will to Night, he cried,
Hear more of this -- You heard him chide my Stay --

Mer. I did -- the Villain -- Heaven! was this the Man
Whom good Sophronius would restore to Honor?
How has thy honest Fraud detected him?
But I will hence, and startle Manuel's Ear
With this Report -- It must be done to Night --

Romans Hold -- ponder well the Issue with the Deed --
You would charge Theodore with Treason?

Mer. Ay --

Romans And I am ready to support the Charge,
But say, with what? what Color? what Pretense?
My Word will weigh no more than Theodore's,
And happily less when he disowns the Crime
With Protestations backed by horrid Oath.
My single Voice is Slander, and not Proof --

Mer. Nay, spur thy Wit -- Aleppo must be saved,
And I must have Revenge.

Romans Why, let me see --
It is the surest Way -- suppose this Night
My Dagger drinks his Blood -- the Dead, thou know,
Are no Gainsayers.

Mer. Right -- proceed -- I hear thee
With most charmed Organs --

Romans To the Governor
The Rashness of the Blow shall be excused
By some well-fram'd, and joint Apology.
The Prejudice of Manuel, and the Place
You hold in his Opinion sets all right,
And everlasting Peace succeeds --

Mer. Well said, my Oracle!

Romans Yet still one Doubt, good Mervan,
Draws back my Resolution.

Mer. Speak it, Friend.

Romans What if the Villain's Groans, or Marks of Blood
Betray me to his Household? They may wait not
Calmly to weigh the Motives to this Deed,
But wreak a sudden Vengeance on my Life --
Now could I show by some plain, pregnant Token,
That I therein proceeded by Commission --

Mer. Hah! To effect that Point is mine, Romanus,
Behold Lord Manuel's Signet. [Shewing it.

Romans Give me that
And I Have a Passport sure.

Mer. Take it, it is thine -- [Gives it him.
And now pursue thy Purpose -- let me hear
Before Tomorrow's Sun, Aleppo's Foe
And Mervan's Bane is levelled with the Dust.

Romans You shall -- good Night.

Mer. Farewell -- [Exit Mervan.

Romans Hah! Hah! The Fool --
How ductile to my Will? -- this magic Ring
Will conjure up a Storm to ruin all --
It gains me Credit with my Brainsick Patron,
And blinded Wrath shall take its furious Course
By my Direction -- this dread Night, Sophronius,
I rob thee of thy Glory; and, proud Nymph, --
Will seize sharp Vengeance for thy late Disdain.
The Saracen right well my Aid implored,
For Policy wins more than Othman's Sword --
So when old Greece had seen her Thousands slain,
And bravely waged a ten Year's War in vain,
She last by wily Stratagem prevailed,
And Sinon conquered where Achilles failed. [Exit.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
SCENE The Gallery. Enter THEODORE. MY Wishes lean to fell Revenge; but oh!
I know not what of Nicety forbids it --
Some Way my swelling Choler must have Vent;
Who ever damned the Ocean's Surge, or stopped
The thought-quick Fury of the fiery Bolt?
That Man preach Peace to me -- Romanus comes --
He loves me well, and may devise new Means --
Enter Romanus. How now Lieutenant -- why thus lost in Thought --
Romans My Lord, your Pardon -- it is a private Grief
That weighs upon my Heart --

The. Thy Griefs, Romanus,
I will make mine.

Romans I owe your Goodness much,
But would not now increase the Debt -- one Day
You shall hear all -- how wears the Time, my Lord!
Am I within the Limit of your Order?

The. Precisely -- O Romanus since thou first
This fatal Day did wake my sleeping Vengeance,
Rage, like a Canker, has been gnawing here.

Romans That Is right -- I trust I have thee on the Hook -- [Aside.
In Truth my Thought has been to Day employed
On that same Matter too -- I much admire
Your mighty Soul, and own Revenge is Baseness,
Unless he marches hand in hand with Honor.

The. Away; is there no Vengeance left, Romanus?
Are there no Means but those I dare not use?
Why did thou rouse me but to mock my Soul?
It Is as you would force the Lion from his Prey,
When Famine gripes his Entrails -- O Revenge!

Romans Nay but, great Sir, with noble Minds Contempt
Is full Revenge -- I am your Proselyte --
But you, I see, like a right skilful Disputant,
Can take the Argument by either End.

The. No, I not waver in my Sentiment;
But, when once crossed by Appetite, O show me
The cold, phlegmatic Moralist, that turns not
A Rebel to his Tenets.

Romans Fie, Lord Theodore;
I thought you master of a better Spirit;
These angry Transports are old Manuel's Triumphs.

The. I am hemmed in with Plagues.

Romans Those Plagues are over,
And Wrath has had his Vent --

The. Ay, but my Soul
Retains Impression still.

Romans I fear my Lord,
Some added Fuel fires your Breast anew --

The. Why no, I think not, no.

Romans Ah! Sir, I see
Your tender Part -- the Battle won this Day
By Chance, and Derar's Death -- does not that gall you?

The. By Heaven, these vile Aleppian's fought to Day
In very Spleen to me -- A Group of Curses
Light on their squeamish Bravery.

Romans Amen!
Yet I Would not grudge the Keenest of my Foes
Imperfect, casual Victory like this.
How vain Dependence on the Swords of Wretches,
That leave the Banner of great-hearted Mars,
To trip with feather-footed Mercury? --
Let us away -- a Soldier cannot breathe
In Air like this.

The. Mirror of Honesty!
O thou best Guide of my distracted Soul --
Yes -- we will go, Romanus -- I submit
To what must be --

Romans Why that was well resolved:
And since I see your Passion wisely quelled,
I safely may unfold a Tale, that else
Should have lain hid in Night's most sable Cloud.
Know then, the Matter, you observed but now,
To rivet down my Strength of Meditation,
Related most to thee.

The. To me! how now?

Romans You will be calm --

The. As Patience.

Romans Hear me then:
My Lord, a Plot is laid against your Life.

The. Against my Life? -- as how? -- by whom, my Friend?

Romans By whom? good Heaven! I thought you knew your Bane
By natural Antipathy -- who is it
Has done you wrong? who is it that dismantled
My Patron of his Honors? who disgraced
The Prince of Chivalry? O! who but Manuel?
The Devil's not more a Foe to human Race
Than he to Theodore.

The. Hah! let me hear thee --
The Night is still -- The Winds are hushed in Silence,
And yon fair Planet, rising with her Train,
Shall witness all the Horrors of thy Story.

Romans The Governor, my Lord, with vilest Arts,
Has long laid Siege to my Affections --
To Day some favoring Angel moved my Thought
To try his Depth of Malice -- I assumed
Sudden Disgust to thee; and in that Conf'rence
With hollow Mervan, which your Presence broke,
Swore myself henceforth to his Master's Service.
The Fool, in whose vile Bosom, you well know,
Manuel locks up his Secrets, nails his Faith
On my dissembled Zeal -- You mark me, Sir, --

The. Ay, ay, proceed.

Romans And you did promise me
You would be calm --

The. I did -- Confusion! -- well --
Go on -- I Am cool.

Romans Admitted to old Manuel,
I wound me soon into his Confidence --
My Lord, he bears a most invet'rate Hate
To your high Virtue, which he terms your Pride --
Nay more, some Wretch has taught him to suspect,
That in your Letters you have often foul-stain'd
His Rule of Government to good Heraclius.

The. Letters! what Letters? By my Hopes of Vengeance,
But that I scorn to condescend so low
As to refute the Calumny; this Night
I Would hurl the Rascal Falsehood in his Teeth.

Romans I held it meet to cherish this his Spleen,
So feigned me privy to your Correspondence,
Nay more, I cited too the black Contents
In venomed Terms, and loud affirmed them yours --
Next I enlarged upon my proper Wrongs,
And vowed this Night, his full Consent my Warrant,
At once to free us both, and the whole World,
Of such a Villain -- Manuel, well-convinc'd
Without more Proof, or better Cause than this,
Applauded the fell Purpose -- ay, and quickened
My Appetite for Vengeance by strong Promise
To lift my Fortunes to a splendid Greatness.
I Am sworn this Night to stab you in your Sleep --

The. Then I am loosed at once from every Tie --
What! Murder me? O! for a Sacrifice
Worthy my boiling Rage -- when I am angry,
Methinks Mankind should suffer -- good Romanus,
Let Othman know the City's his to Night;
The Terms the same as --

Romans How your Wrath transports you?
Thank Heaven, I Am honest -- for your open Heart
Is most accessible to Villainy --
Perhaps I did but mean to try your Temper --

The. Now by the Tempest rolling in my Bosom,
I Will not be trifled with -- Give me to know
The Truth this Instant -- see thou lay'st it plain
To my Mind's Eye, and visible as Proofs
From Demonstration, or assure thee Villain,
Mischiefs await thee -- speak --

Romans O do not storm:
Speak -- I have Naught to speak -- indeed 'twas all
A well invented Lie, a cutthroat Tale.

The. Villain, thou lie -- I see thy Heart's Confusion -- [Seizing him.
Say all thou know, or by --

Romans I Have said too much --
Yet now, in Justice to myself must on --
Perish the World ever I deceive my Friend --
See the Credentials of the cursed Trust;
What was to be my Sanction for the Deed;
Is this Lord Manuel's Signet? [Shewing the Signet.

The. It Is the same,
And darts Conviction on my Sense, as gross
As the Broad-Seal of Hell -- then Blood for Blood --
Romanus, see our trusty Syrians armed
By Midnight's silent Hour.

Romans Are you resolved?

The. As the Decrees of Heaven.

Romans Why then no more --
My private Sentiment shall yield to yours --
I will not dare to doubt your Vengeance just:
I saved your Life to prove my honest Love,
And will confirm it more by full Attachment
Even to your wildest Counsels -- There Is my Hand
In earnest of my Heart --

The. As such I take it --
Honest Romanus, how shall I requite
The Saver of my Life?

Romans Sir, I will own
I had a Prospect of Reward.

The. Command it.

Romans O! I have sighed the painful Breath of Bondage
With the calm Patience of afflicted Saints,
Whole Years for fair Ormelia's Love.

The. She Is thine --
Not my Lieutenant, but my Son -- she is thine.

Romans Behold her here.

Enter Ormelia. The. Ormelia, oh! my Child,
Tell me what Blessings would thou wish the Man,
That has preserved thy Father from Destruction?

Orm. O I would wish him all that Heaven ever crowned
The Piety of his best Vot'ries with;
All that his Heart could ask; all Comforts here,
And Certainty of golden Bliss hereafter.

The. Then hear me and obey -- there is my Deliv'rer --
This fatal Night by Manuel's cursed Design
Romanus stands engaged to shed my Blood;
See here the Token of that hellish Trust --
[Shewing the Signet. His feigned dislike of me explored this Treach'ry:
Ay, and his Faith of Friendship has been bribed
With offers worth Ambition -- ask no more --
But bless his generous Goodness with thy Love,
And make me happy in a Son like him.

Orm. Forgive me, Theodore, if for a while
Distracted by Variety of Passion,
I know not what to answer --

The. We allow
The Niceness of reluctant Modesty
To maiden Innocence -- mean time, Romanus,
Fix we our Thought on this Night's bloody Business, --
I pray advise me in it --

Romans Sir, to you,
And yours, I owe more Service than the best
Of my poor Zeal can pay -- for this same Business,
Resolved, it is done -- Your House stands on the Walls,
From whence a Soldier may descend unseen,
And bear the welcome News to yonder Camp;
Let them approach the Town with silent March;
Just as the Bell beats one, our Syrian Troop
Shall take Possession of the Armory;
Then slay the Sentinels, seize all the Gates,
And let the Torrent of Confed'rates in,
Eager, and rushing on to general Ruin.

The. Be It so -- Aleppo's doomed -- Justice has lent
Her Sword to black Revenge -- Romanus, send me
The Captains of our Troop to take their Orders --
For this one Night, O Mahomet, I Am thine. [Ex. The.

Romans At that Command, I have been wont to fly,
As swift as Fancy's Wing -- yet now would stay,
To catch the Glances of Ormelia's Eyes,
And hear her Sentence on my faithful Passion,
Though the World's Doom depended on this Hour.

Orm. That Sentence, Sir, is past -- You heard my Father --
I cannot, must not, would not disobey him;
Nay and could wish I had a Heart to give
To Worth like thine, for I confess, Romanus
Your Merit far superior to your Claim.

Romans Grant it but equal -- can my lovely Fair
Withold a Heart she owns herself my Due,
And without which I scorn to take her Hand?
No, I renounce the Right thy Father gave me;
I did my Duty -- but would have my Blessing
Ormelia's Gift, not his --

Orm. Thou generous Man!
I thought there was no Passage to my Heart,
But sure the grateful Sentiment that warms
My Soul, if it is not Love, is something greater.

Romans Cherish that Sentiment my Guardian Powers!
And kindle it to Rapture such as mine.

Orm. Yet say, is this a Time for Love, Romanus?
How sacred every Moment is to Vengeance?
The Deed and Guilt are Manuel's -- young Sophronius --
Nay do not start -- he is no more your Rival --
And yet I would not know him for a Villain:
Was he consenting to this cruel Purpose?

Romans Madam, 'twere base, or to disparage Virtue
With scanty Praise, or wrap it up in Silence.
Sophronius is right noble -- but this Evening,
Though Conquest sat upon his shining Plume,
And he stood loaded with a People's Praise;
He owned the Prowess of your Father's Valor;
He willed old Manuel offer Terms of Peace,
Which Theodore might well embrace with Honor --
Even Manuel's self dissembled Approbation,
And veiled the Malice lurking at his Heart.

Orm. O wondrous Proof of thy unequalled Goodness?
Sophronius only is outdone by thee --
The Man thou praisest is the Man I loved;
Even now (with Blushes I disclose my Weakness)
My Heart almost revolts from Thee and Virtue --
But thy Perfections awe the Thought to Shame --
Gratitude, Honor, Duty make me thine,
And Inclination ought.

Romans I know it will --
Such Excellence can never do amiss --
If fondest Care, if Industry of Love,
Can --

Orm. Hold -- it is needless this -- my future Faith
I pledge to thee for ever.

Romans Blessings on thee!
Oh! let me grasp this Crisis of my Fate,
Now all my better Stars propitious beam,
And farther humbly hope --

Orm. What would thou ask? --

Romans You would be mine this happy Night.

Orm. To Night!
Have you forgot?

Romans Nay! by yon Heaven, my Wish
Is pure as is the stainless Thought of Childhood.
Never should my Soul relax to soft Desires,
Till Scenes more calm, and peaceful Sunshines bless us;
But kindly place it in my Power hereafter
To say, this glorious, this distinguished Night,
I saw my Bliss complete, my Lord avenged,
Aleppo punished, and thyself my Bride.

Orm. Sir, I am yours in Honor of Engagement.

Romans Engagement! -- it is too faint, too cold a Word,
And damps the rising Ardour of my Soul --
Give my high Hopes the Title of thy Husband,
And I shall rush like Lightning on the Foe;
Or if some unforeseen, some dreadful Chance,
Should whelm me in the Tumult of the Fight,
At least I shall indulge a virtuous Pride,
And smile in Death to call Ormelia mine.

Orm. Nay this is Humor most extravagant.

Romans It Is noble Eagerness of great Ambition,
But oh! it is vain -- I see through the Disguise
Of this Reluctance, and perceive thy Heart
Unwilling to oblige a Wretch like me; --
And can she love who scruples to oblige?
Impossible! -- Die every flattering Hope!
Welcome the Anguish of a fruitless Passion,
It is Ormelia's Doom, and I must bear it. [Weeps*

Orm. Weep not, Romanus; for thy Tears reproach me;
They call me stubborn, cruel, and ungrateful;
If I must --

Romans No -- by yon bright Orb, you shall not*
I Would not be happy upon selfish Terms,
Or purchase endless Peace with thy Disquiet:
Haste to thy Love -- be blessed in thy Sophronius --
While I in Sorrow languish Life away,
And fall the willing Victim of thy Beauty.

Orm. Forbid it, all ye Powers that guard the Just!
Thy Virtues banish every female Form,
And I this Moment yield my vanquished Hand.

Romans Thus let me thank thee for this dear Compliance; [Kissing her Hand*
Angels, proclaim my Ecstacy of Bliss,
And tune your Harps to sweet Ormelia's Praise.
I fly, my Love, to seek a holy Priest
Whose ready Ministry may crown my Transports.
Soon let me find you in your own Apartment;
Till when -- one balmy Kiss -- Heaven guard thy Goodness --
So -- now I have my Fortune in my Hand.
[Aside and exit.
Orm. Well -- it is obeyed, this Dictate of my Honor,
And sure, I Have nobly sacrificed to Virtue!
Farewell, Sophronius -- 'twas a tender Sigh
Which wafted that Farewell -- but it is the last --
Hah! he is here! -- Good Heaven, of all the World
The Man I would not see --

Enter Sophronius. Sir, you are bold;
I thought I had forbidden you my Presence.
Soph. Though banished from thy Sight, my constant Thought
Has never strayed from thee -- and I come once more
To know my utmost Fortune: The sad Exile
Revisits thus with Doubts and pleasing Dread
His native Land, not dearer to his Soul,
Than late to me was my Ormelia, when
She welcomed me with hospitable Love,
And made her Heart my Home -- once, no strange Guest,
May I not hope again, on noble Terms,
To gain Admittance --

Orm. It Is too late to talk
Of Terms, and Hope is mere Presumption now --

Soph. Forbid it, Love -- Lord Theodore, Tomorrow,
If I mistake not, is my Father's Friend.

Orm. Impossible!

Soph. Let but Ormelia hear me.
I bring him easy Terms of Reconcilement.

Orm. I have heard all.

Soph. Is then thy Father's Spirit
Still so untractable, he will admit
Friendly Proposals upon no Conditions?

Orm. You must not hope to see him Manuel's Friend --

Soph. At least that is not my Crime -- sure we may love --
And wait for happier Days -- If thou know all,
Sophronius stands acquitted in thy Sight.

Orm. I am no Judge in such a Cause as this,
And must not hear you plead --

Soph. Is It possible?
Still cold to all I say -- Is this the Maid,
That often has sat attentive to my Vows,
While the gay Hours were all bespoke by Love,
And Moments were not wasted, but enjoyed?
And when I poured my amorous Rapture forth,
Would she not sometimes aid me with her Sighs,
Or bless the tender Story with a Tear?
But now she looks relentless on my Sorrows --
Nor feels one friendly Pain of Pity for me!

Orm. Alas! I dare not listen to this Talk.

Soph. Yet ever I part for ever from thy Beauties,
Let me be told my Crime -- Art thou unjust,
As well as most unkind? If thou art false,
Even for thy Sake, I Will not suppose hereafter
A Woman can be true -- I Will think thee still
The brightest of thy Sex -- Perhaps, Romanus --
Am I supplanted by my Rival's Love?
His Merit must be raised by Miracle --
Yet grant him all Perfection, if I know
My Heart, he cannot, cannot love like me.

Orm. Oh! [Fainting; he catches her.

Soph. Heaven! she faints -- What would my wayward Fortune?
Awake, my Life, my Love -- See, she revives,
Her Beauties burst like Sunbeams from a Cloud.

Orm. Why have thou called me back to Misery?
My Soul was never Womanish till now --
Who can resist such Tenderness as thine?
Though Heaven and Earth conspire against our Loves,
I feel my Heart will still acknowledge thee --
Yet we must part -- I never can be yours.

Soph. What means my Life? Reprieved and doomed at once!
Part! Who shall part us if thy Will consents?
Though Theodore or Manuel should oppose,
Our Union, the best Pledge of Reconcilement,
It were enough that it is approved by Heaven.

Orm. No, my Sophronius, Heaven decrees against it --
The Voice of Conscience, Reason, Justice, Duty,
Loud thunders in my Ear, It must not be.
Tomorrow will explain the Mystery
I cannot now reveal -- Farewell for ever --
Poor hapless Youth! I see thy struggling Breast,
And mine too labors with an equal Pang --

Soph. Yet stay! For ever, did thou say, Ormelia?
Ah! whither shall I turn? -- Are all Things sacred
Armed against Truth and Innocence? Ye Powers,
What strange Event will this Tomorrow bring?
Even now those Eyes are bent with Fondness on me --
Thy Heart is panting with the Sighs of Love,
And every soft Emotion pleads my Cause --
Can I despair with Joys like these in View,
And be distressed with Happiness before me?

Orm. Adieu! Sophronius -- I must hear no more --
Upbraid me not with Falsehood or Unkindness --
But when the dreadful Truth shall glare upon thee,
Lay thy Reproaches where thou see them due.
The Blessings of eternal Peace be with thee,
And Honor crown thy Days -- O when hereafter
You chance to call this Night to your Remembrance,
(As sure you will have Cause) speak of Ormelia
In gentle Terms, (so shall I speak of thee)
And own my Memory worth a tender Thought.
Once more adieu! Sophronius. [Exit.

Soph. [After a Pause.] Think not, Man,
To trace the secret Maze of Providence,
Or ascertain the Fortune of an Hour.
My Leon here -- [Enter Leon] Thou Partner of my [Sorrow,
Why have thou left the Palace?

Leon. My Sophronius,
I come for thee: For oh! without thy Presence --
Now my Eusebia has forsook the World,
Banished by fatal Love of wretched Leon,
Though Mirth and Triumph raise their jocund Voice,
And the Roof echoes to the Sounds of Joy,
To me thy Father's House is desolate.

Soph. I will return with thee; and as we go,
Thou shall be told my most uncommon Lot --
O could my Soul anticipate Tomorrow --
But wear we calm Content upon our Brows,
And join the general Festivity --
In Love though both have been unhappy, Leon,
We have a Refuge in our Friendship still --
Love is at best, my Friend, a virtuous Weakness;
The Appetite of Nature, not its Glory;
And even the purest is alloy'd with Folly.
Friendship is wholly rational; the Ardour
Of generous Minds, the Rapture of the Soul,
Preservative of Love, and its Survivor.

Leon. Excellent Youth, my Sorrow's Remedy,
Methinks I catch the glorious Theme from thee.
Dear are the sacred Characters in Life
Of Father, Brother, Sister, Husband, Wife;
But the prime Gift that bounteous Heaven can send,
Is the sure Blessing of a faithful Friend. [Exeunt.

ACT V. SCENE I.
SCENE a magnificent Apartment in the Governor's Palace. Manuel, Sophronius,
Izrail, Leon, and others sitting at a Table, with Wine, etc. MANUEL. ONCE more
Prosperity to our Aleppo,
And Thanks to my Sophronius -- [Drinks.]
Izrail, say
Where points the Hour of Night?

Iz. In Truth, my Lord,
I doubt we borrow of the Morning now.

Man. Here then break up our Feast -- Show we our Joy,
Like Christian Soldiers, and not Revellers;
A Health to all our Friends, and then good Night.

Iz. Health and sweet Slumbers to the Governor.
[Drinks.
A great Cry within. Help, fly, O Mercy, Quarter, spare us, Mercy!
Soph. What means that dreadful Cry? I fear some Treach'ry.

Enter an Officer hastily. Offi. O we are lost, betrayed, undone; the Saracens
Are in the Streets, and furious Theodore
Is at their Head, dealing Destruction round --
The Sentinels are slain, the Armory
Is seized by the vile Syrians -- Hark, I hear
The Thunder of the Tempest drive this Way.
[The Cry is heard again as nearer.
Soph. This was thy fatal Mystery, Ormelia. [Aside.

Enter another Officer. Offi. Fly, my Lord, fly -- the Palace Gates are forced
--
Othman and Theodore come storming on --
I saw him drive his Sword in Mervan's Breast --
Hah! they are here --

Man. I Will not survive this Hour --
Come let us fall like Men --

Enter Theodore, Othman, and others, with Swords drawn -- They fight --
Theodore wounds Manuel; Leon interposes; -- then Sophronius speaks. Soph. Hold,
Friends; it is Madness --
Ye Saracens forbear -- the City's yours --
[They give up their Swords. We fight not against Providence -- but, Othman,
O let not loose the horrid Rage of War
Upon the Citizens; spare their Distress,
And save thy own Renown.

The. Hah! who art thou
That would command here still?

Oath. Nay, Theodore,
But hear a noble Foe. -- We have already
Marked well our Way with Blood -- Go, Omar, bid
The Hand of Slaughter and of Pillage cease
Upon Submission -- [Exit an Officer] Christians, you may note,
How Heaven confirms the Cause of Mahomet,
And owns us as He did his once-lov'd People,
When Canaan's warlike Nations sunk before them.
See then, and be converted -- or hereafter
Pay annual Tribute to my Lord the Caliph --
I leave you to resolve your speedy Choice,
And for the rest, Romanus will inform you.
[Exit Othman.
Soph. We have not much to learn. Alas! my Father,
You bleed -- Help here, my Friends --
[They place him in a Chair.
Man. No Help -- I Have seen
Aleppo lost, and would not be immortal:
Why should an old Man live? You whose Veins bound
With youthful Blood, live to revenge your Country:
I would escape from Life, and that black Traitor --

The. Would thou upbraid me, Villain, with a Deed
That thy own Baseness caused?

Man. Pr'ythee away,
And let me die in Peace.

The. Die, and thy Malice
Sink thee to lasting Pain -- Where Is my Romanus?
[Exit Theodore.
Man. Come near me, Friends; I have few Words to speak;
Sophronius, thou art Heir to all my Fortunes;
But it is my Pride to leave thee rich in Virtue --
See thou protect my Friends -- would I could say
My other Children -- I have wronged thee, Leon --
Thy honest Zeal did interpose to save me,
Even when I had no Daughter to reward thee --
Can thou forgive my Frowardness?

Leon. I do --
Oh! if -- Hah! who comes here? Ye Powers above!
It is Eusebia's Self --

Enter Eusebia attended: She runs to her Father and kneels: Both silent some
Time. Man. My Child --

Eus. My Father --
Your Pardon and your Blessing e're you die --

Man. Thou have a Right to both -- alas! my Daughter,
I thought thee shut within the Convent's Walls.

Eus. O! Sir, forgive a Fraud which Love inspired:
Beneath the Shelter of a friendly Roof
Till now I have concealed me, fondly hoping
That such supposed Retirement from the World,
While it might testify my Leon's Truth,
Would melt at length a Father's Heart to Pity.

Man. It has, it has -- and this unhop'd Return
Darts Gleams of Comfort on my parting Hour --
Take my best Blessing to thee -- take thy Leon --
Thy dying Father's most acknowleg'd Friend --
Sophronius, see thy Brother and thy Sister --

Soph. Both Sharers of my Heart, and my Inheritance.

Man. Enough -- The Shades of Night hang over my Brow.
Bury my Frailties with me; O, my Friends,
Yet while you may, defend our holy Faith;
There is much Christian Ground unconquered still --
Yield not a Jot to Mahomet -- remember,
It Is glorious to assert the Cause of Truth
In unbelieving Times -- Farewell, my Friends,
Farewell, my Children; and oh! -- [Dies.

Soph. Worthy Departure of a Patriot Soul:
Sister, the tender Tribute of thine Eye
Is justly paid -- for us, my Brother Leon,
(How sweetens that soft Name the Cup of Sorrow?)
Our Reverence for dead Manuel's Memory
Prove we another Way; by Deeds, not Tears --
Remove the Body -- See it laid, Eusebia,
In decent State, not Pageantry of Pomp --
So shone my Father's Virtues --
Izrail, stay; [Ex. with the Body, Eus. Leon, etc.
Some unknown Motive may have urged this Treason --
I would learn all -- See! Theodore returns --

Enter Theodore. Sir, I well know thy Name renowned in Arms --
But do not number this among your Triumphs --
The. It is not Triumph, Boy! it is Something more;
It Is Something that methinks I would not change
For the wide Fame of Caesar -- It is Justice!
The Satisfaction of a great Revenge!
The Transport of a mighty Soul, inflamed
By basest Wrongs, and pleased with public Ruin!

Soph. I thought a Soldier never would have talked thus;
A Christian ought not.

The. Tell not not me of Rules; --
Souls of ethereal Temper are not held
In vulgar Circumscription; they start wide
From Duty's Path by innate, fiery Impulse,
Which gracious Heaven signs Dispensation to --
Yet think not I have done this Deed Tonight,
Provoked by mere Resentment of Ambition,
Though my great Heart but ill digests Dishonor:
There is a Cause behind thou know not of,
A Cause might force the saint-like Eye of Meekness
To sparkle with the angry Dragon's Beam.

Soph. What may this mean? Do we not all well know
The Weight, and utmost Reach of thy Complaints?

The. No, Stripling, no -- Hark you -- I Will tell you News --
Your Father Manuel was a bloody Villain --

Soph. Thou lie -- I am unarmed -- or by my Hopes --

The. He meant this Night to murder me in Bed.

Soph. It is impossible! -- I had his Order
This Day to bring you Terms of Reconcilement --

The. Curse the Hypocrisy -- Here comes the Man,
My Friend, my Son, that was to do the Deed --

Enter Romanus dressed as a Bridegroom. Come to my Arms -- [embracing Romanus.]
Is that a Murd'rers Face?
Fool! to suspect Romanus for a Villain --
Soph. How Is this? Your Friend, and Son! If this could be --
And yet it could not be --

The. See, and be dumb:
See an authentic Proof of barbarous Trust --
[Shewing the Signet. If this be Manuel's Signet, so -- if not,
Let the Arch-Devil come from Hell, and own it.

Soph. Amazement! Izrail, know thou aught of this?

Iz. No, as my Soul shall prosper --

Romans Come, my Lords,
I Will end this Strife at once --

The. Do, good Romanus.

Romans First, as the Prologue to my Tale, know all --
I own the sacred Law of Mahomet.

The. Hah! Slave, what have thou said? revoke thy Words --

Romans Nay but revoke thy Words, proud Theodore;
I was your Slave, the Spaniel of your Humor;
But my great Soul, superior to its Bondage,
At length, has shook the vile Dependence off,
And now I Am Lord of thee, and of Aleppo.

The. Damnation! thou art mad.

Romans Or you shall be --
You will not hear me then?

The. Ay, I will hear thee --
I Will know this Fate, though every Word thou utter'st
Bites like the Viper's Fang.

Romans Attend, and tremble.
What Time I was a Prisoner in yon Camp,
I left your barren, Christian Law, to thrive
In the rich Harvest of a growing Faith --
And made the League with Othman, which this Night
Has seen fulfilled -- I saw thy fiery Nature
Had shaped thee a fit Tool for my Design --
The slighted Mervan, whom my frequent Vows
Of equal Hate to thee had made my own,
By my Direction poisoned Manuel's Ear
With groundless, brain-forg'd Tales, that waked his Spleen,
And blew the fatal Flame of Strife between you.

The. Oh!

Romans This Attempt, failing of wished Success,
I practiced yet again on hollow Mervan,
Who, fooled by me, believed your desperate Rage
Meant to betray Aleppo to the Foe;
But as I had not seeming Proof enough
To bring a public Charge of such vile Treason,
I undertook this Night to spill your Blood --
Lord Manuel's Signet (for I feigned the Deed
Even in the Act lay level to Discov'ry)
Was in such Case to screen the Blow from Question --
So, Sirs, you have a Key to all my Counsel --
Why raves my noble Lord? -- I saved your Life --

The. Monster, thou lie -- thou well did know my Life
Was wrapped up in my Fame -- That thou have stabbed;
And Murder, when compared with Guilt like thine,
Smiles like a soft-ey'd Cherub -- Oh! Sophronius!
[Leans upon Sophronius,
Romans You paid my Service with your haughty Daughter;
Who, well assured of my transcendent Merit,
Gave me her Hand this Night -- that once obtained --
Sighs and Entreaties, raptured Vows and Oaths,
And the fond Pleadings of a Husband's Right,
Have gained me since the sweet Revenge I wished for --
Now tired of Love, and all its vain Delights,
Gladly I quit the galling Noose of Wedlock --
Thou, or Sophronius take her --

Soph. Matchless Villain!

The. Hah! 'twas well thought. [Aside.] Romanus, the Account
'Twixt me and thee is yet unsettled -- thus

[Pulls a Dagger from his Breast, and stabs Romans With willing Hand I pay thee
all thy Due.
Romans Death, Hell, and black Perdition! I am slain. [Dies.

The. Fiends seize thy Soul -- Come give me Joy, Sophronius;
For I have done one righteous Act Today --
I thought to stain this Blade with Manuel's Blood --
Now let his Spirit smile upon the Stroke --
Heaven marks it in the Record of my Works: --
But see where Murder, Treason, Sacrilege,
Are wrote in Leaves of adamant against it --
You stand amazed -- but wherefore? -- Is a Villain
A Sight so rare? -- O from this Day, the wicked,
The Outcasts of fair Grace shall bless themselves,
And quote my Deed with the pert Pride of Censure.
If there be Ease in Madness --

Soph. Come, reflect --

The. Reflect! on what? eternal Loss of Honor?
The flaming Mouth of Hell that yawns before me,
Yields me a brighter Prospect -- All my Thought
Is steady, fixed, immovable Despair.
Who never hopes can never be deceived --
But Business must be done -- Your Pardon, Sirs --
This is no Place for Traitors -- give me Room there.
[Exit Theodore.
Soph. What strong Commotion shakes him?
Woeful Day!
Alas! how brittle is the stablest Structure
That human Policy, or Prowess raises!
One Villain's Breath dissolves it -- Hah! Ormelia --
She bends this Way -- Izrail, I pray retire --
[Exit Izrail. Fortune diversifies the Scene of Horror.

Enter Ormelia: Seeing the Body of Romanus she starts. Orm. Angels defend me
with your golden Wings
From this heart-striking Sight! -- My Lord! My Husband!
Will not the loved Ormelia's Voice awake thee? --
Nay then thy gallant Soul has burst her Clay,
And I am left to endless Desolation
A wretched, widowed Bride -- What barbarous Hand
Could thus -- but I may spare my Tongue the Question.

Soph. Unhappy Fair! thou see I have no Weapon;
My Hand, my very Soul is now disarmed --
Did thou know all --

Orm. Know what? Equivocator!
Thou Thorn, for ever rankling in my Peace!
Thou had a Weapon when thou did the Deed;
And let me tell you, Sir, it was a Feat
Worthy Aleppo's General.

Soph. O Ormelia,
My Heart weeps for thee -- Soon, believe me, soon
These high-ton'd Strains shall sink to Notes of Woe,
Or float upon the wildest Sounds of Rage.

Orm. Behold a Cause for endless Rage, thou base one --
Did thou not mark the Pang that wrung my Soul,
When I left thee for him, only for him
That now lies blood-steep'd there? -- Thou knew'st me his
By every sacred Tie -- yet him thy Hand
Has poorly slain -- not so he treated thee --
The partial Tongue of most enamored Fondness,
Could scarce have dressed its chosen Idol up
In Terms of fairer Hue, than those Tonight
He decked your Name withal --

Soph. I slew him not --
Or if I had -- alas! thou injured Maid --

Orm. Dissembler, cease -- I know your specious Plea
Of Love for your dear City justly lost;
With this you mean to gloss a horrid Act,
Which gratified the Rancour of thy Soul,
And proves thee true-born Son of murderous Manuel.

Soph. O vain Reproach! Know, Madam, I would boast
The Virtues, not the Greatness of my Race,
And wish to prove myself the Son of Manuel,
To make his Loss more light.

Orm. What! is he fallen?
Thanks to the righteous Vengeance that destroyed him.

Soph. It was thy Father's Vengeance -- but if righteous,
All moral Difference of Good and Ill
Is the Delirium of a sickly Dream --
Oh! you're undone -- How will thou start to find
Romanus fell by Theodore's own Hand,
The Friend avowed of Mahomet, the Foe
Of Theodore, of Manuel, thee, and all!
Can thou not read my Heart? -- Do thou not see
Softest Compassion melt upon my Brow,
And Agony distend my tottering Frame?
Oh! poor Ormelia!

Orm. Madness and Illusion!
Must I not trust my Sense? Hah! who art thou,

Enter an Officer hastily. That with such ghastly Aspect would deliver
Some dreadful Tale?
Offi. It most concerns you, Lady --
As I past by yon Chamber, I descried
Lord Theodore in most distempered Motion;
He traversed wildly over the Room, like one
Whose favorite Scheme Somewhat unlooked for marrs;
Now sudden he stopped short, and, sitting down,
Fast rivetted his Eye unto the Floor;
Then started up, and smote upon his Bosom;
Then spread his Arms to Heaven, and with his Foot
Stamped hard, as though he meant to shake the Roof;
At length, with a deep Groan, that would have melted
The Soul of Cruelty to baby Mildness,
Hasty he drew a Dagger from his Bosom,
And plunged it in his Side.

Orm. Death and Destruction! --

Offi. Amazed I called for Help, and forced the Door --
The Servants raised him up; they bring him hither --
For here he learnt you was -- Lo! where they come.

[Theodore brought in in a Chair, with Officers, Servants, etc. Orm. Ye
Moralists! O teach me Patience now!

The. Ormelia! -- art thou here? Draw near, my Child; --
Thy Tenderness shall cheer my latest Moments,
And light me through the darksome Gate of Death.

Orm. Help; bind his Wounds --

The. Hold off: Did Manuel die
Because he would not survive his Country's Ruin,
And should the Villain live that has betrayed her?
Live, like a wounded Beast, to drag about
A wretched Being with a broken Heart?
What! live to be a Mark of public Scoff
For Holiday Mechanics? -- Welcome, Death!
Thou art at least a Change of Misery,
And I would fly to other Ills for Shelter.

Orm. What does my trembling Heart forebode? -- Sophronius
Has told me --

The. Naught but Truth.

Orm. There lies my Husband --

The. Slain by this Hand, a Villain and Impostor.
The blackest Guile that Treachery e're wore
Were snow-white Innocence and Truth to his:
Soon thou wilt know all -- We Have been abused, my Daughter.

Orm. Abused -- how my Brain turns -- Who has abused us?
Not he -- why, he was Honesty -- I knew him.

The. Strengthen her tender Frame, all gracious Heaven!
And for the Woes thy Justice heaps on me,
O doubly, doubly bless my dearest Child.

Orm. How heartily he prays -- Come let us pray all --
O hear me, hear me -- do not die, my Father!
[Kneels down by her Father.
The. Unhappy Girl! -- I did not know till now
The Bitterness of Death -- I must leave thee --
Even when thou want a Friend, and Father most.
Behold the Woman you once loved, Sophronius;
O had -- it cuts me there -- will thou forgive me,
And shield my Name from popular Reproach?
Thine Eye sheds friendly Grief -- I thank thy Goodness --
Now it grows dark -- pray for my flitting Soul --
Take my last Look, Ormelia -- Bless her, oh! [Dies.

Orm. Let him alone -- he will be up Tomorrow --
And drive the Saracens like Chaff before him --
Soft, place him easy -- his Brain ach'd last Night --
I Will make a Pillow of the Peach's Down
To rest his Cheek upon -- We'll deck him fine --
Come, stick his Couch with shining Pearls, fresh culled
From the gay Morning's Dew -- So -- that is well done --
Now lay him, like a mighty Emperor,
Beneath the painted Rainbow's sumptuous Arch --
He sleeps most soundly -- well -- good Night, my Jewel. --
And now I Will to my Love -- Hah! hah!

Soph. Ye Powers,
Heal her disordered Mind!

Orm. Hah! who goes there?
Fellow, stand off -- It is my Love -- I know him;
If I can catch him, I shall cleave for ever;
[She lays hold on Sophronius. Hot Pincers shall not part us -- Heaven and
Earth!
My Husband's come -- off, vile Adulterer!
[Pushing Sophronius from her. Oh! he has two red Firebrands in his Eyes,
And a long Whip of Scorpions in his Hand.
Forgive me, nay I did but snatch one Kiss --
I Will wear my Knees out on the rugged Flint --

Soph. Most pitiable Sight.

Orm. Oh! he is gone --
Why Weeps my Love? -- Hah! there he is again;
Give me my Wings -- O hide me, hide me from him.
[Exit raving.
Soph. Attend her, Sirs, and bear her gently home --
[Exeunt some, manet the rest. Alas! my Presence would inflame her more --
To what am I reserved? All-righteous Heaven,
Support me in these Trials of my Virtue,
Check the rebellious Sallies of Impatience,
And give me Courage to submit to thee.

Enter Leon, Eusebia, and Izrail. Leon, what Havoc have we seen Today?
Leon. But look we forward now, Sophronius; Othman
Has sent by me to know our last Resolves.

Soph. For me -- I will repair to good Heraclius --
Have thou forgot what pious Manuel said?
Who knows but we may yet avenge our Cause,
And one Day call Aleppo ours again?
The glorious Hope amuses my Heart's Sorrow,
And War shall be my Recreation now --

Eus. We'll follow thee.

Leon. And I.

Iz. And I.

Offi. And all.
I trust, my Lord, no Soldier stays behind.

Soph. Then be it so -- my Friends, it is still our Glory
We were surpised, not conquered. This Day's Woe
Yields us a Moral -- Not to loose the Rein
To the fierce Impulse of impetuous Anger.
[Pointing to Theodore.] The Man, whose Bosom headstrong Passion swayed,
And the blind Zeal of eager Rage betrayed,
Though brave by Nature, and in Action great,
Worked his own Ruin, and Aleppo's Fate. [Ex. om.

THE END.
CYMBELINE.

A TRAGEDY, ALTERED FROM SHAKESPEARE.

As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL in Covent Garden.

By WILLIAM HAWKINS, M. A. Late Fellow of Pembroke College, and Professor of
Poetry in the University of Oxford.

LONDON: Printed for JAMES RIVINGTON and JAMES FLETCHER, at the Oxford Theater,
in Paternoster Row. MDCCLIX.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Countess of Litchfield.
MADAM,
I Have the honor of your LADYSHIP'S permission to present to you a Tragedy,
which, though it met with numerous and unprecedented difficulties and
discouragements in the theater, will, I hope, be thought not altogether
unworthy your protection in the world. -- Indeed, if the unpopularity of its
late situation could in the least affect that degree of merit, which your
LADYSHIP'S candor, or the indulgence of the town, may allow it to have, it
would ill become me to recommend it to my readers, under the sanction of so
polite and illustrious a name. -- But your LADYSHIP has too much good sense, as
well as generosity, to judge of this performance by mere appearances, and
accidental or unlucky circumstances; and therefore, though it will stand as a
kind of memorial of the bad fortune, and worse treatment of its author; it may
at the same time be a proper testimony of the high respect with which I am,

Madam, Your Ladyship's most obliged and most obedient Servant, WILLIAM HAWKINS.
Feb. 22, 1759.
PREFACE.
THE Tragedy of Cymbeline is, in the whole economy of it, one of the most
irregular productions of Shakespeare. Its defects however, or rather its
superfluities, are more than equalled by beauties, and excellencies of various
kinds. There is at the same time something so pleasingly romantic, and likewise
truly British in the subject of it, that, I flatter myself, an attempt to
reduce it, as near as possible, to the regular standard of the drama, will be
favorably received by all, who are admirers of novelty, when propriety is its
foundation. I have accordingly endeavored to new-construct this Tragedy,
almost upon the plan of Aristotle himself, in respect of the unity of Time;
with so thorough a veneration however for the great Father of the English
stage, that, even while I have presumed to regulate and modernize his design, I
have thought it an honor to tread in his steps, and to imitate his Style, with
the humility and reverence of a Son. With this view, I have retained in many
places the very language of the original author, and in all others endeavored
to supply it with a diction similar thereunto; so that, as an unknown friend of
mine has observed, the present attempt is entirely new, whether it be
considered as an alteration from, or an imitation of Shakespeare.

-- The difficulty of such an attempt, as rational as it may be, has a kind of
claim, I presume, to the indulgence of the public; especially as it has been
attended likewise with disadvantages. -- For I found myself necessitated by my
plan to drop some characters, to contract others, and to omit some scenes and
incidents of an interesting nature; -- or rather to bring the substance and
purport of them within the compass of a few short narrations. -- A loss
irreparable this, but that conveniences are likewise to be thrown into the
opposite scale; for as, I hope, I have not injured any characters by
contracting them, but have left them to all intents, and in point of importance
the same; so I have had an opportunity of enlarging and improving some of the
original parts, (those particularly of Palador, and Philario, the Pisanio of
Shakespeare) and, by varying certain incidents and circumstances, of giving a
new cast to the whole drama. -- After all, I am very far from meaning to
detract from the merit of Shakespeare; or* from insinuating that the plays of
so exalted a genius require such new-modelling as the present, in order to the
rendering them useful or entertaining. -- I have ventured publicly to defend
this great dramatic Poet in the liberties he has taken; but still Shakespeare
himself needs not be ashamed to wear a modern dress, provided it can be made
tolerably to fit him.

The only question then will be, whether the present alteration be a judicious
one? -- And this with all due deference is left to the candor and justice of
the public.

It will be proper to acquaint the reader, that, this play, was recommended
some time since by a person of the first distinction, to the manager of the
other theater; who declared, that he had the very same altered play in his
possession, and that it was designed for representation on his stage. Our
Cymbeline therefore was obliged to take up his head quarters at Covent Garden;
where he has contended not only with the usual difficulties, but also with
others of an extraordinary nature -- Mrs. Bellamy's declining the part of
Imogen has done the play incredible prejudice; and convinces me of the vanity
of striving against the stream of popularity in general, or the weight of
particular disadvantages. -- However, I am under obligations to many of the
performers, for their best endeavors to do justice to my piece, and for their
zeal for its success. To some I am indebted for real service, whose names, as
comparisons are invidious, I leave it to the judgment of the reader to supply.

Upon the whole, I am at a loss to balance the account between myself and my
fortune, in this whimsical situation. The kind assistance, and, I hope, not
extremely partial approbation of some, adds as much to my credit and
satisfaction, as the delicacy, or ill nature, etc. of others, has deducted from
my advantages. -- To my friends, I return my sincere acknowledgments, and best
wishes; to my enemies, I shall say nothing, 'till they are candid, and
sagacious enough to speak more plainly than they have hitherto done, -- and
more to the purpose.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. ROSS.

BRITONS, the daring Author of tonight,
Attempts in Shakespeare's manly style to write;
He strives to copy from that mighty mind
The glowing vein -- the spirit unconfined --
The figured diction that disdained control --
And the full vigor of the poet's soul!
-- Happy the varied phrase, if none shall call,
This imitation, that original. --
For other points, our new advent'rer tries
The bard's luxuriant plan to modernize;
And, by the rules of ancient art, refine
The same eventful, pleasing, bold design.
Our scenes awake not now the amorous flame,
Nor teach soft swains to woo the tender dame;
Content, for bright example's sake, to show
A wife distressed, and innocence in woe. --
For what remains, the poet bids you see,
From an old tale, what Britons ought to be;
And in these restless days of war's alarms,
Not melts the soul to love, but fires the blood to arms.
Your great forefathers scorned the foreign chain,
Rome might invade, and Caesar's rage in vain --
Those glorious patterns with bold hearts pursue,
To king, to country, and to honor true! --
Oh! then with candor and good will attend,
Applaud the author in the cordial friend:
Remember, when his failings most appear,
It ill becomes the brave to be severe. --
Look ages back, and think you hear tonight
An ancient poet, still your chief delight!
Due to a great attempt compassion take,
And spare the modern bard for Shakespeare's sake.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. VINCENT.

WELL, Sirs -- the business of the day is over,
And I Am a princess, and a wife no more --
This bard of our's, with Shakespeare in his head,
May be well-taught, but surely is ill-bred.
Spouse gone, coast clear, wife handsome, and what not,
We might have had a much genteeler plot.
What madness equals true poetic rage?
Fine stuff! a lady in a hermitage!
A pretty mansion for the blooming fair --
No tea, no scandal, -- no intriguing there. --
-- The gay beau-monde such hideous scenes must damn --
What! nothing modish, but one cordial dram!
-- Yet after all, the poet bids me say,
For your own credit's sake approve the play;
You cannot for shame condemn old British wit,
(I hope there are no Frenchmen in the pit)
Or slight a timely tale, that well discovers,
The bravest soldiers are the truest lovers.
Such Leonatus was, in our romance,
A gallant courtier, though he could not dance;
Say, would you gain, like him, the fair one's charms,
First try your might in hardy deeds of arms;
Your muffs, your coffee, and down-beds fore-go,
Follow the mighty Prussia through the snow;
At length bring home the honorable scar,
And love's sweet balm shall heal the wounds of war.
For me, what various thoughts my mind perplex?
Is It better I resume my feeble sex,
Or wear this manly garb? it fits me well --
Gallants instruct me -- ladies, can you tell?
The court's divided, and the gentle beaux,
Cry -- no disguises -- give the girl her clothes.
The ladies say, to-night's example teaches,
(And I will take their words without more speeches)
That things go best when -- women wear the breeches.
Dramatis Personae.
CYMBELINE, Mr. RYAN. CLOTEN, Mr. CLARKE. LEONATUS, Mr. ROSS. PALADOR, Mr.
SMITH. CADWAL, Mr. LOW. BELLARIUS, Mr. SPARKS. PHILARIO, Mr. RIDOUT. C.
LUCIUS, Mr. GIBSON. PISANIO, Mr. DYER. TWO LORDS. IMOGEN, Mrs. VINCENT.
OFFICERS, SOLDIERS, andC.
SCENE, partly a Royal Castle, and partly in and near a Forest in WALES.

CYMBELINE. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE A Royal Palace. Enter two LORDS. 1st LORD. I Pray you feast mine ears
with more of this;
For it is so long since first I turned my back
Upon our isle, that I am new in Britain.

2d LORD. I think your wish to breathe in foreign air,
Took you away about the very time
The royal babes were stolen.

1st LORD. It is true, sir --
Some twenty years ago -- 'twas a strange theft,
But the concealment stranger; for you tell me,
That to this hour there is no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.

2d LORD. No, sir -- albeit search
Was hot in the enquiry -- but much time
Has worn out all that miracle -- fresh matter
Supplying wonder since.

1st LORD. Of which my ignorance
Is not yet perfect learner.

2d LORD. Well then, heed me.
Our late good queen (you knew her, sir) whose age
Was thought to advance beyond more hope of children,
Yet brought the joyful Cymbeline a daughter,
And to his kingdoms a most hopeful heir,
In lieu of those he lost: for Imogen
(Such is her name) took all the graces in,
Which the best wisdom of the times put to her,
As we do air, fast as it is minister'd.
If beauty, innocence, and gentleness
Are woman's rarest jewels, she is rich
In most full measure of possession.

1st LORD. You speak her fair.

2d LORD. But not to flatter, sir,
Though I should talk the sun down. You have heard
The bright side of the story, for the other
It has a sable hue -- I Will be brief with it --

1st LORD. Do, but be plain.

2d LORD. The queen quits mortal being;
And Cymbeline, though now in wane of life,
Takes to his lonely bed a second dame,
A widow, bold, ambitious, cunning, cruel,
That ruled his heart by acting what she was not:
She moved the cred'lous king to wed his daughter
With Cloten, her own son, a wretch in whom
All qualities that dub a worthy man
Are low as worst report. -- The princess cast
Disdain upon his suit -- and in mean time
My plotting stepdame dies.

1st LORD. A lucky death!

2d LORD. 'Twas thought so. -- But the king, in whom this weakness
Is his first point of fault, pursues the aim
Of his now dead beloved, and wills the maid
To take the crown with this encumbrance Cloten,
Or hold her birthright void.

1st LORD. Alas! poor lady.

2d LORD. Nay there is more woe behind. -- Sweet Imogen
Had long been listening to the earnest suit
Of Leonatus, a young lord of the court,
A valiant, frank, and honest gentleman,
That has no vice, if poverty be none;
And to say all, as much unlike to Cloten
As man can be to man. -- Him in pure love,
And to undo all aims, she weds, and makes
The deed soon known her boast: the enraged king
Sends Leonatus into banishment,
And her within the circle of this castle
Enforces to abide, till she consent
To break her bond to her new-wedded lord
By strong proposed divorce. -- This is the sum
Of what you wished to hear.

1st LORD. What say the Britons
To these proceedings?

2d LORD. As their humors vary;
Some blame the king, all pity Imogen,
And much lament the loss of Leonatus,
Now the black Romans swarm upon our coasts,
And virtue's called to proof.

1st LORD. They Are landed then!

2d LORD. Report says loudly so. -- But hist! -- the king --
We must forbear, we shall hear more of this.

Enter CYMBELINE, CLOTEN, and Lords. CYMBELINE, Well, sirs, the news abroad?

1st LORD. So please your majesty,
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your coast, with large supply
Of Roman gentry, by the senate sent.

CYMBELINE. Where hold they rendezvous?

2d LORD. My liege, at Milford.

CYMBELINE. Now by the soul of great Cassibelan,
They Are fairly welcome! -- Our right valiant Britons
Will greet them soldier-like. -- Caesar's ambition,
Which swelled so much that it did almost stretch
The sides of the globe, against all color here
Did put the yoke upon's -- which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, such as we
Will prove ourselves to be.

CLOTEN. My royal father,
The dreaded foe we have to cope withal
(That in his empire's paw would gripe the world)
Often have we measured swords with -- ere't be long
We'll make the mighty name of Cymbeline
To sound as roughly in a Roman ear,
As did Cassibelan's. --

3d LORD. My gracious liege,
Old Caius Lucius, and The Italian spark
Pisanio, that was tendant at his side
In his late mission from the Roman camp,
Are come, with errand of especial weight
Upon their brow.

CYMBELINE. Let them approach our presence.

Enter C. LUCIUS, PISANIO, etc. Lucius, we love thy person, though thou come
On deputation from our angry foe.
Pisanio, welcome too. Now, sirs, the message.
LUCIUS. First for myself, I thank you, royal sir,
For courtesies received -- not since forgot --
My present business is, in Caesar's name,
(Caesa, that has more kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers) to know
If in repentant yielding thou will pay
The yearly tribute of three thousand crowns,
Granted by famed Cassibelan thine uncle,
For him and his succession, to great Julius,
(Which by thee lately is untendered left)
Now fell confusion sets his standard up,
And fearful wars point at you?

CYMBELINE. Noble Lucius,
Words have no terrors -- there be many Caesar's
Ere such another Julius -- You well know,
Till the injurious Roman did extort
This tribute, we were free. -- Our Britain is
A world itself, and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own faces -- Sir, our subjects
Will not endure this yoke -- and for ourself,
To show less sov'reignty than they, must needs
Appear unking-like.

LUCIUS. Sir, when late to Britain
I came in peaceful embassy to claim
This yet contested tribute, I remember
The boast that filled your mouth -- you vaunted then
The natural brav'ry of your isle, which stands
As Neptune's park ribbed and paled in
With rocks unscaleable, and roaring waters,
With sands that would not bear your enemies boats,
But suck them up to the topmast. -- We have leaped
This all-forbidding fence, -- and, sir, be sure,
Wherever the Roman banner waves in wrath,
Conquest limps not behind. --

[During this speech, Cloten whispers Pisanio.] CYMBELINE. Had Julius found
In every land he mangled with his sword,
No stabler footing than he gained him here,
I could have bought his empire for a tithe
Of Britain's leanest soil. -- No more of this.
Tomorrow we will meet you in the field,
And this fair land is yours, if you can win it;
If not, our crows shall fare the better for you.
Caius, you are welcome: give him tendance, lords,
And feast him as befits his quality;
The due of honor in no point omit.
Once more my hand in friendship; from this time
I wear it as your enemy.

LUCIUS. The event
Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well.

[Exeunt Lucius, Pisanio, and some Lords. CYMBELINE. Our expectation that it
should be thus
Has made us forward. Cloten, our now heir,
(For the base Imogen our sometime daughter
Has lost all right in us) if so it hap
That I must leave my life in battle, thine
Is this imperial crown. -- Great Jupiter
Sprinkle his blessings on it as thou obey'st
Our sovereign charge. -- Hear us most heedily.

CLOTEN. I do; and will the royal mandate keep
Amongst my religious bonds.

CYMBELINE. Let not our daughter
Breathe more the cheerful air of liberty;
This castle be her home, house, region, world,
Till she shall sue thee for the love she scorned:
And Leonatus, exiled, worthless beggar,
That vilely did seduce her young affections,
If with his foot he mark our land again,
Pursue to bitt'rest death. -- So did we promise
Thy mother, our late queen, whose memory yet
Sits fresh upon my heart. Will thou do this?

CLOTEN. My liege, most willingly.

CYMBELINE. Then I Have laid out
So much of caution well. -- Lords, we must bustle --
It is the common cause that wakes our arms --
We grapple for our own; -- the puny wren
Will chafe him in his thief-assailed nest:
We fight for Britain's franchises, the laws
Of old Mulmutius, our great ancestor,
The first of Britain, which did put his brows
Within a golden crown.

CLOTEN. Those laws, great sir,
We will not change for Caesar's proud behests
That rules by bidding.

CYMBELINE. Deal we then our swords
With dextrous resolution; or hereafter
Let them hang up, like utensils discharged,
In rusty sloth, and vile disuse for ever.
The gore-besmeared Mars infuse his fury
Into our soldiers breasts; for our own self
We go to battle with a blither heart,
Than ere did jovial bridegroom long repulsed,
Into his mistress' bed. Sound there aloft
Our instruments of war, that British bloods
May boil to martial music. Forward, pass.
[Flourish. Exeunt all but Cloten.] Thanks to my mother for this joyless crown
--
It fills not half my wish: while Leonatus
Reigns in the bosom of fair Imogen,
It Is I am banished, and a sovereign he:
Would I could pluck their loves up by the roots!
And I am strong in hope -- if young Pisanio
(Whom I made mine by making myself Caesar's
When he was last in Britain) has been true
To the employ I gave him, long ere now
The jealous exile pines him in belief
His lady's truth is tainted. -- Come, Pisanio --
He said, he would quit the train, and here return
T'unlade his secrets to me. -- Oh! sir, welcome!

Enter PISANIO. What shall I ask thee first? -- How fares Augustus?
Is Leonatus mad? Thou might have told
A history ere this.
PISANIO. I pray you patience --
First, sir, my lord commends him to your highness;
Next, the diseased Leonatus has
Italian fits of jealousy too strong
For hellebore to cure.

CLOTEN. That Is well -- his grief
Is medicine to mine; but when, and how?
Give me particulars at large -- my ear
Shall catch thy narrative as greedily,
As does the sick man the kind drops that fall
Upon his fever's flame.

PISANIO. My lord, as soon
As I had foot in Italy, I challenged
The abused Leonatus with some friends
To the appointment of a merry meeting;
Where, as the wine danced brainward, I began
To praise the freedom of the British ladies,
Their liberal hearts, and amorous 'complishments;
When Leonatus vowed I did them wrong,
And was too bold in my persuasion.

CLOTEN. So.

PISANIO. I fast held me to my sentiment,
And, for his doubt provoked me, swore myself
Had tasted half the court, and his own princess,
(Whose virtue he had deemed unparagon'd)
At her own suit in bed.

CLOTEN. Most brave, brave Roman!

PISANIO. On this the Briton vaults me from his seat,
And bids my ready sword avow the affront
Done his pure lady's honor -- I with looks
Of calm assurance, and arms folded thus,
Wished him attend my proofs. This fair proposal
Had sanction from all sides, and liquor'd noddles
Jostled to hear my tale.

CLOTEN. Why so -- Proceed.

PISANIO. First, roundly I described her bedchamber,
The arras, cieling, pictures; (for of these
I took most faithful inventory, when
I lay concealed there); then I produced
The bracelet that I ravished from her arm,
As sleep, the ape of death, lay dull upon her;
And last I quoted the cinque-spotted mole
That richly stains her breast, like crimson drops
I'th'bottom of a cowslip.

CLOTEN. There was voucher
Stronger than ever law made. -- Well, sir, what
To this the Briton?

PISANIO. He was quite besides
The government of patience -- He rolled round
His bloodshot eyes, stamped with his foot, and writhed
His form into all postures; strove to speak,
And chatter'd monkey-like; -- at length, his choler
Burst into utt'rance rash -- it is well, he cried,
The fiends of hell divide themselves between you --
And so without more ceremony, left
Our board, to cast conjectures, as they might,
Whereto his fury tended.

CLOTEN. Thanks, Pisanio;
Saw you him since?

PISANIO. No; but the rumor was,
Ere I left Rome, that he had turned his thought
To bloody purpose of revenge.

CLOTEN. It Is good --
Pisanio, I did love this lady -- lie
I should not, if I said I love her still --
O she is sweeter than the breath of spring
Wooing the maiden violet -- it is past --
And I have lost her.

PISANIO. She has wronged you.

CLOTEN. True --
She has disdained me -- spurned me -- once she vowed,
The meanest garment that ever clipped the body
Of Leonatus, was in her respect
Dearer than all the hairs upon my head,
Were they all made such men. -- The southfog rot
Him, her, and Caesar's foes.

PISANIO. Thou wishest well. --
This Leonatus is a thorn, my lord,
That pricks your side of greatness. If he 'scape
The snare that traps him now, and happily live
To recognize his country and his queen,
Your crown will totter -- for the lady keeps
High seat in every heart; and for her husband,
(I speak in envy this) through Italy
Tongues quarrel in his praise; the current voice is,
So fair an outward, and such inward stuff,
Endows no man but him.

CLOTEN. I prithee stop --
Was he not yoked with Imogen, myself
Could make my tongue a bankrupt in his praise;
But being what he is, I must abhor him:
I have no other hate than what I bear
Him, and his fortunes; for his kinder stars
Have still eclipsed mine: but I will shroud me
Beneath the Roman wing -- Britain, thou have
Loud service of my tongue; my heart is Caesar's,
Of whom I Will hold my crown; these restif Britons
We must have curb upon; lest galled subjection
Feeling the heavy lash of government,
Fly off from his obedience.

PISANIO. Caesar bad me
Insure his countenance, and puissant arm,
Who will attack your right --

CLOTEN. We Are bound to him.
Sir, I will post me in the approaching battle,
Where least our British archers may annoy
The Roman legions.

PISANIO. It is well -- but hist --
Who is it comes yonder?

CLOTEN. It Is Philario, friend
And council-man to Leonatus; best
Abruptly part we here, as chance alone
Had brought us thus together. [Exeunt severally.

Enter PHILARIO. The four-brow'd Cloten! -- It is wide suspicion
Thou wear'st cold British heart, and this rencounter
With young Pisanio colors it more strong.
But I have other care. -- He writes me here,
(Pulling out letters.) In spleenful terms of most confirmed belief,
That he has cognizance of her incontinence;
And wills me, by the love and truth I owe him,
To murder her. -- Perhaps some false Italian
Has the infection of foul slander poured
In his too ready ear. -- Perhaps she is fallen. --
She Is fair, -- that is much; -- she is young, -- that is more. -- I hold
The virtue of the best attemptable. --
I must proceed with wary steps herein. --
Here Is that will 'tice her from her prisonhouse,
Or for true love, or seeming. -- I will steal
This way to her apartment. [Exit.
SCENE opens, and discovers Imogen in her apartment, sitting by a table; a book
on the table. A father cruel, and a suitor base,
A banished husband too -- O that is the grief
That gives the deepest wound. -- Then am I sure
The shes of Italy will not betray
Mine interest, and his honor? -- Wicked fear!
Where he abides, falsehood is out of fashion,
And truth the law to action. -- Hark! the clock!
(Clock strikes.) It Is the tenth hour of morn -- the very time
I bad him think on me, and combat heaven
With prayers, as I would do. -- O bless him Gods,
And sweeten all his cares with drops of comfort.
-- Now to my book -- Philosophy, best doctor,
Thou wisely do prescribe to human woe
The lenitive of patience. -- (Reads.)
Enter PHILARIO. There she sits --
Sweet student! with a look as chaste as Dian's. --
If she is disloyal, falsehood never yet
Hung out so fair a sign -- yet seems, we know,
Is often read for is -- I must disturb her --
Imogen -- lady --
IMOGEN. Hah! what now, Philario?

PHILARIO. Dear lady, here are letters from your lord --

IMOGEN. From whom? from Leonatus? -- Let me see --
Oh! learned indeed were that astronomer,
That knew the stars as I his characters --
He Would lay the future open -- You good Gods,
Let what is here contained relish of love;
Of my lord's health; of his content; yet not
That we two are apart -- of his content
In all but that -- good wax, thy leave -- blessed bees
That make these locks of counsel -- Good news, Gods.

PHILARIO. Now let me con her visage as she reads --

IMOGEN. (Reading) Justice and your father's wrath, should he take me in his
dominions, could not be so cruel to me, but you, oh! the dearest of creatures,
would even renew me with your eyes. Take notice that I am at Milford Haven;
what your own love will out of this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all
happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and yours increasing in love,
LEONATUS.


Oh! for a horse with wings -- hear'st thou, Philario,
He is at Milford Haven -- prithee tell me
How far it is thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a day, why may not I
Glide thither in an hour? Then, good Philario,
Who long'st like me to see thy friend; who long'st
(O let me bate) but not like me, yet long'st,
But in a fainter kind -- Oh! not like me --
For mine is beyond, beyond -- tell me how far
To this same blessed Milford; and by the way
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as
T'inherit such a haven. But first of all,
How may we steal from hence? I prithee speak
How far to Milford?
PHILARIO. Madam, we may reach it,
With horses swift and sure of foot, before
The sun has ended his day's journey.

IMOGEN. Well --
But how to get from hence --

PHILARIO. I have a thought --
Lady, a thousand eyes keep sentinel
To watch your motions here -- yet happily these
Unquestioned we may pass -- suppose you did
Assume another mien, and but disguise
That, which t'appear itself must not now be
But by self-danger -- cannot you awhile
Forget to be a woman?

IMOGEN. I Am almost
A man already.

PHILARIO. Make yourself but like one,
And every gate shall kindly open to us,
Though Argus' self were porter.

IMOGEN. In my closet
I have a suit of boy's apparel ready,
That was my page's -- under which disguise,
And with what imitation I can borrow
From youth of such a season, I will quit
This castle's loathsome hold.

PHILARIO. You are resolved then
To tie yourself to Leonatus' fortune,
And leave your father and the court behind you?

IMOGEN. No court, no father now -- (for what is a father
Whose mind my crafty stepdame poisoned, that
Bore all down with her brain) no, nor no more
Of that harsh, sullen, haughty, princeling Cloten,
That Cloten, whose love-suit has been to me
As fearful as a siege.

PHILARIO. Hie to your chamber,
And fit you to your manhood -- dull delay
Is sin against resolution.

IMOGEN. I am armed
Even for events of peril infinite,
And woman's love is courage.

PHILARIO. I will hence,
And able horse and furniture prepare
For this adventure: I Will be with you, lady,
Before you're well equipped.

IMOGEN. Do, good Philario:
The gracious Gods direct us!
[Exeunt severally.
End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE The Castle. Enter CLOTEN and LORDS. 1st LORD. IN truth, my lord, her
throwing favors on
So low a thing as Leonatus is,
Slanders her judgment much; it does substract
From her else princely qualities --

CLOTEN. I think so --

2d LORD. Is there a spell in Leonatus' name?
What is he in his person, nature, fortune,
That you are not, and more? -- Say, is he young?
You reaped your chin since he did -- is he valiant?
By Mars, you fear him not -- handsome? you read
Your faithful glass with more content than he --
For birth and fortune the proportion is
As top to the bottom.

CLOTEN. Oh! your pardon, sir,
His lady's smile has tutored him a pride
That ranks him with the highest -- and though Rome
His body holds, he has a heart and hope
In Britain still; which nothing can cut off,
But something that may give a mortal wound
Or to his life, or love.

Enter CYMBELINE, and other Lords. 1st LORD. My lord, the king.

CYMBELINE. Await you here our daughter, noble Cloten?
Will she not forth?

CLOTEN. She will vouchsafe no notice.

CYMBELINE. The exile of her minion is too new,
She has not yet forgot him: some more time
May wear the print of his remembrance out,
And then she is yours.

CLOTEN. Never, I fear, my lord.
O I have proved her heart impregnable;
I should, my liege, your patience overstretch
To tell in course the labors of my love;
Denials but increased my services;
I have put by my nature, crouch'd and fawned;
I seemed as if inspired to do the duties
I tendered to her; if she had forsworn
All commerce with mankind, I Would been content;
But Leonatus' suit had witchcraft in it,
While mine she heard as does the ruthless rock
The drowning seaman's moan.

CYMBELINE. It must be humor:
The stubborn tendency of woman's will,
Still pliant or resisting against all rules
Of virtue and discretion -- Let her suffer --
I have a child in thee --

CLOTEN. A thankful one.

CYMBELINE. Call her before us, sirs, (exeunt Lords) for we would make
A last demand to her unduteous spirit,
Ere yet we take the field -- and here we swear
By the great sovereign of the immortal Gods,
If she consent not fully to the act,
Whereby we late have sentenced her divorce
From that base slave, whose vileness must not soil
The luster of our crown, we reconfirm
Our royal grant to thee, adopted son
Of our dear love; and her blot out for ever
From all connection with our blood, and title
To this imperial diadem -- How now?

Re-enter Lords. 1st LORD. So please you, sir, her chambers all are locked,
Nor answer will be given to the noise
Our loudest clamours make.

CYMBELINE. Hah! fled! escaped!
How may this be? -- Cloten, the guard is yours --
Have you not surety of their faith?

CLOTEN. My liege,
They are the picked of my affection, and
I stand amazed at this.

CYMBELINE. Where is Philario?

2d LORD. My liege, some two hours since, I saw him take
The road that windeth round the castle grove,
And by his side a comely youth that seemed
A page of the court.

CYMBELINE. My life it must be she;
Winged with the fervor of her love she is flown
To Leonatus, and Philario is
The pander of her folly. We Are abused;
All Italy in arms would hurt us less
Than what aggrieves us here -- Our dear son Cloten,
Head thou the search for these vile runagates,
With thy best faculties of diligence;
Then follow to the field -- We must be gone;
But we will carry our displeasure with us,
And Rome shall feel we are angry. -- Come away.
[Exeunt.
Manet CLOTEN with some Lords. To horse, sirs -- mark me -- I am dead to love,
And vengeance speeds me now.
[Exit with Lords. SCENE A Forest, and a Cave at a distance. Enter from the
Cave BELLARIUS, PALADOR, and CADWAL. BELLARIUS. It is a goodly sky -- Stoop,
boys, this gate
Instructs you how to adore the heavens, and bows you
To ev'ning's holy office. Gates of monarchs
Are arched so high that giants may just through,
And keep their impious turbands on without
Obeisance to the sun -- Hail! thou fair heaven,
We house in the rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do.

PALADOR. Hail heaven!

CADWAL. Hail heaven!

BELLARIUS. Our life, my boys, is such as mortals led
Ere living was an art. The busy knaves
That clatter in yon world, are mad to purchase
Honor with danger; wealth with envy; pleasure
With manifold infirmity; while we,
Poor in possession, in enjoyment rich,
Have no more wants than means; our avarice is not
Wider than are our stomachs; our ambition,
Who first shall scale the steepy mountain's cliff,
Or strike the destined venison; this is life,
And health, the life of life.

CADWAL. My reverend father,
Out of your proof you speak -- we, poor unfledged,
Have never winged from view of the nest, nor know
What air's from home; happily this life is best,
If quiet life is best; sweeter to you
That have a sharper known.

PALADOR. What shall we speak of,
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how
In this our pinching cave shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing --
We Are beastly; subtle as the fox for prey;
Like valiant as the wolf for what we eat;
Our courage is to chase what flies; our cage
We make a choir as does the imprisoned bird,
And sing our bondage freely.

BELLARIUS. How you speak?
Did you but know the cities' usuries,
The art of the court, the toil of war that goes
In quest of honest fame, yet dies i'th'search,
And has as often a sland'rous epitaph
As record of fair act; did you know this
How would you smile in solitude -- Oh! boys,
The sharded beetle is in safer hold
Than is the full-wing'd eagle -- I was once
First with the best of note -- Cymbeline loved me,
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off -- Then was I as a tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit; but in one night
A storm, or robb'ry, call it what you will,
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay my leaves,
And left me bare to weather.

PALADOR. Uncertain favor!

BELLARIUS. My fault was nothing, (as I often have told you)
But that two villains, sland'ring my fair honor,
Swore me confed'rate with the Romans: so
Followed my banishment; and these twenty years --
This rock, and these demesnes have been my world;
Where I have lived at honest freedom; paid
More pious debts to heaven than in all
The fore-end of my time -- but up to the woods --
This is not hunter's language -- He who brings
The largest fardle home is lord o'th'feast.

CADWAL. Come, Palador -- [Exeunt Pal. and Cad.

BELLARIUS. I Will meet you in the valleys.
Thou divine nature, how thyself thou blazon'st
In these two princely boys! O Cymbeline!
Thy sons, though trained thus meanly up among
These desert rocks, have lofty thoughts that hit
The roofs of palaces -- it is wonderful
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To royalty unlearned, honor untaught,
Civility not seen from others, valor
That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop,
As if it had been sowed. -- Well -- I must after -- [Exit

SCENE Another part of the Forest. Enter PHILARIO, and IMOGEN in boy's clothes.
IMOGEN. Thou told'st me when we came from home, the place
Was near at hand. Never longed his mother so
To see him first, as I do now. Where are we?
Here is no path, no proof of habitation;
And, but we tread on solid earth, methinks
We Are out of the bounds of the world -- I pray, Philario,
Where do thou lead me? It will soon be night,
For see the lamp of Phoebus is nigh quenched
In Thetis' watery bosom. --

PHILARIO. Madam, here
Our journey ends.

IMOGEN. Here! where is Leonatus?

PHILARIO. Lady, at Rome -- 'twere treason to be here.

IMOGEN. Alas! what means this coldness of reply?
Have thou abused me with a forged letter?
Where is my lord; Philario? -- What Is the matter?
Why offer'st thou that paper to me with
A look untender? how! my husband's hand!
Quick slay, or cure me outright.

PHILARIO. Please you, read,
And you shall find the duty I am bound to.

IMOGEN reads. My wife, Philario, has played the strumpet in my bed; the
testimonies whereof lie bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak surmises, but
from proof, as strong as my grief, and as certain as I expect my revenge. That
part, thou, Philario, must act for me; Let thine own hand take away her life; I
shall give thee opportunity in the road to Milford: my letter is for that
purpose to her: so, if thou fear to strike, and to certify it is done, thou
have broken thy vows, and art a traitor to friendship.

(Imogen drops the letter, stands silent, and in the utmost consternation.)


PHILARIO. Is her amazement innocent or guilty?
Tell me some God, -- for sure a mortal wit
May else misconstrue such perplexity. -- (Aside.)
Madam, what cheer? are you prepared to die?

IMOGEN. I false! I false to's bed? have I been chaste
As snows that sunbeam never kissed, for this?
Gods! have I left my father's gilded roof,
The rights of birth, the largesses of fortune,
The pageants of pre-eminence, and all
That womanhood is said to dote on, yea
And womanhood itself? -- have I left these,
No jewel taken with me but my honor,
To hear I Am false? oh! oh!

PHILARIO. She heeds me not. --

IMOGEN. False to his bed? what is it to be false?
To lie in watch there, and to think on him?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock? if sleep charge nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him,
And cry myself awake? -- that false to's bed!

PHILARIO. What shall I do? I must be home to the point.
(Aside.) Lady, I stand not here to try your cause:
I am your executioner: -- your judge,
My friend, to whom I Have sworn all offices,
Appoints me to this deed; -- if thou art guilty,
I hold the sword of justice; if guilt-free,
Thy blood must light on Leonatus' head --
One prayer and I dispatch. --

IMOGEN. That paper, Sir,
Has done the business: You may sheath your sword; --
I Have heard I am a strumpet, and my heart
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent to bottom that.

PHILARIO. O yet bethink you --
With what a weight descends the guilty soul,
Sunk with a load of unrepented crimes?
For such the infernal ministers prepare
The darkest cells of Erebus.

IMOGEN. Nay, preach not,
But do thy work -- and when thou see my lord,
A little witness my obedience; -- look --
Smiling I meet thy angry sword -- come, hit
The innocent mansion of my love, my heart --
Prithee, dispatch -- Is that the stern Philario,
That came on murder's errand? -- Strike -- for now
The lamb entreats the butcher.

PHILARIO. O that look
Would outface proof. (Aside.) Hence thou vile instrument,
Thou shall not damn my hand. --
(Throws down the sword.) It cannot be
But that my friend's abused -- some crafty villain
That Is sing'lar in his art, has done you both
This cursed injury. -- O thou vip'rous slander,
Thy edge is sharper than the murderous sword;
Thy tongue out-venoms all the worms of Nile;
Thy breath, that rides upon the posting winds,
Belies all corners of the world. -- I Will speak
As from most firm conviction of her virtue,
To probe her still more deeply -- I have yet
More test to put her to. (Aside.)

IMOGEN. Alas! Philario,
Some jay of Italy, with painted feathers,
Has robbed me of his heart; poor I am stale;
A cast-off robe; a garment out of fashion;
And, for I Am richer than to hang by the wall,
I must be ripped -- to pieces with me -- oh!
Men's vows are women's traitors.

PHILARIO. If it be so,
(As I confess it does provoke belief)
The face of virtue shall from hence be thought
The mask of villainy; and Leonatus
Has laid the level to all proper men;
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured,
From his great fall.

IMOGEN. Take up thy sword, Philario,
Behold my breast obedient as the scabbard. --
I lived but to one end, to do his pleasure,
And to that end would die. --

PHILARIO. O gracious lady,
Since I received command to do this business,
I scarce have slept one wink.

IMOGEN. Do It, and to bed then.

PHILARIO. I Will wake mine eye balls blind first. No, thou sweetest,
If he has stained his loyalty, his mind
Is now as low to thine, as were his fortunes. --
What! shall his vileness batteries erect
To shake thy fort of innocence? -- Live, lady,
To kill him with thine eye -- he shall be told
That I have done his bidding, and awhile
You in some residence obscure shall 'bide,
As is thy present habit. -- Come, let us hence.
Sure this discourse has much bewildered me,
Or we have marched too wide. -- Fortune befriend us,
Else we have far to supper. -- This way, lady. -- [Exeunt.

SCENE the Cave. Enter BELLARIUS. My meditation has misguided me,
And I have missed the boys. They Will not return,
Though all the elements should be at war,
'Till darkness sends 'em home. O Cymbeline,
When thou shall see thy royal progeny,
(As I do mean with the first 'vantage to
Render thee back these youths) thou shall confess
Thy loss was gain, and thank calamity.
Hah! who are these?
Enter PHILARIO and IMOGEN. What chance could wind their steps
Thus far from all society? it is strange!
IMOGEN. (seeing him) O look, Philario, look -- what reverend figure
Is this approaches? In his visage sits
The treasured wisdom of an hundred years --
The sages of old time are pictured thus;
Accost him, good Philario; for his presence
Awes my unskilful heart.

PHILARIO. Grave hermit, hail!
Pardon, old man, our ignorant intrusion,
Upon your venerable solitude.
I, and my nephew here, are bound for Milford,
And chance wide straying from our way to night,
Have light upon your lonely habitation.

BELLARIUS. Thou have a gracious favor -- for this youngling,
The dimpled God that holds the cup to Jove
Is second to him. -- You are welcome, sirs --
If you can shape your fancy to your needs,
The wholesome viands of a homely board,
That bloated luxury never cater'd to,
Shall be most freely yours. Your names, beseech you?

PHILARIO. Philario, sir -- this gentle youths' Fidele. --

BELLARIUS. Why once more welcome -- this low roof's your home,
While it is worth owning. -- I Have two sons, whose age
Will yoke in followship with yours, Fidele --
Philario mates with me -- tarry awhile,
And purge your lungs of the foul air of the city,
Or of the court, for that is sickly too --
O! I have lived to make the pop'lous world
A stock for laughter.

IMOGEN. Uncle, we have found
Delightful lodging, and a gracious host --
This good old father's greeting sooths my spirit,
Faint with this long day's march.

PHILARIO. Look here, Fidele --
I have a cordial of especial proof,
I pray thee drink it off -- it is a drug
That three times has my father's life redeemed
From the arrest of death. It has more virtue
Than I shall tell you now. (Aside.)

IMOGEN drinks. Uncle, I thank you.

BELLARIUS. Here come my boys. -- Sirs, stand aside awhile;
How will they take this novelty? they never
Saw mortal but their mother, and myself.

Enter PALADOR and CADWAL. You, Cadwal, are best woodman, and are named,
The master of the feast -- hah! what are these?
Go not near, Cadwal -- they are Gods that come
In visitation to our hermitage --
The eldest is God Pan; the other seems
Like swift-leg'd Mercury, or the God of Love,
Dressed in his mother's smiles. -- Down, Cadwal, down
On knees of adoration, and beseech
Propitious aspect from their deities --
Hear us immortal powers. -- (Kneels.)
BELLARIUS. Rise up my boys:
These are but mortals like ourselves, made up
Of the same stuff as we -- when we have supped,
We will enlarge our conference.

PALADOR. Are they men?
By the puissant Jove they are noble ones --
I long to commune with 'em -- for that youth
My heart is high in sudden palpitation --
Methinks I love him neither more nor less,
Cadwal, than I do thee.

CADWAL. Even so says Cadwal.

IMOGEN. Uncle, I have a tender feeling too,
That yearns on these fair strangers -- I had once
Two brothers, whom the hand of early fate
Snatched from the world -- If they had lived, I think
They had been like this gentle pair. -- Sweet youths,
May I not call you brothers?

PALADOR. Ay, most freely.
And, sir, if you are uncle to our brother,
You stand in kin to us -- I pray, good father,
Let him be tutor to us: we would learn
The mystery of life; the art of war;
The policy of kings; the rules of states;
Will you instruct us? we are ign'rant yet
What drawing breath is good for.

PHILARIO. These young plants
Are of the kindest growth my eyes e're saw --
Why, who would dream this barren desert here
A nursery of demigods?

BELLARIUS. Enough;
Vice is the child of praise; my boys are such
As nature made them, and she made 'em not
For art to mar; but let us in to supper --
Our appetites shall make what is homely, sav'ry:
We eat for health, and rise before the sun,
Silvers the mountain shrubs. -- Come, boys conduct
Your new compeer. -- Philario, you are mine. --

PALADOR. The night to the owl, and morn to the lark less welcome. [Exeunt into
the cave.

End of the Second ACT.
ACT. III.
Enter PHILARIO from the Cave. HOW restless is this thinking! welcome day!
Now I shall sift her thoroughly -- for what is past
Little hangs on it -- were she true and artless,
Thus would she'have; if false and artful, thus --
She shall be told in words as strong and hateful,
As earnestness can make 'em, what she drank
Is deadly to all sense, as for a time
It is, to full effect. -- It Is a rare drug
That locks the spirits up in show of death,
To be more fresh reviving -- Dread of death
Shall force me out the truth; fraud will be honest
Itself thus over-reached -- but hist, Bellarius.
Enter BELLARIUS. Our courtiers say all is savage but at court --
How does this hospitable rock, Bellarius,
Give 'em the lie?
BELLARIUS. Our minds must not be measured
By this rude place we live in -- You are roused
Before the hunter's hour -- Could you not sleep
Upon your bed of moss?

PHILARIO. Ay, sir, as soundly
As cradled infancy.

BELLARIUS. Your chamber was
The best of the house -- For us we often make
The star-wrought sky our tester -- Weariness
Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth
Finds the down pillow hard -- what think you, sir,
Of this our way of life?

PHILARIO. It is unknown,
And therefore envied not -- our courtly great ones
May blush at their high breeding; here is the place
Where virtue teaches school -- are your sons up?
By Jove multipotent there is not a couple,
Whose praise fame trumpets with her loud'st O yes,
That can out-peer these twain -- they seem as gentle
As Zephyrs blowing 'neath the hyacinth,
Not wagging his sweet head, and yet as rough
(Their sprightly blood by a good tale once warmed)
As the rude wind that by the top does take
The mountain pine, and make him stoop to the vale. --

BELLARIUS. Why, thou have marked them well -- Lo! where they come,
And with 'em your Fidele.

Enter PALADOR, CADWAL, and IMOGEN. BELLARIUS. So, my boys,
Are you devotions to the morning star
With solemn homage paid?

PALADOR. They are, my father.

BELLARIUS. What says Fidele? Can he like a court
No bigger than this cave?

IMOGEN. Believe me, sir,
The partnership of labor here, is richer
Than golden honors there.

CADWAL. I Have said I love thee --
I cannot say how much, but sure as much
As I do love my father --

BELLARIUS. What? How? How?

PALADOR. If it be sin to say so, sir, I join me
In my good brother's fault -- I know not why
I love this youth, and I have heard you say
Love reasons without reason. Fate at door,
And a demand who is it shall die, I Would say
My father, not this youth --

BELLARIUS. It Is wonderful:
Does instinct tell them I am not their father?
(Aside.) Well -- to the field -- it is the fourth hour of the morn.
Philario, and Fidele will remain
Here in the cave -- We'll come to you after hunting;
Or are you for our sport?

IMOGEN. I am not well --
A sudden laziness creeps over my senses,
As if fatigue acknowledged no repair
By this nights' sleep --

PHILARIO. The drug begins to work --
(Aside.)
PALADOR. Go you to hunting -- I Will abide with him.

IMOGEN. No -- to your journal course -- the breach of custom
Is breach of all -- My uncle will stay here --
Farewell -- I wish you sport -- I shall be well
By your return --

ALL. We'll not be long away. --

[Exeunt Bellarius, Palador, and Cadwal. PHILARIO. These are kind creatures,
lady.

IMOGEN. On my life
I Would change my sex to be companion with 'em,
Since my dear lord is false.

PHILARIO. I would confer
Once more upon that theme.

IMOGEN. I Am sick already;
And would you minister fresh pain, Philario?

PHILARIO. Come -- I Will no more dissemble -- you are known
False to your banished lord.

IMOGEN. What hear I, Gods!

PHILARIO. The truth, the killing truth -- art not ashamed?
-- But shame is masculine -- Could I find out
The woman's part in me -- for there is no motion
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
It is the woman's part; be it lying, note it,
The woman's flattering, yours; deceiving, yours;
Lust and rank thoughts, yours, yours; revenges, yours;
Ambition; covetings; change of prides; disdain;
Nice longings; slanders; mutability;
All faults that may be named, nay, that hell knows,
Why yours in part, or all; but rather all --
For even to vice
You are not constant, but are changing still
One vice but of a minute old, for one
Not half so old as that.

IMOGEN. Am I awake?
Or have you senses perfect?

PHILARIO. It Is enough --
I have achieved more than er'e did Julius,
And will be chronicled amongst those wise few
That have out-craftied woman.

IMOGEN. You amaze me.

PHILARIO. Oh! no more fooling -- I have proof that tells
The time, the place, the -- fie upon it, lady,
It wounds my modesty to quote the deeds
That cost thee not a blush.

IMOGEN. Blasphemer, hold!
Thou art in league with perjured Leonatus,
And do traduce a lady that despises
Malice and thee like.

PHILARIO. Go ^o -- you're naught --

IMOGEN. Villain, your proof? Why stand you idle thus?
If thou do see a speck upon my honor,
Prick at it with the sword, your just remorse
Even now let drop.

PHILARIO. Mistake not, lady mine,
Remorse was counterfeit, my purpose real;
I found you past all grace, and did commence
Cunning in my revenge; your punishment
Were nothing if not such; you have your death,
Yet never felt his sting.

IMOGEN. What says Philario!

PHILARIO. O now you tremble like a guilty soul
Beneath the furies lash -- now you would pour
A deluge of salt grief to wash your crimes --
It is too late, thou have outlived repentance --
That draught was tinctured with a mortal juice,
And he that drinks an acron on it, is served,
As I would serve a dog.

IMOGEN. Sir, my surprise
Relishes not of fear. -- This is a cure
Which you do call a chastisement -- I feel
The death thou speak of curdling in my veins. --
How sweetly do they sleep whom sorrow wakes not!
Farewell -- my innocence is sacrifice,
Or to the blindfold rage of jealousy,
Or to estranged love -- O Leonatus,
The Gods have pity on thee.

PHILARIO. Do I speak?
Is this my hand? are these my eyes? -- All this
I will to question put, if thou art true --
O Imogen, but that I thought thee foul,
And thy confession a superfluous warrant,
I would have taken my sucking infant's throat,
And broached it with my martial scymeter,
E're touched thy precious life.

IMOGEN. I do forgive thee --
Thy judgment (which how warped it matters not)
Condemned me to this death -- Nay, weep not, sir,
Commend me to my lord -- alas! Philario,
I grieve myself to think how much hereafter,
When the belief, or false affection, which
Holds prisoner now his mind, shall leave him free,
His memory will be pang'd by looking back
On my hard case of woe -- my brain is heavy --

PHILARIO. The mighty Gods throw stones of sulphur on
All jealous, head-sick fools -- He saw it not --
And every day's experience does disprove
The strong'st report -- O the accursed fate
That damned me to this office --

IMOGEN. Curb thy rage
Unprofitably loosed -- I Will in, and die --
Follow me not -- my soul has that to do
Which is best done in secret -- fare thee well --
Present to our good host, and my sweet brothers,
My thanks and choicest blessings.
[Exit. Imogen into the Cave.
PHILARIO. It goes well,
Her honor I have fanned, and found it chaffless --
Friend, thou art fool, or villain -- If I prove
Thou would betray my love to purposes
Of hell-black color, though our friendship stood
Upon a brazen base, it should dissolve,
And, like the film that dews the morning flower,
Break into unseen air. Hah Palador! --

Enter PALADOR hastily* Lend me thy sword, good Uncle -- as I crossed
The mountain's ridge, a fellow at a distance*
(Whose drapery by far out-glistens thine)
Bad me with accents stern and masterly
Stop and attend his speech -- I hied me hither,
And, if he follow, will responses make
By word, or blow, an he dare question me --
Belike it is talked at court that such as we
Cave here; haunt here; are outlaws; and in time
May make some stronger head; the which he hearing
Is sworn with choice attendants in his train
To fetch us in -- It is a crisis that
My father sometimes drops discourses of. --
PHILARIO. Say so? I will go climb the rock, and spy
What companies are near. [Exit. Philario.

PALADOR. Do -- for this bravo,
Let me alone with him -- this instrument
Fits my hand well -- I grasp it fast as though
'Twere part of me, and grew unto my arm --
I feel I can do any thing but fear --
I will look out. -- By the broad shield of Mars
He comes unto my wish -- up sword, and sleep
Till I awake thee, hap'ly soon --

Enter CLOTEN. CLOTEN. My zeal
Has far out-gone my train -- hark thee -- thou fellow,
Why did thou fly me? did not hear me call?

PALADOR. I did, and therefore came not.

CLOTEN. Saucy hind --
Thou art some villain mountaineer -- What art thou?

PALADOR. A man -- thou look as if thou came from court,
And yet thou art no more.

CLOTEN. Thou know me not --
Answer me, wretch, on peril of thy life --
Saw thou two trav'lers speeding through theforest --
The elder somewhat 'bove my age, the younger
Few years below your own?

PALADOR. Such if I saw,
I saw 'em not for thee --

CLOTEN. Ha! do thou mock me?
Where are the traitors, slave? quick, or --

PALADOR. A thing
More slavish did I never, than answering
A slave, without a blow.

CLOTEN. Thou art a robber;
A law-breaker; a villain; yield thee, thief --

PALADOR. To whom? to thee? what art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? a heart as big?
Thy words I grant are bigger -- for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth -- say what thou art,
Why I should yield to thee?

CLOTEN. Thou villian base!
Know me not by my garb?

PALADOR. No, nor thy tailor --
Who is thy grandfather? -- he made that garb,
Which, as it seems, makes thee --

CLOTEN. Injurious thief!
Hear but my name, and tremble --

PALADOR. What Is thy name?

CLOTEN. Cloten, thou villain!

PALADOR. Cloten? then double villain be thy name;
I cannot tremble at it; were it Toad,
Adder, or Spider, it would move me sooner --

CLOTEN. Then to thy fear, and mere confusion, know
I Am son to the late queen, and heir to the crown.

PALADOR. In troth I Am sorry for it; thyself not seeming
So worthy as thy birth. -- Me thou have wronged,
Though thou were son of Juno.

CLOTEN. Thou vile thing!
Wrong thee! -- But die the death -- thou will be honored
To perish by this hand -- when I have slain thee,
I Will on the gate of Lud's Town set thy head
To roast in the sun. (Drawing.)

PALADOR. Are you for scratching? Come --
Today I Will lose a soldier's maidenhead --
Hah! are you down? I see a prince is made (fight)
Of penetrable stuff -- (Cloten falls.)

CLOTEN. Dog! thou have slain me. (dies.)

PALADOR. Ay, and the world no loser -- This is sport
Hotter than hunting -- I will kill no more
The timorous deer -- such killing's cowardice --
My reeking sword sweats honorably now --
Thou poor loud-boasting fool! Hah! how I stalk
In triumph round thee! like the victor lion
Slow pacing 'bout the mangled tyger's corse,
And grimly taking solace in his slaughter --

Enter BELLARIUS, CADWAL, and PHILARIO. BELLARIUS. I heard the clash of swords
-- O Palador!
What have thou done?

PALADOR. I Am perfect what -- cut through one Cloten's heart,
Son to the queen, after his own report --
He came in search of thee and fair Fidele,
Or I did much misconstrue his demand --
(To Philario. He called me villain, mountaneer, and swore
He would displace my head, where now it grows,
And set it on Lud's Town.

PHILARIO. It Is very Cloten,
The king's adopted son.

PALADOR. Why had the king
Misused bold Palador, his royalty
Had lain so weltring there -- What company
Discover you abroad?

PHILARIO. No single soul
Can I set eye on -- yet it is strange his anger
Should bring him here alone.

BELLARIUS. I Will not believe
But quick revenge pursues us!

PALADOR. Let it come;
Let it be such as possible strength may meet,
It shall be welcome.

CADWAL. That Is my valiant brother --
Thou have said well, done well; O Palador!
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou'st robbed me of this deed. Where Is sweet Fidele?

PHILARIO. Asleep within the cave. -- Hear me, good sirs --
This act, I trust, is dangerless, except
We Are traitors to ourselves. -- Boys, take the body,
And let it down the creek behind the rock
Into the sea (Exeunt Pal. and Cad. with the body.)
Bellarius, hark a word --
Thy sons are noble ones, and pity it is
Their worth should waste in dull obscurity.
To day fell war unfurls his bloody flag
Between the Roman and the British host,
And confidence is goad to either side.
Upon the border of the forest here,
The Roman lies encamped -- and two hours march
Will join our countrymen -- your valiant boys
May, in such fight as this is like to prove,
Begin and end a fame.

BELLARIUS. Why now or never
It Is fit they launch into the world, Philario,
But fitter never.

PHILARIO. Do not say so, sir;
Britain does lack such hearts.

BELLARIUS. Well, you shall rule me --
Indeed I wished for such a day as this,
To make them known to Cymbeline. (aside.)
They Are here.

Enter PALADOR and CADWAL. PALADOR. We Have sent him down the stream, and so to
sea,
To tell the fishes he is the queen's son Cloten. --

BELLARIUS. My boys, your uncle here would steal you from me,
To your bruised country's wars.

PALADOR. Oh! let us go;
For this has been our daily fervent prayer --
Uncle, entreat again -- why I can fight --
You have today a sample -- so can Cadwal --
Our opposition we will stake against two,
The stoutest of old Rome -- ay, against odds,
If valor's scarce in Britain.

CADWAL. Odds to choose.

BELLARIUS. The king has wronged me -- he deserves not
Your service, and my love.

PALADOR. The king's deservings
I weigh not now -- this is a public cause.
I do not know my countrymen, but know
They were not born to be the slaves of Rome,
To wear the badge of foreign tyranny,
And crouch to aliens that dominion hold
By rape, not right --

PHILARIO. O! such a spirit as this
Will drive the pestilent invasion hence,
And post it short-breathed home.

PALADOR. Why, my good uncle,
Why not pursue it at the heels, and pay
The foe in kind -- Let the hot war return
Upon our enemies heads. -- O! for the time,
When Britons bold shall throng the streets of Rome,
And breathe strange climes, that conquest makes our own.

PHILARIO. Most like a Briton said. -- Today shall put
This courage to more proof.

PALADOR. Sir, I will fight
For liberty, and Britain, till the blood
Be drained through all my veins; and when my arm
Has lost his office, I will to the last
Give token of resistance.

CADWAL. So will I;
I am ashamed to look upon the sun,
To have the benefit of his blessed beams
So long a poor unknown: Sure than be so
Better to cease to be.

BELLARIUS. Have with you boys*
No reason I, since of your lives you set
So slight a valuation, should reserve
My cracked one to more care. -- We'll all to the army.
Philario and Fidele shall keep house,
Till our return.

PHILARIO. Not so Bellarius; we
Habited like yourself, to 'scape the eye
Of knowledge, will attest to day the feats
Of these brave lads.

PALADOR. Why, let the Gods be witness,
And celebrate this birthday of our glory --
Liberty!

CADWAL. Britain!

BOTH. Liberty and Britain!

BELLARIUS. Go, see if young Fidele be awake.
[Exeunt Palador and Cadwal. Does not this mettle promise well, Philario?
I scarce would change a son with Jupiter!
The service of these lusty boys shall do
The king more good, than this same Cloten's death
Has done him harm* -- (Solemn music within.)
Hah! wherefore sounds within
My most ingenious instrument? What cause
Should give it motion now?

Enter PALADOR. PALADOR. The bird is dead
That we have made so much on. O come in
And see what violent hands stern death has laid
Upon the sweetest lily of the land. --
(They go into the Cave.)
SCENE opens and discovers the inside of the Cave, with Bellarius, Philario,
Palador, and Cadwal, round the Body of Imogen, lying upon a Couch of Moss.
PHILARIO. Alas! my dearest nephew!

PALADOR. I had rather
Have leaped from twenty years of age to eighty,
And turned my warlike spear into a crutch,
Than have seen this.

BELLARIUS. O poor Fidele! Jove does know what man
Thou might have made -- thou died'st a most rare boy.
Tell us how found you him?

PALADOR. Stark as you see;
And smiling thus, as if the dart of death
Had gently tickled slumber;

CADWAL. O sweet brother,
With female fairies will thy tomb be haunted,
And worms shall not come near thee. --

PALADOR. With fair flowers
(While summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele)
I will adorn thy grave -- Thou shall not lack
The flower that is like thy face, pale primrose; nor
The azur'd harebell like thy veins; no nor
The leaf of eglantine, which, not to slander't,
Out-sweeten'd not thy breath -- The ruddock would
With charitable bill bring thee all this,
Yea and furred moss besides, when flowers were none,
To winter-gown thy corse. --

BELLARIUS. Come, boys, have done,
And play no more in wench-like words with that
Which is so serious -- Hence, and lay his corpse
Near good Euriphile's, your worthy mother's --

PALADOR. Be It so -- but, Cadwal, first, albeit thy voice
Has now the mannish crack, sing over his body
In note and words like those which thou did chaunt
Over good Euriphile -- ever she was lodged
Within her leafy grave -- Come on -- begin --

The DIRGE.
Set by Mr. ARNE, sung by Mr. LOW.
Fear no more the heat of the sun,
Nor the furious winter's blast;
Thou thy worldly task have done,
And the dream of life is past.
Golden lads and girls all must
Follow thee, and come to dust.
Fear no more-the frown of the great,
Death does mock the tyrant foe;
Happiest is the early fate,
Misery with time does grow.
Monarchs, sages, peasants must
Follow thee, and come to dust.
No exorciser harm thee!
No spell of witchcraft charm thee!
Grim ghost unlaid forbear thee!
The fairy elves be near thee!
Quiet consummation have,
Unremoved be thy grave.

BELLARIUS. These are our rural obsequies, Philario --

PHILARIO. Most sweet and solemn, sir.

BELLARIUS. When you have removed the body, back repair
Here to the cave, and fit you for the field.
-- We'll share our little armory among us --
And, sons, ever evening we'll forget this grief,
And wipe our tear-stain'd cheeks with bloody hands.
-- Come, good Philario --
[Exeunt severally.
End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE A Field of Battle. Enter CYMBELINE, LORDS, etc. CYMBELINE. THINK you the
Roman will not quit his ground,
And meet our battle in the open plain?

1st LORD. So please your grace, it is my faith he will;
We are already beaten in conceit,
And pride does still forego his 'vantages.
Best then halt here, my liege.

CYMBELINE. Halt! give the word.
(Within) Halt! halt! halt! halt!

CYMBELINE. Our son not yet returned! Oh! here comes one
That was a limb o'th'party. What now, captain?

Enter an Officer. OFFICER. My liege, prince Cloten far outstripp'd his train,
And we are to seek the seeker -- His spurred horse
We found upon the verge of yonder forest,
But him no tidings speak of.

CYMBELINE. Take thou his charge,
And so bestir thee in the field, that none
May think his valor missing. Well -- how now?

Enter another Officer. OFFICER. My liege, here are without four volunteers
That seem to promise marvels, though their looks
And garb be such as hermits wont to wear
In most retired sequestration;
They have bewitched the soldier's hearts, and crave
Instant admittance to your Majesty.

CYMBELINE. It does amaze us -- let 'em come before us --
[Exit Lord, and returns with Bellarius, Palador, Cadwal, and Philario. Now by
the arm of Jove a comely sight,
Those silver locks are taxers of respect
Though kings be lookers on -- All welcome, strangers --
Whence and what are you?

BELLARIUS. Mighty Cymbeline,
Hermits we are, that have a homely dwelling
Where want keeps house -- yet are we bold to boast
Our hands and hearts as good as any he is,
That dares look Roman in the face.

CYMBELINE. Thy speech
Gives earnest of much worth -- Say, who are these
The colleagues of your enterprise?

BELLARIUS. Dread sir,
These striplings are my sons; this worthy fellow
Is kinsman of my wife's --

PALADOR. First, let us go fight,
And then to telling tales.

CYMBELINE. So prompt, so young!
Wast thou a soldier born? Is warlike science
By inspiration caught, which still we judged
By long experience learned?

BELLARIUS. O royal sir,
My boys are of a generous breed -- Great Gods,
When on my three-foot stool I sit, and tell
The val'rous feats I Have done, (for I am free
Of this same trade of war) how will this youth,
My firstborn Palador, let his spirits fly
Out at my story? "Thus mine enemy fell,
"And thus (say I) I set my foot on's neck -- "
Even then the blood flows in his cheeks, he sweats,
Strains his young nerves, and puts himself in posture
That acts my words -- His younger brother Cadwal
With ardour emulous, and as like a figure,
Strikes life into my speech; and richly shows
His great conceiving.

CYMBELINE. In a time that looked
More perilous than this, such early virtue
Would bode us issue fortunate to Britain --

Enter another Officer in haste. Soldier thy speed is big with consequence --
Proclaim it with thy tongue --
OFFICER. To arms, my liege,
The Roman legions are come down the hill,
And their loud clarions sound to present battle.

CYMBELINE. Thanks for thy news -- Return the slaves defiance; (sound within.)
Stretch your big hearts, my countrymen, and shout
From the strong lungs of liberty, till air
Waft your incessant clamours to the thrones
Of the admiring Gods. (a great shout.) Remember, sirs,
We go to fight for death, or victory. --
O let us only live on terms of conquest!
Who dies, at least dies freeman, blessed dies
To live immortal in his country's songs --
If there is a coward here, let him post back
To his soft bed and caudle -- I should weep
Worse than a lovesick girl to find today
Our hearts not of a piece -- Come on, brave fellows,
For soldiers all are fellows -- We'll yet live
(Unless my sins abuse my divination)
To see old Lud's Town bright with joyful fires,
And Britons strut in triumph -- Set we on --
[Exeunt.
Alarm. Enter LEONATUS in disguise. They go to battle with a jocund spirit --
But ah! how heavy is his heart, who bears
A bosom-war within him? O Philario,
(For I well know thy friendship such, thou'st done
The letter of my will) thou should have paused --
Anger is indiscreet in his commands --
Too true, the noble Imogen did wrong me;
(And so, I doubt not, did my mother him
I called my father, though she still was held
The non-pareil of virtue) yet her fault,
The natural failing of her sex, not hers,
Was ill pusu'd with vengeance capital
By me -- O Britain, I have killed my wife,
Who was thy mistress -- therefore thus arrayed
Like a poor soldier, neither known, nor guessed at,
Pitied or hated, to the face of peril
Myself I Will dedicate -- Heaven knows my life
Is every breath a death.
Alarm. Fight. Enter CYMBELINE and Romans. CYMBELINE is in danger of being
slain, or taken. Then enter LEONATUS and rescues him. LEONATUS. What have we
here? The majesty of Britain
O'erpower'd by odds -- Room for an honest sword
That loyalty gives edge to -- how they fly
When resolution drives 'em. -- (the Romans fly.)

CYMBELINE. Great, though mean --
Noble obscure, we thank thee -- what is thy name?

LEONATUS. I cannot stay to tell thee -- hear'st thou not
How loud Mars bellows yonder? -- only this --
The king has friends he knows not -- fare you well,
My sword will cool else. -- [Exit Leonatus.

CYMBELINE. What blunt fellow's this?
We have no time to wonder -- How now, captain?

Enter an Officer. OFFICER. Advance, my liege -- Our battle galls 'em sorely --
Yon sage, and his boy-hermits fight like dragons.
The Roman eagle flaps his wing for flight,
And conquest smiles upon us.

CYMBELINE. Follow me;
And still the word be, Cymbeline, and Britain
[Exeunt.
Alarm. Fight. Enter Britons and Romans fighting. The Romans give back. Then
enter, at opposite doors, PISANIO, and PALADOR. PALADOR. It is a jovial chase
-- fight on, young Cadwal,
Thou shall go halves in glory -- I could swear
To go to bed no more -- Well met, thou Roman,
I have been killing vermin -- thou do seem
Worthy my sword -- Art thou of blood and honor?

PISANIO. Away, and save thy life, thou swagg'ring boy,
By Romulus, my vengeance would not stoop
(Albeit a thousand souls are groaning for it)
To such a lout as thee.

PALADOR. Hah! did thou learn
Thy valor at a dancing school? -- I Will try
Your lightsomness of foot -- Fool, I will hunt thee
Even to thy master's throne. --

PISANIO. Come on, rash hind --
(Fight, Pisanio falls.) Thou have o'erpower'd me stripling -- the just Gods
Unbrac'd my arm -- the heaviness of guilt
Took off my manhood -- I Have belied a lady,
The princess of this country; and the air on it
Revengingly enfeebled me; brave youth,
Witness the penance of my dying hour,
And let the noble Leonatus know
I craved in death his pardon --

PALADOR. How is this?
Roman, proceed.

PISANIO. I was confederate with
Cloten (than whom a viler wretch not lives
'Twixt sky and ground)

PALADOR. Nay, by the Gods, he lives not;
I slew him but today, and sure e're this
He is the food of sharks.

PISANIO. Thou have the arm
That heaven does justice with -- I can no more --
Take thou this note of Cloten's (gives a note) it does speak
In terms full relative to the device
Then hatching in his brain; and farther marks
The lowly bendings of his love to Caesar --
This shall confirm thy by-and-by report
Strongly as living evidence -- I Have done
More good in my last hour, than can be picked
From my whole piece of life -- there is hope in that,
And in that hope I die -- (dies)

PALADOR. Nay, if thou hop'st,
I Will write despair down folly -- Jupiter,
What a vile rogue was this? and yet he wore
A worthy seeming -- I perceive my garb
Does shame the guise of the world -- I will set out
New fashion; less without, and more within.
What have we here? (Flourish.)

Enter LEONATUS. LEONATUS. Hermit, our wars are done;
The Romans turn their backs, and victory
Today is wedded to great Cymbeline.
O that the joy of all should touch not me!
I am not mortal sure; for death I sought,
Yet found him not where I did hear him groan,
Nor felt him where he struck. This ugly monster,
It Is strange he hides him in fresh cups, smooth beds,
Sweet words, and has more ministers than we
That draw his knives in war.

PALADOR. Art thou a Briton,
And do not laugh today? Sad looks are treason,
And take the part of Rome; the man that feels
His own distress, hates more his pers'nal grief,
Than he does love his country.

LEONATUS. O you know not --
Hah! who lies there? Ye Gods, it is Pisanio --
The damned Italian fiend that stained my honor;
I would have saved an hundred lives in fight
To have met his.

PALADOR. If thou art Leonatus,
(As by thy talk thou should be) I have matter
For your quick hearing.

LEONATUS. I am Leonatus,
I would I were aught else!

PALADOR. That villain there
Did much abuse you, Sir.

LEONATUS. He did abuse me
Beyond the power of all his worthless tribe
To make amends -- Who robs me of my wealth,
May one day have ability, or will
To yield me, full repayment -- but the villain
That does invade a husband's right in bed,
Is murderer of his peace, and makes a breach
In his life's after-quiet, that the grief
Of penitence itself cannot repair.

PALADOR. Thou do mistake thy woe, good Leonatus,
Which yet (if the great Gods are merciful)
I have a cure for --

LEONATUS. How! where! which way! when!

PALADOR. Sir, your belief in your dear lady's truth
Is falsely wounded, who, be sure (for aught
This arch impostor Roman could disprove)
Has kept her bond of chastity uncrack'd,
And is as cold as Dian.

LEONATUS. Ay, and colder;
For Dian is alive -- If thou not fool'st me,
Thou curest common sickness with the plague,
And killest with relief -- I could not find
The virtue of my wife untainted now,
(That once I prized to adoration)
For the best carbuncle of Phoebus' wheel,
Nay, all the worth of's car.

PALADOR. Alas! I Am sorry
Your much wronged judgment has proceeded thus. --
For free and full confession made this wretch
Of most refined stratagem to change
Your biass of affection: Sir, this note,
Which with his dying hand he did bequeath you,
Will more at large illustrate what my tongue
Faulters in utt'rance of. (gives the note.)

LEONATUS. Quick, let me see it,
Impatient misery longs to know the worst,
Even when the worst is fatal. (reads)
The Lord Cloten to the Roman Knight Pisanio.
Cloten! the name is ominous -- it bodes
More than the raven's sullen flap that scents
Cadaverous infirmity. -- But on --

If thou love me, let me see thee ere night. I have bought the fidelity of
the princess's woman with my gold; she will give thee admittance into her
chamber, when nothing will be awake but anger and policy; where thou may
make such note as will be sufficient to the madding of the abhorred Leonatus.
Thy service herein will tie me closer to thyself, and to Augustus thy lord. No
more till thou do console with thy presence, thine and Caesar's in affection,
CLOTEN.

PALADOR. How fare you, sir? Alack! his grief is dumb.

LEONATUS. Are there no Gods? or are they Gods that sleep,
And leave us to ourselves? -- Oh! I have done it --
I Have reached the point of shame, and villainy
Is less than 'twas. -- Twice doubly cursed be he
That first did graff the failings of his wife
On a fool's head's suspicion. -- I Have destroyed
The temple of fair virtue, yea herself --
Spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set
The dogs of the street to bait me; every fool
Be Leonatus called. O! Imogen,
My queen, my love my wife, oh! Imogen!

PALADOR. Mark thou unhappy Briton, how my soul
Catches thy grief -- my eyes half drown my tongue.
Wife -- what is wife? what is it thou do feel?
The pang that gripes thee seems more keen than mine was,
When my good mother, and Fidele died!
-- Yet then I mourned heart-deep -- O that thy woes
Had remedy within the reach of power,
I would pursue endeavors infinite
'Till rashness should be virtue. Pardon me
This vain, vain boast -- Valor himself must weep
When he cannot redress -- I Will sit down by thee,
And mourn 'till I beguile thee of thy sorrows --
We'll give our shares in this day's triumph up
To riot and hard hearted jollity.
O Imogen, where art thou? -- soft -- here comes
Philario, my good uncle.

Enter PHILARIO. LEONATUS. How! Philario?
O turn a thousand Romans loose upon me,
But show me not Philario.

PHILARIO. Palador,
Have we a madman here?

LEONATUS. Ay, of thy making.
Thou cred'lous fool, egregious murderer,
Thief, any thing, that is due to villains past,
In being, or to come. --

PHILARIO. I know thee not.

LEONATUS. Know thou not Leonatus?

PHILARIO. Art thou he?
And do thou greet me thus?

LEONATUS. Where is my wife?
My wife, my wife, my Imogen, thou villain!

PHILARIO. Base and ungrateful! is it come to this?
Have I then offered up my mind's repose,
My better judgment, and my nature's pity,
To thy injunction? Have I stained my sword
With blood as rich as ever yet did wash
A British heart, to be bequestion'd now
With, villain, where is my wife, my Imogen?
-- But that thy will was absolute herein,
I could have wished the damned charge had aimed
At universal ruin of the sex,
And her alone left out.

LEONATUS. I Am wild -- forgive me;
I Have killed my wife, and shall my friend escape
The abuses of my fury? -- Read, Philario,
Read this black scroll, (gives him the letter) read it, and after tell me,
If jealousy be written in the list
Of sins that mercy reaches.

PHILARIO. You're undone;
And so am I -- come not to me for comfort,
For my own pers'nal grief out-measures all
The patience I was born with.

LEONATUS. Patience! who
Is patient in despair? Can patience wake
The sleep of death? Can it command old time
To render back the hours he snatched away,
Or what is done, make undone? Give me cord,
Poison, or knife, some upright justicer,
And then prescribe me patience.

PALADOR. O Bellarius,
Thy lectures all were true, and this world holds
Nothing but woe and villainy -- where is Cadwal?
We'll homeward to the rock. --

PHILARIO. Hold thee, young man --
The king must thank you for your services --
Anon he will be here; and, Leonatus,
Do not, I pray, with rashness over-ripe
A vi'lence on thyself -- best wait we both
The royal sentence on our lives, and die
Without more folly on our heads -- to me
The opening leave of this.

LEONATUS. Well, let me die --
The rest you shall command -- I see her now --
Bloody and pale she looks -- her snow-white breast
Whose fragrance sent up incense to the Gods,
Is soiled with clotted gore -- her jetty locks,
Where Cupid and a thousand graces played,
Are turned to fury's snakes -- and in her eye,
At whose kind beams glad Hymen light his torch,
Sits fiery vengeance now with direful looks
Chilling my faculties.

PHILARIO. If thou art man,
Be like one now -- die as a soldier should do,
And do not start at shadows -- I Have bethought me
How we may fit and full disclosure make
Of all our purposes to Cymbeline;
Yea, and of Cloten's too, (whereof the truth
Shall the king's heart sore smite) that devil Cloten
Of whom this gallant youth has well revenged us.

LEONATUS. Has he? who, what art thou, thou wondrous man!
To whom I am indebted for the scourge
Of my two deadly foes.

PHILARIO. He is a wonder
Myself can scarce explain; -- But hark, the king. --
(Flourish.) Let us, my wretched friend, appear a while,
What our now-habits speak us.

Enter CYMBELINE, BELLARIUS, CADWAL, Lords, and Soldiers. CYMBELINE. Thanks to
all;
Chiefly to you, whom the great Gods have made
Best pillars of my throne. Where are the rest?
O here is your worthy kinsman, your brave son,
And the poor soldier that in rags did shame
Rich coats of war, and with his naked breast
Stepped before shields of proof -- we owe our life
To his true valor.

BELLARIUS. I did never see
Such noble fury in so mean a thing;
Such precious deeds in one that promised naught
But begg'ry and bad luck.

CYMBELINE. All bow your knees --
(Bellarius, Philario, Palador, Cadwal and Leonatus kneel.) Arise, my knights
of the battle; we create you
Companions to our person, and will give you
Estates becoming your new dignities.

PALADOR. My Lord, the honor I have won today
Is sustenance for me -- I fought for fame,
And riches give not that -- I Will carry home
The strange experience of some seven hours,
And live upon it hereafter.

CADWAL. Most brave brother.

CYMBELINE. We must not lose you so.

PHILARIO. So please your grace,
I would entreat a word.

CYMBELINE. Say on, and freely.

PHILARIO. Then, in the name of all our brotherhood,
I do beseech your majesty to bless
With your high presence our poor hermitage;
Which (I am ready to make good the boast)
Is fit to give a mighty monarch welcome,
If cleanly wholesomeness, and simple plenty,
Be worth your appetite; and, sir, the more
I do solicit this, for that I have
Much matter for your ear, which only there
My spirit groans to utter. -- May I hope
This invitation likes your majesty?

CYMBELINE. Ay, passing well. -- My sirs, return you with
A monarch in your train -- we long to know
What it is you would impart -- come thou brave fellow! (To Leonatus.)
Some of you lords attend us, and the rest
Abide here in the camp. -- Is there close guard
Upon the Roman prisoners?

1st LORD. My gracious liege, there is.

CYMBELINE. It Is well -- Hermit, lead on.

[Exeunt Cymbelline, Bellarius, Philario, Palador, Cadwal, Leonatus, and Lords
at one door, and other Lords at another. The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE The Forest and Cave. Enter PALADOR, and CADWAL. PALADOR. CADWAL, once
more all hail our happy home!
I Have seen enough of this wide world to day,
To turn my back upon society --
Saving the manly hardiments of war,
There Is naught on earth desirable -- but come,
Do we our errand, and the cave prepare,
(For therefore were we willed to speed us first)
For the reception of high majesty. --

CADWAL. They will overtake us soon --

PALADOR. (Looking into the cave) Stay, come not in --
But that I know this figure, I should think
It were a fairy.

CADWAL. What Is the matter, brother?

PALADOR. By Jupiter, a spirit! -- Gods! one sand
Another does not more resemble, than
This sorm the rosy lad who died, and was
Fidele --

CADWAL. Even the same dead thing alive --

PALADOR. Peace, peace, see more -- he eyes us not -- forbear --
It is Fidele's ghost --

CADWAL. Hist! it comes forward!

Enter IMOGEN from the cave. PALADOR. Cadwal, stand close -- nay shake not --
look, it smiles.
What art thou, beauteous vision, that do take
So sweet a form -- thou can not mean us harm.
Mischief never traveled in a shape like that --
Art thou Fidele? speak -- why have thou left
Thy flowery grave? why do thou haunt our rock?
Or art some spirit in his borrowed likeness,
That for thy merriment do wear a semblance,
Deluding us poor mortals? -- Gentle, speak. --

IMOGEN. Give me your hands -- I am your living brother,
The true Fidele --

CADWAL. Can it be ye Gods!
This is a day of wonders --

PALADOR. I Will no more
Witness the thing I see -- art thou alive?
Dear boy, I feel thou art -- (Embracing Imogen.)

IMOGEN. Sirs, I did take
A certain drowsy potion, that fast seized
The present power of life; but in short time
All offices of nature did again
Resume due functions. -- Wherefore I took this,
Hereafter ask -- and let me now demand,
Where Is good Bellarius? where is my uncle? why
Those weapons at your sides? for thus you never
Equipped for hunting.

PALADOR. No, my dearest brother,
We Have been at better sport in the fair field,
Where honor chases danger -- what we have done
Fame shall set down in brass, and shew't to Caesar;
And then 'twill task arithmetic to count
All the wet cheeks in Rome.

IMOGEN. How! have your rapiers
Been drawn in battle?

PALADOR. To victorious purpose --
The king is coming hither --

IMOGEN. Hah! the king!
What and who brings him?

PALADOR. O your worthy uncle,
Unknown, and in disguise; my father too,
And a long lordly train; ere night, the book
Of fate, wide opened to inspection,
Great secrets shall disclose. -- Here comes Philario,
The rest are not far off. -- Cadwal, we'll in --
Do you, Fidele, meet him here, and strike
New matter of amazement to his heart.

[Exeunt Palador and Cadwal into the cave. Enter PHILARIO. PHILARIO. Fairest,
and best of women, pardon me (kneeling)
The tortures I have put thy virtue to
In trial, not in malice. -- O forgive me;
For till thy lips have passed remission on me,
Mine must be locked in silence.

IMOGEN. Rise, Philario!
Thy stratagem has more complexion in it
Of wisdom, than of guilt -- my honor tried,
I Am served, and not offended -- That same drug,
Murderous awhile to sense, I thanked thee for
With the first breath I waked with -- hence of that
Put the remembrance by -- My brothers tell me
Of something strange at hand. --

PHILARIO. My gracious lady,
Since last we parted, the big hours have teemed
With great, and sad events -- pardon me, Gods,
One fiction more. -- (aside.)

IMOGEN. Have thou heard aught, Philario,
Of Leonatus? What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
From the inward of thee? Speak -- where is my husband?

PHILARIO. Say he were dead -- his villainous intent
Should cure thy present sorrow.

IMOGEN. Thy supposing
Confirms his death, and my hereafter woe --
Thou tell me he was jealous, false, and cruel --
Grant he had faults, yet they were faults that others
Happily infused into his honest nature --
Grant he had faults, yet faults his future life
Might have amended all. -- But, oh! this death
Chills mortally, and with the scythe of winter
Cuts down my spring of hope -- O Leonatus!

PHILARIO. Nay, lady, mark me -- He did leave the world
Without one drop of pity for your fate.
I saw him down in fight, whereto his rage
Had brought him, 'midst the hottest fumes of war
To make a desperate end; and first explaining
This hermit's garb, (which I today put on
To cheat the wary eye of Cymbeline)
Vowed in the doing his will my heart
Rebelled against my hand. "'It Is well, he cried,
"I go to meet the strumpet, and consign her
"To other fires than lust." He said no more,
But to the last breathed anger.

IMOGEN. If it is so, --
Some demon, envious of his peace and mine,
Did witch his sober judgment; naught but magic
In subtle potency of transformation,
Could ruin make of such a noble piece
Of heavenly workmanship. Gods! what is man
When error outlives honor? Yet, Philario,
I will remember the good thing he was,
Ere fury bent him wrongwards -- What he did
Let insolence, that wags his head in scorn
Over virtue fallen, proclaim -- but never so
Shall his poor wife reproach him -- O my lord,
Wise, valiant, gentle, constant, just, and true,
The world did tack to thy all-honour'd name;
Thou were the mark that Jupiter did point to,
When he praised mortal beings.

PHILARIO. Noblest princess,
What shall my wonder call thee? -- thy great father
Yet knows not half thy worth -- hither he is coming;
And I will put into his royal power
The now-disposal of our destinies --
Lo, he is here -- Be silent, and attend --
Hail to king Cymbeline. --

Enter CYMBELINE, BELLARIUS, LEONATUS, and Lords. CYMBELINE. We thank you,
hermit. --

BELLARIUS. Good heavens! Fidele living!

PHILARIO. Hist -- a word --
(Phil. whispers Bell.)
CYMBELINE. In troth, this rock has a most pleasant site
To tempt a king from home -- O luxury,
How art thou put to shame, if comfort lives
Where lowliness inhabits -- our good hosts,
Where are the valiant boys?

PHILARIO. Dread sovereign,
They shall come forth. -- Ho! Cadwal! Palador!

Enter CADWAL and PALADOR from the Cave. And now, so please your highness, I
will open,
Before you do betake you to repast,
A volume of high marvels to your ear.
CYMBELINE. Pray you begin.

PHILARIO. First know then, mighty sir,
He, that addresses here your royal presence,
No hermit is, but your true slave Philario. --
Nay, start not, sir, but know all criminals,
And then proceed to justice -- here is one
(pointing to Leonatus.) Has traveled far to meet your fierce displeasure,
Yet once deserved your grace --

LEONATUS. Ay, I am he --
No beggar, king, but yet a wretch more cursed
Than ever fortune spurned at. -- Know me not?
Send for ingenious torturers; command
The art of cruelty to practice on me,
For I do all abhorred things amend
By being worse than they. -- Know me not yet?
The villain that did steal thy princely daughter;
(Yet that was theft for Gods!) the damned villain
That, in a fit of jealous lunacy,
Murdered all precious qualities that man
Loves woman for -- that --

IMOGEN. (running, and laying hold of her.) Peace, my lord, hear, hear --

LEONATUS. Shall's have a play of this? thou scornful page
Come not athwart my grief -- (strikes her.)

PHILARIO. Hold, Leonatus,
Or thou will murder do, who art so hurt
In a conceit it is done -- Why gaze you so?
Did thou not hear her speak? and know thou not
The tune of Imogen?

CYMBELINE. The rock goes round.

PHILARIO. Nay, wonder is the general word to all!
You that never loved, look on that virtuous pair --
Mark! how he anchors upon Imogen!
See! how she hangs on Leonatus' arm!
While both are mute in sweet extremity
Of truest love, and joy!

LEONATUS (after a pause.) Joy! who names joy? --
It is a word too cold -- What heaven shall be
Hereafter, I feel now -- Whom had I lost,
But Imogen? -- Whom did I hold corrupt,
But Imogen? -- Whom did I drive to death,
But Imogen? -- Yet Imogen is found --
Yet Imogen is purer than the star
That leads her virgin train to light the morn --
Yet Imogen still lives, and lives to love me! --
-- Divide all matter of discourse among you --
What can I say or think but Imogen!

IMOGEN. How do the gracious Gods hide kindness, neath
The sable veil of sad appearances?
O Leonatus! had we never parted,
Had I never stood the mark of thy revenge,
Never had we known what it is to meet again,
What it is to meet again in life, and love!
(Embrace.)
PALADOR. Why so, farewell
The boy Fidele! I begin to fear
I shall hold manhood vile, for sure the graces,
Which fair perfection is compounded of,
Are all bound up in woman! princely Imogen,
Although thou art the daughter of a king,
I have ambition in me, that could wish
To call thee sister* --

BELLARIUS. Wondrous nature still! (aside.)

PALADOR. My sword has from their hearts drawn the best blood
Of those you're little bound to -- and I Will wear it,
Whilst it is mine, for your protection, lady --

PHILARIO. I do believed -- enough -- now Cymbeline*
Wait we your royal sentence -- for myself,
That I have covered honesty with guile,
In which I had in aim the general good,
I rather sue for thanks from all* than pardon --
For this my friend, (points to Leonatus) -- dread
Sir, your clearest judgment
Has sealed his virtue sterling; and albeit
In jealous mood he did conceive an act
That tenderness calls terrible, yet think I,
His jealousy had ground more seeming* sure*
Than common frenzy treads on --

PALADOR. Sir, I know it*

PHILARIO. Well, by-and-by -- for this unparagon'd,
She'as cured me of some spleen against her sex;
I Have proved her (as anon at large you will hear

IMOGEN. When we shall make past terrors our disport,)

PHILARIO. The sweetest lady, and the truest wife,
That ever swore her faith -- your sentence, sir,
Which I forestal a kind one.

CYMBELINE. Since it is thus*
I will not counteract the mighty Gods
In what they have ordained -- My children, take
Full pardon in a blessing -- heaven's good gifts
Fall on your heads like dew!

LEONATUS. Thus on our knees -- (Leonat. and Imogen kneel.)
Take we with pious thankfulness the bounty.
My Imogen! --

IMOGEN. My Leonatus!

BOTH. Oh! -- (Embracing.)

PHILARIO. How glutton-like thou do devour thy joy,
And can not spare one morsel to a friend!

LEONATUS. O yes, to thee -- for it is to thee I owe
The bliss that I am wild with -- O believe me,
Scarce went that angry mandate from my hand,
But my repentance fetched it back, even though
I thought my bride-bed stained with violation --
I landed 'midst a herd of vulgar Romans,
In hope to intercept the fell revenge
That freighted thy commission, or myself
To barter life of future wretchedness
For death of present glory --

CYMBELINE. Well resolved --
But still there does remain behind, Philario,
Long maze to be unravelled -- who are these?
This old man and his boys? How joined you them?
Or know thou aught of Cloten, our dear son?
Upon whose widowed hopes we are bound in honor
To shed some comfort -- him we shall endow with
A moiety of this fair realm --

PALADOR. What him!
Would you make puppets princes? I Am right glad
(Your pardon king) he will not heed your offer --

CYMBELINE. Say thou bold boy?

PALADOR. If honesty is boldness,
I am a lion -- to be brief, my lord --
Wherefore that frown? I was not born to stand
In awe of eyebrows -- Your son Cloten ranks
Amongst those that were your subjects --

CYMBELINE. How is this?
Stripling beware -- who trifles with a king
Plays with his peril --

PALADOR. He is dead -- I slew him --
Upon the very spot thou standst, I slew him --
The foulest blood my hand has spilt is his --
Monarch, thou knew'st him not --

CYMBELINE. Audacious boy!
Thou have condemned thyself -- and spite of all
That thou have done today, do from my lips
Pluck a hard sentence -- thou must die --

PALADOR. Hah! hah!
Die, Sir! why then let treason be true service,
And loyalty make capital -- I Am sorry
To anger you -- but the bare name of Cloten
Untunes my spirits; my enraged soul
Catches like tinder at it; it does fret me,
And make me quarrelous and testy as
Infirmity untended -- Good Philario,
Produce thy scroll --

PHILARIO. Marry, and willingly.
(Gives Cloten's letter.) So please your grace read this. It does contain
Matter important to the point. (Cymbeline reads.) Good Sirs,
Comes it within the compass of belief,
Such wisdom and such valor ever could grow
Beneath so poor a roof? -- This virtuous hermit
Is fit to train up emperors -- These youths --
But peace -- the king

CYMBELINE. This letter, sir, whence came it?

PALADOR. My lord, Pisanio, with his dying hand
Lodged it in mine --

CYMBELINE. It does appear by this*
That Cloten villainous connection held
With the new-beaten Caesar -- I Am abused,
And fool is he that thinks the heart of man
Hangs at his tongue -- loudly this caitif roared
For Britain, and for me; and when he breathed
His amorous plaints, pined like a nightingale. --
This mischief-breeding serpent! Palador,
We thank thy valor, though thy tongue was rude
In roughness of reply.

PALADOR. If I have valor,
It is my nature, sir, for my harsh language
I learned it amongst these rocks.

CYMBELINE. We would know more
Of who, and what thou art -- Bellarius speak,
Make full discov'ry of yourselves, and fortunes,
And end our present wonders.

BELLARIUS. It is meet
Your will should be obeyed -- My sons, I must
For my own part unfold much dangerous truth,
Though happily well for you --

PALADOR. Your danger's ours.

CADWAL. And our good yours.

BELLARIUS. Most mighty Cymbeline!
Thou had a subject that was Edwin called.

CYMBELINE. Edwin! ay, what of him? a banished traitor --

BELLARIUS. Indeed, a banished man, but not a traitor;
For I am he --

CYMBELINE. The whole world shall not save him!
Lords bear him hence --

BELLARIUS. Nay, not so hot, great king -- First pay me for
The breeding of thy sons --

CYMBELINE. Breeding my sons!

BELLARIUS. I am too blunt, and saucy; here is my knee;
Ever I arise, I will prefer my sons, (kneels.)
Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir,
These two young gentlemen, that call me father,
Are the true issue of your royal loins,
And blood of your begetting.

CYMBELINE. How! my issue!

BELLARIUS. So sure, as you your sire's. These noble princes
(For such and so they are) these twenty years
Have I trained up; such arts they have as I
Could put into them -- Sir, my breeding was
As your grace knows -- Their nurse Euriphile,
Whom for the theft I wedded, stole these children
Upon my banishment. The loss of these
The more by you 'twas felt, the more it shaped
Unto my end of stealing them; the vengeance
Of slandered loyalty -- but, royal sir,
Here are your sons again; and I must lose
Two of the sweet'st companions in the world --
Heaven's grace be with them both, for they are worthy
To in-lay heaven with stars.

CYMBELINE. Thou weep'st, and speak --
I lost my children, and if these be they
They are a pair of worthies.

BELLARIUS. Sir, your patience --
This gentleman whom I call Palador,
Most worthy prince, as yours, is true Guiderius;
This gentleman, my Cadwal, is Arviragus,
Your younger princely son; he, sir, was lapt
In a most curious mantle, wrought by the hand
Of his queen mother, which for more probation
I can with ease produce.

CYMBELINE. Guiderius had
Upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star;
It was a mark of wonder.

BELLARIUS. This is he,
Who has upon him still that natural stamp;
It was wise nature's end in the donation
To be his evidence now.

CYMBELINE. It Is he! it is he!
O sure today the Gods do mean to strike me
To death with mortal joy -- (Embracing Palador and Cadwal.) My sons! my sons!
O Imogen! my child, thou'st found two brothers,
But thou have lost a kingdom.

IMOGEN. No, my lord,
I Have got two worlds by this. O my dear brothers,
Do we meet thus? oh! never say hereafter
But I am truest speaker. -- You called me brother,
When I was but your sister; I, you brothers,
When you were so indeed.

PALADOR. Why even let honor
Come, as the Gods foresay it; I Am a prince,
But still the British Palador; sweet sister,
The moiety my father meant for Cloten
Is thine, and thy brave lord's, if my request,
The first I make, be granted -- thee, Bellarius,
We must at leisure thank; and you, Philario,
We shall set down our friend; dear brother Cadwal,
(I cannot yet call thee by that other name)
Thou shall be part'ner of my royalty;
We'll turn our hermitage into a temple,
And yearly smoke it with our sacrifices.

CADWAL. Agreed! O never was a day like this!

CYMBELINE. Laud we the Gods! -- Bellarius, be our brother.
Sirs, we are much indebted to you all,
And we will show it in our courtesies --
Come, let us in, and to more joyous feast
Than princes ever regaled at -- In your stories,
Of which the abridgement fills us with amazement,
Distinction shall be rich -- tomorrow, sirs,
We will to Lud's Town march -- Caesar shall pay
Large ransom for the lives we have in hold,
And sue to us for terms -- never war did cease,
With fairer prospect of a glorious peace.
[Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.
AN ESSAY ON GENIUS.

AN ESSAY ON GENIUS.
INQUIRE, dispute, reply, and all you can,
Say, what is Genius but the Soul of Man?
Beam of that Light which animates our Frame,
Alike in many, but in none the same.
It Is with our Minds, as with our Bodies, none
In Essence differ, yet each knows his own.
Marks of specific Character we see,
That stamp on every Mortal, THIS IS HE.
Nor varies more our present outward Shape,
(This Man half-Angel, and the next half-Ape)
Than do the mental Powers: What Odds we find
Between a -- 's, and a Newton's Mind?
Ask you the Cause? First take it for a Rule,
Whatever the Man, the Soul is not a Fool.
She came in due Perfection from the Skies,
And all Defect in grosser Body lies.
Body and Soul at best but ill agree,
It Is Spirit wedded to Infirmity:
A disproportioned Match, from whence proceeds
The Soul's Inaction through the Body's Needs.
This Truth once stated, and the Soul, it is plain,
Much on the filmy Texture of the Brain,
Much on Formations that escape our Eyes,
On nice Connections, and Coherencies,
And on corporeal Organs must depend,
For her own Function's Exercise, and End.
Hence then the Cause of all Defects is seen,
For one wrong Movement spoils the whole Machine.
It Is hence the several Passions take their Rise,
The Seeds of Virtue, and the Roots of Vice;
Hence Notes peculiar or to Young, or Old,
Phlegmatic, sanguine, amorous, or cold!
And hence from Constitution, such or such,
Wit may take Modes, and Genius op'rate much.
The youthful Bard, a sprightly, sanguine Swain,
Like Ovid warbles in a Lovesick strain:
With weaker Passions, but with Sense more strong,
The melancholy Young pursues his Song.
Mixture of Humors motley Genius shows;
It Is seen methinks in Hervey's dancing Prose.
Why wonder then to mark the Sons of Rhyme,
Gay, serious, turgid, easy, or sublime?
The Soul and Body closely thus allied,
Vile is the Folly, as the Sin of Pride;
And one great Truth the first of Men will fit,
That Nothing more precarious is than Wit.
Behold yon Wretch, that over the Parish strays,
A Baby-Man, a Driv'ler all his Days!
With Tongue out-lolling, and round-rolling Eyes
He grins against the Sun, and catches Flies;
But for some secret Flaws we cannot read,
That check her Motions, and her Flights impede,
His Soul perchance enriched with happiest Thought,
Had spoke like Tully, or like Virgil wrote.
Alas! All Souls are subject to like Fate,
All sympathizing with the Body's State;
Let the fierce Fever burn through every Vein,
And drive the madding Fury to the Brain,
Naught can the Fervor of his Frenzy cool,
But Aristotle's self's a Parish Fool!
Nay in Proportion lighter Ails control
The mental Virtue, and infect the Soul.
Ease is best Convoy in our Voyage to Truth;
What Man e're reasoned with a raging Tooth?
A Poet with a Genius, and without,
Are the same Creatures in the Pangs of Gout.
Hence then we guess, nor vain is the Surmise,
Why some are Fools, and none are always wise;
Why Genius differs in Life's every Stage,
Runs wild with Youth, and creeps with hobling Age.
The Soul uncumber'd with the mortal Clay
Knows no Increase of Strength, nor fears Decay.
A little Art this Secret may unfold,
That what can never die, is never old.
By present Powers Perfection cease to Scan,
For we may daily mourn the Fall of Man!
Ah! how bright Wit possessed of every Gift
Dwindled to Folly, and went mad in Swift.
The mighty Marlb'rough, whose great Soul was proved
Upon the Plains of Blenheim, where unmoved,
"Amidst Confusion, Horror and Despair
"He viewed around the dreadful Scenes of War,
"In peaceful Thought the Field of Death surveyed,
"To fainting Squadrons sent the timely Aid,
"Inspired repulsed Battalions to engage,
"And taught the doubtful Battle where to rage;"
Even He, the Springs of Nature in Decay,
And all the vital Functions worn away,
Unable now to conquer Realms, or buy,
With idiot Gesture, and unmeaning Eye,
Sits a Spectatour in the foremost Row,
And gapes at Heroes in a Puppet-Shew!
Eschew Presumption every half-learn'd Elf;
The noblest Writer does not know himself;
Turn over mighty Milton's raptured Page,
Observe his Strength, his Majesty, his Rage;
His Numbers like the Almighty's Thunders roll,
And strike an awful Pleasure to the Soul;
We joy in Ruin, and are almost pained
To see the (late lost) Paradise regained.
This Work himself judged best; tell me who read,
Was not the mighty Milton blind indeed?
Genius again, by Inf'rence apt we see,
The same in Species differs in Degree;
Propensities are strong, and few Men yet
But have a Relish for some kind of Wit;
Homer is Monarch of the Epic Choir,
Yet Virgil snatched a Brand of Homer's Fire;
The daring Homer's all-impetuous Strain
Like a hot Courser bore him over the Plain.
The Muse of Virgil that affected State
Speeds not so swiftly, but she keeps her Rate;
To those though meet to yield the Glory due,
Lucan, and Statius have their Merits too.
Each Writer is distinguished in his Way,
Grand Sophocles, or trifling Seneca!
All to their favorite Art will lay Pretense,
It Is Inclination, or it is Excellence;
'Midst Clouds of Dullness Gleams of Wit have shone,
Like the faint Burstings of an April Sun.
Grant you what is past, and it will less perplex
To ask, why Woman is the weaker Sex?
Why the Extremes of female Wits are such,
They mostly say too little, or too much?
Beauty's soft Frame, for other Ends designed,
Faints under Toil of Body, or of Mind.
Kind Heaven that gave them Beauty, all things gave;
The soundest Scholar is a Woman's Slave.
Glibly their Tongues the pretty Lispers move,
"And Nonsense will be Eloquence in Love."
Yet have we known superior Nymphs that can
Assert an equal Power, and rival Man!
Born Nature's Wonders, in all Shapes to please,
To speak with Eloquence, to write with Ease,
To model Laws, and rule a factious Realm:
Witness ELIZA at Old ENGLAND'S Helm!
Nay different Countries different Genius make;
Souls Modes peculiar to their Climate take:
Baeotia's foggy Air was marked of old,
Athenian Wits were bright, and Theban cold.
Just view near Home the Surface of the Ball;
In Holland, Genius is mechanical:
In France, the Muses breath a livelier Strain;
They skip in Italy, and strut in Spain!
In England Oh! how manifold our Rhyme!
Where Genius is uncertain as the Clime.
We show (consult the Press, the Stage, the Schools)
All Sorts of Wise Men, and all Sorts of Fools!
We count our Numbers of illustrious Name,
That climbed by different Paths the Hill of Fame.
Ye Bards of Britain that have shined in Song,
Oh, let the Muse survey your tuneful Throng.
Chaucer, who notes not with a merry Glee,
Thy Genius full of quaint Festivity?
Who reads must see, and seeing must admire
Bright Spencer's Fancy, and bold Milton's Fire.
Genius was studied Wit in artful Ben,
But flowed spontaneous, Dryden, from thy Pen:
'Twas thine in manly Richness to excel,
With twice thy Labor few write half so well.
Fletcher had copious Energy of Mind;
Cowley's was Wit let loose, and Wycherly's confined.
Who but applauds soft Otway's melting Lay,
The negligent Simplicity of Gay,
The genuine Mirth that tickled Butler's Vein,
Waller's terse Sonnet, and Garth's nervous Strain?
Such various Forms does Genius take to please;
In Row it is Elegance, in Prior Ease;
In Lee it is Flame, that lays half Nature waste,
And in the Courtly Addison it is Taste.
It Is comic Grace in Steel, that shunned Offense;
In Pope it is Sweetness, Purity, and Sense.
It Is Humor in the DEAN unequalled yet,
And Congreve, who could stand thy two-edged Wit?
To several Bards their several Virtues fall;
But to inimitable SHAKESPEARE, All!
SHAKESPEARE! -- O Phoebus, lend thy golden Lyre,
Give me the Beams of thy celestial Fire!
Avaunt ye Vulgar, Poets listen round,
And all PARNASSUS thunder with the Sound!
While the Muse dwells on SHAKESPEARE'S sacred Name,
And down Time's rapid Tide bears his immortal Fame.
-- The Rapture's over -- I pant in vain to sing,
Droops the weak Muse, and flags her languid Wing;
She sinks beneath the Theme, she quits her Lays,
SHAKESPEARE she named, and Silence is her Praise!
Assert we then the Force of Genius lies
In Verse alone? Are Poets only wise?
We hinted Genius is of various Kind,
And vast the Province of the human Mind*
Who well performs his fate-allotted Part,
By Strength of Nature, or by Dint of Art,
Whatever the Subject of his happy Skill,
The Product is the Work of Genius still.
What honied Dew distilled from Tully's Tongue!
What soft Persuasion on his Accents hung!
So smoothly strong the sweet Oration flows
It Is plain the Muses sometimes speak in Prose;
Bid him write Verses; who but will agree?
Cib -- r can make as good an Ode as He.
It Is naught but Genius that in all presides,
Commands in Battle, and in Council guides;
Sad Woes ensued, where Fools have Squadrons led:
For what is Caesar's Arm, without his Head?
Nor needs the Muse to distant Regions roam;
Genius appears in every Shape at home;
A glorious List in British Annals shines
Of Statesmen, Chiefs, Philosophers, Divines.
Long Lucubrations over the midnight Oil,
Gave to the World a Newton, and a Boil!
Each Alma Matter boasts her favorite Own,
OXFORD her Bradley, CAMBRIDGE Sanderson!
It Is not a puny Judge can find a Flaw
In Sherlock's Gospel, or in H -- 's Law.
What plenteous Streams of easy Sense we see
In fluent Tillotson's Divinity?
Yet fluent Tillotson had naught to say,
Had not the solid Barrow led the Way!
Others may fright you from the Tempter's Gin,
But South will make a Man ashamed of Sin.
Nay some we know (and knowing we must smile)
Blessed with a Talent, but without a Style.
Hammond stands foremost of this awkward Line,
A rumbling Writer, but a deep Divine!
Who ever knew so strange a Vein as His?
Or so much Learning in Parenthesis?
It Would tire the Muse, and Reader to proceed
From reasoning Chillingworth to florid Seed;
The Works of Christian Labor to explore
Of Hooker, Pearson, Laud, and Numbers more;
That drew their manly Quills for righteous Ends,
The Church's Champions, and Religion's Friends.
I grieve to think what Souls have been destroyed,
By Wit perverse, and Genius misemploy'd:
For naught awakes so soon the vengeful Rod,
As Wisdom flying in the Face of God.
The Force of Reason is of finite Length;
This Giant that attempts beyond his Strength,
Our boasted Light of Nature, feeble Spark,
Guides for a while, but leaves us in the Dark.
As glimmering Vapors with a pallid Ray
Light us to Quagmires, and to Gulphs betray.
How vain is mortal Man above his Sphere!
Poor, knowing Fool, just wise enough to err!
Go, span the Globe, the World's strong Bounds o'releap,
Empty the yawning Caverns of the Deep,
Count all the Fibers of that Reptile's Thigh,
Catch me the trembling Sunbeams as they fly,
Then take thy Understanding's Cable-Line,
Examine God, and measure Truths divine.
Grant me, kind Heaven, to see, e're I explain,
Correct the false Ambition of my Brain,
And on my Mind this Maxim printed be,
The Christian Virtue is Humility!
Happier the simple Swain, the rustic Fool,
That never took the Polish of a School,
Than, swelled with Pride, a Master of all Arts
With Shaftsbury's Cunning, and with St. John's Parts!
Much Wit obscene has crept through every Age,
But Lewdness riots on the modern Stage.
O Shame to Arts! -- Our Poets may defy
The Bards of old: with Rome and Athens vie;
May boast Invention, Penetration, Wit,
All Qualities for either Drama fit:
May touch the Passions with enchanting Art,
And take minutest Copies of the Heart:
Yet of past Times the Panegyric be,
That Pagan Wits were better Men than we.
Genius depends then on the Body's Frame --
Tell me, will Genius never be the same?
Or will the Difference we to day espy,
Subsist in Souls to all Eternity?
Such Question put, if Reason may be bold
In humble wise Conjecture to unfold,
She seems to dictate, and she fears not blame,
That Things once differing, never are the same:
Here or hereafter, in what Light you will,
A Man, you know, is Soul and Body still;
And still corporeal Organs, and their Use
Must correspondent Faculties produce:
But Body in that happier State, refined,
Shall leave it is old Imfirmities behind,
And every Soul be perfect in her Kind.
Consult material Objects, and we see
God's Power declared by sweet Variety;
The different Seasons different Beauties bring;
It Is not one Color paints the jolly Spring.
The Sun, gay Giant, travels in his Might;
Smiles from her Orb the placid Queen of Night.
Each Insect that eludes the nicest Eye,
One of the Myriads floating in the Sky,
His Maker's Praise proclaim as loudly can,
As Ocean's Tyrant King, the Great Leviathan!
Look through all Nature, the vast Tracts of Space,
Each Being has it is proper Power and Place.
The Angelic Hosts that round the Godhead wait,
And issue forth, the Ministers of Fate,
Have their respective Provinces, and know
What Part to act above, and what below;
Messiah's Sword to Michael's Might is given,
And Gabriel is Ambassador of Heaven!
Hence then from Inf'rence little forced, we find
That Souls will differ, and excel in Kind;
But when admitted to the Realms of Joy,
What certain Office, what precise Employ
Shall exercise the several Powers of each,
Present Conception not presumes to reach.
Enough from general Principles to show,
That one great Point of Bliss will be, to know:
To touch Perfection in a favorite Art,
And grieve no longer but to know in Part:
To mark where Truth in her Recesses lies,
Pursue her without Toil, and grasp her as she flies!
The Sage Logician then shall clearly see,
How all Ideas differ, or agree,
And from her Coverts drive sly Sophistry;
No need to shift, to wrangle, and confute;
For sure the Blessed reason, not dispute.
See! pensive Metaphysics! Science coy!
In Contemplation only knowing Joy!
Sober Recluse, no noisy Stander by,
She sits, anatomizing Entity!
Purged of the grosser Particles of Clay,
And all material Obstacles away,
In the full Vigor of eternal Youth,
Oh! How will She adore abstracted Truth!
Physics still fond new Secrets to descry,
And look through Nature with a piercing Eye,
Hereafter latent Causes may explore,
When all the present System is no more,
And prove, when Inmate of the blessed Abode,
The World an Atom to the Works of God!
The pale Astronomer that kens from far
The station'd Planet, or the wandering Star,
When this frail Earth in Ruin shall be hurled,
May count the Lamps that light a nobler World;
And subtle Geometry shall lend her Line,
And take Dimensions of the Plan divine.
What Sounds shall flow from Rhetric's silver Tongue!
How sweet her Eloquence, her Voice how strong!
Her wondrous Talents graceful She displays,
And thunders forth the Heavenly Monarch's Praise.
Hark! Hark! the raptured Bard has struck his Lyre,
Blazes aloft the true Poetic Fire;
Ten thousand vast Ideas swell his Mind;
Imagination ranges unconfined;
Now softly trills, now loudly sounds the Strain,
He sings JEHOVAH'S all-triumphant Reign,
And Music fills the unmeasurable Plain!
He charms the winged Hosts that hover by,
And Spirits shout Applause that rends the Sky.
Such then the future Pleasures of the Mind,
So solid, manly, rational, refined,
Productive ever of the truest Joy,
And sure to satisfy, but not to cloy,
How vain at once appear all worldly Schemes,
The Tricks of Statesmen, and Ambition's Dreams?
Low the Designs the wisest Mortals lay,
And vile the brutal Pleasures of a Day!
Awake, awake, pursue the proper Plan;
Virtue and Knowledge only make a Man!
Despise the World, a better Fortune try,
And calculate for Immortality.
Idiots by natural Organs ill supplied,
Untutored Louts, whose parts were never tried,
Hereafter hidden Excellence may show,
And rank with Souls that scorned them here below:
But for the Sot that sees, yet slights his Rule,
The wilful Novice, the industrious Fool,
That lulls with Sloth, or steeps in Vice his Sense,
The Slave of Pleasure, or of Indolence,
How wretched is his Fate? fears he not Pain,
The gnawing Viper, and the galling Chain?
Still wretched is the Blockhead's Fate -- for why?
Eternal Ignorance is Misery.
Who goodly Talents have, should Talents use,
But still with upright, and with virtuous Views;
For Application sometimes less pretense
To Merit has, than barren Indolence;
Nothing fatigues the Soul, or tires the Brain,
Like Lust of Empire, or the Thirst of Gain:
And these o'er-ruling in an active Mind
Spoil Nations, and make Havoc of Mankind:
Ingenious Tyrants only make us Slaves;
Were all Men Fools, sure no Men would be Knaves.
Ambition take the Scepter, and the Robe,
Spread thy huge Greatness over half the Globe;
Lo, the World bursts, It Is Nature's dying Day,
The Sun is dark, the Planets melt away!
Now boast thy Genius, exercise thy Parts,
Recount thy Feats, and recognize thy Arts;
Alas! thou cursest thy too pregnant Brain,
And Knowledge is acute to quicken Pain.
The Nature, the Importance, and the End
Of Genius such, be wise then, and attend;
How we may best our natural Powers improve,
And qualify the Soul for Bliss above.
Genius lies hid, like Metal in the Mine,
Till searching Education bids it shine.
It Is but a glorious Few of deathless Name
Have found, without a Guide, their Road to Fame;
Nor slight their Province, if we justly rate,
Who till the Mind, and Genius cultivate;
Much Penetration, and no little Toil
Must try the Strength, and Temper of the Soil;
Some Minds rich-natur'd, like a fruitful Field,
To little Culture ample Harvests yield;
Others assiduous Labor must secure;
They owe their goodly Produce to Manure:
True Judgment too should mark where Talent lies;
And, soon as seen, indulge Propensities:
For different Objects different Fancies strike,
Genius, we said before, is not alike.
Pope's forward Muse procured him early Fame,
"He lisp'd in Numbers, for the Numbers came;"
Another's unharmonious Taste is such,
Sooner than Poetry he would learn High Dutch!
Yet he peculiar Talents may display,
And prove a very Wonder in his Way.
Why must all Mortals seek one common Praise?
Is there no Garland but a Wreath of Bays?
To steep Parnassus' Summit most sublime,
It Is not a short-breathed Pegasus can climb;
Yet though the panting Jade would fain stand still,
The blind Orbilius flogs him up the Hill.
Some seem to think that Genius may be sold,
But Wit is not, like Honor, bought with Gold;
To foreign Regions wealthy Idiots roam,
Though Fools of all Men sure should stay at Home.
Another's Heir through Markham's Forms must pass,
He goes a Blockhead, and returns an Ass!
He gapes, he strains, he sweats, yet gets no higher;
For Nature put him down a Country 'Squire!
Others of lively Parts, but wretched Fate,
Want Nothing but a Fortune to be great:
Sometimes among the vulgar Herd we find
Strong Marks and Features of a heavenly Mind;
The Village Swain's a Wit, he knows not how,
And I have seen Philosophy at Plough!
How are our Hopes by present Chances crossed?
What Oafs make P -- s-ns, and what Wits are lost!
When now your Genius, near to Ripeness grown,
Begins to glow with Raptures all it is own;
Ply it with chosen Books of various Kinds,
For Reading is the Food of hungry Minds:
Moderate and wholesome will suffice your Need;
It Is not how much, but how, and what you read;
To rise with Appetite is always best;
Gluttons devour much more than they digest:
It Is vain for ever over Books to pore,
Reading does much, but Meditation more:
Mere slavish Plodding never yet prevailed;
See yon lank Student to his Folio nailed,
He reads at Home, Abroad, at Meals, in Bed,
And has five thousand Volumes in his Head:
Yet little to Perfection has be brought,
For he has read so much he never thought.
The Youth more sprightly, and the glowing Bard,
That had as lief go dig, as study hard,
Applies by Fits, and at his Fancy's Call
Little he reads, but has that little all;
He sees, and he enjoys his Author's Worth,
Gathers his Flowers, and culls his Beauties forth;
He dwells with Transport on a favorite Part,
And clasps each striking Passage to his Heart!
Your Models choose from Authors of first Rate,
He cannot write, who dares not emulate;
To Father Homer's sovereign Poetry
Rome owes her Virgil, and our Milton we:
High as the towering Strains of Pindar soar,
Great Flaccus was, what Pindar was before.
For present Times to emulate is all;
It Is not in Wit to be original!
Leave Books -- and go to Company; and then
Leave Company, and go to Books again;
The studious Mind it is useful to unbend
In pleasing Converse with a social Friend:
For cordial Juices of the generous Vine
Refresh the Weary, and the Dull refine;
Over flowing Bowls rebounds the sparkling Wit,
And sure no Poet was a Milk-sop yet.
Intemp'rate Revelling alone consumes
The vital Powers, and clouds the Brain in Fumes.
Horace, expertest Handler of the Lyre,
In rich Falernum quaff'd poetic Fire;
A jovial Bard! How pleasant are his Strains!
How much Good Humor in his Writings reigns!
He laughs, though angry, and will still delight;
His Verse is Satyr, but it is not Spite.
How does his Muse with free Politeness rail,
While Juvenal's is thrashing with a Flail!
Scholars should know, all Fire in Motion lies,
And whet their Parts with manly Exercise:
Dullness sits slumbering in an Elbow chair,
But the gay Muses love to take the Air.
The Shades of Night are fled before the Morn;
The Mountains echoe to the cheerful Horn:
Men, Dogs, and Horses, Neighings, Shouts, and Cries,
Shake, with tumultuous Jollity the Skies;
The Chase begins; they pant in every Vein,
Now climb the Hill's steep Brow, then scour along the Plain!
Such Sports as these enliven; they impart
Warmth to the Brain, and Gladness to the Heart.
But if due Aid to Genius may be lent,
Much too it suffers by Impediment.
Unhappy is the Bard that deals in Rhyme,
When Wit is obsolete, and Sense a Crime.
When the weak Muse, in a degenerate Age,
Crawls from the Press, or lamely treads the Stage;
No longer dares to noble Heights advance,
But chimes in Song, or trifles in Romance.
Infected by false Taste great Souls we see,
Who, R -- d -- n, can Nature paint like thee?
Yet would a Genius toy as thou have done,
And spin Morality like Grandison?
How shall the genuine Bard escape from Fools,
That judge by narrow, or by partial Rules?
A thousand Witlings maul his mangled Name,
And yelping Critics hunt him out of Fame.
Nay Censure so perversely plays her Tricks,
That she will Measure Wit by Politics;
And some with hollow Heads, but Faces big,
Will almost swear APOLLO is a WHIG!
Men of true Genius, and of real Use,
Can Oxford, that vile Nazareth, produce?
And yet impartial Sarum did declare,
Once on a Time there was one Scholar there! Remark somewhere made by the late
Bishop B -- r -- t.

Oxford! my Joy! my Wonder! and my Boast!
My constant Triumph, and my daily Toast!
O let thy Son his willing Duty pay,
And grateful pour the Tributary Lay;
Rescue thy Fame from Slander thrown by Slaves,
And snatch thy Honor from the Gripe of Knaves.
-- I spare my Pen, when naught to prove I find;
For who can see the Sun, when all are blind?
Nor Came repine we at thy equal Praise,
The learned Sisters may divide the Bays.
-- But in this wooden Age, these dastard Times,
O'er-run with Follies, and foul-stain'd with Crimes;
When Vice gigantic takes her public Stand,
And bids Corruption deluge all the Land,
Sculks now no more in Holes from Place to Place,
But stares astonished Virtue in the Face;
When Chiefs blaspheme the God for whom they fight,
And all Religion is to be polite;
In such a Day as this secure to steer,
With spotless Honor from Contagion clear,
To cherish still the dying patriot Fire,
Unawed by Menace, and unbought by Hire,
To own, and to defend the Christian Name,
And fix on Infidels the Mark of Shame,
Is the first Point of Praise; and let the Nine
Sound with their Harps this Praise, fair Oxford, thine.
It Is not a minor Bard can hope to please,
And struggle through Discouragements like these.
For ever sure must damp poetic Rage,
False Taste, loose Manners, and a slavish Age!
If these are Plagues, still more remain behind,
Wits tell you Fortune frowns upon their Kind*
Alas! What Sources of Obstruction lie
In the great common Woe of Poverty!
Whose Case is hardest, it is not quickly said,
Or theirs that work, or theirs that write for Bread:
The starveling Curate the fat Dean supplies,
One makes Divinity, and the other buys. --
How sinks the needy Wretch beneath himself,
That sells his Parts to ministerial Pelf!
Yet such for State Necessities are fit,
For nothing helps a Villain out like Wit.
Sure of all Writers Poets should not lack,
'Twill spoil your Pegasus to make him hack;
The Muse expands her Wings before you ask;
She loves Employment, but she hates a Task:
To Dryden the proud Manager could say,
On pain of Thirst and Hunger, bring your Play;
The Play appears in Breach of every Rule,
And Want makes Dryden sometimes half a Fool.
Such from without the Causes that we find
Obstruct the Operations of the Mind;
Within too, Genius has it is Enemies;
And in ourselves too often our Hindrance lies:
Our Passions, Vices, Follies, Wit misguide,
Intemp'rance, Anger, Hastiness, and Pride.
We said, Debauches will Oblivion bring,
And mix dull Lethe with the Muses' Spring.
The Mind is then most vigorous when serene;
Crude are the half-form'd Dictates of the Spleen.
What then inspires the sharp, satyric Page?
Often, fixed Ill Nature, seldom, sudden Rage.
Some giddy Fancies every Object hit,
It Is Folly to be prodigal of Wit!
The Verse is short-lived that is premature;
The Muse though never slow, should still be sure:
These are thy Honors, Blackmore, this thy Gain,
That Nonsense came in Vollies from thy Brain!
Conceit with empty Vapors puffs the Mind,
And makes an Author to his Errors blind;
It Is the first Praise to make, the next to mend;
Go, court the Censure of an able Friend:
Procure the Sanction of a learned Few:
Who knows what Mortals may your Works review?
True Modesty for Wit may sometimes pass;
But every Coxcomb is, as such, an Ass:
The best Productions some Defects will stain,
And he affronts Mankind, who dares be vain!
-- O! that my Muse Assistance could impart,
As far as Nature may be helped by Art;
Ingenious Art is Nature's truest Friend,
And what God made, it is only she can mend.
For me, however I covet lasting Fame,
And pant with Longings for a Poet's Name;
Yet let my Soul confess a nobler Aim!
Give me, kind Heaven, still higher Point to reach,
Give me to practice, what I strive to teach;
My standing Rules of daily Conduct be,
Faith, Honor, Justice, Candor, Charity;
Careless of false Reproach, or vain Applause,
Be Worth my Eulogy, and Truth my Cause;
O may I wield an independent Pen,
A Friend to Virtue, not a Tool to Men;
In Perseverance placing all my Glory,
While Tories, Whigs, and all Men call me TORY!
Warm in my Breast may patriot Passion glow;
Righteous Resentment of my Country's Woe:
With Voice and Heart for every may I stand
Against Vermin that devour my native Land:
And in one Wish my Wishes centered be,
That I may live to hail my Country free!
Give me this Fame kind Heaven, and though my Song
Ranks me the meanest of the raptured Throng,
I shall enjoy a sweet Content; a Praise
That Shakespeare's could not give, or Homer's Bays.
A PARAPHRASE ON THE TE DEUM.

AN ODE.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN the following Poetical Paraphrase I have thought myself obliged to pursue
the Track before me, and to deviate no farther from it, than might be clearly
warranted by the Sense and plain Import of the Original. -- The greatest
Liberty I have taken is in the two last Stanzas, wherein I have ventured to
mention some striking Circumstances rather from the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, than that of the Hymn itself; a Liberty which I hope will be
indulged to the Solemnity of the Occasion.

A PARAPHRASE ON THE TE DEUM.
I.
GOD of the Worlds! eternally supreme!
Hail! thou first Cause of All!
Our daily Worship, and our endless Theme,
Hear us, we call;
We lift our raptured Souls in lofty Lays,
And breathe sweet Incense of Religious Praise!
Creation bends before thy Sovereign Nod.
Where-e're the Sun his Luster sheds,
And Ocean's spacious Bosom spreads,
Nations remote adore thy Name;
Thee all the Languages proclaim,
Thee, universal Sire! Thee everlasting God!
II.
Legions of Angels, an unnumber'd Throng,
Puissant Powers, that tread Heavens Crystal Plain,
Immortal Seraphin begin the Song,
And full-wing'd Cherubs join the loudly-sounding Strain.
"Thee Holy! Holy! Holy! (aye they sing
Thee Holy! Holy! Holy! joyful ring
The Regions of unbounded Space)
"Thee God of Sabbath we adore,
"Enjoy thy Goodness, dread thy Power,
"And prostrate fall before thy Face!
"O celebrate eternal Jubilee;
"The radiant Orbs that round us glow,
"The pendant Earth that whirls below,
"Thy wondrous Might declare, and ample Majesty."
III.
Lo! where the glorious, chosen Band,
The faithful Twelve, thy Missionaries stand!
Lo! where the goodly Prophet's Race,
Inspired Presagers of thy balmy Grace!
And there the noble Army that defied
The purple Tyrant's barbarous Pride;
Bravely they took the blood-stained Field,
And Warriors without Spear or Shield,
The Champions of thy Faith in Triumph died:
All, all to Thee glad Hallelujahs raise:
The Church below, the Church above,
Grateful chaunt their Songs of Love,
To Thee, high Argument of universal Praise.
IV.
Thee FATHER, Excellence of Majesty,
Thee Fountain of eternal Deity,
With cheerful Voice, and dulcet Sounds they sing;
Next thy all-honour'd Son, MESSIAH great,
And next the peaceful, gracious PARACLETE,
Comfort's perpetual Source, Joy's unexhausted Spring.
V.
Awake; awake again the vocal String,
The Great MESSIAH sing,
Creator of the Worlds, and Glory's King;
Hail! thou begotten of the Father, hail!
Essence that never began, and never shall fail!
Yet did thou leave thy bright Abode
To take a mortal Birth,
To ransom the rebellious Sons of Earth,
A Virgin's Offspring, and a Savior God!
See! on the Cross in Agony of Pain
The God of Nature dies!
He dies, O Death, to crush thy fell Domain:
See him victorious rise!
See Satan, captive Lion, roars in vain,
And sullen bites his adamantine Chain.
Lift up your heads, ye Faithful, and behold
Where Heaven unbars her Gates of everlasting Gold.
VI.
What Floods of Glory break from yonder Throne?
While the paternal Brightness spread
Beloved MESSIAH, round thy Head,
Crowns thy stupendous Toil, and Conquest greatly won.
Hereafter shall the Nations meet,
Before thy awful Judgment Seat:
Propitious lend thy kindly Aid,
Nor let thy Blood be vainly shed.
O may our Souls exalted be
With Hope of blessed Eternity!
Our Names among the Saints enrolled,
In sacred Characters of Gold!
Hear, hear thy People, save thy Race,
Sons of Adoption, Heirs of Grace;
O thou! our Governor, and Guide;
Our true Ambition, humble Pride,
To thee the Tribute due we pay,
With rising, and with setting Day;
And will thy filial Deity adore,
When Nature's Date is out, and Time shall be no more.
VII.
O thou, Distres's Anchor, Terror's Cure,
Prepare us for that all-tremendous Hour,
When thou shall come in Fullness of thy Power:
Let thy bright Beams of Mercy shine,
With Infl'ence on our Souls benign,
And ever keep us from Pollution pure.
What Clangours cleave my started Ear?
What Noises rend the affrighted Air?
What livid Meteors in the Ether play?
The World's deep-laid Foundations shake,
The Graves are burst, the Dead awake:
It was the Trump of God! It is the Judgment Day!
VIII.
He comes; the Godhead comes; behold from far
He comes triumphant in his Cloud-wrapt Car:
While twice ten Thousand Angels cope the Sky,
The Harbingers of his dread Majesty!
The Stars are dropped, the Sun dissolves away,
It is -- Alas! it is neither Night nor Day:
The burning Basis of MESSIAH's Throne,
Spontaneous Splendor beams, a Glory of it is own!
Look, look, the fatal Covers part,
The Book is open; melt my Heart:
Whither, ah! whither shall I flee
In this my Soul's Extremity?
Ah! whither but to thee?
My King, my God, my Hope, my Stay,
O save me this all-dreadful Day,
And let Mankind, and Angels see,
That blessed is the Man who puts his Trust in Thee.
We praise thee, O God: We acknowledge thee to be the Lord.
All the Earth does worship thee: The Father everlasting.
To thee all Angels cry aloud: The Heavens and all the Powers therein.
To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin continually do cry,
Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Sabbath.
Heaven, and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory.
The glorious Company of the Apostles, praise thee.
The goodly Fellowship of the Prophets, praise thee.
The noble Army of Martyrs, praise thee!
The holy Church throughout all the World, does acknowledge thee;
The FATHER of an infinite Majesty;
Thine honorable, true, and only Son:
Also the Holy Ghost, the Comforter.
Thou art the King of Glory, O Christ.
Thou art the everlasting Son of the Father.
When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man; thou did not abhor the Virgin's
Womb.
When thou had overcome the Sharpness of Death, thou did open the Kingdom
of Heaven to all Believers.
Thou sit at the right Hand of God; in the Glory of the Father.
We believe that thou shall come to be our Judge.
We therefore pray thee, help thy Servants; whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious Blood.
Make them to be numbered with thy Saints, in Glory everlasting.
O Lord, save thy People: and bless thine Heritage.
Govern them: and lift them up for ever.
Day by day, we magnify thee.
And we worship thy Name: ever World without End.
Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this Day without Sin.
O Lord, have Mercy upon us: have Mercy upon us.
O Lord, let thy Mercy lighten upon us: as our Trust is in thee.
O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.
AN ESSAY ON THE ANCIENT and MODERN DRAMA, OCCASIONED BY MR. MASON's ELFRIDA,
And the LETTERS Prefixed to it.

AN ESSAY ON THE ANCIENT and MODERN DRAMA.
I Have often read with much Pleasure the ingenious Mr. Mason's Dramatic Poem,
entitled Elfrida, together with the preparatory Letters with which that
Gentleman introduces it to the Public. This Piece is professedly written on the
Model of the ancient Greek Tragedy; and though I flatter myself, the Objections
I have to the Principles laid down in those Letters are not removed by this
much-labour'd Attempt, yet I will readily own the Design is executed with a
skilful hand, and in some respects deserves the Attention of the present
Writers of the English Drama. I did not therefore undertake this Argument with
any Inclination to differ from a Person of his known Taste, and greatly admired
Abilities, but purely in Vindication of the Theory I have had the Honor to
deliver in a Course of Lectures to the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD, in which, with a
particular View to the Justification of Shakespeare, I have ventured to advance
and defend a System in some material Points inconsistent with that under
present Consideration. Neither am I unaware of the great Disadvantage I have to
contend against, when I oppose a celebrated Writer, whose Sentiments are
countenanced by the Practice of the ancient Poets, and whose Pen is drawn under
the Banner of Aristotle himself: A Disadvantage, which the Usage of later
Writers, and the almost concurrent Voice of modern Criticism By modern
Criticism I mean that Plan upon which the English Drama had been formed for a
Course of many Generations, and which Mr. Mason, and other Critics and Poets
have in our Days attempted, both by Precept and Example, to supersede and
explode in favor of the Ancient System.
perhaps will be thought little enough to counterbalance. However, as in Matters
of Taste we ought only, I apprehend, to appeal to the genuine Dictates of
Good-sense, Reason and Nature (which an implicit Veneration for any Name
Ancient or Modern may possibly prevent our regarding) so, if Prejudices on both
Sides were removed, it would probably appear that the Victory is rather to be
divided, than determined, and that without depreciating the real Merit and
Excellency of the ancient Poets, we may yet safely defend the Principles on
which the Moderns reject their Writings as the absolute and everlasting
Standard of Dramatic Composition: I mean principally with regard to the three
great Unities of Action, Time, and Place. -- What I have to say therefore upon
these Subjects I submit without farther Apology to the Judgment of the
intelligent and impartial Reader, advertising him only in this Place, that he
is not to expect a Methodical Treatise of elaborate Criticism, but only a Train
of occasional Thoughts and Reflections, as they occurred to me upon the Perusal
of the Poem of Elfrida, and the Letters prefixed to it.

Had I intended, says Mr. Mason in his first Letter, (for I choose to repeat his
own Words to prevent Misapprehension) to give an exact Copy of the ancient
Drama, your objections to the present Poem would be unanswerable. But my design
was much less confined. I meant only to pursue the ancient Method so far as is
probable a Greek Poet, were he alive, would now do, in order to adapt himself
to the Genius of our Times, and the Character of our Tragedy. According to this
Notion, every Thing was to be allowed to the present Taste, which Nature and
Aristotle could possibly dispense with; and nothing of Intrigue or refinement
was to be admitted, at which ancient Judgment could reasonably take Offense.
Good Sense, as well as Antiquity, prescribed an adherence to the three great
Unities; these therefore were strictly observed. It Is evident from this
Passage, the ingenious Author would have us consider the Laws of Aristotle, and
the Practice of Antiquity relating to the great Unities, as manifestly founded
in the first Principles of Nature and Good Sense; and accordingly in order to
adapt himself to the present Taste no farther than might be justly allowable,
we find him deviating from the Rules and Practice of Antiquity but in two
Instances; First in the Choice of a Story, in which Love is the predominant
Passion, and Secondly, in which Characters are represented as nearly
approaching to private ones as Tragic Dignity would permit. Upon our Author's
Hypothesis indeed these are perhaps almost the only Deviations that could be
allowed him; and the Point must at once be given up, if the Theory be true
which is here in so positive a manner advanced. For Satisfaction therefore in
this Matter it may be useful in the first Place to observe, that the Action of
the ancient Drama, when brought to the Perfection in which Aristotle found it,
was so strictly One, and the Fable so absolutely Simple, and almost totally
abhorrent from Incident, at least from what Mr. Mason calls Contrivance,
Refinement and Intrigue, that the Constitution of the Drama did not so properly
require, as suppose and imply a correspondent Unity of Time and Place. Nay,
usually we find among the ancient Greek Poets the entire Action of the Drama
was brought within the Compass of the Representation itself. And indeed if
exact Nature and strict Propriety are indispensably to be the Objects of the
Dramatic Poet's Attention upon all Occasions, this must be allowed to be the
most perfect Model of Tragedy; and consequently Aristotle himself seems to have
indulged the Tragic Muse too far, when in conformity with the sometime Practice
of the Greek Poets, He has prescribed a Day as the due and regular Boundary of
all Dramatic Action. For certainly a Day cannot really be comprised within the
Space of five Hours any more than a Year, or any precise Duration whatsoever.
The Truth is, Poetry was the Mother of Criticism, not Criticism of Poetry, and
accordingly this great Philosopher formed his simple Notions and Rules upon the
best Plan of the Drama then extant; but I cannot think it will by any Means
follow that those Rules are in all Points of perpetual and necessary
Obligation: For why was it not in itself as agreeable to Nature and Reason for
the Poets to admit Contrivance and Policy, Design and Intrigue into the
Constitution of the Fable, as it could possibly be to confine themselves to the
Representation of the most simple and uniform Action; especially as they hereby
improved, and heightened that Perplexity, and Distress, which are the great
Sources of Delight in Dramatic Entertainment? I say this Latitude of Design is
not in itself unreasonable or unnatural, because it is not to be dissembled that
the Liberty contended for would indeed be, as it has been, in the Hands of the
unskilful and injudicious, an Inlet to Confusion and Absurdity. However it will
not surely be denied that there is in Fact a very material Difference between
Incidents, and the Variety of Designs and Contrivances that occasion them, and
mere Bustle and Business; in his contempt of which Word Mr. Mason seems willing
to involve the whole System of Dramatic Intrigue. The general Theory I would
therefore advance is this, (for I would not be understood to assert it admits
of no Exception) that it is not barely the Privilege, but often even the Duty
of the Dramatic Poet to adapt himself to the Vicissitudes of Public Taste, and
to represent human Life, and human Actions as he finds them; and if in
Pursuance of this Design, he may think it expedient to make Choice of a Subject
of such a complicated Nature as cannot with Ease and Consistency be dispatched
within the statutable Limits of Time, and Place, I cannot see why we may not
indulge him with a proportionable Allowance of each, in order to prevent
infinitely greater Absurdities and Inconsistencies than that Allowance can
possibly produce, that is, those confused and precipitate Action. And all this
while the Extensiveness of the Design, provided it be executed with Judgment in
other Respects, deserves rather to be looked upon as an Excellence and an
Improvement upon the old Model, than to be placed to the Account either of the
Ignorance or the Inattention of the Writer; of which more hereafter.

There is that Sovereign Quality in Poetry (to use the Words of the ingenious
Author of the Notes on the Epistle to Augustus) which the Poet (Horace) in the
following passage, Ille per extensum funem mihi posse videtur
Ire Poeta, meum qui pectus inaniter angit,
Irritat, mulcet, falsis terroribus implet,
Ut Magnus; et modo me Thebis, modo ponit Athenis:
considers as a kind of magic virtue, which transports the Spectator into all
Places, and makes him, occasionally, assume all Persons. The Resemblance holds
also in this, that it is effects are instantaneous and irresistible. Rules, Art,
Decorum, all fall before it. It goes directly to the Heart, and gains all
purposes at once. Hence it is, that speaking of a real Genius, possessed of
this commanding Power, Horace in the Lines above quoted, Ille per extensum,
etc. pronounces him emphatically The Poet; it being more especially this
Property, which, of itself, discovers the true Dramatist, and secures the
success of his performance, not only without the assistance of Art, but in
direct Opposition to it is clearest Dictates. This Passage which I have quoted
verbatim (abating a few Expressions in it) exactly coincides with my sentiment
upon this Head; and the Application which the Author makes of it in Favor of
Corneille, may, I presume, be made with equal Propriety at least in Behalf of
our Shakespeare. -- I am sensible all this while that this great Prince and
Father of the English Stage is supposed by Mr. Mason to have shown a total
Disregard of all the Rules of the Drama, in Compliance merely with the Taste of
the Times. I must own, I could have been glad to have seen fewer Things
supposed upon this Subject. I will take the Liberty likewise to suppose that
this great Poet saw no legal or necessary Restraint upon the Force and
Impetuosity of his Genius with Regard to the Unities of Action, Time and Place;
that he considered the Laws relating to them as merely local and temporary,
well adapted indeed to the simple Genius of ancient Tragedy, but in themselves
and the Reason of Things dispensable upon the Supposition of a Dramatic Plan of
a more extensive and complicated Nature. His Opinion might be (like the current
one mentioned in Mr. Mason's second Letter) that the strict Adherence to the
Unities restrains the Genius of the Poet; by the Simplicity of it is Conduct
diminishes the Pathos of the Fable; and by the Admission of a continued Chorus
prevents that agreeable Embarrass, which awakens our Attention, and interests
our Passions. -- However, that the Nature of Dramatic Poetry will not only
admit of a more extensive Model than the Tragedies of the Greek Poets furnish
us with, but is also improveable by the same, if it cannot be proved, may at
least I think be inferred even from the Doctrine of Aristotle himself. This
great Critic, it is very well known, calls the Fable the Soul of Tragedy; with
a manifest Eye to which Expression, Mr. Dryden observes that Aristotle places
the Fable first, non quoad Dignitatem, sed quoad Fundamentum. And indeed we
need only refer the Reader to the simple Arguments of Aeschylus, and even of
Euripides and Sophocles for the most part too, to convince him that the Fable
upon the ancient Plan of the Drama cannot properly be said to be the Soul of
the Poem in any other Sense, than as it is the Subject of it. Nay, this is in a
great Measure the Case even of those ancient Tragedies which are of the implex
Kind, and, as such, esteemed most excellent by our Philosopher. One main
Argument used by him for the Priority of the Fable in the constituent Parts of
Tragedy is taken from the Consideration of the sudden Revolutions and
Discoveries, (the Sea Arist. Poet. Chap. 6.
(...) as he calls them) which distinguish the Tragedies we are speaking of from
those of the simplest Kind. These are the means, says he, by which Tragedy more
particularly captivates and engages ((...)) the Mind and Affections.

Now if this Doctrine be applied to the modern Drama, it seems to me not only
an Apology for, but in Effect a Recommendation of the Incidents and
Revolutions, which are infinitely more numerous upon the British Stage than
they were upon that of Athens, and are so offensive to squeamish Judgments;
unless it can be proved that these under the Direction of a good Judgment do
not contribute to, or rather constitute that Variety which Aristotle plainly
refers to in the Passage quoted; or that such Variety in modern Plays has not a
proportionable Influence on the Passions, upon which, as Mr. Mason rightly has
observed, it is the Business of the Tragic Muse "directly to strike." -- If
therefore the Fable be the Soul of Tragedy, I will venture to assert, there is
more Soul in a good modern Tragedy, than in the best ancient one; and that Mr.
Dryden might very properly, and therefore gravely call secret Intrigues the
Beauties of our modern Stage. Indeed that great Man in some occasional Remarks
he made on Mr. Rymer's Reflections on the Tragedies of Fletcher, etc. makes no
scruple to give the Preference to our English Poets before the Ancients under
this very Article of Enquiry: Next show, says he, in what Ancient Tragedy was
deficient; for Example, in the Narrowness of it is Plots, and Fewness of
Persons, and try whether that be not a Fault in the Greek Poets; and whether
their Excellency was so great, when the Variety was visibly so little; or
whether what they did was not very easy to be done.

In Opposition to this the following Words of the ingenious Author of the Notes
etc. already referred to, may possibly be urged. An Unity, (says he, speaking
of the two Dramas) and even Simplicity in the Conduct of the Fable is a
Perfection in each. For the Course of the Affections is diverted and weakened
by the Intervention of what we call a double Plot; and even by a Multiplicity
of subordinate Events, though tending to a common End; and, of Persons, though
all of them, some Way, concerned in promoting it. The like Consideration shows
the Observance of this Rule to be essential in just Comedy. For when the
Attention is split on so many interfering Objects, we are not at leisure to
observe, nor do we fully enter into the Truth of Representation in any of them;
the Sense of Humor, as of the Pathos, depending very much on the continued and
undiverted Operation of it is Object upon us. But in answer to this, I will
venture to assert in my Turn, that the Intervention of what we call a
Double-Plot, a competent Number (not Multiplicity) of subordinate Events
tending to a common End, and of Persons all of them some way concerned in
promoting it, do not weaken, but ease and relieve the Course of the Affections;
and also, that in Comedy, the Attention is really quickened even by being split
on so many interfering Objects; -- that different and opposite Characters set
off and illustrate each other; -- and that we are enabled by a proper Variety
of Personages more precisely to observe and fully to enter into The Truth of
Representation in all of them: And consequently that a Comedy with a
Double-Plot artfully conducted, and filled judiciously, not crammed with
Incidents and Intrigue, in which the several Persons of the Drama have room to
exercise, and display themselves, attains it is End, which is the Rotation of
Characters, and their specific Differences, (as this Author well observes) more
effectually, than the simple, and contracted Comedy of the Ancients; but this
Matter I have handled more at large See Lectures.
elsewhere, and in the mean time let these respective Opinions be left to the
Decision of Fact and Experience. -- To return to Mr. Mason.

I should be loath indeed to see Incidents, Bustle, and Business supply the
Place of Simplicity, Nature and Pathos. which, it is not to be denied, is the
Case in some modern Performances. But that the former are likewise very
consistent with the latter, and that such Consistency and Union is one great
Point of Dramatic Composition, as calculated for the rational Entertainment of
an Audience, may be exemplified in many illustrious Instances; particularly in
the Tragedies of Shakespeare. It is true this inimitable Poet, is not so greatly
remarkable for Depth of Plot and Intricacy of Contrivance, as for the
Historical Continuation of his Design, (which, by the way, is indeed carried to
an unreasonable Length in some of his Plays) but however, as such Historical
Continuation necessarily implies a great Variety of Incidents and Revolutions,
it is fairly reducible to the same Head of Disquisition. Shakespeare indeed, for
the most part, formed his Dramatic Plans from History, or Romance, and
therefore has no extraordinary Claim to the Glory of Invention, either as to
the Subject of his Tragedies, or the Conduct of his Plots. His Excellencies,
for the most part, are purely Poetical. But this is far from being the Case of
all our Dramatic Writers. The Groundwork of the greatest part of our English
Tragedies is indeed Historical; but the Superstructure is their own. The whole
Business of Plot, Intrigue, and Contrivance, is generally the Work of the
Poets; and a Work, when executed with Art and Judgment, that shows them to be
superior at least to their Forefathers of Greece in the ample Field of
Invention (the first Point in Poetry): and therefore I should think some of Mr.
Mason's Expressions, relating to the kind Assistance of the Violin to the
Distress of the Hero or the Poet on the British Stage, may in some measure be
retorted upon himself, and those whose Cause he espouses. For though an
intermediate Space between the Acts may be requisite for the Purposes of the
Modern Drama, and even to save Appearances of the Probability of the Design,
yet I can by no means admit these prudential Pauses to be Proofs in themselves
of the Distress or Barrenness of the Writer. Methinks to the Relief of these,
the ancient Chorus seems more peculiarly adapted, when the Drama, by reason of
the Scantiness, or if you please Simplicity of it is Matter, and the Narrowness
of it is Plots, stood in absolute Need of such seasonable and friendly
Interposition: But to the Chorus I am to pay my Compliments again by and by. --

It should be observed here, I am supposing all this while that,
notwithstanding the Extensiveness of Design in modern Tragedies, a due, and
even scrupulous Regard is to be had to Consistency and Uniformity of Plot and
Action; That there is to be but one grand central Point as it were, in which
the several Underplots, Incidents, Turns, and Vicissitudes of the Drama are
finally to terminate; and that though the great Business of the Poet under this
Article be to perplex and embarrass his Audience, and to play with their
Passions at pleasure, yet he is to take Care that the Unravelling of the whole,
and the several Parts, be easy and natural, and the Labyrinths of his Plots
such as, according to Mr. Addison's Expression upon another Occasion, may be
justly deemed a regular Confusion. If proper Care and Caution be taken as to
these particulars, I confess I am apt to look upon the Transgression of the
Letter of the old Laws of Tragedy as Offenses rather against the Custom and
Usage of Antiquity, than the Dictates of Reason and Nature; and, as great a
Veneration as I have for the ancient Poets, cannot possibly think I am
maintaining an Argument to the prejudice of their real Merit, by endeavoring
to assert the Liberty of modern Poets, and to rescue the Drama from Aristotle's
See Mr. Mason's Third Letter.
Magna Charta of Restraint.

To speak freely, I must own farther, I cannot subscribe to a Theory that
condemns at one Dash almost every Compliance with Public Taste, and the Genius
of a People, as mere Complaisance and Servility: I believe a Greek Poet now
alive would adapt himself to the Taste of the Times in more Instances than Mr.
Mason would allow; and that these have been occasionally more or less consulted
and indulged by all Poets in all Ages. Not that I am of Mr. Southern's Opinion
(See his Preface to the Fatal Marriage) that every reasonable Man will, and
ought to govern in the Pleasures he pays for; for in such Case Hamlet must walk
off the Stage to make room for Harlequin. -- I would neither servilely indulge
Public Taste, nor yet self-sufficiently despise it. -- I am willing upon this
Occasion once more to shelter myself under the Authority of Dryden.

One reason of that Success (says he in the above cited Remarks) is in my
Opinion this, that Shakespeare and Fletcher have written to the Genius of the
Age and Nation in which they lived: For though Nature, as he (Mr. Rymer)
objects, is the same in all Places, and Reason too the same; yet the Climate,
the Age, the Dispositions of the People to whom a Poet writes, may be so
different, that what pleased the Greeks, would not satisfy an English Audience.

And if they proceeded upon a Foundation of truer Reason to please the
Athenians, than Shakespeare and Fletcher to please the English, it only shows
that the Athenians were a more judicious People: But the Poet's Business is
certainly to please the Audience.

Whether our English Audience have been pleased hitherto with Acorns, as he
calls it, or with Bread, is the next Question; that is, whether the Means which
Shakespeare and Fletcher have used in their Plays to raise those Passions
before-named, be better applied to the Ends by the Greek Poets, than by them;
and perhaps we shall not grant him this wholly. Let it be yielded, that a
Writer is not to run down with the Stream, or to please the People by their own
usual Methods, but rather to ^^form form their Judgments; it still remains to
be proved, that our Theater needs this total Reformation. -- The Faults which
he h^s found in their Designs, are rather wittily aggravated in many Places,
than reasonably urged; and as much may be returned on the Greeks, by one who
were as witty as himelf:

Mr. Dryden is here compa^ng the Ancients with the Moderns, in regard to the
Conduct and Command of the two great Tragical Passions, Pity and Terror, and
the Comparison concludes to the Advantage of the latter.

A little farther he proceeds thus, To conclude thereore: if the Plays of the
Ancients are more correctly plotted, ours are more beautifully written; and if
we can raise Passions as high on worse Foundations, it shows our Genius in
Tragedy is greater, for in all other Parts of it, the English have manifestly
excelled them.

For the Fable itself, it is in the English more adorned with Episodes, and
larger than in the Greek Poets, consequently more diverting; for if the Action
be but one, and that plain, without any Counterturn of Design or Episode, (i.
e.) Under-plot, how can it be so pleasing as that of the English, which have
both Underplot, and a turned Design, which keeps the Audience in Expectation of
the Catastrophe? w^ereas in the Greek Poets, we see through the who^^ Design at
first. I do lot use this as an accurate Piece of Criticism, nor would be
understood to oppose the Authority of Mr. Dryden, to the Ipse dixit of
Aristotle in general, who has certainly a right to be heard first, in critical
as well as philosophical Matters, with a proportionable Consideration of the
Age he lived in: The only Point in Debate is, whether he can be supposed in the
Nature of Things, from the clear Idea he had formed of the Greek Drama, to be
qualified to give Poetical Laws to all Posterity. -- Public Taste, it is
probable, (as Mr. Dryden intimates) ^^ries in different Countries, according to
the Nature of the Climate, and the Constitution of the People: However, there
are some certain, fixed, and acknowledged Principles of Good Sense, Nature and
Reason, that are, as Mr. Rymer observes, equally and universally, in all Ages
and Nations, at least all civilized ones, the same: I believe there has been
hardly any Age so illiterate, whimsical, or corrupted in this Sense, as to
explode these standing Principles; such for Instance, among many others, are
the following: That the Drama is to be the true Image and Representation of
Nature: That this Representation can only be exhibited under an infinite
Variety of Actions, Designs, Characters, Manners, Sentiments and Expressions:
That with regard to all, and each of these, Propriety, Consistency, and
Probability are most exactly to be observed: That the Motives to all Actions,
the Springs of all Passions, the Grounds of all Prejudices, the Peculiarities
of all Tempers, have one common Foundation, and are productive of their
correspondent Effects, in all Times and Places. -- The Knowledge of these Things
is the Knowledge of Nature, in which the great Arcana of all Poetry, and
particularly Dramatic, are reposited. To these, therefore, it is the Dramatic
Poets Care most heedfully to attend; and to these he may attend, in Fact, very
consistently, with a Disregard of the Laws of the old Drama, as might be
instanced in many of our best Modern Plays, and in almost all of Shakespeare's.
-- It is, indeed, nothing but this Attention that has so eminently raised and
preserved the Reputation of these latter, notwithstanding the Poet's absolute
Neglect, or rather Defiance of the great Unities contended for as essential to
the Drama. And it is as certain, that where this Attention is wanting, either
through Ignorance or Carelessness, the most regular Observance of these Unities
will be found utterly insufficient for the true Purposes of Stage-Poetry.

For these, and the like Reasons, I think one may venture to conclude, that the
Practice of the Ancients is by no means a necessary Standard of Dramatic
writing, and that the Laws relating to the several Unities of Action, Time, and
Place, though they do indeed constitute a particular Form, or Species of the
Drama, (and we will grant the most exact too) yet are by no means essential to
the Nature of it. Whatever is so, cannot be violated or infringed without
Contradiction to the common Judgment of Mankind, and disgusting at least, the
more rational Part of an Audience. And accordingly every Defect in the
Particulars abovementioned, is always received with proportionable Marks of
Disapprobation. But the Case is quite different, in respect of the Liberties
Shakespeare has taken, which therefore, I can never think absurd or unnatural in
themselves. And I am the more confirmed in this Opinion, because Johnson,
Fletcher, and many others, who were confessedly acquainted with the Genius of
ancient Tragedy, and, generally speaking, not only affected Art and Regularity
in their Writings, but even depended principally upon these for the Success of
them, did nevertheless, on many Occasions, hold themselves free from the
Obligation of the Laws at present in Question.

But herein, our modern Refiners will say they judged wrong; and as to
Shakespeare, if he has escaped the Severity of Censure upon this Head, it must
be ascribed wholly to that Complaisance, which every Generation has thought due
to his Excellencies in the higher Beauties of Poetry. -- Now this Answer, (and
something to this Effect must be the Answer) does itself suppose, that the most
punctual Observance of the old Laws, has no Connection with the great Beauties
of Poetry, but is only at best the mechanical Part of the Drama: However, it is
presumed that the great Name of Shakespeare, scorns to be protected by the
Complaisance of his Countrymen; and that the Liberties he has taken, are very
far from being indefensible. -- For is it more improper and irrational, or does
it require less Force of of Genius, and Knowledge of Nature, to trace as it were
a Passion from it is first Rise, through it is Progress, and to it is final Issue,
as that of Jealousy in Othello, or of Ambition in Macbeth, than to represent it
only at a stated Period, and at a particular Crisis? Or, if the Poet thinks
proper to shift the Scene from a Palace to a Heath, or from Venice to Cyprus,
is it at all more inconvenient or impossible for his Audience to attend him,
than it was to give him the Meeting, and suppose themselves in the Place where
he laid his first Scene? It does not at all appear to me, that a greater Degree
of implicit Faith is required in one Instance than in the other: For he may
with equal Probability do both, UT MAGUS, as has been hinted above, and he can
do neither but in Quality of the same. Times and Places are in a great Measure
at the Command of a Genius; and the Argument drawn from the absolute
Unnaturalness of every Breach of exact and precise Unity with regard to them,
if it proves any Thing, proves too much; it will prove the Unnaturalness of the
whole Dramatic Apparatus; it will demonstrate the Impossibility of exhibiting
Woods, Fields, Castles, and Towns, in a single Room, and the Absurdity of
giving an Ear to a Company of Fiddlers, before or after the Solemnity of a
Council, or the Tumult of a Battle. In short, it seems to me a most ridiculous
Hypercriticism, to object to Improprieties which are more or less inseparable
from the Constitution of the Drama, and to talk of Inconsistencies and
Impossibilities, where all is confessedly a Delusion. If the Question indeed
were, whether of the two be the more artificial Model of Tragedy, that of the
Ancients, or the Moderns, I would make no Scruple to give up the Argument: But
a regular and exact Model is one Thing, and an excellent Play is another; it is
one Thing to allow a reasonable Latitude to a great Genius, and another to
prescribe a Plan to a common Poet.

Were the ancient Greek Tragedians defective then in Point of Genius, it will
be asked? Very far from it. -- However, I will venture to assert, that the
Simplicity, (I had almost said Poverty) of their Fables, is by no means their
striking Beauty; that these would have appeared to greater Advantage, had they
taken greater Liberties; that neither Nature nor Reason restrained them to the
precise Observation of the three Unities, and that the Custom of Antiquity in
this Case, under the Abilities of a great Master, would (to use the Words of
Shakespeare) be more frequently honored in the Breach, than the Observance.

But what if, after all, some Precedents even from Antiquity itself, will in a
certain Measure warrant the Non-observance of the great Rules in Dispute?
Euripides and Sophocles, who confessedly improved the more simple Plan of their
Predecessor Aeschylus, and are supposed to have brought the Drama to it is State
of Perfection, do not superstitiously, and without Exception, adhere to their
own general System: Witness first, the Hecuba of Euripides; in which there are
apparently two distinct, and almost unconnected Actions; at least, out of the
two great Incidents of that Tragedy, two distinct Actions might have been
plan'd; for either the Death of Polixena, or the Destruction of Polymnestor,
might, and strictly speaking ought, to have been the simple Subject of that
Drama. If it be said that both these Actions (or Incidents) were no more than
were sufficient or necessary to exemplify the Distresses of Hecuba, and to
illustrate the Character of that unhappy Princess, this is saying, in effect,
what we have already said, in Defense of the complicated Plan of modern
Dramatists; and so, Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim.


Again, the Ajax of Sophocles ought to have ended with it is natural
Catastrophe, the Death of this Hero; instead of which another Action, properly
speaking, commences, arising from the violent Contest between Teucer and
Agamemnon concerning the forementioned Hero's Right of Burial; a Contest,
which, if the Poet in the present Case had studied, or even regarded absolute
Simplicity and Uniformity, he should have reserved for the Groundwork of
another Tragedy. -- And further the Trachiniae of the same excellent Author is
manifestly defective in Point of Unity of Time; of which much more must
naturally be supposed to have lapsed between the Departure of Hyllus to inquire
after his Father, and his Return to Trachin than the Letter of the Dramatic Law
allowed him. -- These Defects and Irregularities I have never seen taken Notice
of, and much less objected to these justly admired Writers. And though we could
bring no other Examples to the same Purpose than the above cited, or however
none so obvious as these, yet it is apprehended a single Instance of this Nature
is of very considerable Weight and Consequence in the present Controversy; and
will warrant us in determining that the strict Laws of the Drama were not of
indispensable Obligation, even in the Judgment of the Ancients themselves. --
Indeed if they are, the Merit of a Poet should be tried chiefly at least by
them; and therefore when Mr. Mason tells us that Shakespeare ought, for his
other Virtues, to be exempted from common Rules, he is unjustifiably candid and
indulgent to him; for sure he ought by no Means to be exempted, if such Rules
are founded in the indispensable Laws and first Principles of Nature and good
Sense. If he is fundamentally and essentially ridiculous, a thousand inferior
Beauties will not excuse him. Common Rules are therefore upon certain important
Considerations dispensable; and if so, Shakespeare's Beauties do not so properly
excuse, as acquit him.

If the judicious Reader will apply here, by the Way, some of the foregoing
Remarks to the Case of Tragi-Comedy, he will be able perhaps to account not
only for the Toleration, but also gracious Reception of so motley a Production
upon the English Stage. For though Shakespeare, with his Contemporaries and many
Successors, did in such Pieces undeniably humor the public Taste to their own
Discredit, yet it is to be observed, that the grand Arcana of Nature above
intimated might be scrupulously attended to even in this heterogeneous
Composition; and accordingly when the Tragic and Comic Representation was each
excellent in it is Kind, it is no Wonder that the Bulk of an Audience should
overlook the manifest Impropriety of the Coalition, or that the more judicious
Part should forgive it for the Sake of the fundamental and essential
Excellencies of the respective Actions and Representations. It is plainly for
this Reason that the best Tragi-Comedies of Shakespeare and others are received
with general Applause at this very Day; the Ground of Complaint against such
Tragic and Comic Union being really not so much that it offends the Judgment,
as that it improperly divides the Attention. Two separate Plots, and distinct
Actions do this to a ridiculous Degree; but in one and the same Action absolute
Uniformity is not essential either to the Tragic or Comic Drama. For though the
Pathos be the Characteristic of Tragedy, and Humor of Comedy, as well ancient
as modern, yet the former will admit of Characters of Pleasantry under certain
Regulations, and the latter is frequently known to abound with Circumstances of
very affecting, though domestic Distress; of which many Instances might, if need
were, be on both sides produced, in the several Dramas both of Ancients and
Moderns. Nor does such occasional and moderate Reciprocation confound or
destroy the different Genius, Nature, and End, of the two Species. And it was
probably owing to some injudicious Writer's Misapplication of this Truth, and
his drawing undue and false Consequences from it, and even in his own
Imagination improving it, that either the Name, or the Constitution of
Tragi-Comedy did ever subsist. For the Reasons why Plautus calls his Amphitrion
a Tragi-Comedy, are of a Nature entirely different from this. However, the
great Objection to this Form of Dramatic Composition is certainly, as has been
said, that it unsuitably divides the Attention, not that it lessens it, or by
exciting many different Passions in the same Space of Time checks the Force of
any single one. That the Attention in a very uniform and regular Play, may be
divided without being lessened, we have already observed; and indeed, if this
were not the Case, absolute Uniformity and Simplicity must be really essential
to the two Species of the Drama, and every reciprocal Participation will be
proportionably, to the Degree of it, absurd. But to assert this, would be
talking against Reason, Experience, and the not uncommon Practice of the best
Poets. Is any Man less moved by the Delicacy and Tenderness of Lord Townley,
upon his Separation from his Wife, on Account of the Mirth that was before
excited in him, by the ridiculous Ignorance, and Rusticity of Sir Francis
Wronghead? Do we less interest ourselves in the Fate of the unhappy Indiana,
because we were diverted by the coxcombical Pertness of Mr. Thomas? Should we
be more affected by the pathetical Complaints of Romeo, if they were not
contrasted in the Buffoonery of Mercutio? Or, to refer the Reader to a Play or
two written directly upon the Tragicomic Plan, does the iniquitous Drollery of
the Spanish Friar abate our Concern for the Distresses of Torrismond and
Leonora? Or, do the comical Rhodomontades, and Humors of Falstaff and his
Associates, take off our Attention from the Bravery of Prince Henry or Hotspur,
etc. etc. at the Battle of Shrewsbury. -- I am very far from contending for
this Mixture, not of opposite, but indeed contradictory Characters, in the same
Drama, and much less for the Form of Tragi-Comedy itself: Proper and due
Uniformity admits of sufficient Variety, and though it be not essential to the
Drama, is no doubt a great Beauty in it: The most popular of the Plays I have
mentioned, are not the better for their Medley of Characters; but all this
while, let the Fault or Impropriety be placed in a fair Light, and ascribed to
it is true Cause, which is the real, though nice Connection, between the Genius
of Tragedy, and that of Comedy, and the extreme Difficulty of precisely
determining how far, or in what Degrees and Proportions the one may assume the
Qualities and Properties of the other.

But to return to my Subject: -- The simple Constitution of the ancient Drama,
has indeed some Advantages over the more complicated one of succeeding Ages,
but still such as are abundantly more than balanced by those of the latter.
The frequent shifting of Scenes, for Instance, though it does not offend the
Judgment, is yet disgusting to the Eye of the Spectator, and so far the
Continuation of one and the same Scene, is a peculiar Beauty, and Propriety.
But all this while, to this Beauty and local Propriety, many other more
important Points of Probability are too often sacrificed. This is, more or
less, I believe, the Case of all strictly uniform Tragedies and Comedies, but
evidently, at least of some of our best English Comedies that have been written
on the old Dramatic Plan; in which, notwithstanding the Unity of Action, so
much Business is transacted, so much Intrigue carried on, by so many different
Personages, in one single Spot of Ground, as is utterly incredible; in which
Case the Poet really offends against Reason, Nature, and good Sense, purely to
save the Appearance of doing so: Indeed if the Unities are essential to the
Drama, the utmost Simplicity will of Course be a Perfection in it; and
consequently many of the most regular Compositions of our Comic Poets (as the
Way of the World, and the Double Dealer of Congreve) will be found to be
infinitely their worst Productions: So ambitious have some been of improving
the Model of the ancient Drama, and yet so cautious at the same Time of taking
such Liberties as were absolutely necessary for those Improvements.

After all, Discretion is to be a general Rule even in the Use of Liberty. I
would neither fetter the Dramatic Muse, nor yet let her run wild; Deviations
from the strict Laws of Antiquity should be made not affectedly and at random,
but with a View to Beauties of a higher Nature; not for the Ease of the Poet,
but to the Advantage of the Poem. I would not vindicate Shakespeare himself in
every Instance of his Transgression. To sum up all that need be said upon this
Point in a few Words; the old Laws of Aristotle are in my Opinion very proper
Regulations and Restraints for an indifferent Poet, but ought not to be the
Shackles of a good one.

The other great Point of Difference between the ancient and modern Drama, is
the Disuse of the Chorus in the latter; which yet Mr. Mason is "willing to
think essential to the Tragic Drama." Now admitting the Theory of Aristotle and
Mr. Mason to be not only a regular, but also necessary Standard of Dramatic
Writings, with Respect to the Unities of Action, Time and Place, the Chorus,
though not essential to the Drama, will indeed as Mr. Mason observes lay a
proper and necessary Restraint upon the Poet. But if these Unities themselves
are far from being essential to the Drama, as we have endeavored to make it
appear, the Use of the Chorus is so far at least superseded. -- The Chorus was
indeed, as I have before observed, not only a constituent Part of, but even a
Convenience to the ancient Tragedy. If I might be excused the Indelicacy of the
Expression for the Significancy of the Sentiment, I would say, let a Tragedy of
Aeschylus be gutted of it is Chorus, and you leave it little better than a
Skeleton.

To proceed; upon the simple Plan of Antiquity the Chorus introduced, it is
true, an agreeable Variety into the Drama, and was no doubt both useful and
ornamental to it, as it is peculiar Province had more immediate Reference to the
great Ends of all Poetry, prodesse and delectare. But after all, if these great
Ends are better, or even as well answered without the Chorus; and if these Ends
are not obstructed by the Admission of Design, Contrivance and Intrigue into
the Fable, but even promoted by it under the Conduct of a masterly Hand, in
this Case, I say, it is not to be denied but the Chorus of the Ancients has
given Place to it is Betters. -- It is true Mr. Mason has very positively
asserted (for I think he has by no Means sufficiently proved) in Behalf of the
old Chorus, that (to lay no Stress upon subordinate Advantages) it augmented
the Pathetic, that it afforded a graceful, and natural Resource to the
Embellishments of picturesque Description, sublime Allegory, and whatever else
comes under the Denomination of pure Poetry; and lastly, which is most
material, that it was the properest Vehicle to convey moral Reflections with
Grace and Propriety. For these Reasons, which respect both the Poet and the
Audience, he judges the Disuse of the Chorus to be an irreparable Loss to the
modern Stage. Let us briefly then review what this Gentleman has said upon each
of these Articles.

Now with Regard to the first he offers us the Authority of a Frenchman. If you
ask me (says he) how it augmented the Pathetic, I cannot give you a better
Answer than the Abbe Vatry has done in his Dissertation on the Subject
published in the Memoirs de l' Acad. des Inser. etc. It affected this (says he)
both in it is Odes and Dialogue. The wonderful Power of Music and the Dance is
universally allowed. And, as these were always Accompaniments to the Odes,
there is no Doubt but they contributed greatly to move the Passions. It was
necessary that there should be Odes or Interludes; but it was also necessary,
that these Interludes should not suffer the Minds of the Audience to cool, but,
on the contrary, should support and fortify those Passions, which the previous
Scenes had already excited. Nothing imaginable could produce this Effect
better, than the choral Songs and Dances, which filled the Mind with Ideas
corresponding to the Subject, and never failed to add new Force to the
Sentiments of the principal Personages. In the Dialogue also, the Chorus served
to move the Passions by showing to the Spectators other Spectators strongly
affected by the Action. A Spectacle of such a Kind as is fitted to excite in us
the Passions of Terror and Pity, will not of itself so strongly affect us, as
when we see others also affected by it. The Painters have generally understood
this Secret, and have had Recourse to an Expedient similar to that of the
Chorus of the Poets. Not content with the simple Representation of an
historical Event, they have also added Groupes of assistant Figures, and
expressed in their Faces the different Passions, they would have their Picture
excite. Nay they sometimes inlist into their Service even irrational Animals.
In the Slaughter of the Innocents, LE BRUN was not satisfied with expressing
all the Horror, of which the Subject is naturally capable; he has also painted
two Horses with their Hair standing on End, and starting back, as afraid to
trample upon the bleeding Infants. This is an Artifice which has often been
employed, and which has always succeeded. A good Poet should do the same; and
Iphigenia should not be suffered to appear on the Theater, without being
accompanied with Persons capable of feeling her Misfortunes.

I have transcribed the whole Passage, and cannot help nothing in the first
Place, a very extraordinary Inaccuracy in this refined Portion of Criticism.
For sure the abovementioned Horses, with their "Hair standing on End," and
"starting back," etc. did greatly add to the Horror of this famous Piece,
which yet before had, it seems, all the Horror expressed in it, of which the
Subject was naturally capable; or, if they did not augment this Horror, it
will be difficult methinks to to tell what Business they had there. But to be
serious:

The wonderful Power of Music is universally allowed; and Music is by no Means
excluded from the modern Stage. Nay, I venture to say, the modern Drama has
Recourse to it more effectually, though less frequently, than the old Drama
had; as we are more affected by it is occasional and unexpected Graces and
Assistances, than we should be by it is stated and periodical Interposition. --
For the Dance, I own I am at a Loss to comprehend how it could contribute
greatly to move the Passions; I mean the Passions proper for Tragedy: I do not
pretend to ascertain the Nature and Method of the ancient Stage-Dancing; but
such has been the Power of the Dance in later Times, that the Tragic Muse, who
is a very grave Matron, has, I believe, no Reason to lament her dancing Days
are over. Admitting therefore at present the Propriety and Efficacy of the
Choral Songs, I cannot conceive how any Kind of Dance should support and
fortify those Passions, which the previous Scenes had excited, or fill the Mind
with Ideas corresponding to the Subject, and never fail to add new Force to the
Sentiments of the principal Personages. Nor farther can I see any Thing even in
the Songs, or Odes, which had so peculiar a Tendency to produce these Effects,
that nothing imaginable could do it as well; for though these might answer this
Purpose very sufficiently, yet if they were not necessary for it, they cannot
be contended for as essential to the Drama, and must consequently be considered
only, as we have before observed, in the Light of an ancient Convenience. --
Now I apprehend the Minds of the Audience are in no Danger of cooling under the
present System of the Drama, and that the Music between the Acts may be adapted
to the Purposes forenamed, of supporting and fortifying the Passions as much
as the old Chorus could be. Without depreciating therefore the real Use and
Design of the Chorus, we only say we can do in many Respects better, and even
in this as well without it.

But farther it seems, In the Dialogue also, the Chorus served to move the
Passions, by showing to the Spectators, other Spectators strongly affected by
the Action. For, a Spectacle of such a Kind as is fitted to excite in us the
Passions of Terror, and Pity, will not of itself so strongly affect us, as
when we see others also affected by it. Admitting the Truth of which Assertion,
I do not see what is to be inferred from it to the Advantage of the ancient
Chorus. For does not the modern Drama move the Passions (as indeed does the
ancient exclusive of it is Chorus) by showing to the Spectators other Persons
(not mere Spectators, but Persons more interested in the Action) strongly
affected by the Events of the Tragedy? The Intervention therefore of
Spectators, as such, upon the Stage is with Respect to this Purpose superfluous
and insignificant, except it can be demonstrated that the Passions of Terror
and Pity, or any other are (if I may be allowed the Expression) more powerfully
excited at the second Rebound. -- Let common Experience at once illustrate and
determine this Matter. -- Supposing half a dozen indifferent Persons admitted
to a Spectacle of Terror or Distress in real Life, for Instance that of a
dying Man taking Leave of his Wife, his Mistress, or his Friend; would not such
a Spectacle immediately raise suitable Emotions in all of them, or would each
first consult the Passions of his next Neighbor in order to learn what Effect
this Spectacle ought to have upon himself? These Questions require no Answer;
and therefore as the Drama is so lively a Representation of real Life, they may
plainly be applied to any Case of Misery or Horror exhibited upon the Stage.
-- For this Reason also it is, that the Illustration of the Matter before us by
the Expedients of the Painters is, I apprehend, (with Deference to the
ingenious Abbe as Mr. Mason calls him) entirely foreign to the present Purpose.
The Painters have very wisely had Recourse to such Expedients as are mentioned
in the above-quoted Criticism, because, after all, their Art is but Painting
still, and properly speaking describes the Passions, more than it excites them;
but the Drama, or rather the Actor in the Drama, realizes what he represents.
He must be a very insensible Spectator, who thinks at all of the Poet or the
Player, when Mr. Garrick is personating a Richard, a Macbeth, or a Lear. The
Poet in short has not the same Occasion for such Artifices and Expedients as
the Painter has. Let Iphigenia appear on the Theater, and behave as she ought
to do, and I will be answerable for it, the Audience will be Persons capable of
feeling her Misfortunes.

But again, by rejecting the Chorus Mr. Mason tells us the true Poet has lost a
graceful and natural Resource to the Embellishments of Picturesque Description,
sublime Allegory, and whatever else comes under the Denomination of pure
Poetry. To which I take Leave to reply, That what the Poet has lost hereby,
Tragedy has gained; for if Mr. Mason's own Theory be just, the Tragic Muse (as
we have before observed from him) strikes directly upon the Passions of the
Audience; which I should be glad to know how Picturesque Description (I mean
such as this Gentleman has favored us with) sublime Allegory, and Poetry in
the Abstract, or, if you please, pure Poetry can do. Mr. Mason says, the Lyric
Muse addresses herself to the Imagination of a Reader or Hearer; and
accordingly few Men have a Strength of Imagination capable of pursuing the
Flights of Pindar; and still fewer, I will venture to add, those of Mr. Mason
in this Dramatic Poem. I am very far from meaning to decry this ingenious
Author's peculiar Talent in loco; but I fear in the present Case, while he
affects to defend the Cause of the old Chorus, his real Design was to introduce
a new one. For, the Name excepted, I can discern little or nothing in the Odes
of Mr. Mason similar to those of the ancient Chorus; that poetical Flow of
tender Commiseration, of religious Supplication, or of virtuous Triumph, of
which it principally consisted, had none of the long-spun Allegory, and aerial
Imagery with which these Dramatic Sonnets of Mr. Mason abound. In Truth it is
to be wished that this professed Admirer, and Imitator of genuine Nature, and
ancient Simplicity in the Structure of his Fable, had paid a little more Regard
to them in his Diction throughout this whole Poem, and particularly in the
Style of the Choral Compositions under present Consideration. It Is Pity indeed
an Author so sober and chaste in his whole Economy, should be so remarkably
extravagant and loose in his Language.

In the Hymn to the Morning a great deal seems to be unfolded, but little
discovered.

Away, ye Elves, away:
Shrink at ambrosial Morning's living Ray;
That living Ray, whose Power benign
Unfolds the Scene of Glory to our Eye,
Where, throned in artless Majesty,
The Cherub Beauty sits on Nature's rustic Shrine.
p. 4. Now I apprehend it would pose the most able Linguist to translate these
Lines, or the most dextrous Painter to give us a Portrait of this angelical
Personage.

Charity has ever been ranked with the first of moral Virtues; but Mr. Mason
not only personifies and deifies it, but likewise makes it a Geometrician, and
a Musician into the Bargain.

Ah! follow still the soft-ey'd Deity;
For know, each Path she draws,
Along the Plain of Life,
Meets at the central Dome of social Joy.
Again,

Humanity! thy awful Strain
Shall ever meet our Ear
Sonorous, sweet, and clear.
And as amid the sprightly-swelling Train
Of dulcet Notes, that breath
From Flute or Lyre,
The deep Base rolls it is manly Melody,
Guiding the tuneful Choir;
So thou, Humanity, shall lead along
The accordant Passions in their moral Song,
And give our mental Concert truest Harmony.
Page 12.
-- This Passage is I confess very melodious in Point of Numbers; it is indeed
like Music itself; for methinks it sounds well, and says nothing. --

In another Ode we have several picturesque Images of the Goddess CONTENT,
presented to us; now she sits upon a Bank, and listens to a Linnet.

Sweet Bird! like thine our Lay shall flow,
Nor gayly loud, nor sadly slow;
For to thy Note sedate, and clear,
CONTENT still lends a listening Ear,
-- Then she is gone to sup with a Hermit, and is amazingly calm and composed,
though she seems every Minute in danger of being drowned, or knocked on the Head.

Perhaps to some lone Cave the Rover flies,
Where lulled in pious Peace the Hermit lies.
For, scorning often the gorgeous Hall,
Where Banners wave with blazoned Gold,
There will the meek-ey'd Nymph delight to call,
And with the solemn Seer high converse hold.
There, Goddess, on the shaggy Mound,
Where tumbling Torrents roar around,
Where pendent Mountains over your Head
Stretch their formidable Shade,
You listen; while the holy Seer
Slowly chaunts his Vespers clear:
Or of his sparing Mess partake,
The sav'ry Pulse, the wheaten Cake,
The Bev'rage cool of limpid Rill. p. 18. 19.
-- In my humble Opinion these, and the two following Odes to Constancy and
Truth are much more calculated to exercise a Metaphysical Head, than make any
Impressions upon a sensible Heart: And after all, the Beauties of such Ideal
Poetry as this, though they may amuse in the Closet, must surely be lost upon the
Stage. To pass by the Ode to CONSTANCY, let us take a short View of TRUTH in
all her Glory.

-- "No Son of Light
Darts swiftly from his heavenly Height,
No Train of radiant Saints descend.
Mortals, in vain ye hope to find,
If Guilt, if Fraud has stained your Mind,
Or Saint to hear, or Angel to defend.
So Truth proclaims. I hear the sacred Sound
Burst from the Center of her burning Throne;
Where aye she sits with star-wreath'd Luster crowned,
A bright Sun clasps her adamantine Zone." p. 51.
-- It is wonderful to observe how far a true Poetic Fancy lifts a Genius above
all Prosaic Conception. Most of us profess ourselves Admirers of the Naked
Truth; but Mr. Mason has clothed her more splendidly than ever Solomon was;
though I think he has given her rather too fine a Buckle for so clumsy a Girdle.

It is indeed well observed by Mr. Pope, that He who would take Boldness from
Poetry, must leave Dullness in the room of it; and I am very sensible that no
Species of Poetry is allowed greater Liberties than the Ode;

SED NON UT PLACIDIS COEUNT IMMITIA, andC. Boldness is the Medium between
Dullness and Temerity; the Muse has no more Business above the Clouds, than she
has under the Ground; and Mr. Mason, though he never creeps, is certainly a
High-Flyer. The extravagant Thoughts, the far-fetched Allusions, and the
unconnected Ideas in most of these Odes are a Proof of it. -- In truth the Heat
of Imagination is apt to transport an Author into false Conclusions, and make
him believe He writes Poetry, because He does not write Prose.

But farther, I can by no Means agree with Mr. Mason that if we had a Tragedy
of Shakespeare's formed on the Greek Model, we should find in it more frequent,
if not nobler Instances of the high Poetical Capacity, than in any single
Composition he has left us. This Author thinks, we have a Proof of this in
those parts of his Historical Plays, which are called Chorus's, and written in
the common Dialogue Meter. Our Imagination (continues he) will easily conceive,
how fine an Ode the Description of the Night, preceding the Battle of
Agincourt, would have made in his Hands; and what additional Grace it would
receive from that Form of Composition. Let us turn to the Description as it now
stands in Shakespeare.

From Camp to Camp, through the foul Womb of Night,
The Hum of either Army stilly sounds;
That the fixed Sentinels almost receive
The secret Whispers of each others Watch.
Fire answers Fire; and through their paly Flames
Each Battle sees the other's umber'd Face.
Steed threatens Steed in high and boastful Neighs,
Piercing the Night's dull Ear; and from the Tents,
The Armourers accomplishing the Knights,
With busy Hammers closing Rivets up,
Give dreadful Note of Preparation.
The Country Cocks do crow, the Clocks do toll.
-- This noble Description is full of Imagery drawn from sensible Objects, as
indeed are most of those we meet with in this incomparable Author; (witness for
Instance the Description of Dover Cliff, of Hamlet's Madness, of Brutus's
Disorder, etc. etc.) It is consequently of the most affecting Nature, and in a
manner possesses the Hearer or the Reader with the same kind of Terror which
the Bravest probably feel upon the Crisis of a decisive Battle. And, by the by,
of the same passionate and affecting (i. e. Dramatic Nature) are the Poetical
Parts of our best Tragedies in general. Now I cannot conceive that the several
Circumstances of this Description could receive additional Force from the Form
of an Ode, notwithstanding the acknowledged Power of Music; and much less that
such a Description would appear to advantage in an Ode of Mr. Mason's. Instead
of what we see, hear and feel in the striking Particulars of the
beforementioned Description, Mr. Mason would entertain and amaze us with an
allegorical Machine of Horror riding on the Brow of Night,
or, From her black Pinions shedding deadly Dews.
-- It is certain whatever might be the Mystic Beauties of such an Ode as this,
it would at best be a dispassionate One, and so far infinitely less Theatrical,
than the foregoing Description of Shakespeare. In truth the pure Poetry which
Mr. Mason tells us that great Poet had the Power of introducing naturally, and
what is most strange, of joining with pure Passion, has an Air utterly
different from, or rather contrary to the Flights of Mr. Mason throughout this
Performance. Shakespeare indeed very rarely gets out of the Reach of our
Apprehensions, even when his Subject leads him directly into the Province of
Imagination. -- I refer the Reader to his Midsummer Night's Dream, his Macbeth,
and his Tempest. Upon the whole of this Article, it may I think, be safely
affirmed that the modern Drama is by no means destitute of Opportunities of
having recourse to Poetical Embellishments and Picturesque Descriptions of all
Kinds; and it has recourse to them, if not so frequently and obviously as the
ancient Drama by means of the Chorus had, at least more consistently with the
Essential Character of Tragedy, whose direct Business it is to excite the
Passions, even according to Aristotle's own Definition of it. For whether
Images, Descriptions, etc. occasionally and naturally interspersed with the
Matter of the Dialogue itself be not more compatible with that Character, than
separate and detached Pieces of Poetry, is a Question that needs not, I
conceive, be discussed. -- Now if these Considerations will lead us to
Conclusions in favor of the Poetical Parts of modern Tragedy against those of
the old Chorus, they will, I am sure, do this a fortiori against the pure
Poetry of Mr. Mason.

I cannot help observing in this Place, that our Author's Affectation of a
Poetical Diction, which contributes so much to the rendering the Odes of his
Chorus undramatical, discovers itself likewise in many Parts of the Dialogue
itself; and often to such a Degree, that Pomp, Figure, and Allegory supply the
Place of Simplicity, Nature, and Pathos. How allegorically does Athelwold
express the Passion of Joy, mixed with an Apprehension of imminent Danger?

-- Heavens! It cannot last,
The giddy height of Joy, to which I Am lifted,
Is as a hanging Rock, at whose low foot
The black and beating Surge of Infamy
Rolls ready to receive, and sink my Soul. p. 21.
-- As this Danger approaches still nearer, the Leader of the Chorus tells the
unhappy Pair (Athelwold and Elfrida) that

Safety now sits wavering on their Love,
Like the light down upon the Thistles beard
Which every Breeze may part. p. 30.
Upon the Earl's declaring his Resolution to murder himself, he is cautioned
against such a desperate Proceeding, by very important (but I think scarce
intelligible) Considerations. --

Forbear, forbear;
Think what a sea of deep Perdition whelms
The wretch's trembling Soul, who launches forth
Unlicens'd to Eternity. Think, think,
And let the Thought restrain thy impious Hand.
The Race of Man is one vast, marshalled Army,
Whose numerous Squadrons fill the Plains of Time,
Their Leader the Almighty. High in Air
The chos'n Archangel rides, whose right Hand wields
The imperial Standard of his Providence,
Which dreadly sweeping through the vaulted Sky,
O'ershadows all Creation.
p. 54. -- With what Delicacy, and Pathetic Force is the Remorse of this Hero
expressed in the following Passage?

I do deserve to breathe,
Deserve to bear this load of Life about me
For many Years; to lengthen out my Age.
Listening the hourly Knell of cursed Remembrance,
Whose leaden Stroke shall tell to my sad Soul
That I was faithful once. --
We may observe farther that the same Enthusiastic kind of Spirit betrays our
Author in many other Places of this Work (where the Thought is extremely
beautiful) into a Stiffness and Formality of Language. -- We will give the
Reader a few Instances of this. --

The Eye that will not weep another's Sorrow,
Should boast no gentler brightness than the glare,
That reddens in the eye-ball of the Wolf.
p. 6. -- Tenderness and Pity
Have made his breast their Home. He is a Man
More apt through inborn gentleness to err,
In giving mercy's Tide too free a Course,
Than with a thristy and illiberal Hand
To circumscribe it is Channel.
p. 8. -- Let no unhallowed Tongue
Dare to profane her Virtue by it is Praise;
It Is a bright Prodigy, which Admiration
Must stand in silent Gaze at, and behold
Full-plum'd Perfection take it is Eagle Flight
Above Ambition, Sovereignty, and Pride.
p. 35. Horror! Horror!
The Pen of Fate dipped in it is deepest Gall,
Perhaps on that ill-omen'd Wall,
Now writes the Event of this tremendous Day.
O! that our weaker Sight
Could read the mystic Characters, and spy
What to the unpurg'd, mortal Eye,
Is hid in endless Night. --
p. 42. -- See, ye Virgins,
See how Despair beneath his ghastly Brow
Stretches her blackest Cloud, through whose thick Night
His Eyes fast rooted in their angry Rings
Dart a dire Glear. --
p. 56. -- For Solitude,
Which sooths the trnnquil Mind, has dread Effects
On wrathful Breasts. The same sequestered Pine,
Which veils the gurgling Ring-dove with it is Boughs,
Whets with his knotty Trunk the Boar's vexed Tooth,
And points each Fang with Death.
In short, to this Spirit we may perhaps ascribe the Impropriety and
Unseasonableness of some of Mr. Mason's most elegant and affecting Images and
Descriptions. -- But I forbear to multiply Quotations. -- Enough, I presume,
has been said to show that Mr. Mason throughout this whole Work discovers much
more of the Poet, than the Tragedian: He discovers so much indeed of the
former, that abating these, and a few other Blemishes and Defects, which I
thought it but Justice to my Subject to endeavor to set in a true Light,
Elfrida, as a Dramatic Poem, has many exquisite Beauties; which however (as
they must be obvious to judicious Eyes) I forbear not for Want of Inclination
but of Time to recite. Indeed as this Performance is entitled a Dramatic Poem,
and not a Tragedy, by the Author himself, I should have made no Exceptions to
it, if the Style of the Letters prefixed to the Drama had been as modest as the
Title Page. -- But to return once more to the Chorus. Mr. Mason laments that
with the Means of introducing Poetry naturally, is lost also the Opportunity of
conveying moral Reflections with Grace and Propriety. -- He tells us
afterward, that in those Parts of the Drama where the Judgment of a mixed
Audience is most liable to be misled by what passes before it is View, the chief
Actors are generally too much agitated by the furious Passions, or too much
attached by the tender ones, to think cooly, and impress on the Spectators a
moral Sentiment properly. -- This is indeed asserting roundly, but however, I
apprehend, without sufficient Foundation in Reason, or Experience. -- I will
make bold to assert too, that it is the Business of the Dramatic Poet (and
indeed of every other) in a moral View to steal imperceptibly into the Heart of
his Audience, or Reader; that Sentiments occasionally and naturally suggested
by the Circumstances of the Parties personally concerned, will have a more
forcible Effect than a thousand set Lessons of Music and Morality from the
Mouth of a third Person; and that the chief Actors are not generally "too much
agitated by the furious Passions, or attached by the tender ones, to think
cooly (enough for the Purpose) and impress on the Spectators a moral Sentiment
properly."

In the next Sentence we are told that A Confidant or Servant has seldom Sense
enough to do it, never Dignity enough to be regarded. -- Now, by the way, a
Servant or a Confidant may always (if the Poet please) be as sensible a Person
as any in the Drama; and sure the Dignity of either, at least of the latter is
equal to that of the Personages of the ancient Chorus, which for the most Part
consisted of a Company of Virgins, the Attendants and Countrywomen of the Hero
of the Poem. -- Mr. Mason's own Chorus, with all it is Pomp and Solemnity, is
composed of Lord Athelwold's Maids. -- But after all, do the modern Tragedians
usually convey moral Sentiments through the Mouths of Servants and Confidants, as
these Expressions would lead us to imagine; or granting they do, and err in so
doing, is the particular Error of a few to be objected to the general System?
Instead therefore of these (and of the Chorus too) the Moderns are sufficiently
provided with Persons not merely capable of seeing and hearing, but of arguing,
advising, and reflecting; from whom a moral Sentiment never comes unnaturally,
but suitably and gracefully. For such are (or may be) all the Persons in the
Drama. "The Character of Pierre in Venice Preserved (Mr. Mason justly observes
in another Place) when left entirely to the Judgment of the Audience, is
perhaps one of the most improper for public View, that ever was produced on any
Stage. It is almost impossible, but some Part of the Spectators should go from
the Representation with very false and immoral Impressions. But had that
Tragedy been written on the ancient Plan; had Pierre's Character been drawn
just as it is, and some few Alterations made in Jaffeir's, I know no two
Characters more capable of doing Service in a moral View, when justly
animadverted upon by the Chorus. For bad Characters become on this Plan as
harmless in the Hands of the Poet, as the Historian. This would indeed be, as I
have elsewhere observed, very just Reasoning against any Man that should
undertake to vindicate Mr. Otway's Conduct in the Tragedy referred to; and to
oppose the same to the ancient Plan; but as this never was, or will be done by
any Man in his Senses, it is surely inconclusive to argue against the
Inconveniences of the whole modern Dramatic System from the particular Error
of a particular Poet. -- The Truth is, perhaps this Gentleman has conceived
strong Prepossessions in Favor of that Species of Poetry, which his Talent
evidently leads him to; for if he had not himself a particular Taste for an
Ode, it is likely he would scarce contend for it as absolutely essential to the
Drama. -- But whatever may have been his real Sentiments upon the Occasion, I
hope, I have given sufficient Reasons for differing from him.

Before I conclue I cannot help taking Notice, that Mr. Mason has drawn Mr.
Dryden himself into his Interests in a very extraordinary Manner; and this I do
the rather, as I have more than once referred to that excellent Person's
Authority. Mr. Mason, among the insuperable Difficulties in the Way to the
desired Reformation of the English Stage, intimates the present improper Form
of the Theaters; and the additional Expense requisite for the Purposes of the
ancient System renders the Matter, he thinks, impracticable. This, he says, Mr.
Dryden foresaw long ago; and then quotes the following curious Passage from
him. A new Theater, much more ample and much deeper, must be made for that
Purpose; besides the Cost of sometimes forty or fifty Habits: which is an
Expense too large to be supplied by a Company of Actors. It Is true I should not
be sorry to see a Chorus on a Theater, more than as large and as deep again as
our's, built and adorned at a King's Charges; and on that Condition, and
another, which is, that my Hands were not bound behind me, as now they are, I
should not despair of making such a Tragedy, as might be both instructive and
delightful, according to the Manner of the Grecians.

Now does any common Reader apprehend from this Passage, that because Mr.
Dryden tells us, he should not be sorry to see a Chorus on a commodious
Theater, etc. therefore he ardently wished to see one, and judged it absolutely
essential to the Drama; or because he declares that in such Case he should not
despair of making such a Tragedy as might be instructive and delightful
according to the Manner of the Grecians, therefore he longed to try his
Strength in this Field, and acknowledged the grand Secret prodesse and
delectare was the Characteristic of the Greek Drama only? And yet such methinks
is Mr. Mason's Construction of this Passage." -- This Suffrage of Mr. Dryden,
says he, is, however, very apposite to to the present Point. But it serves also
to vindicate my Design of imitating the Greek Drama. For if he, who was so
prejudiced to the modern Stage, as to think Intrigue a capital Beauty in it; if
he, I say, owns that the grand Secret prodesse and delectare was the
Characteristic of the Greek Drama only, nothing I think can better justify my
present Attempt than the Approbation he gives to it in this Passage. -- That is
(to reduce this Suffrage to a smaller Compass) Mr. Dryden informs us, that if
Things were properly circumstanced he would at all Events have attempted a
Tragedy upon the Greek Model, and with some Hopes of Success; therefore he
plainly preferred the ancient to the modern System. -- Let the Merits of the
Cause be tried by the Evidence of Mr. Dryden, and Fabio vel Judice vincam.
I have nothing farther to add than that, if the Reader should chance to wonder
at the Freedom I have sometimes taken with this truly ingenious Writer, I
desire it may be imputed to my natural Resentment of that Air of Sufficiency
and Superiority with which he introduces, I do not say his Performance, but his
System. -- Good Sense (i. e. common Sense) as well as Antiquity required an
Adherence to the Unities. This peremptory Declaration involves in a very scurvy
Term almost every Dramatic Writer but our Author, and a Frenchman or two, since
the Days of Aristotle. But delicate Judgment it seems and a true Taste for
genuine Nature and ancient Simplicity are the Allotments, and Privileges only
of a happy Few. -- In what Contempt does this Gentleman hold the universal
Practice of the modern Stage, when he acquaints us, "he believes he could
quickly make the whole tolerably fit for an English Audience by putting the
Dialogue of the Chorus into the Mouth of an Emma or Matilda, who with some
little Show of sisterly Concernment, might be easily made to claim Kindred with
Earl Athelwold; and by the Addition of an unnecessary Incident or two, which
would cost him no more than they are worth in contriving, and an unmeaning
Personage or two, who would be as little Expense in creating." I confess I see
no Sort of Foundation for this Insult and Superiority in the Arguments, or
rather Assertions of Mr. Mason, for which Reason I have written my Thoughts
upon this Occasion; otherwise I have no more Pretension to write against him as
an Adversary, than Desire to enter the Lists with him as a Poet.

LETTERS, etc.

LETTERS, etc.
SIR,
I Sit down, in compliance with your Request, to give you my Sentiments upon
the Subject started at our last Interview. -- In consequence of my Researches
upon this Occasion I have been almost led into a very whimsical Conclusion, --
that the greatest Genius is the Author a Man happens to have in his Hand. It
seems but reasonable to pin our Opinion of an Author upon that of his Editor,
or Translator; and yet we may do this, till we are in a manner at a loss for a
Criterion to judge good Writing by. Genius assumes as many Shapes as ever
Proteus did; and all literary Merit consists principally in Invention, in
Judgment, in Fire, in Propriety, in Simplicity, in Elegance, in Accuracy, in
Ease, in Wit, in Humor, in Fullness, in Brevity, etc. etc. according to the
Spirit, and Complexion of the Writer before me. Mr. Pope declares, Homer was
the greatest Epic Poet in the World, and I am quite of his Mind, till I take up
Mr. Meyrick's Tryphiodorus. -- When I look into my Statius, I begin to think
Virgil was a very cold, and insipid Writer; and Virgil's Acquaintance assure me
that Statius was little better than a Madman. -- In short by Virtue of the
Preface, prefixed to him, Sophocles or Ovid, Terence or Martial, Milton or
Butler, etc. etc. is the best Poet; Herodotus or Eutropius, Livy or Sallust,
Rapin or Clarendon is the best Historian; Aristotle or Newton, Descartes or
Burnet, etc. etc. is the best Philosopher; and Hammond or Hobbes, South, or
Toland, Sherlock or Middleton is the best Divine. --

But to be serious. -- You will wonder perhaps to be told, that what gave Rise
to these ludicrous Remarks of mine was nothing less than Mr. Pope's Commentary
upon his universally, and justly admired Original, Homer; an Author, whom you
will scarce think capable of being complimented, or aggrandiz'd to an undue,
and extravagant Degree, especially by so judicious an Editor. -- Indeed these
great Names are so truly venerable, that I must obviate the Alarm you may take,
by assuring you that what I am going to say neither can, nor means to detract
from the infinite Merit of the Grecian, or the British Homer; for the former,
See the Note at v. 955 of the 16th B. of the Iliad.
I believe upon the whole that scarce any Mortal ever came near him for Wisdom,
Learning, and all good Qualities, for the latter, He has certainly done more
Justice to his Author as an Expositor only, than all the Commentators, ancient
and modern, put together. After this Declaration you will give me leave to tell
you, that Mr. Pope himself appears to me, notwithstanding his very great
Abilities, to have sometimes misapprehended the real Design of his Original, to
have not unfrequently (to use his own Words again) attributed to him what does
not belong to him, and now and then to have imagined Proprieties, or covered
Defects with a seeming View rather to the Honor of his Author at all Events,
than to the precise Ascertainment of Truth. All this, indeed, might be owing
not to a blind Admiration, or to a Want of Discernment, but to a Degree of
laudable Partiality, or a too implicit Adherence to the Notions, and
Interpretations of the Commentators his Predecessors.

But whatever may be allowed to an Editor, or Translator, a Stander-by will be
more impartial, and is, as such, more likely to think justly of an Author. You
who turn to your Homer merely with an Intent to be delighted with him, and
consider Mr. Pope as a Person very able and willing to illustrate his great
Beauties, and Excellencies, will be apt to sce no Grounds for the above
Allegations, but in an Affectation of Singularity, or in Caprice; especially as
Mr. Pope makes no Scruple occasionally to point out the Blemishes of his
Author, and seems by many Remarks to show himself thoroughly divested of all
unreasonable Prepossessions. See the Note at V. 801. B. xi.
It is customary (says he) with those who translate or comment on an Author, to
use him as they do their Mistress; they can see no Faults, or convert his very
Faults into Beauties; but I cannot be so partial to Homer, etc. etc. In another
Place after having enumerated what seemed to him to be Faults of any
consideration, he tells us, See the Note at V. 955. B. xvi.
he hopes after so free a Confession no reasonable Modern will think him
touched with the (...) of Madam Dacier and others. I am sensible, continues he,
of the Extremes which Mankind run into, in extolling and depreciating Authors:
We are not more violent and unreasonable in attacking those who are not yet
established into Fame, than in defending those who are, even in every minute
Trifle. -- There is as much Modesty as there is Truth in this ingenuous
Declaration; and there is great Reason to suppose Mr. Pope in general never
speaks of Homer in higher Terms than he really believed he deserves. However,
whether I have been actuated by a Spirit of Vanity, or of Humor, rather than
just Criticism, you will be able to judge when you have read the following
Sheets, in which I propose to try Homer by himself, (as every Writer should by
his own Key) and by the Suffrages and Evidence of his own Advocates, and
Witnesses. For which Purpose, and for something of Method's sake, the first
Subject of our Inquiry shall be the Machinery of the Iliad, and the next, the
general Economy of this great Poet, and his particular Conduct in Respect of
Characters, Incidents, and other Circumstances. And, I persuade myself, the
Result of this Inquiry will be your agreeing with me that Homer, with the most
fruitful Invention, extensive Knowledge, and no small Judgment, has really much
less Art, and Design in this Work, than he is supposed to have had; at least
for what appears to the contrary from the Observations of his Commentators.

LETTER II.
THE Machinery, you know, is that Part which the Gods bear in an Epic Poem.
That of Homer is conducted with extraordinary Circumstances of Solemnity, and
Magnificence. But the great Question is, whether we are in general to take the
Simple and literal Sense of the Author with regard to the Appearance, and
Actions of these superior Beings; or whether we are to suppose a secret, and
allegorical Meaning to be veiled under all this Apparatus; or, in other Words,
whether we can with any Degree of Certainty extract a System of Morality, or
Theology from it. This has been attempted to be done by Mr. Pope, and all
others who have undertaken to explain, illustrate, or defend the Writings of
this inimitable Poet; and it must be owned too that this has been done in many
Places in a very plausible Manner. However I must be of Opinion, upon reviewing
the Iliad, and comparing it with itself, that these Gentlemen have pushed this
Matter too far, and by strained Explications, and Refinements, found out
Mysteries which were never intended; that, generally speaking, we shall do more
Justice, and even Honor to Homer by supposing See the Note at L. 422. B. V.
he followed Fame, and common Opinion in his Account of the Gods, though no way
agreeable to Truth. Upon this Supposition at least, He will, I think appear
much more uniform, and reconcilable with himself. I do not deny indeed that
the Iliad abounds with noble, and rational Sentiments, and such as are
conformable to true Theology; particularly that the Necessity of Divine
Assistance and Interposition for all Human Successes is a Moral strongly
inculcated throughout the Poem. But whatever Homer's religious Notions, as a
Man, might be, or, as Mr. Pope expresses it, whatever he might think of his
Gods, he took them as he found them; he brought them into Action according to
the Notions which were then entertained, and in some Stories as they were then
believed. If you consider his Jupiter as a Fabulous or Poetical Character,
there is less in it to shock you; but if you believe, He meant to exhibit to
his Reader under this Character, "the One, supreme, omnipotent God" You must
soon have a very mean Opinion not only of his Philosophy, but even of his
Sense. It Is true, He sometimes introduces Jupiter with a Majesty, and
Superiority worthy the great Ruler of the Universe, particularly in the
Beginning of the 8th Book; but he is in general represented as much subject to
Weakness, Infirmity, and Passion as the inferior Deities. Indeed, if any
Divine Attribute be plainly, and consistently applied to Jupiter, it is Power;
yet even this seems to be applied rather from the Authority of Fabulous
Tradition, than by the religious Theory of the Poet himself. For the Story of
the Rebellion of the Gods, and their Defeat by Jupiter, which Homer refers to,
cannot be understood to be his own Invention. Mr. Pope acknowleges the " See
Note at L. 35. of the 8th B.
Notions and Descriptions of his Author" in Respect of the Deity, to be in many
Passages unworthy of the Divinity: See Essay on Homer, p. 56.
He is not even exempted from our common Appetites, and Frailties; He is made
to eat, drink, and sleep. It is pleasant enough to observe how careful the
Commentators have been, notwithstanding such Acknowledgements, to maintain the
supposed Superiority of Jupiter, and what shifts they have recourse to to save
his Honor upon all Occasions. See Note at L. 780. of the 1st B.
Eustathius (Mr. Pope tell sus) makes a distinction between (...) and (...),
the Words which are used at the End of the first Book, and the Beginning of the
second with regard to Jupiter's sleeping. He says (...) only means lying down
in a Disposition to sleep. Now granting this Interpretation to salve the
Contradiction that else would follow in the next Book, where it is said Jupiter
did not sleep, and to prove by-the-by that Homer himself did not nod in this
Passage; yet surely it will afford but a slender Argument for the extraordinary
Vigilance of Jupiter in general beyond that of the other Gods; especially as
Homer acquaints us in the preceding Lines, that he went to the Bed where he had
used to take his Repose. See L. 609 and 610 of the Iliad.
It is worth observing to you that some Critics in Aristotle's Time objected to
the Passage in the second Book, and See Note at L. 1. of the 2d B.
pretended it was ridiculous to describe all the Gods sleeping besides Jupiter:
To which, it seems, Aristotle answers, that nothing is more usual or allowable
than that Figure which puts all for the greater part. A plain Proof, that
neither Aristotle, nor the abovementioned Critics of those Times, supposed any
extraordinary Degree of Vigilance could have been with any Propriety ascribed
by the Poet to Jupiter. -- Perhaps you will be of Opinion too, that there is a
little too much Refinement in another Place in the fifth Book, where Mr. Pope
says, See Note of L. 517. of the 5th B.
we may observe the Decorum and Decency his Author constantly preserves in
making Jupiter only Smile upon certain Occasions, while the other Gods laugh
out.

I leave it to you to judge what Sort of a Salvo this must be, allowing any
Foundation for the Distinction itself; as indeed I do not recollect there is.
There seems at least to be universal Jollity in Heaven in one very remarkable
Passage, without any reserve for the Gravity of this Deity; I mean in the first
Book, where Vulcan See at L. 771. of the 1st B.
designs to move laughter by taking upon him the Office of Hebe and Ganymede,
with his awkward limping Carriage.

Vulcan with awkward grace his Office plies,
And unextinguish'd Laughter shakes the Skies.
Thus you see the Jupiter of Homer, with all his Pomp and Preeminence, is
hardly above a Level with the subordinate Deities in point of corporal Weakness
and Infirmity; nor will you find him to rank much higher if you take a View of
his Conduct, and Actions in general throughout the Poem. You will observe him
upon numberless Occasions under the Influence of Passions utterly unsuitable to
the Purity, as well as Dignity of the Supreme Being. The Fiction of his being
deceived and laid asleep, and of his amorous correspondence with Juno, has, as
Mr. Pope confesses, as great an Air of Impiety, and Absurdity as any Fable in
all Antiquity. I See Note at L. 179. of the 14th B.
must needs, upon the whole, (says that ingenious Remarker) as far as I can
judge, give up the Morality of this Fable; but what Color of Excuse for it
Homer might have from ancient Tradition, or what mystical, or allegorical Sense
might atone for the appearing Impiety, is hard to be ascertained at this
distant Period of Time. Here is a Condemnation, and a Palliation of a Fault in
one Breath. Indeed Mr. Pope, through his unabated Zeal for the Honor of his
Original, is See the Note last referred to.
willing afterward to suppose the "present Passage to be grounded on Religion,"
and to be nothing more than the Representation of a religious Solemnity; or
else to be purely allegorical, and as such implying only the Congress of
Jupiter, and Juno, the Mingling of the Ether and the Air (which are generally
said to be signified by these two Deities.) But I believe, if you consult the
Place, you will think the first Expedient a forced one, and the second
(allowing the Physical Signification of these two Deities) insufficient for the
intended Vindication. For what Connection is there in the Mingling of the
Ether and the Air with the Matter in Hand? or how does it in the least effect
the Circumstances of the Battle between the Greeks and the Trojans. To say
nothing of Venus, who certainly is no Physical Deity, and yet bears a part in
this Transaction. -- The literal, and obvious Sense of Homer with all its
Grossness seems to be the only consistent one which this Passage can fairly be
made to carry.

It is worth while to take Notice of the Shifts the Commentators have recourse
to, when they are pressed with Difficulties of this Nature. Agreeably to the
Circumstances of the Extremity, the Allegories of Homer are Moral, and
Physical; His See Note at L. 96. of the 4th B.
Heaven is no more than an ideal World of abstracted Beings, and so every Motion
which rises in the Mind of Man is attributed to the Quality to which it
belongs, with the Name of the Deity who is supposed to preside over that
Quality superadded to it; the Sea Note at L. 439. of the 8th B.
Deities sometimes mean no more than Beings that presided over the Passions and
Faculties of the Mind, and in consequence of all this Jupiter is either the
Ether, or the Father of Gods and Men, Juno is the Goddess of Honor or the
Air, and Minerva the Goddess not only of Wisdom, but of Craft; that is, both of
true and false Wisdom, etc. etc. as Occasions and Exigencies require. -- Now
it is certain by these Means any Difficulty may be solved, and any Passage in
this Author pretty easily cleared; but all this while the Question is, whether
any System can be ascertained. Nay in Places where the Meaning of the Author is
irreconcilable with allegorical Construction, it is supposed to See Note at
566. B. xxi.
be "darkened by the Remoteness of our Time." A hidden and mysterious Sense
there plainly is, or certainly must be; and we must at all Events, and though
apparent Absurdities will be saved by it, reject a literal Interpertation of
Homer where the Gods are concerned. Mr. Pope himself owns that sometimes
Homer's See Essay on Homer, P. 56, 57.
Machine's play a little too Grossly, and that the Fable violently oppresses the
Moral, which it may be lost Labor to search for in every minute Circumstance,
if indeed it was intended to be there. In Truth, I am apt to think we should
read this Poet with more Pleasure, and equal Profit, if we perplexed ourselves
less to find out Mysteries in him; and by the way, it is scarce worth our Pains
to investigate hidden Meanings, when the plain and literal Moral of the Poem is
as obvious upon a thousand Occasions as it is admirable and excellent. If you
consider the Machinery of Homer in a Poetical, rather than a Theological, or
Philosophical Light, and suppose his Gods to be real Characters acting under
the Influence of Human Passions, as ancient Fables represented them, and taking
their Measures from Motives of personal Affection, Resentment, etc. etc. I
believe you will have a surer Inlet into the Meaning of this famous Author, and
be able to examine him by Rules not liable to Difficulties, which are only to
be removed by forced, and unnatural Solutions. -- But as there is a Novelty in
this Opinion, You will expect I should strengthen and confirm it by more
Reasons, and Observations.

LETTER III.
THE Sea Note at L. 422. B. v.
famous Censure of Tully, and Longinus (mentioned by Mr. Pope) that Homer makes
God's of his Heroes, and Mortals of his Gods, will appear to be groundless, if
you regulate your Ideas of this Author by the Notions I have conceived of him.
For pure Poetical Fictions, whether invented or adopted by Homer, come not
properly under the Cognizance of a Philosophical Inquiry. Accordingly we shall
not only have a ready Excuse for this great Poet when he introduces his Deities
feasting, fighting, wounded by Men, and shedding a Sort of Blood; but also when
they are represented as committing Actions unworthy of themselves, and of the
respective Characters they are supposed by the common Opinion of Commentators
to sustain. Mr. Pope allows that if See Note at L. 96. B. iv.
the Trojans had no Right to break the Treaty, made between them and the
Grecians upon the Duel of Paris and Menelaus, the Machine where Juno is made to
propose Perjury, Jupiter to allow it, and Minerva to be commissioned to hasten
the Execution of it, would be one of the hardest to be reconciled to Reason in
the whole Poem. Whether therefore the Trojans had a Right to break the Treaty
is a Question, it will be very Material, and, I think, easy to determine. Now
that "the Sea Note at L. 18. B. iv.
Conditions of the Treaty were valid" notwithstanding the snatching away of
Paris by Venus in a Cloud, "that is to say, that" the Controversy was to be
decided (either) by the Victory, or by the Death of one of the Combatants, is,
I apprehend, apparent from many Considerations. It is certain, in the first
proposal of the Challenge Paris mentions only the Victory, And who his Rival
shall in Arms Subdue; nor does Hector, who carries it, say any more.

However (continues the Note) Menelaus understands it of the Death by what he
replies: Fall he that must beneath his Rivals Arms,
And live the rest --
And in the solemn Oath too Agamemnon specifies the latter, "If by Paris slain"
-- and If by my Brother's Arms the TROJAN bleed. Priam also understands it of
both, saying, at his leaving the Field, Whose Arms shall conquer, and whose
Prince shall fall,
Heaven only knows --
Paris himself confesses he has lost the Victory in his Speech to Helen, which
he would hardly have done had the whole depended upon that alone; and lastly
Menelaus (after the Conquest is clearly his by the Flight of Paris) is still
searching round the Field to kill him, as if all were of no Effect without the
Death of his Adversary. -- It appears from hence (says Mr. Pope) that the
Trojans had no ill pretense to break the Treaty, so that Homer ought not to
have been directly accused of making Jupiter the Author of Perjury in what
follows, which is one of the chief of Plato's Objections against him.

But was it not extremely natural for Menelaus, Agamemnon, and Priam to mention
the Death of one of the Combatants as the Decision of the Controversy, though the
Terms at the Challenge specified Victory only, in as much as the Death of one
seemed to be the unavoidable Consequence of the Duel, and the Deliverance of
Paris by Venus was a Circumstance that could not possibly be foreseen? For
Paris, he could not be so absurd as to deny the Loss of the Victory, whatever
Shifts he might be drove to evade the Articles of the Combat -- indeed he seems
to hint at the Expedient of a second Engagement. -- This Day the Foe prevailed
by Pallas' power;
We yet may vanquish in a happier Hour. --
And lastly, for Menelaus, he might very naturally "search round the Field to
kill his Adversary" not for the effectual Determination of the Controversy, but
for the Gratification of his personal Resentment.

Be this as it will; whatever private Persons might think of this Affair, it is
plain the Greeks looked upon the War as ended by this great Event, and
accordingly Agamemnon calls upon the Trojans to fulfill the Conditions of the
Treaty.

Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous Foes!
Hear and attest! from Heaven with Conquest crowned,
Our Brother's Arms the just Success have found:
Be therefore now the Spartan Wealth restored,
Let Argive Helen own her lawful Lord -- etc. etc.
But, in a Word, to put the Matter out of all Doubt, the very Terms at the
Commission given to Minerva, suppose the Conditions of the Treaty to be binding
upon the Trojans.

The Sire of Men, and Monarch of the Sky,
The Advice approved, and bade Minerva fly,
Dissolve the League, and all her Arts employ
To make the Breach the faithless Act of Troy.
These two last Circumstances Mr. Pope, for Reasons obvious enough, takes not
the least Notice of: Indeed he found himself so pressed by the Difficulties with
which this whole Transaction is surrounded, that he is forced to have Recourse
to one of the Expedients abovementioned, viz. that of supposing, Homer's
Heaven to be sometimes no more than an ideal World of abstracted Beings, etc.
etc. agreeably to this Notion he resolves the Business into this easy Allegory,
as he is pleased to call it. See Note at L. 96. B. iv.
Pandarus (who broke the Truce by shooting an Arrow at Menelaus) thinks it
Prudence to gain Honor and Wealth at the Hands of the Trojans by destroying
Menelaus. This Sentiment is also incited by a Notion of Glory, of which Juno is
represented as Goddess. Jupiter, who is supposed to know the Thoughts of Men,
permits the Action which he is not Author of, etc. etc."

But how is all this to be reconciled with the general Rules of Interpretation,
or with what Mr. Pope See Note at L. 120.
tells us in the very next Note, The Goddess went not to the Trojans, because
they hated Paris, and would rather have given him up, See L. 565. at the last B.
than have done an ill Action for him: She therefore looks among the Allies, and
finds Pandarus, who was of a Nation noted for Perfidiousness, and had a Soul
avaricious enough to be capable of engaging in this Treachery for the Hopes of
a Reward from Paris. From what Principles of Prudence then or of Honor did
Pandarus act? or, lastly, how can Jupiter be said barely to permit, what he
expressly commands? It is out of the Power of Allegory and Refinement to salve
the Characters of these Deities upon the present Occasion. -- But according to
the Notion I have formed of Homer's Deities, there will be nothing puzzling in
all this Affair. -- I can suppose Juno and Minerva to be actuated by a Desire
of personal Vengeance on the quondam Judgment of Paris; and indeed I am
warranted in this Supposition almost by the present Behavior of these
Goddesses, but clearly I presume, by a Passage in the 24th Book of the Iliad,
where the Poet informs us that these very Deities (with Neptune) opposed the
Proposal of all the rest, to dispatch Mercury to steal away the Body of Hector,
purely from the implacable Hatred they bore to Troy ever since that fatal
Determination.

-- Pallas this denies,
And the unrelenting Empress of the Skies;
Ever since that Day implacable to Troy,
What Time young Paris, simple Shepherd Boy,
Won by destructive Lust, (Reward obscene)
Their Charms rejected for the Cyprian Queen.
Mr. Pope maintains the Authenticity of this Passage, which it seems some of
the Sea Note at L. 36. B. xxiv.
Ancients had disputed, who judged it as an Indecency that the Goddess of Wisdom
and Achilles should be equally inexorable. They thought farther that, had Homer
been acquainted with the Judgment of Paris, he would undoubtedly have mentioned
it before this time in his Poem, etc." It may be answered, (replies Mr. Pope)
that the Silence of Homer in the foregoing Part of the Poem, as to the Judgment
of Paris, is no Argument that he was ignorant of that Story: Perhaps he might
think it most proper to unfold the Cause of the Destruction of Troy in the
Conclusion of the Ilias; that the Reader seeing the Wrong done, and the
Punishment of that Wrong immediately following, might acknowledge the Justice
of it. According to this Observation, which confirms what I have been saying,
we must look beyond the Rape of Helen, for the original Cause of the
Destruction of Troy, and for the Wrong done which so much exasperated these
Goddesses. The same Reason (proceeds the Note) will be an Answer to the
Objection relating to the Anger of Pallas: Wisdom cannot be satisfied without
Justice, and consequently Pallas, ought not to cease from Resentment, till
Troy, has suffered the Deserts of her Crimes. -- Now whether that Crime of
Paris could fairly be considered as the Crime of Troy, and whether therefore
Wisdom could with Justice pursue it to the Destruction of a whole People, a
Novice in Casuistry may determine. -- If we suppose, by the by, that the Juno
of Virgil was copied from this Original, as there is, I think, no Doubt but she
was, we find that Poet in plain Terms ascribing the Illwill of this Goddess
toward the Trojans to be the Affront put upon her by Paris. -- Manet alta
mente repostum
Judicium Paridis, spretaeque injura formae.
Aen. L 1.

-- You will begin probably to think, the Commentators have affected too much
to discover Poetical Secrets in an Author whose Design I take to have been much
more simple than it is generally imagined to be. -- For your farther
Satisfaction, you shall hear from me again upon this Subject.

LETTER IV.
THE Commentators tell us it is with great Art and Judgment that Homer has
engaged his several Deities either on the Side of Greece, or on that of Troy. I
cannot give you a beter Account of their Sentiments upon this Head, than what
you have in Mr. Pope's Note, transcribed from Eustathius, See Note at L. 44. B.
xx.
This Division of the Gods, is not made at Random, but founded on very solid
Reasons, drawn from the Nature of these two Nations. He places on the Side of
the Greeks all the Gods who preside over Arts, and Sciences, to signify how
much in that respect the Greeks excelled all other Nations. Juno, Pallas,
Neptune, Mercury, and Vulcan are for the Greeks; Juno, not only as the Goddess
who presides over Marriage, and who is concerned to revenge an Jnjury done to
the Nuptial Bed, but likewise as the Goddess who represents Monarchical
Government, which was better established in Greece than any where else; Pallas,
because being the Goddess of War and Wisdom, she ought to assist those who are
wronged; besides the Greeks understood the Art of War better than the
Barbarians; Neptune, because he was an Enemy to the Trojans upon Account of
Laomedon's perfidiousness, and because most of the Greeks being come from
Islands, or Peninsulas, they were in some Sort his Subjects; Mercury, because
he is a God who presides over Stratagems of War, and because Troy was taken by
that of the Wooden Horse; and lastly, Vulcan, as the declared Enemy of Mars and
of all Adulterers, and as the Father of Arts. -- The Reasons why Mars, and
Venus engage for the Trojans are very obvious; the Point in Hand was to favor
Ravishers, and Debauchees. But the same Reason, you will say, does not serve
for Apollo, Diana, and Latona. It is urged that Apollo is for the Trojans,
because of the Darts, and Arrows which were the principal Strength of the
Barbarians; and Diana because she presided over Dancing, and those Barbarians
were great Dancers; and Latona, as influenced by her Children. Xanthus being a
Trojan River is interested for his Country.

Now whether these are not rather ingenious than solid Reasons is, in my Mind,
scarce a Question. -- For all that is here asserted is far from being true. All
the Gods who preside over Arts and Sciences are not on the Side of the Greeks:
Apollo, who is surely one of the most considerable of them being the perpetual
Patron of Troy; so that Homer never meant by this Adjustment to signify how
much in this respect the Greeks excelled all other Nations. Juno, and Pallas,
as plausible as the Reasons here alleged for their siding with the Grecians
may seem to be, act in this Affair, by their own See L. 30. etc. B. iv.
Confessions, as we have seen, from very different Motives; nor will it follow,
by the Way, that because the latter of these Goddesses assisted the Greeks,
therefore Homer would intimate that the Greeks understood the Art of War better
than the Barbarians: for as Mr. Pope observes upon Homer's introducing Apollo
on the Side of the Trojans in the fourth Book, Mars See Note at L. 585. B. iv.
(the Friend of Troy) which signifies Courage without Conduct, proving too weak
to resist Minerva, or Courage with Conduct, the Poet brings in Wisdom to assist
Mars, under the appearance of Apollo: and consequently as much may be inferred
to the Advantage of the Trojans from the constant Interposition of this God in
their Behalf, as is in the Passage before us to that of the Greeks, from the
Consideration of the Aid of Minerva. -- But farther, Neptune it seems, is for
the Greeks, because he was an Enemy to the Trojans, upon Account of Laomedon's
Perfidiousness, and because most of the Greeks being come from Islands or
Peninsulas, they were in some Sort his Subjects. Now Laomedons's See L. 525. B.
xxi.
Perfidiousness consisted in the Refusal of the Wages due to this God on Account
of the Building of the Walls of Troy, and in other ill-usage, and so we are to
look upon Neptune's espousing the Grecian Cause, as the Effect of his
Resentment of those personal Indignities; and in this Light he is only acting
in conformity to the Idea I have framed of Homer's Gods in general: But why the
Greeks can with more Propriety be called Neptune's Subjects because they came
from Islands or Peninsulas, than the Trojans themselves, who inhabited a
Seaport Town, (for which very reason Mr. Pope conjectures, Homer ascribes the
Building of the Wall to Neptune only) I confess I am at a loss to discover. --
Again, Mercury, we are informed is a Partisan of the Grecians because he is a
God who presides over Stratagems of War, and because Troy was taken by that of
the Wooden Horse; -- Now the ingenuity of the Stratagem of the wooden Horse, if
we believe Virgil, we must ascribe not to Mercury, but to Pallas. Instar Montis
equum divina Palladis art Aedificant:
However, to let this Deity have the Credit of it; I would only ask whether,
supposing he had been introduced by Homer on the Part of Troy, the Sagacity of
Eustathius would not have assigned as specious a Reason for it as the present.
I can conceive it to be this. Mercury is for the Trojans because he presides
over Thieves and Robbers, and is the Favourer of all clandestine Enterprises,
such as was the Rape of Helen by Paris. -- But lastly, Vulcan assists the
Greeks as the declared Enemy of Mars and of all Adulterers, and as the Father
of Arts. True -- his personal Enmity to Mars, and consequentially to all
Adulterers, it is granted naturally engaged him on the Grecian Side; -- but as
the Father of the Mechanical Arts methinks, he should have fought under Apollo
the Father of the liberal ones.

On the other Hand, the Reasons, says Eustathius, why Mars and Venus engage for
the Trojans are very obvious; the Point in Hand was to favor Ravishers and
Debauchees, rather a Ravisher, etc. If all the above-assigned Reasons had been
as obvious as these, it had indeed been scarce worth while to have entered into
a Discussion of this Matter; but it would be extraordinary if there were no
Circumstances to color the Hypothesis of the Commentators. -- Opinions, all
this while, are not to be grounded on a few Circumstances that are contrasted
by many others. -- The Reasons given for the Assistance of the other Deities to
Troy, which indeed are delivered with an Air of Diffidence, are most of them
far-fetched. It is urged that Apollo is for the Trojans, because of the Darts
and Arrows which were the principal Strength of the Barbarians; supposing, but
by the way not admitting, the Truth of which Assertion itself, might not
Apollo, who is Destiny according to the common Notion, have been represented
with much more Significancy as opposing Troy, whose Destruction was determined
by Fate? One Reason See Note at L. 544. B. xxi.
given by Dacier in the next Book, why Apollo declines fighting with Neptune is,
because Apollo being the same with Destiny, and the Ruin of the Trojans being
concluded upon and decided, that God can no longer defer it. According to this,
Apollo by taking the Part of Troy seems to have been Fighting against himself.
-- But Diana attached herself to the Trojan Interests, we are let to know,
because she presided over Dancing, and those Barbarians were great Dancers; it
may be so; and yet I am apt to think the Goddess of Chastity acts a little out
of Character here, and by aiding and abetting these Dancers, Ravishers, and
Debauchees, is in danger to be taken tripping.

As for Latona, if she was influenced by her Children she was a very Dutiful
Mother; and Xanthus being a Trojan River" is very Naturally, and without any
Design or Artifice of the Poet, "interested for his Country."

Do you not begin to believe upon this Review of the Matter, which I hope you
will think a fair and impartial one, that this Division of the Gods in Homer,
was made much more at random than Eustathius would have persuaded you it was;
and that the Gods upon Jupiter's Permission to them to assist either Party in
the Beginning of this Book, gratified their personal Inclinations, and
Affections; -- Nay Jupiter himself supposes they had done, and would do this.

Celestial Powers descend
And as your Minds direct, your Succor lend
To either Host. L. 35. etc. B. xx.
And farther the Speeches which the Poet puts in the Mouths of his Gods when
they come to engage, are full of personal Invectives, and Reproaches, and
contain little or nothing that countenances an Allegorical Construction. Mars
puts Minerva in Mind of the Wound Diomed had given him through her Instigation.

-- In thy frantic Mood
Thou drov'st a Mortal to insult a God;
Thy impious Hand Tydides' Javelin bore,
And madly bathed it in celestial Gore.
L. 460. etc. B. xxi.
Minerva, whom we may observe, Homer represents in this Engagement as superior
to Mars in point of bodily Strength, not by Virtue of any Art or Stratagem,
insults her vanquished Antagonist in the Language of a Conqueror, instead of
reproving his Rashness in a Style that would have better become the Goddess of
Wisdom: Have thou not yet, insatiate Fury! known
How far Minerva's Force transcends thy own?
L. 478. The same Goddess next attacks Venus, and easily overcomes her, which
Circumstance may, I apprehend, be best literally understood; for in an
Allegorical Sense, Venus might have been at least a Match for Minerva, as Love
often takes Possession of the bravest Heart, and is irresistible by the wisest
Counsels. -- And if Venus had been victorious here, I make no Doubt but that
Sense would have been put upon this Passage.

Neptune addresses himself to Apollo in a long Speech, in which he
recapitulates the injurious Treatment they had both met with from Laomedon, and
wonders at that God's Forgetfulness, and Forgiveness of the same: But he drops
not a single Syllable that intimates himself to be the Representative of
Humidity, or Apollo of Dryness upon this Occasion.

Juno gives Diana most abusive Language, and "Boxes her soundly" into the
Bargain, as Mr. Pope expresses it; -- but I see no Clue to a Mystery in all
this Business, nor any Thing suitable to the Emblematical Characters of either
Goddess.

Lastly, upon Mercury's declining to fight with Latona, Mr. Pope borrows this
Remark from Eustathius; that, See Note at L. 580.
It is impossible that Mercury should encounter Latona; such a Fiction would be
unnatural, he being a Planet and she representing the Night; for the Planets
owe all their Luster to the Shades of the Night, and then only become visible
to the World. -- This Commentator in another Place See Note at L. 91. B. xx.
exclaims with Admiration; With what Art does the Poet engage the Gods in this
Conflict! But sure if there be Truth in the last cited Observation, there was
little Art in making Latona, and Mercury take different Sides. -- In short as
exactly See Note at L. 91. B. xx.
as some Circumstances may tally in the the Disposition of this Engagement, I
am apt to think, upon the whole, it is rather to be attributed to Chance, than
Design, and that the Expositors in general, either through Zeal for the Honor of
Homer, or in Ostentation of their own Sagacity, have gone greater Lengths in
their Allegorical Hypothesis, than they could justify from the plain Scheme of
their Author. But I will take Occasion once more to resume this Argument.

LETTER V.
IT bears hard, I presume, upon the Notion of an allegorical Meaning's being
couched under the Appearances and Actions of Homer's Deities, that we are so
often at a Loss for any Reason to be alleged for them, or cannot give one with
Consistency, and Propriety. If this did not abundantly appear to be the Case
from what has been laid before you, we might proceed to ask, how it comes to
pass that the Interposition of Juno in the Sea B. xvi. L. 540, etc.
16th Book prevents Jupiter's seeming Design to save Sarpedon? Why does she
interpose at all, or why is this the Effect of it? How comes this Goddess to
interfere in the present Passage, and Minerva in the Sea B. xxii. L. 233.
22d Book, when Jupiter discovers the same Inclination to deliver Hector? -- If
Eustathius rightly observes that the Conduct of Homer is remarkably just and
rational, in the fifth Book of the Sea L. 540. B. v.
Iliad, where he tells us Diomed notwithstanding his intrepid Character retired
from Apollo, because it was impossible for him to vanquish Apollo, in
whatsoever Capacity he is considered, either as the Sun, or as Destiny; how is
it that the same Commentator commends in another Place a Conduct, which is the
very Reverse of this? How See Note at L. 110. B. xvii.
observable, says he, or rather Mr. Pope in his Name, is Homer's Art of
illustrating the Valor, and Glory of his Heroes? Menelaus, who sees Hector and
all the Trojans rushing upon him, would not retire if Apollo did not support
them; and though Apollo does support them, he would oppose even Apollo, were
Ajax but near him. According to this Remark (if it is reconcilable with the
former) Menelaus behaves with more Intrepidity or rather Rashness than Diomed
himself; and yet neither are the Characteristics of that Hero, of whom we shall
have something more to say by and by. In the seventh Book, Apollo, we are
informed, See Note at L. 328. B. vii.
comes very opportunely to save his favorite Hector who is overpowered by Ajax.
Eustathius says, that Apollo is the very same with Destiny; so that when Homer
says Apollo saved him, he means no more than that it was not his Fate yet to
die. Now methinks, if this Observation is justly made, this Deity should appear
to the Relief of every Hero in the like Extremity: And yet it is Venus who
saves Paris in the third Book, and Aeneas in the fifth; as Neptune does the
latter this same good Office in the twentieth.

It belongs to the Advocates of the common Notion to solve all these
Difficulties, and many more that might be added to them. -- In the mean Time I
would have you turn your Eyes to a Passage or two, where the Allegory is
supposed to be self-evident, and tell me whether the Matter be so undeniably
clear as the Illustrations of the Commentators pretend to make it. The Descent
of Minerva in the first Book to prevent Achilles' attempting the Life of
Agamemnon is descanted upon at large as a Passage of this Nature. The Sea Note
at L. 261. B. i.
Allegory here (says Mr. Pope) may be allowed by every Reader to be unforced:
The Prudence of Achilles checks him in the rashest Moment of his Anger, it
works upon him unseen to others, but does not entirely prevail upon him to
desist till he remembers his own Importance, and depends upon it, that there
will be a Necessity of their courting him at any Expense into their Alliance
again. Having persuaded himself by such Reflections, he forbears to attack his
General, but thinking that he sacrifices enough to Prudence by this
Forbearance, lets the Thought of it vanish from him; and no sooner is Wisdom
gone, but he falls into more violent Reproaches for the Gratification of his
Passion. All this is a most beautiful Passage, whose Moral is evident, and
generally agreed on by the Commentators.

Now had Minerva only been the Actress in this Affair, all this had been a very
natural Explication; but Homer gives us to understand that Minerva was See L.
262.
dispatched by Juno (the Goddess of Honor) on this Errand. If therefore Juno be
not an utterly insignificant Personage in this Transaction, the Honor as well
as the Prudence of Achilles must be supposed to suggest his present Conduct to
him. But as a Soldier, and a passionate one too, no doubt he must think himself
obliged in Point of Honor to take immediate Satisfaction for the Affront which
had been put upon him; and so his Honor suggests, what his Prudence forbids.
As allegorical Persons therefore I cannot think but Juno and Minerva appear
together with some Force in this Machine. Nor, by the way, does it seem
agreeable to the Character of the Goddess of Wisdom to suffer Achilles to break
out into such scurrilous and virulent Expressions as he makes Use of in his
next Speech to Agamemnon; he does this when Wisdom is gone, Mr. Pope says, but
still it was by her Permission, one might say Direction indeed. The Force of
keen Reproaches let him feel. l. 279.
The Original is stronger, and contains a more unlimited Commission; and in
consequence of it Achilles rates his General with a Vengeance; O Monster! mixed
of Insolence, and Fear;
Thou Dog in Forehead, but in Heart a Deer!
l. 297, etc. Even this Passage then you see is not clear of Difficulties, and
as much as may be said in Defense of the allegorical Interpretation, the
literal Sense is at least easy, and liable to no Exception.

I will only desire you to turn once more to the fifth Book, of which Mr. Pope
observes, See Note at the End of B. v.
the Allegory lies so open, is carried on with such Closeness, and wound up
with so much Fullness and Strength, that it is a Wonder how it could enter into
the Imagination of any Critic, that these Actions of Diomed were only a daring
and extravagant Fiction in Homer, as if he affected the mavelous at any Rate.
The great Moral of it is, that a brave Man should not contend against Heaven,
but resist only Venus and Mars, Incontinence and ungoverned Fury. -- Nothing is
more observable than the particular Care Homer has taken to show he designed
this Moral. -- Minerva, at the Beginning of the Battle, is made to give this
Precept to Diomed: Fight not against the Gods, but give Way to them, and resist
only VENUS. The Hero himself, as soon as he has performed her Dictates in
driving away Venus, cries out not as to the Goddess, but as to the Passion,
Thou have no Business with Warriors, is it not enough that thou deceivest weak
Women? Even the Mother of Venus, while she comforts her Daughter, bears
Testimony to the Moral: That Man (says she) is not long lived who contends with
the Gods. And when Diomed, transported by his Nature, proceeds but a Step too
far, Apollo discovers himself in the most solemn Manner, and declares this
Truth in his own Voice, as it were by direct Revelation: Mortal, forbear,
consider and know the vast Difference there is between the Gods and thee, etc.

Now in the first Place I am afraid Homer will not appear to have been so
particularly careful to show he designed this Moral, as Mr. Pope would make us
believe. For though Diomed was commanded in the Beginning of the Battle to give
Way to the Gods, and resist only Venus, he is afterward empowered to attack
Mars, and any Deity that should come in his Way; Not Mars himself, nor Ought
immortal fear. l. 1020. Accordingly he is directed in the Original to fall upon
Mars See L. 829 of the 5th Book of the Iliad.
first; and therefore though he actually attacks no other God, he seems to have
been sufficiently authorized to do it, which is a Circumstance that clashes
with the Allegory. -- But what bears still harder upon it in my Opinion is
this, that though the Poet speaks in high Terms of the Bravery and Intrepidity
of this Hero, and of the Honor he had to be under the immediate Protection of
Minerva, yet he represents his wounding of Venus, and contending with the
heavenly Powers, as Acts of the highest Rashness and Impiety. Observe Dione's
Words to her Daughter, which Mr. Pope refers to as a Proof of Homer's Intention
to inculcate his Moral, etc.

Rash, impious Man! to stain the blessed Abodes,
And drench his Arrows in the Blood of Gods!
But thou (though Pallas urged thy frantic Deed)
Whose Spear ill-fated makes a Goddess bleed,
Know thou, whoever with heavenly power contends,
Short is his Date, and soon his Glory ends. etc. etc.
l. 491, etc.
And if you will regulate your Opinion by Virgil's Judgment of this Matter, you
will find Diomed See Note at L. 500.
according to that Author, as Mr. Pope remarks, in his Answer to the Ambassador
of King Latinus, enumerating his Misfortunes, and imputing the Cause of them to
this impious Attempt upon Venus.

Haec adeo ex illo mihi jam speranda fuerunt
Tempore, cum ferro coelestia corpora demens
Appetii, and Veneris violavi vulnere dextram.
Aeneid. l. 11.
Nay Diomed condemns himself for this very Action in his Speech to Glaucus in
the next Book, and intimates the great Danger he had exposed himself to by it.

But if from Heaven, celestial thou descend;
Know, with Immortals we no more contend.
Not long Lycurgus viewed the golden Light,
That daring Man who mixed with Gods in Fight, etc.
B. 6. l. 160. etc.
I cannot help transcribing to you Mr. Pope's Note upon this Place, who begins
now to be of the same Sentiment. A quick Change of Mind from the greatest
Impiety to as great Superstition is frequently observable in Men, who having
been guilty of the greatest Crimes without any Remorse, on the sudden are
filled with Doubts and Scruples about the most lawful or indifferent Actions.
This seems the present Case of Diomed, who having knowingly wounded and
insulted the Deities, is now afraid to engage the first Man he meets, lest
perhaps a God might be concealed in that Shape. I confess this Fear of Diomed,
which violently shakes the Allegory in Question, appears to me inconsistent
likewise with the Tenor of this Hero's Character; nor can I think Mr. Pope
brings him off when he acquaints us in the following Note, that what Diomed
here says is the Effect of Remorse, as if he had exceeded the Commission of
Pallas in encountering with the Gods, and dreaded the Consequences of proceeding
too far. At least he had no such Commission now, and besides, was no longer
capable of distinguishing them from Men (a Faculty she had given him in the
foregoing Book). He there mentions this Story of Lycurgus as an Example that
sufficed to terrify him from so rash an Undertaking.

Now in the first Place it by no Means appears that this Commission was
expired, or that Faculty ceased; at least the contrary may be inferred from Mr.
Pope's Translation of this Speech. Diomed says but two Lines above Unhappy
they, and born of luckless Sires,
Who tempt our Fury when Minerva fires! l. 157.
After all, why should he torment himself with Reflections on what he had done
only by Virtue of that Commission before, which he was far from exceeding
except in his Attempt upon Apollo, from whom however upon the first Reproof he
retired? Or, why should the Example of Lycurgus, who acted not by divine
Impulse, terrify one who confessedly did? In this Light what will become of the
allegorical Characters of Minerva, Mars, and Venus; or how comes a Hero to be
troubled in Conscience because he had been resisting Incontinence, and
ungoverned Fury? Thus you find this Allegory, which we were told lies so open,
is clogged likewise with its Difficulties; from which indeed neither is the
literal Construction of the Passage clear; for it seems unreasonable that a Man
should suffer from the Resentment of one God for what he committed by the
Direction, and Command of another; though this is no unusual Thing in Pagan
Story.

Upon the whole, to have done with the Machinery of this great Poet, I leave it
to you to judge, whether there is not abundant Ground to conclude, that the
Interpreters have frequently taken Pains to ascertain a Meaning in him which
never came into his Head; that if he had a latent and symbolical Meaning, at
least they have not hit upon it, and that there is more Ingenuity than
Solidity, as we have hinted, in many of their Interpretations. In a Word, I
cannot see how any thing like a regular and consistent System either of
Theology, or of Morality, can be extracted from Homer's Machinery -- if he
drops a Sentiment or an Expression occasionally, as he often does, with a View
one would think to convince his Reader of the Rectitude of his private Notions
with Regard to the Deity, his Jupiter appears to have been a fabulous and
traditional Character, and is drawn with Imperfections, and Infirmities
incompatible with the natural Ideas of a supreme Being. As to the inferior
Deities it seems impossible to form a precise Idea of their hidden
Significancy, or allegorical Importance, from the Actions which we have seen
ascribed to them: So that Homer had really much less Design in the Plan of his
Poem than is supposed (on which Supposition he may however be plainly made more
uniform, and of a Piece) or he had much more than has ever yet been, or we may
suppose now ever will be, comprehended. In my next I will consider in another
Point of View the noble Production of this excellent Poet.

LETTER VI.
IT may be proper to remind you in this Place that I neither have said, nor
shall say any thing of Homer with an Intent to lessen your Opinion of him, but
to set it right; for it is one Thing to undervalue a Poet, and another to
undeceive the Reader. If Homer be justly esteemed one of the greatest Geniuses
the World has produced, (perhaps the greatest) it is to be remembered that he
is one of the first too; and it is absurd to look for that Perfection in the
Original, which we have a Right to expect in the Copy. It is the Characteristic
of Invention to be great, of Imitation, to be exact; and if Virgil could not
have improved the Model of the Epopee left him by Homer, he should not have
taken a Pen in his Hand. The Intervention of Homer with all his Defects will
always be the Object of our Admiration; the Judgment of Virgil with all his
Proprieties will only deserve our Praise. -- I own it has often amazed me to
find the Commentators so confident to deny, or solicitous to extenuate Homer's
Defects, which really do no Discredit to him, and which ought to be imputed to
that Simplicity with which every original Production of the human Mind is
naturally imagined. It is, I apprehend, for want of considering this great
Author in this Light, that the Expositors often run into the opposite Extreme,
and are industrious to discover Beauties and Excellencies which were merely
accidental, and ought rather to be put to the Account of the Editor's Affection
or Sagacity, than to that of the Art, or Design of the Author. -- Under this
Notion I have already submitted to your Consideration my Sentiments on Homer's
Machines; and agreeably to my Proposal I shall next give you my Thoughts upon
the Plan or Economy of the Iliad in general, and then proceed to a Review of
the Poet's Conduct in some particular Instances. Now, I think, it may be noted
as a Defect in the general Economy of the Iliad, which is to be ascribed to
the Cause just mentioned, that the Poet has not taken sufficient Care to
interest his Readers on the Side of his Countrymen, notwithstanding the
apparent Justice of their Cause. This is clear to me from several
Considerations, as first from the Countenance and Protection given to the
Trojans in general by Jupiter, in Preference to the Greeks. -- I am very
sensible the Commentators represent this Protection as the Consequence only of
that God's Promise to Thetis, to humble the Grecians, and do Honor to
Achilles. -- But is it not as plain too, that Jupiter throughout the Poem is
personally wellaffected to Troy in general, and that for very good Reasons? It
appears from Jupiter's Answer to Thetis, that he had declared himself in the
Interest of the Trojans long before she made this Application to him,

What have thou asked? Ah! why should Jove engage
In foreign Contests, and domestic Rage,
The Gods Complaints, and Juno's fierce Alarms,
While I, too partial, aid the Trojan Arms?
B. 1. l. 672.
And he afterward, in the Council wherein he intimates himself disposed to end
the War, with the Approbation of the other Deities, by suffering the Treaty
made upon the Duel of Menelaus, and Paris to take Effect, expresses a more than
ordinary Concern for Troy, as a Place that deserved well at his Hands.

For know of all the numerous Towns that rise
Beneath the rolling Sun, and starry Skies,
Which Gods have raised, or earth-born Men enjoy,
None stands so dear to Jove, as sacred Troy.
No Mortals merit more distinguished Grace,
Than God-like Priam, or than Priam's Race.
Still to our Name their Hecatomb's expire,
And Altars blaze with unextinguish'd Fire.
B. 4. L. 65. etc.
Mr. Pope has a Note from Dacier, which corroborates what I have remarked upon
this Head. See Note at L. 9. B. iv.
Jupiter's Reproaching these two Goddesses (Juno and Pallas) with neglecting to
assist Menelaus (in the Duel) proceeds from the Affection he bore to Troy;
since if Menelaus had gained by their Help a complete Victory, (which it has
been observed, was a sufficient one) the Siege had been raised, and the City
delivered. On the contrary, Juno and Minerva might suffer Paris to escape, as
the Method to continue the War, to the total Destruction of Troy; and
accordingly a few Lines after we find them complotting together, and contriving
a new Scene of Miseries to the Trojans. The latter Part of this Note confirms
what has been before observed, that these Goddesses seem to have been actuated
by a Spirit of the most inveterate Malice, and Animosity against a whole Race
Unius obnoxam. The Restitution of Helen, etc. was not the grand Object of their
Counsels.

Indeed, if you take them in the Gross, I believe you will find the Deities on
the Side of Troy (though Mars is in the Number) to be more gentle, and mercifully
inclined, than those that are the Assistants of the Greeks.

Again, I cannot help being of Opinion that upon the whole, the Poet gives us a
much more favorable Idea of the Trojans, than he does of the Greeks, if we
regard the Manners, and Characters of the Heroes concerned on both Sides. Let
us take a short View of the principal Personages that fight in the Cause of
Troy. Hector, as Mr. Pope says, See Note at L. 53. B. iii.
if he is not the chief Hero in the Iliad, is at least the most amiable, and is
for several Reasons a favorite Character with every Reader. -- He stands in
contrast to Achilles, an accomplished Character of Valor, unruffled by Rage,
and Anger, and uniting his People by his Prudence, and Example. It is the Love
of his Country, which appears his principal Passion, and the Motive of all his
Actions. He has no other Blemish than that he fights in an unjust Cause, which
Homer has yet been careful to tell us he would not do, if his Opinion were
followed. We may add, that Homer, having so many Greeks to celebrate, makes
them shine it their Turns, etc. whereas Hector appears in every Battle the Life
and Soul of his Party, and the constant Bulwark against every Enemy; he stands
against Agamemnon's Magnanimity, Diomed's Bravery, Ajax's Strength, and
Achilles's Fury.

See Note at L. 212. B. v.
The Piety, and Valor of Aeneas, though not drawn at so full a Length, are
marked no less in (Homer) the Original, than in (Virgil) the Copy. It is the
Manner of Homer to express very strongly the Character of each of his Persons
in the first Speech he is made to utter in the Poem. In this of Aeneas there is
a great Air of Piety in those Strokes, Is he some God who punishes TROY for
having neglected his Sacrifices? and then in that Sentence, the Anger of Heaven
is Terrible. In a Word, as Mr. Pope tells us in another Place. See Note at L.
345. B. xx.
Though Aeneas is represented a Man of great Courage, yet his Piety is his most
shining Character: This is the Reason why he is always the Care of the Gods,
etc.

The Character of Sarpedon, says the same Commentator, is the Sea Note at L.
512. B. xvi.
most faultless, and amiable in the whole Iliad. This Hero is by Birth
superior to all the Chiefs of either Side, being the only Son of Jupiter
engaged in this War. His Qualities are no way unworthy his Descent, since he
every where appears equal in Valor, Prudence, and Eloquence to the most
admired Heroes: Nor are these Excellencies blemished with any of those Defects
with which the most distinguished Characters of the Poem are stained; so that
the nicest Critics cannot find any Thing to offend their Delicacy, but must be
obliged to own the Manners of this Hero perfect. His Valor is neither rash,
nor boisterous, his Prudence neither timorous, nor tricking; and his Eloquence,
neither talkative, nor boasting. He never reproaches the Living, nor insults
the Dead; but appears uniform through his Conduct in the War, acting with the
same generous Sentiments that engaged him in it; having no interest in the
Quarrel, but to succor his Allies in distress. This noble Life is ended with a
Death as glorious; for in his last Moments he has no other Concern, but for the
Honor of his Friends, and the Event of the Day. -- His is the only Death in
the Iliad attended with Prodigies; even his Funeral is performed by divine
Assistance, he being the only Hero whose Body is carried back to be interred in
his native Country, etc. -- These peculiar and distinguishing Honors seem
appropriated by our Author to him alone, as the Reward of a Merit superior to
all his other less perfect Heroes. These are the most illustrious Characters on
the Side of Troy; though the inferior ones, if not so striking, are at least
generally amiable and inoffensive; as those of Deiphobus, Helenus, Polydamas,
and Glaucus. Even that of Paris is upon the whole far from being odious, or
disgusting. I believe, among other Things the Value every Reader has for these
Characters, particularly his Love and Esteem of Hector, inclines his Wishes to
the Side of Troy. Indeed Mr. Pope has (perhaps undesignedly) given us in the
above Accounts of Sarpedon, a kind of Contrast to the Manners, and Characters
of many of the Leaders in the Grecian Army. For the Valor of Achilles, and of
Diomed is undoubtedly rash, and boisterous; the Prudence of Ulysses is
sometimes See Note at L. 121. B. viii.
timorous; and the Eloquence of Idomeneus, and Nector is talkative and
boasting. But what Prejudices us more than any Thing else against the Greeks,
is that Cruelty, and Inhumanity which is so remarkable in their Chiefs of the
first Note, and Figure. Granting Achilles in all he does to act in Character,
and suitably to his ferocious and vindictive Spirit the very Nature of the
Character itself is offensive, and the Propriety and Coherence with which it is
preserved, distasteful. His Inhumanity in dragging the dead Body of Hector has
been severely (and I think indeed not without some Justice, says Mr. Pope)
censured by several, both Ancients, and Moderns. Indeed the Question is whether
the whole Picture of Achilles as drawn by Homer, has not stronger, and more
violent Features in it than Necessity required? The Subject of the Poem is the
Anger of this Hero, and the ill Consequences of it to the Greeks; but this
brutal Treatment of the Body of a generous Enemy, is neither the natural Effect
of that Anger, nor a Soldier-like Revenge for the Death of his Friend
Patroclus. -- It Is true, the Commentators have observed that, See Note at L.
137. B. xvii.
Homer takes Care before Hand, to lessen in his Reader's Mind the Horror he
may conceive from the Cruelty which Achilles will exercise upon the Body of
Hector, by showing this Cruelty as the Punishment only of that which Hector
exercises upon the Body of Patroclus; he drags him; he designs to cut off his
Head, and to leave his Body upon the Ramparts, exposed to Dogs, and Birds of
Prey. The Observation is founded on Fact; but however as this Piece of intended
Cruelty is inconsistent with Hector's general Character, he should not have
been represented as capable of it, and as it was only intended, it makes not so
horrible an Impression upon us as the actual Inhumanity of the Poet's
favourrite Hero. I have often thought by the way, that the Barbarity of
Achilles toward the Remains of the unfortunate, and universally beloved
Hector, occasioned the Misrepresentation of the very Fact of his Death by the
well-known Story, (which Shakespeare adheres to in his Troilus and Cressida) of
Achilles's ungenerously attacking him unarmed, and cutting him to Pieces. -- So
desirous was the exasperated Author to depreciate the Character of this Hero,
and exalt that of his Adversary. But to return; be the Character of Achilles as
"poetically perfect" as possible, and the Morality to be drawn from it as
obvious as you please, he seems to have the least Merit of any of the principal
Personages in the Poem, and we can scarce help being sorry to see so many
detestable Qualities on the right Side of the Question: In a Word "the Virtues
of Humanity" which he See Note at L. 798. B. xxiv.
discovers in the 24th Book, when he restores the Body of Hector to Priam, and
"the amiable Qualities" which Mr. Pope tells us soften the terrible Ideas we
have conceived of him are exercised too late to wipe off the Stain of his past
unheroical, and unmanly Behavior; especially when we consider that this Act of
Humanity was the Effect of Jupiter's express Command, delivered by his Mother
Thetis.

In short, though we cannot but take Notice of a great deal of Insolence and
Cruelty on both Sides, and are shocked, as Mr. Pope confesses he is, at the
many Instances of Inhumanity that occur throughout the Poem, which however are
not to be See Note at L. 57. B. vi.
imputed to the Poet, who followed Nature as it was in his Days, but to be
ascribed to the uncivilized Manners of those Times, when Mankind was not united
by the Bonds of a rational Society, yet I believe we shall find much more Blame
due to the Greeks, than to the Trojans upon this Score. Not to insist upon
those other glaring Proofs of a bloody, and unmerciful Disposition, which
Achilles gives in the killing Lycaon See B. xxi. L. 35. etc.
, taking twelve Captives whom he sacrifices afterward to the Manes of
Patroclus, we see Agamemnon too upon certain Occasions betraying a fierce, and
cruel Temper; as particularly when he prevails upon his Brother to take away a
Trojan's Life which he was inclined in Compassion to See B. vi. L. 55. etc.
spare. I do not know where you will meet with more savage Sentiments than those
of this General in the following Speech to Menelaus.

-- Oh impotent of Mind!
Shall these, shall these Atrides' Mercy find?
Well have thou known proud Troy's perfidious Land,
And well her Natives merit at thy Hand!
Not one of all the Race, nor Sex, nor Age,
Shall save a Trojan from our boundless Rage:
Ilion shall perish whole, and bury all;
Her Babes, her Infants at the Breast shall fall.
L. 67. etc. B. vi.
And if you will turn to the Original you will perhaps think it much softened
in this Translation; notwithstanding Mr. Pope's Observation See Note at L. 74.
B. vi.
from Madam Dacier. It should be remembered too, that the venerable Nestor
himself is a Spectator and Applauder of this Act of Cruelty.

But there is one Consideration behind that interests the Reader in the Behalf
of Troy, much more than all the rest; I mean that of the private Characters of
Priam and his Royal Family. Mr. Pope is of Opinion that the Poet's chief See
Note at L. 107. B. vi.
Intention in making Hector retire from the Battle to carry a Message to Troy
etc. was to introduce the fine Episode of his parting with Andromache in which
the Sea Note at L. 462.
amiable Picture of conjugal Love Homer has drawn gives us Cause to think his
Genius was no less capable of touching the Heart with Tenderness, than of
firing it with Glory. This Episode, (says that excellent Person,) tends very
much to raise the Character of Hector, and endear him to every Reader, and
indeed we cannot admire this Hero more in the Field, than we love him at Home.
His Conduct, his Courage, and his Valor are common to him with many others,
but his affectionate Tenderness to his Parents, his Wife, his Child, and his
Friends is characteristical, and peculiar to himself.

In a Word, you cannot, I believe, but be a Well-wisher to the House of Priam,
when you consider the general Character of this good old Man himself, whose
only Fault was his Indulgence to his Children, and especially his Piety which
"renders him a Favorite of Jupiter," and procures him the Restitution of his
Son's Body; or when you look into the Manners of his whole Family, not even
Helen excepted, but as she is the Mistress of Paris, or Paris himself, but as
he is the Admirer of that fatal Beauty. Upon the whole, I leave you to judge
whether the Grecians do not deserve the Appellation of barbarous, according to
the worst Acceptance of the Term, much more than the People, or the Allies of
Troy.

I cannot think then with Mr. Pope that Homer See Note at L. 49. B. v.
always appears very zealous for the Honor of Greece, or even that he seems to
be so in the Instance produced to support the Assertion; I mean, that of the
Trojans in the Beginning of the third Book rushing on to the Battle in a
barbarous and confused Manner with loud Shouts and Cries, while the Greeks
advance in the most profound Silence and exact Order. This Circumstance, it
seems, is a Proof of the Poet's Endeavor every where to represent the Greeks
as superior to the Trojans in Valor, and the Art of War, to which if you add
the Circumstance of the Grecians being animated by Pallas and the Trojans
instigated by Mars i. e. the former, "by a well-conducted Valor," and the
latter by "rash Strength and brutal Force," the Matter will bear no Dispute.
What Weight there is in this latter Circumstance you will easily see upon
recollecting what has been already remarked upon the Machines of Homer, and for
the former, I think you will agree with me, that little is to be fairly
inferred from it to the Advantage of the Greeks. The Trojan Manner of
encountering with Shouts and Outcries is no Argument against their military
Discipline, or Proof that they were not drawn up in as "exact Order" as the
Grecians themselves. See Note at L. 3. B. iii.
Perhaps these Clamours were only to encourage their Men, instead of martial
Instruments, as Mr. Pope has not scrupled to intimate; at least it is a
Peculiarity (as what Nation is without one?) that does no Discredit to their
Discipline, or Skill in the "Art of War." Indeed the supposed constant See Note
at L. 49. B. iii.
Superiority of the Grecians etc. is by no means so apparent to me as it has
been to the Commentators in general; and probably you may be of the same Mind
if you will refer to Book iv. L. 508, etc. to Book viii. L. 73, etc. to Book
xi. L. 93, etc. to Book vii. L. 11, etc. 23, etc. etc. and to other Places,
wherein there seems to be no Sort of Inferiority on the Part of Troy in respect
of Conduct, Bravery, or Resolution. More might be said upon this Article, but I
have exceeded the ordinary Bounds of my Letters, and indeed should not have
said so much, but that I thought it necessary to enter into such
Particularities as these in order to give you the clearer Idea of an Author
whose Work, I presume, you will think it a rational Amusement thoroughly to
examine and discuss.

LETTER VII.
I Have two more Objections to the general Economy of the Iliad which I am apt
to believe, a little Attention will convince you are reasonable ones; the first
is, that Achilles, the Hero of the Poem, is not the first Personage in it in
Point of Dignity. Hector is his Superior in every amiable Quality, and
Agamemnon no less so in Power, and Command: And as the former Consideration
prepossesses the Reader in Favor of the Trojan General, so the latter has at
least a Tendency to interest us on the Side of Authority in the Quarrel at the
Beginning of the Poem: And the more so, as Homer, if he was not a Friend to
absolute Monarchy, does yet speak in very high Terms of the sacred Rights, and
inviolable Supremacy of Kings:

There want not Chiefs in such a Cause to fight,
says Agamemnon himself,
And Jove himself shall guard a Monarch's Right.
B. 1. l. 227, etc.
and afterward,

Hence shall thou prove my Might, and curse the Hour,
Thou stood'st a Rival of imperial Power;
And hence to all our Host it shall be known,
That Kings are subject to the Gods alone. l. 250, etc.
Old Nestor talks in the same Strain when he attempts to pacify these Chiefs;
(see Line 367, etc.) as does Ulysses in the next Book. (see L. 243, etc.

But besides the visible Propriety there had been in making Achilles Commander
in Chief, with which Appointment the great Design of the Poem, and the due
Execution of it were without Doubt consistent, it is plain that for Want of it
you will meet with much Incongruity, not to say Absurdity, in many Places. One
obvious Example shall suffice to maintain the Allegation; which is that of
Achilles's convening the Council in the first Book; an Act of Royalty that
became him no more than it would Diomed, Ulysses, or any secondary Commander in
the Army. Indeed this very Circumstance you find mentioned by Mr. Pope in his
Note from Plutarch and Eustathius, as doing great Honor to the Judgment of
Homer; for which Reason it will be proper to transcribe it. -- Plutarch
observes, how justly Homer applies the Characters of his Persons to the
Incidents; not making Agamemnon, but Achilles call this Council, who of all the
Kings was most capable of making Observations upon the Plague, and of
foreseeing its Duration, as having been bred by Chiron to the Study of Physic.
One may mention also a Remark of Eustathius in Pursuance to this, that Juno's
advising him in this Case might allude to his Knowledge of an evil Temperament
in the Air, of which she was Goddess. Now admitting the supposed Skill of this
Hero, etc. to have been a good Reason for his private Advice in regard to the
Convention of this Council, and for his delivering his Opinion in it with more
than ordinary Freedom and Confidence, yet how it could give him a Right to call
it, or to open it in Consequence of so doing with a formal Speech, I confess, I
cannot at all comprehend. -- You will give me Leave just to illustrate what I
have been observing upon this Head, by directing you to a Passage in the 24th
Book, in which Achilles at the Height of his Glory, and Popularity among the
Greeks, and at the very Instant that he promises See Note at L. 819.
Priam a Cessation of Arms purely by his own Authority does nevertheless in
Effect acknowledge his Subordination to the Imperial Character, and by his
Apprehensions of the Consequences of the present Proceeding: as if the Poet,
even while he is aggrandizing his Hero, was conscious of ascribing an
Importance to him unsuitable to the Inferiority of his Station.

Then he: Now, Father, sleep, but sleep not here,
Consult thy Safety, and forgive my Fear,
Lest any Argive (at this Hour awake,
To ask our Counsel, or our Orders take)
Approaching sudden to our opened Tent,
Perchance behold thee, and our Grace prevent.
Should such Report thy honored Person hear,
The King of Men the Ransom might defer.
But say with Speed, if ought of thy Desire
Remains unasked; what Time the Rites require
TO interr thy Hector? For so long we stay
Our slaught'ring Arm, and bid the Hosts obey.
L. 816, etc.
You observe there is an Inconsistency here which would have been saved had
Achilles been the principal Person in respect of Precedence, as well as Valor,
etc. etc.

But it is Time to come to the other Objection, which, as I am not singular in
it, I will give you in the Words of Mr. Pope's Note prefixed to the 23d Book of
the Iliad, and endeavor to confirm it by a Remark or two upon what that
Expositor has offered by way of Vindication of his Author. This, and the
following Book, which contain the Description of the Funeral of Patroclus, and
other Matters relating to Hector, are undoubtedly super-added to the grand
Catastrophe of the Poem; for the Story is completely finished with the Death of
that Hero in the 22d Book. Many judicious Critics have been of Opinion, that
Homer is blameable for protracting it. Virgil closes the whole Scene of Action
with the Death of Turnus, and leaves the rest to be imagined by the Mind of the
Reader: He does not draw the Picture at full Length, but delineates it so far,
that we cannot fail of imagining the whole Draught. There is however one Thing
to be said in Favor of Homer, which may perhaps justify him in his Method that
what he undertook to paint was the Anger of Achilles; and as that Anger does
not die with Hector, but persecutes his very Remains, so the Poet still keeps
up to his Subject; nay, it seems to require that he should carry down the
Relation of that Resentment, which is the Foundation of his Poem, till it is
fully satisfied: And as this survives Hector, and gives the Poet an Opportunity
of still showing many sad Effects of Achilles's Anger, the two following Books
may be thought not to be Excrescencies, but essential to the Poem.

Virgil had been inexcusable had he trod in Homer's Footsteps; for it is
evident that the Fall of Turnus, by giving Aeneas a full Power over Italy,
answers the whole Design and Intention of the Poem; had he gone farther he had
overshot his Mark; and though Homer proceeds after Hector's Death, yet the
Subject is still the Anger of Achilles. Now, I apprehend, the Anger of
Achilles, which is the Foundation of the Poem, is entirely distinct from that
Anger, or rather Revenge with which he persecutes the very Remains of Hector,
and that the whole declared "Design and Intention" of the Poet was "to paint
the Anger of Achilles" as the Source of all the Misfortunes the Grecians
underwent; which were ended by the Reconciliation of that Chief and Agamemnon.
We then see as plainly the good Effects of Union to the Greeks, as we did the
fatal Consequences of Discord through the most considerable Part of the Poem;
and therefore the Death of Hector, and the Triumph of the Grecians thereupon
was the proper, and natural Catastrophe of the Iliad. The Anger of Achilles,
considered as the Passion he was addicted to, might have been protracted
through many Books more. -- In short, the Super-addition of these Books,
especially the latter, instead of being justifiable by the Reasons above
alleged, does even come within the Reach of a former Objection: For the Care
taken of Hector's Body by two See B. xxiii. L. 226, etc.
Deities, the Debate in Heaven See B. 24. L. 44. etc.
concerning the Redemption of the same by Priam, the Interposition of Jupiter in
Behalf of his deceased Votary, Mercury's See L. 416. B. xxiv.
conducting Priam to the Tent of Achilles, the Interview of the two Monarchs,
and lastly, the several pathetic Lamentations made over the Corpse of the
unfortunate Hero by his Friends, and Relations at Troy, with which the Poem
concludes; I say, these Incidents confirm our former Prepossessions in Favor
of Hector, leave the most tender Impressions on our Minds, and at the same Time
inspire us with fresh Indignation at the Insolence, and Barbarity of his
implacable Enemy. -- Such are the Defects, as I conceive, in the general
Economy of the Ilias. -- In my next I will communicate to you some
Observations I have made upon the particular Conduct of the great Author in
Relation to Characters, Incidents, and other Circumstances, etc. etc.

LETTER VIII.
HOMER is with much Justice to be admired in the main for the agreeable Variety
of his Characters, and for the remarkable Spirit, and Uniformity with which
each of them is sustained. If he is sometimes faulty upon this Article it is to
be ascribed to mere human Infirmity perhaps, or in some Cases to that
Simplicity which, as has been said, distinguishes the Inventors of Arts and
Sciences from the Improvers of them. To one of these it is probably owing that
we see such a scandalous Character as that of Thersites in the Iliad, or so
contemptible a one as that of Nireus: The latter, the most beautiful, the
former, the most deformed Person of the Poem. It Is observable, Mr. Pope informs
us, that See Note at L. 255. B. ii.
Thersites is never heard of after his first Appearance: Such a scandalous
Character is to be taken no more Notice of, than just to show that it is
despised. But whether ludicrous or scandalous Characters ought to have Place in
the Epic Poem may be justly questioned, or whether it be a Beauty or Propriety
to introduce a Person but once, who seems to be utterly unworthy to appear at
all. As for See Note at L. 815. B. ii.
Nireus, the Insignificancy of his Character, should, I think, have excluded
him from the Iliad, who likewise makes his Appearance once too often. The Truth
is, neither of these Personages are of any Service toward the Illustration of
a principal Character. The Caution with which the Courage of Ulysses is
tempered, sets off the Intrepidity of Diomed, and the Activity of Hector is
finely opposed to the Immobility of Ajax; but the abovementioned Gentlemen are
at best unnecessary Contrasts to each other, and Foils to every Body else. --
But that you may not imagine, I am industriously looking after Objections, and
picking out Characters for the sake of finding Fault, (an Office I abhor) I
must desire you to look a little farther into a Character or two of much higher
Rank, which you will, I believe, find to be liable to the Objection of not
being preserved with that Nicety of Consistence, and Uniformity, which is in
general so Observable in this noble Writer. If you will judge of the Character
of Menelaus, by the Idea which Mr. Pope justly gives us of him, See Note at L.
278. B. iii.
who has taken some Pains to place it in a true Point of View, you will be, I
make no doubt, of Opinion, that upon the whole, his Character is by no Means
contemptible, though not of the most shining Nature: He is called indeed in the
17th Iliad. (...), a soft Warrior, or one whose Strength is of the second
Rate; and so his Brother thought him when he preferred Nine before him to Fight
with Hector, in the 7th Book. Thus far you may safely Subscribe to Mr. Pope's
Notion of this Commander; but I am afraid what follows for the Display of the
bright Side of this Character, will clash rather too much with these
Concessions made to his Disadvantage. For how comes this soft Warrior (whom,
you know, I have mentioned before in another Light,) to discover a Spirit of
Revenge which distinguishes him from all the other Greeks in the second Book,
No See Note at L. 711. B. ii.
Leader in all the List is represented so eager and passionate; he is louder
than them all in his Exhortations; more active in running among the Troops,
etc. etc.

If Homer meant to show us hereby that See Note at L. 711. B. ii.
his Concern in the War was personal, while the others acted only for Interest
or Glory in general, it is odd sure that he does not maintain this Priority of
Zeal and Ardour, as a consequence of that Concern throughout the Poem. Again is
it not hard to Account for his See Note at L. 109. B. vii. and at L. 131.
Forwardness, to accept Hector's Challenge, who immediately afterward was not
thought worthy even to take his Chance of fighting with him? It may be said,
that Agamemnon dissuades his brother from the Combat, from a Principle of
Brotherly Love, not from any Distrust of his Courage, of which he appears to
have so extraordinary an Opinion in the 4th Book, when Menelaus is wounded by
Pandarus, that he expresses his Apprehensions, that the Death of that Hero,
will force the Greeks to return with shame to their Country. Deprived of thee,
the heartless Greeks no more
Shall dream of Conquests on the hostile Shore, etc.
B 4. L. 208. etc. But if his Life was of such Consequence to Greece, he should
never have been styled a soft Warrior, or a Chief of the second Rate.

I will only point out to what I think rather an Oversight than not in Homer,
with regard to another Character, and then quit the present Article of Inquiry;
I mean the Character of Ajax, whom, not absolutely, but comparatively speaking,
I cannot look upon as a proper Person to be dispatched upon the Embassy to
Achilles in the 9th Book. Mr. Pope however informs us that the Choice of three
See Note at L. 222. B. ix.
Persons (Phoenix, Ajax, and Ulysses) is made with a great deal of Judgment.
Achilles could not but reverence the venerable Phoenix, etc. Ajax, and Ulysses,
had been disgraced in the first Book (L. 187) as well as he, and were therefore
proper Persons to persuade him to forgive, as they had forgiven; besides it was
the greatest Honor that could be done to Achilles, to send the most worthy
Personages in the Army to him. Ulysses was inferior to none in Eloquence, but
to Nestor. Ajax was second to none in Valor but to Achilles. Ajax might have
an influence over him as a Relation, etc.

Yet as ingenious as all this may be, it is certain, that of all the Heroes,
Ajax was the worst Orator, and so far at least he was was unqualified for the
Charge in Question. -- He is by no means a favorite Character with the Poet
himself; if he had he would have given him a Prize probably in some of the
Games in the 23d Book; one Reason why he did not, Mr. Pope supposes might be,
because he had a Mind to show that Strength without Conduct, is usually
unsuccessful, which gives us no favorable Idea of this Hero, and much less
authorizes us to pronounce him one of the most worthy Personages in the Army;
that he was second to none in Strength but to Achilles, may be granted; but in
Valor he has no doubt many Competitors. -- In Truth I cannot help looking upon
this as a random Delegation, notwithstanding a few plausible Circumstances,
which surely never entered the Author's Head, viz. the Disgrace of Ajax and
Ulysses in the first Book, etc. (a Disgrace which, by the way, they neither of
them resent, or allude to, in their Speeches to Achilles) or the Relationship
of Ajax to that Hero, which he takes not the least Advantage of in his Address
to him. -- Mr. Pope in the Note last quoted, appears therefore rather to have
acted the Part of a ready Friend, than an impartial Commentator. -- I will only
suppose, and have done, that Diomed had been employed in this Deputation
instead of Ajax; -- in that Case cannot you conceive Mr. Pope would have
expressed himself to the following Purpose? It is with wonderful Art and
Propriety, that Homer appoints Diomed one of the Ambassadors upon this
Occasion. It did Honor to Achilles to send upon this Business the most
valiant, with the wisest of all the Grecian Commanders. Besides, Diomed See
Note at L. 1. B. v.
has more of the Character of Achilles himself, than any besides. He has
naturally an Excess of Boldness, and too much Fury in his Temper, forward and
intrepid like the other, and running after Gods or Men promiscuously as they
offer themselves. Add to this, that as he is forward to act in the Field, so is
he ready to speak in the Council; where his Advice always inclines to War; and
is biased rather on the Side of Bravery, than Caution. A Man of this
Disposition was most likely to influence the Congenial Spirit of Achilles. --
An Ingenious Commentator may take a thousand Occasions of making the most of
his Author, and convert Improprieties themselves into Beauties; of which I
believe I shall be able to give you a few more Proofs in my remaining
Criticisms upon the Iliad of Homer.

LETTER IX.
THE most material Remarks I have farther to make upon the particular Conduct
of Homer, etc. I shall communicate to you in Order, as the Passages which seem
exceptionable will occur in the Course of the Poem. The first that offers
itself is the Interposition of Nestor in the first Book in the Speech wherein
he endeavors to make up the Breach between the contending Princes, Achilles
and Agamemnon; which, as the Design of the Iliad required it should be
ineffectual, I could wish he had spared. Mr. Pope observes, See Note at L. 339.
B. i.
that the Character of Authority and Wisdom in Nestor, is every where admirably
used by Homer, and made to exert itself through all the great Emergencies of
the Poem. As he quiets the Princes here (which how he does we shall see
presently) he proposes that Expedient which reduces the Army into order, after
the Sedition in the second Book. When the Greeks are in the utmost Distresses,
it is he who advises the Building the Fortification before the Fleet, etc. And
it is by his Persuasion that Patroclus puts on the Armor of Achilles, which
occasions the return of that Hero, etc. etc. In these last mentioned
Emergencies, indeed the Authority of this venerable Hero has all the Weight you
can desire; but sure in the present Instance, in which if it had prevailed, all
future Emergencies had been precluded, it was exerted to no, or at best, very
little Purpose. The old Man is represented as Master of the Art of Persuasion,
and rises to speak with all the Advantages of the sweetest Eloquence, and the
Experience of two Generations; and he seems accordingly to promise himself
Success in the Proposal of an Accommodation.

-- Young as you are, this youthful Heat restrain
Nor think your Nestor's Years and Wisdom vain --
-- Do you, young Warriors, hear my Age advise;
Atrides, seize not on the beauteous Slave,
That prize the Greeks by common Suffrage gave:
Nor thou, Achilles, treat our Prince with Pride,
Let Kings be just, and sovereign Power preside.
-- Let both unite with well-consenting Mind,
So shall Authority with Strength be joined.
Leave me, O King! to calm Achilles' Rage,
Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in Age:
Forbid it Gods! Achilles should be lost,
The Pride of Greece, and Bulwark of our Host.
B. i. L. 343. etc. 360. etc. 369. etc.
But what Effect, after all, has this Oratory? Agamemnon confesses that all he
spoke was right, but he will not relinquish his Pretensions to Briseis.
Achilles promises not to fight for Briseis, but neither will he for his
Country; opprobious Language is given on both Sides; the Council dissolves and
the Calamities of Greece ensue. For which Reasons I think the Eloquence of
Homer's Nestor is thrown out of Character by its proving unavailable for the
great End he designed it. -- If he had not spoken at all, or upon offering to
do it, had been interrupted, and prevented by the Fury of Achilles, who seems
to have less Veneration for him, than Agamemnon, that Hero had acted in
Character, and the Eloquence of the reverened Orator had never been exercised
in vain.

The next Objection I have to make, is against the imprudent, and unnecessary
Measure taken by Agamemnon, to sound the Disposition of the Grecians in the
second Book, by proposing the Return of the Forces to Greece; a Proposal which
had taken Effect, but for the Management of Ulysses, and Nestor. It is likely
indeed, (to give you the Words of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, See Note at L.
93. B. ii.
who, in Mr. Pope's Opinion, has given us an admirable Explication of this whole
Conduct) Agamemnon (after his Quarrel with Achilles) had nothing so much at
Heart as to draw the Greeks to a Battle, yet knew not how to proceed without
Achilles, who had just retired from the Army: He was apprehensive that the
Greeks who were displeased at the Departure of Achilles, might refuse Obedience
to his Orders, should he absolutely command it. In this Circumstance he
proposes an Expedient to the Princes in Council, which was that he should sound
the Dispositions of the People, by exhorting them to set sail for Greece, but,
that then, the other Princes should be ready to dissuade, and detain them. --
He had some Cause to fear the Greeks had a Pique against him, which they had
concealed, and whatever it was, he judged it absolutely necessary to know it,
before he proceeded to a Battle. He therefore furnishes them with an Occasion
to manifest it, and at the same Time provides against any ill Effects it might
have by his secret Orders to the Princes. It succeeds accordingly, and when the
Troops are running to embark, they are stopped by Ulysses and Nestor. -- Now
not to insist upon an inaccuracy in this Note; i. e. that Agamemnon judged it
Necessary to know what the Pique the Grecians had against him was, which if
they had any, could be no other than what arose from "their Displeasure at the
departure of Achilles," as is expressed in the former Part of the Note; I say,
not to dwell upon this, the Question is, whether this Stratagem was not
absolutely superseded by the Vision sent by Jupiter to Agamemnon? The Design of
this Vision was to deceive him into the Hope, or rather Assurance of taking
Troy without the Assistance of Achilles. And it had its Effect. The General,
persuaded, as it were by immediate Revelation, of Jupiter's Favor toward him,
and Concern for his Glory, and exalted with the Thought of the promised Success
to his Arms, communicates his Dream to the Princes in Council, who appear to a
Man to be satisfied of the Reality of it, and of the Good Will of Jupiter to
the Grecian Cause. Old Nestor gives his Advice in consequence of this
Conviction.

Princes of Greece, your faithful Ears incline
Nor doubt the Vision of the Powers divine,
Sent by great Jove, to him who rules the Host;
Forbid it Heaven! this Warning should be lost!
Then let us haste, obey the God's Alarms,
And join to rouse the Sons of Greece to Arms.
B. ii. L. 101. etc.
Let me ask you now, whether, if this Dream had been communicated to the
Troops, as well as the Council, they would not as readily have given Credit to
it, and have been impatient to follow to battle a Leader who was the declared
Favorite of Heaven? Would not the Belief of taking Troy in the next Attack,
under his Command, have entirely removed the Pique they had conceived against
him on Account of the Departure of Achilles? if so, as ingenious as the
Stratagem in Question may be in itself, and as artful as the Speech of
Agamemnon is, which he makes in pursuance of it, it seems to be an Expedient,
to which, as Things were then circumstanced, he was not under the least
Necessity, nor in Prudence concerned, to have Recourse.

If you will next turn to the 6th Book, I presume you will find an
Inconsistency between Hector's very particular Prophecy of the Destruction of
Troy, and his Prayer for his Son immediately after; as also, the "strong Hopes
See Note at L. 604. B. vi.
and firm Assurance" he often entertains of raising the Siege by the Flight or
Destruction of the Greeks.

Yet come it will, the Day decreed by Fates,
The Day when thou, imperial Troy, must bend,
And see thy Warriors fall, thy Glories end.
And yet no dire Presage so wounds my Mind,
My Mother's Death, the Ruin of my Kind,
Not Priam's hoary Hairs defiled with Gore,
Not all my Brother's gasping on the Shore;
As thine, Andromache, thy Griefs I dread;
I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led! etc.
B. vi. L. 570. etc.
O thou! whose Glory fills the Aetherial Throne.
And all ye deathless Powers, protect my Son!
Grant him, like me, to purchase just Renown,
To guard the Trojans, to defend the Crown,
Against his Country's Foes the War to wage,
And rise the Hector of the future Age!
L. 604. etc.
Heard ye the Voice of Jove? Success and Fame
Await on Troy, on Greece, eternal Shame.
In vain they skulk behind their boasted Wall,
Weak Bulwarks! destined by this Arm to fall.
-- Soon as before yon hollow Ships we stand,
Fight each with Flames, and toss the blazing Brand;
Till their proud Navy wrapped in Smoke and Fires,
All Greece, encompassed, in one Blaze expires.
B. viii. L. 214. etc. L. 621. etc.
I don't apprehend that what Mr. Pope has urged from Dacier, or advanced
himself, in order to salve this Inconsistency, will afford us sufficient
Satisfaction. We ought to reflect, says he, that this is only a Prayer: Hector
in the Excess of a tender Emotion for his Son, entreats the Gods to preserve
Troy, and permit Astyanax to rule there. It is at all Times allowable to
beseech Heaven to appease its Anger, and change its Decrees; and we are taught
that Prayers can alter Destiny. -- We are taught, I conceive the very Reverse
of this by the general Tenor of the Poem: This Assertion however, supposes
Hector to have foreseen the Destruction of Troy, and the Ruin of his Family;
and yet we are told in the next Sentence, that it cannot be inferred from
hence, that Hector had any divine Foreknowledge of his Fate, etc. since in many
following Passages we find him possessed with strong Hopes, etc. to raise the
Siege, etc. Is not this a sort of Confusion of Apologies, and a Defense of one
Inconsistency by another? In short, the direct, and express Prophecy above
quoted, cannot without much Force, be resolved into the mere Apprehensions and
Misgivings of a Soul dejected with Sorrow, etc. by considering the great
Dangers to which he saw all that was dear to him exposed.

But to proceed -- The Circumstance of Jupiter's weighing in his Scales the
Fates of Greece and Troy in the 8th Book, and those of Hector and Achilles in
the 22d, has something very striking, and poetical in it, but at the same Time,
is itself liable to the Objection made by Macrobius to Virgil's Imitation of
it. Macrobius, says See Note at L. 88. B. viii.
Mr. Pope, observes with some Color, that the Application of this Circumstance
is not so just in Virgil, as in our Author; for Virgil had made Juno say
before, that Turnus would certainly perish. Nunc juvenem imparibus video
concurrere fatis,
Parcarumque dies and vis inimica propinquat.
So that there was less Reason for weighing his
Fate with that of Aeneas, after that Declaration.


But is it not as clear that the Fates of Greece and Troy, and of Hector and
Achilles in Homer, were respectively, to all Intents and Purposes, declared
before this Suspension of the Scales? -- Jupiter, in the Beginning of the 8th
Book threatens the Deities with the Pains of Tartarus, if they assist either
Side, he had in the End of the the preceding See L. 575. B. vii.
Book given Tokens of his Wrath against the Grecians; and if we could doubt
whether the Threatening just mentioned; was denounced in favor of the Trojans,
Minerva's Request "that she may direct the Greeks by her Counsels" must
abundantly convince us that it was.

From Fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
With Arms unaiding mourn our Argives slain;
Yet grant my Counsels still their Breasts may move,
Or all must perish in the Wrath of Jove.
B. viii. L. 43. etc.
In the Case of Hector, Jupiter is undeniably explicit; he declares the Fate of
that Hero approaching, though he is inclined, with the Consent of the inferior
Deities, to rescue him from it.

Consult, ye Powers! ('it is worthy your Debate)
Whether to snatch him from impending Fate,
Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
(Good as he is) the Lot imposed on Man?
So that Virgil appears at least not only to have copied this Circumstance from
Homer, but to have applied it with more Justice; for what Juno said previously
to the Suspension of the Scales, is not at least so glaring an Impropriety as
what Jupiter says here himself. The best excuse perhaps for both these great
Poets, we may borrow from a Note of Mr. Pope's, in the 20th Book, See Note at
L. 41. B. xx.
that it was not easy in the Pagan Religion, to form the justest Ideas upon a
Doctrine (viz. that of Destiny, the Divine Power, etc.) so difficult to be
cleared; and upon which it is no great Wonder if a Poet should not always be
perfectly consistent with himself, when it has puzzled such a Number of
Divines, and Philosophers.

Before I quit this Remark, I must just take Notice of an Oversight in Mr.
Pope, who tells us in his Note See Note at L. 88. B. viii.
upon the Circumstance of Jupiter's weighing the Fates, etc. that This Figure
representing God as weighing the destinies of Men in his Balances, was first
made use of in Holy Writ. Are these only figurative Scales in Homer then? Sure
Aeschylus did not look upon them to be such, when (as Mr. Pope informs us from
Plutarch) he wrote a whole Tragedy upon this Foundation, which he called
Psychostatia, or the weighing of Souls. In this he introduced Thetis and Aurora
standing on either Side of Jupiter's Scales, and praying each for her Son,
while the Heroes fought. I don't see therefore how any Parallel can reasonably
be drawn between this Passage, which must be literally understood in Homer, and
those figurative Expressions in Scripture, of being weighed in the Balance, and
found light, etc. by which the Impartiality of divine Justice is significantly
illustrated to the human Understanding. How far Milton may be warranted in
borrowing this fine Fiction from Homer, which it is acknowledged "he has
admirably improved" or in representing the Deity with a Pair of golden
Compasses in his Hand upon another Occasion, it is not my present Business to
inquire. -- Thus much at least may be said in his Behalf, that Boldnesses give
no Offense when there is no Allay of Impiety in them. These Remarks shall be
continued in my next.

EETTER X.
IN the Note at L. 233. B. xii.
12th Book of the Iliad we have an Account of a signal Prodigy which much
awakens the Reader's Attention, but I think never satisfies it. I mean that of
the Eagle with the Serpent in his Talons, etc. which appears over the Trojan
Army. Polydamas See Note at L. 245.
, upon duly considering it, pronounces it to be a Warning to them from Jupiter
not to attempt the Grecian Entrenchments that Day, but to retreat, etc. He
tells Hector too that what he delivers is not Conjecture, but Science, and
appeals for the Truth of it to the Augurs of the Army. But notwithstanding all
this, Hector holds the Interpretation of the Omen in the utmost Contempt, and
insinuates that the Advice proceeded not from the Skill, but Cowardice of the
Interpreter. He appears indeed to have been in the right not only from the
Success of the Trojan Arms at the End of the Book, when Sarpedon makes the
first Breach in the Grecian Wall and himself forces open one of the "Gates,"
but even from the Countenance, and Assistance of Jupiter to the Trojans
immediately after the Prodigy itself. For the Poet tells us at the Conclusion
of Hector's Speech to Polydamas, and upon his "rushing to the Wall" (L. 295)
that

Jove breathes a Whirlwind from the Hills of I Would,
And Drifts of Dust the clouded Navy hide:
He fills the Greeks with Terror and Dismay,
And gives great Hector the predestined Day.
L. 299, etc.
Either therefore this Appearance had no Significancy in it, and then it will
be difficult to account for the Solemnity with which Homer introduces it, or
for his introducing it at all, or else it boded Misfortune to the Grecians; in
which Case Polydamas, who is every where shown in a favorable Light enough,
makes if not a cowardly yet an ignorant Application of it.

Macrobius it seems See Note at L. ^33.
compares Virgil's Imitation of this Passage in the 11th Aeneid, V. 751, etc.
with the Original, and gives the Preference to the latter on Account of
Virgil's having neglected to specify the Omen. Mr. Pope takes Notice in another
Place of this Author's Partiality to Homer; and his Observation on this
Circumstance is a strong Instance of it. He should have considered (as Mr. Pope
remarks) that Virgil had no Design, or Occasion to make an Omen of it; but took
it only as a natural Image, to paint the Posture of two Warriors struggling
with each other. What Design or Occasion Homer himself had for an Omen in this
Place, you see it is not so easy to say; you have however a Proof of the Latin
Poet's Judgment, and may observe that a needless, or unintelligible Prodigy in
Homer will make an excellent Simile in Virgil.

The Recess See Note at L. 180. B. xx.
of the Gods in the 20th Book is an Incident, which Mr. Pope wonders all the
Commentators should be silent upon; it seems strange at the first View, says
he, that so many Deities, after having entered the Scene of Action, should
perform so short a Part and immediately become themselves Spectators. I must
indeed look upon this as an Objection to the Conduct of the Poet. Let us hear
however what Mr. Pope has urged in his Vindication. He conceives then the
Reason of this Conduct in the Poet to be, that Achilles has been inactive
during the greatest Part of the Poem; and as he is the Hero of it, ought to be
the chief Character in it: The Poet therefore withdraws the Gods from the
Field, that Achilles may have the whole Honor of the Day, and not act in
Subordination to the Deities; besides the Poem now draws to a Conclusion, and
it is necessary for Homer to enlarge upon the Exploits of Achilles, that he may
leave a noble Idea of his Valor upon the Mind of the Reader.

Now I would take the Liberty to ask, whether it be derogatory to the important
Character of Achilles to act in Subordination to the Deities? Whether their
Superintendency and Assistance has not been an Honor to every Hero in the
Course of the Iliad, particularly to Diomed in the fifth Book? Whether Achilles
himself makes so great a Figure in this Book as he does in the next when
Scamander attacks him with all his Waves; when Neptune and Pallas See L. 330.
B. xxi.
appear to assist him: Simois joins Scamander, and at length Vulcan, by the
Instigation of Juno, almost dries up the River. Does the Interposition of these
Deities do a Discredit to the Valor of Achilles, or leave a less noble Idea of
it upon the Mind of the Reader than he would have had without it? -- I dare say
you will agree with me that what Mr. Pope observes in the next Note is a kind
of Answer to what he has advanced in this, and be convinced that the
magnificent Introduction of Achilles into the Field in the Beginning of this
Book, when the Gods descend to Battle, and all Nature is in an Uproar, is not
answered by any suitable Exploits of that Hero, or by any Achievement worthy
so pompous, and terrible an Apparatus! After the Gods are withdrawn, Achilles
and Aeneas meet; but in the very Moment, you expect to see a bloody Combat, you
are entertained with a tedious Conversation. Take Mr. Pope's own Words. -- See
Note at L. 214. B. 20.
Our Expectation is raised to see Gods and Heroes engaged, when suddenly it all
sinks into such a Combat in which neither Party receives a Wound; and (what is
more extraordinary) the Gods are made the Spectators of so small an Action.
What Occasion was there for Thunder, Earthquakes, and descending Deities to
introduce a Matter of so little Importance. Neither is it any Excuse to say the
Poet has given us a Piece of ancient History, we expected to read a Poet not an
Historian. In short after the greatest Preparation for Action imaginable, he
suspends the whole Narration, and from the Heat of a Poet, cools at once into
the Simplicity of an Historian.

I cannot help asking here, whether this be the first Time Homer is faulty in
this Respect? To acquiesce in Mr. Pope's ingenious Justification of the
Interview between Glaucus and Diomed See Note at L. 147. B. vi.
in the 6th Book, which has occasioned so much Censure, I fear the Speech of
Nestor to Patroclus in the 11th Book is equally blameable with the Conversation
in Question. Machaon is wounded: Achilles (who overlooked the Action from his
Ship) sends Patroclus to inquire whether it was he, etc. That Hero has no
sooner entered Nestor's Tent, but he sees Machaon bleeding, and is impatient to
return to his Friend with the News; upon this Nestor detains him in his Tent
standing with a Speech greatly blameable for being too long: he See Note at L.
801. B. xi.
crowds Incident upon Incident, and when he speaks of himself he expatiates upon
his own great Actions, very naturally indeed to old Age, but unseasonably in
the present Juncture, etc. etc. etc. The Circumstances he mentions as they have
no visible Allusion to the Design of the Speech, seem to be unfortunately
introduced. In short, I think they are not so valuable upon any other Account,
as because they preserve a Piece of ancient History, etc. Perhaps the Piece of
ancient History preserved here is no more valuable than that which Aeneas
leaves us in the above Conversation: -- but be that as it will, it is methinks
surprising to find Mr. Pope, after having so impartially given up the Passage,
looking after Excuses and Pretenses to palliate this Conduct of his Author. I
will only mention one on which most Stress seems to be laid. It may not be from
the Purpose to observe (says our English Homer) that Nestor might designedly
protract the Speech that Partoclus might himself behold the Distress of the
Army, etc. whether this was the Intention or not, it must be allowed that the
Stay of Patroclus was very happy for the Greeks; for by this Means he met
Eurypylus wounded, who confirmed him into a Certainty, that their Affairs were
desperate without Achilles's Aid. Did Patroclus want to be told this then after
the Embassy to Achilles in the 9th Book? or, after Achilles had told him, (what
he could not indeed be ignorant of) when he dispatched him upon this very
Message, that

The Time is come, when yon' despairing Host
Shall learn the Value of the Man they lost;
Now at my Knees the Greeks shall pour their Moan,
And proud Atrides tremble on his Throne.
B. xi. L. 745. etc.
In short, any Absurdity may be refined away, if the present can, and if it may
be made to appear that the Length of Nestor's Speech, the Interview of
Patroclus and Eurypylus, and the farther Delay occasioned by the former's Stay,
to cure the Wounds of the latter, which might have been effected by another
Hand, were proper, and well timed in this Place.

It Is now no Season for these kind Delays,
The great Achilles with Impatience stays. --
-- Thou know the fiery Temper of my Friend.
L. 793. etc.
But to return to the Deities. The magnificent Introduction of the Gods above
referred to, so much extolled by Longinus, See Note at L. 75. B. xx.
seems to be the utmost Effort of Homer's prodigious Genius; and after all,
perhaps we must ascribe their Recess so soon to the Poet's consciousness of the
Inequality of human Nature, to so exalted a Subject. It Is certain the Sublimity
of the Passage before us consists not so much in the Horrors of an actual
Combat, as in the dreadful Pomp of Preparation. But you will desire to know
what became of this supposed Consciousness in the next Book, when the Deities
are really described engaging each other. To which I can only say, that,
whatever induced Homer to attempt here, what he seems to have declined before;
I am apt to think the Battle of the Gods the worst, upon the whole, that occurs
in the Poem. Mr. Pope himself is much of the same Opinion, you will naturally
imagine, in the following Remark upon it. See Note at L. 566. B. xxi.
I must confess I am at a loss how to justify Homer in every point of these
Combats with the Gods: When Diana and Juno are to fight, Juno calls her an
impudent Bitch, (...); when they fight, she boxes her soundly, and sends her
crying and trembling to Heaven: As soon as she comes thither, Jupiter falls a
laughing at her: Indeed the rest of the Deities seem to be in a merry Vein
during all the Action; (though Mr. Pope should have excepted Neptune, and Apollo,
from the first of which Gods we have another Piece of ancient History;) Pallas
beats Mars, and laughs at him; Jupiter sees them in the same merry Mood; Juno
when she had cuffed Diana, is not more serious: In short unless there be Depths
that I am not able to Fathom, Homer never better deserved, than in this Place,
the Censure past upon him by the Ancients, that as he raised the Characters of
his Men up to Gods, so he sunk those of Gods down to Men, or even below them.

Mr. Pope is willing to believe, however, that an Allegory may be couched under
all this, and I wish any Body could discover it: In the mean Time I cannot but
observe, that it is great Pity the Gods and Goddesses that often appear so nobly
in separate Machines throughout the Iliad, should make so mean a Figure in the
present Battle.

I must request your Attention to one Incident more, which Mr. Pope would fain
reconcile us to, viz. the Flight of Hector in the 22d Book. I apprehend that
what that Commentator alleges from the Sea Note at L. 180. B. xxii.
Conduct of Virgil, who transferred this Passage to the Death of Turnus, and
likewise from the Doctrine of Aristotle, is extremely insufficient for his
Purpose. Turnus is a Character much inferior to Aeneas, and therefore we are
little shocked at his running away from him. But this is confessedly not the
Case, the Point of mere Strength excepted, with Hector when compared to
Achilles. It was, you will say, that very Strength which he feared -- was it not,
that very Strength too, which he had frequently encountered? And if it was not
necessary he should fly; I will venture to say it is a Circumstance infinitely
disagreeable to the Reader, that he does.

Nor farther is "the Suffrage of Aristotle" himself, if I understand it at all,
satisfactory upon this Point. The wonderful, says he, ought to have Place in
Tragedy, but still more in Epic Poetry, which proceeds in this Point even to
the unreasonable: For as in Epic Poems one sees not the Persons acting, so
whatever passes the Bounds of Reason, is proper to Produce the admirable and
the mavelous. For Example, what Homer says of Hector pursued by Achilles,
would appear ridiculous on the Stage; for the Spectators could not forbear
laughing to see on one Side the Greeks standing without any Motion, and on the
other, Achilles pursuing Hector etc. etc. But all this does not appear when we
read the Poem; for what is wonderful, is always agreeable, and as a Proof of
it, we find that they who relate any Thing, usually add something to the Truth,
that it may the better please those who hear it.

What can we infer from all this, but that the Flight of Hector round the Walls
of Troy, is an Action, which, as such, will much better bear being told, than
represented? No doubt of it -- but is an Action, all this while, which is
unreasonable in itself, therefore agreeable, because it may be told with
Propriety? Do we never wonder without admiring, or marvel with Disgust, as well
as Delight? I will grant this Incident renders this Part of the Poem more
astonishing, as Aristotle says in a subsequent Paragraph of Mr. Pope's Note;
but why it is more admirable, I am quite at a loss to conceive.

What Mr. Pope urges himself in Vindication of this Circumstance, has much more
Weight in it; as that Hector never thought himself a Match for Achilles; that
this Incident is prepared by Degrees, as Dacier has observed too; that, the
mere Sight and Voice of Achilles unarmed, has terrified and put the whole
Trojan Army into Disorder: That Hector stays, not that he Hopes to overcome
Achilles, but because, Shame, etc. forbid him to re-enter the City; that he
stayed by the immediate Will of Heaven, irresistibly bound down by Fate: That
he had been reflecting on the Injustice of the War he maintained; that his
Spirits are depressed by Heaven: That he flies not from Achilles as a mortal
Hero, but from one whom he sees clad in impenetrable Armor, seconded by
Minerva, etc. etc. which Considerations do indeed amount to a Proof of the
Probability of Hector's Flight, but, I think, are no Argument for the Necessity
of it. In short, as Mr. Pope himself says, he don't absolutely pretend to
justify this Passage in every Point, I presume I may venture to say, if Hector
had stood his Ground, we should have liked the Poem better for it.

I cannot think, by the way, that it is a high Exaltation of Achilles, that so
brave a Man as Hector durst not stand him. It would methinks have redounded
more to Achilles's Glory, had Hector been represented as a Match for him.
Indeed this great Event, wherein the whole Fate of Greece and Troy was decided
by the Sword of Achilles, and Hector, does less Honor to that Hero than any
one Action he had been engaged in, for the last of the above Reasons alleged
for Hector's Flight, and besause he knew that Hector was to fall by his Hand.
He was assured of this by Neptune, and Pallas in the 21st. Book.

-- Hector alone shall stand his fatal Chance,
And Hector's Blood shall smoke upon thy Lance,
Thine is the Glory doomed. -- L. 342. etc.
And again by Minerva, just before his Engagement with Hector. See L. 279. etc.
B. xxii.
Nay he tells Hector himself, It Is Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my Lance.
L. 346. And yet Mr. Pope inserts an Observation in the 24th. Book, which he
informs us ought to have been made before; which is, that Achilles did not know
that Hector was to fall by his Hand; if he had known it, where would have been
the mighty Courage, in engaging him in a single Combat, in which he was sure to
conquer? The contrary of this is evident (continues he) from the Words of
Achilles to Hector just before the Combat. -- I will make no Compacts with
thee, but one of us shall fall. -- But sure this Declaration is very consistent
with the Knowledge of his future Success, even though it had been less clearly
ascertained to him.

I hope these Remarks are sufficient to support my former Assertions in regard
to Homer: I shall just mention a few Particulars more in my next, in order to
make my Criticism as complete as I can, under the present Form, and to
corroborate what has been repeatedly advanced, and then take my leave, for a
Time, of this noble Author.

LETTER XI.
IF you consider the Iliad of Homer with any thing of exactness of Attention,
you will perceive numberless Marks of a Genius, thoughtless of, or, it may be,
superior to the Niceties, and Proprieties in which the Excellencies of
second-rate Authors wholly consist. To what has been offered already for the
Illustration of this Truth you may add, if you please, the Repetitions with
which Homer so much abounds. I am far from asserting that these are never
proper, though they are often, as Mr. Pope confesses, See Note at L. 570. B. viii.
visibly absurd. I will only point out one Place, where it is owing to a
Repetition, that the very Design of the Author cannot easily be understood: I
mean the Speech of Agamemnon in the 9th Book, wherein he proposes to the
Generals to quit the Siege, etc. The Critics See Note at L. 23. B. ix.
are divided in their Opinion, Mr. Pope acquaints us, whether this Speech, which
is Word for Word the same with that Agamemnon makes in the 2d Book, be only a
Feint to try the Army, as it is there, or the real Sentiments of the General.
Mr. Pope says, He does not pretend to decide upon this Point nor is it indeed
of any great Consequence, any farther than as it makes good what has been
remarked; however that Agamemnon upon this Occasion spoke his real Sentiments
is, I think most probable, because upon a Parallel one in the 14th Book, he
proposes the very same Thing to the Grecian Princes, though in different Words.

Again, it is in my Opinion more reasonable to put the frequent Incongruities
we meet with in Homer to the Account of Inadvertency, etc. than to reconcile
them by forced and unnatural Constructions. Thus Minerva, who is always
represented as prudently suppressing her Anger upon Jupiter's declaring himself
for Troy, does yet in one Place See L. 435, etc. B. viii.
break out into as much Virulency of Language as Juno herself. -- Thus Neptune
in the same Book, when Juno sollicits him to assist the Greeks, rejects so
desperate a Proposal with Indignation;

What Rage, what Madness, furious Queen is thine?
I war not with the Highest. All above
Submit and tremble at the Hand of Jove.
B. viii. L. 255, etc.
But in the 15th Book he talks in a quite different Strain, and seems
determined to dispute the Superiority with Jupiter himself.

What means the haughty Sovereign of the Skies?
Rule as he will his portion'd Realms on high,
No Vassal God, nor of his Train am I. --
Olympus, and this Earth, in common lie;
What Claim has here the Tyrant of the Sky? etc.
B. xv. L. 206. etc.
-- Thus Diomed, to give you one Instance more, is seized with Fear at the very
Sight See Note at L. 448. B. xi.
of Hector in the 11th Book for which Mr. Pope gives us no other Reason than
that Diomed had just told us, that Jupiter fought against the Grecians, and yet
in the 8th Book, when that Deity See Note at L. 164. B. viii.
personally interposes, and throws a burning Thunderbolt at the Feet of this
Hero's Horses, he can scarce prevail with himself to retreat. Thrice turned the
Chief, and thrice imperial Jove
On Ida's Summits thundered from above.
B. viii. L. 206. It should be remembered too, that at the very Time when
Diomed is struck with this Panick the Poet tells us (notwithstanding the Favor
of Jupiter to Troy) the Battle was doubtful. -- And level hangs the doubtful
Scale of Fight.
L. 437. Nay at that Instant the Greeks were Victors. Ulysses kills Hypirochus
and Hippodamus: Diomed slays Agastrophus, and even gives Hector a Blow that
stuns him, and insults him afterward, etc. (see from Line 416 to 474.) It is
needless to multiply such Examples.

I should lastly be inclined to ascribe to the same Cause the frequent
Unsuitableness of Homer's Epithets, etc. which as they are sometimes
distinctive and specific, if I may so say, so are they often general and
applied at random. Priam (as Mr. Pope himself has See Note at L. 442. B. vii.
observed) is styled (...) when he rejects the wholesome Advice of Antenor, and
complies with his Son. -- It is the (...) the godlike Polydore, whom Achilles
kills in the 20th Book; and yet See L. 471. B. xx.
this Hero is only the youngest Son of Priam, was forbidden to fight, and famous
only for the Swiftness of his Speed, etc. To the forbidden Field he takes his
Flight,
In the first Folly of a youthful Knight. L. 475.
The Mention of these glaring Improprieties, is abundantly sufficient for the
Purpose; else you might be directed to many more of the like Sort in almost any
Book of the Poem: Though they may not be improper in an equal Degree.

I have now finished my Remarks upon the Iliad of Homer with as much Accuracy,
I hope, as was requisite; and must leave it to your Consideration, whether the
common Opinion in respect of this Poet, founded on the Interpretations, and the
Prejudices, etc. of the Commentators, be not on many Accounts an erroneous one.
If you will suppose this Author to have been not only the most sublime, but the
most simple too of all Writers, you will, I believe, have a much more natural
and ready Excuse for many of his Blemishes than the Shifts and Glosses of
Interpreters can supply you with. Indeed these Defects in an original Author,
who was inspired with the Spirit of Poetry even to a Degree of Enthusiasm (to
which Inadvertency and Extravagance are essential) will in a great Measure
carry their Apology with them. -- I have given you my Sentiments impartially,
and should take a much greater Pleasure in reviewing the Beauties of this
admirable Poet than I have done in arraigning his Faults; but Mr. Pope, to whom
I refer you, has illustrated these to more Advantage than I could. -- The
Practice of succeeding Writers of many Denominations is a Demonstration that we
may find a great deal more in Homer to imitate than to avoid. To convince you
of my high Esteem of him, and that I mean to part in Friendship with him, I
will finish with Part of that Translation from Longinus, varying only, and
abating an Expression or two, which concludes Mr. Pope's Notes on the sixth
Book. In our Decisions on the Characters of great Men, etc. we must impartially
confess, that, with all their Errors, they have more Perfections than the
Nature of Man can almost be conceived capable of attaining. -- He who commits
no Faults is barely read without Censure; but a Genius truly great excites
Admiration. In short the Magnificence of a single Period in one of these
admirable Authors is, almost, sufficient to atone for all their Defects: Nay
farther, if any one should collect from Homer all the Errors that have escaped
him, they would bear but little Proportion to the many Beauties to be met with
in, almost, every Page of his Writings. It Is on this Account that Envy, through
so many Ages has never been able to wrest from him the Prize of Eloquence,
etc. etc. which his Merits have so justly acquired: An Acquisition which he
still is, and will in all Probability continue possessed of, As long as Streams
in silver Mazes rove,
Or Spring with annual Green renews the Grove.
Mr. Fenton.

LETTER XII.
IN my former Letters I endeavored to entertain you with some free, but, I
hope, just Remarks upon Mr. Pope's Commentaries upon Homer. If you please we
will now take a short Review of that excellent Person's Translation of the same
incomparable Author. I must once more prevent your Surprise, and perhaps your
Indignation, by declaring that I agree with all the World in allowing this to
be, in the main, the best Translation, that our, or it may be, any Language has
produced. If I think we might have had a better Translation in some few
Respects, I only mean that we might have had it from Mr. Pope himself. Nay, I
will go a Step further, and grant you with much Satisfaction that this
celebrated Translator always errs on the right Side, and even when he does not
do his Reader Justice, never fails to do Honor to his Original: I should
rather say, to himself; for if Boldness of Figure, Force of Expression,
Smoothness and Ease of Numbers, and the Correspondence of Sound with Sense, be
the great Beauties of poetical Diction, I should make no Scruple, upon the
whole, to prefer the English Iliad, to the Greek. But these very Excellencies
are in some Sort his Errors, and what I admire in this Poem, I cannot help often
considering as blameable in the Translation. In short, it is the
Over-poeticalness of this Translation, if I may so call it, which I take to be
exceptionable in many Place. And yet, as there was no Danger of so naturally a
warm Translator's sinking into Flatness, and Insipidity, so one would have
thought he had laid himself under Restraints sufficient to have prevented his
ever soaring into the other Extreme of Rapture, and Extravagance. -- There is
not more Fire in any one Part of the Translation, than there is good Sense and
cool Reasoning in the following Extract from the Preface. It should be
considered what Methods may afford some Equivalent in our Language for the
Graces of these (viz. the Diction and Versification) in the Greek. It is
certain no literal Translation can be just to an excellent Original in a
superior Language; but it is a great Mistake to imagine that a rash Paraphrase
can make Amends for this general Defect; which is no less in Danger to lose the
Spirit of an Ancient, by deviating into the modern Manners of Expression. If
there be sometimes a Darkness, there is often a Light in Antiquity, which
nothing better preserves than a Version almost literal. I know no Liberties one
ought to take, but those which are necessary for translating the Spirit of the
Original, and supporting the poetical Style of the Translation: And I will
venture to say, there have not been more Men misled in former Times by a
servile dull Adherence to the Letter, than have been deluded in ours, by a
chimerical insolent Hope of raising and improving their Author. It is not to be
doubted that the Fire of the Poem is what a Translator should principally
regard, as it is most likely to expire in his managing: However it is his
safest Way to be content with preserving this to his utmost in the whole,
without endeavoring to be more than he finds his Author is, in any particular
Place. It Is a great Secret in writing to know when to be plain, and when
poetical and figurative; and it is what Homer will teach us, if we will but
follow modestly in his Footsteps. Where his Diction is bold and lofty, let us
raise ours as high as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we ought not
to be deterred from imitating him by the fear of incurring the Censure of a
mere English Critic. Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to have been more
commonly mistaken than the just Pitch of his Style; some of his Translators
having swelled into Fustian in a proud Confidence of the Sublime: Others sunk
into Flatness in a cold and timorous Notion of Simplicity. -- There is a
graceful, and dignified Simplicity, as well as a bald and sordid one, etc. --
It Is one Thing to be nicked up, and another not to be dressed at all.
Simplicity is the mien between Ostentation and Rusticity.

If Mr. Pope had always conducted his Translation conformably to these just
Sentiments, it would have been the most exact, as it is now the most Spirited
one extant: But, I believe, you will by and by be convinced that he has often
modernized his Original too much, and sacrificed the true Simplicity of the
Ancients in general, and the particular Air, and Cast of his Author, either to
an Excess of Affection for him, and Desire to set his Work in the most
advantageous Light to the English Reader, or to an undue Fear of lessening and
injuring him through the Inferiority of our Language to the Grecian in many
Respects. To one or both of those we are indebted, I presume, for many bold
Strokes of Poetry, and fine Pieces of Painting, and Imagery, which are not so
much Copies of, as Refinements on, the Original.

And, by the Way, it may be remarked that Mr. Pope should have been more than
ordinarily cautious upon this Article, as he was under an absolute Necessity of
sinking some Peculiarities in Homer's Diction, which would not bear
Transplanting into our Tongue. Such are his compound Epithets, and Repetitions.
How our Translator has acquitted himself with regard to these, you will be best
informed by consulting himself. See Preface to Mr. Pope's Homer.


It is however to be observed in general, that every Thing characteristical in
an Author, is, as far as may be, to be most religiously retained; and that,
notwithstanding the allowed occasional Use of the Periphrasis, or
Circumlocution, the Transposition of Words, and the Substitution of one
Expression in the Room of another, etc. etc. by Means of which the Spirit of an
Original is preserved without Prejudice to the literal Sense, all imaginable
Care is to be taken that these Liberties under the Pretense of maintaining and
supporting this Spirit, do not really overpower, and extinguish it.
Redundancies are as unoriginal as Insipidities, and the Spirit of an Author may
be as much overwhelmed in Exuberance on the one Hand, as it evaporates in
Frigidity on the other. -- Fire and Water are scarce more opposite than Mr.
Pope's Translation of the Iliad, and that of the Aeneid by Dr. Trapp; I am apt
to think we shall often form very wrong Ideas of these Poems if we regulate
them by these respective Translations; for Mr. Pope seems to have exalted the
true Simplicity of Homer, as "graceful and dignified" as it is, in the same
Degree that the Doctor has debased the Majesty of Virgil.

You will begin to think it high Time I should make good this Charge, which I
shall accordingly endeavor to do by pointing to a few select Passages out of
Numbers that might be produced, in which you will plainly discover certain
Boldnesses, and Prettynesses, (for you must gratify me in the Use of that Term
for them) and very frequently a Mixture of both, that were taken from the
Storehouse of Mr. Pope's own Imagination, and are utterly foreign to, and
destructive of, the plain Scope, and unaffected Spirit of his Author.

There is not perhaps in all the Iliad a more pompous Description than that of
Achilles arming himself in the 19th Book. The Comparisons, and Images, (as Mr.
Pope well observes) rise in a noble Scale one above another; the Hero is set in
a still stronger Point of Light than before, till he is at last in a Manner
covered over with Glories; he is at first likened to the Moonlight, then to the
Flames of a Beacon, then to a Comet, and lastly to the Sun itself. But with all
this Sublimity, and almost Enthusiasm, there is a Simplicity which is, I
conceive, lost in that Exaggeration of Imagery with which the Translator has
embelished the Passage. The whole Description, which is too long to be
transcribed, is rather loosely paraphrased perhaps than otherwise, but the
Parts I have marked are so many beautiful Excrescencies, which have no Sort of
Warrant from the Letter, or most of them even from the Import of the Text.

-- His Limbs in Arms divine Achilles dressed --
He grinds his Teeth, and furious with Delay,
O'erlooks the embattled Host, and hopes the bloody Day.
-- Next, his high Head the Helmet graced; behind
The sweepy Crest hung floating in the Wind;
Like the red Star, that from his flaming Hair
Shakes down Diseases, Pestilence, and War;
So streamed the Golden Honors from his Head,
Trembled the sparkling Plumes, and the loose Glories shed.
-- All bright in Heavenly Arms, above his Squire,
Achilles mounts, and sets the Field on Fire;
Not brighter, Phoebus in the Ethereal Way,
Flames from his Chariot, and restores the Day.
The following Passages seem liable to the same Objections with the preceding.

-- Host against Host with shadowy Squadrons drew,
The sounding Darts in iron Tempests flew --
With streaming Blood the slippery Fields are died,
And slaughtered Heroes swell the dreadful Tide.
B. xix. Ver. 391, etc. etc.
-- he turns their Steps from Flight,
And wakes anew the dying Flames of Fight.
B. v. Ver. 608. -- When Juno's Self, and Pallas shall appear
All dreadful in the crimson Walks of War --
B. viii. Ver. 460. Discord with Joy the Scene of Death descries,
And drinks large Slaughter at her sanguine Eyes.
Discord alone, of all the immortal Train,
Swells the red Horrors of this direful Plain.
B. xi. Ver. 99, etc.
He, like a Whirlwind, tossed the scattering Throng,
Mingled the Troops, and drove the Field along.
B. xii. Ver. 45. Their Force embodied, in a Tide they pour,
Till rising Combat sounds along the Shore,
As warring Winds in Sirius' sultry Reign,
From different Quarters sweep the sandy Plain,
On every Side the dusty Whirlwinds rise,
And the dry Fields are lifted to the Skies:
Thus by Despair, Hope, Rage, together driven
Met the black Hosts, and meeting darkened Heaven*
All dreadful glar'd the iron Face of War,
Bristled with upright Spears, that flashed afar,
Dire was the Gleam of Breastplates, Helms, and Shields,
And polished Arms emblaz'd the flaming Fields. --
B. xiii. Ver. 422.
Full in the blazing Van great Hector shined,
Like Mars, commissioned to confound Mankind;
Before him flaming, his enormous Shield,
Like the broad Sun, illumined all the Field:
His nodding Helm emits a streamy Ray,
His piercing Eyes through all the Battle stray;
And while beneath his Targe he flashed along,
Shot Terrors round, that withered even the strong.
B. xiii. Ver. 1010. etc.
-- the pampered Steed, with Reins unbound,
Breaks from his Stall, and pours along the Ground --
B. xv. Ver. 298. Adorned in all his terrible Array,
He flashed around intolerable Day.
B. xvi. Ver. 170. etc. -- Jove's own Glories blaze around his Head.
B. xvii. Ver. 637. -- fierce Atrides flew,
And sent his Soul with every Lance he threw.
B. xvii. Ver. 647. Meanwhile the rushing Armies hide the Ground;
The trampled Center yields a hollow Sound.
Steeds cased in Mail, and Chiefs in Armor bright,
The gleamy Champain glows with brazen Light
B. xx. Ver. 187.
-- Earth is deluged with the sanguine Showers.
B. xx. Ver. 576. -- The fierce Coursers, as the Chariot rolls,
Tread down whole Ranks, and crush out Heroes Souls. B. xx. Ver. 582.
-- Conquest blazes with full Beams on Greece.
B. xxii. Ver. 280.
Mr. Pope tells us, Homer has See Note at L. 142. B. viii.
Figures of that Boldness which it is impossible to preserve in another
Language. It may be sometimes very true; but if you will be at the Pains of
comparing these Transcripts with the Original, I believe you will think that
the very Figure in the Greek which occasioned that Observation ((...), my Spear
is Mad) hardly ranks higher than the Major Part of those which I have quoted.
-- I will conclude this Letter with repeating one general Remark, that Mr.
Pope, by improving, and embellishing a simple Hint in his Author, and raising
pompous Superstructures upon plain Foundations, and by too frequently giving a
loose to his own Fancy, has in many Places rather poetically paraphrased Homer,
than translated him.

LETTER XIII.
AS there are certain heterogeneous, and unhomerical Boldnesses in Mr. Pope's
Translation, if you will permit me to call them so, so there are several
Prettynesses, as has been hinted, which, I presume, will fall under the same
Denominations. The following are a few of the most remarkable.

-- Over the Vale descends the living Cloud.
B. ii. Ver. 116. -- Fainter Murmurs died upon the ear. --
B. ii. Ver. 126. -- Groves of Lances glitter in the Air.
B. ii. Ver. 991. -- All the War descends upon the Wing.
B. iii. Ver. 10. As when the Moon, refulgent Lamp of Night!
Over Heaven's clear Azure spreads her sacred Light,
When not a Breath disturbs the deep Serene,
And not a Cloud o'ercasts the solemn Scene,
Around her Throne the vivid Planets roll,
And Stars unnumber'd gild the glowing Pole,
Over the dark Trees a yellower Verdure shed,
And tip with Silver every Mountain's Head;
Then shine the Vales, the Rocks in Prospect rise,
A Flood of Glory bursts from all the Skies, etc.
B. viii. Ver. 687.
Not those fair Steeds so radiant, and so gay,
That draw the burning Chariot of the Day.
B. x. Ver. 644. -- The deaf Echo rattles round the Field.
B. xii. Ver. 182. -- Silence that spoke, and Eloquence of Eyes.
B. xiv. Ver. 252. -- Discourse, the Medicine of the Mind.
B. xv. Ver. 455. Thick undistinguished Plumes, together joined,
Float in one Sea, and wave before the Wind.
B. xvi. Ver. 263. -- the whirling Car
Smoaks through the Ranks, o'ertakes the flying War --
B. xvi. Ver. 460. As the young Olive, in some sylvan Scene
Crowned by fresh Fountains with eternal Green
Lifts the gay Head, in snowy Flowerets fair,
And plays and dances to the gentle Air, etc. etc.
B. xvii. Ver. 57.
And shot the shining Mischief to the Heart.
B. xix. Ver. 62. Now Twilight veiled the glaring Fall of Day,
And clad the dusky Fields in sober Gray.
B. xxiv. Ver. 427. These last cited Verses put me in Mind of Mr. Pope's
Descriptions of the Morning throughout this Translation, which (one only
excepted, see Ver. 131. B. 23.) are much more elegant and picturesque than
their Counterparts in the Original.

-- Now from forth the Chambers of the Main.
To shed his sacred Light on Earth again,
Arose the golden Chariot of the Day,
And tipped the Mountains with a purple Ray.
B. vii. Ver. 501.
Aurora now, fair Daughter of the Dawn,
Sprinkled with rosy Light the dewy Lawn.
B. viii. Ver. 1. -- Soon as Morning paints the Fields of Air.
B. viii. Ver. 658. The saffron Morn, with early Blushes spread,
Now rose refulgent from Tithonus' Bed,
With newborn Day to gladden mortal Sight,
And gild the Courts of Heaven with sacred Light.
B. xi. Ver. 1. etc.
Soon as Aurora heaved her orient Head
Above the Waves that blushed with early Red,
With newborn Day to gladden etc.
The Affectation of Poetry in all these Places has diffused an Air over Mr.
Pope's Translation quite different from the neat, but generally unornamented
Style of his Author, to which the inexpressible simplex munditiis of Horace may
pertinently enough be applied. It is owing to this that we meet with such
figurative Expressions as these, Around his Head an iron Tempest rained,
A Wood of Spears his ample Shield sustained.
B. v. Ver. 766.

To which we may subjoin a Multitude of others similar to them throughout the
English Iliad -- as -- bristling Lances -- the steely Circle -- dark Showers of
Jav'lins -- the Tide of Combat -- the Stream of Fight -- the Tide of War -- the
wooden Tempest -- the rocky Shower -- the living Flame, or Fire -- the Tide of
Trojans -- Life's purple Tide -- etc. etc. etc. in the free, and unlimited Use
of which the Translation is, I apprehend, little justified by the Original.

I have often thought it was with the same View to Ornament, etc. etc. that Mr.
Pope wrote his Translation in Rhyme. However what Advantages were hereby gained
we shall see presently; but it is certain in the mean time that by the Use of
it, the Translation becomes absolutely modern, and in its very Form unlike the
Original. Mr. Dryden says in his Dedication prefixed to his Translation of the
Aeneid, that he who can write well in Rhyme, may write better in blank Verse;
and that Rhyme is a Constraint even to the best Poets, and those who make it
with most Ease; that what it adds to Sweetness, it takes away from Sense; and
that it often makes us swerve from an Author's Meaning. -- I wish, by the by,
Mr. Dryden had not asserted one Way and translated another. -- It is plain the
Superfluities complained of in Mr. Pope are in a great Measure to be imputed to
this Method of Translation.

I believe you have had some Instances of this already, but the following are
notorious ones.

He ceased; his Army's loud Applauses rise,
And the long Shout runs echoing through the Skies.
B. iii. Ver. 576.
Fierce Discord storms, Apollo loud exclaims,
Fame calls, Mars thunders, and the Field's in Flames.
B. v. Ver. 633.
Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear;
They breathe, and hush the Tumult of the War.
B. vii. Ver. 64.
And in his Hands two steely Jav'lins wields
That blaze to Heaven, and lighten all the Fields.
B. xi. Ver. 56.
In vain he calls; the Din of Helms and Shields
Rings to the Skies, and echoes through the Fields.
The brazen Hinges fly, the Walls rosound,
Heaven trembles, roar the Mountains, thunders all the Ground. B. xii. Ver. 407.
I have purposely selected these Verses because, excepting the marked
Redundancies which the Rhyme required, they are as close a Translation, as any
in the whole Performance. Mr. Pope no doubt was sensible of this Inconvenience
naturally inseparable from Rhyme; but he supposed probably, the Advantage
gained thereby in point of Smoothness, and Harmony would make sufficient Amends
for it. Of all Things he would not have his Author thought unpoetical, though
there are certainly many Passages in him, which, as Mr. Pope himself
occasionally acknowledges, are not made to shine in Poetry. It would be tedious
to pick out all these, and therefore I will only, for Illustration's Sake,
transcribe a very remarkable one, in which a most simple, unadorned Narration
of Homer consisting of a List of proper Names, and those even without Epithets
for the far greater Part, is, by Virtue of Mr. Pope's Adjuncts,
Circumlocutions, and Rhimes, transformed into as poetical and entertaining a
Description as most in the Iliad.

The circling Nereids with their Mistress weep,
And all the Seagreen Sisters of the Deep.
Thalia, Glauce, (every watery Name)
Nesaea mild, and Silver Spio came:
Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh,
And the blue Languish of soft Alia's Eye.
Their Locks Actaea, and Limnora rear,
Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear,
Thoa, Therusa, Doto, Melita;
Agave gentle, and Ampithoe gay:
Next Callianira, Callianassa show
Their Sister looks: Dexamene the slow
And swift Dynamene, now cut the Tides;
Icera now the verdant Wave divides:
Nemertes with Apseudes lifts the Head,
Bright Galatea quits her pearly Bed;
These Orythia, Clymene attend,
Moera, Amphirome, the Train extend,
And black Junira, and Junassa fair,
And Amatheia with her amber Hair.
B. xviii. Ver. 45, etc.
This whole Passage, which makes so pretty a Figure in Mr. Pope's Hands, if
literally (I mean fairly) translated, and that too in blank Verse, would
undoubtedly be very flat and spiritless. Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear,
Thoa, Pherusa, Doro, Melita; --
are more just Translations than any two Lines of the whole Number though they
have neither Fire, nor Fancy in them. In such Places as these Rhyme may among
other Expedients help to save the poetical Character of an Author by giving a
seeming Equivalent for Spirit in Sound. -- But why must a Translation be
beautiful and poetical when the Original is not so? -- It is the Business of a
Translator to give us the whole of an Author, not at all Events to make the
best of him. -- I will venture to say that had Mr. Pope obliged the World with
a blank Verse Translation of Homer, at the same Time that he would have more
effectually preserved the Air, he would have deviated less from the Sense of
his Author; and that his Version upon the whole would have been as poetical, as
animated, and even as harmonious as the present. Dr. Trapp observes, I think,
very justly in his Preface to the Aeneid, that blank Verse is not only more
majestic etc. but more musical and harmonious than Rhyme: It has, says he, more
Rhyme in it according to the ancient and true Sense of the Word, than Rhyme
itself as it is now used. For, in its original Signification, it consists not
in the tinkling of Vowels and Consonants, but in the metrical Disposition of
Words and Syllables, and the proper Cadence of Numbers; which is more agreeable
to the Ear, without the jingling of like Endings than with it. -- After all,
the Measure in blank Verse does really and specifically distinguish it from
mere Prose; and if so, Rhyme is not wanted for this Purpose. Nor can it be
pretended that the strong Colors of Poetry, the Beauties of Description,
Figures, Images, etc. etc. are capable of being displayed to more Advantage in
Rhyme, than in blank Verse. -- Indeed these are not peculiar even to Poetry;
they are independent on Meter, and derive not Energy or Strength, but
Gracefulness only and Dignity from Numbers. -- They are fitter for Verse than
Prose, but not more essential to it. -- Thus the bold Figures, Similies, and
Thoughts, etc. of Homer would be of the same intrinsic Value out of Measure, as
in it; -- as the Holy Scriptures, by the way, though literally translated in
plain Prose, are in numberless Instances poetical, though they are by no means
a Poem. -- It is not for the sake of Luster, but Order, that Diamonds and
Pearls are ranged upon a String. -- But to return to Mr. Pope. -- Whatever
Credit his Translation may have done the Original by heightening and improving
it in some Respects, by Means of Rhyme (and thereby skreening sometimes a
Simplicity or perhaps a Flatness, and Frigidity of Diction which Homer only was
answerable for) it is as true too that it sometimes by Reason only of the Rhyme
falls short of it, and is less beautiful and significant in itself. Mr. Pope is
very happy in his Imitations of those Passages where Homer "applies the Sound
to the Sense" (see particularly B. i. Ver. 451. etc. B. x. Ver. 444. etc. B.
xiii. Ver. 191. etc. B. xiii. Ver. 1005.) but he would have succeeded still
more in these Places, I presume, had he been uncumbered with the Shackles of
Rhyme. How much better and stronger would the following Lines have appeared
without Rhimes than with them.

First march the heavy Mules, securely slow,
O'r Hills, over Dales, over Crags, over Rocks they go;
Jumping high over the Shrubs of the rough Ground,
Rattle the clatt'ring Cars, and the shockt Axles bound.
Loud sounds the Axe, redoubling Strokes on Strokes;
On all Sides round the Forest hurls her Oaks
Headlong. Deep-echoing groan the Thickets brown;
Then rusling, crackling, crashing thunder down.
B. xxiii. Ver. 140.
In spite of the Roughness and Unmusicalness of this excellent Description
there is to me a certain Evenness, and an Harmony in the Tone of the Rhimes
which alone renders it inferior to the Original itself. -- To conclude, I will
upon the Strength of these Observations put two Questions to you, which you may
determine at your Leisure; whether a blank Verse Translation is not like to be
more faithful to its Original, than one in Rhyme? and whether Mr. Pope would
not have been a better Translator, if he had not been so good a Poet?

LETTER XIV.
AFTER reading my last, you will not wonder to hear me wishing Rhimes were
utterly banished from Great Poetry; by which the Critics understand the Epopee,
and the Drama. How far they may be requisite, or even beautiful in Lyric,
Elegiac, Pastoral, etc. or especially Didactic Poetry I shall not enquire; but
it is certain they are in general rather Obstructions than Helps toward the
great Purposes of firing the Heart, and moving the Passions. -- You need only
read over your Milton, and the best Tragedies of Shakespeare to be convinced of
this. -- And if I would have every First-Rate, Original Poem written in blank
Verse for the Sake of the Ear, as well as the Heart, I must still more strongly
recommend the Use of the same to Translations. -- Rhyme is so abhorrent from
the Air and Genius of the ancient Poetry, that nothing but the absolute
Necessity of it can, I think, render it dispensable in an English Version. --
Now convenient it may sometimes be, but it is never necessary -- Whatever are
the Imperfections, and Defects of our Language, they are, it is my Opinion,
such, as Rhyme, though it may disguise, can never supply. But I would exclude
Hypocrisy from Poetry, as well as Religion, and confess for my own Part, that I
had much rather see a Translation in some Places inferior to its Original, than
unlike it in all. If upon the whole not only the very Cast, but the Sense and
Spirit of an Author may be better preserved in blank Verse than Rhyme, every
reasonable Critic will make Allowances for the Poverty, and natural Inferiority
of our Mother Tongue. Mr. Pitt's Translation of the Aeneid is a very noble one;
though I cannot conceive what induced him to give it us in Rhyme, unless it was
the Apprehension of the Inequality of our Language to the Diction of his Author
where it is most plain, and unpoetical. Indeed Purity, and Manliness are the
chief Characteristics of Virgil, as Fire, and Vivacity are those of Homer; for
which Reason I should imagine the latter a more attemptable Author, than the
former, if Mr. Pope had not precluded every Undertaking of this Nature, even
though he wrote in Rhyme. For bold Figures, strong Paintings, and beautiful
Colorings may be ransfused from one Language to another: but Purity,
Simplicity, and Elegance, though they are the same things in all Tongues, are not
equally striking in them all. -- However, no Translation can go farther than
the Genius of our Language will admit; and even with regard to Virgil, it will
go, I am inclined to believe, far enough to convey a strong Idea of this noble
Original in all its Parts. It will go farther at least without Rhyme, than with
it. Dr. Trapp indeed, than whom no Body better understood his Author, by too
superstitious an Adherence to the Letter, and particularly a fruitless and
perpetual Endeavor to retain the Brevity of Virgil, is cold and languid upon
numberless Occasions; and has thereby perhaps contributed more to the
Disreputation of blank Verse, than any other Writer. He was offended, and not
without Reason, with the Licentiousness of Mr. Dryden's Translation; but his
squeamishness has carried him into the other Extreme; for if Mr. Dryden runs
away from Virgil, the Doctor is tied to him. -- There is, by the by, this
observable Difference, between Mr. Dryden's Deviations from Virgil, and Mr.
Pope's from Homer, that those of the latter are always uniform, graceful, and
beautiful, and if they are not Homer's Thoughts are at least worthy of him;
whereas Mr. Dryden is apt to dwindle into a kind of Puerility, which was but
too natural to him, that is altogether unsuitable to the Gravity and Dignity of
Virgil. -- Between this Translator then and Dr. Trapp, there lay a middle Way,
which Mr. Pit has judiciously taken, and religiously pursued, to the immortal
Glory of Virgil, to his own infinite Honor, and the Credit of our Language.
Notwithstanding all this, I think, he has left Room for a Translation of
another Kind (as Dr. Trapp says of his, when compared with Mr. Dryden's) by
writing in Rhyme. -- I attempted some time ago, for my own Amusement, to
translate some of the Speeches in the first Book of the Aeneid into blank
Verse, from a Notion that Virgil if he had been born in England, and in this
present Age (as Mr. Dryden expresses himself) would have spoken something like
such English as I flattered myself I could speak for him. -- I have ventured to
send you a few Specimens, which for your Satisfaction I could wish you
diligently, and impartially to compare with the several Translaions, and with
the Original itself. L. 41.
Mean incepto desistere victam? etc. --


And am I then subdued! must I desist
From my avowed Design, and fails my Power
To drive from Latium's Coasts the Prince of Troy?
The Fates, it seems, forbid me! -- what! could Pallas
In Conflagration ruinous destroy
The Fleets of Greece, and mid the yawning Deep
Plunge their astonished Hosts, in Vengeance due
To One Man's Crime, the frantic Love of Ajax?
Furious she hurled the rapid Bolts of Jove,
That wide-disperst their Ships, and with fell Tempest
Tore up the Bosom of the affrighted Main!
The Wretch, with Thunder blasted, belching Flames,
She seized, She bore upon a Whirlwind's Wing,
And dashed him quivering on the pointed Rock.
While I that tread in State the Courts of Heaven,
Queen of the Gods, Sister, and Wife of Jove,
Wage Wars unceasing with one hated Race:
Who then will sacred Rites of Worship pay
To Juno's unpuissant Deity,
Or load with Honors her neglected Shrine?
L. 69.
Aeole, namque tibi Divum Pater, etc.
O Aeolus, to whom Heaven's awful Sire
Over the unruly Winds consigned the Sway;
It Is thine to smooth the Deep with gentle Gales,
Or toss the Billows boisterous in rough Storm --
A Nation I abhor, a Race of Foes,
With flying Streamers plow the Tuscan Waves,
Importing Ilium into Italy,
With all their vanquished Gods; rouse thou thy Winds,
And in the Gulfs of Ocean whelm their Fleets;
Or drive them scattered over the boundless Waste,
And strew with Trojan Carcases the Main.
Twice sev'n bright Virgin Nymphs adorn my Side,
The fairest of the Choir, young Diope,
I give to thy Embrace, and yield her Charms
To bless thy nuptial Bed with lasting Joys:
Her Sweetness richly shall thy Service pay,
And from your Loves a beauteous Line shall spring.
-- L. 80.
Tuus, O Regina, quod optas, etc.
It Is thine, O Queen, to name thy high Behests,
My Duty to obey -- to thee I owe
The whole of this my Realm, and regal Crown;
To thee the Favor of great Jove; to thee
My Portion at the Banquets of the Gods;
And over the Winds, and Storms my strong Domain.
L. 98.
O terque quaterque beati, etc.
-- And, Oh! thrice happy they (exclaims the Chief)
That died beneath the Bulwarks of old Troy,
Before their Fathers Eyes -- Oh! that my Fate
Had stretched me lifeless on my native Plain!
Tydides, bravest of the Sons of Greece,
Could I not greatly fall in Rage of Battle,
And pour my Soul out to thy slaught'ring Hand?
Where fell fierce Hector by Pelides' Sword;
Where great Sarpedon's manly Bulk extends;
Where Simois rolls his turbid Waves, full charged
With Helms, and Shields, and Bodies of the slain.
L. 233.
O qui res hominumque Deumque, etc.
O Thou eternal King of Gods, and Men,
Whose bolted Thunders shake the trembling World;
Say, what Offense of my unhappy Son,
Or what new Crime of Troy provokes thy Wrath;
That thus through endless Ruin, in vain search
Of Latium's wished for Coasts, distressed we roam,
The Outcasts still of each forbidden Shore?
Thy Promise bade us hope, an After-Age
Should reinstate in Italy the Race
Of ancient Teucer, and the Romans bear
Dominion over the habitable Globe.
What has my Father's gracious Purpose changed?
With this amusing Hope I soothed my Woes,
And against the wretched Fall of ruined Troy
Balanced the Glories of a happier Fate.
But the same adverse Fortune still pursues
Our harrass'd Tribes -- when will our Toils have End?
Antenor escaped through all the Hosts of Greece,
Safely he past the Illyrian Bay, and pierced
Liburnia's inmost Regions, to the Source
Of rich Timavus; from whose plenteous Spring
Nine Torrents, rushing like the Ocean's Tide,
Rebellow through the Mountain's hollow Womb,
And pour the roaring Deluge over the Plain.
Yet here he raised aspiring Padua's Walls,
New-nam'd the Nation, fixed the Arms of Troy,
And now enjoys the placid Sweets of Peace.
While We, descended from thy mighty Loins,
And fated to the Mansions of the Skies,
Our Ships far-scatter'd over the Main, ourselves
Delivered up to Juno's cruel Rage,
Long seek in vain Hesperia's fruitful Shores.
Is Piety rewarded, honored thus?
Is this the Kingdom for my Son reserved?
L. 261.
Parce metu Cytherea, etc.
Daughter dismiss thy Fears -- fixed are the Fates
Of thy beloved Race; thou shall behold
The fair Lavinium's promised Turrets rise,
Another Troy! -- sublime thou shall exalt
Thy gallant-hearted Son above the Stars. --
So steadfast is the Will of Sovereign Jove! --
But since this anxious Care still pangs thy Breast,
List, while the secret Volume of dark Fate
I open to thy View. -- Thy great Aeneas
Through Italy shall bear the mighty War,
And bruise the savage Nations; -- his high Power
Shall found new Cities, and prescribe new Laws;
For three auspicious Years the rolling Suns
Shall hail him Monarch of the vanquished Tribes:
The Boy Ascanius, now Julus called,
(Ilus his Name while flourished Ilium's state)
Shall measure round thrice ten revolving Years
In his imperial Sway; then from Lavinium
The Seat of growing Empire shall transfer,
And with long Ramparts fence proud Alba's Towers.
Here till three glorious Centuries expire,
Great Hector's Race shall full Dominion hold:
When Ilia, Priestess Queen, two Sons shall bear,
Illustrious Progeny, the Seed of Mars;
Then Romulus, the first of mortal Names,
The royal Suckling of a tawny Wolf,
Shall rear his sceptered Hand; high shall he raise
His City sacred to the God of War,
And from his mighty Self shall be derived
The Names august of Romans, and of Rome.
To these my favorite People I appoint
Nor Bound of Glory, nor Extent of Sway --
Even she, the vengeful Juno, that fatigues
Earth, Sea, and Heaven itself with horrid Broils,
At length shall feel her stubborn Heart relent
To milder Counsels; and with me protect
The Sons of Rome, the Nation of the Gown,
The future Masters of the subject World.
So will the Fates. -- I see the distant Age,
When the brave Race of old Assaracus
Shall bend the famed Mycene to the Yoke,
To vanquished Argos give the sovereign Law,
And stretch their Conquests over the Realms of Greece.
From this fair Line shall Trojan Caesar spring,
Whose Rule the Seas, whose Fame the Stars shall bound,
The Lord of all the Nations; Julius called
From great Julus his high Ancestor;
Him, fraught with Spoils, the Conq'ror of the East,
Thou shall advance among his Kindred Gods,
And Mortals shall invoke his Power divine.
Then golden Days of Peace shall bless the Land,
Quirinus, Remus, Vesta shall return,
Old Faith shall flourish, and the World be ruled
By righteous Laws; vast adamantine Bolts
Shall close the Gates of War; within dire Fury
Shall sit on heaps of Arms distilling Blood,
Bound with an hundred Links of knotted Brass,
And bellowing grind his Jaws besmeared with Gore.
You have in these few Passages in the Original, a Sample sufficient to
regulate your Idea of Virgil's Style in general by; which, as Mr. Dryden justly
remarks, is eminent for its Clearness, it Purity, its Easiness, and its
Magnificence; to which we must add no doubt, that which can rarely be
transferred with any tolerable Grace into our Language, viz. its Brevity. --
How far these Translations do justice to the Original, as far as may be, in
regard to all these Particulars, or whether equal Justice can possibly be done
to it by Rhyme from the very Nature of it, I now leave it with you to judge,
and am,

Yours, etc. etc.

FINIS.

