A TRUE CHARACTER of Mr. POPE.
The SECOND EDITION.
SIR,
I Have read over the Libel, which I received from you the Day before
Yesterday. Yesterday I received the same from another Hand, with this Character
of the Secret Author of so much stupid Calumny.

That he is one, whom God and Nature have marked for want of Common Honesty,
and his own Contemptible Rhimes for want of Common Sense, that those Rhimes
have found great Success with the Rabble, which is a Word almost as
comprehensive as Mankind; but that the Town, which supports him, will do by
him, as the Dolphin did by the Shipwrack'd Monkey, drop him as soon as it finds
him out to be a Beast, whom it fondly now mistakes for a Human Creature. It Is,
says he, a very little, but very comprehensive Creature, in whom all
Contradictions meet, and all Contrarieties are reconciled; when at one and the
same time, like the Ancient Centaurs, he is a Beast and a Man, a Whig and a
Tory, a virulent Papist, and yet forsooth, a Pillar of the Church of England, a
Writer at one and the same time, of GUARDIANS and of EXAMINERS, an assertor of
Liberty and of the Dispensing Power of Kings; a Rhimester without Judgment or
Reason, and a Critic without Common Sense; a Jesuitical Professor of Truth, a
base and foul Pretender to Candor; a Barbarous Wretch, who is perpetually
boasting of Humanity and Good Nature, a lurking way-laying Coward, and a
Stabber in the Dark; who is always pretending to Magnanimity, and to sum up all
Villains in one, a Traytor-Friend, one who has betrayed all Mankind, and seems
to have taken his great Rule of Life from the following Lines of Hudibras.

For it is easier to Betray
Than Ruin any other way,
As the Earth is soonest undermined,
By vermin Impotent and Blind.
He is a Professor of the worst Religion, which he laughs at, and yet has most
inviolably observed the most execrable Maxim in it, That no Faith is to be kept
with Heretics. A Wretch, whose true Religion is his Interest, and yet so
stupidly blind to that Interest, that he often meets her, without knowing her,
and very grossly Affronts her. His Villainy is but the natural Effect of his
want of Understanding, as the sowerness of Vinegar proceeds from its want of
Spirit; and yet, says my Friend, notwithstanding that Shape and that Mind of
his, some Men of good Understanding, value him for his Rhimes, as they would be
fond of an Asseinego, that could sing his part in a Catch, or of a Baboon that
could whistle Walsingham. The grosser part of his gentle Readers believe the
Beast to be more than Man; as Ancient Rusticks took his Ancestors for those
Demi Gods they call Fauns and Satyrs.

This was the Character, which my Friend gave of the Author of this miserable
Libel, which immediately made me apprehend that it was the very same Person,
who endeavored to expose you in a Billinsgate Libel, at the very time that you
were doing him a Favor at his own earnest Desire, who attempted to undermine
Mr. PHILIPS in one of his Guardians, at the same time that the Crocodile smiled
on him, embraced him, and called him Friend, who wrote a Prologue in praise of
CATO, and teas'd Lintott to publish Remarks upon it; who at the same time, that
he openly extolled Sir Richard Steel in the highest manner, secretly published
the Infamous Libel of Dr. Andrew Tripe upon him; who, as he is in Shape a
Monkey, is so in his every Action; in his senseless Chattering, and his merry
Grimaces, in his doing hourly Mischief and hiding himself in the variety of his
Ridiculous Postures, and his continual Shiftings, from Place to Place, from
Persons to Persons, from Thing to Thing. But whenever he Scribbles, he is
emphatically a Monkey, in his awkard servile Imitations. For in all his
Productions, he has been an Imitator, from his Imitation of VIRGILS Bucolicks,
to this present Imitation of HORACE. -- His Pastorals were writ in Imitation of
VIRGIL, -- His Rape of the Lock of BOILEAU, -- His Essay on Criticism, of the
present Duke of Buckingham, and of my Lord Rofcommon. -- His Windsor-Forest of
Sir John Denham, -- His Ode upon St. Caecilia of Mr. Dryden, and -- His Temple
of Fame, of CHAUCER.

Thus for fifteen Years together this Ludicrous Animal has been a constant
Imitator. Yet he has rather mimick'd these great Genius's, than he has Imitated
them. He has given a False and a Ridiculous Turn to all their good and their
great Qualities, and has, as far as in him lies, Burlesqu'd them without
knowing it. But after having been for fifteen Years as it were an Imitator, he
has made no Proficiency. His first Imitations, though bad, are rather better than
the Succeeding, and this last Imitation of HORACE, the most execrable of them
all.

For as a Dog that turns the Spit,
Bestirs himself and plies his Feet
To climb the Wheel, but all in vain,
His own Weight brings him down again,
And still he is in the self same place,
Where at his setting out he was,
So in the Circle of the Arts,
Does he Advance his natural Parts.
Hud. If you should chance, Sir, to show this LETTER to any of your
Acquaintance who have perused his Senseless Calumnies, they may think perhaps
that we follow his Example, and retort Slander upon him. I desire that you
would have the Goodness to assure such, that in the Moral part of his
Character, and all that relates to matter of Fact, there is no manner of
Rhetoric used, all is exactly and literally true, for which we appeal to those
Poetical Persons, with whom we have been most conversant in Covent Garden. We
have always been of Opinion that he who invents, or pretends, or falsifies
Matter of Fact, in order to slander any one, deserves an Infamous Punishment,
and we have always had before our Eyes the following Verses out of Horace.

-- Absentem qui rodit amicum,
Qui non desendit alio culpante, solutos
Qui captat risus Hominum, famamque dicacis,
Fingere qui non visa potest, commissa tacere,
Qui nequit, hic niger est, hunc tu Romani.
Caveto, etc. As to what relates to the Person of this wretched Libeller, if in
that there may be some trifling Exaggerations, yet even that is not designed to
Deceive or Impose upon any to whom you mey happen to show it, but is intended
to lead them to an exact Knowledge of the Truth by a very little enlarging upon
it.

But if any one appears to be concerned at our upbraiding him with his Natural
Deformity, which did not come by his own Fault, but seems to be the Curse of
God upon him; we desire that Person to consider, that this little Monster has
upbraided People with their Calamities and their Diseases which are either
false or past, or which he himself gave them by administering Poison to them; we
desire that Person to consider that Calamities and Diseases, if they are
neither false nor past, are common to all Men; that a Man can no more help his
Calamities and his Diseases, than a Monster can his Deformity; that there is no
Misfortune, but what the Generality of Mankind are liable too; and that there
is no one Disease, but what all the rest of Men are subject too; whereas the
Deformity of this Libeller is Visible, Present, Lasting, Unalterable, and
Peculiar to himself. It Is the mark of God and Nature upon him, to give us
warning that we should hold no Society with him, as a Creature not of our
Original, nor of our Species. And they who have refused to take this Warning
which God and Nature have given them, and have in spite of it, by a senseless
Presumption, ventured to be familiar with him, have severely suffered for it,
by his Perfidiousness. They tell me, he has been lately pleased to say, That
it is Doubtful if the Race of Men are the offspring of Adam or of the The WORMS
a Satire, Stanza 4.
Devil. But if it is doubtful as to the Race of Men, it is certain at least, that
his Original is not from Adam, but from the Devil. By his constant and
malicious Lying, and by that Angel Face and Form of his, it is plain that he
wants nothing but Horns and Tail, to be the exact Resemblance, both in Shape
and Mind, of his Infernal Father. Thus, Sir, I return you Truth for Slander,
and a just Satire for an Extravagant Libel, which is therefore ridiculously
called an Imitation of Horace, you know very well, Sir, that the Difference
between Horace, and such an Imitation of him, is almost Infinite; and I leave
you to consider what Influence such an Imitation must have upon his Readers of
both Kinds, both upon those who are acquainted with that Great Poet, and with
those that know him not; how contemptible it must render Horace to the latter,
and his Imitator to the former, who when they shall behold the Ghost of their
old and their valued Friend, raised up before them, by this awkard Conjurer, in
a Manner so ridiculously frightful, when they behold him thus miserably
mangled, and reflect at once with Contempt and Horror, upon this Barbarous
Usage of him, will not be able to refrain from exclaiming in the most vehement
Manner.

Qualis adest, Quantum mutatus ab illo, etc.
They must think that their old and valued Friend had a Prophetic Spirit, and
seemed to foretell the Usage, which he has lately received from this Barbarian
and his Brethren, when in the fourth Ode of his Third Book he cried,

Visam Britannos Hospitibus feros.
But as for the other sorts of Readers, the Readers who have no knowledge of
Horace, but from this contemptible Imitation; what must they think, Sir, of
those great Men, who extol him, for the second Genius of the Roman-Empire,
Illustrious for so many great Qualities which are to be sound in him alone.
Must they not look upon all his Admirers, as so many Learned Idiots, and upon
the Roman-Empire it self, as a vast Nation of Fools.

You know very well, Sir, that as Horace had a firmness of Judgment, and a
sureness and truth of Taste; he never once formed a wrong Judgment to himself,
either of the Actions of Men in general, or of the particular Worth and Merit
of Authors; he had an Honor and a Rectitude of Soul, that would have obliged
him to die a thousand times rather than to Write any thing against his
Conscience.

Pejuque letho flagitium timet.
He was capable indeed of being provoked to expose either a Fool or a Knave,
whom otherwise he might have suffered to have remained in Obscurity; but the
most barbarous Usage of his most Malicious Enemy, could never urge him to
slander that Enemy. From this Force and Clearness of his Understanding, and
this Noble Rectitude of his Will, it has proceeded that all his Censures are
like so many Decrees, that have been all affirmed by Posterity, the only
Supreme Court of Judicature, for the Distribution of Fame and Infamy, from
which Mankind can have no Appeal. That Supreme, Impartial, Incorruptible
Judicature, has the same Opinions of Persons and Things, and especially of
Authors that he had. The same high Value for Tibullus, for Pollio, for Varius,
for Virgil; and the same Contempt for Bavius, for Maevius, for Crispinus, for
Alpinus, for Fannius, and for a Thousand more.

The same Justness and Fineness of Discernment and the same noble Rectitude of
will, appear in the French Satirist, which make the most considerable Share of
his Merit, and the most Distinguishing part of his Character, if we will
believe what he says of himself, in his Admirable Epistle to Monsieur
SEIGNELEY. You know, Sir, that what Boileau says there of himself is exactly
true in Fact. The Persons whom he has attacked in his Writings have been for
the most part Authors and most of those Authors Poets. The Censures which he
has passed on them have been confirmed by all Europe. But at the same time that
judicious Poet, has been as liberal of his Praise to his Contemporaries, who
were excellent in their Kinds, as Corneille, Racine, Moliere, and La Fontaine;
Nay, he was generous enough to defend Racine, and to support and strengthen
him, when a Clamorous crowd of miserable Authors endeavored to oppress him, as
appears by his Admirable Epistle addressed to that Tragic Poet.

You, and I, both know very well, Sir, that there has been never wanting a
Flood of such Authors, neither in England nor France, who being like this
Imitator, in every Respect, the reverse of Horace, in Honor, in Discernment,
in Genius; have always combined to atack any thing that has apear'd above their
own dull Level, while they have hugged and admired each other, Authors who have
thought to be too hard for their Adversaries by opposing Billinsgate to Reason,
and Dogmatical Assertion to Moral Demonstration; and who have been Idiots
enough to belive that their Noise and Impudence could alter the Nature of
Things, and the Notions of Men of Sense.

Of all these Libellers, the present Imitator is the most Impudent, and the
most Incorrigible, who has lately pestered and plagued the World with Five or
Six Scandalous Libels in Prose, that are all of them at once so stupid and so
Malicious, that Men of Sense are Doubtful, if they should attribute them to the
Libellers Native Idiotism or to Accidental Madness.

In all these Libels, the chief Objects of his Scandal and Malice, have been
Persons of distinguished Merit and among these he has fallen upon none so
foully as his Friends and Benefactors. Among these latter, he has attacked no
one so often, or with so much ridiculous, impotent Malice, as Sir Richard
Blackmore; who is Estimable for a thousand good and great Qualities. And what
time has he chosen to do this. Why just after that Gentelman had laid very
great Oblegations on him; and just after he had obliged the World with, so many
Editions of his Excellent Poem upon CREATION, which Poem alone is worth all the
Folios, that this Libeller will ever write and which will render its Author the
Delight and Admiration of Posterity. So that it is hard to determine whether
this Libeller is more remarkable for his Judgment or his Gratitude.

I dare venture to affirm, that there is not an Author living so little
Qualified for a Censurer as himself. I know nothing for which he is so ill
Qualified as he is for Judging unless it be for Translating HOMER. He has
neither Taste nor judgment, but is, if you will pardon a Quibble, the very
necessity of Parnassus; for he has none of the Poetical Laws; or if he has the
Letter of any, He has it without the Spirit. Whenever he pretends to Criticize,
I fancy I see Shamwell or Cheatly in the Squire of Alsatia, cutting a Sham or
Banter to abuse some Bubble. The Presace is full of gross Errors, and he has
shown himself in it, a Dogmatical, Ignorant Impudent Second Hand Critic. As
for the Poem, however he may cry up HOMER for being every where a Grecian --
Trumpeter in the Original, I can see no Trumpeter in the Translator, but the
King of Spain's. But since his Friends will allege it is easy to say this, I
desire it may go for nothing till I have so plainly proved it, that the most
Foolish, and the most Partial of them shall not be able to deny it.

As for what they call his Verses, he has, like Mr. Bays, got a notable knack
of Rhiming and Writing smooth verse, but without either Genius or Good Sense,
or any tolerable Knowledge of English, as I believe I shall show plainly, when
I come to the rest of his Imitations. As for his Translation of HOMER, I could
never borrow it till this very Day, and design to read it over to Morrow; so
that shortly you may expect to hear more of it. I will only tell you
beforehand, that HOMER seems to me to be untranslatable in any Modern Language.
That great Poet is just in his Desings, admirable in his Characters, and for
the most part exact in his Reasoning and correct in his Noble Sentiments; but
these are Excellencies, which may be already seen in the Prose Translations of
Him.

The Qualities which so admirably distinguish HOMER from most other Writers,
and which therefore a Translator in Verse is particularly obliged to show,
because they cannot be shown in Prose, are the Beauty of his Diction, and the
various Harmony of his Versification. But it is as Ridiculous to pretend to make
these Shine out in English Rhimes, as it would be to Emulate upon a Bag-pipe,
the Solemn and Majestic Thorough Basse of an Organ.

But you may suddenly expect more of this, if what I have already said, happens
to entertain you.

LONDON May 7. 1717. I am Sir, Your, etc.

FINIS.

