A COLLECTION of POEMS.

VOL. V.

A COLLECTION OF POEMS IN SIX VOLUMES.

BY SEVERAL HANDS.



LONDON: Printed by J. HUGHS, For R. and J. DODSLEY, at Tully's-Head in
Pall Mall. M DCC LXIII.

RURAL ELEGANCE: An ODE to the late Duchess of SOMERSET. Written 1750.
By WILLIAM SHENSTONE, Esquire
I.
WHILE orient skies restore the day,
And dew-drops catch the lucid ray;
Amid the sprightly scenes of morn,
Will aught the Muse inspire?
Oh! peace to yonder clamorous horn
That drowns the sacred lyre!
II.
Ye rural Thanes that over the mossy down
Some panting, timorous hare pursue;
Does nature mean your joys alone to crown?
Say, does she smoothe her lawns for you?
For you does Echo bid the rocks reply,
And urged by rude constraint resound the jovial cry?
III.
See from the neighboring hill, forlorn
The wretched swain your sport survey;
He finds his faithful fences torn,
He finds his labored crops a prey;
He sees his flock -- no more in circles feed;
Happily beneath your ravage bleed,
And with no random curses loads the deed.
IV.
Nor yet, ye swains, conclude
That Nature smiles for you alone;
Your bounded souls, and your conceptions crude,
The proud, the selfish boast disown:
Yours be the produce of the soil;
O may it still reward your toil!
Nor ever the defenseless train
Of clinging infants, ask support in vain!
V.
But though the various harvest gild your plains,
Does the mere landschape feast your eye?
Or the warm hope of distant gains
Far other cause of glee supply?
Is not the red-streak's future juice
The source of your delight profound,
Where Ariconium pours her gems profuse,
Purpling a whole horizon round?
Athirst ye praise the limpid stream, it is true:
But though, the pebbled shores among,
It mimick no unpleasing song,
The limpid fountain murmurs not for you.
VI.
Unpleas'd ye see the thickets bloom,
Unpleas'd the Spring her flowery robe resume;
Unmoved the mountain's airy pile,
The dappled mead without a smile.
O let a rural conscious Muse,
For well she knows, your froward sense accuse:
Forth to the solemn oak you bring the square,
And span the massy trunk, before you cry, it is fair.
VII.
Nor yet ye learned, not yet ye courtly train,
If happily from your haunts ye stray
To waste with us a summer's day,
Exclude the taste of every swain,
Nor our untutored sense disdain:
It Is Nature only gives exclusive right
To relish her supreme delight;
She, where she pleases kind or coy,
Who furnishes the scene, and forms us to enjoy.
VIII.
Then higher bring the fair ingenuous mind,
By her auspicious aid refined;
Lo! not an hedge-row hawthorn blows,
Or humble hare-bell paints the plain,
Or valley winds, or fountain flows,
Or purple heath is tinged in vain:
For such the rivers dash their foaming tides,
The mountain swells, the dale subsides;
Even thriftless furze detains their wandering sight,
And the rough barren rock grows pregnant with delight.
IX.
With what suspicious fearful care
The sordid wretch secures his claim,
If happily some luxurious heir
Should alienate the fields that wear his name!
What scruples lest some future birth
Should litigate a span of earth!
Bonds, contracts, feoffments, names unmeet for prose,
The towering Muse endures not to disclose;
Alas! her unrevers'd decree,
More comprehensive and more free,
Her lavish charter, Taste, appropriates all we see.
X.
Let gondolas their painted flags unfold,
And be the solemn day enrolled,
When, to confirm his lofty plea,
In nuptial sort, with bridal gold,
The grave Venetian weds the sea:
Each laughing Muse derides the vow;
Even Adria scorns the mock embrace,
To some lone hermit on the mountain's brow,
Allotted, from his natal hour,
With all her myrtle shores in dower.
His breast to admiration prone
Enjoys the smile upon her face,
Enjoys triumphant every grace,
And finds her more his own.
XI.
Fatigued with form's oppressive laws,
When SOMERSET avoids the Great;
When cloyed with merited applause,
She seeks the rural calm retreat;
Does she not praise each mossy cell,
And feel the truth my numbers tell?
When deafen'd by the loud acclaim,
Which genius graced with rank obtains,
Could she not more delighted hear
Yon throstle chaunt the rising year?
Could she not spurn the wreaths of fame,
To crop the primrose of the plains?
Does she not sweets in each fair valley find,
Lost to the sons of power, unknown to half mankind?
XII.
Ah can she covet there to see
The splendid slaves, the reptile race,
That oil the tongue, and bow the knee,
That slight her merit, but adore her place?
Far happier, if aright I deem,
When from gay throngs, and gilded spires,
To where the lonely halcyons play,
Her philosophic step retires:
While studious of the moral theme,
She, to some smooth sequestered stream
Likens the swain's inglorious day;
Pleased from the flowery margin to survey,
How cool, serene, and clear the current glides away.
XIII.
O blind to truth, to virtue blind,
Who slight the sweetly-pensive mind!
On whose fair birth the Graces mild,
And every Muse prophetic smiled.
Not that the poet's boasted fire
Should Fame's wide-echoing trumpet swell;
Or, on the music of his lyre
Each future age with rapture dwell;
The vaunted sweet of praise remove,
Yet shall such bosoms claim a part
In all that glads the human heart;
Yet these the spirits, formed to judge and prove
All nature's charms immense, and Heaven's unbounded love.
XIV.
And oh! the transport, most allied to song,
In some fair villa's peaceful bound,
To catch soft hints from Nature's tongue,
And bid Arcadia bloom around:
Whether we fringe the sloping hill,
Or smoothe below the verdant mead;
Whether we break the falling rill,
Or through meandering mazes lead;
Or in the horrid bramble's room
Bid careless groups of roses bloom;
Or let some sheltered lake serene
Reflect flowers, woods and spires, and brighten all the scene.
XV.
O sweet disposal of the rural hour!
O beauties never known to cloy!
While worth and genius haunt the favored bower,
And every gentle breast partakes the joy!
While Charity at eve surveys the swain,
Enabled by these toils to cheer
A train of helpless infants dear,
Speed whistling home across the plain;
Sees vagrant Luxury, her handmaid grown,
For half her graceless deeds atone,
And hails the bounteous work, and ranks it with her own.
XVI.
Why brand these pleasures with the name
Of soft, unsocial toils, of indolence and shame?
Search but the garden, or the wood,
Let yon admired carnation own,
Not all was meant for raiment, or for food,
Not all for needful use alone;
There while the seed of future blossoms dwell,
It Is colored for the sight, perfumed to please the smell.
XVII.
Why knows the nightingale to sing?
Why flows the pine's nectareous juice?
Why shines with paint the linnet's wing?
For sustenance alone? for use?
For preservation? Every sphere
Shall bid fair Pleasure's rightful claim appear.
And sure there seem, of human kind,
Some born to shun the solemn strife;
Some for amusive tasks designed,
To soothe the certain ills of life;
Grace it is lone vales with many a budding rose,
New founts of bliss disclose,
Call forth refreshing shades, and decorate repose.
XVIII.
From plains and woodlands; from the view
Of rural Nature's blooming face,
Smit with the glare of rank and place,
To courts the sons of Fancy flew;
There long had Art ordained a rival seat;
There had she lavished all her care
To form a scene more dazzling fair,
And called them from their green retreat
To share her proud control;
Had given the robe with grace to flow,
Had taught exotic gems to flow;
And emulous of nature's power,
Mimick'd the plume, the leaf, the flower;
Changed the complexion's native hue,
Molded each rustic limb anew,
And warped the very soul!
XIX.
Awhile her magic strikes the novel eye,
Awhile the faery forms delight;
And now aloof we seem to fly
On purple pinions through a purer sky,
Where all is wondrous, all is bright:
Now landed on some spangled shore
Awhile each dazzled maniac roves
By sapphire lakes, through em'rald groves,
Paternal acres please no more;
Adieu the simple, the sincere delight --
The habitual scene of hill and dale,
The rural herds, the vernal gale,
The tangled vetch's purple bloom,
The fragrance of the bean's perfume,
Be theirs alone who cultivate the soil,
And drink the cup of thirst, and eat the bread of toil,
XX.
But soon the pageant fades away!
It Is Nature only bears perpetual sway.
We pierce the counterfeit delight,
Fatigued with splendour's irksome beams,
Fancy again demands the sight
Of native groves, and wonted streams,
Pants for the scenes that charmed her youthful eyes,
Where Truth maintains her court, and banishes disguise.
XXI.
Then hither often ye senators retire,
With Nature here high converse hold;
For who like STAMFORD her delights admire,
Like STAMFORD shall with scorn behold
The unequal bribes of pageantry and gold;
Beneath the British oak's majestic shade,
Shall see fair Truth, immortal maid,
Friendship in artless guise arrayed,
Honor, and moral Beauty shine
With more attractive charms, with radiance more divine.
XXII.
Yes, here alone did highest Heaven ordain
The lasting magazine of charms,
Whatever wins, whatever warms,
Whatever fancy seeks to share,
The great, the various, and the fair,
For ever should remain!
XXIII.
Her impulse nothing may restrain --
Or whence the joy 'mid columns, towers,
'Midst all the city's artful trim,
To rear some breathless vapid flowers,
Or shrubs fuliginously grim:
From rooms of silken foliage vain,
To trace the dun far distant grove,
Where smit with undissembled pain,
The wood-lark mourns her absent love,
Borne to the dusty town from native air,
To mimick rural life, and soothe some vapour'd fair.
XXIV.
But how must faithless Art prevail,
Should all who taste our joy sincere,
To virtue, truth or science dear,
Forego a court's alluring pale,
For dimpled brook and leafy grove,
For that rich luxury of thought they love!
Ah no, from these the public sphere requires
Example for it is giddy bands;
From these impartial Heaven demands
To spread the flame itself inspires;
To sift Opinion's mingled mass,
Impress a nation's taste, and bid the sterling pass.
XXV.
Happy, thrice happy they,
Whose graceful deeds have exemplary shone
Round the gay precincts of a throne,
With mild effective beams!
Who bands of fair ideas bring,
By solemn grott, or shady spring,
To join their pleasing dreams!
Theirs is the rural bliss without alloy,
They only that deserve, enjoy.
What though nor fabled Dryad haunt their grove,
Nor Naiad near their fountains rove,
Yet all embodied to the mental sight,
A train of smiling Virtues bright
Shall there the wise retreat allow,
Shall twine triumphant palms to deck the wanderer's brow.
XXVI.
And though by faithless friends alarmed,
Art have with Nature waged presumptuous war;
By SEYMOUR'S winning influence charmed,
In whom their gifts united shine,
No longer shall their counsels jar.
It Is hers to mediate the peace:
Near Percy-lodge, with awe-struck mien,
The rebel seeks her lawful Queen,
And havoc and contention cease.
I see the rival powers combine,
And aid each other's fair design;
Nature exalt the mound where Art shall build;
Art shape the gay alcove, while Nature paints the field.
XXVII.
Begin, ye songsters of the grove!
O warble forth your noblest lay;
Where SOMERSET vouchsafes to rove
Ye leverets freely sport and play.
-- Peace to the strepent horn!
Let no harsh dissonance disturb the morn,
No sounds inelegant and rude
Her sacred solitudes profane!
Unless her candor not exclude
The lowly shepherd's votive strain,
Who tunes his reed amist his rural cheer,
Fearful, yet not averse, that SOMERSET should hear.
Inscription near a Sheep-cote. 1745.
By the Same.
SHepherd, would thou here obtain
Pleasure unalloy'd with pain?
Joy that suits the rural sphere?
Gentle shepherd! lend an ear.
Learn to relish calm delight,
Verdant vales, and fountains bright;
Trees that nod on sloping hills,
Caves that echo tinkling rills.
If thou can no charm disclose
In the simplest bud that blows;
Go, forsake thy plain and fold,
Join the crowd, and toil for gold.
Tranquil pleasures never cloy;
Banish each tumultuous joy:
All but love -- for love inspires
Fonder wishes, fiercer fires.
Love and all its joys be thine --
Yet, ere thou the reins resign,
Hear what reason seems to say,
Hear attentive, and obey.
"Crimson leaves the rose adorn,
"But beneath 'em lurks a thorn:
"Fair and flowery is the brake,
"Yet it hides the vengeful snake.
"Think not she, whose empty pride
"Dares the fleecy garb deride;
"Think not she who, light and vain,
"Scorns the sheep, can love the swain.
"Artless deed and simple dress,
"Mark the chosen shepherdess;
"Thoughts by decency controlled,
"Well conceived, and freely told.
"Sense that shuns each conscious air,
"Wit that falls ere well aware;
"Generous pity, prone to sigh
"If her kid or lambkin die.
"Let not lucre, let not pride
"Draw thee from such charms aside;
"Have not those their proper sphere?
"Gentler passions triumph here.
"See, to sweeten thy repose,
"The blossom buds, the fountain flows;
"Lo! to crown thy healthful board,
"All that milk and fruits afford.
"Seek no more -- the rest is vain:
"Pleasure ending soon in pain:
"Anguish lightly gilded over:
"Close thy wish, and seek no more."
NANCY of the VALE. A BALLAD.
Nerine Galatea! thymo mihi dulcior Hyblae!
Candidior cygnis, hedera formosior alba!

By the Same.
THE western sky was purpled over
With every pleasing ray:
And flocks reviving felt no more
The sultry heats of day:
When from an hazle's artless bower
Soft-warbled Strephon's tongue;
He blessed the scene, he blessed the hour,
While Nancy's praise he sung.
"Let fops with fickle falsehood range
The paths of wanton love,
Whilst weeping maids lament their change,
And sadden every grove:
But endless blessings crown the day,
I saw fair Esham's dale!
And every blessing find its way
To Nancy of the Vale.
'Twas from Avona's banks the maid
Diffused her lovely beams;
And every shining glance displayed
The Naid of the streams.
Soft as the wild-duck's tender young,
That float on Avon's tide;
Bright as the water-lily, sprung,
And glittering near its side.
Fresh as the bordering flowers, her bloom:
Her eye, all mild to view;
The little halcyon's azure plume
Was never half so blue.
Her shape was like the reed so sleek,
So taper, strait, and fair;
Her dimpled smile, her blushing cheek,
How charming sweet they were!
Far in the winding Vale retired,
This peerless bud I found;
And shadowing rocks, and woods conspired
To fence her beauties round.
That Nature in so lone a dell
Should form a Nymph so sweet!
Or Fortune to her secret cell
Conduct my wandering feet!
Gay lordlings sought her for their bride,
But she would never incline:
"Prove to your equals true, she cried,
"As I will prove to mine.
"'It Is Strephon, on the mountain's brow,
"Has won my right good will;
"To him I gave my plighted vow,
"With him I Will climb the hill."
Struck with her charms and gentle truth,
I clasped the constant fair;
To her alone I gave my youth,
And vow my future care.
And when this vow shall faithless prove,
Or I those charms forego;
The stream that saw our tender love,
That stream shall cease to flow.
ODE to INDOLENCE, 1750.
By the Same.
AH! why for ever on the wing
Persists my wearied soul to roam?
Why, ever cheated, strives to bring
Or pleasure or contentment home?
Thus the poor bird, that draws his name
From paradise's honored groves,
Ceaseless fatigues his little frame;
Nor finds the resting place he loves.
Lo! on the rural mossy bed
My limbs with careless ease reclined;
Ah, gentle Sloth! indulgent spread
The same soft bandage over my mind.
For why should lingering thought invade,
Yet every worldly prospect cloy?
Lend me, soft Sloth, thy friendly aid,
And give me peace, debarred of joy.
Love thou yon calm and silent flood,
That never ebbs, that never flows;
Protected by the circling wood
From each tempestuous wind that blows?
An altar on its bank shall rise,
Where often thy votary shall be found;
What time pale Autumn lulls the skies,
And sickening verdure fades around.
Ye busy, race, ye factious train,
That haunt Ambition's guilty shrine;
No more perplex the world in vain,
But offer here your vows with mine.
And thou, puissant Queen! be kind:
If ever I shared thy balmy power;
If ever I swayed my active mind,
To weave for Thee the rural bower;
Dissolve in sleep each anxious care;
Each unavailing sigh remove;
And only let me wake to share
The sweets of Friendship and of Love.
ODE to HEALTH, 1730.
By the Same.
O HEALTH, capricious maid!
Why do thou shun my peaceful bower,
Where I had hope to share thy power,
And bless thy lasting aid?
Since thou, alas! art flown,
It 'vails not whether Muse or Grace,
With tempting smile, frequent the place:
I sigh for thee alone.
Age not forbids thy stay;
Thou yet might act the friendly part;
Thou yet might raise this languid heart;
Why speed so swift away?
Thou scorn'st the city-air;
I breathe fresh gales over furrowed ground,
Yet have not thou my wishes crowned,
O false! O partial fair!
I plunge into the wave;
And though with purest hands I raise
A rural altar to thy praise,
Thou will not deign to save.
Amid my well-known grove,
Where mineral fountains vainly bear
Thy boasted name, and titles fair,
Why scorns thy foot to rove?
Thou hear'st the sportsman's claim;
Enabling him, with idle noise,
To drown the Muse's melting voice,
And fright the timorous game.
Is Thought thy foe? adieu
Ye midnight lamps! ye curious tomes!
Mine eye over hill and valley roams,
And deals no more with you.
Is it the Clime you flee?
Yet 'midst his unremitting snows,
The poor Laponian's bosom glows;
And shares bright rays from thee.
There was, there was a time,
When though I scorned thy guardian care,
Nor made a vow, nor said a prayer
I did not rue the crime.
Who then more blessed than me?
When the glad school-boy's task was done,
And forth, with jocund sprite, I run
To freedom, and to glee!
How jovial then the day!
What since have all my labors found,
Thus climbing life, to gaze around,
That can thy loss repay?
Were thou, alas! but kind,
Methinks no frown that Fortune wears,
Nor lessened hopes, nor growing cares,
Could sink my cheerful mind.
Whatever my stars include;
What other breasts convert to pain,
My towering mind should soon disdain,
Should scorn -- Ingratitude!
Repair this mouldering cell,
And blessed with objects found at home,
And envying none their fairer dome,
How pleased my soul should dwell!
Temperance should guard the doors;
From room to room should Memory stray,
And, ranging all in neat array,
Enjoy her pleasing stores --
There let them rest unknown,
The types of many a pleasing scene;
But to preserve them bright or clean,
Is thine, fair Queen! alone.
To a LADY of QUALITY, Fitting up her LIBRARY, 1738.
By the Same.
AH! what is Science, what is Art,
Or what the pleasure these impart?
Ye trophies which the Learned pursue
Through endless fruitless toils, adieu!
What can the tedious tomes bestow,
To soothe the miseries they show?
What, like the bliss for him decreed,
Who tends his flock, and tunes his reed!
Say, wretched Fancy! thus refined
From all that glads the simplest hind,
How rare that object, which supplies
A charm for too discerning eyes!
The polished bard, of genius vain,
Endures a deeper sense of pain:
As each invading blast devours
The richest fruits, the fairest flowers.
Sages, with irksome waste of time,
The steep ascent of Knowledge climb:
Then, from the towering heights they scale,
Behold Contentment range -- the vale.
Yet why, Asteria, tell us why
We scorn the crowd, when you are nigh:
Why then does reason seem so fair,
Why learning then, deserve our care?
Who can unpleas'd your shelves behold,
While you so fair a proof unfold
What force the brightest genius draws
From polished Wisdom's written laws?
Where are our humbler tenets flown?
What strange perfection bids us own
That Bliss with toilsome Science dwells,
And happiest he, who most excels?
UPON A VISIT to the same in Winter, 1748.
By the Same.
I.
ON fair Asteria's blissful plains,
Where ever-blooming Fancy reigns,
How pleased we pass the winter's day;
And charm the dull-ey'd Spleen away!
II.
No linnet, from the leafless bough,
Pours forth her note melodious now;
But all admire Asteria's tongue,
Nor wish the linnet's vernal song.
III.
No flowers emit their transient rays:
Yet sure Asteria's wit displays
More various tints, more glowing lines,
And with perennial beauty shines.
IV.
Though rifled groves and fettered streams
But ill befriend a poet's dreams:
Asteria's presence wakes the lyre;
And well supplies poetic fire.
V.
The fields have lost their lovely dye;
No cheerful azure decks the sky;
Yet still we bless the louring day:
Asteria smiles -- and all is gay.
VI.
Hence let the Muse no more presume
To blame the Winter's dreary gloom;
Accuse his loitering hours no more;
But ah! their envious haste deplore!
VII.
For soon, from wit and friendship's reign,
The social hearth, the sprightly vein,
I go -- to meet the coming year,
On savage plains, and deserts drear!
VIII.
I go -- to feed on pleasures flown,
Nor find the spring my loss atone!
But 'mid the flowery sweets of May
With pride recall this winter's day.
An irregular ODE after SICKNESS, 1749.
By the Same.
-- Melius, cum venerit Ipsa, can^mus.
I.
TOO long a stranger to repose,
At length from Pain's abhorred couch I rose,
And wandered forth alone;
To court once more the balmy breeze,
And catch the verdure of the trees,
Ere yet their charms were flown.
II.
'Twas from a bank with pansies gay
I hailed once more the cheerful day,
The sun's forgotten beams:
O sun! how pleasing were thy rays,
Reflected from the polished face
Of yon refulgent streams!
III.
Raised by the scene my feeble tongue
Essayed again the sweets of song:
And thus in feeble strains and slow,
The loitering numbers 'gan to flow.
IV.
"Come, gentle air! my languid limbs restore,
"And bid me welcome from the Stygian shore:
"For sure I heard the tender sighs,
"I seemed to join the plaintive cries
"Of hapless youths, who through the myrtle grove
"Bewail for ever their unfinished love:
"To that unjoyous clime,
"Torn from the sight of these etherial skies;
"Debarred the luster of their Delia's eyes;
"And banished in their prime.
V.
"Come, gentle Air! and while the thickets bloom,
"Convey the jasmin's breath divine,
"Convey the woodbine's rich perfume,
"Nor spare the sweet-leaft eglantine.
"And may thou shun the rugged storm
"Till Health her wonted charms explain,
"With rural pleasure in her train,
"To greet me in her fairest form.
"While from this lofty mount I view
"The sons of earth, the vulgar crew,
"Anxious for futile gains beneath me stray,
"And seek with erring step Contentment's obvious way.
VI.
"Come, gentle Air! and thou celestial Muse,
"Thy genial flame infuse;
"Enough to lend a pensive bosom aid,
"And gild Retirement's gloomy shade;
"Enough to rear such rustic lays
"As foes may slight, but partial friends will praise."
VII
The gentle Air allowed my claim;
And, more to cheer my drooping frame,
She mixed the balm of opening flowers;
Such as the be, with chymic powers,
From Hybla's fragrant hill inhales,
Or scent Sabea's blooming vales.
But ah! the Nymphs that heal the pensive mind,
By prescripts more refined,
Neglect their votary's anxious moan:
Oh, how should They relieve? -- the Muses all were flown.
VIII.
By flowery plain, or woodland shades,
I fondly sought the charming maids;
By woodland shades, or flowery plain,
I sought them, faithless maids! in vain!
When lo! in happier hour,
I leave behind my native mead,
To range where zeal and friendship lead,
To visit *****'s honored bower.
Ah foolish man! to seek the tuneful maids
On other plains, or near less verdant shades;
IX.
Scarce have my footsteps pressed the favored ground,
When sounds etherial strike my ear;
At once celestial forms appear;
My fugitives are found!
The Muses here attune their lyres,
Ah partial! with unwonted fires;
Here, hand in hand, with careless mien,
The sportive Graces trip the green.
X.
But whilst I wandered over a scene so fair,
Too well at one survey I trace,
How every Muse, and every Grace,
Had long employed their care.
Lurks not a stone enriched with lively stain,
Blooms not a flower amid the vernal store,
Falls not a plume on India's distant plain,
Glows not a shell on Adria's rocky shore,
But torn methought from native lands or seas,
From their arrangement, gain fresh power to please.
XI.
And some had bent the wildering maze,
Bedeckt with every shrub that blows;
And some entwined the willing sprays,
To shield the illustrious Dame's repose:
Others had graced the sprightly dome,
And taught the portrait where to glow;
Others arrang'd the curious tome;
Or 'mid the decorated space,
Assigned the laureled bust a place,
And given to learning all the pomp of show,
And now from every task withdrawn,
They met and frisk'd it over the lawn.
XII.
Ah! woe is me, said I;
And ***'s hilly circuit heard me cry,
Have I for this, with labor strove,
And lavished all my little store
To fence for you my shady grove,
And scollop every winding shore;
And fringe with every purple rose,
The sapphire stream that down my valley flows?
XIII.
Ah! lovely treacherous maids!
To quit unseen my votive shades,
When pale disease, and torturing pain
Had torn me from the breezy plain,
And to a restless couch confined,
Who never your wonted tasks declined.
She needs not your officious aid
To swell the song, or plan the shade;
By genuine Fancy fired,
Her native Genius guides her hand,
And while she marks the sage command,
More lovely scenes her skill shall raise,
Her lyre resound with nobler lays
Than ever you inspired.
Thus I my rage and grief display;
But vainly blame, and vainly mourn,
Nor will a Grace or Muse return
Till LUXBOROUGH lead the way.
ANACREONTIC, 1738.
By the Same.
'TWAS in a cool Aonian glade,
The wanton Cupid, spent with toil,
Had sought refreshment from the shade;
And stretched him on the mossy soil.
A vagrant Muse drew nigh, and found
The subtle traitor fast asleep;
And is it thine to snore profound,
She said, yet leave the world to weep?
But hush -- from this auspicious hour,
The world, I ween, may rest in peace;
And robbed of darts, and stripped of power,
Thy peevish petulance decrease.
Sleep on, poor child! whilst I withdraw,
And this thy vile artillery hide --
When the Castalian fount she saw,
And plunged his arrows in the tide.
That magic fount -- ill-judging maid!
Shall cause you soon to curse the day
You dared the shafts of Love invade;
And gave his arms redoubled sway.
For, in a stream so wondrous clear,
When angry Cupid searches round,
Will not the radiant points appear?
Will not the furtive spoils be found?
Too soon they were; and every dart,
Dipped in the Muse's mystic spring,
Acquired new force to wound the heart;
And taught at once to love and sing.
Then farewell ye Pierian quire;
For who will now your altars throng?
From Love we learn to swell the lyre;
And Echo asks no sweeter song.
ODE. Written 1739.
By the Same.
Urit spes animi credula mutui. HOR.
'TWAS not by beauty's aid alone.
That love usurped his airy throne,
His boasted power displayed:
It Is kindness that secures his aim,
It Is hope that feeds the kindling flame,
Which beauty first conveyed.
In Clara's eyes, the lightnings view;
Her lips with all the rose's hue
Have all its sweets combined;
Yet vain the blush, and faint the fire,
'Till lips at once, and eyes conspire
To prove the charmer kind --
Though wit might gild the tempting snare,
With softest accent, sweetest air,
By Envy's self admired;
If Lesbia's wit betrayed her scorn,
In vain might every grace adorn,
What every Muse inspired.
Thus airy Strephon turned his lyre --
He scorned the pangs of wild desire,
Which lovesick swains endure:
Resolved to brave the keenest dart;
Since frowns could never wound his heart,
And smiles -- must ever cure.
But ah! how false these maxims prove,
How frail security from love,
Experience hourly shows!
Love can imagined smiles supply,
On every charming lip and eye
Eternal sweets bestows.
In vain we trust the Fair-one's eyes;
In vain the sage explores the skies,
To learn from stars his fate:
'Till led by fancy wide astray,
He finds no planet mark his way;
Convinced and wise -- too late.
As partial to their words we prove;
Then boldly join the lists of love,
With towering hopes supplied:
So heroes, taught by doubtful shrines,
Mistook their Deity's designs;
Then took the field -- and died.
The DYING KID.
By the Same.
Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus aevi
Prima fugit --
VIRG.
A TEAR bedews my Delia's eye,
To think yon playful kid must die;
From crystal spring, and flowery mead,
Must, in his prime of life, recede!
Erewhile, in sportive circles round
She saw him wheel, and frisk, and bound;
From rock to rock pursue his way,
And, on the fearful margin, play.
Pleased on his various freaks to dwell,
She saw him climb my rustic cell;
Thence eye my lawns with verdure bright,
And seem all ravished at the sight.
She tells with what delight he stood,
To trace his features in the flood:
Then skip'd aloof with quaint amaze;
And then drew near, again to gaze.
See tells me, how with eager speed
He flew, to hear my vocal reed;
And how, with critic face profound,
And steadfast ear, devoured the sound.
His every frolic, light as air,
Deserves the gentle Delia's care;
And tears bedew her tender eye,
To think the playful kid must die. --
But knows my Delia, timely wise,
How soon this blameless era flies?
While violence and craft succeed;
Unfair design, and ruthless deed!
Soon would the vine his wounds deplore,
And yield her purple gifts no more;
Ah soon, eras'd from every grove
Were Delia's name, and Strephon's love.
No more those bowers might Strephon see,
Where first he fondly gazed on thee;
No more those beds of flowerets find,
Which for thy charming brows he twined.
Each wayward passion soon would tear
His bosom, now so void of care;
And, when they left his ebbing vein,
What, but insipid age, remain?
Then mourn not the decrees of fate,
That gave his life so short a date;
And I will join thy tenderest sighs,
To think that youth so swiftly flies!
LOVE SONGS, written between the Year 1737 and 1743.
By the Same.
SONG. I.
I Told my nymph, I told her true,
My fields were small, my flocks were few;
While faltering accents spoke my fear,
That Flavia might not prove sincere.
Of crops destroyed by vernal cold,
And vagrant sheep that left my fold;
Of these she heard, yet bore to hear;
And is not Flavia then sincere?
How changed by Fortune's fickle wind,
The friends I loved became unkind,
She heard, and shed a generous tear;
And is not Flavia then sincere?
How, if she deigned my love to bless,
My Flavia must not hope for dress;
This too she heard, and smiled to hear;
And Flavia sure must be sincere.
Go shear your flocks, ye jovial swains,
Go reap the plenty of your plains;
Despoiled of all which you revere,
I know my Flavia's love sincere.
SONG II. The LANDSCAPE.
HOW pleased within my native bowers
Erewhile I passed the day!
Was ever scene so decked with flowers?
Were ever flowers so gay?
How sweetly smiled the hill, the vale,
And all the landscape round!
The river gliding down the dale!
The hill with beeches crowned!
But now, when urged by tender woes
I speed to meet my dear,
That hill and stream my zeal oppose,
And check my fond career.
No more, since Daphne was my theme,
Their wonted charms I see:
That verdant hill, and silver stream,
Divide my love and me.
SONG III.
YE gentle nymphs and generous dames
That rule over every British mind;
Be sure ye soothe their amorous flames,
Be sure your laws are not unkind.
For hard it is to wear their bloom
In unremitting sighs away:
To mourn the night's oppressive gloom,
And faintly bless the rising day.
And cruel 'twere a freeborn swain,
A British youth should vainly moan;
Who scornful of a tyrant's chain,
Submits to yours, and yours alone.
Nor pointed spear, nor links of steel,
Could ever those gallant minds subdue,
Who beauty's wounds with pleasure feel,
And boast the fetters wrought by you.
SONG IV. The SKY-LARK.
GO, tuneful bird, that glad'st the skies,
To Daphne's window speed thy way;
And there on quivering pinions rise,
And there thy vocal art display.
And if she deign thy notes to hear,
And if she praise thy matin song,
Tell her the sounds that soothe her ear,
To Damon's native plains belong.
Tell her, in livelier plumes arrayed,
The bird from Indian groves may shine;
But ask the lovely partial maid,
What are his notes compared to thine?
Then bid her treat yon witless beau,
And all his flaunting race with scorn;
And lend an ear to Damon's woe,
Who sings her praise, and sings forlorn.
SONG V.
Ah! ego non aliter trisles evincere morbos
Optarim, quam te sic quoque velle putem.

ON every tree, in every plain,
I trace the jovial spring in vain!
A sickly languor veils mine eyes,
And fast my waning vigor flies.
Nor flowery plain, nor budding tree,
That smile on others, smile on me;
Mine eyes from death shall court repose,
Nor shed a tear before they close.
What bliss to me can seasons bring?
Or what, the needless pride of spring?
The cypress bough, that suits the bier,
Retains its verdure all the year.
It Is true, my vine so fresh and fair,
Might claim awhile my wonted care;
My rural store some pleasure yield;
So white a flock, so green a field!
My friends, that each in kindness vie,
Might well expect one parting sigh;
Might well demand one tender tear;
For when was Damon unsincere?
But ere I ask once more to view
Yon setting sun his race renew,
Inform me, swains; my friends, declare,
Will pitying Delia join the prayer?
SONG VI. The Attribute of VENUS.
YES; Fulvia is like Venus fair;
Has all her bloom, and shape and air:
But still, to perfect every grace,
She wants -- the smile upon her face.
The crown majestic Juno wore;
And Cynthia's brow the crescent bore,
An helmet marked Minerva's mien,
But smiles distinguished Beauty's queen.
Her train was formed of smiles of loves
Her chariot drawn by gentlest doves;
And from her zone, the nymph may find,
It Is Beauty's province to be kind.
Then smile, my fair; and all whose aim
Aspires to paint the Cyprian dame,
Or bid her breathe in living stone,
Shall take their forms from you alone.
The Rape of the TRAP, a BALLAD; written at College, 1736.
By the Same.
'TWAS in a land of learning,
The Muse's favorite station,
Such pranks, of late,
Were played by a rat,
As gave them consternation!
All in a college-study,
Where books were in great plenty,
This rat would devour
More sense, in an hour,
Than I could write -- in twenty.
His breakfast, half the morning,
He constantly attended;
And, when the bell rung
For evening-song,
His dinner scarce was ended.
Huge tomes of geo -- graphy,
And maps lay all in flutter;
A river or a sea
Was to him a dish of tea,
And a kingdom -- bread and butter.
Such havoc, spoil, and rapine,
With grief my Muse rehearses;
How freely he would dine
On some bulky school-divine,
And for desert -- eat verses.
He spared not even heroics,
On which we poets pride us:
And would make no more
Of King Arthurs, by the score,
Than -- all the world beside does.
But if the desperate potion,
Might chance to over-dose him;
To check its rage,
He took a page
Of logic, to compose him.
A trap in haste and anger,
Was bought, you need not doubt on it;
And such was the gin,
Were a lion once in,
He could not, I think, get out on it.
With cheese, not books, 'twas baited;
The fact, I Will not belly it;
Since none, I tell ye that,
Whether scholar or rat,
Minds books, when he has other diet.
No more of trap and bait, sir,
Why should I sing -- or either?
Since the rat, with mickle pride,
All their sophistry defied;
And dragged them away together.
Both trap and bait were vanished,
Through a fracture in the flooring;
Which, though so trim
It now may seem,
Had then a doz'n, or more in.
Then answer this, ye sages;
(Nor think I mean to wrong ye)
Had the rat, who thus did seize on
The trap, less claim to reason,
Than many a sage among ye?
Dan Prior's mice, I own it,
We^e vermin of condition;
But the rat, who chiefly learned
What rats alone concerned,
Was the deeper politician.
That England's topsy-turvy,
Is clear from these mishaps, sir,
Since traps, we may determine,
Will no longer take our vermin;
But vermin take our traps, sir.
Let sophs, by rats infested,
Then trust in cats to catch 'em;
Lest they prove the utter bane
Of our studies, where, it is plain,
No mortal sits -- to watch 'em.
A SIMILE.
By the Same.
WHAT village but has often seen
The clumsy shape, the frightful mien,
Tremendous claws, and shagged hair,
Of that grim brute, yclep'd a Bear?
He from his dam, as wits agree,
Received the curious form you see;
Who with her plastic tongue alone
Produced a visage like her own.
By which they hint, in mystic fashion,
The powerful force of education.
Perhaps yon rural tribe is viewing,
Even now, the strange exploits of Bruin;
Who plays his anticks, roars aloud,
The wonder of a gaping crowd!
So have I known an awkward lad,
Whose birth has made a parish glad,
Forbid, for fear of sense, to roam;
And taught by kind mamma at home;
Who gives him many a well-try'd rule,
With ways and means -- to play the fool.
In sense the same, in stature higher,
He shines, ere long, a rural squire;
Pours forth unwitty jokes, and swears,
And bawls and drinks -- but chiefly stares!
His tenants of superior sense
Carouse and laugh at his expense;
And sure the pastime I Am relating
Must prove as pleasant as Bear-baiting.
The CEREMONIAL.
By the Same.
"SIR, will you please to walk before?"
No pray, Sir -- you are next the door.
"Upon mine honor, I Will not stir!"
Sir, I Am at home; consider, Sir.
"Excuse me Sir, I Will not go first."
Well, if I must be rude, I must;
But yet I wish I could evade it;
It Is strangely clownish -- be persuaded, etc. etc.
-- Go forward, cits! go forward, squires!
Nor scruple each, what each admires.
Life squares not, friends, with your proceeding:
It flies, while you display your breeding;
Such breeding as one's granam preaches,
Or some old dancing master teaches --
O for some rude tumultuous fellow,
Half crazy, or at least half-mellow,
To come behind you, unawares,
And fairly push you both down stairs!
But Death's at hand -- Let me advise ye,
Go forward, friends -- or he will surprise ye.
The Beau to the Virtuosos; alluding to a Proposal for the Publication of a Set
of BUTTERFLIES.
By the Same.
HAIL curious wights, to whom so fair
The form of mortal flies is!
Who deem those grubs beyond compare,
Which common sense despises.
Whether your prey, in gardens found,
Be urged through walks and allies;
Whether over hill, morass or mound,
You make more desperate sallies;
Amid the fury of the chase,
No rocks could ever retard you;
Blessed, if a fly repay the race,
Or painted wing reward you.
'Twas thus See Virgil.
Camilla, over the plain,
Pursued the glittering stranger;
Still eyed the purple's pleasing stain,
And knew not fear nor danger.
It Is you dispense the favorite meat
To nature's filmy people;
Know what conserves they choose to eat,
And what liqueurs, to tipple.
It Is you protect their pregnant hour;
And when the birth's at hand,
Exerting your obstetric power,
Prevent a mothless land.
Yet oh! my friends! however your view
Above gross objects rises;
Whatever refinements you pursue,
Hear what a beau advises.
A beau, that, weighed with yours, must prize
Domitian's idle passion;
Who sought the death of teazing flies
And not their propagation.
Let *****'s eyes more deeply warm,
Nor foolishly determine
To slight fair Nature's loveliest form,
And sigh for Nature's vermin.
And speak with some respect of beaux;
No more, as triflers, treat 'em:
It Is better learn to save one's clothes,
Than cherish moths that eat 'em.
VERSES to a FRIEND.
HAVE you not seen, my gentle squire,
The humors of our kitchen fire?
Says Ned to Sal -- I lead a spade;
Why don't ye play? -- the girl's afraid --
Play something -- any thing -- but play --
It Is but to pass the time away.
Pho! how she stands -- biting her nails --
As though she played for half her vails --
Sorting her cards, haggling and picking --
We play for nothing, do us, chicken?
That card will do -- blood! -- never doubt it --
It Is not worth while to think, about it.
Sal thought and thought, and missed her aim;
And Ned, never studying, won the game.
Methinks, old friend, it is wondrous true,
That verse is but a game at Loo.
While many a bard, that shows so clearly
He writes for his amusement merely,
Is known to study, fret, and toil,
And play for nothing all the while;
Or praise at most (for wreaths of yore
Never signify a farthing more:)
Till having vainly toiled to gain it,
He sees your flying pen obtain it.
Through fragrant scenes the trifler roves,
And hallowed haunts that Phoebus loves;
Where with strange heats his bosom glows,
And mystic flames the God bestows.
You, who none other flame require
Than a good blazing parlour fire,
Write verses -- to defy the scorners,
In cake houses, and chimney corners.
Sal found her deep-laid schemes were vain;
The cards are cut -- come deal again --
No good comes on it when one lingers --
I Will play the card comes next my fingers --
Fortune could never let Ned loo her,
When she had left it wholly to her.
Well, now, who wins? -- Why, still the same --
For Sal has lost another game.
I Have done, she muttered -- I was saying,
It did not argufy my playing.
Some folks will win they cannot choose;
But think or not think -- some must lose,
I may have won a game, or so --
But then it was an age ago --
It never will be my lot again --
I won it of a baby then --
Give me an ace of trumps, and see,
Our Ned will beat me with a three.
It Is all by luck that things are carried --
He Will suffer for it when he is married.
Thus Sal, with tears in either eye,
While victor Ned sat tittering by.
Thus I, long envying your success,
And bent to write, and study less,
Sat down and scribbled in a trice;
Just what you see -- and you despise.
You who can frame a tuneful song,
And hum it as you ride along;
And, trotting on the king's highway,
Snatch from the hedge a sprig of bay;
Accept the verse, however it flows,
From one, who is your friend in prose.
What is this wreath, so green! so fair!
Which many wish; and few must wear?
Which one man's indolence can gain,
Another's vigils never obtain?
For what must Sal or Poet sue,
Ere they engage with Ned or you?
For luck in verse? for luck at Loo?
Ah no! it is Genius gives you fame,
And Ned through skill secures the game.
Written at an INN on a particular Occasion.
TO thee, fair Freedom! I retire,
From flattery, feasting, dice, and din;
Nor art thou found in domes much higher
Than the low cot, or humble inn.
It Is here with boundless power I reign,
And every health which I begin,
Converts dull port to bright champain;
For Freedom crowns it at an inn.
I fly from pomp, I fly from plate,
I fly from Falshood's specious grin;
Freedom I love, and form I hate,
And choose my lodgings at an inn.
Here, waiter! take my sordid ore,
Which Iacqueys else might hope to win;
It buys what courts have not in store,
It buys me Freedom, at an inn.
And now once more I shape my way
Through rain or shine, through thick or thin,
Secure to meet, at close of day,
With kind reception -- at an inn.
Whoever has traveled life's dull round,
Wherever his various tour has been,
May sigh to think how often he found
His warmest welcome -- at an inn.
The PRICE of an EQUIPAGE.
Servum si potes, Ole, non habere
Et regem potes, Ole, non habere
MAR.
I ASKED a friend, amidst the throng,
Whose coach it was that trail'd along:
"The gilded coach there -- don't you mind?
"That with the footmen stuck behind."
O Sir, says he, what have not ye seen it?
It Is Timon's coach, and Timon in it.
It Is odd, methinks, you have forgot
Your friend, your neighbor, and -- what not?
Your old acquaintance, Timon! -- "True,
"But faith his equipage is new.
"Bless me, said I, where can it end?
"What madness has possessed my friend?
"Four powdered slaves, and those the tallest!
"Their stomachs, doubtless, not the smallest!
"Can Timon's revenue maintain
"In lace and food, so large a train?
"I know his land -- each inch of ground --
"'It Is not a mile to walk it round --
"And if his whole estate can bear
"To keep a lad, and one-horse chair,
"I own it is past my comprehension!" --
Yes, Sir; but Timon has a pension.
Thus does a false ambition rule us;
Thus pomp delude, and folly fool us;
To keep a race of flickering knaves,
He grows himself the worst of slaves.
A BALLAD.
-- Trahit sua quemque voluptas. VIRG.
FROM Lincoln to London rode forth our young squire,
To bring down a wife, whom the swains might admire:
But, in spite of whatever the mortal could say,
The goddess objected the length of the way!
To give up the op'ra, the park and the ball,
For to view the stag's horns in an old country hall:
To have neither China nor India to see!
Nor lace-man to plague in a morning -- not she!
To relinquish the playhouse, Quin, Garrick, and Clive,
Who by dint of mere humor had kept her alive;
To forego the full box for his lonesome abode!
O Heavens! she should faint, she should die on the road!
To forget the gay fashions and gestures of France,
And to leave dear Auguste in the midst of the dance;
And Harlequin too! -- 'Twas in vain to require it --
And she wondered how folks had the face to desire it!
She might yield to resign the sweet singers of Ruckholt,
Where the citizen-matron regales with her cuckold;
But Ranelagh soon would her footsteps recall,
And the music, the lamps, and the glare of Vaux-hall.
To be sure she could breathe no where else than in town.
Thus she talked like a wit, and he looked like a clown:
But while honest Harry despaired to succeed,
A coach with a coronet trail'd her to Tweed.
The EXTENT of COOKERY.
-- Aliusque et Idem.
WHEN Tom to Cambridge first was sent,
A plain brown bob he wore;
Read much, and looked as though he meant
To be a fop no more.
See him to Lincoln's End repair,
His resolution flag;
He cherishes a length of hair,
And tucks it in a bag.
Nor Coke nor Salkield he regards,
But gets into the house;
And soon a judge's rank rewards
His pliant votes and bows.
Adieu ye bobs! ye bags give place!
Full-bottoms come instead!
Good Lord! to see the various ways
Of dressing -- a Calve's head!
The Progress of ADVICE. A common Case.
-- Suade, nam certum est.
SAYS Richard to Thomas (and seemed half afraid)
I am thinking to marry thy mistress's maid:
Now because Mrs. Martha to thee is well known,
I will do it if thou bidst me, or let it alone.
Nay don't make a jest on it, it is no jest to me;
For faith I Am in earnest, so prithee be free.
I have no fault to find with the girl since I knew her.
But I Would have thy advice, ere I tie myself to her.
Said Thomas to Richard -- to speak my opinion,
There is not such a bitch in king George's dominion!
And I firmly believe, if thou knew'st her as I do,
Thou would choose out a whipping-post, first, to be tied to.
She Is peevish, she is thievish, she is ugly, she is old,
And a liar, and a fool, and a slut, and a scold --
Next day Richard hastened to church and was wed,
And ere night had informed her what Thomas had said.
SLENDER's GHOST.
-- Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent.
BENEATH a churchyard yew
Decayed and worn with age,
At dusk of eve, methought I spied
Poor Slender's ghost, that whimpering cried,
O sweet, O sweet Anne Page!
Ye gentle bards, give ear!
Who talk of amorous rage,
Who spoil the lily, rob the rose;
Come learn of me to weep your woes:
O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!
Why should such labored strains
Your formal Muse engage?
I never dreamt of flame or dart,
That fired my breast, or pierced my heart,
But sighed, O sweet Anne Page!
And you, whose lovesick minds
No medicine can assuage!
Accuse the leech's art no more,
But learn of Slender to deplore;
O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!
And you, whose souls are held,
Like linnets, in a cage!
Who talk of fetters, links, and chains,
Attend, and imitate my strains:
O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!
And you, who boast or grieve,
What horrid wars ye wage!
Of wounds received from many an eye,
Yet mean as I do when I sigh
O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!
Hence every fond conceit
Of shepherd, or of sage!
It Is Slender's voice, it is Slender's way,
Expresses all you have to say --
O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!
Upon RIDDLES.
HAVE you not known a small machine
Which brazen rings environ,
In many a country chimney seen,
Y-clep'd a tarring-iron?
Its puzzling nature to display
Each idle clown may try, Sir,
Tho, when he has acquired the way,
He Is not a jot the wiser.
It Is thus with him, who fond of rhyme
In Wit's low species piddles;
And tires his thoughts, and wastes his time
In explicating riddles.
Shall idle bards, by fancy led,
(With wrathful zeal I speak it)
Write with design to plague my head,
Who have no right to break it?
He writes the best, who, writing, can
Both please and teach together:
But it is the devil of a plan,
That can accomplish neither.
Ye readers, hear! ye writers too!
O spare your darkling labors!
For, though they please, not profit, you,
They plague and hurt your neighbors.
Go learn of POPE; then judge aright,
Which way to Fame's the surer;
To put the truth in fairest light,
Or render it obscurer.
VERSES to a Writer of RIDDLES.
AH! boast not those obscuring lays,
Nor think it sure and certain
That every one can draw a face,
Who can produce a curtain.
POPE does the flourished truth no hurt,
While graceful flowers disguise it;
Thou daub'st it so with mud and dirt,
That not a soul espies it.
His fancy decks, thy fancy shrowds;
What likeness is between 'em?
'Twixt one who soars above the clouds,
And one entangled in 'em?
But let my candor not upbraid
Thy strains, which flow so purely;
It is thy secret, it is thy trade,
Thy craft -- to write obscurely.
Obscurity in thee to blame
I Have not the least pretense;
It Is that alone can guard thy fame,
The style that suits thy sense.
When Nature forms an horrid mien
Less fit for vulgar sight;
The creature, fearful to be seen,
Spontaneous shuns the light.
The bat uncouth through instinct fears
The prying eyes of day;
Yet when the sun no more appears,
Securely wings away.
It Is instinct bids the frightful owl
To devious glooms repair;
And points out Riddles to a fool,
To wrap his genius there.
To * * * * * *
By ANTHONY WHISTLER, Esquire
RESOLVE me, Strephon, what is this,
I think you cannot guess amiss.
It Is the reverse of what you love,
And all the men of sense approve.
None of the Nine ever gave it birth;
The offspring first of foolish mirth,
The nurs'ry's study, children's play,
Inferior far to Namby's lay.
What vacant Folly first admired,
And then with emulation fired,
Gravely to imitate, aspired.
It Is opposite to all good writing,
In each defect of this delighting.
Obscurity its charms displays,
And inconsistency, its praise.
No gleam of sense to wake the soul,
While clouds of nonsense round it roll.
No smooth description to delight;
No fire the passions to excite;
Not joke enough to shake the pit:
A jest obscene would here be wit.
What train of thought, though ever so mean,
Of black-shoe-boy or cynder-quean,
But far out-shines Sir Fopling's mind
While bent this secret charm to find!
The greatest charm as yet remains,
Best suited to the searcher's brains,
That when he seems on it to fall,
He finds there is no charm at all.
The appearance, first, of Nothing's fine,
To find it Nothing is divine!
But Batho is the flower, to sink
Below what mortal man can think --
Well, now what is it? -- what is it -- a fiddle! --
Yes, do be angry -- it is a Riddle.
SONG.
By the Same.
LET wisdom boast her mighty power,
With passion still at strife,
Yet love is sure the sovereign flower,
The sweet perfume of life.
The happy breeze that swells the sail,
When quite becalmed we lie;
The drop, that will the heart regale,
And sparkle in thr eye.
The sun that wakes us to delight,
And drives the shades away;
The dream that chears our dreary night,
And makes a brighter day.
But if, alas! it wrongly seize,
The case is twice as bad;
This flower, sun, drop, or dream, or brzeee,
Will drive a blockhead mad.
To Lady FANE on her Grotto at Basilden. 1746.
By Mr. GRAVES.
GLIDE smoothly on, thou silver Thames,
Where FANE has fixed her calm retreat;
Go pour thy tributary streams,
To lave imperial Thetis' feet.
There when in flowery pride you come
Amid the courtiers of the main,
And join within the mossy dome
Old Tiber, Arno, or the Seine;
When each ambitious stream shall boast
The glories of its flattered lords;
What pomp adorns the Gallic coast,
What Rome, or Tuscany affords.
Then shall thou speak, (and sure thy tale
Must check each partial torrent's pride,)
What scenes adorn this flowery vale,
Through which thy happier currents glide.
But when thy fond description tells
The beauties of this grott divine:
What miracles are wrought by shells,
Where nicest taste and fancy join:
Thy story shall the goddess move,
To quit her empire of the main,
Her throne of pearls, her coral grove,
And live retired with Thee and FANE.
The INVISIBLE.
By the Same.
WHAT mortal burns not with the love of fame?
Some write, some fight, some eat themselves a name.
For some beau Frightful haunts each public place,
And grows conspicious for -- his ugly face.
Laura, the rural circle's constant boast,
Sighs for the Mall, nor sleeps till she is a toast.
The priestling, proud of doctrine not his own,
Usurps a scarf, and longs to preach in town.
Even Westley's saints, whose cant has filled the nation,
Toil more for fame, I trow, than reformation.
B --, though blessed with learning, sense and wit,
Yet prides himself in never showing it.
Safe in his cell, he shuns the staring crowd,
And inward shines, like Sol behind a cloud.
For fame let fops to distant regions roam,
Lo! here is the man -- who never stirs from home!
That unseen wight, whom all men wish to see,
Illustrious grown -- by mere obscurity.
The Pepper-box and Salt-seller. A FABLE.
To * * * * * Esquire By the same.
THE 'squire had dined alone one day,
And Tom was called to take away:
Tom cleared the board with dextrous art:
But, willing to secure a tart,
The liquorish youth had made an halt;
And left the pepper-box and salt
Alone, upon the marble table:
Who thus, like men, were heard to squabble.
Pepper began, "Pray, Sir, says he,
What business have you here with me?
Is It fit that spices of my birth
Should rank with thee, thou scum of earth?
I Would have you know, Sir, I Have a spirit
Suited to my superior merit --
Though now, confined within this castre,
I serve a northern Gothic master;
Yet born in Java's fragrant wood,
To warm an eastern monarch's blood,
The sun those rich perfections gave me,
Which tempted Dutchmen to enslave me.
Nor are my virtues Here unknown,
Though old and wrinkled now I Am grown.
Black as I am, the fairest maid
Invokes my stimulating aid,
To give her food the poignant flavor;
And to each sauce, its proper savor.
Pasties, ragouts and fricassees,
Without my seasoning, fail to please:
It Is I, like wit, must give a zest,
And sprightliness, to every feast.
Physicians too my use confess;
My influence sagest matrons bless:
When drams prove vain, and cholics teaze,
To me they fly for certain ease.
Nay I fresh vigor can dispense,
And cure even age and impotence:
And, when of dullness wits complain,
I brace the nerves, and clear the brain,
But, to the 'squire here, I appeal --
He knows my real value well:
Who, with one pepper-corn content,
Remits the vassal's annual rent --
Hence then, Sir Brine, and keep your distance:
Go lend the scullion your assistance;
For culinary uses fit;
To salt the meat upon the spit:
Or just to keep our meat from stinking --
And then -- a special friend to drinking!"
"Your folly moves me with surprise,
(The silver tripod thus replies)
Pray, master Pepper, why so hot?
First cousin to the mustard-pot!
What boots it how our life began?
It Is breeding makes the gentleman.
Yet would you search my pedigree,
I rose like Venus from the sea:
The sun, whose influence you boast,
Nursed me upon the British coast.
The chemists know my rank and place,
When nature's principles they trace:
And wisest moderns yield to me
The elemental monarchy.
By me all nature is supplied
With all her beauty, all her pride!
In vegetation, I ascend;
To animals, their vigor lend;
Corruption's foe, I lise preserve,
And stimulate each slackened nerve.
I give jonquils their high perfume;
The peach its flavor, rose its bloom:
Nay, I Am the cause, when rightly traced,
Of Pepper's aromatic taste.
Such claims you teach me to produce;
But need I plead my obvious use?
In seasoning all terrestrial food?
When heaven declares, that salt is good.
Grant then, some few thy virtues find;
Yet salt gives health to all mankind:
Physicians sure will side with me,
While cooks alone shall plead for thee.
In short, with all thine airs about thee,
The world were happier far without thee."
The 'squire, who all this time sat mute,
Now put an end to their dispute:
He rung the bell -- bade Tom convey
The doughty disputants away --
The salt, refreshed by shaking up,
At night did with his master sup:
The pepper, Tom assigned his lot
With vinegar, and mustard-pot:
A fop with bites and sharpers joined,
And, to the side-board, well confined!
MORAL.
Thus real genius is respected!
Conceit and folly thus neglected!
And, O my SHENSTONE! let the vain,
With misbecoming pride, explain
Their splendour, influence, wealth or birth;
-- It Is men of sense are men of worth.
Written near BATH. 1755.
-- Quae tu deserta et inhospita tesqua
Dicis, amoena vocat mecum qui sentit.
HOR.
By the Same.
I.
EACH saucy cit, who strolls from town,
With scorn surveys my gothic cell,
Or wondering asks, what sordid clown
In this drear solitude can dwell.
II.
These mouldering walls, with ivy crowned,
That charm me with their solemn scene,
These flowers that bloom spontaneous round,
Provoke his mirth, or raise his spleen.
III.
Inured to smoke, throughout the year
Yon verdant meads unmoved he sees --
Those hills unsightly rocks appear --
You sacred groves, mere heaps of trees. --
IV.
The lucid fount, that murmuring falls,
Then through my shrubs meand'ring steals,
An useful stream the insipid calls, --
But no poetic rapture feels.
V.
Hither from noisy crowds I fly;
Here dwells soft ease, and peace of mind; --
Yet think not Fancy's curious eye,
To these deep solitudes confined.
VI.
Whenever at morn or eve I rove,
Where yonder cliffs with pines are crowned,
More splendid scenes my rapture move;
How charmed I range the horizon round.
VII.
There Allen's stately columns rise,
And glittering from the circling wood,
With constant beauty feed my eyes,
As he the poor with constant food.
VIII.
Each pompous work, proud Bath! I share
That decks thy hills. -- Well-pleased I see
Thy rising cirque eclipse thy square,
And Pit and Stanhope build for me.
IX.
Here Bathurst's high aerial seat,
There Seymour's lofty groves are seen;
And Riggs's elegant retreat
Adorns the variegated scene.
X.
Would I fair Eden's bloom restore!
Lo! Widcomb's cultivated vale,
Where Flora paints her slopes for Moore,
And all Arabia's sweets exhale.
XI.
Luxurious thus I freely rove,
Nor at the sons of wealth repine;
Mere tenant of each hill and grove,
Which sovereign Fancy renders mine.
XII.
Familiar grown by constant use,
The stateliest dome its master cloys --
Then grant him but these transient views,
What you possess, the bard enjoys.
VERSES to WILLIAM SHENSTONE, Esquire On receiving a Gilt Pocketbook. 1751.
By Mr. JAGO.
THESE spotless leaves, this neat array
Might well invite your charming quill,
In fair assemblage to display
The power of learning, wit, and skill:
But since you carelessly refuse,
And to my pen the task assign;
O! let your Genius guide my Muse,
And every vulgar thought refine.
Teach me your best, your best-lov'd art,
With frugal care to store my mind;
In this to play the miser's part,
And give mean lucre to the wind:
To shun the coxcomb's empty noise;
To scorn the villain's artful mask;
Nor trust gay pleasure's fleeting joys,
Nor urge ambition's endless task.
Teach me to stem youth's boisterous tide;
To regulate its giddy rage;
By reason's aid, my barque to guide
Into the friendly port of age:
To share what classic culture yields;
Through rhetoric's painted meads to roam;
With you to reap historic fields,
And bring the golden harvest home:
To taste the genuine sweets of wit;
To quaff in humour's sprightly bowl;
The philosophic mean to hit,
And prize the dignity of soul.
Teach me to read fair Nature's book,
Wide-opening in each flowery plain;
And with judicious eye to look
On all the glories of her reign.
To hail her seated on her throne;
By aweful woods encompassed round:
Or her divine extraction own,
Though with a wreath of rushes crowned.
Through arched walks, over spreading lawns,
Near solemn rocks, with her to rove:
Or court her, 'mid her gentle fauns,
In mossy cell, or maple grove.
Whether the prospect strain the sight,
Or in the nearer landskips charm,
Where hills, vales, fountains, woods unite.
To grace our sweet Arcadian farm,
There let me sit; and gaze with you,
On Nature's works by Art refined;
And own, while we their contest view,
Both fair, but fairest, thus combined!
The SWALLOWS. Written September, 1748.
By the Same.
ERE yellow Autumn from our plains retired,
And gave to wintry storms the varied year,
The Swallow-race, with foresight clear inspired,
To Southern climes prepared their course to steer.
On Damon's roof a grave assembly sat;
His roof, a refuge to the feathered kind;
With serious look he marked the nice debate,
And to his Delia thus addressed his mind.
Observe yon twitt'ring flock, my gentle maid,
Observe, and read the wondrous ways of heaven!
With us through summer's genial reign they stayed,
And food, and lodging to their wants were given.
But now, through sacred prescience, well they know
The near approach of elemental strife;
The blustry tempest, and the chilling snow,
With every want, and scourge of tender life!
Thus taught, they meditate a speedy slight;
For this, even now they prune their vigorous wing;
For this, consult, advise, prepare, excite,
And prove their strength in many an airy ring.
No sorrow loads their breast, or swells their eye,
To quit their friendly haunts, or native home;
Nor fear they, launching on the boundless sky,
In search of future settlements, to roam.
They feel a power, an impulse all divine!
That warns them hence; they feel it, and obey;
To this direction all their cares resign,
Unknown their destined stage, unmarked their way!
Well fare your flight! ye mild domestic race!
Oh! for your wings to travel with the sun!
Health brace your nerves, and Zephyrs aid your pace,
Till your long voyage happily be done!
See, Delia, on my roof your guests today;
Tomorrow on my roof your guests no more!
Ere yet it is night, with haste they wing away,
Tomorrow lands them on some safer shore.
How just the moral in this scene conveyed!
And what without a moral would we read?
Then mark what Damon tells his gentle maid,
And with his lesson register the deed.
It Is thus life's cheerful seasons roll away;
Thus threats the winter of inclement age;
Our time of action but a summer's day;
And earth's frail orb the sadly-varied stage!
And does no power its friendly aid dispense,
Nor give us tidings of some happier clime?
Find we no guide in gracious Providence
Beyond the stroke of death, the verge of time!
Yes, yes, the sacred oracles we hear,
That point the path to realms of endless day:
That bid our hearts, nor death, nor anguish fear,
This future transport, that to life the way.
Then let us timely for our flight prepare,
And form the soul for her divine abode;
Obey the call, and trust the Leader's care
To bring us safe through Virtue's paths to God.
Let no fond love for earth exact a sigh,
No doubts divert our steady steps aside;
Nor let us long to live, nor dread to die;
Heaven is our Hope, and Providence our Guide.
PART II. Written April, 1749.
AT length the winter's surly blasts are over;
Arrayed in smiles the lovely spring returns:
Health to the breeze unbars the screaming door,
And every breast with heat celestial burns.
Again the daises peep, the violets blow,
Again the tenants of the leafy grove
Forgot the patt'ring hail, the driving snow,
Resume the lay to melody and love.
And see, my Delia, see over yonder stream,
Where on the sunny bank the lambkins play,
Alike attracted to the enlivening gleam,
The stranger-swallows take their wonted way.
Welcome, ye gentle tribe, your sports pursue,
Welcome again to Delia, and to me:
Your peaceful councils on my roof renew,
And plan your settlements from danger free.
No tempest on my shed its fury pours,
My frugal hearth no noxious blast supplies;
Go, wand'rers, go, repair your sooty bowers,
Think, on no hostile roof my chimnies rise.
Again I Will listen to your grave debates,
I Will think I hear your various maxims told,
Your numbers, leaders, policies, and states,
Your limits settled, and your tribes enrolled.
I Will think I hear you tell of distant lands,
What insect-nations rise from Egypt's mud,
What painted swarms subsist on Lybia's sands,
What mild Euphrates yields, and Ganges' flood.
Thrice happy race! whom Nature's call invites
To travel over her realms with active wing,
To taste her choicest stores, her best delights,
The summer's radiance, and the sweets of spring.
While we are doomed to bear the restless change
Of shifting seasons, vapors dank, or dry,
Forbid, like you, to milder climes to range,
When wintry clouds deform the troubled sky.
But know the period to your joys assigned!
Know ruin hovers over this earthly ball;
Certain as fate, and sudden as the wind,
Its secret adamantine props shall fall.
Yet when your short-lived summers shine no more,
My patient mind, sworn foe to vice's way,
Sustained on lighter wings than yours shall soar
To fairer realms beneath a brighter ray.
To plains etherial, and Elysian bowers,
Where wintry storms no rude access obtain,
Where blasts no lightning, and no thunder low'rs,
But spring, and joy unchanged for ever reign.
VALENTINE's Day.
By the Same.
THE tuneful choir in amorous strains
Accost their feathered loves,
While each fond mate with equal pains
The tender suit approves.
With cheerful hop from spray to spray
They sport along the meals;
In social bliss together stray,
Where love or fancy leads.
Through spring's gay scenes each happy pair
Their fluttering joys pursue;
Its various charms and produce share,
For ever kind and true.
Their spritely notes from every shade
Their mutual loves proclaim;
Till winter's chilling blasts invade,
And damp the enlivening flame.
Then all the jocund scene declines,
Nor woods nor meads delight;
The drooping tribe in secret pines,
And mourns the unwelcome sight.
Go, blissful warblers! timely wise,
The instructive moral tell!
Nor thou their meaning lays despise,
My charming Annabelle!
The SCAVENGERS. A Town Eclogue. In the Manner of SWIFT.
By the Same.
AWAKE my Muse, prepare a loftier theme:
The winding valley and the dimpled stream
Delight not all; quit, quit the verdant field,
And try what dusty streets and alleys yield.
Where Avon wider flows, and gathers fame,
A town there stands, and Warwick is its name,
For useful arts, entitled once to share
The Mercian dame, Elfleda's guardian care.
Nor less for feats of chivalry renowned
When her own Guy was with her laurels crowned.
Now indolence subjects the drowsy place,
And binds in silken bonds her feeble race.
No busy artisans their fellows greet,
No loaded carriages obstruct the street;
Scarce here and there a sauntring band is seen,
And pavements dread the turf's incroaching green.
Last of the toiling race there lived a pair,
Bred up in labor, and inured to care,
To sweep the streets their task from sun to sun,
And seek the nastiness that others shun.
More plodding hind, or dame, you never shall see,
He gaffer Pestel hight, and gammer she.
As at their door they sat one summer's day,
Old Pestel first essayed the plaintive lay,
His gentle mate the plaintive lay returned,
And thus alternately their grief they mourned.
O. P. Alas! was ever such fine weather seen!
How dusty are the roads, the streets how clean!
How long, ye almanacks, will it be dry?
Empty my cart how long, and idle I?
Once other days, and different fate we knew,
That something had to carry, I to do.
Now even at best the times are none so good,
But it is hard work to scrape a livelihood.
The cattle in the stalls resign their life,
And baulk the shambles, and the bloody knife.
The affrighted farmer pensive sits at home,
And turnpikes threaten to complete my doom.

WIFE. Well! for the turnpike, that will do no hurt*
The roads, they say, are n't much the better for it.
But much I fear this murrain, where 'twill end,
For sure the cattle did our door befriend.
Often have I praised them as they stalked along,
Their fat the butchers pleased, but me their dung.

O. P. See what a little dab of dirt is here!
But yields all Warwick more, O tell me where?
Lo! where this ant-like hillock scarce is seen,
Heaps upon heaps, and loads on loads have been:
Bigger and bigger the proud dunghill grew,
'Till my diminished house was hid from view.

WIFE. Ah! gaffer Pestel, what brave days were those,
When higher than our house, our muck-hill rose?
The growing mount I viewed with joyful eyes,
And marked what each load added to its size.
Wrapped in its fragrant steam we often sat,
And to its praises held delightful chat.
Nor did I ever neglect my mite to pay,
To swell the goodly heap from day to day;
For this each morn I plied the stubbed-broom;
'Till I scarce hobbled over my furrowed room:
For this I squat me on my hams each night,
And mingle profit sweet with sweet delight?
A cabbage once I bought, but small the cost,
Nor do I think the farthing all was lost:
Again you sold its well digested store,
To dung the garden where it grew before.

O. P. What though the boys, and boy-like fellows jeered,
And at the scavenger's employment sneer'd,
Yet then at night content I told my gains,
And thought well paid their malice and my pains.
Why toils the merchant but to swell his store?
Why craves the wealthy landlord still for more?
Why will our gentry flatter, trade, and lie,
Why pack the cards, and -- what do you called the die?
All, all the pleasing paths of gain pursue,
And wade through thick and thin, as we folk do.
^weet is the scent that from advantage springs,
and nothing dirty that good interest brings.
^Tis this that cures the scandal, and the smell,
The rest -- even let our learned betters tell.

WIFE. When goody Dobbins called me filthy bear,
and named the kennel and the ducking chair:
With patience I could hear the scolding queen,
^or sure 'twas dirtiness that kept me clean.
^lean was my gown on Sundays, though not fine,
^or mistress ***'s cap so white as mine.
^ slut in silk or kersey is the same,
^or sweetest always is the finest dame.
Thus wail'd they pleasure past, and present cares,
While the starved hog joined his complaint to theirs.
To still his grunting different ways they tend
To West-gate one, and one to Cotton-end.

HAMLET's SOLILOQUY, Imitated.
By the Same.
TO print, or not to print -- that is the question.
Whether it is better in a trunk to bury
The quirks and crotchets of outrageous Fancy,
Or send a well-wrote copy to the press,
And by disclosing, end them. To print, to doubt
No more; and by one act to say we end
The headache, and a thousand natural shocks
Of scribbling frenzy -- it is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To print -- to beam
From the same shelf with Pope, in calf well bound:
To sleep, perchance, with Quarles -- Ay, there is the rub --
For to what class a writer may be doomed,
When he has shuffled off some paltry stuff,
Must give us pause. There Is the respect that makes
The unwilling poet keep his piece nine years.
For who would bear the impatient thirst of fame,
The pride of conscious merit, and 'bove all,
The tedious importunity of friends,
When as himself might his quietus make
With a bare inkhorn? Who would fardles bear?
To groan and sweat under a load of wit?
But that the tread of steep Parnassus' hill,
That undiscovered country, with whose bays
Few travelers return, puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear to live unknown,
Than run the hazard to be known, and damned.
Thus critics do make cowards of us all.
And thus the healthful face of many a poem
^s sickly'd over with a pale manuscript;
And enterprizers of great fire and spirit,
With this regard from DODSLEY turn away,
And lose the name of Authors.
Transcribed from the Rev. Mr. PIXEL'S Parsonage Garden near BIRMINGHAM, 1757.
SEEK not in these to view
Dryads green, or Naiads blue;
Such as haunt, at eve or dawn,
Seat of the Earl of Stamford.
Enville's lake, or Seat of lord Lyttelton.
Hagley's lawn:
Such as sport on Seat of Sherrington Davenport, Esquire
Worfield's meads;
Such as Shenstone's Genius leads
Over vale and hill, and to their care
Consigns his waves and woodlands fair;
While the Muses vacant stray,
And Echo wants her sweetest lay.
Long, long may those unrivaled shine,
Nor shall my temperate breast repine,
So Music lend her willing aid
To gladden this ignoble shade;
So Peace endear this humble plain --
And happily Elegance will deign
To wander here, and smiling see
Her sister nymph Simplicity.
MALVERN SPA, 1757. Inscribed to Dr. WALL.
By the Rev. Mr. PERRY.
WITH bounteous hand the gracious King of heaven
His choicest blessings to mankind has given,
Whilst thoughtless they ungratefully despise
The rich profusion that salutes their eyes.
But wise was he who studied every use
Of common weeds which common fields produce.
The dock, the nettle, in each swelling vein,
A healing balm for many an ill contain:
See a pamphlet lately published by Mr. Gataker, where its virtues are with
great candor and judgment displayed.
Even deadly nightshade, though with poison fraught,
At length is found a salutary draught.
The same creative power that first displayed
His wondrous works for our delight and aid;
His love to mortal man still gracious shows,
In every stream that glides, and herb that grows.
At his command, Malvern, thy mountains rise,
And catch their dewy nectar from the skies;
At his command gush out thy crystal rills,
To cure the direful train of human ills.
On all alike their influence freely shed,
As the bright orb that gilds thy mountain's head.
The wealthy squire, whose gouty limbs are laid
On beds of down, almost of down afraid,
At this balsamic spring may soon regain
His lavished health, and over the spacious plain
Pursue the hare, or chase the miscreant fox
With winged speed over hills or craggy rocks.
Here to his comfort the poor helpless swain,
Racked with the torture of rheumatic pain,
Obtains relief without the nauseous pill,
Or that more shocking sight the doctor's bill.
When cloudy mists obscure the visual ray,
And turn to dismal night the gladsome day;
The mournful wretch with pleasure here may find
A stream that heals the lame, and cures the blind.
The pampered cit, whose high luxurious food
With acrimonious poison loads his blood,
Here polished once more his scaly skin,
And purifies the vital stream within.
Amazing truth! his wretched leprous heir,
Who undeserved his father's spots must wear,
Emerges clean if in this fount he lave,
As the white Syrian rose from Jordan's wave.
The latent ulcer, and the cancer dire,
That waste our flesh with slow consuming fire,
Whose subtle flames still spread from part to part,
And still elude the skilful surgeon's art;
Here checked submit, their raging fury laid,
By streams from Nature's mystic engine played.
The stubborn evil, for whose flux impure
Blind bigotry at first devised a cure,
Healed by these waters needs no more demand
The foolish witchcraft of a Stuart's hand;
And Brunswick's line may trust their royal cause
To reason, justice, liberty, and laws.
Should all the virtues of this spa be told,
Its praises might be wrote in lines of gold.
No more would poets their Pierian spring,
But Malvern spa in loftier numbers sing;
No more Parnassus, but the Malvern climb,
To make their diction pure, their thoughts sublime.
Even I at these fair fountains eased of pain,
To you, my friend, address one votive strain:
To you the Naiad of this balmy well
Reveals the wonders of her secret cell:
To you transfers the lay, whose active mind,
Like her own stream from See a treatise lately published by doctor Wall,
concerning ^he extreme purity of the water, and its great efficacy in several
^bstinate chronical disorders.
earthly dregs resin'd,
Explores a panacea for mankind.
Some Reflections upon hearing the Bell toll for the Death of a FRIEND.
By Mr. J. G.
HARK! -- what a mournful solemn sound
Rolls murmuring through the cloudy air:
It strikes the soul with awe profound,
Affects the gay, -- alarms the fair.
With what a pathos does it speak!
Affecting deep the thoughtful mind:
The golden schemes of folly break,
That hold in glittering snares mankind.
It Is Death's dread herald calls aloud,
Proclaims his conquest through the skies:
The sun retires behind a cloud,
And Nature seems to sympathize.
Reflect, ye restless sons of care!
Your vain designs his hand can spoil,
Make hard oppressors lend an ear,
And wretched misers cease their toil.
For what avail vast heaps of gold,
When Death his aweful writ shall send?
Though folly swell, and pride look bold,
The mask must drop, the farce must end.
It is not hoary tottering age
That now lies stretched beneath his stroke;
The tyrant stern, that feels his rage:
The oppressor's rod, that now is broke.
But oh! -- it is generous Cynthio's bell!
Fallen in his prime of youthful bloom:
For Cynthio sounds the doleful knell,
And calls him to the silent tomb.
Cynthio! -- whose happy healing art
Turned from his friends death's fatal blow,
And shielded from that threatening dart,
Which now, alas! -- has laid him low.
But Cynthio's virtues never can die,
They leave a grateful rich perfume:
And now transplanted to the sky,
In heaven's immortal gardens bloom.
And hark! -- ah, what celestial notes,
With grateful accents charm my ear!
As down the etherial music floats,
The sun breaks forth, the skies are clear.
From heaven descends the joyful strain,
Conveyed to earth on angels wings:
To mitigate our grief and pain,
And this the theme of joy it brings:
"Thus write (the voice from heaven proclaims)
"The virtuous dead are ever blessed!
"Their works immortalize their names,
"Their labors cease, and here they rest.
"Behold, the Savior wide display
"The trophies of his generous love,
"To cheer you through life's thorny way,
"And lead to flowery realms above.
"'It Is He destroys Death's baneful sting,
"And bids the grave's dread horrors fly,
"The choirs of heaven his triumph sing,
"And hail him victor through the sky."
The ROBIN: An ELEGY. Written at the close of Autumn, 1756.
By the Same.
O Come, thou melancholy Muse,
With solemn dirge assist my strain,
While shades descend, and weeping dews,
In sorrows wrap the rural plain.
Her mantle grave cool Evening spreads,
The Sun cuts short his joyful race;
The jocund hills, the laughing meads,
Put on a sickening, dying face.
Stern Winter brings his gloomy train,
Each pleasing landscape fades from view;
In solemn state he shuts the scene,
To flowery fields we bid adieu!
Quite stripped of every beauty, see
How soon fair Nature's honors fade!
The flowers are fled, each spreading tree
No more affords a grateful shade.
Their naked branches now behold,
Bleak winds pierce through with murmuring sound;
Chilled by the northern breezes cold,
Their leafy honors strew the ground.
So man, who treads life's active stage,
Like leaf or blossom fades away;
In tender youth, or riper age,
Drops thus, into his native clay!
Alas! and can we choose but moan,
To see all Nature's charms expire!
Fair-blooming Spring, gay Summer gone,
And Autumn hastening to retire!
But see the tender Redbreast comes,
Forsaking now the leafless grove,
Hops over my threshold, pecks my crumbs,
And courts my hospitable love.
Then sooths me with his plaintive tale
As Sol withdraws his friendly ray;
Cheering, as evening shades prevail,
The soft remains of closing day.
O welcome to my homely board!
There unmolested shall thou stand;
Were it with choicest dainties stored,
For thee I Would open a liberal hand.
Since thou, of all the warbling throng,
Who now in silence far retire,
Remain'st to sooth me with a song,
And many a pleasing thought inspire.
An EPITAPH.
By the same.
IF ever sharp sorrow from thine eyes did flow,
If ever thy bosom felt another's woe,
If ever fair beauty's charms thy heart did prove,
If ever the offspring of thy virtuous love
Bloomed to thy wish, or to thy soul was dear,
This plaintive marble asks thee for a tear!
For here, alas! too early snatched away,
All that was lovely Death has made his prey.
No more her cheeks with crimson roses vie,
No more the diamond sparkles in her eye;
Her breath no more its balmy sweets can boast,
Alas! that breath with all its sweets is lost.
Pale now those lips, where blushing rubies hung,
And mute the charming music of her tongue!
Ye virgins fair, your fading charms survey,
She was whatever your tender hearts can say;
To her sweet memory for ever dear,
Let the green turf receive your trickling tear.
To this sad place your earliest garlands bring,
And deck her grave with firstlings of the Spring.
Let opening roses, drooping lillies tell,
Like those she bloomed, and ah! like these she fell.
In circling wreaths let the pale ivy grow,
And distant yews a sable shade bestow;
Round her, ye Graces, constant vigils keep,
And guard (fair Innocence!) her sacred sleep:
Till that bright morn shall wake the beauteous clay,
To bloom and sparkle in eternal day.
UT PICTURA POESIS.
By Mr. NOURSE, late of All Souls College Oxon, 1741.
AS once the Muse, reclining on her lyre,
Observed her favorite bards, a numerous choir;
The conscious pleasure swelled her silent breast,
Her secret pride exulting smiles confessed.
When thus her sister spoke, whose care presides
Over the mixed pallat, and the pencil guides,
Just, Goddess, is thy joy, thy train, we own,
Approaches nearest to Apollo's throne.
Foremost in Learning's ranks they sit sublime,
Honored and loved through every age of time:
Yet let me say, some favorite son of mine
Has more than followed every son of thine.
Thy Homer needs not grieve to hear his fame
Exceeds not Raphael's widely honored name:
Raphael like him 'midst ages wrapped in night,
Rose father of his science to the light;
With matchless grace, and majesty divine,
Bade Painting breathe, and live the bold design;
To the clay-man the heavenly fire applied,
And gave it charms to Nature's self denied.
With judgment, genius, industry and art,
Does Virgil captivate his reader's heart?
With rival talents my Caracci blessed
Fires with like transport the spectator's breast.
The youthful Lucan, who with rapid force
Urged by Pharsalia's field the Muse's horse,
An equal fire, an equal strength of mind,
In Angelo's congenial soul will find:
Whose wild imagination could display
Fierce giants whirled from heaven -- the world's last day.
With more success does tender Ovid move
The melting soul to softness and to love;
Than wanton Titian, whose warm colors show
That gods themselves the amorous riot know?
Thy grandeur, Paulo, and thy happy stroke,
I proudly own my emulation spoke,
For I bestowed them, that the world might see,
A Horace too of mine arise in thee.
Lo! where Poussin his magic colors spreads,
Rise tower'd towns, rough rocks, and flowery meads:
What leagues between those azure mountains lie,
(Whose lessening tops invade the purple sky)
And this old oak, that shades this hollow way,
Amidst whose windings sheep and oxen stray!
It Is thus Theocritus his landscape gives,
It Is thus the speaking picture moves and lives.
Alike in Terence and in Guido's air,
Our praise the height of art and nature share.
In broader mirth if Plautus tread the stage,
With equal humor Hemskirk's boors engage.
She spoke, with friendly emulation stirred,
And Phoebus from his throne with pleasure heard.
The goddess of Indolence.
VACUNA.
By Mr. D --.
SCEPTER of ease! whose calm domain extends
Over the froze Chronian, or where lagging gales
Fan to repose the Southern realms. O! whom
More slaves obey than swarm about the courts
The capital of China.
Pekin, or The capital of the Mogul's country, lately plundered by T. Kouli Kan.
Agra -- universal queen!
Me hap'ly slumbering all a summer's day,
Thy meanest subject, often have thou deigned
Gracious to visit. If thy poppy then
Was ever infused into my gifted quill,
If ever my nodding Muse was blessed with power,
To doze the reader with her opiate verse --
Come, goddess; but be gentle; not as when
On studious heads attendant thou art seen
Fast by the twinkling lamp, poring and pale
Immersed in meditation, sleep's great foe?
Where the clue-guided casuist unwinds
Perplexities; or Halley from his tower
Converses with the stars: In other guize
Thy presence I invoke. Serene approach,
With forehead smooth, and sauntring gait; put on
The smile unmeaning, or in sober mood
Fix thy flat, musing, leaden eye: as looks
Simplicius, when he stares and seems to think.
Prompted by thee, Reservo keeps at home,
Intent on books: he when alone applies
The needle's reparation to his hose,
Or studious slices paper. Taught by thee
Dullman takes snuff, and ever and anon
Turns over the page unread. Others more sage,
Place, year, and printer not unnoted, well
Examine the whole frontispiece, and if
Yet stricter their enquiry, even proceed
To leaves within, and curious there select
Italicks, or consult the margin, pleased
To find a hero or a tale: all else,
The observation, maxim, inference
Disturb the brain with thought -- It sure were long
To name thy several vot'ries, Power supine,
And all thy various haunts. Why should I speak
Of coffee-house? or where the eunuch plays,
Or Roscius in his buskin? These and more
Thy crowded temples, where thou sit'st enshrined
Glorious, thy incense ambergris, and time
Thy sacrifice. -- About thee cards and dice
Lie scattered, and a thousand vassal beaux
Officiate at thy worship. -- Nor mean while
Is solitude less thy peculiar sphere;
There unattended you vouchsafe to shroud
Your beauties, gentle Potentate; with me
By vale or brook to loiter not displeased:
Hear the stream's pebbled roar, and the sweet be
Humming her fairy-tunes, in praise of flowers;
Or clamorous rooks, on aged elm or oak,
Aloft the cawing legislators sit,
Debating, in full senate, points of state.
My bower, my walks, my study all are thine,
For thee my yews project their shade: my green
Spreads her soft lap, my waters whisper sleep.
Here thou may reign secure, nor hostile thought,
Nor argument, nor logick's dire array
Make inroad on thy kingdom's peace. -- What though
Malicious tongues me harmless represent,
A traitor to thy throne: or that I hold
Forbidden correspondence with the Nine,
Plotting with Phoebus, and thy foes! What though
Of satire they impeach me, strain severe!
Thou know my innocence: it is true indeed
I sometimes scribble, but it is thou inspir'st:
In proof accept, O goddess, this my verse.
On J. W. ranging PAMPHLETS.
By the Same.
WHAT ken mine eyes, enchanted? man of ease,
In elbow chair, and under brow of thought
Intense, on some great matter fixed, no doubt:
What mean the myrmidons on either hand
In paper-coats, and orderly array,
Spread far and wide, on table, desk, and stool,
Variety of troops, white, purple, pied,
And gray, and blue's battalion trim; and who
In marbled regimentals, some in vest
Gay edged with gold; of various garb, and tongue,
And clime; extended over the wooden plain.
Not force more numerous from her teeming loins
Pours forth Hungaria to the Danube's bank
Croats and Pandeurs: nor the swarming war
Of Turk and Nadir, nodding opposite
With part colored turbans. Sing, O Muse,
Their marshaled numbers, and puissance. First,
With sable shield, and arms opaque, advance
Divinity polemic, sober rage,
Yet deadly! (and can rage in minds divine
Inhabit!) councils, synods, cloisters, schools,
Cowl beats off cowl, and mitre mitre knocks.
Presbyt'ry here with withered face askew,
Vengeance demure; and there devoutly fierce
Catholicos, in lawn sprinkled with blood.
Not far behind with her divided troops
Comes Policy, with democratic shouts
On one hand, on the other loud acclaim
For power hereditary, and right divine:
I see the various portraiture displayed,
Brutus and Nimrod, libertines, and slaves,
And crowns, and Alluding to the arms impressed on the money of the
Commonwealth of England.
breeches flutter in the air.
Who next with aspect sage and parchment waved
Voluminous come on? I know their beards
Historic, see the style acute, with which
They fight old Time, maugre his desperate scythe,
And as he cleaves the pyramid, apply
Their puny prop. Hence annals, journals hence,
And memoirs, doubtful truth, and certain lies,
And tales, and all the magazines of war.
What Muse, O Poetry, can pass unsung
Thy flowing banners, and gay tent, adorned
With airy trophies? or would leave thy name
Uncatalogu'd, were it but Nereus-like
To beautify the list. Not that thou want
The offensive dart, 'till Satire's quiver fails.
All these, and more came flocking; -- but await
The dread commander's voice, and dare no more
Start from their place, than did the Theban stone,
Ere yet Amphion sung. -- From side to side
The sedentary chief, in studious mood,
And deep revolve, darts his experienced eye.
Forth from his presence hies his aid-de-camp,
A sturdy Cambro-Briton, to survey
The posture of the field; from rank to rank
Posting succinct. He gives the word, which way
The squadrons to advance, where wheel their course.
"Vanguard to right and left." Forthwith the bands,
As at the sound of trump, obedient move
In perfect phalanx. Each their station knows
And quarters, as the general's will ordains.
First to its place spontaneous Verse repairs,
Knowing the call, and practiced to obey
His summons. Peaceful Controversy sheaths
Her claws, contracted to make room for Scot
And Tom. Aquinas, slumbering side by side;
And Bellarmine, and Luther, heard no more
Than Delphi's shrine, or Memnon's statue dumb.
All, all, in order due and silence, look
A modern convocation. History lies
By history, -- Hyde and Oldmixon agree.
Which when the marshal, from his easy chair
Of callimanco, saw; knit his calm brows
Thoughtful, and thus the assembled leaves bespoke.
Ye hierarchies, and commonweals, and thrones,
Folios, octavos, and ye minor powers
Of paper, ere to winter quarters sent,
Hear me, ye listening books. First I direct
Submission to your lord and faith entire.
Did I not list you, and enroll your names
On parchment? See the volume; look at me.
Did I not mark you (as the Prussian late
His subjects) badge of service when required?
It Is well, -- and let me next, ye flimsy peers,
Love brother-like and union recommend:
Live peaceful, as by me together tied
In bands of strictest amity: should then
Your master lend you to some neighboring state
Auxiliaries; remember ye preserve
Your first allegiance pure, and cheerful home
Return, when summoned by your natural prince.
Be humble, nor repine, though smeared with ink
And dust inglorious; know your birth and end,
For rags ye were, and must to rags return.
EPITHALAMIUM.
By the Same.
YE nymphs, that from Diana's sport retired,
Yon forest leave awhile, and love to haunt
The bord'ring valleys; saw ye, as they passed,
A chosen pair, the glory of your plains,
Arrayed in youth's full bloom, and nature's prime?
Saw ye the glance of beauty, when the fair,
Quiver'd with charms, and by the Graees dressed,
Marched on: with joy the bridegroom flushed, beyond
What liveliest fancy, unpossess'd, can dream?
Heard ye the music of the groves around
Warbling, while choirs of gratulation rung
From every spray; and nightingales, soft tuned,
In notes peculiar thrilled the nuptial song!
Such as in neighboring Windsor's favorite shade
They chaunt; and, if their Handel's ear be true,
No where on silence steal with lay so sweet.
Auspicious omens brood on the fair hour!
Did ever Hymen's look more fresh appear,
Or his bright vest with deeper yellow flow?
The vest that on occasions high and rare
Pontifical he wears, when hearts sincere
Combine; of healthy cheek, and sparkling eye
As in the state of nature, ere his shafts
By gold were blunted. How the blazing torch,
Fanned by love's pinion, sheds unusual fire!
Lo! by the trail of light, he left behind,
As from the shrine his jubilee returned,
The Muse, invited guest, attends her theme
Right to the nuptial bower. There entering, thrice
She hemmed, thrice blessed the threshold with a sneeze,
Prelude of happiness to come. Her lyre
She strung, -- a friendly, voluntary strain.
"Hail (she began) distinguished pair! how fit
To join in wedded love, each other's choice!
Bridegroom, thy taste is elegant indeed,
And fingers nice, that on some sunny bank
In beauty's garden culled so fair a flower,
To thine transplanted from her native soil.
Cherish besure thy blooming charge; keep off
Each blast unkind, and Zephyr's gale alone
Blow there, and genial suns for ever smile.
Who not applaud thy vow? hereafter who
Dispute thy palate, judging and exact,
Owner of curious bliss? -- Nor thou, fair bride,
Repine, nor homeward cast thy longing eye;
'Twas time to sever from the virgin choir.
What joy in loneliness to waste the hours
Unfruitful? see, hard by, Loddona's stream
Cold and inactive creep along; her face
Shaded with pensive willow, -- till anon
Married to jovial Thames, briskly she glides
Over many a laughing mead. -- It Is nature wills
Such union: blessed society! where souls
Move, as in dance, to melody divine
Fit partners. (How unlike the noisy broils
Of wedded strife!) Hence friendship's generous glow
At love's high noon; and hence the sober flame
Steady, as life declines. -- All comforts hence
Of child and parent, strongest, dearest ties!
Think not the fair original designed
To flourish and be lost. The world expects
Some copies to adorn another age. --
Thank the kind gods; be happy, live and love.
To a GENTLEMAN, on the Birthday of his first Son.
By the Same.
THY sanguine hope completed in a boy,
Hymen's kind boon, my friend, I give thee joy.
Of fine strange things, and miracles to be,
Expect no flattering prophecy from me.
It Is Time's maturing business to call forth
Degenerate meanness, or transmitted worth:
Under his sliding course of hours and days
The artist's labor mellows or decays.
Then, let me see, what my fond wish bespoke,
The lively coloring, and manly stroke.
Is there the sweetness, easiness, and grace,
Maternal beauties, shed upon his face?
Is there the frank benevolence; the fire
Sincere and generous, darted from his sire?
The judging Muse, where lines like these must strike,
Will eye the copy, -- own, -- it is very like:
Point out each virtue, each resemblance tell
Pleased, that the parents drew themselves so well.
On two FRIENDS born on the same Day.
By the Same.
THERE are it seems who think the natal star
Sostens to peace, or animates to war;
That yon bright orbs, as in their course they roll,
Dart their strong influence on the dawning soul;
Whether to empire led by shining Jove,
Or lulled to pleasure by the queen of love:
Whether Mercurius gently wave his hand;
And point to arts and sciences the wand;
Or angry Mars inspiring warlike heat,
Alarm the pulse, and at the bosom beat.
If so: then why the Muse a contrast finds
In Palamon's and Arcite's various minds?
The one of nature easy and composed,
Untoss'd by passion, and in arts reposed;
TO other of eager and impetuous soul,
Starting in Honor's race, and stretching to the goal.
One calm, like Theodosius, to desire;
The other glowing with Varanes' fire:
This pleased to wander in Pierian glades,
Where the rill murmurs, and the laurel shades;
That warmed and roused by what his soul approves,
The sport, the mistress, or the friend he loves.
Yet the same sun saluted them on earth,
Yet the same planets glittered at their birth,
The same soft gale, or whispered in the wood,
Or the same tempest discomposed the flood.
It is enough, that harmony appears,
And friendship reconciles, where nature jars;
For whatsoever the scheme of dreamers be,
Their stars may differ, since their lives agree.
A WINTER THOUGHT.
By J. EARL.
I.
THE man whose constitution's strong,
And free from vexing cares his mind,
As changing seasons pass along
Can in them all fresh pleasures find.
II.
Not only in the teeming bud,
The opening leaf, and following bloom,
(Urged by the sap's ascending flood)
And fruit fair knitting in its room;
III.
Not only when the smiling fields
In all their gaity appear,
And the perfumes their bosom yields
On balmy wings the zephyrs bear.
IV.
In morning fair, in evening mild,
The murmuring brook, and cooling shade,
Birds airy notes in consorts wild,
And Philomela's serenade.
V.
Not only in the waving ear,
And branches bending with their load,
Or whilst the produce of the year
Is gathering, and in safety stowed.
VI.
He pleased, in days autumnal sees
The shadowy leaf diversified
With various colors, and the trees
Stripped, and stand forth in naked pride.
VII.
Each hollow blast, and hasty shower,
The rattling hail, and fleecy snow,
The candy'd rhyme, and scattered hoar,
And icicles which downward grow.
VIII.
The shining pavement of the flood,
To which the youthful tribes resort,
And game, which the discovered wood
Exposes to the fowler's sport.
IX.
The greens, which wintry blasts defy,
Through native strength, or human care,
In hedge, or close arrangery,
All these a source of pleasure are.
X.
The sun which from the northern signs
Scorched with unsufferable heat,
Now in a milder glory shines,
And every glancing ray is sweet.
XI.
The silver morn, and each fair star
Forth to the best advantage shine,
And by the richest scene prepare
For noble thoughts the enlarged mind.
XII.
He, when the mornings slowest rise,
Can sweetly pass the nights away
In lucubration with the wise,
Or conversation with the gay.
XIII.
And when the winter tedious grows,
And lengthening days cold stronger bring,
A new increasing pleasure flows,
From expectation of the spring.
XIV.
So he whose faculties are sound,
His heart upright and conscience clean,
Agreeably can pass his round
Of life, in every shifting scene.
XV.
Not only in his youthful prime,
And whilst his powers continue firm,
But when he feels the effect of time,
And age prepares him for the worm.
XVI.
Grateful for every blessing past,
Patient in every present ill;
And on whatever ground he is placed,
Hope does with pleasing prospects fill;
XVII.
And faith in heaven's enchanting love
(From whence that Sun will soon appear
Whose smiles make endless spring above)
Does all his damps, and darkness clear,
SONG.
By the Same.
STELLA and Flavia every hour
Do various hearts surprise;
In Stella's soul lies all her power,
And Flavia's in her eyes.
More boundless Flavia's conquests are,
And Stella's more confined;
All can discern a face that is fair,
But few a lovely mind.
Stella, like Britain's monarchs, reigns
Over cultivated lands;
Like eastern tyrants Flavia deigns
To rule over barren sands.
Then boast not, Flavia, thy fair face,
Thy beauty's only store;
Thy charms will every day decrease,
Each day gives Stella more.
VERSES spoken at WESTMINSTER School.
J. F. HOW like you, Sir, the splendour of the day?
What! has your lordship not a word to say?
Can neither verse, nor prose your praises move?
He sure dislikes who cares not to approve.
You view with scorn our antiquated ways,
Queen Bess's golden rules and golden days.
No powdered liveries attend us here,
Hunger's our sauce, and mutton is our cheer.
Our worn-out customs may provoke your sport,
How long the graces, and the meals how short!
Nor can our moldy college-life afford
A bed more fashionable than its board.
No state-alcove, no wainscot can you see
Of cedar old, or new mahogany:
To us, poetic furniture is given,
Curtains of night and canopy of heaven:
Our youths, whom well-bred gentlemen despise,
Sleep with the lamb, as with the lark they rise.
Nay, prayers each day (strange things to modern beaux)
Open our morning, and our evening close:
Nor yet content with what at home we do,
Our laws present us to the public view;
We to the Abbey march in white array
Thrice every week, beside each holy day.
What boys of rank could brook such hard commands?
Like meanest choristers to take their stands,
Or penitents, with tapers in their hands?
But these objections nobles may disown,
Who seldom stoop to wear the daggled gown:
The school itself unmannerly they call,
Like death a general leveller of all;
Which never regards the priv'lege of a peer,
What race you spring from, or what arms you bear.
Boys on themselves, not ancestors, rely,
Distinguished by intrinsic quality:
A saucy commoner may take his place,
Who is a lord, and is to be his grace.
Not so at home -- there due distinction's made,
And full obeisance to degree is paid:
Far milder treatment does his honor meet,
From handmaid gentle, and from sister sweet:
With footmen romps (which finely must improve him)
And kiss his cousins that his aunts may love him.
There the whole kindred join to form an heir,
And uncles, grandsires, grandmothers are there:
But oh! the enchanting blessings who can show,
Which from the kennel, and the stable flow!
When honor quits the closet for the fields,
And all the student to the sportsman yields.
Perhaps some glorious hunting-match designed,
Even now, though absent, rises to your mind;
If not prevented by this luckless day,
How had you scower'd over hills and dales away,
By foxes murdered glory to obtain,
And boast three vixens in a fortnight slain!
Or had the generous stag with winged speed
Across whole countries urged the straining steed,
^ach Yorkshire Riding might have viewed the race;
Your horn perhaps had rung through Chevy-Chace.
^^^ore could I say --

LORD C. -- But hold, it is time you end,
Who for a renegade mistake a friend.
And could you think one son so void of grace,
^' abjure his Alma Matter to her face?
^ow should not she with irony dispense,
Who lends us figures to adorn our sense?
Why, it is to gain her smiles our parts we prove,
^o show our genius is to show our love:
and you the judges, since yourselves inspire,
(...) our pacific or prolific fire,
(...) candid, and absolve the general aim,
^e argue different, but we think the same.
(...) Parents, when fondess, or the fashion sway,
^ill breed their child themselves, the modern way:
^o pedant schemes, that abject minds control,
^ou'd thwart the native freedom of his soul:
Him their own eye o'erlooks, own modes refine,
And master's powdered every day to dine.
As for his pretty head, mamma takes care
The comb's well fixed, and nicely curled the hair,
And not one thing, I Will warrant you, breeds there.
Even let the dirty boys, so doomed, be fools,
And walk through thick and thin to crowded schools,
Lest such rude noise should hurt his tender brain,
In his own hall Sir Timothy they train.
Moll tells him stories while she sweeps the room,
And he imbibes his morals from the groom.
At twelve years old the sprightly youth is able
To turn a pancake, or dry-rub a table.
Soon as the clerk has taught him all he can,
They send to London for some abler man.
Down comes a Frenchman: Sire, me swear and vow,
Me be surpised you make no better bow:
But will make you un brave scholar, no fear,
Better den my own self, in two, tree year.
The knight begins, and in a literal sense,
Turns French to English, and makes Latin French.
Three years my lady mother has the joy
To hear the Frenchman and to see the boy;
To her it is a comfort (above all)
That Tim should learn so fast, and grow so tall.
Kitty, my lady's waiting maid, was sister
To Tom the groom, who knew the knight had kissed her;
Tom manages his knight at such a rate,
He beats the Frenchman, and he marries Kate.
So fondly the wise mother loved the child,
She quite undid him, lest he should be spoiled.
This news the widow of the neighboring grange
Heard with surprise -- But I, said she, will change
This unsuccessful method, and my Jerry,
I Will answer for it, shall never thus miscarry.
Prate with the maid! No -- him I Will breed up shyly,
And every servant shall respect him highly.
No trifling monsieur here shall give advice;
I Will have some senior-fellow, grave and wise,
From either of our universities.
She said -- It Is done -- The honest man with pains
Gender and number, mood and tense explains;
Jerry goes through his daily task and thrives,
From in speech be to the apple tree arrives.
Then studious reads what Belgian authors writ,
And drains whole nomenclators for their wit:
From thence apace he grows accomplished fully,
Has read Corderius, and has heard of Tully.
Should Oxford next, or Paris be his chance?
The last prevails, and he is equipped for France.
He goes -- sees every thing that rare and new is,
And hunts like any alderman, with Lewis;
Till some great fortune, or mamma's command,
Again restores him to the British strand,
Then, welcome Sir, to bless your native land.
But see the proper vacancy present,
And up he comes full fraught for parliament.
Then first his noble heart begins to sink,
Fain would he speak, but knows not how to think:
However he will needs launch out beyond his reach,
Fer who never made a theme, makes no good speech.
Hence the loud laugh, and scornful sneer arise,
Hence round and round the piquant raill'ry flies,
And thus (sad shame) though now he is twenty-four,
He Is finely lashed that never was lashed before.
While each mean time, or commoner or peer,
Who passed the discipline in practice here,
Convinced applauds the doctor's wholesome plan,
Who made the youngster smart to save the man.
For what though some the good old man desert,
Grow learned with ease, and grasp the shade of art,
For us, we foster here no vain pretense,
Nor fill with empty pride the void of sense;
We rise with pains, nor think the labor light
To speak like Romans, and like Romans write.
It Is ours to court with care the learned throng,
To catch their spirit as we gain their tongue;
To enjoy the charms in Caesar's works that shine,
And learn to glow at Virgil's lofty line.
'Twas thus you moved, and thus in riper years,
With such superior luster fill your spheres;
'Twas thus you learned to rise, nor can you blame
If as we tread your steps we hope your fame.
And oh! may Westminster for ever view
Sons after sons succeed, and all like you;
May every doubt your great examples clear,
And Education fix her empire here.

A LETTER to Sir ROBERT WALPOLE.
By the late HENRY FIELDING, Esquire
SIR,
WHILE at the helm of state you ride,
Our nation's envy and its pride;
While foreign courts with wonder gaze,
And justly all your counsels praise,
Which, in contempt of faction's force,
Steer, though opposed, a steady course,
Would you not wonder, Sir, to view
Your bard a greater man than you?
And yet the sequel proves it true.
You know, Sir, certain ancient fellows
Philosophers, and others tell us,
That no alliance ever between
Greatness and happiness is seen;
If so, may heaven still deny
To you, to be as great as I.
Besides, we 're taught, it does behove us,
To think those greater who 're above us:
Another instance of my glory,
Who live above you twice two story,
And from my garret can look down,
As from an hill, on half the town.
Greatness by poets still is painted,
With many followers acquainted:
This too does in my favor speak,
Your levee is but twice a week,
From mine I can exclude but one day;
My door is quiet on a Sunday.
The distance too at which they bow,
Does my superior greatness show.
Familiar you to admiration,
May be approached by all the nation,
While I, like Great Mogul in Indo,
Am never seen but at a window.
The family that dines the latest,
Is in our street esteemed the greatest,
But greater him we surely call,
Who hardly deigns to dine at all.
If with my greatness you 're offended,
The fault is easily amended:
You have it, Sir, within your power
To take your humble servant lower.
An EPISTLE from the Elector of BAVARIA to the FRENCH King, after the Battle of
RAMILLIES.
IF yet, great Sir, your heart can comfort know,
And the returning sighs less frequent flow;
If yet your ear can suffer ANNA'S fame,
And bear, without a start, her MARLBRO'S name;
If half the slain over wide Ramillia spread,
Are yet forgot, and in your fancy dead:
Attend, and be yourself, while I recite
(Oh! that I only can of losses write!)
To what a mighty sum our ills amount,
And give a faithful, though a sad account.
Let not Bavaria be condemned unheard,
Nor, 'till examined, have his conduct cleared;
Charge not on me alone that fatal day,
Your own commanders bore too great a sway.
Think! Sir, with pity think! what I have lost,
My native realms and my paternal coast,
All that a firm confed'rate could bestow,
Even faith and fame, if you believe the foe.
Think what a heavy load o'erwhelms my breast,
With its own sorrows and with yours oppressed;
After one battle lost, and country gone,
Vanquished again, alas! and twice undone.
Oh! where shall I begin? what language find
To heal the raging anguish of your mind?
Or if you deign a willing ear to lend,
Oh! where will my disastrous story end?
Conquest I often promised, I confess,
And who from such a power could promise less?
There Gallia's force, and here Bavaria's shines,
The experienced household fills our crowded lines;
Already had our towering thoughts overthrown
The Belgian host, while we surveyed our own,
Destroyed their provinces with sword and flame,
Let in their seas, and sacked their Amsterdam;
Already had we shared the fancied spoil,
(Imaginary trophies crowned our toil)
Batavian standards to this temple gave,
In that the British crosses doomed to wave,
A rural seat assigned each captive chief,
In flowery gardens to assuage his grief,
And by his arts, and first escape prepared,
On MARLBRO had bestowed a double guard.
Paris impatient for the conquered foe,
Hastened the tuneful hymn and solemn show;
Triumphal chariots for the victor stayed,
And finished arches cast a pompous shade;
With nicest art the bards had dressed their lays,
Of nothing fearful but to reach our praise;
But all our hopes and expectation crossed,
What lines have we? what fame has Boileau lost?
Your army now, fixed on its high designs,
Rush forth like vernal swarms, and quit their lines;
Eager the Dyle they pass to seek the fight,
Judoina's fields with sudden tents are white,
The foe descends, like torrents from the hills,
And all the neighboring vale tumultuous fills:
Preluding cannons tell the approaching storm,
And working armies take a dreadful form.
Soon your victorious arms, and stronger force,
Tore all the left, and broke the Belgian horse;
Their scattered troops are rallied to the fight,
But only rallied for a second flight:
As when high heaven on some aspiring wood,
Which in close ranks, and thickest order stood,
Pours its collected stores of vengeance down,
Cedars are seen with firs and oaks overthrown,
Long ravages and intervals of waste!
So gored their lines appeared, and so defaced.
The third attack had ended all the war,
Sunk their whole force, and saved your future care,
Had MARLBRO, only MARLBRO, not been there.
As some good genius flies, to save the realms
Which, in his absence born, a plague o'erwhelms,
Through opening squadrons did the hero haste,
And raised their drooping courage as he past.
Amidst the routed Belgians he arrived,
Turned the pursuit, the fainting fight revived,
Supplied each rank, filled every vacant space,
And brought the battle to its former face.
With trembling hearts we see our fate decreed;
Where MARLBRO fights how can a foe succeed?
To reach his life our boldest warriors strive,
On him the storm with all its thunder drive;
He stems the war, and half encompassed round
Still clears his way, and still maintains his ground:
Amazed I saw him in such dangers live,
And envied him the death I wished to give.
But how our rising pleasure shall I tell?
The thundering steed, and the great rider, fell:
We thanked kind heaven, and hoped the victor slain,
But all our hopes, and all our thanks were vain:
Free from the guilt of any hostile wound
Alive he lay, and dreadful on the ground.
As when a lion in the toils is cast,
That uncontrolled had laid the country waste,
The insulting hinds surround him, who before
Fled from his haunts, and trembled at his roar;
So round beset the mighty Briton lies,
And vulgar foes attempt the glorious prize.
'Till fresh battalions to his succor brought,
Contending armies for the hero fought;
The wanted steed some friendly hand prepared,
And met a fatal, but a great, reward:
A glorious death; of his loved lord bereft,
The pious office unperform'd he left.
The rescued chief, by the past danger warmed,
Our weakened household with new fury stormed:
While all around to our admiring eyes
Fresh foes, and undiscovered squadrons, rise.
The boasted guards that spread your name so far,
And turned wherever they fought the doubtful war,
With heaps of slaughter strow'd the fatal plain,
And did a thousand glorious things in vain;
Broke with unequal force such numbers die,
That I myself rejoiced to see them fly.
But oh! how few preserved themselves by flight?
Or found a shelter from the approaching night?
Thousands fall undistinguished in the dark,
And five whole leagues with wide destruction mark.
Scarce at Ramillia did the slaughter end,
When the swift victor had approached Ostend;
Took in whole states and countries in his way,
Brussels, nor Ghent, nor Antwerp gained a day;
Within the compass of one circling moon,
The Lis, the Demer, and the Scheld his own.
What in the foe's, and what in William's hand,
Did for an age the power of France withstand;
Though each campaign she crowded nations drained,
And the fat soil with blood of thousands stained;
Those forts and provinces does MARLBRO gain
In twice three suns, and not a soldier slain;
None can suspend the fortune of their town,
But who their harvest and their country drown;
Compelled to call (his valor to evade)
The less destructive ocean to their aid.
Oh! were our loss to Flandria's plains confined!
But what a train of ills are still behind!
Beyond the Adige Vendome feels the blow,
And Villars now retires without a foe,
The fate of Flanders spreads in Spain the flame,
And their new monarch robs of half his fame;
But France shall hear, in some late distant reign,
An unborn Lewis curse Ramillia's plain.
Whither, oh! whither shall Bavaria run?
Or where himself, or where the victor shun?
Shall I no more with vain ambition roam,
But my own subjects rule in peace at home?
Thence an abandoned fugitive I Am driven,
Like the first guilty man by angry heaven
From his blessed mansions, where the avenging lord
Still guards the passage with a brandished sword.
Or shall I to Brabantia's courts retire,
And reign over distant provinces for hire?
Shall I with borrowed government dispense,
A royal servant and another's prince?
These countries too (oh my hard fate!) are lost,
And I am banished from a foreign coast;
Now may I sight secure of future toils,
Of no new countries a third battle spoils.
Oh, Tallard! once I did thy chains deplore,
But envy now the fate I mourned before;
By bondage blessed, protected by the foe,
You live contented with one overthrow;
Her captive, Britain kindly kept away
From the disgrace of the last fatal day.
How does my fall the haughty victor raise,
And join divided nations in his praise;
Grateful Germania unknown titles frames,
And CHURCHILL writes amongst her sovereign names.
Part of her states obey a British lord,
Small part! of the great empire he restored.
From the proud Spaniard he extorts applause,
And rivals with the Dutch their great Nassaus.
^n every language are his battles known,
The Swede and Pole for his, despise their own.
A thousand sects in him their safety place,
and our own saints are thanked for our disgrace.
England alone, and that some pleasure gives,
^nvies herself the blessings she receives.
My grief each place renews wherever I go,
and every art contributes to my woe;
^amillia's plain each painter's pencil yields,
^avaria flies in all their canvas fields:
^n me, young poets their rude lays indite,
and on my sorrows practice how to write;
(...) in their scenes with borrowed passion rage,
and act a shameful part on every stage.
In Flandria will the tale be ever told,
Nor will it grow, with ever telling, old:
The lisping infants will their MARLBRO raise,
And their new speech grow plainer in his praise;
His story will employ their middle years,
And in their latest age recall their fears,
While to their children's children they relate
The business of a day, their country's fate:
Then lead them forth, their thoughts to entertain,
And show the wondering youth Ramillia's plain;
'Twas here they fought, the household fled that way,
And this the spot where MARLBRO prostrate lay.
Here they, perhaps, shall add Bavaria's name,
Censure his courage, and his conduct blame:
It Is false, it is false, I did not basely yield,
I left indeed, but left a bloody field:
Believe not, future ages, never believe
The vile aspersions which these wretches give;
If you too far my injured honor try,
Take heed, my ghost, it will, it shall, be nigh,
Rise in his face, and give the slave the lie.
Why should the stars thus on Britannia smile,
And partial blessings crown the favorite isle?
Holland does her for their great founder own;
Britannia gave to Portugal a crown:
Twice by her queens does proud Iberia fall;
Her Edwards and her Henrys conquered Gaul:
The Swede her arms from late oppression freed,
And if he dares oppress, will curb the Swede.
She, from herself, decides her neighbors fates,
Rescues by turns, by turns subdues their states;
In the wide globe no part could nature stretch
Beyond her arms, and out of Britain's reach:
Who feared, she ever could have Bavaria seen?
Such realms, and kingdoms, hills, and seas between?
Yet there, -- oh sad remembrance of my woe!
Distant Bavaria does her triumphs show.
Proud state! must Europe lie at thy command,
No prince without thee rise, without thee stand!
What share? what part is thine of all the spoil?
Thine only is the hazard and the toil.
An empire thou have saved and all its states,
Iberia's realms have felt severer fates:
What would thou more? still do thy arms advance?
Heaven knows what doom thou have reserved for France!
From whose wise care does all the treasure rise,
That slaughtered hosts and shattered fleets supplies?
From whence such boundless conquest does she reap,
Purchased with all her boasted millions cheap?
O blessed! oh envied QUEEN! that does command
At such a time, in such a happy land;
Great in her armies and her powerful fleet!
Great in her treasures! in her triumphs great!
But greater still! and what we envy most,
That can a MARLBRO for her subject boast!
Oh, Gallia! from what splendors art thou hurled?
The terror once of all the western world;
Thy spreading map each year did larger grow,
New mountains still did rise, new rivers flow;
But now surrounded by thy ancient mounds,
Do inward shrink from thy new-conquer'd bounds.
Why did not nature, far from MARLBRO'S worth,
In distant ages bring her Louis forth?
Each uncontrolled had conquered worlds alone,
Happy, for Europe, they together shone.
Cease! Louis, cease! from wars and slaughter cease!
Oh! sue at last, it is time to sue, for peace!
Urge not too far your twice unhappy fate,
Nor MARLBRO'S stronger arm confess too late:
Who never camps nor rough encounters saw,
Can no just image of the hero draw:
He must, alas! that MARLBRO truly knows,
Face him in battle, and whole armies lose.
Believe me, Sir, on my unwilling breast,
Fate has his virtues one by one impressed:
With what a force our Schellemberg he stormed?
And Blenheim's battle with what conduct formed?
How great his vigilance; how quick his thought;
What his contempt of death, Ramillia taught.
These nature cool for peace and counsel forms,
For battle those with rage and fury warms;
But to her favorite Britain does impart
The coolest head at once and warmest heart;
So does Sicilia's lofty mountains show
Flames in her bosom, on her head the snow.
My youth with flattering smiles did Fortune crown,
The more severely on my age to frown?
Of Pleasure's endless stores I drank my fill,
Officious Nature waited on my will;
The Austrian rescued, and the Turk overthrown,
Europe and Asia filled with my renown:
^^asted are all my glories and my fame,
^ost is my country and illustrious name;
^he titles from their present lord are torn,
Which my great ancestors so long had borne;
^o native honors shall my offspring grace,
The last elector with a numerous race.
^alf my unhappy subjects lost by wars,
^he rest for a worse fate the victor spares:
^ere they for this entrusted to my care?
^his the reward the brave, the faithful share?
^y sons lament, in distant dungeons thrown,
^nacted crimes, and follies not their own;
^ut oh! my comfort! -- my o'er-flowing eyes
^ush forth with tears, and all my sorrows rise,
^hile the dear tender exile I bemoan;
^h royal bride! oh daughter of a throne!
^ot thus I promised when I sought thy bed,
^hou did the brave, the great Bavaria wed:
first be ambition! cursed the thirst of power!
and cursed that once-lov'd title Emperor!
Excuse, great Sir, the ravings of a mind,
That can so just a cause for sorrow find;
My words too rudely may a monarch greet,
For oh! was ever grief like mine discreet!
No sufferings shall my firm alliance end,
An unsuccessful, but a faithful friend.
To the DUKE of MARLBOROUGH.
PARDON, great Duke, if Britain's style delights;
Or if the Imperial title more invites;
Pardon, great Prince, the failings of a Muse,
That dares not hope for more than your excuse,
Forced at a distance to attempt your praise,
And sing your victories in mournful lays,
To cast in shadows, and allay the light,
That wounds, with nearer rays, the dazzled sight,
Nor durst in a direct and open strain
Such acts, with her unhallowed notes, profane:
In towering verse let meaner heroes grow,
And to elab'rate lines their greatness owe,
Your actions, owned by every nation, want
Praises, no greater than a foe may grant.
Oh! when shall Europe, by her MARLBRO'S sword,
To lasting peace and liberty restored,
Allow her weary champion a retreat,
To his loved country and his rising seat?
Where your soft partner, far from martial noise,
Your cares shall sweeten with domestic joys:
Your conquests she with doubtful pleasure hears,
And in the midst of every triumph fears;
Betwixt her queen and you divides her life,
A friend obsequious, and a faithful wife.
Hail Woodstock! hail ye celebrated glades!
Grow fast ye woods, and flourish thick ye shades!
Ye rising towers for your new lord prepare,
Like your old Henry come from Gallia's war.
The gen'ral's arms as far the king's o'erpow'r,
As this new structure does surpass the bower.
The pleasing prospects and romantic site,
The spacious compass, and the stately height;
The painted gardens, in their flower prime,
Demand whole volumes of immortal rhyme,
And if the Muse would second the design,
Mean as they are, should in my numbers shine,
There live, the joy and wonder of our isles,
Happy in Albion's love, and ANNA'S smiles.
While from the godlike race of CHURCHILL born,
Four beauteous Rosamonds this bower adorn,
Who with the ancient siren of the place
In charms might vie, and every blooming grace;
But blessed with equal virtues had she been,
Like them she had been favored by the QUEEN,
Whom your high merit, and their own, prefers
To all the worthiest beds of England's peers.
Thus the great eagle, when heaven's wars are over,
And the loud thunder has forgot to roar,
Jove's fires laid by, with those of Venus burns,
To his forsaken mate and shades returns;
On some proud tree, more sacred than the rest,
With curious art he builds his spacious nest;
In the warm sun lies basking all the day,
While round their sire the generous eaglets play;
Their sire, well-pleased to see the noble brood
Fill all the loftiest cedars of the wood.
An ODE on Miss HARRIET HANBURY at Six Years old.
By Sir CHARLES HANBURY WILLIAMS.
I.
WHY should I thus employ my time,
To paint those cheeks of rosy hue?
Why should I search my brains for rhyme,
To sing those eyes of glossy blue?
II.
The power as yet is all in vain,
Thy numerous charms, and various graces:
They only serve to banish pain,
And light up joy in parents' faces.
III.
But soon those eyes their strength shall feel;
Those charms their powerful sway shall find:
Youth shall in crowds before you kneel,
And own your empire over mankind.
IV.
Then when on Beauty's throne you sit,
And thousands court your wished for arms;
My Muse shall stretch her utmost wit,
To sing the victories of your charms.
V.
Charms that in time shall never be lost,
At least while verse like mine endures:
And future HANBURYS shall boast,
Of verse like mine, of charms like yours.
VI.
A little vain we both may be,
Since scarce another house can show,
A poet, that can sing like me;
A beauty, that can charm like you.
A SONG Upon Miss HARRIET HANBURY, addressed to the Rev. Mr. BIRT.
By the Same.
I.
DEAR doctor of St. Mary's,
In the hundred of Bergavenny,
I Have seen such a lass,
With a shape and a face,
As never was matched by any.
II.
Such wit, such bloom, and such beauty,
Has this girl of Ponty Pool, Sir,
With eyes that would make
The toughest heart ach,
And the wisest man a fool, Sir.
III.
At our fair the other day she appeared, Sir,
And the Welchmen all flocked and viewed her;
And all of them said,
She was fit to have been made
A wife for Owen Tudor.
IV.
They would never have been tired with gazing,
And so much her charms did please, Sir,
That all of them staid
Till their ale grew dead,
And cold was their toasted cheese, Sir.
V.
How happy the lord of the manor,
That shall be of her possessed, Sir;
For all must agree,
Who my HARRIET shall see,
She Is a HERRIOT of the best, Sir.
VI.
Then pray make a ballad about her;
We know you have wit if you would show it,
Then don't be ashamed,
You can never be blamed,
For a prophet is often a poet.
VII.
But why don't you make one yourself then?
I suppose I by you shall be told, Sir:
This beautiful piece,
Alas, is my niece;
And besides she is but five years old, Sir.
VIII.
But though, my dear friend, she is no older,
In her face it may plainly be seen, Sir,
That this angel at five,
Will, if she is alive,
Be a goddess at fifteen, Sir.
To Mr. GARNIER and Mr. PEARCE of BATH.
A grateful ODE, in return for the extraordinary Kindness and Humanity they
showed to me and my eldest Daughter, now Lady ESSEX, 1753.
By the Same.
I.
WHAT glorious verse from Love has sprung?
How well has Indignation sung?
And can the gentle Muse,
Whilst in her once beloved abode
I stray, and suppliant kneel, an ode
To Gratitude refuse?
II.
GARNIER, my friend, accept this verse,
And thou receive, well-natur'd PEARCE,
All I can give of fame.
Let others, other subjects sing,
Some murderous chief, some tyrant king,
Humanity's my theme.
III.
For arts like yours, employed by you,
Make verse on such a theme your due,
To whom indulgent Heaven
Its favorite power of doing good,
By you so rightly understood,
Judiciously has given.
IV.
Behold, obedient to your power,
Consuming fevers rage no more,
Nor chilling agues freeze;
The cripple dances void of pain,
The deaf in raptures hear again,
The blind transported sees.
V.
Health at your call extends her wing,
Each healing plant, each friendly spring,
Its various power discloses;
Over Death's approaches you prevail,
See Chloe's cheek, of late so pale,
Blooms with returning roses.
VI.
These gifts, my friends, which shine in you,
Are rare, yet to some chosen few
Heaven has the same assigned;
Health waits on Mead's prescription still,
And Hawkins' hand, and Ranby's skill,
Are blessings to mankind.
VII.
But hearts like yours are rare indeed,
Which for another's wounds can bleed,
Another's grief can feel;
The lover's fear, the parent's groan,
Your natures catch, and make your own,
And share the pains you heal.
VIII.
But why to them, Hygeia, why
Do thou thy cordial drop deny
Who but for others live?
Oh, goddess, hear my prayer, and grant
That these that health may never want,
Which they to others give.
ODE to DEATH. Translated from the FRENCH of the King of PRUSSIA.
By Dr. HAWKSWORTH.
YET a few years, or days perhaps,
Or moments pass with silent lapse,
And time to me shall be no more;
No more the sun these eyes shall view,
Earth over these limbs her dust shall strew,
And life's fantastic dream be over.
Alas! I touch the dreadful brink,
From nature's verge impelled I sink,
And endless darkness wraps me round!
Yes, Death is ever at my hand,
Fast by my bed he takes his stand,
And constant at my board is found.
Earth, air, and fire, and water, join
Against this fleeting life of mine,
And where for succor can I fly?
If art with flattering wiles pretend
To shield me like a guardian friend,
By Art, ere Nature bids, I die.
I see this tyrant of the mind,
This idol Flesh to dust consigned,
Once called from dust by power divine;
Its features change, it is pale, it is cold --
Hence dreadful spectre! to behold
Thy aspect, is to make it mine.
And can I then with guilty pride,
Which fear nor shame can quell or hide,
This flesh still pamper and adorn!
Thus viewing what I soon shall be,
Can what I am demand the knee,
Or look on aught around with scorn?
But then this spark that warms, that guides,
That lives, that thinks, what fate betides?
Can this be dust, a kneaded clod!
This yield to death! the soul, the mind,
That measures heaven, and mounts the wind,
That knows at once itself and God?
Great Cause of all, above, below,
Who knows thee must for ever know,
Immortal and divine!
Thy image on my soul impressed,
Of endless being is the test,
And bids Eternity be mine!
Transporting thought! -- but am I sure
That endless life will joy secure?
Joy's only to the just decreed!
The guilty wretch expiring, goes
Where vengeance endless life bestows,
That endless misery may succeed.
Great God, how aweful is the scene!
A breath, a transient breath between;
And can I jest, and laugh, and play!
To earth, alas! too firmly bound,
Trees deeply rooted in the ground,
Are shivered when they are torn away.
Vain joys, which envied greatness gains,
How do ye bind with silken chains,
Which ask Herculean strength to break!
How with new terrors have ye armed
The power whose slightest glance alarmed?
How many deaths of one ye make!
Yet, dumb with wonder, I behold
Man's thoughtless race in error bold,
Forget or scorn the laws of death;
With these no projects coincide,
Nor vows, nor toils, nor hopes, they guide,
Each thinks he draws immortal breath.
Each blind to fate's approaching hour,
Intrigues, or fights, for wealth, or power,
And slumbering dangers dare provoke:
And he who tottering scarce sustains
A century's age, plans future gains,
And feels an unexpected stroke.
Go on, unbridled desperate band,
Scorn rocks, gulphs, winds, search sea and land,
And spoil new worlds wherever found.
Seize, haste to seize the glittering prize,
And sighs, and tears, and prayers despise,
Nor spare the temple's holy ground.
They go, succeed, but look again,
The desperate hand you seek in vain,
Now trod in dust the peasant's scorn.
But who that saw their treasures swell,
That heard the insatiate vow rebel,
Would ever have thought them mortal born?
See the world's victor mount his car,
Blood marks his progress wide and far,
Sure he shall reign while ages fly;
No, vanished like a morning cloud,
The hero was but just allowed
To fight, to conquer, and to die.
And is it true, I ask with dread,
That nations heaped on nations bled
Beneath his chariot's fervid wheel,
With trophies to adorn the spot,
Where his pale corse was left to rot,
And doomed the hungry reptile's meal?
Yes, Fortune wearied with her play,
Her toy, this hero, casts away,
And scarce the form of man is seen:
Awe chills my breast, my eyes overflow,
Around my brows no roses glow,
The cypress mine, funereal green!
Yet in this hour of grief and fears,
When aweful Truth unveiled appears,
Some power unknown usurps my breast;
Back to the world my thoughts are led,
My feet in Folly's lab'rynth tread,
And fancy dreams that life is blessed.
How weak an empress is the mind,
Whom Pleasure's flowery wreaths can bind,
And captive to her altars lead!
Weak Reason yields to Phrenzy's rage,
And all the world is Folly's stage,
And all that act are fools indeed.
And yet this strange, this sudden flight,
From gloomy cares to gay delight,
This fickleness, so light and vain,
In life's delusive transient dream,
Where men nor things are what they seem,
Is all the real good we gain.
The Hymns of DIONYSIUS: Translated from the Greek.
By the Rev. Mr. MERRICK.
To the MUSE.
LEND thy voice, celestial maid:
Through thy vocal grove conveyed,
Let a sudden call from thee.
Wake my soul to harmony.
Raise, oh! raise the hallowed strain,
Mistress of the tuneful train.
And thou sacred source of light,
Author of our mystic rite,
Thou whom erst Latona bore
On the sea-girt Delian shore,
Join the favoring Muse, and shed
All thy influence on my head.
II. TO APOLLO.
Be still, ye vaulted skies! be still
Each hollow vale, each echoing hill,
Let earth and seas, and winds attend;
Ye birds awhile your notes suspend;
Be hushed each sound; behold him nigh,
Parent of sacred harmony;
He comes! his unshorn hair behind
Loose floating to the wanton wind,
Hail, sire of day, whose rosy car,
Through the pathless fields of air,
By thy winged coursers borne,
Opes the eyelids of the morn.
Thou, whose locks their light display
Over the wide aetherial way,
Wreathing their united rays
Into one promiscuous blaze.
Under thy all-seeing eye
Earth's remotest corners lie;
While, in thy repeated course,
Issuing from thy fruitful source,
Floods of fire incessant stray,
Streams of everlasting day.
Round thy sphere the starry throng,
Varying sweet their ceaseless song,
(While their vivid flames on high
Deck the clear untroubled sky,)
To the tuneful lyre advance,
Joining in the mystic dance,
And with step alternate beat
Old Olympus' lofty seat.
At their head the wakeful Moon
Drives her milkwhite heifers on,
And with measured pace and even
Glides around the vast of heaven,
Journeying with unwearied force,
And rejoicing in her course.
Time attends with swift career,
And forms the circle of the year.
III. TO NEMESIS.
Nemesis, whose dreaded weight
Turns the scale of human fate;
On whose front black terrors dwell,
Daughter dire of Justice, hail!
Thou whose adamantine rein
Curbs the arrogant and vain.
Wrong and Force before thee die,
Envy shuns thy searching eye,
And, her sable wings outspread,
Flies to hide her hated head.
Where thy wheel with restless round
Runs along the unprinted ground,
Humbled there, at thy decree
Human greatness bows the knee.
Thine it is unseen to trace
Step by step each mortal's pace:
Thine the sons of Pride to check,
And to bend the stubborn neck,
Till our lives directed stand
By the measure in thy hand.
Thou observant sit'st on high
With bent brow and steadfast eye,
Weighing all that meets thy view
In thy balance just and true.
Goddess, look propitious down,
View us, but without a frown,
Nemesis, whose dreaded weight
Turns the scale of human fate.
Nemesis be still our theme,
Power immortal and supreme,
Thee we praise, nor thee alone,
But add the partner of thy throne.
Thee and Justice both we sing,
Justice, whose unwearied wing
Rears aloft the virtuous name
Safe from hell's rapacious claim;
And when thou thy wrath have shed
Turns it from the guiltless head.
A SATIRE in the Manner of PERSIUS, in a Dialogue between ATTICUS and EUGENIO.
By the late Lord HERVEY.
ATTICUS. WHY wears my pensive friend that gloomy brow?
Say, whence proceeds the imaginary woe?
What prosperous villain have thou met today?
Or has afflicted Virtue crossed thy way?
Is it some crime unpunished you deplore,
Or right subverted by injurious Power?
Be this or that the cause, it is wisely done
To make the sorrows of mankind your own:
To see the injured pleading unredress'd,
The proud exalted, and the meek oppressed,
Can hurt thy health, and rob thee of thy rest.
Your cares are in a hopeful way to cease,
If you must find perfection to find peace.
But reck thy malice, vent thy stifled rage,
Inveigh against the times and lash the age. --
Perhaps just recent from the court you come,
Over public ills to ruminate at home:
Say, which of all the wretches thou have seen
Has thrown a morsel to thy hungry spleen?
What worthless member of that medley throng,
Who basely acts, or tamely suffers wrong?
He, who to nothing but his interest true,
Cajoles the fool he is working to undo:
Or that more despicable timorous slave,
Who knows himself abused, yet hugs the knave?
Perhaps you mourn our senate's sinking fame,
That show of freedom dwindled to a name:
Where hireling judges deal their venal laws,
And the best bidder has the justest cause;
What then?
They have the power, and who shall dare to blame
The legal wrong that bears Astraea's name?
Besides, such thoughts should never stir the rage
Of youthful gall; -- reflection comes with age:
It Is our decaying life's autumnal fruit,
The bitter produce of our latest shoot,
When every blossom of the tree is dead,
Enjoyment withered, and our wishes fled:
Thine still is in its spring, on every bough
Fair Plenty blooms, and youthful Odours blow;
Season of joy, too early to be wise,
The time to covet pleasures, not despise:
Yours is an age when trifles ought to please,
Too soon for reason to attack thy ease.
Though soon the hour shall come, when thou shall know
It Is vain fruition ull, and empty show.
But late examine, late inspect mankind,
If seeing pains, it is prudence to be blind.
Let not their vices yet employ thy thoughts,
Laugh at their follies, ere you weep their faults:
And when (as sure you must) at length you find
What things men are, resolve to arm your mind.
Too nicely never their demerits scan,
And of their virtues make the most you can.
Silent avert the mischief they intend,
And cross, but seem not to discern, their end:
If they prevail, submit, for prudence lies
In suffering well. -- It Is equally unwise,
To see the injuries we will not resent,
And mourn the evils which we cannot prevent.

EUGENIO. You counsel well to bid me arm my mind.
Would the receipt were easy, as it is kind;
But hard it is for misery to reach
That fortitude prosperity can teach.
Could I forbid what has been to have been,
Or lodge a doubt on truths myself have seen;
Could I divest remembrance of her store,
And say, collect these images no more;
Could I dislodge sensation from my breast,
And charm her wakeful faculties to rest;
Could I my nature and myself subdue,
I might the method you prescribe pursue.
But if unfeigned afflictions we endure,
If reason's our disease, and not our cure,
Then seeming ease is all we can obtain;
As one, who long familiariz'd to pain,
Still feels the smart, but ceases to complain.
Though young in life, yet long inured to care,
Thus I submissive every evil bear:
If unexpected ills alone are hard,
Mine should be light, who am for all prepared:
No disappointments can my peace annoy,
Disuse has weaned me from all hopes of joy:
The vain pursuit for ever I give over,
Repulsed I strive, betrayed I trust no more:
Mankind I know, their nature, and their art,
Their vice their own, their virtue but a part;
Ill played so often, that all the cheat can tell,
And dangerous only where it is acted well.
In different classes ranged, a different name
Attends their practice, but the heart's the same.
Their hate is interest, interest too their love,
On the same springs these different engines move:
That sharpens malice, and directs her sting,
And thence the honey'd streams of flattery spring.
Long I suspected what at last I know:
I thought men worthless, now I Have proved 'em so;
Reluctant proved it, by too sure a rule,
I learned my science in a painful school.
He buys even wisdom at too dear a price,
Who pays my sad experience to be wise.
Why did I hope, by sanguine views possessed,
That Virtue harbored in a human breast?
Why did I trust to Flattery's specious wile,
The April sunshine of her transient smile?
Why disbelieve the lessons of the wise,
That taught me young to pierce her thin disguise?
^ thought their rancour, not their prudence, spoke,
That age perverse in false invectives broke;
^ thought their comments on this gaudy scene
The effects of phlegm, and dictated by spleen;
That jealous of the joys themselves were past,
Their envy tried to pall their children's taste:
Like the deaf adder to the charmer's tongue,
^ gave no credit to the truths they sung;
But, happy in a visionary scheme,
^till sought companions worthy my esteem:
The tongue, the heart's interpreter I deemed,
And judged of what men were by what they seemed;
^ thought each warm professor meant me fair,
Each supple sycophant a friend sincere.
The solemn hypocrite, whose close design
^lirth never interrupts, nor love, nor wine,
Who talks on any secret but his own,
Collecting all, communicating none;
Who still attentive to what others say,
Observes to wound, or questions to betray;
Of him as guardian of my private thought,
In morning counsels cool resolves I sought;
To him still open, cautiously consigned
The inmost treasures of my secret mind;
My joys, and griefs delighted to impart,
In sacred confidence unmixed with art;
That dangerous pleasure of the honest heart!
Whenever I purposed to unbend my soul
In social banquets, where the circling bowl
To gladness lifts all sorrows but despair,
And gives a transient Lethe to our care;
I chose the men whose talents entertain
And season converse with a lively strain;
Who thoughtless still, by hope, nor fear perplexed,
Enjoy the present hour, and risque the next.
These not the luxury of slothful ease,
Soft downy beds, nor balmy slumbers please;
While wakeful kings on purple couches own
The secret sorrows of their envied crown,
And wait revolving light, with shorter rest
Than even those wretches by their power oppressed:
This jocund train, devoted to delight,
In cheerful vigils still protract the night,
Nor dread the cares approaching with the day;
Through each vicissitude for ever gay.
With such I commun'd, pleased that I could find
Recess so grateful to the active mind:
And while the youths in sprightly contest try,
With humorous tale, or apposite reply,
Or amorous song, or inoffensive jest,
(The test of wit) to glad the lengthened feast;
My soul, said I, depend upon their truth,
For fraud inhabits not the breast of youth;
Indulge thy genius here, be free, be safe,
Mirth is their aim, they covet but to laugh;
Pure from deceit, as ignorant of care,
Their friendship, and their joys are both sincere.
I judged their nature, like their humor good;
As if the soul depended on the blood;
And that the seeds of honesty must grow
Wherever health resides, or spirits flow.
I see my error: but I see too late:
It Is vain inspection to look back on Fate. --
What are the men who most esteemed we find,
But such whose vices are the most refined?
Blind preference! for vice like poison shows,
The surest death is in the subtlest dose. --
To such reflections when I turn my mind,
I loath my being, and abhor mankind.
What joy for truth, what commerce for the just,
If all our safety's founded on distrust;
If all our wisdom is a mean deceit,
And he who prospers but the ablest cheat!

ATTICUS. O early wise! how well have thou defined
The worth, the joys, the friendship of mankind!

EUGENIO. Blessed be the powers, I know their abject state.

ATTICUS. Yet bear with this, and hope a better fate.
Thrice happy they, who view with stable eyes
The shifting scene, who temperate, firm, and wise,
Can bear its sorrows, and its joys despise;
Who look on disappointments, shocks, and strife,
And all the consequential ills of life,
Not as severities the gods impose,
But easy terms indulgent Heaven allows
To man, by short probation to obtain
Immortal recompense for transient pain.
The intent of Heaven thus rightly understood,
From every evil we extract a good:
This truth divine implanted in the heart,
Supports each drudging mortal through his part;
Gives a delightful prospect to the blind;
The friendless thence a constant succor find:
The wretch by fraud betrayed, by power oppressed,
With this restorative still soothes his breast;
This suffering Virtue chears, this Pain beguiles,
And decks Calamity herself in smiles.
When Mead and Friend have ransacked every rule,
Taught in Hippocrates' and Galen's school,
To quiet ills that mock the leech's art,
Which opiates fail to deaden in the heart,
This cordial still the incurable sustains:
He triumphs in the sharp instructive pains,
Nor like a Roman hero, falsely great,
With impious hand anticipates his fate;
But waits resigned the slow approach of death;
Till that great Power who gave, demands his breath.
Such are thy solid comforts, love divine,
Such solid comforts, O my friend, be thine.
On this firm basis thy foundation lay,
Of happiness unsubject to decay.
On man no more, that frail support, depend,
The kindest patron, or the warmest friend;
The warmest friend may one day prove untrue,
And interest change the kindest patron's view.
Hear not, my friend, the fondness they profess,
Nor on the trial grieve to find it less:
With patience each capricious change endure;
Careful to merit where reward is sure.
To Providence implicitly resigned,
Let this grand precept poise thy wavering mind:
With partial eyes we view our own weak cause,
And rashly scan her upright equal laws:
For undeserved she never inflicts a woe,
Nor is her recompense unsure, though slow.
Unpunished none transgress, deceived none trust,
Her rules are fixed, and all her ways are just.

To Mrs. BINDON at BATH.
By the Honorable Sir C. H. WILLIAMS.
APOLLO of old on Britannia did smile,
And Delphi forsook for the sake of this isle,
Around him he lavishly scattered his lays,
And in every wilderness planted his bays;
Then Chaucer and Spenser harmonious were heard,
Then Shakespeare, and Milton, and Waller appeared,
And Dryden, whose brows by Apollo were crowned,
As he sung in such strains as the God might have owned:
But now, since the laurel is given of late
To Cibber, to Eusden, to Shadwell and Tate,
Apollo has quitted the isle he once loved,
And his harp and his bays to Hibernia removed;
He vows and he swears he will inspire us no more,
And has put out Pope's fires which he kindled before;
And further he says, men no longer shall boast
A science their slight and ill treatment has lost;
But that women alone for the future shall write;
And who can resist, when they doubly delight?
And lest we should doubt what he said to be true,
Has begun by inspiring Saphira and You.
Mrs. BINDON'S ANSWER.
WHEN home I returned from the dancing last night,
And elate by your praises attempted to write,
I familiarly called on Apollo for aid,
And told him how many fine things you had said;
He smiled at my folly, and gave me to know,
Your wit, and not mine, by your writing you show;
And then, says the God, still to make you more vain,
He has promised that I shall enlighten your brain,
When he knows in his heart, if he speak but his mind,
That no woman alive can now boast I am kind:
For since Daphne to shun me grew into a laurel,
With the sex I have sworn still to keep up the quarrel.
I thought it all joke, 'till by writing to you,
I have proved his resentment, alas! but too true.
Sir CHARLES'S REPLY.
I WILL not believe that Phoebus did not smile,
Unhappily for you I know his style;
To strains like yours of old his harp he strung,
And while he dictated Orinda sung.
Did beauteous Daphne's scorn of proffered love
Against the sex his indignation move?
It rather made you his peculiar care,
Convinced from thence, ye were as good as fair.
As mortals who from dust received their birth,
Must when they die return to native earth;
So too the laurel, that your brow adorns,
Sprang from the fair, and to the fair returns.
To a LADY, who sent Compliments to a CLERGYMAN upon the Ten of Hearts.
YOUR compliments, dear lady, pray forbear,
Old English services are more sincere;
You send Ten Hearts, the tithe is only mine,
Give me but One, and burn the other Nine.
The GROTTO.
Written by the late Mr. GREEN of the Custom-House, under the Name of PETER
DRAKE, a Fisherman of BRENTFORD. Printed in the Year 1732, but never published.
Scilicet hic possis curvo dignoscere rectum,
Atque inter silvas Academi quaerere verum.
HOR. Our wits Apollo's influence beg,
The Grotto makes them all with egg:
Finding this chalk-stone in my nest,
I strain, and lay among the rest.

ADIEU awhile, forsaken flood,
To ramble in the Delian wood,
And pray the God my well-meant song
May not my subject's merit wrong.
Say, father Thames, whose gentle pace
Gives leave to view what beauties grace
Your flowery banks, if you have seen
The much sung GROTTO of the queen.
Contemplative, forget awhile
Oxonian towers, and Windsor's pile,
And Woolsey's pride (his greatest guilt)
And what great William since has built;
And flowing fast by Richmond scenes,
(Honored retreat of two great queens)
From Sion-house, whose proud survey
Brow-beats your flood, look cross the way,
And view, from highest swell of tide,
The milder scenes of Surry side.
Though yet no palace grace the shore,
To lodge that pair you should adore;
Nor abbeys, great in ruin, rise,
Royal equivalents for vice;
Behold a Grott, in Delphic grove,
The Graces' and the Muses' love.
(O might our laureat study here,
How would he hail his newborn year!)
A temple from vain glories free,
Whose goddess is Philosophy,
Whose sides such licensed idols crown
As superstition would pull down;
The only pilgrimage I know
That men of sense would choose to go:
Which sweet abode, her wisest choice,
Urania chears with heavenly voice,
While all the Virtues gather round,
To see her consecrate the ground.
If thou the God with winged feet,
In council talk of this retreat,
And jealous gods resentment show
At altars raised to men below;
Tell those proud lords of heaven, it is fit
Their house our heroes should admit;
While each exists, as poets sing,
A lazy lewd immortal thing,
They must (or grow in disrepute)
With earth's first commoners recruit.
Needless it is in terms unskilled
To praise whatever Boil shall build;
Needless it is the busts to name
Of men, monopolists of fame;
Four chiefs adorn the modest stone,
For virtue as for learning known;
The thinking sculpture helps to raise
Deep thoughts, the genii of the place:
To the mind's ear, and inward sight,
Their silence speaks, and shade gives light:
While insects from the threshold preach,
And minds disposed to musing teach:
Proud of strong limbs and painted hues,
They perish by the slightest bruise;
Or maladies begun within,
Destroy more slow life's frail machine;
From maggot-youth through change of state
They feel like us the turns of Fate;
Some born to creep have lived to fly,
And change earth-cells for dwellings high;
And some that did their six wings keep,
Before they died been forced to creep.
They politics like ours profess,
The greater prey upon the less:
Some strain on foot huge loads to bring;
Some toil incessant on the wing;
And in their different ways explore
Wise sense of want by future store;
Nor from their vigorous schemes desist
Till death, and then are never mist.
Some frolic, toil, marry, increase,
Are sick and well, have war and peace,
And broke with age, in half a day
Yield to successors, and away.
Let not profane this sacred place,
Hyprocrisy with Janus' face;
Or pomp, mixed state of pride and care;
Court kindness, Falshood's polished ware;
Scandal disguised in Friendship's veil,
That tells, unasked, the injurious tale;
Or art politic, which allows
The jesuit-remedy for vows;
Or priest, perfuming crowned head,
Till in a swoon Truth lies for dead;
Or tawdry critic, who perceives
No grace, which plain proportion gives,
And more than lineaments divine
Admires the gilding of the shrine;
Or that self-haunting spectre Spleen,
In thickest fog the clearest seen;
Or Prophecy, which dreams a lie,
That fools believe and knaves apply;
Or frolic Mirth profanely loud,
And happy only in a crowd;
Or Melancholy's pensive gloom,
Proxy in Contemplation's room.
O Delia, when I touch this string,
To thee my Muse directs her wing.
Unspotted fair, with downcast look
Mind not so much the murmuring brook;
Nor fixed in thought, with footsteps slow
Through cypress allies cherish woe:
I see the soul in pensive fit,
And mopeing like sick linnet sit,
With dewy eye and moulting wing,
Unperch'd, averse to fly or sing;
I see the favorite curls begin
(Disused to toilet discipline,)
To quit their post, lose their smart air,
And grow again like common hair;
And tears, which frequent kerchiefs dry,
Raise a red circle round the eye;
And by this bur about the moon,
Conjecture more ill weather soon.
Love not so much the doleful knell;
And news the boding night-birds tell;
Nor watch the wainscot's hollow blow;
And hens portentous when they crow;
Nor sleepless mind the death-watch beat;
In taper find no winding sheet;
Nor in burnt coal a coffin see,
Though thrown at others meant for thee:
Or when the coruscation gleams,
Find out not first the bloody streams;
Nor in impressed remembrance keep
Grim tap'stry figures wrought in sleep;
Nor rise to see in antique hall.
The moonlight monsters on the wall,
And shadowy specter darkly pass
Trailing their sables over the grass.
Let vice and guilt act how they please
In souls, their conquered provinces;
By heaven's just charter it appears,
Virtue's exempt from quartering fears.
Shall then armed fancies fiercely dressed,
Live at discretion in your breast?
Be wise, and pannic fright disdain,
As notions, meteors of the brain;
And sighs performed, illusive scene!
By magic lanthorn of the spleen.
Come here, from baleful cares released,
With Virtue's ticket, to a feast,
Where decent mirth and wisdom joined
In stewardship, regale the mind.
Call back the Cupids to your eyes,
I see the godlings with surprise
Not knowing home in such a plight,
Fly to and fro, afraid to light. --
Far from my theme, from method far,
Conveyed in Venus' flying car,
I go compelled by feathered steeds,
That scorn the rein when Delia leads.
No dawb of elegiac strain
These holy walls shall ever stain;
As spiders Irish wainscot flee,
Falsehood with them shall disagree:
This floor let not the vulgar tread,
Who worship only what they dread;
Nor bigots who but one way see
Through blinkers of authority;
Nor they who its four saints defame
By making virtue but a name;
Nor abstract wit, (painful regale
To hunt the pig with slippery tail!)
Artists who richly chase their thought,
Gaudy without but hollow wrought,
And beat too thin, and tool'd too much
To bear the proof and standard touch;
Nor fops to guard this silvan ark
With necklace bells in treble bark;
Nor Cynics growl and fiercely paw,
The mastiffs of the moral law.
Come Nymph with rural honors dressed,
Virtue's exterior form confessed,
With charms untarnish'd, innocence
Display, and Eden shall commence:
When thus you come in sober fit,
And wisdom is preferred to wit;
And looks diviner graces tell,
Which don't with giggling muscles dwell;
And beauty like the ray-clipt sun,
With bolder eye we look upon;
Learning shall with obsequious mien
Tell all the wonders she has seen;
Reason her logic armor quit,
And proof to mild persuasion fit;
Religion with free thought dispense,
And cease crusading against sense;
Philosophy and she embrace,
And their first league again take place;
And morals pure, in duty bound,
Nymph-like the sister chiefs surround;
Nature shall smile, and round this cell
The turf to your light pressure swell,
And knowing beauty by her shoe,
Well air its carpet from the dew.
The Oak, while you his umbrage deck
Lets fall his acorns in your neck:
Zephyr his civil kisses gives,
And plays with curls, instead of leaves:
Birds, seeing you, believe it spring,
And during their vacation sing;
And flowers lean forward from their seats
To traffic in exchange of sweets;
And angels bearing wreaths descend,
Preferred as vergers to attend
This fane, whose deity entreats
The Fair to grace its upper seats.
O kindly view our lettered strife,
And guard us through polemic life;
From poison vehicled in praise,
For satire's shots but slightly graze;
We claim your zeal, and find within,
Philosophy and you are kin.
What Virtue is we judge by you,
For actions right are beauteous too:
By tracing the sole female mind,
We best what is true Nature find:
Your vapors bred from fumes declare,
How streams create tempestuous air,
Till gushing tears and hasty rain
Make heaven and you serene again:
Our travels through the starry skies
Were first suggested by your eyes;
We by the interposing fan,
Learn how eclipses first began;
The vast ellipse from Scarbro's home,
Describes how blazing comets roam;
The glowing colors of the cheek
Their origin from Phoebus speak;
Our watch how Luna strays above
Feels like the care of jealous love;
And all things we in science know
From your known love for riddles flow.
Father! forgive, thus far I stray,
Drawn by attraction from my way.
Mark next with awe, the foundress well
Who on these banks delights to dwell;
You on the terrass see her plain,
Move like Diana with her train.
If you then fairly speak your mind,
In wedlock since with Isis joined,
You Will own, you never yet did see.
At least in such a high degree,
Greatness delighted to undress;
Science a sceptered hand caress;
A queen the friends of freedom prize;
A woman wise men canonize.
The BE, the ANT, and the SPARROW: A FABLE. Addressed to PHEBE and KITTY C. at
Boarding School.
MY dears, it is said in days of old,
That beasts could talk, and birds could scold.
But now it seems the human race
Alone engross the speaker's place.
Yet lately, if report be true,
(And much the tale relates to you)
There met a Sparrow, Ant, and Be,
Which reasoned and conversed as we.
Who reads my page will doubtless grant
That Phe's the wise industrious Ant.
And all with half an eye may see
That Kitty is the busy Be.
Here then are two -- but where is the third?
Go search your school, you will find the Bird.
Your school! I ask your pardon fair,
I Am sure you will find no Sparrow there.
Now to my tale -- One summer's morn
A Be ranged over the verdant lawn;
Studious to husband every hour,
And make the most of every flower.
Nimble from stalk to stalk she flies,
And loads with yellow wax her thighs;
With which the artist builds her comb,
And keeps all tight and warm at home:
Or from the cowslip's golden bells
Sucks honey to enrich her cells:
Or every tempting rose pursues,
Or sips the lilly's fragrant dews;
Yet never robs the shining bloom,
Or of its beauty or perfume.
Thus she discharged in every way
The various duties of the day.
It chanced a frugal Ant was near,
Whose brow was wrinkled over by care:
A great oeconomist was she,
Nor less laborious than the Be;
By pensive parents often taught
What ills arise from want of thought;
That poverty on sloth depends,
On poverty the loss of friends.
Hence every day the Ant is found
With anxious steps to tread the ground;
With curious search to trace the grain,
And drag the heavy load with pain.
The active Be with pleasure saw
The Ant fulfill her parents' law.
Ah! sister-labourer, says she,
How very fortunate are we!
Who taught in infancy to know
The comforts, which from labor flow,
Are independent of the great,
Nor know the wants of pride and state.
Why is our food so very sweet?
Because we earn, before we eat.
Why are our wants so very few?
Because we nature's calls pursue.
Whence our complacency of mind?
Because we act our parts assigned.
Have we incessant tasks to do?
Is not all nature busy too!
Does not the sun with constant pace
Persist to run his annual race?
Do not the stars, which shine so bright,
Renew their courses every night?
Does not the ox obedient bow
His patient neck, and draw the plough?
Or when did ever the generous steed
Withhold his labor or his speed?
If you all nature's system scan,
The only idle thing is man!
A wanton Sparrow longed to hear
Their sage discourse, and strait drew near.
The bird was talkative and loud,
And very pert and very proud;
As worthless and as vain a thing,
Perhaps as ever wore a wing.
She found, as on a spray she sat,
The little friends were deep in chat;
That virtue was their favorite theme,
And toil and probity their scheme:
Such talk was hateful to her breast,
She thought them arrant prudes at best.
When to display her naughty mind,
Hunger with cruelty combined;
She viewed the Ant with savage eyes,
And hopt and hopt to snatch her prize.
The Be, who watched her opening bill,
And guessed her fell design to kill;
Asked her from what her anger rose,
And why me treated Ants as foes?
The Sparrow her reply began,
And thus the conversation ran.
Whenever I Am disposed to dine,
I think the whole creation mine;
That I Am a bird of high degree,
And every insect made for me.
Hence often I search the emmet brood,
For emmets are delicious food:
And often in wantonness and play,
I slay ten thousand in a day.
For truth it is, without disguise,
That I love mischief as my eyes.
Oh! fie, the honest Be replied,
I fear you make base man your guide;
Of every creature sure the worst,
Though in creation's scale the first!
Ungrateful man! it is strange he thrives,
Who burns the Bees, to rob their hives!
I hate his vile administration,
And so do all the emmet nation.
What fatal foes to birds are men
Quite to the Eagle from the Wren!
Oh! do not men's example take,
Who mischief do for mischief's sake;
But spare the Ant -- her worth demands
Esteem and friendship at your hands.
A mind with every virtue blessed,
Must raise compassion in your breast.
Virtue! rejoined the sneering bird,
Where did you learn that gothic word?
Since I was hatched, I never heard,
That virtue was at all revered.
But say it was the ancients' claim,
Yet moderns disavow the name;
Unless, my dear, you read romances,
I cannot reconcile your fancies.
Virtue in fairy tales is seen
To play the goddess or the queen;
But what is a queen without the power,
Or beauty, child, without a dower?
Yet this is all that virtue brags,
At best it is only worth in rags.
Such whims my very heart derides,
Indeed you make me burst my sides.
Trust me Miss Be -- to speak the truth,
I Have copyed men from earliest youth;
The same our taste, the same our school,
Passion and appetite our rule.
And call me bird, or call me sinner,
I Will never forego my sport or dinner.
A prowling cat the miscreant spies,
And wide expands her amber eyes:
Near and more near Grimalkin draws,
She wags her tail, protends her paws;
Then springing on her thoughtless prey,
She bore the vicious bird away.
Thus in her cruelty and pride,
The wicked wanton Sparrow died.
ODE on a STORM.
WITH gallant pomp, and beauteous pride
The floating pile in harbor rode,
Proud of her freight, the swelling tide
Reluctant left the vessel's side,
And raised it as she flowed.
The waves with Eastern breezes curled,
Had silvered half the liquid plain;
The anchors weighed, the sails unfurled,
Serenely moved the wooden world,
And stretched along the main.
The scaly natives of the deep
Press to admire the vast machine,
In sporting gambols round it leap,
Or swimming low, due distance keep,
In homage to their queen.
Thus, as life glides in gentle gale
Pretended friendship waits on power,
But early quits the borrowed veil
When adverse Fortune shifts the sail,
And hastens to devour.
In vain we fly approaching ill,
Danger can multiply its form;
Exposed we fly like Jonas still,
And heaven, when it is heaven's will,
O'ertakes us in a storm.
The distant surges foamy white
Foretell the furious blast;
Dreadful, though distant was the sight,
Confed'rate winds and waves unite,
And menace every mast.
Winds whistling through the shrouds, proclaim
A fatal harvest on the deck,
Quick in pursuit as active flame,
Too soon the rolling ruin came,
And ratified the wreck.
Thus, Adam smiled with newborn grace,
Life's flame inspired by heavenly breath;
Thus the same breath sweeps off his race,
Disorders Nature's beauteous face,
And spreads disease and death.
Stripped of her pride the vessel rolls,
And as by sympathy she knew
The secret anguish of our souls,
With inward deeper groans condoles
The danger of her crew.
Now what avails it to be brave,
On liquid precipices hung?
Suspended on a breaking wave,
Beneath us yawn'd a seagreen grave,
And silenced every tongue.
The faithless flood forsook her keel,
And downward launched the laboring hull,
Stunned she forgot awhile to reel,
And felt almost, or seemed to feel
A momentary lull.
Thus in the jaws of death we lay,
Nor light, nor comfort found us there,
Lost in the gulf and floods of spray
No sun to cheer us, nor a ray
Of hope, but all despair.
The nearer shore, the more despair,
While certain ruin waits on land;
Should we pursue our wishes there,
Soon we recant the fatal prayer,
And strive to shun the strand.
At length, the Being whose behest
Reduced this Chaos into form,
His goodness and his power expressed,
He spoke -- and, as a God, suppressed
Our troubles, and the storm.
ISAIAH XXXIV.
COME near, ye nations! and give ear, O earth!
Ye distant isles, and continents remote,
Wherever dispersed beneath the vast expanse
Of heaven's high roof, attend! Attend, and hear
^our doom tremendous ratified above,
^^d retribution of enormous guilt,
Which calling loud for justice and revenge,
Flew swift as light up to the throne of God,
And pulled down dire destruction on the earth.
The mighty God, with all his thunder armed,
Will cast abroad the terrors of his wrath;
And shower down vengeance on the guilty land.
The Lord of hosts amidst a night of clouds,
And with the majesty of darkness crowned,
Thundered aloft; and from the inmost heaven
Hurled down impetuous fury swift as thought
Through the azure void, wide-stretch'd from pole to pole,
To ravage all the boundless universe.
As when a blustering wind rolls from the north,
And shakes all autumn with the driving blast;
So shall the fury of the Omnipotent
Destroy the nations, and confound their arms,
Swords, shields, and spears, and all the powers of war;
With eager speed rush over the embattled ranks,
And through the thick battalions urge its way.
JEHOVAH'S arm will shake the vast unequal,
And wrap the whole circumference around
In wasting desolation, ruin wide.
Destructive slaughter, ghastly to behold,
Dire specimen of wrath omnipotent,
Shall march tremendous over the burdened earth,
Oppressed, and conscious of unusual weight,
Shrinking beneath the heavy load of death.
The purple piles, and mountains of the slain,
Expiring wretches, pouring out their souls
With bursts of groans, shall fill the laboring world.
Each slaughtered corpse shall breath a pestilence;
And wide around diffuse the scents of death.
The eternal hills shall float in seas of blood;
And mountains vanish in the crimson tide.
Nature's huge volume shall be folded up
Like a vast scroll; and all the glittering orbs
Drop from the heavens like autumnal leaves,
Or the ripe fig, when sultry Sirius reigns;
While peals of thunder rattling in the skies,
Shall roll incessant over the astonished world.
Death and destruction threatening all below,
And in substantial darkness high enthroned,
Shall draw the curtains of eternal night,
And spread confusion hideous over the earth,
As when the embryo world ere time began,
In one rude heap, one undigested mass
Of jarring discord, and disorder lay.
The sun, amazed to see the wild obscure,
No more with radiant light shall gild the skies;
No more diffusing his all genial beams
On the high mountains spread the shining morn;
But downwards flaming through the vast immense,
Shall hide his glory in eternal night,
Thus in loud thunder speaks the Almighty Sire --
In copious slaughter will I take my sword,
And, Idumea! thou shall swim in blood.
The Lord shall hasten from the lofty skies;
Destruction on his aweful footsteps waits;
Death stalks before, ruin on every side
Proclaims the terror of an angry God.
The ravenous sword, pampered with reeking gore,
Drunk with the blood of half the rebel world,
Shall there be sheathed in Israel's stubborn foes.
Bozrah with human sacrifice shall smoke,
And Idumea, thoughtless of her fate,
Shall feel the smart of heaven's avenging rod.
The great, the small, the oppressor, and the oppressed,
Shall join promiscuous in the common heap;
And one vast ruin shall involve them all.
For Israel's God is girt with burning rage,
And vows a last revenge to Zion's foes.
The silver streams, that shine along the plain,
And chide their banks, and tinkle as they run,
Shall stop, and stagnate to a sable pool;
And, black with mud, unconscious of a tide,
No more shall charm the sense, or lull the soul,
Or in soft murmurs die upon the ear:
But in crude streams and deadly stench exhale,
And with contagious vapors load the sky.
Rapacious flames, in pyramids of fire,
Shall burn unquenchable; and sulfurous smoke,
Advancing over the horizontal plain,
In dusky wreaths roll ever to the skies.
The inhospitable land, left desolate,
Unfruitful, but in every noxious weed,
Shall be a lonely desert, waste and wild;
Within whose silent confines none shall dwell;
Nor ever more be heard the harmonious voice
Of warbling birds, that heretofore were wont
In vocal choir to animate the grove,
And from the shady covert of the trees
Dispense sweet music to the listening vale:
But hooting owls, that spread their lazy wings
Over the dark gloom, and with their boding screams
Double the native horrors of the night;
These with the cormorants shall dwell therein,
Securely in the upper lintels lodge,
And in the windows direful dirges sing.
God shall extend, and bare his thundering arm;
And with confusion circumscribe the land.
Where are the nobles, and the mighty chiefs,
That in soft ease their silken moments waste;
To whom their prostrate vassals throng in crowds,
^triving who first shall aweful homage pay,
And adoration! Them shall they invoke;
But all in vain; their names shall be no more,
But in their stead more worthy savages,
With rapine uncontrouble shall reign;
And nobler brutes shall canton out the land,
Those regal domes, and towering palaces,
That high in clouds exalt their impious heads,
Reflecting through the liquid firmament
Home to the distant ken a dazzling blaze,
Thorns shall surround, and nettles grow within:
Ivy shall creep along the painted walls:
The matted grass overspread the polished floor;
And brambles vile entwine the empty throne.
While beasts from different climes, joyous to find
A place of rest to man alone denied,
Shall take possession of the gilded domes:
The shaggy satyrs, that old forests haunt,
The ostrich and his mate, and dragons huge
Shall sport, and revel in the dreary waste.
There the hoarse screech-owls, that in dead of night
Upon the chimney tops perch ominous,
While songs obscene the silent hours disturb,
Shall in loud shrieks their sad presages tell,
Shall unmolested solitude enjoy,
And desolation make more desolate.
Ravens, and vulturs, scenting from afar
The universal slaughter, shall come forth
From the high mountain, and the humble vale,
Croaking in hideous concert, as they fly,
Dark'ning the heavens with their ghastly train;
And glut their hungry jaws with human prey,
Not one of these shall fail; none want her mate;
But shall for ever, such the Lord's decree,
In Edom's ruins wanton undisturbed.
This is the fate, ordained for Zion's foes.
ISAIAH XXXV.
WHEN Idumea, and the nations round,
The inveterate foes of Israel, and of God,
Lie vanquished, dormant on the dreary waste
Of far extended ruin; and involved
In hideous woe, and desolation wide,
Then shall Judea lift her cheerful head;
Put forth the leaves of glad prosperity;
And, after all the gloomy scene of grief
And sad affliction, flourish and revive
In all the bright serenity of peace.
As the gay rose, when winter storms are past,
Warmed with the influence of a kinder sun,
Comes from the bud with a vermilion blush,
Cheering the sight, and scattering all around
A balmy odor, that perfumes the skies.
She shall rejoice with joy unspeakable,
And, fraught with richest blessings from above,
Spring forth in all the pride of Lebanon,
Whose lofty cedars, wondrous to behold,
In bodies huge, and to the skies erect
Stand eminent, branch over branch out-spread
In reg'lar distances, and verdant shades,
Emblem of happy state. Nor shall the hills
Of fragrant Carmel, rich in fruitful soil;
Nor Sharon's flowery plain in all its bloom,
Arrayed in Nature's goodliest attire,
And breathing fresh a gale of heavenly sweets,
Spring forth in greater glory. For the Lord
His goodness will declare, that knows no bounds;
And all the people shall behold his might,
And see the wonders of omnipotence.
Strengthen the languid nerves, ye seers! and bid
The trembling hand be strong. Call into life
The dissipated spirits; and confirm
The feeble knees; the unactive joints support;
And bid the lazy blood flow briskly on,
And circulate with joy through every vein.
Comfort the oppressed; and smooth the ruffled mind;
Say to the afflicted heart, devoid of hope,
Behold! the Almighty rushes from the skies,
Even Israel's God from his refulgent throne
Of glory comes, but not with radiant blaze
Of light, even light invisible, as when
To Moses on Mount Horeb he appeared,
And sent his faithful servant to redeem
Ungrateful Israel from Egyptian bonds;
Nor with the music of a still, soft voice,
As when h' informed the prophet of his will;
But in a black and dreadful hemisphere
Of darkness, armed with flaming thunderbolts,
And flashes of red lightning to increase
The woe, and make even darkness visible.
The hills shall tremble at his dire approach;
And fearful mountains, pil'd up to the clouds,
Fall down precipitant with rapid force,
And spread a plain immense. For God will come
Full fraught with vengeance to consume your foes;
You in his bounteous mercy to protect.
Then shall the eyes long closed in blackest night.
To whom no gladsome dawn of light appeared,
But comfortless, impenetrable shade,
Shake off the film of darkness, and behold
The long-expected day. New scenes of joy.
Shall then appear, and various prospects rise
To cheer the newborn sight. The deafen'd ear,
On whose dull nerves sad-moping Silence dwelt,
And locked from music's note, or voice of man,
Shall open glad its labyrinths of sound,
Again the stringed instrument shall feel,
And the sweet words of social converse hear.
The lame, infirm, creeping with slow advance,
Dragging with pain reluctant feet along,
And scarcely by the friendly crutch sustained,
Shall throw the unserviceable prop aside,
And stand erect, exulting like a roe
Upon Mount Tabor, frisking nimbly round
On the soft verdant turf, with wanton tread
Skimming along the surface of the plain,
Or lightly bounding over the rising ground.
The dumb for melancholy silence framed,
Cut off from friendly converse with mankind,
Striving in vain the sad defect to mend
With gabb'ring noise of broken syllables
Confused, shall talk in dialects complete;
And tongues, that knew not how to speak, shall sing.
New scenes of joy shall gladden every face;
And universal peace overspread the land.
The glowing ground, gaping with burning thirst,
Shall greedily suck in the humid tide,
Pouring from caverns of the craggy hills
In limpid streams, still warbling, as they fall,
Melodious murmurs down the ample glade,
And crystal springs refresh the thirsty land.
Where heretofore the curling serpent lay
In many a wily labyrinth self-roll'd,
Or swept deceitful over the dusty plain
In horrid spires, and many a towering maze,
The trembling reed shall wave his fringed top;
And the tall rush in slender spires up-rise.
The swampy marsh shall its broad flag produce,
With bending willow, sport of every wind;
And vegetable earth new bloom display
Delightful, with prolific verdure clothed,
A wasteful desert now, and barren soil.
A way shall be prepared, a path direct,
Marked out by line with an unerring hand,
Even a straight path, which God himself shall make;
It shall be called, THE WAY OF HOLINESS;
A way to sacred footsteps only known,
Where the unhallowed shall no entrance find,
Nor impious feet profane the sacred ground.
God shall attend the motions of the just,
Watch over their steps, and guide them as they go;
And none shall wander from the obvious path,
For who can err, when God directs the way?
The rampant lion shall not wander there,
Nor fiery tiger, roaring for his prey;
Nor prowling wolf, that howls along the plain,
With the keen pangs of raging hunger stung;
Nor surly bear in Nebo's mountains bred,
Or Carmel's forest ranging merciless;
Such as came furious from the neighboring groves
Of ancient Bethel with voracious speed,
Grinning destruction as they roam'd along,
And slew the mockers of the good old seer.
But free, and unmolested shall they walk
Whom heaven protects, and God vouchsafes to guide.
The ransomed captives, weary of the yoke,
The heavy yoke of long oppressive thrall,
Shall cheerfully return to happier climes,
In melody break forth the gladden'd heart,
That speaks deliverance, and the voice of joy.
Judah shall witness to the grateful song;
And faithful Zion echo back the sound.
No signs of woe shall hang upon the cheek,
No shuddering fear, nor horrible despair;
But grief with all its melancholy train
Of huge dismay shall fly from every face.
Gladness shall crown the head, peace fill the heart,
And endless rapture dwell on every brow.
WOODSTOCK PARK. A POEM.
By WILLIAM HARRISON. 1706.
Habitarunt Di quoque silvas. VIRG.
KIND heaven at length, successfully implored,
To Britain's arms her hero had restored:
And now our fears removed, with loud applause
Jointly we crowned his conduct, and his cause.
Transporting pleasure raised each drooping tongue,
The peasants shouted, and the poets sung.
The poets sung, though Addison alone
Adorns thy laurels, and maintains his own;
In him alone, great MARLBOROUGH, is seen,
Thy graceful motion, and thy godlike mien:
Each action he exalts with rage divine,
And the full Danube flows in every line.
But we in vain to that sublime aspire;
So heatless glowworms emulate the fire,
Shine without warmth: another song prepare,
My Muse; the country is the Muse's care;
Thither thy much-loved MARLBOROUGH pursue
With eager verse, and keep thy theme in view.
But oh! what joyful numbers can disclose
The various raptures his approach bestows;
How vales resound, how crowds collected share
The radiant glories of the matchless pair?
The generous youths, within whose bosoms glow
Some secret unripe longings for a foe,
Surveying here the favorite of Fame,
Conceive new hopes, and nurse the growing flame:
While softer maids confess a pleasing pain,
And sighing wish he had been born a swain.
So when the powers appeased bade discord cease,
And Greece obtained from jarring gods a peace,
The god of war, and beauteous queen of love,
To Cyprian shades their peaceful chariot drove:
Shepherds and nymphs attending formed the train,
And mirth unusual revell'd on the plain.
And should the gods once more their heaven forego,
To range on earth, and bless mankind below,
Over all the globe no region would be found,
With nobler soil, or brighter beauty crowned.
Phoebus for this would change his Delphic grove,
Juno her Samos, and his Ida Jove.
Olympic games no longer should delight,
But neighboring plains afford a nobler sight.
Where England's great Aeneas standing by,
Impatient youths on winged coursers fly:
Urged by his presence they outstrip the wind
Involved in smoke, and leave the Muse behind.
But see! once more returns the rival train,
And now they stretch, now bending loose the rein,
And fears and hopes beat high in every vein,
'Till one (long since successful in the field)
Exerts that strength he first with art concealed;
Then swift as lightning darted through the skies,
Springs forward to the goal, and bears away the prize.
By arts like these all other palms are won,
They end with glory, who with caution run.
We neither write, nor act, what long can last,
When the first heat sees all our vigor past;
But, jaded, both their short-lived mettle lose,
The furious statesman, and the fiery Muse.
The contest ended, night with gloomy face
O'erspreads the heaven; and now with equal pace
The victor, and the vanquished, quit the place:
Sleep's friendly office is to all the same,
His conquest he forgets, and they their shame.
Next morning, ere the sun with sickly ray
Over doubtful shades maintains the dawning day,
The sprightly horn proclaims some danger near,
And hounds, harmonious to the sportsman's ear,
With deep-mouthed notes rouse up the trembling deer.
Startled he leaps aside, and listening round,
This way and that explores the hostile sound,
Armed for that fight, which he declines with shame,
Too fond of life, too negligent of fame;
For Nature, to display her various art,
Had fortified his head, but not his heart:
Those spears, which useless on his front appeared,
On any else had been adored and feared.
But honors disproportioned are a load,
Grandeur a specious curse, when ill bestowed.
Thus void of hope, and panting with surprise,
In vain he would combat, and as vainly flies.
Of paths mysterious whether to pursue
The scented track informs the laboring crew:
With speed redoubled, they the hint embrace,
Whilst animating music warms the chase:
Flushed are their hopes, and with one general cry
They echo through the woods, and sound their conquest nigh.
Not so the prey; he now for safety bends
From enemies professed, to faithless friends,
Who to the wretched own no shelter due,
But fly more swiftly than his foes pursue.
This last disgrace with indignation fires
His drooping soul, and generous rage inspires;
By all forsaken, he resolves at length
To try the poor remains of wasted strength;
With looks and mien majestic stands at bay,
And whets his horns for the approaching fray:
Too late alas! for, the first charge begun,
Soon he repents what cowardice had done,
Owns the mistake of his o'er-hasty flight,
And aukwardly maintains a languid fight;
Here, and there, aiming a successless blow,
And only seems to nod upon the foe.
So coward princes, who at war's alarm
Start from their greatness, and themselves disarm,
With recollected forces strive in vain
Their empire, or their honor, to regain,
And turn to rally on some distant plain,
Whilst the fierce conqu'ror bravely urges on,
Improves the advantage, and ascends the throne.
Forgive, great Denham, that in abject verse,
What richly thou adorn'st, I thus rehearse.
Thy noble chase all others does exceed,
In artful fury, and well-tempered speed.
We read with pleasure, imitate with pain,
Where faney fires, and judgment holds the rein.
Goddess, proceed; and as to relics found
Altars we raise, and consecrate the ground,
Pay thou thy homage to an aged seat,
Small in itself, but in its owner great;
Where Chaucer (sacred name!) whole years employed,
Coy Nature courted, and at length enjoyed;
Moved at his suit, the naked goddess came,
Revealed her charms, and recompensed his flame.
Rome's pious king with like success, retired,
And taught his people, what his Nymph inspired.
Hence flow descriptions regularly fine,
And beauties such as never can decline:
Each lively image makes the reader start,
And poetry invades the painter's art.
This Dryden saw, and with his wonted fate
(Rich in himself) endeavored to translate;
Took wondrous pains to do the author wrong,
And set to modern tune his ancient song.
Cadence, and sound, which we so prize, and use,
Ill suit the majesty of Chaucer's Muse;
His language only can his thoughts express,
Old honest Clytus scorns the Persian dress.
Inimitable bard!
In raptures loud I would thy praises tell,
And on the inspiring theme for ever dwell,
Did not the maid, whose wondrous beauty seen,
Inflamed great Henry, and incensed his queen,
With pleasing sorrow move me to survey
A neighboring structure, aweful in decay,
For ever sacred, and in ruin blessed,
Which heretofore contained that lovely guest.
Admiring strangers, who attentive come
To learn the tale of this romantic dome,
By faithful monuments instructed, view
(Though time should spare) what civil rage can do.
Where landskips once, in rich apartments high,
Through various prospects led the wandering eye:
Where painted rivers flowed through flowery meads,
And hoary mountains reared their aweful heads:
Or where by hands of curious virgins wrought,
In rich array embroidered heroes fought:
Now hemloek thrives, and weeds of powerful charms
Over ragged walls extend their baleful arms.
Monsters obscene their poisonous roots invade,
And bloated pant beneath the gloomy shade.
Thus noblest buildings are with ease effaced,
And what is well wrote alone, will always last.
Even Vanbrugh's frame, that does so brightly shine
In rules exact, and greatness of design,
Would fall a victim to devouring age,
Had not that hand, which built, adorned the stage.
Wit so refined without the poet's pain,
Such artful scenes in such a flowing vein,
Over latest aeras deathless will prevail,
When Doric and Corinthian orders fail;
When each proud pyramid its height foregoes,
And sinks beneath the base on which it rose.
Ye British fair, whose names but mentioned, give
Worth to the tale, and make the poem live;
Vouchsafe to hear, whilst briefly I relate
Great Henry's flame, and Rosamonda's fate.
Pierced to the soul by her resistless eyes,
Lo! at her feet the sceptered vassal lies,
Now big with hopes, now tortured with despair,
Nor toils, nor pleasures, can divert his care.
Her voice, her look, ten thousand wounds impart,
And fix the pleasing image in his heart;
Such as (if Fame has drawn the picture true,
Her native luster sung, nor added new)
Might tempt the thund'rer from his blessed abode,
To court that beauty which himself bestowed.
Features so wrought not Venus' self displays,
When dressed by youthful pens in vocal lays;
Not equal charms in all the Graces join,
And only Sunderland is more divine.
Thus fatally adorned, the hapless fair
Receives his suit, and listens to his prayer;
Fond of her ruin, pleased to be undone,
She reaps the conquest that her eyes had won.
Though tongues obscure, at humble distance placed,
May censure joys which they despair to taste;
Whenever the attack is made, all jointly own
What bright temptations sparkle from a throne:
Could love no entrance find, ambition can,
They clasp the monarch who despise the man;
Beyond his boldest wish the hero blessed,
Riots in joys too great to be expressed;
And now, with caution, does the means pursue,
As they are great, to make them lasting too.
'Mid shades obscure, remote from vulgar eye,
An artful edifice is reared on high,
Through which inextricable windings run,
Lost in themselves, and end where they begun.
Maeander thus, as ancient stories feign,
In curling channels wandered over the plain;
Often by himself o'ertook, himself surveyed,
And backward turning, to his fountain strayed.
Nor much unlike to these are mazes found,
By loit'ring hinds imprinted on the ground;
Who, when released by some distinguished day,
Lead ruddy damsels forth to rural play;
And on the flowery vale, or mountain's brow,
The yielding glebe in wanton furrows plow.
Ye Sylvan Nymphs, who with a pleasing pride,
Over shady groves, and secret vows preside,
On this mysterious pile with care attend,
Protect the mistress, and the prince befriend:
With both conspire to blind the wary dame,
And screen the important tale, from babbling Fame.
Ah faithless guards! in vain with odorous smoke
We feast your altars, and your aid invoke;
When nuptial debt's are now no longer paid,
More ways than one the rover is betrayed:
Affected passion does no more suffice,
And awkward kindness proves a weak disguise.
Woman, by nature armed against deceit,
With indignation smiles upon the cheat;
Looks down with scorn, and only burns to know
The uncertain author of her certain woe.
As a fierce lioness of Lybian race,
Struck by the hunter's hand, with furious pace
Strides over the sands, and red with recent gore
Yells out her pain, and makes the forest roar:
^o raves the queen incensed; and loudly tells
The restless grief that in her bosom dwells,
For her loved lord from her embraces fled,
Her slighted beauty, and her widowed bed.
What dire effects her kindled fury wrought,
Whether by pointed steel, or poisoned draught,
The unguarded rival fell, forbear to ask,
The unwilling Muse declines the mournful task,
Recoils with anguish, wounded to the soul,
Feels every stab, and drinks the envenomed bowl.
Thee, beauteous fair, Love made a prisoner here,
But great Eliza's doom was more severe;
By hate implacable to shades confined,
Where still the native grandeur of her mind
Clear and unsullied shone, with radiant grace
Gilding the dusky horrors of the place.
No nobler gifts can heaven itself pour down,
Than to deserve, and to despise a crown.
In some dark room, for pompous sorrow made,
Methinks I see the royal virgin laid;
With anxious thoughts employed on former times,
Their various fate, their glory, and their crimes;
The ill-boding place a just concernment gives,
Since Elinora in Maria lives.
Maria -- but forgotten be her name,
In long oblivion lost, o'erlook'd by fame.
Do thou, O Albion, from remembrance chase
Thy persecuted sons, thy martyred race:
And freed at length by ANNA'S milder ray,
From furious zeal, and arbitrary sway,
Enjoy the present, or the future scene,
With promised blessings fraught, without one cloud serene.
Stop, goddess, stop, recall thy daring flight,
I cannot, must not tempt the wondrous height.
Themes so exalted, with proportioned wing,
Let Addison, let Garth, let Congreve sing;
Whilst listening nations crowd the vocal lyre,
Foretaste their bliss, and languish with desire.
To thee thy song, thy province is assigned,
And what should foremost stand, is yet behind.
Silenced be all antiquity could boast,
And let old Woodstock in the new be lost.
No more her Edwards, or her Henrys please;
Their spoils of war, or monuments of peace:
By CHURCHILL'S hand so largely is outdone,
What either prince has built, and both have won.
With admiration struck, we gaze around,
The fancy entertain, the sense confound:
And whilst our eyes over the foundation roam,
Presage the wonders of the finished dome.
Thus did our hero's early dawn display
The auspicious beams of his advancing day.
We, who in humble cells, and learned retreat,
Are strangers to the splendour of the great,
On barren cliffs of speculation thrown,
Of all besides unknowing, and unknown,
Pronounce our fabrics just in every part,
And scorn the poor attempts of modern art;
(Proud of his cottage so exults the swain,
Who loves the forest, and admires the plain,)
'Till here convinced, unwillingly we find
Our Wickhams, and our Wainfleets, left behind;
Far as the molehill by the mountain's brow,
Or shrubs by cedars, in whose shade they grow.
Rise, glorious pile, the princess bids thee rise,
And claim thy title to her kindred skies:
Where she presides all must be nobly great,
All must be regular, and all complete;
No other hand the mighty work requires,
Art may inform, but she alone inspires.
When laboring Tyrians, with united toil,
Advanced their Carthage on the destined soil,
So sat their queen, and looked auspicious down,
Herself the Genius of the rising town.
Thrice happy he, to whom the task shall fall,
To grace with shining images the wall;
And in bold colors silently rehearse,
What soars above the reach of humble verse.
No famed exploits, from musty annals brought,
Shall share his art, or furnish out the draught;
No foreign heroes in triumphant cars,
No Latian victories, nor Grecian wars:
Germania's fruitful fields alone afford
Work for the pencil, harvest for the sword.
Her well-drawn fights with horror shall surprise,
And clouds of smoke upon the canvas rise;
Rivers distained shall reeking currents boast,
And wind in crimson waves the plunging host;
Each mortal pang be seen, each dying throe,
And Death look grim in all the pomp of woe.
But far, oh far distinguished from the rest!
By youth, by beauty, and a waving crest,
Like young Patroclus, Dormer shall be slain,
And great Achilles' soul be shocked again.
Successful Kneller, whose improving air
Adds light to light, and graces to the fair,
Thus may complete the glories of his age,
And in one piece the whole soft sex engage;
Who shall in crowds the lovely dead surround,
And weep rich gems upon his streaming wound;
By sad remembrance urged to fruitless moan,
And lost in Dormer's charms, neglect their own.
Yet artist stop not here, but boldly dare
Next to design, what next deserves thy care.
'Midst British squadrons awefully serene,
On rising ground let MARLBOROUGH be seen,
With his drawn faulchion lightning on the foe,
Prepared to strike the great decisive blow;
While phlegmatic allies his vengeance stay,
By absence these, and by their presence they.
Ill-fated Gauls to 'scape his thunder so,
And by a short reprieve inhance their woe!
When they in arms again the combat try,
Again their troops in wild disorder fly,
No usual ties of clemency shall bind,
No temper shall assuage the victor's mind:
But heaps on heaps atone the fatal wrong,
And rage unbounded drive the storm along.
Legions of foes resistless shall advance
Over prostrate mounds, to shock the power of France,
Their loud demands to proud Lutetia tell,
And rouse the inglorious tyrant from his cell.
Then provinces released shall break their chain,
Forego their bondage, and forget their pain.
Iberia, with extended arms, shall run
To liberty, to life, to Austria's son;
And by mild councils generously swayed,
Own thy example, ANNA! and thy aid;
Whole kingdoms shall be blessed, all Europe free,
And lift her hands unmanacled to Thee.
A Fit of the SPLEEN. In Imitation of SHAKESPHEAR.
By Dr. IBBOT.
FAREWELL, vain world! and thou its vainest part,
O lovely woman! framed for man's destruction!
Beauty, like nightshade to the teeming wife,
If seen, gives wishes restless, endless longings;
If tasted, death. Too hard decree of fate,
That life must be a burden, or must end!
Farewell, vain world! dwelling of ills and fears,
Full of fond hopes, false joys, and sad repentance;
For though sometimes warm Fancy lights a fire,
That mounting upwards darts its pointed head
Up, through the unopposing air, to heaven,
Yet then comes Thought, and cold Consideration,
Lame Afterthought with endless scruples fraught,
Benumbed with Fears, to damp the goodly blaze.
Farewell, vain world! -- Yet, ere I die, I Will find
Contentment's seat, unknown to guilt or sorrow;
Haste then, for nimble Death pursues me close,
Methinks I hear his steps, though trod in air;
My fluttering soul seems like a bird entrapp'd,
That beats his wings against the prison walls,
And fain would be at liberty again;
And often the death-watch with ill-boding beats
Has warned me that my time would soon expire,
And that life's thread, never to be wound up more,
Would by the spring of fate be quickly drawn
To its full stretch -- Haste then, and let me find
A shelter, that may shut out noise and light,
Save one dim taper, whose neglected snuff,
Grown higher than the flame, shall with its bulk
Almost extinguish it; no noise be there,
But that of water, ever friend to thought.
Hail, gloomy shade! the abode of modesty
Void of deceit; no glittering objects here
Dazzle the eyes; and thou, delightful Silence,
Silence, the great Divinity's discourse!
The angels' language, and the hermits' pride,
The help of waking wisdom, and its food;
In thee philosophers have justly placed
The sovereign good; free from the broken vows,
The calumnies, reproaches, and the lies
Of which the noisy babbling world complains.
These four lines are said to be added by Mr. POPE.
So the struck deer, with some deep wound oppressed,
Lies down to die, the arrow in his breast;
There hid in shades, and wasting day by day,
Inly he bleeds, and pants his life away.
HYMN to Miss LAURENCE, in the PUMP-ROOM. BATH, 1753.
NAIAD of this healthful stream,
Fair LAURENTiA, if I deem
Rightly of thy office here,
If the theme may please thine ear,
Listen gracious to my lays,
While the springs of HEALTH I praise:
Nor will less thy glory shine,
If their praise I blend with thine.
For of their renown of old
Stories many FAME has told:
Ancient bards their name have sung
Heroes, kings, and gods among,
And with various titles graced,
While their fountainhead they traced.
Whether BLADUD.] See Mr. Selden's notes on the third song of Drayton's
POLYOLBION, where, in an ancient fragment of rhimes, are enumerated all the
ingredients which BLADUD employed in making the baths.
BLADUD, king of yore,
Skilled in philosophic lore,
Mingling various kinds of earth,
Metallic, gave the waters birth,
KING'S-BATH named, beneath thy feet
Boiling ay with mineral heat:
Or, whether from his car on high
Phoebus saw with amorous eye
The fountain-nymph, with humid train,
Light of foot, trip over the plain;
Strait the god, inflamed with love,
Swift descending from above,
All in fervors bright arrayed
Pressed her bosom; and the maid
Gladly to his warm embrace
Yielded: whence the happy place,
Where the nymph he wooed and won,
Was called the WATERS OF THE SUN.] Aquae solis. Bath. Sol in hac urbe templum
habuit, et nomen quod exhibet Antoninus, loco dedit. Antonini Iter XIV.
published by Gale.
WATERS OF THE SUN.
FAME that title widely spread;
Yet, ere Roman legions fled
The wrath of sturdy British knights,
Pallas claimed religious rights;
British PALLADOUR.] Pallas etiam, test Solino, fontibus hisce fuit praesul,
suamque habuit aedem, ubi et perpetuos ignes. Ab ea, appellabatur Britannis,
Caer PALLADOUR: Urbs aquae Palladiae. Ibid.
PALLADOUR then rose,
From the goddess named, who chose
Near the favorite streams to dwell,
Guardian of the sacred well.
But long since HYGEIA.] The goddess of health.
HYGEIA fair
Under her peculiar care
Received the springs; for well she knows
Each salubrious rill that flows
Forth from subterranean vaults,
Stored by NATURE'S hand with salts,
Steel, or sulphur: for her use
NATURE opens every sluice,
Which HYGEIA gives in charge
To several nymphs: herself at large
Roams over hill, and dale, and plain,
Lacky'd by a duteous train;
Oreads, Naiads, Dryads pay
Service glad: some smooth her way,
Or mists disperse, or brush the trees;
Others waft the morning-breeze
From mountain-tops: adown the hills
Others pour refreshing rills,
Or bathe her limbs in fountain neat,
Aiding, all, her influence sweet.
SHE with smiling eye surveys
Rustic labors, and conveys
STRENGTH to the active thresher's arm,
To village-maidens BEAUTY'S charm.
Happy are the sons of earth
Whom the goddess at their birth
Shined on. Yet, her heavenly ray
Numbers, not respecting, stray
From her presence, and pursue
LUXURY'S paths, whose sordid crew,
LUST inordinate, and SLOTH,
And GLUTTONY'S unwieldy growth,
Lead them on to SHAME, and PAIN,
And MALADIES, an endless train.
Often with pangs distracting torn
They HYGEIA'S absence mourn;
Bitter change! their languid eyes
Feel not joy in sunny skies;
Nor does NIGHT, with slumber blessed,
Close them at the hour of rest.
And often with sighs, and tears, and prayer
Half-suppress'd by sad despair,
They the queen of health implore
Her wished presence to restore.
Nor unmindful of their woes
Is the goddess; for me chose
Thee, LAURENTIA, loveliest maid
Among thy sister nymphs, who played
On the banks of AVON.] The river which runs by Bath.
Avon, Thee,
Bright-ey'd nymph, she chose to be
Her substitute, and power she gave
Sovereign over the healing wave
Which thou rul'st with gentle sway.
Thee the smoking tides obey
Joyous; and at thy command
Wash thy Rosy-finger'd.] The effects of the hot water.
rosy-finger'd hand;
Thence in crystal cups conveyed
Yield their salutary aid
To all, whom Thou with look benign
Smil'st on round HYGEIA'S shrine;
All of appetite depraved,
Those whom pale-ey'd SPLEEN enslaved,
Cripples bent with gouty pain,
Whom JAUNDICE tinged with muddy stain,
Or whose frame of nerves, with stroke
Benumming, tremulous PALSY broke.
These the balmy, cordial stream
Quaff, rejoicing; Thee, their theme
Of praise, extol; thy tender care,
Thy soft address, and courteous air:
And while HARMONY.] The music in the pump-room,
HARMONY, the friend
Of HEALTH, delights to recommend
Thy ministry, thy charms inspire
Love and joy, and gay desire:
For the goddess, when she gave
Rule imperial over the wave,
To adorn the gift, and grace thy state,
On Thee bade YOUTH and BEAUTY wait.
Nor do thou not taste delight
Where thou sit'st in duteous plight;
For the joy, thy hand bestows,
Back to thee redounding flows,
When the cheek of faded hue,
Thou see displaying roses new.
Thee suspended Crutches.] Over Bladud's image in the king's bath hang ^any
crutches,
crutches please,
Signal trophies from DISEASE
Won to HEALTH victorious. Hail,
Comfort, and support of frail
Human state! Hail, blooming maid!
Nymph beloved! without thy aid,
He, who, greeting thee, his lays
Now attunes to notes of praise,
Mute had been, oppressed with pain
Of spasm rheumatic. Hail again,
Priestess of HYGEIA'S shrine!
Sitll dispense her gift divine,
Still her vot'ries lead to HEALTH;
Else, what profits Marlborough's wealth,
Eliza.] Lady Betty Spencer.

(...).

LUCIAN.
Eliza's form, and Stanhope's wit,
And all the eloquence of Pit?
A LETTER to CORINNA from a CAPTAIN in Country Quarters.
MY earliest flame, to whom I owe
All that a captain needs to know;
Dress, and quadrille, and air, and chat,
Lewd songs, loud laughter, and all that;
Arts that have widows often subdued,
And never failed to win a prude;
Think, charmer, how I live forlorn
At quarters, from Corinna torn.
Nor more distress the cornet feels
From gruel, and Ward's popish pills.
What shall I do now you're away,
To kill that only foe, the day?
The landed 'squire, and dull freeholder,
Are sure no comrades for a soldier;
To drink with parsons all day long,
Misaubin tells me would be wrong:
Sober advice, and Curl's Dutch whore
I Have read, 'till I can read no more.
At noon I rise, and strait alarm
A sempstress' shop, or country farm;
Repulsed, my next pursuit is a'ter
The parson's wife, or landlord's daughter:
At market often for game I search,
Often at assemblies, often at church,
And plight my faith and gold to-boot;
Yet demme if a soul will do it --
In short our credit's sunk so low,
Since troops were kept o'foot for show,
She that for soldiers once run mad,
Is turned republican, egad!
And when I boast my feats, the shrew
Asks who was slain the last review.
Know then, that I and captain Trueman
Resolve to keep a miss -- in common:
Not her, among the battered lasses,
Such as our friend Toupet caresses,
But her, a nymph of polished sense,
Which pedants call impertinence:
Trained up to laugh, and drink, and swear,
And railly with the prettiest air --
Amidst our frolicks and carouses
How shall we pity wretched spouses!
But where can this dear soul be found,
In garret high, or under ground?
If so divine a fair there be,
Charming Corinna, thou art she.
But oh! what motives can persuade
Belles, to prefer a rural shade,
In this gay month, when pleasures bloom,
The park, the play -- the drawing room --
Lo! birthnights upon birthnights tread,
Term is begun, the lawyer fee'd;
My friend the merchant, let me tell ye,
Calls in his way to Farinelli;
Add that my satin gown and watch
Some unfledged booby 'squire may catch,
Who, charmed with his delicious quarry,
May first debauch me, and then marry;
Never was season more befitting
Since conv -- ns last were sitting.
And shall I leave dear Charing Cross,
And let two boys my charms ingross?
Leave playhouse, temple, and the rummer?
A country friend might serve in summer!
The town's your choice -- yet, charming fair,
Observe what ills attend you there.
Captains, that once admired your beauty,
Are kept by quality on duty;
Cits, for attoning alms disburse
A tester -- templars, something worse:
My lord may take you to his bed,
But then he sends you back unpaid;
And all you gain from generous cully,
Must go to keep some Irish bully.
Pinchbeck demands the tweezer case,
And Monmouth-street the gown and stays;
More mischiefs yet come crowding on,
Bridewell, -- West Indies -- and Sir John --
Then oh! to lewdness bid adieu,
And chastely live, confined to two.
A TALE.
By Mr. MERRICK.
IF Virtue prompt thy willing mind
To actions generous, good and kind;
Fortune beyond thy hopes shall bless
Thy toils, and crown them with success:
But he whose bounties only rise
From prospects of a future prize,
With sorrow shall compute his gains,
And reap repentance for his pains.
Precepts are often found to fail,
So take instruction from my tale.
In ancient days there lived a priest,
Inshrin'd within whose pious breast
Fair Virtue shone; his open look
Gave sanction to each word he spoke.
Fixed to no home, in mean array,
From place to place he took his way,
Instructing as he went along,
And dealing blessings to the throng.
The truth he labored to express,
In language plain as was his dress;
Yet all with secret rapture hung
On every accent of his tongue:
A silent eloquence there ran
Through all the actions of the man;
They marked his soul's unblemished frame,
His precept and his life the same.
It chanced, as musing once he strayed,
Around him night's descending shade
Unheeded stole; through paths unknown
With darkling steps he wandered on,
And wished to shroud his weary head
Beneath some hospitable shed.
When through the gloom a sudden ray
Sprung forth, and shot across the way,
Led by the light, a cott he found:
A pious dame the mansion owned,
Whose open heart, though small her store,
Never turned the stranger from her door.
Think at the sight of such a guest,
What transport rose within her breast:
With joy the friendly board she spread,
And placed him in her warmest bed.
Deep sunk in sleep the trav'ler lay,
Tired with the labors of the day.
It Is best, as ablest critics deem,
To suit your language to your theme;
Obsequious to their rules, the Muse
In humbler strain her tale pursues.
The matron, while her thankful guest
Had shared with her the slender feast,
With curious eye had viewed him over,
Had marked the tattered garb he wore,
And through the yawning frieze had seen
No traces of a shirt within.
And now her hands with pious care
A shirt of homespun cloth prepare:
'Twas coarse, but would the longer hold,
And serve to fence him from the cold.
The toil employed her all the night,
And ended with the rising light.
The priest arose at break of day,
And hastened to pursue his way;
With thanks he took the finished vest,
The hospitable dame he blessed,
"And that thy charity, he said,
"May fall with interest on thy head,
"May thy first work, when I am gone,
"Continue 'till the setting sun."
She heard; but soon her household care
Had banished from her thoughts the prayer;
The remnant of her cloth she took,
And measured out her little stock.
Beneath her hands the lengthening piece
Surpised her with a vast increase;
Astonished at a sight so new,
She measured still and still it grew.
As when in sleep, with winged pace
Over hills and plains we urge the race,
With eager hopes we onward bend,
And think our labor near its end;
But mimick Fancy soon supplies
New scenes to cheat our wondering eyes:
Before our feet new plains extend,
New valleys sink, new hills ascend,
And still the goal, when these are over,
Appears as distant as before.
In such a dream with such surprise,
From morn to eve the woman plies
Her task; but when the setting ray
Had closed her labor with the day,
With joy the wondrous heap surveyed,
And saw her bounty well repaid.
A neighboring dame, the story known,
Much wished to make the case her own;
For though she never was seen before
To lodge the stranger or the poor,
She wisely thought on one so good
Her charity were well bestowed.
As by her door his journey lay,
She stopped the trav'ler on his way;
Begged him to enter and receive
Such welcome as her house could give:
The priest complied, and entering found
The board with various plenty crowned;
On heaps of down he past the night,
And slumber'd 'till the morning light.
At break of day the dame addressed
In friendly guise her reverend guest:
Linen so coarse, she said, was never
Designed for Christian backs to wear;
And as it grieved her to survey
Such virtue in so mean array,
Herself had toiled with sleepless eyes
To furnish him with fresh supplies:
Fine was the texture, such as comes
From wealthy Holland's skilful looms.
The priest accepts the proffered boon,
He thanks her for her kindness shown,
And grateful as he leaves her door,
Repeats the prayer he made before.
Just parted from the holy man,
With eager haste the matron ran
To reach her cloth, and had designed
To measure what was left behind;
But thinking first, that as the prayer
For the whole day had fixed her care,
One labor would employ it all,
And leave no time for Nature's call,
Ere to the destined work she goes,
She deems it best to pluck a rose.
The hissing geese, as forth she went,
Gave omens of the dire event;
The herds, that grazed the neighboring plain,
Looked up, and snuff'd the coming rain;
The bird that screams at midnight hours,
(Diviner of approaching showers)
Full on the left, with hideous croak,
Stood fluttering on a blasted oak.
Amazement seized the trembling dame,
When first she saw the plenteous stream:
She wondered much, and much she feared;
And think how Niobe appeared,
When changed into a rock she stood,
And at her feet the headlong flood,
With downward force impetuous ran,
High foaming, over the deluged plain;
So looked the dame, when all around
The torrent smoked upon the ground:
Still spreading wider than before,
It seemed a sea without a shore.
Your bards that wrote in heathen days,
Had such a theme employed their lays,
Had tortured their inventive brain,
With dire portents to fill the strain;
Had bid the neighboring river mourn
His altered stream and tainted urn;
Or made the Naiads lift their heads,
Astonished from their watery beds,
And, seated on the river's side,
Squeeze from their locks the briny tide.
But little skilled in Pagan lore;
I pass such idle fancies over:
Truth is my care, whose lovely face
Shines brightest in the plainest dress.
At eve the torrent stopped its course;
Stung with vexation and remorse;
The dame laments her fruitless cost,
Her hopes deceived, her labor lost.
Nor think that here her sufferings end,
Reproach and infamy attend:
Surrounding boys, wherever she came,
With insults loud divulge her shame;
And farmers stop her with demands
Of recompense for damaged lands.
The WISH.
By the Same.
HOW short is life's uncertain space!
Alas! how quickly done!
How swift the wild precarious chase!
And yet how difficult the race!
How very hard to run!
Youth stops at first its wilful ears
To Wisdom's prudent voice;
Till now arrived to riper years,
Experienced age worn out with cares
Repents its earlier choice.
What though its prospects now appear
So pleasing and refined;
Yet groundless hope, and anxious fear,
By turns the busy moments share,
And prey upon the mind.
Since then false joys our fancy cheat
With hopes of real bliss;
Ye guardian powers that rule my fate,
The only wish that I create,
Is all comprised in this.
May I through life's uncertain tide,
Be still from pain exempt;
May all my wants be still supplied,
My state too low to admit of pride,
And yet above contempt.
But should your Providence divine
A greater bliss intend;
May all those blessings you design,
(If ever those blessings shall be mine)
Be centered in a friend.
The BEARS and BEES. A FABLE.
By the Same.
AS two young Bears in wanton mood,
Forth-issuing from a neighboring wood,
Came where the industrious Bees had stored
In artful cells their luscious hoard;
O'erjoy'd they seized with eager haste
Luxurious on the rich repast.
Alarmed at this the little crew
About their ears vindictive flew.
The beasts unable to sustain
The unequal combat, quit the plain;
Half blind with rage, and mad with pain;
Their native shelter they regain;
There sit, and now discreeter grown,
Too late their rashness they bemoan;
And this by dear experience gain,
That pleasure's ever bought with pain.
So when the gilded baits of vice
Are placed before our longing eyes,
With greedy haste we snatch our fill,
And swallow down the latent ill;
But when experience opes our eyes,
Away the fancied pleasure flies.
It flies, but oh! too late we find
It leaves a real sting behind.
A FRAGMENT.
By the Same. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
When recent in the womb I lay,
Ere yet my life began,
Thy care preserved the sleeping clay,
And formed it into man.
Oh! may this frame, that rising grew
Beneath thy plastic hands,
Be studious ever to pursue
Whatever thy will commands.
The soul that moves this earthly load
Thy semblance let it bear;
Nor lose the traces of the God,
Who stamped his image there.
The CAMELION: A FABLE after Monsieur DE LA MOTTE.
By the Same.
OFTEN has it been my lot to mark
A proud, conceited, talking spark,
With eyes, that hardly served at most
To guard their master against a post,
Yet round the world the blade has been
To see whatever could be seen,
Returning from his finished tour,
Grown ten times perter than before;
Whatever word you chance to drop,
The traveled fool your mouth will stop,
"Sir, if my judgment you will allow --
"I Have seen -- and sure I ought to know --
So begs you would pay a due submission,
And acquiesce in his decision.
Two travelers of such a cast;
As over Arabia's wild they past,
And on their way in friendly chat
Now talked of this and then of that,
Discoursed awhile amongst other matter
Of the Camelion's form and nature.
"A stranger animal, cries one,
"Sure never lived beneath the sun.
"A lizard's body lean and long,
"A fish's head, a serpent's tongue,
"Its tooth with triple claw disjoined;
"And what a length of tail behind!
"How slow its pace, and then its hue --
"Who ever saw so fine a blue?"
"Hold there, the other quick replies,
"'It Is green -- I saw it with these eyes,
"As late with open mouth it lay,
"And warmed it in the sunny ray;
"Stretched at its ease the beast I viewed,
"And saw it eat the air for food."
"I Have seen it, Sir, as well as you,
"And must again affirm it blue.
"At leisure I the beast surveyed
"Extended in the cooling shade."
"'It Is green, it is green, Sir, I assure ye --
"Green! cries the other in a fury --
"Why, Sir -- do you think I Have lost my eyes?"
"'Twere no great loss, the friend replies,
"For, if they always serve you thus,
"You Will find 'em but of little use."
So high at last the contest rose,
From words they almost came to blows:
When luckily came by a third --
To him the question they referred;
And begged he would tell 'em, if he knew,
Whether the thing was green or blue.
"Sirs, cries the umpire, cease your pother --
"The creature's neither one nor to other.
"I caught the animal last night,
"And viewed it over by candlelight:
"I marked it well -- 'twas black as jet --
"You stare -- but Sirs, I Have got it yet,
"And can produce it." "Pray, Sir, do:
"I Will lay my life, the thing is blue."
"And I Will be sworn, that when you have seen
"The reptile, you will pronounce him green."
"Well then, at once to ease the doubt,
"Replies the man, I Will turn him out:
"And when before your eyes I Have set him,
"If you don't find him black, I Will eat him."
He said; then full before their sight
Produced the beast, and lo! 'twas white. --
Both star'd, the man looked wondrous wise --
"My children," the Camelion cries,
(Then first the creature found a tongue)
"You all are right, and all are wrong:
"When next you talk of what you view,
"Think others see, as well as you:
"Nor wonder, if you find that none
"Prefers your eyesight to his own."
IMMORTALITY: or, the Consolation of HUMAN LIFE. A MONODY.
By THOMAS DENTON, M. A.
-- Animi natura videtur
Atque animae claranda meis jam versibus esse:
Et metus ille for as praeceps Acheruntis agendus
Funditus, humanam qui vitam turbat ab imo,
Omnia suffundus mortis nigrore.
LUCR.
I.
WHEN black-brow'd Night her dusky mantle spread,
And wrapped in solemn gloom the sable sky;
When soothing Sleep her opiate dews had shed,
And sealed in silken slumbers every eye:
My wakeful thoughts admit no balmy rest,
Nor the sweet bliss of soft oblivion share;
But watchful woe distracts my aching breast,
My heart the subject of corroding care:
From haunts of men with wandering steps and slow
I solitary steal, and sooth my pensive woe.
II.
Yet no fell passion's rough discordant rage
Untuned the music of my tranquil mind;
Ambition's tinsell'd charms could never engage,
No harbor there could sordid avarice find:
From lust's foul spring my grief disdains to flow,
No sighs of envy from my bosom break,
But soft compassion melts my soul to woe,
And social tears fast trickle down my cheek;
Ah me! when nature gives one general groan,
Each heart must beat with woe, each voice responsive moan.
III.
Wherever I cast my moist'ned eyes around,
Or stretch my prospect over the distant land,
There foul Corruption's tainted steps are found,
And Death grim-visag'd waves his iron hand.
Though now soft Pleasure gild the smiling scene,
And sportive Joy call forth her festive train,
Sinking in night each vital form is seen,
Like air-blown bubbles on the watery plain;
Vid. VIRG. Aen. lib. 3. ver. 210. and scq.
Fell Death, like brooding Harpy, the repast
Will snatch with talons foul, or sour its grateful taste.
IV.
Ye smiling glories of the youthful year,
That open your fragrant bosoms to the day,
That clad in all the pride of spring appear,
And steeped in dew your silken leaves display:
In Nature's richest robes though thus bedight,
Though her soft pencil trace your various dye,
Though lures your roseate hue the charmed sight,
Though odours sweet your nect'rous breath supply,
Soon on your leaves Time's cank'rous tooth shall prey,
Your dulcet dews exhale, your beauteous bloom decay.
V.
Ye hedge-row elms, beneath whose spreading shade
The grazing herds defy the ratt'ling shower;
Ye lofty oaks, in whose wide arms displayed
The clamorous rook builds high his airy bower;
Stripped by hoar Winter's rough inclement rage,
In mournful heaps your leafy honors lie,
Even your hard ribs shall feel the force of age,
And your bare trunks the friendly shade deny;
No more by cheerful vegetation green,
Your sapless bolls shall sink, and quit the evanid scene.
VI.
Ye feathered warblers of the vernal year
That careless sing, nor fear the frowns of fate,
Tune your sad notes to death and winter drear!
Ill suit these mirthful strains your transient state.
No more with cheerful song nor sprightly air
Salute the blushes of the rising day,
With doleful ditties, drooping wings repair
To the lone covert of the nightly spray:
Where love-lorn Philomela strains her throat,
Surround the budding thorn, and swell the mournful note.
VII.
Come, sighing Elegy, with sweetest airs
Of melting music teach my grief to flow,
I too must mix my sad complaint with theirs,
Our fates are equal, equal be our woe.
Come, Melancholy, spread thy raven wing,
And in thy ebon car, by Fancy led,
To the dark charnel vault thy vot'ry bring,
The murky mansions of the mouldering dead,
Where dank dews breathe, and taint the sickly skies,
Where in sad loathsome heaps all human glory lies.
VIII.
Wrapped in the gloom of uncreated night
Secure we slept in senseless matter's arms,
Nor pain could vex, nor pallid fear affright,
Our quiet fancy felt no dream's alarms.
Soon as to life our animated clay
Awakes, and conscious being opes our eyes,
Care's fretful family at once dismay,
With ghastly air a thousand phantoms rise,
Sad Horror hangs over all the deep'ning gloom,
Grief prompts the labored sigh, Death opes the marble tomb.
IX.
Yet life's strong love intoxicates the soul,
And thirst of bliss inflames the fev'rous mind,
With eager draughts we drain the poisonous bowl,
And in the dregs the cordial hope to find.
O heaven! for this light end were mortals made,
And placed on earth, with happiness in view,
To catch with cheated grasp the flitting shade,
And with vain toil the fancied form pursue,
Then give their short-lived being to the wind,
As the winged arrow flies, and leaves no track behind!
X.
Thus lonely wandering through the nightly shade
Against the stern decrees of stubborn Fate,
To mockful Echo my complaints I made,
Of life's short period, or its toilsome state.
It Is death-like silence all, no sound I hear,
Save the hoarse raven croaking from the sky,
Or scaly beetle murmuring through the air,
Or screech-owl screaming with ill-o men'd cry;
Save when with brazen tongue from yon high tower
The clock deep-sounding speaks, and counts the passing hour.
XI.
Pale Cynthia mounted on her silver car
Over heaven's blue concave drives her nightly round:
See a torn abbey, wrapped in gloom, appear
Scattered in wild confusion over the ground.
Here ravenous Ruin lifts her wasteful hands
Over bri'ar-grown grots and bramble-shaded graves;
Safe from her wrath one weeping marble stands,
Over which the mournful yew its umbrage waves;
Open, open thy ponderous jaws, thou friendly tomb,
Close the sad deathful scene, and shroud me in thy womb!
XII.
Forth issuing lovely from the gloomy shade,
Which stately pines in phalanx deep compose,
Fair above mortals comes a smiling maid
To sooth my sighs, and cheer my heartfelt woes.
Here nursed by Contemplation, matron sage,
Where with mute Solitude she loves to dwell,
In truth's fair lore she formed her early age,
And trimmed the midnight lamp in lonely cell,
Here learned clear reason's heav'n-sprung light to raise
Over passion's low-born mists, or pleasure's spurious blaze.
XIII.
Her azure mantle flows with easy grace,
Nor fashion's folds constrain, nor custom's tie;
An optic tube she bears, each sphere to trace
That rolls its rapid orbit round the sky:
Yet not to heaven alone her view's confined;
A clear reflecting plane she holds, to show
The various movements of the reasoning mind,
How strange ideas link, and habits grow,
Passion's fierce impulse, will's free power to scan,
To paint the featured soul, and mark the internal man.
XIV.
Whence these sad strains, said she, of plaintive grief,
Which pierce the sleep-clos'd ear of peaceful rest?
Often has the sickening mind here found relief,
Here quelled the throbbing tumults of the breast:
Lift up thy laden eyes to yon fair cloud,
Where moon-sprung A rainbow formed by the rays of the moon at night: an object
often visible, though from its languid colors not often observed.
Iris blends her beauteous dies:
I lift them soon, and as I gazing stood,
The fleeting phantom in a moment flies;
Where beamed the gilded arch of gaudy hue,
Frowns the dark lou'ring cloud all gloomy to the view.
XV.
Life's emblem fit, said I, that roscid bow!
The gay illusive pageant of an hour
To real semblance tricks her air show,
Then sinks in night's dull arms, and is no more!
Ah! fool, said she, though now to fancy's sight
The violet pale, the blushing red decays,
Though now no painted cloud reflect the light,
Nor drops prismatic break the falling rays,
Yet still the colors live, though none appear,
Glow in the darting beam that gilds yon crystal sphere.
XVI.
Then let not Fancy with her vagrant blaze
Mislead in trackless paths of wild deceit;
On Reason's steady lamp still ardent gaze;
Led by her sober light to Truth's retreat.
Though wondering Ignorance sees each form decay,
The breathless bird, bare trunk, and shrivel'd flower:
New forms successive catch the vital ray,
Sing their wild notes, or smile the allotted hour,
And search creation's ample circuit round,
Though modes of being change, all life's immortal found.
XVII.
See the slow reptile groveling over the green,
That trails through slimy paths its cumbrous load,
Start in new beauty from the lowly scene,
And wing with fluttering pride the aetherial road;
Burst their shell-prisons, see the feathered kind,
Where in dark durance pent awhile they lie,
Dispread their painted plumage to the wind,
Brush the brisk air, swift shooting through the sky,
Hail with their choral hymns the newborn day,
Distend their joy-swoln breasts, and carol the sweet lay.
XVIII.
See man by varied periods fixed by fate
Ascend perfection's scale by slow degree;
The plant-like foetus quits its senseless taste,
And helpless hangs sweet-smiling on the knee;
Soon outward objects steal into the brain,
Next prattling childhood lisps with mimic air,
Then memory links her fleet ideal train,
And sober reason rises to compare,
The full-grown breast some manly passion warms,
It pants for glory's meed, or beats to love's alarms.
XIX.
Then say, since nature's high behest appears
That living forms should change of being prove,
In which new joy the novel scene endears,
New objects rise to please, new wings to move;
Since man too, taught by sage experience, knows
His frame revolving treads life's varying stage,
That the man-plant first vegetating grows,
Then sense directs, then reason rules in age;
Say, is it strange, should death's all-dreaded hour
Waft to some unknown scenes, or wake some-untried power?
XX.
The wise Creator wrapped in fleshly veil
The ray divine, the pure aetherial mate;
Though worn by age the brittle fabric fail,
The smiling soul survives the frowns of fate:
Each circling year, each quick-revolving day
Touches with mouldering tooth thy flitting frame,
With furtive slight repairs the unseen decay;
For ever changing, yet in change the same,
Often have thou dropped unhurt thy mortal part,
Dare the grim terror then, nor dread his guiltless dart.
XXI.
The twinkling eye, whose various-humour'd round
Takes in soft net the inverted form behind,
The listening ears, that catch the waving sound,
Are but mere organs of the feeling mind:
External matter thus can lend its aid,
And distant shapes with foreign power supply;
Thus the long tube by Galilaeo made
Brings home the wonders of the peopled sky:
The power percipient then feels no decay,
Though blind the tube, and darkness blot the visual ray.
XXII.
When locked in short suspense by sleep's soft power
In temporary death the senses lie,
When solemn silence reigns at midnight hour,
Deaf the dull ear, and closed the curtain'd eye;
Objects of sense, each conscious sense asleep,
With lively image strike the wakeful soul,
Some frowning rock that threats the foaming deep,
Or wood-hung vale, where streams meand'ring roll,
Some long-lost friend's returning voice you hear,
Clasp the life-pictur'd shade, and drop the pleasing tear.
XXIII.
Each outward organ, as ideas rise,
Gives easy entrance to the motley train;
Reflection calm, with retrospective eyes
Surveys her treasures in the formful brain;
Though Death relentless shed his baleful dew,
In Lethe dip each form-conveying power,
Unhurt Reflection may her themes pursue,
Smile at the ruin, safe amidst her store;
Without one sense's aid in life's low vale,
Fancy can furnish joys, and reason lift her scale.
XXIV.
Thus the lone lover in the pensive shade
In day-dreams rapt of soft ecstatic bliss,
Pursues in thought the visionary maid,
Feasts on the fancied smile, and favored kiss:
Thus the young poet at the close of day
Led by the magic of some fairy song
Through the dun umbrage winds his heedless way,
Nor hears the babbling brook that brawls along:
Thus deathless Newton deaf to nature's cries
Would measure Time and Space, and travel 'round the skies.
XXV.
When just expiring hangs life's trembling light,
And fell disease strikes deep the deadly dart,
Reason and memory burn with ardour bright,
And generous passions warm the throbbing heart;
Often will the vigorous soul in life's last stage
With keenest relish taste pure mental joys:
Since the fierce efforts of distemper's rage
Nor 'bates her vigor, nor her powers destroys,
Say, shall her luster death itself impair?
When in high noon she rides, then sets in dark despair?
XXVI.
Though through the heart no purple tide should flow,
No quivering nerve should vibrate to the brain,
The mental powers no mean dependence know;
Thought may survive, and each fair passion reign;
As when Lucina ends the pangful strife,
Lifts the young babe, and lights her lambent flame,
Some powers new-waking hail the dawning life,
Some unsuspended live, unchanged, the same;
So from our dust fresh faculties may bloom,
Some posthumous survive, and triumph over the tomb.
XXVII.
This fibrous frame by nature's kindly law,
Which gives each joy to keen sensation here,
Over purer scenes of bliss the veil may draw,
And cloud reflection's more exalted sphere.
When Death's cold hand with all-dissolving power
Shall the close tie with friendly stroke unbind,
Alike our mortal as our natal hour
May to new being raise the waking mind:
On death's new genial day the soul may rise,
Born to some higher life, and hail some brighter skies.
XXVIII.
The moss-grown tree, that shrinks with rolling years,
The drooping flowers that die so soon away,
Let not thy heart alarm with boding fears,
Nor thy own ruin date from their decay:
The blushing rose that breathes the balmy dew,
No pleasing transports of perception knows,
The reverend oak, that circling springs renew,
Thinks not, nor by long age experienced grows;
Thy fate and theirs confess no kindred tie:
Though their frail forms may fade, shall sense and reason die?
XXIX.
Nor let life's ills, that in dire circle rage,
Steal from thy heaving breast those labored sighs;
These, the kind tutors of thy infant age,
Train the young pupil for the future skies:
Unschool'd in early prime, in riper years
Wretched and scorned still struts the bearded boy;
The tingling rod bedewed with briny tears
Shoots forth in graceful fruits of manly joy:
The painful cares that vex the toilsome spring
Shall plenteous crops of bliss in life's last harvest bring.
XXX.
She ceased, and vanished into sightless wind --
Over my torn breast alternate passions sway,
Now Doubt desponding damps the wavering mind,
Now Hope reviving sheds her cheerful ray.
Soon from the skies in heavenly white arrayed,
Faith to my sight revealed, fair Cherub! stood,
With life replete the volume she displayed,
Sealed with the ruddy stains of crimson blood;
Each fear now starts away, as specter fly
When the sun's orient beam first gilds the purple sky.
XXXI.
Mean while the faithful herald of the day
The village cock crows loud with trumpet shrill,
The warbling lark soars high, and morning gray
Lifts her glad forehead over the cloud-wrapt hill:
Nature's wild music fills the vocal vale;
The bleating flocks that bite the dewy ground,
The lowing herds that graze the woodland dale,
And cavern'd echo, swell the cheerful sound;
Homeward I bend with clear unclouded mind,
Mix with the busy world, and leave each care behind.
To the Memory of a GENTLEMAN, who died on his Travels to ROME. Written in 1738.
By the Rev. Dr. SHIPLEY.
LANGTON, dear partner of my soul,
Accept what pious passion meditates
To grace thy fate. Sad memory
And grateful love, and impotent regret
Shall wake to paint thy gentle mind,
Thy wise goodnature, friendship delicate
In secret converse, native mirth
And sprightly fancy; sweet artificer
Of social pleasure; nor forgot
The noble thirst of knowledge and fair fame
That led thee far through foreign climes
Inquisitive: but chief the pleasant banks
Of Tiber, ever-honour'd stream,
Detained thee visiting the last remains
Of ancient art; fair forms exact.
In sculpture, columns, and the mouldering bulk
Of theaters. In deep thought rapt
Of old renown, thy mind surveyed the scenes
Delighted, where the first of men
Once dwelt, familiar: Scipio, virtuous chief,
Stern Cato, and the patriot mind
Of faithful Brutus, best philosopher.
Well did the generous search employ
Thy blooming years by virtue crowned, though death
Unseen oppressed thee, far from home,
A helpless stranger. No familiar voice,
No pitying eye cheered thy last pangs.
O worthy longest days! for thee shall flow
The pious solitary tear,
And thoughtful friendship sadden over thine urn.
Captain T -- of BATTEREAU'S Regiment in the Isle of SKY to Captain P -- at
Fort AUGUSTUS.
-- COME, Thomas, give us the other sonnet --
Dear captain, pray reflect upon it.
Was ever so absurd a thing?
What, at the pole to bid me sing!
Alas! search all the mountains round,
There Is no Thalia to be found;
And Fancy, child of southern skies,
Averse the sullen region flies.
I scribble verses! why you know
I left the Muses long ago,
Deserted all the tuneful band
To right the files, and study Bland.
Indeed in youth's fantastic prime
Misled I wandered into rhyme,
And various sonnets penned in plenty
On every nymph from twelve to twenty;
Compared to roses, pinks and lillies,
The cheeks of Chloe and of Phillis;
With all the cant you find in many
A stillborn modern miscellany.
My lines -- how proud was I to see 'em
Steal into Dodsley's new Musaeum,
Or in a letter fair and clean
Committed to the Magazine.
Our follies change -- that whim is over --
The bagatelles amuse no more.
Know by these presents, that in fine
I quit all commerce with the Nine.
Love strains, and all poetic matters,
Lampoons, epistles, odes, and satires,
These toys and trifles I discard,
And leave the bays to poet Ward.
Know, now to politics consigned
I give up all the busy mind;
Curious each pamphlet I peruse,
And sip my coffee over the news.
But a propos -- for last Courant,
Pray thank the lady governante.
From Aix -- pho! what is it -- la Chapelle,
Of treaties now the gazettes tell;
A peace unites the jarring powers,
And every trade will thrive, but our's.
Farewell, as wronged Othello said,
The plumed troops, and neighing steed!
The troops! alas! more havoc there
A peace will make, than all the war.
What crowds of heroes in a day
Reduced to starve on half their pay!
From Lowendhal 'twou'd pity meet,
And Saxe himself might weep to see it.
Already Fancy's active power
Foreruns the near approaching hour,
Methinks, cursed chance! the fatal stroke
I feel, and seem already broke.
The park I saunter up and down,
Or sit upon a bench alone
Pensive and sad -- le just portrait
D'un pauvre captain reform.
My wig, which shunned each ruder wind,
Toupee'd before, and bag'd behind,
Which John was used with nicest art
To comb, and teach the curls to part,
Lost the belle air and jaunty pride,
Nor lank depends on either side:
My hat grown white and rusted over
Once bien trousse with galon d'or;
My coat distained with dust and rain,
And all my figure quite campaign.
Tavern and coffee-house unwilling
To give me credit for a shilling:
Forbid by every scornful belle
The precincts of the gay ruelle.
My vows though breathed in every ear,
Not even a chambermaid will hear:
No silver in my purse to pay
For opera-tickets, or the play:
No message sent to bid me come
A fortnight after to a drum:
No visits or received or paid,
No ball, ridotto, masquerade:
All pensive, heartless, and chagrine
I sit, devoted prey to spleen;
Shabbily fine with tarnish'd lace,
And hunger pittur'd in my face.
To you, dear P --, indulgent heaven
A gentler, happier lot has given;
To you has dealt with bounteous hands
Palladian seats, and fruitful lands:
Then in my sorrows have the grace
To take some pity on my case;
And as you know the times are hard,
Send a spruce valet with a card --
Your compliments, and beg I Would dine,
And taste your mutton and your wine;
You Will find most punctual and observant,
Your most obliged humble servant,
C. T.

To Mr. J. H. at the TEMPLE, occasioned by a Translation of an Epistle of
HORACE. 1730.
By the Rev. Mr. S --, of Magdalen College, OXFORD.
TIME flies -- so you and Horace sing,
From whence you many a moral bring,
To teach us how to steer our lives,
TO enjoy our bottles and our wives.
Young man, I will approve your notions,
And wholly am at your devotions.
I hate your sour, canting rascals,
That talk of Ember-weeks and Pascals;
Black villains, who desire to wean us,
From Bacchus' pleasures, and from Venus',
To gain themselves a larger share,
And fob us off with fast and prayer:
And tell us none to Elysium go,
Who do not plague themselves below.
Can misery raise the grateful heart,
Or tuneful songs of praise impart?
The great Creator's work we view
And trace it out by Wisdow's clue;
Nothing is good but what is true.
With cautious and with thankful eye
We scan the great variety:
Each good within our reach we taste,
And call our neighbor to the feast.
Our souls do gen'rously disown
All pleasure that is confined to one;
The only rational employment
Is, to receive and give emjoyment:
To every pleasure we attend,
Not to enjoy is to offend.
But still, amidst the various crowd
Of goods, that call with voices loud,
Our natural genius, education,
Parents, companions, or our station,
Direct us to some single choice,
In which we chiefly must rejoice.
Pleasures are ladies -- some we court
To pass away an hour in sport:
We like them all for this or that,
For silence some, and some for chat;
For every one, as Cowley sings,
Or arrows yields, or bows, or strings.
But, after all this rambling life,
Each man must have his proper wife.
You know my meaning -- some one good,
Felt, heard, or seen, or understood,
Will captivate the heart's affection,
And bring the rest into subjection.
Pray mind the tenor of my song;
It holds together, though it is long.
You Have made an early choice, and wise one;
The best I know within the horizon.
My lady Law is rich and handsome:
May she be worth you a king's ransom!
But I must tell you, (you will excuse
My friendly, though plain dealing Muse)
In her own hands is all her dower;
There Is not a groat within your power;
And yet you're whoring with the Nine;
With them you breakfast, sup and dine,
With them you spend your days and nights --
Is It fitting she should bear such slights?
Beggarly, ballad-singing carrions,
Can they advance you to the barons?
You Have made me too an old Tom Dingle,
And I, forsooth, must try to jingle.
Your lady would not do you wrong;
She owns you're tender yet, and young --
She Would wink at now and then a song:
But still expects to share the time,
Which now is all bestowed on rhyme.
Read in the morning Hobbes de Homine,
At noon, even sport with your Melpomene.
Youngster, I Have something more to say,
To wean you from this itch of play.
In his Officiis old Marc Tully,
Amongst certain points he handles fully,
(A book I ever must delight in
Far beyond all that since is written!) --
He tells us there, our parents' praise
Their children's virtue ought to raise:
Their worth and praise should prick us on
To labor after like renown.
Who but thy father has been able,
Since Hercules, to cleanse a stable?
About his ears how strange a rattle!
Who ever stood so tough a battle?
H' has tamed the most unruly cattle. --
Just two such jobbs as yet remain
To be dispatched by you and B --.
Your father with Herculean club
The tyrants of our souls did drub;
B -- for our bodies, you our chattels,
Must undertake the self-same battles.
The world on you have fixed their eyes,
It Is you must quell these tyrannies:
So shall some title, now unknown,
Bangorian-like your labors crown.
Ravished, methinks, in thought I see
The universal liberty.
But after all, I know what is in you:
You Will do it, a thousand to one guinea.
Time flies -- the work and pleasure's great;
Begin, before it grows too late.
Where the plays stand the statutes lodge;
And dance not, 'till you dance a judge;
Then, though you are not half so taper,
My Lord, you will cut a higher caper.
To the Rev. Mr. J. S. 1731.
By J. H.
SIR,
PROMISES are different cases
At various times, in various places.
In crowded street of Arlington,
Where slaves of hope to levees run,
A promise signifies no more,
Than in the chamber of a whore.
And when the good deceived Sir Francis
With madam up from Yorkshire dances,
To claim the great man's promise given
Some six years since, or (some say) seven;
No one can blame that curious writer,
That says, they will both return the lighter.
But can we hence affirm that no miss
Of all the sex can keep a promise?
Or say, from what our courtier speaks,
That all men's faiths are wafer-cakes?
That courts make rogues is my belief,
As it is the mill that makes the thief.
But 'cause one limb is none of the best,
Shall I for that cut off the rest?
Sure it may be with safety said,
A parson's promise duly made
Beneath a prelate's holy roof,
Must stand against all assaults a proof.
Yet he, who thinks the church unshaken,
May find himself in time mistaken.
I know the man, and grieve to say it,
Who so did fail -- and that was S --
And can we then no more depend on
Our good forgetful friend at Findon,
Than on a courtier promiseful,
Or a whore's oath to cheat her cull?
Can S -- no better promise keep?
If that were true -- I even should weep.
In Sarum's town when last we met,
I told you amongst much other prate,
That my design was to withdraw,
And leave the craggy paths of law:
And as the skilful pilot steers
Wide of the dreadful rocks he fears,
And in the safer ocean rides,
Nor fears his vessel's bulging sides;
So I from Coke's and Croke's reports,
And special pleadings of the courts,
Had veer'd about to bury dead,
And against a pulpit run my head.
Did thou not promise then and there,
(But promises are china-ware)
Did thou not promise, as I spoke,
That you would ere long your Muse invoke,
And clothed in strong harmonious line,
Send counsel to the young divine?
Where of thy word then is the troth,
Which I thought good as any oath?
Or where that strong harmonious line,
Blessed by each sister of the Nine?
That whore we speak of in the beginning,
Has some excuse to make for sinning:
Her tongue and tail are taught deceit
From her not knowing where to eat.
The courtier too has some excuse
To think word-breaking small abuse:
And 'midst the hurry, noise, and bustle,
Of crowds, that at his levee jostle,
No man can be in such a taking
To see a little promise-breaking.
But what indulgence, what excuse
Can plead for thee, or for thy Muse?
For thee, on whom the sisters wait
Pleased with the task imposed by S --;
Whom at his christ'ning they did dip
Over head and ears in Aganip;
For thee, at mention of whose strain
Their winged courser courts the rein,
Bounds even through Sussex-roads along,
Proud of the burden of thy song?
Answer to the foregoing, 1731.
By J. S.
-- MY dearest boy,
Apollo's and the prelate's joy;
Your sharp rebuke came safe to hand,
And speedy answer does demand.
You charge me home -- our conscious Muse
Would fain say something in excuse.
The promise made must be confessed,
But here, Sir -- distinguendum est.
A promise broke and one delayed
Differ as much as light and shade.
By this distinction all your whores
And courtiers I turn out of doors,
And, by induction logical
Prove, they affect not me at all.
But if my logic be not good,
I Will prove it from the word of God,
Which serves to clear all sorts of cases,
And wears a masquerade of faces.
When bloody-minded Jephtha swore,
If he returned a conqueror,
He Would offer up in sacrifice
What from his house first met his eyes;
And when his girl and only child
Hastened to welcome from the field
With pious joy her prosperous sire,
Gaily dancing to the lyre;
The holy butcher understood
His promise's performance good,
Though for a year the virgin strayed,
And wept her unlost maidenhead.
Thus, Sir, you see we men of letters
Can, like Jack Shepherd, cut our fetters;
When pinched, we file scholastic saw,
And iron is no more than straw:
The man is thought to have no brains,
Who cannot break loose, or bind in chains.
Your Sykes's and your Waterlands
Have nothing else upon their hands:
They stand prepared with double tackle
To fix, or to remove the shackle.
But, my dear boy, we'll only tie
The silken bands of amity;
Or such as hock-tide boys and misses
With laughter bind, and harmless kisses;
Indulge the free poetic measure,
And mimic discord for more pleasure.
But after all these long preambles,
In which our nag, at best, but ambles:
After our plea of mere delay,
It Is fit we think our debt to pay.
Soon then as business will permit,
We'll send you up another sheet,
Full fraught with our most learned advice,
In which we must be somewhat nice;
We'll rouse our thoughts, and take due time,
And trifle not in dogrel rhyme;
But boldly whip the winged steed,
And raise him to a nobler speed.
Quod dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?
By the Same.
ADAM alone could not be easy,
So he must have a wife, an't please ye:
But how did he procure his wife,
To cheer his solitary life?
Why, from a rib taken out his side
Was formed this necessary bride.
But how did he the pain beguile?
Pho! he slept sweetly all the while.
But when this rib was re-applied,
In woman's form, to Adam's side,
How then, I pray you, did it answer?
He never slept so sweet again, Sir.
CUPID and CHLOE.
By the Same.
TO deck her bosom Chloe chose,
Before all flowers, the blushing rose:
It made her breasts more lovely show,
And added whiteness to their snow.
The tender nymph, herself a bud,
So much already understood.
But once, blessed hour! she went to see
The produce of the favorite tree.
A large and tempting rose she found,
Which spread its perfumes all around.
It seemed to court the virgin's hand,
The virgin did not long withstand.
She plucked -- but O! a sudden pain
Made her release the stalk again.
The wound appeared, her finger bled,
And stained the rose with guilty red.
The nymph, with pain and anger moved,
Began to hate what once she loved;
She sighed, she wept, and stamped, and swore
She Would touch the odious tree no more.
When forth a little Cupid came,
TO appease the crying angry dame.
The angry nymph the God perceives
Struggling through the intangling leaves:
When from his fragrant ambuscade
He thus accosts the weeping maid.
Cease, Chloe, cease; and do not cry,
Nor blame the harmless tree -- 'twas I.
'Twas I, that caused the little pain,
And I -- will make it well again.
My mother bad me do it; and said,
This herb would ease the suffering maid.
Let it but to the place be bound,
'Twill stop the blood, and heal the wound.
But, Chloe, if so small a dart,
And in the finger, gives such smart,
What, madam -- if I Would pierced your heart?
Cease then to scorn my power; and know,
By what I Have done, what I can do.
Here he assumed an aweful look;
He nodded thrice, his locks he shook,
And mimick'd Jove in all he spoke.
With strenuous arm he twang'd his bow,
He showed her all his quiver too;
This, says the God, -- and this, the dart,
That wounded such and such a heart.
The virgin saw, admired, believed,
And bowed -- the God with smiles received
The adoration which she paid,
And waved his purple wings, and left the wondering maid.
My Chloe still can show the scar,
And boasts the God's peculiar care.
She loves and is beloved again,
Secure of pleasure, free from pain.
I Have seen the rose adorned with blood,
Which from my Chloe's finger flowed;
I Have seen the sprig where Cupid stood.
I saw his little fragrant nest --
And Chloe told me all the rest.
The POET to his false Mistress.
By the same.
WONDER not, faithless woman, if you see,
Yourself so changed, so great a change in me.
With shame I own it, I was once your slave,
Adored myself the beauties which I gave;
For know, deceived deceitful, that 'twas I
Gave thy form grace, and luster to thine eye:
Thy tongue, thy fingers I their magic taught,
And spread the net in which myself was caught.
To pagan priests first form and dress the wood,
Then prostrate fall before the senseless God.
But now, cursed woman, thy last sentence hear:
^ called thy beauty forth, I bid it disappear.
^ll strip thee of thy borrowed plumes; undress,
And show thee in thy native ugliness.
Those eyes have shone by me, by me that chin
The seat of wanton Cupids long has been:
^^e fires, go out -- ye wanton Cupids, fly --
^f every beam disarm her haggard eye:
It Is I recall ye; my known voice obey --
^^d naught of beauty but the falsehood stay.
On Mr. * * * *, Schoolmaster at * * *.
By the Same.
BEHOLD the lordly pedant in his school,
How stern his brow, how absolute his rule!
^he trembling boys start at his aweful nod;
^^^e's scepter is less dreaded than his rod.
(...) him at home before the sovereign dame!
^^w fawning, how obsequious, and how tame!
^osper, bright amazon, to thee it is given,
^ike Juno, to rule him who rules the heaven.
KAMBROMYOMAXIA: OR THE MOUSE-TRAP; Being a Translation of Mr. HOLDSWORTH'S Of
this translation Mr. Holdsworth declared his entire approbation in a letter, by
giving it this short character, that it was exceedingly well done. See preface
to a dissertation upon eight verses in the second book of Virgil's Georgies.
1749.
MUSCIPULA, 1737.
By * * * *.
THE Mountain-Brim, first of men who framed
Bonds for the Mouse, first who the tiny thief
In prison closed vexatious -- fatal wiles,
And death inextricate -- sing, heavenly Muse.
Thou PHOEBUS, (for to Mice thyself wast erst
A foe, in antique lore thence SMINTHEUS A title of APOLLO, given him for
freeing Smintha, a colony of the Cretans near the Hellespont, from Mice, which
much infested them, OVID. MET. xii. 585. A (...), quae Cretensium lingua murem
domesticum sign. AINSWORTH.
called,)
Inspire the Song; and amongst the Cambrian Hills
Thy Pindus choosing, smile upon the Muse,
Whom lowly themes and humble verse delight.
The Mouse, an hostile Animal, enured
To live by rapine, now long time had roved
Wherever his lust innate of spoil led on;
And unaveng'd his wicked craft pursued;
Long fearless, unaveng'd -- All things on earth
Felt his fell tooth, while safe in nimble speed
Evasive, he in every dainty dish
His revels held secure. Naught was untouched,
But every feast wail'd the domestic foe,
A constant guest unbidden. Nor strong walls
His thefts obstruct, nor massy bars avail,
Nor doors robust, to save the luscious cates:
Through walls, and bars, and doors he eats his way
Contemptuous, and regales with unbought fare.
Thus wail'd the helpless world the general foe,
But Cambria most; for Cambria's odorous stores
Most stimulate the curious taste of Mouse:
Not with a taste content, or lambent kiss,
(The fate of common cheese,) he undermines
And hollows with reiterated tooth
Eatable Palaces.
The Nation saw,
And raged -- Revenge and grief distract their minds --
What should they do? They foam, they gnash their teeth,
And over their pendant rocks in fury rove,
Restless with rage -- for Nature prone to rage
The Cambrians formed, and bade their fiery breasts
Burst into sudden flame -- that men would deem
Their souls were with their fingers sulphur-ting'd.
It is decreed -- Rage prompts them to revenge
Unsated but with blood -- Yet by what means,
What art the cautious felon to ensnare,
They doubt: for, Cambria, thy Grimalkin race
Nor to the house defense, nor in distress
So imminent, could aught of succor bring.
Often had the Cat placed at the cavern's mouth
The various ambuscade; as often with paw
Soft-silent creeping, near the hollow cell
Kept wary watch -- In vain -- The little Mouse
In little bulk secure, (advantage great
Over a Giant Foe!) if chance he spy
Her watching at his door intent on prey,
Inward he flies, his serpentine recess
Pursues, and caves impervious to Cat:
Nor dares again thrust out his head in air,
Nor form new sallies, till the siege be raised,
And danger with the watchful foe withdrawn.
The Cambrians thus, (if Cambrians with the Mouse
We may compare,) when Roman JULIUS sought
To join the Britons to the world subdued,
Eluded his vain toil. -- To their retreat
At once a nation vanished; in their rocks,
Rampires impregnable, lay safe obscured
'Mid circling ruin; and of conquest though
Despairing, to be conquerable scorned.
Their long, unbroken lineage hence they boast,
Their country unsubdued, and ancient tongue.
Thus did the Mouse, by custom tutored, often
Evade the hostile paw; nor Cambria's sons
Had hope from their confederate of the war:
When strait, on the utmost frontiers of their Land,
Where now Menevia the shrunk honors mourns
Of her divided mitre, of whose walls
Half-buried but an empty name remains,
Behold a Council summons'd. From each side
See Nobles, Fathers, and the vulgar throng
Of stench sulphurous, mix.
An ancient Sage,
Whose length of beard often from his native hills
The goat with envy eyed; his hands, his face
With scurf of ancient growth encrusted over;
Broken with years, against a post reclined,
(By Cambrian backs still shaken) in the midst
Stood visible to all, and with deep tone
These words precipitating, gutt'ral spoke.
"Of open war we treat not, but sly theft --
"No foreign foe, but a too inmate guest
"(That heavier evil) summons us to meet.
"Still shall the bold insulter lord it thus,
"The tyrant Mouse? Rouse, aweful Fathers, rouse;
"Ye, to whose breasts your country's good is dear,
"By counsel end these horrors; and if aught
"Of hope remain, now lend propitious aid:
"So shall your glory grow, your names be known
"Immortal as CAIDWALADER'S in fame."
He spoke, and strait the fragments, moldy scraps,
Relics of rapine, monuments of theft,
High in their sight uprearing, roused their rage.
Now thirst of dire revenge, now lust of fame
Burns emulous, and fires each Patriot breast;
Each meditates to Mouse unheard of fate,
And every brain is hamm'ring on a TRAP.
But one 'bove all by the honour-added name
Of TAFFY famed, far more for wit renowned:
Cambria never bred his peer, whether at forge,
Or council; Senator and Blacksmith He.
Thus 'gan the Sage -- "Should Cheese, our Nation's boast,
"In Cambria be extinct, I fear our hinds
"Would mourn their whole meals sunk, and Nobles grieve
"The honors lost, that crowned the second course.
"Since then nor Cambria's courage, nor her Cats
"Against the monsters can prevail, we'll try
"If this mechanic hand, if craft, deceit,
"Can aught advantage: in a foe none asks
"If force prevail, or fraud."
Strait at this boast,
All fix on TAFFY their expecting eyes,
All in glad murmurs speak their promised joy,
Wait whence the bliss; question, and burn to know.
Scratching his head, (as British heads demand,)
He ghastly smiled, and strait with freer air
Proceeded thus -- "When wearied, at the close
"Of yester sun I gave my limbs to rest,
"And slumber deep my eyes had quenched; a Mouse
"Bold and pursuing, as I guess, the trail,
"Which unconnected Cheese recent exhaled
"From out my viscous jaws, stole down my mouth
"Then discontinuous; and reaching now
"My very entrails, strait their crude contents
" 'Gan gnaw, and through my throat ill-fortified
"My yester's meal, alas! triumphant drags.
"When sudden roused from sleep, in his retreat
"I 'twixt my teeth the felon snap'd, and bound
"Vainly rebellious in the biting chain.
"Instructed thus that Mouse might be enthralled,
"New visionary prison-houses rise
"In my revolving mind, and such restraints,
"As the late captive of my jaws suggests.
"By what mysterious laws the hand of JOVE
"Moves sublunary things! By what hid rules
"The chain of causes acts! the Mouse himself
"To us involuntary succor brings,
"And for the wounds he gave himself prescribes.
"Blush not by such a master to improve;
"From foes to learn, honor nor right forbids."
These said, homeward he his. The applauding throng
Accompany his route, and to his toil
Propitious omens beg. Each to his house
Bends his swift course; each to his Lares flies,
Glad harbinger of this expected birth
From TAFFY'S brain: and whilst they tell the tale,
Whilst to the Gods for glad event they bend
Of the great enterprise, the Mousing Kind
(Prophetic instinct!) show unwonted joy
Gamesome; and (if we credit Fame) beneath
The matron's hand dances the embryo cheese.
TAFFY mean while with head, and hand, and heart,
Plies his great work, with PALLAS' aid divine
The MOUSE-TRAP builds. A wonderful machine
Now stood confessed; and form 'till then unknown
The Tragi-comic edifice indu'd.
Now smile, sweet Muse, and to our sight disclose
The infant fabric; each particular
Dilate, and join them in the finished pile.
Of oblong form twin planks of wood compose
The base and roof; a wiry palisade
Fences each side, on whose small columns raised
The fabric stands: the insi'dious gate invites
With friendly-seeming welcome; but on high,
Depending from a slender thread, the vast
Portcullis threats, to thoughtless Mice sure death.
(Such is the thread of life, spun by the FATES
To Mouse and Man -- All on a thread depend.)
Amidst the level roof shoots up a mast
Erect, in whose cleft head a slender beam
Transverse inserted plays, and on each side
Extends its poised arms; whose one extreme
Depressed, one equally the pendent door
Exalts. Within, let through a slender bore,
A wire depends that fluctuates with a touch;
The lower part is cramped into a hook,
Tenacious of the bait; while the upper gripes
The extremest handle of the treacherous beam.
But soon as ever it feels the foe to 've touched
The fatal food, the loosened portal strait
Lets fall, and speaks the first attack revenged.
Things thus disposed, instant the pendent hook
TAFFY with treason clothes, and turns to death
The very food of Mouse: but, that his cheese
More fragrant may from far the Foe invite,
Toasts the fell bait, and strengthens the perfume.
And now appeared the memorable night,
When on his bed TAFFY his limbs fatigued
Reposing, near his pillow's downy side
His Minion MOUSE-TRAP set, and all-secure
IN the faithful centry, slumber sweet indulged.
The frolic Mice, (a tribe audacious they)
Safe in the covert of the silent night,
Now sport abroad: when one, a leader Mouse,
Of nose sagacious, born the Gods his foes,
The hostile ambush seeks, led by the scent
Of toasted cheese delicious. The Grate resists
His swift career, and entrance first denies --
But he, to suffer such severe repulse
Indignant, round the wiry fortress scours,
And crisps his nose, and with sagacious beard
A pass explores; and entered now the lines,
Impassable again, of all his wish
At length possessed, the deadly bait secures,
Feasts on his ruin, and enjoys his fate.
TAFFY, whom strait the pendulous door, scarce dropped,
With sudden clap had waked, you might behold
Now on his elbow prop'd, now from his bed
Skipping triumphant, fired with thirst to know
What new-come guest. The Mouse ridiculous
Rages within, batters with front and foot,
Proves with his head each wiry interval,
And wears with raging tooth his iron hold.
Driven to the toils so raves the Marsian boar
Horrid, and shakes his waving bonds, the sport
Of circling dogs; he flings about his foam,
And on his front erect the bristles stare.
The morrow came, and from her rocky highths,
Precipitant, whole Cambria pours; for strait
In every ear the novel tale was rife --
Nor wonder, for the Ass, his solemn wont
Relaxed, nor mindful of his late slow pace,
The mountain climbs more wanton than the kid:
Thence with sonorous din from rusty throat,
(The Cambrian Herald simulating,) thrice
Thee, TAFFY, brayed; thrice told the public joy.
Nor less the Owl; (from that great Era termed
Cambria's Ambassador:) for through her towns,
And utmost limits wandering wild that night,
She scratched the windows with her ominous beak,
Grating harsh dissonance, and sung in shrieks
The instant fate of Mouse. The laboring rocks
Bring forth, and Pembroke's, and Mervinia's sons
In swarms condensed rush down; and whom the walls
Of Bonium hold, and Maridunum famed
For their prophetic bard, MERLIN; and whom
Fruitful Glamorgan feeds, and he that drinks
Of Vaga's stream, with the rough hardy clown
Montgomery manures. -- Then TAFFY, 'midst
The crowded ring, his raging prey insults.
"Vain are thy efforts -- fixed thy doom of death,
"On this my altar the first victim thou,
"To dye with memorable blood the frame.
"No hope remains: thy flight these wiry posts
"Inexorable bar -- Dread, wicked wight,
"The fate thy merits ask; for these thy bonds
"Thou quit'st not but with life."
The fatal words
Scarce had he spoke, when from the sunny thatch,
(Her wonted haunt, when with extended limbs
She basks luxurious, winking in soft ease,)
Down leaped the playful Cat. -- Her swift approach
The captive eyes, and pricks his ears, and stiff
Bristles his gibbous back, nor dares attempt
The portal now up-drawn; but his sole hope
Of freedom only in his prison fixed,
With hooked talons grasps his bonds, and hangs
Tenacious by his feet -- At length he drops
Out-shaken: instant to her prey the Cat
Flies rapid, and With rude, embrace enfolds,
And savage kisses on her struggling foe
(Vain efforts!) cruelly imprints. No pause
Her rage admits; her sinuous-twirling tail
Denotes the Victor's joy; her body moves
Agil in wanton frolicks, watching now
Prone on the earth intent the destined Mouse;
His neck now lightly pats with hurtless paw,
Dissembling love; but ruminates the while
To tear him limb from limb. The Mouser thus,
Witty in tyranny, with various art
Wanton barbarity enjoys: but now,
Tired with the sportive mockery, no more
Conceals her rage, but over her trembling prey
Like the starved lion hangs, and growling tears
His gory entrails, and convulsive limbs.
The circling crowd, soon as his hated blood
Sprinkled they spy, fill with glad shouts the air;
And ECHO, tenant of the Cambrian hills,
Their clamorous joy repeats; Plinlimmon's highth,
And Brechin with the loftier Snowdon join:
To the neighboring stars the loud acclaim ascends,
And OFFA'S Ditch rebellows to the din.
TAFFY, for ever live -- Even to this day
Thy gift the Cambrian celebrates; and Thee
Commemorates each circling year. The land
Grateful, its native honors to maintain,
Each joyful head crowns redolent with Leek.
VERSES under the Prints of Mr. HOGARTH'S Rake's Progress, 1735.
By the Same.
PLATE I. SCENE, The room of the miserly father.
O Vanity of AGE! untoward,
Ever spleeny, ever froward!
Why those bolts, and massy chains,
Squint suspicious, jealous pains?
Why, thy toilsome journey over,
Lay'st thou in an useless store?
Hope along with Time is flown,
Nor can thou reap the field thou'st sown.
Have thou a son? -- In time be wise.
He views thy toil with other eyes. --
Needs must thy kind, paternal care,
Locked in thy chests, be buried there;
Whence then shall flow thy friendly ease,
That social converse, homefelt peace,
Familiar duty without dread,
Instruction from example bred,
Which youthful minds with freedom mend.
And with the Father mix the Friend?
Uncircumscrib'd by prudent rules,
Or precepts of expensive schools;
Abused at home, abroad despised,
Unbred, unlettered, unadvised;
The headstrong course of youth began,
What comfort from this darling son?
PLATE II. The rake's levee.
PROSPERITY (with harlot's smiles,
Most pleasing when she most beguiles,)
How soon, sweet foe, can all thy train
Of false, gay, frantic, loud, and vain,
Enter the unprovided mind,
And memory in fetters bind;
Load Faith and Love with golden chain,
And sprinkle Lethe over the brain!
PLEASURE, in her silver throne,
Smiling comes, nor comes alone;
Venus comes with her along,
And smooth Lyaeus ever young;
And in their train, to fill the press,
Come apish Dance, and swollen Excess,
Mechanic Honor, vicious Taste,
And Fashion in her changing vest.
PLATE III. A brothel.
O vanity of youthful blood,
So by misuse to poison Good!
Woman, framed for social love,
Fairest gift of powers above;
Source of every household blessing,
All charms in innocence possessing --
But turned to Vice all plagues above,
Foe to thy being, foe to Love!
Guest divine to outward viewing,
Abler minister of ruin!
And thou no less of gift divine,
Sweet Poison of misused WINE! Milton.

With freedom led to every part,
And secret chamber of the heart;
Do thou thy friendly host betray,
And show thy riotous gang the way
To enter in with covert treason,
O'erthrow the drowsy guard of reason,
To ransack the abandoned place,
And revel there with wild excess?
PLATE IV. St. James' street where the rake is arrested.
O vanity of youthful blood,
So by misuse to poison Good!
Reason awakes, and views unbar'd
The sacred gates he watched to guard;
Approaching sees the harpy, Law,
And Poverty, with icy paw
Ready to seize the poor remains
That Vice has left of all his gains.
Cold Penitence, lame After-thought,
With fears, despair, and horrors fraught,
Call back his guilty pleasures dead,
Whom he has wronged and whom betrayed.
PLATE V. Marybone church, where he marries a rich old woman.
New to the school of hard Mishap,
Driven from the ease of Fortune's lap,
What shames will Nature not embrace
TO avoid less shame of drear distress!
GOLD can the charms of youth bestow,
And mask deformity with show:
GOLD can avert the sting of Shame,
In Winter's arms create a flame;
Can couple youth with hoary age,
And make antipathies engage.
PLATE VI. A gaming house.
GOLD, thou bright son of Phoebus, source
Of universal intercourse;
Of weeping Virtue soft redress,
And blessing those who live to bless!
Yet often behold this sacred trust,
The tool of avaritious lust:
No longer bond of humankind,
But bane of every virtuous mind.
What Chaos such misuse attends!
Friendship stoops to prey on friends;
Health, that gives relish to delight,
Is wasted with the wasting night;
Doubt and mistrust is thrown on HEAVEN,
And all its power to Chance is given.
Sad purchase of repentant tears,
Of needless quarrels, endless fears,
Of hopes of moments, pangs of years!
Sad purchase of a tortured mind
To an imprisoned body joined!
PLATE VII. A prison.
Happy the man, whose constant thought
(Though in the school of hardship taught,)
Can send Remembrance back, to fetch
Treasures from life's earliest stretch;
Who, self-approving, can review
Scenes of past virtues, which shine through
The gloom of age, and cast a ray
To gild the evening of his day!
Not so the guilty wretch confined;
No pleasures meet his conscious mind;
No blessings brought from early youth,
But broken faith, and wrested truth,
Talents idle and unused,
And every trust of heaven abused.
In seas of sad reflection lost,
From horrors still to horrors tossed,
Reason the vessel leaves to steer,
And gives the helm to mad DESPAIR.
PLATE VIII. Bethle'm.
MADNESS! thou Chaos of the brain;
What art, that pleasure giv'st and pain?
Tyranny of Fancy's reign!
Mechanic Fancy! that can build
Vast labyrinths and mazes wild,
With rule disjointed, shapeless measure,
Filled with Horror, filled with Pleasure!
Shapes of Horror, that would even
Cast doubt of mercy upon heaven!
Shapes of Pleasure, that but seen
Would split the shaking sides of Spleen!
Of vanity of AGE! here see
The stamp of heaven effaced by thee!
The headstrong course of youth thus run,
What comfort from this darling son?
His rattling chains with terror hear;
Behold death grappling with despair;
See him by thee to ruin sold,
And curse thyself, and curse thy GOLD.
On the Friendship of two young Ladies, 1730.
By the Same.
HAIL, beauteous pair, whom Friendship binds
In softest, yet in strongest ties,
Soft as the temper of your minds,
Strong as the luster of your eyes!
So Venus' doves in couples fly,
And friendly steer their equal course;
Whose feathers Cupid's shafts supply,
And wing them with resistless force.
Thus as you move Love's tender flame,
Like that of Friendship, paler burns;
Both our divided passion claim,
And friends and rivals prove by turns.
Then ease yourselves and bless mankind,
Friendship so cursed no more pursue*
In wedlock's rosy bower you will find
The joys of Love and Friendship too.
CHLOE'S unknown Likeness, 1738.
By the Same.
I.
IN shape, in air, in face and voice
The very ape of Chloe!
Since I have fixed for life my choice,
It Is well I do not know you.
II.
Yet witness, Love, I own the power
Of this ideal maid:
So much my Chloe I adore,
I bow me to her shade.
III.
If idol-worship be a fault,
Have mercy, Love, on me --
Chloe's the goddess of my thought,
Though Celia bows my knee.
IV.
Though the mock-sun amuse the sight,
And more demand the view;
We wonder at the mimic light,
But only feel the true.
V.
Forgive me, fair reflected shade,
That I suppress this flame:
Who can pursue the ideal maid,
Blessed in the real dame?
VI.
Consult your mind, consult your glass,
Each charm of sense and youth;
Then own, who changes is an ass,
Nor wonder at my truth.
The BIRD of PASSAGE, 1749.
By the Same.
I.
GROWN sick of crowds and noise,
To peaceful rural joys.
Good Bellmont from the town retires,
Miss Harriet seeks the shade,
And looks the country maid,
And artfully his taste admires.
II.
Their sympathizing themes
Of lawns, and shades, and streams,
Were all they sung, and all they said.
The music sweet he finds
Of well-according minds,
And loves the perfect rural mind.
III.
His honest pure desires
Not fed by vicious fires,
Suggest to speak his flame betimes:
But, scarce his passion known,
This Passage-Bird is flown
To warmer air, and brighter climes.
IV.
From shades to crowded rooms,
From flowers to dead perfumes --
The season calls -- she must away,
It Is then alone she lives,
When she in riot gives
To routs the night, to sleep the day.
V.
He follows her enraged,
And finds her deep engaged
At crafty Crib and brazen Brag:
He hears her betting high.
He sees her slur the die --
He takes his boots, and mounts his nag.
VERSES said to be fixed on the Gate of the LOUVRE at PARIS. 1751.
DEUX Henris immoles par nos braves ayeux,
L'un a la liberte, et Bourbon a nos Dieux,
Nous animent, Louis, aux memes enterprises.
Ils revivent en toi ces anciens tyrans --
Crains notre desespoir -- la noblesse a ses Guises,
Paris des Ravillacs, le clerge des Clements.
ENGLISH.
By the Same.
OUR fathers' victims the two Henry's see,
This to religion, that to liberty.
Louis, in thee again the tyrants live;
Dread, lest our deep despair those scenes revive.
Paris nor yet a Ravilliac denies,
The church a Clement, nor the court a Guise.
LATIN.
By the Same.
CIVILI Henricum cecidit par nobile ferro,
Hic libertati victima, et ille Deo:
Dum priscos renovas iterum, Ludovice, tyrannos,
Nos renovare iterum facta priora doces.
Nos timeas laesos -- Guisos dabit aula recentes,
Claustraque Clementes, urbsque Rabilliacos.
CHLOE resolved. A BALLAD.
By the Same. Set to Music by Dr. GREEN, 1743.
I.
AS Chloe on flowers reclined over the stream,
She sighed to the breeze, and made Colin her theme;
Though pleasant the stream, and though cooling the breeze,
And the flowers though fragrant, she panted for ease.
II.
The stream it was fickle, and hasted away,
It kissed the sweet banks, but no longer could stay;
Though beauteous inconstant, and faithless though fair,
Ah! Colin, look in, and behold thyself there.
III.
The breeze that so sweet on its bosom did play,
Now rose to a tempest, and darkened the day.
As sweet as the breeze, and as loud as the wind,
Such Colin when angry, and Colin when kind.
IV.
The flowers when gathered, so beauteous and sweet,
Now fade on her bosom, and die at her feet;
So fair in their bloom, and so foul in decay,
Such Colin when present, and Colin away.
V.
In rage and despair from the ground she arose,
And from her the flowers so faded she throws;
She weeps in the stream, and she sighs to the wind,
And resolves to drive Colin quite out of her mind.
VI.
But what her resolves when her Colin appeared?
The stream it stood still, and no tempest was heard;
The flowers recovered their beautiful hue:
She found he was kind, and believed he was true.
EPILOGUE to SHAKESPEARE'S first Part of King HENRY IV. ACTED BY Young GENTLEMEN
at Mr. NEWCOME'S School at HACKNEY, 1748;
Spoken by Mr. J. Y. in the Character of FALSTAFF, Pushed in upon the Stage by
Prince HENRY.
By the Same.
A Plague upon all cowards still I say --
Old Jack must bear the heat of all the day,
And be the master-fool beyond the play --
Amidst hot-blooded Hotspur's rebel strife,
By miracle of wit I saved my life,
And now stand foolishly exposed again
To the hissing bullets of the critic's brain.
Go to, old lad, it is time that thou were wiser --
Thou art not framed for an epiloguizer.
There Is Hal now, or his nimble shadow Poins,
Strait in the back, and lissome in the loins,
Who wears his boot smooth as his mistress' skin,
And shining as the glass she dresses in;
Can bow and cringe, fawn, flatter, cog and lie --
Which honest Jack could never do -- not I.
Hal's heir-apparent face might stand it buff,
And make (ha! ha! ha!) a saucy epilogue enough;
But I am old, and stiff -- nay, bashful grown,
For Shakespeare's humor is not now my own.
I feel myself a counterfeiting ass;
And if for sterling wit I give you brass,
It is his royal image makes it pass.
Fancy now works; and here I stand and stew
In mine own greasy fears, which set to view
Eleven buckram critics in each man of you.
Wights, who with no out-faceings will be shamm'd,
Nor into risibility be bamm'd;
Will, though she shake their sides, think nature treason,
And see one damned, ere -- laugh without a reason.
Then how shall one not of the virtuous speed,
Who merely has a wicked wit to plead --
Wit without measure, humor without rule,
Unfettered laugh, and lawless ridicule?
'Faith! try him by his peers, a jury chosen --
The kingdom will, I think, scarce raise the dozen.
So -- be but kind, and countenance the cheat,
I Will in, and swear to Hal -- I Have done the feat.
PROLOGUE to COMUS, Performed for the Benefit of the General Hospital at BATH,
1756.
By the Same. Spoken by Miss MORRISON, in the Character of a Lady of Fashion.
She enters with a Number of Tickets in her Hand. WELL, I Have been beating up
for volunteers,
But find that -- charity has got no ears.
I first attacked a colonel of the guards --
Sir, charity -- consider its rewards.
With healing hand the saddest sores it skins,
And covers -- oh! -- a multitude of sins.
He swore, the world was welcome to his thoughts:
'Twas damned hypocrisy to hide one's faults;
And with that sin his conscience never was twitted --
The only one he never had committed.
Next, to my knight I plead. He -- shook his head;
Complained the stocks were low -- and trade was dead.
In these Bath-charities a tax he would found
More heavy than -- four shillings in the pound.
What with the playhouse, hospital, and abbey,
A man was stripped -- unless he would look quite shabby.
Then such a train, and such expense to fit!
My lady, all the brats, and cousin Kit --
He Would steal, himself -- perhaps -- into the pit.
Old lady Slipslop, at her morning cards,
Vows that all works of genus she regards;
Raffles for Chinese Gods, card-houses, shells,
Nor grudges to the music, or the bells,
But has a strange antiquity to nasty ospitels.
I hope your lordship -- then my lord replies --
No doubt, the governors are -- very wise;
But, for the play, he -- wondered at their choice.
In Milton's days such stuff might be the taste,
But faith! he thought it was damned dull and chaste.
Then swears, he to the charity is hearty,
But cannot, in honor, break his evening party.
When to the gouty alderman I sued,
The nasty fellow, ('gad!) was downright rude.
Is begging grown the fashion, with a pox!
The mayor should set such housewives in the stocks.
Give you a guinea! z -- ds! replied the beast,
'Twou'd buy a ticket for a turtle-feast.
Think what a guinea-a-head might set before ye --
Sir -- mullet -- turbot -- and a grand John Dorey,
I Will never give a groat, as I Am a sinner,
Unless they gather 't in a dish, at dinner.
I trust, by art and more polite address,
You fairer advocates met more success;
And not a man compassion's cause withstood,
When beauty pleaded for such general good.
EPIGRAMS from MARTIAL.
By the Same. To JAMES HARRIS, Esquire
MARTIAL, Book IV. Ep. 87.
Would thou, by Attic taste approved,
By all be read, by all be loved,
To learned Harris' curious eye,
By me advised, dear Muse, apply:
In him the perfect judge you will find,
In him the candid friend, and kind.
If he repeats, if he approves,
If he the laughing muscles moves,
Thou nor the critic's sneer shal'st mind,
Nor be to pie's or trunks consigned.
If he condemns, away you fly,
And mount in paper kites the sky,
Or dead amongst Grub-street's records lie.
BOOK I. Ep. 11.
Curmudgeon the rich widow courts,
Nor lovely she, nor made for sports;
It Is to Curmudgeon charm enough,
That she has got a churchyard cough.
BOOK I. Ep. 14.
When Arria from her wounded side
To Paetus gave the reeking steel,
I feel not what I Have done, she cried;
What Paetus is to do -- I feel.
BOOK III. Ep. 43.
Before a swan, behind a crow,
Such self-deceit never did I know.
Ah! cease your arts -- death knows you're gray,
And spite of all, will keep his day.
BOOK IV. Ep. 78.
With lace bedizen'd comes the man,
And I must dine with lady Anne.
A silver service loads the board,
Of eatables a slender hoard.
"Your pride, and not your victuals spare;
"I came to dine, and not to stare.
BOOK VII. Ep. 75.
When dukes in town ask thee to dine,
To rule their roast, and smack their wine;
Or take thee to their country-seat,
To make their dogs, and bless their meat;
--, dream not on preferment soon,
You Are not their friend, but their buffoon.
BOOK VIII. Ep. 35.
Alike in temper and in life,
A drunken husband, sottish wife,
She a scold, a bully he, --
The devil's in it, they don't agree.
BOOK XII. Ep. 23.
Your teeth from Hemmet, and your hair from Bolney,
Was not an eye too to be had for money?
BOOK XII. Ep. 30.
Ned is a sober fellow, they pretend --
Such would I have my coachman, not my friend.
BOOK XII. Ep 103.
You sell your wife's rich jewels, lace, and clothes;
The price once paid, away the purchase goes:
But she a better bargain proves, I Am told;
Still sold returns, and still is to be sold.
BOOK I. Ep. 40.
Is there, to enroll amongst the friendly few,
Whose names pure faith and ancient fame renew?
Is there, enriched with Virtue's honest store,
Deep versed in Latian and Athenian lore?
Is there, who right maintains and truth pursues,
Nor knows a wish that heaven can refuse?
Is there, who can on his great self depend?
Now let me die, but Harris is this friend.
A very gallant Copy of VERSES, (but somewhat silly) upon the Ladies, and their
fine Clothes at a Ball.
By Mr. W. TAILOR.
HAPPY the worms, that spun their lives away,
TO enrich the splendor of this glorious day!
Well pleased these generous foreigners expire,
A sacrifice to Beauty's general fire.
Oh! had they seen, with what superior grace
Beauty here triumphs in each lovely face,
Their amorous flames had their own work betrayed,
And burned the web their curious art had made!
Another on the same Subject, written with more Judgment, but fewer good
Manners.
By the Same.
HOW strangely does the power of custom rule,
And prejudice our wisest thoughts control!
How does one country with contempt deride
What other nations count their chiefest pride!
Our European ladies think they are fine,
When in the entrails of a worm they shine;
Yet laugh to see conceited Hottentots
Grow vain, though shining in far nobler guts.
In turgid pomp their strutting limbs are decked,
And unctuous splendours from their robes reflect:
The balmy gloss, which on the surface shines,
Regales the smell, and smooths the ladies' skins.
Richly, yet wisely dressed! for of the cost
They suffer not a remnant to be lost;
But eat each tatter, as it wears away,
And sup upon the fragments of the day.
Frugal of time, at once they undress and feed,
Gnaw off their clothes, and put themselves to bed.
Their wedding garments prove their wedding feasts,
And the bride's fin'ry entertains the guests:
The eager bridegroom surfeits on her charms,
And fills his belly, as he fills his arms.
Justly may they condemn our foolish pride,
Who only for the naked back provide;
And useless garments to the dunghill cast,
Before they have through the hungry stomach passed;
Who well might purchase, had we their good sense,
Both food and raiment at the same expense.
When will our wives and daughters be so good,
Thus to convert their old clothes into food?
The BREWER'S Coachman.
By the Same.
HONEST William, an easy and good-natured fellow,
Would a little too often get a little too mellow.
Body coachman was he to an eminent brewer --
No better ever sat in a box, to be sure.
His coach was kept clean, and no mothers or nurses
Took that care of their babes that he took of his horses.
He had these -- ay and fifty good qualities more,
But the business of tippling could never be got over:
So his master effectually mended the matter,
By hiring a man, who drank nothing but water.
Now, William, says he, you see the plain case;
Had you drunk as he does, you would kept a good place.
Drink water! quoth William -- had all men done so,
You Would never have wanted a coachman, I trow.
They Are soakers, like me whom you load with reproaches,
That enable you brewers to ride in your coaches.
FEMALE CAUTION.
By the Same.
MOTHER Breedwell presented her husband each year
With a chopping brave boy, and sometimes with apair;
'Till the primitive blessing of multiplication
Had filled the whole house with a young generation.
But as that increased, so sorrow and care,
Those primitive curses, put in for a share;
And the toilsome employments of mother and wise,
Had hag'd the poor woman half out of her life.
To the doctor she goes with a pitiful face,
And begs he would give his advice in her case.
She tells him her husband was wretchedly poor,
And prays he would consider her chargeable store,
And prevent for the future her having of more.
As for that, quoth the sage, I Have a cure never failing,
Which neither Hippocrates thought of, nor Galen.
Look here -- I present you this wonderful hose,
Into which, every night when you bed with your spouse,
Thrust both legs; nor pull off the magical fetters,
Till you rise in the morn about family matters.
Observe but this rule, which I give you in charge,
And your stock may diminish, but never enlarge.
Many thanks for your kindness, dear Sir, quoth the dame,
(Here she dropped him a curt'sie) -- if it were not for shame,
And for fear you should think me too bold, I Would fain beg
TO other shocking -- and so have a hose to each leg:
For if such rare virtue's contained in one,
How safe should I be, had I both of them on!
GRACE and NATURE.
By the Same.
QUOTH John to his teacher, Good Sir, if you please,
I would beg your advice in a difficult case;
It Is a weighty concern, that may hold one for life --
It Is, in short, the old story of taking a wife.
There Is a pair of young damsels I Am proffered to marry,
And whether to choose puts me in a quandary:
They Are alike in age, family, fortune, and feature,
Only one has more grace, and the other goodnature.
As for that, says the teacher, goodnature and love,
And sweetness of temper are gifts from above,
And as coming from thence we should give 'em their due;
Grace is a superior blessing, it is true.
Ay, Sir, I remember an excellent sarment,
Wherein all along you gave grace the preferment.
I shall never forget it, as how you were telling,
That heaven resided where grace had its dwelling.
Why John, quoth the teacher, that is true: but, alas,
What heaven can do is quite out of the case;
For by day and by night, with the woman you wed
It Is you that must board, and it is you that must bed;
And a good-natured girl may quickly grow gracious,
But a sour-headed saint will be ever vexatious.
HULL ALE.
By the Same.
LONG time did a silly old proverb prevail,
That meat, drink, and cloth were all found in good ale;
'Till a lover of truth went on purpose to Hull,
And to try the experiment drank his skin full.
He began to see visions, his head it turned round,
'Till off from his keffal he fell on the ground:
There in trances profound our philosopher mellow
Lay all night in the snow consulting his pillow.
Oracular vapors give prophecy birth,
As Plutarch reports, springing out of the earth.
Whether this was the cause, or however inspired,
Our sage gave a sentence will be ever admired.
'Twas this -- I pronounce that good ale is good meat,
For I find, I have no inclination to eat:
That good ale is good cloth, you may honestly boast,
For in faith! I Am as blithe and as warm as a toast:
But to call it good drink -- is a lie, I Will be sworn,
For I never was so dry since the hour I was born.
The cloth, cries a punster who chanced to come by,
Must be a good drap, if it kept you so dry.
ABSOLUTION.
By the Same.
IT blew an hard storm, and in utmost confusion
The sailors all hurried to get absolution;
Which done, and the weight of the sins they would confessed,
Was transferred, as they thought, from themselves to the priest
To lighten the ship, and conclude their devotion,
They tossed the poor parson souse into the ocean.
PENANCE.
A Drunken old Scot by the rigorous sentence
Of the kirk was condemned to the stool of repentance.
Mess John to his conscience his vices put home,
And his danger in this, and the world that is to come.
Thou reprobate mortal; why, do not thou know
Whither, after your death, all you drunkards must go?
Must go when we are dead? why Sir, you may swear,
We shall go, one and all, where we find the best beer.
The MISTAKE.
By the Same.
A Cannon ball, one bloody day,
Took a poor sailor's leg away;
And, as on 'his comrade's back he made off,
A second fairly took his head off.
The fellow, on this odd emergence,
Carries him pick-back to the surgeons.
Z -- ds! cries the Doctor, are you drunk,
To bring me here an headless trunk?
A lying dog! cries Jack, -- he said
His leg was off, and not his head.
A Fragment of CHAUCER.
By J. H. Esquire
RIGHT well of learned clerkis is it sed,
That womenhud for mannis' use is made;
But naughty man likes not one, or so,
He lusts aye unthirftily for mo;
And whom he whilome cherished, when tied
By holy church he cannot her abide.
Like unto dog which lights of a bone,
His tail he waggeth, glad therefore y-grown,
But thilke same bone if to his tail thou tie,
Pardie, he fearing it away does fly.
Upon an ALCOVE, now at PARSON'S Green.
O Favorite Muse of SHENSTONE hear!
And leave awhile his blissful groves;
Aid me this sweet alcove to sing,
The Author's seat whom SHENSTONE loves.
Here the soul-harr'wing genius formed
His PAMELA'S enchanting story!
And here divine CLARISSA died
A martyr to our sex's glory!
'Twas here the noble-minded How
With every generous passion glowed:
And here the gentle Belford's eyes
With manly sorrows overflowed.
Here Clementina, hapless maid!
With wild distress each bosom tears:
And here the lovely Harriet owned
A virgin's hopes, a virgin's fears.
Here Emily, sweet artless girl,
Fills every breast with strange delight!
And when we fear her early fall,
Secures her conquest by her flight.
Here sprightly Charlotte's hum'rous wit
Dispenses mirth to all around:
But, ah! we tremble, whilst we smile,
Lest its fine edge herself should wound.
Here GRANDISON, to crown the whole,
A bright exemplar stands confessed!
Who stole those virtues we admire
From the great Author's glowing breast.
O sacred seat! be thou revered
By such as own thy master's power;
And, like his works, for ages last,
Till fame and language are no more.
The COUNTRY PARSON.
I.
BETWEEN the smooth descent of yonder hills,
Deep in the vale with tufted trees beset;
Whose antique roots are washed with brawling rills,
Whose leafy arms the summer's rage defeat,
There stands a country parson's calm retreat.
View well the silent shade with sober eye,
And wonder at the courtier's swollen luxury.
II.
See to his garden's pale where close allied
A decent church the neighboring glebe commands;
Whose steeple's stocked with bells, (the country's pride)
Whose beams are wreathed about with virgin bands,
Wove on the bridal day by virgin hands.
The surplice clean, and chancel newly whited,
That with the good man's neatness all must be delighted.
III.
His house stands near, (this church's younger brother)
Whose furniture shows housewifely, and neat;
A little garden runs from one to to other,
Stately in use, excluding useless state,
In which a yew tree stands of ancient date:
And near it rosemary climbs up the wall;
Or else imperfect were the rites of funeral.
IV.
Him lives near in gentle neighborhood
An heartsome friend, replete with bounteous love,
Whose generous wine long time has corked stood,
(Not to avoid the taste but to improve;)
With him the good man's moments softly move:
Nor yet complete, if I should leave untold
The dame who of his joys sweet partnership does hold.
V.
Well knows me when to govern, when obey,
Versed in the rights and laws of womanhood;
Nor has she too much wisdom to be gay,
Nor has she so much wit to be o'er-loud:
Nor has she so much beauty to be proud;
But cheerful sense and decent mirth impart
The sweet domestic joys of a well-natur'd heart.
VI.
Eight years has heaven possessed them of a boy,
Who loves a sister younger by a year;
And as they prank about, with silent joy
They sit and smile upon the prattling pair,
(Who two sweet roses on one stalk appear)
And think upon themselves once fair and young,
Before soft Cupid's golden bow became unstrung.
VII.
Each sun arises fresh with sweet content,
And leads them on a course of new delight;
With the same joy the summer's day is spent,
And over a cheerful fire their winter night.
Such are their joys who spend their lives aright:
Though seasons change, no sense of change they know,
But with an equal eye view all things here below.
VIII.
When the amorous earth is wooed with smiling weather,
To wear the verdant mantle of the spring;
Forth walk the little family together
To see the wood, and hear its natives sing;
The flowers sweet odours to their senses bring:
The world appears in blossom, far and near
Joyful they view the purple promise of the year.
IX.
Summer beholds the good man near his bride,
In sweet contentment smoking in his chair;
He views the flocks nibbling the mountain's side,
And every tenth he reckons to his share.
Now to the hay field walk the happy pair,
And with such kindness greet the country folk,
The parson's bush is placed upon the biggest cock.
X.
The promised fruit now fills the teeming soil,
And certain plenty all his doubts relieves;
The peach he planted pays his honest toil,
The farmer brings him home his yellow sheaves,
And his stuffed barn the willing tax receives.
His servants to his loaded orchards hye,
To lay in liquid stores for future jollity.
XI.
When icy bands the stiffened wave enfold,
Still is the parson with contentment crowned;
The cheerful blaze chaces the chilly cold,
In circling cups all winter thoughts are drowned,
And no ill nature sends the laugh around;
Or he, in study pent, thinks what to say,
May touch, yet not offend the squire next sabbath day.
XII.
Thus, still in age the same, he journeys on,
Till envious Fate overtake him on the road;
For the calm pleasures of the holy man
Claim not the madness of a youthful blood.
For many winters thus serenely stood,
Strong in its smooth decline, the sturdy oak,
Till came from heaven the unfear'd and unresisted stroke.
PLAIN TRUTH.
By HENRY FIELDING, Esquire
AS Bathian Venus the other day
Invited all the Gods to tea,
Her maids of honor, the miss Graces,
Attending duly in their places,
Their godships gave a loose to mirth,
As we at Butt'ring's here on earth.
Minerva in her usual way
Rallied the daughter of the sea.
Madam, said she, your loved resort,
The city where you hold your court,
Is lately fallen from its duty,
And triumphs more in wit than beauty;
For here, she cried; see here a poem --
It Is Dalston's; you, Apollo, know him.
Little persuasion sure invites
Pallas to read what Dalston writes:
Nay, I have heard that in Parnassus
For truth a current whisper passes,
That Dalston sometimes has been known
To publish her works as his own.
Minerva read, and every God
Approved -- Jove gave the critic nod:
Apollo and the sacred Nine
Were charmed, and smiled at every line;
And Mars, who little understood,
Swore, d -- n him, if it was not good.
Venus alone sat all the while
Silent, nor deigned a single smile.
All were surpised: some thought her stupid:
Not so her confident 'squire Cupid;
For well the little rogue discerned
At what his mother was concerned,
Yet not a word the urchin said,
But hid in Hebe's lap his head.
At length the rising choler broke
From Venus' lips, -- and thus she spoke,
That poetry so crammed with wit,
Minerva, should your palate hit,
I wonder not, nor that some prudes
(For such there are above the clouds)
Should wish the prize of beauty torn
From her they view with envious scorn.
Me poets never please, but when
Justice and truth direct their pen.
This Dalston -- formerly I Have known him;
Henceforth for ever I disown him;
For Homer's wit shall I despise
In him who writes with Homer's eyes.
A poem on the fairest fair
At Bath, and Betty's name not there!
Has not this poet seen those glances
In which my wicked urchin dances?
Nor that dear dimple, where he treats
Himself with all Arabia's sweets;
In whose soft down while he reposes
In vain the lillies bloom, or roses,
To tempt him from a sweeter bed
Of fairer white or livelier red?
Has he not seen, when some kind gale
Has blown aside the cambric veil,
That seat of paradise, where Jove
Might pamper his almighty love?
Our milky way less fair does show:
There summer's seen 'twixt hills of snow.
From her loved voice whenever she speaks,
What softness in each accent breaks!
And when her dimpled smiles arise,
What sweetness sparkles in her eyes!
Can I then bear, enraged she said,
Slights offered to my favorite maid,
The nymph whom I decreed to be
The representative of me?
The Goddess ceased -- the Gods all bowed,
Nor one the wicked bard avowed,
Who, while in beauty's praise he writ,
Dared Beauty's Goddess to omit:
For now their godships recollected,
'Twas Venus' self he had neglected,
Who in her visits to this place
Had still worn Betty Dalston's face.
Ode to Venus, from her Votaries of the Street.
By * * * * *
ARE these thy palms? oh queen of love!
Pity thy wretched votaries! From above
Behold them stroll, their bosoms bare,
Chilled with the blasts of rude St. Clement's air;
And twitch the sleeve with sly advance:
Roll the bright eye, or shoot the side-long glance:
Whilst the chaste moon, with envious light
Peeps through the curtain of the freezing night.
Not thus when Horace hymn'd thy praise.
You heard the Glyceras of happier days.
Oh goddess of love's pleasing pain!
From thy own isle avert the frost, and rain;
Nor let the little mouth inhale,
(Bane to the teeth) a rough, unfriendly gale;
Or slender ancle white, and neat,
Betray a splash from the polluted street.
Look down with pity on the woes,
That trace our footsteps, and our haunts enclose.
For thee, we forfeit fair renown,
Brave want and danger, orphans of the town;
For thee, sustain the cruel shock
Of caustic Franks, and cicatrizing Rock:
Happy! if Hermes' timely care,
The searching deity of here and there,
Can soften the venereal doom,
And keep awhile pale beauty from the tomb.
But languid! lifeless! cold, and bare,
Gone every tooth, and fallen every hair,
A prey to grief, remorse, disease, --
Ah! Paphian Venus, faithless as the seas!
Fired by thy spells, and magic charms,
We guiltless virgins glowed at soft alarms.
Embarked with youth, and airy smiles,
The graces, playful loves and wanton wiles;
On pleasure's wave we loosed the sails,
Alas! too credulous of flattering gales;
For lo! the heavens with clouds are spread,
The graces, loves, with youth are fled,
And leave the ship, an easy prize,
Unrigg'd and leaky to the inclement skies.
An EPIGRAM.
By the Same.
I Dropped a thing in verse, without a name;
I felt no censure, and I gained no fame:
The public saw the bastard in the cradle,
But never inquired; so left it to the beadle.
A certain nobleman takes up the child,
The real father lay perdue, and smiled.
The public now enlarges every grace,
What shining eyes it has! how fair a face!
Of parts what symmetry! what strength divine!
The noble brat is sure of Pelops' line.
The POET's IMPORTANCE.
By Dr. H * * *
THE glowworm scribblers of a feeble age,
Pale twinklers of an hour provoke my rage:
In each dark hedge we start an insect fire,
Which lives by night, and must at dawn expire;
Yet such their number that their specks combine,
And the unthinking vulgar swear they shine.
Poets are prodigies so greatly rare,
They seem the talks of heaven, and built with care:
Like suns, unquench'd, unrivaled and sublime,
They roll, immortal, over the wastes of time:
Ages in vain close round and snatch in fame;
High over all still shines the Poet's name!
Lords of a life that scorns the bounds of breath,
They stretch existence and defy stern death.
Glory and shame are theirs -- they plant renown,
Or shade the Monarch's by the Muse's crown:
To say Augustus reigned when Virgil shined,
Does honor to the lord of half mankind.
So when three thousand years have wan'd away,
And POPE is said to have lived when GEORGE bore sway,
Millions shall lend the King the Poet's fame,
And bless implicit the supported name.
To POLLY LAURENCE, quitting the Pump. BATH, January 1756.
SPITE of beauty, air, and grace,
With honor have thou run thy race!
In sunshine well thy part thou'st played --
Now, sweet Polly, seek the shade.
The prudent general, though beat,
Reaps honor from a good retreat;
But nobler thou, thy thousands killed,
With flying colors leave the field.
Let not retirement give the spleen,
Thy sex's longing -- to be seen:
But teach the vicious and the vain,
Their pleasure's but refining pain.
Teach the gay by thy retreat,
Eternal giggle is not wit;
And the formal fool advise,
Prudery cannot make her wise.
Take with thee to thy private state
The applauses of the good and great;
The best reward below allowed
Of a conduct great and good.
ODE, to a LADY in LONDON.
By Miss C * * *
WHILE soft through water earth, and air
The vernal spirits rove,
From noise, my dear, and giddy crowds
To rural scenes remove.
The mountain snows are all dissolved,
And hushed the blustering gale,
While fragrant Zephyrs gently breathe
Along the flowery vale.
The circling planets' constant rounds
The wintry wastes repair,
And still from temporary death
Renew the verdant year.
But ah! when once our transient bloom,
The spring of life, is over,
That rosy season takes its flight,
And must return no more.
Yet judge by Reason's sober rules,
From false Opinion free,
And mark how little pilfering years
Can steal from you or me.
Each moral pleasure of the heart,
Each smiling charm of truth,
Depends not on the giddy bud
Of wild fantastic youth.
The vain coquet, whose empty pride
A fading face supplies,
May justly dread the wintry gloom
Where all its glory dies.
Leave such a ruin to deplore
To fleeting forms confined;
Nor age, nor wrinkles, discompose
One feature of the mind.
Amidst the universal change,
Unconscious of decay,
It views unmoved the scythe of Time
Sweep all besides away.
Fixed on its own eternal frame
Eternal are its joys,
While borne on transitory wings
Each mortal pleasure flies.
While every short-lived flower of sense
Destructive years consume,
Through friendship's fair enchanting walks
Unfading myrtles bloom.
Nor with the narrow bounds of time
Its beauteous prospect ends,
But lengthened through the vale of death
To paradise extends.
ODE to SPRING.
By Miss F.
HAIL, genial goddess, blooming Spring!
Thy blessed return, O let me sing,
And aid my languid lays:
Let me not sink in sloth supine,
While all creation at thy shrine
Its annual tribute pays.
II.
Escaped from Winter's freezing power
Each blossom greets thee, and each flower;
And, foremost of the train,
By Nature, (artless handmaid!) dressed,
The snow-drop comes in lilly'd vest,
Prophetic of thy reign.
III.
The lark now strains his warbling throat,
While every loud and sprightly note
Calls Echo from her cell.
Be warned, ye fair, that listen round,
A beauteous maid became a found,
A maid who loved too well.
IV.
The bright-hair'd sun with warmth benign
Bids tree, and shrub, and swelling vine
Their infant-buds display:
Again the streams refresh the plains,
Which Winter bound in icy chains,
And sparkling bless his ray.
Life-giving Zephyrs breathe around,
And instant glows the enameled ground
With Nature's varied hues:
Not so returns our youth decayed,
Alas! nor air, nor sun, nor shade
The spring of life renews.
VI.
The sun's too quick-revolving beam
Will soon dissolve the human dream,
And bring the appointed hour:
Too late we catch his parting ray,
And mourn the idly-wasted day
No longer in our power.
VII.
Then happiest he, whose lengthened sight
Pursues, by virtue's constant light,
A hope beyond the skies;
Where frowning Winter never shall come,
But rosy Spring for ever bloom,
And suns eternal rise.
ODE to CYNTHIA.
By the Same.
SISTER of Phoebus, gentle Queen,
Of aspect mild and brow serene,
Whose friendly beams by night appear,
The lonely traveller to cheer;
Attractive Power; whose mighty sway
The ocean's swelling waves obey,
And, mounting upward, seem to raise
A liquid altar to thy praise:
Thee withered hags, at midnight hour,
Invoke to their infernal bower;
But I to no such horrid rite,
Sweet Queen, implore thy sacred light,
Nor seek, while all but lovers sleep,
To rob the miser's treasured heap:
Thy kindly beams alone impart
To find the youth who stole my heart,
And guide me, from thy silver throne,
To steal his heart, or find my own.
ODE to a THRUSH.
By Miss P * * *
SWEET warbler! to whose artless song
Soft Music's native powers belong,
Here fix thy haunt; and over these plains
Still pour thy wild untutored strains,
Still hail the morn with sprightly lay,
And sweetly hymn the parting day:
But sprightlier still, and sweeter pour
Thy song over Flavia's favorite bower;
There softly breathe the varied sound,
And chant thy loves, or woes around.
So may thou live securely blessed,
And no rude storms disturb thy nest;
No bird-lime twig, or gin annoy,
Or cruel gun thy brood destroy;
No want of shelter may thou know,
Which Ripton's lofty shades bestow;
No dearth of winter berries fear,
But haws and hips blush half the year.
ELEGY.
I.
AH me! that restless bliss so soon should fly!
Still as I think my yielding maid to gain,
And flattering hope says all my joys are nigh,
Officious jealousy renews my pain.
II.
When cold suspense and torturing despair,
When pausing doubt, and anxious fear's no more,
Some idle falsehood haunts my listening ear,
And wakes my heart to all it felt before.
III.
One treads the mazes of the puzzled dance,
With easy step, and unaffected air,
False rapture feigns, or rolls a meaning glance,
To catch the open, easy-hearted fair.
IV.
Another boasts a more substantial claim,
For him fair Plenty fills her golden horn,
A thousand flocks support his haughty flame,
A thousand acres crowned with waving corn.
V.
But I nor tread the mazes of the dance
With easy step, and unaffected air,
Nor rapture feign, nor roll a meaning glance,
To catch the open, easy-hearted fair.
VI.
I boast not Fortune's more substantial claim,
For me nor Plenty fills her golden horn,
Nor wealthy flocks support my humble flame,
Nor smiling acres crowned with waving corn.
VII.
Say will thy generous heart for these reject
A tender passion, and a soul sincere?
For though with me you have little to expect,
Believe me, Sylvia, you have less to fear.
VIII.
Come, let us tread the flowery paths of peace,
'Till Fate shall seal the irrevocable doom;
Then soar together to yon realms of bliss,
And leave our mingled ashes in the tomb.
IX.
Perhaps some tender sympathetic breast,
Who knows with Sorrow's elegance to moan,
May search the enamel where our relics rest,
And grave our memory on the faithful stone.
X.
"Tread soft, ye lovers, over this hallowed ground,
"Here lies fond Damon by his Sylvia's side;
"Their souls in life by mutual love were bound,
"Nor death the lasting union could divide."
A POEM to the Memory of THOMAS, late Marquess of WHARTON, Lord Privy Seal.
VAIN are these pomps, thy funeral rites to grace,
And blazon forth thy long Patrician race;
These banners marked with boasted feats of old,
And streamers waving with distinguished gold.
Proud hieroglyphics! where are darkly shown
Thy brave forefathers merits, not thy own.
Herald forbear! these painted honors give
To names that only in thy paint can live.
Thy colors fade near this illustrious clay,
And all thy gaudy gildings die away.
See, The marquess turn interred at Winchindon on the 22d of April 1715. The
total eclipse of the sun happening whilst his remains were on the road, stopped
the procession.
heaven displeased thy fond attempt upbraids,
And claims the province thy bold hand invades;
Untimely darkness gathering round the skies,
Blackens the morn to grace his obsequies.
The sickening sun shines dim, and in the sight
Of gazing crowds, resigns his waning light;
Mark how he labors with relapse of night!
How his diminished face a crescent seems,
Like Cynthia newly silvered with his beams.
But as in full eclipse his light expires,
Back to its source our gelid blood retires;
Chilled with surprise, our trembling joints unbrace,
And pale confusion sits on every face.
The bleating flocks, no more the shepherd's care,
Stray from those folds to which they would repair.
Home to his young the raven wings his way,
And leaves untasted his yet bleeding prey.
While towering larks their rival notes prolong,
They drop benighted in their morning song.
Darkness and horror reign over earth and skies,
And nature for awhile with WHARTON dies.
O! speak, refulgent parent of the day!
With beamy eye who do the globe survey;
Thou radiant source of wit's diviner fire!
Thou truest judge of what thou do inspire!
Say, have thou seen in any age, or clime,
Since thy bright race began to measure time,
So great a genius rise? in every part
So formed by nature, finished so by art?
Such manly sense, with so much fire of mind?
Judgment so strong, to wit so lively joined?
No prepossession swayed his equal soul,
Steady to truth she pointed as her pole:
Convinced of varying in the least degrees,
Her pliant index she reclaimed with ease.
Early through custom's and prescription's yoke,
Tyrants of weaker souls, his reason broke.
Good sense revering from the meanest hand,
He durst authority in robes withstand.
Determined always on maturer thought,
Still by new reasons, to new measures brought;
Firm, but not stubborn; thoughtful, not involved;
Swift to perform what slowly he resolved.
No tempests raged within his peaceful breast,
Where kindling passion reason soon suppressed.
'Midst all events his firmness he maintained,
Struggled with great, but slighter ills disdained.
Thus what philosophers could only preach,
His inborn virtue did in practice reach.
Nature designed him master of address;
None knew it more, nor seemed to know it less.
It worked like magic on your yielding heart,
Sure was the charm, but secret was the art.
In human nature most exactly learned,
The artful man he through his masque discerned.
With chosen baits that every temper take,
He knew of knave or fool good use to make.
His easy breeding free from form and rules,
That stiffen the civility of fools,
Of various turn, for all occasions fit,
Was squared with judgment, and well touched with wit.
Free of access, from affectation clean,
Great without pride, nor when familiar, mean.
Obliging always with good-natured sense,
Nor apt to give nor apt to take offense.
Nor fond when kind, nor harsh when most severe,
Betwixt extremes he justly knew to steer.
In conversation wondrous was his art
To guard his own, and sift another's heart.
To mirth and wit he led the cheerful way,
Reserv'dly open and discreetly gay;
Nor could the softest hour his secret soul betray.
Bright as the youngest, as the oldest wise,
In both extremes, alike he gave surprise.
In body active, yet his sprightly mind
Within that body felt herself confined. --
When thoughts important claimed no longer place,
Then building, planting, and the speedy race,
Paintings, and books successive took their round,
No blanks of time were in his journal sound.
Skilled in the ends of his existence, he
To be unuseful thought was not to be.
Polite his taste of arts, but vain was art
Where nature had so greatly done her part.
Through tiresome mediums we at truth arrive;
His easy knowledge seemed intuitive.
No copied beauties meanly formed his mind,
By heaven a great original designed.
The seeds of science in his blood were sown,
Born with philosophy, 'twas all his own The poet designed by this to cover the
marquiss's want of literature, for he studied men and the world more than books.
.
Nor bribes nor threat'nings could his zeal abate
To serve his country, and avert her fate.
Firm to her laws and liberties he stood,
Submitting private views to public good.
Who could obsequious with the current swim,
Whigs might be called, but tories were to him.
Persons or parties he no longer knew,
When swerving once from honest, just, and true.
Often has he stem'd the rage of impious times,
When patriot virtues bore the brand of crimes.
To check proud tyrants born, and factions awe,
But most devoted to good kings and law.
Twice his dear country was on ruin's brink,
Resolved to save her, or with her to sink,
His brave attempts successful twice he saw,
Once in wise BRUNSWICK, once in great NASSAU.
No bolder champion in religion's cause;
None fought more battles, nor with more applause.
To arms he flew as danger pressed her home,
And snatched the hopeless prey from France and Rome.
But as from conscience pure, religion springs,
He freedom pressed in unessential things.
Coercive laws, he rightly understood,
Might make men hypocrites, but never good.
All genuine virtue is by nature free;
And will, when forced, no longer virtue be.
Who justly would his eloquence declare,
Himself must WHARTON'S fertile genius share.
Would you conceive it? see how over the sands
Fair Thames advances where Augusta stands.
Gentle he flows, but with resistless force,
Not like the rapid Rhone's impetuous course;
Though deep, so clear are his transparent streams,
His bottom rising to his surface seems.
Full is his spreading current, but restrained.
And still within its flowery banks contained.
Alternate wealth his two extremes unfold,
Downwards he sends us bread, and upwards gold.
Flow, sweetest river! still thy course prolong!
Thus deep and clear, thus gentle, full and strong,
That distant ages may the image see
Of WHARTON'S flowing eloquence in thee.
So shall no torrents soil thy crystal stream,
Thou patriot's emblem, and thou poet's theme!
Ye nobles who surround the British throne,
Reflect its luster, and improve your own;
You who resemble, in rich robes of state,
That majesty august on which you wait,
Witness how often his decisive sense,
His wit, his art, and copious eloquence,
Have singly won the question to his side,
Made Oxford blush, and St. John drop his pride;
Whilst every ear was with his accents charmed,
As every breast was with his ardour warmed:
Faction was touched and felt the secret force,
Dumb, and convicted, but without remorse,
Envy with rage contending in her face,
To see his triumph and her just disgrace.
Nor less in council did his weight appear,
The ablest statesman, as the brightest peer.
Thou mighty prince, who from perfidious power
Did speed to save us in a timely hour;
Whilst beauty joined with valor formed thy train,
To grace our court, and raise our martial vein;
Whose rising beams made drooping Credit thrive,
Religion spring, fair Liberty revive:
Say, if thy chosen ministers, who sat
With thee to guide the great machine of state,
A more consummate character could boast,
Than that which Britain in her WHARTON lost.
Oh! had kind heaven (if prayers were not too late)
Another lustrum added to his date,
How would his head, his heart, his hand conspire,
To punish traitors as their crimes require!
To crush rebellion, bridle factious rage,
And quell the monsters of an impious age!
How would his bosom beat with joy to see,
Great GEORGE! the British legend true in thee!
To see thee over the vanquished dragon ride,
And free thy kingdoms from his rage and pride!
Whilst peace and plenty spread their golden wings
Around the best of men, the best of kings,
And every tide shall waft into thy ports
Wealth from all lands, and homage from all courts.
But sovereign heaven, whose ways are ever wise,
He died a few months after the accession of GEORGE I.
Just drew the glorious dawn before his eyes;
And for his happier son reserved the sight
Of Brunswick's power in its meridian light.
GEORGE shall in him prove honor, courage, truth,
And find the father in the pregnant youth.
Thus the great leader of the Hebrew bands,
Through opening billows and over burning sands,
From Egypt's yoke, and haughty Pharaoh's chains,
To Canaan's fruitful hills, and flowery plains,
From Pisgah's height the promised land descried;
More was forbid; he saw, rejoiced, and died.
PARAPHRASE upon a FRENCH SONG.
By the late WILLIAM SOMERVILE, Esquire
Venge moy d'une ingrate maitresse,
Dieu du vin, j'implore bon yvresse.

KIND relief in all my pain,
Jolly Bacchus! hear my prayer,
Vengeance on the ungrateful fair!
In thy smiling cordial bowl,
Drown the sorrows of my soul,
All thy deity employ,
Gild each gloomy thought with joy,
Jolly Bacchus! save, oh save
From the deep devouring grave,
A poor, despairing, dying swain.
Haste away,
Haste away,
Lash thy tigers do not stay,
I Am undone if thou delay.
If I view those eyes once more,
Still shall love, and still adore,
And be more wretched than before.
See the glory round her face!
See her move!
With what a grace!
Ye Gods above!
Is she not one of your immortal race?
Fly, ye winged Cupids, fly,
Dart like lightning through the sky:
You Would ye in marble temples dwell,
The dear one to my arms compel;
Bring her in bands of myrtle tied,
Bid her forget, and bid her hide
All her scorn and all her pride.
Would ye that your slave repay
A smoking hecatomb each day,
O restore,
The beauteous Goddess I adore,
O restore, with all her charms,
The faithless vagrant to my arms.
THE TOMB of SHAKESPEARE. A VISION.
By JOHN GILBERT COOPER, Esquire
WHAT time the jocund rosie-bosom'd HOURS
Led forth the train of PHOEBUS and the SPRING,
And ZEPHYR mild profusely scattered flowers
On Earth's green mantle from his musky wing,
Thr MORN unbarr'd the ambrosial gates of light,
Westward the raven-pinion'd Darkness flew,
The Landscape smiled in vernal beauty bright,
And to their graves the sullen Ghosts withdrew.
The nightingale no longer swelled her throat
With love-lorn plainings tremulous and slow,
And on the wings of Silence ceased to float
The gurgling notes of her melodious woe:
The God of sleep mysterious visions led
In gay procession before the mental eye,
And my freed soul awhile her mansion fled,
To try her plumes for immortality.
Through fields of air, methought, I took my flight,
Through every clime, over every region passed,
No paradise or ruin 'scap'd my sight,
HESPERIAN garden, or CIMMERIAN waste.
On AVON'S banks I lit, whose streams appear
To wind with eddies fond round SHAKESPEARE'S tomb,
The year's first feath'ry songsters warble near,
And vi'lets breathe, and earliest roses bloom.
Here FANCY sat, (her dewy fingers cold
Decking with flowerets fresh the unsullied sod,)
And bathed with tears the sad sepulchral mold,
Her favorite offspring's long and last abode.
Ah! what avails, she cried, a Poet's name?
Ah! what avails the immortalizing breath
To snatch from dumb Oblivion other's fame?
My darling child here lies a prey to Death!
Let gentle OTWAY, white-rob'd PITY'S priest,
From grief domestic teach the tears to flow,
Or SOUTHERN captivate the impassioned breast
With heartfelt sighs and sympathy of woe.
For not to these his genius was confined,
Nature and I each tuneful power had given,
Poetic transports of the madding mind,
And the winged words that waft the soul to heaven:
The fiery glance of the intellectual eye,
Piercing all objects of creation's store,
Which on this world's extended surface lie;
And plastic thought that still created more.
O grant, with eager rapture I replied,
Grant me, great goddess of the changeful eye,
To view each Being in poetic pride,
To whom thy son gave immortality.
Sweet FANCY smiled, and waved her mystic rod,
When strait these visions felt her powerful arm,
And one by one succeeded at her nod,
As vassal sprites obey the wizard's charm.
First a celestial form Ariel in the Tempest.
(of azure hue
Whose mantle, bound with bread aetherial, flowed
To each soft breeze its balmy breath that drew)
Swift down the sunbeams of the noontide rode.
Obedient to the necromantic sway
Of an old sage to solitude resigned,
With fenny vapors he obscured the day,
Launched the long lightning, and let loose the wind.
He whirled the tempest through the howling air,
Rattled the dreadful thunderclap on high,
And raised a roaring elemental war
Betwixt the seagreen waves and azure sky.
Then, like heaven's mild ambassador of love
To man repentant, bade the tumult cease,
Smoothed the blue bosom of the realms above,
And hushed the rebel elements to peace.
Unlike to this in spirit or in mien
Another form Caliban in the Tempest.
succeeded to my view;
A two-legg'd brute which Nature made in spleen,
Or from the loathing womb unfinished drew.
Scarce could he syllable the curse he thought,
Prone were his eyes to earth, his mind to evil,
A carnal fiend to imperfection wrought,
The mongrel offspring of a Witch and Devil.
Next bloomed, upon an ancient forest's bound,
The flowery margin Fairy-land from the Midsummer night's dream.
of a silent stream,
O'er-arch'd by oaks with ivy mantled round,
And gilt by silver CTNTHIA'S maiden beam.
On the green carpet of the unbended grass,
A dapper train of female fairies played,
And eyed their gambols in the watery glass,
That smoothly stole along the shad'wy glade.
Through these the queen TITANIA passed adored,
Mounted aloft in her imperial car,
Journeying to see great OBERON her lord
Wage the mock battles of a sportive war.
Armed cap-a-pee forth marched the fairy king,
A stouter warrior never took the field,
His threatening lance a hornet's horrid sting,
The sharded beetle's scale his sable shield.
Around their chief the elfin host appeared,
Each little helmet sparkled like a star,
And their sharp spears in pierceless phalanx reared,
A grove of thistles, glittered in the air.
The scene then changed, from this romantic land,
To a bleak waste by bound'ry unconfined,
Where three smart sisters The witches in Macbeth.
of the weird band
Were mutt'ring curses to the troublous wind.
Pale Want had withered every furrowed face,
Bowed was each carcass with the weight of years,
And each sunk eye-ball from its hollow case
Distilled cold rheum's involuntary tears.
Horsed on three staves they posted to the bourn
Of a drear island, where the pendant brow
Of a rough rock, shagg'd horribly with thorn,
Frowned on the boisterous waves which raged below.
Deep in a gloomy grot remote from day,
Where smiling Comfort never showed her face,
Where light never entered, save one rueful ray
Discov'ring all the terrors of the place,
They held damned myst'ries with infernal state,
Whilst ghastly specter glided slowly by,
The scritch-owl scream'd the dying call of fate,
And ravens croak'd their baleful augury.
No human footstep cheered the dread abode,
Nor sign of living creature could be seen,
Save where the reptile snake, or sullen toad,
The murky floor had soiled with venom green.
Sudden I heard the whirlwind's hollow sound,
Each weird sister vanished into smoke.
Now a dire yell of spirits Ghosts in Macbeth, Richard III. etc.
underground
Through troubled Earth's wide yawning surface broke;
When lo! each injured apparition rose;
Aghast the murderer started from his bed;
Guilt's trembling breath his heart's red current froze,
And Horror's dew-drops bathed his frantic head.
More had I seen -- but now the God of day
Over earth's broad breast his flood of light had spread,
When Morpheus called his fickle dreams away,
And on their wings each bright illusion fled.
Yet still the dear ENCHANTRESS of the brain
My waking eyes with wishful wand'rings sought,
Whose magic will controuls the ideal train,
The ever-restless progeny of THOUGHT.
Sweet power, I said, for others gild the ray
Of Wealth, or Honor's folly-feather'd crown,
Or lead the madding multitude astray
To grasp at air-blown bubbles of renown.
Me (humbler lot!) let blameless bliss engage,
Free from the noble mob's ambitious strife,
Free from the muck-worm miser's lucrous rage,
In calm Contentment's cottag'd vale of life.
If frailties there (for who from them is free?)
Through Error's maze my devious footsteps lead,
Let them be frailties of humanity,
And my heart plead the pardon of my head.
Let not my reason impiously require
What heaven has placed beyond its narrow span,
But teach it to subdue each fierce desire,
Which wars within its own small empire, man.
Teach me, what all believe, but few possess,
That life's best science is ourselves to know,
The first of human blessings is to bless,
And happiest he who feels another's woe.
Thus cheaply wise, and innocently great,
While Time's smooth sand shall regularly pass,
Each destined atom's quiet course I Will wait,
Nor rashly break, nor wish to stop the glass.
And when in death my peaceful ashes lie,
If ever some tongue congenial speaks my name,
Friendship shall never blush to breathe a sigh,
And great ones envy such an honest fame.
INDEX to the Fifth Volume.
RURAL Elegance: An Ode, 1750 Page 1 Inscription near a Sheep-cote Page 13
Nancy of the Vale. A Ballad Page 16 Ode to Indolence, 1750 Page 19 Ode to
Health, 1730 Page 21 To a Lady of Quality, fitting up her Library, 1738 Page 24
Upon a Visit to the same in Winter, 1748 Page 26 An irregular Ode after
Sickness, 1749 Page 28 Anacreontic, 1738 Page 33 Ode. Written 1739 Page 34 The
Dying Kid Page 36 Love Songs, and lighter Pieces, written between the Year 1737
and 1743 Song 1. Page 38 2. The Landscape ib. 3. Page 39 4. The Sky-Lark Page 40
5. ib. 6. The Attribute of Venus Page 41
The Rape of the Trap, a Ballad; written at College 1736 Page 42 A Simile Page
45 The Ceremonial Page 46 The Beau to the Virtuosos Page 47 Verses to a Friend
Page 49 Written at an Inn on a particular Occasion Page 51 The Price of an
Equipage Page 52 A Ballad Page 53 The Extent of Cookery Page 54 The Progress of
Advice. A common Case Page 55 Slender's Ghost Page 56 Upon Riddles Page 57
Verses to a Writer of Riddles Page 58 To * * * * Page 60 Song Page 61 To Lady
Fane on her Grotto at Basilden, 1746 Page 62 The Invisible ib. The Pepper-box
and Salt-seller. A Fable Page 63 Written near Bath, 1755 Page 67 Verses to
William Shenstone, Esquire on receiving a Gilt Pocket Book, 1751 Page 70 e
Swallows. Written September, 1748 Page 72 Part II. Written April, 1749 Page 75
Valentine's Day Page 77 The Scavengers. A Town Eclogue. In the Manner of Swift
Page 78 Hamlet's Soliloquy, imitated Page 82 Transcribed from the Rev. Mr.
Pixel's Parsonage Garden near Birmingham, 1757 Page 83 Malvern Spa, 1757.
Inscribed to Dr. Wall Page 84 Some Reflections upon hearing the Bell toll for
the Death of a Friend Page 87 The Robin: An Elegy. Written at the close of
Autumn, 1756 Page 90 An Epitaph Page 92 Ut Pictura Poesis Page 93 Vacuna Page
95 On J. W. ranging Pamphlets Page 98 Epithalamium Page 102 To a Gentleman, on
the Birthday of his first Son Page 104 On two Friends born on the same Day
Page 105 A Winter Thought Page 107 Song Page 110 Verses spoken at Westminster
School Page 111 A Letter to Sir Robert Walpole Page 117 An Epistle from the
Elector of Bavaria to the French King, after the Battle of Ramillies Page 119
To the Duke of Marlborough Page 130 An Ode on Miss Harriet Hanbury at six Years
old Page 132 A Song upon Miss Harriet Hanbury, addressed to the Rev. Mr. Birt
Page 134 To Mr. Garnier and Mr. Pearce of Bath. A grateful Ode, in return for
the extraordinary Kindness and Humanity they showed to me and my eldest
Daughter, now Lady Essex, 1753 Page 136 Ode to Death. Translated from the
French of the King of Prussia Page 138 The Hymns of Dionysius: Translated from
the Greek Page 143 A Satire in the Manner of Persius, in a Dialogue between
Atticus and Eugenio Page 147 To Mrs. Bindon at Bath Page 156 Mrs. Bindon's
Answer Page 157 Sir Charles's Reply ibid. To a Lady, who sent Compliments to a
Clergyman upon the Ten of Hearts Page 158 The Grotto Page 159 The Be, the Ant,
and the Sparrow: A Fable Page 169 Ode on a Storm Page 174 Isaiah xxxiv. Page
177 Isaiah xxxv. Page 183 Woodstock Park. A Poem Page 188 A Fit of the Spleen.
In Imitation of Shakespeare Page 202 Hymn to Miss Laurence, in the Pump-Room.
BATH 1753 Page 204 A Letter to Corinna from a Captain in Country Quarters Page
210 A Tale Page 213 The Wish Page 219 The Bears and Bees. A Fable Page 221 A
Fragment Page 222 The Camelion: A Fable after Monsieur de la Motte Page 223
Immortality: or, the Consolation of Human Life. A Monody Page 226 To the Memory
of a Gentleman, who died on his Travels to Rome Page 239 Captain T -- of
Battereau's Regiment in the Isle of Sky to Captain P -- at Fort Augustus Page
240 To Mr. J. H. at the Temple, occasioned by a Translation of an Epistle of
Horace, 1730 Page 244 To the Rev. Mr. J. S. 1731 Page 248 Answer to the
foregoing, 1731 Page 251 Another Page 253 Cupid and Chloe Page 254 The Poet to
his false Mistress Page 256 On Mr. * * *, Schoolmaster at * * *. Page 257
KAMBROMYOMAXIA: or the Mouse-Trap; being a Translation of Mr. Holdsworth's
Muscipula, 1736 Page 258 Verses under the Prints of Mr. Hogarth's Rake's
Progress, 1735 Page 269 On the Friendship of two young Ladies, 1730 Page 275
Chloe's unknown Likeness, 1738 Page 276 The Bird of Passage, 1749 Page 277
Verses said to be fixed on the Gate of the Louvre at Paris, 1751 Page 279 Chloe
resolded. A Ballad Page 280 Epilogue to Shakespeare's first Part of King Henry
IV. Page 281 Prologue to Comus Page 283 Epigrams from Martial Page 285 A very
gallant Copy of Verses (but somewhat silly) upon the Ladies, and their fine
Clothes at a Ball Page 288 Another on the same Subject, written with more
Judgment, but fewer good Manners Page 289 The Brewer's Coachman Page 290 Female
Caution Page 291 Orthodox Advice Page 292 Hull Ale Page 293 Epigram Page 294
Another Page 295 The Mistake ibid. A Fragment of Chaucer Page 296 Upon an
Alcove, now at Parson's Green ibid. Plain Truth Page 302 Ode to Venus, from her
Votaries of the Street Page 305 An Epigram Page 306 The Poet's Importance Page
307 To Polly Laurence, quitting the Pump. Bath, Jan. 1756 Page 308 Ode, to a
Lady in London Page 309 Ode to Spring Page 311 Ode to Cynthia Page 312 Ode to a
Thrush Page 313 Elegy Page 314 A Poem to the Memory of Thomas, late Marquess of
Wharton, Lord Privy Seal Page 316 Paraphrase on a French Song Page 323 The Tomb
of Shakespeare. A Vision Page 325
The END of VOL. V.

