SPEED THE PLOUGH: A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

AS PERFORMED WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

By THOMAS MORTON, Esquire. AUTHOR OF "A CURE FOR THE HEART ACHE," "WAY TO GET
MARRIED," etc. etc.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON; PRINTED BY A. STRAHAN, PRINTERS-STREET; FOR T. N. LONGMAN AND O. REES,
PATERNOSTER-ROW.

1800.

[Price Two Shillings.]

PROLOGUE,
Written by W. T. FITZGERALD, Esquire SPOKEN BY MR. BETTERTON.
IN every age, the trump of deathless fame
Proclaims the warrior's and the poet's name;
Painting and sculpture all the powers combine,
And laurels deck the bard's and hero's shrine.
No further can the parallel extend,
The poet's honors on success depend;
While Fortune's frown can never molest the brave,
Nor blast the laurel springing from his grave.
An equal wreath impartial Fame supplies,
To him who conquers, and to him who dies;
For British valor was displayed, not more
On Nile's proud flood, than Helder's barren shore!
The chance of war the bravest may control,
But leaves untouched the courage of the soul;
And England gives her heroes, ever dear!
The shout of triumph, or the starting tear.
Not so the Bard -- with him success is all!
When Fortune frowns, his air-built castles fall:
But if she smiles, he sails with prosperous breeze,
Like the small Nautilus over Summer seas;
Whose little oars on ocean's bosom sweep,
Fearless of all the monsters of the deep.
(After a pause.) Often at this Bar, our Author has been tried,
Where English Judges take the pris'ner's side!
Guilty of faults no doubt he will appear,
But human errors find acquittal here --
Where even the friendless always meet support,
From honest Juries, and an upright Court.
Critics, who rule over politics and plays,
If you are adverse, vain the poet's lays!
"You, who with equal hands the balance hold,
"Whose just decision never was bought or sold,
"But who to every candidate dispense
"His lot of humor, and his share of sense,"
Protect our Author on the coming day,
And though you damn the Prologue -- spare the Play:
To your decree each Dramatist must bow,
Give but your aid, and that will "Speed the Plough!"

The lines marked with inverted commas were omitted.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir Philip Blandford Mr. POPE. Morrington Mr. MURRAY. Sir Abel Handy Mr.
MUNDEN. Bob Handy Mr. FAWCETT. Henry Mr. H. JOHNSTON. Farmer Ashfield Mr.
KNIGHT. Evergreen Mr. DAVENPORT. Gerald Mr. WADDY. Postillion Mr. ABBOT. Young
Handy's Servant Mr. KLANERT. Peter Mr. ATKINS.
Miss Blandford Mrs. H. JOHNSTON. Lady Handy Mrs. DIBDIN. Susan Ashfield Miss
MURRAY. Dame Ashfield Mrs. DAVENPORT.
SPEED THE PLOUGH.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- In the fore-ground a Farm House -- A view of a Castle at a
distance.
Farmer ASHFIELD discovered with his jug and pipe. Enter Dame ASHFIELD in a
riding dress, and a basket under her arm. ASHFIELD. WELL, Dame, welcome whoam.
What news does thee bring vrom market?


Dame. What news, husband? What I always told you; that Farmer Grundy's wheat
brought five shillings a quarter more than ours did.


Ash. All the better vor he.


Dame. Ah! the sun seems to shine on purpose for him.


Ash. Come, come, Missus, as thee has not the grace to thank God for prosperous
times, dan't thee grumble when they be unkindly a bit.


Dame. And I assure you Dame Grundy's butter was quite the crack of the market.


Ash. Be quiet, woolye? aleways ding, dinging Dame Grundy into my ears -- what
will Mrs. Grundy zay? What will Mrs. Grundy think? -- Casn't thee be quiet, let
ur alone, and behave thyzel pratty?


Dame. Certainly I can -- I Will tell thee, Tummas, what she said at church last
Sunday.


Ash. Can thee tell what parson zaid? Noa -- Then I Will tell thee -- A' zaid
that envy were as foul a weed as grows, and cankers all wholesome plants that
be near it -- that is what a'zaid.


Dame. And do you think I envy Mrs. Grundy indeed?


Ash. What dant thee letten her aloane then -- I do verily think when thee
go to the other world, the vurst question thee't ax 'il be, if Mrs. Grundy's
there -- Zoa be quiet, and behave pratty, do'ye -- Has thee brought whoam the
Salisbury news?


Dame. No, Tummas; but I have brought a rare wadget of news with me. First and
foremost I saw such a mort of coaches, servants, and wagons, all belonging to
Sir Abel Handy, and all coming to the Castle -- and a handsome young man,
dressed all in lace, pulled off his hat to me, and said -- Mrs. Ashfield, do me
the honor of presenting that letter to your husband. -- So, there he stood
without his hat -- Oh, Tummas, had you seen how Mrs. Grundy looked!


Ash. Dom Mrs. Grundy -- be quiet, and let I read, woolye? (reads) "My dear
Farmer" (taking off his hat), Thankye, Zur -- zame to you we all my heart and
soul -- " My dear Farmer" --


Dame. Farmer -- Why, you are blind, Tummas; it is -- " My dear Father" -- It Is
from our own dear Susan.


Ash. Odds! dickens and daizeys! zoo it be, zure enough! -- "My dear Feyther, you
will be surprised" -- Zoo I be, he, he! What pretty writing, beant it? all as
strait as thof it were ploughed -- Surprised to hear that in a few hours I
shall embrace you -- Nelly, who formerly was our servant, has fortunately
married Sir Abel Handy Bart. --


Dame. Handy Bart -- Pugh! Bart. stands for Baronight, mun.


Ash. Likely, likely -- Drabbit it, only to think of the zwaps and changes of
this world!


Dame. Our Nelly married to a great Baronet! I wonder, Tummas, what Mrs. Grundy
will say?


Ash. Now, woolye be quiet, and let I read -- And she has proposed bringing me
to see you; an offer, I hope, as acceptable to my dear feyther --


Dame. "And mother" --


Ash. Bless her, how prettily she do write feyther, dant she?


Dame. And mother.


Ash. Ees, but feyther first, though -- As acceptable to my dear feyther and
mother, as to their affectionate daughter -- Susan Ashfield -- Now beant that a
pratty letter?


Dame. And, Tummas, is not she a pretty girl?


Ash. Ees; and as good as she be pratty -- Drabbit it, I do feel zoo happy, and
zoo warm, -- for all the world like the zun in harvest.


Dame. Oh, Tummas, I shall be so pleased to see her, I shall not know whether I
stand on my head or my heels.


Ash. Stand on thy head! vor sheame o'thyzel -- behave pratty, do.


Dame. Nay, I meant no harm -- Eh, here comes friend Evergreen the gardner,
from the Castle. Bless me, what a hurry the old man is in.


Enter EVERGREEN. Everg. Good day, honest Thomas.


Ash. Zame to you, measter Evergreen.


Everg. Have you heard the news?


Dame. Anything about Mrs. Grundy?


Ash. Dame, be quiet, woolye now?


Everg. No, no -- The news is, that my master, Sir Philip Blandford, after
having been abroad for twenty years, returns this day to the Castle; and that
the reason of his coming, is to marry his only daughter to the son of Sir Abel
Handy, I think they call him.


Dame. As sure as twopence, that is Nelly's husband.


Everg. Indeed! -- Well, Sir Abel and his son will be here immediately; and,
Farmer, you must attend them.


Ash. Likely, likely.


Everg. And, mistress, come and lend us a hand at the Castle, will you? -- Ah,
twenty long years since I have seen Sir Philip -- Poor Gentleman! bad, bad
health -- worn almost to the grave, I am told. -- What a lad do I remember him
-- till that dreadful -- (checking himself.) But where is Henry? I must see him
-- must caution him (a gun is discharged at a distance). That Is his gun, I
suppose -- he is not far then -- Poor Henry!


Dame. Poor Henry! I like that indeed! What, though he be nobody knows who,
there is not a girl in the parish that is not ready to pull caps for him -- The
Miss Grundys, genteel as they think themselves, would be glad to snap at him --
If he were our own, we could not love him better.


Everg. And he deserves to be loved -- Why, he is as handsome as a peach tree in
blossom; and his mind is as free from weeds as my favorite carnation bed. But,
Thomas, run to the Castle, and receive Sir Abel and his son.


Ash. I wool, I wool -- Zo, good day, (bowing.) Let every man make his bow, and
behave pratty -- that is what I say -- Missus, do'ye show un Sue's letter,
woolye? Doye letten see how pratty she do write feyther.


Exit. Dame. Now Tummas is gone, I Will tell you such a story about Mrs. Grundy
-- But come, step in, you must needs be weary; and I am sure a mug of harvest
beer, sweetened with a hearty welcome, will refresh you.


Exeunt into the house. SCENE II. -- Outside and Gate of the Castle. --
Servants cross the Stage, laden with different Packages.
Enter ASHFIELD. Ash. Drabbit it, the would castle 'ull be hardly big enough to
hold all thic lumber -- Who do come here? A do zeem a comical zoart ov a man --
Oh, Abel Handy, I suppoze.


Sir Abel Handy (without). Gently there! mind how you go, Robin.

A crash. He enters -- SERVANT following. Zounds and fury! you have killed the
whole county, you dog! for you have broke the patent medicine chest, that was
to keep them all alive! -- Richard, gently! -- take care of the grand
Archimedian corkscrews! -- Bless my soul! so much to think of! Such wonderful
inventions in conception, in concoction, and in completion!

Enter PETER. Well, Peter, is the carriage much broke?


Peter. Smashed all to pieces. I thought as how, Sir, that your infallible
axletree would give way.


Sir Abel. Confound it, it has compelled me to walk so far in the wet, that I
declare my waterproof shoes are completely soaked through.

Exit PETER. Now to take a view with my new-invented glass! ( pulls out his
glass.)
Ash. (loud and bluntly.) Zarvent, Zur! Zarvent!


Sir Abel (starting). What Is that? Oh, good day. -- Devil take the fellow!

(aside.)
Ash. Thankye, Zur; zame to you wi' all my heart and zoul.


Sir Abel. Pray, friend, could you contrive gently to inform me, where I can
find one Farmer Ashfield.


Ash. Ha, ha, ha! (laughing loudly.) Excuse my tittering a bit -- but your
axing myzel vor I be so domm'd zilly (bowing and laughing). -- Ah! you stare at
I beceas I be bashful and daunted.


Sir Abel. You are very bashful to be sure. I declare I Am quite weary.


Ash. If you will walk into the Castle, you may zit down, I dare zay.


Sir Abel. May I, indeed! you are a fellow of extraordinary civility.


Ash. There Is no denying it, Zur.


Sir Abel. No, I Will sit here.


Ash. What! on the ground? Why, you will wring your old withers --


Sir Abel. On the ground -- no, I always carry my fear with me (spreads a small
camp-chair.) -- Here I Will sit and examine the surveyor's account of the Castle.


Ash. Dickens and daizeys! what a gentleman you would be to show at a vair!


Sir Abel. Silence, fellow, and attend -- An account of the castle and domain
of Sir Philip Blandford, intended to be settled as a marriage portion on his
daughter, and the son of Sir Abel Handy, by Frank Flourish, surveyor. --
Imprimis -- The premises command an exquisite view of he isle of Wight. --
Charming! delightful! I don't see it though (rising) -- I Will try with my ^ew
glass -- my own invention -- (he looks through the glass) Yes, there I caught
it -- Ah! now I see it plainly -- Eh! no -- I don't see it, do you?


Ash. Noa, Zur, I doant -- but little zweepy do tell I he can zee a bit out
from the top of the chimbley -- zoa, an you have a mind to crawl up you may zee
un too, he, he!


Sir Abel. Thank you -- but damn your titter! (reads) -- "Fish ponds well
stocked" -- That Is a good thing, Farmer.


Ash. Likely, likely -- but I doant think the vishes do thrive much in theas
ponds.


Sir Abel. No! Why?


Ash. Why, the ponds be always dry in the zummer; and I be tuold that beant
wholesome vor the little vishes.


Sir Abel. Not very, I believe -- Well said surveyor! "A cool summer house."


Ash. Ees, Zur, quite cool -- by reason the roof be tumbled in.


Sir Abel. Better and better -- The whole capable pable of the greatest
improvement. -- Come, that seems true however -- I shall have plenty to do,
that is one comfort -- I Will have such contrivances! I Will have a canal run
through my kitchen. -- I must give this rustic some idea of my consequence
(aside). You must know, Farmer, you have the honor of conversing with a man
who has obtained patents for tweezers, tooth-picks, and tinder-boxes -- to a
philosopher who has been consulted on the Wapping docks and the Gravesend
tunnel; and who has now in hand two inventions which will render him immortal
-- the one is, converting saw-dust into deal boards, and the other is, a plan
of cleaning rooms by a steam engine -- and, Farmer, I mean to give prizes for
industry -- I Will have a ploughing match.


Ash. Will you, Zur?


Sir Abel. Yes; for I consider a healthy young man between the handles of a
plough, as one of the noblest illustrations of the prosperity of Britain.


Ash. Faith and troth! there be some tightish hands in theas parts, I promize
ye.


Sir Abel. And, farmer, it shall precede the hymeneal festivities --


Ash. Nan!


Sir Abel. Blockhead! the ploughing match shall take place as soon as Sir
Philip Blandford and his daughter arrive.


Ash. Oh, likely, likely!


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Sir Abel, I beg to say, my master will be here
immediately.


Sir Abel. And, Sir, I beg to ask who possesses the happiness of being your
master?


Serve. Your son, Sir, Mr. Robert Handy.


Sir Abel. Indeed! and where is Bob?


Serve. I left him, Sir, in the belfrey of the church.


Sir Abel. Where?


Serve. In the belfrey of the church.


Sir Abel. In the belfrey of the church! What was he doing there?


Serve. Why, Sir, the natives were ringing a peal in honor of our arrival --
when my master finding they knew nothing of the matter, went up to the steeple
to instruct them, and ordered me to proceed to the Castle -- I have the honor
--


Bows and exit. Sir Abel. Wonderful! My Bob, you must know, is an astonishing
fellow! -- you have heard of the admirable Crichton, may be? Bob's of the same
kidney! I contrive, he executes -- Sir Abel invenit, Bob fecit. He can do
everything -- everything!


Ash. All the better vor he. Izay, Zur, as he can turn his hand to everything,
pray, in what way med he earn his livelihood?


Sir Abel. Earn his livelihood!


Ash. Ees, Zur -- How do he gain his bread?


Sir Abel. Bread! Oh, he cannot earn his bread. Bless you! he is a genius.


Ash. Genius! Drabbit it, I have got a horze of thic name, but dom' un he will
never work -- never.


Sir Abel. Egad! here comes my boy Bob! -- Eh! no -- it is not! no.


Enter POSTBOY with a round Hat and Cane. Why who the devil are you?

Postb. I am the postboy, your Honor; but the Gem'man said I did not know how
to drive, so he mounted my horse, and made me get inside -- Here he is.


Enter HANDY, jun. with a postboy's cap and whip. Handy, jun. Ah, my old Dad,
is that you?


Sir Abel. Certainly; the only doubt is, if that be you?


Handy, jun. Oh, I was teaching this fellow to drive -- Nothing is so horrible
as people pretending to do what they are unequal to -- Give me my hat -- That Is
the way to use a whip.


Postb. Sir, you know you have broke the horses knees all to pieces.


Handy, jun. Hush, there is a guinea

(apart).
Sir Abel (to ASHFIELD). You see Bob can do every thing. But, Sir, when you
knew I had arrived from Germany, why did you not pay your duty to me in London?


Handy, jun. Sir, I heard you were but four days married, and I would not
interrupt your honeymoon.


Sir Abel. Four days! oh, you might have come

(sighing).
Handy, jun. I hear you have taken to your arms a simple rustic,
unsophisticated by fashionable follies, -- a full blown blossom of nature.


Sir Abel. Yes!


Handy, jun. How does it answer?


Sir Abel. So, so!


Handy, jun. Any thorns?


Sir Abel. A few!


Handy, jun. I must be introduced -- where is ihe?


Sir Abel. Not within thirty miles; for I don't hear her.


Ash. Ha, ha, ha!


Handy, jun. Who is that?


Sir Abel. Oh, a pretty behaved tittering friend of mine.


Ash. Zarvent, Zur -- no offense I do hope -- Could not help tittering a bit at
Nelly -- when she were zarvent maid wi' I, she had a tightish prattle wi' her,
that is vor zartain.


Handy, jun. Oh! so then my honored Mamma was the servant of this tittering
gentleman -- I say, father, perhaps she has not lost the tightish prattle he
speaks of.


Sir Abel. My dear boy, come here -- Prattle! I say, did you ever live next
door to a pewterer's? -- that is all -- you understand me -- did you ever hear a
dozen fire-engines full gallop? -- were you ever at Billingsgate in the sprat
season? -- or --


Handy, jun. Ha, ha!


Sir Abel. Nay, don't laugh, Bob.


Handy, jun. Indeed, Sir, you think of it too seriously. The storm, I dare say,
soon blows over.


Sir Abel. Soon! You know what a trade wind is, don't you, Bob? why, she thinks
no more of the latter end of her speech, than she does of the latter end of her
life --


Handy, jun. Ha, ha!


Sir Abel. But I will not be laughed at -- I Will knock any man down that laughs!


Handy, jun. I beg your pardon -- but how in the name of Babel did she wheedle
you into matrimony?


Sir Abel. Why, she dealt with me as the devil deals with a witch -- humoured
me for a time, that I might be her slave for ever! I thought I was marrying a
notable woman, who would have eased my head of part of its burden: -- instead
of which --


Handy, jun. She has added to its burden.


Sir Abel. You know, my dear boy, my aim is to make my head useful --


Handy, jun. And her aim, I suppose, is to make it ornamental.


Sir Abel. Bob, if you can say anything pleasant, I Will trouble you; if not, do
what my wife cannot -- hold your tongue.


Handy, jun. I Will show you what I can do -- I Will amuse you with this native

(apart).
Sir Abel. Do -- do -- quiz him -- at him, Bob.


Handy, jun. I say, Farmer, you are a set of jolly fellows here, an't you?


Ash. Ees, Zur, deadly jolly -- excepting when we be otherwise, and then we
beant.


Handy, jun. Play at cricket, don't you?


Ash. Ees, Zur; we Hampshire lads conceat we can bowl a bit or thereabouts.


Handy, jun. And cudgel too, I suppose?


Sir Abel. At him, Bob.


Ash. Ees, Zur, we sometimes break oon another heads by way of being
agreeable, and the like o'that.


Handy, jun. Understand all the guards?

(putting himself in an attitude of cudgelling.)
Ash. Cannot zay I do, Zur.


Handy, jun. What, hit in this way, eh?

( makes a hit at ASHFIELD, which he parries, and hits Young HANDY violently.)
Ash. Noa, Zur, we do hit thic way.


Handy, jun. Zounds and fury!


Sir Abel. Why, Bob, he has broke your head.


Handy, jun. Yes; he rather hit me -- he somehow --


Sir Abel. He did indeed, Bob.


Handy, jun. Damn him -- The fact is, I am out of practice.


Ash. You need not be, Zur; I Will gi'ye a belly full any day wi' all my heart
and soul.


Handy, jun. No, no, thank you -- Farmer, what is your name?


Ash. My name be Tummas Ashfield -- anything to say against my name?

(threatening.)
Handy, jun. No, no -- Ashfield! should he be the father of my pretty Susan --
Pray, have you a daughter?


Ash. Ees, I have -- anything to zay against she?


Handy, jun. No, no; I think her a charming creature.


Ash. Do ye faith and troth -- Come, that be deadly kind o'ye however -- Do you
zee, I were frightful she were not agreeable.


Handy, jun. Oh, she is extremely agreeable to me, I assure you.


Ash. I vow, it be quite pratty in you to take notice of Sue. I do hope, Zur,
breaking your head will break noa squares -- She be a coming down to theas
parts wi' lady our maid Nelly, as wur -- your spouse, Zur.


Handy, jun. The devil she is! that is awkward!


Ash. I do hope you will be kind to Sue when she do come, woolye, Zur?


Handy, jun. You may depend on it.


Sir Abel. I daresay you may. Come, Farmey, attend us.


Ash. Ees, Zur; wi' all respect -- Gentlemen, pray walk thic way, and I Will walk
before you.


Exit. Sir Abel. Now, that is what he calls behaving pretty.


Handy, jun. Susan Ashfield coming here!


Sir Abel. What, Bob, some intrigue, eh?


Handy, jun. Oh fie!


Sir Abel. Consider, Sir, you come here to marry the beautiful and accomplished
Miss Blandford -- and consider on the other hand, you have already got a slight
memorandum of the Farmer's agreeable way.


Exeunt. SCENE III. -- A Grove.
(MORRINGTON comes down the stage, wrapped in a great coat -- He looks about --
then at his watch, and whistles -- which is answered.) Enter GERALD. Mor. Here,
Gerald! Well, my trusty fellow, is Sir Philip arrived?


Ger. No, Sir; but hourly expected.


Mor. Tell me, how does the Castle look?


Ger. Sadly decayed, Sir.


Mor. I hope, Gerald, you were not observed.


Ger. I fear otherwise, Sir: on the skirts of the domain I encountered a
stripling with his gun; but I darted into that thicket, and so avoided him.


(HENRY appears in the back ground, in a shooting dress, attentively observing
them.) Mor. Have you gained any intelligence?


Ger. None: the report that reached us was false -- The infant certainly died
with its mother -- Hush! conceal yourself -- we are observed -- this way.


They retreat. -- HENRY advances. Henry. Hold! as a friend, one word!

They exeunt, he follows them and returns. Again they have escaped me -- The
infant died with its mother -- This agony of doubt is insupportable.


Enter EVERGREEN. Everg. Henry, well met.


Henry. Have you seen strangers?


Everg. No!


Henry. Two but now have left this place -- They spoke of a lost child -- My
busy fancy led me to think I was the object of their search -- I pressed
forward, but they avoided me.


Everg. No, no; it could not be you; for no one on earth knows but myself, and
--


Henry. Who, Sir Philip Blandford?


Everg. I am sworn, you know, my dear boy; I am solemnly sworn to silence.


Henry. True, my good old friend; and if the knowledge of who I am can only be
obtained at the price of thy perjury, let me for ever remain jgnorant -- let
the corroding thought still haunt my pillow, cross me at every turn, and render
me insensible to the blessings of health and liberty -- yet, in vain do I
suppress the thought -- who am I? why thus abandoned? perhaps the despised
offspring of guilt -- Ah! is it so!

(seizing him violently.)
Everg. Henry, do I deserve this?


Henry. Pardon me, good old man! I Will act more reasonably -- I Will deem thy
silence mercy.


Everg. That Is wisely said.


Henry. Yet it is hard to think that the most detested reptile that Nature
forms, or man pursues, has, when be gains his den, a parent's pitying breast to
shelter in; but I --


Everg. Come, come, no more of this.


Henry. Well! -- I visited today that young man who was so grievously bruifed
by the breaking of his team.


Everg. That was kindly done, Henry.


Henry. I found him suffering under extreme torture, yet a ray of joy shot from
his languid eye -- for his medicine was administered by a father's hand -- it
was a mother's precious tear that dropped upon his wound -- Oh, how I envied him!


Everg. Still on the same subject -- I tell thee, if thou art not acknowledged
by thy race, why, then become the noble founder of a new one The most valuable
carnations were once seedlings -- and the pride of my flower-bed is now a
Henry, which, when known, will be envied by every florist in Britain -- Come
with me to the Castle for the last time.


Henry. The last time!


Everg. Aye, boy; for when Sir Philip arrives, hou must avoid him.


Henry. Not see him! where exists the power that shall prevent me?


Everg. Henry, if you value your own peace of mind -- if you value an old man's
comfort, avoid the Castle.


Henry (aside). I must dissemble with this honest creature -- Well, I am
content.


Everg. That Is right -- that is right, Henry -- Be but thou resigned and
virtuous, and he who clothes the lily of the field, will be a parent to thee.


Exeunt. THE END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. -- A Lodge belonging to the Castle.
(Dame ASHFIELD discovered making Lace.) Enter HANDY, jun. HANDY, jun. A
SINGULAR situation this my old Dad has placed me in; brought me here to marry a
woman of fashion and beauty, while I have been professing and I Have a notion
feeling the most ardent love for the pretty Susan Ashfield -- Propriety says,
take Miss Blandford -- Love says, take Susan -- Fashion says, take both -- but
would Susan consent to such an arrangement? -- and if she refused, would I
consent to part with her? Oh time enough to put that question when the previous
one is disposed of -- ( seeing DAME) How do you do? How do you do? -- Making
lace I perceive -- Is it a common employment here?


Dame. Oh! no, Sir, nobody can make it in these parts but myself! -- Mrs.
Grundy indeed pretends -- but, poor woman! she knows no more of it than you do.


Handy, jun. Than I do! that is vastly well -- My dear Madam, I passed two
months at Mechlin for the express purpose.


Dame. Indeed!


Handy, jun. You don't do it right -- now I can do it much better than that.
Give me leave, and I Will show you the true Mechlin method (turns the cushion
round, kneels down and begins working). First you see, so -- then, so --


Enter Sir ABEL and Miss BLANDFORD. Sir Abel. I vow Miss Blandford, fair as I
ever thought you, the air of your native land has given additional luster to
your charms! -- (Aside.) If my wife looked so -- Ah! But where can Bob be --
you must know, Miss, my son is a very clever fellow! you will not find him wasting
his time in boyish frivolity! -- no; you will find him --

(sees him.)
Miss B. Is that your son, Sir?


Sir Abel (abashed). Yes, that is Bob!


Miss B. Pray, Sir, is he making lace, or is he making love?


Sir Abel. Curse me if I can tell (hits him with his stick) Get up you dog!
don't you see Miss Blandford?


Handy, jun. (starting up.) Zounds! how unlucky! Ma'am, your most obedient
servant (endeavors to hide the work). Curse the cushion!

(throws it off).
Dame. Oh! he has spoiled my lace!


Handy, jun. Hush! I Will make you a thousand yards another time -- You see,
Ma'am, I was explaining to this good woman -- what -- what need not be
explained again -- Admirably handsome by Heaven!

(aside.)
Sir Abel. Is not she, Bob?


Handy, jun. (to Miss B.) In your journey from the coast, I conclude you took
London in your way? Hush!

( to DAME.)
Miss B. Oh no, Sir, I could not so soon venture into the beau monde, a
stranger just arrived from Germany --


Handy, jun. The very reason -- the most fashionable introduction possible! but
I perceive, Sir, you have here imitated other German importations, and only
restored to us our native excellence.


Miss B. I assure you, Sir, I am eager to seize my birthright, the pure and
envied immunities of an English woman!


Handy, jun. Then I trust, Madam, you will be patriot enough to agree with me,
that a^ a nation is poor, whose only wealth is importation -- that therefore
the humble native artist may ever hope to obtain from his countrymen those
fostering smiles, without which genius must sicken and industry decay. But it
requires no valet de place to conduct you through the purlieus of fashion, for
now the way of the world is, for every one to pursue their own way, and
following the fashion is differing as much as possible from the rest of your
acquaintance.


Miss B. But surely, Sir, there is some distinguishing feature by which the
votaries of fashion are known?


Handy, jun. Yes; but that varies extremely -- sometimes fashionable celebrity
depends on a high waist -- sometimes on a low carriage -- sometimes on high
play, and sometimes on low breeding -- last winter it rested solely on green
peace!


Miss B. Green peace!


Handy, jun. Green peace! -- that Lady was the most enchanting who could bring
the greatest quantity of green peace to her table at Christmas! the struggle was
tremendous! Mrs. Rowley Powley had the best of it by five pecks and a half, but
it having been unfortunately proved, that at her ball there was room to dance
and eat conveniently -- that n^ lady received a black eye, and no coachman was
killed, the thing was voted decent and comfortable, and scouted accordingly.


Miss B. Is comfort then incompatible with fashion?


Handy, jun. Certainly! -- Comfort in high life would be as preposterous as a
lawyer's bag crammed with truth, or his wig decorated with coquelicot ribbons!
No -- it is not comfort and selection that is sought, but numbers and
confusion! So that a fashionable party resembles Smithfield market, only a good
one when plentifully stocked -- and ladies are reckoned by the score like
sheep, and their husbands by droves like horned cattle!


Miss B. Ha, ha! and the conversation --


Handy, jun. Oh! like the assembly -- confused, vapid, and abundant; as How do,
Ma'am! -- no accident at the door? -- he, he! -- Only my carriage broke to
pieces! -- I hope you had not your pocket picked! -- Will Not you sit down to
faro? -- "Have you many tonight?" -- "A few, about six hundred!" -- Were you
at Lady Overall's? -- Oh yes; a delicious crowd and plenty of peace, he, he! --
and thus runs the fashionable race.


Sir Abel. Yes; and a precious run it is -- full gallop all the way: first they
run on -- then their fortune is run through -- then bills are run up -- then
they are run hard -- then they have a run of luck -- then they run out, and then
they run away! -- But I Will forgive fashion all it is follies in consideration of
one of its blessed laws.


Handy, jun. What may that be?


Sir Abel. That husband and wife must never be seen together.


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Miss Blandford, your father expects you.


Miss B. I hope I shall find him more composed.


Handy, jun. Is Sir Philip ill?


Miss B. His spirits are extremely depressed, and since we arrived here this
morning his dejection has dreadfully increased.


Handy, jun. But I hope we shall be able to laugh away despondency.


Miss B. Sir, if you are pleased to consider my esteem as an object worthy your
possession, I know of no way of obtaining it so certain as by your showing
every attention to my dear father.

(As they are going)
Enter ASHFIELD. Ash. Dame! Dame! she be come!


Dame. Who? Susan! our dear Susan


Ash. Ees -- zo come along -- Oh, Sir Abel! Lady Nelly! your spouse -- do order
you to go to her directly!


Handy, jun. Order! you mistake --


Sir Abel. No, he don't -- she generally presers that word.


Miss B. Adieu! Sir Abel.


Exeunt Miss BLANDFORD and HANDY, jun. Sir Abel. Oh! if my wife had such a
pretty way with her mouth!


Dame. And how does Susan look?


Ash. That Is what I do want to know, zoa come along -- Woo ye though -- Missus,
let us behave pratty -- Zur, if you pleaze, Dame and I will let you walk along
wi' us.


Sir Abel. How condescending! Oh, you are a pretty behaved fellow!


Exeunt. SCENE II. Farmer ASHFIELD'S Kitchen.
Enter Lady HANDY and SUSAN. Susan. My dear home, thrice welcome! what
gratitude I feel to your Ladyship for this indulgence.


Lady H. That Is right, child!


Susan. And I am sure you partake my pleasure in again visiting a place where
you received every protection and kindness my parents could show you, for I
remember while you lived with my father --


Lady H. Child! don't put your memory to any fatigue on my account -- you may
transfer the remembrance of who I was, to aid your more perfect recollection of
who I am.


Susan. Lady Handy!


Lady H. That Is right, child! I am not angry.


Susan (looking out). How luxuriantly the honeysuckle has grown that I planted
-- Ah! I see my dear father and mother coming through the garden.


Lady H. Oh! now I shall be caressed to death but I must endure the shock of
their attentions.


Enter Farmer and Dame with Sir ABEL. Ash. My dear Susan!

( they run to SUSAN.)
Dame. My sweet child! give me a kiss.


Ash. Hald thee! Feyther first though -- Well, I be as mortal glad to zee thee
as never war -- and how be'st thee? and how do thee like Lunnun town? -- it be
a deadly lively place I be tuold.


Dame. Is not she a sweet girl?


Sir Abel. That she is.


Lady H. (with affected dignity.) Does it occur to any one present that Lady
Handy is in the room?


Sir Abel. Oh, Lud! I Am sure, my dear wife, I never forget that you are in the
room.


Ash. Drabbit it! I overlooked Lady Nelly, sure enough; but consider, there be
zome difference between thee and our own Susan! I be deadly glad to zee thee
however.


Dame. So am I, Lady Handy!


Ash. Don't ye take it unkind I ha'nt a buss'd thee yet -- meant no slight
indeed

(kisses her)
Lady H. Oh! shocking!

(aside.)
Ash. No harm I do hope, Zur.


Sir Abel. None at all.


Ash. But dash it, Lady Nelly, what do make thee paint thy vace all over we rud
ochre zoo? Be it vor thy spouse to know thee? -- that be the way I do know my
sheep.


Sir Abel. The flocks of fashion are all marked so, Farmer.


Ash. Likely! Drabbit it! thee do make a tightish kind of a Ladyship zure enough.


Dame. That you do, my Lady! you remember the old house?


Ash. Aye; and all about it, doant ye? Nelly! my Lady!


Lady H. Oh! I Am quite shocked -- Susan, child! prepare a room where I may
dress before I proceed to the Castle.


Exit SUSAN. Enter HANDY, jun. Handy, jun. I don't see Susan -- I say, Dad! is
that my Mamma?


Sir Abel. Yes -- speak to her.


Handy, jun. (chucking her under the chin.) A fine girl upon my soul!


Lady Handy. Fine girl indeed! Is this behavior?


Handy, jun. Oh! beg pardon, most honored parent (she curtsies) -- that is a
damned bad curtsey. I can teach you to make a much better curtsey than that!


Lady H. You teach me, that am old enough to -- hem!


Handy, jun. Oh! that toss of the head was very bad indeed -- Look at me! --
That Is the thing!


Lady H. Am I to be insulted? Sir Abel, you know I seldom condescend to talk.


Sir Abel. Don't say so, my Lady; you wrong yourself.


Lady H. But when I do begin, you know not where it will end.


Sir Abel. Indeed I do not

(aside).
Lady H. I insist on receiving all possible respect from your son.


Handy, jun. And you shall have it, my dear girl! -- Madam, I mean.


Lady H. I vow I am agitated to that degree -- Sir Abel, my fan!


Sir Abel. Yes, my dear -- Bob, look here, a little contrivance of my own.
While others carry swords, and such like dreadful weapons in their canes, I
more gallantly carry a fan (removes the head of his cane and draws out a fan),
a pretty thought, is not it?

(presents it to his Lady.)
Ash. Some difference between thic stick and mine, beant there, Zur?

( to HANDY, jun.)
Handy, jun. (moving away.) Yes, there is -- ( to Lady H.) Do you call that
fanning yourself (taking the fan). My dear Ma'am, this is the way to maneuver
a fan.


Lady H. Sir, you shall find ( to HANDY, jun.) I have power enough to make you
repent this behavior -- severely repent it -- Susan!


Exit, followed by DAME. Handy, jun. Bravo! passion becomes her -- She does
that vastly well.


Sir Abel. Yes; practice makes perfect.


Enter SUSAN. Susan. Did your Ladyship call? -- Heavens! Mr. Handy!


Handy, jun. Hush! my angel! be composed! that letter will explain ( giving a
letter, noticed by ASHFIELD). Lady Handy wishes to see you.


Susan. Oh, Robert!


Handy, jun. At present my love, no more.


Exit SUSAN, followed by ASHFIELD. Sir Abel. What were you saying, Sir, to that
young woman?


Handy, jun. Nothing particular, Sir. Where is Lady Handy going.


Sir Abel. To dress.


Handy, jun. I suppose she has found out the use of money.


Sir Abel. Yes; I Will do her the justice to say she encourages trade. -- Why, do
you know, Bob, my best coal-pit will not find her in white muslins -- round her
neck hangs a hundred acres at least; my noblest oaks have made wigs for her; my
fat oxen have dwindled into Dutch pugs, and white mice; my India bonds are
transmuted into shawls and otto of roses; and a magnificent mansion has shrunk
into a diamond snuff box.


Enter COUNTRYMAN. Coun. Gentlemen, the folks be all got together, and the
ploughs be ready -- and --


Sir Abel. We are coming.


Exit SERVANT. Handy, jun. Ploughs!


Sir Abel. Yes, Bob, we are going to have a grand agricultural meeting.


Handy, jun. Indeed!


Sir Abel. If I could but find a man able to manage my new invented curricle
plough, none of them would have a chance.


Handy, jun. My dear Sir, if there be anything on earth I can do, it is that.


Sir Abel. What?


Handy, jun. I rather fancy I can plough better than any man in England.


Sir Abel. You don't say so! What a clever fellow he is -- I say, Bob, if you
would --


Handy, jun. No; I cannot condescend.


Sir Abel. Condescend! why not? -- much more creditable, let me tell you, than
galloping a maggot for a thousand, or eating a live cat, or any other
fashionable achievement.


Handy, jun. So it is -- Egad! I will -- I Will carry off the prize of industry.


Sir Abel. But should you lose, Bod.


Handy, jun. I lose! that is vastly well!


Sir Abel. True, with my curricle plough you could hardly fail.


Handy, jun. With my superior skill, Dad -- Then, I say, how the newspapers
will teem with the account.


Sir Abel. Yes.


Handy, jun. That universal genius, Handy, junior, with a plough --


Sir Abel. Stop -- invented by that ingenious machinist, Handy, senior. --


Handy, jun. Gained the prize against the first husbandmen in Hampshire -- Let
our Bond-street butterflies emulate the example of Handy, junior. --


Sir Abel. And let old City grubs cultivate the field of science, like Handy,
senior -- Ecod, I am so happy.


Lady Handy (without). Sir Abel.


Sir Abel. Ah! there comes a damper.


Handy, jun. Courage, you have many resources of happiness.


Sir Abel. Have I? I should be very glad to know them.


Handy, jun. In the first place you possess an excellent temper.


Sir Abel. So much the worse; for if I had a bad one, I should be the better
able to conquer hers.


Handy, jun. You enjoy good health --


Sir Abel. So much the worse; for if I were ill she wouldn't come near me.


Handy, jun. Then you are rich --


Sir Abel. So much the worse; for had I been poor she would not have married
me. But I say, Bob, if you gain the prize, I Will have a patent for my plough.


Lady Handy (without). Sir Abel, I say. --


Handy, jun. Father, could not you get a patent for stopping that sort of noise?


Sir Abel. If I could, what a sale it would have! -- No, Bob, a patent has been
obtained for the only thing that will silence her --


Handy, jun. Aye -- What Is that?


Sir Abel (in a whisper). A coffin! hush! -- I Am coming my dear.


Handy, jun. Ha, ha, ha!


Exeunt. SCENE III. -- A Parlour in ASHFIELD's House.
Enter ASHFIELD and WIFE. Ash. I tell ye, I zee'd un gi' Susan 2 letter, an' I
dan't like it a bit.


Dame. Nor I: if shame should come to the poor child -- I say, Tummas, what
would Mrs. Grundy say then?


Ash. Dom Mrs. Grundy; what would my poor would heart zay? but I be bound it be
all innocence.


Enter HENRY. Dame. Ah! Henry, we have not seen thee at home ail day.


Ash. And I do zomehow fanzie things dan't go zo clever when thee'rt away from
farm.


Henry. My mind has been greatly agitated.


Ash. Well, will not thee go and zee the ploughing match?


Henry. Tell me, will not those who obtain prizes be introduced to the Castle?


Ash. Ees, and feasted in the great hall.


Henry. My good friend, I wish to become a candidate.


Dame. You, Henry!


Henry. It is time I exerted the faculties heaven has bestowed on me; and
though my heavy fate crushes the proud hopes this heart conceives, still let me
prove myself worthy of the place Providence has assigned me. -- (Aside) Should
I succeed, it will bring me to the presence of that man, who (I know not why)
seems the dictator of my fate. -- (To them) Will you furnish me with the means?


Ash. Will I! -- Thou shall have the best plough in the parish -- I wish it were
all gould for thy zake -- and better cattle there cannot be noowhere.


Henry. Thanks, my good friend -- my benefactor -- I have little time for
preparation -- So receive my gratitude, and farewell.


Exit. Dame. A blessing go with thee!


Ash. I zay, Henry, take Jolly, and Smiler, and Captain, but dan't ye take thic
lazy beast Genius -- I Will be shot if having vive load an acre on my wheat land
could please me more.


Dame. Tummas, here comes Susan reading the letter.


Ash. How pale she do look, dan't she?


Dame. Ah! poor thing! -- If --


Ash. Hauld thy tongue, woolye?

They retire.
Enter SUSAN, reading the letter. Susan Is it possible? Can the man to whom
I Have given my heart write thus: -- I am compelled to marry Miss Blandford; but
my love for my Susan is unalterable -- I hope she will not, for an act of
necessity, cease to think with tenderness on her faithful Robert. -- Oh man!
ungrateful man! it is from our bosoms alone you derive your power; how cruel
then to use it, in fixing in those bosoms endless sorrow and despair. -- "Still
think with tenderness" -- Base, dishonorable insinuation -- He might have
allowed me to esteem him.

Locks up the letter in a box on the table, and exit weeping.
(ASHFIELD and DAME come forward). Ash. Poor thing! -- What can be the matter
-- She locked up the letter in thic box, and then bursted into tears

(looks at the box).
Dame. Yes, Tummas, she locked it in that box sure enough

(shakes a bunch of keys that hangs at her side).
Ash. What be doing, Dame? what be doing?


Dame (with affected indifference). Nothing; I was only touching these keys.


(They look at the box and keys significantly) Ash. A good tightish bunch!


Dame. Yes; they are of all sizes

(they look as before)
Ash. Indeed! -- Well -- Eh! -- Dame, why dan't ye speak; thou can chatter
vast enough zometimes.


Dame. Nay, Tummas -- I dare say -- if -- you know best -- but I think I could
find --


Ash. Well, Eh! -- you can just try you know (greatly agitated) You can try,
just vor the vun on it; but mind, dan't ye make a noise (she opens it). Why,
thee hasn't opened it?


Dame. Nay, Tummas, you told me!


Ash. Did I?


Dame. There Is the letter!


Ash. Well, why do ye gi't to I? -- I dan't want it, I Am zure (taking it -- he
turns it over -- she eyes it eagerly -- he is about to open it) -- She Is
coming! she is coming! (he conceals the letter, they tremble violently.) No,
she is gone into the other room (they hang their heads dejectedly, then look at
each other). What mun that feyther and mother be doing that do blush and
tremble at their own dater's coming (weeps). Dang it, has she desarv'd it of us
-- Did she ever deceive us? -- Were she not always the most open-hearted,
dutisullest, kindest -- and thee to goa like a dom'd spy and open her box, poor
thing? --


Dame. Nay, Tummas --


Ash. You did -- I zaw you do it myzel -- you look like a thief, now -- you do
-- Hush! -- no -- Dame -- here be the letter -- I will not reead a word on it, put
it where thee wound it, and as there vound it.


Dame. With all my heart

(she returns the letter to the box).
Ash. (embraces her.) Now I can wi' pleasure hug my would wife, and look my
child in the vace again -- I Will call her and ax her about it; and if she dan't
speak without disguisement, I Will be bound to be shot -- Dame, be the color of
sheame off my face yet? -- I never zeed thee look ugly before -- Susan, my dear
Sue, come here abit, woolye?


Enter SUSAN. Susan. Yes, my dear father.


Ash. Sue, we do wish to gi' thee a bit of admonishing and parent-like
conzultation.


Susan. I hope I have ever attended to your admonitions.


Ash. Ees, bless thee, I do believe thee have, lamb; but we all want our
memories jogged abit, or why else do parson preach us all to sleep every Zunday
-- Zo thic be the topic -- Dame and I, Sue, did zee a letter gi'd to thee, and
thee -- bursted into tears, and locked un up in thic box -- and then Dame and I
-- we -- that is all.


Susan. My dear father, if I concealed the contents of that letter from your
knowledge, it was because I did not wish your heart to share in the pain mine
feels.


Ash. Dang it, didn't I tell thee zoo?

(to his Wife.)
Dame. Nay, Tummas, did I say otherwise?


Susan. Believe me, my dear parents, my heart never gave birth to a thought my
tongue feared to utter.


Ash. There, the very words I zaid!


Susan. If you wish to see the letter I will show it to you

(she searches for the key).
Dame. Here Is a key will open it.


Ash. Drabbit it, hold thy tongue, thou would fool! (aside.) No, Susan, I Will not
zee it -- I Will believe my child.


Sussan. You shall not find your confidence illplaced -- it is true the
gentleman has declared he loved me; it is equally true that declaration was not
unpleasing to me -- Alas! it is also true, that his letter contains sentiments
disgraceful to himself, and insulting to me!


Ash. Drabbit it, if I Would knaw'd that, when we were cudgelling abit, I would have
lapt my stick about his ribs pratty tightish, I would.


Susan. Pray, father, don't you resent his conduct to me.


Ash. What, may not I leather un abit?


Susan. Oh, no! I have the strongest reasons to the contrary!


Ash. Well, Sue, I will not -- I Will behave as pratty as I always do -- but it be
time to go to the green, and zee the fine zights -- How I do hate the noise of
thic dom'd bunch of keys -- But bless thee, my child -- dan't forget that
vartue to ayoung woman be vor all the world like -- like -- Dang it, I have
gotten it all in my head; but zomehow -- I cannot talk it -- but vartue be to a
young woman what corn be to a blade o'wheat, do ye zee; for while the corn be
there it be glorious to the eye, and it be called the staff of life; but take
that treasure away, and what do remain? why naught but this worthless straw,
that man and beast do tread upon.


Exeunt. SCENE IV. -- An extensive View of a cultivated Country -- A ploughed
Field in the center, in which are seen six different Ploughs and Horses -- At
one side a bandsome Tent -- a number of country People assembled.
Enter ASHFIELD and DAME. Ash. Make way! make way for the gentry; and do ye
hear, behave pratty, as I do -- Dang thee stond back, or I Will knack thee down,
I wool.


Enter Sir ABEL and Miss BLANDFORD with Servants. Sir Abel. It is very kind of
you to honor our rustic festivities with your presence.


Miss B. Pray, Sir Abel, where is your son?


Sir Abel. What, Bob? Oh, you will see him presently. (nodding significantly).
Here are the prize medals; and if you will condescent to present them. I Am sure
they will be worn with additional pleasure. -- I say, you will see Bob presently --
Well, Farmer, is it all over?


Ash. Ecs, Zur; the acres be plough'd and the ground judged; and the young lads
be coming down to receive their reward -- Heartily welcome, Miss, to your
native land; hope you be as pleased to zee we as we be to zee you, and the like
o'that. -- Mortal beautizome to be zure -- I declare, Miss, it do make I quite
warm zomehow to look at ye.


(A shout without.) Sir Abel. Now you will see Bob -- now my dear boy, Bob --
here he comes

(Huzza).
Enter HENRY and two young Hushandmen. Ash. It Is he, he has don't -- Dang you
all, why dan't ye shout? Huzza!


Sir Abel. Why, zounds, where is Bob? -- I don't see Bob -- Bless me, what has
become of Bob and my plough?

(retires and takes out his glass.)
Ash. Well, Henry, there be the prize, and there be the fine Lady that will
gi'it thee.


Henry. Tell me who is that lovely creature?


Ash. The dater of Sir Philip Blandford.


Henry. What exquisite sweetness! Ah! should the father but resemble her, I
shall have but little to sear from his severity!


Ash. Miss, thic be the young man that ha got'n the guolden prize.


Miss B. This; I always thought ploughmen were coarse, vulgar creatures, but he
seems handsome and diffident.


Ash. Ees, quite pratty behaved -- it were I that teach'd un.


Miss B. What Is your name?


Henry. Henry!


Miss B. And your family?

(HENRY, in an agony of grief, turns away, strikes his forebead, and leans on
the shoulder of ASHFIELD.)
Dame. (apart to Miss B.) Madam, I beg pardon, but nobody knows about his
parentage; and when it is mentioned, poor boy! he takes on sadly -- He has
lived at our house ever since we had the farm, and we have had an allowance for
him -- small enough to be sure -- but, good lad! he was always welcome to share
what we had.


Miss B. I am shocked at my imprudence. -- ( To HENRY) Pray pardon me; I would
not insult an enemy, much less one I am inclined to admire -- (giving her hand,
then withdraws it) -- to esteem -- you shall go to the Castle -- my father
shall protect you.


Henry. Generous creature! to merit his esteem is the fondest wish of my heart
-- to be your slave, the proudest aim of my ambition!


Miss B. Receive your merited reward (he kneels -- she places the medal round
his neck -- the same to the others).


Sir Abel (advances). I cannot see Bob; pray, Sir, do you happen to know what is
become of my Bob?


Henry. Sir!


Sir Abel. Did not you see a remarkable clever plough, and a young man --


Henry. At the beginning of the contest, I observed a gentleman; his horses, I
believe, were unruly, but my attention was too much occupied to allow me to
notice more.

Laughing without.
Handy, jun. (without.) How dare you laugh?


Sir Abel. That Is Bob's voice!

Laughing again.
Enter HANDY, jun. in a smock frock, cocked hat, and a piece of a plough in his
hand. Handy, jun. Dare to laugh again, and I Will knock you down with this --
Ugh! how infernally hot

(walks about).
Sir Abel. Why, Bob, where have you been?


Handy, jun. I don't know where I Have been.


Sir Abel. And what have you got in your hand?


Handy, jun. What? All I could keep of your nonsensical ricketty plough

( walks about, Sir ABEL following).
Sir Abel. Come, none of that, Sir. -- Don't abuse my plough to cover your
ignorance, Sir; where is it, Sir? and where are my famous Leicestershire
horses, Sir?


Handy, jun. Where! ha, ha, ha! I Will tell you as nearly as I can, ha, ha!
What Is the name of the next county?


Ash. It be called Wiltshire, Zur.


Handy, jun. Then, Dad, upon the nicest calculation I am able to make, they are
at this moment engaged in the very patriotic act of ploughing Salisbury plain,
ha, ha! I saw them fairly over that hill, full gallop, with the curricle plough
at their heels.


Ash. Ha, ha! a good one, ha, ha!


Handy, jun. But never mind father, you must again set your invention to work,
and I my toilet -- rather a deranged figure to appear before a lady in
(fiddles). Hey dey! What, are you going to dance?


Ash. Ecs, Zur; I suppose you can sheake a leg abit?


Handy, jun. I sancy I can dance every possible step, from the pas ruse to the
war dance of the Catabaws.


Ash. Likely -- I do hope, Miss, you will join your honest neighbors; they will be
deadly hurt an you will not gig it a bit wi'un.


Miss B. With all my heart.


Sir Abel. Bob's an excellent dancer.


Miss. B. I dare say he is, Sir; but on this occa sion, I think I ought to
dance with the young man who gained the prize -- I think it would be most
pleasant -- most proper, I mean; and I am glad you agree with me -- So, Sir, if
you will accept my hand

(HENRY takes it).
Sir Abel. Very pleasantly settled upon my soul -- Bob, will not you dance?


Handy, jun. I dance! -- No, I Will look at them -- I Will quietly look on.


Sir Abel. Egad, now as my wife's away, I Will try to find a pretty girl and make
one among them.


Ash. That Is hearty -- Come, Dame, hang the rheumatics -- Now, lads and lasses,
behave pratty, and strike up.

A dance.
(HANDY, jun. looks on a little, and then begins to move his legs -- then
dashes into the midst of the dance, and endeavors to imitate every one
opposite to him; then being exhausted, he leaves the dance, seizes the fiddle,
and plays till the curtain drops). THE END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. -- An Apartment in the Castle.
Sir PHILIP BLANDFORD discovered on a couch, reading, SERVANTS attending. Sir
PHILIP. Is not my daughter yet returned?


Serve. No, Sir Philip.


Sir Philip. Dispatch a servant to her.


Exit SERVANT. Re-enter SERVANT. Serve. Sir, the old gardener is below, and asks
to see you.


Sir Philip (rises, and throws away the book) Admit him instantly, and leave
me. --

Exit SERVANT. Enter EVERGREEN, who bows, then looking at Sir PHILIP clasps his
hands together and weeps. Does this desolation affect the old man? Come near me
-- Time has laid a lenient hand on thee --


Everg. Oh, my dear master! can twenty years have wrought the change I see?


Sir Philip. No (striking his breast); it is the canker here that has withered
up my trunk; -- but are we secure from observation?


Everg. Yes.


Sir Philip. Then tell me, does the boy live?


Everg. He does; and is as fine a youth --


Sir Philip. No comments.


Everg. We named him --


Sir Philip. Be dumb! let me not hear his name, Has care been taken he may not
blast me with his presence?


Everg. It has; and he cheerfully complied.


Sir Philip. Enough! Never speak of him more. Have you removed every dreadful
vestige from the fatal chamber? (EVERGREEN hesitates.) O speak!


Everg. My dear master! I confess my want of duty. Alas! I had not courage to
go there.


Sir Philip. Ah!


Everg. Nay, sorgive me! wiser than I have selt such terrors! -- The apartments
have been caresully locked up -- the keys not a moment from my possession --
here they are.


Sir Philip. Then the task remains with me. Dreadful thought! I can well pardon
thy fears, old man -- O! could I wipe from my memory that hour, when --


Everg. Hush! your daughter.


Sir Philip. Leave me -- we'll speak anon.


Exit EVERGREEN. Enter Miss BLANDFORD. Miss B. Dear father! I came the moment I
heard you wished to see me.


Sir Philip. My good child, thou art the sole support that props my feeble
life. I fear my wish for thy company deprives thee of much pleasure.


Miss B. Oh no! What pleasure can be equal to that of giving you happiness? Am
I not rewarded in seeing your eyes beam with pleasure on me?


Sir Philip. It Is the pale reflection of the luster I see sparkling there. My
love! did you enjoy the scenes you beheld?


Miss B. Greatly. How strongly they contrast with those we witnessed abroad!


Sir Philip. True. Happy country! which, in the midst of direful war can draw
out its rustic train to join the festive dance, as securely as if peace again
had blessed the world! -- But tell me, did your lover gain the prize?


Miss B. Yes, papa.


Sir Philip. Few men of his rank --


Miss B. Oh! you mean Mr. Handy?


Sir Philip. Yes.


Miss B. No; he did not.


Sir Philip. Then, who did you mean?


Miss B. Did you say lover? I -- I mistook -- No -- a young man called Henry
obtained the prize!


Sir Philip. And how did Mr. Handy succeed?


Miss B. Oh, it was so ridiculous! I will tell you, papa, what happened to him.


Sir Philip. To Mr. Handy?


Miss B. Yes; as soon as the contest was over Henry presented himself; I was
surprised at seeing a young man so handsome and elegant as Henry is -- then I
placed the medal round Henry's neck, and I was told that poor Henry --


Sir Philip. Henry! -- So, my love! this is your account of Mr. Robert Handy?


Miss B. Yes, papa -- no, papa -- he came afterward, dressed so ridiculously
that even Henry could not help smiling.


Sir Philip. Henry again!


Miss B. Then we had a dance.


Sir Philip. Of course you danced with your lover?


Miss B. Yes, papa.


Sir Philip. How does Mr. Handy dance?


Miss B. Oh! he did not dance till --


Sir Philip. You danced with your lover?


Miss B. Yes -- No, papa! -- Somebody said (I don't know who) that I ought to
dance with Henry, because --


Sir Philip. Still Henry! Oh! some rustic boy. My dear child, you talk as if
you loved this Henry.


Miss B. Oh! no, papa -- and I am certain he don't love me.


Sir Philip. Indeed!


Miss B. Yes, papa; for when he touched my hand, he trembled as if I terrified
him; and instead of looking at me as you do, who I am sure love me, when our
eyes met, he withdrew his and cast them on the ground.


Sir Philip. And these are the reasons which make you conclude he does not love
you?


Miss B. Yes, papa.


Sir Philip. And probably you could adduce proof equally convincing that you
don't love him?


Miss B. Oh yes -- quite; for in the dance he sometimes paid attention to other
young women, and I was so angry with him! Now, you know, papa, I love you --
and I am sure I should not have been angry with you, had you done so.


Sir Philip. But one question more -- Do you think Mr. Handy loves you?


Miss B. I have never thought about it, papa.


Sir Philip. I am satisfied.


Miss B. Yes; I knew I should convince you.


Sir Philip. Oh, Love! malign and subtle tyrant, how falsely art thou painted
blind! It Is thy votaries are so; for what but blindness can prevent their
seeing thy poisoned shaft, which is for ever doomed to rankle in the victim's
heart.


Miss B. Oh! now I am certain I am not in love; for I feel no rankling at my
heart. I feel the softest, sweetest sensation I ever experienced. But, papa,
you must come to the lawn. I don't-know why, but today Nature seems
enchanting; the birds sing more sweetly, and the flowers give more perfume.


Sir Philip (aside). Such was the day my youthful sancy pictured! How did it
close?


Miss B. I promifed Henry your protection.


Sir Philip. Indeed! that was much. Well, I will see your rustic here. This
infant passion must be crushed. Poor wench! some artless boy has caught thy
infant fancy! -- Thy arm, my child!


Exeunt. SCENE II. -- A Lawn before the C sile.
Enter HENRY and ASHFIELD. Ash. Well! here thee'rt going to make thy bow to Sir
Philip. I zay, if he should take a fancy to thee, thou wilt come to farm and zee
us zometimes, wo'tn't Henry?


Henry (shaking his hand). Tell me, is that Sir Philip Blandford who leans on
that lady's arm?


Ash. I don't know, by reason do you zee I never zeed'un. Well, good bye! I
declare thee doz look quite grand wi' thic golden prize about thy neck, vor all
the world like the lords in their stars, that do come to theas pearts to pickle
their skins in the zale zea ocean! Good b'ye, Henry.


Exit. Henry. He approaches! Why this agitation? I wish, yet dread, to meet him.


Enter SIR PHILIP and Miss BLANDFORD, attended. Miss B. The joy your tenantry
display at seeing you again must be truly grateful to you.


Sir Philip. No, my child; for I feel I do not merit it. Alas! I can see no
orphans clothed with my beneficence, no anguish assuaged by my care.


Miss B. Then I am sure my dear father wishes to show his kind intentions. So I
will begin by placing one under his protection

( goes up the stage and leads down HENRY. Sir PHILIP, on secing him, starts,
then becomes greatly agitated).
Sir Philip. Ah! do my eyes deceive me? No, it must be him! Such was the face
his father wore!


Henry. Spoke you of my father?


Sir Philip. His presence brings back recollections which drive me to madness!
How came he here? Who have I to curse for this?


Miss B. (falling on his neck). Your daughter.


Henry. Oh, Sir, tell me! on my knees I ask it! do my parents live? Bless me
with my father's name, and my days shall pass in active gratitude -- my nights
in prayers for you. (Sir PHILIP views him with severe contempt.) Do not mock my
misery! Have you a heart?


Sir Philip. Yes; of marble. Cold and obdurate to the world -- ponderous and
painsul to myself -- Quit my sight for ever!


Miss B. Go, Henry, and save me from my father's curse.


Henry. I obey: cruel as the command is, I obey it -- I shall often look at
this (touching the medal) and think on the blissful moment when your hand
placed it there.


Sir Philip. Ah! tear it from his breast.

(SERVANT advances.)
Henry. Sooner take my life! It is the first honor I have earned, and it is no
mean one; for it assigns me the first rank among the sons or industry! This is
my claim to the sweet rewards of honest labor! This will give me competence,
nay more, enable me to despise your tyranny!


Sir Philip. Rash boy, mark! Avoid me, and be secure -- Repeat this intrusion,
and my vengeance shall pursue thee --


Henry. I defy its power! -- You are in England, Sir, where the man, who bears
about him an upright heart, bears a charm too potent for tyranny to humble. Can
your frown wither up my youthful vigor? No! -- Can your malediction disturb
the slumbers of a quiet conscience? No! Can your breath stifle in my heart the
adoration it feels for that pitying angel? Oh, no!


Sir Philip. Wretch! you shall be taught the difference between us!


Henry. I feel it now! proudly feel it! -- You hate the man that never wronged
you -- I could love the man that injures me -- You meanly triumph over a worm
-- I make a giant tremble.


Sir Philip. Take him from my sight! Why am I not obeyed?


Miss B. Henry, if you wish my hate should not accompany my father's, instantly
begone.


Henry. Oh, pity me!


Exit. (Miss BLANFORD looks after him -- Sir PHILIP, exhausted, leans on his
Servants). Sir Philip. Supported by my servants! I thought I had a daughter!


Miss B. (running to him.) O, you have, my father! one that loves you better
than her life!


Sir Philip ( to SERVANT). Leave us.


Exit SERVANT. Emma, if you feel, as I fear you do, love for that youth -- mark
my words! When the dove woos for its mate the ravenous kite; when Nature's
fixed antipathies mingle in sweet concord, then and not till then, hope to be
united.

Miss B. O heaven!


Sir Philip. Have you not promised me the disposal of your hand?


Miss B. Alas! my father! I didn't then know the difficulty of obedience!


Sir Philip. Hear, then, the reasons why I demand compliance. You think I hold
these rich estates -- Alas, the shadow only, not the substance.


Miss B. Explain, my father!


Sir Philip. When I left my native country, I lest it with a heart lacerated by
every wound that the falsehood of others or my own conscience could inflict.
Hateful to myself, I became the victim of dissipation -- I rushed to the gaming
table, and soon became the dupe of villains. -- My ample fortune was lost; I
detected one in the act of sraud, and having brought him to my feet, he
confessed a plan had been laid for my ruin; that he was but an humble
instrument; for that the man who, by his superior genius, stood posseffed of
all the mortgages and securities I had given, was one Mortington.


Miss B. I have heard your name him before. Did you not know this Morrington?


Sir Philip. No; he, like his deeds, avoided the light -- Ever dark, subtle,
and mysterious. Collecting the scattered remnant of my fortune, I wandered
wretched and desolare, till, in a peaceful village, I first beheld thy mother,
humble in birth, but exalted in virtue. The morning after our marriage she
received a packet, containing these words: The reward of virtuous love,
presented by a repentant villain; and which also contained bills and notes to
the high amount of ten thousand pounds.


Miss B. And no name?


Sir Philip. None; nor could I ever guess at the generous donor. I need not
tell thee what my heart suffered when death deprived me of her. Thus
circumstanced, this good man, Sir Abel Handy, proposed to unite our families by
marriage; and in consideration of what he termed the honor of our alliance,
agreed to pay off every encumbrance on my estates, and settle them as a portion
on you and his son. Yet still another wonder remains. -- When I arrive, I find
no claim whatever has been made, either by Morrington or his agents. What am I
to think? Can Morrington have perished, and with him his large claims to my
property? Or, does he withhold the blow, to make it fall more heavily?


Miss B. It Is very strange! very mysterious! But my father has not told me what
misfortune led him to leave his native country.


Sir Philip (greatly agitated). Ha!


Miss B. May I not know it?


Sir Philip. Oh! never, never, never!


Miss B. I will not ask it -- Be composed -- Let me wipe away those drops of
anguish from your brow. -- How cold your check is! My father, the evening damps
will harm you -- Come in -- I will be all you wish -- indeed I will.


Exeunt. SCENE III. -- An Apartment in the Castle.
Enter EVERGREEN. Everg. Was ever anything so unlucky! Henry to come to the
Castle and meet Sir Philip. He should have consulted me; I shall be blamed --
but, thank heaven, I am innocent.


(Sir ABEL and Lady HANDY without). Lady H. I will be treated with respect.


Sir Abel. You shall, my dear.

(They enter.)
Lady H. But how! but how! Sir Abel, I repeat it. --


Sir Abel (aside). For the fiftieth time.


Lady H. Your son conducts himself with an insolence I will not endure; but you
are ruled by him, you have no will of your own.


Sir Abel. I have not indeed.


Lady H. How contemptible!


Sir Abel. Why, my dear, this is the case -- I am like the ass in the fable;
and if I am doomed to carry a pack-saddle, it is not much matter who drives me.


Lady H. To yield your power to those the law allows you to govern! --


Sir Abel. Is very weak indeed.


Everg. Lady Handy, your very humble servant; I heartily congratulate you,
Madam, on your marriage this worthy gentleman -- Sir, I give you joy.


Abel (aside). Not before it is wanted.


Everg. Aye, my Lady; this match makes up for the imprudence of your first.


Lady H. Hem!


Sir Abel. Eh! What! -- what is that -- Eh! what do you mean?


Everg. I mean, Sir -- that Lady Handy's former husband --


Sir Abel. Former husband! -- Why, my dear, I never knew -- Eh!


Lady H. A mumbling old blockhead! -- Didn't you Sir Abel? Yes; I was rather
married many years ago; but my husband went abroad and died.


Sir Abel. Died, did he?


Everg. Yes, Sir; he was a servant in the Castle.


Sir Abel. Indeed! So he died -- poor fellow!


Lady H. Yes.


Sir Abel. What, you are sure he died, are you?


Lady H. Don't you hear?


Sir Abel. Poor fellow! neglected perhaps -- had I known it, he should have had
the best advice money could have got.


Lady H. You seem sorry.


Sir Abel. Why you would not have me pleased at the death of your husband,
would you? -- a good kind of man!


Everg. Yes; a faithful fellow -- rather ruled his wife too severely.


Sir Abel. Did he? (apart to EVERGREEN.) Pray do you happen to recollect his
manner? -- Could you just give a hint of the way he had?


Lady H. Do you want to tyrannize over my poor tender heart? -- It Is too much!


Everg. Bless me! Lady Handy is ill -- Salts! salts!


Sir Abel (producing an essence-box). Here are salts, or aromatic vinegar, or
essence of --


Everg. Any -- any.


Sir bell. Bless me, I cannot find the key!


Everg. Pick the lock


Sir Abel. It cannot b^ picked, it is a patent lock.


Everg. The br^^k i^ o^en, Sir.


Sir Abel. It cannot be broke open -- it is a contrivance of my own -- you see,
here comes a horizontal bolt, which acts upon a spring, therefore --


Lady H. I may die while you are describing a horizontal bolt. Do you think you
shall close your eyes for a week for this?


Enter Sir PHILIP BLANDFORD. Sir Philip. What has occasioned this disturbance?


Lady H. Ask that gentleman.


Sir Abel. Sir, I am accused --


Lady H. Convicted! convicted!


Sir Abel. Well, I will not argue with you about words -- because I must bow to
your superior practice -- But, Sir --


Sir Philip. Pshaw! (apart.) Lady Handy, some of your people were inquiring for
you.


Lady H. Thank you, Sir. Come, Sir Abel.


Exit. Sir Abel. Yes, my Lady -- I say ( to EVERGREEN), could not you give me a
hint of the way he had --


Lady (without). Sir Abel!


Sir Abel. Coming, my soul!


Exit. Sir Philip. So! you have well obeyed my orders in keeping this Henry
from my presence.


Everg. I was not to blame, Master.


Sir Philip. Has Farmer Ashfield left the Castle?


Everg. No, Sir.


Sir Philip. Send him hither.


Exit EVERGREEN. That boy must be driven far, far from my sight -- but where?
-- no matter! the world is large enough.

Enter ASHFIELD. -- Come hither. I believe you hold a farm of mine?

Ash. Ees, Zur, I do, at your zarvice.


Sir Philip. I hope a profitable one?


Ash. Zometimes it be, Zur. But thic year it be all the other way as 'twur -- but
I do hope as our landlords have a tightish big lump of the good, they will be zo
kind hearted as to take a little bit of the bad.


Sir Philip. It is but reasonable -- I conclude then you are in my debt.


Ash. Ees, Zur, I be -- at your zarvice.


Sir Philip. How much!


Ash. Sir, I do owe ye a hundred and fifty pounds -- at your zarvice.


Sir Philip. Which you cannot pay?


Ash. Not a varthing, Zur -- at your zarvice.


Sir Philip. Well, I am willing to give you every indulgence.


Ash. Be you, Zur? that be deadly kind. Dear heart! it will make my auld Dame
quite young again, and I don't think helping a poor man will do your Honor's
health any harm -- I don't indeed, Zur -- I had a thought of speaking to your
worship about it -- but then thinks I, the gentleman mayhap be one of those
that do like to do a good turn; and not have a word zaid about it -- zo, Zur,
if you had not mentioned what I owed you, I am zure! never should -- should not
indeed, Zur.


Sir Philip. Nay, I will wholly acquit you of the debt, on condition --


Ash. Ees, Zur.


Sir Philip. On condition, I say, you instantly turn out that boy -- that Henry.


Ash. Turn out Henry! -- Ha, ha, ha! Excuse my tittering, Zur; but you bees
making your vun of I, zure.


Sir Philip. I am not apt to trifle -- send him instantly from you or take the
consequences.


Ash. Turn out Henry! I do vow I shou'dn't know how to zet about it -- I should
not indeed, Zur.


Sir Philip. You hear my determination. If you disobey, you know what will
follow -- I Will leave you to reflect on it.


Exit. Ash. Well, Zur, I Will argusy the topic, and then you may wait upon me,
and I Will tell ye. (makes the motion of turning out) -- I should be deadly
awkward at it vor zartain -- however, I Will put the case -- Well! I goes
whiztling whoam -- noa, drabbit it! I shou'dn't be able to whiztle a bit, I Am
zure. Well! I goes whoam, and I zees Henry zitting by my wife mixing up someit
to comfort the would zoul, and take away the pain of here rheumatics -- Very
well! Then Henry places a chair vor I by the vire zide, and zays -- Varmer, the
horses be fed, the sheep be folded, and you have nothing to do but to zit down,
smoke your pipe, and be happy! Very well! (becomes affected.) Then I zays --
Henry, you be poor and ^^^endless, zo you must turn out of my houze directly.
Very well! then my wife stares at O -- reaches her hand toward the vire place,
and throws the poker at my head. Very well! then Henry gives a kind of aguish
shake, and getting up, sighs from the bottom of his heart -- then holding up
his head like a king, zays -- Varmer, I have too long been a burden to you --
Heaven protect you, as you have me -- Farewell! I go. Then I says, If thee docz
I Will be domn'd! (with great energy.) Hollo! you Mister Sir Philip! you may come
in. --


Enter Sir PHILIP BLANDFORD. Zur, I have argufied the topic, and it would not be
pratty -- zo I cannot.

Sir Philip. Cannot! absurd!


Ash. Well, Zur, there is but another word -- I will not.


Sir Philip. Indeed!


Ash. No, Zur, I will not -- I Would zee myzelf hanged first, and you too, Zur -- I
would indeed

(bowing).
Sir Philip. You refuse then to obey.


Ash. I do, Zur -- at your zarvice

(bowing)
Sir Philip. Then the law must take its course.


Ash. I be zorry for that too -- I be indeed, Zur; but if corn would not grow I
could not help it; it wer'n't poisoned by the hand that zow'd it. Thic hand,
Zur, be as free from guilt as your own.


Sir Philip. Oh!

(sighing deeply.)
Ash. It were never held out to clinch a hard bargain, nor will it turn a good
lad out into the wide wicked world because he be poorish a bit. I be zorry you
be offended, Zur, quite -- but come what wool, I Will never hit thic hand against
here, but when I be zure that zomeit at inzide will jump against it with
pleazure (bowing). I do hope you will repent of all your zins -- I do indeed,
Zur; and if you should, I Will come and zee you again as friendly as ever -- I
wool indeed, Zur.


Sir Philip. Your repentance will come too late!


Exit. Ash. Thank ye, Zur -- Good morning to you -- I do hope I have made myzel
agreeable -- and so I Will go whoam.


Exit. THE END OF THE THIRD ACT
ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- A room in ASHFIELD' s house.
Dame ASHFIELD discovered at work with her needle. HENRY sitting by her. DAME.
COME, come, Henry, you will fret yourself ill, child. If Sir Philip will not be
kind to you, you are but where you were.


Henry (rising) My peace of mind is gone for ever. Sir Philip may have cause
for hate; -- spite of his unkindness to me, my heart seeks to find excuses for
him -- for, oh! that heart doats on his lovely daughter.


Dame (looking out). Here comes Tummas home at last. Heyday! what is the matter
with the man? He does'nt seem to know the way into his own house.

Enter ASHFIELD, musing, he stumbles against a chair. Tummas, my dear Tummas,
what is the matter?


Ash. (not attending) It be lucky vor he I h^^ zoo pratty behaved, or dom if I
--

(doubling his fist)
Dame. Who -- what?


Ash. Nothing at all, where is Henry?


Henry. Here, farmer.


Ash. Thee woult'nt leave us, Henry, wou't?


Heny. Leave you! What, leave you now, when by my exertion I can pay off part
of the debt of gratitude I owe you? oh, no!


Ash. Nay, it were not vor that I axed, I promise thee; come, gi' us thy hand
on it then (shaking hands). Now I Will tell ye. Zur Philip did send vor I, about
the money I do owe 'un; and said as how he would make all strait between us --


Dame. That was kind.


Ash. Yes, deadly kind. Make all strait on condition I did turn Henry out of my
doors.


Dame. What!


Henry. Where will his hatred cease?


Dame. And what did you say, Tummas?


Ash. Why, I zivelly told un, if it were agreeable to he to behave like a
brute, it were agreeable to I to behave like a man.


Dame. That was right. I would have told him a great deal more.


Ash. Ah! likely. Then a zaid I should ha a bit of laa vor my pains.


Henry. And do you imagine I will see you suffer on my account? No -- I will
remove this hated form --

(going.)
Ash. No, but thee shat'un -- thee shat'un -- I tell thee. Thee have givun me
thy hand on it, and dom'me, if thee shat budge one step out of this house.
Drabbit it! what can he do? he cannot send us to jail. Why, I have corn will
zell for half the money I do owe 'un -- and ha'nt I cattle and sheep? deadly
lean to be zure -- and ha'nt I a thumping zilver watch, almost as big as thy
head? and Dame here a got -- How many silk gowns have thee got, Dame?


Dame. Three, Tummas -- and sell them all -- and I Will go to church in a stuff
one -- and let Mrs. Grundy turn up her nose as much as she pleases.


Henry. Oh, my friends, my heart is full. Yet a day will come, when this heart
will prove its gratitude.


Dame. That day, Henry, is every day.


Ash. Dang it! never be down hearted. I do know as well as can be, zome good
luck will turn up. All the way I comed whoam I looked to vind a purse in the
path, but I did not though.


(A knocking at the door.) Dame. Ah! here they are coming to fell I suppose --


Ash. Lettun -- lettun, zeize and zell; we ha gotten here (striking his breast)
what we will not zell, and they cannot zell. (knocking again) Come in -- dang it,
don't ye be shy.


Enter MORRINGTON and GERALD. Henry. Ah! the strangers I saw this morning.
These are not officers of law.


Ash. Noa! walk in, Gemmen. Glad to zee ye wi 'all my heart and zoul. Come,
Dame, spread a cloth, bring out cold meat, and a mug of beer.


Gerald ( to MORRINGTON). That is the boy.

(MORRINGTON nods.)
Ash. Take a chair, Zur.


Mor. I thank, and admire your hospitality, Don't trouble yourself, good woman.
-- I am not inclined to eat.


Ash. That be the case here. Today none o'we be auver hungry: misfortin be apt
to stay the stomach confoundely. --


Mor. Has misfortune reached this humble dwelling?


Ash. Ees, Zur. I do think vor my part it do work its way in every where.


Mor. Well, never despair.


Ash. I never do, Zur. It is not my way. When the sun do shine I never think of
voul weather, not I; and when it do begin to rain I always think that is a zure
zign it will give auver.


Mor. Is that young man your son?


Ash. No, Zur -- I do wish he were we all my heart and zoul.


Gerald ( to MORRINGTON). Sir, remember.


Mor. Doubt not my prudence. Young man, your appearance interests me; -- how
can I serve you?


Henry. By informing me who are my parents.


Mor. That I cannot do.


Henry. Then, by removing from me the hatred of Sir Philip Blandford.


Mor. Does Sir Philip hate you?


Henry. With such severity, that even now he is about to ruin these worthy
creatures, because they have protected med.


Mor. Indeed! misfortune has made him cruel. That should not be.


Ash. Noa, it should not indeed, Zur.


Mor. It shall not be.


Ash. Shall Not it, Zur? But how shall not it?


Mor. I will prevent it.


Ash. Wool ye faith and troth? Now, Dame, did not I zay zome good luck would
turn up?


Henry. Oh, Sir, did I hear you rightly? Will you preserve my friends; -- will
you avert the cruel arm of power, and make the virtuous happy? my tears must
thank you

(taking his hand).
Mor. (disengaging his hand) Young man, you oppress me -- forbear! I do not
merit thanks -- pay your gratitude where you are sure it is due -- to Heaven.
Observe me -- here is a bond of Sir Philip Blandford's for L. 1000 -- do you
present it to him, and obtain a discharge for the debt of this worthy man. The
rest is at your own disposal -- no thanks.


Henry. But, Sir, to whom am I thus highly indebted?


Mor. My name is Morrington. At present that information must suffice.


Henry. Morrington.


Ash. (bowing) Zur, if I may be zo bold --


Mor. Nay, friend --


Ash. Don't be angry I had'nt thanked you, Zur, nor I wont. -- Only, Zur, I
were going to ax when you would call again. You shall have my stamped note vor
the money, you shall indeed, Zur. And in the mean time, I do hope you will take
zomeit in way of remembrance as'twere.


Dame. Will your Honor put a couple of turkies in your pocket?


Ash. Or pop a ham under your arm? don't ye zay no, if it is agreeable.


Mor. Farewell, good friends, I shall repeat my visit soon.


Dame. The sooner the better.


Ash. Good bye to ye, Zur -- Dame and I wool go to work as merry as crickets.
Good bye, Henry.


Dame. Heaven bless your Honor -- and I hope you will carry as much joy away
with you, as you leave behind you -- I do indeed.


Exeunt ASHFIELD and Dame. Mor. Young man, proceed to the castle and demand an
audience of Sir Philip Blandford. In your way thither I Will instruct you
further. -- Give me your hand.


Exeunt. MORRINGTON, looking steadfastly on HENRY, GERALD following.] SCENE. II.
-- An apartment in the castle.
Sir PHILIP BLANDFORD discovered -- Miss BLAND FORD reading. Miss B. Shall I
proceed to the next essay?


Sir Philip. What does it treat of?


Miss B. Love and friendship.


Sir Philip. A satire?


Miss B. No, father; -- an eulogy.


Sir Philip. Thus do we find in the imaginations of men, what we in vain look
for in their hearts. -- Lay it by (a knocking at the door). Come in.


Enter EVERGREEN. Ever. My dear master, I am a petitioner to you.


Sir Philip (rises). None possesses a better claim to my favor -- ask, and
receive.


Ever. I thank you, Sir. The unhappy Henry.


Miss B. What of him --


Sir Philip. Emma -- go to your apartment.


Miss B. Poor Henry --


Exit. Sir Philip. Imprudent man --


Ever. (Sir PHILIP turns from him with resentment) Nay, be not angry, he is
without, and entreats to be admitted.


Sir Philip. I cannot, will not again behold him.


Ever. I am sorry you refuse me, as it compels me to repeat his words: "If,"
said he, "Sir Philip denies my humble request, tell him I demand to see him."


Sir Philip. Demand to see me! well, his high command shall be obeyed then
(sarcastically); bid him approach.


Exit EVERGREEN. Enter HENRY. Sir Philip. By what title, Sir, do you thus
intrude on me?


Henry. By one of an imperious nature, the title of a creditor.


Sir Philip. I your debtor!


Henry. Yes; for you owe me justice. You, perhaps, withhold from me the
inestimable treasure of a parent's blessing.


Sir Philip (impatiently) To the business that brought you hither.


Henry. Thus then -- I believe this is your signature

(producing a bond).
Sir Philip. Ah! (recovering himself) it is --


Henry. Affixed to a bond of L. 1000, which by assignment is mine. By virtue of
this I discharge the debt of your worthy tenant Ashfield; who, it seems, was
guilty of the crime of vindicating the injured and protecting the unfortunate.
Now, Sir Philip, the retribution my hate demands is, that what remains of this
obligation may not be now paid to me, but wait your entire convenience and
leisure.


Sir Philip No; that must not be.


Henry. Oh, Sir, why thus oppress an innocent man? -- why spurn from you a
heart that pants to serve you? No answer, farewell

(going).
Sir Philip. Hold -- one word before we part -- tell me -- I dread to ask it
(aside). How came you possessed of this bond?


Henry. A stranger, whose kind benevolence stepped in, and saved --


Sir Philip. His name?


Henry Morrington.


Sir Philip. Fiend! tormentor! has he caught me! -- You have seen this
Morrington?


Henry. Yes.


Sir Philip. Did he speak of me?


Henry. He did -- and of your daughter. "Conjure him," said he, "not to
sacrifice the lovely Emma by a marriage her heart revolts at." Teil him the
life and fortune of a parent are not his own. He holds them but in trust for
his offspring. Bid him reflect, that while his daughter merits the brightest
rewards a father can bestow, she is by that father doomed to the harshest fate
tyranny can inflict.


Sir Philip. Torture (with vehemence). Did he say who caused this sacrifice?


Henry. He told me you had been duped of your fortune by sharpers.


Sir Philip. Aye. He knows that well. Young man, mark me -- This Morrington,
whose precepts wear the face of virtue, and whose practice seems benevolence,
was the chief of the hellish banditti that ruined me.


Henry. Is it possible?


Sir Philip. That bond you hold in your hand was obtained by robbery.


Henry. Confusion!


Sir Philip. Not by the thief who, encountering you as a man, stakes life
against life, but by that most cowardly villain, who, in the moment when reason
sleeps and passion is roused, draws his snares around you, and hugs you to your
ruin; then fattening on the spoil, insults the victim he has made.


Henry. On your soul is Morrington that man?


Sir Philip. On my soul he is.


Henry. Thus, then, I annihilate the detested act -- and thus I tread upon a
villain's friendship

(tearing the bond).
Sir Philip. Rash boy! What have you done?


Henry. An act of justice to Sir Philip Blandford.


Sir Philip. For which you claim my thanks?


Henry. Sir, I am thanked already -- here (pointing to his heart). Curse on
such wealth; compared with its possession, poverty is splendor. Fear not for
me -- I shall not feel the piercing cold; for in that man whose heart beats
warmly for his fellow low creatures, the blood circulates with freedom -- My
food shall be what few of the pampered sons of greatness can boast of, the
luscious bread of independence; and the opiate that brings me sleep, will be
the recollection of the day passed in innocence.


Sir Philip. Noble boy! Oh! Blandford!


Henry. Ah!


Sir Philip. What have I faid?


Henry. You called me Blandford.


Sir Philip. 'T was error -- 'T was madness.


Henry. Blandford! a thousand hopes and fears rush on my heart. Disclose to me
my birth -- be it what it may, I am your slave for ever. Refuse me, you create
a foe, firm and implacable as --


Sir Philip. Ah! am I threatened? Do not extinguish the spark of pity my breast
is warmed with.


Henry. I will not. Oh, forgive me.


Sir Philip. Yes, on one condition -- leave me: Ah! some one approaches.
Begone, I insist -- I entreat.


Henry. That word has charmed me. I obey, Sir. Philip -- you may hate, but you
shall respect me.


Exit. Enter HANDY, jun. Handy, jun. At last, thank heaven, I have found
somebody. But, Sir Philip, were you indulging in soliloquy -- You seem agitated.


Sir Philip. No, Sir, rather indisposed.


Handy, jun. Upon my soul, I am devilish glad to find you. Compared with this
Castle, the Cretan labyrinth was intelligible; and unless some kind Ariadne
gives me a clue, I shant have the pleasure of seeing you above once a week.


Sir Philip. I beg your pardon, I have been an inattentive host.


Handy, jun. Oh, no; but when a house is so devilish large, and the party so
very small, they ought to keep together; for to say the truth, though no one on
earth feels a warmer regard for Robert Handy than I do -- I soon get heartily
sick of his company -- whatever he may be to others, he is a cursed bore to me.


Sir Philip. Where is your worthy father?


Handy, jun. As usual, full of contrivances that are impracticable, and
improvements that are retrograde; forming, altogether, a whimsical instance of
the confusion of arrangement, the delay of expedition, the incommodiousness of
accommodation, and the infernal trouble of endeavoring to save it -- he has
now a score or two of workmen about him, and intends pulling down some
apartments in the east wing of the Castle.


Sir Philip. Ah! ruin! -- Within there!


Enter a SERVANT. Fly to Sir Abel Handy -- Tell him to desist; order his
people, on the peril of their lives, to leave the Castle instantly. Away.

Exit Servant. Handy, jun. Sir Philip Blandford, your conduct compels me to be
serious.


Sir Philip. Oh! forbear! forbear!


Handy, jun. Excuse me, Sir, -- an alliance, it seems, is intended between our
families, founded on ambition and interest. I wish it, Sir, to be formed on a
nobler basis, ingenuous friendship and mutual confidence. That confidence being
withheld, I must here pause, for I should hesitate in calling that man father,
who refuses me the name of friend.


Sir Philip (aside). Ah! how shall I act?


Handy, jun. Is my demand unreasonable?


Sir Philip. Strictly just -- But, oh! -- you know not what you ask -- Do you
not pity me?


Handy, jun. I do.


Sir Philip. Why then seek to change it into hate?


Handy, jun. Confidence seldom generates hate -- Mistrust always.


Sir Philip. Most true.


Handy, jun. I am not impelled by curiosity to ask your friendship. I scorn so
mean a motive. Believe me, Sir, the folly and levity of my character proceed
merely from the effervescence of my heart -- you will find its substance, warm,
steady, and sincere.


Sir Philip. I believe it from my soul. -- Allow me a moment's thought. --
(Aside) -- Suspicion is awakened, does not prudence as well as justice prompt
me to confide in him. Does not my poverty command me. Perhaps, I may find a
sympathizing friend -- the task is dreadful -- but it must be so -- perhaps, he
will perform the awful task of visiting the chamber, and removing every vestige
of guilt. (To him) Yes, you shall hear my story, I will lay before your view
the agony with which this wretched bosom is loaded.


Handy, jun. I am proud of your confidence, and am prepared to receive it.


Sir Philip. Not here -- let me lead you to the eastern part of the Castle, my
young friend -- mark me: This is no common trust I repose in you; for I place
my life in your hands.


Handy, jun. And the pledge I give for its security is what alone gives value
to life, my honor.


Exeunt. SCENE III. -- A gloomy Gallery in the Castle -- in the Center a
strongly barred Door. -- The Gallery hung with Portraits.
HENRY discovered examining a particular Portrait, which occupies a conspicuous
Situation in the Gallery. Henry. Whenever curiosity has led me to this gallery,
that portrait has attracted my attention -- the features are peculiarly
interesting. One of the House of Blandford -- Blandford! -- my name -- perhaps
my father. To remain longer ignorant of my birth, I feel impossible. There is a
point when patience ceases to be virtue -- Hush. I hear footsteps -- Ah! Sir
Philip, and another, in close conversation. Shall I avoid them? -- No -- Shall
I conceal myself and observe them -- Curse on the base suggestion! -- No --


Enter Sir PHILIP and HANDY, jun. Sir Philip. That chamber contains the mystery.


Henry (aside). Ah!


Sir Philip (turning round). Observe that portrait ( seeing HENRY -- starts).
Who Is there?


Handy, jun. (to HENRY). Sir, we wish to be private.


Henry. My being here, Sir, was merely the effect of accident. I scorn
intrusion (bows). But the important words are spoken -- that chamber contains
the mystery

(aside).
Exit. Handy, jun Who is that youth?


Sir Philip. You there behold his father -- my brother -- (weeps) -- I Have not
beheld that face these twenty years. -- Let me again peruse its lineaments. (in
an agony of grief) Oh, God! how I loved that man! --


Handy, jun. Be composed.


Sir Philip. I will endeavor. Now listen to my story.


Handy, jun. You rivet my attention.


Sir Philip. While we were boys, my father died intestate, So I, as elder born,
became the sole possessor of his fortune; but the moment the law gave me power,
I divided, in equal portions, his large possessions, one of which I with joy
presented to my brother.


Handy, jun. It was noble.


Sir Philip. At least it was just -- we lived together, Sir, as one man; as my
life I loved him, and selt no joys but what he shared -- Sorrow I knew not.


Handy, jun. Such love demanded a life of gratitude.


Sir Philip (with suppressed agony). You shall now hear, Sir, how I was
rewarded. Chance placed in my view a young woman of superior personal charms;
my heart was captivated -- Fortune she possessed not -- but mine was ample. She
blessed me by consenting to our union, and my brother approved my choice.


Handy, jun. How enviable your situation.


Sir Philip. Oh! (sighing deeply) On the evening previous to my intended
marriage, with a mind serene as the departing sun, whose morning beam was to
light me to happiness, I sauntered to a favorite tree, where, lover like, I
had marked the name of my destined bride, and with every nerve braced to the
tone of ecstacy, I was wounding the bark with a deeper impression of the name
-- when, oh, God! --


Handy, jun. Pray proceed!


Sir Philip. When the loved offspring of my mother, and the woman my soul
adored -- the only two beings on earth who had wound themselves round my heart,
by every tie dear to the soul of man, placed themselves before me; I heard him
-- even now the sound is in my ears, and drives me to madness -- I heard him
breathe vows of love, which she answered with burning kisses -- He pitied his
poor brother, and told her he had prepared a vessel to bear her for ever from
me. -- They were about to depart, when the burning fever in my heart rushed
upon my brain -- Picture the young tiger, when first his savage nature rouses
him to vengeance -- the knife was in my gripe -- I sprung upon them -- with one
hand I tore the faithless woman from his damned embrace, and with the other --
stabbed my brother to the heart.


Handy, jun. (starting with horror, then recovering). What followed? --


Sir Philip. At that dreadful moment my brother's servant appeared, and the
vessel that was to wast him to happiness bore away his bleeding body; a few
days brought the news that he had died suddenly in France, and all inquiry
ceased

( exhausted he falls into HANDY, jun. arms).
Handy, jun. You are faint -- But let me lead you from this place -- Yet hold!
-- the wretched woman --


Sir Philip. Was secretly conveyed here -- even to that chamber. -- She proved
pregnant, and in giving birth to a son, paid the forfeit of her perjury by
death.


Handy, jun. Which son, is the youth that left us.


Sir Philip. Even so -- Tell me, could wretch be born possessed of a more solid
title to my hate?


Handy, jun. Yet, he is innocent.


Sir Philip. My task being ended, yours begins.


Handy, jun. Mine!


Sir Philip. Yes, that chamber contains evidence of my shame; the fatal
instrument, with other guilty proofs, lie there concealed -- can you wonder I
dread to visit the scene of horror -- can you wonder I implore you, in mercy,
to save me from the task. Oh! my friend, enter the chamber, bury in endless
night those instruments of blood, and I will kneel and worship you.


Handy, jun. I will.


Sir Philip (weeps). Will you (embraces him)? I am unused to kindness from man,
and it affects me. Oh! can you press to your guiltless heart that blood-stained
hand.


Handy, jun. Sir Philip, let men without faults condemn; I must pity you.


Exeunt HANDY, jun. leading Sir PHILIP. THE END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. -- A wooded view of the country.
Enter SUSAN ASHFIELD, who looks about with anxiety, and then comes forward.
SUSAN. I FEAR my conduct is very imprudent. -- Has not Mr. Handy told me he is
engaged to another? But it is hard for the heart to forego, without one
struggle, its only hope of happiness; and conscious of my own honor, what have
I to fear? Perhaps he may repent his unkindness to me -- at least I Will put his
passion to the proof; if he be worthy of my love, happiness is for ever mine;
if not, I Will tear him from my breast, though from the wound my life's blood
should follow. Ah, he comes -- I feel I am a coward, and my poor alarmed heart
trembles at its approaching trial -- pardon me, female delicacy, if for a
moment, I seem to pass thy sacred limits.


Retires up the stage. Enter HANDY, jun. Handy, jun. By Heavens, the
misfortunes of Sir Philip Blandford weigh so heavily on my spirits, that -- but
confusion to melancholy! I am come here to meet an angel, who will, in a
moment, drive away the blue devils like mist before the sun. Let me again read
the dear words; (reading a letter) I confess I love you still, (kisses the
letter) but I dare not believe their truth till her sweet lips confirm it. Ah,
she is there -- Susan, my angel! a thousand thanks. A life of love can alone
repay the joy your letter gave me.


Susan. Do you not despise me?


Handy, jun. No; love you more than ever.


Susan. Oh, Robert, this is the very crisis of my fate. -- From this moment we
meet with honor, or we meet no more. If we must part, perhaps when you lead
your happy bribe to church, you may stumble over your Susan's grave. Well, be
it so.


Handy, jun. Away with such sombre thoughts!


Susan. Tell me my doom -- yet hold -- you are wild, impetuous -- you do not
give your heart fair play -- therefore promise me (perhaps it is the last favor
I shall ask), that before you determine whether our love shall die or live with
honor, you will remain here alone a few moments, and that you will give those
moments to reflection.


Handy, jun. I do -- I will.


Susan. With a throbbing heart I will wait at a little distance. May virtuous
love and sacred honor direct his thoughts!

(aside.)
Exit. Handy, jun. Yes, I will reflect -- that I am the most fortunate fellow
in England. She loves me still -- what is the consequence? that love will
triumph -- that she will be mine -- mine without the degradation of marriage --
love, pride, all gratified -- how I shall be envied, when I triumphantly pass
the circles of sashion! one will cry, Who is that angel? another, "Happy
fellow!" then Susan will smile around -- will she smile? oh yes -- she will be
all gaiety -- mingle with the votaries of pleasure, and -- what! Susan
Ashfield, the companion of licentious women! Damnation! no; I wrong her -- she
would not -- she would rather shun society -- she would be melancholy --
melancholy, (sighs and looks at his watch) would the time were over. Pshaw! I
think of it too seriously -- it is false -- I do not -- should her virtue yield
to love, would not remorse affect her health? should I not behold that lovely
form sicken and decay -- perhaps die -- die! then what am I? a villain --
loaded with her parent's curses and my own. Let me fly from the dreadful
thought -- But how fly from it -- (calmly) by placing before my imagination a
picture of more honorable lineaments -- I make her my wife. Ah! then she would
smile on me -- there is rapture in the thought -- instead of vice producing
decay, I behold virtue emblazening beauty -- instead of Susan on the bed of
death, I behold her giving to my hopes a dear pledge of our mutual love. She
places it in my arms -- down her father's honest face runs and tear, but it is
the tear of joy. Oh, this will be luxury -- paradise! -- Come, Susan -- come,
my love, my soul, my wife!


Enter SUSAN -- she at first hesitates -- on hearing the word wife, she springs
into his arms. Susan. Is it possible?


Handy, jun. Yes; those charms have conquered.


Susan. Oh! no; do not so disgrace the victory you have gained -- it is your own
virtue that has triumphed.


Handy, jun. My Susan! how true it is, that fools alone are vicious. But let us
fly to my father, and obtain his consent. On recollection, that may not be
quite so easy. His arrangements with Sir Philip Blandford are -- are -- not
mine, so there is an end of that. And Sir Philip, by missortune, knows how to
appreciate happiness. Then poor Miss Blandford -- upon my soul, I feel for her.


Susan (ironically). Come -- don't make yourself miserable. If my suspicions be
true, she will not break her heart for your loss.


Handy, jun. Nay, don't say so -- she will be unhappy.


Ash. (without) There he is. Dame, shall I shoot at un?


Dame. No.


Handy, jun. What does he mean?


Susan. My father's voice.


Ash. Then I Will leather un wi' my stick.


Handy, jun. Zounds -- no -- come here.


Enter ASHFIELD and DAME. Ash. What do thee do here wi' my Sue, eh?


Handy, jun. With your Sue -- she is mine -- mine by a husband's right.


Ash. Husband! what, thee Sue's husband?


Handy, jun. I soon shall be.


Ash. But how though --? what, faith and troth, what, like as I married Dame?


Handy, jun. Yes.


Ash. What, axed three times?


Handy, jun. Yes; and from this moment I Will maintain that the real Temple of
love is a parish church -- cupid is a chubby curate, his torch is the sexton's
lantern, and the according paean of the spheres is the profound nasal thorough
bass of the clerk's Amen.


Ash. Huzza! only to think now -- my blessing go with you, my children!


Dame. And mine.


Ash. And Heaven's blessing too. Ecod, I believe now, as thy feyther zays, thee
can do every thing.


Handy, jun. No; for there is one think I cannot do -- injure the innocence of
woman.


Ash. Drabbit it, I shall walk in the road all day to zee Sue ride by in her
own coach.


Susan. You must ride with me, father.


Dame. I say, Tummas, what will Mrs. Grundy say then?


Ash. I do hope thee will not be ashamed of thy feyther in laa, woolye?


Handy, jun. No; for then I must also be ashamed of myself, which I am resolved
not to be again.


Enter Sir ABEL HANDY. Sir Abel. Heyday, Bob! why an't you gallanting your
intended bride? but you are never where you ought to be.


Handy, jun. Nay, Sir, by your own confession I am where I ought to be.


Sir Abel. No; you ought to be at the Castle -- Sir Philip is there, and Miss
Blandford is there, and Lady Handy is there -- and therefore --


Handy, jun. You are not there -- in one word, I shall not marry Miss Blandford.


Sir Abel. Indeed! who told you so?


Handy, jun. One who never lies -- and therefore, one I am determined to make a
friend of -- my conscience.


Sir Abel. But, zounds, Sir, what excuse have you?


Handy, jun. (taking SUSAN's hand) A very fair one, Sir -- is not she?


Sir Abel. Why, yes, I cannot deny it -- but, 'sdeath Sir, this overturns my
best plan.


Handy, jun. No, Sir: for a parent's best plan is his son's happiness, and that
it will establish. Come, give us your consent. Consider how we admire all your
wonderful inventions.


Sir Abe. No; not my plough, Bob -- but it is a devilish clever plough.


Handy, jun. I dare say it is. Come, Sir, consent and perhaps, in our turn, we
may invent something that may please you.


Sir Abel. He! he! he! well -- but hold -- what is the use of my consent without
my wife's -- bless you! I dare no more say I approve, without --


Enter GERALD. Gerald. Health to this worthy company.


Sir Abel. The same to you, Sir.


Handy, jun. Who have we here, I wonder?


Gerald. I wish to speak with Sir Abel Handy.


Sir Abel I am the person.


Gerald. You are married?


Sir Abel. Damn it! he sees it in my face. -- Yes, I have that happiness.


Gerald. Is it a happiness?


Sir Abel. To say the truth -- why do you ask?


Gerald. I want answers, not questions -- and depend on it, it is your interest
to answer me.


Handy, jun. An extraordinary fellow this!


Gerald. Would it break your heart to part with her?


Sir Abel. Who are you, Sir, that --


Gerald. Answers -- I want answers -- would it break your heart, I ask?


Sir Abel. Why, not absolutely I hope. Time, and philosophy, and --


Gerald. I understand -- what sum of money would you give to the man who would
dissolve your marriage contract?


Handy, jun. He means something, Sir.


Sir Abel. Do you think so, Bob?


Gerald. Would you give a thousand pounds?


Sir Abel. No.


Handy, jun. No!


Sir Abel. No; I would not give one; but I would give five thousand pounds.


Gerald. Generously offered -- a bargain -- I Will do it.


Sir Abel. But, an't you deceiving me?


Gerald. What should I gain by that?


Sir Abel. Tell me your name?


Gerald. Time will tell that.


Lady H. (without.) Sir Abel -- where are you*


Gerald. That Is your wife's voice -- I know it.


Sir Abel. So do I.


Gerald. I Will wait without -- Cry, "Hem!" when you want me.


Sir Abel. Then you need not go far --


Exit GERALD. I dare not believe it -- I should go out of my wits -- and then
if he fail, what a pickle I shall be in! Here she is.

Enter Lady HANDY. Lady H. So, Sir, I have found you at last?


Handy, jun. My honored mama, you have just come in time to give your consent
to my marriage with my sweet Susan.


Lady H. And do you imagine I will agree to such degradation?


Ash. Do'e, Lady Nelly, do'e be kind hearted to the young loviers -- Remember
how I used to let thee zit up all night a sweethearting.


Lady H. Silence! and have you dared to consent?

( to Sir ABEL.)
Sir Abel. Oh, no, my Lady.


Handy, jun. Sir, you had better cry -- "Hem!"


Sir Abel. I think it is time, Bob -- Hem!


Handy, jun. Hem!


Lady H. What do you mean by -- Hem?


Sir Abel. Only, my dear, something troublesome, I want to get rid of -- Hem!


Enter GERALD. There he is -- never was so frightened in all my life.

(GERALD advances.) Lady H. (shrieks and exclaims) Gerald!


Gerald. Yes.


Lady H. An't you dead, Gerald? Twenty years away and not dead?


Gerald. No, wife.


Sir Abel. Wife! Did you say, wife?


Gerald. Yes.


Sir Abel. Say it again.


Gerald. She is my wife.


Sir Abel. Once more.


Gerald. My lawful, wedded wife.


Sir Abel. Oh, my dear fellow! -- Oh, my dear boy! Oh, my dear girl! -- (
embraces GERALD and the rest) Oh, my dear! ( running to Mrs. GERALD) No -- yes,
now she an't my wife, I will -- well -- how will you have the five thousand?
Will you have it in cash, or in bank notes -- or stock, or India bonds, or
lands, or patents, or --


Gerald. No -- land will do -- I wish to kill my own mutton.


Sir Abel. Sir, you shall kill all the sheep in Hampshire.


Gerald. Sir Abel, you have lost five thousand pounds, and with it, properly
managed, an excellent wife, who, though I cannot condescend to take again as
mine -- you may depend on it shall never trouble you. Come! this way ( beckoning
to Mrs. GERALD) -- important events now call on me, and prevent my staying
longer with this good company. Sir Abel, we shall meet soon. Nay, come, you
know I Am not used to trifle; come, come --

( she reluctantly, but obediently, crosses the stage, and runs off -- GERALD
follows).
Sir Abel (imitating). Come, come -- That Is a damned clever fellow! Joy, joy,
my boy! Here, here, your hands -- The first use I make of liberty, is to give
happiness -- I wish I had more imitators -- Well, what will you do? (walks
about exultingly.) Where will you go? I Will go anywhere you like -- Will you go
to Bath, or Brighton, or Petersburgh, or Jerusalem, or Seringapatam? all the
same to me -- we single fellows -- we rove about -- nobody cares about us -- we
care for nobody.


Handy, jun. I must to the Castle, father.


Sir Abel. Have with you, Bob (singing). "I Will sip every flower -- I Will change
every hour." -- (beckoning) -- Come, come --


Exeunt Sir ABEL, HANDY, jun. and SUSAN. SUSAN kisses her hand to ASHFIELD and
DAME. Ash. Bless her! how nicely she do trip it away with the gentry!


Dame. And then, Tummas, think of the wedding.


Ash. (reflecting.) I declare I shall be just the zame as ever -- may be I may
buy a smartish bridle, or a zilver backy stopper, or the like o'that.


Dame (apart). And, then, when we come out of church, Mrs. Grundy will be
standing about there --


Ash. I shall shake hands agreeably wi' all my friends

(apart).
Dame (apart). Then I just look at her in this manner.


Ash. (apart.) How do do, Peter -- Ah, Dick -- glad to zee thee wi' all my
zoul

(bows toward the center of the stage).
Dame (apart). Then, with a kind of half curtesy, I shall --

(she advances to the center also and their heads meet).
Ash. What an would fool thee bees't, Dame -- Come along, and behave pratty,
do'e.


Exeunt. SCENE II. -- The same as Act fourth, Scene third,
Enter HANDY, jun. with Caution, bearing a Light and a large Key. Handy, jun.
Now to fulfill my promise with Sir Philip Blandford -- by -- entering that
chamber, and removing -- It Is rather awful -- I don't half like it, somehow,
everything is so cursedly still. What Is that? I thought I heard something -- no
-- why, 'sdeath, I am not afraid -- no -- I Am quite su -- su -- sure of that --
only every thing is so cursedly hush, and -- (a flash of light and a tremendous
explosion takes place) What the devil's that? (trembling) I swear I hear some
one -- lamenting -- who is there?


Enter Sir ABEL HANDY. Father!

(trembling.) Sir Abel (trembling). Bob!


Handy, jun. Have you seen anything?


Sir Abel. Oh, my dear boy!


Handy, jun. Damn it, don't frighten one --


Sir Abel. Such an accident! Mercy on us!


Handy, jun. Speak!


Sir Abel. I was mixing the ingredients of my grand substitute for gunpowder,
when, somehow, it blew up, and set the curtains on fire, and --


Handy, jun. Curtains! zounds, the room's in a blaze.


Sir Abel. Don't say so, Bob.


Handy, jun. What Is to be done? Where Is your famous preparation for
extinguishing flames?


Sir Abel. It is not mixed.


Handy, jun. Where Is your fire escape?


Sir Abel. It is not fixed.


Handy, jun. Where Is your patent fire-engine?


Sir Abel. It Is on the road.


Handy, jun. Well, you are never at a loss.


Sir Abel. Never.


Handy, jun. What Is to be done?


Sir Abel. I don't know. I say, Bob, I have it -- perhaps it will go out of
itself!


Handy, jun. Go out! it increases every minute -- Let us run for assistance --
Let us alarm the family.


Exit. Sir Abel. Yes -- dear me! dear me!


Servant (without). Here, John! Thomas! some villain has set fire to the
Castle. If you catch the rascal, throw him into the flames.


(Sir ABEL runs off and the alarm bell rings.) SCENE III. -- The Garden of the
Castle. -- The effects of the Fire shown on the Foliage and Scenery.
Enter HENRY meeting EVERGREEN. Henry. The Castle in flames! -- What occasioned
it?


Everg. Alas, I know not!


Henry. Are the family in safety?


Everg. Sir Philip is.


Henry. And his daughter?


Everg. Poor lady! I just now beheld her looking with agony from that window!


Henry. Ah! Emma in danger! -- Farewell!


Everg. (holding him.) Are you mad? the great staircase is in flames.


Henry. I care not! Should we meet no more, tell Sir Philip I died for his
daughter!


Everg. Yet reflect.


Henry. Old man, do not cling to me thus -- 'Sdeath! men will encounter peril
to ruin a woman, and shall I hesitate when it is to save one?


Exit. Everg. Brave, generous boy! Heaven preserve thee!


Enter Sir PHILIP BLANDFORD. Sir Philip. Emma, my child, where art thou?


Everg. I fear, Sir, the Castle will be destroyed.


Sir Philip. My child! my child! where is she! speak!


Everg. Alas! she remains in the Castle!


Sir Philip. Ah! then will I die with her!

(going.)
Everg. Hold, dear master! if human power can preserve her, she is safe -- The
bravest, noblest of men has flown to her assistance.


Sir Philip. Heaven reward him with its choicest blessings!


Everg. It Is Henry.


Sir Philip. Henry! Heaven will reward him -- I will reward him!


Everg. Then be happy! Look, Sir!


Sir Philip. Ah! dare I trust my eyes!


Everg. He bears her safe in his arms.


Sir Philip. Bountiful Creator, accept my thanks!


Enter HENRY, bearing EMMA in his arms. Henry. There is your daughter.


Sir Philip. My child! my Emma, revive!


Henry (apart). Aye -- now to unfold the mystery -- The avenue to the eastern
wing is still passable -- the chamber not yet in flames -- the present moment
lost, and all is closed for ever. I will be satisfied, or perish.


Exit. Miss B. Am I restored to my dear father's arms?


Sir Philip. Yes, only blessing of my life! In future thy wishes shall be mine
-- thy happiness my joy.


Enter HANDY, jun. and SUSAN. Handy, jun. My dear friend safe! and the lovely
Emma in his arms! Then let the bonfire blaze.


Sir Philip. My young friend, do you mark? the flames will save the trial I
imposed on you. Behold -- they already burst from the eastern turret! Ere this
they must have reached the chamber -- that consumed, the secret is with us
secure.


Miss B. Oh, father, this unkind man has refused me, and given his hand to that
sweet girl.


Handy, jun. I confess it is true -- Your eyes can only fail to conquer those
who are before subdued.


Sir Philip. But, Emma, where is your Henry? I wish to be just to him -- I wish
to thank him.


Miss B. He has withdrawn to avoid our gratitude. --


Everg. No -- he again rushed into the Castle, exclaiming, I will penetrate
that chamber, or perish in the attempt.


Sir Philip. Then all is discovered.


Handy, jun. Hush! for heaven's sake collect yourself!


Enter HENRY, in great agitation. Miss B. Ah! (shrieks.) Thank heaven he is
safe. What urged you, Henry, again to venture in the Castle?


Henry. Fate! the desperate attempt of a desperate man!


Sir Philip. Ah!


Henry. Yes; the mystery is developed. In vain the massy bars, cemented with
their cankerous rust, opposed my entrance -- in vain the heated suffocating
damps enveloped me -- in vain the hungry flames flashed their vengeance round
me! What could oppose a man struggling to know his fate? I sorced the doors, a
firebrand was my guide, and among many evidences of blood and guilt, I found --
these!

(produces a knife and bloody cloth.)
Sir Philip (starts with horror, then with solemnity). It is accomplished! Just
heaven, I bend to thy decree! -- Blood must be paid by blood! Henry, that
knife, aimed by this fatal hand, murdered thy father!


Henry. Ah!

(grasping the knife.)
Miss B. (placing herself between him and her father.) Henry! (he drops his
hand.) Oh, believe him not! 'Twas madness! I Have heard him talk thus wildly in
his dreams! We are all friends! None will repeat his words -- I am sure none
will! My heart will break! -- Oh, Henry! will you destroy my father?


Henry. Would I were in my grave!


Enter GERALD. Sir Philip. Ah, Gerald here! How vain concealment! Well, come
you to give evidence of my shame?


Gerald. I come to announce one, who for many years has watched each action of
your life.


Sir Philip. Who?


Gerald. Morrington.


Sir Philip. I shall then behold the man who has so long avoided me --


Gerald. But ever has been near you -- he is here.


Enter MORRINGTON, wrapped up in his cloak. Sir Philip. Well, behold your
victim in his last stage of human wretchedness! Come you to insult me?


(MORRINGTON clasps his hands together and hides his face.) Ah! can even you
pity me? Speak -- still silent -- still mysterious -- Well, let me employ what
remains of life in thinking of hereafter -- (Addressing heaven) Oh, my brother!
we soon shall meet again -- And let me hope, that stripped of those passions
which make men devils, I may receive the heavenly balm of thy forgiveness, as
I, from my inmost soul, do pardon thee.

(MORRINGTON becomes convulsed with agony, and falls into GERALD's arms.) Ah,
what means that agony? He faints! give him air! --

(They throw open his cloak and hat.) (starts) Angels of mercy! my brother!
it is he! he lives! Henry, support your father!

Henry (running to MORRINGTON) Ah, my father! he revives!


Sir Philip. Hush!


(MORRINGTON recovers -- seeing his brother, covers his face with shame, then
falls at his feet). Mor. Crawling in the dust, behold a repentant wretch! --


Sir Philip (indignantly). My brother, Morrington!


Mor. Turn not away -- in mercy hear me!


Sir Philip. Speak!


Mor. After the dreadful hour that parted us, agonized with remorse, I was
about to punish home what your arm had left unaccomplished; when some angel
whispered -- Punishment is life, not death -- Live and atone!


Sir Philip. On! go on!


Mor. I flew to you -- I found you surrounded by sharpers -- What was to be
done? I became Morrington! littered with villains! practiced the arts of
devils! braved the assassin's steel! possessed myself of your large estates --
lived hateful to myself, detested by mankind -- to do what? to save an injured
brother from destruction, and lay his fortunes at his feet!

( places parchments before Sir PHILIP.)
Sir Philip. Ah! is it possible?


Mor. Oh, is that atonement? No -- By me you first beheld her mother! 'Twas I
that gave her fortune! Is that atonement? No -- But my Henry has saved that
angel's life -- Kneel with me, my boy -- lift up thy innocent hands with those
of thy guilty father, and beg for mercy from that injured raint.

(HENRY kneels with him).
Sir Philip. O, God! how infinite are thy mercies! Henry, forgive me -- Emma,
plead for me -- There -- there

(joming their hands).
Henry. But my father --


Sir Philip (approaching). Charles!


Mor. Philip!


Sir Philip. Brother, I forgive thee.


Mor. Then let me die -- blessed, most blessed!


Sir Philip. No, no (striking his breast). Here -- I want thee here -- Raise
him to my heart.


( They raise MORRINGTON -- in the effort to embrace, be falls into their arms
exhausted.) Again!

(They sink into each others arms.) Handy, jun. (comes forward.) If forgiveness
be an attribute which ennobles our nature, may we not hope to find pardon for
our errors -- here?


The curtain falls. EPILOGUE,
Written by MILES PETIT ANDREWS, Esquire SPOKEN BY MR. FAWGETT.
So here I am -- once more to bear a bob,
And for our Author do a friendly job;
Perhaps you don't know how to clap a Play;
Mind me -- hand rattle hand -- thus (claps his hands) -- that is the way!
No doubt you think, though second sure to none,
I Am rather sanguine about number One;
Ask all the world, who everything would try,
And all the world will answer, I! I! I!
Your sprightly Damsels seeking active fame,
Will rival schoolboys in each schoolboy game;
Give 'em but rope enough, they will shine in skipping!
While many a lucky rogue may catch them tripping:
Others, with beauteous arm and lovely shoulder,
Conspicuous to each accurate beholder,
Vaulting on toe, with tamborine and bells,
Surpass the heroines of -- Sadler's Wells!
Nor less our Beaux excite our admiration;
Their shoulders too are worthy observation;
Not bare indeed, but cased in tenfold stuffing --
They need not, if they like not, feel a cuffing;
Nay what is more frequent, and preserves as much,
They save the pressure of a Bailiff's touch.
Stuffing's a charm attracts us every minute;
Even female bosoms find protection in it;
Exposed to open charms and powerful flattery,
Why not gain conquests by a well-mask'd battery?
But truce to satire -- Folly's lost in doubt,
And this age enters ever that age goes out:
None know, so none to blame can find pretext,
Whether we sin last century or the next.
"You're a base man!" cries wealthy Madam Dump,
To her fond spouse who took her by the lump,
"To hide a wench last week behind the screen!"
"Last week, my love! -- last Century you mean."
"Sure! says Miss Lydia Lank, an ancient maid,
"You will not countenance that painted jade:
"I hate to name the odious word miscarried;
"And yet the wanton minx was never married!"
"That Is an old story!" -- "Old! two months or so."
"Two months! you dream! a Century ago!"
"Dam'me!" cries Dash, "each age has its beginning!"
His chin quite buried in five rounds of linen;
"Think you we drive through life with too much haste?
"'It Is neck or nothing with us lads of taste!"
"Your taste!" cries Dad; "I fear your credit shocks,
"The rise of Cravats proves the fall of Stocks:
"Save then today, tomorrow we'll want some."
"Tomorrow, Squaretoes! That Is an Age to come!"
Since then from changeful Time's uncertain state,
Our very foibles now are out of date;
Let the Bard's faults find shelter on the Stage,
And let his labors live at least an age.
Cheer with your smiles the Poet's growing joy --
A scanty harvest must his hopes destroy;
To brighten future prospects, all should now,
With heart and hand unite to -- Speed the Plough!


