THE NUNNERY. AN ELEGY. In IMITATION of the ELEGY in a CHURCHYARD.

Son pittore anche io -- CORREGIO. LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY, at
Tully's-Head, Pall Mall. (Price Sixpence.)

THE NUNNERY.
REtirement's Hour proclaims the tolling Bell,
Each sacred Virgin follows its Decree;
With meek Submission seeks her lonely Cell,
And leaves the Grate to Solitude and me.
Now shows the sinking Sun a fainter glare
And Silence through the Convent reigns confessed,
Save where some pale-ey'd Novice (wrapped in Prayer)
Heaves a deep groan: and smites her guiltless breast.
Save where in artless melancholy Strains
Some Eloisa whom soft Passion moves,
Absorpt in Sorrow to the Night complains;
For ever barred the Abelard she loves.
Within those ancient Walls by Moss overspread,
Where the relenting Sinner learns to weep;
Each in her narrow Bed till Midnight laid,
The gentle Daughters of Devotion sleep.
No Stings of Conscience goad their easy Breast,
No unrepented Crimes their Slumbers fright,
No mournful Dreams invade their peaceful Rest,
Nor shrouded Specter stalk before their Sight!
The endearing Scenes of Life They all forego
Even Hymen's Torch for Them must never blaze,
The Husband's fond Embrace They never shall know,
Nor view their Image in their Children's' Face.
Often did they steal the flowery Robe of May
To deck the Altar and the Shrines around:
How fervent did They chant the pious Lay,
While the deep Organ swelled the sacred Sound?
Let not the gay Coquette with Jest profane,
Mock their veiled Life and Destiny severe:
Nor worldly Beauty with a Sneer disdain
The humble Duties of the Cloistered Fair.
The glist'ning Eye: The half-seen Breast of Snow,
The coral Lip, the clear vermilion Bloom
Awaits alike the inexorable Foe,
The Paths of Pleasure lead but to the Tomb.
Forgive, Ye Fair, whom Britain's Sons admire,
If This her meanest Bard incur your Blame,
While He devotes not to your Praise the Lyre,
But to the Convent dedicates his Theme.
Can These partake the sprightly-moving Dance?
Or in the Garb of Luxury appear?
Can These ever pierce the Lover with a Glance?
Or grace the Tragic Scene with Pity's Tear?
Perhaps in this drear Mansion are confined
Some whose accomplished Beauty could impart
The soft Desire to the severest Mind,
And wake to Extacy the throbbing Heart.
But splendid Life in each Allurement dressed
Attracts Them not, though flushed with youthful Bloom:
Stern Penance chills the Ardour of their Breast,
And buries their Ambition in this Gloom.
Full many a Riv'let steals its gentle Way
Unheard, untasted, by the thirsty Swain,
Full many a Philomel attunes her Lay,
And pours her plaintive Melody in vain.
Some veiled Eliza (like the clouded Sun)
May here reside inglorious and unknown;
Some, like Augusta, might have reared a Son
To bless a Nation and adorn a Throne.
From Flatt'ry's Lip to drink the Sweets of Praise,
In Wit and Charms with other Belles to vie,
In Circles to attract the partial Gaze
And view Their Beauty in the Admirer's Eye
Their Lot forbids: nor does alone remove
The Thirst of Praise, but even their Vices chains,
Forbids through Folly's Labyrinth to rove,
And yield to Pleasure the unheeded reins:
To raise mid Hymen's Joys domestic Strife,
Or seek that Converse which They ought to shun,
To break the sacred Ties of married Life
And give to many what they vowed to one.
Far from the Bustle of the splendid Throng
They tread Obscurity's sequestered Vale,
Where the white Hours glide silently along
Smooth as the Stream, when sleeps the breezy Gale.
Yet though they are sprinkled with ethereal Dew?
With blooming Wreaths by Hands of Seraphs crowned?
Though Heaven's eternal Splendors burst to View?
And Harps celestial to their Ear resound?
Still grateful Memory paints the absent Friend,
Not even the World to their Remembrance dies:
Their Midnight Orisons to Heaven ascend
To stop the Bolt descending from the Skies.
For who entranced, in Visions from above
The Thought of Kindred razes from the Mind?
Feels in the Soul no warm returning Love
For some endeared Companion left behind?
From Friendship's Breast reluctant they withdrew,
And with a Sigh forsook their native Air:
To their fond Parents when they bad Adieu
Gushed from their Eye the tender filial Tear.
For Thee, who mindful of the encloyster'd Fair
Do in these Lines their artless Tale relate,
If Chance in distant Time's revolving Year
Some kindred Spirit shall enquire thy Fate,
Happily some aged Vestal may reply,
"Often have we seen Him 'ere Aurora's Ray
"Had faintly tinged with red the opening Sky,
"Hasten to Church, and join the Matin Lay.
"There at the Tomb where Eloisa lies,
"He Would read the Inscription: and her Fate condole,
"Then in his Breast, as Scenes of Grief arise,
"Sigh the kind Requiem to her gentle Soul.
"Against yon Pillar careless now He Would lean,
"Smiling at what his wayward Fancy moves:
"Now drooping, wan, and pensive, would be seen
"As one abandoned by the Fair He loves.
"One Morn I missed Him in the aweful Dome
"Along the Isle, and in the Sacristy:
"Another came, nor yet beside the Tomb,
"Nor at the Font, nor in the Porch was He.
"The next we heard, which did our Wonder move,
"He was departed to return no more,
"Yet lest the sudden Change we should reprove,
"These Lines He sent us from Britannia's Shore.
"What Time in Transport lost the Naiad Throng,
"First caught their Akenside's enchanting Lay,
"And raptured Fancy listened to the Song
"Of laureled Whitehead, and sweet-plaintive Gray."
The LETTER.
A Vestal Fair (Her Name I may not unfold)
Has planted in my Breast the pleasing Dart;
Who by relentless Vows, if not controlled,
Would own, perchance, a Sympathy of Heart:
The growing Passion impotent to quell,
Severe Discretion urged me to retreat;
Now at my native rural Home I dwell,
Where Contemplation keeps her lonely Seat.
Seek not to draw me from this still Abode,
Where the kind Muses to my Aid repair,
And when the Thoughts of hapless Love corrode,
Check the deep Sigh, and wipe the trickling Tear.
FINIS.

