THE DOCTOR AND THE APOTHECARY. A MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT IN TWO ACTS. AS
PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. MDCCLXXXVIII.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
THOMASO, MR. PARSONS. STURMWALD* MR. DODD. CARLOS, MR. KELLY. JUAN, MR.
BANNISTER, JUN* GUZMAN, MR. SEDGWICK. DR. BILIOSO, MR. SUETT. PEREZ, MR.
BURTON. ANNA, MRS. CROUCH. ISABELLA, MISS ROMANZINI. THERESA, MRS. BOOTH.
[The lines with inverted commas are omitted in the representation.]

THE DOCTOR AND THE APOTHECARY.
ACT I.
The outside of Thomaso's house -- a view of distant hills, with the sun
setting behind them. STURMWALD, GUZMAN, ANNA, ISABELLA, and THERESA. -- ANNA,
ISABELLA, and GUZMAN. TRIO.
NOW the sun so faintly glancing*
Over the western hills his ray;
Evening shadows quick advancing,
Triumph over the fading day.

ANNA and ISABELLA. DUET.
Timorous love, at day affrighted,
Blushing courts the silver moon;

STURMWALD. "Bacchus' sons are now delighted,
"Night's the jolly fellow's noon."

TRIO.
Evening thus our joys uniting,
To her power due homage pay.
Mirth, to dance and song inviting,
Bids us hail the close of day.

Enter THOMASO. Thomaso. What moping yet, my friend Guzman? -- For shame, you a
sailor, and carry sorrow aboard! Zounds, if I had lost a mistress -- nay, had
it been my wife --


Theresa. Well, Sir --


Thomaso. I think I could have comforted myself. Ah Captain, how far preferable
are the charms of peace, and a country life, to all the bustle and danger of a
campaign!


Sturmwald. It may be so to you, Signor Thomaso, who slumber in the inglorious
lap of peace -- but war is my element; glory is my mistress; and I have courted
her amid the cannon's thunder.


Thomaso. Many men of many minds, Captain; for my part, I always prefered a
more quiet kind of courtship; but in faith you are a man of true gallantry to
remain so partial to your mistress, after having lost the use of a leg and an
eye in her service.


Sturmwald. A leg and an eye! Psha -- trifles! while my honor, a soldier's
vital spark, has escaped unhurt. -- You may be a very good apothecary, Signor
Thomaso, and may understand lotions and potions -- but as to a soldier's honor
--


Theresa. Ah, very true, Captain. He is a most provoking man, though he is my
husband. For shame, after our good friend, Captain Sturmwald, has come all the
way from Germany to marry our daughter Anna.


Thomaso. Nay, I Am sure, the Captain knows, I mean no harm. -- Anna, come
hither, child (aside to Anna.) Why don't you smile upon your husband that is to
be?


Anna. Do not, my dear father, persist in this cruel solicitation.


Thomaso. (aside to her.) Psha! how can you be so obstinate! -- though the
Captain is not very handsome, he is very rich. It Is true, he is rather old; but
then you know you have the better chance of being a widow soon; and as to his
having but one eye, it ought to be his recommendation, for you will have no
trouble in discovering his blind side.


Theresa. Lookee Anna -- you know my way of arguing, and so does your father.
It is my pleasure that you marry Captain Sturmwald* and have him you shall!


Guzman. Have a little patience with her, my dear madam.


Anna. Then you are resoved to render me miserable.

AIR. ANNA.
ON Love's blessed altar burns the flame
Whence Hymen's torch should kindle bright,
To bliss which boasts fair Virtue's name,
It casts its pure and radiant light.
But ah! should avarice interpose,
With sordid and unhallowed fires,
The prospect which their light bestows,
Repentance and despair inspires.
Da Capo.
(Exeunt Anna, Isabella, and Guzman, into the house. Theresa. Anna's reluctance
is certainly owing to that impertinent slut, her cousin. I Am sure she doet not
inherit her obstinacy from me. When my mother proposed a husband to me, I gave
my consent without a moment's hesitation. Didn't I, my dear?


Thomaso. True, my love; but then I had not lost any of my limbs in pursuit of
glory, like the Captain.

(Aside to her.
Sturmwald. I was thinking whether I had not better talk to the young lady
myself.


Theresa. To be sure -- how the deuce else are you to gain her consent?


Sturmwald. In Faith I will. She Will find me very entertaining. -- I Will breakfast
with her tomorrow, and give her the history of my last campaign. I Will come
early in the morning, that I may finish the story before dinner.


Theresa. Ha! ha! ha!


(Exit Theresa. Thomaso. Well, Captain, now my wife is gone, I want to have a
little talk with you about my new invented miraculous drops, as I call them,
that cure all disorders.


Sturmwald. Do they cure gunshot wounds?


Thomaso. Every thing.


Sturmwald. I wish then I had had a bottle in that engagement where I was
wounded by a French dragoon in the shoulder -- I Will tell you how it happened:


Thomaso. (aside.) Unfortunate man that I am! He Will talk like my wife.


Sturmwald. We were fording a river, and I was about the middle of the stream
--


Thomaso. (aside.) He will not be out of the water this half hour.


Strumwald. A scoundrel French dragoon, upon a black horse --


Thomaso* A gray horse.


Sturmwald. Black -- black as jet.


Thomaso. I beg your pardon, Captain, it was a gray horse. I have heard you
tell the story twenty times, and you always said the horse was gray. -- So much
for that. -- Now you must know my drops --


Strumwald. You have heard me tell the story then?


Thomaso. Often. -- So my drops --


Sturmwald. And what do you think of it?


Thomaso. One of the best stories I ever heard in my life. -- So --


Sturmwald. I Am very glad you like it. I Will tell you another.


Thomaso. Curse his stories. (Aside.) Tomorrow, Captain, I shall be happy to
hear it.


Strumwald. Well, if you are tired of my company, I Will go and get a bottle of
good wine, to make me sleep soundly; and so adieu, my dear father-in-law.


Thomaso. Adieu, my dear son-in-law. (Aside.) What a cursed bore he is for
talking!


Exit. Sturmwald. A good kind of a man enough; but cannot bear to hear any body
talk except himself.


Exit* The sun sets, and Thomaso's shop is lighted up. Enter CARLOS. AIR.
CARLOS.
WHEN will thou cease, thou pleasing pain,
With cruel sway to rend my heart?
Yet though of torment I complain,
Alas! I fear to cure the smart.

Enter JUAN, with a Guittar. AIR. JUAN.
SIGHING never gains a maid!
I Will tell you what is better far:
Call good humor to your aid,
And play the lass a tune upon the sweet guittar.
If a heart has nature dealt her,
Music's charms will surely melt her;
But should the gipsey answer, No,
Sing tol de roll, and let her go.
Da Capo.
Carlos. (aside.) Zounds! I see some one at the door. A rival perhaps!

(They approach, each with his hand on his sword, till Carlos perceives it to
be Juan.) Juan!


Juan. Carlos! my dear boy, how do you do?


Carlos. I Am heartily glad to see you -- no, in faith, now I think again, I am
not glad to see you, till I know what brought you hither!


Juan. I was going to tell you, I have an appointment with a very pretty girl
in this house --


Carlos. Ah! my fears.

(Aside.
Juan. So I am sure you will be complaisant enough to wish me a good night.


Carlos. Faith I am sorry to deny you. But I happen to have an assignation here
myself. You perceive a light in that window?


Juan. That light is my signal.


Carlos. Egad it is my signal too! So I Am sure you will be complaisant enough to
wish me a good night.


Juan. Sir, this insult --


Carlos. Insult, Sir!

(Laying their hands on their swords.
Juan. Though, now I recollect myself, perhaps we are going to cut throats,
without any cause. There are two fair damsels in that house. What is the name
of your mistress?


Carlos. Anna, the daughter of old Thomaso, the Apothecary; -- and your
mistress is --


Juan. Isabella! her laughing little cousin.


Carlos. Then I am glad to see you, after all -- and yet I am an unlucky dog,
Juan. They are going to marry my dear Anna, to old Sturmwald, the German
Captain. I dare not acquaint my father of my passion for her; you know he and
Thomaso are the bitterest enemies. The only resource left is, to carry her off;
and I have, for this week past, in vain sought an opportunity of seeing her.


Juan. Oh, the devil! -- old Thomaso's man to shut the shop up. Stand aside --

(Thomaso's man shuts up the shop, while they talk aside.) Give me your hand,
Carlos -- you shall see Anna; speak to her, and carry her off this night.


Carlos. My dear Juan, how is this to be accomplished?


Juan. The first thing is to get the old fellow out of the house.


Carlos. And how is that to be managed?


Juan. Very easily -- as thus: I Will act an old woman, and bring him down I Will
warrant you. (Knocks.) Say nothing, and stand aside.

(Knocks louder.)
(Thomaso opens the window and looks out.) Thomaso. What the devil is all that
noise for?


Juan. (in a feigned voice.) Pray, is this Signor Thomaso's?


Thomaso. Why, what do you want with Signor Thomaso, good woman?


Juan. The sick gentleman, Signor, at the next inn, is much worse.


Thomaso. I Am sorry for it -- I wish the gentleman had been much worse an hour
ago; because then I could have attended him -- but at present I Am going to bed.


Juan. Dear Signor, you will not leave the poor man to the mercy of an ignorant
physician?


Thomaso. Why, who attends him?


Juan. Dr. Bilioso.


Thomaso. Then I give him over. Good night to you good woman.

(Shuts the window.
Carlos. Our plot is ruined.


Juan. Not yet, Carlos.

(Knocks again still louder.
Thomaso. (again opens the window.) Zounds! what is the matter with the woman?
Go about your business.


Juan. (again in a female voice.) The sick man has heard wonders related of
your famous drops, Signor.


Thomaso. Eh! what! -- Oh! ho! he has heard of my drops. Well, Madam?


Juan. And he wishes you would come to him directly, and bring a bottle in your
pocket.


Thomaso. Aye, that I will -- poor soul! poor soul! -- I Will cure him in spite
of his Physician. (Calls within.) Hallo! Pedro! (To Juan.) I Will go with you,
good woman, and as we walk, I Will tell you some of the cures I have performed.
-- I Will wait on you instantly.


(Shuts the window. Carlos. This is a prosperous beginning, Juan.


Juan. Hush, not a word -- we must retire.


(They retire. Enter THOMASO, from the house. Thomaso. And so, good woman, you
say -- Hey day, she is gone! The poor gentleman's case is urgent, I suppose --
so I Will lose no time. What a pleasure it is to attend sensible patients! I dare
say he is a shrewd fellow, by his wishing to try my drops.


(Exit Thomaso. Juan. Ha! ha! ha! The old fox is fairly unkennel'd.


Carlos. But how are we to get into the house?


Juan. The door is fast. -- Eh! in faith this shutter is unbolted, (opens part
of the shutter) so we will even get in at the shop window.


Carlos. My best friend!


(Going to climb in at the window. Juan* Hold! let me reconnoitre first. I know
every part of the house -- follow me.


Carlos. Kind Cupid light us on our way.


Juan. Psha! Zounds! a lantern would light us much better. So rot your heroics,
and follow me.


(Gets in at the window, and Carlos follows. Enter STURMWALD, drunk. Sturmwald.
Tol de roll, de roll -- halt! -- Stand to your arms, Captain Sturmwald. Do my
eyes deceive me, or have the enemy besieged my father-in-law's house, and made
a practicable breach in the shop window? Who the devil are they? -- Thieves!
No, in faith, that cannot be. -- Who'd think of stealing any thing out of an
Apothecary's shop? Perhaps they are gallants -- have at you, my boys; -- I must
enter and defend my father-in-law. (Going to climb in at the window, he stops)
but hold! a prudent general should know what force he has to contend with --
besides, I forget, -- old Bolus is not at home -- I remember I met him just now
-- Egad I Will go and fetch him, and we'll surprise the enemy together. How lucky
it is that I am sober. If I had taken the other bottle, my senses might have
been confused; but now I am cool and collected. Ah! there is nothing like
drinking in moderation.


(Exit. SCENE, the Inside of Thomaso's Shop. Enter JUAN and CARLOS. Carlos.
Hush! tread softly, for your life.


Juan. Why, what are you afraid of?


Carlos. If Thomaso should return! and then perhaps --


Juan. Perhaps what? Why, your whole conversation is composed of Ifs -- Buts --
Perhapses -- and Supposes -- a mere vocabulary of doubts.


Carlos. Hark! I hear Anna's voice -- the sound transports me. Oh, Juan, I
scarcely know where I am.


Juan* Why, then I Will tell you -- This is an apothecary's shop; it is dark, and
you are surrounded with phials, therefore take care you break none -- Those are
stairs before us, and lead to the room where our dear girls are -- I shall go
up first, and you may follow, unless you prefer staying here -- I have now
given you full information, and so come along.


(Exeunt. SCENE, a room in Thomaso's house. The moon is seen through a window.
ANNA and ISABELLA. DUET.
Two maidens sat complaining,
And mourned their hapless lot,
The pangs of absence paining,
Each by her love forgot.
On every former token
Of love, while fancy hung,
Of vows so sweet, yet broken,
They deeply sighing, sung.
" At every sound they hear,
" With fond alarm they start,
" Alternate hope and fear,
" Now joy, now pain impart."
But by each sound misguided,
Alas! they only find
Their tears, their sighs derided,
By mocking rain and wind.
On every former token
Of love, etc.
Anna. Isabella, it is a whole week since I saw my Carlos; how can he say he
loves me, and yet suffer them to marry me to this hateful German officer?


Theresa. (Within.) Anna, why don't you go to your chamber, child?


Isabella. Heavens! your mother is not gone to bed yet.


Anna. And do you think my Carlos has really forsaken me? My Carlos, did I say
-- Yes, will repeat it -- My heart yields to the fond elusion of my tongue, and
I think I love him better every time I call him mine.


(Exit. ISABELLA sola. Poor Anna; I love her sincerely, and yet I am not sorry
she is gone -- I think Juan must be here soon -- and -- and perhaps our
conversation would be very uninteresting to her.


Re-enter ANNA. Anna. Oh, Isabella, I Am frightened out of my wits. Two men have
got into the house, and I think it is your lover and mine.


Isabella. Well, my dear, and what is there so alarming in all that?


Enter CARLOS and JUAN. Carlos. My dear Anna!


Anna. Ah!

(Screams.)
Juan. My dear Isabella!


Isabella. Hush! you will wake your mother.


(Carlos shows Anna a marriage contract. Theresa. (Within.) Anna! What Is the
matter, child?


Isabella. My cousin was frightened at something, but I am sure there was no
reason to be afraid.


Anna. Do you know, Isabella, this unreasonable creature has brought me a
marriage contract, and would have me seize this moment to elope with him.


Carlos. (To Isabella.) And do you know, Madam, this unreasonable creature
hesitates, though she promised me long ago to elope, whenever I could find an
opportunity.


Juan. Psha! Marry first, and dispute afterward; that would be much more in
the common order of things. -- Come, my dear Isabella, let us set them a good
example; -- leave dissimulation to knaves and coquettes, and lead up the dance
of Hymen as first couple --


Isabella. Why, if I were sure you would never wish to change partners.


Carlos. Consider, my dear Anna, the moments fly.


Isabella. (Peeping through the keyhole.) I vow, your mother is not in bed yet
-- (To Anna.) Away! away instantly, and leave me to keep her quiet -- I Will
follow you directly. (Exeunt Anna, Carlos, and Juan.) I Will sing, that she may
suspect nothing.

AIR. ISABELLA.
I.
Ye hours that part my love and me,
And slow with envy creep,
The dawn of bliss obscured by clouds
Of doubt, in vain ye keep.
Still I through Sorrow's tedious night,
Hope's friendly star discern:
On that I fix my anxious eye
Until my love return.
II.
By Jealousy's pernicious power,
Untainted are my sighs:
Confiding in my Juan's truth,
My fondest wishes rise.
Still I through Sorrow's, etc.

Thomaso. (Without.) Hey! Guzman! Pedro! where the devil are ye?


Re-enter CARLOS, JUAN, and ANNA. Anna. Oh, Isabella, my father is come home;
all the doors are locked.


Carlos. And our retreat cut off.


Isabella. Then we are all lost.


Juan. No, faith, I Am afraid we are all found. Where can we hide ourselves?


Isabella. Go into our chamber.


Anna. My father is now at the chamber door.


Carlos. In here then.


(Going into Theresa's chamber. Anna. That Is my mother's room.


Isabella. We are in luck -- My uncle, in his hurry to visit his patient, has
left the door of his study open -- In -- In -- directly. (Exit Carlos, and Juan
into the closet.) Here comes your father.


Enter THOMASO and STURMWALD. Thomaso. Anna! Theresa! Isabella! there are
thieves in the house!


Anna. Thieves! bless me, Sir, what shall we do?


Sturmwald. Take 'em, to be sure -- Take 'em, dead or alive.


Enter THERESA. Theresa. What Is that you say -- Thieves in our house?


Thomaso. The Captain saw them get in. -- He Will tell you the whole story.


Sturmwald. That I will, with a great deal of pleasure. As I was coming from
the tavern, where I had been drinking a glass in moderation, as sober as I am
now -- I saw two men getting into my father-in-law's house. -- What Is to be
done, thought I -- For this was enough to stagger me, you may suppose --


Thomaso. Oh! certainly, (Aside) that you had enough to stagger you, I believe.


Theresa. (Taking the contract from Anna's pocket.) Yes, and here is enough to
stagger us all -- This paper explains to me, that these thieves are of Cupid's
gang; gentlemen who commit sentimental robberies on the hearts of young ladies.
-- There, Thomaso, read that!


(Gives the contract. Thomaso. What do I see! a contract of marriage, between
my daughter and Carlos!


Sturmwald. Carlos! What the devil! the enemy surprise us in our own camp --
Egad, we'll hold a council of war immediately; I have something in my head --


Thomaso. (Aside.) Yes, rather more than you ought to have.


Theresa. I tell you, I am sure young Carlos is in the house.


Sturmwald. Is he? Why then we'll break up the council. -- Bella! horrida
bella! is our resolve; and so let us search for the enemy.

(Going to open Theresa's chamber door.
Theresa. Bless me, Captain Sturmwald -- do you know that is my chamber?


Sturmwald. Well, my dear mother-in-law -- and is not a lady's chamber the most
likely place to find a man of gallantry? However, I Will wheel to the right
about, if you please.

(Goes to Thomaso's closet door.
Thomaso. Stop, Captain; no person ever enters that closet but myself -- It Is
here where I compose my miraculous drops.


Sturmwald. Aye, aye, I understand you -- It Is your hocus pocus shop.


Thomaso. No, Sir, it is my miracle shop.


Sturmwald. Your magazine for the destructive ammunition of physic.


Thomaso. My laboratory for the arcana of the Materia Medica. It Is the Temple
of Health; and the rosy Goddess herself presides over my pestle and mortar.


Sturmwald. A small room for the Temple of Health, I think, and rather dark --
Suppose, father-in-law, instead of confining the poor Goddess of Health to her
room, you were to let her visit some of your patients.


Thomaso. You may sneer as you please, Captain Sturmwald; I have the key of
that closet in my pocket, and there it shall remain -- So let us finish a
foolish adventure, by wishing each other a good night.


Theresa. I shall take you with me, young ladies, to prevent further accidents.
Captain Sturmwald, where will you sleep?


Sturmwald. No where, Madam -- I suspect the enemy is in ambuscade. I will be
the sentinel of the night -- Rest securely, while I guard you -- Here I take my
post, and shall be on the watch, in case the enemy should make a sally.


Thomaso. Well, Captain, I have no objection -- Here is the key of the house,
in case you choose to refresh yourself with a walk in the morning.


(Hangs up the key. QUINTETT.
ANNA, ISABELLA, THERESA, STURMWALD, and GUZMAN. But see the moon ascending
high,
Reigns the empress of the sky;
And i^ the zenith of her power,
Presides over Midnight's solemn hour.

THERESA. You must bid adieu -- (to Anna)
Yes, Miss, so must you -- (to Isabella)

ANNA and ISABELLA. Must we bid adieu?
Wherefore should we part?
Spare my aching heart.

THOMASO. Come let us go to bed;
Spare my aching head.

STURMWALD. Let him go to bed;
Spare his aching head.

ALL. Bid adieu!



(Exit Theresa, with Anna and Isabella. (Exeunt Thomaso and Guzman, at the door
in the middle of the scene, and Sturmwald places himself on a couch, before
Thomaso's closet door. AIR. STURMWALD.
" Come on, my boys, now I Am commander,
" Though you're as brave as Alexander.
" -- Heigho!
(yawning) " -- You lie.
" On my guard here am I.
" I fear no ambush, no entrapping,
" No one shall catch old Sturmwald napping."
(Falls asleep. Juan and Carlos come out of the closet. Carlos. Softly, softly
-- First let us secure the key of the shop door, to let ourselves out.


(Takes the key. Juan. That this old remnant of mortality should think of
rivalling a young fellow, with his five senses in perfection!


Carlos. But to our plot, good Juan -- our plot -- We have no time to lose.


Juan. Faith, that is very true -- So in you must go, my old commander.


(They wheel the couch into Thomaso's closet. AIR. CARLOS.
Bacchus now his nap is taking;
But his power can never subdue
Watchful Love, who, ever waking,
Bids the sleeping sot adieu.
Bacchus should on Venus waiting,
Hold the cup with bended knee;
None but fools, his worth o'er-rating,
With the servant make too free.
(Juan comes out of the closet, and brings with him Sturmwald's cloak, hat, and
patch. DUET. CARLOS and JUAN.
Bacchus now his nap is taking;
But his power can never subdue
Watchful Love, who, ever waking,
Bids the sleeping sot adieu.
END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE. The outside of Dr. Bilioso's house. Enter GUZMAN and PEREZ. GUZMAN. BUT
pray, Perez, is Doctor Bilioso informed of his son's attachment to my cousin,
Anna?


Perez. Oh dear, no. My old master hates Signor Thomaso to that degree, that he
would rather see his son hanged than married into the family.


Guzman. Though unacquainted with poor Carlos, I sympathize with him -- had my
Leonora lived --


Perez. Ah! but she is gone -- and your honor has been doleful and dumpish, as
one may say, ever since you came home from sea! Oh! I love to hear you talk of
old stories -- you make me so melancholy, and so happy, that I cry by the hour
together.


Guzman. Poor fellow!


Perez. And pray good Signor Guzman, when you was voyaging about on the stormy
main, and fighting the Algerines, was not you now and then frightened too much
to think of your love?


Guzman. No, Perez. -- True love purifies the soul from every base alloy.


AIR. GUZMAN.
I.
LET angry Ocean to the sky,
In proud despite his billows roll;
Let thunders to his threats reply,
Fear is a stranger to my soul.
Within the heart which love illumes,
And blesses with his sacred rays,
If meaner passion ever presumes,
It fades before the hallowed blaze.
II.
Though War with sullen aspect lower,
And crimson over the troubled wave,
And emulate the lightning's power,
The dangers of the fight I brave.
Within the heart, etc.
(Exit. Perez. Here comes my master -- and as cross as usual.


Enter DR. BILIOSO. Dr. Bilioso. What a cursed neighborhood is this for a
physician to live in. No such thing as an asthma, or a fit of the gout, to be
met with from year's end to year's end. All the villagers are such a set of d
-- n'd vulgar, healthy dogs -- never have the pleasure of seeing a meagre,
bilious, gentleman-like man within ten miles of the place. -- How comfortable
it would be to live at Constantinople, where the plague rages all the year. --
And then people laugh more here, than in all Spain besides. -- Ah! I don't like
laughing. Well, Perez -- any body ill this morning?


Perez. (sighing) No, Sir -- all well.


Dr. Bilioso. Aye -- and will remain so as long as this plaguey fine weather
lasts -- no chance of another influenza. -- I, who am the physician, am the
only sick man in the parish.


Perez. Yes, your worship seems stuck up here by way of a medical scarecrow, to
frighten away sickness.


Dr. Bilioso. Or rather like an electrical conductor -- I save the
neighborhood from danger, by attracting it to myself. -- Ah! I lost the only
good patient I had, in my friend Alvarez -- as fine a corpulent -- inactive
subject as a physician would wish for. What with repletion, and want of
exercise, the good soul was always ailing. I had great expectations from him --
but he grew stingy as he grew rich -- avarice produced abstinence, and he
starved away the only hopes I had left.


Perez. There Is the traveller who was taken ill at the next inn --


Dr. Bilioso. Aye, the only person I have at present under my care, and he is a
foreigner -- no native would have behaved so civilly as to be taken ill -- Not
got well, I hope?


Perez. Yes, so they say -- the apothecary, Thomaso, was sent for to him last
night.


Dr. Bilioso. What! send for my enemy -- my antagonist, Thomaso, the
apothecary? A man of honor would have sooner died under his physician's hands,
than have played him such a trick.


Perez. And he took some of Thomaso's quack medicine.


Dr. Bilioso. O curse his quack medicine -- I hate all violent remedies -- they
make an end of a business so soon; -- they either kill or cure; and then either
way one loses the patient.


Perez. And so Thomaso --


Dr. Bilioso. Oh rot him -- I Will go to the rascally quack directly; my patients
are my property -- and shall I tamely suffer my property to be taken from me?
I Will trounce the dog. No, no, if a Doctor's patients are permitted to slip
through his fingers, and get well by stealth, there is an end to all law and
justice.


SCENE. A room in Thomaso's house. Enter THOMASO. Thomaso. Ah ha! the Captain
off already -- I did'n't expect he had shaken off the effects of last night's
dose quite so soon. I can hardly reconcile it to myself to sacrifice poor Anna
to such a sot. My conscience revolts against it, and whispers -- Aye: but then
my wife talks so much louder than my conscience; and so there is an end of the
matter.


Enter JUAN (behind) disguised as STURMWALD, and CARLOS disguised as a Notary,
who listens at the corner of the scene. Juan. (in a hoarse voice)
Father-in-law, good morning to you.


Thomaso. Eh! what! bless my soul, son-in-law, how do ye do? There seems to be
a wonderful change in your voice.


Juan. All the effects of last night.


Thomaso. I suppose so -- a violent cold no doubt -- my drops are remarkably
good for the voice.


Juan. No, no, never mind -- I Will tell you a story --


Thomaso. I Would rather you would let it alone. -- Come now -- one spoonful will be
enough. -- It Is a most wonderful remedy -- I have it here in this closet.


Juan. Curse your drops. -- I am sure the lovers of your daughter and niece are
now in the house.


Thomaso. Well, Captain, perhaps you know best -- but upon my soul I don't
believe a word of the matter. Now let me fetch a bottle of drops.


Juan. My jealousy is alarmed, Sir -- and I must be your son-in-law this
morning, or not at all -- No reply! I have brought this gentleman with me; he
is my notary, and has drawn up a marriage contract. So call your wife and the
bride; let us sign and seal, and then to church immediately.


Thomaso. Well, but Captain --


Juan. I Am commanding officer today. So no more words, father-in-law. (Exit
Thomaso.) Ha! ha! ha! Well Carlos, how have I imitated the old German Captain?


Carlos. -- To a miracle. I wish I may play my part half as well.


Juan. Psha! what difficulty is there in it -- the old folks will take you for
the notary who h^s prepared the contract of marriage between A^na and
Sturmwald; instead of that you will substitute the other contract, in which
your own name is inserted. But here they come.


Enter THOMASO, THERESA, and ANNA. Anna. No, nothing shall shake my constancy
-- every obstacle you raise, serves but to increase my affection.


AIR. ANNA.
THE summer heats bestowing
Their influence on the rose,
Perfect its charms when blowing,
And every sweet disclose.
Yet summer funs denying
The zephyr and the shower.
Their fervid glow applying,
Destroy their favorite flower.
The lovesick heart requiring
The sunshine of success;
Continual bliss desiring,
Yet sickens with excess.
The fond, the secret tear,
Soft passion keeps alive;
The breath of doubt and fear,
Like zephyrs bid it thrive.
Juan. Well Signor Thomaso, have you looke^ over the contract?


Thomaso. I have; and find it perfectly rig^t.


Juan. Very well; but where is Isabella?


Theresa. Oh, I Will call her. -- Isabella! -- but I assure you I would not trust
her with any body else.


Enter ISABELLA. Isabella. My dear Juan, what means --


Juan. (aside to her.) Hush, my love -- ask no questions -- persuade Anna to
sign that paper -- it is a contract of marriage between her and Carlos, who you
see personates the notary.


(Carlos offers the contract to Anna, who puts it aside. Anna. No, nothing
shall induce me to sign this hated paper. Oh Carlos, why are you not here to
snatch me from impending ruin!


Thomaso. Daughter, do not oblige me to exert my authority.


Theresa. Let her beware of my authority, which is much greater.


Juan. Psha, psha! persuasion is better than authority. -- Let her cousin talk
to her. (Isabella whispers Anna.) These girls know the way to each others
hearts; there -- mother-in*law, you see, she hangs out a smile of truce already.


Theresa. My dear daughter, you transport me.


Juan. Come sign your consent to the marriage.


Theresa. Sign it -- aye, that I will -- Come husband --


(Anna and Theresa sign the contract. Thomaso. Egad, Captain, I don't
understand that notary's whispering my daughter, I --


Juan. It Is his way -- come sign your name.


Thomaso. No Sir -- (to Carlos.) -- I insist upon knowing what you mean?


Carlos. What I mean?


Juan. If you put him in a passion, take care of yourself; he is the most
choleric fellow -- you had better sign at once.


AIR. CARLOS.
THIS marriage article,
(to Thomaso. In every particle,
Is free from flaw, Sir;
I know what is law, Sir.
Zounds, Sir, my character none shall accuse!
Behold this artifice, true love devising,
(to Anna, aside. Your Carlos thus to all but you disguising;
Witness -- Thomaso my skill dares abuse.
(to Juan. My only chance, I see, is pique pretending;
(to Anna aside. On that alone success is now depending.
Throughout this nation,
(to Thomaso. High my reputation,
For law precision is,
And expedition is,
In bonds, conveyances, do you mind,
And instruments of any kind.
Kind fortune see, at length, our prayers heeding,
Relenting, gives us promise of succeeding.
(to Anna aside. In this transaction
(to Thomaso. The law is my friend;
I Will bring my action,
Which you must defend.
(Thomaso frightened, signs the contract. Juan. Come, come, now all is finished,
let us away to church.


Theresa. Well, I Will be with you in a moment.


(Exit. Carlos. (aside to Juan.) For heaven's sake, Juan, let us be gone. If
Sturmwald should wake, we are ruined.


Juan. (aloud.) I beg your pardon for detaining you. -- Mr. Notary, conduct
these ladies to my house, and I Will follow you immediately.


Exeunt Anna, Isabella, and Carlos. Thomaso. Stop! stay -- What! without my
wife's leave!


Sturmwald. (in the closet.) Halloo! death and fury! where am I?


Thomaso. Eh! what is that?


Sturmwald. Thieves! thieves!


Thomaso. I Am lost in amazement.


Juan. Did not I tell you one of the rogues was hid there? -- I Will run and
fetch an Alguazil.


Thomaso. You run. -- Why, you forget you are lame.


Juan. (in his natural voice) Egad so I do -- but I am so interested in this
business.


Thomaso. And you have recovered your voice too.


Juan. (resuming his hoarse voice.) No, faith, I think I Am as hoarse as ever.


Sturmwald. Thomaso! Signor Thomaso!


Thomaso. It Is the Captain's voice. Egad I Will fetch an Alguazil myself, and
make sure of one of ye.


(Exit. Sturmwald. Signor Thomaso!


Juan. Have a little patience. (Aside.) What Is to be done! If I attempt the
door, I meet the Alguazil. I must even try this chamber-window.


Pulls off Sturmwald's hat, cloak, and patch; throws 'em down at the
closet-door, and then goes into Theresa's chamber. Re-enter THOMASO. Thomaso.
An Alguazil will be here presently, and then, Mr. Scoundrel. -- (Sees the cloak
and patch.) Hey dey! what is all this?

(Takes 'em up.)
Sturmwald. (in the closet.) Will nobody hear me!


Thomaso. It is Sturmwald! Oh, my mind misgives me.

(Going to the door.)
(He hears the noise of phials breaking in the closet, and rushes in. Re-enter
THOMASO and STURMWALD. Thomaso. All my phials of drops broken! Let me tell you,
Captain Sturmwald --


Sturmwald. Zounds! Sir, you shall tell me nothing but what I desire to know. I
say, Sir, how did I come in that closet?


Thomaso. That Is the very question I want to ask you; and, if we both ask the
same question, how the devil are we to get an answer?


Sturmwald. Why, you dirty scrap of an Apothecary, how dare you laugh at me
thus?


Thomaso. I laugh! Look at the bottles you have broke -- I believe I shall never
laugh again.


Sturmwald. You are all in the plot -- it is a trick to abuse me; but I Will be
revenged. S'blood and thunder! to make a jest of me, who have fought in sixteen
different battles! Did you know that? --


Thomaso. Yes, you have often told me the names of them all. But do hear me,
Captain.


Sturmwald. I Will hear nothing but revenge. -- To cram me up in a dark closet,
among pickled snakes, and stuffed alligators; me, who have lived amidst fire
and smoke, who have fought for every Prince in Europe by turns, and always had
the honor to be wounded! Who, to this hour, bear the trophies of war in every
limb, and rejoice in the aches, the cramps, and the twinges of glory!


THERESA enters, and THOMASO explains to her, in dumb show, what has passed.
Theresa. I am sure, Captain, I don't wonder at your being angry with my husband
-- he is a poor blundering creature, as I often tell him.


Thomaso. Nay, the Captain knows I never mean to offend him. I Have done all I
can --


Theresa. Psha! so you always say. Go, get an Alguazil, and seek for the rogues
that have stolen our two girls, do. (Exit Thomaso.) Come, Captain, suppose you
and I follow him. For my sake be patient. -- The brave never refuse the
requests of the fair.


Sturmwald. Never; and to prove it, I Will tell you a story of what happened when
I was in Germany.


(Exeunt. JUAN comes softly out of THERESA'S room in women's clothes. Juan.
This confounded window is too closely barred even for a mouse to creep through.
However, in this disguise, I think I shall get off undiscovered; -- or, if I
should be questioned, I Will pass for a patient, come to ask Thomaso's advice.


Dr. Bilioso. (speaking to a servant as he comes on.) Don't tell me -- I say he
is at home, and I will see him.


Juan. Who comes here? -- Dr. Bilioso himself!


Enter DR. BILIOSO. (Seeing JUAN.) Dr. Bilioso. But I beg pardon; you want
advice, I presume; -- let me feel your pulse.

(Attempting to take Juan's hand.)
Juan. (struggling.) Zounds! I shall be discovered. (Aside.) Dear Sir, pray let
me alone -- my nerves are so weak -- and you agitate me so. --


Dr. Bilioso. Why, really Madam, you have rather agitated me. I think I never
yet met with a Lady so strong in the arm. Pray, what is your complaint, Ma'am?


Juan. My complaint is against Thomaso, who has killed a poor friend of mine.


Dr. Bilioso. Oh, he has done worse than that -- he has taken a patient away
from me, after I had given him over. So if he recovers the man, he ruins my
reputation. -- There Is an unfeeling scoundrel, for you!


Juan. Ah, you and I mean the same person -- the poor gentleman at the next
inn. -- But Thomaso's drops have done for him -- my poor friend is no more.


Dr. Bilioso. I Am heartily glad of it -- very sorry for it, I mean. I thank you
for the news, however. Now I have that rogue, Thomaso, in my gripe.


Juan. Lose no time, Sir, but get an officer immediately, and secure Thomaso.


Dr. Bilioso. That I will. -- Aye, aye --

(Going.)
Juan. Surely, Sir, you will have the gallantry to conduct me safe out of this
house. -- If I should be insulted!


Dr. Bilioso. Insulted! Lord, Ma'am, there is no danger of that. Nature has
furnished you with such powers of defense; united the charms of your sex, to
the strength of ours. You are a glass of Nature's choicest cordial, Madam;
sweet and strong at the same time.


(Exit, leading Juan off. SCENE changes to a Wood, with a Village seen at a
distance through the Trees. Enter ANNA and CARLOS. Carlos. Consider, my dear
Anna, we have your father's signature to our contract of marriage.


Anna. But will he give his voluntary consent, to what has been procured by
artifice?


Carlos. Fear nothing, my dear; trust to me.


AIR. CARLOS.
AM I beloved? Can you refuse?
Alas! my heart for pity sues.
That heart whose constancy you have known;
That heart you have fondly called your own.
Every moment, as it flies,
Warns us where our danger lies.
Ah! there is ruin in delay;
Lovely Anna let us away.
Enter ISABELLA. Carlos. Well, Isabella, any news of Juan?


Isabella. Alas! none -- Every human being that passed at a distance, did my
pliant fancy conjure up into a likeness of Juan.


Carlos. The rising ground, on the left hand, commands a prospect of the road
-- Let me try, whether friendship may not see more clearly than love.


(Exit. Anna. Are not we a couple of wild girls, Isabella?


Isabella. Not incorrigible, my dear cousin, however; we have pursued a very
effectual mode of taming ourselves, by getting married.


Anna. To be sure, we have uttered the fatal, Yes.


Isabella. The fatal, Yes. Why, my dear, do you think our lovers are such
fools, as to think the better, or the worse of our affection for them, because
we have said, Yes.


AIR. ISABELLA.
How mistaken is the lover,
Who on words builds hopes of bliss!
And fondly thinks we love discover,
If perchance we answer, Yes.
Prompted often by discretion,
Is the seeming kind expression,
When the tongue, the heart belying,
Dares not venture on denying;
But in spite of discontent,
Gives the semblage of consent.
How mistaken, etc,
Ah! how vain is art's profession,
Though the fault'ring tongue comply!
What avails the cold confession,
If the averted eyes deny!
Happier far the experienced swain,
Knows he triumph must attain,
When in vain successless trial,
Language gives the faint denial:
While the eyes betray the fiction,
In delightful contradiction;
And the cheeks with blushes glow,
And the tongue still faulters, No.
How mistaken, etc.
Enter CARLOS. Carlos. Here is Juan -- So all we have to do, is to mount our
horses and gallop off.


Enter JUAN. Juan. Hold! you're mistaken -- You Have something else to do, I
assure you. We have certainly been traced from the village -- Doctor Bilioso,
and Signor Thomaso, are both coming up the hill, different ways, and will most
likely meet at this spot. -- But they are here.


(Anna, Isabella, Carlos, and Juan, retire up the stage. Enter Dr. BILIOSO and
THOMASO, meeting -- Each with an Alguazil. Dr. Bilioso. Oh! you vile quack!
Where Is my patient?


Thomaso. Where is my daughter, you old rogue -- You have assisted your son to
run away with her -- Lay hold of him, Alguazil.


Dr. Bilioso. What! Why, I brought an officer to seize you. Here, do your duty.

(To the Alguazil.
Juan. (coming forward.) Dear gentlemen, what is the matter?


Dr. Bilioso. Why, Sir, that fellow is a quack, and has killed one of my
patients.


Thomaso. That Is impossible; for though he calls himself a physician, he has no
patients to kill.


Dr. Bilioso. What! Do you forget the poor gentleman at the inn?


Thomaso. Well, he was fair game -- You had given him over.


Dr. Bilioso. Zounds, Sir, what does that signify -- I have given over fifty
people in my time, who have recovered afterward.


Juan. (aside.) My plot has taken, I perceive -- they believe him dead yet. --
(To Thomaso.) In Faith, this is a serious affair. You had better compound this
business.


Thomaso. He will not agree to it -- He hates me so.


Juan. (aside to Thomaso.) Let me talk to him. (Aside to Dr. Bilioso.) Sir,
when I see so valuable a life as yours in danger --


Dr. Bilioso. My life in danger!


Juan. From that bloody minded apothecary -- I find, your son has cloped with
his daughter, and he is resolved to be revenged, by assassinating you and your
whole family. See, how he looks at you!


Dr. Bilioso. Ratsbane and arsenic in his countenance!


Juan. (aside to Thomaso.) Did you ever see such a determined dog. He is
resolved to hang you!


Thomaso. I dare say he has the rope in his pocket. Pray, mollify him.


Dr. Bilioso. (aside to Juan.* In Faith, I don't half like him -- Tell him, I Will
forgive him.


Juan. Dismiss your Alguazils. (Exit Alguazils.) You bind yourselves to stand
by my determination.


Dr. and Thomaso. We do.


Juan. Then, I believe, all parties are satisfied. Appear, appear!


ANNA, CARLOS, and ISABELLA, come forward. Anna. My dear father!


Thomaso. Zounds, what is all this!


Enter THERESA, STURMWALD, and GUZMAN. Sturmwald. A general muster of the whole
corpse, egad; deserters and all. You are my prisoner, Madam.

(To Anna.
Carlos. No, Sir, not while I can defend her.


Anna. (to Sturmwald.) Oh, Sir! hear me -- the brave are ever generous; do not
attempt a life so dear to me --


Sturmwald. Bullets and gunpowder! why don't you love me then -- I thought you
told me, mother-in-law, it was all maiden coyness in her.


Theresa. Stuff and nonsense -- Take her, Captain Sturmwald, she is yours --
Defend your honor.


Sturmwald. And that my honor may be worth defending, I Will take care it shall
not be tarnished by an unjust action. -- Anna, your mother says you are mine.
-- If so, I dispose of what is mine -- thus: -- (giving her hand to Carlos.)
Come, come, we have by mistake opposed the union of hearts on their march to
form a junction, and we are defeated. So much the better -- who would wish to
conquer in a bad cause? You must consent to unite these turtles.

(to Thomaso.
Thoamso. Has my wife any objection?


Theresa. I Will have nothing to do with it -- so act as you please.


Thomaso. Why then give me your hand, Doctor (to Dr. Bilioso) and here is an end
of old quarrels. -- Take my daughter, young man, (to Carlos) and you take my
niece (to Juan); and you (to Sturmwald) take my wife if you will* Egad, I am in
such a good humor, I could give away any thing.


FINALE.
IT IS joy inspires the vocal lay,
And animates the choral song;
Of love we sing the gentle sway!
May constancy the theme prolong.
Old Time, with joys unceasing,
Shall add to Hymen's store;
Our friendship still increasing,
When youth shall be no more.
THE END.

