PRACTICAL RULES OF DIET In the various Constitutions and Diseases OF HUMAN
BODIES.

By JOHN ARBUTHNOT, M. D. Fellow of the College of Physicians, and of the Royal
Society.

LONDON: Printed for J. TONSON in the Strand. MDCCXXXII.

PRACTICAL RULES OF DIET In the various Constitutions and Diseases OF HUMAN
BODIES.

THE PREFACE.
THE former Part of this Treatise has been censured for two Faults; first for
being obscure; secondly, for not being so practical as it ought to be: As to
the First, I answer, That Obscurity may be taken in two Senses, as Real, or as
Relative to the Understanding of the Reader; if Obscurity is taken in the first
Sense, I will venture to affirm, That it is unjustly blamed upon that Account:
Perhaps it may not be all true, but I am sure it is intelligible. If Obscurity
is taken in the second Sense, Euclid's Elements may be said to be obscure: I
freely own that I had made too partial a Judgment of the Capacity of several of
my Readers; and yet it is true, That many, not bred up in the Profession of
Physic, understood the Whole; many, a great Part of it; and it was not
possible to write it down to the Capacity of every Body.

The second Fault, of its not being sufficiently practical, I have endeavored
to repair, by the Addition of this Second Part, which I was obliged to write in
haste, when the Distress both of my Mind and Body, besides Business, rendered
me very unfit for such an Undertaking: All I can say for it is, That though it be
less accurate, it may perhaps be more useful than the first, it being much such
a Work as an Almanac, of public Benefit, but from which no body I believe
ever proposed any Reputation. It is a Collection of the scattered Precepts of
the First Part, and other new Rules, extended to the most common Diseases as
well as Constitutions of Human Bodies. I have still followed the Method of the
learned and industrious Boerhaave, who has certainly studied and taught this
Part of the Profession more than any that ever were before him.

I cannot think it trifling nor unnecessary to treat this Dietetick Part of
Medicine by it self with some Accuracy, for the following Reasons: First,
Because the Parts of any Art or Science are often best understood when they are
treated separately: Secondly, Because the Practitioners in Physic and
Surgery are often frustrated in their Intentions by Errors in Diet committed
by their Patients, a Misfortune that I my self have felt several times, and, as
I suppose, in common with others of the Profession. Thirdly, Because some
practical Rules of this sort may be useful to such as are remote from good
Advice; and likewise to some coarse Practitioners which they are obliged to
make use of: By the Methods prescribed in this short Treatise, which are almost
within the Reach of every Body, more Good and less Mischief will be done in
acute Distempers, than by Medicines improperly and unseasonably administered;
and great Cures may be effected in Chronical Distempers, by a proper Regimen of
the Diet. I hope I have done with this Subject. I was drawn in to write the
First Part by Accident, and to write the Second by some Defects in the First;
these are the cumbersome Perquisites of Authors.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of the different Qualities and Effects of Alimentary Substances.
ALimentary Substances, austere and astringent. Page 243 Alimentary Substances,
softening and relaxing. 245 Diluting Substances. 252 Anti-acid, or contrary to
Acidity or Sourness. 253 Acid Substances. 259 Those things which resolve
glutinous and fat Substances. ibid. Stimulating. 260 Incrassating, or
Thickeners of the Humors. 261 What renders the Blood acrimonious, or sharp.
262 Abaters of Acrimony, or Sharpness. 263 Coagulators of the Humors. 265
Those things which accelerate the Motion of the Blood. ibid. Those things which
increase Milk. 266 Substances expectorating. ibid. Lenitive, or laxative of the
Belly. 267 Diuretic. 269 Sudorificks. 271 Diaphoreticks, or Promoters of
Perspiration. 273 Emenagogues. ibid. Those things which produce Heat in animal
Bodies. 275 Those things which produce Cold in animal Bodies. 276 Cephalic.
277 Cordial. 278 Carminative, or Expellers of Wind 279 Anthelmintick, or
contrary to Worms 280 Anodyne, or Abaters of Pain of the alimentary Kind. 281
CHAP. II. Rules of Diet in the different Constitutions of Human Bodies.
Lax and weak Fibers. 283 Too strong and springy Fibers. 284 Plethorick
Constitutions. 285 Sanguineous Constitutions. 287 Constitutions subject to
Acidity. 288 Constitutions abounding with a spontaneous Alkali. 290 Phlegmatic
Constitutions. 293 Thickness of Blood. 295 Oily or fat Constitutions. 296
Melancholy or atrabilarian Constitutions. 298 Faulty Motion of the Fluids. 300
Wounds. 301
CHAP. III. Of Acute Diseases.
Fevers, with their various Symptoms. 303 Intermitting Fevers. 323
Inflammatory Diseases.
A Phrensy, or Inflammation of the Brain. 327 Quincy. 328 Inflammation of the
Lungs. 332 Pleurisy. 339 Paraphrenitis, or Inflammation of the Diaphragm. 341
Inflammation of the Liver. 342 Inflammation of the Stomach. 348 Inflammation of
the Guts. 350 A Thrush. 355 Inflammations of the Kidneys. 357 Apoplexy. 362
CHAP. IV. Rules of Diet in Chronical Diseases.
Palsy. 367 Epilepsy, Convulsions. 370 Melancholy, Madness. 374 Scurvy. 377
Cachexy, or ill Habit of Body. 381 Consumption pulmonary. 382 Dropsy. 389 Gout.
395 Greensickness, Obstructions. 401 Diseases of Infants. 404 Smallpox. 412
Gravel, Stone. 419 Rheumatism. 428
PRACTICAL RULES OF DIET In the various CONSTITUTIONS and DISEASES of HUMAN
BODIES.
CHAP. I.
Of the different Qualities and Effects of ALIMENTARY SUBSTANCES.
1. Alimentary Substances, austere and astringent.
AUSTERE, astringent, vegetable Substances, are such as contain an acid
essential Salt, combined with Earth, and very little Oil; as,

Several sorts of Plumbs, and some sorts of Pears, distinguishable by their
rough styptick Taste.

Quinces, which by their Quality are often useful to weak Stomachs, and in
stopping of Fluxes of Blood.

Pomegranates, which contain a Juice styptick, and extremely cooling.

Barberries, Medlars, Cornelian Cherries, all beneficial in Bloody-Fluxes.

Sorrel, useful in Spitting of Blood, and Stinking Breath.

Purslain, succulent, subacid, with a cooling nitrous Salt.

Burnet, astringent, with a gentle spicy Quality, vulnerary.

Tamarinds, cooling, astringent, yet laxative to the lower Belly.

Capers, astringent and diuretic.

All Pickles, especially Samphire, which is stimulating. Such sort of
Substances by their Acidity and astringent Quality offend some Stomachs.

There are Wines of the same Quality, known by their rough austere Taste; as
likewise all acidulated and chalybeat Waters.

Strong Waters or spirituous Liquors contract and harden the solid Parts most
of all.

2. Alimentary Substances softening and relaxing.
The Juices of most sorts of ripe Garden Fruits, as Cherries, are cooling, and
laxative to the Bowels; their Kernels are good for the Gravel in the Kidneys.

Strawberries, which by their fragrant Smell seem likewise to be cordial. The
Seeds, which are obtained by shaking the ripe Fruit in Water, are an excellent
Remedy against the Stone: The Juice of Strawberries and Limons in Spring Water
is an excellent Drink in bilious Fevers.

Oranges, those that are sweet are more relaxing than the bitter or Seville
Oranges, which nevertheless are not heating; these are an excellent Remedy
against the hot Scurvy.

Citrons and Limons, their Juices more cooling than that of Oranges. Sour
Limons do not possess this relaxing Quality very much, they being somewhat
styptick.

Apples, which are likewise pectoral, cooling, and lenitive; they differ
considerably as to the Kinds of them, and their Qualities may be easily known
by their Taste.

Pears have most of the same Qualities; some Kinds by their high Flavor seem
to be more cordial than Apples.

Peaches, which are likewise cordial and pectoral.

Sweet Plumbs, those of the austere Kind are astringent.

Mulberries, pectoral, corrective of the bilious Alkali.

Apricocks, unless mellow, are rather somewhat styptick.

Gooseberries, extremely ripe, are lenient; unripe, they are sour, and rather
astringent.

Currants are good in Spitting of Blood, extremely cooling, and somewhat
astringent. The Jelly or Rob of Currants, mixed with Water, is a most excellent
Drink in bilious Fevers.

Grapes taken in moderate Quantities help the Appetite and Digestion; in great
Quantities, they resolve the Bile too much, and produce Fluxes; dried, they are
pectoral.

Figs are great Subduers of Acrimony, useful in Hoarseness and Coughs,
extremely emollient, and by relaxing the Urinary Passages, diuretic, useful in
bloody Urine; it has been always believed that the immoderate use of them
generates Lice.

Plants of the low pomiferous Kind, as Melons, Pompions, Gourds, Cucumbers,
contain a cooling Juice, with a nitrous Salt; that of Melons and the Ananas is
rich and cordial; they are diuretic; and there are Instances, when eaten in
great Quantities, they have produced bloody Urine; they ought to be taken
fasting. The Juice of Cucumbers is too cold for some Stomachs, and ought not to
be taken by such as have thin and poor Blood; if the Stem upon which they grow
be bruised, the Pulp of the Fruit grows bitter, and has the Effect of
Coloquintids. The Juice of an unripe Cucumber is purgative. Cucumbers are
useful in bloody Urine.

All Fruits which contain a subacid essential Salt, much Phlegm, and a small
Quantity of Oil, have this lenient Quality; as likewise the emollient
Pot Herbs; as,

Cole, Cabbage, Coleworts, which are soft and demulcent, without any Acidity.
The Jelly or Juice of red Cabbage, baked in an Oven, and mixed with Honey, is
an excellent Pectoral.

Lettuce, which has a milky Juice, with an anodyne or opiate Quality, resolvent
of the Bile, proper for melancholy People, diuretic, and good in Stranguries,
especially when eat raw; it is reckoned to increase Milk.

Cichory and Dandelion have some of the same Qualities, with a small degree of
Bitterness extremely agreeable to the Stomach, and not heating. The Juice of
the Dandelion is a Remedy in intermitting Fevers.

Spinach, emollient, but not very nourishing; it is reckoned good in
Inflammations of the Bowels.

Beets, emollient, nutritive, and relaxing.

Carrots, good in nephritical Cases, antiacid, and fattening.

Parsnips, useful in phlegmatic Colicks; the Plant from which Apoponox is
taken, is a sort of Parsnip.

Skirrets, useful in bloody Urine, and Spitting of Blood.

Scorzonera, demulcent in the SmallPox, Meazles, and pestilential Fevers, and
for Gouty People; the expressed Juice better than the Decoction.

Goats-beard, an alimentary Root, has most of the Qualities of Scorzonera.

Emollient likewise are all farinaceous or mealy Substances.

Barley, which is deterging, tho viscous in a small degree; the Decoction and
Cream of Barley are proper in inflammatory Distempers.

Rice, nourishing, good in Haemorrages, or Fluxes of Blood.

Mays is not so easily brought to Fermentation as other Grains, therefore more
viscous.

Wheat, the properest of any Grain for Bread, which, when not entirely purged
from the Bran, is laxative, and stimulating to the Bowels.

Rice, the Bread, more acescent and less nourishing than that of Wheat.

Oats, cleansing, resolving, and pectoral; Oatmeal and Butter outwardly applied
dry the Scab on the Head.

Millet, diuretic, cleansing, and good in Diseases of the Kidneys.

Panick, aperient, boiled with Milk, demulcent, temperating Acrimony.

Pease contain a soft Oil, without any spicy Quality; therefore are extremely
demulcent, and temper Acrimony.

Beans and Kidney-Beans have the same Qualities; they are reckoned diuretic,
and good for the Stone.

It has been commonly reckoned, because of the Viscosity of Pease and Beans,
that People who live a sedentary Life should not feed much upon them.

The Animal Oils; Cream, Butter, and Marrow, are all lenient and nourishing:
Marrow is excellent in the dry Scurvy with crackling of the Bones, where it
performs its natural Office.

Of all Drinks, Whey is the most relaxing, so are warm Water and Decoctions of
mealy Substances, and Panadas, or Bread boiled in Water.

3. Diluting Substances.
Water and watery Liquors, without any saline Substance; Decoctions of mealy
Substances; Robs and Gellies of Garden Fruits in Water.

Resolving is bringing a Fluid which is new concreted into the State of
Fluidity again. Such are

All Substances which are saponaceous, or contain Salt and Oil; therefore most
ripe Garden Fruits have this Quality, and Honey most of all vegetable
Substances. Mere diluting dissolves and carries off Salts.

4. Anti-acid, or contrary to Acidity or Sourness, are,
All Animal Diet in general, because no Animal has any acid Salt in it,
especially Flesh roasted; though not so easy of Digestion as boiled.

The Animals which feed on other Animals must have this Quality stronger than
those who feed on acid Vegetables; such are most Fishes, all Birds which feed
upon Worms and Insects, several Kinds of Waterfowl, Woodcocks, Snipes, and
several Kinds of small Birds, which for that Reason afford a higher Aliment
than those that feed upon Grains or other Vegetables.

The Flesh of Animals differs according as they are terrestrial, aquatick, or
amphibious. Fishes contain much Oil, and amphibious Animals participate
somewhat of the Nature of Fishes, and are oily; and the same Species of Animals
differs according to the Soil and Air it lives in, and the Nourishment which it
takes, as those in Marshes and Mountains; the Flesh of Oxen, Sheep, Deer, in
different Pasturage; and this is in none more sensible than in Hogs Flesh.

Young Animals from their Age and the Nature of their Aliment have more tender
Fibers, and more superfluous Humidity than old Animals, which have their Fibers
tougher, and the Juices more exalted and relishing.

Mutton by Experiment is the most perspirable of all animal Food, and Hogs
Flesh and Oysters the least.

The Flesh of Animals which take and digest a great Quantity of Food, and
consequently use strong Exercise, must be nourishing, because they have strong
Sanguification, such are Pigeons; and the same is true of some Fishes.

The Nature of most sort of animal Diet may be discovered by Taste and other
sensible Qualities, and some of those general Rules abovementioned, without
particular Disquisitions upon every Kind.

Eggs are perhaps the highest, most nourishing and exalted of all animal Food,
and most indigestible, because no body can take and digest the same Quantity of
them as of other Food.

Shellfish are nourishing, and their Oil is corrected by their Salts, which
make it pungent and stimulating.

But, as was said before, all Animal Diet is Anti-acid or Alkalescent.

Vegetables used in Aliment antiacid are such as of themselves turn foetid or
stinking, rather than four.

All the Cole or Cabbage Kind.

Asparagus diuretic or aperient; by the foetid Smell which it gives the Urine
it is suspected to be hurtful to the Kidneys.

Parsley and Celery, both contain a pungent Salt and Oil, diuretic and
aperient, bad in Bloody-Fluxes.

Garlic, Rockambole, Onions, Shalot, Leeks, these abound with a pungent
volatile Salt and Oil, are extremely diuretic, and, when stimulating
Diuretics may be safely used, are very effectual: Garlic has been found by
Experience to be a very excellent Remedy in Jaundices and Dropsies, and in
Asthmas proceeding from a cold viscous Phlegm. All these Plants are hurtful in
Cases where the Blood is too much dissolved, in Spitting of Blood, and bloody
Urine.

Cresses, Radishes, Horse-Radishes, Mustard, abound likewise in their several
degrees with a pungent Salt, and as they subdue Acidity, are very improper
where the Blood verges to the contrary State of a putrescent Alkali; and in
general they are fitter for old People, and cold Constitutions, than the young
and sanguine. Mustard is a very powerful Remedy in viscous cold phlegmatic
Cases.

Dilse, a Sea-Plant, antiscorbutick. There are other Sea Plants used as
Aliment, which contain a temperate Sea Salt, very useful in Scurvies; as Laver,
which is the Lactuca Marina, or Sea-Lettuce, and Sea-Cole, or Cale.

Carrots, Turnips, Parsnips, are Anti-acids of a milder Kind.

Nettles, good against Haemorrages.

Such as abound with a soft Oil, which operate by blunting the Acrimony of the
Salts, as most sorts of Nuts; most of which are hard of Digestion, yet possess
some good medicinal Qualities.

Walnuts are cordial, anti-hysterick, and gently sudorisick.

Hazle-Nuts, good against Spitting of Blood.

Chestnuts are good in Female Weaknesses, and afford a very good Nourishment.

Almonds, Pectoral.

Pistachos, nourishing and stimulating.

Olives are anti-acid by their Oil, but all oily Substances beget an Acrimony
of another sort.

Truffles, which have an exalted Oil, and a volatile Salt of a grateful Savor,
are heating.

Morelles have some of the same Qualities; and so have Earth-Nuts and Potatoes,
which are very nourishing.

Mushrooms, which contain an Oil of a volatile Salt; therefore they are best
corrected by Vinegar; some of them being poisonous, make the rest suspicious;
the poisonous Kinds operate by a sort of Suffocation, in which the best Remedy
is Wine or Vinegar and Salt, and Vomiting as soon as possible.

Acidity is likewise cured by diluting, therefore Water is an Anti-acid.

5. Acid Substances are,
Most ripe Garden Fruits, fermented Liquors, small Wines, with little Oil, and
much Tartar, Vinegar, sour Milk, Butter-Milk. Several Plants known by their
Taste, as Sorrel, etc. Those of the mealy Kind are acescent, that is, being
kept they turn sour rather than corrupted and stinking.

6. Those things which resolve glutinous and fat Substances, are
Spices, as Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, Ginger, Pepper. These abounding
with a high exalted Oil, and volatile Salt, by which Principles they are
heating, and act strongly both on the Fluids and Solids; Ginger is perhaps one
of the best of them. All Spices are bad for melancholy People.

Of the same nature are the Vegetables used in Seasoning, as Thyme, Savory,
Marjoram, Rosemary, Mint, Orange and Limon-Peel, Fennel, which contains a
subtle Spice, balsamic, warm, and stimulating; Chervil, of the same nature;
they are good in phlegmatic cold Constitutions: Sage is stimulating, drying,
astringent; used in great Quantities it will produce Temulency, or Drunkenness.

All Soaps and Soapy Substances, and consequently ripe Fruits, the Juices of
pungent and aromatical Plants, all those Substances resolve Solids, and
sometimes attenuate or thin the Fluids.

7. Stimulating.
All Salts in general, both acid and alkaline; all acrimonious Oils, and all
Substances that abound with them, for by their Oil they obstruct the
Extremities of the small Vessels, and by their Salts they irritate the Solids,
consequently all the Substances mentioned in the foregoing Article are
stimulating, and all fermented Spirits, the Effect of which is very sudden.

Extreme Cold stimulates, producing first a Rigor and then a glowing Heat;
those things which stimulate in the extreme degree, excite Pain.

8. Incrassating or Thickeners of the Humors, are
All things which expel the liquid Parts strongly, so as to thicken what
remains. Therefore violent Exercise or Labor produces this Effect; the Blood
of laboring People is more dense than that of the sedentary. A due Consistence
of the Blood is very necessary for Health, and this is acquired chiefly by
Exercise; all things which provoke great Secretions, especially Sweat, produce
this Effect at last.

9. What renders the Blood acrimonious or sharp
Are such things as increase its Velocity; for by mutual Attrition Salts are
produced.

Whatever attenuates the Humors.

Whatever resolves Concretions, and turns them fluid; for whatever putrifies,
is acrid.

Acrimony is threefold: Acid, which is produced from Vegetables lying long in
the Stomach; no animal Substance produces Acidity, except Milk.

Great Quantities of Oily Substances, for Animal Humors, by Heat, stink and
grow foetid, like Oil.

Expressed Oils are mild.

Distilled Oils turn acrid.

Oils entirely depraved of their Salts are not acrid.

Alkaline Acrimony is produced by fixed Salts, by fixed Alkalis, and volatile
Alkalis, taken in great Quantities; and by essential Salts of Vegetables, of
which sort are Sugar, Manna, and Honey.

Alkaline Acrimony is produced by all Vegetables which abound with a pungent
volatile Salt and Oil, as Mustard, Garlic, Onions, Horseradish, Cresses; and
by all Spices. All things which create Pain, render the Humors sharp.

10. Abaters of Acrimony or Sharpness.
Expressed Oils of ripe Vegetables, and all Preparations of such, as of
Almonds, Pistachos, and other Nuts.

Emulsion of the Seeds of Barley, Oats, etc.

Decoctions of farinaceous Legumes, as Pease, Beans, etc.

Native Animal Oils, as Fat, Cream, Butter, Marrow, especially the last, which
is excellent in some Scurvies.

All insipid inodorous Vegetables are demulcent.

Jellies, Broths of Animal Substances not high seasoned, acid Substances in
respect of alkaline, and alkaline in respect of acid.

Fermented burning Spirits subdue Acidity, and are very often a present Remedy
when the Stomach is affected with it. Spirit of Wine dulcifies Spirit of Salt,
Nitre, or Vitriol; but then those Spirits have other bad Effects.

Absorbents, as Chalk, Crabs Eyes; but these are not alimentary, except
calcined Hartshorn, which has something of this Quality.

Nothing abates Acrimony of the Blood more than an equable Motion of it,
neither too swift nor too slow; for too quick a Motion produces an alkaline,
and too slow an acid Acrimony.

11. Coagulators of the Humors.
Those things which expel the most fluid Parts, as in the Case of incrassating,
or thickening; and by those things which suck up some of the fluid Parts, as
Absorbents.

All Vegetables, which make a black or purple Tincture with the Vitriol of
Mars, such as Galls do. Juices of unripe Vegetables, and the juices of all
austere Vegetables which coagulate the Spittle, and being mixed with the Blood
in the Veins would produce Polypus's in the Heart, and Death.

All burning fermented Spirits have this Quality in a strong degree.

12. Those things which accelerate the Motion of the Blood, are
All stimulating, diluting, and attenuating Substances; what relaxeth the
Veins, as Frictions, Bathings, Compressions by Ligatures often removed,
Sneezing, Coughing, Laughing, and several other natural Motions.

Those things which take off the Causes of Acceleration, retard the Motion of
the Blood.

13. Those things which increase Milk.
What generates quickly a great Quantity of Chyle, as thin Broths, Ptisanes of
Barley or Oatmeal, Panadas, but nothing more than Milk with Salt and Sugar;
Cream, if the Milk be not too thick, Malt Drink, not strong, or stale; a due
degree of Exercise or Labor. Eating much Flesh-Meat abates Milk.

14. Substances expectorating.
Such as cleanse and open, as mild vegetable Oils, such as that of Almonds or
Olives; soapy Substances, especially Honey; Emulsions of farinaceous
Substances, Decoctions of emollient Vegetables, Sugar.

Sometimes stimulating Substances are necessary to dissolve viscid Phlegm, and
excite a Cough.

The mild Vapor of warm Liquids, especially warm Water.

And such things as are endued with an opiate Quality by incrassating the
Phlegm.

15. Lenitive or laxative of the Belly.
Animal Oils, fresh Butter, Cream, Marrow, Fat Broths, especially of those
Parts which are about the Mesentery; Livers of Animals, because of the Bile
which they contain; the expressed Oils of mild Vegetables, as Olives, Almonds,
Pistachos, and the Fruits themselves; all oily and mild Fruits, as Figs;
Decoctions of mealy Vegetables, these lubricate the Intestines; some
saponaceous Substances which stimulate gently, as Honey, Hydromel, or boiled
Honey and Water, and even Sugar it self, especially unrefin'd.

Such lenitive Substances are proper for dry atrabilarian Constitutions, who
are subject to Astriction of the Belly, and the Piles, and will operate when
stronger medicinal Substances are sometimes ineffectual; but such lenitive Diet
hurts those whose Bowels are weak and lax.

Lenitive are likewise watery Substances; and even common Water or Whey, drank
in cool Air, and walking after it; sour Milk and Butter Milks have the same
Effect.

There are other Substances which stimulate more, even new Milk, especially
Asses Milk, when it sours on the Stomach; and Whey, turned sour, will purge
strongly.

Jellies made of the solid Parts of Animals contain a sort of ammoniacal Salt;
Shellfish, as Oysters, the same, by which they are lenitive; most Garden
Fruits, by the Salts which they contain, produce the same Effect; some of them,
as Grapes, will throw such as take them immoderately, into a Cholera Morbus, or
incurable Diarrhoeas; all Fruits when they have this Effect, are flatulent;
Wine and spirituous Liquors are not so useful in such a windy Colic, as Water,
which is much the best Remedy after a Surfeit of Fruit. The expressed Juices of
several Vegetables, because of their essential Salts, stimulate the Bowels.

All fossil Salts, as Sea Salt, Rock-Salt, etc. have this Quality; a Diet of
salted Flesh throws Ships Crews sometimes into Diarrhoeas.

16. Diuretic.
All Decoctions, Emulsions, Oils of emollient Vegetables, such relax and
lubricate the Urinary Passages; they ought to be taken in an empty Stomach, an
open Air, and with gentle Exercise.

Diluents, as Water, Whey, Tea, small Ale without Hops.

Substances stimulating, by which Quality all Salts whatsoever are diuretic.

Soaps which resolve solid Substances, any Salt, Oil, Salads of pungent Herbs,
with Oil of Olives, and Vinegar, are diuretic.

By this saline Quality, the Juices of Shellfish, of Oysters, Muscles, Crabs,
Crawfish, and the Soups made of them, are diuretic.

Vegetables which have little Oil, and a great Quantity of essential Salt, are
diuretic, Parsley, Celery, Sorrel, Chervil, Eringo.

Vegetables which are aromatic and balsamic, Saffron, Asparagus, Nutmeg;
these affecting the Urine with an Odor, have some specific Quality of this
Kind.

All anodyne Substances which take off Spasms and Contractions of the
membranous Parts, and all which subdue any particular Acrimony, are diuretic.

For provoking of Urine, one should begin with the gentlest at first, as the
lenient, relaxing, diluent, demulcent, and last of all the stimulating.

The Blood may be cleans'd, and the Salts of it carried off perhaps better by
Urine than any other Secretion.

17. Sudorificks.
Such things as relax the Vessels of the Skin, by which Quality many things
which are diuretic, are likewise sudorifick; warm Water and Honey,
Barley-Water, Friction, and tepid Vapors, applied to the Skin, operate by this
Quality.

Substances anodyne, by abating Spasms, relax, and by that Quality prove
sudorifick.

Such things as dissolve and dilute the Blood, thus cold Water.

Water, Vinegar, and Honey, is most excellent Sudorifick used by Hippocrates;
it is more effectual with a little Mace added to it.

Those things which determine the Motion of the Fluids toward the extreme
Parts, increase the Strength and Frequency of the Pulse, as violent Exercise,
all Cordials, Spices, thin and sharp Wines, Juices of Limon, operate by these
Qualities.

The Matter of Sweat is the most spirituous and nutritious Part of the Blood,
nor is it to be forced without apparent Indications. It contains the same
lixivial Salts with Urine.

Sweating often thickens the Blood, and sometimes thins and dissolves it.

Sudorificks are to be varied according to the Cause of the Disease which it is
designed to remove.

18. Diaphoreticks or Promoters of Perspiration.
What helps the Organs of Digestion, because the Attenuation of the Aliment
makes it perspirable.

Such things as constrict the Fibers, and strengthen the solid Parts; Exercise
to a degree less than what provokes Sweat.

Substances which stimulate in a small degree.

Air, moderately warm.

There are likewise Aliments more and less perspirable. See Sanctorius.

19. Emenagogues.
Such as produce a Plethora or Fullness of the Vessels, consequently such as
strengthen the Organs of Digestion, so as to make good Blood, especially
Exercise; such as carry off the Foeces and Mucus, deobstruct the Mouths of the
Lacteals, so as the Chyle may have a free Passage into the Blood.

Substances saline or soapy, that is, consisting of Salt and Oil.

Such as relax, and take off the Resistance of the Vessels of the Womb,
Fomentations, and tepid Bathings of the lower Parts of the Body.

What accelerates the Reflux of the Blood from the lower Parts to the Heart,
Friction, Walking, especially Dancing.

What stimulates and promotes the Excretion of the Blood, especially some of
the Plants which abound with a pungent Salt, and a high exalted Oil, as those
used in seasoning Aliment, Savory, Thyme, Marjoram, Pennyroyal, etc. Vapors
acrimonious.

20. Heat is produced in animal Bodies
By the Application of hot things. By increasing of Attrition or Rubbing of the
Fluids and Solids, to which Heat is proportional.

Therefore whatever increases the Velocity of the Blood, by stimulating,
heateth, as spirituous fermented Liquors, and when the Heat is increased, the
Velocity of the Blood is certainly increased.

What increases the Density of the Fluids, heateth, for a denser Fluid is
hotter than a rarer; and thus it is that Cold it self at last heateth.

Whatever straitens the Vessels so as the Channels become more narrow, must
heat, because in that Case the Attrition is made greater; therefore strait
Clothes, thick Coverings, heavy and cold Air, but especially cold Baths, heat:
All who are subject to Haemorrages ought to avoid these things. In Consumptions
and Atrophy, the Liquids are exhausted, and the Sides of the Canals collapse,
therefore the Attrition is increased, and consequently the Heat.

21. Cold is produced in animal Bodies.
By Causes contrary to the former, viz.

By whatsoever diminishes the projectile Motion of the Blood, by weakening the
Force of any Stimulus; therefore diluting things are cooling, as Whey, Water,
Milk and Water, both as they abate Acrimony, and relax the Vessels.

What is contrary to any particular Acrimony, is cooling, as alkaline
Substances in respect to acid, and acid Substances in respect of alkaline; and
soapy Substances, if the Heat proceeds from an oily or viscous Cause.

What expels any Stimulus out of the Body, cools.

Those things which attenuate and dilute by diminishing the Density of the
Fluid; thus Nitres, and those Vegetables, which have nitrous Salts in them,
cool.

Tepid Baths cool by relaxing the Vessels; and Air, when it is light, is more
cooling, caeteris paribus, than when it is heavy, because it compresseth the
Vessels less.

All those who have lax Fibers and Vessels are naturally cooler than those that
have strait.

22. Cephalic.
Such things as attenuate the Fluids which circulate through the capillary
Vessels of the Brain, and abound with a volatile Oil, Salt, and Spirit, and are
known commonly by a grateful Flavor and Odor, as Marjoram, Balm, Sage,
Rosemary.

Those things which affect the Nose with a grateful Smell, and are not hot, by
their Odor promote the Separation of the Animal Spirits.

23. Cordial
Are all such things as increase and facilitate the animal or natural Motions,
the Power of, moving the Muscles, or circulating the Fluids.

What increases the Strength of the Heart, is not always a Cordial; for in
inflammatory Distempers, by increasing the projectile Motion of the Blood, the
Strength may be diminished.

What increases the Force of the Heart so as to give a due degree of
projectile Motion to the Blood, is a Cordial.

What produces a due Quantity of Animal Spirits, necessarily facilitates the
animal and natural Motions.

Such are all Aliments which put the nutritious Juices in such a State of
Tenuity and Heat as approaches to the White of an Egg, while it is hatching;
those are commonly Meats and Drinks of easy Digestion, nourishing, of a Flavor
grateful to most Palates.

Such as determine and settle the irregular Motions of the Animal Spirits;
therefore, anodyne Substances, and what abate Spasms and Convulsions, are
Cordial.

Such as stimulate and excite the Spirits, as Spices and Vegetables, which
abound with a volatile Salt, Oil, and Spirit.

In short, whatever relaxeth the too strict Vessels, or straitens the too lax;
what thickens the too thin, or attenuates the too thick Fluids, is a Cordial.

24. Carminative, or Expellers of Wind.
Wind is elastick and rarified, pent up in some Vessel of the Body, which by
its Expansion creates a Tension or Convulsion in that Part.

Every thing which takes off that Convulsion, is, properly speaking,
carminative.

Therefore what relaxeth or opens so as the clastick Air may escape, as warm
Water drank plentifully, Bathing, Fermentations, and all things which abate
Pain, and those things which abound with volatile oily Salts, are carminative.

As those Spasms are often occasioned by some acrimonious Substance which
constringeth the Fibers of the affected Part; whatever is contrary to that
particular Acrimony, is carminative.

25. Anthelmintick, or contrary to Worms.
All things which are known by Experience to kill them, as Oils of all Kinds;
Honey taken upon an empty Stomach, or after some gentle purging Medicine.

Substances which by their small pungent and sharp Particles kill them without
hurting the Intestines, as all Fish Bones and Hartshorn powdered.

Those things which purge and expel them out of the Body, of which kind there
are several alimentary Substances.

26. Anodyne, or Abaters of Pain of the Alimentary Kind.
Such things as relax the Tension of the affected nervous Fibers, as Decoctions
of emollient Substances; those things which attenuate and remove the
Obstruction, or destroy the particular Acrimony which occasions the Pain, or
what deadens the Sensation of the Brain by procuring Sleep; some Alimentary
Substances are endued with this Quality, as Saffron, Lettuce, Cichory, Wine,
and inflammable Spirits.

This being a sort of a compendious Alimentary Dispensatory, makes it
unnecessary in the following Rules to repeat constantly the same things, it
being sufficient to mention the Intention or Design to be pursued in the Diet.

When there are Contra-indications, that is, when different Symptoms demand
opposite Methods one must adapt the Method to the most urgent Symptom.

When the Disease is complicated with other Diseases, one must consider that
which is most dangerous. These may serve for general Rules.

CHAP. II.
Rules of Diet in the different Constitutions of Human Bodies.
Lax and weak Fibers.
PAleness, a weak Pulse, Palpitations of the Heart, flabby and slack Flesh,
Laziness, Lassitude, Bloatedness, scorbutical Spots are Symptoms of weak Fibers.

Leanness is no Sign of weak Fibers, for though the bundle of Fibers which
constitute the Muscle may be small, the Fibers themselves may be strong and
springy.

Such as have weak Fibers ought to avoid all great Evacuations, especially
Letting of Blood, Substances viscous, and hard of Digestion, a sedentary Life,
and moist Air.

They ought to take Aliment frequently, in small Quantities, nourishing, and of
easy Digestion, such as Milk, Broths and Jellies of Flesh Meat, Panadas, etc.
Their Drinks ought to be austere Wines mixed with Water, or any Wine mixed with
chalybeat Water; and to use in their Aliment styptick austere Vegetables, such
as are enumerated No 1, as far as their Stomachs can bear them.

Too strong and springy Fibers.
A Body hard, dry, scraggy, hairy, warm, with firm and rigid Muscles, a strong
Pulse, Activity and Promptness in Animal Actions, are Signs of strong, rigid,
and elastick Fibers.

Such Constitutions are subject to inflammatory Distempers.

They ought to avoid the Diet proper in the contrary State.

Their Nourishment ought to be emollient and cooling, the Pulps, Juices,
Jellies, Mucilages, and Decoctions of Vegetables mentioned No 2. animal Oils,
and all things which relax and increase Fat, avoiding all things seasoned with
Spice and Salt: Their Drink, Water, Barley-Water, Whey; and especially to avoid
fermented Spirits, which to such are extremely hurtful.

Bathing in tepid Water is beneficial to such Constitutions, and immoderate
Labor or Exercise hurtful.

Plethorick Constitutions.
The Signs of a Plethorick Constitution, or of such as abound with laudable
animal Fluids, are evident.

The Causes of it are a good Stomach, nourishing Diet, a good Digestion, little
Exercise, much Sleep, and Suppression of usual Evacuations, especially
Perspiration; therefore the avoiding these, and inducing their Contraries, are
the proper Cure.

A plethorick Constitution is subject to a Stoppage of the Circulation, and
consequently to Suffocation, Ruptures of the Vessels, and sudden Death;
therefore it ought to be speedily broke by proper artificial Evacuations, and
restoring the usual natural ones.

Long Abstinence is not proper for plethorick Constitutions, for it thickens
the Fluids; frequent Blood-letting, in small Quantities, often increases the
Force of the Organs of Digestion, fattens, and increases the Distemper.

They ought to avoid oily and nourishing Substances; watery Vegetables, as
being less nourishing than animal Diet, are proper; and Fish rather than Flesh:
In a Lent Diet People commonly fall away.

Sanguineous Constitutions.
Such are known by their Complexion, or Color of their Countenance and Skin:
They are subject to Haemorrages, Inflammations, especially of the Lungs,
Impostumations, and often to scrophulous Distempers.

All things which accelerate the Motion of the Blood are hurtful to sanguineous
Constitutions, as violent Exercise and Watching.

Acid Substances, No 5, especially Vinegar, are useful; the copious Use of
Vinegar brings Paleness.

The sanguineous ought to avoid the copious Use of all things that abound with
an acrimonious Salt and high exalted Oil, as Mustard, Onions, Garlic, Leeks,
the Herbs used in Seasoning, mentioned No 6, and in general, all Spices.

Constitutions subject to Acidity.
Sour Belchings, a craving Appetite sometimes of unusual things, as in the Case
of the Green Sickness, Colical Pains, dry Gripes, change of the color of the
Bile from Yellow toward Green, a sour Smell in the Excrements and Sweat,
paleness of the Skin, lowness of the Pulse, and some sort of Eruptions of the
Skin, are the common Signs of such a Constitution.

The chief Seat of Acidity is in the Stomach and Intestines, from whence it
will sometimes pass into the Blood, and other Juices.

Such ought to abstain from the copious use of acid alimentary Substances,
mentioned No 5, they ought not to eat much Bread, nor take great Quantities of
mealy Substances, no^ drink much of fermented Liquor especially sour and thin
Wines.

Their Diet ought to be rather of animal Substances than vegetable: The Flesh
of those Animals which live upon other Animals is most anti-acid, as several
Birds, and Waterfowl; though those are offensive to the Stomach sometimes, by
reason of their Oiliness. Vegetable and animal Oils are often agreeable to such
Stomachs, as Almonds, Pistachos, Cream, Butter, Marrow.

Their Diet ought to consist, in general, of Substances mentioned No 4.

Water or Wine not sour or thin, is their proper Drink.

They ought to use much Labor or Exercise, for laboring People have commonly
a good Digestion, and subdue the Acidity of their Aliment.

Acidity in the sucking Infant is to be cured by an alkaline Diet in the Nurse.

To know whether Eruptions of the Skin come from an acid or alkaline Cause, one
must attend to the previous Diet and the concomitant Symptoms; (Children, by
eating unripe Fruit often, have Eruptions upon their Skin) the Lentor, itching
Color, and State of such Eruptions, not inflammatory, nor tending to
Suppuration, point rather to an acid Cause, and the Success of the Cure often
demonstrates the same, such being often healed by animal alkaline Salts.

Constitutions abounding with a spontaneous Alkali.
This Constitution is more natural to Human Bodies, because all animal
Substances are alkalescent.

Heat, Thirst, hot nidorose Belchings, Foulness of the Tongue and Palate, a
bitter and hot Taste in the Mouth, Sickness, Loathing, bilious Vomitings,
Stools with a cadaverous Smell, Pains in the Belly, with Heat, are Symptoms of
an alkaline State of the Humors in the Stomach and Bowels.

Such a State disposes the Humors of the whole Body to Heat, Inflammations,
and Putrefaction, hinders Nutrition, and often causes Eruptions on the Skin,
dark, livid, lead-colour'd and gangrenous, and what is commonly called the hot
Scurvy.

Such Constitutions ought to avoid alkaline Substances, mentioned No 4, viz. an
animal Diet, especially Fat, Spices, and all Vegetables which abound with an
acrimonious Salt and high exalted Oil, and the copious use of Salts in general;
all animal Salts are alkaline; Sea Salt and Rock-Salt, though they are of a mixed
Nature, rather increase the Disease; Saltpeter is the most cooling and proper.

They ought to use plentifully the acid Substances mentioned No 15, to live
much upon Aliments made of Grains or mealy Substances, to eat much Bread, and
season much with Vinegar; thin Wines, Wine mixed with Water, Water with Juice
of Limon, and especially Milk and Water, are proper Drinks.

Those who feel no Inconvenience in taking Acids, ought to take them
plentifully.

People of such Constitutions ought not to use violent Exercise, nor long
Abstinence, which disposes to such a State, and after long Abstinence they
ought not to eat plentifully; they ought to use liquid rather than solid
Aliment.

Plethorick Constitutions are subject to fall into this alkaline State of the
Fluids, which is more dangerous than that which proceeds from Acidity, for the
Bile (which is here redundant) is the strongest Anti-acid, and when it is
highly exalted, and acrimonious, is capable of producing all the dreadful
Symptoms of malignant and pestilential Fevers, as is evident from the
Experiments that were made in the Plague of Marseilles. There is nothing
corrects the Acrimony of the Bile so much as the acid Diet abovementioned;
therefore one cannot be too early and quick in discerning a Tendency to such a
State, and observing if the Person be plethorick, hot, or dry; if the Air be
hot; if bilious Fevers reign; if there be any Acrimony in the Faeces, Urine,
Sweat; or a yellow; Cast in the Skin; with the Signs abovementioned, by an
early Application of proper Remedies, many dangerous and fatal Diseases might
be prevented.

Phlegmatic Constitutions.
Sickness of the Stomach, a Sense of Fullness without eating; Crudities or Meat
remaining in the Stomach undigested, Dejection of Appetite, Wind coming
upwards, but especially tough Phlegm frequently rejected by Vomiting,
Inflations and Tumors of the Belly (sometimes short Breath) and Paleness, are
Signs of a phlegmatic Constitution; when a Child grows pale, and his Belly
swells, as happens to those that are rickety, there is certainly tough Phlegm
in the Intestines, which commonly shuts up the Mouths of the Lacteals, and
hinders the Nourishment from passing: Persons of such Constitutions ought to
avoid mealy Substances unfermented, unripe Fruits, and all viscous Nourishment;
they ought not to let Blood, except upon urgent Occasions, nor provoke Sweat,
which thickens the Humors.

Their Diet ought to be alkalescent, of Substances mentioned No 4, because
whatever brings them into an alkaline State, is a proper Cure for the Disease;
therefore soapy Substances, which consist of a pungent Salt and volatile Oil,
Spices, Salt, Garlic, Onions, Leeks, and the warm Vegetables used in
Seasoning, Thyme, Rosemary, Savory, Basil, Marjoram, and in general, every
thing which exalts the Bile; for bilious and phlegmatic Constitutions are
opposite; and even Children so diseased ought to use a warmer Diet, than what
seems proper to their Age without it.

Phlegmatic Persons ought to drink fermented Liquors and generous Wines, such
as put the Blood in a vigorous Motion. Warm Water dissolves Phlegm, but it
relaxeth too much.

Thickness of Blood.
Thirst, Leanness, Excess of animal Secretions, as of Urine, Sweat, liquid
Dejections, too strong a Perspiration, are Signs and Effects of too great
Thinness of Blood.

For such, the Diet prescribed in Debility or Weakness of Fibers, is useful;
Milk boiled with Grains, especially Rice, rather solid than liquid Aliment, and
austere Wines for Drink.

Oily or fat Constitutions.
Fat People ought to eat and sleep little, and use much Exercise, in which the
Cure chiefly consists.

Whatever heats moderately, stimulating Substances abounding with a pungent
acrid Salt, as Mustard, Horse-Radishes, Garlicks, Onions, Leeks, Spices, and
the aromatic Plants used in Seasoning, Saffron, carminative Seeds, Meats high
seasoned with Salt, Pepper and Vinegar, are all proper, and dissolve Fat; they
have only one Inconvenience, that they create Thirst, and great Quantities of
Liquids increase the Disease, by diluting and relaxing the Solids; Salt is a
great Dissolver of Fat.

Fat People ought to avoid oily Nourishment; but Soaps, which consist of Oil
and Salt, are proper, because they are resolvent; therefore Honey, Sugar, and
ripe Garden-Fruits are useful.

Some of the astringent Substances, mentioned No 1, are useful, because their
Fibers are commonly too lax.

Whatever promotes Perspiration, and therefore Frictions of the Skin, are
useful.

Their Drink ought to be thin Wines; Coffee and Tea, as they dilute and
stimulate moderately, are useful; great Quantities of oily fermented Liquors
increase Fat; mere Water relaxeth too much; moist Air is hurtful to fat People,
by relaxing the Fibers, and stopping Perspiration.

Melancholy or atrabilarian Constitutions.
A Tendency to this is known by Darkness or Lividity of Countenance, Dryness of
the Skin, Leanness, a quick penetrating Genius, a slow Pulse, and Respiration,
Obstruction of the Belly, and too great Application to one Object.

To such, all things which heat and promote too great a Perspiration, as all
Substances that abound with an acrimonious Salt and volatile Oil, are hurtful,
which the Reader may see in the First Chapter. Nourishment viscous and hard of
Digestion, and nothing more than salted and smok'd Flesh or Fish; in general,
every thing that thickens the Fluids, or reduces them to a pitchy Condition.

Astringent austere Aliment, mentioned No 1, and austere Wines, are hurtful.

Too cold and too hot Air are both hurtful, for in such States of Air,
melancholy Persons are always worst.

Diluting is beneficial, especially with Water impregnated with some
penetrating Salt, Substances which cool, relax the Belly, and resolve the Bile;
Barley-Water, Whey, ripe Garden Fruits, emollient Pot Herbs, especially
Lettuce, Cichory, Dandelion, and Honey most of all.

There is one Caution to be observed, That the Diet ought to be opposite to the
particular Acrimony which occasions the Disease; for if it proceeds from too
great Acidity, in such a Case an animal Diet, Broths made of Flesh-Meat, and
even Eggs, are proper; if the Cause be alkaline, the contrary Method is useful.

Faulty Motion of the Fluids.
The Blood and other Fluids of a Human Body, are often not only peccant in
their Qualities, but Motion, which may be either too flow, too quick, or in
some of the Vessels totally obstructed.

Those who have too slow a Circulation, are to be considered, as in the Case of
phlegmatic and fat People; and those who have too quick a Circulation are to
be considered, as in the Case of such as are bilious, hot, and alkaline; and
the respective Diets are proper.

In Obstructions of the Vessels inflammatory, the Aliment ought to be cool,
slender, thin, diluting, avoiding the copious use of Substances of a saline
Quality, which stimulate, and consequently may increase the Inflammations,
unless in some Cases where there is hopes by volatile Salts to attenuate the
Fluid, and remove the Obstruction, or where the Intention is to produce a
Suppuration; but it is certain that any stimulating Substance, when it does not
remove the Obstruction, increases the Inflammation.

In cold Tumors, where the Intention is to dissipate and attenuate, the Diet
ought to be diluting and stimulating, consisting of such Substances as are of a
soapy Nature, that is, of Salt and Oil.

Wounds.
The Aliment of such as have fresh Wounds ought to be mild, that is, without
stimulating or saline Substances, of easy Digestion, of such sort as keeps the
Humors from Putrefaction, and renders them oily and balsamic.

When a Suppuration is to be promoted, the Aliment ought to be more copious and
warm, because such induces a Putrefaction.

When a Sore is healing, the Patient is in some measure in the Case of an
Infant that is growing, whose Aliment ought to be such as lengthens the Fibers
without Rupture, for it is by such an Elongation of the Fibers that Sores heal;
and indeed the Surgeon ought to vary the Diet of his Patient as he finds the
Fibers lengthen too much, are too flaccid and produce Fungus's, or as they
harden and produce Callosities; in the first Case Wine and spirituous Liquors
are useful, in the last hurtful.

Women in Childbed are in the Case of Persons wounded.

CHAP. III.
Of Acute Diseases.
Fevers, with their various Symptoms.
RIGOR, Coldness. A right Regimen during the Rigor or cold Fit in the beginning
of a Fever, is of great Importance, and Mistakes of dangerous Consequence: A
long continued Rigor is a Sign of a strong Disease, and is in it self an.
Approach toward Death; during the Rigor, the Circulation is less quick, and
the Blood actually stagnates in the Extremities, and pressing upon the Heart
creates great Anxieties, and may produce Concretions about the Heart, and in
other Parts of the Body; therefore a Rigor increases an Inflammation. Those
who die of Quartan Fevers, die in the cold Fit; and indeed there is no Mischief
but what may proceed from a Rigor of long Duration.

In such Rigors, all warm Cordials and stimulating Substances are improper, for
the first acting with force upon the right Ventricle of the Heart, may drive
the Blood with too much Force through the Lungs; and stimulating Substances, by
constringing the Vessels, often increase the Symptom.

In such a Rigor, nothing is more proper than Water, which dilutes and relaxes
at the same time, and will sooner terminate the cold Fit, and throw the Patient
into a Sweat, than the warmest Cordial; if a very small Quantity of Rhenish
Wine be mixed with the Water, it will be still more effectual: In this Case
strong Frictions of the Extremities relieve.

Anxieties. In Anxieties which attend Fevers, when the cold Fit is over, a
warmer Regimen may be allowed; and because Anxieties often happen by Spasms
from Wind, Spices are useful.

In those Anxieties, Soapy Substances which dissolve the Blood, are indicated;
ripe Fruits; some of the lactescent Plants, as Lettuce, Endive, etc. and
especially Honey, have this Quality.

Thirst. In Thirst attending Fevers, Liquors should not be drank quite cold;
for cold Liquors, by constringing the Glands of the Palate and Throat, do not
quench Thirst so well as Liquors moderately warm: In this Case subacid Liquors
should be drank plentifully; all Salts increase Thirst, except Nitre, and
dulcified Spirit of Nitre mixed with Water, is very proper in this Case; so are
BarleyWater and Emulsions, except in great Weakness and Flatulencies of the
Stomach, in which Case Water mixed with a small Quantity of Rhenish Wine, is
best of all.

Sickness, Vomiting. This is one of the most troublesome Symptoms attending a
Fever, because it renders the Patient incapable of taking any thing.

This Symptom is often prevented by giving a Vomit; or cured by promoting the
Vomiting for a while by tepid Water.

During the Symptom, acid Liquors, and even such as are austere and astringent,
are indicated, because such strengthen the Fibers of the Stomach; and indeed
Nature directs Patients to such a Diet, for they covet subacid Liquors, and
abhor fat and oily things.

Diluting, and sometimes relaxing the Belly, and carrying the bilious Salts
downwards, often cures this Symptom.

Attention is to be given to the Appetites of Patients, in this and many other
Cases, who have sometimes coveted odd things which have relieved them, as Salt,
Vinegar, etc.

Vomiting, from a bilious Cause, is cured by subacid Liquors; Vomiting, from
some putrid Cause, by Salts of all Kinds; in such a Case, Water Gruel with
Cream of Tartar, Rhenish Wine and Water, Jelly of Currants, Marmalade of
Quinces, Sorrel boiled in Broths well skimm'd from Fat, are beneficial.

If the Vomiting comes from a phlegmatic Cause, Spices, and bitter things will
relieve. The Counterpoison must be adapted to the Cause; for Example, in Poison
from Sublimated Corrosive, and Arsenick.

In the First, alkaline Substances; in the Second, oily Substances are proper;
in both, diluent.

It is easy to judge of the Cause by the Substances which the Patient throws up.

Whether Vomit may be safely or properly given, must be judged by the
Circumstances; if there be any Symptoms of an Inflammation of the Stomach, a
Vomit is extremely dangerous.

Wind and Spasms are occasioned by the feverish Heat expanding the aerial
Particles in the Fluids.

Whatever is anodyne and quiets Convulsions, and what abates the Heat, relieves
this Symptom.

Weakness, or the Impotence of exercising animal Motion which attends Fevers,
proceeds from too great Fullness in the beginning, and too great Inanition in
the latter end of the Disease; for whatever stops or retards the Circulation in
the smallest Vessels, especially those of the Brain (which either of these
Causes will do) produces this Symptom. Those two Causes demand different
Methods, in the first emptying and diluting; in the latter, a more plentiful
Nourishment, the use of Wine diluted with Water, and Spices in small
Quantities, Jellies, Broths, the alkalescent Quality of which may be corrected
with some acid, unless there be Signs of Acidity, and in that Case the Diet
ought to be contrary to the Cause of the Symptom; Viper-Broth is both anti-acid
and nourishing.

In Debility, from great Loss of Blood, Wine, and all Aliment that is easily
assimulated, or turned into Blood, is proper; Blood is required to make Blood;
a small Quantity of Blood brings the Patient into danger of a Dropsy.

Frictions of the extreme Parts relieve Weaknesses, as they promote the Flux of
the Juices and Spirits in the Joints and Limbs.

Fat People are most subject to this Symptom of Weakness in Fevers, because the
Fat, melted by the feverish Heat, obstructs the small Canals, and consequently
produces this Symptom. This is evident by the great Loss of Fat such People
sustain in Fevers. In the latter end of Fevers, such are weak by the Laxity of
the Fibers, and the Emptiness of the smaller Vessels; such therefore must be
treated with particular Care, viz, after due Evacuations, diluting strongly
both by Drink and Clysters, avoiding all things oily, and using Sugar, Honey,
and ripe Fruits.

Cordials made of spirituous Liquors are not the best Remedies for this
Debility, though they increase the Force of the Heart, and are necessary
sometimes to keep up the vital Functions, they rather coagulate the Fluid; they
add Strength to the Mill, but congeal the Stream. Whatever makes the
Circulation more free through the small Vessels, is a Cordial.

Heat; the Degree of which may be known by the Thermoscope, the Sensation of
the Patient, the Intenseness of the red Color of the Urine, the Sizeness of
the Blood, the Dissipation of the fluid Parts, which renders it thicker; the
Hardness, Strength, and Frequency of the Pulse, which makes the Friction the
stronger, to which the Heat is proportional, the bad Disposition of the Humor,
and the dry Temperament of the Body.

Feverish Heat is moderated by Blood-letting, by muscular Rest, by moderate
Ligatures which compress the Veins only, and often removed from Joint to Joint,
by a mechanical Reason, retard the Circulation; of such sort is dry Cupping,
bathing the lower Parts, watery Liquors for Drink, not cold, but tepid;
subacid, as Jelly of Currants dissolved in tepid watery Liquors; Decoctions of
mealy Substances acidulated, Substances anodyne, Substances which dissolve
Concretions, as Sugar, Honey, and the simple Oxymel, often used by Hippocrates,
plentiful diluting, and restoring as much Water to the Blood as is dissipated
by the Heat; all demulcent and relaxing Substances, cooling the Air in the
Room, opening the Curtains, and removing too thick Bed-clothes; all stimulating
and slyptick Substances to be avoided, because they increase the Force of the
solid Parts.

Delirium. Too great Alacrity and Promptness in Answering, especially in
Persons naturally of another Temper, is a Sign of an approaching Delirium: In a
feverish Delirium there is a small Inflammation of the Brain; therefore any
thing which increases the Circulation in the lower Parts, and diminishes the
Pressure on the Brain, is beneficial, as immerging the Feet in warm Water;
nothing relieves the Head more than the Piles, therefore Suppositories of
Honey, Aloes, and Rock-Salt, ought to be tried, relaxing by emollient and
watery Substances, both in Drink and Clysters, especially Barley-Cream and
Barley-Gruel.

Coma Sleepiness. A Coma will proceed either from a Pressure upon the Originals
of the Nerves, by too great Repletion; or from a Penury of Spirits by too great
Inanition.

Old Men are subject to Comas by the Tenacity of the Fluids circulating in the
Brain, which being resolved by the Fever, obstruct the small Canals of the
Brain: In young People it commonly proceeds from Fullness, and is best cured by
letting Blood, and relaxing the Belly. The Sign of such a Fullness is, a red
Countenance, and Eyes inflamed; if it proceeds from a glutinous Oil, it ought
to be attempted to be resolved by Water, nitrous Salts, Soaps, and subacid
Liquors.

People recovering from Comas, must take at first soft Nourishment, and in
small Quantities.

Watchfulness. This Symptom, which is sometimes called a Coma Vigil, often
precedes too great Sleepiness, and is perhaps the most ill-boding Symptom of a
Fever.

The Expedients in such a Case are extreme Care to keep the Patient from Noise,
and what makes any strong Impression upon his Senses, some of those Helps used
in a Delirium, because this is an Approach toward it; a moist softening Diet;
all Preparations of Barley, Emulsions of Poppy Seeds, and Almonds, Aliment of
some lactescent Plants, especially Lettuces, Decoctions of Scorzonera Roots,
Almond Cream, and what is called Winter Flummery, used as Aliment; Tea, made of
Cowslip Flowers, relaxing gently the Belly.

Boerhaave proposes some mechanical Expedients which may perhaps have a good
Effect, as a soft Noise of Water distilling by Drops into a Basin, and the
Patient trying to reckon them.

The Air perfumed with the Smell of soporiferous Plants, as Poppies, Mandrakes,
Nightshade, Bean Flowers.

Application of Cloths dipped in Vinegar to the Temples.

Opiats must never be given but after great Evacuations.

Convulsions. It is of the utmost Importance to know the Cause and the Seat of
this Disease, which is often obscure.

In Infants they commonly proceed from Acidity in the Stomach, and are cured by
terrestrial Absorbents; in such indeed Convulsions attending Fevers are not
quite so dangerous.

Convulsions arising from some Acrimony in the Stomach, or from something
vellicating a Nerve in its Extremity, and not in its Original where it arises
from the Brain, are not very dangerous.

Convulsions which arise from great Evacuations, as great Haemorrages attending
Fevers, are dangerous.

Convulsions arising from Inflammations of the Membranes of the Brain are
commonly fatal: The Symptoms attending them are a great Heat, a hard Pulse, and
a Delirium: The Remedies, and even those from Diet, are to be used according to
the Seat of the Disease.

If from the Stomach, such Aliments as are contrary to the particular Acrimony,
Acid Alkaline, or Oily, residing there, as in the Case of Vomiting.

If from something impacted in the Brain, warm volatile and spicy Substances
will increase the Disease; in that Case, Substances which relax and dilute are
proper, especially such as open the Belly; which, See in the First Chapter; and
in general, the Regimen prescribed in a Coma, or Delirium.

Violent Sweats proceed from a Laxity of the Vessels, and too vehement a
Circulation of the Blood.

Profuse Sweats deprive the Blood of its most fluid Parts, thicken, and often
cause Obstructions; it is not good Practice to push Sweating too much in
Fevers, except in such as are pestilential.

In profuse Sweats, Care at least should be taken, by diluting, to restore the
Liquid which the Blood loses, and to use the Methods advised in too great
Heat, by taking away some of the Coverings of the Bed, and admitting of cool
Air, and using a Diet moderately astringent; Wine, Spices, and spirituous
Liquors, in this Case, have often a good Effect; spirituous Liquors thicken the
Fluids; Sage is a good Remedy in the Case of profuse Sweats.

A Diarrhoea Looseness proves often a dangerous and fatal Symptom in Fevers, it
weakens, excoriates and inflames the Bowels, occasions Bloody-Fluxes, thickens
the circulating Juices, and exhausts the Strength of the Patient;
notwithstanding, a critical Diarrhoea is not to be stopped, for fear of incurring
these Dangers.

Attention is to be given to the Cause of Acidity; it is to be cured by
Anti-acids; but, as in Fevers, the Cause is more frequently alkaline and
bilious, Acid or four things resolve, and it happens that oily Substances by
blasting the Acrimony will do good in Diarrhoeas. Oily Substances of themselves
do not irritate or provoke Diarrhoeas, they only lubricate or make the Bowels
slippery. Diarhoeas arising from Quantities of Fruit are often cured by
Emulsions.

Vomiting, by evacuating the irritating Cause, often cures such Diarrhoeas.

Anodyne Substances are proper, and generally speaking, solid and dry Aliment,
rather than liquid.

Inflammatory Eruptions. In all these of any kind whatsoever, as Smallpox,
Meazles, Scarlet Fever, Purples, the Intention in Diet ought to be, to avoid
strong Sudorificks, which push out too great a Quantity of the Matter upon the
Skin; to use cooling and temperate Diluents, which keep the Matter fluid and
moveable, so that it may be secern'd from the Blood; to keep warm during the
Eruption; and that then Diet be cool; for which Reason the moderate Use of
Acids, as Juice of Limon, is indicated.

A due Attention to the few Rules abovementioned, in the several Symptoms,
will prove very successful in the Cure of most Fevers. I shall only add a few
more according to the various Kinds of Fevers and Inflammatory Distempers.

An Ephemera, or a Fever of one Day, is cured by Abstinence, Rest, and
Diluting; and the same Method will prove effectual if the Fever lasts several
Days, and is not putrid, or attended with a greater Inflammation and Acrimony,
and Obstruction of the Vessels in some Parts of the Body, amongst which is what
is commonly called, a Causus, or burning Fever.

The Causes of such a Fever are various; Errors in the Non-Naturals, Air, Meat
and Drink, Rest and Motion. Such a Fever will be raised by Vehement Exercise or
Labor, Heat of the Sun, by long Thirst, by the immoderate Use of fermented and
spirituous Liquors; and hot things, as Spices; and by great Lassitude endured
any way, especially in hot Weather.

Its Symptoms are a burning Heat in the Skin, a Sensation of extreme Heat
inwardly; sometimes Coldness in the extreme Parts; Dryness of the Skin, Mouth,
and Nostrils; a Dryness and Roughness of the Tongue; laborious and short
breathing; great Thirst; Loathing, Sickness of the Stomach, and Vomiting;
Anxiety, Restlesness, Weariness; sometimes a Cough and Hoarseness; Watchfulness
and Delirium, and Exacerbation every other Day.

Such a Fever is often resolved by a bleeding at the Nose, which ought not to
be stopped unless it endangers Life. It is likewise often in the critical Day
resolved by Sweating, Vomiting, Looseness, and Spitting of thick Phlegm. The
fatal Signs are commonly bloody Urine, Difficulty of Swallowing, watery Sweats
about the Head and Face, without Relief; Coldness of the Extremities,
Trembling, too great a Looseness; and sometimes an Inflammation of the Lungs.

The Regimen, in such a Fever, is keeping the Air of the Room pure and cool,
untainted with Fire, Smoke, or the Breaths of many People; they ought to have
no more Bed-clothes than barely protects them from Cold; their Curtains ought
to be kept open so as to renew the Air; and their Posture in lying, as erect as
they can bear; the Sick, in this Condition, covet all these things, and their
Contraries offend them.

Their Drink ought to be cool, mild, subacid, tepid, given in moderate
Quantities, and often, as Water with Juice of Limon or Tamarinds.

Their Aliment ought to be light, of farinaceous Vegetables, as Water Gruel,
Preparations of Barley, with some Juice of Limon; Rice boiled in Whey, and
strained. Roasted Apples in the Progress of the Disease; a little toasted Bread
with Rhenish Wine and Water, Jelly of Currants; Broths and Jellies made of
animal Substances are rather too alkalescent, at least they ought to be
qualified with Juices of Limon, or some acid.

Sometimes such alimentary Substances as gently stimulate the Belly, are
useful, as some ripe Fruits, Strawberries, Currants, Mulberries.

The Symptoms increase by the Use of hot things given either as Aliment or
Medicine.

Intermitting Fevers.
They are (at least in this Country) very obstinate, often return in spite of
all Remedies, and by long Continuance they degenerate into Hepatical Fevers,
and many chronical Distempers, as Jaundice, Dropsy, Schirrus's, and Scurvies;
therefore in this Disease a right Method, both of Medicines and Diet, is of
great Importance. There is a great Variety in these Diseases, as to the
Intervals of Times between the Paroxysms; Tertians sometimes redouble their
Paroxysms, so as to appear like Quotidians. I think it may be taken as a
general Rule, That the greater Distance of Time there is between the Paroxysms,
the Fever is less dangerous, but more obstinate.

There is a different Regimen to be used during the Continuance and Absence of
the Paroxysm; and in the Paroxysm itself, during the Rigor or cold Fit, the
Heat and the Sweat.

During the Rigor, the Regimen prescribed in the foregoing Part of this
Chapter, in the Article of Feverish Rigors, is proper in all Fevers, and Care
is to be taken by all proper Methods to shorten that Period as much as
possible, and by tepid Diluents to bring on the Sweat soon, but not to push it
beyond its due Measure, because an intermitting Fever relaxeth and weakens the
Body extremely.

Between the Paroxysms, too great Abstinence is hurtful as much as too great
Repletion; as intermitting Fevers are often of long Continuance, extreme
Abstinence is impracticable, and would reduce the Patient to a Condition not to
be able to sustain the Shock of the next Attack.

Between the Paroxysms, such Substances as temper, correct, and subdue the
bilious Alkali, as acid Substances, nitrous Salts, small thin Wines with Water,
Chicken Broth with Juice of Limons; Wine with Bitters infused, are proper;
Cichory and Dandelion are useful, because the expressed Juices of them cure
intermitting Fevers in warm Countries; the Physicians of these Countries
likewise use astringent Vegetables, See Chap. I. No 1.

Exercise, to as great a degree as the Patient can bear, is extremely
beneficial between the Paroxysms.

But the chief Remedy of all is to endeavor to prevent the cold Fit, by
getting to Bed, by Frictions, and some sudorifick and warm Liquor; for by
putting off the cold Fit some Agues have been cured.

Letting of Blood seldom does good, and often a great deal of Hurt in
intermitting Fevers; but the Condition of the Patient is to be considered in
this Case.

Intermitting Fevers have been observed to free from some Chronical Distempers,
as the Gout and Convulsions, but they often induce great ones themselves.

INFLAMMATORY DISEASES.
A Phrensy, or Inflammation of the Brain.
This Disease, of all others, requires the speediest Applications, profuse
Haemorrages from the Nose commonly resolve it, and copious Bleeding, by opening
the temporal Arteries, are the most effectual Remedies: But to stick to my
Subject, which is the Diet.

Substances which cool, and at the same time relax the Belly, are highly
beneficial, as Tamarinds boiled in Water, which taken plentifully may at last
bring a Looseness which is a great Relief to the Head.

Soliciting the Blood to other Parts of the Body; therefore tepid Bathings of
the lower Parts, and procuring the Piles, relaxing Fomentations applied to the
Veins, which carry the Blood from the Head, relieve in this Disease. Cool Air,
and Sitting up, if possible; for the warm Air of the Bed exagitates the Blood.

The Aliment ought to be slender, of farinaceous Substances, as Water Gruel
acidulated, or subacid ripe Fruits, with their Jellies; the Drink small,
diluting, and cooling, Barley-Water, Small-Beer, or the Decoction of Tamarinds
abovementioned. All such gentle Anodynes as are to be found amongst the
Alimentary Kind, are safe. See the Articles of Delirium and Watchfulness in
this Chapter.

Quincy.
The Tumor of the Throat, which occasions the Difficulty of Swallowing and
Breathing, attending this Distemper, may be of various sorts: Sometimes it
proceeds from a Serosity obstructing the Glands, which may be watery,
aedematose, schirrous, according to the several degrees of the Viscosity of the
Humor; sometime inflammatory, which Inflammation will sometimes end in a
Suppuration, or Gangrene.

The Difficulties of Breathing and Swallowing, which happen without any Tumor
outward or inward, after long Diseases, proceed commonly from a Resolution or
paralytical Disposition of the Parts, and is the immediate Forerunner of Death.

The Regimen in those Quincies which proceed merely from the Obstruction of the
Glands, must be to use such warm Liquors as gently relax, soften, and moisten
those Glands, such as carry off the redundant Serum by Stool, Sweat, and Urine;
or by stimulating, open the Emunctories of these Glands to secern the Humor
See Chap. I.
.

In a more watery Tumor, the Diet may be more warm than in the inflammatory,
and the moderate use of Wine often relieves the Patient.

The Difficulty of Swallowing and Breathing, occasioned by Schirrosities of the
Glands, is not to be cured any otherwise than by Extirpation.

Those who are subject to Inflammations of the Throat, ought to live
temperately to prevent a Plethora; or to break such a Fullness speedily by
proper Evacuations, to beware of cold Air, too astringent or stimulating
Aliment or Medicine, and violent Exercise, which, by increasing the projectile
Motion of the Blood, heat; but especially the swallowing of cold Liquors when
they are hot.

In these Inflammations a slight Diarrhoea relieves; therefore Aliments which
promote it are useful, as Tamarinds infused in Whey. Decoctions and Emulsions
of farinaceous Vegetables moderately acidulated, and such as abound with a
cooling nitrous Salt, are proper; it is commonly thought that Punpenella,
Saxifraga, or Burnet, is a Specific in this Case: Every body knows the Benefit
of Mulberries, taken all manner of ways. All Acids, as Sorrel, Juice of Limon,
etc. abate Inflammations.

The Mouth and Throat must be kept moist, and the Nose clear, that the Air may
have a free Passage through it; for Air drawn by the Mouth, dries.

When the Deglutition is totally abolished, the Patient may be nourished by
Clysters, which I have known to have been done for a whole Week, after which
the Tumor suppurated.

When the Inflammation ends in a Gangrene, the Case generally proves mortal,
except it be only in the Tonsils, Uvula, and Palate, and go no further, which
Parts may be separated, and the Patient live.

Inflammation of the Lungs.
Such may happen either in the bronchial or pulmonary Vessels, and may soon be
communicated from one to the other; when the Inflammation affects both the
Lobes and the whole Body of the Lungs, the Case is desperate, because the
Circulation must be stopped, and no Blood can flow back into the Heart. Besides
the general Causes of Inflammations, those which affect the Lungs particularly,
are a bad Conformation of the Lungs and Thorax commonly attended with an
Asthma, Air too hot, cold and moist, abounding perhaps with caustic,
astringent, and coagulating Particles; the Lungs, properly speaking, are an
outward Part of the Body, exposed to the Air, which, by its immediate Contact
may easily coagulate the Blood which flows along the Surfaces of the
Air-Bladders, and I believe the Qualities of the Air are the general Cause of
the Inflammation of the Lungs which happen in the Winter time.

As the Lungs are the chief Organ of Sanguification, crude and viscous Chyle,
viscous Aliment, Spices, but especially spirituous Liquors, may occasion this
Inflammation; too great an Exercise of the Lungs, so as to occasion a short and
laborious Breathing, or keeping them too long upon the Stretch by Vociferation,
or loud Singing, may produce the same Effect: There are coagulating Poisons
which affect the Lungs very suddenly; extreme violent Passions, by affecting
the Motion of the Heart, may do the same; it is a common thing to see People in
sudden Transports of Anger breathe short. Inflammations are sometimes
translated from other Parts to the Lungs; a Pleurisy easily passes into
Peripneumony. The avoiding those Causes is the best Rule of Diet to prevent the
Disease; besides, speedy and plentiful letting of Blood before it has quite
taken place.

This Disease is often cured by the critical Resolution, Concoction, and
Evacuation of the morbifick Matter, which is either attenuated so as to be
returned into the Channels, and to go on in the common. Thread of Circulation,
or expectorated by Coughing, which may be easily known by the Abatement of
Symptoms, viz. the Fever, Difficulty of Breathing, Thirst, Anxiety,
Restlesness, and the Patient's falling into gentle breathing Sweats. One of the
best Resolvents is the Blood of the wild Goat.

Copious Bleeding is the most effectual Remedy in the beginning of the Disease;
but when the Expectoration goes on successfully, not so proper, because it
sometimes suppresseth it, and in that Case Sudorificks thicken the Matter that
is expectorated. The Motions of Nature ought to be followed. This by the way.

From the Symptoms in this Stage of the Disease, and the use of the Lungs, it
is evident the Aliment ought to be more slender and thin than in any other
inflammatory Disease whatsoever, common Whey being sufficient to preserve the
Strength of the Patient; watery Liquors, and even the Steam of warm Water taken
in by the Breath, attenuates the impacted Matter. Relaxing Aliment, of which
Barley and all its Preparations are the best.

In this State, Diuretics, which have not much Acrimony in them, are proper,
for Fluxes of Urine relieve the Lungs; for this Intention, an Infusion of Fenel
Roots in warm Water, with Milk, is good, both as Nourishment and Drinks.

If Nature relieves by a Diarrhoea, without sinking the Strength of the
Patient, it is not to be stopped, but promoted gently by emollient Clysters.

Decoction of Cichory, Lettuce, as being anodyne and resolvent, are proper.

If the Patient is not relieved nor dies in eight Days, the Inflammation ends
in a Suppuration and an Abscess in the Lungs, and sometimes in some other Part
of the Body; the Symptoms of which are, an obstinate dry Cough, increased by
Motion and taking of Food; theeasiest Posture in Lying being upon the affected
Side; a continual Lent-Fever, with Rigors invading with uncertain Periods;
Exacerbations after Motion and Repast, Thirst, Night-Sweats, a frothy Urine,
Paleness, Leanness, Weakness.

In such a Case one must forbear letting of Blood. The Diet must be mild, soft,
incrassating, and more plentiful; tepid Vapors admitted into the Lungs, of
Decoctions of proper Ingredients; and when by the Symptoms and Time the
Imposthume may be judged to be ripe, the Vapor of Vinegar it self, and any
thing which creates a Cough, as Oxymel, or Vinegar and Honey, Exercise and
Concussion are proper, the sooner it is broke, the less Danger to the Lungs.

Though such a State is extremely dangerous, it is not quite desperate; the
Aliment ought to be Milk; the Drink, Milk, and Barley-Water, and such
alimentary Substances as are expectorating and cleansing, with gentle Anodynes,
that the Patient may have some Rest. See Chap I.

The principal Intention in every State of Inflammation of the Lungs is to
promote Expectoration, and to restore it when it is lost.

If the Inflammation ends in a Gangrene, the Case is desperate; if in a
Schirrus, incurable.

There is a spurious sort of a Peripneumony, not inflammatory; when the Vessels
are obstructed with a viscous Pituite that mixeth with the Blood, and invades
in cold Weather, it is dangerous, and often suffocates; it is incident to weak
and old People. In this, some of the Methods used in the Inflammatory are
proper, but not so copious Bleeding, Clysters frequently injected; Aliment more
generous, Broths, and Jellies with Juice of Limon, Hydromel, or Honey and
Water; for Drink, soft Oils, and Aliments which abound with a soft, not
volatile Oil, are beneficial.

A Peripneumony is the last fatal Symptom of every Disease, for no Body dies
without a Stagnation of the Blood in the Lungs; as long as it circulates
through the Lungs, it will circulate through the rest of the Body. The total
Extinction of Breath is caused by the Stagnation of Blood in the Lungs.

Pleurisy.
There is none of the Membranes which invest the Inside of the Breast, but may
be the Seat of this Disease, the Mediastine as well as the Pleura.

The Causes of this Disease, besides those common to all Inflammations, are
often a particular Disposition to inflammatory Distempers, a Straitness of the
Arteries of the Pleura, a Callosity of that Membrane, an Adhesion of the Lungs,
the sudden Admission of cold Air by too thin clothing, too hot a Regimen, and
especially the copious use of spirituous Liquors, cold Liquors drank when the
Body is very hot, a Translation of some inflammatory Matter from some other
Part, but most of all cold Air from a Northerly or North-easterly Wind; from
which Causes proper Cautions may be taken in the Regimen by way of Prevention.

This Disease is sometimes dry, without any Spitting, and sometimes attended
with Expectoration from the Lungs, and that is taken off by a Coction and
Resolution of the feverish Matter, or terminates in Suppurations, or a Gangrene.

The Regimen ought to be much the same as in a Peripneumony, a cool, relaxing,
slender, diluting Diet, and avoiding all things which increase Heat, even too
hot Air.

The Symptoms of Suppuration are the same as in Inflammations of the Lungs;
when the Matter is made, the Side must be opened to let it out.

When the Disease is obstinate against all Remedies, a sudden Abatement of the
Pain, a quick weak Pulse, sometimes intermitting, short Breath and cold Sweats
are Symptoms of a Gangrene, and approaching Death.

Paraphrenitis, or Inflammation of the Diaphragm.
The Symptoms of this Disease (which is often mistaken) are a violent Fever, a
most exquisite Pain increased upon Inspiration; by which it is distinguished
from a Pleurisy, in which the greatest Pain is in Expiration.

This Pain is increased by Sickness, Vomiting, Repletion of the Stomach, or any
Compression of the Muscles of the Abdomen, by rendering the Faeces or Urine.
The Breathing is extremely quick, suffocating, and seems to be performed only
by the Motion of the Breast: It is likewise attended with a Delirium, Fury, and
an involuntary Laughter, the Convulsion emulating this Motion.

This Disease terminates as Pleurisies and Peripneumonies, but is generally
fatal if it suppurates the Pus, is evacuated into the lower Belly, where it
produces Putrefaction, and a most miserable and painful Death.

The Regimen, if any can be successful, ought to be the some as in Pleurisies.

Inflammation of the Liver.
The hepatical Artery, and the Vena Porta, carry the Blood into the Liver; the
first being very small, and the Motion of the Blood in the last being slow, is
the reason that Inflammations in the Liver are not so frequent as in some other
Parts of the Body; but when they obtain, extremely dangerous, unless they take
up but a small Part of the Liver, and such happen more frequently than is
commonly imagined.

Some of the best Cautions in Diet may be taken from the Causes and Symptoms of
this Disease.

Which, besides the general Causes of Inflammations, are extreme Fatness. Fat
dissolved by Heat and Inflammations obstructs the Vessels of the Liver very
suddenly. Cattle fatted by good Pasturage, after violent Motion, sometimes die
suddenly; in such the Liver is found to be inflamed and corrupted. An
atrabilarian adust Temper of the Blood and Gall, an acrimonious or purulent
Matter, stagnating in some other Organ, is more easily deposited upon the Liver
than any other Part, especially if attended with the use of hot and spicy
Aliments, spirituous Liquors, great Heat, and a Fever* Erosions, by the
Acrimony of the Gall, or Obstructions by Viscosity; any Callosity, Schirrus, or
Stone in the Liver; Thirst, long endured, being suddenly chilled by cold Air,
cold Water, or drinking cold Liquors after great Heat; Vomits given
injudiciously, when the Liver is already unsound, which if they do not remove
the Obstruction, exagitate the Liver too much; inveterate hypocondriacal
Distempers. All these Causes may produce Inflammations of the Liver.

In such a Case, the Liver being swelled compresseth the Stomach, Diaphragm,
and the neighboring viscera of the lower Belly, stops the Circulation of the
Juices, the Generation and Excretion of the Gall, and all Digestion; produces
an Infinity of bad Symptoms, the Jaundice, with all the Diseases depending upon
it; for the Liver receives the refluent Blood almost from all the Parts of the
Abdomen, and is the chief Instrument of all the Digestions which are made
there. A Fever, an Inflammation and pungent Pain on the Region of the Liver and
Diaphragm, a Tension of the Hypochondres, Yellowness of the Skin and Eyes, and
a Saffron-colour'd Urine, are Signs of an inflammatory Disposition of the Liver.

This Disease ends as other Inflammations, being cured either by Resolution,
Concoction, and Excretion of the morbid Matter, terminates in an Abscess,
Schirrus, or Gangrene.

During the first State, a warm Regimen and Saffron, which is reckoned a
Specific, is improper.

Cooling resolving Liquors taken inwardly, as Whey, with Sorrel boiled in it;
outward Fomentations, and frequent Injection of Clysters, Bathing and
Frictions, relax, and render the Matter fluid; Honey, with a little Rhenish
Wine, or Vinegar; the Juices and Jellies of some ripe Garden Fruits; and those
of some lactescent papescent Plants, as Endive, Dandelion, Lettuce, are
resolvent.

Violent Purging hurts, gently relaxing the Belly relieves, Diluents with
nitrous Salts are beneficial, or Tamarinds boiled in warm Water or Whey; bloody
Stools, not in an extreme degree, or streaked with Blood, ought not to be
stopped, because they help to resolve the Distemper, and Haemorrages by the Nose
often do the same.

The feverish Matter is often carried off by Urine, and therefore Diuretics
not highly stimulating, are proper.

Sweating ought not to be promoted by warm Cordials, but encouraged by warm
diluting Liquors.

It is a deplorable Case when the Inflammation terminates in a Suppuration,
unless the Abscess points outwardly, so as it may be opened; for if the Pus be
evacuated into the Abdomen, it produces dismal Symptoms, Putrefaction, or an
incurable hepatical Dysentery, or Bloody Flux.

The Pus, from an Ulcer of the Lungs, growing thin and ichorose corrodes the
Vessels (for the Liver of all the Viscera, is the most friable, and easily
crumbled or dissolved) it is often carried into the Blood, and rejected by
Vomiting, with a cadaverous Smell, attended with great Thirst; if it is carried
downward, it occasions a purulent colliquative Diarrhoea; acid Substances
relieve most in this Case.

This Disease may happen to produce a Cancer, or Schirrus; one cannot say that
the last is absolutely incurable, because it has been known by Experience that
Grass and fresh Pasture has cured it in Cattle; and perhaps the expressed
Juices of Grass, and some opening Plants, may do the same thing in Mankind, as
of the lactescent Plants abovementioned.

The Diet prescribed here is necessary in a Jaundice, and all Diseases of the
Liver; and Abstinence from such Substances as induce Putrefaction, especially
salted Fish and Flesh, and above all, strong Liquors.

Inflammation of the Stomach.
The Symptoms of this Disease are a vehement, burning, fixed, pungent Pain in
the Stomach, attended with a Fever; a great Exacerbation of this Pain the
Moment after swallowing any thing, succeeded with Vomiting; a painful Hickup,
and great Anxiety. The Causes of these Symptoms are those common to all
Inflammations, a natural Weakness, and perhaps Erosion of the Coats of the
Stomach, and acrid Substances taken as Aliment and Medicines.

If this Disease is not speedily cured, it proves fatal.

It terminates in a Cure by a Resolution of the morbifick Matter, a
Suppuration, Schirrus, Cancer, but most commonly in a Gangrene.

Of all Diseases this demands most a total Abstinence from every thing that has
Acrimony in it, even the nitrous cooling Salts, which are beneficial in other
Inflammations, irritate too much; Vomits, all Cordials of volatile or spicy
Substances; spirituous Liquors are no better than Poison, and Milk generally
curdles; Aliments must be given frequently, and by Spoonfuls at a time, for any
Distension increases the Inflammation; a thin Gruel of Barley, Oatmeal, Whey,
with very little Sugar, or Honey, or Chicken-Broth, are proper Aliments; Whey,
emollient Decoctions, Barley-Water, Emulsions, are proper Drinks; and it has
been found by Experience, that chalybeat Waters have been agreeable to the
Stomach even in this inflammatory State. If there happens an Imposthume, Honey,
and even Honey of Roses, taken inwardly, is a good Cleanser, and Decoctions of
Comfrey Roots, healing; speedy and plentiful Bleeding, Fomentations, and
Clysters, have the same good Effect as in other inflammatory Distempers.

The same Regimen is necessary in a Schirrus, or Cancer of the Stomach; though
nothing will be quite effectual.

The same Regimen is to be observed in the Inflammation of the Spleen, Caul,
Pancreas.

Inflammation of the Guts.
The Intestines or Guts, most frequently the small ones, may be inflamed by any
acrid or poisonous Substance taken inwardly; from any purulent Matter
translated upon them from some other Part of the Body; from Bile, extremely
acrimonious, by a violent Tension; from a Convulsion filling them with Wind.

The Symptoms are a total Stoppage of the Passage; a vehement fixed burning
Pain, irritated by things taken inwardly, when any thing touches the affected
Part, it excites Vomiting, sharp griping Pains, with Wind in other Parts of the
Bowels; the Consequences of such an Inflammation are an Ileus, what is commonly
called the Twisting of the Guts, but is really either a Circumvolution or
Insertion of one part of the Gut within the other. All these Symptoms are
attended with a Fever.

It is of the utmost Importance to know what the Causes of Colicks are; for as
they are various, the Remedies in one Case are quite opposite and destructive
in the other; for the spicy warm carminative things which are given in a
Colic, from a phlegmatic or cold Cause, are Poison in an inflammatory one;
they may be distinguished by the Fever, high Pulse, Thirst, and flame-colour'd
Urine attending the Inflammation, as to the Heat, though it is great likewise by
the Violence of the Pain, the Extremities grow cold; besides, there is a sudden
Prostration of the Strength or Weakness attending this Colic, more than any
other.

This Disease admits of a speedy Remedy, or none, for it ends in an Ileus, and
Mortification of the Bowels very soon.

Besides a copious Bleeding, there is hardly any other Method but fomenting and
relaxing the Bowels by emollient tepid Liquids, both taken by the Mouth and by
Clysters, injected hourly; yet it has been known by Experience, that Acids have
relieved in very desperate Cases, as Juice of Limons taken by the Mouth, and
Vinegar and warm Water given in Clysters, have saved the Patient, because of
the incessant Vomiting; Opiats to quiet the Convulsions are sometimes necessary.

Warm Fomentations even of warm Animals to the Belly, are extremely beneficial.

If the Inflammation happens to be in the lower Guts, it is not so dangerous;
and even when it suppurates, it admits of a Cure, then it can be reached by
proper Medicines in the Form of Clysters; in the latter end of such a Case
Chalybeat Waters are beneficial.

If the Patient survives three Days, the Acuteness of the Pain abates, and a
Chilliness or Gruing affects the Body, it betokens a Suppuration, and in a few
Days the Matter flows either into the Cavity of the Abdomen, producing all the
Symptoms which happen in the Imposthumation of the Liver, or into the Cavity of
the Intestines, and causing a purulent Bloody Flux, and often a Consumption,
Sinus's, Fistulas.

Whey and Chalybeat Waters are often beneficial in such a Case, as Drinks.

The Aliment ought to be of such things as generate little or no Excrements, as
Broths of Flesh-Meat, with Scorzonera, Parsley, or Fennel boiled in them; Goats
Whey is likewise excellent; fat and oily Substances generally hurt.

The Continuance of the Fever, clammy Sweats, Paleness, an ichorose Diarrhoea,
foetid, black, or like the Washings of Flesh, a small intermitting Pulse, and
at last a total Cessation of Pain, are Signs of a Gangrene and approaching
Death.

If none of the forementioned things happen, if the Fever abates, and the
Patient complains of a Weight, dull Pain, Stoppage of the Excrements, a
Schirrus is forming, which increases daily, and may terminate in a Cancer,
which Purging, and indeed all Medicines irritate; the Patient in such a Case
may protract a miserable Life with an exact thin Diet of Whey, Broths, and such
things as produce no Foeces, or by alimentary Clysters.

A Thrush.
By this Name are called small, round, superficial, Ulcerations, which appear
first in the Mouth, but as they proceed from the Obstruction of the Emissaries
of the Saliva, by the Lentor and Viscosity of the Humor, they may affect every
Part of the alimentary Duct, except the thick Guts; they often succeed Fevers,
especially those that inflame the Intestines, or are attended with a Looseness;
and they are just the same in the inward Parts as Scabs in the Skin, and fall
off from the Inside of the Bowels like a Crust: The nearer they approach to a
white Color, the less dangerous.

The viscous Matter is to be pushed out, therefore Bleeding in the beginning is
not proper, nor Sudorificks, because they thicken; but Sweating is beneficial,
when the Matter is quite pushed out; tepid, diluent and small Liquors are good
in the first State, and Bathing, if the Patient can bear it, with Gargarisms,
Clysters; afterward the Food ought to be nourishing, detergent, Panadas with
Bread and Water, Bread and Milk, Honey mixed with the Aliment, when they fall,
Aliment demulcent, soft, anodyne, and the moderate use of Rhenish Wine; when
they are separated, lenitive, purging Substances.

Inflammations of the Kidneys.
The Kidneys are subject to Inflammations as much as other Parts of the Body.

A pungent Pain in the Region of the Kidneys, a Stupor, or dull Pain in the
Thigh, Colic, Wind, Vomiting, a Fever, Urine sometimes totally suppressed, in
small Quantity, high colored; and which is worse, sometimes quite pale,
without any Sediment, are Symptoms of an Inflammation of the Kidneys; as to the
Sensation of outward Heat, the Extremity of Pain often creates a Coldness in
the Extremities, but such a Sensation is very consistent with an inflammatory
Distemper.

Whatever obstructs the Blood in the Extremities of the Arteries of the
Kidneys, will produce this Disease; a Wound, Abscess, Bruise, Swelling, Lying
much on the Back, too violent Motion, especially walking in hot Weather;
whatever obstructs the Passage of the Urine, as a viscous Matter, Gravel or
Stone; every thing which drives the Blood into the Urinary Canals, Heat, hard
Riding, too great Fullness of Blood, but especially sharp and forcing
Diuretics: Lastly, Spasms and involuntary Contractions of the Vessels of the
Kidneys.

Coffee-colour'd Urine is not a dangerous Symptom; it proceeds indeed from a
Mixture of a small Quantity of Blood with the Urine, but often prognosticates a
Resolution of the obstructing Matter, and the Expulsion of Gravel or a Stone
after great Pain; pale Urine is a Symptom of a more lasting and dangerous
Disease.

After plentiful Bleeding, and a careful avoiding of all stimulating
Diuretics, which in this State of the Disease will increase it, the Expulsion
of the obstructing Cause must be promoted by emollient and soft Liquors drank
plentifully, by Clysters of the same frequently injected, by Bathing and
outward Fomentations, by opiat and anodyne Substances, which stupify and relax
the Fibers; those Liquors must be swallowed down notwithstanding the continual
Vomiting; for Vomiting is the Instrument of Nature to promote the Expulsion of
the Stone Gravel, or other obstructing Cause.

Whey, and in a great feverish Heat, Butter-Milk, Emulsions of Barley and Poppy
Seeds, Honey in Whey and Water, are proper Liquors for this Intention.

When the Gravel, Stone, or other obstructing Cause is separated from the
Kidney, soft expressed Oils, and oily Substances relax the Passages; if the
Pain proceeds only from Gravel, or a Stone, oily Substances may be joined
safely with stimulating Substances, as with Juice of Limon, Juniper-Water, and
some diuretic Syrrup; this by the way, for it is out of my present Subject.

Violent Motion, as jolting in a Coach, may be used in this Case.

The Pain protracted beyond seven Days, a Pulsation, Chillness, often and
irregularly returning, a Heaviness and Stupor in the Part, are Signs of making
of Matter, which when made will appear in the Urine.

In which Case soft and balsamic Substances are beneficial, for if the Matter
stays long, the Case is incurable.

It happens sometimes to end in a Fistula, with which the Patient may live many
Years in no great Uneasifiness. Butter-Milk, not very sour, has been reckoned a
great Secret in Ulcers of the Kidneys, and Chalybeat Waters have been
beneficial to some; Spruce Beer is a good Balsamic in such a Case: I should
advise soft Malt Liquors rather than Wine.

Inflammations of the Kidneys sometimes end in a Schirrus, or great Stone in
the Kidneys.

A sudden Remission of the Pain, with cold Sweats, weak and intermitting Pulse,
Hickup; no Urine, or in small Quantity, black and foetid, are Signs of a
Mortification and approaching Death.

The Regimen of such as are subject to nephritick Symptoms may be in some
measure taken from what is abovementioned.

Such ought to be extremely careful of the choice of their Liquors; sharp Wines
which abound with Tartar, are hurtful; Malt Liquors, not hard, nor stale, are
certainly better to make use of; some of the softest Diuretics mentioned Chap.
I. No 15. to avoid acrimonious Substances in their Aliment, use moderate
Exercise, and not to lie hot, soft, nor much upon the Back.

Apoplexy.
This Disease is a sudden Abolition of all the Senses, external and internal,
and of all voluntary Motion, by the Stoppage of the Flux or Reflux of the
Animal Spirits through the Nerves destined for those Motions, commonly attended
with a strong Pulse, laborious Breathing, a deep Sleep with Snorting.

There is no difference between a Person asleep, and in an Apoplexy, but that
the one can be awaked, and the other cannot.

The Causes of this Disease are a particular Confirmation of the Body, as a
short Neck; for there be some who have fewer Vertebrae in their Necks than
others; long-necked People are subject to Consumptions, and short-neck'd to
Apoplexies, though this Rule is not generally true; a gross, plethorick, fat,
phlegmatic Constitution; whatever hinders the Motion of the Blood through the
Arteries of the Brain, as polypose Concretions, especially about the Heart,
attended, commonly with an unequal Pulse, a Vertigo, and sometimes a momentary
Loss of the Eyesight; an inflammatory and coreaceous Thickness of the Blood,
preceded by a Fever, attended with the Headache, Redness of the Face and Eyes;
Old Age, attended with a glutinous, cold, catarrhous, leucophlegmatick
Constitution; in such, the Forerunners of an Apoplexy are Dullness, Inactivity,
Drowsiness, Sleepiness, Slowness of Speech and giving Answers, Vertigoes,
Tremblings, Oppressions in Sleep, Night-Mares; Weakness, Wateryness, and
Turgidity of the Eyes; pituitous Vomiting, laborious Breathing upon the
smallest Motion; whatever compresseth the Vessels of the Brain so as to stop
the Flux of the animal Spirits and Blood; a great Fullness of Blood with its
Velocity, increased by Heat, violent Motion, a high Diet, spirituous Liquors,
Tumors of any kind; within the Skull a partial and imperfect Circulation of
the Blood toward the lower Parts. The Effusion and Pressure of any Serosity or
Blood upon the Ventricles of the Brain (which is the most common and immediate
Cause of Apoplexies) violent Passions and Affections of the Mind. The immediate
Forerunners of an Apoplexy are commonly a Vertigo, Staggering, Loss of Memory,
Stupor, Sleepiness, a Noise in the Ears, and a more deep and laborious
Breathing; those last Symptoms commonly precede an Apoplexy, but they are
likewise common to it with other nervous and hysterical Distempers.

Attention to the forementioned Symptoms affords the best Cautions and Rules of
Diet by way of Prevention; for when it has taken place Hippocrates's
Prognostic is generally true, That it is very hard to resolve a small
Apoplexy, and quite impossible to resolve a great one, the gentlest Kind of
this Disease is often taken off by Sweating.

The Applications in the Fit are of the Medicinal Kind, it being too acute a
Disease to admit of any Helps from Diet, but that may be of great use for
Prevention; a thin, slender, cool, regular Diet, opposite to the particular
Symptoms abovementioned; frequent and copious Bleeding; keeping the Belly
always open; stimulating Substances, which have been thought beneficial, in
this Case very often hurt, by forcing the Blood too much up to the Head;
Vomiting may prove extremely pernicious, but the Regimen is to be varied
according to the Cause of the Disease, which may be collected from the
Constitution of the Patient in these Apoplexies, which depend upon a
sanguineous Cause: The Regimen prescribed in sanguineous Constitutions is
proper; fat and phlegmatic People, who are very subject to this Disease, ought
to attend to the Rules prescribed in their Case; and as there are Apoplexies
from inveterate Gouts, the Regimen of such must be different from both, the
Intention being to translate the morbifick Matter upon the Extremities of the
Body.

Those who have a Disposition to this Disease ought never to go to Bed with a
full Stomach, nor to lie with their Head low.

An Apoplexy is resolved by a Fever, and when not fatal terminates in a Palsy.

There is a Disease of the same Kind, but not so frequent, called a Catalepsis,
wherein the Patient is suddenly seized without Sense or Motion, and remains in
the same Posture in which the Disease seizes him, the Muscles remaining in the
same Tension: Violent Fevers in strong atrabilarious dry Constitutions has
produced this Distemper; the Diet after the Fit is off ought to be moistening
and relaxing. A Lethargy is a lighter sort of Apoplexy, and demands the same
Cure and Diet as an Apoplexy from a phlegmatic Case, such being the
Constitution of the Lethargick.

CHAP. IV.
Rules of Diet in CHRONICAL DISEASES.
Palsy.
A PALSY is an Immobility of a Muscle from Relaxation, insuperable by the Will
or any Endeavor of the Patient; sometimes the Sensation or Feeling is either
totally abolished, or dull, with a Sense of Tingling: A Palsy is opposite to a
Convulsion in the first; there is an Ineptitude to Motion from the too great
Laxity in the Second; an Ineptitude to Motion from too great Tension, and a
Relaxation of a Muscle, must produce a Spasm in its Antagonist, because the
AEquilibrium is destroyed. The best Rules of Diet in this Disease are taken
from the Knowledge of its Causes. Whatever stops either the Flux of the
Spirits, or the Flux of the Blood to any Part, induces a Palsy, for both are
necessary for Sense and Motion; such are all the Causes of an Apoplexy, an
Epilepsy, extreme and lasting Pains, the Suppression of usual Evacuations
either natural or morbid, Translations of morbific Matter in acute Distempers;
whatever distends, distorts, compresses, or contracts the Nerves; strong and
strait Ligatures, Luxations, Fractures, any Inflammation in the Integument, or
membranaceous Sheath of a Nerve, especially in the Ganglia, where they are tied
together; Serous Defluxions, Excess in astringent Aliment, especially unripe
Fruits; drinking too much warm Water, which is weakening and relaxing; Excess in
Coffee, or Tea; extreme Heat; extreme Cold; poisonous Vapors of Arsenick or
Mercury.

A Palsy is more or less dangerous according to the Cause, the Extent, and Seat
of the Disease; when the Original of the Disease is in the Brain, it is most
dangerous; when it seizes the Heart, or Organs of Breathing, fatal; because
Life cannot be continued a Moment without the Use of those Parts.

The Regimen in this Disease ought to be warm, attenuating, consisting of spicy
and cephalic Vegetables, such as create a feverish Heat, because such is
necessary to dispel the Viscosity. Of Vegetables, soapy; of such as consist of
an acrid, volatile Salt and Oil, Mustard, Horseradish, etc. stimulating by
Vomits, Sneezing, relaxing the Belly, purging and diluting strongly at the same
time, promoting Sweat by such Motions as can be used, or other Means, by strong
Frictions, etc.

Bleeding is to be used or omitted according to the Symptoms which affect the
Brain; it relieves in any inflammatory Disposition of the Coat of the Nerve.

Epilepsy, Convulsions.
The Causes of which are sometimes an hereditary or family Disposition from
Parents; a sudden Fright of the Mother when with Child of the Patient; an
Affection of the Brain by a Contusion; Abscess, acrimonious Serum, Splinter of
a Bone or sharp Instrument; Inflammation, Corruption, Erosion of the Meninges
or Membranes of the Brain; Fullness, Heat, Drunkenness, intense Study, strong
Passions, especially sudden. Terror; all violent Affections and Irritations of
the Nerves in any Part of the Body; especially by something acrimonious in the
Stomach or Bowels, by Worms, by Teething, and Acidity in the Stomach in
Infants; by some Contagion or purulent Matter after acute Diseases; Suppression
of usual Evacuations, the Menses, Haemorroids; hysterical Affections contracted
by Accidents in Lying-in; and often by too great Inanition; the smallest
irritating Cause will induce a Fit in such as are subject to it, and such ought
to be prevented with great Care.

There is no Disease which insests Mankind more terrible in its Symptoms and
Effects, the worst of which are a weakening and perhaps an Abolition of the
Faculties of the Mind; whether the Cause of the Disease be in the Brain, is
easily known from the concomitant Symptoms.

The Intentions in the Cure of the Disease must be different, according to the
Cause; Bleeding, and plentiful Evacuations, when there is a Plethora or
inflammatory Disposition in the Brain; Aliments without Acrimony, demulcent,
avoiding every thing which stimulates, taking such things as are opposite to
the particular Acrimony which causes the Disease, relaxing the Belly without
irritating; in acute and periodical Pains, anodyne Substances; if the Disease
is the Consequence of an hysterical Disposition, a warmer Regimen is necessary;
if the Cause is in the Stomach, generally anti-acid Substances relieve; if they
are not flatulent, several have been cured by a Milk-Diet, but it will do hurt
when there is Acidity in the Stomach; when the irritating Cause is in some
outward Part of the Body, it is proper to eradicate it by Suppuration.

The common Custom of applying stimulating things, as volatile Salts and
Spirits to the Nose, during the Fit, is generally speaking pernicious.

Epilepticks ought to breathe a pure Air, unaffected with any Steams, even such
as are very fragrant. Their Diet ought to be nourishing, of easy Digestion,
avoiding Hogs Flesh, Waterfowl, and all Vegetables that are pungent, windy,
and generally speaking all Fruits, especially Nuts; with little Wine, and none,
if they have not been accustomed to it; they ought not to turn round, nor stand
on Precipices, to keep regular Hours for Repast and Sleep, for every unusual
thing is a Stimulus; but of all things the most necessary is the avoiding the
Occasions of violent Passions, and keeping themselves cheerful.

Melancholy, Madness.
The Constitution which disposes to such a State, the Causes, Symptoms and
proper Regimen in it is described Chap. II.

This being a Disease more terrible than Death, extremely obstinate, invading
sometimes by insensible degrees, and hard to be cured when it has taken place,
the Approaches toward it ought to be carefully observed.

These are commonly obstinate Watchfulness, or short Sleeps, troublesome and
terrible Dreams, great Solicitude and Anxiety of Mind, with Sighing, sudden
Fits of Anger without any Occasion given, Love of Solitude, Obstinacy in
defending trifling Opinions, and Contempt of such as are about them,
Suppression of usual Evacuations, as of the Menses in Women, and Haemorroids in
Men; great Heat, Eyes hollow and fixed, immoderate Laughter or Crying without
occasion; too great Loquacity, and too great Taciturnity; by Fits; great
Attention to one Object, all these Symptoms without a Fever.

When this Disease is hereditary it is seldom cured.

The atrabilarian Constitution, or a black viscous pitchy Consistence of the
Fluids which most frequently occasions this Disease, makes all Secretions
difficult and sparing; the Intention therefore ought to be to render the
Humors fluid, moveable, and carry them out of the Body, especially the Bile,
which is viscous; Sudorificks indeed are (...) so proper, because they thicken.

To use the Aliment prescrib^d Chap. II, in atrabilarian Constitutions
Boerhaave gives an Instance of a Patient who by a long use of Whey, Water, and
Garden-Fruits, evacuated a great Quantity of black Matter, and recovered his
Senses. Cold Bath, and especially a sudden Immersion in the Sea, has done good
by acting upon the Nerves and Spirits; wherever there is any Uneasiness or
Sensation of Pain, one ought to solicit the Humors toward that Part, or to
make the proper Evacuations from them, especially (if it be possible) to
procure the Piles, which seldom miss to relieve the Head.

The Madness which proceeds from a Plethora, or too great Fullness, is cured by
plentiful Bleeding and Purging.

The Weakness which succeeds the Madness requires a more refreshing and warm
Diet, especially the use of Chalybeat Waters.

Scurvy.
This is a Disease impossible to be defined by Words containing any simple or
distinct Idea; it is rather a Name used to denote a Multitude of Symptoms,
different, and sometimes opposite in their Causes and Cures.

It is a Distemper of the Inhabitants of cold Countries, and amongst those,
such as inhabit marshy, fat, low, moist Soils, near stagnating Water, fresh or
Salt; invading chiefly in the Winter such as are Sedentary, or live upon salted
and smoaked Flesh and Fish, or Quantities of unfermented farinaceous
Vegetables, and drink bad Water; such as are Hypochondriacal and Hysteric; and
sometimes such as have taken the Peruvian Bark, either in great Quantities, or
without proper Evacuations. From these Causes the best Rules are taken for
Prevention.

Its Symptoms are a spontaneous Lassitude or Sensation of Weariness, being
unrefresh'd by Sleep, laborious Breathing upon small Motion, cold Tumors in
the Legs going off and returning; sometime Paleness, or a livid Color of the
Countenance; Spots on the Skin of various Colors, red, violet-colour'd,
yellow, livid; sometimes an ill Smell in the Mouth, painful and bleeding
Erosions of the Gums, and by these the Teeth growing bare and loose;
Haemorrages of all kinds, Ulcers; untractable, especially in the Legs, with a
gangrenous Appearance in the Skin; the Itch; a dry crusty Eruption, and
sometimes a small degree of Leprosy in the Skin; the Blood, when let, black,
grumous, the red part without a due Consistence; the Serum saline, and of a
yellowish Green; wandering Pains in the Limbs, increasing by the Warmth of the
Bed, sometimes a feverish Heat.

These Symptoms proceed from an ill Temperature of the Blood, too thick or too
thin, being of a saline Constitution, either from an acid, alkaline, or
muriatick Cause, and according to the Cause, demands very different and
oftentimes opposite Remedies. See Part First, of acid and alkaline
Constitutions.

The Scurvy of Mariners is generally cured by Acids, as all sorts of ripe
Fruits, Limons, Oranges, Butter-Milk; alkaline Spirits hurt them; and acid
Spirits, as that of Salt, does them good; when the Symptoms are attended with a
Foetor of any kind, either in the Urine, Mouth, Breath, with Drought, Heat,
Haemorrage of the Gums, or of any kind, such a Disease will be cured by
acescent Substances, and none better than Whey: In this Scurvy Chalybeat Waters
are generally effectual.

If the Scurvy be entirely muriatick, proceeding from a Diet of salt Flesh or
Fish, the Vegetables commonly called Antiscorbutick, as Watercresses,
Scurvy Grass, and Brook-Lime may be given with Success, but tempered with
Acids, as the Juice of Oranges and Limons; and the Pot Herbs which are antiacid
in this Case are a proper Diet; but if there be a high degree of Heat and
Inflammation, the hot Antiscorbuticks will do hurt.

If the Patient be pale, cool, without Thirst, with pale or natural colored
Urine, with a previous Diet of acescent Substances, the Eruptions not of a high
inflammatory or livid Color, the warm Antiscorbuticks, animal Diet, and animal
Salts, are proper.

There is great Attention to be given to the Condition of the Mouth, Gums, and
Teeth, in the Scurvy, from which the Nature and Degree of the Disease may be
guessed at.

Violent Purging always hurts scorbutic Constitutions; lenitive Substances
relieve.

Bleeding is not proper, unless where the Symptoms are urgent, and the Case is
inflammatory.

A Scurvy, from an alkaline Cause is more dangerous than from an Acid.

Cachexy, or ill Habit of Body.
This is likewise a general Word to express a great Variety of Symptoms; most
commonly it denotes such a Distemperature of the Humors as hinders Nutrition,
and weakens the vital and animal Functions, proceeding from Weakness of the
Fibers, and an Abuse of the Nonnaturals, and often from severe acute
Distempers: It sometimes disposes to Consumptions, sometimes to
Leucophlegmacy, Bloatedness, and Dropsies; it is attended often with
Palpitations of the Heart. The Rules for Diet must be drawn from the Symptoms.
See Chap. I. of this Part.

Consumption pulmonary.
This Disease is a Decay of the whole Body, from an Ulcer of the Lungs, the
Matter of which is mixed, circulates with, and infects the Blood, and by its
Acrimony infects the whole Mass of the Fluids.

This Disease makes up above a tenth part of all the Bills of Mortality about
London, is often the Product of a scrophulous Constitution, or King's Evil,
seldom invades after Thirty Years of Age, may be prevented, but seldom admits
of any other than a palliative Cure, and is generally incurable when
hereditary, but easily so when it proceeds from an accidental Cause.

It is often preceded by a Spitting of Blood, occasioned by its Acrimony, and
too great a projectile Motion, with Slenderness and Weakness of the Vessels; to
which Persons of a fair rosy Complexion, long Neck, and narrow Chest, are often
subject; Aliment too viscous, obstructing the Glands, and by its Acrimony
corroding the small Vessels of the Lungs (an Organ of a slender Texture,
through which the Half of the whole Blood passes, and which is never at rest)
after a Rupture and Extravasation of Blood, easily producing an Ulcer, then a
small Fever, dry Cough, Heat, Flushing after Repast; when the new Chyle enters
the Lungs, short Breath, a Disposition to Sweat after Sleep; all these
Symptoms, when the Blood is most copious and hot, between the Ages of 16 and
30; such a Disease may be indue'd by the Suppression of Evacuations natural and
artificial, by any great Force upon the Lungs, from some accidental Cause; by
too hot, full, and acrimonious Meat or Drink, by some acute Disease, the
Meazles or Smallpox.

The Blood is ejected from the Lungs with some small Pain, Heat, Oppression on
the Breast, florid, and frothing, with short Breathing, and a small soft quick
Pulse.

If after such Haemorrage from the Lungs, the Symptoms increase, Shortness of
Breath, Flushing in the Face, a Cough, hectic Fever, but especially Rigours
and Chilliness invading irregularly, with Weakness, one may be sure that there
is a Suppuration.

In a Haemorrage from the Lungs, no Remedy so proper as Bleeding, often
repeated; Stypticks are often insignificant, and if it were possible that they
could operate immediately upon the affected Part, so far as to make a Scar,
when that fell off the Disease would return. Both incrassating and styptick
Substances work universally, but they would hurt the Lungs if given before the
Vessels are emptied. Balsamic Substances often hurt by their too great Heat.

The Intention here is by Diet to abate the Acrimony and projectile Motion of
the Blood, after repeated Bleeding; to keep strictly to a Milk Diet, with
farinaceous Substances, as Rice and Barley, Milk with roasted Apples, Jelly of
Currants, or the Jelly of any ripe subacid Fruit, which is cooling, and very
agreeable to the Stomach; Milk and common Water, or Barley-Water, for Drink,
taking the Aliment frequently, and in very small Quantities, for fear of
charging the Lungs with too great a Quantity of Chyle at a time. ( See Part I.
Chap. II.) Avoiding all violent Motion, or any thing that puts the Lungs upon a
Stretch. Acrimony is likewise corrected by oily Vegetables, not such as contain
a volatile or high exalted Oil, but those whose Oil is mild, as Almonds,
Pistachos, Dates, etc.

The English Consumptions, generally speaking, proceed from a scrophulous
Disposition; in the first Access of such a Disease any Substance which is
deobstruent, without much Acrimony, is beneficial, but what heats disposes to
Suppuration.

There is likewise a Consumption from an Empyema, after an Inflammation of the
Lungs, which may be known from a Weight upon the Diaphragm, Oppression of the
Lungs, a Difficulty of Breathing, and Inability to lie on one Side (which is
that which is found) a perpetual Cough and Fever, with Thirst, Flushing of the
Cheeks, Weakness, and Decay of Appetite.

The Cure of such a Case is chirurgical, by opening the Side; if the Ulcer is
not broke, it is commonly called a Vomica, attended with almost the same
Symptoms as an Empyema, because the Vomica communicating with the Vessels of
the Lungs must necessarily void some of the putrid Matter into these Vessels,
and taint the Blood.

The Ulcer may break suddenly into the Larynx, with the danger of Suffocation;
or inwardly, and the Matter may by degrees be expectorated. The Event of the
Disease depends upon the Symptoms, especially the Nature of the Pus; that which
swims in Water, without any ill Smell, is better than what sinks, is livid, and
smells of putrified Flesh.

There may be a Consumption with a purulent Spitting, when the Vomica is
contained in a Cyst or Bag, upon the breaking of which the Patient is commonly
suffocated.

In this Case the same Intentions must be pursued in the Diet, as in a Wound or
any other Ulcer. The Aliment cool, demulcent, vulnerary, and not drying or hot,
but consisting of Quantities of liquid things, even though they provoke Sweat.
It is a common Mistake that acid things hurt the Lungs. The Gas Sulphuris may
be given with Success in any Disease of the Lungs, but at some distance of Time
from Milk, Vinegar, and Honey, is proper and detergent; anodyne Substances
relieve the Cough; gentle Exercise by Riding, is beneficial; by an extremely
exact Regimen a consumptive Person may hold out for Years, if the Symptoms are
not violent.

The Sweats and Diarrhoea attending Consumptions are generally fatal Symptoms,
but must be relieved by a Diet proper in these Cases, not interfering with what
is formerly advised.

Consumptions are induced by Purulency in any of the other Viscera; the Regimen
must be very near the same as in the Pulmonary.

Dropsy.
This Disease is commonly an Extravasation of Serum received in some Cavity of
the Body; I say commonly, for there may be a Dropsy by a Dilatation of the
serous Vessels, as that in the Ovarium, wherein the very Membrane of the Ovum
is extended with the Water, and at the same time thickened so as to keep it
from Rupture.

Therefore this Disease may happen wherever there are serous Vessels; a
Hydrocephalous, or Dropsy of the Head, which is only incurable when the Serum
is extravasated into the Ventricles of the Brain, and generally fatal in
Infants, when the Sutures are closed, and the Skull will yield no more.

A Dropsy of the Breast is attended with almost the same Symptoms as an
Empyema, and cured by the same Surgery.

A Dropsy of the Lungs, either by Hydatides, or by Lymph, extravasated in the
Body of the Lungs.

A Dropsy in the Forepart of the Windpipe, emulating a Bronchocele.

A Dropsy in the Ovarium, Testes, Scrotum, or Uterus.

An Ascites, or Collection of Water in the Abdomen. 1. In the Duplicature of
the Peritonaeum. 2. Between the Peritonaeum and the Bowels. 3. When the Water
is contained in the membranaceous Coat of the Glands.

Sometimes the Air is so rarified in the Tumor as makes it hard and tight like
a Drum, and from thence it is called a Tympany; when the Tension is from Air,
it is easily distinguished by the Specific Gravity of the Patient, and so is
Water.

When the Lymph stagnates, or is extravasated under the Skin, it is called an
Anasarka.

Whatever hinders the Return of the Lymph into the Veins, or breaks the
lymphatick Vessels, or obstructs the absorbent Vessels, so as the Lymph cannot
be absorbed or exhaled, produces a Dropsy: Any Stoppage of the Circulation
will produce a Dropsy, as by strong Ligature, or Compression.

The most common of these Causes are an hereditary Disposition; swilling down
great Quantities of cold watery Liquors, which are not voided; violent acute
Distempers; stubborn Obstructions of the Viscera; the Jaundice, obstinate
intermitting Fevers, Bloody-Fluxes; great Evacuations, especially of Blood;
Aliment viscous and of hard Digestion; inveterate Scurvies; but the most common
of all is the habitual and copious Use of fermented and spirituous Liquors.

The Effects are a Swelling of the Legs at Night by degrees, still ascending
higher; a Swelling of the Belly increasing; and in a Tympany founding and tense
like a Drum; sometimes the Sensation and Noise of fluctuating Water, Shortness
of Breath, Thirst, Urine in too small Quantity, no Sweat; The stagnating Serum
at last turning acrimonious, exulcerates and putrifies the Bowels, producing
most dismal Symptoms.

The best Cautions and Rules of Diet may be taken from the Enumeration of these
Causes and Effects.

The Intentions to be pursued are, removing the Causes, as Obstructions,
dissolving the Viscosity or Tenacity of the Lymph, and evacuating it out of the
Body.

The Viscosity of the Lymph is best corrected by such Substances as contain
abundance of alkaline and volatile Salts, Spices, acrimonious pungent
Vegetables, saponaceous Substances; what they are the Reader may see Chap, I.
of this Part.

The only Contradiction to this is too great Heat and Thirst, to which Regard
is to be had, and do indicate the Use of Acids, Juice of Limons, Oranges,
Sorrel, etc. I think it may be taken for a general Rule, when the Urine is
high-colour'd, that Acids are proper, for they are opposite to that alkalescent
State of the Humors, and resist the Putrefaction, which is the Effect of
acrimonious Serum.

The Drink should be sparing; but forasmuch as the Thirst is sometimes
intolerable, the Patient may be indulged the free Use of Spaw-Water and Rhenish
Wine.

The Aliment should be dry, diuretic. See Chap. I. Diuretics of the acid Kind
are the safest.

The Chirurgical Operations for drawing off the Waters are to be left to the
Judgment of the Physician.

Nothing is more beneficial than strong Frictions of the Skin, which attenuate
and promote the Circulation of the stagnating Serum.

Vomiting, in strong Constitutions, has proved often very effectual, for the
Concussion of the solid Parts dissolves and dispels the stagnating Humors; and
even Clysters of proper Ingredients are very beneficial.

Violent Purgers, by dissolving the Blood, have proved often pernicious.

Many have been cured by Abstinence from Drink, eating dry Biscuit, which
creates no Thirst, and strong Frictions four or five times a Day.

When the extravasated Serum is evacuated, the Diet ought to be such as
strengthens the solid Parts, allowing Spices and generous Wine, and especially
the Use of Chalybeat Waters, Abstinence from other Sorts of Liquids, dry Food
and Vegetables, astringent, Exercise, especially Riding; and in general, such a
Diet as generates good Blood.

If the Serum stagnates long, it turns acrimonious, and commonly renders the
Patient feverish and thirsty. Acid or sour things are the properest both to
prevent and cure these Symptoms, as they are opposite to that alkaline
Putrefaction.

Gout.
This is a Disease which may affect any membranous Part, but commonly those
which are at the greatest Distance from the Heart or the Brain, where the
Motion of the Fluids is the slowest, the Resistance, Friction, and Stricture of
the solid Parts the greatest, and the Sensation of Pain by the Obstruction of
the small Vessels and Dilaceration of the nervous Fibers extreme.

The most common Seat of it is in the Foot, its Tendons, Nerves, Membranes,
Ligaments, and Periostea, or Membranes investing the Bones.

The most common Causes of it are an hereditary Disposition (which operates
more strongly in this Disease than in any other) a too rich and high Diet, and
too copious Use of Wine and other spirituous Liquors, especially at Supper;
Excess in some other Pleasures; a full gross Habit of Body; the too copious use
of acid or sour things, the Gout being the only Disease in which they are very
hurtful to Human Bodies; a sudden chilling of the Feet after Sweat, or drying
them at the Fire after being wet and cold; a sedentary Life, with a plentiful
Diet, and intense Study, and Application of the Mind; most commonly a Gouty
Constitution is attended with great Acuteness of Parts, the nervous Fibers both
in the Brain and the other Extremities being delicate; and there are Instances
where Wives have got it from their Husbands by Infection, so Boerhaave says;
Females and young People are not subject to this Disease, unless where it is
hereditary.

A proper Regimen of Diet is necessary in this Distemper, because it does not
admit of very many Helps from Medicines, and there are no better Rules than
Abstinence from those things which occasion it.

It seems to be a Disease of the nervous Parts, which makes it so hard to cure;
Diseases are so as they are more remote in the Thread of the Motion of the
Fluids, by the constant and regular Returns of it in some People, and their
Freedom from it after the Morbid Matter is exhausted; it looks as there were
regular Accumulations and Gatherings of it, as of other Humors in the Body,
growing perhaps in some People as Corns.

As one of the Causes of the Gout is the Suppression of Sweat and Perspiration,
the procuring a due degree of these seems to be the best Preventive of it; if
the Feet could be made to sweat, in due time it would prevent the Gout, which
invades in such Constitutions of the Air as suppress Perspiration.

Violent Purging, in Absence of the Paroxysm, by agitating the Humors often
hurts, and during the Paroxysm, may draw the Gout inwardly.

The best Diet is Abstinence from acid Substances; the moderate use of such as
promote Perspiration, as Substances aromatical, and volatile Salts, which
relieve the Gouty, as they make the Body perspirable; diluent Liquors, taken in
such a degree as not to hurt the Stomach; Moderation in the Quantity of Food
and spirituous Liquors; Exercise without Fatigue; but especially Frictions of
the extreme Parts, daily, and often repeated; all possible Methods of making
the Feet sweat, and much Sleep.

In the Paroxysm, as temperate and cool, and diluent a Diet as the Patient can
bear; Abstinence from Opiats, except when the morbid Matter is separating (by
Opiats any Irruption goes on better) the constant Use of them will hurt;
keeping the affected Part warm, without the Application of Cataplasms, even
such as are emollient, weaken and relax too much, and have been sometimes found
to distort the Parts.

It is of the utmost Importance to know if any Disease proceeds from a
Translation of the Gouty Matter; for the Methods, especially Evacuations, used
in an original Disease, would be very improper in a Gouty Case, where the
Intention must be to draw the Gout down to the Feet, by Blisters applied to the
Thighs or Legs, and acrid inflammatory Cataplasms and Plasters; therefore when
any Gouty Person is disappointed of a Paroxysm which he expected by the Season,
or the previous Symptoms, and instead of it is seized with another Disease, let
him speedily consult his Physician.

If a Gouty Person can bring himself entirely to a Milk Diet, he may so change
the whole Juices of his Body as to eradicate the Distemper.

The Approach of a Fit of the Gout is easily known by the inward Disorders, as
Wind, Sickness, Crudities in the Stomach, a Drowsiness, these joined with the
Season or Weather, if such a one by a statical Engine could regulate his
insensible Perspiration, he might often by restoring of that, foresee, prevent,
or shorten his Fit.

Greensickness, Obstructions.
The Symptoms of this Disease are evident, a due Age of the Patient, with an
Obstruction of the Menses, a Fullness, sometimes Pains about the Loins, a
Laziness, Inactivity, which is both the Cause and Symptom of the Disease; a
quick Pulse, often emulating that of a hectic Fever, Palpitation of the Heart,
Difficulty of Breathing upon the least Motion, a livid Circle about the Eyes,
Diziness of the Head, sometimes an Appetite of odd things, as Chalk,
TobaccoPipes, proceeding from an Acidity in the Stomach, a Paleness of the Face
and Skin, unnatural Haemorrages from the Mouth, Nose, and other Parts,
hysterical Symptoms.

Young Persons under a womanly Age are often troubled with some of the same
Symptoms, but not from that Cause; and Women obstructed have not always the
forementioned Symptoms; in those, the Signs of Gravidity and Obstructions are
hard to be distinguished in the beginning.

This Disease is the Parent of many other dangerous Diseases, and after six
Months hardly to be cured.

What is to be considered in this Case, is chiefly, if there be a sufficient
Fullness or Deficiency of Blood, different Methods are to be taken, in those two
Cases, Bleeding, which may relieve in the first Case, will do hurt in the
Second Motion; Exercise, Frictions, Bathings, Clysters, Fumigations often
repeated are very beneficial.

Substances abounding with volatile oily Salts, Substances saponaceous,
aromatical, as those Vegetables which abound with a volatile Oil.

When there is not a sufficient Plethora, a Diet wholesome, plentiful, and
nourishing, at the same time strengthening the Organs of Digestion, is often
effectual.

After Relaxing, such Substances as strengthen the solid Parts in general, are
beneficial; it is by this Quality that Steel operates so strongly in this
Distemper, and likewise as being an Antiacid. See Chap. I. No 18.

A Woman who by some unusual Haemorrage has that natural Defect supplied, is
only to be cured by topical Remedies.

Diseases of Infants.
Infants newborn, before they have taken any Aliment, often have the whole
alimentary Duct filled with a glutinous cheesy Matter, and all of them have a
Meconium, or sort of dark-colour'd Excrement in the Bowels, which ought to be
purged off.

Most of the Diseases of suckling Infants proceed from Milk growing sour and
curdling in the Stomach; the Cure of which is to be effected First, By
attenuating this curdy Matter; and Secondly, by expelling it out of the Body;
it may be digested by the Infant by Abstinence from Sucking for several Hours;
Honey and Water, with a little Wine, attenuate and dissolve; and some gentle
purging Syrup, as Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb, expels the peccant Matter;
oily Substances are apt to turn rancid on the Stomachs of Infants; Clysters and
warm Fomentations, and other Applications of aromatical Substances to the
Stomach and Belly, are useful in this Case.

Antiacids, especially the Absorbents, are more effectual in the Diseases of
Infants than in any other.

Opiats and anodyne Substances are dangerous.

Volatile Salts are hurtful to Infants, being too active, and operate sometimes
as Opiats.

Gall is the greatest Resolvent of curdled Milk: Boerhaave has given at a time
one Drop of the Gall of an Eel with Success.

Gentle Carminatives, as Fennel-Water, Mint-Water, relieve.

The Colic, green Stools, Vomiting, Wind, and Convulsions, all depend upon
this Acidity, and when that is rectified the Symptoms cease.

Diseases of Infants, and the Cure of them, depend very much upon the Diet of
the Nurse. See Part. I. Page 93.

When Children begin to feed upon Substances on which Infects deposite their
Eggs, especially Fruits, they are often troubled with Worms, for want of a
sufficient Force of Digestion to destroy these Eggs.

The most common Sort in Children are the round or Earthworms.

The Symptoms occasioned by the Motion and Biting of these Worms are Loathing
as it were from a Feather in the Throat, a Vomiting, Looseness, Fainting, a
feverish Disposition, with a small quick pulse, Itching of the Nose, Grinding
of the Teeth, Fits, Paleness, a craving Appetite, Weakness, and when the Worms
are large they consume the Moisture, and instead of Looseness will occasion
Astriction of the Belly, with a Swelling; Worms will perforate the Guts.

Children subject to Worms ought not to live much upon Milk, Cheese, or ripe
Fruits, nor take much Sugar; some Insects lay their Eggs in Sugar.

The Gall of Animals, and Mercury, kill Worms, and destroy their Nests; it is
found by Experience that the Water in which Mercury is boiled has this Effect;
all Bitters among alimentary Substances; Honey and Oil given by the Mouth, or
Clysters, have a good Effect; they may be taken together fasting; any Substance
which by its Pungency can wound the Worms, will kill them, as Steel, Hartshorn,
Coraline, Coral powdered, Fish Bones. See Chap. I.

Above a tenth Part of Infants die in Teething, by Symptoms proceeding from the
Irritation of the tender nervous Parts of the Jaws, occasioning Inflammations,
Fevers, Convulsions, Looseness, with green Stools (not the worst Symptom) and
in some, Gangrenes: It is plain that such a Case ought to be treated as any
other inflammatory Distemper.

When the Symptoms of Teething appear, the Gums ought to be relaxed by
softening Ointment, the Jaws fomented with emollient Decoctions, and the whole
Head to be kept warm; when the Teeth is ready to cut, the upper Part rubbed
with hard Substances, which Infants by a natural Instinct affect, and when
there is a manifest Tension of the Gum by the Tooth, then it ought to be cut;
but this Operation ought not to be performed too soon.

In the Convulsions it is necessary to give volatile Spirits, which they can
bear better than when they are newborn.

The Rickets is another Disease to which Children are subject: It has been
reckoned a Disease unknown to the Ancients, uncommon in hot Countries, and more
common in England than any other Northern Country.

Children have this Disease from sickly Parents, and especially from Mothers of
a weak lax Constitution, living on a various, high, and plentiful Diet, without
Exercise; and Children born healthy, often contract the Disease from an
unwholesome Nurse.

A Diet of farinaceous Substances infermented, as of Pudding, much Butter, wet
or ill-air'd Linen, cutaneous Eruptions repelled, or ill cured, exposing their
lower Parts too long to cold Air, may bring, or at least increase this Disease.

The Disease may be foreseen by the Child's being long in taking to his Feet;
when it takes place the Child grows lean, the muscular Flesh decays, and grows
flabby, the Skin loose and flaccid, the Epiphyses of the Bones about the Joints
of the Arms grow big, the Belly swells, the Blood Vessels about the Neck
enlarge, and so does the Head it self, the Bones grow crooked; these are the
outward Appearances, the Constitution of the inward Parts is often much worse.

It is highly probable that this Disease proceeds from a redundant Acidity,
because Vinegar will soften and crook tender Bones; and this Symptom must
happen in Children when there is no Strength in the Muscles to support them, or
they must be inflected to that Side where the Muscle pulls strongest. Contrary
to the common Rules for the Aliment of Children, the Diet of those that are
Rickety ought to be moderately warm, even making use of Spices or carminative
Seeds. They ought to forbear unfermented farinaceous Substances, new Bread; and
rather use Biscuit. Their Diet should be pretty much of flesh Meat, such as are
commonly called White Meats, and rather roasted than boiled, such Diet being
anti-acid. They may be allowed a moderate Quantity of Wine.

I knew a rickety Child cured by a very great Indulgence of fermented Liquors,
but it is not an Experiment that I would advise.

Frictions of the Backbone and Joints with Flannel, smoked with penetrating
aromatical Substances, and fomenting the Joints with old Malaga Wine, have
proved often very effectual.

They ought to use as much Exercise as they are capable of, but especially by
Voiture or Carriage. Care must be taken to open the Obstructions in the lower
Belly by Vomits and proper Purgations, where the Seat of the Disease chiefly
lies, and after that the Cold Bath is a very proper and effectual Remedy.

I have lanch'd out of my Subject under this Head, mentioning some medicinal
Helps, because the Nurses in such Cases are often the Physicians, which
nevertheless they ought not to be when they can get better Advice.

Smallpox.
Though I took notice of this Disease in the Article of Feverish Irruptions,
yet it being one of the most dangerous and universal that infests Mankind, I
shall add a few more Rules which may be of use to such as have not the Advice
of an able Physician.

The greatest and most important Strokes for the Recovery of the Patient, must
be made at the time of the Invasion, or first State of this Disease; therefore
it is necessary to know the first Symptoms of it; many have suffered by
mistaking it for another Disease.

In general, young Persons who have not had the Disease ought to be extremely
careful to avoid great Irregularities in their Diet, because the Smallpox
which are occasioned by such often prove dangerous. This Disease is likewise
more dangerous as the Fluids are more exalted and dissipated, and the Solids
more strict and compacted, and consequently more so as People are advanced in
Age.

This Disease may be easily communicated by the Contagion or Steams of an
infected Person swimming in the Air, and drawn in by the Breath, or perhaps by
the Pores of the Skin; and it is evident by Inoculation that the smallest
Quantity of the Matter mixed with the Blood produces the Disease, though not so
quickly as those volatile Steams.

The first Symptoms are a Chilness, Rigor, succeeded by a Fever and constant
Heat, a certain Splendour or Shining in the Eyes, with a little moisture; this
is very observable in Children; a great Pain in the Head, with Dullness,
Drowsiness, Sleepiness, a pain in the Back in some, but Pains in the Limbs in
all, Anxiety, Inquietude, notwithstanding their Drowsiness, Loathing, Sickness
of the Stomach, Vomiting, and in Infants Convulsions shortly before the
Eruption. The Blood let the first time, florid; after a second time sizy.

It is evident that in this State the Disease ought to be treated as any other
inflammatory Distemper, by such Methods as if it were possible to hinder any
Suppuration at all, and to resolve and digest as much of the feverish Matter as
we can; for the longer the Eruption is a coming, and the smaller when it comes,
the Disease is less dangerous; therefore all the Methods prractis'd in the
beginning of inflammatory Diseases are here necessery, with a particular Care
of cleansing the alimentary Duct by Vomiting and Clysters, the Impurities of
which will be carried into the Blood.

There is not yet found any particular Antidote to the poisonous Stimulus of
this Distemper; the learned Boerhaave is of opinion, that if any such could be
found, it must be in Antimony, or Mercury entirely destitute of all Acrimony:
The Effects of Mercury on all Ulcerations are very manifest.

Bleeding, which is extremely useful in the beginning of the Disease, is not so
proper and useful when it is advanced.

In the first Stage the whole Habit of the Body ought to be relaxed, a free
Perspiration through the Skin, without violent Sweating, promoted; the Viscosity
or Toughness of the Fluids taken off by diluents; the alkalescent State of the
Salts corrected; all these things are effected by emollient Fomentations
applied inwardly in Clysters, and why not outwardly to the Skin? Such are used
successfully in other Eruptions, as Erysipelas, Shingles, by a slender Diet of
Decoctions of farinaceous Vegetables, and copious drinking of cooling Liquors,
with nitrous and acid Salts, and other acid Substances, mixed with them; no
Flesh, unless it be small Chicken-Broth; no Spice; the Air ought not to be
spoiled by Heat, nor the Coverings of the Bed so thick as to promote Sweat.

The Greatness and Danger of this Disease is estimated by the Quantity of
Eruptions on the Face and other Parts of the Head; therefore the Matter ought
to be solicited by all possible Methods to the lower Parts, especially the
Legs, by Fomentations, Bathing, Epispasticks, Blistering, and through the whole
Disease keeping the Feet and Legs warm; the Breast and Head not any more
covered than to keep them from the Impression of cold Air.

During the Filling and Ripening of the Pustles, the Diet may be more
plentiful, but still not hot or inflammatory, with the due Use of anodyne
Substances: In this State Demulcents, or what abates Acrimony; and where the
Circumstances of the Patient require it, a Spoonful or two of Canary Wine,
twice or thrice a Day, are proper: The Diet in this State ought likewise to be
adapted to the particular Symptoms of the Disease, as cleansing, attenuating,
expectorating; to promote the Spitting, diuretic; when that is suppressed, and
Clysters diluent, without any Stimulus, frequently injected, are beneficial in
every Stage of the Disease.

When the Age, Temperament, high Pulse, and especially a Watchfulness and
Delirium, all would seem to demand it in any other Case, why not Bleeding in
this State? which I know to have been used with great Success; a great many
Vessels are in this State almost impervious by the Fluids; those who die of
this Disease have inward Inflammations, especially in the Lungs; those Reasons
seem to justify Bleeding.

Indeed the gangrenous Disposition which appears in the malignant Kind, is a
Reason against it, but hardly any thing will do good in these extremely
malignant Cases.

In such malignant Kinds, all that is left is at last to try evacuating the
morbifick Matter by other ways, as Epispasticks and Stools procured by lenitive
Substances, not irritating, which would only agitate the Humors and increase
the Fever.

Gravel, Stone.
A Stone or stony Matter may grow in any Part of a Human Body; for when any
thing insoluble sticks in any Part of the Body, it gathers a Crust about it; a
small Drop of concreted Blood may grow to be a Stone, for by the Evaporation of
the most fluid Parts it grows hard, and by the Attraction of new Matter
increases Blood, and a Human Calculus, or Stone, yield the same Contents by
Chemical Trial, though in an inverse Order.

These stony Concretions happen most commonly in the Kidneys and Bladder; and
indeed if the Tartar and other Contents of the Urine were not constantly
voided, such Concretions would happen to every Human Creature; for the Urine of
the most sound Person being inspected with a Microscope, after it has stood a
while, will discover a black Speck, which is Sand, and wherever this Sand
sticks it grows still bigger, by the apposition of new Matter: When such
Concretions happen in the Kidneys, and are expelled or drop into the Ureters,
it makes what we call Gravel; when they lodge and stick in the Body of the
Kidneys, and grow to such a Bulk as not to drop into the Pelvis, or pass by the
Ureters, they make the Stone in the Kidneys: The Symptoms of which are a dull
Pain in the Kidney, most commonly bloody Water; upon a sudden Jolt, violent
Motion, Pain in Stooping; Pain in the Thigh, Sickness in the Stomach, Colical
Pains, various Changes in the Color of the Urine, black, bloody, pale,
occasioned by something sharp or scabrous wounding the small Blood Vessels; if
the Stone is smooth and well bedded, perhaps this may not happen. Fleshy
Filaments, or Matter voided by Urine, are suspicious Symptoms of a Stone in the
Kidney, especially if the Patient has been subject to Voiding of Gravel.

When a small Stone is lodged in the Body of the Kidney, it does not create
Pain, nor much when it falls into the Pelvis; but when it falls into the
Ureter, and sticks, the Pain is most acute; it often stops at the Flexure and
Valve of the Ureter, and sometimes in the Urethra, or Passage of the Urine from
the Bladder; while it stays in the Bladder it creates no Pain, but remaining
there long it grows a confirmed Stone, too big to be passed by the Urethra: The
manner of its Concretion is by concentrical Rings, like an Onion, about the
first Kernel, which shows the Cause to be Attraction. This is not only true of
a small Stone, but any solid Body lodged in the Bladder will make the Kernel of
a Stone; the Experiment of a Bullet's producing this Effect has been tried upon
a Dog; and such an Accident has happened to a Man by a Wound, in which a Bullet
has dropped into the Bladder.

The Symptoms of a Stone in the Bladder are a Titillation about the Neck of the
Bladder, and the Parts thereabout; a frequent Needing to make Water; a
Sensation of Weight in the lower Belly, under the Shear-Bone, with a great
Pain, especially upon any sudden Motion, which causes a Concussion of the
Bladder, a Dribling, Difficulty, and a momentary Suppression of Urine by the
Stone, shutting up the Orifice of the Bladder, attended with a Tenesmus, or
needing to go to Stool, and a burning Pain in the Urethra; sometimes a white
Mucus in the Urine; though this last Symptom will happen without a Stone in the
Bladder.

The Regimen in the Stone in the Kidneys is by diluent and soft Diuretics to
try to expel it, if it is small enough to pass; if the Stone is brittle, it
will often crumble and pass in the Form of Gravel; if the Stone is too big to
pass, the best Method is to come to a sort of a Composition or Truce with it;
the Diet ought to be cool and diluent, as far as possible to hinder its Growth;
to use Diuretics that gently resolve, as Parsley, Fennel, Scorzonera,
Sassafras, Mallows, and Tea, Dandelion, Cichory, Oats, Barley, Honey, Honey and
Vinegar; Nitrous Salts, as Spirit of dulcified Nitre; the most soft cooling
Diluent of all, is Whey; the best Emollients are Decoctions of Marshmallows,
Linseed-Tea.

Bathing in tepid Water, Clysters, seasoning the Aliment moderately with
Sea Salt, for the immoderate Use of it is resolving and diuretic; the Belly,
in all Cases of the Stone, ought to be kept lax and open.

In a confirmed Stone of the Kidneys too violent Exercise is dangerous.

During the passing of a Stone, one should avoid at first all strong
Stimulating; relaxing and lubricating the Passages, and quieting the Spasms by
Opiats is certainly the best Method; and where Bathing cannot be conveniently
had, OxBladders, half full of warm Water, applied constantly to the affected
Part may be usefully substituted. Letting of Blood takes off a Tension better
than any thing, and is very necessary where the Symptoms are violent; when the
Parts are sufficiently relaxed, stimulating Diuretics may be used more safely,
especially if associated with Opiats.

As to Dissolvents of the Stone, all that have hitherto been proposed are
chimerical; Helmont talks of Bulls Blood; Goats Blood is rather a better
Dissolvent.

The surest way to hinder the Generation of a Stone, is to procure a Diarrhoea
by Whey, Broth, and a liquid Diet; and indeed what would not one do to prevent
so painful a Disease?

When the Stone is fallen to the Bladder, Care should be taken to make it pass
as soon as possible, for the Reasons abovementioned; if all the Symptoms abate
without the passing of the Stone, it is not certain that the Stone remains in
the Bladder, because a very small Stone may pass insensibly by Urine; if the
Stone has passed, it is not certain that the Fit is over, for there are often
more, and the usual Remedies ought not to be left off.

The Irritations of the Membranes of the Bladder by a Stone, may be much
mitigated by the Injection of the Oil of Linseed or Almonds, into the Bladder.

Such as are subject to the Gravel or Stone ought to be careful of their Diet,
to use such Aliments as generate a small Quantity of Foeces, or relax the
Belly; Aliment demulcent, as Pease; a Decoction of Chick-Pease is a Remedy in a
Fit of the Stone; they ought to drink Whey in the Spring, and take Honey in
several Forms, if it agrees with them; Rice, Barley, Millet, are all good in
this Case; nothing makes Stones or Gravel pass more easily than Opiats.

If the Stone sticks in the Urethra, emollient Fomentation of the Parts, Oil
injected, or in case of great Extremity, an Instrument with a Cavity like a
small Spoon, dipped in Oil, may fetch out the Stone.

The Stone in the Bladder is not only a painful, but a mortal Disease, if not
extracted. The Diet of a Patient in such a Case is such as of a wounded Person,
nourishing, without Acrimony.

Let the Reader look into the Article of Inflammations of the Kidneys, where
there are some Directions proper for all who are subject to the Stone or Gravel.

Rheumatism.
The Disease seems to be an inflammatory Disposition in the serous Part of the
Blood, affecting the lymphatick Arteries, and therefore affecting those Parts
where the Vessels are the narrowest. The Blood, as in other inflammatory Cases,
is sizy, the alkalescent Salts in the Serum producing coreaceous Concre^ons.

The common Methods used in this Case are certainly proper; these are, repeated
Bleedings and Purges, interposing Anodynes, and gentle Sudorisicks; and
Blisters when the Pain is obstinate in one Part.

As for the Diet, it ought to be cool, diluting, and chiefly Vegetable.

If there be a specific in Aliment is certainly Whey; I knew a Person subject
to this Disease who could never be cured by any other Method but a Diet of Whey
and Bread. A Milk Diet is likewise effectual for changing that saline
Constitution of the Serum of the Blood.

Cream of Tartar in Water Gruel, taken for several Days, will abate the Pains
and Swellings considerably, by its Acidity correcting the alkalescent Salts in
the Blood.

In obstinate Sciatical Pains, Blistering and Cauteries have been found
effectual, and the most penetrating Medicines, especially the ethereal Oil of
Turpentine mixed with Honey.

I have lanch'd out of my Subject in this Article, because of many common
People who cannot always have good Advice.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 250, Line 3, for Apoponox read Apoponax

Page 253, Line 21, for differ read differs

Page 280, Line 9, for Fermentations read Fomentations

Page 318, Line 14, for Cause of Acidity, read Cause, if Acidity,

Ibid. Line 17, for resolve read relieve

Page 319, Line 19, for then read the

Page 330, Line 1, for more read mere

Page 335, Line 25, for Drinks read Drink

Page 338, Line 17, for Water; read Water,

Page 342, Line 21, for is the Reason read are the Reasons

Page 345, Line 15, after Matter, add or terminates

Page 347, Line 8, for Lungs, read Liver,

Page 378, Line 14, after Ulcers dele;

Page 386, Line 20, for found read found

Page 395, Line 9, after Vegetables dele,

Page 420, Line 6, after increases add:

Page 424, Line 24, for immoderate read moderate


