THE NOBLE PEASANT, A COMIC OPERA, IN THREE ACTS; AS PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, IN THE HAYMARKET.

BY THOMAS HOLCROFT.

DUBLIN: Printed by J. EXSHAW, for the COMPANY of BOOKSELLERS.

M DCC LXXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
FOR the ease and convenience of the Provincial Theaters, as well as to gratify
the Curiosity of the Reader, those Passages and Songs, which were omitted in
the Representation, are put between inverted Commas. Scenes, which often are
tedious in the Theater, amuse in the Closet; and it would, perhaps, be an
experiment not much to the advantage of most Theatrical Productions, to
restore, on any Stage, Passages which, without great Experience, it would be
difficult to give a reason, why they should not be restored.

The Fable relates to Times so remote, that the task of supporting dialogue, in
which Wit is necessary, and yet of not offending the manners of those Times, is
no easy one. Glory is often acquired in proportion as impediments are overcome:
Far be it, however, from the Author to insinuate in what degree he is entitled
to this kind of praise; that Decision rests with the Public, and it cannot be
in hands more equitable.

Ambitious of deriving Fame from a source whence Fame has so often flowed, from
Poetry, the Author has paid an attention to the Songs, which he hopes the
Lovers of Poetry will approve. Should they really possess Excellence, it is
still to be expected it must oftcn remain unnoticed. The Poetical Beauties of
the Songs in the Duenna are frequently overlooked, but they are not therefore
the less beautiful. In some instances Poetry has here been obliged to give
place to Situation and other Accidents, and pretends to no Charms.

To Mr. Shield, the Author of the Music, every Praise, every Respect is due!
The universal Admiration he has received on this, as well as on various former
occasions, must give Pleasure to every ingenuous mind: For who can forbear
being happy at the prosperity of a Man, whose Head and whose Heart are equally
superior? The NOBLE PEASANT owes much, very much of its success to the Genius
of the Musician. The Airs not only possess Sweetness and Originality, but they
are learned likewise; and, what is far to be preferred, they have Passion and
Enthusiasm: The very Accompaniments are full of these inestimable Qualities. If
Friendship be not more than partial, the first Song in the third Act is, in
particular, in all its Parts, worthy of the greatest Master Harmony ever
inspired: and yet, to single out this Song, only, is doing great injustice to
the rest. There is little danger, indeed, in declaring such Opinions, for every
one declares the same.

To all those whose Talents have contributed to the success of this Opera, from
the greatest to the least, the Author returns his Thanks. He forbears to recite
Names, because distinctions are difficult; and because he cannot, without an
appearance of seeking to flatter, mention them with all the Respect he wishes,
should he mention them at all.

UPPER MARY-LE-BONE-STREET, AUGUST 14, 1784. [The Words of the Glees are
Parodies, as are those of Song IX, Act II. The Name of the Musical Composer is
printed at the Beginning of each Song.]
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
LEONARD, Mr. PALMER. EARL WALTER, Mr. AICKIN. EARL EGBERT, Mr. PARSONS.
ANLAFF, Mr. GARDENER. HAROLD, Mr. RILEY. ADAM BELL, Mr. BANNISTER. CLYM OF THE
CLOUGH, Mr. BRETT. WILL CLOUDESLEE, Mr. DAVIES. DWARF, Miss BRETT. FOOL, Mr.
EDWIN.
KNIGHTS, WARRIORS, ARCHERS, MESSENGERS, SERVANTS, HERALD.

EDWITHA, Mrs. BANNISTER. ADELA, Miss GEORGE. ALICE, Miss MORRIS.
The Scene is the Castle of Earl Walter, the adjacent Forest and the Valley.
The time is somewhat less than two days.

THE NOBLE PEASANT, A COMIC OPERA.
ACT I.
OVERTURE. SHIELD.
SCENE I.
The Scene is a Forest -- Deer seen at a distance -- The Archers are hid
beneath a very thick foliage -- They are heard singing a glee, and, after
singing a part of it, appear and finish it. Enter Adam Bell, Will Cloudeslee,
Clym of the Clough, etc. dressed in the old English fashion, with their bows
and arrows, swords, etc. GLEE.
SMITH.
COME, my good fellows, and quit the bower,
The Sun no longer seems to lour;
Your arrows bring, your bows of yew,
With silver tips and silken clue;
And let the lusty bugle horn
Tell of the death of deer forlorn:
With fatal note resounding,
What though he be swift and bounding,
The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
Shall tell the death of deer forlorn.
Adam. Well said, and well sung, my merry hearts. But where is Leonard? Where Is
the valiant Stripling? -- Does he not draw a good bow, Will? What think
thou, Clym, is not he a child of valor?


Clym. By my faith, he is no Flincher.


Will. It must be a hard crown that the Youngster cannot crack.


Clym. How furiously the rascal laid about him in the battle.


Adam. I tell thee what, Clym, -- mercy forsake me if I would not rather
encounter the sheriff and all his men, than be obliged, hand to hand, to fight
this Leonard.


Will. By the Lord, he has an arm like the claws of a Lion.


Adam. Ay, boy, and he has a Lion's heart too. Did you see in the fight how he
brought down that termagant Dane, that man of might, that Alric -- he that
seemed determined to kill every body himself? How he died, grinding the dust,
and cursing his heathen Gods, to be so baffled by a Boy.


Will. Yes, and, as if Leonard cared little for such a victory, he left another
to take the spoil.


Adam Ay, prithee, Will, who was that Knight that was so nimble at running away
with the slain Alric's arms? I had not seen him before in the battle.


Will. Seen him! -- No no -- he will take care nobody shall see him in any
danger; -- catch him there if you can -- 'Twas Earl Egbert.


Adam. Oh! what the foolish Braggart, that we have played pranks with him and
his purse so often?


Will. Ay; he. -- I saw his beaver up -- I could not mistake his unleavened
face.


Clym. But hark ye me, boys, tell me, you that can, what was the cause of this
fray? for though I have been fighting, I hardly know what about.


Adam. About? -- About a pair of blue eyes, two rosy cheeks, some certain (...)
of ivory teeth, with various items and and ceteras, all summed up in the word
Woman.


Clym. Explain, explain.


Adam. Why thus -- Anlaff, the Dane, meets, upon a certain day, with Edwitha,
the daughter of Earl Walter and is amazed at her beauty -- Well, Sir, finding*
himself attacked by a terrible disease, called sighing, with dangerous
symptoms, he demands me this same Lady fair in marriage, that he may be able to
eat his beef as heretofore. Earl Walter, however, did not choose his daughter
should be the Dane's doctor in this case.


Clym. Why so?


Adam. Why so? -- Zounds, Clym, have no religion? -- Do not know that these
Red-heads, these Carroty-poles,are Pagans?


Clym. Damn it, I had forgot that.


Adam. My freckle-faced gentleman takes this denial in dudgeon; and turning on
his heel, vows vengeance. -- Now neither Earl Walter, nor his son Harold, are
of the cuckoo breed; they will not be pecked at -- so the issue of this no
marriage was the battle in question.


Will And Anlaff, instead of gaining a wise, has lost his brother Alric.


Clym. Ay, and some few more -- we left some on their backs, that wont't be in
a hurry to get up.


Will. Well, well, they may call us Outlaws if they please, but I say we are
brave fellows; and if not the most honorable, we are at least as merry as our
neighbors.


SONG. WILL CLOUDESLEE.
SHIELD.
I.
Beneath the worn rock, or upon the shorn grass,
Where pipes the blythe Lad, or where trips the sweet Lass;
By hawthorns that bloom or that bear the red berry,
In hail, rain, or sunshine, we are happy and merry.
II.
When clouds ride the mountains, and winds rend the vales,
When murrains and mildews the Shepherd bewails;
If scanty our store let us share it with pleasure,
The heart of the Brave is the chest of his treasure.
Adam. But let me tell you, my Hearts, Harold may thank US for the victory:
That Anlaff, and his Redheads, and especially that Alric, with his two-handed
sword, bestirred themselves so stoutly, that by the Lord, Lads, Harold's men
were little better than Run-aways, when we came to the field.


Will. Well then -- our assistance gained the battle -- what now shall be our
reward?


Clym. Hanging on the next tree, if Earl Walter could catch us.


Adam. Why truly, my boys, there are dangerous complaints gone abroad against
us; your fat Monks, and your lean Usurers, have taken exception at us
Forresters, and called us Free-booters -- for which reason the King's pardon
would be a good thing.


Clym. But how are we to get it?


Adam. Why, I have a project.


Will. Ay -- What is it?


Adam. I will go to the castle, disguised like a Friar -- There I shall learn
what they say about the battle; and whether they will be ready to thank us for
the service we did them.


Clym. Thank us! why zounds they did not know it was us. Did not we all go
disguised?


Adam. But we have tongues, and they understand English -- Earl Walter is a
great man at court.


Clym. But hark ye me, Adam; suppose you should be discovered, and there should
be any foul play?


Adam. There is no danger; I have a friend there in a corner -- Besides I know
how to a^^ my part; I will sing them jovial songs, tell them merry tales, and
forgive them all their sins, and I warrant I shall be a favorite in the family.


Clym. Nay, I don't fear thee, for thou art thoroughly instructed in the art
and mystery of eating, drinking, and wenching, and that is the trade of a Friar.


Adam. However, I intend to go armed, and sling my bugle horn across my
shoulder: do you watch round the skirts of the forest, and in case of any
accident, I will wind the signal of good or ill success. -- But let Leonard
know the scheme as soon as you see him -- he has a true heart, and will never
forsake a good cause.


Clym. Why to be sure he will fight -- but he has one bad fault.


Adam. Ay! -- What is that?


Clym. Too scrupulous -- "too conscientious" -- he would not let me rob the old
miserly Abbot of Whitby the other day -- we almost quarrelled about it.


Adam. Oh! he has not been long among us, you know: -- he will mend.


Will. Well, success to your scheme.


Omnes. Ay -- ay -- success to Friar Adam.


SONG. ADAM BELL.
SHIELD.
I.
We are Archers so stout and so good,
With hearts unacquainted with fear;
We live in the merry green wood,
And feed on the King's fallow deer.
We feed on the King's fallow deer
In spite of the Sheriff and law;
We never from the Poor draw a tear.
But keep Monks and fat Abbots in awe.
CHORUS.
And so merry, so merry live we,
With hearts light as air,
We are strangers to care,
All under the green wood tree.
II.
For Archery England is famed,
Expert are her sons at the bow;
Their broad arrows often have tamed
The rude insults and vaunts of the Foe.
But England itself cannot excel,
For valor and good archery,
Bold Clym of the Clough, Adam Bell,
And William of Cloudeslee.
CHORUS.
And so merry, so merry live we,
With hearts light as air,
We are strangers to care,
All under the green wood tree.
SCENE II. Changes to a beautiful valley, with the prospect of a superb castle,
in the Gothic style.
Edwitha and Adela. Edw. Truly, Adela, I would be cheerful, but memory will not
let me. -- I know as well as thou do, that sorrow will not cure a wound; but
knowing myself the cause of this unhappy broil, the cheerful spirits which
health and active youth bestow, are all dispersed by Fear and froward
Apprehension. I am like a respited Criminal, that every moment dreads a
confirmation of his sentence.


Ade. Pshaw, Edwitha, I declare you don't deserve your happiness. There are
hundreds of Ladies in little England, that would give their brightest eye thus
to have the gauntlet thrown, and see themselves the happy subject of
contention, when young and valiant Knights mount neighing Steeds, and ride in
bright and burnished armor to the field! -- To hear the winding of the
Bugle-horn, the clattering of the Horses' hoofs, and the prophetic buz of
victory among the Warriors! Oh! were I the beauteous Dame that could inspire
such glorious strife, I should think of nothing but roses and lilies, Venus and
the Graces -- talk of nothing but Helen and Hector, Greeks and Trojans -- read
nothing but ballads of beauteous Ladies and valorous Knights, and sing 'em in
my sleep -- should -- Lord, I should be so transported I don't know what I
should do.


Edw. This, good cousin, is said to divert me -- but I know your heart, Adela
-- you do not envy, you pity me -- Oh! Harold! Oh my brother! would I were
assured of thy safety!

[Edwitha begins to sing.] [Responses are heard from the wood.] Ye rocks and
caves, with deep resounding voice,


Res. With deep resounding voice.

[Edwitha and Adela are surprised.]
Edw. Did you hear, Adela?


Ade. Yes, yes; I heard.


Edw. Once more.


SONG. EDWITHA.
SHIELD.
Ye rocks and caves with deep resounding voice,

Res. With deep resounding voice.

Bid Echo, who, your haunts among,
Can mimic well the Shepherd's song,
Or Herdsman's hoarser throat;

Res. Or Herdsman's hoarser throat.

Or with the festive Villager rejoice,
Can chirp to all the winged throng;
Can often repeat the jolly Plough-boy's song;
Bid gentle Echo ease my grief,

Res. Ease your grief.

And tell me is my Harold safe.

Res. Harold's safe.

Edw. This is enchantment, Adela? It Is sure some kind Spirit sent to comfort me.


Ade. I cannot tell how kind he may be, but I have discovered the Spirit. Come,
come from your hiding place, Mr. --, and let us know what and who you are.
[Adela goes toward a tuft of trees, from whence]


SCENE III.
Enter Leonard with his flute. Edw. Was it you, young Swain, that with such
respondent sweetness echoed me?


Leo. [Bows.]


Ade. Ha! That Is as much as to say, yes. [Mimics his modest bow.]


Edw. Such delightful melody in a poor Peasant is surely wonderful.


Leo. [Bows again, and shakes his head.]


Ade. Oh! ho! -- That Is as much as to say -- No. [Mimicking.] Come, come, young
man, don't be over modest -- If heaven has given you good gifts, hold up your
head and own it.


Edw. But tell me truly -- Do you know any thing of my brother's fate? -- Is he
-- is he safe?


Leo. He is. [Bows.]


Edw. Then I am happy.


Ade. There! -- there now! -- Didn't I tell you so?


Edw. And is he victorious? Is Anlaff vanquished?


Leo. He is.

[Edwitha turns away, as if to suppress the joy that overpowers her.]
Ade. There! there! -- Didn't I tell you that too? Didn't I bid you dance, and
sing, and -- Here, young man -- here is something for your good news.

[Offers him money.]
Leo. [Bows and refuses it.] Thank you, Lady, I am over-paid already.


Ade. Gad-a-mercy! Aye. indeed! How so?


Leo. By being a welcome messenger to such fair and gentle Ladies.


Ade. Hey-day! -- A Peasant too! -- Do you mind this, Edwitha? This silly
fellow refuses money, and talks -- I don't know how.


Edw Tell me, young Swain, where you learnt these happy tidings. I^ it from
report you speak, or were you at the battle?


Leo. I was at the battle.


Ade. Were you? Oh! for heaven's sake give us a description of it.


Leo. How shall a simple Peasant, Lady, speak of such high deeds? Besides, I
saw but little of the combat.


Edw. Perhaps you joined the Combatants and fought.


Leo [Bows.]


Ade. Upon my word, Mr. Young man, you are a very extraordinary kind of a
person -- What is your name?


Leo. Leonard.


Ade. And -- how many Danes might you kill yourself?


Leo. To speak of my own exploits were to undo with my tongue what I had
achieved with my arm. I and my companions came not to the field till it was
late; the battle was hot, and then I fought among the rest.


Edw. Companions! And did you go to fight for Harold and Edwitha?


Leo. For Harold and Edwitha. [Bows.]


Edw. "What shall I say?" How shall I thank you? But come, come young Swain, to
the castle; and my father, Earl Walter, shall bestow rewards, equal I hope to
your deserts.


Leo. The rewards I sought are already bestowed -- Harold is victorious, and
Edwitha condescends to approve. [Sighs.]


Ade. A sigh, too! Observe his eyes, Edwitha. -- If you give him any further
encouragement he will make love to you. -- Well, really he is a very likely
fellow. What a pity it is he is a Peasant, Edwitha!


Edw. It is, indeed, Adela. [Sighs.]


Ade. It is, indeed, Adela. [Mimicks her.] So so; sigh for sigh. -- Why, Don
Cupid seems disposed to make a pretty piece of work here. [Aside.] Come,
Edwitha, it is time to be gone, I see. -- Will you walk? -- Fare you well,
young man, fare you well. -- Edwitha is very much obliged to you -- She seems
inclined to like the color of your hair too -- but that the Fates and
Destinies forbid. [significantly.] And so you -- you must return home again,
and comfort pretty Nancy or pretty Peggy, or -- some other neat little
linsey-woolsey lass -- and you will sing, and play, and tell 'em a pretty tale --
I warrant they will listen. -- And, do you hear, don't -- don't you be silly, and
dream either of Paradise or Purgatory; but eat your curds and cream, and honor
your father and mother after your old fashion. -- You understand me -- Content
is better than a down-bed, and the stars will be obeyed. -- There is many a
precious stone trod under foot. -- Every Hero cannot be Alexander -- but these
things cannot be helped. -- So, farewell to you. -- Come, come, Edwitha.


Edw. Take this ring, young Swain; wear it in remembrance of Edwitha. -- Come,
Adela. -- Heaven protect you, Sir, and make you victorious in battle, and
fortunate in love.


Leo. Thanks, gentle Lady, sweet Lady; from my heart, dear Lady, I thank you --
And while one drop of blood shall cherish this poor bosom, will wear, with
thankfulness, your favor -- and so farewell.

[Exit Leonard.]
SCENE IV.
Adela and Edwitha. Ade. Well, really there is something very uncommon about
this young man -- A rustic dignity -- a conscious kind of humble superiority --
a firm step -- a steady eye -- a bold front -- Yes, the Warrior's character is
absolutely stamped upon his forehead.


Edw. And that is surely magnanimity.


Ade. So have I been told, girl.


RONDEAU. ADELA.
SHIELD.
The Hero, conscious of his worth,
Amid tumultuous war sedate,
Arms Rage and Danger, sends them forth,
And seems to give decrees to Fate.
When Trumpets in the deafen'd ear,
With brazen throat and warlike breath,
Would drown the trembling voice of Fear,
And bid the Coward look on death;
The Hero, conscious of his worth,
Amid tumultuous war sedate,
Arms Rage and Danger, sends them forth,
And seems to give decrees to Fate.
Edw. Oh, Leonard! Wherefore should such a mind be called ignoble! --
Ungenerous and unjust!


Ade. But how now, Edwitha! Why surely, girl, you have more wit, more pride,
than positively to love this Peasant! I can see the fellow has a handsome leg
as well as you -- can read the modest pre-eminence of his eye as quick -- can
construe all his latent virtues as truly -- What of that? -- I cannot purchase
every trinket I see; and there are many that, if I had them, I could not wear,
because -- they are unfashionable.


Edw. More is the pity that modesty, courage, and virtue should be out of
fashion.


Ade. Very true; but this has been a pitiable subject ever since Adam wore a
beard. -- Consider, Edwitha, the respect due to yourself, your father, and your
--


Edw. Nay, Adela, prithee do not mistake me so widely. -- Though I can see, and
cannot but admire in a poor Peasant, those exalted virtues which first made men
noble, yet I know my duty; I must worship nobility in its titles, and its
outward honors; for so the free-judging world, and the haughty pride of lineal
dignity, demand -- and I obey. -- Though my heart may lament its destiny, it
never shall reproach me.


Ade. "Why, that is my brave girl!" -- And yet, methinks, there is something
exceedingly remantic in this sudden way of falling in love at first sight.


Edw. Nay, Adela, if it even were love, it is not at first sight.


Ade. No, indeed! -- Aha! What, you are old acquaintances then!


Edw. We never spoke till now; but lately he has often crossed my way, run
before me to "open gates," chase the browzing ox, and remove the straggling
bramble from my path, seeking to be noticed, yet avoiding to be thanked. Once,
too, he hung a garland on a style over which I was to pass.


Ade. Audacity! -- "An enterprizing Gentleman, truly!" -- But you did not touch
his garland?


Edw. No -- I turned suddenly back to the castle.


Ade. You did right -- Come, come, think of these things but as a dream;
remember the victory of your brother, and smile at trifles.


DUET. EDWITHA and ADELA.
RAUZZINI.
Virtue bids us conquer passion,
Hard the victory we obtain;
Hard to vanquish inclination,
But the pleasure pays the pain.
If a moment Virtue waver,
She, restored to former peace,
Proud that Vice could not enslave her,
Feels her energy increase.
[Exeunt.]
SCENE V. changes to the inside of the Castle.
Enter Adam Bell in a Friar's habit, followed by the Fool, Servants, etc. SONG.
ADAM BELL. (The Seasons.)
SHIELD.
WINTER. I.
Ere the beard of thistle sails;
Ere the tadpoles wag their tales*
When the maids with milking-pails
Doff their mits and blow their nails;
When the cottage chimney smokes,
And waggish letchers crack their jok es
By the glowing ember's light,
And fright the girls, with tale of Sprite,
Then will we, over ale and cakes,
Brag of feats at Autumn wakes.
SPRING. II.
When the swallows twittering sing
Of the lovely birth of Spring;
When Bridegrooms make our three bells ring,
Ding dong ding -- ding dong ding;
When the Valley's face is seen
Veiled in many a shade of green;
When girls of husbands nightly dream,
And jolly swains get clouted cream;
Then we, upon sweet primrose beds,
Will rant our glees and rest our heads.
SUMMER. III.
When the young frog sears the rook;
When the kine stand in the brook;
When sleepy louts lose many a crook,
And codlings drop when trees are shook;
When salt mushrooms nightly spring,
And martins dip the dappled wing;
When the sun with strait-down beam
Lathers well the lusty team;
Then beneath new hay-ricks we
Will sing with might and merry glee.
AUTUMN. IV.
When the sickle and the scythe
Make the ruddy Farmer blythe;
When Hodge the bulky sheaf does writhe,
And the fat Vicar claims his tithe;
When Autumn yields her golden store,
Till well-fill'd barns can hold no more;
When ripe fruits press the plenteous board,
And old wives cull their wintry hoard;
Then will we, when labor's over,
At harvest-home our catches roar.
Adam. Though a Friar, wenches, this is my maxim -- summer or winter, spring or
fall, I am always merry.


Fool. Why then, master Friar, you and I complete the proverb, Be merry and
wise: for you are merry, and I am wise. -- And let me tell you, I am not the
only wise Fool in the world.


Adam. May be so -- But pray you, now expel some of your wisdom upon me, and
tell me how Earl Walter bears this dangerous absence of his son.


Fool. Oh, Sir, with that gravity of deportment as should seem to say -- I defy
Fate -- if Misfortune come, I am no flincher -- And then, Sir, he strokes his
beard, and endeavors to put a good face on the matter. -- But I know him -- he
has it here -- sick of the father -- Sir, between ourselves -- he has been --
as melancholy! -- as a Fiddle with one string -- as restless as a Cat in a cage
-- and as solemn as a blind Baboon on Good Friday.


Adam. But is he naturally thus grave and serious?


Fool. Oh, no, the old gentleman is a -- very good sort of an old gentleman --
when he is pleased -- a sociable conversable comprehensible kind of an old lord
enough -- likes to have his own way -- as most of your great lords do, I
observe.


Adam. Ay, and little lords too.


Fool. Why, yes, yes -- I myself, simple as I stand here, should like
exceedingly to cast this Fool's skin, and deck myself in the garment of
Authority. To see underlings tremble, if I should stamp; and look pale, if I
had the toothache -- As to ^a^l Walter, Sir, if young Harold should return safe
and sound, in health and honor, you shall see him a -- a very different man --
Lively and alert as an Owl at midnight -- Happy as a Lawyer in Term time, or a
Physician in November.


Adam But what if he were vanquished? How then?


Fool. Then -- Why then, Sir, the old gentleman would sit you down as mute and
as motionless as a bell without a clapper -- as silent -- as a bagpipe without
wind, and as sedately dismal as a death's head upon a tombstone.


Adam. You abound in comparisons, Master Motley.


Fool. Yes -- they are part of my stock in trade, and I love to keep a good
assortment. -- Can you tell why the world is like a Fair?


Adam No --


Fool. No! -- Your finger to your lip then -- listen and learn. -- The world is
like a Fair, because -- basta -- I Will turn my simile into a song.


SONG. FOOL.
SHIELD.
I.
This world is a Fair, where the crowd is bent wholly
On gew-gaws and rattles, noise, nonsense and folly;
Where higledy piggle, pell-mell and confusion,
We Are born, take a peep, die, and lose the illusion.
And there we see whirligigs, roundabouts,
Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs,
Fall lals, drums, trumpets, globes, sceptres, and crowns;
Hot spiced gingerbread, and merry-go-rounds;
With wonders! wonders! and wonders! enough to make a blind man stare!
Oh! don't you think it a wonderful Fair?
II.
Here are all sorts of toys for all ranks and gradations;
Gilt ribbands for ladies! for lords -- installations;
Wigs first worn at Westminster, after on May-days,
On Judge's and Chimney-sweep's high days and play-days.
And there you shall see masked faces, false noses, castenets and saltboxes*
Jack-puddings with gridirons, dukes, devils, and doxies;
With a strange medley of tythe-pigs and bishops, lawyers, bailiff, and prisons*
Fanatic Craw-thumpers, who have many more words than reasons,
Wise dogs, learned horses, illiterate asses, and many other strange beasts
there.
Oh! don't you think it a wonderful Fair?
III.
In this Fair you will find, Sir, the worst wares are vending;
Here Knav'ry is hoarding what Folly is spending;
Here titles and honors are trades most prolific,
And gold is the one universal specific.
And here you hear many fine promises in many fine speeches;
But if you love liberty and property beware of such leeches;
With their legerdemain tricks, Hey! Presto! fly quick, and be gone,
They are here, there, and every where, on all sides, and on none;
Then they squeeze their hats, beat their breasts, rave, rant, cant, stamp, and
stare.
Oh! don't you think it a wonderful Fair?
IV.
Here puppet-show Patriots their booths have erected,
To tell how the rights of mankind they have protected;
When in hopes to be bribed, Sir, each man with his fellow,
Of brib'ry and slavery will bluster and bellow.
Then it is that you see these Whirligigs, Roundabouts, Ups and Downs, Ins and
Outs,
Scrambling for fal-lals, drums, trumpets, globes, sceptres, and crowns,
Swords, maces, and woolsacks, and scarlet furred gowns.
Such wonders, wonders, and wonders, are enough to make a blind man stare!
Oh! don't you think it a wonderful Fair?
[Exeunt. SCENE VII.
Changes to an area within the castle walls. A march is played. Enter first the
warriors, all in martial order, and in armor; then Earl Egbert, followed by a
Dwarf bearing a huge sword and shield; next Harold, who is met and embraced by
Earl Walter and Edwitha; then Adam Bell and the Fool, and lastly, Adela, with a
laurel crown, followed by Virgins. -- She crowns Harold, as do the Virgins
Egbert, and the rest of the Knights. -- Then the following Chorus, etc. ODE.
SHIELD.
EDWITHA, ADELA, ADAM BELL, etc. etc. Behold the conquering Hero's meed,
Behold his rich reward;
Who, nobly valiant, dares to bleed,
His native rights to guard.
For him the loveliest Virgin's hand shall pluck
The freshest laurel to adorn his brow;
For him the sweetest, loudest chords are struck,
Heroic verse and harmony bestow.
With rapid finger, firm and deep,
The harp, sonorous, boldly sweep;
Now touch the amorous lovesick lute,
And gently swell the breathing flute;
With melting airs and soothing strains
Relieve the weary Soldier's pains.
Hither smiling Virgins bring
The fragrant rose, the lily sweet,
Gathered from the lap of Spring,
To strew beneath the Warrior's feet.
Nor yet forget to drop a pitying tear,
To grace the ever-honour'd bier
Of those brave Warriors who remain
Lifeless, entombed upon the bloody plain.
E. Wall. Oh welcome, welcome my Harold, welcome noble Earl Egbert! How shall I
speak my joy? To see you thus return in safety and in honor, is the supreme of
happiness.


Har. And to be thus received at our return, is the best, the mostglorious
reward -- None but a soldier can imagine the strong throbbings of the soldier's
heart, when those his arm has fought for, fly to his embraces, and pour the
grateful balm of a thousand welcomes in his wounds.


Edw. Oh my brother! my joys overcome me -- they are excessive as my fears have
been. -- From this moment may the sword sleep in honor; or if fate will again
call thee to the horrors of inexorable war, may thou find another, and a
worthier subject!


Har. A worthier, my Edwitha? the world contains not a worthier!


E. Eg. No -- The world contains not a worthier; and that I will prove against
Dane or Devil.


Ade. Will you, my lord?


E. Eg. I -- I -- He that denies it, lies and dies -- he must digest steel.


Ade. Bless me!


E. Eg I Would fight with Charlemagne and all his host! ay, and conquer too, in
such a cause.


Ade. How childish, then, have been our fears, Edwitha. -- This must have been
an easy victory to such a champion.


E. Eg. Easy lady! -- Pardon me! -- We have been in horrible danger, that is the
truth.


Har. There is no danger to the brave, for he thinks of none.


E. Wall. True Harold, when danger is present, the brave think only of opposing
danger; but when it is over, it is their delight to recollect each perilous
circumstance.


E. Eg. "To be sure -- to be sure" -- I shall never look on that sword and
shield again, but I shall remember the grim visage of that terrible Alric.


[Points to the sword and shield borne by the Dwarf.] E. Wall. What is Alric
slain?


E. Eg. The vile Pagan is dead.


E. Wall. And fell by your hand, Earl Egbert?


E. Eg. By mine -- This right arm did the deed.


Adam. Here Is a cowardly lying slave. [Aside.]


E. Eg. This good sword -- was the lancet ^^at let him blood -- this gave vent
to his foul humors -- this cut his pack thread.


Ade. Put it up my Lord -- it has carved you more honor than you will digest
in a twelvemonth.


Edw. It is too valiant for women to look at without danger of hysterics.


E. Eg. Sweet Dove of peace, at your entreaty my sword shall hide its
honorable face.


Ade. Let it; lest it should blush to hear its own praise. [Half aside.]


E. Egb. For your sake, bright Pearl of Britain, was it drawn.


Edw. I am sorry for the occasion, my Lord.


Fool. Ha! -- See how a man may be mistaken -- I should sooner have expected to
have heard of the (...) being run through with a knitting needle, or (...) ^own
with the butt-end of a thread-paper.


E. Egb. Sirrah -- you know your privilege.


Fool. Yes, we Fools have a license.


E. Egb. Dwarf.


Dwa. My Honorable Lord.


E. Egb. Watch me that Fool's mouth -- if he dare utter any more malice bestow
the bastinado -- liberally -- afflict him with a cudgel -- grievously.


Fool. What, must the honest mouth of Plaindealing be gagged by a broomstick?


E. Wall. But how went the battle, Harold? was it a hard fought field?


Har. It was my Lord; and heaven only knows what would have been the fortune of
the day had not some fresh and unknown friends arrived just as the hand of the
soldier, weary with slaughter, began almost to tire, and his heart to droop
before the unremitting fury of the numerous Dane.


Adam. Thanks for that brave Harold. [Aside.]


E. Wall. Unknown friends, say you?


Har. Yes my Lord -- they appeared to be Peasants, but they foug^^ like Heroes.


Edw. Do you hear this, Adela? [Aside to Adela.]


Ade. You do I perceive, Edwitha.


E. Egb. Yes -- yes -- the -- the Boors played their part. But what of that? It
all availed nothing till that Alric was demolished.


E. Wall. Was he so desperate?


Har. He was indeed irresistible -- His brother Anlasf, alone, of all the
Danes, was deemed his equal.


E. Egb. You may guess at a workman by his tools! Dwarf.


Dwa. My Honorable Lord.


E. Egb. Advance me that shield above your head, and hold me out the sword at
arm's length.


Dwa. I cannot, my Honorable Lord.


E. Egb. Cannot -- no -- nor such another Dwarf (...) help thee -- But I laid
him low -- I gave him a sleeping powder.


Adam. Alas -- I am sorry to find this bad world so given to falsehood.


E. Egb. False! What Is false? thou general collector of crimes and Peter Pence
-- Thou ear of Iniquity -- "Thou common sewer of sin," what is false? Did I not
kill Alric? Did I not vanquish the Dane?


Adam. Who dare doubt it, my Lord! It were a meanness beyond contempt for one
of your dignity to speak an untruth; and it would still be more vile, more
despicable to assume a valor which you durst not maintain.


E. Wall. What do thou mean, Friar?


Adam. Your pardon, my Lord, "without offense to Earl Egbert," I intended to
tell your Lordship that a Peasant, whom I shrived this very morning, did
enumerate, among other sins that hung upon his soul, the death of Alric the
Dane, whom he said he had slain in battle.


Edw. A Peasant?


Ade. What was this Peasant's name?


Adam. Leonard.


Edw. My Lord, it was this Peasant of whom I spoke to you before, who first
informed Adela and me of my brother's victory! -- He was one of those to whom,
it seems, the victory was greatly owing.


E. Wall. A Peasant! It Is some mistake. Earl Egbert, receive my best, my warmest
thanks. -- I understand the service you have done my house, and will remember
it to my utmost power.


E. Egb. Nay, but it seems -- the Friar has been Confessor to the man in the
moon, and I did not kill Alric -- Let it pass -- The fire of Etna will have
vent -- Melted pitch may boil over -- Henceforth, I will travel into the land
of the Cyclops, and exterminate Giants. -- Dwarf.


Dwa. My Honorable Lord.


E. Egb. Speak -- Valor must be tongue-tied -- relate, -- and strike
Detraction dumb -- utter, and seal up the mouth of Envy -- Whose sword and
shield are those?


Dwa. Yours my Honorable Lord.


E. Egb. Whose were they, Imp? whose were they, Wren?


Dwa. Alric, the Dane's.


E. Egb. And by what means do they appertain to me? which way do I inherit?


Dwa. You took them perforce from Alric.


Fool. You inherit illegally, if you take a man's property perforce -- Your
master has robbed the Dane, Dwarf, and you are an accomplice. He is a great
man, and may escape, but you are pigmy villain, and must be hanged, Dwarf.


E. Egb. It Is a pleasant conceit Fool -- Ha! -- ha! -- It does abate my bile --
I feel my conflux of choler evaporate.


E. Wall. Come Harold -- come Earl Egbert; within we will question you further
on the fortune of the field -- it is our duty to give the brave an opportunity
of relating their Exploits.


FINALE.
SHIELD.
HAROLD. From the clangor of arms to the banquet repair,
Where Plenty and Pleasure combine;
On the bosom of Peace court the smiles of the Fair.
'Twill give the true zest to your wine.

EDWITHA and ADELA. While around the jocund Table,
Each brave Warrior takes his seat,
The Bard shall chaunt some ancient fable,
To the attentive Soldier sweet.

EARL EGBERT. Father Friar, you will come and say grace,
With your fat and pontifical face?

ADAM. Ay, ay, never fear,
Find a Friar good cheer,
And he will find himself a good place.

FOOL. The Dwarf and the Fool
Shall sit both on one stool,
And their gibes shall afford you some sport;

DWARF. In the hall they shall sing,
Till they make the roof ring,
While the morris-men dance in the court.

CHORUS.
Soon among the motley crowd,
Festive Mirth and Laughter loud;
Convivial Frolic, blithe and jolly,
Whose antics give a grace to Folly;
Sportive trick and merry tale
Shall many a happy Guest regale.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Earl Walter and Edwitha. Earl Walter. THE active spirit of your brother,
Edwitha, cannot loiter in indolence. Harold and his companions are going for
some few days to hunt on Cheviot hills. War and the chase are his delight.


Edw. Earl Egbert, I hear, remains at home, my Lord.


E. Wall. He does; detained by respect -- by love for thee.


Edw. Love, my Lord!


E. Wall. Ay, love, Edwitha.


Edw. I am sorry for it.


E. Wall. How, girl! sorry.


Edw. It is impossible I ever should return his love.


E. Wall. Edwitha! --

Who am I!
Edw. My ever honored father.


E. Wall. And is this the duty, this the reverence a father claims! -- Indeed!
-- so prompt at disobedience.


Edw. Dear my Lord.


E. Wall. "Peace" -- thou have almost angered me -- What! a father, who, with
such anxious love and tenderness, for unremitting years, had cherished thee in
his bosom, so slightly thought of, and so lightly answered!


Edw. Pardon me, dearest father, perhaps I am to blame.


E. Wall. The reasons for this union are many and weighty; Earl Egbert is
powerful in friends and vassals; my enemies are numerous and revengeful; my
obligations too are great, and gratitude demands --


Edw. Do not, dear Sir, think I speak with a disobedient spirit,

but surely Earl Egbert has --
E. Wall. Peculiarities perhaps; say foibles; but his courage, and his virtues,
are not the less estimable -- Beware, Edwitha, of a refiactory and pertinacious
will; cherish no unduteous thoughts, or unjust prejudices; and dread to provoke
parental wrath.


Edw. Heaven forbid -- No, let me suffer any misfortune, any torment, rather
than a dear father's displeasure -- Only let me entreat you farther to examine
the real character of Earl Egbert; to give me time, and not precipitate me in
the most important action of my life.


E. Wall. Well, my child, so far thy wishes shall be granted, but remember the
reasons I have urged, harbor no disgust against Earl Egbert; or if thou have,
erase every unjust prejudice from thy thoughts, by henceforth considering him
as thy intended husband, which will teach thee to hold him in due esteem.

[Exit E. Wall.
Edw. My husband! Earl Egbert! Let me not think, lest I should find reason to
be convinced disobedience here were virtue -- Oh Leonard! -- Alas! -- it cannot
-- must not be.


SONG. EDWITHA.
SHIELD.
The northern Blast, that bleakly blows
Adown the mountain's snowy side,
The tendril bites and blights the rose,
And withers all the valley's pride.
More fatal bites not, through the grove,
The Winter's sharp and cankered tooth,
Than does the Blight of hopeless Love
The tender Bud of hapless Youth.
[Exit. SCENE II.
The Dwarf and the Fool. Fool. Verily, Dwarf, thou art but a pitiful Pigmy.


Dwa. How so, Fool?


Fool. First, in that thou art a Dwarf, and cannot hang thy hat upon a peg
without borrowing assistance from a wooden stool.


Dwa. That is a blessing, Fool; the exercise is good for my health, and*will
make me long-lived.


Fool. Next, because thou art a holder of bridles; one that waits cap in hand
while my Lord takes leave of my Lady -- during which thou art obliged to stand
bare-headed to a horse!


Dwa. These are proofs of my humility and good manners, Fool.


Fool. A very crouching spaniel, that yelps at the jingle of a bell, and the
crack of a whip, would not submit to thy office.


Dwa. Why, Fool!


Fool. Why? -- Oh shallow interrogation! -- Would a spaniel, think thou,
pull off a Lord's boot because he was bid? Or ride before him on a palsrey, to
open gates, and turn pack-horses out of the road? Would a spaniel doff his
bonnet, scrape his foot, kiss his fingers, and deliver a message from Sir to
Madam? -- The horsewhip would not make him. --


Dwa. This is still more to my praise, Fool, since it proves me more obedient
and docile even than a spaniel.


Fool. Nay then thou will pick praise out of the seven deadly sins; but come,
disclose -- tell me wherefore you, and your honorable Lord, did not go with
young Harold this morning to hunt on Cheviot Hills?


Dwa. Because one of us stays at home to make love to Edwitha.


Fool. And, like young hounds, you only hunt in couples. Verily, Dwarf, you are
but an empty Pair.


Dwa. Why look thee, Fool, I am somewhat of a Philosopher, and am resolved not
to let thy railing make me think the worse of my own good parts. A man who is
not a yard high can see the sun as distinctly as a Giant -- A good Lacquey is
better than a bad Lord -- I am contented with my lot -- Were all the world of
my mind, there would be no Madmen, sew Fools, and the Hangman would starve for
want of employment.


SONG. DWARF.
DUNY.
Ah! tell me why should silly man
Thus misapply his short sojourn.
Thus waste the life that is but a span*
The minutes that shall never return!
If he with thankful lip would taste
The pleasures which around him play*
No gloomy cloud should overcast,
But sunshine deck his happy day.
II.
It Is not the biting wint'ry blast;
It Is not the scorching summer sky*
It Is not the coast on which he is cast,
Or where he is born, or where shall die*
No, independent quite of these,
The joys or anguish he must find,
No sun can scorch, no frost can freeze
The joys of a contented mind.
Fool. Ha! Very wise, and full of most sublime sentiment -- Now I Will sing you
the second part -- It is as new and as true as yours, and as full of logic --
Open your eyes and listen.


SONG. FOOL.
SHIELD.
I.
When swallows lay their eggs in snow,
And geese in wheat-ears build their nests;
When roasted crabs a hunting go,
And cats can laugh at gossip's jests;
When law and conscience are akin,
And pigs are learnt by note to squeak;
Your worship then shall stroke your chin,
And teach an owl to whistle Greek.
Till when let your wisdom be dumb;
For say, man of Gotham,
What is this world?
A Tetotum,
By the finger of Folly twirl'd;
With a hey-go-up, and about we come;
While the sun a good post-horse is found,
So merrily we'll run round.
II.
When frost, and snow, and hail, and rain,
Are guided by the Almanac;
When Lapland wizards can explain
How many stars will fill a sack;
When courtiers hate to be preferred,
And pearls are made of whitings' eyes;
Instructed by your worship's beard,
The world shall merry be, and wise.
Till when let your wisdom be dumb;
For say, man of Gotham,
What is this world?
A Tetotum,
By the finger of Folly twirl'd;
With a hey-go-up, and about we come;
While the sun a good post-horse is found,
So merrily we'll run round. [Exeunt.
SCENE III. Changes to the skirts of the Forest, a dark umbrageous* foliage, in
the back ground.
Adela and Edwitha. Ade. Prithee, Edwitha, do not look and speak with such a
dismal gravity of countenance. Mercy on me! Thou will be fit company for nobody
shortly but Sextons and Parish-Clerks. Before I would mope in this manner, I
would live on the east side of a yew tree, sleep in a cemetry, and wrap myself
in a shroud.


Edw. What would thou have of me, girl? When contending passions disturb the
mind, and occupy the heart, the tongue in vain endeavors to trifle, and the
lips to smile.


SONG. EDWITHA.
SHIELD.
I.
Love leads us to lab' rinths of woe;
Though roses spontaneous invite,
Though Pleasure seems prompt to bestow
Each moment some new-sprung delight,
Should the Virgin be tempted to taste
The fruit that so blooming appears,
Her sweets, by Imprudence debased*
All melt in Contrition and Tears.
II.
The bosom where Purity reigns
The breath of Detraction cannot taint:
But she who not wholly abstains,
Shall utter in vain her complaint:
Like the Lily unable to rise,
That Is wounded and droops to its bed,
Untimely she withers and dies,
And the Cypress springs over her head.
Ade. Pshaw! Tell me not of drooping lilies and cypress shades -- Laughter and
light heels are certain antidotes to sorrow.


Edw. Thou art a mad girl, Adela.


Ade. A merry girl, you mean -- Mad I shall never be, unless I were to fancy
myself a fiddle, and go mad because I could get nobody to dancy to me.


Edw. What could thou be merry, if, like me, thou were going to be married
to a Fool!


Ade. Ay by my conscience could I. -- Married to a Fool! Marry amen, and with
all my heart, and the sooner the better -- Your Fool is the only manageable
beast among a herd of husbands. When you are angry you may vent your spleen in
metaphor, talk treason in simile, and abuse him by irony and allegory, and he
shall kiss you for being so kind -- The greater my husband's folly, the more
apparent would my wit be. -- I could mould him, lik a piece of unbaked dough,
into any form. -- A Fool, like a Watchman, walks always in the dark, and his
wife is the lanthern by whose light he finds his way. Lord, girl, I could give
thee my apron full of reasons, and a handful over, why a woman should marry a
Fool.


Edw. I thought men of wit and understanding were always thy favorites.


Ade. As gallants, but not as husbands. Give 'em a little love, and a little
hope before marriage, and they will see good sense in every sentence, wit in
every antic, and Cupids hanging in clusters at every ringlet; but the honey
moon over, and all the little Loves drop as dead as suffocated Bees -- vanish
like Ghosts when a candle enters. After this, my Lord becomes so full of wisdom
and observation, that one must set Discretion with a pair of scales at the door
of one's mouth, to weigh Words, and detect Levities, or else expect to have 'em
entered in a memorandum-book, and read every Sunday after sermon.


Edw. By way of reproof and edification, hey girl!


Ade. Yes. -- And then Sir Gravity seats himself in his Elbow-chair, and with
all the conscious dignity of Wisdom rubs his shins, hems thrice, and begins. --
Hem! -- my dear -- hem -- my dear -- Pshaw, zounds! leave playing with the
cat's tail, and listen to me. -- My dear -- how often must I remind you of the
necessity of being circumspect in your words and actions! -- Last Sunday was a
se'nnight, after vespers, being in company with the parson of the parish, you
asked if Aristotle could talk French; and soon after wanted to know what was
Latin for a bag-pudding. -- I have told you a thousand times, my dear, that
your tongue is so flippant, you prattle so fast, and your discourse is such a
mixture of sense and nonsense, that it is like reading the Proverbs of Solomon,
interlined with the merry exploits of Jack the Giant-killer.


Edw. Ha, ha, ha.


Ade. So proceeds he -- reproving me for not paring my nails properly --
reading me wise documents concerning the milk-fever, the danger of cutting
eyeteeth, and sipping hot soup; together with the indecency of clambering over
styles, sleeping in church, and wearing short petticoats


Edw. And what would thou do, had thou one of these circumspect, learned,
fault-finding husbands?


Ade. Do? -- Why I would make mince-meat of Aristotle, put Epictetus in a pie,
and serve up Seneca in a sack-posset, that he might be choked with his own
wisdom.


RONDEAU. ADELA.
SHIELD.
Give me the man of simple soul,
Not prone to proud o'erweening,
Whose open eye can vacant roll,
And never betray a meaning.
No solemn Sir, within whose looks
Live naught but wrinkles and rebukes.
Give me the man, etc.
No spoilt child of wit,
Every ready to spit
The spleen of his brain at who stands in his way,
Finding fault, when you're silent, with what you don't say.
May the Fates rather send me a fool,
Whom the genius of woman may rule;
Whom her rattle and tattle, caprices or kisses, cannot teaze;
Whom the jig of a fiddle, or wit of a riddle, can please.
Give me the man, etc.
Edw. Here comes one will never die of too much wisdom.


SCENE IV.
Enter Earl Egbert and Fool. E. Eg. Ladies, the blessings of sunshine be upon
you.


Ade. What are these, Sir, beside ripe fruit and thunder-showers?


E. Eg. What are those? -- Why they are -- umph -- they are -- what are they,
Fool?


Fool. The Fool cannot tell.


Ade. Do you walk for contemplation, Sir, or health?


E. Eg Umph! -- Marry, to say the truth, neither -- Not but that I am somewhat
addicted to contemplation. -- But then I am apt to think about so many things,
that at last I cannot tell what I am thinking about.


Ade. That Is strange.


E. Eg. At other times I am so full of meditation! -- that I fall fast asleep!
-- To say the truth, ladies, I came, seeing you approach so near the skirts of
the forest, to give you protection back to the castle.


Edw. We are obliged to your courage, Sir, but there is no danger.


E. Eg. Pardon me, bright Constellation, I have heard to the contrary.


Ade. Yes truly, and so have I.


E. Eg. Have you? -- Have you heard that these woods are dangerous?


Ade. Exceedingly.


E. Eg How? -- how? -- where? -- In what manner.


Ade. This forest is at present the shelter of a daring band of outlaws.


E. Eg. Come, ladies -- come, let us return.


Edw. No, I shall walk a little farther; there is nothing to fear in the
daytime.


E. Eg. No! Let us walk a little farther then.


Ade. Indeed, Edwitha, you are mistaken. -- If Earl Egbert were not with us, I
would not proceed a hundred paces farther for a king's ransom.


Edw. Nay, we are all safe enough, Adela, for heaven protects the Fool and the
Innocent, and the Valiant protect themselves.

[A cry is heard without of "The wolf! the wolf!" they are all alarmed.]
E. Eg. Mercy! -- What cry is that?

["The wolf! the wolf!"]
Edw. Heaven defend us!

[Exeunt Adela and Edwitha.]
Enter Peasants, crying "the wolf!" etc. E. Eg. Where? -- which way?


Wom. There, there -- run, run. [Exeunt Peasants.]


E. Eg. O Lord! -- which way shall I run? -- what will become of me? -- [A
shriek of women and children.] Oh mercy!


Fool He Is coming, he is coming -- draw your sword, my lord. --


E. Eg I Am a deadman! -- [Stands a moment confused, then runs behind the trees]


Fool. [Another shriek] Oh my lady! my lady! oh my poor lady! she will be
devoured! -- [Shout.] Ha! well said, well said, my brave fellow! well said, my
sturdy rascal -- have a care -- now -- now -- there -- there -- again -- there
was a home-stroke -- well said, my boy -- aha, Mr. Wolf -- Huzzah! huzzah! he is
dead! he is gone! it is all over with him! he is defunct! there he lies! huzzah!


E. Eg. [Peeping.] Fool!


Fool. My Lord.


E. Eg. He lies very still.


Fool. Yes -- he is out of breath. -- But come, come -- will your valiant
lordship please to have a nearer peep at the savage monster?


E. Eg. Are you sure he is dead? -- quite dead?


Fool. Nay, if ever he taste mutton more, call me Sheep.


E. Eg. Why then -- But Fool -- you shall go first, and see if he breathes
still; for though he seem dead, he grins horribly.


Fool. I Will sell you his teeth for sixpence a dozen.

[Exit Fool.]
E. Eg. A bargain, Fool. -- But don't be rash -- don't be too venturesome --
take care -- go softly --

[Keeps following, and peeping with the utmost caution, step by step.] [Exit.]
SCENE V.
Enter Leonard, with his sword bloody, supporting Edwitha, Leo. How are you,
gentle Lady?


Edw. Sase, Sir; thanks to "your generous, to" your noble valor. -- Are you
wounded, Sir?


Leo. Not at all, Lady,


Edw. Do you know where is my cousin Adela? -- Is she out of danger?


Leo. Entirely. -- I saw her enter a cottage a little to the left.


Edw. You are born, Sir, to be my Desender.


Leo. Would I were.


Edw, "Heaven reward your magnanimity." -- I was too much your debtor, Sir,
before. --


Leo. Say not so, dear Lady; -- you are not, it is I am the debtor! To be
permitted to converse with you! To touch your beauteous hand! To hear you
acknowledge you are obliged to me! -- To me! -- A poor and humble Peasant! How
might I hope such abundant happiness? Oh that I had been born a Prince, that I
might have been some way worthy of you!


Edw. You speak, Sir, with passion.


Leo. Pardon me, gentle Lady -- I had almost forgot myself. -- [Sighs.]


Edw. I rate your virtues highly, Sir.


Leo. Tell me, Lady, what would he deserve, who, sunk like me, in indigence and
obscurity, should dare, by loving you, to make himself your Equal?


Edw. "If, Sir, he had your virtues," he would deserve more than I durst grant.


Leo. Generous Lady! But when I suffer a word, a wish to escape, offensive to
that purity I adore in you, may you and heaven detest me!


Edw. I find, Sir, you are truly noble. Tell me, then, how does it become the
daughter of an ancient house, proud of its alliances, and jealous of its
honors, to behave?


Leo. Equal to its dignities and expectations, and consistent with her own
worth: and he who, under the mask of love, tempts Innocence to betray her duty,
and wound her honor, is unworthy the least regard of Beauty or of Virtue.


SCENE VI.
Enter Adela. Ade. Mercy on me, Edwitha, what a terrible affair this had like
to have proved. -- We jested about wolves with that Fool to some purpose. --
So, young man -- what, are you here again?


Edw. Yes, Adela, and to him we owe our present safety; he killed the horrid
savage.


Ade. He! -- Well, I declare if ever I write a romance, I Will call my hero
Leonard. -- But come, come* let us get away from this frightful forest -- I
shall dream of wolves for this twelvemonth. -- Young man, will you see us safe
out of these territories of teeth and claws?


Leo. [Bows.]


Ade. Well, well, give me your arm then. -- Edwitha, I have left a wing for
you. -- Though stay, stay. -- What is your name?


Leo. Leonard.


Ade. You must know, Leonard -- I have a very great esteem for you -- I think
myself very much obliged to you; and though somewhat flippant, perhaps, as I
know myself to be a very prudent sensible girl, I would fain give you a little
advice, because I -- see how it is with you. -- But -- no -- I cannot speak it
-- so I 'll turn it into a song.


SONG. ADELA.
HAYDN.
He who loves his mistress truly,
Ever anxious for her fame,
Scorns to let a thought unruly
Taint his ardent generous flame:
Sooner far would hopeless perish,
Than indulge impure desires,
Though through life he will constant cherish
Gentle hopes and holy fires.
If the Lover does not so,
Virgins mark him for your foe.
Ever faithful, ever tender,
Ever watchful for the day,
When his valor may defend her,
Not his cunning may betray.
Selfish snares so much detesting,
If unequal love denies,
(Pity's tear alone requesting)
He a willing martyr dies.
If the Lover does not so,
Virgins mark him for your foe.
[Exeunt Edwitha and Adela.] Leo. Oh fortunate day! Unhop'd for happiness*
Angelic Edwitha! And have I! -- have I rescued thee from death! -- But who can
tell what farther danger may yet occur? -- I 'll follow, and while my ravished
eyes can trace the celestial Vision, will still be ready to defend her from
harm. [Exit.]


SCENE VII. Changes to the Castle.
Enter Adam Bell and Alice. Alice. I wish, Master Friar, you would not keep
teizing me, and following me up and down, in and out, backward and forward,
into every room of the house, a this'n. -- I tell you, I don't want to have any
thing to say to you -- I don't like you.


Adam. Nay, but hear ye me, Alice, I 'll confess you your sins, Alice, and
enjoin you the sweetest penance, Alice.


Alice. You! -- sweet! -- An old fusty Friar. -- There is nothing sweet about
you.


Adam. Oh, yes, Alice, I have a sweet breath, as you shall taste, Alice.
[Kisses her, she struggles.]


Alice. If you touch me again I -- I 'll raise the house about your ears -- an
ugly, old monster. -- I declare there is no living for these wicked old Friars.


Adam. What then -- all Friars are -- hey, Alice --


Alice. All Friars are -- [mimicks him] -- Yes -- all Friars are -- "hey,
Alice." And so, if you offer to lay a finger on me again -- "look you -- here
are my nails."


Adam. But hear you me, Mrs. Alice -- you are not so furiously virtuous when
you meet Adam Bell at the dark cave in the forest, Mrs. Alice.


Alice. Hey! [frightened.]


Adam. Do you remember, the last time you saw him, which is now three weeks
since, and two days, how lovingly you clasped him round the neck, and called
him your dear Adam, and your sweet Adam; and how you persuaded him to swear he
would marry you at Easter -- Hey, Alice!


Alice. Lord a' mercy! -- why sartinly you deal with Old Nick.


Adam. I can conjure a little, Mrs. Alice. -- If I pleased I could show you
Adam Bell standing here in this very spot in less than half a minute.


Alice. Nay, don't, don't -- for goodness sake, don't -- For I have heard say,
as how, when the Old One carries any body through the air, a' that'n, he always
raises a whirlwind; and that they are sometimes miserably dashed in pieces
against a chimney or a church steeple.


Adam. What -- then you -- you really -- love Adam Bell -- Hey, Alice?


Alice. Aye, do I, from the very bottom of my heart -- My mother has found it
out, and --


Adam. I know what you are going to say -- You are going to inform me how she
scolds you, and tells you Adam is an outlaw, and will come to be hanged.


Alice. As I hope to be saved and so she does. -- Moreover, she says as how he
does not care for me; and that he is only leading me into a fool's Paradise, and
when he has got me there, there he will leave me.


Adam. And then, instead of Paradise, you will awake in Purgatory -- Hey, Mrs.
Alice.


Alice. So she says. -- However, I have a good heart on it. -- She does not know
my Adam.


SONG. ALICE.
SHIELD.
I.
Oh my bonny, bonny Adam Bell,
With thee I Would traverse hill and dale;
All the day I would follow whatever befell,
To listen at night to the tale
Of my bonny, bonny Adam Bell.
II.
Over sea or land, by night or day,
With a light heart and undaunted,
I Would trip over the hills and far away,
While merrily I chaunted,
Of my bonny, bonny Adam Bell,
With whom I Would traverse hill and dale;
All the day would I follow whatever befell,
To listen at night to the tale
Of my bonny, bonny Adam Bell.
III.
Though my bed were of the grass so green,
And a cold stone were my pillow,
I Would brave the blast that bites so keen,
Nor fear the foaming billow;
But with my bonny, bonny Adam Bell,
I Would jocund traverse hill and dale;
All the day would I follow whatever befell,
To listen at night to the tale
Of my bonny, bonny Adam Bell.
Adam. Well, but now -- hark ye me, Mrs. Alice -- you perceive I know your
pranks, and so -- you -- you


Alice. Keep your hands to yourself -- what do you know? -- I am sure if you
were the devil himself in the shape of a friar, which, for aught I can tell,
you may be, you know no harm of me, except that I love Adam Bell.


Adam. And that is harm enough, Alice. -- He is a wicked fellow, and, as your
mother says, may come to be hanged; though I have the christian charity to hope
he will not. -- But you must not be coy to me, Alice -- consider, I can tell
tales, Alice.


Alice. Well then, you may tell. -- To be sure you may get me turned away from
my place, may hap, and I should be very sorry for that -- But I would sooner
lose fifty places, than be false-hearted to Adam Bell.


Adam. [Very much pleased.] Ha, ha -- well -- ha, well -- ha, well -- ha -- I
-- I find you -- you are a true-hearted lass, Alice, and I partly commend you,
Alice. -- But hark ye me, Alice -- If ever you play Adam a trick with any body
else, Alice, I Will -- I Will be revenged on you for this -- I Will surely tell him
the instant I know it.


Alice. You Will stay till you know before you tell, will not you?


Adam. Yes, yes, Alice, yes --


Alice. When then I defy both you and your grandfather, old Nick.


Adam. Well, Alice, since it is so, say your prayers night and morning, and
continue to love Adam Bell. -- "(...) a great friendship for him." -- He is a
very worthy clever fellow.


Alice. Yes, so he is; a much cleverer than ever stood on the shanks of a
friar. [Exit.]


SCENE VIII.
Adam alone. Well said, my bonny lass; -- and when I forsake thee, or use thee
unkindly, may I never taste the blessings which love and a true-hearted woman
can bestow.

SONG. ADAM BELL.
SHIELD.
Woman! charming lovely woman,
Thy gentle smiles shall ever be
Adored by me,
Oh lovely woman!
For what would all the bounteous stores
Which Nature from her bosom pours,
Of rich and rare,
Of good, and sweet, and fair; --
What would they be,
Deprived of thee,
Oh lovely, kind, enchanting woman!
Ah! who could hear the Linnet sing,
Or see the beauteous tints of Spring;
Ah! who could hear, or see, or taste,
If thou beyond the reach of man were placed?
Oh woman! charming, lovely woman!
Thy gentle smiles shall ever be
Adored by me,
Oh lovely woman!
[Exit.] SCENE IX.
Enter Earl Egbert with the wolf's head, his sword drawn, and the Fool
following him. E. Egb. What a horrible monster it is, Fool! -- What tusks!


Fool. And what do you intend to do with it, now you have been valiant enough
to cut off the head of a dead Wolf?


E. Egb. Preserve it as a trophy to tell posterity,


Fool. How courageously you ran away.


E. Egb. Fool, -- do see* this purse of gold?


Fool. Yes -- but tactus -- feeling is the best of the five senses.


E. Egb. I -- did not run away from the wolf, Fool.


Fool. Oh, oh! [aside.] -- Yes -- yes, you did.


E. Egb. I tell you, Fool, I did not -- nay more -- I killed the wolf with my
own right arm. -- Did -- I not?

[Tosses the purse about.]
Fool. No.


E. Egb. Yes I did -- and you saw me -- you were a spectator of the terrible
combat.


Fool. No -- no -- no.


E. Egb. No! [Plays with the purse.]


Fool. No.


E. Egb. Well, well -- then I did not --

[Puts the purse in his pocket.]
Fool. Hey! -- egad -- now I recollect -- I -- I believe you did, but the proof
lies in the purse, and the purse lies in your pocket.


E Egb. -- There -- take it -- and show your wisdom, Fool, by praising my valor.


Fool. Valor! [examining the contents of the purse] three, six, nine, twelve,
-- by the sting in the dragon's tail St. George was a coward to you --
eighteen, twenty, one, two, three -- a Welshman on St. David's*day was never
half so full of wrath.


E. Egb. Now answer me -- How, when the wolf approached -- how did I look?


Fool. Look! -- terrible! -- as nine tailors at one cucumber! I remember a song
about a Knight almost as courageous as yourself: you shall hear.


SONG. FOOL.
SHIELD.
I.
Sir Eglamore was a valiant knight,
Fa, la, lankey down dilly.
He called for his sword, and went forth to fight,
Fa, la, lankey down dilly.
He went forth to fight, as I Have heard say*
And when he came there he ran away. Fa, la, etc.
II.
A hungry wolf did towered him leap, Fa, la, etc.
But he would rather have met with a score of sheep;
Fa, la, etc.
Then he ran so fast that his sword did drop*
And he scorned to turn back to pick it up. Fa, la, etc.
III.
Then there came whistling down the plain Fa, la, etc.
A surly, sturdy, dauntless swain: Fa, la, etc.
Mean while the knight ran up a tree,
That if they should fight, he the combat might see.
Fa, la, etc.
IV.
Oh then began a bloody fray, Fa, la, etc.
As the knight durst not fight, he resolved to pray;
Fa, la, etc.
But had you beheld Sir Eglamore,
When as he heard the savage roar! Fa, la, etc.
V.
This Peasant did his ribs so roast, Fa, la, etc.
That Mr. Wolf gave up the ghost: Fa, la, etc.
So when the knight saw the Monster dead,
His courage returned, and he cut off his head.
Fa, la, etc.
E. Egb. Hark ye, Fool -- this is no jesting matter -- It is not convenient
that Earl Walter should know the truth -- Besides -- I say, Fool, I am valorous
-- set that down in your creed -- believe and report it, and gold shall jingle
in your purse.


Fool. Oh, I am a very Pagan Priest for that -- I will believe any thing, and
report any thing for Gold. -- But Edwitha, and that wasp, Adela, will tell a
different tale.


E. Egb. Nay, now I find you are a dull Fool. -- Let it be granted, which,
considering their fright, is very unlikely, that they saw somebody else attack
the wolf -- he fell -- What of that? -- He was only stunned -- he got up again
-- more enraged than ever -- upon which I -- seeing him make toward Edwitha --
drew my sword, set myself in his path, and with a single stroke cut off his
head.


Fool. You had better do it at two -- double your stroke -- it will sound
better.


E. Egb. "No matter;" -- follow my directions, and your fortune is made* Fool.


Fool. Ha -- so shall the proverb, That Fools have fortune, be verified. --
Well -- so be it.


SCENE X.
To them Earl Walter. E. Egb. My Lord -- I -- have -- here brought -- a
trifling gift for your Lordship.


E. Wall. For me, my Lord? [coldly]


E. Egb. Um -- a -- kind of -- present nothing -- though not long since -- a
terrible reality. -- But thus do circumstances change the properties of things;
and thus was the sword a circumstance that changed these fangs to the mere
images of Anger and Destruction.


E. Wall. Ay, my Lord -- but whose sword?


E. Egb. Mine --


E. Wall. Yours!


E. Egb. Mine -- a -- matter -- of -- small moment -- yet -- something. -- The
labors of Hercules were not all equally dangerous. -- Let these poor doings be
construed in their plain sense, and Courage shall sleep contented.


E. Wall. Let me understand you, Earl Egbert. -- Was it you who fought with the
Wolf?


E. Egb. I.


E. Wall. And killed him?


E. Egb. And killed him. -- "The deed is recent and notorious." -- Women, boys,
and cowards did speculate. -- The Fool likewise beheld; let him impart, -- "To
the act of Valor let him give the garb of Truth."


E Wall. Is it possible?


E. Egb. Am I doubted? -- Why then, let Virtue be extinct from this vile world,
and only let Fear and Falsehood flourish.


Fool. Amen. -- So shall our cause thrive. [Aside.]


E. Wall. Pardon me, Earl Egbert, but I had been told --


E. Egb. That new moons are made of old Almanacs, perhaps. And that royal
Arthur's knights were taylor's 'prentices -- I claim daylight, and fifty pair
of eyes, for my testimonies -- they saw, and they shall announce.


E. Wall. Saw you! you yourself vanquish the wolf!


E. Egb. Me -- Me myself they saw, from the loopholes of hedges, and the tops
of trees -- The act was visible. -- The sun was not in eclipse, nor hid behind
a wooden trencher -- What! is the blood not moist, and smoking still upon my
sword?


E. Wall. Forgive me, noble Egbert. -- The account I had heard from Adela was
very different. --


E. Egb. Let the Fool speak; he saw the combat.


Fool. Yes, yes, the Fool saw it -- the Fool was wise and ran away.


E. Egb. Ay -- The Fool ran away. -- For* my own part -- I -- I retreated a few
paces, it is true, but it was only to draw my sword.


Fool. And put himself in a posture of offense -- and defense. -- Had you
beheld how he looked -- [bursts inton laugh.] -- you would have died with
laughing.


E. Wall. With laughing!


E. Egb. How!


Fool. Ay -- to see what a silly figure he cut --

[Laughs excessively.]
E. Egb. Silly figure! who? what? [Angrily, but striking his pocket as to give
the Fool hints of future reward.]


Fool. Why -- [laughs; then stops suddenly] the wolf without his head to be
sure.


E. Wall. But pray was there not a Peasant, who --


E. Egb. Oh, yes -- yes -- There was a sturdy Hind who gave him the first blow.


Fool. And to say the truth, a devilish hard knock it was -- I thought Mr. Wolf
had been dead and gone -- quite deceased, till Earl Egbert showed me to the
contrary. -- But he was only stunned. --


E. Wall. This accounts for the mistake.


Fool. He got up again -- more enraged than ever -- upon which, the valiant
Earl seeing him make toward Edwitha, drew his sword, set himself in his path,
and with a single stroke -- humph -- hold -- I forget -- was it one or two
strokes?


E. Egb. Two -- two strokes.


Fool. Oh -- ah -- and with two single strokes cut off his head.


E. Wall. Leave your fooling, sirrah -- Earl Egbert, I know not how to thank
you. -- Twice has my daughter owed her safety to your arm. -- But she shall
acknowledge, she shall reward your services.


E. Egb. Why that is sufficient, Earl Walter. -- Good deeds and valiant, I
find, are liable to misconstructions. -- Envy is the shadow of Merit -- Let it
pass. --


SCENE XI.
Enter a Messenger. Mess. My Lord, Anlaff, the Dane, with a strong band, is
approaching fast to assault the castle, informed, as Rumor says, of the
absence of young Harold and your friends.


E. Egb. Anlaff! The devil he is. [Aside.]


E. Wall. Anlaff! Oh my prophetic spirit! -- How far are they hence?


Mess. Some three hours march, as it is said, my lord.


E. Wall. Fly, friend, take the swiftest horse, and use thy utmost diligence to
Cheviot Hills, to inform my son -- Relate our danger, bid him make what speed
he may, and we; in the mean time, will do all that desperate men can do to
repel the enemy. [Exit Messenger.] -- Oh Earl Egbert, we now shall have
occasion for all our courage.


E. Egb. I wish I was at sea in a cockle shell, with all my soul. [Aside]


SCENE XII.
Enter Edwitha and Adela. Edw. My Father!


E. Wall. Edwitha! -- have thou heard?


Edw. I have.


E. Wall. Oh my child, I tremble for thee.


Edw. Fear not for me, my father; my heart tells me you never shall behold
Edwitha in any state unworthy of yourself -- you may see me die, but never
debased.


E. Wall. I foresaw the probability of this -- I warned thy brother, but he,
rash and unthinking, contemned my fears. -- But wherefore do I waste that time
in complaint which might be so much better employed? Come, Earl Egbert, let us
think about defense and dying properly. [Exit Earl Walter.]


SCENE XIII.
E. Egb. Dying properly -- a very happy subject for contemplation truly.
[Aside.]


Ade. Take comfort, rely on the care of heaven, my Edwitha.


Edw. On that alone I depend for support and preservation.


FINALE.
SHIELD.
EDWITHA. To man the future's unsoreseen;
It Is then his duty to await
The various turns of wayward sat,
With mind unawed and thought serene.

ADELA. Though present tempeste cloud the fky,
Around the livid lightnings blaze,
Sweet innocence can yet supply
The soul resigned,
The constant mind,
Whose power supreme the raging storm obeys.

[EDWITHA and ADELA walk up the stage.] EGBERT. I find my sears increase apace,
Oh, would I were in any other place.

FOOL. Did you ever see a Tailor, Sir, handle his sheers?
How he will snip,
And he will clip,
And his fury to quell,
In buckram make terrible slaughter;
Often sending vast remnants to hell!
Like him the fierce Dane gives no quarter,
But with blood and with battle
Will make the walls rattle
About your ears;
Would I were hid in some old well.

Enter ADAM BELL. Where is Earl Walter, who can tell?

EDWITHA. He went good Friar hence, even now,
With heavy heart and clouded brow.

Enter ALICE frightened. Ah me! where shall we women run!
Oh, Lady, we are all undone!

EGBERT. Ay, ay, alack, we are all undone!

ADAM. Hence with your dastard doubts and fears.
Alice cheer your heart, and dry your tears.

ADAM and FOOL. Hence, then, with dastard doubts and fears

EDWITHA, ADELA, and ALICE. We'll cheer our hearts, and dry our tears.

CHORUS.
Who knows but heaven may on high,
Behold a speedy succor nigh.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Earl Walter, and afterward Adam Bell. [Shouts are heard. Earl Walter. THIS
generous alacrity, this grateful courage, infuses fresh vigor into my old arm,
and almost makes me young again -- almost teaches me to hope impossibilities.
-- Alas it is in vain! The revengeful Dane will soon arrive, and satiate
himself with slaughter. [Enter Adam Bell.] What here still, holy Friar? Why
do thou not fly this place of death?


Adam. No, my Lord, I mean to stay with you.


E. Wall. To stay with me?


Adam. Ay, my Lord; to fight with you, to die with you, should it be necessary,
but I have better hopes.


E. Wall. Whence? How, good Friar?


Adam. My Lord, you heard the testimony your son gave to the valor of certain
Peasants, by whose assistance the late battle was turned against the Dane.


E. Wall. Ay, I heard it with surprise.


Adam. Those Peasants might again do you good service, if --


E. Wall. If what? Who are they? what are they? where are they?


Adam. They are men who have greater cause to live in fear than expectation
from the house of Earl Walter.


E. Wall. Fear! you speak in riddles -- explain yourself.


Adam. They are the Outlaws whom you have so often threatened to pursue to
death and ignominy, but who wish to obtain your savor, and by your means the
pardon of offended Majesty.


E. Wall. And do they intend to reform?


Adam. They are steadfast in that purpose.


E. Wall. But who shall tell them of my distress?


Adam. I will my Lord, and quickly.


E. Wall. Will you, Friar?


Adam. I will, my good Lord, though no Friar.


E. Wall. How?


Adam. But one of the chief of those bold Outlaws -- Adam Bell --

[Throws off his disguise, and appears armed.
E Wall. Adam Bell! And where -- where are your associates?


Adam. Waiting within the sound of this [Points to his bugle born] This shall
presently collect a set of brave fellows, who at least will do something toward
protecting the castle from the Dane till the arrival of your son.


E. Wall. Miraculous! unhoped relief! -- Come then -- draw your companions
hither -- believe me you will not find me forgetful of a service like this.


Adam. My Lord, We neither doubt your honor nor your generosity: use us but
according to the nobleness of your own nature, and our zeal in your defense,
and we shall be sully satisfied. [Exit E. W.


SCENE II.
Enter Alice. Alice. Dear Adam, I never was so rejoiced to see thee in all my
life. -- Are your friends all safe within the castle?


Adam. All -- and all are yet too few -- The Dane is arrived flush of men, and
boiling with revenge for the loss of his brother.


Alice. Well, I don't fear 'em now Adam -- you shall be our Hector to fight the
Trojans.


Adam. The Trojans, Alice! What do thou know about the Trojans?


Alice. Know! -- why a great deal -- My grandfather used to tell me endless
stories about the Trojan Greeks.


Adam. Indeed.


Alice. Oh yes -- It was all his delight -- and so of a night he would sit and
reharse such things -- About the rape of Troy, and the destruction of the
Greeks, and the burning of Fair Helen -- and about Nestor, that had seventy
sons -- and how fifty men crept into a horse's belly.


Adam. Surely!


Alice. And then he said there was such terrible battles between Hector and
Alexander, and Killies and Hecuba.


Adam. Well, well, Alice, we'll fight like Greeks and Trojans true I warrant.


Alice. Yes, I have a good heart on it now, Adam -- There be you and your
companions, and Earl Egbert, and --


Adam. Earl Egbert, Alice! Earl Egbert is a Braggart, a Coward --


Alice. A Coward!


Adam. Ay, Alice -- A false lying Coward -- that would run from his own shadow,
if on lifting his arm it appeared in a threatening posture.


Alice. Mercy! Why he talks as if he could live upon Lion's hearts, and broil
them himself.


Adam. Yes he has talked too much -- he will repent his talking ere long. But
come Alice, this is no time for talking with me -- I must give thee a kiss for
comfort, and then to the battle.


SONG. ADAM BELL.
SHIELD.
Inured to wars and rude alarms,
Unshaken amid the din of arms,
We startle not at Terror's dismal yells:
The shouts and clangors of the foe,
The horrors Death and Danger know,
But animate the heart where Courage dwells.
[Exit Adam, manet Alice. Alice. Heaven be with thee, Adam -- I love thee, and
in spite of all my mother can say against thee, ever shall love thee.


SONG. ALICE.
SHIELD.
I.
How can my mother chide my love?
How can she frown and scold me?
How can she say he will faithless prove,
As she has often told me!
II.
Ah! did she know his winning wiles!
Ah! could she taste such blisses!
And heard his oaths, and saw his smiles,
And felt his precious kisses!
She would not surely chide my love,
She would not frown and scold me;
She would not say he will faithless prove,
As she has often told me.
III.
His lips are like the sugar-pea,
His tongue is dipped in honey;
His words are dearer far to me
Than wagon loads of money!
Then do not, mother, chide my love,
Then do not frown and scold me;
Then do not say he will faithless prove,
As you have often told me.
[Exit.] SCENE III. Continues.
Earl Egbert and Fool. E. Eg. Prithee, Fool, good Fool, afford me consolation
-- give me comfort, most sage Fool.


Fool. I cannot -- cannot -- unless I could give you wings -- There is no
escaping -- bolts and bars forbid -- stone walls are not to be moved with fine
speeches -- Rhetoric is lost -- eloquence thrown away upon 'em -- a key is your
only Counselor in this case.


E. Eg. Is it not very strange, Fool, that I should be as valiant as Alexander
at some moments, and at others have no propensity to molest even a mouse? No
man in England is at this instant less inclined to mischief, murder, and
bloodshed, than I am.


Fool. Then you have no inclination to die like a Hero, that you may live for
ever?


E. Eg. Not the least in the world as I hope for mercy -- my thoughts are all
turned to tranquillity -- Peace -- peace and quietness is my wish -- and, when
one considers, that -- that now is really a most virtuous disposition -- Why
should I cut any man's throat? Or why should any man cut mine?


Fool. How will Anlaff understand that logic* when he finds that you are the
person who killed his brother Alric?


E. Eg. I didn't, Fool, I didn't.


Fool. No.


E. Eg. No -- Thank heaven I have not that sin to answer for -- I killed nobody
-- "Nay more" -- I never killed a man in my life.


Fool. Never killed a man in your life!


E. Eg. No.


Fool. Zounds, what a shame that is!


E. Eg And I shall think it exceedingly hard if any body kills me. Oh Lord!
What is that!

[Shouts, and founding of the bugle born is heard. Yes, yes, it is the Danes --
What shall I do? I tremble all over -- shale like a cobweb in a high wind -- my
imagination is haunted by ten thousand furious figures of bloody-minded Danes*
I shall certainly be murdered if I don't keep out of the way, [looks] Hark!
[Noise again and born] They are entered! [Noise] Aye, aye, they are at it --
I Will hide myself in this corner till their first fury is abated [Gets beneath
the armour] Oh that I could go to sleep!


SCENE IV.
Enter Leonard. Leo. Where can this vaunting coward* this ignominious Earl have
hid himself? -- Hark you, sirrah, do you know any thing of! all Egbert?


Fool. I know Earl Egbert, Sir!


Leo. Do you know any thing of him, sirrah?


Fool. Yes, Sir, many things --


Leo. I perceive by your countenance and equivocation you know where he is, and
if you will not tell me peaceably, I will take you by the heels, and shake the
secret out of you, sirrah.

[Leonard lays hold of the Fool, who immediately points to the place where E.
Egbert is concealed]
Fool. Sir -- if you were to shake my soul out of me, I would not say a word.
-- Nay -- kill me if you please -- separate me like an opened oyster, but I
will not speak.

[The Fool keeps pointing till Leonard goes and overturns the armor, and
discovers Earl Egbert.]
Leo. Be gone, sirrah. [Exit Fool.]


SCENE V.
Thou shameless Lord! thou disgrace to honor -- But I have no Time to waste
with a Thing so bale and insignificant. -- Rise -- listen and obey.

E. Eg. I will, good Sir, I will -- what would you please to have me do?


Leo. Anlaff, the Dane, has sent a Herald with a challenge.


E. Eg. Oh Lord! a challenge! To whom, pray'


Leo. To the man who vanquished his brother Al^^^^ the conditions (...), Anlaff
will give hostag^s that i^ he be conquered, the Danes immediately shall quit
the castle; but if he conquer, the life of his enemy shall remain in his power,
and Edwitha be given for his Bride.


E. Eg. Lord Sir! what is all this to me? You know I never killed Alric his
brother, and you or he are very welcome to the lady.


Leo. Hear me, wretch!


E. Eg. I do, Sir.


Leo. Go to Earl Walter -- and with your yesterday's confidence profess
yourself the Vanquisher of Alric, and the Foe of Anlaff -- Then send your own
armor hither by your Dwarf, together with the sword and shield you so
valiantly took from the dead Alric; and after that, go hide -- hang yourself --
only be sure to keep out of sight.


E. Eg. That, Sir, at least you may depend upon.


Leo. Away then -- You are safe, therefore swell, and look important. -- Dare
not to fail -- observe me -- on your life dare not to fail.


E. Eg. I will endeavor, Sir, to obey.

[Exit Earl Egbert.]
SCENE VI.
Leonard, and afterward Adam Bell. Leo. This Reptile almost makes me forget,
respect, and assume a chacter I detest.


Enter Adam Bell. Adam. What are you determined, Leonard, to fight the Dane?


Leo. I am.


Adam. But wherefore do you take the disguise of that cowardly Earl?


Leo. Why ask you that? -- you know it is a condition in the challenge of the
haughty Anlaff, that he will not debase himself to fight any whose birth and
origin are obscure or mean. -- "Besides -- I -- but it is no matter.


Adam. Well Leonard, there is not an arm on earth I would more gladly commit
the protection of every thing most dear to, than to thine. -- And yet -- I am
not without fear -- The Dane is a bold, and almost matchless Warrior -- Never
yer equalled by his most renowned or desperate Foe.


Leo. "Aye!" -- But I have a cause would nerve an Infant! -- Edwitha! Love! and
Edwitha!


Adam. Love and Edwitha! you rave, Leonard -- And yet impossible as it is that
love like this should be successful, I almost rejoice at it.


Leo. Aye, it is a noble passion, that adds strength and dignity to courage,
gives magnanimity to the lover's enthusiasm, and makes the young Hero more than
mortal. -- But we talk too long -- Have you informed and cautioned our
companions?


Adam. I have -- their hearts and prayers are with you.


Leo. Away then, good Adam, watch the behavior of that foolish Earl, and
confirm him, if you should perceive him faultering. -- Hole -- take this
Letter, and find some private way of conveying is to Edwitha, before we enter
the lists.


Adam. Well, Leonard -- ^e firm -- be resolute -- be -- yourself -- Farewell.
--


Leo. Farewell! -- I go, determined, to a glorious Victory! -- or a glorious
Fa^^!

[Exit Leonard.]
SCENE VII.
Enter Clym of the Clough, and Will. Cloudeslee. Adam. Welcome, my friends,
every thing conspires to procure our pardon. We have only to sight bravely, and
ply our bows as formerly, and we shall become sons of grace and favor.


Clym. Why look you, Adam, you know me -- I am no Flincher -- I conquer, or --
or there is an end of me -- that is all


Will. And a dead man, Clym, don't value an angry King.


Clym. Right, lad. -- He that fights and wins, may sup in peace.


Will. And he that fights and dies, don't want any supper.


Adam. We shall have warm work.


Will. It Is not the first time I have been in danger.


Clym. He that never was in danger, never knew the sweets of safety.


SONG. CLYM OF THE CLOUGH.
EZIO.
When, over the World, the playful Lamb
Has, till the dusky twilight, strayed,
His tender plaints cry Here I am
Of night and solitude afraid.
But if, far off, his Dam he hears,
Echoing often the mournful bleat,
He runs, and stops, and hopes, and sears,
And bounds with pleasure when they meet.
Will. Well, my lads, since reformation's the word, why I 'll reform; we have
spent many a merry day together, but if they pardon an treat us like men, why
so -- if not --


Clym. If not, Will, I am an outlaw again.


Will. And I* by this right hand.


Adam. And I -- But sear it not -- they are noble, and we are brave.


ANCIENT GLEE, composed in the year 1500.
I.
We three Archers be,
Rangers that rove through the North Country,
Lovers of ven'fon and liberty,
That value not honors or money.
II.
We three good follows be,
That never yet ran from three times three,
Quarter-staff, broad-sword, or bow-manry,
But give us fair play for our money.
III.
We three merry men be,
At a lass or a glass under green wood tree;
Jocundly chaunting our ancient Glee,
Though we have not a penny of money.
[Exit.] SCENE VIII. Changes to the Courtyard of the Castle.
Enter Earl Walter, Earl Egbert, Dwarf, Saxon Herald, Edwitha, Adela, and Adam
Bell. E. Wall. You have heard, brave Egbert, the challenge of the imperious
Anlaff, and the threat of instant saccage, if refused. You see the almost
impossibility of our making a stand against his multitudes, and you know the
personal prowess of the Dane. Put therefore all consideration of the particular
safety of me or mine aside. -- Consult your own feelings, and let them alone
direct you.


Edw. Heavens! How I tremble. -- He surely will not dare to accept the
challenge. -- [Aside to Adela.]


Ade. Will he drink boiling Lead do think? or stand a tiptoe on a church
Steeple?


Adam. You know your lesson; speak confidently.

[Aside to Egbert.]
E. Eg. My Lord -- hem -- I -- Are you sure the youth dare fight this Anlast?
[Aside to Adam Bell.]


Adam. Yes -- And I am sure the youth dare cut your throat if you don't leave
your quaking* and speak in your other voice. -- Come Sir, -- mouth a little. --
Utter your big breath. [Aside to Egbert.]


E. Eg Hem! My Lord -- hem -- deeds done in open day -- must see the light. --
That I have done the deed which does stir the gall of the angry Dane is
notorious and past recall.


Edw. Do hear Adela? He is going to pronounce my condemnation. [Aside]


Ade. Pooh -- silly -- do thou not know him? It Is all flourish. -- One bright
blaze, and the snuff is out.


E. Eg. Alric is dead. -- Swelling renown sits perched upon my Crest. -- Anlaff
would pluck it thence and transplant it to his own. -- Anlaff -- is mighty in
strength -- in bone -- in ligament and sinew awful! -- I am -- but as other men.


Ade. Ay -- Think of that, good Earl Egbert, remember that.


E. Eg. I -- I do -- I do. -- Were I to compare myself to the Dane, -- my wrist
to his, -- my leg, -- or estimate success, by breadth of back --


Ade. And how else, would you estimate my Lord? you have no charm, to make
yourself invulnerable. -- Blows -- wounds, -- and death -- must determine the
fearful Conflict -- If you once pronounce the dreadful yes, fight you must --
there is no retreating -- and die you must, unless you conquer. -- Anlaff will
never forgive his brother's death.


Edw. Thanks dear girl.


Ade. Fear nothing -- observe his lip; that proclaims his thought.


E. Eg. Why -- these -- these -- a -- it is true -- are circumstances, that will
obtrude upon the fancy in Valor's spite -- and therefore -- it will argue
prudence in me to decline the combat. [During the next side speeches, Earl
Walter seems engaged in speaking to the Herald, and Adela and Edwitha with each
other.]


Adam. God's Death! what do you mean? accept the challenge instantly -- Shake off
your fears, and appear confirmed, or by heaven I 'll stab you -- What sheep you
are not to fight. [Aside.]


E. Eg. I had forgot -- I will, I will [Aside.] -- I say My Lord. -- Or I meant
to say, -- These circumstances weighed might induce, a -- a cautious man to
turn recreant, and decline the desperate contest -- but no --


Ade. How!


Edw. I am lost.


E. Eg. No, no, no! -- I am fixed -- immovable -- determined.


Adam. Well said, Sir -- proceed.


E. Eg. Away Herald, and hurl defiance forth. -- Tell the mighty Anlaff, that
Egbert the Valiant, who slew Alric the Cruel, will meet him instantly. [Exit
Herald, Earl Egbert, and Adam Bell.]


Edw. Why then the die is cast, -- and I am the devoted victim.


SCENE IX.
Ade. Patience! Is it possible! It cannot be that he dare meet Anlaff! "the
Demon of temerity possesses him" -- My Lord you will be shamed, disgraced for
ever -- my cousin ruined --


E. Wall. You are mistaken, Niece.


Ade. No, Uncle -- It Is you are mistaken -- That braggart, that bubble will
burst, and leave an everlasting stain upon your house, your happiness, and
honor.


E. Wall. I confess I have my doubts: I did not like his behavior, and
desperate as our condition is, I even hoped he would refuse, but I could not
honorably control his choice.


SCENE X.
Enter a Messenger. Mess. My Lord, your son young Harold, and all his Knights,
are hastening to your relief.


Edw. My brother! Is he arrived?


Mess. Half an hour will bring him to the lists.


Ade. Happy tidings! Delay the fatal trial my Lord, and save my Edwitha!


E. Wall. Oh! that I had the power -- But -- it must not be -- my honor is
pledged -- the combat must proceed -- Would he had arrived but one short hour
sooner!

[Exeunt Earl Walter and Messenger.
SCENE XI.
Ade. Why this is madness! -- My poor Edwitha! -- surely men have conspired thy
destruction! -- This Coward! this Thing! this Egbert! -- But it cannot be! --
What, a fellow that faints if he cuts his thumb -- that ^i^s trembling at an
old woman's tale of a ghost -- that dare not sleep in the dark -- and that
would run away from a coat and a hat hung upon a broom-stick to scare crows! He
fight Anlaff! he! -- Why did not see how he shook!


Edw. It is i^^ed most unaccountable. The fear of reproach may, perhaps, for a
moment have overcome his other fears: Be it as it will, there is now no hope
for me, and I have only to prepare, and meet my fate becomingly.


SONG. EDWITHA.
SACCHINI.
The rill that from the steep ascent
The mountain pebble washes white,
Mournfully murmuring, as it is bent
In search of rest, with anxious flight:
That rill, ever to the ocean borne,
Shall sooner from its motion cease,
Than my poor heart shall cease to mourn,
Than my poor heart regain its peace.
I apprehend the worst, and go with a mind calmly fortified, and a patient
resignation to my fate


An arrow drops at the feet of Edwitha with a letter. Edw. What is this, Adela?
An arrow and a letter? [reads.]

To the fairest of Earthly beauties the Lady Edwitha. [Opens the letter greatly
agitated.] Gentle Saint, Let your holy wishes and fervent prayers be offered to
the giver of victories, for -- Leonard the Peasant! -- [Edwitha looks up at
Adela almost overpowered, but with great expression -- reads again] Who is soon
to be engaged in all the hazard os mortal strife, for the most virtuous,
worthy, and accomplished lady of the World.


Ade. [After a long sigh] Oh my poor heart!


Edw. [With her eyes fixed] Why what is this! What aenigma!


Ade. A Miracle! A Man! A Hero! A Demigod! Had heaven granted me a Wish, this
should have been the first! That he may be victorious is the second. [With
great fervor.]


Edw. Oh, Adela! But now I was acquiescent in the worst of fortunes; had forbad
my heart to flutter, reasoned irregularity from my beating pulse, and soothed
my troubled passions into apathy -- And now -- in an instant, with increasing
violence, they are all returned, and overwhelm me with a rushing tide of fears.


Ade. Fears! Hopes! Extacies! Unexpected Raptures! -- Why girl, thou art as one
suddenly cast from a precipice, whom a protecting Angel has caught falling,
and winged to Heaven.


[Trumpet sounds, Anlaff crosses the stage] Edw. Why look thee, Adela -- behold
the good proportion, the big stature and haughty confidence of the Dane. -- Is
he not an enemy to be feared?


Ade. He may be matched. -- [Trumpet again.] Yonder is one coming, will teach
him humility.


Edw. Nay, but is not that Earl Egbert's armor, Adela?


Ade Yes, the case is his -- [Leonard enters, the Ladies are on the farther
side from his entrance] -- but observe the step -- the gesture, and the form --
look at the modest manly air with which it moves; then tell me, though it be
the Shell of Egbert, is it animated by the Soul of Egbert, think thou?

[ Leonard bows with a modest respect as he passes, then turns with an attitude
of hope and admiration, and goes off to the combat.]
Ade. Oh brave, brave youth!


Edw. The smiles of Heaven, and the strength of Lions go with him!


SONG. ADELA.
SHIELD.
I.
When Scorching Suns the thirsty Earth
Of all her treasures drain,
The Rose, of Summer's loveliest birth,
Droops on the languid plain.
II.
But when refreshing rains descend
Again the Verdure shoots;
Again reviving Nature sends
Her gifts of flowers and fruits.
III.
The heart exhausted thus, depressed,
A prey to ardent Woe,
Revives and smiles, when Joys so blessed
Once more unhoped for flow.
[Exeunt Edwitha and Adela. SCENE XII. Changes to the Hall.
Enter "Dwarf and" Fool. Fool. So, Dwarf, I would advise you to pack -- I would
counsel you to be gone -- you and your thrice valorous Lord -- steal off --
now, while the hubbub of Contention shall cover your retreat -- or you will
both die by the dishonorable distaff -- Be advised, I say, and run -- scud --
scamper -- skulk.


Dwa. Think you my honorable Lord will take a Fool's advice?


Fool. No -- he never takes yours -- But go -- tread, trainple, traverse,
trot, travel, trundel, trip, troop, trudge, I say, with trepidation. [Exit
Dwarf.


Manet Fool. Fool. The combat is going to begin, and we shall have hopes and
fears, and aching hearts, and streaming eyes, and ahs! and ohs! and hurra's! in
plenty -- It Is a great happiness I am a Fool, otherwise these things would make
me melancholy -- But singing and joking is a merry trade, and I should be a
Fool, indeed, to forego the best perquisite of my place -- No -- let them them
fight that will -- I Will look on.


SONG. FRENCH AIR.
I.
For were a man melancholy
At proofs of others folly,
His days would be wasted wholly
In moaning out oh, oh:
His cares each moment heaping,
His nights all spent in weeping,
He Would want time to eat or to sleep in,
For his tears should eternally flow.
II.
Then let 'em fight and quarrel
For Wealth, or Wench, or Laurel,
Pretending they abhor ill,
Yet I Will laugh out ah, ah!
He that wears the longest rapier
Let him make his enemy caper,
And his soul fiz forth like a vapor,
My trade shall be still ha, ha!
SCENE XIII. and last.
The Lists, Danish Knights, etc. arranged on one side, and Archers on the
other. Earl Walter, Edwitha and Adela seated on a kind of throne, as near the
front as may be. Leonard and Anlaff armed with sword and target. Two Heralds,
one Saxon, the other Danish. Trumpeters. [Trumpet sounds.] E. Wall Mighty
Anlaff, let me demand on the part of your antagonist, what is your cause of
quarrel, and the motive of your present challenge?


Anl. Revenge for a dear brother, basely slain, and reparation for a rude
denial to an honorable proposition. -- Briefly, I seek to win Edwitha, whom I
vehemently love, and punish Earl Egbert, whom I as deadly hate.


Leo. I demand to know the challenger's source of enmity to Earl Egbert.

[Earl Walter is surprised to hear it is not Earl Egbert who speaks.]
Anl. Insolent Lord, I have said -- thy proclaimed death of Alric.


Leo. Then is thy enmity misplaced -- For not Earl Egbert, [lifts up his
beaver] but I, Leoline, the Briton, slew thy brother.


Anl. Leoline! [amazed.] Prince of the Britons!


Leo. In defense of that most chaste and beauteous Lady, I slew him; and again,
in her defense, here do I stand in thy defiance, proud Dane; nay further do
proclaim my Love for her with a tongue as loud as thine, but with a heart, I
hope, less arrogant. -- Now, if thou have a soul worthy of such most matchless
Excellence, let it rouse up every latent faculty, and fill thee with the divine
furor of courageous Love. -- Behold -- look upon that lovely, that inestimable
Prize, and be thou equal to a contention so exalted -- Come --

[The trumpets sound the charge. -- The combat: -- during which, Edwitha and
Adela are greatly agitated. Several turns in which the Cambatants are each in
danger, at last Leoline falls on his knee, Anlaff runs furiously at him, he
springs on one side, averts the blow, and suddenly disarms the Dane. Shout.]
Leo. There, Sir, are your arms. -- Agreeably to your own condition, your life
is in my power -- but I do not thirst for blood. -- To repel lawless force, and
redress the Injured, is the extent of my ambition.


E. Wall. Astonishment, noble youth, and joy almost deny my tongue the utterance
of my full heart's gratude -- speak -- speak -- Edwitha.


Edw. I cannot, Sir.


Leo. Beauteous Edwitha, why I have appeared in a shape and character so
ambiguous shall be the question, I hope, of many a happy hour. -- It was indeed
to gain your true affection -- not as a Prince, who could confer, but as a
Suppliant who besought your favor, -- and such let me ever continue.


Edw. Why am I silent? -- Oh my heart!


Leo. I could not come, my Lord, proud of my birth, and heralding, my titles,
to claim a jewel so inestimable, so much above the price of Kings, or Kingdoms.
-- No, Edwitha, though I love you to distraction, could I not first have won
your heart, I never would have asked your hand. -- My fixed passion, would have
descended with me to the grave, but never should have troubled your repose.


Ade. You tell us, my Lord, how much you are in love, but not how you became so.


Leo. The fame of Edwitha's beauties, her virtues, and the rare endowments of
her mind, of these I had often heard. At last a Knight, who had met courteous
entertainment, from my Lord her father here, described her wit, her gentleness,
and charms, with such enraptured words, I could no longer resist the secret
wish to behold her, which from the moment when first I heard her praise, I had
ever cherished. -- That my love has been successful, is the happiness and glory
of my life.


Edw. Do not, generous youth, thus over-rate what you so kindly think valuable,
left hereafter you should find me far -- far less deserving, and I should lose
your Love.


Leo. No, Edwitha -- you have a native dignity of mind incapable of degradation
or alloy.


Edw. Well, my Lord, I will at least endeavor to be what you kindly think I am.


Leo. My honored Lord, and Father, as I hope.


E. Wall. Willingly, my Lord -- you have given me life and honor.


Leo. Adam, and my brave Associates, now no longer Outlaws, you shall be my
Soldiers, and become true men as well as valiant.


Om Ar. Thanks noble Prince.


Adam. Sir, we will ever love and serve you faithfully -- Alice, Thou art a
true-hearted Lass, and shall listen at night to the tale of thy bonny Adam Bell.


Alice. Then I shall be the happiest Lass in England.


FINALE. GLEE.
DOCTOR COOK.
Come, come with songs of mirth and joy,
Let Us celebrate the day;
Sing sweetly to the amorous boy
A dulcet Roundelay.
And you who hope such bliss to prove
Our moral make your care,
Nor till your hearts are worthy love
For love's Delights prepare.
END.

