THE JOURNEY TO SNOWDON.
RUDLAND


LONDON Printed by Henry Hughes, MDCCLXXXI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Journey is the continuation of my Tour in WALES. Another part will appear
with all convenient speed, and comprehend the remainder of Caernarvonshire, the
Isle of Anglesea, the county of Montgomery, and conclude with some account of
SHREWSBURY, the ancient seat of the British Princes; which will complete the
second volume, and probably all that I shall say of our Principality; for
indolence, the forerunner of age, begins to check every new attempt.

THIS book contains a journey from my own house to the summit of Snowdon, and
takes in almost the whole of our Alpine tract.

As far as the Title announces, it is complete. A more general Title Page will
be given with the second part, and the journey continued regularly from p. 183.

I THANK my friends for variety of information, and must present my particular
acknowlegements to Sir JOHN SEBRIGHT, Baronet, for his liberal communication of
several of the late Mr. EDWARD LLWYD'S Manuscripts, which have flung great
light on several parts of our history. I have added an Appendix of the errors
or omissions of my former volume: as they are freely acknowleged, let them be
heartily received.

THOMAS PENNANT.
DOWNING, MARCH 1, 1781.
Directions to the Book-Binder, AND LIST OF THE PLATES.
FRONTISPIECE, Rudland Castle, Church, and Church, and Bridge. A Vignet of
Conway Castle, Page. 1 I. Denbigh Castle, Page. 36 II. View from the Mount at
Bala of the Lake, Aran Pen-Llyn, and Cader Idris, -- 68 II.* The Torques, --
123 III. Sir John Win, Bart. from the original at Wynne-Stay, [After taking
off a set of first impressions for this work, I gratified the Editor of Mr.
BARRINGTON's Miscellanies with the use of the Plate, for the purpose of giving
in that Collection the Head of the Author of the History of the Gwedir Family.]
140 IV. Sir Richard Win, Bart, from a Painting by Jansen, in Possession of
Sir WATKIN WILLIAMS WIN, Bart. 144 V. Llanrwst Bridge, -- 145 VI. Dolwyddelan
Castle This Plate being wrongly numbered, reference must be made to the number
of the page.
, -- 135 VII. Snowdon, from Capel Kerig, -- 150 VIII. A View in Nant-Beris, --
156 IX. Dinas Emrys, -- 174 X. Bedd-Kelert, from a Drawing by Mr. Evans, of
Llwyn y Groes, -- 176 XI. A Plan of Hawarden Castle, to be placed at p. 99 of
the former Volume. A Vignet of Pont Aber Glass Llyn.


IN this, the sequel of my former tour, I directed my course westward from
Downing, passed by Whiteford, our parish church, and ascended the hill of
Garreg, or the Rock, a high and most conspicuous part of the country. The
Romans took advantage of it, and placed on its summit a Pharos, A PHAROS.
to conduct the navigators to and from Deva, along the difficult channel of the
Seteia Portus. The building is still remaining. I hope my friends will not deem
me an antiquarian Quixote, and imagine me mistaking, in this my second sally, a
building, hitherto supposed to have been a windmill, for a Roman light-house.
It is tolerably entire; its form is circular; the height considerable; the
inner diameter twelve feet and a half; the thickness of the walls four feet
four inches. The doors, or entrances, are opposite to each other: over each is
a square funnel, like a chimney, which opens on the outside, about half way up
the building. On each side is a window. About four feet from the ground are
three circular holes, lined with mortar, as is frequent in Roman buildings; and
penetrate the whole wall, for purposes now unknown.

WITHINSIDE are the vestiges of a staircase, which led to the floors, of which
there appear to have been two. Along such part of the upper, which was
conspicuous from the channel, are eight small square openings, cased with
freestone (the rest of the building being of rude limestone, bedded in hard
mortar) and each of these were separated by wooden pannels, placed in deep
grooves, the last still in a perfect state. In each of these partitions were
placed the lights, which the Romans thought necessary to keep distinct, or to
prevent from running into one, lest they should be mistaken by seamen for a
star. Periculum in corrivatione ignium, ne sidus existimetur Plini^ Hist. Not.
lib. xxxvi. c. 12.
.

To the building is very evidently a broad and raised road, pointing from the
east; and near its upper end are the marks of a trench, which surrounded and
gave protection to this useful edifice. Descend, and near the foot of the hill
leave on the left Maen Achwynfan, the cross described in my former tour. Glol,
an enclosed mountain a little farther on, has among the bushes various circular
foundations of stone unmortared building. About a mile from hence, NEWMARKET.
visit the small town of Newmarket, almost the entire creation of its then
owner, John Win, esquire of Gop, who died in the present century. The ancient
name of the parish is Trelawnyd, for which I can find no satisfactory reason.
In the churchyard is a handsome old cross. Here is fixed one of the
charity-schcols, founded and opened in 1726, by doctor Daniel Williams, a
dissenting minister, with an endowment of eight pounds a year; a charity which
he extended to every county in North Wales, distinguishing that at Wrexham, the
place of his birth, by an annual salary of fifteen pounds. He also established
a fund, I believe, to each, from which the children are apprenticed, at five
pounds apiece.

FROM the town I ascended the hill, Cor.
called Copa'r'leni, on whose summit is a most enormous carnedd, or tumulus,
formed of limestones. It was probably the site of specula, or exploratory
tower, and memorial of some chieftain. If Roman, perhaps Paulinus gave name to
it, Cop-Paulini. There is great uncertainty in these derivations: I may
possibly as well abide by my former etymology of Cop yr Goleuni, or the Mount
of Lights; for it might have been a place of signals by fire of the approach of
an enemy by sea Tour in Wales, i. 413.
, or a station of the holy fires, the Coel Ceithie of the Druids, similar to
the Karn Gollewa, the carn of lights, and Karn Leskyz, or carn of burnings, of
the Cornish, supposed by the learned BORLASE Antiq. Cornwall, 131.
to have been used for similar purposes. The tract from hence to Caerwys was
certainly a field of battle: no place in North Wales exhibits an equal quantity
of tumuli; but all sepulchral, as is proved by the urns discovered in them:
they are of a far inferior size to the first, and covered with turf. It will
not be too hazardous a conjecture to suppose, that in this place was the
slaughter of the Ordovices by Agricola, when our gallant nation was nearly
extirpated. Part of the brow of the hill is called Bryn y Saethiau, or the Hill
of Arrows, from being the station of the archers in the engagement.

RETURN along the ridge of the hill, marked its whole length with verdant
tumuli, the tombs of ancient heroes. See beneath me the little church of
Gwaen-yskor, GWAEN-YSKOR.
remarkable for its ancient register.

DESCEND to the church and village of Llanasa, the former dedicated to St.
Asaph, whose festival is kept on the first of May. LLANASA.
Laurence Child, Bishop of St. Asaph, in 1385, procured the impropriation of
this church to supply his cathedral with lights Willi's St. Asaph, 56, App. No.
xxi.
, and repair the ruins occasioned by the wars. In my approach from these high
lands toward the shore, observe the ruins of a small chapel at the little
hamlet of Gwespyr, near Trelacre, one of the seats of Sir Pyers Mostyn,
Baronet, a branch of the house of Mostyn. His adjacent quarry is noted for the
excellence of the freestone; and his vast and profitable warren beneath, noted
for the delicacy of the rabbets, by reason of their feeding on the maritime
plants.

PASS over Gronant-Moor. GRONANT.
There is a tradition, that its extent was so great, that the people on this
side could hold conversation over the channel with those of Cheshire. This may
be exaggerated; but from authentic records, it appears, that this flat was
formerly very extensive, and that it had been reduced to its present scanty
limits by the fury of the sea, which still possesses its ancient place.
Previous to that catastrophe, it was possessed by the sea of St. Asaph, by
virtue of a grant made by Edward the Black Prince, son of Edward III. to
Llewelyn ap Madoc, elected Bishop of St. Asaph in 1357. The inundation happened
before the reign of Henry V. Previous to that time, the Bishop paid annually
into the exchequer at Chester, as an acknowlegement, the sum of twenty marks:
but Henry V. in 1414, and Henry VI. in 1445 and 1451, in consideration of the
misfortune, released the sea from that rent Willis's St. Asaph, 65. App. No.
xxxi. xxxii.
. If this record did not remain an inconteslable proof of the ravages of the
ocean on this part of the country, there exist other natural ones, that would
have given reasonable grounds for suspicion. The Hyle sands, which run for
twelve or fourteen miles parallel to the narrow hundred of Wiral, in Cheshire,
and divided from Wales by a narrow channel, were once, in all probability, part
of the firm land of England. A few miles to the west of Gronant-Moor, under the
parish of Abergeleu, in Denbighshire, are to be seen at low water, very remote
from the shore, bedded in the sand, immense numbers of oak-trees, a forest
before this event. Lastly, in the churchyard wall of Abergelli is a dateless
epitaph, in Welsh, signifying the person who was interred there lived three
miles to the north of that spot, a tract now entirely possessed by the sea.

ON approaching Prestatyn, about two miles from Trelacre, the flat becomes
extremely fertile in corn, especially wheat, which is of distinguished
excellence; and continues equally noted through all the flat tract, as far as
Ruddlan, where it is interrupted for a space by the marsh, and is again
continued along the coast far beyond Abergeleu. A little below Prestatyn-mill,
in a meadow, is the site of its Castle: nothing more than an elevated space,
with foundations consisting of stone and mortar, and a fosse at some distance
from it, now remain. PRESTATYN-CASTLE.
This little fortress was probably built by the Welsh, but wrested from them by
the English, who were possessed of it in 1167, the only time I find any mention
of it, when it was destroyed by Owen Gwynedd, Cadwalader his brother, and Rees
Prince of South Wales; and all Tegengle reduced to the power of its lawful
sovereign.

THE hamlet and village of Prestatyn lie in the parish of Meliden. This place
was granted by Richard I. to Robert Banaster, who enjoyed it for three years
and a half, and built the town; which was destroyed by Owen Gwynedd. Robert de
Crevecoeur, in the seventh year of Edward I. laid claim to it in right of his
ancestor, Banaster. An inquisition was made, before a jury of twenty-four men
Sebright's MSS.
: their determination was in favor of Robert; since I find, by another record,
that he died possessed of lands in Maelwr Saesneg and Prestatyn, which he held
by the service of one knight's fee.

THE road from hence to Diserth is extremely pleasant, at the foot of high
hills, rich in lead ore, with a fine and fertile flat to the right. The white
rock makes a conspicuous figure on the left, and its sides appeared deeply
trenched by the miners in search of ore. Near this place is the beginning of
the vale of Clwyd, and the termination of the range of mountains, which bound
it on the east. At a small distance from hence lies the church of Diserth, in a
picturesque and romantic bottom, beneath some rude rocks: the church overshaded
with great yews, and the singular figure of some of the tombs, form a most
striking appearance. DISERTH CHURCH.
A water-fall in the deep and rounded hollow of a rock, finely darkened with
ivy, once gave additional beauty to this spot; but of late the diverting of the
waters to a mill, has robbed the place of this elegant variation. The stream,
which is little inferior to that of Holywell, flows principally from a single
well, called Fynnon Asa, or St. Asaph's Well, in a dingle in the parish of Cwm,
about a mile distant. The fountain is enclosed with stone, in a polygonal form,
and had formerly its votaries, like that of St. Winefrede.

ABOVE Diserth church, on a high rock, stand the remains of its Castle. We
cannot trace the foundation of this fortress, which went by the names of
Din-colyn, Castle y Ffailon, and Castle Gerri Llwyd's Itin.
CASTLE.
It probably was Welsh, and the last of the chain of British posts on the
Clwydian hills. Henry III. in 1241, fortified it Powel, 307.
; but its date was but short, for in 1261 Llewelyn ap Gryffydd rased both this
castle, and that of Diganwy Same, 326.
. It was at a siege of this place that Eineon, the son of Ririd Vlaidd, was
slain Hengwrt, MS.
. A cross was erected on the spot, called Croes Eineon, the shaft of which,
ornamented with strange sculpture, now is supposed to form the style into the
churchyard of Diserth; in which is another cross, of very curious workmanship.

THE castle occupied the summit of the rock, whose sides are escarpee, or cut
steep, to render the access more difficult. On one part, beneath the top, is a
square out-work, with fosses cut in part through the solid limestone. The
fragments of the castle show, that its ruin was not effected by time: they lie
in vast masses, overthrown by mining, which was a common method of besieging,
very long before the use of powder.

IN a field a little to the south of the castle, is a ruinous building, called
Siamber Wen. This is said to have been the seat of a Sir Robert Pounderling
Llwyd's Itin. MS.
, once constable of the adjacent castle, SIR ROBERT POUNDERLING.
a knight valiant and prudent, who had one of his eyes knocked out by a
gentleman of Wales, in the rough sport of tournament; but being requested to
challenge him again to feats of arms, on meeting our countryman at the
English court, declined the combat, declaring that he did not intend that the
Welshman should beat out his other eye Leland's Itin. vi. 23.
.

Moel Hiraddug, a British post, on a very steep and rocky hill, with an immense
agger of loose stones on the accessible part, stands to the south of the
castle, and forms the next to it in the chain of fortresses Tour in Wales.
On the east side, and on a place called Marion, are long deep trenches, out of
which minerals have been dug, probably in the times of the Saxons: the ore
appears, by the fragments, and color of the rubbish, to have been iron: and on
the summit of the hill (which is in the parish of Cwm) is a great bed of
beautiful red spar, which seems to take its tinge from the ore.

Cwn church, as the word signifies, is embosomed with hills, and fronts the
vale of Clwyd. CWM CHURCH.
On a very ancient stone in the churchyard is this inscription, Hic jacet
TANGWISTE, uxor LLEWELIN ap INIR; but whether of Inir of Yale is uncertain.

FROM Diserth I rode to Bod-Rhyddan, long the residence of the Conways, a
family derived from Sir Hugh Conway, son of old John Coniers, of Richmond,
Yorkshire, brother to Jevan Lord Coniers Mr. W. Mytton's Coll. Pedigrees.
: his son Sir Henry, by marriage with Angharat, heiress to Sir Hugh Crevecoeur,
of Prestatyn Salusbury Pedigree, p. 68. b.
, probably acquired the settlement in this country. Prestatyn continued
possessed by the Conways till the death of Sir John Conway, Baronet, in 1721,
the last of the male line, when the estate was divided.

ABOUT a mile and a half farther stands the small borough of Rhuddlan, seated
high on the red, clayey banks of the Clwyd, and above Morsa-Rhuddlan, a marsh
celebrated for the battle in 795, between the Saxons and Welsh: our monarch
Caradoc fell in the conflict Powel, 20.
, and, I fear, victory declared against us. We do indeed say, that Offa, the
famous king of Mercia, was slain here; but the Saxon chronicle places his death
Sax. chapter 65.
the year before that battle. The fine plaintive Welsh tune, so well known by
the name of Morfa-Rhuddlan, is supposed to have been composed on this occasion:
for victories are not the only subjects for the harp. How beautifully does
David lament the blood of the slain on the mountains of Gilboa: HOW ARE THE
MIGHTY FALLEN, AND THE WEAPONS OF WAR PERISHED!

THE castle had been a handsome building, in a square, with two extremes placed
at opposite corners, with a double round tower at each; and a single one at the
two other corners. CASTLE.
The court forms an irregular octagon. The ditch is large, faced on both sides
with stone. The steep slope to the river was defended by high walls, and square
towers: one is entire, and there are vestiges of two others: the first is
called Twr-y-Silod; another, in the castle, was named Twr-y-Brenhin, or the
King's Tower.

To the south of the castle, at about a furlong distance, is a large artificial
mount, the site of another fortress, of very early date; the whole surrounded
by a very deep fosse (including also the abbey) which crosses from the margin of
the bank, near the ascent of the present road to St. Asaph, to another parallel
road; near which it is continued, then turns and falls nearly into the southern
part of the walled ditch of the castle: the whole forms a square area, of very
great extent. These different works were formed at three several times. The
mount, now called Tut-Hill, and its superstructure, (whatever it was) is
thoroughly British, and is said to have been built by Llewelyn ap Sitsylt, who
reigned from the year 1015 to 1020 Cambden, ii.
. It was a residence of our princes from that time: but Gryffyd ap Llewelyn, in
1063, having given offense to Edward the Confessor, by receiving Algar, one of
his rebellious subjects, was attacked by Harold, who in revenge burned the
palace at Rhuddlan Powel, 100.
. It was soon restored, and as soon lost. Robert, afterward surnamed of
Rhuddlan, a valiant Norman, nephew to Hugh Lupus, earl of Chester, conquered it
from the Welsh, and, by the command of William the Conqueror, fortified it with
new works Order. Vital. 670.
, and made it his place of residence; from whence he greatly annoyed our
countrymen. The square towers are evidently of Norman architecture, and
naturally adopted by the new owner. Robert received here a visit from our
prince Gryffydd ap Kynan, who came to solicit aid against his enemies, from
the Norman warrior; which he obtained: but on some quarrel attacked him in his
castle, took and burnt the bailey, or yard, and killed such a number of his
men, that very few escaped into the towers Life of Gr. ap Kynan. SEBRIGHT MSS.
.

Henry II. in 1157, added new strength to the castle, and left a considerable
garrison in it before he quitted the country. Notwithstanding this, Owen
Gwynedd, in 1167, took and dismantled it; but it was afterward re-fortified by
the English; for it appears that this fortress had, with two others, been
bestowed by Henry, with Emma his natural sister, on David ap Owen, son and
successor to Owen Gwynedd. Here, in 1187, he entertained, very nobly, Baldwin
archbishop of Canterbury, in his progress through Wales Girald Cambr. Itin. 872.
. Possibly he resigned it again to the English; for I find that in 1214 it was
besieged and taken by Llewelyn ap Jorwerth, his successor in the principality
Powel, 270.
.

I MUST not omit relating, notwithstanding I am unable to give the year of the
event, that Randle Blundeville, earl of Chester, was in this castle surprised
by a body of Welsh, and lay in the utmost distress, until he was relieved by
his lieutenant, Roger Lacy, alias Hell; who collecting suddenly a rabble of
fiddlers and idle people, put the besiegers to flight. In reward, he received
from the earl, Magisterium omnium Leccatorum et meretricum TOTIUS CESTRESHIRE
Leicester, 142. This Earl of Chester held his earldom from 1182 to 1232.
.

I FIND it in possession of Edward I. in 1277; who was so well convinced of its
importance in the conquest of Wales, that he made it the rendezvous of all the
forces destined for that purpose. It was the place d'armes, and the great
magazine of provision for the support of his army, in its advance into the
country. The reigning prince, Llewelyn ap Gryffydd, knew the danger of leaving
so consequential a place in the hands of his enemy: but it resisted all the
most vigorous efforts made on it in 1281, by Llewelyn and his brother David,
just reconciled to him by the sense of their common danger. Soon after, it
proved the place of confinement to the letter, not long before his ignominious
end at Shrewsbury.

IN order to secure it from any future attempts, Edward turned all his thoughts
toward founding a fortress impregnable by any future attempts of the Welsh. He
accordingly began with an act of justice, that of making recompense to Master
Richard Bernard, parson of Rhuddlan, for certain lands taken from him for the
purpose of enlarging the castle Ayl^ff's Rot. Wall^^^. 75.
; and again, in 1282, made an exchange with the same church, of six acres and a
half, for the same uses Sebright MS.
: and on which he built the castle, whose ruins we now survey. The finishing of
it took a considerable time; for I find an order in 1291, for overlooking the
works at the castles of Rhuddlan, Flint, and Chester Ret. Walha. 98.
. I cannot but remark here, the strong necessity of curbing the new-conquered
country with powerful garrisons; for notwithstanding all the ravages of long
and barbarous wars, it remained so exceedingly populous, that Edward
politically drafted out of it not less than fifteen thousand men, in aid of his
Scottish expedition Carte, II. 264.
The consequence proved almost fatal to him: for while he lay encamped near
Linlithgow, a national quarrel ensued between the English and Welsh troops; and
after great bloodshed, the latter separated themselves from his army
Da^^ym^^^'s Anna's, II. 257.
.

DURING the civil wars of the last century, TAKEN BY GENESIS MYTTON.
, it was garrisoned on the part of the king; was taken by general Mytton in
July 1646; and in the same year ordered by the parliament in the phrase of the
times) to be slighted, i. e. dismantled, with many other Welsh castles
Whitelock, 231.
.

IN respect to the civil history of Rhuddlan, I find, that in the reign of
Edward the Confessor, it made part of the great territories of earl Edwin. It
was then, by reason of the inroads of Harold, a waste; and continued so when it
was possessed by Hugh Lupus. It then became the capital of the district: and
Hugh enjoyed a moiety of the church, the mint, and mines of the iron ore found
in the manor Probably those which we have mentioned in the parish of Cwm, to
which this manner might have extended; for Dissarch, or Diserth, adjoining to
Cwm, is cited in Doomsday-Book as belonging to it.
; and a moiety of the water of Clwyd, i. e. of the mill and fishery on such
part which belonged to earl Edwin; a moiety of the forests on the manor, and of
the toll, and of the village called Bren: and there were at this time in
Rhuddlan eight burgesses. All this Hugh Lupus granted to Robert of Rhuddlan,
with an addition of certain hamlets dependent on the place; and a new borough
was erected, with eighteen burgesses, who enjoyed the same privileges with
those of Hereford and Bretril; and were exempted from all fines exceeding
twelve-pence, except in case of manslaughter, theft, and heinfare, i. e. the
depriving a person of his servant Doomsday-Book.
.

EDWARD I. A BOROUGH.
made this town a free borough, appointed the constable of the castle for the
time being to be mayor, and the bailiffs to be chosen annually by the burgesses
on Michaelmas-day, who were to be presented to the constable to be sworn. The
town was to have power of imprisoning, except in such cases which affected the
life, or loss of limb: when criminals of this nature were to be committed to
the castle, burgesses only were permitted to bail. No Jews were to inhabit the
town. The burgesses had a forest and free warren; a gild cum hausa et loath et
shoth, sok sak et theme et insangenthest et lib. per totam terram de
Theoloniis, lestagio, Muragio, Danegeld, Gaywite, etc.

THIS charter was given by the King at Flint, September 8th, in the twelfth
year of his reign; Testibus, Rob. Bath and Wells, etc. and confirmed by Richard
II. at Leicester, and again at Westminster.

No constable has been appointed since the days of Oliver Cromwell.

THE burgesses contribute toward electing a member for the borough of Flint.
Those who are qualified inhabit the place, and that part of the parish called
Rhuddlan Franchise, which extends above a mile from the town.

THE parliament said to have been held here in 1283, JTS PARLIAMENT.
by Edward I. was probably no more than a council assembled by the conqueror,
to divide his new conquests into counties, and to give salutary laws to the
Welsh; to abolish any ancient customs which the wise prince thought
detrimental, and to introduce such of the English as would prove of use. This
was not done hastily; for in the year preceding, a commission had been
appointed, with Thomas Beke, bishop of St. David, president; who were to
consider and report upon oath the different laws of both countries. From their
resolutions were framed the famous STATUTE OF RHUDDLAN; in which, among many
excellent institutions, were introduced sheriffs and coroners, their powers
defined, and the principal crimes of the times pointed out: most of which were
acts of violence, rapine, and theft; such as might be expected to exist among
people: an evil which resulted more from the turbulence of the times, than the
want of wholesome laws See the Statuta Walliae passim.
.

A PIECE of ancient building, called the Parliament House, is still to be seen
in Rhuddlan; probably the place where the king sat in council. From hence he
actually practiced the well-known deceit of giving them a prince born among
them, who never spoke a word of English, and whose life and conversation no man
was able to stain Powel, 376.
: all which our discontented nobility eagerly accepted, little thinking the
person intended, to be the infant Edward, just born at Caernarvon.

THE bridge consists of two arches. BRIDGE.
It appears to have been rebuilt or repaired in 1595: that date, with the arms
of St. Asaph, and the initials of William Hughes, the bishop of that time,
being cut in the battlements. The tides flow very little higher than this
place; and bring up to the bridge slats or vessels of about seventy tons. The
port of these parts is about three miles further, at the vorryd, or great ford,
where the river discharges itself into the sea; and from whence much corn and
timber is exported.

THE house called the Gwindy, or Wine House, GWINDY.
must not be forgotten. There are few towns in Wales which have not one of that
name: but the use has long been lost. In old times, most gentlemen's houses had
one in their neighborhood, where they met their friends and retainers, to
ymgampio, or to exert feats of activity. Here the gentleman kept a wine cellar,
which he retailed for his own profit. Here they passed the day in archery,
wrestling, throwing the sledge, and other manly exercises. At first, the
drinking was moderate: but at length the purpose was abused; and these places
were made the sanctuary for all sorts of crimes, committed by the dependents or
friends of the owner of the Gwindy, who were recommended to his care: and there
Llawruddion, i.e. persons who came red-handed from a murder, were protected
till composition could be made for their crimes.

THE church is dedicated to St. Mary. CHURCH.
It has nothing remarkable about it, except an ancient gravestone, with a
flowery cross and sword; the last the mark of the gentility of the person
interred. The patronage of this church was granted in 1284 to the sea of St.
Asaph, in recompense for the loss of that of Eglwysvach, which had been taken
from it, and bestowed on the abbey of Conway Willis's St. Asaph, 159. Rot.
Walliae, 92.
.

THE priory of blackfriars, stood about half a mile south of the castle. There
is a fragment which bears the marks of antiquity: the rest is disguised in the
form of a farm-house and barn. We do not know the time of its foundation: but
it was certainly before the conquest by Edward I. as Anian, or Eineon de
Schonan, a friar of this house, was made bishop of St. Asaph in 1268. It
suffered much in the wars between Edward and Llewelyn, but soon recovered its
losses, toward which they were allowed 17 l. 10 s. Rymer, ii. 292.
besides a grant of a fishery on the Clwyd with one net, free from any
obstruction Rot. Walliae. 90.
. On the dissolution, the house was granted to Harry ap Harry, and now belongs
to John Davies, esquire of Llanerch.

NEAR this place were certain lands, called Nunneland and St. Marieland
Sebright MSS.
: but whether they had reference to any house of female religious, I cannot say.

THE hospital, which existed in 1281, stood between the town and Bodyryddan.

As soon as Edward I. had finished the fortifications of Rhuddlan, and filled
his new town with inhabitants, he and bishop Anian II. made different petitions
to the pope, to remove the sea of St. Asaph to this place Rymer, ii. 245,
Willis's St. Asaph, 45.149.155.
They urged the solitude and insecurity of the former; its hazard from
banditti; and the danger to which the body of the most glorious confessor St.
Asaph was continually exposed: and the king in particular adds, the great
safety of this place, by reason of the vast works he had completed. But these
petitions never took effect: frustrated either by the death of the pope, or the
exhortion of the archbishop of Canterbury, to rebuild the cathedral on its
ancient site.

A LITTLE beyond the priory I descended the bank, ST. ASAPH.
and fording the Clwyd, soon came in sight of St. Asaph. The handsome extensive
bridge, the little town, and the cathedral mixed with trees, form a most
agreeable view. The place is seated on the slope of a pleasant eminence: the
cathedral on its summit. The Clwyd runs on the eastern side: the Elwy, a most
turbulent stream; on the western: and from the last is taken the British name
of Llan-Elwy. The township in which it stands, is also called Bryn-Paulin; and
one part of it, Bron y Wylfa, or the brow of the watch: from which
circumstances, as well as the great fitness of the situation, between two
rivers, I cannot but think that it was a place of encampment of Paulinus, in
his way; to or from Mona.

ITS ecclesiastical history may be spoken of with more certainty. When
Kentigern, bishop of Glasgow, was driven from his see in 543, he retired into
Wales, and established here a monastery for nine hundred and sixty-five monks,
instituted on the same plan with that of Bangor; part for labor, part for
prayer. SII.
Here he built a church; and having won over the British prince Maglocunus,
once his violent opponent, established here a see, and was himself the first
bishop. Being recalled to Scotland, he nominated for successor, Asaph, or
Hassaph, a Briton of great piety and good family (being grandson of Pabo pou
Prydain). He died in 596, was buried in his cathedral, and gave name to the
place.

THE church was first built of wood; but soon after, of stone. In 1247, during
the wars of Henry III. the diocese was destroyed by fire and sword Matthew
Paris, 642.
, and the bishop, who sided with the English, obliged to live on alms. In 1282,
CATHEDRAL.
the cathedral was burnt down; but ample amends was made to the sea, by the
grant of Edward I. of lands in Newmarket, Nannerch, Dincolyn, Cwed y Mynedd,
and a rich mineral tract in Diserth: four hundred and nine acres were given,
each of which appears at that time to be valued at only sixpence Sebright MSS.
. In 1402, the church underwent new misfortunes: being burnt by Owen Glyndwr,
together with the palace, and canons houses; who, strange to say! soon after
brought over to his party, John Trevor, the injured bishop of the sea, who was
deprived on account of his revolt. After this, the church remained in ruins for
eighty years, when it was rebuilt by that worthy prelate, Richard Redman. The
same building still remains, handsome, plain, and neat. The present dean and
chapter are now rebuilding (out of a fund vested in them for that purpose) the
choir, after the inevitable dilapidations of time in the space of near four
hundred years. The good imitation of the gothic, and the happy copy in the east
window, of the noble remains in Tintern abbey, will add no small beauty to the
church, and credit to the idea.

THE tombs are very few. TOMBS.
Here is one in an episcopal habit, supposed to commemorate that munificent
bishop, David ap Owen, who died in 1512; and in the churchyard, near the west
door, is a plain altar monument of bishop Isaac Barrow, who departed in 1680:
and whose pious address I can read without any offense, howsoever papistical
zealots may think it. Exuviae ISAACI ASAPHENSIS Episcopi
In manum Domini depositae
In spem letae resurrectionis
Per sola CHRISTI merita,
Obiit dictus Reverendus Pater festi D. JOHANNIS BAPTISTAE.
An. Dom. 1680. Aetatis 67.
Et translationis suae undecimo.
O vos transeuntes in Domum Domini
In Domum orationis
Orate pro conservo vestro,
Ut inveniat misericordiam in die Domini.


IN the churchyard of the parish church, is another tomb, singular enough,
with foliage, a shield with a lion rampant, inscribed around, Hic jacet
Ranulsus de Smalwode; and beneath the shield passes a sword, held by a hand. It
is said to have been brought from Rhuddian; but we are left unacquainted with
the person whose memory it perpetuates An old drawing of this, and some other
ancient Welsh monuments, were most obligingly presented to me, by that
excellent antiquary, the Rev. Mr. William C^le, of (...), near Cambridge; a
gentleman, to whom I have been frequently indebted for variety of useful
information.
.

THIS church stands at the lower part of the town, and serves for the use of
the inhabitants of the town and country, the cathedral not being used for that
purpose.

THE members of the chapter are the dean, archdeacon, (who is the bishop) six
prebendaries, and seven canons. Besides these, belong to the church, four
vicars choral, four singing-men, four choristers, and an organist.

THE present palace is not very magnificent. The walls are the same with those
built by bishop David ap Owen, restorer of the house, in 1503, after it had
lain in ruins a hundred years.

THE diocese comprehends all Flintshire, excepting Hawarden; all Denbighshire,
but the deanery of Dyffrin Clwyd; all Montgomeryshire, excepting seven
parishes; and the hundreds of Mowddwie, Penllyn, and Ideirnion, in
Meirionyddshire: and trespasses a little even on Shropshire. The number of
livings are a hundred and thirty; of which all, except seven Viz. Holywell,
Flintshire; Kevedoc, alias St. George, Denbighshire; Kinnersley, Oswestry,
Knocking, Whittington, Selattin, Sal^p.
, are in the patronage of the bishop: as is the valuable deanery.

THE road from St. Asaph along the common called the Row, is extremely
beautiful: is watered by the Elwy, which runs beneath lofty banks, finely
wooded: at its extremity is Pont yr allt Goch, a noble bridge of one lofty
arch, eighty-five feet in diameter. The Elwy here takes another direction,
running west, and then north, along most romantic dingles, varied with meadows,
woods, and cavernous rocks: neither is it destitute of antiquities. Y fynnon
vair, or our lady's well, a fine spring, enclosed in an angular wall, formerly
roofed; and the ruins of a cross-shaped chapel, finely overgrown with ivy,
exhibit a venerable view, in a deep wooded bottom, not remote from the bridge:
and this, in days of pilgrimage, the frequent haunt of devotees.

THE most capital view of these picturesque glens, PENCRAIG.
is from Pencraig, on the grounds of Mrs. Jones, of Galt-vaenan; from whence is
a sight of three at once, together with an unspeakable variety of other
objects, extremely worthy a visit from every traveller.

AT Llannerch, the chief seat of my kinsman, John Davies, esquire formerly called
Lleweni Vechan, about half a mile to the east of the bridge, I stopped a while
to admire the charming view of the vale of Clwyd, with the magnificent boundary
between it and Flintshire. The intervening plain is of matchless fertility:
enclosures creep high up the hills; the remaining part is divided into various
summirs, in the season, glowing to the setting sun with the purple flowers of
the heath. Churches and neat mansions enliven the scene. From
Tremeirchion-Green, placed high above Llannerch, is a very fine view of the
whole vale, of the western ^oundary, and the lofty tract of Snowdon. The
middle, from end to end, is enriched with towns and castles; among which rises
supreme, the rock of Denbigh, topped with its great fortress.

IN Tremeirchion church is the mutilated tomb of Sir Robert Pounderling, before
mentioned. By his crossed legs, it seems he had attained the merit of
pilgrimage to the holy sepulcher.

UNDER a handsome gothic arch lies, DAFYDD DDU.
in priestly vestments, well executed, the image of Dafydd Ddu, or the black of
Hiraddug. Underneath is inscribed, Hic jacet DAVID AP RODERIC AP MADOC. He was
vicar of this place, and dignitary of St. Asaph: prophet and poet; and had a
great concern in regulating our prosody. The Daroganen, or prophecies of Robin
Ddu, so celebrated in North Wales, I believe properly belong to Dafydd, who
flourished in 1340, above a hundred years before the time of Robin.

IN this church stood a cross, celebrated for its miracles, which are
celebrated in an owdwl, or poem, about the year 1500, by Gryffydd ap Isan ap
Llen vychan. The cross is now demolished; but the carved capital is still to be
seen, in a building adjoining to the churchyard.

IN the bottom, not far from Tremerchion, lies, half buried in woods, the
singular house of Bachegraig. It consists of a mansion, and three sides,
enclosing a square court. The first consists of a vast hall, and parlour: the
rest of it rises into six wonderful stories, including the cupola; and forms
from the second floor the figure of a pyramid: the rooms small, and
inconvenient. The bricks are admirable, and appear to have been made in
Holland; and the model of the house was probably brought from Flanders, where
this species of building was not unfrequent. The country people say, that it
was built by the devil, in one night, and that the architect still preserves an
apartment in it: but Sir Richard Clough, an eminent merchant in the reign of
queen Elizabeth, seems to have a better title to the honor. The initials of his
name are in iron on the front, with the date 1567; and on the gate-way that of
1569.

SIR Richard was a man of distinguished character, who raised himself, by his
merit, from a poor boy at Denbigh, to one of the greatest merchants of his
time. He was first a chorister at Chester Puller's Br. Worthies. Flintshire, p.
40.
: then had the good fortune to become apprentice to the famous Sir Thomas
Gresham; and afterward his partner. His residence was chiefly at Antwerp,
where his body was interred: his heart in Whichurch, a neighboring church. He
is said to have made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and to have been made knight of
the holy sepulcher: this is confirmed; for he assumed the five crosses, the
badge of that order, for his arms Salusbury Pe^^gree, 17
. His wealth was so great, that Ese a aeth in Glough, or He is become a CLOUGH,
grew into a proverb, on the attainment of riches by any person. He left two
daughters: one he bestowed, with this house, and certain tithes in Llein, on
Roger Salusbury, a younger son of Llewenni: the other on a Win, of Melay,
with whom he gave the abbey of Maenan. Sir Richard meditated great things for
the advantage of his country: he designed to make the Clwyd navigable from
Rhuddlan; to have introduced commerce; and to have made the sides of his court
the magazines, from which he was to dispense his imports to the neighboring
parts.

IN front of the house, cross the Clwyd on Pont y Cambull, and, turning to the
left, cross it again at Pont Gryffydd, in order to search in the parish of
Bodfari, for the ancient Varis. Soon enter the deep pass, formed by nature in
the Clwydian hills, from the vales into the county of Flint. But neither my own
examination, or that of some intelligent friends, availed any thing. The sole
remaining antiquity is British; a post on a hill to the left, called Moel y
Gaer, or the hill of the camp. The beauty of the ride makes amends for the
disappointment. The vale is narrow, fertile, diversified with groves, and
watered by the crystal Wheeler. The part about Maes mynan is singularly fine,
consisting of detached hills, clothed with timber; a charming extent of
meadows; and the lofty mountain Moel y pare, skirted with trees, contrasting;
itself to the softer part of the scenery. This place is at present the property
of Sir Roger Mostyn, purchased by one of his family from the Messies, a name
which represented the county of Flint as early as the first of queen Mary
Willis's Not. Parliam. ii. part and. 25.
. This place has been called Llys Maes Mynan, or the palace of Maes Mynan,
where Llewelyn ap Gryffydd, last prince of Wales, resided in a house, whose
foundations, till within these few years, were to be seen in an adjacent meadow
Hy^. Gwedir. 28.
.

BUT there is no part of this vale that furnished me with the lest vestige of
the Roman station, Varis, mentioned by Antonine, in his eleventh Iter. and
placed at nineteen or twenty-one miles distant from Conovium, or Caer-hen; for
there appears an uncertainty in the reading.

QUIT the turnpike road on the left; ford the Wheler; and, after crossing the
Clwyd, reach Lleweni. On this spot is said to have resided, about the year 720,
Marchweithian, one of the fifteen tribes or nobility of North Wales. At present
it is the seat of the honorable Thomas Fitzmaurice, lately purchased by him
from Sir Robert Salusbury Cotton, baronet, of Cumbermere-Abby, in Cheshire.
That gentleman possessed this place by the marriage of his ancestor, Sir Robert
Cotton, with Hester, sister to Sir John Salusbury, the last baronet of his
name, in the time of Charles II. The Salusburies were an English family,
settled here before the time of Henry III. Several of the portraits were
transferred with the estate, to the present owner, and preserved in the
magnificent old hall. Sir John Salusbury the Strong, SIR JOHN SALUSBURY.
is represented on board, a half length, with short dusky hair, beardless, in a
yellow figured jacket, a vast ruff, and one hand on his sword: dated 1591: aet.
24. He succeeded to the estate on the execution of his elder brother Thomas, I.
SIR THOMAS.
who suffered in 1586, for his concern in Babington's plot. A picture, supposed
to be his, is to be seen here; representing him in a gray and black vest, dark
hair, short whiskers, bushy beard, and with an ear-ring: his bonnet in his
hand; his breast naked.

SIR Henry, SIR HENRY.
the first baronet, is placed sitting in his shirt; his bosom naked: over one
arm is cast a red mantle: his breeches red, with points at his knees; his
stockings purple; his slippers rich in lace; his beard bushy; his whiskers
small: he is seated in a balcony, as if at his toilet. I have seen here a fine
picture of his eldest son, Sir Thomas, II. SIR THOMAS.
as much distinguished by his pen as his sword. He appears as if on the point
of quitting his family, to join the army; for he was a distinguished loyalist
in the time of Charles I. He is taking leave of his lady and three children; is
dressed in a buff surtout, brown boots, with a rich scymetar by his side;
attended by two grehounds, a groom, dressed in a long canvas gown, holding a
horse, with the arms of the house on the man's shoulders, by way of badge. This
gentleman was educated at Jesus College, Oxford: and having, as Wood Athen,
Oxon. ii. 25.
says, a natural geny to poetry and romance, exercised himself much in those
juvenile studies; and produced from his pen, the History of Joseph, in English
verse, in thirteen chapters. He retired to Lleweni; and died in 1643.

I MUST not omit the portrait of a lady, CATHERINE Y BERAIN.
exceedingly celebrated in this part of Wales; the famous Catherine Tudor,
better known by the name of Catherine of Berain, from her seat in this
neighborhood. She was daughter and heiress of Tudor ap Robert Fychan, of
Berain: she took for her first husband John Salusbury, heir of Lleweni; and on
his death gave her hand to Sir Richard Clough. The tradition goes, that at the
funeral of her beloved spouse, she was led to church by Sir Richard, and from
church by Morris Win, of Gwedir, who whispered to her his wish of being her
second: she refused him with great civility, informing him, that she had
accepted the proposals of Sir Richard, in her way to church; but assured him
(and was as good as her word) that in case she performed the same sad duty
(which she was then about) to the knight, he might depend on being her third.
From this match I have the honor of some of Catherine's blood in my veins. As
soon as she had composed this gentleman, to show that she had no superstition
about the number THREE, she concluded with Edward Thelwal, of Plas y Ward, esquire
departed this life August 27; and was interred at Llanivydd on the 1st of
September, 1591.

HER portrait is an excellent three-quarters, on wood. The plate represents the
dress. By the date, 1568, it seems to have been painted by Lucas de Here; the
only artist which I know of in that period, equal to the performance. I was
told, that in the locket she wore to the gold chain, was the hair of her second
and favorite husband.

Lleweni, notwithstanding it lies on a flat, has most pleasing views of the
mountains on each side of the vale: the town and castle of Denbigh form most
capital objects, at the distance of two miles: and the nearer environs of the
place, promise to animate die country by the commercial spirit of their active
master.

David, brother of our last Llewelyn, makes great complaints of the havoc made
by Reginald de Gray, justice of Chester, in cutting down his wood of Lleweni
Powel, 350.
; which David probably held as lord of Denbigh.

ABOUT a mile and a half west of this house, visit the church of Whitchurch, or
St. Marcellus, the parish church of Denbigh. In the porch, a small brass shows,
kneeling at an altar, Richard Middelton (governor of Denbigh castle under
Edward VI. Mary, and Elizabeth) who, with Jane his wife, was interred beneath.
Behind him are nine sons: behind her seven daughters. He died in 1575: she in
1565. His virtues are rehearsed in the following quaint lines: In vayn we bragg
and boast of blood, in vain of sin we vaunte,
Sith flesh and blood must lodge at last where nature did us grant.
So where he lies that lyved of late with love and favor much,
To find his friend, to feel his foes, his country skante had such.
When lyff did well report his death, whose death his lyff does try,
And points with finger what he was that here in claye does lie.
His virtues shall enroll his acts, his tomb shall tell his name,
His sons and daughters left behind, shall blaze on Earth his fame.
Look under feet and you shall find, upon the stone you stand,
The race he ran, the lyff he lead, each with an upright hand.


SEVERAL of the sons were men of distinguished characters. The third, William,
was a sea captain, and an eminent poet. His early education was at Oxford: but
his military turn led him abroad, where he signalized himself as soldier and
sailor. He translated the psalms into Welsh meter, and finished them on Jan.
4th, 1595, apud Scutum insulam occidentalium Indorum; which, as well as his
Barddoniaeth, or art of Welsh poetry, were published in London: the first in
1603, the other in 1593 Athen. Oxon. i. 284.
. It is said, that he, with captain Thomas Price, of Plasyollin, and one
captain Koet, were the first who smoked, or (as they called it) drank tobacco
publicly in London; and that the Londoners flocked from all parts to see them
Sebright MSS.
. Pipes were not then invented, so they used the twisted leaves, or segars. The
invention is usually ascribed to Sir Walter Raleigh. It may be so; but he was
too good a courtier to smoke in public, especially in the reign of James, who
even condescended to write a book against the practice, under the title of The
Counter-blast to Tobacco.

Thomas, the fourth son, became lord mayor of London, and was the founder of
the family of Chirkcastle. It is recorded, that having married a young wife in
his old age, the famous song of Room for cuckolds, here comes my lord mayor!
was invented on the occasion Myddelton Pedigree, MS.
.

Charles, the fifth son, succeeded his father in the government of Denbigh
castle.

I NOW speak of the sixth son, Hugh; a person whose useful life would give
luster to the greatest family. This gentleman (afterward Sir Hugh) displayed
very early his great talents; and began, as we are told by himself, by
searching for coal within a mile of his native place. His attempt did not meet
with success: his genius was destined to act on a greater stage. The Capital
afforded him ample space for his vast attempts: few readers need be told, that
he planned and brought to perfection, the great design of supplying the city
with water. This plan was meditated in the reign of Elizabeth; but no one was
found bold enough to attempt it. In 1608, the dauntless WELSHMAN stepped forth,
and SMOTE THE ROCK: and on Michaelmas 1613, the waters flowed into the
thirsting metropolis. He brought it, in defiance of hills and valleys,
reckoning every winding, near thirty-nine miles; conveyed it by aqueducts in
some places; in others pierced the high grounds, and gave it a subterraneous
course. He was a true prototype of the later genius of similar works; but he
sacrificed private fortune to the public good. Two thousand pounds a month,
which he gained from the Cardiganshire mines, were swallowed up in this river
Fodina Regales. 32.
. He received the empty honor of seeing himself attended by the king, his
court, and all the corporation of London, among whom was his brother (designed
mayor for the ensuing year). The waters gushed out in their presence, and the
great architect received their applause, and knighthood; and, in 1622, the
title of baronet. His own fair fortune being expended on an undertaking, which
now brings in to the proprietors an amazing revenue, he was reduced to become a
hireling surveyor, and was eminently useful in every place where draining or
mining was requisite. I shall have occasion to speak of some other of his
labors in the course of this book. He died in 1631 Myddelton Pedigree MS.
. Sir -- Myddelton, the last baronet of this branch of the family, died a few
years ago. The present representative is a widow in distressful circumstances:
Sir Hugh left a certain number of shares to the Goldsmith's company, to be
divided among the poor members; but, as the husband of this poor woman happened
not to be of the company, the representative of the greatest benefactor London
ever had, is, I trust through ignorance of her case, permitted to linger away
her days in cruel penury.

A MURAL monument needlessly attempts to preserve the memory of that great
antiquary, HUMPHREY LLWYD.
Humphrey Llwyd. He is represented in a Spanish dress, kneeling at an altar,
beneath a range of small arches; above, a multitude of quarterings proclaim his
long descent. He derived himself from the Rosendales of the north, who settled
at Foxhall, in this neighborhood, in 1297, by marriage with the heiress of the
place. He himself was of a branch, which fixed at Denbigh. He was educated at
Oxford, a commoner of Brazen-nose college, and master of arts. He returned to
his native place, an accomplished gentleman. He studied at the university the
healing art; but is celebrated as a person of great eloquence, an excellent
rhetorician, and sound philosopher. After the panegyric passed on him by
Cambden, it would be presumptious to add any thing relative to his great skill
in the antiquities of our country. He practiced, for his amusement, physic and
music. The motto on his portrait, in possession of his representative John
Lloyd, of Aston, esquire expresses his liberal turn of mind: Hwy pery klod Nagolyd;
FAME IS BETTER THAN WEALTH. In medicine, and the study of antiquities, he has
left several proofs of his knowledge, which seems to have been quite unconfined.
He made the map of England, for his friend Ortelius. For his brother-in-law,
lord Lumley, (whose sister he married) he formed a large collection of useful
and curious books; which were afterward purchased by James I. and now make the
most valuable part of the British Museum Grainger, i. 270. For the history of
his works, see Athen. Oxon. i.
. In his last letter to the great geographer Ortelius Prefixed to his
Commentarioli Britannicae descriptionis fragmentum. 410 edit.
, he foresees his own death, which happened soon after its date, in August
1568, aged 41. The very simple inscription on the monument promises his
character; but instead, appears only three lines of a psalm tune.

THE CORPSE AND EARTHLY shape does rest, Here tombd in your sight,
Of Humfrey Lloyd, Mr of Art, a famous worthy Wight.
By fortune's hapye Lore he Espowsyd and take his wife to be
Barbara, second Sister to the noble Lord Lumle:
Splendian, Hare, Jane, and John, Humfrey, Also a Lumley,
His Children were, of which be dead Jane and eke Humfrey.
His famous Monuments and deeds that lusts for to see,
Here in the Epytaph annexed set forth at large they Be.


THE tomb of Sir John Salusbury is altar-shaped: his image, and that of his
lady, are placed in it, recumbent; he in armor; she with a great ruff. Nothing
is recorded of this good couple, except that Sir John died in 1578; and that
ten years after she erected this monument to his memory, and I suppose to her
own, a blank being left for the year and day of her departure.

A LITTLE further stands Denbigh, placed, like Sterling, on the slope of a
great rock, crowned with a castle. Its ancient British name was Castle Kled
vryn in Rhos, or the Craggy Hill in Rhos, the former name of the tract in which
it is seated. The word Dinbech, the present Welsh appellation, signifies a
small hill, which it is, comparative to the neighboring mountains. The first
time I find any mention of it, is in the beginning of the reign of Edward I.
from whom David, in defiance of his brother Llewelyn, chose to hold this
lordship, together with the cantred of Dyffryn Clwyd R^tu^ae Walliae. 66.
. He made it his residence till the conquest of our country; soon after which,
he was taken near the place, and carried, laden with irons, to the English
monarch at Rhuddlan.

THE king politically secured his new acquisitions, by bestowing several of the
great lordships on his followers. He gave that of Denbigh to Henry Lacy, earl
of Lincoln, who built the castle, and enclosed within a wall the small town he
found there. Among other priveleges, he gave his vassals liberty of killing and
destroying all manner of wild beasts on the lordship, except in certain parts
reserved out of the grant; I suppose for the purpose of the particular
amusement of the lord Sebright MSS.
; for I find, in the reign of Henry VI. the names of five parks in this
lordship, viz. Moylewike, Caresnodooke, Kylford, Bagha^, and Posey, of which
the king constituted Owen Tudor, ranger. On the death of Lacy, the lordship
passed to Thomas earl of Lancaster, by virtue of his marriage with Alicia,
daughter of the last possessor. After the attainder of Thomas, Edward II.
bestowed it on Hugh D'Espencer; who proved an oppressive superior, and abridged
the inhabitants of the priveleges granted to them by Lacy The same.
. By the fatal end of that favorite, it fell again to the crown; and was given
by Edward III. to another, equally unfortunate, Roger Mortimer earl of March;
whose death enabled the king to invest with this lordship William Mountacute
earl of Salusbury. He died in 1333: and on the reversal of the attainder of the
earl of March, it was restored to his family, in the perfon of his grandson
Roger: and by the marriage of Anne, sister to another Roger, last earl of
March, with Richard Plantagenet earl of Cambridge, it came into the house of
York, and so into the crown. Queen Elizabeth, in 1563, bestowed it, as a most
valuable gift, on her unmerited minion, Robert Dudley earl of Leicester; who
soon made the country feel the weight of his oppression. Notwithstanding the
tenants made him a present of two thousand pounds at his first entrance into
the lordship, he remained unsatisfied; he constrained the freeholders to raise
the old rents of 250 l. a year, to 8 or 900 l. Secret Memoirs of Robert earl of
Leicester, 89.
and at his will enclosed the waste lands, to the injury of the tenants; who,
offended at his rapacity, arose, and levelled his encroachments. This was
construed into riot and rebellion: two hopeful young men, of the house of
Lleweni, were taken to Shrewsbury, tried and executed there, for the pretended
offense. He had the insolence even to mortgage the manor to some merchants of
London Strife's Annals, ii. 498.
; and, I apprehend, tricked them for their credulity. The various disorders
which rose from these practices, were so great, that Elizabeth interposed, and
by charter confirmed the quiet possession of the tenants, and allayed the
discontents Baron Price's Speech.
. These were again excited in die reign of king William, by the vast grant made
to the earl of Portland. The same ferments arose, and the same means were used
to allay them: at present, this, and the other great manors of Bromefield and
Yale, remain in the crown, and are peacefully superintended by a steward
appointed by the king.

THE castle and enclosed part of the town, took up a very considerable space,
and were defended by strong walls and towers: the last are chiefly square.
There are two gates to the outmost precinct: that called the Burgesses Tower,
GATES.
is large, square, and built singularly, with small ashler stones. The other
was called the Exchequer Gate, in which the lord's court was kept. Some few
houses, with most beautiful views, are at present inhabited in this part.
Leland says, that there had been diverse rows of streets; but in his time there
were scarcely eighty householders within these walls. Here stands the chapel,
called St. Hillary's, formerly belonging to the garrison, now the place of
worship for the town. In old times, on every Sunday here were masses for the
souls of Lacy and Percy Leland ITIN. v. 61.
. Not far from it are the remains of an unfinished church, a hundred and
seventy-five feet long, and seventy-one broad, and designed to have been
supported by two rows of pillars. This noble building was begun in 1579, as
appears by the date on a foundation-stone. It was to this purpose; for at
present it is much defaced: 1mo Martii 1579
Et Regni Re: Elizabethae 22.
W.


ON the other side appeared,

Veritas, vita, via. Duo sunt templa Dei. Unu mudus I. ein: est Pontifex
primogenties ejus verbu Dei: Alterum rationalis anima: cujus sacerdos est verus
homo.

G. A. Copied from Dr. Foulk's Papers, among Mr, Mytton's MSS.


THIS church was begun under the auspices of Leicester: CHURCH.
but it is said that he left off his buildings in Wales, by reason of the
public hatred he had incurred on account of his tyranny Memoirs.
. A sum was afterward collected, in order to complete the work; but it is
said, that when the earl of Essex passed through Denbigh, on his Irish
expedition, he borrowed the money destined for the purpose, which was never
repayed; and by that means, the church was left unfinished Dr. Foulk's Papers.
.

THE Castle crowns the summit of the hill, CASTLE.
one side of which is quite precipitous. The entrance is very magnificent,
beneath a gothic arch, over which is the statue of Henry Lacy, sitting in
stately flowing robes. On each side of the gate-way stood a large octagonal
tower. The breaches in it are vast and awful: they serve to discover the
ancient manner of building: a double wall appears to have been built, with a
great vacancy between, into which was poured all forts of rubbish, stone, and
hot mortar, which time consolidated to a stony hardness. This part, as Leland
says, was never completed, the work having been deserted by the earl, on the
loss of his eldest son, who was accidentally drowned in the well, whose opening
is still to be seen in the castle-yard. Charles I. lay here on the 23d of
September, 1645, after his retreat from Chester, in a tower still called
Siamber y Brenbin, or the King's Tower.

THE prospect through the broken arches is extremely fine, extending in parts
over the whole vale, and all its eastern hills, from Moel Venlli to Diserth
rock; a rich view, but deficient in water: the river Clwyd being too small to
be seen; and in great rains so furious, as to overflow a great space of the
meadowy tract.

LELAND relates a particular of this fortress, which I do not discover in any
other historian: he says, that Edward IV. was besieged in it; and that he was
permitted to retire, on condition DENBIGH CASTLE
that he should quit the kingdom for ever. The only time in which that prince
was constrained to abdicate his dominions, was in 1470, when he took shipping
at Lynn; not by reason of any capitulation with his enemies, but through the
desperate situation of his affairs at that period.

fasper Tudor, earl of Pembroke, had, in the year 1459, possessed this place,
and several others in the principality, in behalf of his weak half-brother,
Henry VI. Dugdale Baron, ii. 241
but they were wrested from him by the Yorkists in the following year. In 1468
he returned, was joined by two thousand Welsh, and burnt the town Carte. ii.
775.
; meditating rather revenge than conquest.

IN the beginning of November 1645, the parliament army obtained, near this
town, a most important victory over the royalists. The latter, BATTLE.
under the command of Sir William Vaughan, had formed a considerable body of
forces, Welsh and Irish, with a design of marching to the relief of Chester,
then besieged: Sir William Brereton had notice of the design, and immediately
detached that able officer Mytton, and under him colonel Jones and colonel
Louthian, with one thousand four hundred horse, and a thousand foot, to
frustrate the plan. Mytton did his duty, attacked the royalists with vigor, and
after several hot engagements, totally routed them, took five hundred horse and
four hundred foot, killed one hundred, and so entirely dispersed them, as not
to leave a hundred together in one place Whitelock, 179.
.

In 164, SIEGE.
we find the castle garrisoned by the loyalists: its governor was colonel
William Salusbury, of Bachymbyd, commonly called Salusbury Hosandu Gleisiau, or
Blue Stockings. The siege was begun under the conduct of major general Mytton,
about the 16th of July Whitelock, 216.
; but such was the gallant defense of the besieged, that it was not surrendered
till the 3d of November, and then only on the most honorable conditions The
same, 226. For the Articles of Capitulation, see Appendix.
. It is very remarkable, that notwithstanding the orders of fallen majesty, in
June, for the general surrender of every garrison in England and Wales, on fair
and honorable terms, yet the first which yielded in North Wales, held out above
two months longer than the last English castle.

THE priory of Carmelites, PRIORY.
or White Friars, stood at the bottom of the town. It was founded by John
Salusbury, of Lleweni, who died, as appeared from a mutilated brass, found in
the conventual church, on the 7th of March, 1289 Collin's Baronets, Edit. 1720,
i. 82.
. Speed ascribes the building to one John de Sunimore, in 1399; but the
inscription fixes the honor on Salusbury. On the dissolution, this house was
granted to Richard Andreas and William L'Isle. The church, now converted into a
barn, is the only remaining building: it was the burying-place of the family of
the founder, till the reformation; and some of their tombs were to be seen here
within memory of man.

THE present town covers great part of the slope of the hill; TRADE.
and some streets extend along the plain. Its manufactures in shoes and gloves
are very considerable; and great quantities are annually sent to London, to the
great warehouses of the Capital, and for the purposes of exportation.

THE constitution of this borough, and its origin, will be fully explained by
the following transcript, communicated to me by one of its burgesses. It begins
with citing the last charter, CHARTER.
which is that granted by king Charles II. which recites letters patent granted
by queen Elizabeth, and dated at Westminster the 20th of June, in the
thirty-ninth year of her reign; in which the said queen recites, "That seeing
Edward I. by his letters patent, dated at Northampton the 29th of August, in
the eighteenth year of his reign, has granted to Henry de Lacy, earl of
Lincoln, that all his men then inhabiting his town of Denbigh, or that should
for ever inhabit it, through all his territories, formerly belonging to the
king of Wales, and also through the counties of Chester, Salop, Stafford,
Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford, should be free and acquitted for ever from
all toll, stallage, payage, panage, murage, pontage, and passage; and seeing
also king Edward III. by his letters patent, dated at York the 27th of October,
in the sixth year of his reign, has, for himself, and his heirs and
successors, then inhabiting, and afterward to inhabit, the said town, should,
through the kingdom and dominions, be free and acquitted from all such toll,
stallage, payage, murage, pontage, and passage; and seeing also that Richard
II. by his letters patent, dated at Westminster the 22d of February, in the
second year of his reign, granted to the abovesaid men, that the aforesaid town
of Denbigh, and half a mile compass about the town, should be a free borough,
and that the men inhabiting, and afterward to inhabit, should be free
burgesses; and seeing also that Richard III. by his letters, dated at
Westminster the 10th of December, in the second year of his reign, confirmed
the aforesaid grants, and by his said letters patent did grant unto the said
burgesses, their heirs and assigns, being Englishmen, common of pasture for all
manner of cattle, at all times in the year, in the common pasture of the town
and forest of Lleweney; and that the burgesses aforesaid, and their heirs and
assigns, should be free and acquitted, in all his dominions and territories in
England and Ireland, soc, sac, toll, and them, lastage, stallage, payage,
pannage, pontage, murage, and other customs whatsoever. And the aforesaid queen
Elizabeth, by her said letters patent, did ordain, constitute, grant, and
confirm, that the town and borough of Denbigh may extend, on every side, one
mile and a half, according to the common acceptations of that place, from the
high cross standing in the marketplace of the said town; and that the said
town and borough of itself, and the burgesses of the said borough, now and
hereafter in being, be, and shall be for ever hereafter, one body corporate and
politic, in things, fact, and name, by the name of "THE ALDERMEN, BAILIFFS,
and BURGESSES of the borough of Denbigh;" and it is also ordained, that there
be a common seal for transacting of any causes or businesses; and also
ordained, that there be two aldermen, two bailiffs, and two coroners, and
twenty-five of the better sort and best reputed of the burgesses, to be capital
burgesses and counselors of the said borough.

"THE aldermen and bailiffs are elected and nominated upon Michaelmas-day,
yearly. There are two other officers, called sergeants at mace (or
mace-bearers) for the execution of processes and mandates issuing out of the
court of the said borough; they are appointed by the bailiffs of the said
borough for the time being.

"THERE is also a recorder of the said borough, who is appointed by the
aldermen, bailiffs, and capital burgesses.

"CONSTABLES, leavelookers, and other inferior officers, are likewise appointed
by the aldermen, bailiffs, and capital burgesses.

"THERE is a council chamber, or guild, within the said borough, for the
purpose of holding and sitting courts of convocation, before the aldermen,
bailiffs, and capital burgesses.

"THERE is a court of record, to be held every other Friday through the year,
before the bailiffs of the said borough, or one of them; and in that court, by
complaint made in it, they may hold all and all manner of pleas, actions,
suits, demands of all sorts of transgressions vi et armis, or otherwise; and
also all and all manner of debts, accounts, bargains, frauds, detaining of
deeds, writings, muniments, and taking and detaining of beasts and cattle, or
goods; and all contracts whatsoever, arising within the said borough; and that
such pleas, suits, and actions, be heard and terminated before the bailiffs, or
one of them.

"THE aldermen are justices, and hold quarter sessions, in the same manner as
county sessions are held by statute, to hear and determine causes; but not to
proceed in case of death, or loss of life or limb.

"No country justice to intermeddle with any matters or things whatsoever,
appertaining to the office of justice of the peace, which shall arise or happen
within the borough.

"RESIANT burgesses are to serve upon jury at the sessions.
"THE aldermen and bailiffs are commissioners of array.
"THE resiant burgesses are voters for a member for the borough."
I CANNOT but record the virtue of those of the year 1572, who had the courage
to withstand the insinuations, the promises, and the threats, of as
unprincipled a lord as this kingdom was ever afflicted with; who had power to
inflict, and will to execute, any vengeance that opposition to his arbitrary
inclinations might excite. In that year it was his pleasure that one Henry
Dynne should represent this borough in parliament; the burgesses were
refractory, and chose another person; which gave rise to the following letter,
which I print, as a sans pareille.

A Lre sent from the earl of Leicester to the bayliffe, aldermen, and
burgesses, greatly blaminge them for making choice of the burges of the
parliament without his lordship's consent, and commanding them to allter their
electione, and to chose Henry Dynne.
I HAVE been latlie advertised how small consideration you have had of the Lre
I wrote unto you, for the nomynasion, of yor burgess, whereat as I cannot but
greatly mervayle (in respect I am yor L. and you my Tenaunts, as also the
many good tournes and commodities which I have been always willinge to procure
you, for the benefitte of yor whole state) so do I take the same in so --, and
vill yte so unthankfullie, as if you do not upon receite hereof presently
revoke the same, and appointe such one as I shall nominate, namely, Henry
Dynne, be ye well assured never to look for any ffrienshipe or favor at my
hand, in any yor affairs herafter; not for any great account I make of the
thing, but for that I would not it should be thought that I have so small
regard borne me at yor hands, who are bounden to owe (as yor L.) thus much
duty as to know mine advice and pleasure; that will happily be aleadged, that
yor choice was made before the receipt of my Lres (in rely I would little have
thought that you would have been so forgetful, or rather careless of me, as
before yor elecion not to make me privy thereto, or at the least to have some
desire of mine advise therein (havinge time enough so to do) but as you have
of yor selfs thus rashly proceeded herein, without mine assent, so have I
thought good to signify unto you, that I mean not to take it in any wise at
yor hands, and therefore wysh you more advisedlie to consider hereof, and to
deal with me as may continue my favr toward you, otherwise look for no favr
at my hands: and so fare ye well. From the Court, this last day of April, 1572.

R. LEYCESTER.


THIS doughty letter had no effect: the burgesses adhered to their own choice,
and Richard Candishe, gent. stands as member for Denbigh in that year Willis
Notitiae Parliam. iii. 98.
. Leicester did but copy his mistress in his contempt of privelege of
parlements: Elizabeth thought them the mere instruments of giving sanction to
her will: for if they once presumed to oppose it, she without ceremony informed
them of her displeasure. Peter Wentworth, for the simple proposition, that a
member of parliament might, without controlment of his person, or danger of the
laws, by bill or speech, utter any of the griefs of this commonwealth
whatsoever, touching the service of GOD, the safety of the prince, and this
noble realm, was sent to the tower; and to the petition of the house for his
release, an answer was returned, that it was very unfit for her majesty to give
any account of her actions. Her prerogative was the rule of government: the
great council was expressly forbidden to meddle in matters of state, or in
causes ecclesiastical Drake's Parliam. Hist. iv. 396.
: and this was the GOLDEN REIGN of ELIZABETH!

FROM Denbigh I went to the hospitable house of Gwaenynog, about two miles
distant, fronted by the most majestic oaks in our principality. The fine wooded
dingles belonging to the demesne are extremely well worth visiting: they are
most judiciously cut into walks by the owner, John Myddelton, esquire and afford as
beautiful scenery in their kind, as any we have to boast. Moel Vamma superbly
terminates one view; and the ruins of Denbigh Castle burst awfully at the
termination of the concluding path.

IN rummaging over the family papers of this house, I met with an anecdote of
it, too singular to be suppressed. It will prove at left, that private morals,
and respect to the laws, were in that distant period but in a very low state;
for no notice seems to have been taken of so atrocious an offense. The criminal
enjoyed the favor of the crown, in common with others its peaceful subjects.

David Myddelton, who is styled receiver of Denbigh in the nineteenth of Edward
IV. and Valectus Coronae Dni Regis, in the second of Richard III. made his
addresses to Elyn, daughter of Sir John Done, of Utkinton, in Cheshire, and
gained the lady's affections; but the parents preferred their relation, Richard
Done, of Croton. The marriage was accordingly celebrated; which David having
notice of, watched the groom leading his bride out of church, killed him on the
spot, and then carried away his mistress, and married her the same day; so that
she was a maid, widow, and wife twice, in one day. From Roger, the eldest son
of the match, descended the Myddeltons of this place.

I MENTION Thomas Myddelton, another of his progeny, only to prove, that the
custom of the Irish howl, or Scotch Coranich, was in use among us; for we are
told he was buried cum magno dolor et clamore cognatorum et propinquorum
omnium.

HAVING made Gwaenynog my head quarters for this neighborhood, I one day
visited from thence Henllan, the parish church of these parts; remarkable for
the schism between church and steeple: the first having retreated into the
bottom, the last maintains its station on the top of the hill. The church is
covered with shingles; a species of roof almost obsolete. St. Sadwrn, or St.
Saturnus, cotemporary to St. Wenefrede, has it under his protection. Here was
interred Sir Peter Mutton, knight, descended from Richard Mutton, of Rhuddlan,
and Elen, daughter to John (Aer Hen) Conway, of Bodrhyddan. Sir Peter, as his
epitaph informs us, was chief justice of North Wales, a matter in chancery,
prothonatory, and clerk of the crown. He died November the 4th, 1637. He had
the honor of representing the borough of Caernarvon; and once occasioned much
diversion to the house, by asserting, in one of his speeches, "that he
remembered fourteen years before he was he was born, etc. etc." But he was a
good judge, made a fair fortune, and by marriage acquired the estate of
Llanerch, which passed with his daughter to Robert Davies, of Gwysaney, esquire
ancestor of the present owner.

NOT far from Henllan church, in the parish of Llan-nefydd, on the bank of the
brook Meirchion, are the remains of a seat of Mereddydd ap Meirchion, or Merach
y Meirch, lord of Isdulas. Part is now standing, particularly the chapel, which
serves for a farmhouse; but some very extensive foundations show its former
importance.

FROM hence, after a ride of a few miles, I reached Dyffryn Alled, or the vale
of the river Alled, a very narrow tract, bounded by high hills, and of late
ornamented by the magnificent seat built by Mrs. Meyric. At the head of the
valley stand the village and church of Llansannan, dedicated to St. Sannan,
confessor and hermit; descended (for our very saints boast of their pedigree)
from ancient parentage, near the territory of the father of St. Wenefrede, with
whom he maintained strict friendship. Their remains were both enterred at
Gwytherin; to which place, though unworthy, I resolved on an immediate
pilgrimage.

IN my way, I descended a very steep wooded dell, in the township of Penared,
to visit the gloomy cataract of Llyn yr ogo, where the Alled tumbles into a
horrible black cavern, overshaded by oaks. Somewhat higher up is another,
exposed to full day, falling from a vast height, and dividing the naked glen.
Llyn-Alled, the small lake from which the river flows, lies at a small
distance, amidst black and heathy mountains, through which runs much of the
road to Gwytherin.

THAT little village and church stand on a bank, at the head of a small vale,
near the rise of the Elwy. The church is celebrated for the honor of having
first received the remains of St. Winefrede, ST. WINEFREDE.
after her second death. On the decease of St. Beuno, she was warned by a voice
to call on St. Deifer at Bodvari; by St. Deifer she was directed to go to St.
Saturnus, at Henllan; and by St. Saturnus, to seek a final retreat with St.
Elerius, at Gwytherin. Hither she repaired, found a convent of nuns, received
the veil from the saint, and, on the death of the abbess Theonia, succeeded to
the high charge. St. Wenefrede died on the 3d of November, and rested here in
quiet, near the body of her predecessor, for the space of five hundred years.
By reason of a miracle, wrought, as was supposed, by her intercession, on a
monk of Shrewsbury, the abbot determined on the translation of her remains to
their monastery. HER REMAINS TRANSLATED.
Seven holy men were deputed: the inhabitants of Gwytherin refused to part with
such a treasure: visions determined the former to persist in their request: and
at length, on the declaration of the will of heaven, by another vision, to the
parson of Gwytherin, who declared to his flock the impiety of farther
resistance, the relics were delivered up, and carried with triumph to their
place of destination This, and much more, may be seen in the Life of St.
Winefrede, pp. 38, etc.
The prior at this time was Robert. Mr. William Mytton Antiquities of
Shropshire, folio MS.
calls him Pennant. If he was of the neighborhood of Holywell, I do not wonder
he was so anxious about the remains of his countrywoman, which he knew could
not fail enriching his house, by virtue of the miracle-craft so frequent in
that age.

IN the church is shown the box in which her relics were kept, before their
removal to Shrewsbury. Here is also an ancient gravestone, with a flowery cross
and chalice (the last denoting the priestly profession of the deceased) with
Hic jacet Llowarch Mab Cadell, inscribed on the cross.

THE Saint's Chapel, Capell Gwenfrewi, is now totally destroyed: it stood on
the south side of the church; but nothing remains: except some slight ditches
and foundations.

ON the north side of the churchyard stand four rude upright stones. On one is
rudely cut an inscription, for which I refer to the supplemental plates.

IN my return, I followed the course of the Elwy, by Havodynos, the seat of
Howel Lloyd, esquire by the church and village of Llangerniew; by Garthewin, the
seat of Robert Wynn, esquire commanding a most lovely view of a fertile little
valley, bounded by hills covered with hanging woods; and by Llanvair Dolhaearn,
a village and church at a small distance above the conflux of the Elwy and
Alled. In this parish above the Elwy, was one of the residences of Hedd
Molwynog, descended from RODERIC THE GREAT king of all Wales. YR HEN LLYS.
A large moat, called Yr Hen Llys, marks the place: as the field, styled Maes y
Bendithion, does the spot where the poor received his alms Llwyd's Itin. i. 14.
MS.
. Molwynog was chief of one of the fifteen tribes of North Wales; was
cotemporary with David a^ Owen Gwynedd; and assisted that prince to carry fire
and swor^ through England, even to the walls of Coventry. A descendant ^^ his
third son, Gwrgi, peopled North Wales with Llwyds; so Bleyddyn, the son of
Bleyddyn Vychan, assuming the addition ^^ Llwyd, or the Gray, founded the house
of Havodynos. Among hi^ good deeds must be told, that to him is owing the stone
bridge (...) Llansanan.

I HOPE my countrymen will not grow indignant, when I express my fears, that in
very early times we were as fierce and savage as the rest of Europe: and they
will bear this the better, when they reflect, that they keep pace with it in
civilization, and in the progress of every fine art. We cannot deny but that we
were, to the excess, Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel.

Two gentlemen of this house exemplify the assertion. RUDE TIMES.
Meiric ap Bleyddyn, resentful of the injuries which he and his tenants
received from the English judges and officers) slew one of the first, and
hanged several of the latter on the oaks of his woods; by which he forfeited to
the crown the lands, still known in these parts by the name of Ter Meiric
Llwyd, or the estate of Meiric Llwyd Llwyd's Itin. i. 16.
. As to his person, he secured it within the sanctuary at Hulston My Welsh
Tour, i. 237.
; and marrying, founded in that neighborhood the house of Llwyn y Maen.

Bleyddyn Vychan, another of this race, fell out with his tenants, and in a fit
of fury chased them from his estate, and turned it into a forest Llwyd's Itin.
i. 15.
; a pretty picture of the manners of the times! The place lies in the parish of
Llansanan, and bears the name of Forest to this day.

RETURNED to Gwaenynog, and passing beneath Denbigh Castle, visit Llanrhaider,
a village in the middle of the vale, remarkable for an east window of good and
very entire painted glass, expressing a favorite subject of the time, the root
of Jesse. The patriarch is represented sprawling at the bottom, with a
genealogical tree issuing out of him, containing all the kings of Israel and
Juda, up to our SAVIOR. The branches around the kings are in very beautiful
foliage: at the top is a rose of Lancaster, and another with an eye in glory
within it: the window being done in 1533, after the accession of that house.
Here, in a vast monument of Maurice Jones, of Llanrhaider, esquire may be seen
Eternal buckle take in Parian stone. His figure is lying down, leaning on his
arm, in his gown, with his wig in excellent curl, and surrounded by weeping
genii, and much funebrial absurdity.

IN the churchyard is a common altar-tomb of a gentleman, who chose to build
his fame on the long series of ancestors which distinguished his from vulgar
clay. It tells us, that HEAR LIES THE BODY OF
JOHN, AP ROBERT, OF PORTH, AP
DAVID, AP GRIFFITH, AP DAVID
VAUCHAN. AP BLETHYN, AP
GRIFFITH, AP MEREDITH,
AP JERWORTH, AP LLEWELYN,
AP JERORH, AP HEILIN, AP
COWRYD, AP CADVAN, AP
ALAWGWA, AP CADELL, THE
KING OF POWYS, WHO
DEPARTED HIS LIFE THE
XX DAY OF MARCH, IN THE
YEAR OF OUR LORD GOD
1642, AND OF
HIS AGE XCV.


ON an eminence to the north-west of the church, called Cader Gwladus, or
Gwladus's A common Welsh name.
Chair, is an extremely beautiful view of the vale between Denbigh and Ruthin,
FINE VIEW.
and the whole breadth chequered with wood, meadows, and corn fields; and
almost the whole range of the eastern limits soaring far above it. Denbigh
Castle from hence shows itself to great advantage, with its walls and towers
extending along its precipitous base.

AT the foot of this rising is Fynnon Ddysnog, a fine spring, dedicated to St.
Ddysnog, one of our long pedegreed faints; formerly much resorted to by
votaries. The fountain is enclosed in an angular wall, decorated with small
human figures; and before is the well for the use of the pious bathers.

NEAR this are some comfortable almshouses for eight widows, founded by Mrs.
Jones, of Llanrhaider (a Bagot) in 1729: and each has her garden, and two
shillings a week.

HERE the diocese of Bangor encroaches on that of St. Asaph, and takes out of
it the beautiful parish of Llanrhaider, and all the upper end of the vale.

ON the road to Ruthin, on an estate of Sir William Bagot, are to be seen some
very fine chestnut trees; CHESTNUT TREES.
one of which is near twenty-four feet in circumference. The reader need not be
told, that this species of trees is not a native of Great Britain, nor even of
Europe. We are indebted for it to the Romans, who probably first planted it in
Kent, where it has been fo fully naturalized, as to form, in certain tracts,
great woods; in other parts of the kingdom, it every where appears cultivated;
as sparingly as it might have been originally in Italy, after it had been
brought from Lydia, its native place Sardibus eae provenere primum. Ideo apud
Graecos, Sardianos balanos appellant. Plin. Hist. Not. lib. xv. c. 23.
.

REACH Ruthin, RUTHIN.
and enter under Porth y Dwr, its only remaining gate. The town is pleasantly
seated, on the easy slope and summit of a rising ground. CASTLE.
The castle stood on the south side, and in part sunk beneath the earth: its
poor remains impend over the fall of land fronting the west, where a fragment
or two of a tower are still to be seen, mixed with the native rock, which in
parts served as a facing to the fortress, whose lower part was formed out of
it; a very deep fosse, hewn out of the live stone, with a portal at each end,
divides it breadthways. Honest Churchyard, with great truth and simplicity,
thus describes the work: This castle stands on rock much like red brick,
The dykes are cut with tool through stony cragge;
The towers are hye, the walls are large and thick,
The work itself would shake a subject's bag.


A DRAWING I discovered in the British Museum, shows that it soared high above
the ground, and that its numerous towers well merited the poet's praise.

THE views from the summit of the ruins, are very well worthy of the
traveller's attention. If he is fond of a more aerial one, I would by all means
have him ascend the heights of Bwlch pen y Barras, from whence is a full
prospect of our boasted vale, and the remote hills of our Alpine tract.

THE Welsh name of the fortress is Castle Coch in Gwernvor Llwyd's Itin. MS.
iii. 61.
. Possibly our countrymen had here a strong-hold before the time of Edward I.
who built the castle whose ruins we survey Rotulae Walliae, 66.
, and bestowed it, in 1281, with the cantred of Dyffryn Clwyd, on Reginald de
Gray; for which he did homage, at Chester, to Edward of Caernarvon, then prince
of Wales. The king added at the same time the townships of Maesmynnan, Pembedw,
and Blowite, as dependencies on the castle; and I ought to add the land of
Wenchal de Lacy. Out of this ancient cantred was formed the present lordship of
Ruthin, which comprehends several parishes. It remained in the family of the
Greys till the time of Richard earl of Kent, who having dissipated his fortune
by gaming, sold it to Henry VII. Queen Elizabeth bestowed it on Ambrose Dudley
earl of Warwick: and it is now in possession of Richard Myddelton, esquire of Chirk
Castle. I must observe, this lordship was directed by Edward the Second, to
contribute two hundred foot soldiers for his Scottish expedition, in 1309; but
in 1325, only one man at arms and thirty footmen were required Rymer, iii. 157.
iv. 137
.

THE inhabitants, united with those of Denbigh and Holt, send a representative
to parliament.

THE town of Ruthin was burnt by Owen Glendwr, BURNT BY GLENDWR.
on September the 20th, 1400. He took the opportunity of surprising it during
the fair, enriched his followers with the plunder, and then retired to his
fastnesses among the hills.

IN the last century, the castle was garrisoned by the loyalists, and
sustained, in 1646, a siege, from February to the middle of April; CASTLE TAKEN
BY MYTTON.
when it surrendered, with two months provisions, to general Mytton, who
received the thanks of the house for his services; the commons ordered Mr.
Fogge, his chaplain, fifty pounds for bringing the news, and confirmed the
general's appointment or lieutenant colonel Mason to the government of the new
conquest Drake's Parliament. Hist. xiv. 355.
. The fortress was afterward demolished by an order of the house.

THE church is large, CHURCH.
yet only a chapel to Llanruth. The roof prettily divided into small squares,
ornamented with sculpture, and marked with the names of the workmen. The only
monument of any note, is that of Doctor Gabriel Goodman, dean of Westminster in
the time of queen Elizabeth, whose figure is represented by a bust. This
illustrious divine was a native of Ruthin, and was greatly distinguished by his
various merit. As a churchman, he acquired great fame by his translation of the
epistle to the Corinthians, being assistant in the version of the bible into
English: as a philanthropist, his foundation of a hospital for twelve poor
people, and a warden (who is the clergyman of the place) perpetuates his
benevolent turn: and his affection to learned men is evident, not only by his
establishing here a free school for this parish, and that of Llan-Elidan, with
a stipend to the master of sixty pounds a year; but by his being the patron of
the great Cambden Cambden Middlesex, i, 385.
, whom he enabled to take those travels, which produced the finest collection
of provincial antiquities ever extant.

THE church was originally conventual, and belonged to a house of Bonhommes
Leland Itin. iii, 135.
, a species of Augustins, introduced into England in 1283: but the time of
their continuance here could be but very short; for, in 1310, John, son of
Reginald de Gray, made it collegiate, and established seven regular priests,
with an endowment of two hundred and five acres of land, in Rosmeryon and Rue,
besides other lands, and woods, a mill, pasture for twenty-three cows and a
bull; and pannage, or the free keeping of sixty hogs in the woods of the
lordship Dugdale's Monast. iii. pars ii. 57.
. For these, and several other good things, the said priests were for ever to
celebrate daily a solemn mass, for the souls of Edward I. queen Eleanor,
Reginald de Gray and Matilda his wife, the founder and his wife, all their
friends and relations, and of all the benefactors to this church Dugdale's
Monast. iii. pars ii. 57.
.

John de Gray was possibly buried here; and his might be the tomb, which
Churchyard calls that of an earl of Kent; which stood in the chancel, and in
his days was placed on the right side of the choir.

THE apartments of the priests were connected to the church by a cloister; part
of which is built up, and serves as the mansion of the warden. When John de
Gray undertook this work, he obtained the consent of Sir Hugh, then rector of
Llanruth; to whom he allows this to have been subordinate, by custom as well as
right The same.
.

IN 1583, here were left in charge four incumbents, with pensions from six
pounds to one pound six shillings and eight-pence each Willis Abbeys, ii. 311.
. The lands were granted by Edward VI. to William Winlove and Richard Fyld
Tanner, 708.
.

Ruthin, and several other parishes, which formerly composed the cantref of
Dyffryn Clwyd, form a deanery in the diocese of Bangor, bearing the ancient
name.

Leland mentions a house of white friars Itin, v. 45.
in this town, but gives no particulars. It possibly stood in the street, to
this day called Prior's-Street.

THE new jail does much honor to the architect, JAIL.
Mr. Joseph Turner; the contrivance comprehending all the requisites of these
seats of misery, security, cleaness, and health. The debtors are separated from
the criminals by a very lofty wall, dividing their respective yards, which are
airy and spacious, and are supplied with baths. The condemned cells are on a
level with the ground; are dry, light, and strong; an excellent contrast to the
sad dungeons of ancient prisons.

FROM Ruthin. I visited the neat little mother church of Llanruth, dedicated to
St. Meugan, a great astrologer, and physician to king Vortigern. In it is the
monument of John Thelwall, esquire of Bathavarn, and his wife, kneeling at an
altar: behind him are ten sons Several of their portraits are preserved at
Bathavarn, the seat of the reverend Mr. Carter.
; behind her, four daughters. Of the sons, Sir Bevis is armed; the rest are in
gowns; and three carry in their hands a skull, to denote their early departure.
The other seven lived to advanced life, and flourished cotemporaries in the
several professions they had embraced.

John, the eldest, died aged 97, and left a posterity, amounting to between two
hundred and forty and two hundred and sixty.

SIR Eubule became master of Jesus College, Oxford. I will not tire the reader
with the whole family history; but must not omit Ambrose, the ninth son, who
began life with being servant to Sir Francis Bacon; and so great a favorite was
he, that in order to reward him, Sir Francis moved his royal master to knight
all the masters in chancery; for which Ambrose was to have a gratuity of one
hundred pounds a man. The affair was done, and the money paid, except by his
brother, Sir Eubule, then one of the masters, to whom he remitted the fees.

THERE is in the church a monumental bust of Ambrose, admirably cut: his hair
short; beard, peaked; and ruff, flat.

THIS family came from Thelwall, in Cheshire, and took their name from the
place. The founder was a follower of Reginald de Gray, and made a settlement in
these parts. Notwithstanding the numerous offspring of the family, and the
other branches, only two remain of the name, my kinsman, Edward Thelwall, esquire
of Llanbeder, a most beautiful situation, high on the side of the hills, two
miles east of Ruthin; and Simon Thelwall, esquire of Blaen-yal.

FROM Llanruth the vale grows very narrow, and almost closes with the parish of
Llanvair. If I place the extremity at Pont Newydd, there cannot be a more
beautiful finishing; where the bridge, near the junction of the Clwyd and the
Hespin; and a lofty hill, with its clothed with hanging woods, terminate the
view.

Go over part of Coed Marchan, a large naked common, noted for a quarry of
coarse red and white marble. Descend into the narrow vale of Nant-clwyd; and
for some time ride over dreary commons. On one is a small encampment, with a
single fosse, called Caer Senial. Near this place, enter MEIREONEDDSHIRE. And,
within sight of the former, visit Caer Drewyn, another post, in full view of
the beautiful vales of Glyn-dwrdwye and Edernion, watered by the Dee. It lies
on the steep slope of a hill; is of a circular form, BRITISH POST.
and about half a mile in circumference; and the defense consists of a single
wall, mostly in ruins; yet in some parts the facings are still apparent: in the
thickness of the walls are evident remains of apartments. It had two entrances.
Near the north-eastern is an oblong square, added to the main works; and as the
ground there is rather flat, it is strengthened with a great ditch, and a wall:
within are the foundations of rude stone buildings; one of which is circular,
and several yards in diameter: the ditch is carried much farther than the wall;
and seems part of an unfinished addition to the whole. It is conjectured, that
Owen Gwynedd occupied this post, while Henry II. lay encamped on the Berwyn
hills, on the other side of the vale. Owen Glyndwr is said also to have made
use of this fastness, in his occasional retreats.

NOT far from hence, near Gwyddelwern, is a place called Says Marchog, from
the circumstance of Owen having there surprised Reginald de Gray, and seven
knights (Says Marchog) in his train Mr. Thomas's MSS.
.

THIS post or fastness of Caer Drewyn, is but one of the chain which begins at
Diserth, and is continued along the Clwydian hills into the mountains of Yale;
for on the last are others; one on a Moel y Gaer, and another on Moel Forfydd;
and Bryn Eglwys church seems to have been placed in the area of a third. These
were the temporary retreats of the inhabitants in time of war, or sudden
invasions: here they placed their women, their children, and cattle, under
strong garrison; or perhaps a whole clan or nation might withdraw into them,
till the retreat of the enemy, who could never subsist long in a country, where
all the provisions were in this manner secured. It is also equally certain,
that the inhabitants themselves could not remain here for any long space, as
most of these fastnesses are destitute of water Tour in Wales, i. 414.
.

DESCEND, and finding the usual ford of the Dee to Corwen impassable, get again
into the Ruthin road, on a common marked with Tumuli, the frequent signs of
slaughter. These appear to me to have been the graves of the slain in some
skirmish which the Welsh had with the English, about the year 1255; when
Llewelyn ap Gryffyd, collecting all his power, recovered the inland part of
North Wales, and all Merioneddshire, from the usurpation of Henry III. Powel,
320.
.

PASS near the house of Rug. This place is memorable for the treacherous
surprizal of Gryffyd ap Conan, king of Wales, soon after his victory at Carno,
in the year 1077; having been enveigled hither by the treason of one Muriawn
Goch. The mount (in all likelihood originally Roman) on which the castelet
stood, is still to be seen in the garden. Notwithstanding his eminent success,
he fell into a long captivity, being here betrayed into the hands of Hugh Lupus
earl of Chester, and Hugh Belesme earl of Shrewsbury, and was conveyed to the
castle of Chester, where he endured a twelve years imprisonment. At length he
was released by the bravery of a young man of these parts, Kynwric Her; who,
coming to Chester under pretense of buying necessaries, took an opportunity,
while the keepers were a feasting, to carry away his prince, laden with irons,
on his back, to a place of security Life of Gr. ap Conan. Sebright MSS.
.

IN aftertimes, this place became the property of Owen Brogyntyn, natural son
of Madog ap Mereddydd, a prince of Powys. Such was the merit of Brogyntyn, that
he shared his father's inheritance equal with his legitimate brethren. His
dagger, curiously wrought, is, I am told, still preserved in the house. By the
marriage of Margaret Wenn, daughter and heiress of Jevan ap Howel, a descendant
of Brogyntyn, with Pyers Salusbury, of Bachymbyd Salusbury Pedigree, 14.
, were derived the Salusburies of Rug; a name existing in the male line till
the present century.

I MAY mention here, as a sequel to the life of Owen Glyndwr, that on his
attainder, Henry IV. sold the lordship of Glyndwrdwy to Robert Salusbury Powel,
214.
, of Rug.

CROSS the Dee, on a very handsome bridge of six arches, from which the river
shows itself to vast advantage, above and below, in form of two extensive
channels, bordered by trees, and fertilizing a verdant tract of meadow.

REACH Corwen, whose church and small town, seated beneath a vast rock at the
foot of the Berwyn hills, form a picturesque point of view, from various parts
of the preceding ride.

Corwen is celebrated for being the great rendezvous of the Welsh forces under
Owen Gwynedd Lord LITTLETON, iv. 99.
, who from hence put a stop to the invasion of Henry II. in the year 1165. The
place of encampment is marked, as I am told, by a rampart of earth, above the
church southward; and by the marks of the sites of abundance of tents from
thence to the village of Cynwyd.

THE church is built in form of a cross. Within is the tomb of one of its
vicars, Jorwerth Sulien. His figure, holding a chalice in his hand, is
represented as low as his breast, over which the inscription, "Hie jacet
Jorwerth Sulien, Vicarius de Corvaen, ora pro eo," is continued. The whole is a
very elegant piece of engraving, upon the coffin-lid, I fear not old enough to
make it the tomb of St. Julien, archbishop of St. David; the godliest man and
greatest clerk in all Wales He died in 1089.
: yet that saint has his well here, and is patron of the church.

ON the south side of the church wall is cut a very rude cross, which is shown
to strangers as the sword of Owen Glyndwr. A most singular cross in the
churchyard merits attention: the shast is let into a flat stone, and that
again is supported by four or five rude stones, as if the whole had been formed
in imitation of, and in veneration of the sacred Cromlehs of very early time.

A MONUMENT of our superstition remains in the Carreg y Big in y fach Newlyd, a
pointed rude stone, which stands near the porch. We are told that all attempts
to build the church in any other place, were frustrated by the influence of
certain adverse powers, till the founders, warned in vision, were directed to
the spot where this pillar stood.

IN the churchyard is a building, founded by William Eyton, of Plas Warren, in
Shropshire; who, in 1709, left by will a sum for the support of six widows of
clergy of the county of Merioneth only, and for the erecting six houses for
them to live in. In consequence, this building was finished, and lands, to the
present amount of sixty pounds a year, bought, which is equally divided among
the widows resident here.

LEAVE Corwen, and return as far as the bridge on the way I came. The vast
Berwyn mountains are the eastern boundary of this beautiful vale. Their highest
tops are Cader Fronwen, or The White Breast, and Cader Ferwyn. On the first is
a great heap of stones, brought from some distant part, with great toil, up the
steep ascent; and in their middle is an erect pillar. Of him, whose ambition
climbed this height for a monument, we are left in ignorance. Under their
summit is said to run an artificial road, FFORD HELEN.
called Ffordd Helen, or Helen's Way; a lady, of whose labors I shall soon have
occasion to speak further.

ON these hills, particularly about Cader Fronwen, is found the Rubus
Chamaemorus, CLOUD BERRIES.
Cloud Berries, or Knot Berries. Llwyd In Camden's Br. ii, 835.
says, that the Welsh call it Mwyar Berwyn, Mora Montis Berwyn. They are
frequently used for the making of tarts; and the Swedes and Norwegians reckon
the berries to be excellent antiscorbutics, and preserve great quantities in
autumn, to make tarts. The Laplanders bruise and eat them as a delicious food,
in the milk of reindeer; and to preserve them through the winter, bury them in
snow, and at the return of spring, find them as fresh as when first gathered
Flora Scotica, i. 267. tab. xiii.
. I have seen them in the Highlands of Scotland, brought to table as a desert.

REACH Cynwyd, a small village, formerly noted for the courts kept here by the
great men of the neighborhood, to settle the boundaries of their several clames
on the wastes and commons, and to take cognizances of the encroachment; but
they have been long discontinued, and the records destroyed.

VISIT from this place Rhaider Cynwyd, WATTER-FALL.
or the fall of Cynwyd, which finely finishes the end of the dingle, that
extends about half a mile from the village. The water of the river Trystion
bursts from the sides of the hill, through deep and narrow chasms, from rock to
rock, which are overgrown with wood. The rude and ancient stocks, that hang in
many parts over the precipices, add much to this picturesque scene; which is
still improved by the little mill, and its inhabitants, in this sequestered
bottom.

PURSUE the journey to Bala. Go by the little church of Llangar. Observe
somewhat farther on the left, in a field called Caer Bont, CAER BONT.
a small circular entrenchment, consisting of a fosse and rampart, with two
entrances, meant probably as a guard to this pass. My fellow-traveller, the
reverend Mr. Lloyd, informed me, that in another tour he had ascended a hill,
above this place, called Y Foel, on whose summit was a circular coronet, of
rude pebbly stones, none above three feet in height; with an entrance to the
east, or rising sun. The diameter of the circle is ten yards. Within was a
circular cell, about six feet in diameter, sunk a very little below the
surface; and about a hundred yards distance, facing this, are the relics of a
great Carnedd, surrounded by large stones. The whole of this formed a place of
worship among the ancient Britons, and probably was surrounded with a grove.
But what I have to say on the subject of Druidism, is reserved till I reach
Anglesea, its principal seat.

PROCEED to Llandrillo, a village with a church dedicated to St. Trillo. It is
seated on the torrent Keidio, at the mouth of a great glen, which extends
upwards of two miles, embosomed in the Berwyn mountains, and leads to the noted
pass through them, called Milter Gerrig, into the county of Montgomery.

AT about a mile distance from Llandrillo, I again crossed the Dee, at Pont
Gilan, a bridge of two arches, over a deep and black water. Beyond this spot,
the valley acquires new beauties, especially on the right. The valley here
contracts greatly: the road runs at the foot of a brow, of a stupendous height,
covered with venerable oaks, which have kept their stubborn station, amidst the
rudest of rocks, which every now and then show their gray and broken fronts,
amidst the deep verdure of the foliage of trees, which so strangely find
nutriment amongst them. The growth of the oak, in forcing its root downward,
frequently rends thse vast strata, whose fragments often appear scattered at
the base, of most amazing sizes. The whole scenery requires the pencil of a
Salvator Rosa: and here our young artists would find a fit place to study the
manner of that great painter of wild nature.

A LITTLE beyond the extremity of this romantic part, in an opening on the
right, ST. DERFEL.
stand the church and village of Llan-Dderfel: the first was dedicated to St.
Derfel Gadarn, and was remarkable for a vast wooden image of the saint, the
subject of much superstition in ancient times. The Welsh had a prophecy, that
it should set a whole forest on fire. Whether to complete it, or whether to
take away from the people the cause of idolatry, I cannot say; but it was
brought to London in the year 1538, and was used as part of the fuel which
consumed poor friar Forest to ashes, in Smithfield, for denying the king's
supremacy. This unhappy man was hanged in chains round his middle to a gallows,
over which was placed this inscription, allusive to our image: David Darvel
Gutheren,
As says the Welshman,
Fetched outlawes out of Hell.
Now is he come with spear and sheld,
In harnes to burn in Smithfeld,
For in Wales he may not dwell.
And Foreest the freer.
That obstinate liar,
That wylfully shall be dead.
In his contumacye,
The gospel does deny,
The king to be supreme head Halle's Chr. ccxxxiii.
.


THE prophecy was fulfilled, the image burnt, and the Forest consumed, to the
great content of the lord mayor, the dukes of Suffolk and Norfolk, the lord
admiral, and lord privy seal, and diverse others of the nobility, who honored
this auto de fe with their presence Stow's Annals, 573.
; but unfortunately, the friar not having the insensibility of our wooden
saint, on the touch of the flames showed the natural horrors at approach of an
agonizing death, and paid very little respect to the arguments of the pious
Latimer, who was placed opposite to the sufferer, in a pulpit, to preach him
into a sense of the crime of differing in opinion with his sovereign in
religious matters; for which the prelate himself suffered in a succeeding
reign. Forest thought fit to deny that Henry was head of the church; and
Latimer would force that honor upon Mary, who chose to cede it to the Pope.

OPPOSITE to this church is Llandderfel bridge, of four arches. At some
distance from it, the vale almost closes; and at Kalettur finishes nobly with a
lofty wooded eminence, above which soars the vast mafs of the Arennig
mountains, notwithstanding they appear immediately after to be very remote. And
I here stop a moment, to recommend to the traveller, who does not choose
precisely to pursue my steps, to follow the course of the Dee from Bangor,
through the delicious tract it waters from thence to Llangollen, to follow it
through Glyndwrdwy to Corwen, and thence, through the matchless vale of
Edeirneon, to this spot, where, for a small space, it passes through a flat, an
unpleasant contrast to the preceding ride.

ON the left lies Rhiwaedog, or The Bloody Brow, noted for a battle between
Llowarch Hen and the Saxons, in which he lost Cynddelw, the last of his
numerous sons. A spot not far from hence, called Pabell Llowarch Hen, or the
tent of that monarch, is supposed to have been the place where he rested the
night after the battle, and where he finished that pathetic elegy, in which he
laments the loss of all his sons. In it he directs the last to defend the brow
of that hill, indifferent to the fate of the only survivor. CYNDDELW, cadw
dithew y Rhiu
Arr a ddel yma heddiw
Cubeb am un mab nyd gwiu J. D. Rhys's Grammar, 103.
.
CYNDDELW, defend thou the brow of yonder hill. Let the event of the day be
what it-will: when there is but one son left, it is vain to be over-fond of him.

THE house and estate of Rhiwaedog is now owned by Mr. Dolben, descended by his
mother from the Llwyds, the very ancient possessors. Eineon ap Ithel, of this
place, a valiant ancestor of his, articled with John duke of Lancaster, in
1394, to attend him for a year in his expedition to Guyen, with one mam at arms
and one archer; for which the duke rewarded him with twenty marks, issuing out
of his manor of Halton Mr. Evan Evans's Notes.
.

PASS by the village and church of Llanvawr, and cross the torrent Troweryn,
beneath Rhiwlas, the ancient seat of the Prices. In the house are the portraits
of some of the family: RHIWDAS.
among others, that of William Price, esquire member for the county in the long
parliament, but soon displaced for his adherence to the king.

REACH Bala, a small town in the parish of Llanyekil, noted for its vast trade
in woollen stockings, and its great markets every Saturday morning, when from
two to five hundred pounds worth are sold each day, according to the demand.
Round the place, women and children are in full employ, KNITTING.
knitting along the roads; and mixed with them Herculean figures appear,
assisting their omphales in this effeminate employ. During winter the females,
through love of society, often assemble at one another's houses to knit; sit
round a fire, and listen to some old tale, or to some ancient song, or the
sound of a harp; and this is called Cymmorth Gwau, or, the knitting assembly.

MUCH of the wool is bought at the great fairs at Llanrwst, in Denbighshire.

CLOSE to the south-east end of the town, is a great artificial mount, TOMMEN Y
BALA.
called Tommen y Bala, in the summer time usually covered in a picturesque
manner with knitters, of both sexes, and all ages. From the summit is a fine
view of Llyn-tegid, and the adjacent mountains. On the right appear the two
Arennigs, Vawr and Vach; beyond the farther end, soar the lofty Arans, with
their two heads, Aran Mowddwy and Penllyn; and beyond all, the great Cader
Idris closes the view.

THIS mount appears to have been Roman, and placed here, with a castelet on its
summit, to secure the pass toward the sea, and keep our mountaneers in
subjection. The Welsh, in after time, took advantage of this, as well as other
works of the same nature.

THE town is of a very regular form: the principal street very spacious, and
the lesser fall into it at right angles. I will not deny, but that its origin
might have been Roman.

THE mounts form a chain. I have observed one within sight of this, on the
mountain road to Ruthin, which is called Tommen y Castle; Caer Crwyni is a
small entrenchment, not remote from it, overlooking the vale of Edeirnion; the
mount in the garden of Rug is another; a third, much more considerable, lies
within VIEW FROM TOMMEN Y BALA.
sight of this, on the road to Gwyddelwern; and farther on, in the parish of
Bettws, is a fourth, which goes under the usual name of Tommen y Castle.

Bala takes its name from its vicinity to the place where a river discharges
itself from a lake. Balloch in the Erse language signifies the same. I know
little of its ancient history, any more than it seems to have been dependent on
the castle of Harlech; and that, in the reign of Edward II. it was committed to
the care of Finian de Stanedon, constable of that castle Sebright MSS.
; and in the time of Edward III. his great general, Walter de Manni, was
rewarded with the fee-farm of Bala and Harlech, and was made sheriff of this
county for life Dugdale Baron ii 149.
. I may add incidentally, that Edward I. gave one Hugo de Turbervill liberty of
hunting through Meirionithshire all kinds of wild beasts Rotulae Walliae, 98,
In P 97 is an order for him to have six stags out of the forest of Meirionith.
, while probably the subdued natives were only his Chasseurs.

Bala Lake, Pimble Mere, LAKS.
or Llyn-tegid, lies at a small distance from the town; and is a fine expanse
of water, near four miles long, and twelve hundred yards broad in the widest
place: the deepest part is opposite Bryn Golen, where it is forty-six yards
deep, with three yards of mud; the shores gravelly: the boundaries are easy
slopes, well cultivated, and varied with woods. In stormy weather, its billows
run very high, and incroach greatly on the north-east end, where, within memory
of man, numbers of acres have been lost. It rises sometimes nine feet, and
rains and winds jointly contribute to make it overflow the fair vale of
Edeirnion.

ITS fish are, FISH.
pike, perch, trout, a few roach, and abundance of eels; and shoals of that
Alpine fish, the Gwyniaid, which spawn in December, and are taken in great
numbers in spring, or summer. Pike have been caught here of twenty-five pounds
weight, a trout of twenty-two, a perch of ten, and a gwyniaid of five. Sir
Watkin Williams Wynn clames the whole fishery of this noble lake. It had been
the property of the abbey of Basingwerk; for Owen de Brogynton made a grant to
GOD, St. Mary, and the monks of that house, of a certain water in Penthlinn,
called Thlintegit, or Pembelmore, and all the pasture of the said land of
Penthlinn. This was witnessed by Reiner (who was bishop of St. Asaph from 1186
to 1224) and by Ithail, Owen's chaplain Sebright MSS.
.

THE waters are discharged under Pont Mwnwgl y Llyn, a bridge of three arches.
They seem inconsiderable in respect to the size of the streams which feed the
lake; for the Dee does not make in dry seasons the figure I expected. Salmon
come in plenty to this place, but neither do they trespass into the lake, and
the gwyniaids very rarely into the river. Report says, that the Dee passes
through the lake from end to end, without deigning to mix its waters; as the
Rhone was fabled to serve the lake of Geneva. But, in fact, the Dee does not
assume its name, till it quits its parent.

NEAR the west side, close to the bridge, and just opposite to Tommen y Bala,
stood another castelet; not so high, but of a more extensive form than that
mount. It is now broke through by a public road, but is very apparent on both
sides. The mount, or keep, was on the lower, immediately above the river; and
the vestiges of a wall are still evident. This was subservient to the same
purposes as the others; for there must have been, from the nature of the
ground, a travellable road on both sides of the lake. This I apprehend to have
been the castle of Bala, which Llewelyn ap Jorwerth founded in 1202 Powel, 258.
.

THERE is no river in England which has been so much celebrated by our poets,
for its sanctity, THR DLF, SACRED
as the Dee. Most countries had one, which they held in peculiar veneration.
The Thessalians paid divine honors to their Paeneus, on account of its beauty:
the Scythians worshipped their Ister, on account of its size: the Germans the
Rhine, because it was the judge whether their offspring was legitimate; for the
spurious sunk, the lawful floated Cluverius Germ. Antiq. lib. i. 185.
: and let me add to the list, the Ganges, out of whose waters no Indian of a
certain sect would willingly yield his last. breath. Our river foretold events
by the change of its channel Girald. Camb, Itin. c. xi.
; and it often seemed miraculously to increase, without the usual intervention
of rains; therefore, in all probability, derived its name, not from Ddu, or
black, because its waters are not so, except in parts, by reason of the depth;
nor from Dwy, two, because it does not appear to flow from any two particular
fountains; but from Duw, divine, by reason of its wondrous attributes. Our
original stock, the Gauls, deified fountains, lakes, and rivers. They even had
one, which in theirs (our primitive tongue) bore the same name, and was called
(Latinised) into Divona. Salve fons ignote ortu, sacer, alme, perennis
Vitree, glauce, profunde, sonore, opace.
Salve urbis GENIUS, medico potabilis haustu,
DIVONA celtarum lingua, sons addite divis Ausonius Clarae Urbes, lin. 29.



Giraldus, who traveled through our country in 1188, gives the first account
of the prophetic quality of the Dee; and the notion was continued to many ages
after his. Spencer introduces it among the rivers attendant on the marriage of
the Thames and the Medway Stanza 39, cant. xi, lib. iv.
: And following Dee, which Britons long ygone
Did call DIVINE, that does by Chester tend.


BUT Draiton is still more particular, and adds many of its presaging
qualities, delivered down to him from the more ancient times. Again Dee's
holiness began
By his contracted front and sterner waves to show,
That he had things to speak that profit them to know:
A brook that was supposed much business to have seen,
Which had an ancient bound 'twixt Wales and England been,
And noted was by both to be an ominous flood,
That changing of his fords, the future ill or good
Of either country told; of either's war or peace;
The sickness or the health, the dearth or the increase Song x.

.

WELL, therefore, might the sacred rivers be called URBIS GENII; and that ours
was as deserving as the best of them of that title, is evinced from the above.
Finally, Milton, in the following line, beautifully alludes to the interpreters
of the presages among the Britons, the ancient Druids, who dwelt upon its
banks: Nor yet where DEVA spreads her wizard fstream Lycidas.
.

IT was long before we got clear of these superstitions. They were very
prevalent in the time of Gildas, in the sixth century, when our ancestors
strongly retained the idolatry of the Druids among their Christian rites: and,
notwithstanding the fulmination of many a monarch Edgar and Canute.
, it kept its ground; and hydromancy still remains practiced among us; of which
I shall have occasion to speak of more than one kind.

I FOUND that I could here, KERRIG Y DRUIDION
with greater ease than from any other place, digress to Kerrig y Druidion; a
parish a few miles to the north, in the county of Denbigh, noted for certain
Druidical remains, which gave name to the place. After a dreary ride, I found
myself disappointed; these sacred relics having been profanely carried away,
and converted into a wall. It is therefore from the annotator on Cambden II.
813.
, and the drawings preserved by him among the Sebright MSS. that I must form my
description.

THE largest was a fine specimen of the British Kissed vaen, or stone chest. It
consisted of one stone at top, placed inclining to the north, and was, when
measured by Mr. Llwyd, ten feet long, supported by a stone on each side about
seven feet long, and near two and a half broad. Under one end was a stone,
three feet long; at the other, one of the length of two feet. The hollow
beneath was only seven feet long, three and a half broad, and only two and a
half high; which sufficiently shows, that these monuments had not been the
cells of Druids; their uses, therefore, must: have been sepulchral, according
to the conjecture of Doctor Borlase. The ancient natives of our isle did not
always burn their dead. Skeletons have been discovered in similar Kissed vaens,
at full length: in such as this, they might lie commodiously, with all the
parade of arms, often buried with them. Around this, was a circle of stones,
enclosing an area of about forty paces in diameter; and the precinct might be
formed with the intent of keeping people at a respectable distance from the
remains, perhaps of some mighty chieftain. This monument went by the name of
Karchar Kynric Rwth; not that it ever was used for that purpose originally; but
there is a tradition, that in aftertimes, a little tyrant of that name, in the
neighborhood, was wont to cram those who offended him, into the hollow of these
stones; which might serve for the purposes of torment as well as the little
ease in the tower of London, or the iron cages of the Bastille.

THE other Kissed vaen was nearly similar to the first; but no mention is made of
the circle of stones: probably they were taken away before Mr. Llwyd visited
the place.

AT Giler, BARON PRICE.
in this parish, was born that upright and able judge; Robert Price, esquire baron
of the exchequer, and finally justice of the common pleas. His famous speech in
the house of commons, against the grant of the great Welsh lordships to the
earl of Portland, will ever testify his love to his country. His speedy
promotion by king William, do equal credit to his majesty, and Mr. Price; since
the former, howsoever grievous to him might be the opposition to his will, yet
no consideration could induce him to permit his subjects to lose the benefit of
a magistrate capable and honest, as he knew our countryman to be.

RETURN to Bala, and continue my journey on the south side of the lake, a most
beautiful ride. Pass by Llanyckil church, dedicated to St. Beuno; and see, on
the opposite side, Llangower, dedicated to St. Gwawr, mother of the Cambrian
bard Llowarch Hen. Beneath flows Avon Gwawr, the only feed of the lake on that
side.

Go by Glan y Llyn, GLAN Y LLYN.
an old house, near the water edge; which, as well as the following, had been
the property of the Vaughans.

LEAVE on the right another ancient seat, Caer Gai, placed on an eminence.
Cambden says, it was a castle, built by one Caius, a Roman; the Britons ascribe
it to Gai, foster-brother to king Arthur. It probably was Roman, for multitudes
of coins have been found in different parts of the neighborhood; and it is
certain, that it had been a fortress to defend this pass, for which it is well
adapted, both by situation, and form of the hill.

I PROCEEDED about two miles farther, CASTLE CORNDOCHON.
to visit another, seated a mile from the Dolgelleu road, on the summit of a
high rock, which bears the name of Castle Corndochon, the origin of which we
are equally ignorant of. Two sides of the rock are precipitous. In the front of
the castle is cut a deep fosse: the castle consisted of an oblong tower, rounded
at the extremity; and its measure within is forty-three feet by twenty-two.
Behind that, and joined to it by a wall, are the ruins of a square tower; this
lies in the main body of the fortress, whose form, as Cambden observes,
inclines to oval. This had been very considerable; was built with mortar, made
of gravel and sea shells; and was faced with freestone, squared, and well cut.

I RETURNED toward Caer Gai; LLANUWCHLLYN.
and, not far from thence, to the village and church of Llan-uwchllyn. In the
last is the figure of an armed man, with a conic helmet, and mail muffler round
his chin and neck: on his breast is a wolf's head, and on his belly another;
and in the intervening space, three roses. The first are the arms of Ririd
Vlaidd; the others of Kynedda Wledig, or, The Warlike, a Cumbrian prince, whose
sons (after their father had been defeated by the Saxons, in the sixth century)
retired, and possessed themselves of these parts of Wales: and from Meirion, a
grandson of his, is said to be given the name of Meirionith to this shire.
Ririd was lord of Pen-Llyn, which signifies the head of the lake, and forms one
of the hundreds of Meirionithshire. It had also its castle, which probably was
that of Corndochon. Around the margin of the tomb is a mutilated inscription,
which, as far as I could discover, run thus: Hic jacet Johannes ap * * * * ap
Madoc ap J -- eth, cujus animae pr -- etur. Deus amen. anno. D^i MCCC. V. 88.

CLOSE by this village runs Avon-y-Llan, Avon Llew, or Amlew. The last rises
from two springs, and falls into the former. Those who choose to derive the Dee
from its double origin, may fix on these: but I met with a third, at the
farthest corner of the lake, arising from the neighborhood of the lofty Aran,
ARAN HI^^
to which Spencer gives the honor of forming that celebrated river, I suppose
after running through the lake, unmixed with the waters. The poet makes the
foot of that mighty mountain the place of education of our renowned prince,
Arthur; who, on his birth, being delivered to a fairy knight, is by him
instantly conveyed to an ancient hero, To be upbrought in gentle thews and
martial might.

IT is evident that Spencer, who was deeply read in all the romance of his
romantic days, had heard the tradition of Caer Gai, and its old inhabitant,
Gai's father, to whom he chooses to give the more classical name of Timon; for
so prince Arthur is made to name his foster-father.

Unto old Timon he me brought bylive,
Old Timon, who in youthful years had been*
In warlike feats the expertest man alive,
And is the wisest now on earth, I ween:
His dwelling is low in valley green,
Under the foot of Rauran mossie hoar,
From whence the river Dee, as silver clean,
His tumbling billows rolls, with gentle rore:
There all his days he trained me up in virtuous lore Fairy Queen, book I.
canto ix.

.

THIS honored stream is now known by the name of Avon Twrch; is a fierce
mountain torrent, precipitating itself from the Aran; and crosses a road from
whence I first begin my journey among the Alps of our country, and ascend from
hence, then sink into very deep bottoms, bounded on each side by fields of such
steepness, as to put the inhabitants to great difficulties in the cultivation.
Woods, especially of birch, vary the scene. On the right, tower the vast hills
of Aran; or rather, two heads, arising from one base.

ARRIVE at the foot of Bwlch y Groes, or the pass of The Cross, one of the most
terrible in North Wales. The height is gained by going up an exceeding steep
and narrow zig-zag path: the pass itself is a dreary heathy flat, on which I
suppose the cross stood, to excite the thanksgiving of travelers, for having
so well accomplished their arduous journey. The descent on the other side, is
much greater, and very tedious, into the long and narrow vale of Mowddwy. VALE
OF MOWDDWY.
It is seven or eight miles long; and so contracted, as scarcely to admit a
meadow at the bottom. Its boundaries are vast hills, generally very verdant,
and fine sheep walks; but one on the left exhibits a horrible front, being so
steep, as to balance between precipice and slope: it is red and naked, and too
steep to admit of vegetation; and a slide from its summit would be as fatal as
a fall from a perpendicular rock. In one place on the right, the mountains
open, and furnish a gap to give sight to another picturesque and strange view,
the rugged and wild summit of Aran Mowddwy, which soars above with tremendous
majesty.

THERE is a beauty in this vale, which is not frequent in others of these
mountanous countries. The enclosures are all divided by excellent quickset
hedges, and run far up the sides of the hills, in places so steep, that the
common traveller would scarcely find footing. Numbers of little groves are
interspersed; and the hills above them show a fine turf to the top, where the
bog and heath commence, which give shelter to multitudes of red grous, and a
few black. But their consequences to these parts are infinitely greater, in
being the beds of fuel to all the inhabitants. The turberies are placed very
remote from their dwellings; and the turf, or peat, is gotten with great
difficulty. The roads from the brows of the mountains, in general, are too
steep even for a horse; TURF SLEDGES
the men therefore carry up on their backs, a light sledge, fill it with a very
considerable load, and drag it, by means of a rope placed over their breast, to
the brink of the slope At this time the turberies lie at a great distance from
the brow of the hill; the natives are therefore obliged to bring a horse by a
round-about way to them, which assists in dragging the turf to the brink of the
slope, where men supply its place.
; then go before, and draw it down, still preceding, and guiding its motions,
which at times have been so violent, as to overturn and draw along with it the
master, to the hazard of his life, and not without considerable bodily hurt.

AFTER riding some time along the bottom of the vale, pass by the village and
church of Llan y Mowddwy; the last is dedicated to St. Tydecho, ST. TYDECHO.
one of our most capital saints. His legend Gywydd y DYDDECHO SANT in amser
MEALGWIN GWYNEDD; i. ^^ the poem of St. Tydecho, who lived in the time of
Malgwyn Gwynedd.
is written in verse, by Dafydd Llwyd ap Llewelyn ap Gryffydd, lord of
Mathafarn; a person who had a great hand in bringing in Henry VII, by feeding
his countrymen with prophecies, that one of them was to deliver Wales from the
English yoke, by which means thousands of them were induced to rise, under Sir
Rhys ap Thomas, and join Henry, then earl of Richmond, at Milford.

THIS illustrious bard informs us, that Tydecho had been an abbot in Armorica,
and came over here in the time of king Arthur; but after the death of that
hero, when the Saxons overran most of the kingdom, the saint retired, and led
here a most austere life, lying on the bare stones, and wearing a shirt of
hair: yet he employed his time usefully, was a tiller of the ground, and kept
hospitality. Malgwyn Gwynedd, then a youth, took offense at the saint, and
seized his oxen; but wild stags were seen the next day, performing their
office, and a gray wolf harrowing after them. Malgwyn, enraged at this, brought
his milk-white dogs to chase the deer, while he sat on the blue stone, to enjoy
the diversion; but when he attempted to rise, he found his breech immoveably
fixed to the rock, so that he was obliged to beg pardon of the saint, who, on
proper reparation, was so kind as to free him from his awkward pain.

So far legend. That St. Tydecho might have lived, and that Malgwyn Gwynedd did
live a prince of our country, I make no doubt; and that the former did receive
from the prince the privileges it once enjoyed, of sanctuary for man and beast,
is equally probable: every offender, however criminal, met with protection
here. Legend says, that it was to endure for a hundred ages; but, blind to
futurity! the reformation was not foreseen. This place was also exempted from
all fighting, burning, and killing; nor was it permitted to affront any of the
inhabitants, without making the most ample reparation.

THE lands of Tydecho were also freed from mortuaries, clames, oppression, and
that great duty, which most places were subject to, the Gobr Merched, the
penalty of incontinence; which the saint, in tenderness to the possible frailty
of his flock, wisely took care to get it exempted from.

ABOUT four or five miles farther, I reached Dinas y Mowydwy, DINAS MOWDDWY.
seated on the plain of an eminence, at the junction of three vales, beneath
the rock Craig y Dinas; whose peat paths I now survey with horror, reflecting
on a frolic of my younger days, in climbing to its summit, to enjoy the
pleasure of darting down again in one of the peat sledges. The foot of this
eminence is watered by the Kerris and the Dyfi. The last, which retains its
name till lost in the sea at Aberdyfi, rises at the bottom of the rude rock
Craig Llyn Dyfi, under Aran Mowddwy. It abounds with salmon, which are hunted
in the night, by an animated, but illicit chase, by spearmen, who are directed
to the fish by lighted whisps of straw.

THIS Mowddwy, notwithstanding it is dignified with the name of Dinas, or city,
consists but of one street, strait and broad, with houses ill according with
its title; but it still preserves the insignia of power, the stocks, and
whipping-post, the vag-vawr, or great fetter, the mace, and standard measure.
It is likewise the capital of an extensive lordship, under the rule of my
worthy cousin, John Mytton, esquire. OWNERS.
He derives it from William, or Wilc^cke, as he is commonly called, fourth son
of Gryffyd ap Gwenwynwyn, lord of Powis. His granddaughter and sole heir
married Sir Hugh de Burgh, son of the famous Hugh, justiciary of England. His
son, Sir John, left four daughters, married into the houses of Newport,
Leighton, Lingen, and Mytton; Alianor, the fourth daughter, having given her
hand, and this seignory, to Thomas Mytton, ancestor of the present lord.

THE powers of this capital over a district, PRIVILEGES.
which comprehends this large parish, and seven out of the eight townships of
that of Mallwyd, are considerable. The corporation consists of a mayor,
aldermen, recorder, and several burgesses. The mayor tries criminals; but, as
the late worthy magistrate, a very honest smith, told me, that, for some years
past, they have not adventured to whip; the stocks, or confinement in the
vag-vawr, is the utmost severity they have exerted: but then they retain the
exclusive power of licensing alehouses in their district, and are likewise
justices of the peace as far as the limits of their little reign.

THE recorder (in absence of the lord) tries all matters of property, not
exceeding forty shillings; and the attorneys, whose fees do not exceed half a
crown, are chosen from the lettered part of the community, or those who can
read.

I WAS accommodated with entertainment at the manor-house, from whence I took a
delightful walk of about two miles, along the vale, on the banks of the Dyvi.
The valley expands, and the hills sink in height, toward the west. After
passing the Dyfi, cross a bridge over the deep and still water of the Klywedog,
black as ink, passing sluggishly through a darksome chasm, into open day.

REACH Mallwyd, MALLWYD.
remarkable for the situation of the altar, in the middle of the church; which
Doctor Davies, author of the dictionary, then incumbent, in defiance of the
orders of archbishop Laud, removed again from its imaginary superstitious site
at the east end.

ONE of the beautiful yew trees in the churchyard, is extremely well worth
notice. It is a sort of forest of vast trees, issuing from one stem, forming a
most extensive shade, and magnificent appearance. Another reason for planting
these trees in churchyards, besides those usually assigned, was a custom in
old times, upon Palm Sunday, to make this the substitute of the tree, from
which that Sunday took its name; to bless on that day the boughs; also to burn
some of them to ashes; and with those the priest, on the following
Ash Wednesday, signed the people on the forehead, saying. Memento, homo! quod
pulvis es, et in pulverem reverteris. And of the branches, so blessed, it was
customary to stick some in the fields, in rogation week, or at the times of
processions.

RETURN to Dinas y Mowddwy. CRUEL MURDER.
On the road was informed of the place, not far from hence, where Lewis Owen,
vice-chamberlain of North Wales, and baron of the exchequer of North Wales, was
cruelly murdered in the year 1555, by a set of banditti, with which this
country was overrun. After the wars of the houses of York and Lancaster,
multitudes of felons and outlaws inhabited this country; and established in
these parts, for a great length of time, from those unhappy days, a race of
profligates, who continued to rob, burn, and murder, in large bands, in
defiance of the civil power; and would steal and drive whole herds of cattle,
in midday, from one county to another, with the utmost impunity. To put a stop
to their ravages, a commission was granted to John Wynn ap Meredydd, of Gwedyr,
and this gentleman, in order to settle the peace of the country, and to punish
all offenders against its government. In pursuance of their orders, they raised
a body of stout men, and on a Christmas-Eve seized above four score outlaws and
felons, on whom they held a jail delivery, and punished them according to their
deserts. Among them were the two sons of a woman, who very earnestly applied to
Owen for the pardon of one: he refused; when the mother, in a rage, told him
(baring her neck) These yellow breasts have given suck to these, who shall wash
their hands in your blood. Revenge was determined by the surviving villains.
They watched their opportunity, when he was passing through these parts from
Montgomeryshire assizes, to way-lay him, in the thick woods of Mowddwy, at a
place now called, from the deed, Llydiart y Barwn; where they had cut down
several long trees, to cross the road, and impede the passage. They then
discharged on him a shower of arrows; one of which sticking in his face, he
took out, and broke. After this, they attacked him with bills and javelins, and
left him slain, with above thirty wounds. His son-in-law, John Llwyd, of
Ceisgwyn, defended him to the last; but his cowardly attendants fled on the
first onset. His death gave peace to the country; for most rigorous justice
ensued; and the whole nest of banditti was extirpated, many by the hand of
justice; and the rest fled, never to return.

THE traditions of the country respecting these banditti, are still extremely
strong. I was told that they were so feared, that travelers did not dare to go
the common road to Shrewsbury, but passed over the summits of the mountains, to
avoid their haunts. The inhabitants placed scythes in the chimneys of their
houses, to prevent the felons coming down to surprise them in the night; some
of which are to be seen to this day. This race was distinguished by the titles
Gwyllied y Dugoed, and Gwilliaid Cochion Mowddwy, i. e. The Banditti of the
Black Wood, and The red-headed Banditti of Mowddwy.

LEAVE Dinas, and take the road toward Dolgelleu. Pass by some deserted lead
mines; which, as yet, have never been worked with success. I may here mention
an earth, which this place is noted for, OCHRE.
a bluish ochre, which the shepherds wet, and pound in a mortar, then form into
balls, and use in marking their sheep. An old proverb of the three things which
Mowddwy wishes to send out of the country, shows their long knowledge of it.

O Fowddy ddu ni ddaw, dim allan
A ellir i rwystraw,
Oad tri pheth helaeth hylaw
Din atgas, NOD GLASS, a gwlaw Detested people, blue-marking earth, and rain.
.


ABOUT three miles from Dinas, leave on the left the vast sheep farm of
Pennant-higi: a deep bottom, environed on three sides by vast mountains,
forming a noble theater. This whole country abounds in sheep and cattle; and
the wool is manufactured in all parts into flannel and stockings.

ASCEND a steep hill, into the pass Bwlch Oer-ddyrws; BWLCH OER-DDRWS.
and the country beyond suddenly assumes a new face. Before us is a vast extent
of dreary slope, bounded by vast rocky mountains; among which, Cader Idris
soars pre-eminent.

THIS pass is noted for being one of the three places, CONVENTION THERE.
in which were assembled, six years after the wars of Glyndwr, all the great
men of certain districts, in order to enforce the observation of justice by
their own weight, without any other legal sanction. This, perhaps, was
occasioned by the merciless laws enacted against the Welsh by Henry IV. At each
of these places, they entered into a compact to cause justice to be done for
all wrongs inflicted, before and after the wars, but not during that turbulent
period. Every one was to have his goods, or land, which had been forced from
him, restored without lawsuit; and any goods detained after this, were to be
deemed as stolen: or if his lord sold them, he was fined ten pounds, and the
goods, or their value, to the owner. If the refractory person was hanged, or
died a natural death, the demand lay good against the wife, heirs, or
executors: but if they or she denied the demand, the plaintiff must procure his
compurgators, viz. six persons with him, to swear to the right of his clame;
but (like the English, in cases of jury) the defendant had a right to challenge
one of the six; and another was to be provided in his stead.

AFTER this, follow various regulations for restoring the government of the
country in general; and several laws relative to waifs and estrays, vagrants,
bail, recovery of debts, manslaughter, thefts, duty of officers, etc. The code
concludes with valuation of several goods and chattels, for which satisfaction
was to be made. For example, a horse and mare, on the oath of the owner and two
neighbors, were valued at ten shillings; a foal at twenty pence; an ox at a
mark; a cow at ten shillings; the hire of an ox, and the milk of a cow, were
also valued; an ewe was esteemed at sixteen pence, her wool at four pence, her
milk at two pence, and her lamb at eight pence.

As a proof of the high value of arms, and that we had few manufactures of that
kind, a two-handed sword was valued at ten shillings, a one-handed at six
shillings and eight pence, and a steel buckler at two shillings and eight
pence: but, what is very singular; a bow, which themselves could make, was
valued at sixteen pence, and an arrow at six pence.

To all these laws, no penalty was annexed for the breach; except the
forfeiture of the benefit of the compact, which, in those unsettled times, was
probably sufficient, as it left the party unsupported and friendless.

DESCEND from hence, DOLGELLEU.
along very bad stoney roads, to Dolgelleu; every entrance to which is barred
by a turnpike, in imitation of other places; and every approach mended for a
short space, by help of the scanty tolls. The town is small; the streets
disposed in a most irregular manner; but the situation is in a beautiful vale,
fertile, well wooded, and embellished with numbers of pretty seats, and watered
by the river Onion; over which, on account of its floods, is a bridge of
several arches. The town takes its name from its being placed in a dale
abundant in hazels. It has nothing in it remarkable but the church, which,
notwithstanding it is pew-less, is a good building. Within is the monument of
Meiric Vychan ap Ynyr Vychan, of the neighboring house of Nanney, fifth in
descent from prince Cadwgan, son of Bleyddyn ap Cynvyn, who resided there, and
in whose posterity it continues to this time; He is armed in a close mail
helmet and neck-guard, sword in hand, and with a short mantle over the rest of
his armor.

Cader Idris rises immediately above the town, CADER IDRIS.
and is generally the object of the traveller's attention. I skirted the
mountain for about two miles, left on the right the small lake of Llyn Gwernan,
and began the ascent along a narrow steep horse-way, perhaps the highest road
in Britain, being a common passage even for laden horses, into
Llan-vibangel-y-Pennent, a vale on the other side. On gaining the brow of the
hill, I found it to be a very extensive pasture of coarse grass, mixed with a
little bog. The hill slopes from hence upwards: the steeper part to the highest
peak, or the Pen yr Cader, grows more and more rocky: the approach to the
summit extremely so, and covered with huge fragments of discolored rocks, very
rugged, and cemented by a semivitrified matter, which gives them a very
vulcanic look, added to their disjoined, adventitious appearance. I met with,
on my ascent, quantities of pumice, of the same cellular kind with the
toadstone of Derbyshire, but of a green color. The day proved so wet and misty,
that I lost the enjoyment of the great view from the summit. I could only see
that the spot I was on was a rude aggregate of strangely disordered masses. I
could at intervals perceive a stupendous precipice on one side, where the hill
recedes inwards, forming a sort of theater, with a lake at the bottom; yet very
high, in comparison of the base of the mountain. On the other side, at a nearer
distance, I saw Craig Cay, a great rock, with a lake beneath, lodged in a deep
hollow; possibly the crater of an ancient Vulcano. This is so excellently
expressed by the admirable pencil of my kinsman, Mr. Wilson, that I shall not
attempt the description.

IN descending from the Cader; I kept on the edge of the greater precipice,
till I came near the Cyfrwy, another peak. The whole space, for a considerable
way, was covered with loose stones, in the form of a stream, sloping from the
precipitous side. Multitudes of them were columnar, COLUMNS.
but not jointed, square, or pentagonal; none erect, but lying very disorderly,
in all directions. Some appeared hanging down the face of the precipice; the
ends of others were peeping out at a vast depth beneath me, which showed the
great thickness of the stream. I wish the day had been more favorable; but I
hope another traveller will surround the whole, and make a more satisfactory
relation of this mountain, than I have been able to do.

IN respect to the heights of this mountain, HEIGHT.
and those of Aran Benllyn, and the Arrenig Vawr, I am enabled to give a very
exact account, by the assistance of the ingenious Mr. Meredith Hughes, of Bala;
who assures me, that the Pen y Gader is nine hundred and fifty yards higher
than the green near Dolgelleu; Aran Benllyn, seven hundred and forty above
Llyn-tegid; and the Arrenig, only twenty yards short of the Aran; that the fall
from the lake to Dolgelleu-Green, is one hundred and eighty yards; so that the
real difference of height between the Cader and the Aran, is only thirty yards.

AFTER recovering the fatigue of this journey, I began another, in order to
encircle the vast base of the mountain. I took the same road as I did before;
and continued my ride beneath Tyrrau Mawr, one of the points of Cader Idris,
the highest rock I ever rode under. Beyond, on the right, are the two pools
called Llynian Cregenan; and not far distant, are some remains of circles of
upright stones, with many carns; a vast stone, raised erect on the top of a
neighboring rock; and several maeni hirion, or rude upright columns.

AT some distance beyond these, LLYS BRADWEN.
near the river Kregennan, I saw the remains of Llys Bradwen, the court or
palace of Ednowain, chief of one of the fifteen tribes of North Wales, either
in the reign of Gryffydd ap Cynan, or soon after. The relics are about thirty
yards square: the entrance about seven feet wide, with a large upright stone on
each side, by way of door-case: the walls with large stones, uncemented by any
mortar: in short, the structure of this palace shows the very low state of
architecture in those times: it may be paralleled only by the artless fabric
of a cattle house.

Ednyfed ap Aaren, a descendant of this great man, had the honor of
entertaining Owen Glyndwr, in one of his sad reverses of fortune; and is said
to have concealed him from the pursuit of his enemies, in the parish of Llan
Gelynln, in a cave, to this day called Ogof Owain.

I MUST not lead the reader into a belief, that every habitation, of these
early times, were equal in magnificence to that of Ednowain ap Bradwen. Those
of inferior gentry were formed of wattles, like Indian wigwams, or Highland
hovels; without gardens or orchard, and formed for removal from place to place,
for the sake of new pasture, or a greater plenty of game. The furniture was
correspondent; there were neither tables, nor cloths, nor napkins Girald.
Cambr. Dejer. Walliae, 888.
; but this is less wonderful, since we find, that even so late as the time of
Edward II. straw was used in the royal apartment Anderson's Dict. Com, ii. 112.
. ANCIENT HOSPITALITY.
Notwithstanding this, the utmost hospitality was preserved: every house was
open, even to the poorest person. When a stranger entered, his arms were taken
from him, and laid by; and, after the scriptural custom, water was brought to
wash his feet. The fare was simple; the meal did not consist of an elegant
variety, but of numbers of things put together in a large dish: the bread was
thin oat-cakes, such as are common in our mountanous parts at this time. The
family waited on the guests, and never touched any thing till they had done,
when it took up with what was left. Music, and the free conversation of the
young women, formed the amusements of the time; for jealousy was unknown among
us. Bands of young men, who knew no profession but that of arms, often entered
the houses, and were welcome guests; for they were considered as the voluntary
defenders of the liberties of their country. They mixed with the female part of
the family, joined their voices to the melody of the harp, and consumed the day
with the most animated festivity. At length, sunk into repose, not under rich
testers, or on downy beds, but along the sides of the room, on a thin covering
of dried reeds, placed round the great fire, which was placed in the center,
they lay down promiscuously, covered only by a coarse home-made cloth, called
Brychan, or played, the same with the more ancient Bracha; and kept one another
warm, by lying close together; or should one side lose its genial heat, they
turn about, and give the chilly side to the fire Giraldus, 888.
.

SOME vein of the ancient minstrelsie is still to be met with in these
mountanous countries. ANCIENT MINSTRELSIE.
Numbers of persons, of both sexes, assemble, and sit around the harp, singing
alternately pennylls, or stanzas of ancient or modern poetry. The young people
usually begin the night with dancing, and when they are tired, sit down, and
assume this species of relaxation. Oftentimes, like the modern Improvisitore of
Italy, they will sing extempore verses. A person conversant in this art, will
produce a pennyll apposite to the last which was sung: the subjects produce a
great deal of mirth; for they are sometimes jocular, at others satirical, and
many amorous. They will continue singing without intermission, and never repeat
the same stanza; for that would occasion the loss of the honor of being held
first of the song. Like nightingales, they support the contest throughout the
night: Certant inter se, palamque animosa contentio -- victa morte finit saepe
vitam, spiritu prius deficiente quam cantu, may almost be added. The audience
usually call for the tune: sometimes only a few can sing to it; and in many
cases the whole company: but when a party of capital singers assemble, they
rarely call for a tune; for it is indifferent to them, what tune the harper
plays. Parishes often contend against parishes; and every hill is vocal with
the chorus.

CONTINUE the ride, as before, between high mountains, in a narrow glen. Quit
the narrow pass, and go along a good road, formed on the sides of the hills,
with a fine slope from it to the sea, at this time strangely mottled with black
and green, varied by the light through the broken clouds. The road now passes
between verdant and smooth hills, the great sheep walks of the country; they
are round at their tops, and covered with flocks, which yield the materials for
the neighboring manufactures. From a place called Allt-Lwyd, have a very full
view of the flat called Towyn Meirionydd, a mixture of meadow land and black
turbery, watered by the Dysynni, which falls into the sea a few miles lower. On
one side is the village and church of Tywyn, TOWYN.
or Towyn. The rectory is an impropriation in the bishop of Lichfield: the
vicarage formerly belonged to the nunnery of Barking, in Essex, now in the
patronage of the bishop of Bangor. I neglected visiting this place; but believe
my trouble would not have been thrown away; for I find, among Mr. Llwyd's
papers Sebright MSS.
, the drawing of the sepulchral effigies of a churchman, another of a warrior,
and two rude pillars, one seven feet high, with the figure of the cross, and an
inscription on each side, in old characters. Another column, marked likewise
with a cross, but inscribed with letters of a different form, is drawn in the
same collection, from one in the churchyard of Llanvihangel y Traetheu, in
this county.

FROM the place where I made this digression, I descended a sleep path through
fields; and, crossing the river, dined on a great stone beneath the vast rock
Craig y Deryn, CRAIG Y DERYN.
or The Rock of Birds, so called from the numbers of corvorants, rock pigeons,
and hawks, which breed on it. At the foot is a prodigious stream of stones,
which extend some hundreds of yards from the bottom of the rock, and is formed
by the continual lapse of fragments from it. Here the Towyn is contracted into
a fertile vale, which extends about two miles further. Near its end is a long
and high rock, narrow on the top. Here stood the castle of Teberri, TEBERRI
CASTLE.
which extended lengthways over the whole surface of the summit, and was a
fortress of great strength and extent. The most complete apartment was
thirty-six feet broad, and was cut out of the rock on two sides; for much of it
is hollowed. In some parts, the precipices, skirted by a wall, formed the
defense. The remaining walls are well built: the stones squared: the mortar,
shells, and gravel, but at present very rotten. The whole of this place is so
overgrown with bushes, as to render the survey very difficult. It lies in the
parish of Llan vi hangel y Pennant, and is said to have been once defended by a
Coch o'r Pennant, or The Red, of that place.

THIS probably was the castle Bear belonging to our last Llewelyn, which was
taken, not long before the final conquest of Wales, by William de Valence, earl
of Pembroke Leland's Collect. i. 178.
. This seems to have been likewise the same which was committed by Edward I. to
the custody of Robert Fitzwalter, who had, at the same time, the liberty of
hunting all kinds of wild beasts in this county Rotulae Walliae, 99.
. It is fit to mention this, as there was another strong fortress in
Cardiganshire, of a similar name.

RETURN about half a mile, TAL Y LLYN.
and ride several miles along the pretty vale of Tal y Llyn; very narrow, but
consisting of fine meadows, bounded by lofty verdant mountains, very steeply
sloped. Went by Llyn y Myngil, a beautiful lake, about a mile long, which so
far fills the valley, as to leave only a narrow road on one side. Its
termination is very picturesque; for it contracts gradually into the form of a
river, and rushes through a good stone arch into a narrow pass, having on one
side the church, on the other a few cottages, mixed with trees. The church, and
that of Llanvehangel y Pennant, are chapels to Towyn Ecton, 499.
.

ADJACENT to this valley, SINGULAR COFFIN.
at a place called Llwyn Dool Ithel, in the year 1684, was found, in digging
turf about three yards deep, a coffin, made of deal, about seven feet long,
carved and gilt at both ends. Two skeletons, supposed of different sexes, were
found in it, placed with the head of the one parallel to the feet of the other;
the bones were moist; and tough, and of an uncommon size, the thigh bones being
twenty-seven inches long. Within a yard of the coffin, were found two other
skeletons, of the same dimensions with the former, laid on the bare clay; and
within two roods of them, a grave, with a skeleton of the usual size. Along the
graves and coffin were laid hazel rods, with the bark on, and so tough, as to
be flexible Llwyd's Itin. MS. Another instance is related in Cambden, ii. 793.
. The high preservation of these rods, and the toughness of the bones, were
owing to the bituminous quality of the turbery in which they were deposited.
The rods were placed for some superstitious purpose, perhaps to avert the power
of witchcraft, since a double hazel-nut, in some parts of the Highlands of
Scotland, is to this day supposed to have that virtue.

A FEW miles beyond Tal y Llyn church, the hills almost meet at their bottoms,
and change their aspect. No verdure now is to be seen, but a general appearance
of rude and savage nature. The sides are broken into a thousand crags; some
spiring and sharp pointed; but the greater part project forward, and impend in
such a manner, as to render the apprehension of their fall tremendous. A few
bushes grow among them; but the dusky color of them, as well as the rocks, only
served to add horror to the scene.

ONE of the precipices is called Pen y Delyn, LLAM Y LLADRON.
from some resemblance it has to a harp. Another is styled Llam y Lladron, or
The Thieves Leap, from a tradition that thieves were brought there, and thrown
down. I have no doubt but that such a punishment might have been inflicted from
this Welsh Tarpeian, by order of an arbitrary lord; but we formerly very rarely
used capital punishments, for any crime; not but the gallows was in use for
theft Leges Walliae, 221.
, but fines were accepted in almost all instances, even in cases of murder;
which gave rise to private revenge, and brought on a train of endless feuds and
bloodshed.

ON the left, is the rugged height of Cader Idris, LLYN Y TRI GRAIENYN.
pass near a small lake, called Llyn y tri Graienyn, or of the three grains;
which are three vast rocks, the ruins of the neighboring mountain, which some
time or other had fallen into the water. These, say the peasants, were the
three grains which had fallen into the shoe of the great Idris, which he threw
out here, as soon as he felt them hurting his foot.

PASS over Bwlch Coch, NANNEY.
and, after descending a very bad road, again reach Dolgelleu; from whence I
visited Nanney, the ancient seat of the ancient family of the Nanneys, now of
the Vaughans. The way to it is a continual ascent of two miles; so perhaps it
is the highest situation of any gentleman's house in Britain. The estate is
covered with fine timber, which clothe all the sides of the dingles for many
miles. On the road side is a venerable oak, in its last stage of decay, and
pierced by age into the form of a gothic arch; yet its present girth is
twenty-seven feet and a half. The name is very classical, Derwen Ceubren yr
Ellyll, the hollow oak, the haunt of demons. How often has not warm fancy seen
the fairy tribe revel round its trunk! or may not the visionary eye have seen
the Hamadryad burst from the bark of its coeval tree?

ABOVE Nanney is a high rock, with the top incircled with a dike of loose
stones. This had been a British post, the station, perhaps, of some tyrant, it
being called Moel Orthrwm, or the hill of oppression.

THE park of Nanney is remarkable for its very small, but very excellent
venison. I have before mentioned the ruins of the house of Howel Sele, within
this park, and related his unfortunate history Tour in Wales, i. 324.
.

RETURN through Dolgelleu; and about a mile beyond, on a rising spot, have a
beautiful view of three vales, finely bounded by hills, and embellished with
gentlemen's houses; finely watered by the junction of the Onion and the Maw, or
Mowdach. I was diverted from taking the direct road to Barmouth, by the great
deference I always found reason to pay to the judgment of a gentleman, who, a
few years ago, honored our country with his remarks A Gentleman's Tour through
Monmouthshire and Wales, in 1774, printed for T. Evans, 1775.
, and has made a particular euloge on the cascades of Glyn-Maw. Let me add,
that the consideration of ending this little excursion at the hospitable house
of Mr. Garnons, of Rhiw Goch was another spur to my design.

CROSS the bridge of Llan Elltyd. Below is a fine tract of meadow, wretchedly
deformed by the necessity of digging into them for turf, the fuel of the
country. The tide flows within a small distance of this place; and on the banks
I saw a small sloop, ready to be launched. On the left is the church of
Llan-Elltyd: on the right, in a rich flat, stand the remains of the abbey of
Cymmer. CYMMER ABBEY.
Part of the church is still to be seen, and shows its ancient grandeur. At the
east end are three lofty, but very narrow windows, pointed at top; and over
them three lesser, mantled in a great and gloomy thicket of ivy. The great
hall, and part of the abbot's lodgings, now form a farm-house.

THIS had been an abbey of Cistercians, founded (not by Llewelyn ap Jorwerth,
as has been supposed, who only confirmed the donations, as prince of Wales) but
by the two princes Meredydd and Gryffydd, the sons of Conan and Howel, the son
of Gryffydd, about the year 1198. In the charter of Llewelyn, in 1209, is
mention of their benefactions, of his own, and of the boundaries of the abbey
lands Sebright MSS.
; which show it had been founded by other persons. This charter is most ample,
over rivers, lakes, and sea; birds, and wild beasts and tame; over all
mountains, woods, things moveable and immovable; and over all things under and
over the lands so granted; and gives liberty of digging for metals and hidden
treasures: all which was done in presence of Esau, then lord abbot, and others,
religious of the house Dugdale Monast. i. 826; who, as well as Tanner,
confounds this with Cwmbir abbey, in South Wales.
. At the dissolution, its revenues were valued at fifty-one pounds thirteen
shillings and six pence, by Dugdale, at fifty-eight pounds fifteen shillings
and four pence, by Speed. The only charge on it in 1553, was six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence, paid to Lewis ap Thomas, supposed to have
been the last abbot Willis, ii. 313.
.

Uchtred ap Edwyn built a castle here, CASTLE.
which was taken and overthrown, about 1116, by Eneon ap Cadwgan, and Gryffyd
ap Meredydd ap Bleyddyn Powel, 183.
; and its place is not at present even known.

CONTINUE my journey on a bank high above the Maw. The valley grows soon very
contracted; the sides of the hills finely covered with wood, almost to the top;
and the river assumes the form of a torrent, rolling over a rocky channel.

ABOUT five or six miles from Dolgelleu, at Dool y Melynllyn, I turned out of
the road, meeting the furious course of the Gamlan, that falls, with short
interruptions, from rock to rock, for a very considerable space, amidst the
woods and bushes, till it reaches a lofty precipice, from whence it
precipitates into a black pool, shaded by trees (which gives to the cataract
the name of Rhaiader-ddu, RHAIADER DDU
or The Black.) A noble birch, placed above, finely finishes this picturesque
scene.

CROSS Pont ar Gamlan, below which the river falls into the Maw. Not far from
thence, the junction of the Maw and Eden forms another fine scene. A lofty
hill, clothed with woods, ends here, and forms the forks of the rivers,
correspondent to the steeps through which these torrents roll, and exhibits a
view like those of the shady wilds of America.

BEGIN a considerable ascent, and find on the top some groves of handsome oaks:
before me, a naked country. Descend, through some steep fields, to another set
of wooded dingles, that wind along the bottoms, and join with the former. In
various parts, Cader Idris appears in full majesty over these sloping forests,
and gives a magnificent finishing to the prospect. Soon after my arrival among
the woods, another cascade astonishes me with its grandeur. From the situation
I was in, it formed a vast fall, bounded on one side by broken ledges of rocks,
on the other by a lofty precipice, with trees here and there growing out of its
mural front. On the summit of each part, oaks and birch form distinct little
groves, and give it a sort of character distinct from our other cataracts.
After the water reaches the bottom of the deep concavity, it rushes in a narrow
rocky chasm, of a very great depth, over which is an admirable wooden Alpine
bridge; and the whole, for a considerable way, awefully canopied by trees. This
is called Pistill y Kain, or the spout of the river Kain. At no great distance
from it, is another (for nature is here profuse in her beauties of this kind).
PISTILL Y MAW.
The Maw, for some space, runs along a deep glen, finished by a bare mountain,
seen through vistos, formed by the woods on each side. The water tumbles down a
series of ledges, of different heights, into a very black and sullen pool, from
which it re-assumes its violence, and is lost among the far extending woods.

IN the nakedness of winter, there is a spot, far above, from whence these two
cataracts may be seen at once, exhibiting through the trees a piece of scenery,
as uncommon as it is grand. After emerging from these romantic depths, I reach
a long extent of woodless tract, the vast parish of Trawsfynnydd, walled in on
all sides by lofty rugged mountains, of various forms.

IN a farm-house, BEDH PORUS.
not far from this road to Rhiw Goch, I visited Bedh Porus, or the grave of
Porus. On a flat stone over it, is the following inscription, copied somewhat
differently by Mr. Llwyd, in the Britannia II. 791.
: PORVS
HIO IN TVMVLO IACIT,
HOMO PIANVS FVIT.


SOME have supposed the P to have been an R, and the word to have been
CHRISTIANUS FUIT; but, whatsoever the letter in dispute might have been, there
certainly never was room between HOMO and the next word, for the letters CHRIS.

NOT far from it, in another field, is a great upright stone, called Llech
Idris. There is some silly legend about it, concerning the giant Idris; but it
is no more than one of the monumental columns, so frequent in Wales, and many
other parts.

AFTER a short ride, SARN HELEN.
see on a common, for the first time, the noted Sarn, or Llwybr Helen, the
causeway or path of Helen; a road supposed to have been made through part of
North Wales, by Helena, daughter of Eudda, or Octavius, and wife to the emperor
Maximus Rowland, 165.
.

THIS road is now entirely covered with turf; but, by the rising of it, is in
most parts very visible: beneath are the stones which form it, and extend in
all its course, to the breadth of eight yards. There are tumuli near it, in
various places, it being very usual for the Romans to inter near their
highways. Close to the part in question is one, in which were found five urns:
the whole materials of it are composed of burnt earth and stones, with several
fragments of bricks, which had been placed round the urns, to keep them from
being crushed.

AFTER reposing a night at Rhiw Goch, CASTLE PRYSOR.
adjacent to this part of the journey, I continued it a few miles to Castle
Prysor, a very singular little fort, placed in a pass between the hills, on a
natural round rock, appearing, at first sight, like the artificial mounts we
had before observed. Around its summit had been the wall, whose remains are
visible in several places; and in one is the appearance of a round tower: the
facings are very regular, but the work destitute of mortar. Notwithstanding
this, the castelet is probably Roman; for multitudes of coins and urns are
found about it. The name explains the cause of the want of lime in the walls,
Castle Prysor signifying a castle made in baste, so that there was not time to
prepare the usual cement. Around its base are the foundations of several
buildings, which were placed there to enjoy the protection of the place.

FROM hence I took the track toward Festiniog, and saw, by the road side, Llyn
Rathllyn, a small lake, noted for a strange variety of perch, CROOKED PERCH.
with a hunched back, and the lower part of the backbone, near the tail, oddly
distorted Br. Zool, iii. tab. xlviii.
: in other respects, they resemble the common kind, which are equally numerous
in this water. The same are found at Fablun, in Sweden.

NOT far from hence, ROMAN CAMP.
within the enclosed country, I found a very fine Roman camp, most judiciously
placed, in a situation over an extensive view of the country, partly level,
partly inclining from it, and commanding a number of passes to die lesser posts
of this mountanous tract. It is surrounded with a ditch and bank, on the last
of which are the vestiges of a wall: near one end is a great mount of earth,
broken and hollow in the middle, from the removal of the stones which composed
the fort: round its base is a deep ditch. This camp is called Tomnen y Mur, or
the mount within the wall. Coins and urns are as frequent about this place as
the former. Sarn Helen runs into it at one end, and is continued to Rhyd yr
Halen, in Festiniog parish, and by the side of Fannod Vawr, and over a farm
called Cae Du, to Ffrydd y Dduallt, to the upper part of a farm called Croesor,
at the upper end of Cwm Croesor, and through Cae Ddafydd, in Nanmor, and
perhaps to Dinas Emrys. The branches are numerous: I cannot entertain a doubt
but that one pointed, by Castle Dol Wyddelan, to Caer Hun, or Conovium; and
that by Pont Aber Glass Llyn, and y Gymwynas, or the work done in kindness, may
be supposed to have been another, pointing to Segontium. I have before
mentioned a Ffordd Helen, among the Berwyn hills; and let me add those recorded
by the annotator on Cambden, in Llanbadarn Odyn, in Caerdiganshire; and from
Brecknock to Neath, in Glamorganshire; which pass under the name of the same
princess Cambden, ii, 790.
.

CLOSE by the road side, OVAL ENCLOSURE.
on the common, at a small distance from the camp, is an oval enclosure, about
thirty-six yards long, and twenty-seven wide in the middle, surrounded by a
high mound of earth, but without a fosse. There were two entrances, one opposite
to the other; and near one end, a part seemed to have been divided off by a
wall, whose foundations still remain.

I RETURNED out of the parish of Trawsfynnydd, along the beautiful road of the
preceding day, till I reached Llan Elltyd, when I kept on the side of the hill,
above the valley which leads to Barmouth. The ride is very picturesque; the
vale watered by the Maw (known here only by the name of Avon, or The River)
which widens as we advanced: the sides bounded by hills, chequered with woods.
I found the little town of Barmouth, BARMOUTH
seated near the bottom of some high mountains, and the houses placed on the
steep sides, one above another, in such a manner as to give the upper an
opportunity of seeing down the chimneys of their next subjacent neighbors. The
town is seated very near to the sea, at the mouth of the Maw, or Mawddoch; and
takes its name of Barmouth, i. e. Aber Maw, or Mawddoch, from that
circumstance. At high water, the tide forms here a bay, about a mile over, but
the entrance hazardous, on account of the many sand-banks. This is the port of
Meirioniddshire, but not so much frequented as it ought to be, by reason the
inhabitants do not attempt commerce on a large scale, but vend their
manufactures through the means of factors, who run away with much of the
advantages which the natives might enjoy; yet ships now and then come to fetch
the webs, or flannels; and I am informed, that a few years ago, forty thousand
pounds worth have been exported in a year, and ten thousand pounds worth of
stockings. Many of the webs are sold into Spain, and from thence sent to South
America.

IN a former visit July 18th, 1770.
to this place, FASTING WOMAN.
my curiosity was excited to examine into the truth of a surprising relation of
a woman in the parish of Cylynin, who had fasted a most supernatural length of
time. I took boat, had a most pleasant passage up the harbor, charmed with the
beauty of the shores, intermixed with woods, verdant pastures, and corn fields.
I landed, and, after a short walk, found, in a farm called Tydden Bach, the
object of my excursion, Mary Thomas, who was boarded here, and kept with great
humanity and neatness. She was of the age of forty-seven, of a good
countenance, very pale, thin, but not so much emaciated as might be expected,
from the strangeness of the circumstances I am going to relate; her eyes weak,
her voice low, deprived of the use of her lower extremities, and quite
bed-ridden; her pulse rather strong, her intellects clear and sensible.

ON examining her, she informed me, that at the age of seven, she had some
eruptions like the measles, which grew confluent and universal; and she became
so fore, that she could not bear the left touch: she received some ease by the
application of a sheep's skin, just taken from the animal. After this, she was
seized, at spring and fall, with swellings and inflammations, during which time
she was confined to her bed; but in the intervals could walk about; and once
went to Holywell, in hopes of cure.

WHEN she was about twenty-seven years of age, she was attacked with the same
complaint, but in a more violent manner; and during two years and a half,
remained insensible, and took no manner of nourishment, notwithstanding her
friends forced open her mouth with a spoon, to get something down; but the
moment the spoon was taken away, her teeth met, and closed with vast snapping
and violence: during that time, she flung up vast quantities of blood.

SHE well remembers the return of her senses, and her knowledge of every body
about her. She thought she had slept but a night, and asked her mother whether
she had given her any thing the day before, for she found herself very hungry.
Meat was brought to her; but so far from being able to take any thing solid,
she could scarcely swallow a spoonful of thin whey. From this, she continued
seven years and a half without any food or liquid, excepting sufficient of the
latter to moisten her lips. At the end of this period, she again fancied
herself hungry, and desired an egg; of which she got down the quantity of a nut
kernel. About this time, she requested to receive the sacrament; which she did,
by having a crum of bread steeped in the wine. After this, she takes for her
daily subsistence a bit of bread, weighing about two penny-weights seven
grains, and drinks a wine glass of water: sometimes a spoonful of wine, but
frequently abstains whole days from food and liquids. She sleeps very
indifferently: the ordinary functions of nature are very small, and very seldom
performed. Her attendant told me, that her disposition of mind was mild; her
temper even; that she was very religious, and very servent in prayer: the
natural effect of the state of her body, long unembarrassed with the grossness
of food, and a constant alienation of thought from all worldly affairs She was
living in 1780, and in the same state.
.

THIS instance of the influence of disease (for such only can it be called)
strange as it is, is not without parallel.

THE first is the case of a lady, a patient of the late doctor Gower, of
Chelmsford, who was confined to her bed for ten years, during which time she
had an extreme and constant aversion to all kinds of solid nourishment. She
drank a pint of tea daily; and once in three or four days chewed, without
swallowing, a few raisins of the sun and blanched almonds, about four or half a
dozen of each: she seldom eat oftener than once a month, and then only a bit of
dry bread, of the size of a nutmeg; but frequently abstained from food for many
weeks together. This lady recovered, by means of constant medical regimen; so
that she could walk two miles, without taking either rest or refreshment.

I REFER the reader to the Tour in Scotland of 1769, for the extraordinary case
of Katherine Macleod, of the county of Ross; and finally, shall mention that of
Martha Tailor, of --, near Bakewell, Derbyshire, who abstained from food from
December 22, 1669, for thirteen months, and took nothing the whole time,
excepting a few drops of syrup, water and sugar or the juice of roasted
raisins. She was also very religious; was much emaciated; her palms moist; her
other evacuations very small Harleian Miscel. iv. 41. 55. See London Magazine,
1762, p. 340, in which is another instance of long abstinence.
.

I SHALL now mention another singular personage, EVANS THE CONJURER.
but less innocent, a native of the same parish with Mary Thomas. This was the
noted astrologer, and ill-favored knave, Arise Evans, a character and species
of impostor frequent in the reigns of Elizabeth and James I. His figure is
preserved in the Antiquarian Repertory, and answers the description given of
him by his great pupil, William Lilly, of having a broad forehead, beetlebrows,
thick shoulders, flat nose, full lips, a down look, black curling stiff hair,
and splay foot. He was a deep student in the black art; and Lilly assures us,
that he had most piercing judgment naturally upon a figure of theft, and many
other questions, he ever met withal; was well versed in the nature of spirits;
and had many times used the circular way of invocating. He then tells how his
friend Evans, by means of the angel Salmon, brought to him a deed, which one of
his customers had been wronged of, at the same time blowing down part of the
house of the person in whose custody it was: and again, how, to satisfy the
curiosity of lord Bothwel and Sir Kenelm Digby, who wanted to see a spirit, he
liked to have lost his life, being carried over the Thames, and flung down near
Battersea, by the spirits, whom he had vexed at the time of invocation, for
want of making In the life of Benevuto Cellini, is a most ridiculous tale of
this nature.
a due fumigation. These ridiculous impostures were the fashionable credulity
of the times; and the greatest men were the dupes of these pretenders to occult
science. To show that Wales was fertile in geniuses of every kind, we must lay
clame to the celebrated doctor John Dee, or Du, who. was born at Nant-y-Groes,
Radnorshire J. D. Rhys Cambr. Brit. Ling. Institut. p. 60.
, and was sought after by the greatest princes in Europe. Ben. Johnson, in his
excellent comedy of The Alchemyst, for a time, gave almost as fatal a blow to
the black art, as Quevedo did in Spain to chivalry; but, since avarice and
curiosity are passions most difficult of conquest, it rose again with fresh
vigor, and maintained its ground till the restoration See Lilly's Life passim.
.

ON my return to Barmouth, I proceeded for some time along the coast, among
shifting sands. Pass near Kail Wart, by a stone, now serving as a foot bridge,
on which was this inscription: Hic jacet CALIXTUS Monedo Regi. There is no
tradition of the place it was removed from.

ASCEND from the coast to Cors-y-gedol, CORS-Y-GEDOL.
the ancient seat of the Vaughans, where I was entertained by William Vaughan,
esquire, for some days, in the style of an ancient baron. The woods near his
house are extensive, but affected by the west winds in a very surprising
manner: the tops are shorn quite even, and the boughs so interwoven, as to form
seemingly a close and almost impenetrable surface.

THERE are few places which abound more in British antiquities, than the
environs of Cors-y-Gedol. CRAIG Y DINAS.
I first visited Craig y Dinas, the summit of a hill, surrounded with a vast
heap of stones, the ruins of a wall, which, in many parts, retain a regular and
even facing: this, and some others similar, are the first deviations from the
rude ramparts of stone, and prior to the improvement of masonry by the use of
mortar. Into this is an oblique entrance, with stone facings on both sides; and
near it are two ramparts of stones. The whole is on the steep extremity of the
hill, near to which is a pass into the country.

ABOUT a mile farther, LLYN BODLYN.
is Llyn Bodlyn, a small lake, beneath a lofty precipice, well stocked with
char, which will take a bair, and afford good diversion to the angler. Llyn Cwm
Howel is another lake in this neighborhood, noted for a race of trouts (which I
have seen) with most deformed heads, thick, flatted, and toad shaped; and
which, probably, might give rise to the fabled accounts of the monstrous
species recorded by Giraldus.

AFTER passing by Llyn-Irddin, a small piece of water, on a plain, arrive
amidst a wondrous group of Druidical antiquities. On the flat appear two
circles. CIRCLES OF STONES.
The first is about fifty-six feet in diameter, formed of piles of loose
stones, with upright columns, placed at five yards distance from each other, in
pairs, so as nearly to divide the circle into four parts. About thirty yards
from this, is a lesser, with several upright stones among the smaller, but
placed with less regularity. Design, not chance, certainly directed the
founders of these circles in the disposition of the columnar stones; but I
fear, when I come to speak more fully of them, the cause must remain
unaccounted for, by reason of the remoteness of the time, and the mystery of
the ancient priesthood.

HALF a mile fouth of these, on the side of a hill, are two carnedds, of a most
stupendous size, containing an uncommon assemblage of druidical customs,
CARNEDDEU HENGWM.
or religion, in form of Cromleh, Maen Her, and Kissed Vaen. Both are of an
oblong form, and composed of loose stones: the largest is fifty-five feet,
long, and twelve high, in the middle. At the east end is a great Cromleh altar,
composed of two sloping stones, one placed over the edge of the other, upon
five flat upright stones, seven feet high in one part, and four feet ten in the
lowest. About eight yards from this, is the upper stone of a Cromleh, lying
flat on the carnedd, without the appearance of any other support.

ELEVEN yards farther, is another great heap of stones, and in it a large
Cromleh, supported with upright stones. It is now converted into a retreat for
a shepherd, who has placed stone seats within, and formed a chimney through the
loose stones above. In the same carnedd, a little farther on, is another
magnificent Cromleh, whose incumbent stone is twelve feet by nine; four vast
columns, or maen hirion, three now fallen, and a third erect. The columns are
from the height of ten feet four, to that of twelve feet eight; and each
between four and five feet broad.

NORTH-WEST of these antiquities, CASTLE DINAS CORTIN.
on the top of a hill, is a strong post, called Castle Dinas Cortin,
entrenched around, with an advanced work on one side. This, and Castle Craig y
Dinas, were doubtlessly formed as defenses to the sacred ground, the subject of
the above description. I may add likewife another object of protection, of the
same nature, which I met with on my return to Corsegedol, two great Carnedds,
placed on small eminences, near to each other; and within one, the five square
flags of a Kissed vaen, the top being destroyed. The place is most remarkable for
the name, Bryn Cornyn JAU. The neighbors of this antiquity are fond of
rendering it, The Hill of the Horns of JOVE. It more probably was a place of
sacrifice before or after the chase, and derived its title from the horned
deity Cernunnos, CERNUNNOS.
who was venerated by the Gauls, and applied to as a protector from the dangers
attendant on the diversion Religion de Gaulois, ii. ^ 85.
Both the Gauls and Britons had one common religion; so that Cernunnos might as
reasonably be supposed to have a place here as in France.

THIS neighborhood also abounds with Cromlechs of very great size. CROMLECHS.
I measured one, in a tenement called Bryn-y-Voel, which was sixteen feet four
inches long, seven feet four broad, and twenty inches thick. It lay about two
feet above the ground, supported by small stones, and was surrounded with a
circle of loose stones. Most of the Cromlechs of these parts lie very near to
the ground, and in that respect differ from those of other places. They lie
likewife horizontally, which shows that their object was different, whatsoever
it was.

THIS country is in the hundred of Ardudwy. The entrance into it from
Trawsfynnydd is called Drws Ardudwy, DEWS ARDUDWY.
or the door of Ardudwy, formed by nature through the sterile mountains, which
separate the places. I was tempted to visit this noted pass, and found the
horror of it far exceeding the most gloomy idea that could be conceived of it.
The sides seemed to have been rent by some mighty convulsion into a thousand
precipices, forming at their tops rows of shelves, which the peasants,
comparing to the ranges in a dove cot, style Carreg y Klommenod, or the rock of
the pigeons. The bottom of this passage is covered with a deluge of stones,
which have streamed from the sides; and along it is a narrow horse-path, on the
slippery rock, formed by the removal of a few of the fragments, which, in other
places, are disposed into form of most steep and hazardous flights of steps:
and yet, as if the natural and artificial difficulties of these ways were not
sufficient to terrify invaders, there are, in one place, the vestiges of a
wall, which went across the pass, in which might have been the door which gave
name to it.

ON my return, I visited an ordinary house, called Maes y Garnedd, the birth
place of the regicide colonel Jones; whose insolence to the neighboring gentry
is still spoken of, even to this day, with much warmth. Actuated by enthusiasm,
he went every length that the congenial Cromwell dictated; and was a brave and
successful officer in a cause, which, after a certain period, was the result of
ambition, and the foundation of tyranny.

FROM some of the adjacent heights of this ride, I had a full view beneath me
(it being low water) of the long range of sand and gravel, which runs from this
coast twenty-two miles into the sea. It is deservedly called Sarn Badrig, SARN
BADRIG.
or, more properly, Bad-rhwyg, or Ship breaking Causeway, from the number of
ships lost upon it. This shoal is dry at the ebb of spring-tides, and marked in
storms by horrible breakers. Tradition says, that all this part of the sea had
been a habitable hundred, called Cantreer Gwaelod, or The Lowland Hundred; and
that it was overwhelmed by the sea, about the year 500, in the time of Gwyddno
Goronhir.

A SIMILAR accident happened, in some distant period, on the coast of Essex.
The canons of St. Paul must be possessed of a prebend, before they can become
residentiaries; and the one usually given is, The Praebenda consumpta per mare,
which lay on the coast of that county.

FROM Corsegedol, I pursued my journey toward Harlech; but, on the road, was
tempted, by my constant fellow-traveller, the reverend Mr. John Lloyd, to make
a small deviation to the right, to visit a near relation of his, who lived a
few miles to our right, in his ancient territories of Cwm Bychan. We approached
it through Glyn Artro, a little valley, watered by a river of the same name,
and prettily wooded. The view upwards was extremely picturesque, of a conic
rock, skirted by a sweet grove; and beyond soared the naked mountains, which
bounded the object of our ride.

AFTER passing through the wood, and ascending Dinas Porchellyn, had before us
a wild horizon of rocks and rocky mountains. Even these tracts, unfriendly as
they seem to vegetation, had once been covered with venerable oaks; and there
still remained a few, between eight and nine feet in circumference. We went
under their shade, above a rapid torrent, with a delightful view before us of a
true Alpine wooden bridge, and a small mill; and, a little farther, an ancient
arch, flung from rock to rock, giving passage over a still and black water,
shaded by trees. Ford the river again near Llyn Sarph, or The Serpent's Hole.
Wind up a rocky staircase road, and arrive full in sight of Cwm Bychan, CWM
BYCHAN.
embosomed with rocks of magnificent height. After a short ride, high above a
lake of the same name, descend, and reach the house of the venerable Evan
Llwyd, who, with his ancestors, boast. of being lords of these rocks, at left
since the year 1100. This, and the fortified pass of Drws Ardudwy, were most
probably occupied by the sons of Cadwgan, in their contests with the sons of
Uchtryd ap Edwyn, whom they at last expelled the country.

The following, as it is the true descent of Mr. Evan Llwyd, and my
fellow-traveller, who, being brother's children, are eighteenth in descent from
Blyddyn ap Cynvyn, so it is a genuine copy of the form of a British pedigree:

Evan ap Edward, ap Richard, ap Edward, ap Humphrey, ap Edward, ap Dafydd, ap
Robert, ap Howel, ap Dafydd, ap Meirig Llwyd o Nannau, ap Meirig Vychan, ap
Ynyr Vychan, ap Ynyr, ap Meuric, ap Madog, ap Cadwgan, ap Bleddyn, ap Cynvyn,
prince of North Wales and Powys Numbers of respectable families in this
country, are of the same descent.
.

I WAS introduced to the worthy representative of this long line, who gave me
the most hospitable reception, and in the style of an ancient Briton. He
welcomed us with ale and potent beer, to wash down the Coch yr Wden, or hung
goat, and the cheese, compounded of the milk of cow and sheep. He likewise
showed us the ancient family cup, made of a bull's scrotum, in which large
libations had been made in days of yore. The family lay in their whole store of
winter provisions, being inaccessible a great part of the season, by reason of
snow. Here they have lived for many generations, without bettering or lessening
their income; without noisy fame, but without any of its embittering attendants.

OF this house was the valiant Dai Llwyd, to whom is said to have been
addressed the noted Welsh tune, Ffarwel DAI Llwyd, on occasion of his going
with Jasper Tudor and Owen Lawgoch, to fight Risiart Frawdwr, or Richard the
Traitor, by which name the Welsh stigmatized Richard the Third.

THE mansion is a true specimen of an ancient seat of a gentleman of Wales. The
furniture rude: the most remarkable were the Cistie Styffylog, or the great
oatmeal chests, which held the essential part of the provision.

THE territories dependent on the mansion, extend about four miles each way,
and consist of a small tract of meadow, a pretty lake swarming with trout, a
little wood, and very much rock; but the whole forms a most august scenery. The
naked mountains envelope his vale and lake, like an immense theater. The
meadows are divided by a small stream, and are bounded on one side by the lake;
on the other, by his woods, which skirt the foot of the rocks, and through
which the river runs, and beyond them tumbles from the heights, in a series of
cataracts. He keeps his whole territory in his own hands; but distributes his
hinds among the Havadwys, or summer dairy-houses, for the convenience of
attending his herds and flocks: he has fixed his heir on another part of his
estates. His ambition once led him to attempt draining his lake, in order to
extend his landed property; but, alas! he gained only a few acres of rushes and
reeds; so wisely bounded his desires, and saved a beautiful piece of water. He
found on one side a stratum of fine white earth, about half a yard thick, which
I knew was what mineralogists dignify with the name of Lac Lunae, and Agaricus
Mineralis. The Germans use it as an absorbent in dysenteries and malignant
fevers Da Costa's Fossils, i. 83.
; and it would prove a good manure.

STOOLS and roots of firs, of vast size, are frequently found near the lake.
Mr. Llwyd found one, with the marks of fire on it, which he used to repair the
Tyddyn y Traian, or jointure-house of his family; an ancient customary
appendage to most of the Welsh houses of any note.

AMONG the mountains which guard the Cwm, is one named Carreg y Saeth, on whose
verge is a great Maen Her, and Carnedd. Saeth signifies an arrow; so probably
the ancient sportsmen here took their stand, to watch the passing of the deer,
which formerly abounded in these parts. Nor have they long been extinct; a
person of the last generation informed my host, that he had seen eighteen at
once, grazing in the meadow.

THE Welsh had several animals, ANCIENT HUNTING.
which were the objects of the chase; such as, y Carw, or the stag; Kaid Wenyn,
a swarm of bees; and y Gleisiad, or the salmon. Yr Arth, the bear; y
Dringhedydd, climbing animals, I suppose wild cats, martins, and squirrels; and
Ceiliog Coed, or cock of the wood. And the last division was, y Llwynog, the
fox; Ysgyfarnog, the hare; and yr Ywrch, the roe. Some of the above come very
improperly under our idea of hunting, yet were comprehended in the code of laws
relative to the diversion, formed, as is supposed, by Gryffyd ap Cynan Lewis's
Hist, Wales, Introd. 56.
.

I SUSPECT also, that the otter was an object of diversion; there being a Cylch
Dyfrgwm, or an annual payment, by the Welsh, for the prince's water dogs Record
of Caernarvon, Harl. MSS.
.

THE three first were Helfa Gyffredyn, or the common hunt. The stag, because he
was the noblest animal of chase; and because every body, who came by at his
death, before he was skinned, might clame a share in him. The next animals
were, Helfa Gyfarthfa, or the animals which could be brought to bay, such as
the bear, etc. which were hunted with hounds till they ascended a tree. The
bird mentioned here, is the cock of the wood, whose nature it is to sit perched
on a bough, where they will gaze till they are shot, as they were, in old
times, by the bow, or cross-bow.

THE third division was Helfa Ddolef, or the shouting chase, because attended
by the clamor of the sportsmen; and comprehended the fox, the hare, and the
roe. The method of hunting was either with hounds, or grehounds, which they let
slip at the animals, holding the dogs in leashes. No one was to slip his
grehound when the hounds were in chase, unless he had a hound in the pack, on
penalty of having the grehound ham-strung: neither was it allowed to kill any
animal of chase on its form, or at rest, on pain of forfeiting his bow and
arrow to the lord of the manor. When several grehounds, the property of
different persons, were slipped at any animal, the person whose dog was nearest
the beast, when last in sight, clamed the skin. A bitch was excepted, unless it
was proved she was pregnant by a dog which had before won a skin.

EVERY person who carries a horn, must give a scientifical account of the nine
objects of chase, or else he will be looked on as a pretender, and forfeit his
horn. The same penalty attends the Cynllafan, or leash; he is never again to
wear it round his middle, on pain of forfeiture; but then he is suffered to
wear it round his arm.

THE ancient Welsh held the flesh of the stag, hare, wild boar, and the bear,
to be the greatest delicacies among the beasts of chase.

THE prince had his Pencynwydd, or chief huntsman. He was the tenth officer of
the court. He had for his own supper one dish of meat; and after it, three
horns of mead, one from the king, another from the queen, the third from the
steward of the household. He was never to swear, but by his horn and his leash.
He had the third of the fines and heriots of all the other huntsmen; and
likewise the same share of the amobr, on the marriage of any of their
daughters. At a certain time of the year, he was to hunt for the king only: at
other seasons, he was permitted to hunt for himself. His horn was that of an
ox, of a pound value. He had in winter an ox's hide, to make leashes; in
summer, a cow's, to cut into spatterdashes.

THE king had liberty of hunting wheresoever he pleased; but if a beast was
hunted and killed on any gentleman's estate, and not followed and clamed by the
huntsman that night, the owner of the land might convert it to his own use, but
was to take good care of the dogs, and preserve the skin.

THE penalty of killing a tame stag of the king's, was a pound; and a certain
fine, if it was a wild one, if it was killed between a certain day in November
and the feast of St. John, the value was sixty pence; but the fine for killing
it, a hundred and eighty pence. A stag was also reckoned equivalent to an ox; a
hind to a well grown cow; a roe to a goat; a wild sow to a tame sow; a badger
had no value, because in some years it was measled; wolves and foxes, and other
noxious animals, had no value, because every body was allowed to kill them; and
there was none set upon a hare, for a very singular reason, because it was
believed every other month to change its sex See Leges Wallicae, xxxix. 256 to
260.
.

FROM Cwm Bychan, HARLECH.
took the road to Harlech, a small and very poor town, remarkable only for its
castle, which is seated on a lofty rock, facing the Irish sea, above an
extensive marsh, once occupied by the water. This fortress was anciently called
Twr Bronwen, from Bronwen or The White-necked, sister to Bran ap Llr, king of
Britain. In aftertimes, it got the name of Caer Collwyn, from Collwyn ap
Tango, one of the fifteen tribes o North Wales, and lord of Efionydd, Ardudwy,
and part of Lln. His grandchildren flourished in the reign of Gryffydd ap
Cynan. He resided some time in a square tower in the ancient fortress, whose
remains are very apparent; as are part of the old walls, which the more modern,
in certain places are seen to rest on.

THE present castle was the work of Edward I. is a noble square building, with
a round tower at each corner, and one on each side the entrance, with elegant
turrets issuing out of the great rounders, like those of his other castles of
Caernarvon and Conway. It was completed before the year 1283: at lest, I then
find, that a hundred pounds was the annual salary of Hugh de Wlonkeslow, the
constable Ayloff's Welsh Calendar, 92.
; but it was afterward reduced; for it appears, that the annual fee was only
twenty-six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence, and in some accounts fifty
pounds, which was supposed to be for both constable and captain of the town.
The whole garrison, at the same time, was twenty soldiers, whose annual pay
amounted to a hundred and forty pounds Dodderidge, 58.
. The present constable is Evan Lloyd Vaughan, esquire with a salary of fifty
pounds a year, payable out of the revenues of North Wales. It was impregnable
on the side next to the sea: on the other, it was protected by a prodigious
fosse, cut with vast expense and trouble in the hard rock.

THIS place was possessed, BESIEGED IN 1468
in 1468, by Dafydd ap Jevan ap Einion, a strong friend of the house of
Lancaster, and distinguished as much by his valor, as his goodly personage,
and great stature Gwedir Family, 77.
. He was besieged here by William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, after a march
through the heart of our Alps, attended with incredible difficulties; for in
some parts, the soldiers were obliged to climb; in others, to precipitate
themselves down the rocks Cambden, ii, The road is to this day called Lle
Herbert.
; and at length invested a place, till that time deemed impregnable. Pembroke
committed the care of the siege to his brother, Sir Richard, a hero equal in
size and prowess to the British commandant. Sir Richard sent a summons of
surrender; but Dafydd stoutly answered, that he had kept a castle in France so
long, that he made all the old women in Wales talk of him; and that he would
keep this so long, that all the old women in France should talk of him. Famine
probably subdued him: he yielded on honorable terms, and Richard engaged to
save his life, by interceding with his cruel master, Edward IV. The king at
first refused his request; when Herbert told him plainly, that his highness
might take his life, instead of that of the Welsh captain; or that he would
assuredly replace Dafydd in the castle, and the king might send whom he pleased
to take him out again. This prevaled; but Sir Richard received no other reward
for his service Life of lord Herbert. 7, 8.
.

Margaret of Anjou, the faithful and spirited queen of the meek Henry VI. found
in this castle, in 1460, an asylum, after the unfortunate battle of
Northampton. She first fled to Coventry, and from thence retired to this
fortress Carte, ii. 757.
: after a short stay here, she went to Scotland, and, collecting her friends in
the north of England, poured all her vengeance on her great enemy, duke of
York, at the battle of Wakefield.

THE place more than once changed masters, AND IN 1647.
during the last civil wars. It was well defended by major Hugh Pennant, till
he was deserted by his, men. It was finally taken, in March 1647, by general
Mytton, when Mr. William Owen was governor, and the whole garrison consisted
but of twenty-eight men. It had the honor of surrendering on articles, and of
being the last in North Wales which held out for the king. Whitelock, 24^.


Torques


Edward I. formed the town into a borough, and conferred on it grants of
certain lands, and other emoluments.

NEAR this place was found the celebrated piece of antiquity In possession of
Sir Roger Mostyn.
, TORQUES.
on which the learned have thought sit to bestow the name of Torques. It is
well described in Cambden, as a wreathed rod of gold, about four feet long,
with three spiral furrows, with sharp intervening ridges running its whole
length to the ends, which are plain truncated, and turn back like pot-hooks.
Whether this was purely Roman, or whether it might not have been common to both
nations, I will not dispute. The use was that of a baldric, to suspend
gracefully the quiver of men of rank, which hung behind by means of the hook,
and the golden wreath crossed the breast, and passed over the shoulder. Virgil,
in his beautiful description of the exercises of the Trojan youth, expresses
the manner in these frequently misconstrued lines: Cornea bina ferunt praefixo
hastilia ferro:
Pars laeves numero pharetras, it pectore summo,
Flexilis obtorti per collum circulus auri.
Each brandishing aloft a cornel spear.
Some on their backs their burnished quivers bore,
Hanging from wreaths of gold, which shone before A little altered from the
translation in Cambden, ii. 788.
.


THE Torch, or Torques, worn by the Gauls and Britons, was a very different
affair, a collar of gold, or other metal, worn round the neck. Our heroine
Boadicia had a great one of that precious metal; and Virdomarus wore round his
neck another, fastened behind with hooks, which fell off when the conqueror cut
off his head. Illi virgatis jaculanti ex agmine braccis
Torquis ab incisa decidit unca gula Propertius, lib. iv. eleg.
.


Manlius acquired the addition of Torquatus, from a Torques which he won from a
Gaul, whom he slew in single combat, in sight of the army; and Publius
Cornelius, after his slaughter of the Boii, took, among other spoils, not fewer
than four thousand and seventy golden Torques Livij, lib. xxxvi. c. 40.
.

THEY were also in use among the Romans, who bestowed them as military rewards;
and, as Pliny pretends, the golden on the auxiliaries, the silver on the
citizens Plin, lib. xxxiii. c. 2.
. They probably were made in several ways: I have seen a very beautiful one (I
think at present in possession of the reverend Mr. Prescot, of Cambridge)
composed of several links of silver wire, most elegantly twisted together: it
was long enough to go twice round the neck, and had clasps, which fastened it
on.

THE custom of wearing the Torques was continued from the more remote periods
of Britain, to later times. Llewelyn, a a lord of Yale, was called Llewelyn aur
Dorchog, Llewelyn with the golden torques, on that account; and the common
proverb, Mi a dynna'r dorch a chwi, I will pluck the torques with you,
signifies, to this day, a hard struggle of a person before he would yield a
victory.

FROM Harlech I ascended a very steep hill, and on my way observe several maen
hirion, and circles formed of large common pebble-stones, and of different
diameters; sometimes appears circle within circle; in other places, they
intersect each other. I should have doubted whether they had not been the
foundations of Cytti'er Gwyddelod, CYTTI'ER GWYDDELOD.
or the cottages of the wood rangers, a sort of temporary hovels, erected for
the purposes of hunting, by our remotest ancestors Mona Antiqua.
, had it not been for their intersections. The learned Borlase gives instances
of such, in the circles of Botallek Antiq. Cornwall, 188. tab. xiv.
, which he supposes to have been formed for religious ceremonies; and that one
rite might have been performed in one particular circle, and another again in a
compartment allotted for it by the superstition of Druidism. Clusters of
circles were not peculiar to our island: baron Dahlberg Suecia Antiqua, etc.
tab. 322.
has given a plate of similar assemblages, near the town of Wexio, in Smaland,
in Sweden, which are on a flat, at the foot of a vast sepulchral tumulus, with
a high column, and great globe of stone on the summit. Some columnar stones, or
maen hirion, appear in the ranges of stones composing the circles.

THE tumulus is called that of king Ingo: but since the three monarchs of that
name were said to have been steady christians, and to have lived in the
eleventh century, I do guess both tumulus and circles to have been of earlier
date, and formed in honor (...) pagan potentate; for the northern christendoms
old Wormii Mon. Dan. 4.
, or (...) of christianity, abolished all such customs.

I MUST observe, that this place is called Bon-leff Her, or the loud shout or
cry to battle. Possibly it had been a field of combat, and a chieftain had fell
here, for one of the maen hirion is of a distinguished size.

FROM hence the road is intolerably bad and stoney, GLYN.
till I reached Glyn, a house of my kinsman, Robert Godolphin Owen, esquire seated
in a romantic bottom, well wooded. This had been the residence of the ancient
family of the Wynnes, from whom it passed to the Owens, by the marriage of Sir
Robert with the heiress of the place, in the last century.

PASS by the village of Llan Tegwyn, and near a small lake, filled with that
beautiful aquatic, the Water Lilly. Somewhat farther is Llyn-Tegwyn,
LLAN-TEGWIN.
which well merits the name of Fair and Lovely, a lake about a mile round,
whose waters are of a crystalline clearness; its margin full; its boundaries
neat and clean. The narrow path we rode on, impends over it, and is cut out of
a hill, whose sides are composed of shivering slate, starting out at an immense
height above, threatening destruction: they were much enlivened by flocks of
milk-white goats, which skiped along the points, and looked down on us with
much unconcern.

FROM one of the heights, a vast Alpine prospect appears in view. The
stupendous mountains of Caernarvenshire, and those of Merioneddshire, not much
inferior, form a tremendous scenery, and rise divided into a multitude of
craggy heads. The last are particularly barren, and appear quite naked,
excepting where varied by a mossy verdure, or whitened by the lichen
tartaricus. The highest summit of Snowdon, called y Wyddfa, soars pre-eminent.
From thence, the mountains gradually lower, to Lleyn, which stretches in view
far to the west, and terminates on the point of Aberdaron. Descend into a deep
glen, clothed on each side with trees, with the Velyn-Rhyd, VELYN RHYD.
or Yellow Ford, at bottom; notwithstanding its name, a most inky stream; the
fine cataract a little above, being most fitly styled Rhaiader-Du, or The Black.

AFTER a short ride, reach the village and chapel of Maen Twrog, dependent on
the church of Festiniog, Near one end is a great upright stone, from which it
takes the name. This stone is taken into the Welsh calendar, canonized by the
name of St. Twrog. The place lies in the Tempe of this country, the vale of Tan
y Bwlch, TAN Y BWLCH.
a narrow, but beautiful tract, about three or four miles long, divided by the
small river Dwy'ryd, or The Two Fords, being formed by the Cynsael and another
stream, which unite toward the upper ends. The vale is composed of rich
meadows; the sides edged with groves; and barren precipitous mountains close
this gem, as it were, in a rugged case. Here is a very neat small inn, for the
reception of travelers, who ought to think themselves much indebted to a
nobleman The present earl of Radnor.
, for the great improvement it received from his munificence.

ABOVE it is a house, embosomed with woods, most charmingly situated on the
side of the hill. This seat, from the quick succession of owners by the fatal
attachment to the bottle, has occasioned many a moral reflection from the
English traveller. A heavy glutinous ale has charms enough to debauch the
senses of the whole principality; and, let me add, after a certain stage, the
fiery dram is called in, to effect the destruction the former had begun; yet I
trust that its charms do not fascinate the senses of the WHOLE principality;
but that, after a fair scrutiny, there may be found some corner free from the
Bacchanalian rout.

THE river hereabouts widens into a good salmon fishery; and, after some space,
falls into an arm of the sea, called Traeth Bach, or the little sands.

RIDE up the vale, and dismounting, meet the course of the Cynfael, FALLS OF
THE CYNFAEL.
which tumbles along the bottom of a deep time-worn chasm, sided with sharp and
rugged rocks for a very considerable space, darkened by trees that overspread
the whole, issuing both from the sides and margin. Near Festiniog is one
cascade, remarkably fine, consisting of three great falls, the lowest dropping
into a deep pool, black, and over-shadowed by far impending rocks. Below, is a
magnificent columnar rock, rising out of the torrent, and called Pulpit Hugh
Llwyd Cynfael. Hugh lived in the time of James I. was supposed to have been a
magician, and from thence to have delivered his nocturnal incantations; a
place, fit indeed for the purpose as the pit of Acheron.

ABOUT a mile from the Cynfael, is another comfortable inn, which has often
received me, after my toilsome expeditions. Opposite to it lies Cwm Cwm^orthin;
CWM^ORTHIN.
a retreat much more sequestered, and much more difficult of access, than even
Cwm-bychan. In my visit to it, I descended through woods, along a steep road,
into a very deep, but narrow valley, which I crossed, and began a very
hazardous and fatiguing ascent up the rocky front of a losty mountain: the path
narrow and dangerous, and, I believe, very rarely attempted by horses. After
the labor of a mile, reached this strange habitation of two farmers, in a
hollow surrounded on three parts by the rudest of environs, and containing a
pretty lake, and two tenements, which yield only grass; so that, in case the
inhabitants have any other wants, they must descend from their Cwm to get them
supplied. The mountains which enclose it, are the Moel-wyn yr Hydd, and the
Moel-wyn Gwyn, and others equally rude. High in the first is the lake Du-bach,
which affords perch; and another, called Llyn Trwstyllon; and opposite to the
last, a third, called Llyn Conglog; all of which, after hard rains, form noble
cataracts down the fronts of the hills. We preferred another way out of this
singular place, and wound up a narrow path at the farthest end, on part of
Molwyn y Hydd, in order to descend through Cwm Croesor; being then desirous of
getting by the nearest road to Pont Aber Glass Llyn. But in our descent we met
with such narrowness of path, such short turnings, and horrible precipices,
that our poor beasts, with much reason, trembled in every limb; and, in fact,
had a wonderful escape in getting safe to the bottom. The traveller who chooses
to follow our steps, will find a narrow grassy bottom in Cwm Croesor, with a
few tenements: he will pass through a pretty wood, and soon after find himself
on the high road from Tan y Bwlch to Caernarvon.

IN this journey, I went from Festiniog on a less hazardous way. Not two miles
from thence, on the road from Trawsfynnydd to Yspytty, I fell again into Fford
Helen, which is here quite bare, and exhibits the rude stones with which it was
made.

NEAR it, BEDDAU GWYR ARDUDWY.
at Rhyd yr Halen, on the right, are the remains of Beddau Gwyr Ardudwy, or the
graves of the men of Ardudwy. These graves were about six feet long, marked at
each end by two upright stones; but most of the stones are now removed. There
are yet to be seen several circles of stones, the largest about fifty-two feet
in diameter; a vast carnedd, with two upright stones placed on one part, as if
to mark the entrance to the cell, which it probably incloses; and near it a
lesser heap, and a small circle; all of which had been surrounded with a larger
circle, now incomplete by the application of the materials to the making of
walls. The tradition relating to these monuments, is classical; nearly parallel
with the rape of the Sabines. The men of Ardudwy, to populate their country,
made an inroad into the vale of Clwyd, and laid violent hands on the fair
ladies of the land: they carried them in safety to this place, where they were
overtaken by the warriors of the vale: a fierce battle ensued, and the men of
Ardudwy all slain; but the ravishers had some how or other so gained the hearts
of their fair prey, that, on their defeat, the ladies, rather than return home,
rushed into an adjacent water, called, from the event, Llyn y Morwynion, or The
Maiden's Lake, and there perished. That this had been the scene of a bloody
conflict, there is a probability: the graves and carnedds prove it; and the
circles evince, that it was in the time when the ceremonies of druidism existed.

FROM hence I descended the long and tedious steep of Bwlch Carreg y Fran, into
the narrow vale of Penmachno; and, after ascending another hill, turn to the
right into the black and moory mountains, to visit Llyn Conwy, LLYN CONWY.
the source of the noted river of that name. It is a very large piece of water,
most dismally situated among rock and bog, and the sides very irregularly
indented. It is placed the highest of any large piece of water I have met with
in these parts. In it are three islands, one of which is the haunt of the
black-back Gulls, during the breeding season. They are so exceedingly fierce in
the defense of their young, that I knew of a man who was nearly drowned, in an
attempt to swim to their nests, being so violently beaten by the old birds,
that he thought he escaped well, with the dreadful bruises he received on all
the upper part of his body. The water issues out of the end of the lake, in
form of a little rill; but in the course of a few miles, before it reaches
Llanrwst, becomes a most: considerable river, by the addition of the various
mountain streams.

DESCEND for two or three miles, and reach the village of Yspytty Jevan,
YSPYTTY.
or the hospital of St. John of Jerusalem; so styled from its having formed, in
the then inhospitable country, an asylum and guard for travelers, under the
protection of the knights who held the manor, and made its precincts a
sanctuary. After the abolition of the order, this privelege became the bane of
the neighborhood; for the place, thus exempted from all jurisdiction, was
converted into a den of thieves and murderers, who ravaged the country far and
wide with impunity, till the reign of Henry VII. when they were extirpated by
the bravery and prudence of Meredydd ap Evan.

AFTER a very long interval, another charity succeeded, in the almshouses for
six poor men, founded in 1600, by captain Richard Vaughan, a poor knight of
Windsor, and descended from the neighboring house of Pant Glass.

IN the church are three alabaster figures. TOMBS.
The first is the valiant Rhys Vawr ap Meredydd, of the house of Plas Yolyn; to
whom, at the battle of Bosworth, Henry VII. entrusted the standard of England,
after the bearer, Sir William Brandon, was slain by Richard: a proper respect
to the Welsh, who so highly favored the Lancastrian cause. The next is an
ecclesiastic, his son, Robert ap Rhys, cross-bearer and chaplain to cardinal
Wolsey: and the third Lowry, the wife of the great Rhys. I may add, that he
left several sons, from whom were descended many familes, particularly those of
Rhiwlas, Pant Glass, Giler, and Voelas.

FROM Yspytty I made an excursion to Voelas, VOELAS.
about two miles distant, remarkable for a great column, with an inscription in
memory of Llewelyn, prince of Wales, who was slain in the year 1021. Here is
likewise a vast artificial mount, the site of a Welsh castelet, destroyed by
Llewelyn the Great See the Poem addressed to him by Llywarch Brydydd y Much, in
Evans's Coll. Awdl. vii.
. Mr. Llwyd confesses the inscription to be very obscure. It is part in Latin,
part in Welsh. The last line says, Levelinus optimus princeps hic humatus;
which, if meant of any of the actual princes of Wales, must intend Llewelyn ap
Sitsyllt; he being the only one of the three of the name of Llewelyn, of whose
place of interment we are ignorant Cambden, ii. 816.
.

TURN back, and again reach the river Conway. Enter CAERNARVONSHIRE, And, after
a short ride, RHAIADER Y GRAIG LLWYD.
arrive at its celebrated falls, not very far from its junction with the
Machno. The prospect is very extraordinary, from the neighborhood of a fulling
mill, where the channel of the rivers form a triangle of deep and doleful
chasms, worn by the water through the live rock. Not far below, begins the
cataract, the most tremendous I ever saw, and whose roaring gives sufficient
notice of its vicinity. The rocks which bound it are of a vast height, and
approach very near to each other, and want the pleasing accompaniment of trees,
attendant on most of our cascades. One fall is of very great height; and
beneath that, full in view, is a succession of four lesser. The descent is
steep and dangerous, and not to be attempted but by those who have strength of
body, and steadiness of head. When down, I found myself environed with naked
precipices, faced with angular columnar rocks, pointing in a sloping direction
toward the river, adding to the strangeness of the scenery.

DESCEND a steep hill, and arrive in Nant Conwy, or the vale of Conwy, after
passing over Pont-or-Lleder; beneath which, the river Lleder hastens to join
thar which gives name to the valley, Observe, in the course of the Conwy, a
deep, wide, and still water, called Llyn yr Afange, or The Beavers Pool,
BEAVERS.
from being, in old times, the haunt of those animals. Our ancestors also
called them, with great propriety, Llost-Lydan, or the broad tailed animal.
Their skin was in such esteem, as to be valued at a hundred and twenty pence;
while that of the martin took no more than twenty-four pence; an ermine,
twelve; an otter, wolf, or fox, only twelve Leges Wallicae, 260. 261.
. They seem to have been the chief finery and luxury of the days of Hoel Dda.

THE vale gradually expands from this end, and extends about twenty miles,
terminating at the town of Conway. It soon widens to about a mile in breadth,
and improves in beauty, especially in the neighborhood of Llanrwst, where it is
divided into the most beautiful meadows. The sides of the hills finely
cultivated: on the western, the vast mountains of Snowdon rise in a majestic
range. The eastern consists of low and broken hills, chequered with rich
pasturage, corn fields, and groves. The river meanders through the whole, and
before it reaches Llanrwst, is of a considerable size.

VISIT the church of Bettws Wyrion Iddon, BETTWS WYRION.
or the bead-house of the gran-children of Iddon. Within is the figure of
Gruffydd ap Dafydd Goch, son to Dafydd Goch, natural son of Dafydd, brother to
the last prince of Wales. He is in armor, recumbent, with this inscription:
Hic jacet Grufud ap Davyd Goch, agnus DEI misere mei.

DOLWYDDELAN CASTLE.


A LITTLE farther, pass by Pont y Pair, PONT Y PAIR.
a most singular bridge, flung over the Llugwy, consisting of five arches,
placed on the rude rocks, which form most durable piers. These rocks are
precipitous, and in high floods exhibit to the passenger most awful cataracts
below the bridge. The scenery beyond, of rocky mountains, fringed which woods,
is very striking.

THIS bridge was built on the following occasion: One Howel, a mason from
Penllyn, having occasion, about the year 1468, to attend the Merionethshire
assizes, then held at Conway, had his passage over the Lleder obstructed by
floods. This determined him to remove to the spot, where he built a bridge, at
his own expense, and received no other gratuity than what resulted from the
spontaneous generosity of passengers. He afterward moved to the Llugwy, and
began that of Pont y Pair, but died before he completed his work Llwyd's Itin.
MS. i. The same authority says, that near this place is a great Cromleh, called
Cromleh Hwva, so named from one Hwva ap Kyfnerth, at Rhyddon, who concealed
himself under it, when the earl of Pembroke desolated these parts.
.

I SOON left the bridge, and, after a steep ascent, arrive at Dolwyddelan
castle, DOLWYDDELAN CASTLE,
seated in a rocky valley, sprinkled over with stunted trees, and watered by
the Lleder. The boundaries are rude and barren mountains; and, among others,
the great bending mountain Scabod, often conspicuous from most distant places.

The castle is placed on a high rock, precipitous on one side, and insulated:
it consists of two square towers; one forty feet by twenty-five; the other
thirty-one by twenty. Each had formerly three floors. The materials of this
fortress are the shattery stone of the country; yet well squared, the masonry
good, and the mortar hard. The castle-yard lay between the towers.

THIS had been founded by some of our princes; but we are ignorant of its
origin. There were very few castles in North Wales, before its conquest by the
English. They were needless; for Nature created in our rocks and mountains,
fortifications (until our fatal divisions) quite impregnable. Had there been
occasion for artificial retreats, the wealth of our country could readily have
supplied the means of erecting them. We had the balance of trade in our favor.
This prevented our princes from ever making use of their third prerogative,
that of coining Tertiam est, jus leges condendi, et MONETAM PERCUTIENDI.
Wottou's Leges Wallicae, 71.
. Our herds and flocks were the frequent resource of the English, and brought
large sums into Wales. Witness the large sums of money we too frequently were
obliged to pay, as purchasers of disgraceful peace. Besides, cash was far from
being requisite, since, by our laws, every subject was bound to assist in
building the royal castles, excepting the husbandmen belonging to the king
Leges Wallicae, 165.
.

Jorwerth Drwndwn made this place his residence; and here is said to have been
born his son, Llewelyn the Great Gweair Fam. 7.
, who began his reign in the time of Richard I. If Dolinchalan castle is, as I
suppose, the same with this, Gryffydd ap Tudor, in the reign of Edward I. had a
fee of fifteen pounds as constable Rotulae Walliae, 97.
.

Meredydd ap Jevan, an ancestor of the Wynnes, of Gwedir, in the reign of Henry
VII. purchased the lease of this castle, and the enclosures belonging to it,
from the executors of Sir Ralph Berkenet; it having been excepted among the
places granted by Richard III. and resumed by his successor Gwedir Family, 137;
a publication we are indebted for, to my respected friend, the honorable DAINES
BARRINGTON.
. Before that time, Hoel as Evan ap Rhys Gethin, a noted outlaw, resided here.
As soon as it came into possession of Meredydd, he removed his habitation in
Evionedd, a hundred in the county, to this castle; giving this excellent
reason: I had rather fight with outlaws and thieves, than with my own blood and
kindred: if I live in my own house in Evionedd, I must either kill mine own
kinsmen, or be killed by them! The feuds among the gentry in Evionedd,
occasioned perpetual murders; and Nant-Conwy was filled with banditti.

THIS gentleman soon reformed the country: he established colonies of the most
tall and able men he could procure; till at last they amounted to seven score
tall bowmen, every one arrayed in a jacket or armolet coat, a good steel cap,
a short sword and dagger, together with his bow and arrows; many of them also
had horses and chasing slaves, which were ready to answer the cry on all
occasions The same.
.

HE founded the strong house of Penamnaen, PENAMNAEN.
a mile distant from the castle. He removed the church, which before lay in a
thicket, to a more open place, by way of security; for he never dared to quit
his house, without leaving in it a strong guard; and another of twenty tall
archers to attend him, whenever he went to church; besides a watchman, on a
rock called Carreg y Big, to give notice of the approach of the banditti. He
ended his useful life in 1525, and left behind him twenty-three legitimate, and
three natural children.

THE church had been an impropriation of the abbey of Beddkelert; is very small;
and has in it a monument, commemorating such of the family who were buried here
(...) pedigree of the Wynnes, See Appendix.
.

IN my return to Pont y Pair, digressed a little up the river Llugwy, to see a
noted cascade, called Rhaiader y Wenol, or The Water-fall of the Swallow. The
river runs along a strait stony channel, for a considerable way, amidst narrow
meadows, bounded by majestic Alpine scenery; then falls into an amazing hollow.
The bottom is difficult of access; but when arrived at, exhibits a wonderful
scene of mountain and precipice, shaded with trees, which fringe the top, and
start even from the fissures of the sides.

CROSS Pont y Pair, CARREG Y GWALCH.
and go beneath a very lofty rock, clothed with wood, called Carreg y Gwalch,
or The Rock of the Faleon. Here was the retreat of a famous partizan of the
house of Lancaster, called, Dafydd ap Shenkin, who lurked in a cave, still
named, from him, Ogo Davyd ap Shenkin. The noblest oaks in all Wales grew on
this rock, within memory of man. I remember the stools of several, which proved
that they were equal to any which grow in the deepest soil; yet these rocks are
totally destitute of all earth for a considerable way, so that the nutriment
which the oaks received, must have been derived from the deep penetration of
the roots, through the fissures of the stones, into some nutritive matter.

THE ancient house of Gwedir stands near the foot of this rock. GWEDIR.
It is built round a greater and lesser court. Over the gate-way is the date,
1558, with I. W. John Win ap Meredydd, gran-father to the famous Sir John,
author of the memoirs of the family. This shows 1553, the supposed time of the
death of the former, to be a mistake. The place takes its name from Gwaed-dir,
the bloody land, from the battles fought here by Llywarch Hen See his Works.
, about the year 610; or perhaps from the cruel battle in 952, between the sons
of Hoel, and the princes Jevaf and Iago Powel, 60.
; and a third may be added, between Gryffydd ap Cynan, and Trahaern ap Cradog,
equally bloody Vide his Life.
The supposition that it was derived from its being the first house in Wales
which had glass windows, is not well founded, those conveniences having been
known long before. Sir John Win himself even mentions a date of 1512, on a
window at Dolwyddelan, which is long before the building of Gwedir. But the
following lines of a poet, who flourished some centuries before, is still a
stronger proof of the antiquity of glass in our country: Trwy ffenestri Gwydir
yd ym gwelent See the poems of Cynddelw Brydydd Mawr, who flourished about the
year 1250.
.
They see me through the glass windows.


ON a rock, high above the Lower Gwedir, stood another, called The Upper,
seemingly built for the enjoyment of the beautiful view it commands of the rich
meadows watered by the Conwy, and their elegant boundaries. It was a sort of
Diaeta, or summer house, erected by Sir John Win, in 1604, who had a
classical taste. The walls were covered with inscriptions; and the situation
well deserved the panegyric bestowed on it in the following Welsh lines, placed
over the entrance: Bryn Gwedir gwelir goleu adeilad
Uwch dolydd a chaurau
Bryn gwiech adail in ail ne;
Bron wen Henllys bren hinlle.
A conspicuous edifice on Gwider hill, towering over the adjacent land; a
well-chosen situation, a second paradise, a fair bank, a palace of royalty
Hist. Gwedir Fam. xii.
.

THIS has been of late demolished; but the family chapel, which stands near the
site of the old house, is still preserved, and service performed in it four
times in the year. Among various papers belonging to Gwedir, communicated to me
by my friend, Paul Panton, esquire is a curious one, drawn up by old Sir John
Win, prescribing the rules to his chaplain; an odd mixture of SIR JOHN WIN
BARONET.
portrait of Sir John Win insolence and piety Appendix.
. The inventory of his wardrobe, drawn up in his own hand, is also worth
preservation, as it shows not only the complete dress of a man of rank in those
days, but the great economy of the times, among people of fashion, when their
wardrobe was bestowed by will, and passed from generation to generation The
same.
.

SIR John was sent to London in 1574, to study the law; was a man of abilities,
and particularly attentive to the antiquities of his country and family. His
consequence made him to be taken notice of by the court; for he was made a
baronet in June 1611.

THIS place continued in the family till the year 1678, when it passed into
that of the late duke of Ancaster, by marriage of Mary, daughter and heiress of
Sir Richard Win, with Robert marquess of Lindsey; and is now possessed by
Peter Burrell, esquire in right of his wife Priscilla, baroness Willoughby, eldest
sister to Robert, late duke of Ancaster.

FROM hence to Llanrwst is a pretty walk, LLANRWST BRIDGE.
mostly by the side of the river. The town lies in Denbighshire, on the
opposite bank. The approach is over the bridge, the boasted plan of Inigo
Jones. INIGO JONES.
It consists of three arches; the middle fifty-nine feet wide: two are
extremely beautiful, and mark the hand of the architect: the third differs
greatly, having been rebuilt in 1703, by a very inferior genius. I wish I
could do more honor to my country, than suppose him to have been a descendant
of this neighborhood: but he seems to have been by birth a Londoner, a son of a
cloth-worker Mr. WALPOLE'S Anecd. Painting, ii. 142.
, who, in all probability, was a native of this part of Wales; but our country
is right to clame the son, which is done by universal tradition of the country.
The turn of his countenance, and the violence of his passions His print, tab.
at p. 142. Anecd. and his Life passim.
, at lest legitimate no distant descent. He was patronized by the earl of
Arundel, and William earl of Pembroke; and by one or other sent into Italy. His
real christian name was Ynyr, which he there changed into Inigo, or Ignatius.
Thus, John Cooper, master of the Viol de Gambia to Charles I. after he had been
in Italy, assumed the name of Giovanni Coperario Hawkins's Hist. Music, iv. 55.
. It is in vain to give the life of a man, which has been so amply written by
one of the ablest pens in the fine arts. Let it suffice to say, that the first
Sir Richard Win procured from Jones the plan of this bridge, of which he was
founder, in 1636; determined to do his country all possible honor, by the
beauty of the design, invented by an architect to which Wales had at lest a
near relation Among all the family papers, there is not the lest mention of
Inigo, which must, have been the case, had he been an Eleve of the Wynnes, as
has been popularly asserted.
.

THERE is one circumstance attending this great genius, which deserves mention,
as it bears some relation to the country from whence he may have derived his
origin. When he was employed to furnish rare devices, and paint the scenery for
the masks of the festive year 1619, he painted the Creigie'r eira, or a scene
in Snowdonia, for the masque FOR THE HONOR OF WALES. He did it with such
success, as to excite the envy of the poet, Ben Jonson; for the scenes were
more admired than the entertainment, which might very well be: but Jonson was
so offended; as to give vent to his spleen in a copy of verses, as imbecil as
they were rancorous and ill-founded Ben. Jonson's Works, vi. 294.
.

THE river here makes a handsome appearance, extending in a direct line far
above the bridge, and often enlivened with the coracles, the vitilia navigia of
the ancient Britons, busied in taking salmon; and in the months of February and
March, numbers of smelt. The tide does not flow nearer than Llyn y Graig, a
mile and half below the bridge, where, in spring tides, boats of twelve tons
may come.

THE town of Llanrwst is small, TOWN OF LLANRWST, AND CHURCH.
and ill built; and has nothing remarkable, except the church, which is
dedicated to St. Rystyd, or Restitutus, archbishop of London in 361, present at
the council of Arles in 353. The ground on which it is built, is said to have
been given by Rhun, the son of Nefydd Hardd, to expiate the foul murder of
prince Idwal, a son of Owen Gwynedd, slain by order of his foster-father,
Nefydd, to whom he had been entrusted XV. Tribes, of which Nefydd was one.
. Some curious carving, said to have been brought from the neighboring abbey,
graces the inside. The Gwedir chapel, founded in 1633, by the abovementioned
Sir Richard Win, from a design of Inigo, would be another ornament, if not so
shamefully neglected. On the wall is a ruinous marble monument, elegantly
ornamented with trophies: it was meant to comemorate the ancestors of the
family; but soon promises to tumble into a heap of undistinguishable rubbish.

TRAMPLED under feet, are several brass plates, BRASSES AND TOMBS.
admirably engraven with the heads of several of the family, who rest beneath.
Among them is that of Sir John Win, compiler of the memoirs, who died in
1626. The country people have a tradition, that he was a great oppressor; and
accordingly have sent his perturbed spirit to reside in the neighboring
cataract of Rhaiader y Wenol. The head of his wife, Sydney Died in 1639.
, daughter of Sir William Gerard, chancellor of Ireland, is elegantly engraven
on a plate near him: that of their daughter, Mary, wife of Sir Roger Mostyn, on
another. These were the work of Sylvanus Crew. But a half-length of dame Sarah
Win Died in 1671.
, daughter of Sir Thomas Middleton, of Chirkcastle, and wife to Sir Richard
Win, by William Vaughan, is far the most beautiful piece of engraving I ever
saw: yet neither the names of this, or the foregoing artist, are on the records
of the fine arts. Her husband was a gentleman of distinguished merit, groom of
the bedchamber to Charles I. when prince of Wales, and one of his attendants in
the wild expedition into Spain, in 1623. He left behind him an excellent
account of the journey, which was published by Mr. Hearne. He died the 19th of
July 1649, and was interred distant from his country, in the church of
Wimbledon. A fine head of him, by Jansen, is preserved at Wynn-Stay; and the
charming print from it, by that inimitable artist, Mr. Bartolozzi, lays me
under very great obligations to Sir Watkin Williams Win, to whose SIR RICHARD
WIN
portrait of Sir Richard Win LLANRWST BRIDGE.
spontaneous munificence I am indebted for so considerable an ornament to the
book.

A VERY plain stone records the death of his eldest brother, Sir John Win,
knight, who died at Lucca, on his travels, in 1614, and was buried there, in
the parish of St. John. I have seen numbers of his letters, which show him to
have been a very observant man; some of which may, in the Appendix, be an
amusement to the reader.

ONE other tomb, of far greater antiquity than the others, remains to be
mentioned; that of Howel Coytmor, whose figure, armed, is represented in stone.
He was gran-son of the knight at Bettws; owned Gwedir, which was sold by one of
his posterity to the family of the Wynnes,

IN this church is preserved the stone coffin of Llewelyn the Great, with the
sides curiously cut into quatre-foils. That prince was enterred in Conwy abbey;
but at the dissolution, the coffin was removed to this place.

I MADE from Llanrwst two excursions; one to visit Maynan Abbey, MAYNAN ABBEY.
translated hither in 1289, from Conwy, by permission of pope Nicholas Rymer,
ii. 427.
, as he says, at the request of Edward I. and the monks. The king bestowed on
them the township of Maynan, in lieu of Conwy, and confirmed to them all the
revenues and priveleges they before enjoyed, together with various immunities
from taxes, tolls, and duties Dugdale Mon. i. 921. Steven's Transt. 106.
; and besides, gave them the patronage of their ancient church at Conwy Rotulae
Walliae, 90.
The revenues of this house, at the dissolution, were, according to Dugdale,
one hundred and sixty-two pounds fifteen shillings; to Speed, one hundred and
seventy-nine pounds ten shillings and ten pence. The last abbot was Richard
Kyffyn Willis calls him Richard ap Rhys.
, who had a pension of twenty pounds a year. The abbey was granted, in the fifth
of queen Elizabeth, to Elizeus Win; and it is still possessed by his
descendant, lady Win, widow of the late Sir John Win, of Glynllivon. A
large old house, built from the materials of the abbey, still remains.

I RETURNED through Llanrwst, TREFRIW.
and, about two miles beyond, high over the Conwy, visit the village of
Trefriw, where numbers of small vessels are built, and sent down the river at
spring tides. It is said that Llewelyn the Great had near this place a palace;
and, as a proof, several hewn stones have been found, in ploughing a field
called Gardd y Neuodd. The church of Trefriw was originally built by Llewelyn,
for the ease of his princess, who before was obliged to foot it to
Llanrhychwyn, a long walk among the mountains Sebright MS.
.

FROM hence I went back as far as Gwedir, and ascend a very steep hill, leaving
the park belonging to the house on the left. Go over an open space, called
Bwlch yr Haiarn, full of turberies, the providential fuel of the country. Some
lead-mines have been discovered in these parts, but none of any consequence.
The Gale, GALE, OR BOG MYRTLE.
or bog myrtle, abounds here, and perfumes the air with its spicy smell. It is
a northern plant, but does not extend far. It is found in Lapland, Norway, and
Sweden, and several parts of the Alpine situations of Great Britain. It is
called Bwrli, or the emetic plant; and Gnwyrddling, or green plant. Our
countrymen use it as a yellow dye. They lay branches of it upon and under their
beds, to keep off fleas and moths; and also give it in powder or infusion, and
apply it to the abdomen as a vermifuge. It is besides sometimes used as a
succedancum for hops.

THE Sorbus Aucuparia, or mountain ash, is frequent in these parts. The poorer
sort of people make a drink, called diodgriafel, by infusing the berries in
water. In former times, a superstitious use was made of the wood: a piece, made
in form of a cross, was carried in the pocket, as an infallible preservative
against all sorts of fascinations.

AFTER gaining the summit, visit, to the right, Llyn Geirionnydd, a small lake,
noted for having had near it the habitation of the celebrated Taliesin,
TALIESIN.
who flourished about the year 560, in the time of Gwyddno Goronhir, a petty
prince of Cantre'r Gwaelod. The history of our famous bard begins like that of
Moses; for he was found exposed on the water, wrapped in a leathern bag, in a
wear which had been granted to Elphin, son of Gwyddno, for his support. The
young prince, reduced by his extravagance, burst into tears, at finding, as he
imagined, so unprofitable a booty. He took pity on the infant, and caused
proper care to be taken of him. After this, Elphin prospered; and Taliesin,
when he grew up, addressed to him the following moral ode, styled Dyhuddiant
ELPHIN, or ELPHIN'S Consolation; supposed to have been addressed to the prince
by the infant bard, on the night he was found. I take the liberty of using the
beautiful translation, with which a fair countrywoman of mine has lately
favored the world Printed in M.DCC.LXXX. 410. and sold by Dodsley and Elmsley.
.

ELPHIN degrees taw ath wylo
Na chabled, etc. See Mr. Evan Evans's Collection, 150.

I.
ELPHIN! fair as roseate morn,
Cease, O lovely youth! to mourn;
Mortals never should presume
To dispute their Maker's doom.
Feeble race! too blind to scan
What the Almighty deigns for man;
Humble hope be still thy guide,
Steady faith thy only pride,
Then despair will fade away,
Like demons at the approach of day,
CUNLLO'S prayers acceptance gain,
Goodness never sues in vain;
He, who formed the sky, is just,
In him alone, O ELPHIN! trust.
See glist'ning spoils in shoals appear,
Pate smiles this hour on Gwyddno's wear.
II.
ELPHIN fair! the clouds dispell
That on thy lovely visage dwell;
Wipe, ah! wipe the pearly tear,
Nor let thy manly bosom fear;
What good can melancholy give*
It Is bondage in her train to live.
Pungent sorrows doubts proclaim,
Ill suit those doubts a Christian's name;
Thy great Creator's wonders trace,
His love divine to mortal race,
Then doubt, and fear, and pain will fly,
And hope beam radiant in thine eye.
Behold me, least of human kind,
Yet Heaven illumes my soaring mind.
Lo! from the yawning deep I came,
Friend to thy lineage and thy fame.
To point thee out the paths of truth,
To guard from hidden rocks thy youth;
From seas, from mountains, far and wide,
GOD will the good and virtuous guide.
III.
ELPHIN fair! with virtue blessed,
Let not that virtue idly rest;
If roused, 'twill yield thee sure relief,
And banish far unmanly grief:
Think on that Power, whose arm can save,
Who even can snatch thee from the grave;
He bade my harp for thee be strung,
Prophetic lays he taught my tongue.
Though like a slender reed I grow,
Tossed by the billows to and fro',
Yet still, by Him inspired, my song
The weak can raise, confound the strong:
Am not I better, ELPHIN, say,
Than thousands of thy scaly prey In the original, SALMONS.
?
IV.
ELPHIN! fair as roseate morn,
Cease, O lovely youth! to mourn.
Weak on my leathern couch I lie,
Yet heavenly lore I can descry;
Gifts divine my tongue inspire,
My bosom glows celestial fire;
Mark! how it mounts! my lips disclose
The certain fate of ELPHIN'S foes,
Fix thy hopes on Him alone,
Who is the eternal Three in One;
There thy ardent vows be given,
Prayer acceptance meets from Heaven;
Then thou shall adverse fate defy,
And ELPHIN glorious live and die.
FROM this lake I desended a great steep, GLYN LLUGWY.
into Glyn Llugwy, a bottom watered by-the Llugwy, fertile in grass, and varied
by small groves of young oaks; very unlike the great woods which clothed this
place, Dyffryn Mymbyr, Llanberis, and other parts of Snowdon, in the time of
Leland Litin v. 45
. Go through a narrow pass, high above a raging torrent, falling in broken
cascades from rock to rock. At a small distance from hence, enter Dyffryn
Mymbyr, a valley in which woods, and even trees, disappear. The small church of
Capel Kerig, CAPEL KERIG.
and a few scattered houses, give a little life to this dreary tract. Snowdon
and all his sons, Crib Coch, Crib y Distill, Lliweddy yr Aran, and many others,
here burst at once full in view, and make this far the finest approach THE
SUMMIT OF SNOWDON FROM CAPEL CERIG
to our boasted Alps. The boundaries of this vale are, on one side, the base of
the crooked mountain, Moel Siabod; on the other, that of the Gludar Bach, and
several other hills of lesser note. The bottom is meadowy; at this time
enlivened with the busy work of hay harvest, and filled with drags, horses, and
even men and women, laden with hay. The middle is varied with two small lakes,
along whose sides we rode; and at some distance beyond them, near Pont y Gwryd,
quitted our horses, to visit the summit of the Glyder, noted for the report the
editor of Cambden had made, of the singular disposition of the rocks. We
directed our servants to go on to Llanberis, with our steeds. The ascent was
extremely long, steep, and laborious, wet and slippery; and almost the whole
way covered with loose fragments of rocks, beneath which was a continual roar
of waters, seeking their way to the bottom.

OUR pains were fully repaid, on attaining the summit. GLYDER BACH.
The area was covered with groupes of columnar stones, of vast size, from ten
to thirty feet long, lying in all directions: most of them were of a columnar
form, often piled on one another: in other places, half erect, sloping down,
and supported by others, which lie without any order at their bases. The tops
are frequently crowned in the strangest manner with other stones, lying on them
horizontally. One was about twenty-five feet long, and six broad: I climbed up,
and, on stamping it with my foot, felt a strong tremulous motion from end to
end. Another, eleven feet long, and six in circumference in the thinnest part,
was poised so nicely on the point of a rock, that, to appearance, the touch of
a child would overset it. A third enormous mass had the property of a rocking
stone.

MANY of the stones had, bedded in them, shells; and in their neighborhood I
found several pieces of lava. I would therefore rather consider this mountain
to have been a sort of wreck of nature, formed and flung up by some mighty
internal convulsion, which has given these vast groupes of stones fortuitously
such a strange disposition; for had they been the settled strata, bared of
their earth by a long series of rains, they would have retained the regular
appearance, as we observe in all other beds of similar matter.

ONE side of this mountain is formed into a gap, berissce, I may call it, with
sharp rocks, pointing upwards, one above the other, to a great height. In the
midst of a vale far below, rises the singular mountain Trevaen, TREVAEN.
assuming on this side a pyramidal form, naked, and very rugged. A precipice,
from whose summit I surveyed the strange scene, forbad my approach to examine
the nature of its composition; and whether it might not have been suspected of
being formed at the same time with the phoenomena on the top of its neighbor
Glyder: for I have heard that insulated mountains of this form often appear at
the base of greater, which have been supposed to owe their origin to volcanic
force.

FROM Glyder Bach I passed over a plain, above half a mile broad, called Y Waun
Oer, The Chilly Mountainous Flat. Observe from the edge, in a tremendous
hollow, Llyn y Boch Llwyd, or The Lake of the Gray Goat; and in the bottom of
the valley, near the foot of the Trevaen, Llyn Ogwen, noted for its fine trout.

FROM Waen Oer we made a most hazardous descent to Cwm Bochllwyd, and from
thence to Llyn Ogwen. The way from that place into the valley, or rather chasm,
of Nant Frankon, is called The Ben-glog, BEN-GLOG.
the most dreadful horse path in Wales, worked in the rudest manner into steps,
for a great length. On one side, in a deep hollow, formed under fallen rocks,
was once the hiding place of Rys Goch o'r Eryri, or Rhys the Red, of Snowdon; a
mountain bard, patronised by Robert Meredydd, a partizan of Glyndwr, an
outlawed chieftain, of whose fortunes he partook.I do assure the traveller, who
delights in wild nature, that a visit to it up Nant Frankon, from Bangor, will
not be repented. The waters of five lakes dart down the precipice of the middle
of the Benglog, and form the torrent of the Ogwen, which falls into the sea a
few miles lower. This bottom is surrounded with mountains of a stupendous
height, mostly precipitous; the tops of many edged with pointed rocks, I have,
from the depth beneath, seen the shepherds skipping from peak to peak; but the
point of contact was so small, that from this distance they seemed to my
uplifted eyes like beings of another order, floating in the air.

THE Trevaen, from this bottom, makes also a very singular appearance,
resembling a human face, reclined backward. Forehead, nose, lips, and chin, are
very apparent; and you may add, without any great strain of fancy, the beard of
an ancient inhabitant, an arch-druid.

BEGIN another hard ascent to Cwm Idwal, CWM IDWAL.
infamous for the murder of a young prince of that name, son of Owen Gwynedd,
by Dunawt, son of Nefydd Hardd, one of the fifteen tribes of North Wales, to
whom Owen had entrusted the youth, to be fostered, according to the custom of
the country. It was a fit place to inspire murderous thoughts, environed with
horrible precipices, shading a lake, lodged in its bottom. The shepherds fable,
that it is the haunt of Demons; and that no bird dare fly over its damned
water, fatal as that of Avernus. Quam super haud ullae poterant impune volantes
Tendere iter pennis.


NEAR this place is a quarry, noted for excellent hones, of which quantities
are sent annually to London.

A NEW and greater toil is to be undergone in the ascent from Cwm Idwal, to the
heights I had left. The way lies beneath that vast precipice, Castle y Geifr,
or The Castle of the Goats. In some distant age, the ruins of a rocky mountain
formed a road by a mighty lapse. A stream of stones, each of monstrous size,
points toward the Cwm; and are to be clambered over by those only, who possess
a degree of bodily activity, as well as strength of head to bear the sight of
the dreadful hollows frequent beneath them.

OBSERVE, on the right, a stupendous roche fendue, or split rock, called
Twll-Du, TWLL DU.
and The Devil's Kitchen. It is a horrible gap, in the center of a great black
precipice, extending in length about a hundred and fifty yards; in depth, about
a hundred; and only six wide; perpendicularly open to the surface of the
mountain. On surmounting all my difficulties, and taking a little breath, I
ventured to look down this dreadful aperture, and found its horrors far from
being lessened, in my exalted situation; for to it were added the waters of
Llyn y Cwn, impetuously rushing through its bottom.

REACH the Glyder Vawr, KLOGWYN DU.
and pass by the edge of Klogwyn Du Ymben y Glyder, as dreadful a precipice as
any in Snowdonia, hanging over the dire waters of Llyn Idwal. Its neighborhood
is of great note among botanists for rare plants, among which may be reckoned
the Saxifraga Nivalis, Bulbocodium, and the Lichen Islandicus, The last is of
singular use to the Icelanders. A decoction of the fresh leaves in water serves
them in the spring as a powerful cathartic; and yet, when dried, changes its
quality, and if grinded to powder, is a common food, either made into bread, or
boiled with milk, or water. Haller and Scopoli also mention its use, at their
time, in Vienna, in coughs and consumptions, made into broth, or gruel
Lightfoot's Fl. Sectica, ii. 83.
.

THE prospect from this mountain is very noble. GLYDER VAWR.
Snowdon is seen to great advantage; the deep vale of Llanberris and its lakes,
Nant Frankon, and variety of other singular views. The plain which forms the
top is strangely covered with loose stones like the beach of the sea; in many
places crossing one another, in all directions, and entirely naked. Numbers of
groupes of stones are placed almost erect, sharp pointed, and in sheafs: all
are weather-beaten, time-eaten, and honey-combed, and of a venerable gray
color. The elements seemed to have warred against this mountain: rains have
washed, lightnings torn, the very earth deserted it, and the winds made it the
constant object of their fury. The shepherds make it the residence of storms,
and style a part of it Carnedd y Gwynt, or The Eminence of Tempests.

THIS mountain is connected to the lesser Glyder by the Weyn Oer: the traveller
therefore has his choice of ways to these wondrous mountains; but the most:
preferable for ease, is the road I descend into the vale of Llanberis. In my
way, pass close by a rugged brow of a hill, which I think is Rhiw y Glyder,
recorded by LLWYD and RAY, for its variety of plants. From thence descend by
Oleu Fawr.

SOON after, visit the small lake, called Llyn y Cwn, LLYN Y CWN.
noted for the tale of Giraldus; who informs us, that in his days, the three
kinds of fish it yielded, trouts, perch, and eels, were monocular, every one
wanting the left eye. At present, there is not a fish in it to disprove the
relation. To make amends, the botanist will find in it the Lobelia Dortmanna,
Sabularia Aquatica, and Isoetis Lacustris; and not far from it, the Juncus
Triglumis, common to this, and some of the Highland mountains. The Hieracium
Alpinum, Ruhus Saxatilis, Solidago Cambrica, and other rare plants, are to be
met with. In the course of this part of the descent, leave o^ the right Llider
Vawr and Llider Vach, two great mountains, part of the boundaries of
Nant-Beris; and arrive in that vale by Caunant yr Esgar, or The Dingle of the
Enemy.

THIS is a very picturesque vale, NANT-BERIS.
bounded by the base of VIEW in NANTBERIS
Snowdon, Cefn Cwm Gafr, the two Glyders, and two Lliders, each of them
first-rate mountains. It is strait, and of nearly an equal breadth, filled by
some meadows, and two magnificent lakes, which communicate to each other by
means of a river. The venerable oaks, spoken of by Leland, are no more.
Avarice, or dissipation, and its constant follower, poverty, have despoiled
much of our principality of its leafy beauties. Among the numberless errors of
this performance, I fear the word is clothed with trees, must be supplied by
the traveller with WAS. But this shadeless tract is still worthy his attention.
A road, once a succession of rude and stony stairs, made with much labor, ran
on one side, high above the lake, and was often cut out of the rock, to form
the way. This is, I am now informed, changed into a road, which too much
facilitates the approach, and lessens its propriety, and its agreement with the
wild environs.

ON the loftiest part, CASTLE DOLBADERN.
over one of the lakes, stand the remains of Castle Dolbadern, consisting of a
round tower, and a few fragments of walls. It was constructed with the thin
laminated stones of the country, cemented with very strong mortar, without
shells. The inner diameter of the tower is only twenty-six feet. This seems to
have been built to defend the pass into the interior parts of Snowdonia; and it
was likewise used as a state prison. The founder is unknown to me; but it was
evidently a Welsh prince.

IN this valley are two groupes of wretched houses. The farthest is near the
end of the upper lake, with its church, dedicated to St. Peris, who was, as we
are told, a cardinal. Here is to be seen the well of the saint, enclosed with a
wall. The sybil of the place attends, and divines your fortune by the
appearance or nonappearance of a little fish, which lurks in some of its holes.

FROM hence I took a ride above the lakes, to their lower extremity. The upper
is the lesser, but much the most beautiful piece of water. It is said to be in
places a hundred and forty yards deep; to have abounded with char, before they
were reduced by the streams flowing from the copper mines, which had been
worked on the sides of the hills. The lower lake is about a mile and a half
long, narrows gradually into the form of a river, called the Rythell, and flows
in a diffused channel to Caernarvon, where it assumes the name of Seiont.

NEAR this end of the lake lived a celebrated personage, MARGARET UCH EVAN.
whom I was disappointed in not finding at home. This was Margaret uch Evan, of
Penllyn, the last specimen of the strength and spirit of the ancient British
fair. This extraordinary female was the greatest hunter, shooter, and fisher of
her time. She kept a dozen at lest of dogs, terriers, grehounds, and spaniels,
all excellent in their kinds. She killed more foxes in one year, than all the
confederate hunts do in ten: rowed stoutly, and was queen of the lake: fiddled
excellently, and knew all our old music: did not neglect the mechanic arts, for
she was a very good joiner: and notwithstanding she was seventy years of age,
was the best wrestler in the country, and few young men dared to try a fall
with her. Some years ago, she had a maid of congenial qualities; but death,
that mighty hunter, at last earthed this faithful companion of here is. I must
not forget, that all the neighboring bards paid their addresses to Margaret,
and celebrated her exploits in pure British verse.

ABOUT half a mile farther, I visited the remains of Lls Dinorwig, a house said
to have been one of the palaces of prince Llewelyn ap Gryffydd: the walls high
and strong; the hall twenty-four yards long; and before the house is a deep
ditch, over which had probably been a drawbridge. Not very far from hence is a
spot, called Rhiw'r Cyrn, or The Brow of the Horns; where, according to old
usage, an officer stood and blew his horn, to give notice to the household of
the approach of their master, or to summon the vassals to assemble on all
emergent occasions.

THIS country is part of the woodless flat, BRITISH POSTS.
between the mountains and the Menai. Its want of strength is supplied with
several posts, fortified in the British manner. Dinas Dinorwig, about half a
mile south of the church of Llandeniolen In the churchyard is an yew tree,
twenty-seven feet in girth.
, is the chief. The area is very large, surrounded with an agger of small
stones, backed by another of very large ones: then succeeds a deep ditch, a
rampart of earth, a second vast ditch, and a third rampart: within the area is
a circle of stones, the post probably of the commander in chief.

IN our way from hence, we passed by another, called Pen y Gaer; and soon
after, by a smaller, called Bryn y Castrelau, surrounded with a single wall;
and on a rising on the other side of the Rythell, is another, named Caer Cwm y
Glo, or Caer Carreg-y-Fran, from which had been (as we were informed) a paved
way to Lls Dinorwig. I may here add, that after the death of Llewelyn, Edward
I. bestowed that palace on Sir Gryffydd Llwyd, the same gentleman who first
brought him the news of the birth of his son Edward of Caernarvon.

RETURN by the same road, and, after refreshing myself with a night's rest at
Mr. Close's, agent to the mines in Llanberris, early in the morning begin our
ascent to the highest peak, of Snowdon, under the guidance of Hugh Shone, whom
I beg leave to recommend as a most able conductor. Keep upon the side of the
lake for a considerable way; then turn to the left, and see, not far from the
road, Caunant Mawr, CAUNANT MAWR.
a noble cataract, precipitating over two vast rocks into two most horrible
chasms. Near this place were found several beads; some of glass, and one of jet.

ASCEND, above Cwm Brwynog, a very deep bottom, fertile in Gwair y Rhosydd,
which is composed chiefly of different kinds of rushes, particularly Juncus
Squarrosus, the moss-rush, Scirpus Caspitosus, the heath club rush, Schaenus
Nigricans, the black bog rush, and Carexes, intermixed with few kinds of grass.
The hay which the lower meadows produce, is very different in quality, GRASSES.
being remarkably fine and soft; and consists in great part of the fine bent
grass, Agrostis Capillaris. As we are on the subject of grasses, it may be
pleasing to observe, how some of them wonderfully change their appearance, as
they ascend the higher hills: the turfy hair grass, Aira Caespitosa, sheep's
fescue grass, Pestuca Ovina, Alpine meadow grass, Poa Alpina, and some others,
which, in the low countries, where they enjoy the due influence of the sun, and
length of summer, to ripen their seeds, are propagated in the common manner
that grasses are; as they reach a more exalted situation, where they want
continuance of summer, and the necessary power of that enlivening body, to
perfect their seeds, become viviparous; that is, the rudiment of the Germen
vegetates, and shoots into blade in the cup, from whence falling, it readily
takes root, and grows; a kind and providential dispensation, for the advantage
of those colder climates, which are less favorable to vegetation!

THIS mountanous tract scarcely yields any corn. Its produce is cattle and
sheep, which, during summer, keep very high in the mountains, followed by their
owners, with their families, who reside in that season in Havodtys, SUMMER
DWELLINGS.
or summer dairy-houses, as the farmers in the Swiss Alps do in their Sennes.
These houses consist of a long low room, with a hole at one end, to let out the
smoke from the fire, which is made beneath. Their furniture is very simple:
stones are the substitutes of stools; and the beds are of hay, ranged along the
sides. They manufacture their own clothes; and dye their cloths with Cenn du y
Cerrig, or Lichen Omphaloides; and another Cenn, the Lichen Parietinus; native
dies, collected from the rocks. During summer, the men pass their time either
in harvest work, or in tending their herds: the women in milking, or making
butter and cheese. For their own use, they milk both ewes and goats, and make
cheese of the milk, for their own consumption. The diet of these mountaneers is
very plain, consisting of butter, cheese, and oat-bread, or Bara Cyrch: their
drink whey: not but they have a reserve of a few bottles of very strong beer,
by way of cordial, in illness. They are people of good understanding, wary and
circumspect; usually tall, thin, and of strong constitutions, from their way of
living. Toward winter, they descend to their Hen Dref, or old dwelling, where
they lead, during winter, a vacant life.

IN the course of our ascent, saw on the left, above the Cwm, Moel y Cynhorion,
or The Hill of Council. Pass through Bwlch y Maes-cwm, and skirt the side of
Snowdon, till we reach Bwlch y Cwm Brwynog, where the ascent becomes very
difficult, by reason of its vast steepness. People here usually quit their
horses. We began a toilsome march, clambering among the rocks. On the left were
the precipices over Cwm Brwynog, with Llyn du yr Arddwy at their foot. On our
right were those over the small lakes Llyn Glass, Llyn y-Nadroedd, and Llyn
Coch. THE HIGH LAKES.
The last is the highest on this side of the mountain; and on whose margins, we
were told, that, in fairy days, those diminutive gentry kept their revels. This
space between precipice and precipice, forms a short, and no very agreeable
isthmus, till we reached a verdant expanse, which gave us some respite, before
we labored up another series of broken crags: after these, is a second smooth
tract, which reaches almost to the summit, TOP OF SNOWDON.
which, by way of pre-eminence, is styled Y WYDDFA, or The Conspicuous. It
rises almost to a point, or, at best, there is but room for a circular wall of
loose stones, within which travelers usually take their repast.

THE mountain from hence seems propped by four vast buttresses; between which
are four deep Cwms, or hollows: each, excepting one, had one or more lakes,
lodged in its distant bottom The nearest was Fsynnon Las, FYNNON LAS.
or The Green Well, lying immediately below us. One of the company had the
curiosity to descend a very bad way to a jutting rock, that impended over the
monstrous precipice; and he seemed like Mercury ready to take his flight from
the summit of Atlas. The waters of Ffynnon Las, from this height, appeared
black and unfathomable, and the edges quite green. From thence is a succession
of bottoms, surrounded by the most lofty and rugged hills, the greatest part of
whose sides are quite mural, and form the most magnificent amphitheatre in
nature. The Wyddfa is on one side; Crib y Distill, with its serrated tops, on
another; Crib Coch, a ridge of fiery redness, appears beneath the preceding;
and opposite to it is the boundary called the Lliwedd. Another very singular
support to this mountain is Y Clawdd Coch, rising into a sharp ridge, so
narrow, as not to afford breadth even for a path.

THE view from this exalted situation is unbounded. In a former tour August
25th Old Style.
, I saw from it the county of Chester, the high hills of Yorkshire, part of the
north of England, Scotland, and Ireland: a plain view of the Isle of Man; and
that of Anglesea lay extended like a map beneath us, with every rill visible. I
took much pains to see this prospect to advantage; sat up at a farm on the west
till about twelve, and walked up the whole way. The night was remarkably fine
and starry: toward morn, the stars faded away, and left a short interval of
darkness, which was soon dispersed by the dawn of day. The body of the sun
appeared most distinct, with the rotundity of the moon, before it rose high
enough to render its beams too brilliant for our sight. The sea which bounded
the western part was gilt by its beams, first in slender streaks, at length
glowed with redness. The prospect was disclosed to us like the gradual drawing
up of a curtain in a theater. We saw more and more, till the heat became so
powerful, as to attract the mists from the various lakes, which in a slight
degree obscured the prospect. The shadow of the mountain was flung many miles,
and showed its bicapitated form; the Wyddfa making one, Crib y Distill the
other head. I counted this time between twenty and thirty lakes, either in this
county, or Meirionyddshire. The day proved so excessively hot, that my journey
cost me the skin of the lower part of my face, before I reached the
resting place, after the fatigue of the morning.

ON this day August 15th, New Style.
, the sky was obscured very soon after I got up. A vast mist enveloped the
whole circuit of the mountain. The prospect down was horrible. It gave an idea
of numbers of abysses, concealed by a thick smoke, furiously circulating around
us. Very often a gust of wind formed an opening in the clouds, which gave a
fine and distinct visto of lake and valley. Sometimes they opened only in one
place; at others, in many at once, exhibiting a most strange and perplexing
sight of water, fields, rocks, or chasms, in fifty different places. They then
closed at once, and left us involved in darkness: in a small space, they would
separate again, and fly in wild eddies round the middle of the mountains, and
expose, in parts, both tops and bases clear to our view. We descended from this
various scene with great reluctance; but before we reached our horses, a
thunder storm overtook us. Its rolling among the mountains was inexpressibly
awful: the rain uncommonly heavy. We re-mounted our horses, and gained the
bottom with great hazard. The little rills, which on our ascent trickled along
the gullies on the sides of the mountain, were now swelled into torrents; and
we and our steeds passed with the utmost risque of being swept away by these
sudden waters. At length we arrived safe, yet sufficiently wet and weary, to
our former quarters.

IT is very rare that the traveller gets a proper day to ascend the hill;
ATTRACTION OF CLOUDS.
for it often appears clear, but by the evident attraction of the clouds by
this lofty mountain, it becomes suddenly and unexpectedly enveloped in mist,
when the clouds have just before appeared very remote, and at great heights. At
times, I have observed them lower to half their height, and notwithstanding
they had been dispersed to the right and to the left, yet they have met from
both sides, and united to involve the summit in one great obsscurity.

THE quantity of water which flows from the lakes of Snowdonia, RIVERS.
is very considerable; so much, that I doubt not but collectively they would
exceed the waters of the Thames, before it meets the flux of the ocean.

THE reports of the height of this noted hill have been very differently given.
HEIGHT.
A Mr. Caswell, who was employed by Mr. Adams, in 1682, in a survey of Wales,
measured it by instruments made by the directions of Mr. Flamstead: Wren's
Parentalia, i. 253. I suppose; Caswell was employed by Mr. Adams, author of the
Index Villeris.
; and asserts its height to have been twelve hundred and forty yards: but for
the honor of our mountain I am sorry to say, that I must give greater credit to
the experiments made of late years, which have sunk it to one thousand one
hundred and eighty-nine yards and one foot, reckoning from the quay at
Caernarvon to the highest peak.

THE stone that composes this, STRATA.
and indeed the greatest part of Snowdonia, is excessively hard. Large coarse
crystals are often found in the fissures, and very frequently cubic pyritae,
the usual attendants on Alpine tracts. These are also frequented by the rock
ouzel, a mountain bird; and some of the lakes are stocked with char and
gwyniads, Alpine fish. The ancient inhabitant, the goat, decreases daily in
value, since the decline of orthodoxal wigs, to which its snowy hair
universally contributed. Still large flocks are kept for the dairy, and milked
with great regularity.

BOTANY is not within my province. BOTANY.
I shall therefore say nothing more of the plants, than that those species
which LINNAEUS so very expressively styles. Aethereae, are entirely confined to
the higher parts of the mountains; and notwithstanding the seeds must be blown
downwards, they never vegetate in the lower parts, which are deserted by
certain plants, which are natives of a higher tract of the same hill.

THE animals of these regions are chiefly foxes. Stags were found here in the
days of Leland, in such numbers, as to destroy the little corn which the
farmers attempted to sow: but they were extirpated before the year 1626 Gwedir
MSS.
. A ROYAl FOREST.
Snowdon being a royal forest, warrants were issued for the killing of the
deer. I have seen one from the duke of Suffolk, dated April the 30th, 1552; and
another, in the first year of queen Elizabeth, signed by Robert To^nesend; and
a third, in 1561, by Henry Sydney. The second was addressed to the master of
the game, ranger and keeper of the queen's highness forest of SNOWDON, in the
county of Caernarvon. The last extended the forest into the counties of
Meirionydd and Anglesea, with the view of gratifying the rapacity of the
favorite, Dudley, earl of Leicester, who had by letters patent been appointed
chief ranger of the forest. In consequence, he tyrannized over the counties
with great insolence. A set of informers immediately acquainted him, that most
of the freeholders estates might be brought within the boundaries.
Commissioners were appointed to enquire of the encroachments and concealments
of lands within the forest. Juries were empannelled; but their returns were
rejected by the commissioners, as unfavorable to the earl's designs. The jurors
performed an honest part, and found a verdict for the country. Leland, who, no
longer before than the reign of Henry VIII. had gone over this tract, as he did
most of England, under the royal commission; and yet reports, that all Cregery,
i. e. Snowdon, is in Caernarvonshire, and no part in Merionethshire; though,
says he, that shire be montanius Itin V. 43.
.

A NEW commission was then directed to Sir Richard Bulkeley, of Baron Hill,
Anglesea, Sir William Herbert, and others; but this, by the firmness of Sir
Richard, was likewise soon superseded. But, in 1578, another was appointed,
dependent on the favorite. A packed jury was directed to appear at Beaumaris,
who went on the same day to view the marsh of Malltraeth, ten miles distant;
and found that marsh to be in the forest of Snowdon, notwithstanding it was in
another county, and divided from the forest by an arm of the sea; because the
commissioners had told them, that they had met with an indictment in the
exchequer of Gaernarvon (which they had the year before broke open and
ransacked) by which they had discovered that a stag had been rouzed in the
forest of Snowdon, in Caernarvonshire, was pursued to the banks of the Menai;
that it swam over that branch of the sea, and was killed at Malltraeth INFRA
forestam nostram de Snowdon. The jury appeared in the earl's livery, blue, with
ragged staves on the sleeves; and were ever after branded with the title of the
black jury, who sold their country.

SIR Richard Bulkeley, not the lest daunted with this decision, continued
steady in his opposition to the tyrant; and laid before the Queen the
odiousness of the proceedings, and the grievances her loyal subjects, the
Welsh, labored under, by the commission, insomuch, in 1579, her highness was
pleased, by proclamation at Westminster, to recall it. Leicester, disappointed
in his views, pursued Sir Richard with the utmost inveteracy: he even accused
him of a concern in Babington's conspiracy. BEFORE GOD, says the Queen, we will
be sworn upon the evangelists, he never intended us any harm; and so ran to the
bible, and kissed it, saying, We shall not commit him: we have brought him up
from a boy From the communication of Paul Panton, esquire
.

Snowdon was held as sacred by the ancient Britons, SACRED.
as Parnassus was by the Greeks, and Ida by the Cretans. It is still said, that
whosoever slept upon Snowdon, would wake inspired, as much as if he had taken a
nap on the hill of Apollo. The Britons, in very early times, worshipped
mountains and rivers; Gildas.
but that does not appear from the triambics quoted by our able antiquary, Mr.
Rowlands Rowlands, 253.
for the words Eiry Mynydd are applicable, not to this mountain in particular,
but to all which are covered with snow. There are multitudes of these
triambics, each ending with a moral reflection, the work of Llywarch Heen; of
which the following may serve as an example: Eiry mynydd gwangeus jar;
Gochwiban gwynt ar dalar;
IN YR ING, GORAN YW'R CAR. Mr. Rhys Jones's Coll. of Welsh Poems, p. 13.
.
While the hill is clad with snow,
Fowls for food scream out below,
Fierce the winds on plough-lands blow.
WHEN DEEP GRIEF AFFECTS YOUR MIND,
BALMY CURE FROM KIN YOU WILL FIND.


THE Welsh had always the strongest attachment to the tract of Snowdon. It was,
say they the appertenance of the principality of Wales, which the prince and
his predecessors held since the time of Brute. Edward I. was told by the
inhabitants of Snowdon, in the treaty he held with our countrymen, in the year
1281, that even should their prince be inclined to gratify the king, in
yielding him possession, they would not do homage to strangers, of whose
tongue, manners, and laws, they were ignorant Powel, 369.
. Our princes had, in addition to their title, that of LORD OF SNOWDON. They
had five hardy barons within the tract, who held of them. Such was the
importance of this strong region, that when Llewelyn was at the last extremity,
he rejected the proposal of Edward, of a thousand a year, and some honorable
county in England, well knowing that his principality must terminate with the
cession.

No sooner had Edward effected his conquest, FAIR HELD THERE.
than he held a triumphal fair upon this our chief of mountains; and adjourned
to finish the joy of his victory, by solemn tournaments on the plains of Nevyn.

I SHALL take my leave of Snowdonia, NAME.
with some remarks on the name, and the weather. The first is a literal
translation By the Saxons first into SNAWDUNE. Sax. Chr. 203.
of the ancient appellation, Creigie'r Eira, The Snowy Mountains, from the
frequency of snow upon them. Niphates, in Armenia, and Imaus, in Tartary,
derive their name from the same circumstance. Some have supposed it to be taken
from Creigiau'r Eryri, or The Eagle Rocks; but that bird appears very seldom
among them. The other circumstance is constant: not that it is to be imagined
that they are covered with snow in some part or other the whole year, as has
been idly fabled; there being frequently whole weeks, even in winter, in which
they are totally free.

THE earliest appearance of snow, WEATHER.
is commonly between the middle of October, and the beginning of November: the
falls which happen then, are usually washed away with the rains, and the hills
remain clear till Christmas. Between that time and the end of January, the
greatest falls happen; which are succeeded by others, about the latter end of
April, or beginning of May, which remain in certain places till the middle of
June, in which month it has been seen of the depth of some feet. It has even
happened, that the greatest fall has been in April, or beginning of May; and
that never fails happening, when the preceding winter has had the smallest
falls. But the fable of Giraldus, concerning the continuance of snow the whole
year, is totally to be exploded.

NEAR the end of Nant-beris, pass beneath Glyder Vawr, and observe the strata
of a columnar form, high above our heads. At times, vast fragments of this
tremendous rock tumble down, the ruins are scattered about the base, and
exhibit awful specimens of the frequent lapses. One is styled the Cromlech, for
having accidentally fallen on other stones, it remains lifted from the earth,
with a hollow beneath, resembling one of those Druidical antiquities. The
length of the incumbent stone is sixty feet: the breadth forty-six: the
thickness sixteen. The hollow is said once to have been occupied by an old
woman; but now serves for a sheep pen.

THE ascent from hence is either over loose stones, or solid staircase; and is
exceedingly steep. It is a singular road, lying in a stupendous chasm, bounded
for above a mile by nearly equidistant precipices, of prodigious height; on one
side belonging to the Glyders, on the other by the parts of Snowdon.

REFRESH ourselves on a spot called The Gorphwysfa, GORPHWYSFA.
or The Resting Place. At a small distance from which is Bwlchy Gwyddyl, or The
Pass of the Irishmen; from whence is a singular view of Dyffryn Mymbyr, the
chasm we had left; and far below us, the picturesque vale of Nant Gwynnan, the
scene of many a bloody skirmish in the time of Edward IV. between William earl
of Pembroke, and the Welsh Lancastrians, under Jevan ap Robert.

DESCEND a very steep road, CWM DYLI.
into that part called Cwm Dyli; where we quitted our horses, and began a most
toilsome journey to visit the hidden vales lodged in the bosom of the
mountains. We began with clambering up the rugged face of a rock, broken into a
multitude of short precipices, and divided in the middle by a cataract, the
discharge of the waters from the Alpine lakes. After about a quarter of a
mile's labor, CWM DYLI UCHA.
we reached Cwm y Cwm Dyli, a flat tract of hay ground, watered by a river, and
filled with hay-makers; the farmer and his family being resident here in his
Havodtu, for the summer season. After dining with them on curds and whey, we
kept along the river's side, and found opposed to us another front, rugged as
the former, and attended with a cataract. This was surmounted with equal
difficulty. We found, on arriving at the top, a bottom a mile in length, filled
with Llyn Llydaw, LLYN LLYDAW.
a fine lake, winding beneath the rocks, and vastly indented by rocky
projections, here and there jutting into it. In it was one little island, the
haunt of black-backed Gulls, which breed here, and, alarmed by such unexpected
visitants, broke the silence of this sequestered place by their deep screams.
We continued our walk, ascending along a narrow path above the lake, as far as
the extremity; then descending, reached the opposite side, in order to
encounter a third descent, as arduous as the preceding. This brought us into
the horrible crater, immediately beneath the great precipice of the Wyddfa, in
which is lodged Ffynnen Las. FFYNNON LAS.
Its situation is the most dreadful, surrounded by more than three parts of a
circle, with the most horrible precipices of the Wyddfa, Crib y Distill, and
Crib Coch, with the vast mural steeps of Lliwedd, continued over the other lake
and Cwm Dyli. In the Lliwedd was a strange break, called Bwlch y Saethau, or
The Pass of the Arrows; probably a station for hunters, to watch the wanderings
of the deer.

THE margins of Ffynnon Las here appeared to be shallow and gravelly. The
waters had a greenish cast; but what is very singular, the rocks reflected into
them seemed varied with stripes of the richest colors, like the most beautiful
lutestrings; and changed almost to infinity.

HERE we observed the Wheat-ear, WHEAT-EAR
a small and seemingly tender bird; and yet is almost the only small one, or
indeed the only one, except the Rock Ouzel, or Mwyalchen y Graig, that
frequents these heights* the reason is evidently the want of food.

WE descended from this dreary scene, on the other side of the hill, CRIB COCH.
above Llyn Llydaw, having the tremendous red precipices of Crib Coch high
above us, rising into a mere ridge, serrated, or rather herissee, its whole
length. The face of many of the rocks were marked with large veins of coarse
white crystal; and others, especially Crib Coch, were varied with the deep
green of the dwarf Alpine juniper. On attaining the top of the hills, above the
lower end of the lake, we descend to the Gorphwysfa, where we found our horses,
and returned once more into Nant-Gwinan.

THIS is the most beautiful vale in Snowdonia, NANT GWYNAR
varied with woods, lakes, river, and meadows; besides the most august
boundaries: being guarded on each side by vast mountains, such as Crib Du, or
part of Mynydd Nanmer, the Aran, Lliwedd, Dduallt, and Wenallt, extending about
five miles to the church of Beddkelert. On the left, we passed by Havod Lwyvog,
the seat of the late Meyric Meredydd, esquire surrounded with large woods. A little
farther is the pretty lake Llyn Gwynan, about three quarters of a mile long,
and near it are the ruins of a chapel of the same name. The chapel had been an
ease to the church of Beddkelert, and was supported by a stipend of five pounds
a year from the estate of Gwedir. It is said to have been founded by John
Williams, grandson of John Coetmor, ap Meredydd, ap Jevan, ap Robert, of
Keselgyfarch and Gwedir, and goldsmith in London; the same who is reported to
have furnished Michael Drayton with Leland's papers.

NEAR the end of the lake, the valley grows so contracted, as to form only a
narrow straight; but almost instantly opens again into a fine expanse, chiefly
filled with the beautiful Llyn Dinas. Beyond that, is a tract of meads,
chequered with woods, and watered by the river created by the various lakes;
but retains the name of Avon Glas-Lyn, from the lofty Ffynnon-Las, from which
it originates.

AT the bottom rises a vast rock, DINAS EMRIS.
insulated, and clothed with wood; the famous Dinas Emris, from early times
celebrated in British story; for here Prophetic Merlin sat, when to the
British king
The changes long to come, auspiciously he told.


DINAS EMRYS.


WHEN Vortigern found himself unable to contest with the treacherous Saxons,
ITS LEGEND.
whom he had, in the year 449, invited into Britain, he determined, by the
advice of his magicians, on building an impregnable fortress in Snowdon. He
collected the materials, which all disappeared in one night. The prince,
astonished at this, convened again his wise men. They assured him, his building
would never stand, unless it was sprinkled with the blood of a child born
without the help of a father. The realm was ransacked: at length, one of his
emissaries overheard some boys at play reproach another, and call him an
unbegotten knave. The child and his mother were brought before the king. She
confessed he was the offspring of an Incubus; a species of being, now unhappily
out of all credit. The boy, whose name was Merlin, was ordered to be
sacrificed; but on confounding all the magicians with his questions, and
explaining the cause of the miscarriage, got his liberty Nennius, c. xl. xlii.
xliii.
, and to that mighty king, which rashly undertook
A strong walled tower to rear, those earthly spirits that shook
The great foundation still, in dragon's horrid shape,
That dreaming wizard told, making the mountain gape
With his most powerful charms, to view those caverns deep;
And from the the top of Brith, so high and wondrous steep,
Where Dinas Emris stood, showed where the serpents fought,
The WHITE that tore the RED; from whence the prophet wrought
The Britons sad decay, then shortly to ensue Draiton's Pel^^lb. SONG X.
.


THIS is the poetical translation of the legend. Merlin, MERLIN.
or Merd^il^ Emris, or Ambrosius, was in fact the son of a noble Roman, of the
same name. His mother, a Vestal, to save her life and honor Powel's Notes on
Giraldus Itin. Cambriae, lib. I. c. x.
, invented the fable of his father, which was swallowed by the credulity of the
times. Merlin was an able mathematician and astronomer, and deeply read in all
the learning of his age. The vulgar, as usual, ascribed all he did to art
magic; and his discovery that Vortigern had begun to found his castle on a
morass, was immediately said to have been attended with most portentous
circumstances. Numbers of prophecies were attributed to him; the repetition of
which is said to have been forbidden by the council of Trent.

THREE sides of this famous rock are precipitous. On the top is a large area;
on the accessible part of which are two great ramparts of stone, and within is
the ruin of a stone building, ten yards long: the walls are dry, but strong.
Since it is certain that Vortigern, after his misfortunes, retired to the
Snowdon hills, and died not very remote from them, it is possible he might have
selected this for his strong-hold, as it is admirably adapted for that purpose,
and nearly fills the straight of the valley, and Merlin Ambrosius might have
given to it the name of Emris. A place close by, styled Cell y Dewiniaid, or
The Cell of the DIVINERS, allusive to the magicians of Vortigern's court, is
another circumstance which favors the history of this celebrated supposed
prophet.

FROM hence is a pleasant, BEED KELERT.
but short ride, near the river, to the village of Bed Kelert, seated in a
beautiful tract of meadows, at BEDDKELERT
the junction of three vales, near the conflux of the Glass Lyn and the Colwyn,
which flows through Nant Colwyn, a vale that leads to Caernarvon. Its situation
was the fittest in the world to inspire religious meditation, amidst lofty
mountains, woods, and murmuring streams. The church is small, yet the loftiest
in Snowdonia. The east window consists of three narrow slips. The roof is neat;
and there yet remains some very pretty fretwork. A side chapel is supported by
two neat pillars, and gothic arches. I could discover no tombs, nor any thing
worth transcribing, but the following epitaph: Infra jacet corpus Evani Lloyd,
de
Hafod Lwyfog, Armigeri, qui
Inhumatus fuit paterno et avito
Tumulo, sexto die Idus Maiae.
A. D. 1678. Annos Natus 72.


THIS church had been conventual, PRIORY.
belonging to a priory of Augustines, dedicated to St. Mary. There is reason to
suppose they might have been of that class which was called Gilbertines, and
consisted of both men and women, who lived under the same roof, but strictly
separated from each other by a wall. The cause of my suspicion is, that I
discovered a piece of ground near the church, called Dool y Llein, or The
Meadow of the Nun.

BED KELERT had been the most ancient foundation in all the country, excepting
Bardsey. Tanner ascribes it to our last prince; but it must have been long
before his days, there being a recital of a charter for certain lands bestowed
on it by Llewelyn the Great, Rymer, ii. 316.
, who began his reign in 1194. It was favored in the same manner by others of
the succeeding princes. David ap Llewelyn bestowed on it some lands in Pennant
Gwernogan, belonging to Tudor ap Madoc, to which the prince had no right. This
occasioned a suit between the sons of Tudor, and Philip, prior of the house,
before William de Grandison and R. de Stanedon, at Caernarvon, when a verdict
was given against the convent Sebright MS.
. The prior had for his support the grange of Llecheidior and part of a mill,
the grange of Fentidilt and village of Gwehelyn, the grange of Tre'rbeirdd, one
plough land, and a certain share of the bees. The esteem which these insects
were held in by the ancient Britons, on account of their producing the
nectareous Medd, was so great, that they considered them as created in
PARADISE; that when they quitted it on the fall of man, they were blessed by
God himself; and therefore, no mass ought to be celebrated, but by the light of
their wax Leges Walliae, 254.
.

THE prior had besides, an allowance of fifty cows and twent-two sheep. The
expenses of the house must have been large. It lay on the great road from
England and West Wales into North Wales, and from Ireland and North Wales into
England. In order to enable this place to keep its usual hospitality, after it
had suffered, in 1283, by a casual fire, Edward I. most munificently repaired
all the damages; and bishop Anian, about the year 1286, for the encouragement
of other benefactors, remitted to all such who were truly repentant of their
sins, forty days of any penance inflicted on them Rymer, ii, 317.
.

IN 1535, it was bestowed, by Henry VIII. on the abbey of Chertsey, in Surry;
and in 1537, it was given with the last, as an appertenance to that of Bisham,
in Berkshire Dugdale Monast. iii. 21.
. On the dissolulution, the king gave to the family of the Bodvels, all the
lands in Caernarvonshire which belonged to this priory; and all those in
Anglesey, to that of the Prydderchs, excepting the township of Tre'rbeirdd.
Rowland's MSS.
. The revenues of Bed Kelert were valued by Dugdale at seventy pounds three
shillings and eight pence; by Speed, at sixty-nine pounds three shillings and
eight pence. Edward Conway is mentioned as last prior. There are not the lest
relics of the house.

IN order to complete the mountain ramble, as far as was in my power, I made an
excursion from this village up a narrow vale. Ascend a steep road, amidst a
thin hanging wood; and see from the road multitudes of black cattle, desending
from all parts, on their way to a neighboring fair. The vale expands; is
watered by the Colwyn, which flows from a small lake we passed by, called Llyn
Cader. LLYN CADER.
Left on the right another ascent to the Wyddfa, where its base extends to a
considerable breadth, and is far less steep than that on the side of
Nant-Beris. We soon reached the pretty lake of Cawellyn, noted for its Char.
The mountains hereabouts approach near to each other. On the right, Mynydd Mawr
forms a striking feature: its top is smooth, but its front is formed into a
most immense precipice, retiring inwards in a semicircular shape. Moel Eilio,
is another mountain of a stupendous bulk, most regularly rounded, and of a
beautiful verdure. At Bettus Garmon, a village with a church dedicated to St.
Germanus, the scene changes into a range of beautiful meadows, watered by a
rapid stream.

I HERE turn my back on the humble flats, and resume my former road, till I had
passed Cawellyn. Not far beyond that lake, LLYN Y DYWARCHEN.
I turned to the right, to visit Llyn y Dywarchen, or The Lake of the Sod, long
since celebrated by the hyperbolical pen of Giraldus Itin. Cambr. lib. ii. c.
ix. p. 871.
, for its insula erratica, its wandering island, as he calls it. That little
lake is seated in the middle of a turbery; and at this time actually exhibited
the phenomenon recorded by our romantic historian. It had on it a floating
island, of an irregular shape, and about nine yards long. It appeared to be
only a piece of the turbery, undermined by the water, torn off, and kept
together by the close entangling of the roots, which form that species of
ground. It frequently is set in motion by the wind; often joins its native
banks; and, as Giraldus says, cattle are frequently surprised on it, and by
another gale carried a short voyage from the shore.

CONTINUE our journey to Drws y Coed, DRWS Y COED.
or The Door of the Wood, a pass toward Clynnog. It is bounded by vast
mountains: on one side by Tal Mignedd; on the other, by a great clift of Mynydd
Mawr. Some years ago, here were considerable adventures for copper, of the
yellow kind; and in the rocks were sometimes found some very thin laminae of
the native metal. I was tempted here to exceed a little the limits of my Alpine
tour; for now the mountains descend fast from their majestic heights, growing
less and less as they approach the Irish sea. My motive was to obtain a sight
of two fine lakes, called Llynnieu Nanlle, which form two handsome expanses,
LLYNIEU NANLLE.
with a very small distance between each. From hence is a noble view of the
Wyddfa, which terminates the view through the visto of Drws y Coed. It is from
this spot Mr. WILSON has favored us with a view, as magnificent as it is
faithful. Few are sensible of this; for few visit the spot.

NEAR these lakes Edward I. in the summer of 1284, resided for some days; and
from hence issued out more than one of his edicts. I find some dated July the
17th and the 20th. Others are dated in the same year, from Bangor, Caernarvon,
Mold, and Hope. One from Caernarvon Sebright MSS. Rymer, ii. 276 to 289.
is dated as late as the 22d of October; which shows what attention he paid to
the establishment of government in his new dominions, by the long visit he
deigned to honor them with. The place he resided at here, was called Bala Deu
Llyn, or the place where a river discharges itself from two lakes: but at
present all memory is lost of the situation of the town, whose traces might
perhaps be still discovered, after proper search.

I RETURNED by the same road; and again reach Bed Kelert, where I made a
coarse lodging. The evening was so fine, that we were irresistibly tempted not
to defer till morning our visit to Pont Aberglas Llyn, a short walk from hence.
PONT ABERGLAS LLYN.
The first part is along the narrow vale; but in a very little time the
mountains approach so close, as to leave only room for the furious river to
roll over its stony bed; above which is a narrow road, formed with incredible
labor, impending over the water. The way seems to have been first cut out of
the rock, and then covered with great stones, as usual in several of our narrow
passes. The scenery is the most magnificent that can be imagined. The mountains
rise to very uncommon height, and oppose to us nothing but a broken series of
precipices, one above the other, as high as the eye can reach. Here is very
little appearance of vegetation; yet in spots there is here and there enough to
tempt the poor goat to its destruction; for it will sometimes leap down to an
alluring tuft of verdure, where, without possiblity of return, it must remain
to perish, after it has finished the dear-bought repast.

THE bridge terminates the pass; and consists of a single arch, flung over a
deep chasm, from rock to rock. Above is a considerable cataract, where the
traveller at times may have much amusement, in observing the salmon, in great
numbers, make their efforts to surpass the heights. Near the place is a salmon
fishery. Here had been a royal wear in the reign of Henry IV. which was then
rented by Robert ap Meredydd. It probably belonged in old times to our natural
princes; for it seems to have been a most valuable privelege. We have seen
before, that young Elphin was endowed with one by his royal father; and the
effect of his disappointment in missing his usual revenues, by finding (which,
I dare say, was in those days a very rare instance) an empty wear. Salmon was
the most useful and esteemed fish among the Welsh: it was reckoned among the
game; and, if I remember right, is the only species which was preserved by law.

ON my return to Bed Kelert, RHYS GOCH.
a stone by the road side was pointed out to me, by the name of the chair of
Rhys Goch O'ryri, the famous mountain bard, cotemporary with Owen Glyndwr. He
was of the house of Havod Garregog at the entrance into Traeth Mawr, from
whence he used to walk, and sitting on this stone, compose his poems. Among
others, is a satire on a fox, for killing his favorite peacock. He died about
the year 1420, and was interred in the holy ground at Bed Kelert, after
escaping the vengeance of the English, for inspiring our countrymen with the
love of liberty, and animating them, by his compositions, into a long and
gallant resistance to the galling yoke.



CONTINUATION OF THE JOURNEY.
FROM Bed Kelert I returned to Pont Aber Glass lyn; and soon reached Traeth
Mawr, a large extent of sands, between the counties of Caernarvon and
Meirionydd, of most dangerous passage to strangers, by reason of the tides
which flow here with great rapidity. This forms the bottom of the vast bay of
Cardigan. In the year 1625, Sir John Win, of Gwedir, conceived the great
design of gaining this tract, and a lesser, called Traeth Bychan, from the sea,
by means of embanking. He implored the assistance of his illustrious contryman
Sir Hugh Middleton. Sir John's letter, and Sir Hugh's reply, will be the best
account I can give of the affair; which never was carried into execution, as I
imagine, for want of money. Sir John's is as follows:

Right worthy Sir, my good cousin, and one of the great honors of the nation,
I UNDERSTAND of a great work that you have performed in the Isle of Wight, in
gaininge too thousand acres from the sea. I may say to you what the Jews said
to Christ -- We have heard of thy great works done abroad, do somewhat in
thine own country.

THERE are too washes in Merionethshire, whereon some part of my being lies,
called Traeth Mawr and Traeth Bychan, of a great extent of land, and entering
into the sea by one issue, which is not a mile broad at full sea, and very
shallow. The fresh currents that run into the sea are both vehement and great,
and carry with them much sand; besides the southerly wind usually blows
fulle to the havens mouth, carries with it so much sand, that it has
overwhelmed a great quantity of the ground adjacent. There, and also in the
borderinge countries, abundance of wood, brush, and other materials fit to
make mounds, to be had at a very cheap rate, and easily brought to the
place; which I hear they do in Lincolnshire, to expel the sea. My skill is
little, and my experience none at all in such matters, yet I ever had a desire
to further my country in such actions as might be for their profit, and leave a
remembrance of my endeavors; but hindered with other matters, I have only wished
well, and done nothing. Now being it pleased God to bring you into this
country, I am to desire you to take a ride, the place not being above a days
journey from you; and if you do see the thing fit to be undertaken, I am
content to adventure a brace of hundred pounds to join with you in the work.

I HAVE lead ore on my grounds great store, and other minerals near my house;
if it please you to come hither, being not above too days journey from you,
you shall be most kindly welcome -- it may be you shall find here that will
tend to your commodity and mine. If I did know the day certain when you
would come to view Traeth Mawr, my son Owen Wynn shall attend you there, and
conduct you thence to my house. Concluding me very kindly to you, do rest,

Your loving cousin and friend, J. WYNN.
Gwydir, 1st September 1625.
To the honored Sir Hugh Myddleton, Knt. Bart.

Honorable Sir,
I HAVE received your kind letter. Few are the things done by me, for which I
give God the glory. It may please you to understand my first undertaking of
public works was amongst my own, within less than a mile of the place where I
hadd my first being, 24 or 25 years since, in seekinge of coals for the town
of Denbigh.

TOUCHING the drowned lands near your lyvinge, there are many things
considerable therein. If to be gained, which will hardly be performed without
great stones, which was plentiful at the Weight, as well as wood; and great
sums of money to be spent, not hundreds but thousands -- and first of all his
Majesty's interest must be got. As for myself, I am grown into years, and full
of business here at the mines, the river at London, and other places -- my
weeklie charge being above L200; which makes me very unwillinge to undertake
any other work; and the least of these, whether the drowned lands or mines,
requires a whole man, with a large purse. -- Noble Sir, my desire is great to
see you, which should draw me a far longer way; yet such are my occasions at
this time here, for the settlinge of this great work, that I can hardly be
spared one hour in a day. My wieff being also here, I cannot leave her in a
strange place. Yet my love to public works, and desire to see you (if God
permit) may another time draw me into those parts. So with my hearty
comendations I comitt you and all your good desires to God,

Your assured lovinge couzin to command, HUGH MYDDELTON.
Lodge, Sept. 2d, 1625.

VIEW FROM THE SANDS.
THE view from the middle of the sands toward Snowdonia, is most extravagantly
wild. Mountain rises above mountain, exposing the most savage and barren aspect
imaginable, naked, precipitous, and craggy. The Cyfnicht soars into a
picturesque rocky cone; and Y Wyddfa rises in the back-ground pre-eminent among
its companions.

ON quitting the sands, arrive in a tract of meadows, sprinkled with insulated
rocks rising in various places, and embosomed with woods, rocks, and
precipices. On the road observed some poor iron ore, and groups of coarse
crystals, the relics of an unprofitable mine-adventure. PENMORVA.
The small town of Penmorva lies at the head of these meadows. The church is
dedicated cated to St. Beuno, and annexed to it is the chapel of Dolbenmaen.
Here was interred that valiant knight Sir John Owen. Besides his monument, is
another small one to Sir William Morris of Clenenney, who died August 11th 1622.

IN former times this neighborhood abounded with gentry. It lies in the hundred
of Evionydd, in remote days possessed by two clans; one descended from Owen
Gwynedd, prince of Wales, and consisted of four houses, Cessail Gyfarch,
Ystym-cegid, Clenenney, Brynker, Glasfryn, or Cwmstrallyn; the other was
derived from Collwyn ap Tangno, and consisted of the houses of Whilog, Bron y
Foel, Berkin, Gwynfryn, Tal Hen Bont (now Plas Hen), and Pennardd. Gwedir
family, in Mr. Barrington's Miscell, octavo, 143.
My curiosity once led me to make a tour of a few miles from hence to visit
these ancient mansions. In the days I allude to, the feuds among the gentry
filled the land with blood. The history of our country, during that period, is
the history of revenge, perfidy, and slaughter. This consideration induced
Meredydd ap Jevan, ancestor of the Wynnes of Gwedir Tour in Wales, ii. 137.
, to quit this his paternal country. "I had rather," says he, fight with
outlaws and thieves, than with my own blood and kindred. If I live in my own
house in Evionydd, I must either kill my own kinsmen, or be killed by them.

THERE was not a house in the hundred but had its dreadful tale. They would
quarrel, if it was but for 'the mastery of the country, and the first good
morrow Hist. Gwedir family.
!' John Owen ap John ap Mereddyd and Howel ap Madoc Vychan, fell out for no
other reason. Howel and his people fought valiantly. When he fell, his mother
placed her hand on his head, to prevent the fatal blow, and had half her hand
and three of her fingers cut off by some of her nearest kindred. An attempt was
made to kill Howel ap Rhys in his own house, by the sons of John ap Mereddyd,
for no other reason but that their servants had quarrelled about a fishery.

ANTIQUETIES.
THEY first set fire to the mansion with great bundles of straw. The besieged,
terrified With the flames, sheltered themselves under forms and benches; while
Rhys, the old hero, stood sword in hand, reproaching his men with cowardice,
and telling them be bad often seen a greater smoke in that hall on a Christmas
even. These flagitious deeds seldom met with any other punishment than what
resulted from private revenge; and too often composition was made for the most
horrible murders. There was a Gwerth, or price of blood, from the slaughter of
a king to the cutting off of one of his subject's little fingers.

SEVERAL antiquities are scattered over this part of the county. Near
Dolbenmaen is a large mount, on which might have been, as Mr. Rowland
conjectures, a watchtower. Near Ystymkiged are three Cromlehs joining to each
other, possibly memorial of three chieftains slain on the spot. And near
Clenenney, on Bwlch Craigwen, is a fine druidical circle, consisting at present
of thirty-eight stones: at a mile's distance, and within sight of this, above
Penmorva, is another. Before I returned, I visited Brynkir, in my memory
inhabited by a family of the same name. It lies beneath the great mountain
Hedog, which, divides this country from the vale of Bed Kelert. From hence the
country gradually lowers to the extremity of the county.

DURING my stay at Penmorva, DWARFS.
I was desired to observe Dick Bach, a diminutive person, who casually called
there. He was servant to a neighboring gentleman, about the age of thirty, and
only three feet eleven inches high. He was pointed out to me only for the sake
of describing his sister, Mary Bach o Cwmmain, or, little Mary of Cwmmain; a
well-proportioned fairy, of the height of three feet four. Her virtues are
superior to her size: she brews, bakes, pickles; in short, does every thing
that the best housekeeper can do. Their parents live in these parts, have many
children of the common stature of man; but nature chose to sport in the
formation of this little pair.

IN the winter of 1694, A MEPHITIC VAPOR.
this neighborhood was remarkable for an amazing and noxious phenomenon. A
mephites, or pestilential vapor, resembling a weak blue slame, arose, during a
fortnight or three weeks, out of a sandy marshy tract, called Morva Bychan
Cambden, ii. 788. Ph. Trans. No 208. Lowthorp's Abridg. ii. 183.
, and crossed over a channel of eight miles to Harlech. It set fire on that
side to sixteen ricks of hay and two barns, one filled with hay, the other with
corn. It infected the grass in such a manner, that numbers of cattle, horses,
sheep, and goats, died. One character of a mephites was wanting; for men went
into the midst of it with impunity. It was easily dispelled; any great noise,
such as the sounding of horns, the discharging of guns, or the like, at once
repelled it. It moved only by night; and appeared at times, but less
frequently, the following summer; after which this phenomenon ceased. It may
possibly arise, as the editor of Cambden conjectures, from a local casualty,
such as the fall of a flight of Locusts in that spot, as really did in the sea
near Aberdaron; which growing corrupt, might, by the blowing of the wind for a
certain period from one point, direct the pest to a certain spot, while others
less remote might, for the same reason, escape the dreadful effects. Mouffet
gives an account of a plague in Lombardy, about the year 591, which arose from
the fall of a cloud of Locusts, which corrupted the air to such a degree, that
eighty thousand men and cattle perished Theater of Infects, Engl. ed. 986.
.

I continued my journey along the shore, WRECK OF BIRDS.
which is for the most part flat, except where some small headland juts into
it. On this coast the Reverend Mr. Hugh Davies, of Beaumaris, was witness to a
very uncommon wreck of sea-fowl, which had happened in 1776. He saw the beach,
for miles together, covered with dead birds, especially those kinds which
annually visit the rocks in summer; such as Puffins, Razor-bills, Guillemots,
and Kittiwakes; of the last. there were many many thousands. Numbers also of
Tarrocks. And of birds which retire to distant countries to breed, were
Gannets, Wild-geese, Bernacles, Brent-geese, Scoters, and Tufted-ducks. The
frost, from January 6th to February the 2d, had been in that winter uncommonly
severe: a storm had probably overtaken both the migrants and re-migrants, and
occasioned this havoc; and the birds, which are perpetually resident with us,
underwent the same fate, unable to resist the freezing gale.

Passed by Stymllyn, the seat of -- Win, Esquire and soon reach Crickaeth,
CRICKAETH.
a poor borough town, contributory to Caernarvon.

CRICKAETH


Its castle is seated on a pretty round hill, jutting far into the sea, and the
isthmus crossed, by way of defense, by two deep ditches; on each side of the
entrance is a great round tower. The court is of an irregular form, and has the
remains of a square tower; beyond is another court, and in it, on the verge of
the rock, are two others, also square. It is probable that all the towers were
originally square, for the insides of the two round towers are of that form.
They have so much the appearance of the architecture of Dolwyddelan castle,
that I entertain no doubt but that this castle was founded by a Welsh prince,
and that its supposed founder Edward I. did no more than case the towers, which
at present are the two rounders. After the Conquest, Edward appointed William
de Leybourn to be constable, with a salary of a hundred pounds a year; for
which he was to maintain a garrison of thirty stout men (ten of whom were to be
cross-bow men) one chaplain, one surgeon, one carpenter, and one mason Sebright
MSS.
.

OUR boasted countryman, SIR HOWEL Y FWYALL.
Sir Howel y Fwyall, was constable of this castle; a hero descended from
Collwyn ap Tangno. He attended the Black Prince to the battle of Poitiers, and,
as we say, was the person who took the French king prisoner; but history
bestows that honor on Denis de Morebeque, a knight of Artois Froissart, tom. i.
chapter clxiiii. p. 195. Engl. Froissart, i.
. Perhaps we must wave that particular glory; but he undoubtedly behaved on the
occasion with distinguished valor: for the Black Prince not only bestowed on
him the constableship of this castle, which he afterward made his residence,
but knighted him, and, in perpetual memorial of his good services, ordered that
from thenceforth a mess of meat should be served up before the pole-ax with
which he performed such great feats; for what reason he bore it in his coat of
arms, and was slyled Sir Howel y Fwyall, or of the Ax: after the mess had
appeared before the knight, it was carried down and bestowed on the poor. Eight
yeomen attendants were constituted to guard the mess, and had eight pence a day
constant wages, at the king's charge; and these, under the name of yeomen of
the crown, were continued on the establishment till the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. Some do not scruple to say, that the yeomen of the crown were
grafted upon this stock. After the death of Sir Howel, the mess was carried as
before, and bestowed on the poor, for the sake of his soul; and probably as low
as the period above mentioned See XV Tribes of North Wales; and Hist, Gwedir
Family in Mr, Barrington's Miscelles; and Hist. Gwedir, octavo 143.
.

EIGHT miles farther is Pwllheli. In my way cross over a pretty stream, on a
bridge of three arches, at Llan Ystyndwy, a church and village in a pretty
wooded bottom. A little farther inland is Plas Hen, a seat of Evan Lloyd
Vaughan, Esquire by marriage of an heiress of the name of Vaughan, a descendant of
Colwyn ap Tangno: she afterward married William Lloyd, a younger son of
Bod-idris. Cross the little river Arch, at Aber-arch, or the port of the
coffin, near a church dedicated to St. Cwrda. After another mile's ride reach
Pwllheli, the best town in this country, and the magazine of goods which
supplies all this tract. It lies close on the shore, and has a tolerable
harbor for vessels of about sixty tons. The entrance is by a high rock called
The Gimlet, a mile from land, to which it is joined by a range of sand-hills.
This place was made a free borough by the Black Prince, by charter, dated in
the 12th year of his principality, at Caernarvon, in compliment, to Nigel de
Loryng or Lohareyn, one of the gentlemen of his bedchamber, on whom he had
bestowed Pwllheli and Nevyn, in consideration of his great service in Gascony,
and particularly at the battle of Poitiers. He entitles him to Servitiis
quorumcunque tenentium tam liberorum quam nativorum; by which it may be
presumed that he did not include the Welsh in the privileges. What those were I
do not learn; but they were the same which the burgesses of Rosfair in Anglesey
enjoyed: and for them Pwllheli was to pay to Nigel fourteen pounds a year, and
Nevyn thirtytwo. This borough and Nevyn he freely bestowed on him, with all its
appurtenances, together with four librates of land, toward the repair of his
manors; and for all these he was only to pay an acknowlegement of a rose, in
lieu of all services. If he died without issue, the whole was to revert to the
crown. Edward III. afterward confirmed these grants at Sandwich.

FROM hence I took a ride about five miles inland to Carn Madryn, CARN MADRYN.
a lofty rocky insulated hill, noted for having been a strong hold of the sons
of Owen Gwynedd, Roderick and Malgwn, to whom this part of the country
belonged. The bottom, sides, and top, are filled with cells, oblong, oval, or
circular, once thatched, or covered from the inclemency of the weather: many of
them are pretty entire. The chieftains resided on the top; the country, with
the cattle, in times of invasion, occupied the sides and bottom. The whole
summit was surrounded with a wall, still visible in many places. From the
summit is an extensive view of the country, with the bay of Caerncr^^ on one
side, and that of Cardigan on the other. Sarn Badrig Tour in Wales, ii 212.
is seen extending from Meireonyddshire its dangerous length, nearly parallel
to the shore of Lhein. South Wales may be seen plainly, and in clear weather
Ireland; and in front the whole tract of Snowdonia exhibits a most magnificent
and stupendous barrier.

AT the foot of this hill is Madryn, formerly the seat of the Bodvels,
descended from Collwyn ap Tangno; but on the death of the last male heir the
estate was purchased by -- Parry, Esquire of Wern Vawr. From Pwllheli I continued
my journey near the shore to Llan Badrog, along the sides of that noble bay the
Tudwal's road, sheltered by two islands of that name, so named from St. Tudwal;
sacred to whom was a small chapel on the greater. Its present inhabitants are
sheep, rabbits, and, in the season, puffins.

IN the promontory Penrhyn Du, PENRHYN DU.
one of the points of this bay, have been considerable adventures for lead ore;
and of late years attempts to drain the mines, by means of a fire engine: but
the expenses proved superior to the profits. A little beyond this is another
bay, called Hell's Mouth, dreaded by mariners, being the Scylla to the
Charybdis of Sarn Badrig, whose extremity lies nearly opposite.

IN a small time I reached Aber-^aron, ABER-DARON.
a poor village, at the very end of Caernarvonshire, seated on a sandy bay,
beneath some high and sandy cliffs. The mouth of the bay is guarded by two
little islands, called Ynys Gwylan, a security to the small craft of the
inhabitants, who are all fishermen. It takes its name from the small rivulet
the Daron, which empties itself here.

IN the church are two ailes, supported by four very handsome pillars. This
being the place where devotees usually took boat for Bardseye island, was
greatly resorted to. It was dedicated to St. Hywyn, a saint of that island: was
a sanctuary Powel, 176.
, and also much frequented by pilgrims. Leland says, it was called Llan Engas
Brenin, Fanum Niniani Reguli Itin. v. 51. Ninian died in 432.
. Ninian is a saint, son of a Cumbrian prince, and whom legend might have sent
here to found the church.

FROM this port I once took boat for Bardseye island, BARADSEYE ISLAND.
which lies about three leagues to the west. The mariners seemed tinctured with
the piety of the place; for they had not rowed far, but they made a full stop,
pulled off their hats, and offered up a short prayer. After doubling a
headland, the island appears full in view: we passed under the lofty mountain
which forms one side. After doubling the farther end, we put into a little
sandy creek, bounded by low rocks, as is the whole level part. On landing, I
found all this tract a very fertile plain, and well cultivated, and productive
of every thing which the main land affords. The abbot's house is a large stone
building, inhabited by several of the natives: not far from it is a singular
chapel, or oratory, being a long arched edifice, with an insulated stone altar
near the east end. In this place one of the inhabitants reads prayers: all
other offices are performed at Aber-daron.

THE island is about two miles in circumference, contains a few inhabitants,
and is rented from Lord Newborough. It was granted by Edward VI. to his uncle
Sir Thomas Seymour, and after his death to John Earl of Warwick Tanner, 703.
. The late Sir John Wynn purchased it from the late reverend Dr. Wilson of
Newark.

THE island, whose spiritual concerns are at present under the care of a single
rustic, once afforded, during life, an asylum to 20,000 saints; and after
death, graves to as many of their bodies: well therefore might it be called
Insula Sanctorum, The Isie of Saints. But, with Dr. Fuller, I must observe,
that it would be more facile to find graves in Bardseye for so many saints,
than saints for so many graves Worthies of Wales, 29.
, But to approach the truth; S^. DUBRITIUS
let it be said, that Dubritius, archbishop of Caer-leon, almost worn out with
age, resigning his see to St. David, retired here, and, according to the best
account, died in 612; was interred on the spot; but in after times his body was
removed to Llandaff. The slaughter of the monks of Bangor, about the year 607,
is supposed to have contributed to the population of this island; for not only
the brethren who escaped, but numbers of other pious Britons, fled hither to
avoid the rage of the Saxons.

THE time in which the religious house was founded, CONVENT.
is very uncertain; it probably was before the retreat of Dubritius; for
something of that kind must have occasioned him to give the preference to this
place. It seems likely to have been a seat of the Culdees, or Colidei, the
first religious recluses of Great Britain; who sought islands and desert places
in which they might in security worship the true GOD. It was certainly resorted
to in very early times; for our accounts say, that it flourished as a convent
in the days of Cadwan king of Britain, Rowlands, 137.
, coeval with Dubritius. It was an abbey dedicated to St. Mary. I find among
the Sebright MSS. mention of a petition from the abbot to Edward II. in which
he sets forth the injuries he had received from the sheriff of Caernarvon, who
had extorted from him 68s. and 6d. contrary to his deed of feoffment: on which
the king directed Roger de Mortimer, justiciary of Wales, to make enquiry into
the matter; who reported, that the abbot held his lands in the county of
Caernarvon, in puram et perpetuam elemosynam, without any service or secular
acknowlegement; and further, that David, lord of Lhein, and brother to the last
Prince of Wales, had exacted the same sum; as did his Pencynydd, or master of
his dogs, possibly under pretense of maintaining them. The king therefore, by
his special favor, and by advice of his council, does for ever remit the said
sum, and all arrears; and directs that no one in future, either on his account,
or that of his heirs, ever should molest the convent.

THE house underwent the common fate of others at the dissolution. Its revenues
were, as Dugdale says, 46 l. 1 s. 4 d. according to Speed, 58 l. 6 s. 2 d. In
the year 1553, only 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. remained in charge to the surviving
religious of this place.

THE British name of the island is Ynys Enlli, or the Island in the Current,
from the fierce current which rages particularly between it and the main land.
The Saxons named it Bardseye, probably from the bards who retire here,
preferring solitude to the company of invading foreigners.

THERE are great plenty of fish round the island, and abundance of lobsters:
the spiny lobster, Br. Zool. iv. No 22. is more frequent here than in most
other places.

WE re-embarked from the rocks on the opposite side of the island to that on
which we landed. Rowed through the rapid current called the Race of Bardsey,
between the island and the great promontory Braech y Pwll, the Canganum
Promontorium of Ptolemy: part of it is called, from certain yellow stones, Maem
Melyn; the rest is a vast precipice, black and tremendous. After landing at
Aber-daron, I rid to its summit, and found the ruins of a small church, CAPEL
VAIR.
called Capel Vair, the Chapel of our Lady; and I was informed, that at the
foot of the promontory, below high water mark, was a fountain of fresh water,
to which devotees were wont to descend by a circuitous and most hazardous path,
to get, at low water, a mouthful of the spring; which if they carried up safe
to the summit, their wish, whatsoever it was, was to be surely fulfilled. This
was under the protection of our Lady, and called Ffynnon Vain. The chapel was
placed here to give the seamen opportunity of invoking the tutelar saint for
protection through this dangerous sound, and I dare say, in old times, the
walls were covered with votive tables. Not far from hence I pasfed by the ruins
of Capel Anhelog, or, the Chapel without Endowment.

AFTER going through a fertile bottom, ascended a lofty mountain impending over
the sea, called Uwch Mynydd; on which were several circular hollows, edged with
stone, the temporary VIEW OF BARDSEY ISLAND.
habitations of perhaps some invader. Descend, and pass by a large and ancient
house, called Bethelem.

NOT far from thence, about a quarter of a mile from the shore, rises a high
rock, called Maen y Mellt, or, The Stone of Lightning. MAEN Y MELLT.
Ride by Cefn-amwlch, the seat of John Griffith, Esquire and soon after to
Brynodol, that of Hugh Griffith, Esquire where I met with a most hospitable
reception for two nights. From hence I visited the neighboring shore, which is
here low and rocky, opening into frequent little creeks, useful to the
fishermen; who find in them, during the herring-fishery, a safe retreat from
storms. Among these are, Porth Towyn, Porth Colman, Porth Gwylan, and Porth
Ysgadan. Near the last, about thirty years ago, a rock, which towered a great
height out of the sea, was suddenly missed, after a horrible night of thunder
and lightning, supposed to have been struck down by the resistless bolt. I
observed that the fields about Porth Gwylan were covered with y ddafad, or
samphire, which sheep and cattle eagerly feed on, and grow very fat. I was
pleased here with the fine blossom of thrift glowing over numbers of the
pastures.

LLYN or Lleyn is a very extensive hundred: in general flat, LLYN, PRODUCE OF.
but interspersed with most characteristic hills or rocks, rising insulated in
several parts: none makes so conspicuous a figure as Carn Madryn and Carn
Boduon. The houses of the common people are very mean; made with clay,
thatched, and destitute of chimnies. Notwithstanding the laudable example of
the gentry, the country is in an unimproved state, neglected for the sake of
the herring-fishery. The chief produce is oats, and black cattle. I was
informed that above three thousand are annually sold out of these parts. Much
oats, barley, butter, and cheese, are exported. The land is excellent for
grazing, being watered by a thousand little rills. It is destitute of trees,
except about the houses of the gentry.

THE herrings, about the year 1771, HERRINGS.
were taken here in vast abundance, from Porth Ysgadan, or the Port of
Herrings, to Bardseye island. The capture amounted usually to the value of
about four thousand pounds. They were sometimes salted on shore; at other times
bought from the fishers by the Irish wherries at sea, and carried to be cured
in Dublin. These desultory fish, about the period mentioned, appear in July and
went away in October; in earlier times they came in September and went away in
November. Dories are often taken here. The fishermen were wont to fling them
away, on account of their ugly appearance: nor was this luxury known to the
gentry, till one of their servants, who was acquainted with the fish, informed
them of its being an inhabitant of thief seas. The Atherine, Br. Zool. iii. No
157, is taken near Pwllbeli; and a small lobster is often found burrowing in
the sand; but differs from the common kind only in its place of residence, and
in size. The traps for lobsters are made with packthread, like thief-nets, and
baited with pieces of the lesser spotted shark, Br. Zool. iii. No 47. The
fishers remark, that the sexes of these voracious fish confort, at certain
times, apart; for at certain periods they take only males, at others only
females.

THE churches in this country are of very ancient foundation. Some cause or
other prevented me from seeing several old inscriptions; a few of which I have
since picked up. In the church of Llangynodol is said to be this; Hic jacet
GWEN HOEDL, a holy lady, who lived in very early times. DERVORI hic jacet, is
another inscription, on a stone now placed over a door of Penprys stable, in
Llannor parish Sebright MSS.
; and at Capel Yverach, in Aberdaron parish, is another, which I think better
expressed by an engraving The same.
. They are cut on very rude stones, and were certainly the work of the early
times of Christianity.

BRYNODOL, by advantage of situation on the side of a hill, commands a vast
view of a flat woodless tract, the sea, and a noble mass of mountains. The Eist
hills, Boduon, and the vast Carn Madryn, rise in the fore ground; and beyond
these soars all Snowdonia, from those alps which surround the Wyddfa, to the
most remote in the county of Meireonydd.

ON quitting Brynodol I descended into an extensive flat; PORTH IN LLYN.
reached Porth in Lln, a fine safe and sandy bay, guarded on the west by a
narrow headland, jutting far into the sea. On part of it are the remains of
very strong entrenchments; probably an out-post of the Romans: who, as I shall
have occasion to mention, had another between this place and Caernarvon.

SEPARATED from this bay by a small headland, is that of Nefyn; and near it a
small town of the same name, NEFYN.
a contributory borough to Caernarvon. This place had been bestowed on Nigel de
Lohareyn by the Black Prince, in the 12th year of his principality, and made a
free borough: was allowed a guild mercatory, with every privilege attendant on
other free boroughs, and all the liberties and customs granted heretofore to
that of Newborough in Anglesey. He also gave it a grant of two fairs annually,
and a market on a Sunday; to which the inhabitants of that part of the Commot y
Lln, then called Dynthlayn, were obliged to resort.

HERE Edward I, in 1284, held his triumph on the conquest of Wales; and
perhaps, to conciliate the affections of his new subjects, in imitation of our
hero Arthur, held a round table, and celebrated it with dance and tournament Ad
rotundam tabulam juxta Snowdon praeonizatam in choreis et hastiludiis ad
invicem colludentibus. Annal. Waverleins* in Gale, ii. 239.
.

Where throngs of knights, and barons bold,
In weeds of peace high triumphs hold,
With store of ladies, whose bright eyes
Rain influence, and judge the prize
Of wit or arms, while both contend
To win her grace, whom all commend.
TOURNAMENT.
The concourse was prodigious; for not only the chief nobility of England, but
numbers from foreign parts, graced the festival with their presence.

THE custom is very ancient; for it may be derived even higher than the days of
Arthur. We may allow that he held his round table on account of one of his
victories; and that he had four-and-twenty knights who sat at the festive
board; which might have been designedly made of a circular form, in order to
destroy all dispute about pre-eminence of seat. But the Gauls also sat at
their round tables, and every knight had at his back a squire with his armor,
in waiting Athenaeus, lib. iv.
. This gallant assembly was held for many ages after. Besides this held at
Nefyn, another was presented by Earl Mortimer at Kenilworth, where the knights
performed their martial exercises, and the ladies danced in silken mantles
Dugdale's Warwickshire, i. 247.
.

VORTIGERN's VALLEY,
THE first, I apprehend to have been performed in those circular areae, which we
still meet with in some parts of England, surrounded with a high mound, a ditch
in the inside, and two entrances one opposite to the other, for the knights to
enter at and make their onset. One of these I have seen by Penrith, which bears
the name of Arthur's round table Tour in Scotland, 1769, 3d ed.
; others, which are far larger, I found on Thornborough heath, in Yorkshire; of
which I may in future time give some account.

ASCEND from Nefyn for a considerable way up the side of the high hill; and
after a short ride on level ground quit our horses, in order to visit Nant y
Gwrtheyrn, or Vortigen's valley, VORTIGERN'S VALLEY.
the immense hollow, to which Vortigern is said to have fled from the rage of
his subjects, and where it was said that he and his castle were consumed with
lightning. Nennius Hist. Br. c. xlviii.
places the scene near the Teivi, in Caermarthenshire; but I believe that the
historian not only mistakes the spot, but even the manner of his death. His
life had been profligate; the monks therefore were determined that he should
not die the common death of all men, and accordingly made him perish with
signal marks of the vengeance of Heaven. Fancy cannot frame a place more fit
for a retreat from the knowledge of mankind, or more apt to inspire one with
full hopes of security from any pursuit. Embosomed in a lofty mountain, on two
sides bounded by stony steeps, on which no vegetables appear but the blasted
heath and stunted gorse; the third side exhibits a most tremendous front of
black precipice, with the loftiest peak of the mountain Eifl soaring above; and
the only opening to this secluded spot is toward the sea, a northern aspect!
where that chilling wind exerts all its fury, and half freezes, during winter,
the few inhabitants. The glen is tenanted by three families, who raise oats,
and keep a few cattle, sheep, and goats; but seem to have great difficulty in
getting their little produce to market.

JUST above the sea is a high and verdant mount, natural; but the top and sides
worked on by art. The first flatted: the sides marked with eight prominent ribs
from top to bottom. On this might have been the residence of the unfortunate
prince; of which, time has destroyed every other vestige. Till the beginning of
the last century, a tumulus, of stone within, and externally covered with turf,
was to be seen here; it was known by the name of Bed Gwrtheyrn: tradition
having regularly delivered down the report of this having been the place of his
interment. The inhabitants of the parish, perhaps instigated by their then
minister, Mr. Hugh Roberts, a person of curiosity, dug into the carn, and found
in it a stone coffin, containing the bones of a tall man Kenne's Paroch. Antiq.
Hist. Allchester, 698.
. This gives a degree of credibility to the tradition, especially as no other
bones were found with it; no other tumuli on the spot: a proof at lest of
respect to the rank of the person; and that the place was deserted after the
death of the royal fugitive, about the year 465.



AFTER emerging out of this chearless bottom, I found fresh and amazing matter
of speculation. I got into a bwlch, or hollow, between two summits of the Eifl
mountains; THE EIFL HILLS.
a range that makes a most distinguished figure, with the sugar loaf points,
from various and distant parts of the country: they range obliquely, and
separate Lleyn from the hundred of Arfon, and jut into the sea near Vortigern's
valley.

ACROSS this hollow, from one summit of the Eifl to the other, extends an
immense rampart of stones, or perhaps the ruins of a wall, which effectually
blocked up the pass. On the Eifl is the most perfect and magnificent, as well
as the most artful, of any British post I ever beheld. It is called Tre'r
Caeri, TRE'R CAERI.
or, the Town of the Fortresses. This, which was the accessible side, is
defended by three walls; the lowest is very imperfect, the next tolerably
entire, and has in it the grand entrance. This wall in one part points upwards
toward the third wall, which runs round the edges of the top of the hill: the
second wall unites with the first, which runs into a point, reverts, and joins
the highest, in a place where the hill becomes inaccessible. The facings on the
two upper walls are very entire, especially that of the uppermost. They are
lofty, and exhibit from below a grand and extensive front. The space on the top
is an irregular area; part is steep, part flat: in most parts covered with
heath, giving shelter to a few red grouse. The whole is almost filled with
cells. To be seen with advantage, the station should be taken from the summit,
about which the cells are very distinct, and disposed with much art. About the
middle is a square place fenced with stones; a sort of praetorium, surrounded
with two rows of cells: numbers are also scattered about the plain, and others
again are contiguous to the wall all along the inside.

THE cells are mostly perfect: of various forms; round, oval, oblong, square.
Some of the round were fifteen feet in diameter; of the oblong, thirty feet in
length, with long entrances regularly faced with stone. All of them, when
inhabited, were well protected from the weather by roofs of thatch or sod.

THE upper wall was in many places fifteen feet high on the outside, and often
sixteen feet broad. It consisted of two parallel and contiguous parts, one
higher than the other, serving as a parapet to the lower, which seemed to have
had its walk, like that on the walls of Chester. There was in one place a cell
in the thickness of the wall, or perhaps a sally-port, in part stopped by the
falling-in of the stones.

I was determined to trace every species of fortress of this nature which lay
in the neighborhood. On descending from Tre'r Caeri to the south, GARY GUWCH.
I very soon ascended Moel Garn Guwh, a hill of conic form, on the summit of
which is a prodigious heap of stones, seemingly a shapeless ruin; if it was not
for the appearance of certain facings of a central cell still remaining, to
prove that it had been a large tower, and an out-post to the preceding place.
These ruins are called by the country people A^^^^^^g^d y G^^^^s, or, The
apron-full of stones flung down by ^he G^^^^^^s.

I MUST remark, that from the Eift saw sveral other lesser eminences fortified
in a manner nearly similar. I may mention Carn Madryn, before described; the
hill of Boduan, above (...), covered with similar cells; Meel ben Twrch,
between (...); and Castle Gwgan, remarkable for a CLYNNOG
small circular intrenchment; and to these I may add another fortified hill,
called Pen y Gaer, on the other side of the pass which leads from Arfon to Lln:
all which makes it probable that this country was the retreat of multitudes of
Britons, to escape the first fury of the Saxon invaders.

AFTER viewing the Arffedoged-y-Gowres, I descended to the village and church
of Llan-Aelhaiearn, LLAN-AELHALEARN.
the last dedicated to St. Aelhaiearn, or, the saint with an iron eyebrow, from
a legend too absurd to relate. Near it is a fine well, once much frequented for
its reputed sanctity. Continue descending: on the right are the high conic
hills of Gern goch and Gern ddu, the extremity of the long chain which extends
obliquely from Snowdon, beginning at Talmignedd. Reach

CLYNNOG, CLYNNOG.
seated in a small grove near the shore, on a plain near the foot of the hills.
CHURCH.
The church is the most magnificent structure of its kind in North Wales, built
in form of a cross; the length from east to west is about a hundred and
thirty-eight feet, from north to south seventy. Near the altar are three neat
stalls, divided by pillars supporting gothic arches, the seats of the
officiating priests. The monuments are few: one to William Glynn de Lleiar,
with his figure, and those of his wife and seven children: another to his
son-in-law George Twisleton, Esquire of Aula Barrow in Yorkshire, and in right of
his wife, of Lleiar. I imagine him to be the same with Colonel Twisleton, an
active officer under Cromwell, and the same who had the honor of beating and
making prisoner the gallant Sir John Owen Whitelock's Memorials, 311, and 454,
599.
.

ADJOINING to the church is the chapel of St. Beuno. The passage to it is a
narrow vault covered with great flat stones, and of far greater antiquity than
either church or chapel; which seem nearly coeval. Leland speaks of the first
as new work, and the architecture verifies his account. He speaks also of the
old church, where St. Beuno lies, being near the new Itin. v. 13.
. The passage is the only part left. The chapel was probably built after that
traveller had visited the place, in the room of the old church, which might
have fallen to ruin. In the midst is the tomb of the saint, plain, and
altar-shaped. TOMB OF ST. BEUNO.
Votaries were wont to have great faith in him, and did not doubt but that by
means of a night's lodging on his tomb, a cure would be found for all diseases.
It was customary to cover it with rushes, and leave on it till morning sick
children, after making them first undergo ablution in the neighboring holy
well; and I myself once saw on it a feather bed, on which a poor paralytic from
Meirionyddshire had lain the whole night, after undergoing the same ceremony.

I HAVE given some account of St. Beuno in the preceding volume p. 32.
. ST. BEUNO, ACCOUNT OF.
After he had assumed the monastic habit, he here founded a convent in 616.
Cadvan, king of North Wales, was his great patron, and promised him much land:
his son Cadwallan performed the promise, and received from the Saint a golden
scepter worth sixty cows. The land was clamed in behalf of a little infant, and
his title proved good: the king refuses either to give other land in lieu, or
to resign the present. Beuno cursed him, and went away; but was appeased by
Gwrddeint, first cousin to the king, who overtook him, and gave the town of
Celynnog for ever to GOD and St. Beuno, for his own soul's sake, and that of
the wicked Cadwallan. Long after his time, the Carmelites, or white monks, had
here an establishment. They were suppressed, but I cannot learn the period. At
the time of the Lincoln taxation, or the year 1291, the church was collegiate,
consisting of five portionists or prebendaries; and it continued so to the
dissolution Tanner, 705.
. The rectory is a sinecure annexed to the headship of JESUS College, Oxford;
the poor vicarage is the gift of the bishop.

ITS revenues at the dissolution are not recorded; but they must at one time
have been very great: many of the kings and first: people of the country appear
on the list of benefactors. Cadwaladr gave Grayanoc; Tegwared gave Porthamel;
Cadel bestowed Kylcourt; prince Mervyn, Carnguin; Cadwgan ap Cynvelyn,
Bodveilion in Lln; Idwal endowed it with Penrhos and Clynog Vechan in Anglesey:
and besides these are numbers of others, for which I refer the reader to my
authority Dugdale Monast. ii. 919.
.

AT present there are, I believe, no sort of revenues to keep this venerable
pile from falling to ruin. The offerings of calves and lambs, which happen to
be born with the Nod Beuno, or mark of St. Beuno, a certain natural mark in the
ear, have not entirely ceased. OFFERINGS TO.
They are brought to the church on Trinity Sunday, the anniversary of the
Saint, and delivered to the churchwardens; who sell and account for them, and
put it into a great chest, called Cyff St. Beino, made of one piece of oak,
secured with three locks. From this the Welsh have a proverb for attempting any
very difficult thing, You may as well try "to break up St. Beuno's chest." The
little money resulting from the sacred beasts, or casual offerings, is either
applied to the relief of the poor, or in aid of repairs.

THOSE who are curious in druidical antiquities, A CROMLEH.
may see a very uncommon Cromleh on the tenement of Bachwen, about half a mile
from this place. The inclination of the upper stone is to the west; on its
surface are numbers of small shallow holes, with two or three larger than the
rest, possibly for some purpose of augury. At thirty paces distance is an
upright stone, placed, as is supposed, to mark the limits of approach to the
people, while the rites were performing by the Druidpriest.

THE distance from Clynnog to Caernarvon is ten miles; a continued plain: the
mountains recede gradually from the sea, so as to leave a considerable extent
of level ground as we approach the capital of the county. The road is
excellent, and the greatest part has the merit of being made at the expense of
the parishes. The shore is low, gravelly, or sandy, and forms one side of the
bay of Caernarvon.

CROSS the Llyfni, a rapid stream flowing out of Llyn Nanlle. I heard here of a
strong camp, called Carreg y Dinas; of which I find this note in the MS.
travels of the late ingenious Dr. Mason of Cambridge. He mentions it as being
placed upon the Isthmus of the Llyfni, opposite to the house of Lleiar. The
three sides to the river are very steep; the fourth is defended by two fosses
and two banks, made chiefly of stone, especially the inner one, which is six
yards high. In the middle is a mount, possibly the ruins of a tower. The
entrance is at the east end, between the ends of the banks.

ABOUT three miles, DINAS DINLLE.
turn to the left, to visit Dinas Dinlle, a vast mount of gravel and sand, on
the verge of a great marsh, upon the shore. On the top is a large area,
surrounded by an amazing agger, seemingly formed by the earth scooped out of
the summit. Within are remains of foundations of buildings, of an oblong form,
constructed with earth and round stones; and in one part is a tumulus of the
same materials. On the outside of the agger, on one part, is a very deep ditch,
with another high rampart; and the ground toward the base seems every where to
have been smoothed by art. There is a regular entrance at one end; on the
other, the ground slopes to the sea, and is quite open, a defense being there
needless. The waves have made great depredations, and worn one side into a
cliff. I must attribute this fortress to the Romans; and am the more confirmed
in my notion, as I am informed that coins have been found here, among which was
one of Alectus. The Romans might possibly be induced to form this post, to
secure a landing-place for any necessaries the country might want; for the
entrance into the port Segontium *s often, even at present, very difficult;
much more so in the earlier times of navigation.

THAT intelligent traveller and able botanist Mr. Thomas Johnson An ingenious
apothecary, the editor of Gerard's Herbal. He traveled through North Wales in
1639, to collect plants. He published his tour in 1691, a small volume, under
the title of Mercurius Botanicus. He was slain in the defense of Basing stoke
House, in 1644.
speaks thus of Dinas Dinlle, Stationem hie in ipso littore Romani milites
habuerunt, cujus adhuc satis clara vestigia manent. Possibly there may be
another of the same kind; for I find in the old maps, both of Saxton and Speed,
the name Caer Ierienrode, a little lower down, at the mouth of the Llyfni; and
by the addition of the word Caer, it must have been a fortified place.

WHEN I made my visit to Dinas Dinlle, I was under the guidance of a worthy
friend, and learned antiquary, the Reverend Richard Farrington (now deceased).
He conducted me to his residence at Dines Dincethwy, about four miles distant.
In the way he showed to me Dinas y Prif, or, The Post of the Chieftain; a small
camp, about forty-four yards square. Each corner is elevated above the
ramparts; and withinside are foundations of some stone buildings. By the name,
it might: be the summer station of the Roman commander in chief, resident in
winter at Segontium.

FROM Dinas I visited Glynllivon, a house built by the late Sir John Wynn,
seated near the little river Llifon, issuing from the Kilgwyn mountain. Cilmin
Troed-ddu, or, Cilmin with a black foot, one of the fifteen tribes of North
Wales, and nephew to Merfyn Fryeh, prince of Wales, slain in 841, had his
residence on this spot. From him are descended the family of the Glynns, who
took their name from the place. They bear, in allusion to the name of their
ancestor, a man's leg, coupe a la cuisse, sable. A ridiculous legend tells you,
that Cilmin's leg became so discolored by escaping from a demon, whose books
he had assisted a magician to steal. In leaping over a brook, which was to be
the limit of the pursuit, Cilmin's left leg plunged into the water, and assumed
its sable dye. Our stories are absurd; but not more so than an Eastern tale.
Glynllivon came into possession of the late Sir John Wynn, by the marriage of
his father, Tho. Wynn, Esquire Afterward created a Baronet. He died in April 1749.
of Boduan, with Frances second daughter to John Glynn, Esquire of Glynllivon.

CONTINUE my journey on a turnpike road. Cross, at Pont Newydd, the Gwyrfai,
which flows from Llyn Cwellyn; CAERNARVON.
and soon after cross the Seiont, and reach CAERNARVON.

THIS town is justly the boast of North Wales, for the beauty of situation,
goodness of the buildings, regularity of the plan, and, above all, the grandeur
of the castle, the most magnificent badge of our subjecton. The place sprung
from the ruin of the ancient Segontium; but it does not owe its name to Edward
I. as is generally supposed. Giraldus Cambrensis mentions it in his journey of
the year 1188 Iter. Cambr. 865.
; and Llewelyn the Great dates from it a charter in the year 1221 This charter
is to the Canons of Penmon. Sebright MSS.
. I greatly suspect the Caernarvon of those times to have been no other than
the ancient Segontium, whose name the Welsh had changed to the apt one of Caer
ar Fon, or, The strong hold opposite to Anglesey. But the present town was in
all probability a creation of our conqueror. A judicious warrior, such as
Edward, could not fail profiting of so fit a situation for a curb on the
new-conquered country. It had natural requisites for strength; being bounded on
one side by the arm of the sea called the Menai; by the estuary of the Seiont
on another, exactly where it receives the tide from the former; on a third
side, and part of the fourth, by a creek of the Menai; and the remainder has
the appearance of having the insulation completed by art. Edward undertook this
great work immediately after his conquest of the country in 1282, and completed
the fortifications and castle before 1284; for his queen, on April 25th in that
year, brought forth within its walls Edward, first prince of Wales of the
English line. It was built within the space of one year, by the labor of the
peasants, and at the cost of the chieftains of the country, on whom the
conqueror imposed the hateful task Sebright MSS.
. Henry Ellerton, or de Elreton, was appointed master mason of the castle
Sebright and Gloddaeth MSS.
, and perhaps was the architect; and under him must have been numbers of other
skilful workmen: for I dare say that the Welsh peasants were no mare than
cutters of wood and hewers of stone. It is probable that many of the materials
were brought from Segontium, or the old Caernarvon; and tradition says, that
much ot the limestone, with which it is built, was brought from Twr-kelyn in
Anglesey;; and of the grit-stone, from Vaenol in this county. The Menai greatly
facilitated the carriage from both places.

THE external state of the walls and castle are at present exactly as they were
in the time of Edward. The walls are defended by numbers of round towers, and
have two principal gates: the east, facing the mountains: the west, upon the
Menai. The entrance into the castle is very august, beneath a great tower, on
the front of which appears the statue of the founder, with a dagger in his
hand, as if menacing his new-acquired unwilling subjects. The gate had four
portcullises, and every requisite of strength. The court is oblong. The towers
are very beautiful; none of them round, but pentagonal, hexagonal, or
octagonal: two are more lofty than the rest. The Eagle tower is remarkably
fine, and has the addition of three slender angular turrets issuing from the
top. Edward II. was born in a little dark room in this tower, not

CAERNARYON CASTLE.


twelve feet long, nor eight in breadth: so little did, in those days, a royal
consort consult either pomp or convenience. QUEEN'S GATE.
The gate through which the affectionate Eleanor entered, to give the Welsh a
prince of their own, who could not speak a word of English, is at the farthest
end, at a vast height above the outside ground; so could only be approached by
a drawbridge. In his sixteenth year, the prince received the homage of his
duped subjects at Chester Powel, 382.
, invested, as marks of his dignity, with a chaplet of gold round his head, a
golden ring on his finger, and a silver scepter in his hand Dodridge's Wales, 6.
.

THE walls of this fortress are about seven feet nine inches thick; and have
within their thickness a most convenient gallery, with narrow slips, for the
discharge of arrows. The walls of the Eagle Tower are near two feet thicker.
The view from its summit is very fine, of the Menai, Anglesey, and the nearer
parts of the British alps.

THE first whom I find appointed by Edward to be governor of the castle, was
John de Havering, with a salary of two hundred marks; for which he was obliged
to maintain constantly, besides his own family, fourscore men, of which fifteen
were to be cross-bowmen, one chaplain, one surgeon, and one smith; the rest
were to do the duty of keepers of the gates, sentinels, and other necessary
offices Sebright MSS.
.

IN 1289, I find that the king had appointed Adam de Wetenhall to the same
important office Ayloff's Rotulae Wailiae, 98.
.

THE establishment for town and castle was as follows:

THE constable of the castle had sometimes sixty pounds, at others only forty.

THE captain of the town had 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. for his annual fee; but this
office was sometimes annexed to the former, and then the sea was 60 l. for both.

THE constable and the captain had twenty-four soldiers allowed them for the
defense of the place, at the wages of 4 d. per day each. Surely this slight
garrison was only during peaceful times!

The porter of the gates of the town had for his annual see 3 l. 10 s Dedridge,
56.
.

I can discover no more than two instances of this place having suffered by the
calamities of war. In the great insurrection of the Welsh, under Madog, in
1294, they surprised the town during the time of a fair, and put many English
to the sword Powel, 380.
; and, according to Mr. Carte Carte, ii. 237.
, took the castle, that of Snowdon (Conway), and made himself master of all
Anglesey.

In the last century, Captain Swanly, a parlementarian officer, took the town
in 1644, made four hundred prisoners, and got a great quantity of arms,
ammunition, and pillage. The royalists afterward repossessed themselves of the
place. Lord Byron was appointed governor; was besieged by General Mytton in
1646, and yielded the place on the most honorable terms. In 1648, the General
himself and Colonel Moson were besieged in it by Sir John Owen; who hearing
that Colonel Carter and Colonel Twisselton were on the march to relieve the
place, drew a party from the siege, in order to attack them on the way. The
parties met near Llandegay: Sir John was defeated, and made prisoner; and after
that all North Wales submitted to the parliament Whitelock, 87, 208.311.
.

THE quay is a most beautiful walk along the side of the Menai, QUAY.
and commands a most agreeable view.

CAERNARVON is destitute of manufactures, TRADE.
but has a brisk trade with London, Bristol, Leverpool, and Ireland, for the
several necessaries of life. It is the residence of numbers of genteel
families; and contains several very good houses; a very ancient one, called
Plas Pulesdon, is remarkable for the fate of its first owner, Sir Roger de
Pulesdon, ROGER DE PULESDON.
a distinguished favorite of Edward I, He had been appointed sheriff and keeper
of the county of Anglesey Ayloff's Rotulae Walliae, 89.
in 1284. What office he held here, I am unacquainted with; but in 1294, being
directed to levy the subsidy for the French war, a tax the Welsh had never been
accustomed to, they took up arms, and hanged de Pulesdon and several of his
people. This was a signal for a general insurrection: Madoc, a relation of the
late Prince Llewelyn, headed the people of this country. Edward marched against
them in person, and with great difficulty reduced the country to submit again
to his yoke Matt, Westminster. 423.
.

THE church is no more than a chapel to Llan Beblic; CHAPEL.
and probably originally only a chapel to the garrison.

EDWARD I. bestowed on Caernarvon its first royal charter, CHARTER.
and made it a free borough. Among other privileges, none of the burgesses
could be convicted of any crime committed between the rivers Conwy and Dyfy,
unless by a jury of their own townsmen Sebrigbt MSS.
It is governed by a mayor, who, by patent, is created governor of the castle.
CORPORATION.
It has one alderman, two bailiffs, a town clerk, and two sergeants at mace.
The representative of the place is elected by its burgesses, and those of
Conwy, Pwllbeli, Nefyn, and Crickaeth. The right of voting is in every one,
resident or non-resident, admitted to their freedom Willis's Notitia Parliam.
iii. Part i. 76.
FIRST MEMBERS.
The first member was John Puleston: and the second time it sent
representatives, which was in the 1st of Edward VI. it chose Robert Puleston,
and the county elected John The same. Part ii. pp. 9, 10.
; as if both town and county determined to make reparation to the family for
the cruelty practiced on its ancestor.

The mother church of Caenarvon is about half a mile southeast of the town; is
called Llan Beblic, being dedicated to Sr. Peblic or Peblicius, (according to
our historians) son of Maxon Wledic ( Maximus the tyrant) and his wife Helen,
daughter of Euddaf. It is said that he retired from the world and took a
religious habit Rowlands' Mena denqua, 165.
. Richard II. bestowed this church, and the chayel of Caernarvon, on the nuns
of St. Mary's in Chester, in consideration of their poverty Sebright MSS.
I find in the recital of another charter of the same prince, that his
grandfather Edward III. had bestowed on those religious the advowson of
Llangathen in Caermartsoershire The same.
: both which, on the dissolution, were annexed to the sea of Chester, and
remain to this day under the patronage of the Bishop of Chester. In the church
is the tomb of a son This son. (for the name is defaced) seems from the
pedigree of the family to have been Sir Rhys Gryffydd.
of Sir William Gryffydd of Per^^byn, who died in 1587; and Margaret, daughter
to John Win ap Mereddyd. Their figures are in white marble, lying on a mat,
admirably carved. He is in armor. She has on a short quilled ruff, and quilled
ruffles at her wrists; in a long gown, and a sash round her waist.

NEAR the steep bank of the river Seiont, ROMAN FORT.
at a small distance from the castle, is an ancient Roman fort. On two sides
the walls are pretty entire; one is seventy-four yards long; the other, which
points to the river, is sixty-four. The height ten feet eight inches. The
thickness six feet. Much of the facing is taken away, which discovers the
peculiarity of the Roman masonry. It consists of regular courses, the others
have the stones disposed in zigzag fashion. Along the walls are three parallel
lines of round holes, not three inches in diameter, nicely plastered within,
which pass through the whole thickness. There are other similar holes, which
are discovered in the end of the wall; and seem to run through it lengthways. I
can discover the use of neither one or other. Those that run through the walls
are supposed to be for the purpose of annoying an enemy with arrows; but from
the smallness of the diameter, a compass of aim in directing the shot is
wanting. Near the corner of one of the walls is a heap of stones, the ruins of
a tower; for on digging, some years ago, the foundation of a found one was
discovered. It was paved, and in it were found the horn of a deer and skeletons
of some lesser animals. This place seems intended to secure a landing-place
from the Seiont, at time of high water; and I was informed, that in Tre'r
Beblic, on the opposite shore, had been other ruins, the work of the same
people.

AT a small distance above this, SEGONTIUM.
and about a quarter of a mile from the Menai, is the ancient Segontium, to the
use of which the fort had been subservient. It forms an oblong of a very
considerable extent, seemingly about six acres, placed on the summit of rising
ground, and sloping down on every side. It is now divided by the public road;
but in several parts are vestiges of walls; and in one place appears the
remnant of a building made with tiles, and plastered with very hard and smooth
mortar: this seems to have been part of a hypocaust. The mortar in all other
parts is very hard, and mixed with much gravel and sand. At present a public
road passes through the midst of this ancient station, beyond which the Romans
had only a small out-post or two in this county. A gold coin, of about
seventeen shillings weight, was found here, inscribed T. DIVI AVG, FILL AVGVTVS.

CAMBDEN suspects that this might have been the Setantiorum Portus of Ptolemy,
being willing to read it Segontiorum ii. 798.
; but the situation of the former is certainly at the mouth of the Ribble. He
may be right in supposing it to have been in after times named Caer Custenin,
or the Castle of Constantine Nennius.
, and that Hugh Lupus, who certainly invaded Anglesey in 1098, had here a
temporary post. How far the relation of Matthew of Westminster, that
Censtantius, father of Constantine, was interred here, may be depended on, I
will not say; nor whether, as the historian farther asserts, that Edward caused
the body to be taken up, and honorably re-buried in the church, I suppose of
St. Publicius Mat. Westminster; 411.
. Mr. Rowlands says, that Helen, the mother of Publicius, had a chapel here,
which he tells us was in being in his days Mona Antiq. 163. Helen was born at
Segontium.
. A well, near the fort, bears the name of that princess; and some very slight
remains of ruins are to be seen adjacent. Tradition says, the chapel stood on
that spot.

THE traveller who wishes to visit Snowdon, ROAD FROM CAERNARVON TO SNOWDON.
from this town, may have a very agreeable ride. After crossing the Fai, or
Gwyrfai This river issues out of Llyn Cwellyn, and separates the two Hundreds
of Uwch-Gwrfai and Is-Gwrfai.
, at Pont y Bettws, about four miles and a half from Caernarvon, he will find
about the village of Bettws Garmon, or Is-Gwrfai, a beautiful cascade fronting
him, as he passes up a valley; which consists of verdant meadows, watered by
the same river, and bounded by hills rising fast into alpine majesty. He will
go under Moel Elian, a noble mountain of a stupendous bulk, clothed with a
smooth green turf, and most regularly rounded. He will pass on the right near
Castle Cedwm, said by Mr. Rowlands to be one of the guards to the entrance
into Snowdon: it is a great rock; which I did not ascend, so cannot certify
whether it had any works like those of other British posts. The lake Cwellyn
here almost fills the valley; a water famous for its Char, which are taken in
nets in the first winter months, and after that season retire to the
inaccessible depths. In former times, this water was called, from the steepness
of its banks, Llyn y Torlennydd. Above, on the right side of the lake, soars
the magnificent Mynnydd Vawr, smooth on the top, but the sides receding inwards
in a semicircular form, exhibiting a tremendous precipice. Soon after this, the
vale expands; y Wyddfa appears full in view. The traveller will pass by LLYN Y
CADER, and join in my former tour at Bed Kelert.

FROM Caernarvon I crossed in the ferry to Tal y Voel, in the island of
ANGLESEY.

THE Menai is here two miles broad. In my passage had a view of Abermenai,
ABERMENAI.
the very narrow passage into the port of Caernarvon, and rendered more
dangerous by the sands both within and without. Abermenai has its ferry, and is
one of the five over this strait. They were originally the property of the
crown of England; till Henry VIII. granted all of them to Richard Gifford, one
of the sewers of his chamber; who again set them to William Bulkely, in the 33d
year of his royal master: but since that period, every one has been transferred
to other hands.

I SOON reached Newborough, NEWBOROUGH.
about three miles from the shore, a place greatly fallen away from its ancient
splendour. Here had been one of the residences of his princes. In Mr. Rowlands'
time, the foundation of the Lls, or palace, was to be seen a little to the
south of the church; which is supposed to have been the domestic chapel. In its
neighborhood, at Vrondeg, is a stone which I overlooked. I find it mentioned in
the manuscripts of Mr. ROWLANDS; who has given the following inscription:
CUR..... FILIUS CUURICINI EREXIT HUNC LAPIDEM. The author of the History of
Anglesey P. 43. Printed for Dodsley, 1775. 4 to.
also mentions it, but varies in the name of the founder, and his father. His
reading is thus: FILIUS ULRICI EREXIT HUNC LAPIDEM. I am credibly informed that
the inscription is at present illegible; but the style of the memorial induces
me to give it to a Dane: such are extremely frequent in Scandinavia. STODINGUS
fecit erigi lapidem in memoriam ARNONIS filii sui qui profectus est in HARDALAM
Peringskioldi Monum. Suev-gothic, 289.
-- THORSTATUM and GURA fecerunt erigi saxum in memoriam LAFSONIS patris sui
The same, 301.
-- and the imperfect one, like this of Ulric, SAXO lapidem hunc posuit Wormii
Mon. Danica, 501.
, are proofs of the custom in the Baltic kingdoms.

THE Danes frequently invaded Anglesey, and between the years 969 and 972
Godfryd, the son of Harold, subdued the whole island Powel, 34. 62.
: a pious son in one of the times might, according to the custom of his
country, have erected this monument to his father; but from the imperfect state
of the inscription, we are at a loss to know whether it was sepulchral or
votive.

NEWBOROUGH, or more properly Rhos-vair, the British name, was a manor of our
princes. It was divided into two parts; the one consisted of officers of the
household under the prince; which were of two kinds, and had twelve gavels in
land between them: part maintained the Maer-drefyrs, or persons who overlooked
his demesne; the other was for the Garddwyr, certain persons resembling our
cottagers, who possessed small parcels of land called Gardds. Record of
Caernarvon, in Biblioth. Litteraria, 23.
. There were besides eight gavels, which were the property of freeholders; the
posterity of whom enjoyed the same to the very time of my author, Mr. Rowlands.
This was also the feat of justice for the whole commot of Menai, and continued
so long after it became subject to the English. A respect to a royal seat was
still maintained by the new royal possessors. It became a manor of the princes
of Wales. Edward I. erected the town into a corporation, and gave it a gild
mercatory, and other privileges, which were confirmed by parliament in the first
year of Edward III Mr. Rowlands' MSS.
. From this time it was called Newborough. In the latter part of that reign
were found ninety-three houses, thirteen gardens, one orchard, twelve cro^ts,
and sixty small pieces of ground enclosed for the use of the houses. The crown
had its steward for this district, with a salary of ten pounds a year. The
palace and royal chapel existed in the time of Edward III; for it appears by an
inquisition taken here in 1329, before William de Shaldeford, representative of
Richard Earl of Arundel, justiciary of North Wales, that the tenants of the
commot of Menai had been required to put those buildings into repair: but, on
their representing that, if that duty was put in force, they would be of little
or no advantage to the king, the justiciary was directed to enquire into the
truth; and whether it would not be better for him to take an annual sum in lieu
of the repairs, not only of the palace and chapel, but of all the other
buildings on the royal manor Sebright MSS.
In after times it had the honor of sending representatives to the British
parliament. Richard ap Rhydderch ap Myfyrian sat in the third of Henry VIII.
and John ap Robert Llwyd in the first of Edward VI; who in the next year
transferred this honor to Beaumaris. The glory of Newborough is now passed away.

IT now subsists by a manufacture of mats, and Rhosir morhesg ropes, made of
sea reed-grass; a plant of which Queen Elizabeth, in tenderness to such of her
subjects who lived on sandy shores, wisely prohibited the extirpation See the
sad effects of these moveable sands in Mr. Cordiner's Letters, 86, 87. and my
Tour Scotl. 1769, 4th ed. 144. 168.
, in order to prevent the misfortunes which have since happened, of having half
the parish buried in the unstable sands by the rage of tempests.

SUCH is the case of Llanddwyn, LLANDDWYN.
a parish which extends below into the sea, and terminates in a narrow
peninsula: almost the whole is at present covered with sand-hills. We are told
that in the time of Edward III. there were on it no more than eight small
houses, or, as they were then called, weles Rowlands' MSS.
; yet in the reign of Henry VIII. it was one of the richest prebends in the
cathedral of Bangor. Its wealth arose not from the real fertility of the place,
but from the superstition of the common people; from pilgrimages to crosses,
relics, holy wells, ordeals, and what Mr. Rowlands calls (...), or divination
from fishes The same.
In the time of Owen Glyndwr, one Yerwerth Vychan, rector of Llanddoged, made
pretensions to the offerings, and sacrilegiously seized on them; but Griffydd
le Young, chancellor to our hero, interfered, and by a decree of his put a slop
to the invasion of the rights of the place The same, and Hist. Anglesey, 44.
.

ON the peninsula are the ruins of the church, CHURCH.
dedicated to St. Deuwen, daughter of Brychan, one of the holy Colidei, or
primitive Christians of Britain. Near it are the small remains of the
prebendal. house. The first appears to have been no inelegant building. The
laft is noted for the residence of Richard Kyssyu, then rector of Llanddwyn,
and afterward dean of Bangor. He was a strenuous friend to the house of
Lancaster, and here concerted with Sir Rhys ap Thomas, and other Welsh
chieftains, a plan for the bringing in the Duke of Richmond, then in Britany;
to whom they transmitted, by means of fishing-vessels, all necessary
intelligence.

FROM Newborough, I, several years ago, made an excursion to Ahersraw, about
seven miles to the north, in search of another palace of our ancient princes.
They took one of their titles from this place, Princeps de Ahersraw, which
preceded that of Dominus de Snowdon. I crossed, at low water, the arm of the
sea called Malltraeth; LLAN-GADWALADR.
and rode by the church of Llan-Gadwaladr, said to have been founded by
Cadwalladr, last king of the Britons, and made one of the sanctuaries of the
island. Over the door is said to be an inscription in memory of Cadvan,
grandfather to the founder, to this effect.: CATAMANUS Rex sapientissimus
opimutissimus omnium Regums Cambden, ii. Rawlands, 157.
. The stone on which this is inscribed, is said to-be in form of a coffin; and
probably in the former church had a more suitable place.

ABOUT a mile or two farther reach the site of the princely residence. ABERFRAW.
It is now reduced to a few poor houses, seated on the river Ffraw, near a
small bay. Not a vestige is to be seen of its former boast. It was a chief seat
of our princes, and one of the three courts of justice for the principality
Leges Wallicae, 147.
. Here was always kept one of the three copies of the ancient code of laws;
another at Dinevawr in Caermarthenshire; and the third was kept by the
Blegored, or doctors of laws, for their constant use Leges Wallicae, 6.
. This place was of great antiquity, being one of the three fixed on by Roderic
the Great, about the year 870, for the residence of his successors. In 962 it
was ravaged by the Irish Powel, 62.
. An extent was made of Aberfraw in the 13th Edward III; from which may be
learned some of the ancient revenues of the Welsh princes. It appears that part
arose from rents of lands, from the profit of mills and fisheries, and often in
things in kind; but the last were frequently commuted for their value in money.
Thus one place paid XIIIs VIId instead of butter, milk, and services in work;
and another district rendered for CIV sheep, IX hens, and XXXVIIs IId in lieu
of the labor of a hundred and sixty-one days.

BUT to return to the Menai. From Newhorough I visited Llanidan, LLANIDAN.
a seat of Lord Boston's, finely situated on that arm of the sea, commanding
upwards a beautiful, prospect of Caernarvon, and the Snowdon hills. The church,
which is adjacent, was once belonging to the convent of Beddcelert. In 1535 it
followed, the sat of that house. Queen Elizabeth granted it to Edmond Downam
and Peter Ashton; who sold it in 1605 to Richard Prytherch of Myfyrian, whose
daughter married a Llwyd of Llugwy, on the other side of the island. On the
extinction of that family all their estates were bought by Lord Uxbridge, who
left them to his nephew Sir William Irby, the late Lord Boston.

IN the church is a reliquary, made neither of gold nor silver, nor yet
ornamented with precious stones; but of very ordinary gritstone, with a
roof-like cover. Whether it contained any relics of the patron saint, a St.
Aiden, of whom the venerable Bede makes such honorable mention De vita
Cudbercti,,c. 4.
, I cannot say. The church of Durham possessed his cross, three of his teeth,
his head, and two Griffin's eggs Smith's Beda, App. No XV.
. The living is a rectory, but saddled with the churches of Llanedwen,
Llan-ddaniel, and Llanvair y Cwmmwd.

I MUST not pass unnoticed the celebrated stone Maen Mordbwyd, or the stone of
the thigh, now well secured in the wall of this church. In old times it was so
constant to one place, that, let it be carried ever so far, it would be sure of
returning at night. Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, determined to subdue its
loco-motive faculties, fastened it with iron chains to a far greater stone, and
flung it into the sea; but, to the astonishment of all beholders, it was found
the next morning in its usual place Giraldus Itin. Cambr. lib. ii. c. vii. and
Powel's note. Giraldus says, the stone took its name from its shape.
.

I NOW enter on classical ground, and the pious seats of the ancient Druids;
the sacred groves, the altars, and monumental stones. A slight mention of what
I saw must content my reader; who is referred to the works of the celebrated
and learned Mr. Henry Rowlands, the former rector of this place, and to those
of my friend the late reverend Dr. Borlase, who has added fresh illustrations
of these obscure remains.

AT Tre'r Dryw, TRE'R DRYW.
or the habitation of the Arch-Druid, I met with the mutilated remains
described by Mr. Rowlands. His Bryn Gwyn, or Brein Gwyn, or royal tribunal, is
a circular hollow of a hundred and eighty feet in diameter, surrounded by an
immense agger of earth and stones, evidently brought from some other place,
there not being any mark of their being taken from the spot. It has only a
single entrance. This is supposed to have been the grand consistory of the
druidical administration.

Not far from it was one of the Gorseddau, now in a manner dispersed, but once
consisted of a great copped heap of stones, on which sat aloft a Druid
instructing the surrounding people Mona Antiq. 92. tab. iv.
multa de Deorum immortalium vi et potestate disputare, et juventuti tradunt
Caesar. Bell. Gal. lib. vi.
.

HERE were also the relics of a circle of stones, with the Cromlech in the
midst; but all extremely imperfect. Two of the stones are very large; one,
which serves at present as part of the end of a house, is twelve feet seven
inches high, and eight feet broad; and another eleven feet high and
twenty-three feet in girth. Some lesser stones yet remain. This circle, when
complete, was one of the temples of the Druids, in which their religious rites
were performed. It is the conjecture of Mr. Rowlands, that the whole of these
remains were surrounded with a circle of OAKS, and formed a deep and sacred
grove, Tam per se roborum elegunt lucos, neque ulla sacra sine ea fronde
conficiunt Plin. Hist. Not. lib. xv. c. 44.
.

NEAR this is Caer-Le^b Mona Antiq. 88. tab. iii.
, CAER-LE^B.
or the moated entrenchment; of a square form, with a double rampart, and broad
ditch intervening, and a lesser on the outside. Within are foundations of
circular and of square buildings. This Mr. Rowlands supposes to have been the
residence of the arch-druid, and to have given the name, Tre'r Dryw, to the
township in which it stands.

AT Trev-Wry Mona Antiq. tab. iii. fig. 2.
I saw several saint traces of circles of stones, TREV-WRY.
and other vestiges of buildings, all so dilapidated, or hid in weeds, as to
become almost formless. To divert our thoughts from their present dreary view,
let us change the period to that in which they Were tenanted by Bards, who
nightly thence,
Robbed in their flowing vests of innocent white,
Issued, with harps that glitter to the morn,
Hymning immortal strains Mr. Mason's Caractacus.

Bod-drudan, or the habitation of the Draids, Tre'r-Beirdd, or that of the
Bard, and Bodowyr, BODOWYR:
or that of the priests Rowlands, 240.
, are all of them hamlets, nearly surrounding the feat of the chief Druid,
composing the essential part of his suite. At the last I saw a thick Cromlech,
resting on three stones.

THE shore near Porthamel, not far from hence, is famed for being the place
where Suetonius landed, and put an end in this island to the Druid reign. His
infantry passed over in flat-bottom boats, perhaps, at the spot still called
Pant yr Yscraphie The same, 99.
, or the valley of Skiffs. His horse crossed partly by fording, partly by
swimming. The description of the conflict is so animated, that I beg leave to
give it in the words of the Roman historian.

STAT pro littore diversa acies, densa armis virisque, intercursantibus
faeminis in modum furiarum, vest ferali, crinibus dejectis, faces preferebant;
Druidaeque circum, preces diras sublatis ad coelum manibus fundentes. Novitate
aspectus percutere militem, ut quasi haerentibus membris, immobile corpus
vulneribus praeberent. Dein cohortionibus ducis, et se ipse stimulantes, ne
muliebre et fanaticum agmen pavescerent, inserunt signa, sternuntque obvios et
igni suo involvunt. Praesidium posthac impositum vicis, excisque luci, saevis
superstitionibus sacri. Nam cruore captivo adolere aras, et hominum fibris
consulere deos fas habebant TACITI Annals, lib. xiv. c. 30.
ON the shore stood a motley army in close array, and well armed; with women
running wildly about in black attire with disheveled hair, and like the furies
brandishing their torches; surrounded by the Druids, lifting up their hands to
heaven, and pouring forth the most dreadful imprecations. The soldier stood
astonished with the novelty of the sight. His limbs grew torpid, and his body
remaining motionless, resigned to every wound. At length, animated by their
leader, and rouzing one another not to be intimidated with a womanly and
fanatic band, they displayed their ensigns, overthrew all who opposed them, and
flung them into their own fires. After the battle, they placed garrisons in the
towns, and cut down the groves consecrated to the most horrible superstitions:
for the Britons held it right to sacrifice on their altars with the blood of
their captives, and to consult the gods by the inspection of human entrails.

WHAT a scene was this! and how worthy of the pencil of an inspired painter!

THERE are no traces of any Roman works left in this country. Their stay was so
short, that they had not time to form any thing permanent. BRYN GWYDRYN.
At Bryn Gwydryn, behind Llanidan, are two or three dikes and fosses of a
semicircular form, each end of which terminates at a precipice, leaving an
intervening area of no great space. Both from its figure and name, Caer Idris,
I suspect it to be British.

I AM sorry that it is not in my power to give a better account than the
following of that prodigy of learning the reverend HENRY ROWLANDS, vicar of
this parish. His account of the druidical antiquities of this part of the
island, and his comments on them, is a most extraordinary performance,
considering that he never enjoyed any other literary advantages than what he
found in his native isle. It is said that he never even traveled farther than
Conway; but I believe it is certain that Shrewshury was the farthest limits of
his travels. He died in 1723, aged 68, and was interred under a slab of black
Anglesey marble, in the parish of Llanedwen. He was descended from Henry
Rowlands, who died Bishop of Bangor in 1616, and who in 1600 purchased from
Robert Gryffydd of Penrhyn the estate of Plas Gwyn, in the forementioned
parish, which remains to this day in his posterity. The inscription on his tomb
was of his own composing, and is as follows.

M. S.
Depositum
HENRICI ROWLANDS
de Plas Gwyn, Clerici,
Hujus Ecclesiae Vicarii;
Qui hinc cum hisce Exuviis
Per Spiritum JESU,
Animam interea refocillantem,
in ultimo die
Se fore resuscitatum
Pia fide sperabat:
Ac inde,
TRIUMPHANTE MISERICORDIA,
In eternum cum Christo gaudium
Fore susceptum,
Quod maxim anhelabat;
id eft
Esse semper cum Domino.
Obiit 21 die Novembris
Anno Salutis 1723
Aetatis suae 68.
Spiritus ubi vult spirat.
Laus tota Tri-Uni.
Omnia pro nihilo nisi quoe tribuebat egenis,
Ista valent cum arts pereant and scripta fatiscant.


ABOUT three miles from this place is Moel y Don ferry. MOEL Y DON.
It is said; that Aeloedd, king of Dublin, and father to Racwel, mother of
Gryffydd ap Cynan, built a castle here, called in old times Castle Aeloedd
Frenin, but by the country people Bon y Dom Life of Gryffydd ap Cynen. Sebright
MSS.
. The army of Edward I. in 128, ENGLISH DEFEAT.
made here an attempt fatal to many a gallant man. He landed his forces in this
island, and, after reducing to obedience the few inhabitants who had not taken
the oath of fealty to him, built a bridge of boats near this place, some say at
the very spot where Agricola passed. The Welsh, aware of his design, flung up
entrenchments to secure the entrance into the mountains. Luke de Tany, a
gallant commander, who had lately come from Gascony with a number of Gascon and
Spanish troops, rashly passed over the unfinished bridge at low water, in
contempt perhaps of the enemy: none appeared; but on the flowing of the tide,
which cut off access to the nearest part of the bridge, the Welsh suddenly
rushed on them with hideous shouts, flew numbers, and forced the remainder into
the sea. On this occasion perished Tany himself, Roger Clifford the younger,
thirteen knights, seventeen young gentlemen, and two hundred soldiers; William
Latimer alone escaped by the goodness of his horse, which swam with him to the
bridge Powel, 372.
.

LET us suppose a panic at this time to have seized the English forces: yet, as
that must have been unforeseen by the Welsh, ANCIENT WEAPONS OF THE WELSH.
let us pay due praise to the intrepidity of my countrymen, at a period in
which (in comparison of the well-appointed soldiery of other countries) they
fought nearly unarmed. A poet of the latter end of the thirteenth century thus
describes the character and accoutrements of the army of ancient Britons, led
by our valiant prince Richard Coeur de Lion into France.

Gens Wallensis habet hoc natural per omnes
Indigenas, primis proprium quod servat ab annis.
Pro domibus sylvas, bellum pro pace frequentat.
Irasci facilis, agilis per devia curfu,
Nec foleis plantas, caligis nec crura gravantur.
Frigus docta pati, nulli cessura labori.
Vest brevi, corpus nulli oneratur ab armis*
Nec munit thorace latus, nec Casside frontem.
Sola gerens, hosti caedem quibus inferat, arma,
Clavam cum jaculo, venabula, gesa, bipennam,
Arcum cum pharetris, nodosaque tela, vel hastam
Assiduis gaudens praedis, fusoque cruore William Brito, as quoted in Camden's
Remains, 10.

AT a small distance from Moel y Don I entered into the fine woods of Sir
Nicholas Bayley, WOODS.
skirting the Menai for a confiderable way. The wooded part of the island is on
this side. It commences at Llanidan, and recalls the ancient name of Anglesey,
Ynys Dywyll, or the Dark Island, on account of the deep shade of its groves:
but at present it is (except in this part) entirely divested of trees; and the
climate so averse to their growth, that in most parts it is with great
difficulty the gentry can raise a plantation round their houses.

PLAS NEWYDD, PLAS NEWYDD.
the seat of Sir Nicholas Bayley, lies close upon the water, protected on three
sides by venerable oaks and ashes. The view up and down this magnificent
river-like strait is extremely fine. The shores are rocky; those on the
opposite side covered with woods; and beyond soar a long range of Snowdonian
alps. Here stood a house built by Gwenllian, a descendant of Cadrod Hardd Plas
Gwyn MSS.
. The mansion has been improved, and altered to a castellated form, by the
present owner.

IN the woods are some very remarkable druidical antiquities, Behind the house
are to be seen two vast Cromlechs. CROMLECHS.
The upper stone of one is twelve feet seven inches long, twelve broad, and
four thick, supported by five tall stones. The other is but barely separated
from the first: is almost a square, of five feet and a half, and supported by
four stones. The number of supporters to Cromlechs are merely accidental, and
depend on the size or form of the incumbent stone. These are the most
magnificent we have, and the highest from the ground; for a middle-sized horse
may easily pass under the largest.

DR. BORLASE has shown the improbability of these stones ever being designed or
used as altars. The figure proves the impossibility of making fires, or
performing sacrifices on their sloping summits; and almost all which I have
seen have an inclination. It is reasonable to suppose them to have been
sepulchral monuments, and that the body might be lodged in the space beneath;
and near the monument divine honors might be paid, or sacrifices performed to
the manes of the dead See what the learned author offers in support of his
opinion, Antiq, Cornwall, p. 210. and the following.
.

THIS species of monument is to be found in most parts of Europe; in
Scandinavia Wormii Manum. Dan. 7.
, in Holland Oudheinkundige Brieven, etc. tab. i.
, and in France: in the last, the Pierre Levee, near Poitiers, is a stupendous
specimen Braunii Civitat. v. 18.
. They extend even farther south; for Mr. Armstrong gives a drawing of one of
this nature in Minorca Hist. Minorca.
They vary in form: in many the space between the supporters is closed up with
stones of greater or lesser sizes Exemplified in Monfaucon, Supplem. v. tab.
lxv. highest figure.
and thus formed security to the CROMLEH AT PLA^SNEWYDD.
remains of the deceased therein deposited. Probably all those which we see in
our island might originally have been thus closed up; but in time destroyed,
either through the sacrilegious hope of finding wealth deposited with the
corpses, or, as is the case often at present, for the sake of applying the
stones to oeconomical uses. Others again are quite bedded in the Carnedd, or
heap of stones; of which instances may be produced in Llan Faelog, in this
island, in that of Arran Voy. to the Hebrides, 2d ed. 208.
, and in the county of Meireonedd Tour in Wales, vol. ii. 110. 111.
.

NOT far from the Cromlech is a large Carnedd: CARNEDD.
part has been removed, and within was discovered a cell about seven feet long
and three wide, covered at top with two flat stones, and lined on the sides
with others. To get in I crept over a flag, placed across the entrance. On the
top of the stone were two semicircular holes, of size sufficient to take in the
human neck; it is conjectured, that above might have been another; so that both
together might perform the office of a stocks. It is indeed conjecture, yet not
an improbable one, that in this place had been kept the wretches destined for
sacrifice; as it is well known that they performed those execrable rites, and
often upon captives who had suffered long imprisonment Borlase Antiq. Cornwall.
, perhaps in cells similar to this.

A LITTLE below Plas Newydd, on the Caernarvonshire side, VAENOL.
appear the extensive woods of Vaenol, with the old house of the same name.
This place had long been the residence of the Williams, a branch of the family
of Edneved Vychan, and which were honored with a baronetage June 15th 1622. Sir
William Williams, the last of the line, was a man of profligate life; had been
married, but had no issue. He got acquainted with Sir Bourchier Wrey of
Trebitch, and a young man brought up to the law. In a drunken sit he was
prevaled on to make a will, and dispose of his whole estate to Sir Bourchier
for the terms of his life, and that of his brother the reverend Chichester
Wrey, and the remainder to King William in see. LEFT TO KING WILLIAM.
The young lawyer also lest to himself 540 l. annuity in see, the odd forty
pounds toward the trouble and expense of collecting the rest. He also
purchased Sir Bourchier's life estates, which his representatives enjoyed till
the death of the reverend Mr. Wrey. On which the late Mr. Smith, of Tedworth in
Hampshire, took possession of it by virtue of a grant from King William to his
ancestor, a commissioner of the salt office: and at present the whole, to the
amount of upwards of 4000 l. a year, is enjoyed by his great nephew Ashton
Smith, Esquire

FROM Plas Newydd I continued my journey within sight of the water. At Craig y
Ddinas I was irresistably delayed by feasting my eyes with the fine view of the
noble curvature of the Menai. The annexed view is given with the utmost
fidelity. THE SWELLY.
Not far from hence I rode toward the shore, to admire the furious current of
the Swelly, or Pwll Keris, a part where, by opposition of rocks, and the
narrowness of the channel, are great over-falls and violent whirlpools, during
the time when the flood or ebb makes strong. At low water the channel, for a
considerable space, appears pointed with rocks black and horrible. The fury of
the tide amongst them, at the times I mention, is inconceivable, unless by the
navigator. I (when very young) ventured myself in a small boat VIEW on the
MENAL.
during the greatest rage, and never shall forget the rapid evolutions between
rock and rock, amidst the boiling waves, and mill-race current. At high water
all is still. This is a great obstacle to the navigation of large vessels,
which must consult the critical season, and a good pilot. The rest of this
strait is secure: its whole length is about fourteen miles; ten from Bay glass,
near Beaumaris, to Caernarvon, and four from thence to its entrance at
Abermenai.

A LITTLE lower down, on a small rocky peninsula, stands the church of
Llandyssilio, jutting far into the water; a most dreary cure. It is remarkable
that most of the seventy-four parishes, which this island is divided into, have
their churches not remote from the shores.

PORTH-AETHWY, PORTH-AETHWY.
the most general ferry into Anglesey, is immediately below the church. The
passage of cattle at this place is very great: I cannot enumerate them; but it
is computed that the island sends forth annually from twelve to fifteen
thousand heads, and multitudes of sheep and hogs. It is also computed that the
remaining stock of cattle is thirty thousand Hist. Anglesy, 6.
. My same authority says, that in 1770 upwards of ninety thousand bushels of
corn were exported. He reckons only barley, rye, and oats; but I have seen most
incomparable wheat growing on the island. The improvement in husbandry has
greatly increased since the suppression of smuggling from the Isle of Man;
before that time every farmer was mounted on some high promontory, expecting
the vessel with illicit trade: but since that period, he sets in earnest to
industry and cultivation. Not but that the island was in most remote time
famous for its fertility. Mon, Mam Gymry, Anglesey, the nursing-mother of
Wales, was a title it assumed even in the twelfth century Giraldas Itin, Cambr.
.

A BARBAROUS accident in the feudal system prevaled in this island, A BARBAROUS
CUSTOM.
and possibly in many other parts. Here was exemplified the power of a lord to
sell his vassals and their offspring, as he would the cattle of his estate. It
was done in the township of Porth-aethwy, many years after the reign of our
princes Rowlands' Mona Antiq. 122.
. The deed of sale in this instance is not extant; but I find among Mr.
Rowlands' three specimens, of which the following is the full form of the cruel
usage.

EDNYFED Vychan ap Ednyfed, alias dictus Ednyfed ap Arthelw uz Davydd ap
Gryffydd et Howel ap Davydd ap Ryryd, alias dictus Howel ap Arthelw uz Davydd
ap Gryffydd, Liberi tenentes Dni Regis villae de Rhandir Gadog, etc. dedimus et
confirmavimus Willimo ap Gryffydd ap Gwilim armigero et libero tenenti de
Porthamel, etc. septem nativos nostros; viz. Howel ap Davydd Dew, Matto ap
Davydd Dew, Tevan ap Evan Ddu, Llewelyn ap Davydd Dew, Davydd ap Matto ap
Davydd Dew, Howel ap Matto ap Davydd Dew, et Llewelyn ap Evan Coke, cum eorum
sequelis tum procreatis tuam procreandis ac omnibus bonis catellis, etc.
habend. etc. praedictos nativos nostros, etc. praefato Willimo Giyffydd ap
Gwilim heredibus et assignatis suis in perpetuum. Datum apud Rhandir Gadog, 20
die Junii, an. Henr. 6 ti, 27 mo Rowlands' MSS.
.

THE country from hence, and quite to Holyhead (twenty-five miles) right and
left, is dreary, woodless, hedgeless, rising into small hills, watered with
numberless rills, and fertile in grass and corn.

I CONTINUED my ride near the Menai, which now widens considerably. The
opposite limits are inexpressibly beautiful, lofty, and finely clothed with
hanging woods. NOBLE VIEWS.
Bangor opens on the Caernarvonshire side; and in front is a magnificent bay,
bounded by the great promontory Pen Maen Mawr, and the vast Llandidno,
apparently insulated; and the estuary of the river Conwwy flows at its bottom
between those noble headlands. This prospect is seen to best advantage from
that beautiful spot the Green, near the castle of Beaumaris: from whence may be
seen, in addition, Priestholm island, and the semilunar bay from thence to the
town; the fortress itself; Baron Hill, and its elegant improvements; nor must
Red Hill, the house of Mr. Sparrow, seated at the head of a wooded dingle,
directing the eye to great part of this delicious view, be left out of the
description.

THE town of Beaumaris is, BEAUMARIS.
as the name implies, pleasantly seated on a low land at the water's edge; is
neat, and well built, and one street is very handsome. Edward I. created the
place; for, after founding the castles of Caernarvon and Conway, he discovered
that it was necessary to put another curb on my headstrong countrymen. CASTLE.
He built this fortress in 1295, and fixed on a marshy spot, near the chapel of
St. Meugan, such as gave him opportunity of forming a great fosse round the
castle, and of filling it with water from the sea. He also cut a canal, in
order to permit vessels to discharge their lading beneath the walls Sebright
MSS.
: and, as a proof of the existence of such a convenience, there were within
this century iron rings affixed to them, for the purpose of mooring the ships
or boats. The marsh was in early times of far greater extent than at present,
and covered with fine bullrushes Sebright MSS. and Pla Gwyn MSS.
. There is even a strong tradition that one Helig ap Clunog had great
possessions, which extended even to Dwygyfyechau, and fair house where now the
sea flows; all which were suddenly overwhelmed: and it is pretended that there
may still. be seen, at very low ebbs, ruins of houses, and a causeway from
Priestholm pointing toward Penmaen Mawr plas Gwyn MSS.
.

THE lands, on which Edward built the castle, were private property: and it
appears he made them full satisfaction; and, among other recompenses, bestowed
on Eneon ap Meredydd, Gryffydd ap Evan, and Eneon ap Tegerin, lands in the
township of Earianell, and Tre'r Ddol, free from rent or service. The castle
itself being built on their ground Rowlands' MSS.
.

EACH of Edward's, three castles differs in form. This has lest clame to
beauty, not having the height or elegance of Caernarvon or Conwwy. The exterior
walls are guarded by ten strong round towers. These are the case to the castle,
which stands within at a considerable equidistant space; is far superior in
height to the former, and has also its round towers. Within is a square of one
hundred and ninety feet, or, as Mr. Gross expresses it, HALL.
a square with the corners canted off. The great hall has five windows in
front, is seventy feet long, and twentythree and a half broad. The approach
seems to have been through a sub-hall, by a flight of steps.

CHAPEL in BEAUMARIS CASTLE.


WITHIN, the walls on one side is a beautiful chapel, CHAPEL.
in form of a theater, the sides ornamented with Gothic arches, and the roof
supported by ribs springing from elegant pilasters; between each of which is a
narrow window, and behind some are small closets, gained out of the thickness
of the wall, probably allotted to the officers, or persons of rank. A narrow
gallery runs within the whole space of the castle walls.

THE entrance faces the sea; and near it is a long narrow advanced work, called
the Gunners Walk.

THE first: governor, was Sir William Pickmore, a Gascon knight, appointed by
Edward I. CONSTABLE OF THE CASTLE.
There was a constable of the castle, and a captain of the town. The first had
an annual fee of forty pounds, the last, of twelve pounds three shillings. and
four pence; and the porter of the gate of Beaumaris had nine pounds two
shillings and six pence. Twenty-four soldiers were allowed for the guard of the
castle and town, at four pence a day to each Dodridge, 58.
.

THE constable of the castle was always captain of the town, except in one
instance: in the 36th of Henry VI. Sir John Boteler. held the first office, and
Thomas Norreys the other.

THE castle was extremely burdensome to the country: quarrels were frequent
between the garrison and the country people. In the time of Henry VI. a bloody
fray happened, in which David ap Evan ap Howel of Llwydiarth, and many others
were slain.

FROM the time of Sir Rowland Villeville, alias Brittayne, reputed base son of
Henry VII. and constable of the castle, the garrison was withdrawn till the
year 1642, when Thomas Cheadle, deputy to the Earl of Dorset, then constable,
put into it men and ammunition. In 1643, Thomas Bulkeley, Esquire soon after
created Lord Bulkeley, succeeded: his son, Colonel Richard Bulkeley, and
several gentlemen of the country, held it for the king till June 1646, TAKEN IN
1646.
when it surrendered on honorable terms to General Mytton, who made Captain
Evans his deputy governor. In 1653, the annual expense of the garrison was
seventeen hundred and three pounds.

EDWARD I. when he built the town, TOWN.
surrounded it with walls, made it a corporation, and endowed it with great
privileges, and lands to a considerable value. He removed the ancient
freeholders, by exchange of property, into other countries. Henlls, near the
town, was the seat of Gwerydd ap Rhys Goch, one of fifteen tribes, and of his
posterity till this period, when Edward removed them to Boddle Wyddan in
Flintshire, and bestowed their ancient patrimony on the corporation Plas Gwyn
MSS.
. It sends one member to parliament. Its first representative was Maurice
Gryffydd, who sat in the 7th year of Edward VI Willis's Notitia Parliam. iii. 23
.

THERE is very good anchorage for ships in the bay which lies before the town;
THE BAY.
and has seven fathom water even at the lowest ebb. Vessels often find security
here in hard gales. The town has no trade of any kind, yet has its customhouse
for the casual reception of goods.

THE ferry FERRY.
lies near the town, and is passable at low water. It was granted by charter to
the corporation in the 4th of Queen Elizabeth. I find an order from Edward II.
to Robert Power, chamberlain of North Wales, to inspect into the state of the
boat, which was then out of repair; and, in case it was feasible, to cause it
to be made fit for use, at the expense of the baileywick: but if the boat
proved past repair, a new one was to be built, and the expense allowed by the
king. It appears that the people of Beaumaris paid annually, for the privilege
of a ferry, thirty shillings into the exchequer; but by this order it seems
that the king was to find the boat Sebright MSS.
. After passing the channel, the distance over the sands to Aber in
Caernarvonshire, the point the passenger generally makes for, is four miles.
The sands are called Traeth Telaven, and Wylofaen, or the Place of Weeping,
from the shrieks and lamentations of the inhabitants when it was overwhelmed by
the sea, in the days of Helig ap Clunog.

THE church is dependant on Llandegvan, CHURCH.
which is in the gift of Lord Bulkeley. The former is called the chapel of the
Blessed Virgin; yet in ancient writings one aile is called St. Mary's chapel,
and another that of St. Nicholas. In the first is a beautiful monument of a
knight and his lady in white alabaster, placed recumbent on an altar tomb. It
had been removed to this place on the dissolution, from the religious house at
Llanvaes, and the memory and names of the persons represented lost. On the
south side of the altar is a stone with the following inscription: how it came
here, or for what purpose, I cannot discover.

HENRICUS SYDNEY, ordinis Garterii, miles, presidiens ex consiliis marchiis
Walliae, Dominus deputatus in Hibernia.
ANTONUS SENTLEGER, ordinis Garterii, miles, quondam deputatus in Hibernia.
FRANCISCUS AGARD, armiger, ex consiliis in Hibernia.
EDWARDUS WATERHOWS me posuit.
GWILLIELMUS THWAYTES, armiger, obiit 20 die Januarii 1565. Nosce Teipsum. --
Fide et Taciturnitate.


AT a small distance from the town, on the shore, LLANVAES.
stand the remains of Llanvaes, or the Friars. It was founded by Prince
Llewelyn ap Jerwerth, and, according to the general tradition of the country,
over the grave of his wife Joan, daughter of King John, who died in 1237, and
was interred on the spot. Here also were interred a son of a Danish king, Lord
Clifford, and many barons and knights who fell in the Welsh wars Leland's
Collect. i. 65. and Henry V's patent in Sebright MSS.
. It was dedicated to St. Francis, and consecrated by Howel bishop of Bangor, a
prelate who died in 1240. The religious were Franciscans, or minor friars.
Their church and house were destroyed, and their lands wasted, in the
insurrection made soon after the death of Llewelyn, our last prince, by his
relation Madoc. Edward II. in consideration of their misfortunes, remitted to
them the payment of the taxes due to him, which before the war were levied at
the rate of twelve pounds ten shillings. These friars were strong favorers of
Glyndwr Henry, in his first march against Owen, plundered the convent, put
several of the friars to the sword, and carried away the rest; but afterward
set them at liberty, made restitution to the place, but peopled it with English
recluses. It possibly was again reduced to ruin; for Henry V. by patent,
establishes here eight friars, but directs that two only should be Welsh
Sebright MSS.
.

AT the dissolution, Henry VIII. sold the convent, and its possessions, to one
of his courtiers. They became in later days the property of a family of the
name of White (now extinct) who built here a good mansion. It of late became,
by purchase, the property of Lord Bulkeley. The church is turned into a barn,
and the coffin of the Princess Joan now serves for a watering-trough. I am
informed, that on the farm of Cremlyn Monach, once the property of the friery,
is cut on a great stone the effigies of its patron St. Francis; and that his
head is also cut on the stone of a wall, in a street of Beaumaris, to which all
passengers were to pay their respects, under pain of a forfeit.

ABOUT the year 818, BATTLE.
a bloody battle was fought near Llanvaes: neither occasion or parties are
mentioned; but by the text Powel, 24.
I guess it to have been between Egbert king of the West Saxons, and the Welsh;
for the former, in the reign of Merfyn Frych, carried his arms into all parts
of North Wales.

A LITTLE farther is Castle Aber Llienawg, CASTLE ABER LLIENAWG.
a small square fort, with the remains of a little round tower at each corner.
In the middle one stood a square tower. A fosse surrounds the whole. A hollow
way is carried quite to the shore, and at its extremity is a large mound of
earth, designed to cover the landing. This castle was founded by Hugh Lupus
Earl of Chester, and Hugh the Red Earl of Shrewsbury, in 1098, when they made
an invasion, and committed more savage barbarities on the poor natives,
especially on one Kenred, a priest, than ever stained the annals of any
country. Providence sent Magnus king of Norway to revenge the cruelties. His
coming was to all appearance casual. He offered to land, but was opposed by the
earls. Magnus stood in the prow of his ship, and, calling to him a most expert
bowman, they at once directed their arrows at the Earl of Shrewsbury, who stood
all armed on the shore. An arrow pierced his brain through one of his eyes, the
only defenseless part Terfaei Hist. Norveg. iii. 423.
The victor, seeing him spring up in the agonies of death, insultingly cried
out, in his own language, Leit loupe -- Let him dance Girald. Iter. Cambr. 867.
.

THIS fort was garrisoned fo lately as the time of Charles I; when it was kept
for the parliament by Sir Thomas Cheadle; but was taken by Colonel Robinson in
1645 or 6 Plas Gwyn MSS.
.

ABOUT a mile farther I visited the Priory of Penmon, PENMON PRIORY
placed, like the former, on the shore. The remains are the ruinous refectory,
and the church; part of the last is in present use. Within is a small monument,
informing us that Sir Thomas Wilford, of Ildington in Kent (one of whose
daughters married Sir Richard Bulkeley) died January 25th, 1645. About a mile
from the shore is the little island of Priestholm, St. Seiriol, or Glannauch,
which perhaps might have been the principal residence of the religious, for the
priory goes under both names: usually they were called Canonici de insula
Glannauch Dugdale Monast. ii. 338.
. Probably part might reside on the main land, to look after their property,
and others be engaged in acts of devotion in their retirement. The only remains
of their residence is a square tower; but abundance of human bones scattered up
and down, are strong proofs of its reputed sanctity, and the superstitious wish
of people to have this made the place of their interment. The first recluses of
this island, according to Giraldus, were hermits; of whom (as usual) he tells a
superstitious tale, that whenever they disagreed, they were plagued with swarms
of mice; which quitted them as soon as they had laid aside their animosity
Girald, Itin. Cambr. lib. ii. c. 6. p. 868.
Their successors were black monks, dedicated to St. Mary, endowed, if not
founded, by Llewelyn ap Jorwerth, before the year 1221 Tavner, 699.
The Prior was one of the three spiritual lords of Anglesey. At the dissolution
the revenues were valued at 47 l. 15 s. 3 d. in the whole, or 40 l. 17 s. 9 d.
clear; granted in the 6th of Queen Elizabeth to John More.

THE channel, PRIESTHOLM.
or, as it is called, the Sound, between the main land and Priestholm is very
deep, and is the common passage for ships to and from the road of Beaumaris. On
the other side is the East passage, which, at low water, is between the island
and the point of Traeth Telaven, little more than a quarter of a mile broad,
and navigable for only very small vessels. The island is about a mile long,
extremely lofty, and bounded by precipices, except on the side opposite to
Penmon, and even there the ascent is very steep. The land slopes greatly from
the summit to the edge of the precipices. During part of summer the whole
swarms with birds of passage. The slope on the side is animated with the PUFFIN
AUKS, PUFFINS.
Br. Zool. i. No 232. which incessantly squall round you, alight, and disappear
into their burrows; or come out, stand erect, gaze at you in a most grotesque
manner, then take flight, and either perform their evolutions about you, or
seek the sea in search of food.

THEY appear first about the fifth, or tenth of April; but quit the place,
almost to a bird, twice or thrice before they settle. Their first employ is the
forming of burrows; which falls to the share of the males, who are so intent on
the business as to suffer themselves at that time to be taken by the hand. Some
few save themselves the trouble of forming holes, and will dispossess the
rabbits; who, during the Puffin season, retire to the other side of the island.

THEY lay one white egg. Males, as well as females, perform the office of
sitting, relieving each other when they go to feed. The young are hatched in
the beginning of July. The parents have the strongest affection for them; and
if laid hold of by the wings, will give themselves most cruel bites on any
part of the body they can reach, as if actuated by despair: and when released,
instead of flying away, will often hurry again into the burrow to their young.
The noise they make when caught is horrible, and not unlike the efforts of a
dumb person to speak. This affection ceases at the time of remigration, which
is most exactly about the eleventh, of August. They then go off, to a single
bird, and leave behind the unfledged young of the later hatches a prey to the
Peregrine Falcon, which watches the mouth, of the holes for their appearance,
compelled as they must soon be by hunger to come out.

THE food of these birds is sprats, FOOD.
or sea-weeds, which makes PUFFIN AUK.
them excessively rank; yet the young are pickled, and preserved by spices, and
by some people much admired.

IT appears certain that the Puffins do not breed till their third year. THEIR
BILLS. CHANGE IN.
The proof arises from the observations made by the reverend Mr. Davies on the
different forms of the bills, among the thousands of this species which he saw
wrecked, as I have mentioned in page 192. He remarked them in their several
periods of life. Those which he supposes to have been of the first year, were
small, weak, destitute of any furrow, and of a dusky color; those of the second
year, were considerably larger and stronger, lighter colored, and with a faint
vestige of the furrow at the base; those of more advanced years, were of the
vivid colors, and great strength. Among the myriads which annually resort to
Priestholm, not an individual has ever been observed which had not its bill of
an uniform growth. Perhaps the same remark may hold good in respect to the
RAZOR-BILL, Br. Zool. i. No 230, Mr. Davies having found multitudes with bills
far inferior in strength to those which haunt the island; of an uniform black
color, and without the characteristic white furrow, and black grooves.

The channel between Priestholm and Anglesey has produced some very uncommon
fish. FISH.
The Beaumaris SHARK, Br. Zool iii. No 50; the MORRIS, No 67; and the
trifurcated HAKE, No 84, are new species taken in this sea. I was indebted to
the late Mr. William Morris of Holyhead, for that on which I bestowed his name.
The reverend Mr. Hugh Davies favored me with two others. The new Mussel, called
the umbilicated, Br. Zool. iv. No 76, is also frequently dredged up in the
neighborhood of this isle

THE Smirnium Olusatrum, PLANTS.
or Alexanders, almost covers the south-west end of the island, and is greedily
eaten (boiled) by sailors who are just arrived from long voyages. The Iris
Foetidissima, or stinking Gladwin, is common about the square tower, and is
frequently made into a poultice with oatmeal, and used by the country people
with success in the quincy.

I RETURNED to Beaumaris, and from thence visited Baron-Hill. BARON-HILL.
The seat of Lord Bulkeley, placed at the head of an extensive lawn sloping
down to the town, backed and winged by woods, which are great embellishments to
the country. The founder of Baron-Hill was Sir Richard Bulkeley, a most
distinguished personage of the name I will not here break in on my Tour with
his history; but, as it may merit the reader's attention, I refer him to the
Appendix.
. He built it in 1618: before that time the residence of the family was at
Court Mawr in the subjacent town, and afterward in another house, called Old
Place. The present seat has of late been wholly altered, with excellent taste,
by its noble owner, by the advice of that elegant architect Mr. Samuel Wyat.

THE view is justly the boast of the island. The sea forms a most magnificent
bay, with the Menai opening into it with the grandeur of an American river. The
limit of the water in front is a semicircular range of rocks and mountains, the
chief of Snowdonia, with tops spiring to the clouds, and their bottoms richly
cultivated, sloping gently to the water edge. The great promontory Penmaen
Mawr, and the enormous mass of Llandudno, are rude but strinking features, and
strong contrasts to the softer parts of the scenery.

I PROCEEDED on my journey, CROMLECH.
and at Trevawr passed by a great and rude Cromlech, with the ruins of others
adjacent. Reach Plas Gwyn, PLAS GWYN.
the seat of my friend Paul Panton, Esquire in right of his first wise Jane,
daughter of William Jones, Esquire The house was built by Mr. Jones, and may be
reckoned among the best of the island. Here are preserved two portraits, heads
of two prelates, natives of Wales. Humphrey Humphreys, who died bishop of
Hereford in 1712, aged 63. He was painted by Mrs. Mary Beale, when he was
bishop of Bangor; and is represented in lawn sleeves, with dark hair, and a
good countenance. The other prelate is Robert Morgan, who died bishop of the
same diocese in 1673, and is recorded to have been a considerable benefactor to
his cathedral. He is dressed like the former; has short gray hair, a close
black cap, and hard countenance.

FROM Plas Gwyn I made an excursion to Traeth Coch, or Redwharf, REDWHARF.
a large bay covered with a firm sand; which, on the west side, has so large a
mixture of shells, as to be used as a manure in all parts of the island within
reasonable distance. On the east side, about three miles from Plas Gwyn, near
the shore, are two rounded mounts on each side of a deep gully leading toward
Llanddona church. These seemed to have been the work of the Danes, cast up to
protect their vessels in their plundering excursions; a calamity to which, it
appears from the writing of our poets, this island was much subject.

ABOVE Llanddona is a high hill, called Bwrdd Arthur, BWRDD ARTHURY
or Arthur's round table: the true name was probably Din, or Dinas Sulwy; for a
church immediately beneath bears that of Llanvihangle Din-Sulwy. On the top of
it is a great British post, surrounded by a double row of rude stones with
their sharp points uppermost; and in some parts the ramparts are formed of
small stones. In the area are vestiges of oval buildings: the largest is formed
with two rows of flat stones set an end. These had been the temporary
habitations of the possessors. It had been a place of vast strength; for,
besides the artificial defense, the hill slopes steeply on all sides, and the
brink, next to the ramparts, are mostly precipitous. It is worth while to
ascend this hill for the sake of the vast prospect; an intermixture of sea,
rock, and alps, most savagely great.

ABOVE it, the reverend Mr. Hugh Davies pointed out to me the Hypericum
Montanum; and beneath, on the west side, the Cystus Hirsutus.

I DESCENDED to the church of Llan-jestyn, LLAN-JESTYN.
remarkable for the tomb of its tutelar saint, St. Estyn, or Jestyn, son of
Geriant, a worthy knight of Arthur's round table, slain by the Saxons at the
siege of London! The figure of the saint represents a man with a hood on his
head, a great round beard, and whiskers on upper and under lip. He has on a
long cloak fastened by a broche: in one hand is a staff with the head of some
beast on the top; in the other is a scroll with an inscription: round his long
cassock is a sash and long cord. This appears by the inscription to have been a
votive offering. I shall give it as copied by my worthy and ingenious friend,
the honorable DAINES BARRINGTON Archaelogia, v. 146.
Hic jacet Santtus Yestinus cui Gwenllian, Filia Madoc et Gryffyt ap Gwilym,
optulit in oblaco^em istam imaginem p. salute animarum S. By the cord it is
evident, that the pious Gwenllian thought St. Jestyn to have been a Franciscan;
a piece of anachronism not at all uncommon in early times.

ANOTHER excursion was to Penmynnydd, PENMYNNYD.
about two miles south of Plas Gwyn, once the residence of the ancestors of
Owen Tudor, second husband to Catherine of France, queen dowager of Henry V;
"who being," as honest Halle informs us, young and lustye, following more her
own appetyte than frendely consaill, and regardyng more her private affection
then her open honor, took to husband privily (in 1428) a goodly gentylman, and
a beautiful person, garniged with many godly gifts both of nature and of
grace, OWEN TUDOR.
called Owen Teuther, a man brought forth and come of the noble lignage and
ancient line of Cadwalader, the last king of the Britonnes Halle's Chr. 41.
. The match, important in its consequences, restored the British races of
princes to tliis kingdom, No more our long-lost Arthur we bewail:
All-hail, ye genuine kings; Britannia's issue, hail!
These reigned long, under the title of the house of Tudor; the mixed race
having ceased on the accession of Henry VII. grandson to our illustrious
countryman.

OWEN himself was unfortunate. He lost his royal consort in 1437, after she had
brought him three sons and one daughter, Edmund, Jaspar, and Owen; the last
embraced a monastic life Sandford's Geneal. 291.
in the abbey of Westminster, and died soon after: the daughter died in her
infancy. It appears, that after the death of their mother, Edmund and Jaspar
most respectfully were placed under the care of Catherine de la Pole, daughter
of Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, and abbess of Berking. A petition from
her, dated 1440, appears on record for the payment of certain money due to her
on their account Rymer, x. 828.
During the life of the queen, the marriage had been winked at, notwithstanding
a law had been made after that event, enacting that no person, under severe
penalties, should marry a queen dowager of England, without the special license
of the king Drake's Parliam. Hist. ii. 211.
On the death of Catherine all respects ceased to her spouse: he was seized,
and committed first to Newgate, from which he escaped by the assistance of his
confessor and servant. On being retaken, he was delivered to the custody of the
Earl of Suffolk, constable of the castle of Wallingford Rymer, x. 685.
, and after some time was again committed to Newgate The same.
He made his escape a second time. The length of his second imprisonment does
not appear. After a considerable period, high honors were conferred on his two
eldest sons, half brothers to the king. In the year 1452, they were both
created earls; Edmund was made Earl of Richmond, and Jaspar, Earl of Pembroke.
Henry, about this time, was disturbed by the open clame of the Duke of York to
the succession, and found it prudent to strengthen his interest by all possible
means. The Welsh, flattered by the honors bestowed on their young countrymen,
ever after faithfully adhered to the house of Lancaster.

OWEN had besides a natural son, called Dafydd, knighted by his nephew Henry
VII. who also bestowed on him in marriage Mary, the daughter and heiress of
John Bohun of Midherst, in Sussex, and with her a great inheritance Cambden, i.
204. Dugdale Baron, i. 187.
Owen was taken no notice of till the year 1460, when, as the patent expresses
it, in regard of his good services, he had a grant of the parks, and the
agistment of the parks in the lordship of Denbigh, and the wodewardship of the
same lordship Rymer, xi. 439.
The year following, he fought valiantly under the banners of his son Jaspar,
at the battle of Mortimer's Cross; would not quit the field, but was taken with
several other Welsh gentlemen Among whom were Dafydd Llovyd and Morgan ap
Reuther. Holinshed, 660.
, beheaded with them soon after at Hereford, and interred in the church of the
Gray Friars in that city Leland Itin. iv. 86. viii. 36.
.

NOTWITHSTANDING the birth of Owen was calumniated, he certainly was of very
high descent. Henry VII. early in his reign, issued a commission to Sir John
Leiaf, priest, Gutten Owen, and a number of others, to make enquiry into his
paternal descent; and they, from our Welsh chronicles, proved incontestably,
that he was lineally descended by issue male, saving one woman, from Brutus son
of Aeneas the Trojan, and that he was son to Brute in fivescore degrees See the
return of the commission, etc. in Wynn's Hist. Wales, 331. etc.
. I shall drop a little short of this long descent. Owen Tudor was assuredly of
high blood. He was seventh in descent from Ednyfed Vychan, counselor, and
leader of the armies of Llewelyn the Great, and a successful warrior against
the English. His Of a noble race was Shenkin, of the line of Owen Tudor. origin
was from Marchudd, one of the fifteen tribes. Ednyfed's wife was Gwenllian,
daughter of Rhys, prince of South Wales: so that he might boast of two royal
descents, and deliver down a posterity not unworthy of the British empire.

OWEN must have been the instrument of his own advancement, and have owed it
entirely to his personal merit. His grandfather Tudor ap Gronw was a man of
great valor, a favorite of Edward III. and received from him the honor of
knighthood. He died and was buried September 19th 1367, and was interred at the
friery at Bangor. His fourth son Meredydd was in no higher station than
Scutifer to the bishop of Bangor. Having committed a murder, he fled his
country, and lived in exile; during which time his wife was delivered of Owen,
the subject of these pages. By what means he introduced himself to the English
court does not appear; most probable by military services, the usual road to
honors in those days.

THE remains of the residence of the Tudors are, HOUSE OF PENHYNNYDD.
the door of the gateway: part of the house, and the great chimney-piece of the
hall, are to be seen in the present farm-house. Some coats of arms, and dates
of the building, or time of repairs, are to be seen, with the initial letters
of the names of the owners. The Tudors, for a considerable space before the
extinction of their race, assumed the name of Owen. Richard was the last male
of the family, and was sheriff of the county in 1657. Margaret, heiress of the
house, married Coningshy Williams, Esquire of Glan y gors, in this island, who
possessed it during his life. It was afterward sold to Lord Bulkeley, in whose
descendant in still continues.

IN the church of Penmynydd is a most magnificent monument of white alabaster,
removed at the dissolution from the abbey of Llanvaes to this place; probably
erected in memory of one of the house of Tudor, who had been interred there. On
it is the figure of a man in complete armor, a conic helm, and mailgaurd down
to his breast. His lady is in a thick angular hood. Their feet rest on lions.
Their heads are supported by angels.

ABOUT a mile farther, I visited Tre-garnedd, TRE-GARNEDD.
a farm-house, in the parish of Llangesni, once the site of the great Ednyfed
Vychan, mentioned in a preceding page. His arms were originally a Saracen's
head erazed, proper, wreathed or; but after defeating the English army, who
were invading our frontiers, and killing three of their chiefest captains,
whose heads he brought to his master Llewelyn the Great, the prince directed,
as a reward, that in future he should bear gules, between three Englishmen's
heads couped, a cheveron ermin. EDNYFED VYCHAN.
Directly descended from him were Henry VII. and VIII. Edward VI. Queen Mary,
and Queen Elizabeth, and every crowned head in England ever since, besides
heroes not less illustrious in their degree. Among them was Sir Grayffydd
Llwyd, SIR GRYFFYDD LIWYD.
son of Rhys ap Grayffyd ap Ednyfed Vychan. This gentleman received from Edward
I. the honor of knighthood, on bringing him the news of the birth of his son
Edward of Caernarvon. He did homage, for his lands in Wales, to the young
prince at Chester; but, indignant at the sufferings of his countrymen under the
English yoke, meditated a revolt. Between the years 1316 and 1318, his
attempted to form an alliance with Edmund Bruce, the short-lived king of
Ireland. Letters passed between them, but without effect Wynn's Hist. Wales,
311.
At length, from the greatness of his sprit, determined alone to endeavor to
free his country from the slavery to which he himself had probably contributed,
he took arms in 1322 Powel, 383.
, and for a while overrun the country with resistless impetuosity. At length
was subdued, taken, and doubtlessly underwent the common fate of our gallant
insurgents. I find that he had fortified his house at Tre-garnedd with a very
strong fosse and rampart, and made another strong hold about three quarters of a
mile distant, in the morass of Maltraeth, called Ynys Cevenni; which he
insulated, by bringing round it the waters of the river Cefni Rowlands' MSS.
: both are still remaining. The fosse is nearly perfect, and near four yards
deep and eitht wide. His daughter Morvydd, one of his coheiresses Sebright MSS.
, conveyed by marriage this estate, being her protion, to Madog Gloddaeth;
which followed the succession of that house till 1750, when it was alienated by
the late Sir Thomas Mostyn to Mr. Owen Williams.

THE name of this place is taken from an immense Carnedd, GREAT CARNEDD.
or heap of stones, surrounded with great upright stones, in an adjacent field.
It seems to have beneath it passages formed on the sides and tops with flat
stones, or flags. These were the repositories of the dead See Borlase's
Cornwall, p. 207. tab. xvii. fig. i. iii. and his Scilly Islands, 29, 30. tab.
ii. at p. 19.
Not that bones or urns are also discovered in them; for the founders, like
those of the pyramids of Egypt, appear often to be disappointed in their hopes
of having their relics lodged in these labored Mausoleums.

A FEW years ago, beneath a carnedd similar to that at Tregarnedd, was
discovered, on a farm called Bryn-celli-ddu, near the feat of Sir Nicholas
Bayley, a passage three feet wide, four feet two or three inches high, and
about nineteen feet and a half long, which led into a room, about three feet in
diameter, and seven in height. The form was an irregular hexagon, and the sides
composed of six rude slabs, one of which measured in its diagonal eight feet
nine inches. In the middle was an artless pillar of stone, four feet eight
inches in circumference. This supports the roof, which consists of one great
stone, near ten feet in diameter. Along the sides of the room was, if I may be
allowed the expression, a stone bench, on which were found human bones, which
fell to dust almost at a touch: it is probable that the bodies were originally
placed on the bench. There are proofs that it was customary with the Gauls to
place their dead in that form in cells; but they added to the head of each body
a stone weapon, which served as a pillow La Religion de Gaulois, ii. 312. plate
42.
: but nothing of the king was discovered in this sepulcher. The diameter of the
incumbent carnedd is from ninety to a hundred feet. This seems to be that which
Mr. Rowland takes notice of in his Mona Antiqua P. 94. tab. vii.
.

I MUST not omit mention of the great patriarch of Tregaian, PATRIARCH OF
TREGAIAN.
a chapelry of this parish, who lived in the year 1580, and died at the age of
105; his name was William ap Howel ap Jerwerth. He had by his first wife
twenty-two children, by his second, ten, by his third, four, and by his two
concubines seven; in all forty-three. His eldest son was eithty-four in 1581,
and his eldest daughter seventy-two; and his youngest son then only two years
and a half old: so that between his first child and last there was an interval
of eighty-two years. Nor did there less than three hundred people descend from
this stock in that interval, eighty of whom lived in this parish. He was small
of statute, of a cheerful convivial temper; but spare in his diet, living
mostly on milk. He passed his time in rural employments, and at his leisure in
fishing and fowling; and preserved his memory and senses to the last.

I RETURNED to Plas Gwyn, CASTELL-MAWR.
and from thence crossed Redwharf, to the western horn of the bay called
Castell-mawr, a small cape, flat at top, and joined to the land by a low
isthmus. It is composed of limestone, which is carried to distant parts in
small vessels, which lie in a small channel near the rock, and by their numbers
frequently enliven the view. Roman coins have been found in this neighborhood;
but there are no vestiges of there having been any station. Beyond
Castell-Mawr, on the shore, I saw vast blocks of black marble filled with
shells, corolloids, and fungitae.

Proceed near the shore. LLUGWY.
On the left are the woods of Llugwy, extensive for this island. This estate
fomerly belonged to the Llwyds; at present to Lord Boston See p. 5
. Not far from the road, in the lands of Llugwy, is a most stupendous Cromlech,
GREAT CROMLECH.
of a rhomboid form. The greatest diagonal is seventeen feet six inches, the
lesser fifteen; the thickness three feet nine; its height from the ground only
two feet: it was supported by several stones. The Welsh, who ascribe every
thing stupendous to out famous British king, call it Arthur's Quoit. In the
woods are some druidical circles, nearly contiguous to each other.

CROSS Llugwy sands, and soon after ride over Dulas bay, DULAS BAY.
likewise dry at low water. It runs about a mile and a half deep into the
country, and is frequented by small vessels, which take off the oats and butter
of these parts. Off the mouth is Ynys Gadarn, a small island. Go by Llys Dulas,
the seat of Mrs. Lewis; and soon after within sight of the church of
Llan-Elian, LLAN-ELIAN.
seated on the rocks not far from the sea. It is handsomely built, and makes a
considerable figure among the churches of this part of Wales. It is dedicated
to St. Elian, surnamed Gannaid, or the Bright. He was formerly a most popular
saint, and had a great concourse of devotees, who implored his assistance to
relieve them from variety of disorders. To gain his favor they made
considerable offerings, which were deposited in the church in Cyff Aelian, or
St. Aelian's chest. These amounted to so large a sum, that the parishioners
purchased with it three tenements, for the use of the church, which belong to
the living to this day.

NEAR this place, Caswallon Law-hir, or Caswallon Longimanus, kept his Llys, or
court. He had made a grant of lands and several privileges to this church,
among which was that of a Nawddfa, or sanctuary. This was one of the seven
church-patron saints in Anglesey, which were entitled in Capite to several
tenures; one of the conditions of which seems to have been the preservation of
these places of refuge Rowlands' Mona Antiq. 133. 147. The other saints, or
patron-churches, were St. Beuno, St. Kybi, St. Cadwaladr, St. Peirio, St.
Machutus or Mechel, and St. Cyngar.
.

FROM hence I visited Trysclwyn mountain; on part of which, PARIS MOUNTAIN.
called Paris mountain (probably from a Robert Paris, who was chamberlain of
North Wales There was another of the same name in the reign of Edward III.
in the reign of Henry IV.) is the most considerable body of copper ore perhaps
ever known. The external aspect of the hill is extremely rude, and rises into
enormous rocks of coarse white quartz. The ore is lodged in a basin, or hollow,
and has on one side a small lake, on whose waters, distasteful as those of
Avernus, no bird is known to alight. The whole aspect of this tract has, by the
mineral operations, assumed a most savage appearance. Suffocating fumes of the
burning heaps of copper arise in all parts, and extend their baneful influence
for miles around. In the adjacent parts vegetation is nearly destroyed; even
the mosses and lichens of the rocks have perished: and nothing seems capable of
resisting the fumes but the purple Melic grass Melica Caerulea, Lightfoot, Fl.
Scot. i. 96. Aira Caerulea, Hudson, Fl. Angl. i. 33.
, which flourishes in abundance.

I HAVE little doubt but that the ore had been worked in a very distant period.
Vestiges of the ancient operations appear in several parts, carried on by
trenching, and by heating the rocks intensely, then suddenly pouring on water,
so as to cause them to crack, or scale; thus aukwardly supplying the use of
gunpowder See Tour in Wales, i. 52.
Pieces of charcoal were also found, which prove that wood was made use of for
that purpose. As the Britons improted all works in brass, it is certain that
the Romans were the undertakers of these mines; and it is very probable that
they sent the ore to Caerben to be smelted, the place where the famous cake of
copper was discovered Tour in Wales, p. 72. tab. ix.
. They might likewise have had a smelting-hearth in this island; for a round
cake of copper was discovered at Llanvaethlle, a few miles from this place. Its
weight was fifty pounds, and it had on it a mark resembling an L.

IN the year 1762, one Alexander Frazier came into Anglesey in search of mines.
He visited Paris mountain; called on Sir Nicholas Bayley, and gave him so
flattering an account of the prospect, as induced him to make a trial, and sink
shafts. Ore was discovered; but before any quantity could be gotten, the mines
were overpowered with water. In about two years after, Messrs. Roe and Co. of
Macclesfield applied to Sir Nicholas for a lease of Penrhyn ddu mine in
Caernarvonshire; with which they were, much against their wills, compelled to
take a lease of part of this mountain, and to carry on a level, and make a fair
trial. The trial was accordingly made: ore was discovered; but the expenses
overbalanced the profits. They continued working to great loss: and at length
determined to give the affair up. They gave their agent orders for that
purpose; but he, as a final attempt, divided his men into ten several
companies, of three or four in a partnership, and let them sink shafts in
various places, about eight hundred yeards eastward of a place called the
Golden Venture, on a presumption that a spring, which issued from near the
place, must come from a body of mineral. His conjecture was right; for in less
than two days they met with, at the depth of seven feet from the surface, the
solid mineral, which proved to be that vast body which has since been worked to
such advantage. The day that this discovery was made was March 2d 1768; which
has ever since been observed as a festival by the miners. Soon after this
discovery, another adventure was begun by the reverend Mr. Edward Hughes, owner
of part of the mountain, in right of his wife Mary Lewis of Llys Dulas; so that
the whole of the treasure is the property of Sir Nicholas Bayley and himself.

THE body of copper ore is of unknown extent. THE ORE.
The thickness has been ascertained, in some places, by the driving of a level
under it, several years ago, and it was found to be in some places twenty-four
yards. The ore is mostly of the kind called by Cronsted, Pyrites cupri flavo
viridescens; and contains vast quantities of sulphur. It varies in degrees of
goodness; some of it is rich, but the greater part poor in quality.

THERE are other species of copper ore found here. Of late a vein of the
Pyrites cupri griseus of Cronsted, about seven yards wide, has been discovered
near the west end of the mountain: some is of an iron gray, some quite black;
the first contains sixteen lb. of copper per clb. the last, forty. An ore has
been lately found, in form of loose earth, of dark purplish color; and the best
of it has produced better thatn eight in twenty. Some years ago, above thirty
pounds of native copper was found in driving a level through a turbery; some
was in form of moss, some in very thin leaves.

IT is quarried out of the bed in vast masses; is broken into small pieces; and
the most pure part is sold raw, at the rate of about 3 l. to 6 l. per ton, or
sent to the smelting-houses of the respective companies to be melted into
metal. Mr. Hughes has great furnaces of his own at Ravenhead, near Leverpool,
and at Swansey, in South Wales. An idea of the wealth of these mines may be
formed, by considering that the Macclesfield company have had at once fourteen
thousand tons of ore upon bank, and Mr. Hughes's, thirty thousand.

THE more impure ore is also broken to the size of about hen's eggs; but in
order to clear it from the quantity of sulphur with which it abounds, as well
as other advantitious matter, it must undergo the operation of burning. For
that purpose it is placed between two parallel walls of vast length: some kilns
are twenty, others forty, and fifty yards in length; some ten, others twenty
feet wide, and above four feet in height. The space between is not only filled,
but the ore is piled many feet higher, in a unequal form, from end to end: the
whole is then covered with flat stones, closely luted with clay; and above is
placed a general integument of clay, and small rubbish of the work, in order to
prevent any of the fumes from evaporating. Of late some kilns have been
constructed with brick arches over the ore, which is found to be the best
method of burning. Within these few years, attempts are made to preserve the
sulphur from flying away; and that is done by flues, made of brick, whose tops
are in form of a Gothic arch, many scores of feet in length: one end of these
opens into the beds of copper which are to be burnt. Those beds are set on fire
by a very small quantity of coal, for all the rest is effected by its own
phlogiston. The volatile part is confined, and diredted to the flues; in its
course the sulphurous particles strike against their roofs, and fall to the
bottom in form of the finest brimstone; BRIMSTONE.
which is collected, and carried to adjacent houses, where it is melted into
what is called in the shops stone brimstone.

THE beds of copper, thus piled for burning, are of vast extent. Some contain
four hundred tons of ore, others two thousand. The first require four months to
be completely burnt; the last, near ten. Thus burnt, it is carried to proper
places to be dressed, or washed, and made merchantable. By this process the ore
is reduced to a fourth part in quantity, but considerably improved in quality:
and by this means the water is strongly or richly impregnated with copper,
which is dissolved by the acid quality of the sulphur; and is collected or
precipitated again by iron in the above-described pits. The iron is all
dissolved.

BUT a far richer produce of copper is discovered from the water lodged in the
bottom of the bed of ore, PRECIPITATED COPPER.
which is highly saturated with the precious metal. This is drawn up, either by
means of whimsies or windmills, to the surface, and then distributed into
numbers of rectangular pits thirty-six feet long, some pits more some less,
twelve to fifteen feet broad, and twenty inches deep. To speak in the language
of the adept, Venus must make an assignation with Mars, or this solution will
have no effect. In plain English, a quantity of iron must be immersed in the
water. The kind of iron is of no moment; old pots, hoops, anchors, or any
refuse will suffice; but of late, for the convenience of management, the
adventurers procure new plates, four feet long, one and a half broad, and three
quarters of an inch thick. These they immerse into the pits; the particles of
copper instantly are precipitated by the iron, and the iron is gradually
dissolved into a yellow ocher; great part of it floats off by the water, and
sinks to the bottom. The plates, or the old iron (as it happens) are frequently
taken out, and the copper scraped off; and this is repeated till the whole of
the iron is consumed. The copper thus procured differs little from native
copper, and is prized accordingly, and sold for prices of 25 l. to 45 l. a ton.

THIS discovery is far from new; it has been practiced long in the Wicklow
mines in Ireland, and above a century in those of Hern-grundt in Hungary, where
it is called Ziment Copper Brown's travels, 68. Keysler's travels, iv. 70.
The waters of the Hungarian mines are much more strongly impregnated with
copper than those of Paris mountain. The first effects its operation in twelve
or about twenty days; the last requires two months. Horse-shoes, iron made in
shape of hearts, and other forms, are put into the foreign waters, and when
perfectly transmuted, are given as presents to curious strangers.

THE ore is not got in the common manner of mining, but is cut out of the bed
in the same manner as stone is out of a quarry. A hollow is now formed in the
solid ore open to the day, and extends about and hundred yards in length, about
forty yards in breadth, and twenty-four yards in depth. The ends are at present
undermined, but supported by vast pillars and mignificent arches, all metallic;
and these caverns meander far under ground. These will soon disappear, and
thousands of tons of ore be gotten from both the columns and roofs. The sides
of this vast hollow are mostly perpendicular, and access to the bottom is only
to be had by small steps cut in the ore; and the curious visitor must trust to
them and a rope, till he reaches some ladders, which will conduct him the rest
of the descent. On the edges of the chasms are wooden platforms, which project
far; on them are windlasses, by which the workmen are lowered to transact their
business on the face of the precipice. There suspended, they work in mid air,
pick a small space for a footing, cut out the ore in vast masses, and tumble it
to the bottom with great noise. In such situations they form caverns, and there
appear safely lodged, till the rope is lowered to convey them up again. Much of
the ore is blasted with gunpowder, eight tons of which, I am informed, is
annually used for the purpose.

NATURE has been profuse in bestowing her mineral favors on this spot; for
above the copper ore, and not more than three quarters of a yard beneath the
common soil, is a bed of yellowish greasy clay, from one to four yards thick,
containing lead ore, and yielding from six hundred to a thousand pounds weight
of lead from one ton; and one ton of the metal yields not less than fifty-seven
ounces of silver. Mixed with the earth, are frequently certain parts of the
color of cinnabar: whether these are symptomatic of the sulphurous arsenical
silver ores, or of quicksilver, I will not pretend to decide. Something
interferes with the successful smelting of this earth in the great: insomuch
that it has not yet been of that profit to the adventurers, which might
reasonably be expected from the crucible assays of it; and they have at this
time about eight thousand tons on bank undisposed of. This place has been
worked for lead ore in very distant times. In the bottom of the pool was found
an ancient smelting hearth of grit-stone, and several bits of smelted lead, of
about four inches in length, two breadth, and half an inch thick.

THESE works have added greatly to the population of the island; for about
fifteen hundred persons are employed, who, with their families, are supposed to
make near eight thousand persons, getting their bread from these mines. The
little village of Amlwch, the port of the place, is increasing fast, and the
market grows considerable. At the season of the greatest work, Mr. Hughes's men
alone receive, for many weeks, two hundred pounds in one week, and a hundred
and fifty in another, merely for subsistence. The port is no more than a great
chasm between two rocks, running far into land, and dry at low water; into
which sloops run, and lie secure to receive their lading.

FROM Paris mountain I visited the north-west parts of the island, and passed
over a sandy plain country, fertile in grain. See to the right, the Middle
Mouse; and farther on is the third small isle of that name, called the West
Mouse. Between these, on the coast of Anglesey, is Kemlyn bay, where there is
safe anchorage for small vessels. Not far from hence I saw the noted quarry of
marble, common to this place, some parts of Italy, and to Corsica, MARBLE
QUARRY.
and known in the shops by the name of Verde di Corsica. Its colors are green,
black, white, and dull purple, irregularly disposed. In different blocks one or
other of the colors are frequently wanting; but among the green parts are often
found narrow veins of a most elegant and silky white asbestos. It is a compound
species of marble; part is calcareous, and may be acted on by aqua fortis. The
green parts partake of the nature of jasper. It is apt to be intersected by
small cracks, or by asbestine veins, therefore incapable of taking a high
polish. This quarry lies on the lands of Monach-ty, in the parish of
Llan-Fair-Ynghornwy; and it is found again in the isle of Skerries, off this
parish.

NEITHER the quarry not the asbestos are at present in use. The ancients set a
high value on the last, a price equal to that of pearls. They wove napkins of
it, and at great feasts diverted themselves (in order to clean them) to fling
them into the fire, from which they returned unhurt, and with improved luster.
They likewise made of it shrouds for the bodies of great men, before they were
placed on the funeral pile, and by that means preserved their ashes pure from
those of the wood. The ancients believed that it was found only in India, in
places where showers never fell, and the residence of dire serpents Plinii,
Not, Hist. lib. xix. c. 1.
.

FROM hence I vesited Carreg-Lwyd, CARREG-LWYD.
then the residence of that worthy and convivial gentleman Jobn Griffith, Esquire
From thence I made an attempt to sail to the Skerries, THE SKERRIES.
called in Welsh Ynys y Moel Rhoniaid, or the isle of Seals, distant about a
league from this place, and about half a league from the nearest part of
Anglesey: a turbulent sea made us return with speed. The island is very rocky,
but affords food for a few Sheep, Rabbits, and Puffins. The light-house, placed
on it about the year 1730, is of great use to ships sailing between Ireland and
the ports of Chester and Leverpool. The produce from the tonnage, about the
year 1759, was 1100 l. a year; of which Ireland contributed 400 l. British
vessels pay 1 d. per ton, aliens 2 d. Fish sport about the rocky sides in most
amazing multitudes, and appear even crowding their backs above water; these are
chiefly the Cole-fish and Whiting Pollacks: Cod-fish lurk beneath in abundance,
and the beautiful Wrasses, etc. are frequently caught.

THIS isle formerly belonged to the cathedral of Bangor, which clamed an
exclusive right of fishing on it. The right of the prelates of that see had
been, by some neglect, invaded; and the Griffiths of Penrhyn had usurped the
privilege, by having in the isle what was called a Well, a bed or small
possession Record of Caernarvon, in the Bibliotheca Litteraria, 20.
About 1498, bishop Dean exerted himself, and in person resumed the fishery,
and on the 8th of October took twenty-eight "fishis called Grapas;" when Sir
William Griffith sent his son and heir apparante, with dyvers men in harnes,
wiche ryetowsely in the seid county of Anglesey, within the seid bishope's
diocese, took the seid fishis from the servants of the seid bishope. But the
honest prelate caused him to make restitution, and established his right as
lord of the fisheries of the island Willis's Bangor, 245.
A successor of his, Nicholas Robinson, was not so tenacious; but, according to
Mr. Willis The same. The bishop calls it Saint Danyyel's Isle.
, alienated the isle to one of his sons. Between forty and fifty years ago,
William Robinson, Esquire of Monach-ty in this county, and of Gwerfillt in
Denbighshire, the last male descendant, perished in a storm in his return from
this dreary spot, with about a dozen people who had unfortunately attended him.
Monach-ty, MONACH-TY.
or the house of the Monks, had been part of the possessions of the abbey of
Conway, and alienated by the same prelate to his son.

FROM Carreg-Lwyd I rode to Holyhead, about eleven or twelve miles distant.
Passed by Llanfachreth and Llanynghenedl to Rhyd-Pont bridge, where a very
small river-like channel insulates the great promontory. Go over Towyn y Capel,
a low sandy common, bounded on one side by rocks, which in high winds the sea
breaks over in a most aweful and stupendous manner, and are justly dreaded by
mariners. In the middle of the common is an artificial mount, on which are the
ruins of Capel St. Ffraid. I have no kind of doubt but that, prior to the
chapel, it had been the site of a small fort; for I never saw atrificial
elevations given to any but works of a military kind. This common abounds with
the shells called the FASCIATED WREATH, LAND SHELLS.
Br. Zool. iv. No 119. and the ZONED SNAIL, No 133.

NOT far from hence, between Bodior and Rhyd-Pont, in Rhoscolyn Parish, is a
fossil not frequently found. A green amianthus, AMIANTHUS.
or brittle asbestos, is met with in great plenty, in a green marble, similar
to that at Monach-ty; but by reason of the inflexible quality of its fibers,
not applicable to the same uses.

WITHIN two miles of Towyn y Capel is the town of Holyhead, seated on a noted
and safe harbor, guarded at its mouth from the winds by Ynys GYBI -- the
island of St. Gybi -- surnamed Corineus, son of Solomon Duke of Cornwall; who,
after studying some years in Gaul, returned to Britain, and fixed his see at
the place called now Caer Gybi, and Holyhead Cressy's Chapter Hist. 149.
In honor of his instructor, St. Hilarious, bishop of Poitiers, he bestowed his
name on one of the headlands; the same which goes also under that of St.
Aelian's.

THE town is small, TOWN.
but greatly resorted to by passengers to and from the kingdom of Ireland; and
is the station of the pacquets, five of which are in constant employ; are stout
vessels, and well manned.

THE church is dedicated to St. Gybi. CHURCH.
Is an ancient structure, embattled, with the inside of the porch, and the
outside of part of the transept, rudely carved. On the outside of the last is a
dragon, a man leading a bear with a rope, and other gross representations. St.
Gybi is said to have founded a small monastery here, about the year 380 Tanner,
699.
Maelgwyn Gwynedd, who began his reign about the year 580, is said to have
founded a college here Hist. Anglesey, 29.
This prince was styled Draco Insularis; perhaps the dragon, engraven on the
church may allude to him. Others assert, that the founder of this college was
Hwfa ap Cynddelw, lord of Llys Llivon, in this island, and one of the fifteen
tribes of North Wales, and contemporary with Owen Gwynedd The same, 699.
The head of the college was called Penclas, or Pencolas, and was one of the
spiritual lords of Anglesey: the archdeacon of the isle was one; the abbot of
Penmon the other. His Latin title was Rector, as appears by the ancient seal,
inscribed Sigillum rectoris et capituli Ecclesia de CAER GYBI The same, 30.
I am not acquainted with the number of prebendaries; but they were twelve at
lest, that number being found on the pension list in 1553 Willis's Abbeys, i.
303.
, at 1 l. each. Before the dissolution, I find that the rector, or provost, for
so he is also styled, had thirty-nine marks; one chaplain had eleven, and the
other two the same between them Willis's Bangor, 201.
The whole value, in the 26th of Henry VIII. was esteemed at 24 l. The English
monarch had the gift of the provostship. Edward III. bestowed what was called
the provostship of his free chapel of Caer-Cube, on his chaplain Thomas de
London; for which the king, in 1351, dispensed with him for his services to
himself Newcourt's Repertorium, i. 453.
James I. granted this college to Francis Morris and Francis Philips. It became
afterward the property of Rice Gwynne, Esquire who bestowed on Jesus college,
Oxford, the great tithes, for the maintenance of two fellows and as many
scholars Tanner, 699. and Hist. Anglesey, 31.
; and since that time the parish is served by a curate nominated by the college.

NEAR the church stood, ECLWYS Y BED.
in old times, a chapel called Eglwys y Bed, or the church of the Grave; and
Capet Llan y Gwyddel, or the chapel of the Irishman. Sirigi, a king of the
Irish Picts, invaded this country, and was here slain by Caswallon Law Her, or
Caswallon the long-handed, who reigned about the year 440 Powel, Pres. 15.
Sirigi was canonized by his countrymen, and had in this chapel a shrine, in
high repute for many miracles. This place had distinct revenues from the
collegiate church. At length it fell to ruin, and was disused for ages. In
removing the rubbish, not many years ago, a stone coffin was found with bones
of a stupendous size; but we must not suppose these to have been the relics
of Sirigi; which had been carried away by some Irish rovers, and deposited in
the cathedral of Christ Church in Dublin Hist. Anglesey, 34, 35.
.

THE precinct of the churchyard clames a far higher antiquity than the church.
ROMAN FORT.
It is a square of two hundred and twenty feet by a hundred and thirty. Three
sides are strong walls, seventeen feet high, and six feet thick; the fourth
side is open to the precipitous rocks of the harbor, and never had been
walled, being intended for ships to retire to, and receive the benefit of
protection from this enclosure. At each corner of the wall is an oval tower.
The masonry of the whole is evidently Roman: the mortar very hard, and mixed
with much coarse pebble. Along the walls are two rows of round holes, about
four inches in diameter, which penetrate them. They are in all respects like
those at Segontium, p. 220, and nicely plaistered within.

THE use of this harbor to the Romans, in the passage from various places to
the ports of Lancashire and that of Chester, is very evident. They could not
find a better place to run into, in case of hard weather, than this, as it
projected farthest into the Vergivian sea; so that they could make it with less
danger of being embayed than in any other place. If (as is very probable) they
had commerce with Ireland, no place was better adapted. The Romans, it is true,
never made a settlement in that country, but they certainly traded with it,
even in the time of Agricola, when its ports and harbors were better known,
from the concourse of merchants for the purposes of commerce Tacitus, Vitae
Agricola.
.

I TOOK a walk from the town to the top of The Head, THE HEAD.
in search of other antiquities. In my way, saw the ruins of Capel y Gorlles,
one of several which are scattered about this holy promontory. On the side
which I ascended, my course was interrupted with a huge dry wall, in many
places regularly faced, and ten feet high in some of the most entire parts, and
furnished with an entrance. On the Pen y Gaer Gybi, or the summit of the
mountain, are foundations of a circular building, strongly cemented with the
same sort of mortar as the sort in the town. It seems to have been, a Pharos, A
PHAROS.
a necessary director in these seas.

FROM the top of this mountain I had a distinct view of the isle of Holyhead:
it being at that time high water, and the channel filled on each side of
Rhyd-Pont bridge. The isle is of unequal breadth, and greatly indented.

THE part of the Head fronting the sea, is either an immense precipice, BIRDS.
or hollowed into most magnificent caves. Birds of various kinds breed in the
rocks; among them are, Peregrine Falcons, Shags, Herons, Razor-bills, and
Guillemots. Their eggs are sought after for food; and are gotten by means of a
man, who is lowered down by a rope held by one or more persons. Within memory,
the person let down, by his weight overpowered the other, and pulled him down;
so that both perished miserably.

I RETURNED over Rhyd-Pont bridge, and along the great road (which is
excellent) toward Bangor. A little on the left is Presaddfed, PRESADDFED.
the seat of Mrs. Roberts, formerly of the Owens. On the site stood the mansion
of Hwfa ap Kynddelw, before mentioned. He held his estate in see by the
attendance at the prince's coronation, and bearing up the right side of the
canopy over the prince's head at that solemnity. The bishop, who was first
chaplain, also held some land by the office of crowning him.

NEAR the comfortable inn called the Gwindy, in the middle of the island,
BODYCHAN.
on the great road, is Bodychan, an ancient building, once the seat of Rhys ap
Llewelyn ap Hwlkyn, first sheriff of this county, and a potent man in the time
of Henry VIII. The family afterward took the name of the place, and flourished
for many generations. The founder, Rhys ap Kemlyn ap Hwlkin, went to Bosworth
field to assist Henry VII. with a company of foot. In return, was sworn sheriff
of Anglesey for life. He made his house (now converted into a barn) the county
jail, the dungeon whereof is still to be seen. In the last century it passed to
the Sparrows of Red Hill, by the marriage of the heiress of this place.

BEFORE I leave the island, POPULATION OF ANGLESEY.
I beg leave to communicate a brief account of its population, in the manner I
received it from Paul Penton, Esquire whose remarks on the same subject have before
appeared in a far more respectable place Phil. Trans. lxiii. Part i. p. 180.
.

BY an account given on the 13th of August 1563, there were 2010 households, or
families, in Anglesey Willis's Bangor, 51.
: allowing five to a family, the whole number of inhabitants in that period was
10,050. In 1776, the number of houses in Anglesey was about 3,956: allowing
five persons to a family, the whole number of inhabitants was at that time
19,780; which wants only 340 of doubling the number of inhabitants in the
intervening space.

CONTINUE my journey from Porth-aithwy Ferry up a steep road, BANGOR.
and soon descend another to BANOOR, a small town seated between two low hills,
in a valley opening to the bay of Beaumaris. This is the episcopal seat. The
prelate is very indifferently lodged, in a palace near the cathedral; which,
from an inscription, appears to have been rebuilt by Bishop Skeffington, who
died in 1533, at the abbey of Beaulieu, of which he had been abbot. He directed
that his body should be interred there; his heart at Bangor, before the image
of the patron saint, St. Daniel.

ST. DANIEL, son of Dynawd, abbot of Bangor is Coed in Flintshire, first
esttablished here a college for the instruction of youth, and support of the
clergy of those parts The same, 53.
Cressy calls it a monastery, and says it was filled with monks Church Hist.
233.
probably fugitives from the other Bangor, from which it might derive its name.
About the year 550, Maelgwyn Gwynedd, one of those gentry who, growing virtuous
in their old age, make a sacrifice to God of the Devil's leavings Swist.
, converted the college into a bishopric, and appointed Daniel to be first
bishop. We know not the extent of his diocese. That of the present, comprehends
all Anglesey; Caernarvonshire, except Llysvaen, Eglwys Rhos, and Llangystenin,
which belong to St. Asaph, and Llanbeblic to Chester. In Denbighshire it has
fourteen parishes; in Montgomeryshire seven.

The cathedral was destroyed by the insurgent Saxons in the year 1071.
CATHEDRAL.
It was afterward rebuilt; for we find that in 1212 Annal. Menev. in Goodwin,
ii. 650.
King John invaded the country, forced the bishop, Robert of Shrewshury, from
before the altar, and obliged him to pay two hundred hawks for his ransom. In
the year 1402 it was reduced again to ruin by the rage of Glyndwr, and lay
unrestored uring ninety years; when the choir was restored by Bishop Dean, or
Deny: the body and tower were built by that liberal prelate Thomas Skeffington,
in 1532. The tower was to have been raised to double its present height; but
the death of the bishop prevented the execution of the design Willis, 21.
The windows were made, or glazed, according to the custom of the times, by the
piety of different persons, among whom may be reckoned Dean Kyffin, and some of
the Gryffydds of Penrhyn Willis, 17, 18.
.

THERE is nothing remarkable within, TONES.
except a few tombs. That wise and valiant prince Owen Gwynedd lies beneath an
arch, with a flowery cross cut on a flat stone. He died, regretted by his
countrymen, and feared by his foes, in 1169. On the floor is a mutilated figure
in brass, designed for Richard Kyffyn, the active dean of this church in the
reigns of Richard III. and Henry VII. He died the 13th of August 1502. The
place of his interment still bears the name of Bed y Deon du, or the grave of
the Black Dean, I suppose from his complexion. Several of the bishops are
buried here; but, excepted the headless busts of the prelates Rowlands and
Vaughan, mutilated in the fanatical times, no remarkable memorials of any of
them at present exist. Of the shrine on the left side of the great altar,
beneath which, in 1137, was interred the brave and wise prince Gryffydd ap
Cynan Vita Gryffydd ap Kynan in the Sebright MSS.
, not a vestige is to be seen.

IN ancient times here was a parochial church dedicated to St. Mary, which
stood behind the palace. It is said to have been founded by King Edgar, in the
beginning of the reign of Howel ap Jevaf; who at the same time confirmed the
privileges of the sea, and endowed it liberally Willis, 46. 183. Wynne's Hist.
Wales, 59.
.

THE house of friars preachers stood a little way out of the town. FRIERY.
It was founded as early as the year 1276: Bishop Tanner gives the honor of it
to Tudor ap Gronw, lord of Penmynnydd and Trecastell in Anglesey, who enlarged
or rebuilt it in 1299, and was interred here in 1311. Edward VI. made a grant
of the place to Thomas Brown and William Breton. Soon after, it was converted
into a free school by Jeffry Glynn, LL. D. an advocate in Doctors Commons, and
brother to Bishop Glynn. By his will, proved July 21st 1557, he left the
conduct of it to his brother, and to Maurice Gryffydd bishop of Rochester. They
dying before the settlement could be completed, left their power to Sir William
Petre, and others; who agreed on the statutes for the master and usher, with
the concurrence of the bishop, dean, and chapter, and of Alexander Nowel, dean
of St. Paul's, who is said to have composed them Willis.
. Over the chimney-piece is a fragment of an ancient monument to one Gryffydd
with a long sword carved on it. On the staircase is another stone, with the
words ap Tudor, probably part of the tomb of the founder Tudor ap Gronw ap
Tudor Salisbury Pedigree, 126.
.

HUGH Lupus, in his barbarous inroad into Anglesey, CASTLE.
founded a castle at Bangor, in order to carry on his ravages with greater
security Sebright MSS. in vita Gryffydd ap Knan.
. The site was wholly unknown, till it was pointed out to me by the reverend
Mr. E. R. Owen, a gentleman to whom this part of the work is under frequent
obligations. It lies nearly a quarter of a mile eastward of the town, on the
ridge of hills which bound the south-east side of the vale, and nearly the same
distance from the port. The castle stood on a rocky, and, in many parts, a
precipitous hill. Three sides of the walls are easily to be traced: on the
south-east side they extended a hundred and twenty yards; on the south-west,
sixty-six, ending at a precipice; the north-east may be traced forty yards, and
ends in the same manner. On the fourth side, the natural strength of the place
rendered a farther defense useless. Mounds of earth tending to a semicircular
form, with rocks and precipices, connect the north-east and south-west walls.
We know not the time of its demolition: probably as soon as the earl had
effected his design, it was suffered to fall to ruin.

ON leaving Bangor I took the road toward Conway. At a small distance from the
former, crossed Aber Cegid, ABER CEGID.
a small creek, fordable at low water; from whence are annually imported many
millions of slates. A little farther, on the summit of a hill commanding a most
charming view, stands Penrhyn, PENRHYN.
an ancient house, once beautifully embosomed with venerable oaks. The house is
said to have been built on the site of a palace of Roderic Mwlwynog, prince of
Wales, who began his reign in 720. It continued long in our princes. In 987 it
was levelled to the ground by Meredydd ap Owen; who, in that year, invaded
North Wales, and slew Cadwallon ap Jewaf, the reigning prince. In the time of
Llewelyn the Great, it was bestowed, with the whole hundred of Llechwedd Ucha,
on Yarddur ap Trabaiarn, a man of rank at that period. Eva, or as she is called
by some Enerys, one of his descendants, who had, by the customary division of
the lands by gavel-kind, Penrhyn to her share, bestowed it, with her person, on
Gryffydd ap Heilin ap Sir Tudor ap Ednyved Vychan, originally lord of Bryn
Ffanigl. The family flourished for many generations. William Vychan, son of
Gwilim ap Gryffydd, and Jonet, daughter of Sir William Stanley of Hooton, and
relict of Judge Paris, chamberlain of North Wales and Chester, succeeded, in
the 18th of Henry VI. to the estates of his father and the Judge, and also
succeeded the last in his important office of chamberlain of North Wales; an
honor continued to several of his posterity, and at this time possessed by lord
viscount Bulkeley.

IT is remarkable, that in his time the severity of the laws against the Welsh
were so rigidly enforced, that he was made denizen of England, on condition
that he should not marry a Welsh woman; and accordingly he married a daughter
of a Sir William, or Sir Richard Dalton.

IN the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Piers Gryffydd He married Margaret, daughter
of Sir Thomas Mostyn, of Mostyn, knight, and had by her three sons, all of whom
died young. It is said that he built, or repaired, his ships in Aber Cegid;
where there was, till of late years, on the gable end of a house, his initials,
P. G. and the date, 1598.
, PIERS GRYFFYDD.
lord of the place, distinguished himself as a naval officer; He sailed from
Beaumaris on the 20th of April 1588, and arrived at Plymouth on the 4th of May,
where he was most honorably received by that gallant commander Sir Francis
Drake. He shared with the other men of rank and gallantry in the honor of
defeating the Spanish armada. After that distinguished victory, he joined with
Sir Francis Drake and Sir Walter Raleigh in their different expeditions against
the Spaniards in the West Indies; but in the reign of James I. continuing his
depredations against the Spaniards after peace was proclaimed, he was called to
account, and so harrassed by persecutions, that he was obliged to mortgage his
estate to defray the expenses; part to some citizens of London, and part to
Jevan Llwyd, Esquire of Yale: the last of whom, in conjunction with Sir Richard
Trevor, bought the whole in 1616, and sold it to the lord keeper Williams in
1622; and the archbishop bequeathed it to Gryffydd Williams, son of his eldest
brother, created baronet June 17th 1661. His son Sir Robert, the last owner who
inhabited Penrhyn, left three daughters; Frances, first married to Robert Lloyd
of Ecclusham near Wrexham, afterward to Edward lord Russel, third son of the
first duke of Bedford; Anne, married to Thomas Warburton of Winnington
Cheshire; and Gwen, to Sir Walter Young of Devonshire. Lord Russel having no
issue, generously resigned his part of the estate to the surviving sisters. Sir
George Young, grandson of the former, sold his moiety to the late John Pennant,
Esquire whose son Richard Pennant, Esquire possesses the whole by virtue of his
marriage with Anne Susannah, daughter and sole heiress of the late General
Warburton of Winnington.

THE present buildings stand round a court, and consist of a gateway, chapel, a
tower, vast hall, and a few other apartments. By several ruins may be traced
its former extent. The house was rebuilt, in the reign of Henry VI. by Guilim
ap Gryffydd. The Stanley arms (those of his wife) empaled with his own, were to
be seen in the hall windows, till the year 1764: by the initials R. G. and date
1575, it appears that Sir Rhys Gryffydd repaired it in that year. It gives me
great satisfaction to find, that the place will soon be restored to its former
luster, under the auspices of the present worthy owners, and on the plan of
that able architect Mr. S. Wynt.

THE only furniture left to this house, which savored of antiquity, was the
drinking-horn of its hero Piers Gryffydd; DRINKING-HORN.
out of which I have made libations, in the hospitable reign of the agent Mr.
Richard Hughes. It was a large bugle, or horn of an ox, enriched with
sculptured silver, and with a chain of the same metal. At one end are the
initials of his own name, P. G. and those of his father and mother, R. G. K. or
Rhys and Catherine Gryffydd. Such horns were in use with Danes, Saxons, Scots,
and Welsh. We had in old times three species in our royal court, which, by
usage, were to be made of those of the ox. The first was Y Corn ydd Yfo y
BRENIN, or that allotted for the sole use of the king; the second was Corn
Cyweithas, or the horn with which the domestics of the palace was to be called;
and the third was y Corny y Pencynydd, or the horn of the chief huntsman. Each
of them was to be worth a pound Leges Walliea, 311.
. To drink out of the royal cup, at great entertainments, was a privilege of
the officers of the palace. Thus the governor was to receive a cup of metheglin
by the hand of the high steward. The same officer was also dispenser of horns
of drink to several others; among them, to the royal porter; who at certain
seasons had, besides his horn from the king and queen, another from the master
of the horse, which was styled Gwirawd i'r Ebysdyl, or the Waissail cup of the
apostle The same, 17. 47.
, whom they probably invoked at the time of drinking. This custom was in
frequent use in old times. The Danes invoked the highest powers to assist the
mighty draught: Help GOT unde MARIA Journey to London, 179.
. And the Saxon Ulphus, when he conveyed certain lands to the church of York,
quaffed off the horn, DEO et St. Petro Archaelogia, iii. S.
. On less serious occasions, on festive days, the horn was emptied at one tip,
and then blown to show that there was no deceit. The jovial horn was a subject
of poetry. Thus Owen Cyveiliog, the princely Bard He was prince of Powis, and
flourished about the year 1160. See the reverend Mr. Evan Evans's Collections,
p. 7.
, celebrates the Hirlas, or drirnking-horn used at feasts in his palace. He
writes in a more exalted strain, as the poem was composed immediately after a
great victory over the English in Maelor. I lay a translation before my reader,
by the same elegant pen to which I have been so frequently obliged.

HIRLAS OWAIN;
Or, The DRINKING-HORN of OWEN.
1.
UPROSE the ruddy dawn of day;
The armies met in dread array
On Maelor Dre^red's field:
Loud the British clarions sound,
The Saxons, gasping on the ground,
The bloody contest yield.
2.
By Owen's arm the valiant bled;
From Owen's arm the coward fled
Aghast with wild affright:
Let then their haughty lords beware
How Owen's just revenge they dare,
And tremble at his sight.
3.
Fill the HIRLAS HORN, my boy,
Nor let the tuneful lips be dry
That warble Owen's praise;
Whose walls with warlike spoils are hung,
And open wide his gates are flung
In Cambria's peaceful days.
4.
This hour we dedicate to joy;
Then fill the HIRLAS HORN, my boy,
That shines like the sea;
Whose azure handles, tip'd with gold,
Invites the grasp of Britons bold,
The sons of Liberty.
5.
Fill it higher still, and higher,
Mead will noblest deeds inspire.
Now the battle's lost and won,
Give the horn to Gronwy's son;
Put it into Gwgan's hand,
Bulwark of his native land,
Guardian of Sabrina's flood,
Who often has died his spear in blood.
When they hear their chieftain's voice;
Then his gallant friends rejoice;
But when to fight he goes, no more
The festal shout resounds on Severn's winding shore.
6.
Fill the gold-tip'd horn with speed,
(We must drink, it is decreed.)
Badge of honor, badge of mirth,
That calls the soul of music forth!
As thou will thy life prolong,
Fill it with Metheglin strong.
Gruffudd thirsts, to Gruffudd fill;
Whose bloody lance is used to kill;
Matchless in the field of strife,
His glory ends not with his life:
Dragon-son of Cynvyn's race,
Owen's shield, Arwystli's grace.
To purchase same the warriors flew,
Dire, and more dire, the conflict grew;
When flushed with Mead, they bravely fought,
Like Belyn's warlike sons, that Edwin's downfall wrought.
7.
Fill the horn with foaming liquor,
Fill it up, my boy, be quicker;
Hence away, despair and sorrow!
Time enough to sigh tomorrow.
Let the brimming goblet smile,
And Ednyfed's cares beguile;
Gallant youth, unused to fear,
Master of the broken spear,
And the arrow-pierced shield,
Brought with honor from the field.
Like an hurricane is He,
Bursting on the troubled sea.
See their spears distained with gore!
Hear the din of battle roar!
Bucklers, swords, together clashing.
Sparkles from their helmets flashing!
Hear ye not their loud alarms?
Hark.! they shout-to arms! to arms!
Thus were Garthen's plains defended,
Maelor fight began and ended.
There two princes fought, and there
Was Morach Vorvran's feast exchanged for rout and fear.
8.
Fill the horn: it is my delight,
When my friends return from fight,
Champions of their country's glory,
To record each gallant story. --
To Ynyr's comely offspring fill,
Foremost in the battle still;
Two blooming youths, in counsel sage,
As heroes of maturer age;
In peace, and war, alike renowned,
Be their brows with garlands crowned;
Decked with glory let them shine,
The ornament and pride of Ynyr's ancient line!
9.
To Selyf fill, of Eagle-heart,
Skilled to hurl the fatal dart:
With the Wolf's impetuous force
He urges on his headlong course.
To Tudor next, great Madoc's son,
They the race of honor run
Together in the tented field,
And both alike disdain to yield:
Like a Lion in the fray,
Tudor darts upon his prey.
Rivals in the feats of war;
Where danger called, they rushed from far;
Till shattered by some hostile stroke,
With horrid clang their shields were broke;
Loud as the foaming billows roar,
Or fierce contending winds on Talgath's stormy shore.
10.
Fill the horn with rosy wine,
Brave Moreiddig claims it now,
Chieftain of an ancient line,
Dauntless heart, and open brow.
To the warrior it belongs,
Prince of battles, theme of songs!
Pride of Powys, Mochnant's boast!
Guardian of his native coast! --
But ah! his short-lived triumph's over,
Brave Moreiddig is no more!
To his pensive ghost we'll give
Due remembrance, while we live;
And in fairy fiction dressed,
Flowing hair, and sable vest,
The tragic Muse shall grace our songs,
While brave Moreiddig's name the mournful strain prolongs.
11.
Pour out the horn, (though he desire it not)
And heave a sigh on Morgan's early grave;
Doomed in his clay-cold tenement to rot,
While we revere the memory of the brave.
12.
Fill again the HIRLAS HORN.
On that ever-glorious morn,
The Britons and their foes between,
What prodigies of might were seen!
On Gwestyn's plain the fight began;
But Gronwy sure was more than man!
Him to resist, on Gwestyn's plain,
A hundred Saxons strove in vain.
To set the noble Meyric free,
And change his bonds to liberty,
The warriors vowed. The God of day
Scarce darted his meridian ray,
When he beheld the conquerors steeped in gore,
And Gwestyn's bloody fight, ere highest, noon was over.
13.
Now a due libation pour
To the spirits of the dead,
Who, that memorable hour,
Made the hostile plain their bed.
There the glittering steel was seen,
There the twanging bow was heard;
There the mighty pressed the green,
Recorded by the faithful Bard.
Madoc there, and Meilir brave,
Sent many a Saxon to his grave.
Their drink was Mead; their hearts were true;
And to the head their shafts they drew;
But Owen's guards, in terrible array,
Resistless march along, and make the world give way.
14.
Pour the sweet transparent Mead,
(The spear is red in time of need)
And give to each departed spirit
The honor and reward of merit.
What cares surround the regal state,
What anxious thoughts molest the great,
None but a prince himself can know,
And Heaven, that rules kings, and lays the mighty low.
15.
For Daniel fill the horn so green,
Of haughty brow, and angry mien;
While the lessening tapers shine
Fill it up with generous wine.
He nor quarter takes, nor gives,
But by spoils and rapine lives. LLANDEGAI.

Comely is the youth, and brave;
But obdurate as the grave.
Had thou seen, in Maelor fight,
How we put the foe to flight!
Had thou seen the chiefs in arms,
When the foe rushed on in swarms!
Round about their prince they stood,
And stained their swords with hostile blood.
Glorious bulwarks! To their praise
Their prince devotes his latest lays. --
Now, my boy, thy task is over;
Thou shall fill the horn no more.
Long may the King of kings protect,
And crown with bliss, my friends elect;
Where Liberty and Truth reside,
And Virtue, Truth's immortal bride!
There may we all together meet,
And former times renew in heavenly converse sweet!
R. W.

FROM Penrhyn I visited the church of Llandegai, about a mile distant from the
house. It is finely situated on a lofty, bank above the Ogwen, and commands a
beautiful view. It is a small but neat structure, in form of a cross; with the
tower in the center, supported within by four arches. Here is preserved an
alabaster monument of an armed man, and his lady, recumbent. They probably
belonged to the neighboring house; but on the dissolution were removed from the
friery of Llanvaes, where the persons represented had been interred. A mural
monument, with the figure of archbisshop John Williams in his episcopal dress,
ARCHBISHOP WILLIAMS.
kneeling at an altar, is placed above the remains of that great prelate. He
was born at Conwy. His father Edmund was sixth son of the neighboring family of
Cwchwillan, a branch of that of Penrhyn. His mother Mary, daughter of Owen ap
John Owen Pedigree of the family, MS.
. The archbishop was fifth son. In his childish years, with other play-fellows,
he was diverting himself with leaping from part of the walls of Conwy down to
the shore. The fall was on so critical a part, as ever to secure him from all
reproaches of unchastity. I mention this merely to rescue him from the
reflections flung on him by that satirical historian Sir Anthony Weldon Memoirs.
. At school, which was that of Ruthin, he was a compound of alternate truantry
and industry. His great abilities were soon taken notice of. He entered on
public life as chaplain to lord chancellor Egerton; and preaching before the
king, so pleased the royal ear, that in 1610 James made him dean of Salisbury;
and on farther discovery of his great abilities, in 1620, dean of Westminster;
and in 1621, lord keeper, in the room of the illustrious Lord Bacon; and in
less than a month, nominated him to the sea of Lincoln. Now placed above
restraint, his character began to unfold. His spirit grew beyond the control
of ministers; for, with undaunted courage, he persisted in all that was right:
and, being subject to the failings of his country, (great passion, pride, and
vanity) sometimes in what was wrong. He discharged his office, foreign as it
was to his profession, with distinguished credit near five years. Soon after
the accession of Charles I. by the influence of the favorite Buckingham, he was
suddenly dismissed: for he always had resisted the unreasonable demands of that
minion.

IN two parts of his conduct I must consider him as a wife but not as a good
man: -- His advice to his distressed master, in the case of the earl of
Strafford, had too great a share of duplicity to be vindicated; perhaps of
resentment, for he hated the devoted minister. The spirit of Machiavel arose
strong in him, when he spoke of a public and private conscience; and still more
strongly when he advised Charles, in case the king could not gain Cromwell by
promises of fair treatment, to catch him by some stratagem, and cut him short.
He may appear in these instances a great minister, but a bad divine. The
infirmity, the inequalities, which may be met in men even of first-rate
abilities, may be exemplified in his attempt to defend himself from a frivolous
accusation; for he fell into the disgraceful crime of subornation of perjury,
was censured in the star chamber, and suffered imprisonment from 1637 to 1640.
On his release, irritated against the court, he for a time joined the popular
leaders. Let me attribute this (and candor may admit the cause) to the natural
violence of his temper; for on all trying occasions he showed his zeal for the
liberty of the subject, and his sincerity to his order. Soon after this, he
was, according to an old promise, promoted to the sea of York. He was a firm
friend to the petition of right Drake's Parliam. Hist. viii. 146.
, foreseeing that he served both king and people in the support of it. As a
friend to the church, he was so successful an advocate, and showed such
eloquence and strength of reasoning, in the debate in May 1641, on taking away
the votes of bishops in the house of lords The same, ix, 334.
, as to cause the affair to be dropped for that sessions. In the latter end of
the year, when popular fury ran high, he was attacked in Westminster abbey; and
with great courage repelled the violence of the mob. This gave rise to the
first satirical political print I know. The prelate is represented in his
episcopal dress, a musket on his shoulder, rest in his hand, helmet on his
head, and mitre on the ground. The rage of the common people increased, even so
far as to seize him in his way to the house of lords, and to tear his robes
from his back. Incensed at this, he returned to Westminster abbey (the deanery
of which he had been allowed to hold three years in commendam) and, in a fit of
passion, induced eleven bishops to join him in a phrenetic protest against all
acts that should be done in the house of lords during their forced absence
Clarendon, ii. 350.
. This brought an impeachment of high treason against them, imprisonment of
eighteen months, and in the end a release upon bail, in which the archbishop in
particular was bound not to go into his diocese during the disturbances in the
county of York Drake's Parliam. Hist. x. 483.
. He instantly disobeyed the injunction, followed the king into the city of
York, was enthroned there on June 27th 1642; but immediately driven away by the
Hothams. He then retired to his native country, where he finished his days on
his birthday, March 25th 1650, aged 68. He died at Gloddaeth, the seat of Sir
Roger Mostyn, an eminent loyalist; whose lady warned him of the approach of
death, the stroke of which he received with exemplary piety, courage, and
resignation Philips's Life of archbishop Williams, 305. His chaplain Hackett,
afterward bishop of Lichfield, composed his epitaph. His memory is more
pleasingly preserved in an elegant little poem on the fight of his monument,
preserved in vol. vi. of Dodsley's Miscellanies.
.

FROM Llandegai I descended, and crossed the wooden bridge over the furious
torrent Ogwen, which, a little lower, discharges itself into the sea at
Aber-ogwell; and near which is the ruin of the old chapel, Capel Ogwen, and
certain entrenchments, defenses of this part of the country. I soon quitted the
great road to visit Carnedd Llewelyn and Carnedd Dafydd. In my way, near a
field called Car Gwilim Ddu, is an artificial cave, in which (tradition says)
was interred William de Breos, executed, by Llewelyn the Great, on suspicion of
too great familiarity with his royal consort. From hence I begin a steep
ascent, and leave on the left the vast mountain Moelwynnion, and the strange
ferrated rocks Bear Mawr and Bear Bach. The Gern appeared on our right, and
Trwsgwl in front. On the right, farther on, projected into the bottom the lofty
peaked Moel yr Elain, or the naked hill of the Fawn, seeming like a buttress to
Carnedd Llewelyn; and between it and Carnedd Dafydd lies the little vale of Cwm
Penllafar, fertile in grass. We proceeded on the sloping sides of the Trwsgwl,
and near Carnedd y, Filiast and Carnedd y Lladron; and passing over Clogwyn y
Heliwr, or the rock of the Hunters, and ascending the steep and stoney side of
Carnedd Llewelyn, reach the broad and flat summit, and quickly decide its
height to be far inferior to that of its rival Y Wyddfa. The view is amazingly
great. At some distance are Y Wyddfa, and its neighboring alps. The Glyders,
Trevaen Tour in Wales, vol. ii.
, and Carnedd y Filiast, or rock of the Bitch Gre-hound, appear immediately
beneath. The front of the last is an even slope of rock, smooth and uniform;
and so slippery, that if the fox, in extreme danger, takes over it in wet
weather, it falls down and perishes.

NANT FRANKON is a tremendous glen, NANT FRANKON.
or rather chasm, bounded by these and other lofty rocks. In the bottom is a
narrow tract of meadowing, watered by the Ogwen, which at the end tumbles out
of Llyn Ogwen down the rude front of the Benglog. In one part it is called Sarn
yr Afange, or the Beavers Dam, another proof Taur is Wales, vol. ii.
of the former existence of those animals in our country. Over part of this
vale impends Yr Oleu Wen, with its front torn into amazing gullies, through
which torrents of stones were some time before carried into the Nant, by the
single collision of a cloud which burst against it, discharging an ocean of
water. The ruins of the hill looked like a stream of lava; which providentially
divided above a house, and by that means gave safety to the inhabitants. Among
the ruins were stones filled with innumerable small brassy cubic pyritae. I
must not omit, that the passage through this dreary bottom was once defended by
a fort, about a mile from the Benglog, called Ty'n y Twr, close to a bridge
called Pont y Twr; but at present there is not a vestige to be seen.

THE Menai, Anglesey, and the river Conway, afforded a distinct and fine
prospect. The high hills east of Nant Conway appeared a mere undulated tract; a
proof of our lofty situation. Our near view was very disagreeable, of dreary
bottoms or moory hills, and of no waters of any consequence, except Llyn
Llyphaint, LLYN LLYPHAINT.
or the lake of the Frogs, distinguished only by a ridiculous tale. About the
year 1542, says Dr. Powel, two vast stones, one of which a thousand yoke of
oxen could not have moved, in a certain night marched out of the bottom of the
lake, up part of the foot of Carnedd Llewelyn, the space of at lest a bow-shot;
from whence they have not stirred to this day. Henry VIII. doubting the truth,
sent a person to enquire into it; but was fully satisfied of the fact by the
mouth of his messenger Powel's Notes on Girald. Cambr. Iter. Cambriae, lib. ii.
c. 9.
.

CARNEDD DAFYDD, CARNEDD DAFYDD.
the companion summit, is connected to Carnedd Llewelyn by a semilunar isthmus,
which, on the side over Cwm Penllafar, is called Ysgollion Duon, or the black
ladders; and forms the most horrid precipice that thought can conceive. The
height of Carnedd Dafydd equals that of Llewelyn. We descended through Cwm
Penllafar, which signifies the Vale of Melody; perhaps that of the hounds, when
in full cry over the rock of the Hunters. A few peasants, who have sufficient
strength of head, sometimes attempt to pass the tremendous isthmus, as the
shortest way to Dyffryn Mymbr and Llanrwst. A safer way, through variety of bog
and stoney tracts, may be found up the Benglog, and along Nant y Benglog and
Bwlch Oleuni, over which is a narrow path into Dyffryn Mumbr.

IN my return from this sublime ride, I called at Coytmor, COYTWOR.
or more properly Coed Mawr, seated in the midst of lofty trees, every now and
then opening so as to admit sight of the exalted mountains and rocks soaring
above with misty tops. This had long been the residence of a family of the same
name; and of later years, by the marriage of the heiress, the property of the
Pughs of Penrhyn in Creuddyn. In the house is a remarkable picture, by Sir
Peter Lely, of the diminutive painter Richard Gibson, PICTURE OF GIBSON THE
PAINTER.
and his fairy wife, hand in hand: neither of them exceeded three feet ten
inches in height. He was distinguished for his skill in water-colors; and was
excellent in his copies of the portraits of Sir Peter Lely. He had the honor of
being drawing-master to the princess of Orange, and her sister Queen Anne. He
died in 1690, aged 75. His little widow survived him till 1709, when she
quitted life at the great age of 89 Mr. Walpole's Anecdotes of Painting, iii.
64.
. They had the honor of being married in the presence of Charles I. and his
queen, and the still greater honor of having their epithalamium composed by Mr.
Waller. It is so beautiful that I doubt not but the reader will excuse me for
giving it at full length.

Of the MARRIAGE of the DWARFS.
DESIGN, or chance, make others wive;
But Nature did this match contrive.
Eve might as well hare Adam fled,
As she denied her little bed
To him; for whom Heaven seemed to frame
And measure out this only dame.
Thrice happy is that humble pair.
Beneath the level of all care!
Over whose heads those arrows fly
Of sad distrust and jealousy:
Secured in as high extreme,
As if the world held none but them.
To him the fairest nymphs do show
Like moving mountains top'd with snow;
And every man a POLYPHEME
Does to his GALATEA seem:
None may presume her faith to prove;
He proffers death who proffers love. --
Ah CHLORIS! that kind Nature thus
From all the world had severed us;
Creating for ourselves us two,
As love has me for only you!
CONTINUE my ride toward the shore, toward Aber, ABER.
a small village with a church, in the gift of Lord Bulkeley; seated at the
mouth of a deep glen, which runs straight a mile and a half between the
mountains, and bounded on one side by a magnificent rock, called Maes y Gaer.
One part is hid with trees; on the other they only sprinkle its gray surface.
At the extremity of this glen a mountain presents a concave front, in the
center of which a vast cataract precipitates down a double fall. CASCADE.
The lowest is of a very great height, and forms partly a broad white sheet,
partly a snowy dew, not unlike the Staubhauch, or dusty cascade, in Switzerland.

AT the entrance of the glen, close to the village, is a very large artificial
mount, flat at top, and near sixty feet in diameter, widening toward the base.
It was once the site of a castle belonging to Llewelyn the Great. Some
foundations are yet to be seen round the summit, and in digging, traces of
buildings have been discovered. In this place was detected the intrigue of
William de Breos (son of Reginald, a potent baron in the reign of Henry III.)
with the wife of Llewelyn. It seems that William, by chance of war, had before
fallen into the hands of our prince, at which time probably the familiarity
with the princess commenced; but was not discovered till after he was released
on a large ransom Dugdale Baron, i. 419.
. The vindictive Llewelyn, in the following year (1229) inveigled Breos into
his power, by an invitation to celebrate the feast of Easter; when, after an
elegant banquet, the prince reproached him with his crime, and caused him to be
dragged from his presence Knyghton in Hist. Angl Script. ii. 1439. Cambden in
Brecknockshire, ii. 710.
, and hung on an adjacent hill. The tradition of the country is, that a Bard of
the palace accidentally meeting with the princess (who was ignorant of the fate
of her lover) accosted her in the following manner; and on receiving her
answer, showed him to her, hanging on a tree.

Diccyn doccyn, gwraig Lhewelyn,
Beth y roit'i am weled Gwilim?
The princess answers,

Cymry, Lloiger, a Lhewelyn
Y rown'i gyd, am weled Gwilim.
BARD. -- Tell me, wife of Llewelyn, what would you give for a sight of your
William?


PRINCESS. -- Wales, England, and Llewelyn to boot, I would give them all to
see my William.


I CONTINUED my journey from Aber along the rich recess, enjoying a fine view
of the entrance into the Menai, with its wooded shores of Anglesey and
Priestholm isle, and the great expanse of water between them and Llandudno, or
Ormshead: the vast cape rising, like the rock of Gibraltar, high out of the
waves. Before me soared the great promontory of PENMAEN MAWR, protruding itself
into the sea, and exhibiting a fine contrast to the fertility which it
interrupts, by a rude view of gray weather-beaten stone and precipice. I passed
by Bryn y Neuodd, a house late the property of Humphrey Roberts, Esquire now of his
daughter and sole heiress, relict of Robert Win, Esquire of Plasnewydd, near
Denbigh. A little farther is the small village and church of Llanvair Vechan;
from whence is a very short ride to the once tremendous road over this
celebrated rock.

IN past times it was justly the terror of the traveller; PENMAEN MAWR.
extremely narrow, bad, and stoney; and what added to his fears, for a
considerable way the danger increased with his progress, by reason of the
precipice gaining additional height. Generally it was without the protection of
a wall to secure him in case of a false step; which might in the loftiest place
precipitate him some scores of yards, either on sharp rocks or into the sea
according to the state of the tide. A vein of a crumbling stratum, in one part
so contracted the road as to excite new horrors. The British parliament eased
the fears of the travelers by a generous aid; which, by means of the judicious
employment of JOHN SYLVESTER, about the year 1772, effected what was before
thought beyond the reach of art to remedy. The road is now widened to a proper
breadth, and near the verge of the precipice secured by a strong wall. The
descent toward Penmaen Bach, or the Little Penmaen, which before was hardly
practicable, is now destroyed; and the road is brought on a level for two or
three miles, at a vast height above a return of rich slopes, and the deep
bottom of Dwygyfylchig, till we arrive at the rude back of that lesser
promontory; when we labor up the steep ascent of Sychnant, with a horrible and
almost precipitous mountain on one side, and hills, with tops broken into most
singular crags, on the other. From the top of Sychnant, the road is continued
about two miles on a perpetual descent to the town of Conway.

THE breach occasioned by the crumbling stratum, is now effectually repaired by
a series of arches; a work the just admiration of travelers, and a high credit
to the ingenious contriver. One danger yet remains, which must for ever baffle
the art of man: the side of this great rock, above the road, breaks into
millions of vast masses, depending often on precarious tenures; which, loosened
by the frequent torrents, sometimes (though rarely) descend in stoney streams.

Two or three accidents, ACCIDENTS THERE.
which have happened on this road, will remain as miracles. An exciseman fell
from the highest part, and escaped unhurt. The reverend Mr. Jones, who, in
1762, was rector of Llanelian, in the isle of Anglesey, fell with his horse,
and a midwife behind him, down the steepest part. The sage femme perished, as
did the nag. The divine, with great philosophy, unsaddled the steed, and
marched off with the trappings, exulting at his preservation.

I HAVE often heard of another accident, attended with such romantic
circumstances that I would not venture to mention it, had I not the strongest
traditional authority, to this day in the mouth of every one in the parish of
Llanvair Vechan, in which this promontory stands. Above a century ago, Sion
Humphries of this parish had made his addresses to Anne Thomas of Creyddyn, on
the other side of Conway river. They had made an appointment to meet at a fair
in the town of Conway. He in his way fell over Penmaen Mawr: she was overset in
the ferry-boat, and was the only person saved out of more than fourscore. They
were married, and lived very long together in the parish of Llanvair. She was
buried April 11th 1744, aged 116. He survived her five years, and was buried
December 10th 1749; was buried close by her in the parish churchyard, where
their graves are familiarly shown to this day.

I HAVE more than once visited the summit of this noted rock, to view the
fortifications described by the editor of Cambden, from some notes of that
sensible old baronet Sir John Wynn of Gwedir, and have found his account very
just Cambden, ii. 804, and seq. Before Sir John Wynn, a Sir Thomas ap William,
medicus, M. A. had described it; but his account never appeared in print. He
was eighth son of one of the family of Cochwillan. Lived in the year 1594, and
is said to have resided at Trefriw.
. The ascent is laborious. Soon after leaving the inn, I met with the ruins of
St. Seiriol's chapel, or, as it is here called, his Gweli, or bed; and after
passing a considerable way amidst small trees and brush-wood, attain the bare
and stoney part, or the Braich y Ddinas, (i. e. the arm of the city) which
rises in form of another hill out of this promontory. A Mr. Caswel, ITS HEIGHT.
at the request of Mr. Flamsteed the great astronomer, measured the height, and
found it to be from the sands 1545 feet.

AFTER climbing for some space among the loose stones, the front of three, if
not four, AN ANCIENT FORTRESS.
walls presented themselves very distinctly one above the other. In most places
the facings appeared very perfect; but all of dry work. I measured the height
of one wall, which was at the time nine feet; the thickness seven feet and a
half. Between these walls, in all parts, were innumerable small buildings,
mostly circular, and regularly faced within and without; but not disposed in
any certain order. These had been much higher, as is evident from the fall of
stones, which lie scattered at their bottoms; and probably had once the form of
towers, as Sir John asserts. Their diameter in general is from twelve to
eighteen feet; but some were far less, not exceeding five feet. The walls were
in certain places intersected with others equally strong. On the north-west and
south-east sides are the plain marks of two roads, of a zig-zag form, with the
remains of walls on both sides, which lead to the summit. On the small area of
the top had been a group of towers, or cells, like the former; one in the
center, and five others surrounding it. Three are still distinct; of the two
others are only faint vestiges. Near this had been, I believe, a similar group;
but at present reduced to a shapeless heap of stones. Near one of these groups
is a well cut in the live rock, and always filled with water, supplied by the
rains, and kept full by the frequent impending vapors.

THIS strong hold of the Britons is exactly of the same kind with those on Carn
Madryn, Carn Boduan, and Tre'r Caeri, described pp. 194. 206. 207. This was
most judiciously founded, to cover the passage into Anglesey, and the remoter
part of their country; and must, from its vast strength, have been invincible,
except by famine; being inaccessible by natural steepness toward the sea, and
on the other parts fortified in the manner described See a plan of the top and
one side of this strong hold in the Archaelogia, iii. plate xxix. p. 352.
.

THE white beam, or Aria Theophrasti, ARIA THEOPHRASTI.
is frequent on the sides of this rock, and in many similar places in Wales. No
use is made of it in our country. The Swiss procure from the berries a good
spirit. The wood is very hard, and excellent for flutes: and the wood, from its
great solidity, was esteemed to make the best charcoal.

I DESCENDED from the summit into a hollow between the Penmaen and an adjacent
mountain. Got upon my horse, and directed my course on a good sheep-walk
toward Conway. In my way observed, above Gwdhw Glass, in the parish of
Dwygyvylcheu, a long series of antiquities, some of which are mentioned in the
account of Penmaen Mawr preserved in Cambden. For a very considerable length of
way I saw circles of stones of various diameters, and great Carneddau. CIRCLES
AND CARNEDDAU.
The principal circle consists at present of ten upright stones, at unequal
distances from each other; the largest of which is eight feet three inches
high: on the ground is another, eleven feet two. The circle is completed by a
low bank of loose stones placed between the greater. The diameter of this
circle is eighty feet. Near this are four other circles, far inferior in size.
In the center of one is a flat stone, the remains of a Cromlech; probably the
rest might have had those memorials before they were removed for the purpose of
walling, or the like. About a quarter of a mile from these is a large Carnedd,
composed of small stones, and near it another of large stones; and not far from
these, a circle composed of small ones An assemblage of antiquities of this
nature may be seen in plate ii. book iii. of Mr. THOMAS WRIGHT'S Louthirna.
That book is a small specimen of his great abilities. The vast treasure he
possesses of drawings of Irish antiquities, in the highest degree merit
publication, and clame the assistance of some distinguished patron, to enable a
person of his merit to enrich the literary world with more of his labors.
. Near the last is a great rude stone standing upright, called Maen y Campiau,
MAEN Y CAMPIAU.
or Stone of the Games; and almost contiguous is a Carnedd, and a small circle
of twelve stones. This tract had certainly been much inhabited; for all around
are the foundations of small buildings, made of rounded stones, suitable to the
rudeness and simplicity of distant ages. Small upright stones, and numbers of
small Carnedds, are scattered in various places; and the vestige of a formed
road is to be seen pointing from hence toward the Conway.

WHATSOEVER purpose the lesser circles might be designed for, there is great
reason to suppose that the greater, especially that near to the Maen y Campiau,
were the British circus for the exhibition of ancient games; probably the
Eisteddfods, or sessions for deciding the merits of rivals in our British
Olympics, might have been originally held here, or in similar places. Of
British games, THE ANCIENT GAMES.
we had twenty-four, Pedair CAMP ar hugain, whose names, as preserved by Dr.
Davies in his Dictionary, I shall give, with their explanation, as far as in my
power. Of these, ten were called GWROLGAMPAU, or manly games; of these, six
depended on bodily strength alone, and were styled Tadogion, i. e. Father
games, because no instrument whatsoever was necessary to perform them: for they
depended on the man, naked as he was born. The Greeks had their Pentathlum. We
had one more. I. Strength to raise weights; II. Running; III. Leaping; IV.
Swimming; V. Wrestling; VI. Riding. I imagine that the word Marchogaeth extends
farther than the common acceptance, and that the game intended was a contest
between charioteers; for no people were more skilled in the use of chariots in
war than the Britons: it is therefore improbable that they would not, in time
of peace, exert their art in mimic combat, or in competitions of speed in the
festive field. And these six were undoubtedly original games of this island,
and from the earliest of times: of others, some doubt may be made.

THE remaining four manly games were, O Rym-arfau, or what depended on skill in
arms. I. Archery; II. Playing with the sword and buckler; III. Playing with the
Cleddyf Deuddwrn, or the two-handed sword, the ancient weapon of the Britons,
as exemplified in a statue of a soldier, found in digging among the ruins of
London, after the great fire in 1666 Monfaucon's Antiq. iv. 16. tab. ix.
; IV. Chwarau Ffon Ddwybig, or playing with the two-end staff; which seems to
correspond with the more modern quarter-staff.

AFTER these were the ten Mabolgampau, or JUVENILE games. Among them, three
species of the chare: I. Coursing with the gre-hound; II. Fishing; III.
Fowling. The remaining seven were of the domestic kind: I. Bairddoniath, or
poetical competitions, of which I have before spoken In my account of the
Eisteddfoddau Caerwy, Tour in Wales, i. 427 to 446, some light is thrown on
this and certain of the following articles.
; II. Playing upon the harp; III. Reading Welsh; IV. Singing a Cywydd with
music; V. Singing a Cywydd between four with accents; VI. Drawing of coats of
arms; VII. Heraldry. These two seem so congenial, as to be unnecessarily
separated.

AFTER these were four Go-gampiau, or Sub-games. I. Chwarau Gwydd-bwyll, a game
like that of Draughts, played with men, and probably the game of Fox and Goose,
Gwydd signifying a goose, and Gwerin y Wyddbwyll the men of that game.

II. CHWARAU Tawl Bwrdd, is probably Back gammon: words of British origin; bach
little, and gammon a battle, the strife of gamesters: and Tawl bwrdd is
literally the cast on the table.

III. CHWARAU Ffristeal, or the games of the dice-box; of which we know no more
than that dice had a concern in it. And IVthly, Cyweiriaw Felyn, or the tuning
of the harp.

AFTER leaving the antiquities of Goddw Glass, I joined the turnpike road above
Sychnant. On the left, was pointed to me a lofty hill, impending over Conway
March. On its summit is Castle Caer Lleion, a British post, surrounded with
ditches, and strong ramparts of stones; an additional defense to the country,
besides that of Penmaen Mawr. The view of part of Conway, and a large bend of
the river, with its rich and wooded banks, are seen from the descent to them to
great advantage.

I ENTERED CONWAY at the upper gate. CONWAY.
A more ragged town is scarcely to be seen, within; or a more beautiful one,
without. The situation is on a steep slope to the verge of the river, here a
mile broad at high water. The form is nearly triangular, surrounded with lofty
walls, guarded by twenty-four round towers. The lower face of the triangle
borders on the river. A castle of matchless magnificence rises on a lofty rock,
at one corner; and from near each end of the town-walls, fronting the Conwy, a
curtain terminated with a round tower ran some way into the river, the more
effectually to prevent the approach of an enemy from the water. Only one of
these curtains exists; the other, with both the towers, have long since
perished.

IN front is an extensive quay, from which is a delightful view up and down the
river. The opposite side is hilly, varied with CONWAY CASTLE.
CONWAY CASTLE.
woods and gentlemen's seats, and the bifurcated hill of Diganwy, a fortress.
The ground called Arcadia, laid out by my worthy friend and old school-fellow
Owen Holland, Esquire and Plas-tyrion, the house of the reverend Mr. Owen Jones,
well merit a visit from the traveller.

THE castle was built by Edward I. in the year 1284; who, I believe, employed
the architect who built Caernarvon. All his skill seems to have been exerted
here. A more beautiful fortress never arose. Its form is oblong, placed on all
parts on the verge of the precipitous rock. One side is bounded by the river;
another by a creek full of water at every tide, and most beautifully shaded by
hanging woods. The other two sides face the town. Within are two courts; and on
the outside project eight vast towers, each with a slender one of amazing
elegance issuing from its top, within which had been a winding staircase. In
one of the great towers is a fine window, in form of an arched recess, or bow,
ornamented with pillars. This, in ancient times, was an elegant part of
architecture, called the oriel, usual in the houses of people of rank; and
appears, from a poem of the very age in which this was built, to have been the
toilet of the ladies, and probably might have been that of Queen Elinor. In her
ORYALL there she was,
Closyd well with royal glass;
Fulfullyd it was with ymagery,
Every window by and by,
On each side had there a gynne
Sperde with many a dyvers pynne Part of the poem of the SQUIRE OF LOW DEGREE.
See Mr. WARTON'S Hist. Poetry, i. 175. -- The gynnes were the fastenings of the
casements, which were often secured with pynnes of yvere.
.


THE great hall suited the magnificence of the founder. HALL.
It is of a curved form, conformable to the bend of the outward walls,
including one end with a large window, which seems to have been the private
chapel. It extended a hundred and thirty feet in length, was thirty-two broad,
and of a fine height. The roof once supported by eight noble arches, six of
which still remain. A great fireplace at one end, and another on the side,
warmed it: and six windows to the country, and three to the court, gave light
to this spacious apartment. Beneath were vast vaults, the magazines of all that
contributed to the convivial mirth above.

THERE were two entrances into this fortress, ENTRANCES TO THE CASTLE.
both contrived for security. The one from the Conwy, up a steep rock, once a
winding narrow stairs, ending in a small advanced work before one of the gates
of the castle, and protected by small round towers. At the other extremity is a
similar work, from which had been a drawbridge, occasionally dropped into the
town, over a great fosse. This entrance is expressed in the vignette, p. 1. of
this volume.

THE town contains but few inhabitants, TOWN.
a considerable space being vacant of buildings. It has four entrances: the
upper gate; the lower, or that next to the water; a portal between that and the
castle; and another to the creek, called Porth y Felin, or the gate to the mill.

EDWARD I. made Conwy a free borough, and ordered that the mayor, who was the
constable of the castle for the time being, should preserve its privileges.
William Sikun was appointed first to that honor. At present it is governed by
one alderman, a recorder, coroner, water-bailiff, and two sergeants at mace,
HALL in CONWAY CASTLE.
chosen annually. The privileges extended from Caernarvon to the river Clwyd;
for none could be convicted of any crime, within that district, but by a jury
collected within that tract. Such was the case with all the other English
garrisons in North Wales.

THE ferry is at present the property of the owner of Marle. FERRY.
An order was issued by Edward II. for either the repairing the boat, or
building a new one: for the use of which the inhabitants were to pay eight
marks Sebright MSS.
. At low water the river is not fifty yards broad, nor above eight feet deep.
The spring-tides rise twelve feet; but the aproach to this port is unsafe, by
reason of the sand-banks.

THERE are some remains of the Cistercian abbey, ABBEY.
founded in 1185 by Llewelyn ap Jorwerth, prince of North Wales, in honor of
the Blessed Virgin and All Saints Dugdale's Monasticon, i. 918.
. A long vaulted room of good masonry, worked with clay, but plaistered with
lime; and a Saxon door, are still to be seen. He endowed it with lands, to a
vast extent, in Caernarvonshire and in Anglesey The same, 918. 919.
, and with privileges of great value: among the lands are mentioned Caput Wedva
Vawr, and Caput Grybcoch, and Morva Dinllin. It was exempted not only from the
maintenance of all men, horses, dogs, and hawks, and even of those of the
prince. No one was to interfere in the elections, or affairs of the house. They
were to enjoy all benefits of wrecks on the shores of their property, in the
same manner as the prince did on his; but no advantage was to be taken of
similar misfortunes to the religious men, but all their goods, so wrecked, were
to be restored. They and their servants were to be exempt, in all parts, from
tolls, pontage, and the like; and their free passage over the Menai, Conwy,
Barmouth (Abermaw) and Dyni (perhaps Dyfi) is particularly provided for.
Numbers of other privileges are mentioned, the charter of which is dated from
Aberconwy, and witnessed by Yorwerth Gam, Gwin ap Ednewein Ydon, the prince's
chaplain, and by Madog ap Cador Dugdale's Monasticon, 920.
. This shows that Conwy was a place of some note before the English conquest.
It probably had some sort of fortress before the existence of the present, its
ancient name being Caer Gyffin, Gyffin being that of the stream that flows into
the creek beneath the castle MS in the possession of his grace the Duke of
Beaufort.
. Cambden, in vol. ii. p. 803, tells us that Hugh Lupus had fortified the
place, I suppose on his march into Anglesey in 1098.

EDWARD I. did not choose to trust within his new walls religious of the
principality, but immediately removed them to his new foundation at Maynan See
p. 145 of this work.
, REMOVED TO MAYNAN.
a few miles higher up the river. He acted with tenderness toward the monks,
and left them all their lands and privileges, and preserved to them the
presentation of their conventual church at Conway, now made parochial, provided
they found two able and worthy Englishmen as chaplains, and a third, a
Welshman, for the benefit of those who did not understand English. One of the
English was to be perpetual vicar, to be named by the convent on every vacancy,
and presented by the diocesan Dugdale Monast. i. 921.
.

AMONG the illustrious persons buried in the church, TOMBS.
was Cynan ap Owen Gwynedd, who was interred in the year 1200, in a monk's
cowl; because, says Powel, it was then made to believe by the moonks and
friars, that that strange weed was a sure defense betwixt their souls and
hell, howsoever they died Powel's Hist. Wales, 252.
. Its great founder was also buried here; but on the dissolution his coffin was
removed to Llanrwst, and is still to be seen.

A VERY rude figure, cut on stone, preserves the memory of Mary, mother to
Archbishop Williams, who died of childbirth of twins, October 10th 1585; and a
singular epitaph on a Mr. Hooks, proves the remarkable secundity of the
family. Here lies the body of NICHOLAS HOOKS of CONWAY, Gent. who was the
41st child of his father WILLIAM HOOKS, Esquire by ALICE his wife, and the father
of twenty-seven children; who died the 20th day of MARCH 1637.

IN the street not far from the abbey, is a very old house, with a singular
window, with several coats of arms sculptured beneath; some relative to the
Stanlies. This house is called the College. COLLEGE.
As it is said that Edward I. took this abbey into his hands, he possibly might
establish here a place for the instruction of youth.

THE Plas Mawr is a vast house built by Robert Wynn, PLAS MAWR.
Esquire of the house of Gwedir. Over the gateway is inscribed (...), Sustine
abstine; and on the house, the pious letters I. H. S. X. P. S. and the date
1585. Within is a great quantity of rude stucco, with various arms of the
founder's allies or patrons. Scattered over the walls and ceilings are swans,
owls, cranes, ostriches, and bears and ragged staves; the last, the badges of
Robert Dudley earl of Leicester; a piece of flattery paid to him by the founder
of the house.

FEW of the remarkable events which have befell this place, EVENTS.
are preserved in history. When Henry III. made his calamitous encampment under
Diganwy, opposite to this town, he dispatched three hundred renegado Welshmen
of the borders, with some other troops, to rescue a ship of provision which had
been stranded on this side. They succeeded; but, instigated by avarice,
sacrilegiously plundered the abbey, and burnt several houses belonging to it.
The loyal Welsh grew desperate, attacked the banditti laden with spoils, slew
numbers, and hung or beheaded every prisoner whom they took Powel, 311.
.

RICHARD II. before his return from Ireland, directed that the rendezvous of
his forces, destined to oppose the usurping Bolingbroke, should be here. Forty
thousand loyalists, out of Cheshire and Wales, had assembled under the banners
of the earl of Salisbury. Wearied by the delays of their ill-fated prince,
numbers disbanded themselves: yet sufficient remained animated against the
usurper, and determined to follow their king through all his fortunes. Richard,
seized with a panic, stole from Conwy in the night Helinshed, 499.
, was betrayed by the earl of Northumberland, and soon after perished in the
hands of his enemy In the Tour in Wales, i. 45, is the sequel of his story.
.



THE town was almost depopulated by the plague, in 1607, and numbers of people
were buried in the streets. It was observed to break out here within three
weeks of the time it appeared in London, probably brought here by some
sugitives.

IN mention of the transactions in this place during the civil wars, the last
active scene of the life of Archbishop Williams must be related, especially as
it was a part for which he underwent the greatest, but perhaps unjust, calumny.
As soon as he retired into Wales in 1642, he was resorted to by all the
loyalists, being the person on whose prudence and spirit they could fully rely.
He had received in charge from his majesty all North Wales, and in particular
the castle of Conway Philip's Life of Archbishop Williams, 287.
. He began with fortifying his house at Penrhyn; and was at considerable
expense in strengthening this fortress. In the perilous state of those times,
multitudes of the country gentlemen requested the archbishop to receive into
the castle their writings, plate, and most valuable movables. He undertook the
charge, and gave to every owner a receipt, by which he made himself liable to
the loss; and put his nephew, William Hooks, in possession of the place, in
January 1603-4 Philips, 289.
. His Grace, from that time, was the protector of the country, not only from
the violence of the enemy, but from the oppression of his own party. In May
1645, Prince Rupert unfortunately superseded the prelate in his command, and
caused Sir John Owen to take possession of the castle. This he did with most
blameable violence, and with a constant evasion of giving the archbishop any
security of the valuables he had in charge The same, 295, 296.
.

AFFAIRS were in this state till June 1646; when Williams, foreseeing ruin to
himself, irritated by injuries from those who had embarked in the same cause
with himself, and in the critical time (when the king's affairs were desperate)
invited by General Mytton to put himself on the favor of parliament, accepted
his offer, and assisted him in the reduction of the place General Mytton's
Letter, in Drake's Parl. Hist. xv. 3.
.

MYTTON, by the advice of the archbishop, took the town by storm on August
15th: the latter assisted personally, and was wounded in the neck Rushworth,
iv. part i. 297.
. With the severity usual at that time toward the Irish, Mytton seized on all
that were found, and caused them to be tied back to back, and flung into the
river Whitelook, 219.
. The castle surrendered on the 10th of November; and Mytton, who is
represented as a generous character, more haughty than covetous Philips, 300.
, restored to every individual the property entrusted to Williams. For these
services the parliament granted him a general pardon, and a release from all his
sequestrations.

THE beauty and grandeur of this fortress seemed to have induced the governing
powers to forbear offering any violence to its walls: that impiety was reserved
for loyal hands. A grant had been made of it by the king to Edward Conway, earl
of Conway. In 1665, the earl employed his servant, Milward, to take down the
iron, timber, and lead, and to transport it to Ireland, under pretense of its
being for his majesty's service The Earl's Letter in the Appendix.
. Thomas Bulkely, Esquire Colonel Wynn, and several of the principal gentlemen of
the country, opposed the design; but their remonstrance was overruled, and
this noble pile reduced to nearly its present condition. At present it is held
from the crown by Owen Holland, Esquire

SEVERAL years ago, the folly of some of the inhabitants, by getting stones
from the rock beneath one of the great towers, brought down a vast segment. The
ruins are the most awful I ever beheld; lying in stupendous fragments on the
shore, some so unbroken as to preserve both the grand external rotundity and
inward concavity: a hardened cement of stone and mortar eleven feet thick. The
prospect of the upper part of the tower remains entire, suspended at a vast
height above our heads, exhibiting in the breach such a strength of walling as
might have given to the architect the most reasonable hope that his work would
have endured to the end of time. When I image to myself the gay appearance of
this fortress, filled by the festive court of Edward, his beloved Elinor, and
all the train of gallant nobility, who passed a Christmas here, exulting at the
conquest of my hardy countrymen; and when I survey its present ruins, my mind
naturally falls into melancholy reflections, suitable to the scene around me.
Let me only change the rock on Towy's flood for that of Conwy, and a favorite
poet will express the ideas that must arise in the mind, of its past and
present state.

Deep at its feet, in Conwy's flood,
His sides are clothed with waving wood;
And ancient towers crown his brow,
That cast an awful look below.
Whose ragged walls the Ivy creeps,
And with her arms from falling keeps:
So both a safety from the wind
On mutual dependence find.
It Is now the Raven's blank abode:
It Is now the apartment of the Toad:
And there the Fox securely feeds,
And there the poisonous Adder breeds,
Concealed in ruins, moss, and weeds.
While ever and anon there falls
Huge heaps of hoary moulder'd walls.
Yet time has seen, that lifts the low,
And level lays the lofty brow,
Has seen this broken pile complete,
Big with the vanity of state;
But transient is the smile of Fate!
A little rule, a little sway,
A sunbeam in a winter's day,
Is all the proud and mighty have,
Betwixt the cradle and the grave.
DYER'S Grongar Hill. FROM Conway I took the road toward Caer Hen, BATTLE OF
KYMRYD.
the Conovium of the Romans. In my way passed near Kymryd, a place noted for a
bloody battle in 880, between Anarawd prince of Wales, and the Saxons under
Edred duke of Mercia. The Britons were victorious, and drove the invaders back
into their own country. Anarawd styled the battle Dial Rodri, or the Revenge of
Roderic; for his father Roderic the Great had the year before been slain by the
Saxons Cambden, ii. 802, 3. Powel, 38.
.

PASSED by the ferry of Tal y Cafn. At a small distance from it is a large
artificial mount, called Bryn y Castle; probably the site of a watchtower
belonging to Conovium, and judiciously placed in a very contracted part of the
vale, to observe the approach of an enemy from this side.

CAER HE^N, CARE HE^N.
the old Conovium, lay in a low spot near the river. There are still to be seen
remains of Roman bricks, and a sunk building divided into two parts, probably
the remains of the hypocaust from which the hollow brick, or funnel, preserved
at Gloddaeth, was taken. On one of the common bricks was inscribed LEG. X. --
the Legio Antonianus -- which served in these parts under Ostorius Cambden.
. Here also was found the cake of copper mentioned in the 63d page of my first
volume. Near the church are some remains of walls, which are all that are left
of this once noted place. The Itinerary places it twenty-four miles from
Segontium, and nineteen from Varis.

I PROCEEDED a little farther, and turned up a very steep road, by the church
of Llanbedr, to the summit of a very lofty hill, called Pen Caer Helen, PEN
CAER HELEN.
to try to discover more of Helen's noted road; but my search was fruitless.
Yet my pains were rewarded by the sight of a British post of great strength,
and in some parts singularly guarded. It had the usual fosses, and vast
ramparts of stones, with some remains of the facing of walls, and the
foundations of three or four round buildings: but what struck me much, were two
considerable spaces of ground thickly set with sharp-pointed stones, set
upright in the earth, as if they had been to serve the use of chevaux du frize,
to impede the approach of an enemy. From this hill is one way a wild and barren
prospect of Carnedd Llewelyn, and a long tract of rude hills and stoney
bottoms; and on another, the whole extent of the fertile Nant Conwy. Descended:
returned the same road, and passed the river in the good ferry at Tal y Cafn.

FROM hence I continued my journey through the wooded parish of Llansaintfraid,
beautifully sloping to the water's edge. The rout I took was toward Llandudno,
the grand boundary of the entrance of the Conwy. From the road, in many parts,
are most august views of the vast: expanse of the river, and the majestic
towers of Conwy. Similar views, and old fortified towns, I have seen frequent
on the Rhine, but in magnificence far inferior to these, our British glory.
After a ride of about three miles, descend to a flat. Pass by Marle, a house of
fine appearance, but now little more than a case, having suffered by fire about
forty years ago. It is picturesquely seated under a lofty rock, almost covered
with wood; and opposite to the town of Conwy. It had been originally the
property of the Hollands. It fell afterward to Sir Hugh Williams, second son
of Sir Gryffydd Williams of Penrhyn; and on the death of his grandson, Sir
Robert, devolved to Sir Thomas Prendergast of the kingdom, in right of his
lady, Anne, sister to Sir Robert.

HIGH above Marle, BODSCALLAN.
is Bodscallan, the property of Sir Roger Mostyn, in right of his wife
Margaret, daughter of the reverend Hugh Win. I find Richard Mostyn, second
son of Thomas ap Richard ap Howel, in possession of it; and that he had one
daughter, Margaret, married to Gryffydd Win, second son of John Win ap
Mereddydd of Gwedir, and who had his settlement at Berth Du near Llanrwst. It
is a fine situation, environed with woods. From a neglected terrace is a most
beautiful view, over the tops of trees, of Conwy, part of the river, and the
vast mountains the back ground of the prospect. It is a place of great
antiquity, being mentioned in the record of Caernarvon; but was inhabited in
far earlier times, as appears by the ruins of a small castlet, now hid in
woods, on the top of a small hill near the present house. Bodscallan signifies
the dewlling place of Scallan; in all probability a word corrupted from
Caswallon, the owner in some distant period. It was one of those townships
called Tre' Welyog, not entirely free. The tenants were originally possessors
of hereditary estates, which were divided and subdivided among their posterity
to the fourth descent, after which they became possessed by branches
independent of each other; every one of whom paid for their own land Record of
Caernarvon, Bibl. Litt. 19.
. This possibly might have been one of the three Gwelis, or estates of children
from a common stock, originally belonging to Gloddaeth The same, 22.
. In the present house is a good portrait of old Sir John Win of Gwedir. A
small head, on board, of Robert Wynn, founder of the Plas Mawr in Conwy. He is
painted in black, with a book in his hand, and with short gray hair and beard.
But the most remarkable is that of Dr. Ellis Pryse, of Plas Yollin in
Denbighshire, dated 1605; a creature of the earl of Leicester's, and devoted to
all his bad designs. Pryse's dress is a white jacket, with a broad turnover;
his hair yellow, and his beard thin, and of the same color; his visage very
long, lank, and hypocritical. He was the greatest of our knaves in the period
in which he lived; the most dreaded oppressor in his neighborhood; and a true
sycophant; for a common address of his letters to his patron was, O LORD, in
thee do I put my trust!

FROM hence is a small walk to GLODDAETH, GLODDAETH.
a seat of Sir Roger Mostyn's, placed on the slope of a very extensive hill, or
limestone rock, clothed with successful plantations by Sir Roger, grandfather
of the present possessor. Part of the plain below the house was planted, by the
same gentleman, with forest-trees; and laid out, according to the taste of his
time, in straight walks, intersecting each other, or radiating from a center,
distinguished by a statue. ITS WALKS.
The upper walks, having fortunately a steep and stubborn rock for their basis,
checked the modish propensity to rectitude; so there was a necessity to deviate
from it; but in no greater degree than the flexure of a zigzag would admit.
Notwithstanding some blemishes, corrigible at an easy rate, these walks may be
considered among those of the first rate of this island, for such beauties of
view which nature can bestow; and, from those spots favored by the sight of
Conwy, FINE VIEWS.
I may add the majestic ones of ancient art. Every flight of path presents new
and grand objects: at first, of the great windings of the river toward
Llanrwst, the lofty towers of Conwy, and the venerable walls of the town; and
beyond, a long extent of alps, with Moel Siabod, the Drum, and Carnead Llewelyn
and Dafydd, appearing with distinguished height. From a little higher ascent is
opened to us the discharge of the Conwy into the sea, sublimely bounded by the
lesser Penmaen, and the immense Orm's Head, or Llandudno; between which appear,
a fine bay, the vast promotory of Penmaen Mawr, the isle of Priestholm, and the
long extent of Anglesey. After gaining the summit, beneath is seen a
considerable flat, with the estuary of the river Conwy falling into the Irish
sea on one side, and the beautiful half moon bay of Llandudno on the other: one
of whose horns is the great head of the same name; the other, the lofty rock
Rhiwleden, or the little Orm's Head. A little farther progress brings us in
sight of a great bay, sweeping semicircularly the shores; and beyond are the
distant hills of Flintshire, and the entrances into the estuaries of the Mersey
and Dce, frequently animated with shipping.

BESIDES the adventitious trees and shrubs, RARE PLANTS.
these walks afford great amusement to the botanists, by their variety of rare
plants, all within a very small compass. Among them, that able botanist, my
fellow voyager through the Hebrides, the reverend Mr. Lightfoot, enumerated the
Veronica Spicala, or spiked speedwell, Fl. Angl. i. 3; Geranium Sanguineum, or
bloody cranesbill, Fl. Angl. i. 305. Fl. Scot. i. 372; Cystus Marifolius, Sp.
Pl. i. 741; Cystus; Hirsutus, Fl. Angl. 432, or hoary thymeleaved Cystus;
Silene Nutans, or Nottingham catchfly, Fl. Angl. i. 188; Rubia Tinctorium, or
wild madder, Sp. Pl. i. 158; Scilla Verna, or vernal hyacinth, Fl. Angl. 142;
Potentilla Verna, or vernal cinquesoil, Fl. Scot. 270. Fl. Angl. i. 224;
Thalictrum Minus, or lesser meadow rue, Fl. Scot. i. 285. Fl. Angl. i. 238;
Arenaria Verna, or vernal mountain chickweed, Fl. Angl. i. 191. Fl. Scot. i.
231 Tour in Wales, i. p. 19. tab. ii.
; Scrophularia Vernalis, or yellow figwort, Fl. Scot. i. 330. Fl. Angl. i. 275.
And near the gate, in the lane leading to Conwy, the Polypodium vulgar var.
Cambriciem, or Welsh or jagged polypody, Fl. Angl. ii. 455. Fl. Scot. ii. 668.

GREAT part of the present house was built by Thomas Mostyn, in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth. On the dais of the great hall are painted the arms of that
princess, those of the house, and of the profligate earl of Leicester; the
last, a proof of the general flattery paid to his power.

HERE is, in a poor room, an excellent collection of books and manuscripts:
among the last is a most beautiful copy of the first and second books of
Froissart, a manuscript on vellum, with most elegant illuminations. The
frontispiece represents the author on his knees, in a blue mantle, presenting
his book to Edward III. A king of France, distinguished by the fleurs de lis on
his robes, holds a queen by the hand, who, from the arms of England, the lions
on her robe, seems to be Queen Philippa, to whom Froissart was clerk of the
closet. She holds by the hand a little boy, whose robe is also marked with the
lions. This must have been Richard of Bourdeaux, her grandson, afterward
Richard II. A lady, and several other figures, appear in the piece. This book
was given by Lord Buckburst to Sir William Cecil, and by him to his cotemporary
of the house of Mostyn.

GLODDAETH came into possession of the family of Sir Roger Mostyn by the
marriage of his ancestor Howel ap Evan Vychan, in 1460, with Margaret, daughter
and heir of Gryffydd ap Rhys ap Gryffydd ap Madoc Gloddaeth ap Madoc ap
Jerwerth Goch of Cryddyn, the hundred in which the house lies. The tenure of
this place was perfectly free, and the tenant owed only suit and service to the
county and hundred courts; and when they went to attend the prince in war, they
went at his expense.

EGGLWYS RHOS, EGGLWYS RHOS.
the parish church, is in a flat, at a small distance from Gloddaeth, near a
precipitous rock, clothed with wood, called Bryn Maelgwyn. Painted in the east
window is the figure of a man kneeling, dressed in a herald's mantle, with the
arms of Englefield. From the maimed inscription I collect that he must have
been Howel ap Tudor of Mostyn Salisbury Pedigree, 37.
, and that he had bestowed this window on the church.

BUT this church is celebrated for the death of the prince of Maelgwyn Gwynedd,
who had taken shelter here to avoid the Vad felen, or yellow pestilence, which
at that time raged through Europe. The Britons, like the Romans, personified
disease. In this instance, it was to assume either the form of a Basilisc, or
the powers of one, under the form of a fair woman, who slew Maelgwyn with a
glance, as he incautiously looked out of the window; according to the prophecy,
Pan ddelo y'r pry rhyfedd i forfa Rhianedd, os gwel MAELGWN GWYNEDD FEFYD farw.
Whenever a strange creature arrives on the marsh of Rhianedd, if Maelgwn
Gwynedd looks at it, he will die.

THE small remains of Diganwy, DIGANWY.
or, as it is called by the English, Gannoc, are on two small hills, near the
shore of the Conwy, at small distance from Egglwys Rhos. The walls crossed the
space between the hills, and ran up their sides; on the summit of one is a
vestige of a round tower, and here and there a few foundations of walls on the
accessible parts. Dr. Powel, from the authority of the Welsh historians His
notes on Giraldus Cambr. Itin. lib. ii. c. 10.
, says, there had been a city here, which, in 810, was destroyed by lightning;
and Cambden adds, that he believed it to have been the ancient Dictum, from its
having been the station of a party of Nervii Dictenses, under the later
emperors. I cannot discover the founder of the fortress, on whose ruins I
contemplate. Possibly it might have been Robert of Rudland. We are told this
country was parcel of the possessions of the earls of Chester; and that Robert
was in it when he came to his fate. On July the 3d, 1088, our brave prince
Gryffydd ap Cynan, with three ships, entered the Conwy; and landing under the
castle at high water, left the ships on shore at the recess of the tide. He
ravaged the neighboring country, and drove toward his vessels a great booty of
men and cattle. Robert, indignant at this, descended from his fortress,
attended by a single soldier, Osbern de Orgar, and without any defensive armor
except his shield. The Welsh attacked him with missile weapons, and, filling
his shield so full of darts that it fell under their weight, the enemy rushed
on him, cut off his head, and, fastening it to the mast, failed off in savage
triumph Ordericus Vitalis, lib. viii. p. 670.
. Llewelyn the Great destroyed this castle; but it was rebuilt, in 1210, by
Randle Blondevil, earl of Chester Powel, 262.
. King John lay for some time encamped under its walls, in the year 1211, and
was reduced to great streights by the policy of Llewelyn: he came between him
and England, and cut off his resources The same.
. Henry III. fared even worse on the same spot, in 1245, at which time John de
Gray of Wilton was constable. One of his courtiers most pathetically describes
their miseries The same, 311.
. At length Diganwy was, in 1260, totally dismantled by our last prince
Llewelyn ap Gryffydd.

NOT far from hence, ANCIENT TOWER.
on the top of a low hill near Bryniau, is an ancient tower. Its form is
circular; its height about twenty feet, the diameter twelve. Its walls compose
only two thirds of a circle, the rest is open to the top; and the finishing of
the walls complete, without any appearance of there ever having been a door;
and this opening is to the land. Within are the marks of two floors. Round the
inside are three rows of square holes, none of which pass through the building.
Its walls are of great thickness, and the mortar appears very ancient. I can
make no conjecture about the use; but describe it in order to exercise the
talents of others.

CONTINUED my ride along the shore by the flat isthmus which connects the high
land of Gloddaeth with the great promontory Llandudno. Ride along part of the
last, on a narrow road above the sea, having on the right steep hills and
precipices. Reach Gogarth, GOGARTH.
a long but narrow tract of great fertility. It had been an appendage to the
abbey of Conway, of which there remains part of a very strong building.

I ASCENDED on a very long and steep path to the top of Llandudno, LLANDUDNO,
OR ORM'S HEAD.
a beautiful sheepwalk, consisting of a fine turf, except where the rock
appears, extending near four miles in length, and one in breadth. It lies in
the manor of Gogarth, belonging to the sea of Bangor. The western extremity is
a vast precipice, the haunt of various sea-fowls in the season of breeding.
SEA-FOWLS.
The Gulls possess the lowest part; above them the Razor-bills and Guillemots
have their quarters; over them croak the Corvorants; and Herons occupy the
highest regions; and scattered in different parts are a few Puffins, and black
Guillemots. The Peregrine Falcon builds in these rocks. FALCONS.
The kind was in the days of falconry so excellent, that the great minister
Burleigh sent a letter of thanks to an ancestor of Sir Roger Mostyn, for a
present of a cast of Hawks from this place.

FALCONRY was in high esteem among the Welsh. ANCIENT FALCONRY.
Our prince had his chief falconer, who held the fourth rank among the officers
of his court. He held his lands free; had a double portion of provender for his
horse: the prince supplied him with woollen clothes, the princess with linen.
He brought his cup with him into the hall; but was not allowed to drink more
than would quench his thirst, least he should get fuddled, and neglect his
Hawks. He was allowed the hearts and lungs of all the animals in the royal
kitchen, and sometimes a barren ewe to feed his birds. Whenever his Hawks
killed any of the three most noble species of game, the Heron, the Bittern, or
the Crane, he received from the prince three services; that of holding his
stirrup when he descended from his horse, of holding his horse while he was
taking the Hawks from the game, and of holding his stirrup again when he
mounted his horse: and at night the prince honored him with serving him thrice
at table with his own hands. In case the falconer took any of the royal birds
in the prince's absence, he was to bring it into the hall, and show it to him:
on that the prince was to arise, or if he did not, he was to bestow on him the
robe which he then wore. During the time that the Hawks were in their mew, the
falconer was not bound to answer any suit. If he killed his horfe in the
exercise of his office, the prince was to find him another. The fine for an
injury to the chief falconer was vi cows, and cxxvi pence. His slaughter was
not to be atoned for less than cxxvi cows L^ges Wallicae, 23 to 26.
. Let me conclude with saying, that there was a peculiar tax for the support of
this office, called Cylch Hebog Yddjon Record of Caernarvon, in Bibliotheea
Litteraria, 25.
, which fell on the vassals; for the prince contributed little or nothing to
the expense of his amusements.

THE northern side of this promontory is broken into precipices of various
heights; and the base of both these sides is washed by a very deep water. It is
well worth the labor of ascending to the highest point, to view the extensive
and various prospects.

ON the same side are the remains of several rude walls without mortar, called
Llety Vadog, or the house of Madoc, a supposed ancestor of Gloddaeth: and not
far from it is a strait narrow path, with stones on each side, probably the
remains of two walls; a watch-place for Deer, as the name Wylfa yr Ceirw
signifies.

ON a great eminence, called Dinas, is a large enclosure. The edge of the hill
is surrounded with a rude wall; and within are multitudes of small circular
hollows, about twelve feet in diameter, environed with walls; such as are found
on Tre'r Caeri, and similar places, the rough habitations of our distant
ancestors. Near this place is a Maen Sigl, rocking-stone, a great one, whose
point of contact with the ground is so small as to make it moveable with the
left touch. The country people call it Crd Tudno, St. Tudno's Cradle. This is
surrounded with a fosse, and has a formed road to it. It is the conjecture of
the learned, that the Druids made these stones an instrument of imposition on
their votaries; and in case of any judicial determinations, pretended that none
but their holy hands could move them: and probably they were surrounded with a
fosse, and had their prescribed road to keep off the vulgar, and give greater
solemnity to the miraculous decision. The ingenious Bernier relates a
superstition not very foreign from this. At Sendbrary, in the kingdom of
Cachemire, the Bramins, the Druids of India, showed him a stone which the
strongest man could not lift, yet eleven of those holy men, with the tip of
their finger, could effect it, on praying to their saint Bernier's vojage of
Cachemire, 112.
.

FROM hence I passed by the church, LLANDUDNO CHURCH.
on the bleakest of situations, above the sea, and remote from all dwellings.
It is dedicated to St. Tudno of Maes Gwyddno, the country now overflown by the
sea, between Meirionyddshire and Llein. In descending from this promontory I
passed by several copper works, which at times are worked to advantage. The
ride from hence along the side of Llandudno bay is extremely pleasant. I
ascended to Gloddaeth, near the foot of Rhewledin, a vast rock, which swarms in
the season with Razor-bills and Puffins; and with Rock Pigeons, abundance of
which regularly breed here, in preference to the dove-houses, which they
constantly quit at their laying-time.

I DESCENDED from Gloddaeth to the sea side, about two miles distant. Saw,
close to the shore, the singular little building called St. Trillo's Chapel. It
is oblong; has a window on each side, and at the end; a small door; and a
vaulted roof, paved with round stones, instead of being slated. Within was a
well. The whole building is surrounded with a stone wall.

ON a hill, about half a mile distant from this chapel, is the church of
Llandrillo, LLANDRILLO.
dedicated to the same saint. Near it is a large ruined house, called Bryn
Euryn; formerly called Lls Maelgwyn Gwynedd, who had a palace on this spot.
About the twelfth century it was inhabited by the great Ednyfed Vychan; and
some time in the last was possessed by a family of the name of Conwy, of Welsh
descent, derived from Gryffydd Goch, lord of Rhos and Rhyfoniod.

KEEP along the shore, and pass by Rhos Vynach, RHOS VYNACH.
or the Marsh of the Monks, having been the property of Conwy abbey. The church
still keeps share in a considerable wear, which runs from this point; the
bishop, and the vicar of Llandrillo, having the fish of every tenth tide
between them. At times they have a good chance of a profitable capture; for in
two successive tides forty pounds worth of mackrel have been taken.

FROM Rhos Vynach the land recedes inwards, and forms a pretty bay. The country
slopes to the water edge, and is varied with woods and cultivation. Penmaen
Rhos, PENMAEN RHOS.
a great limestone rock juts into the sea at the end of the bay. In my memory
the traveller went along a narrow path cut on its front, like the road on
Penmaen Mawr, but infinitely more terrible and dangerous: a fine coach-road has
of late years been formed far behind this precipice. From thence I descended to
Llanddulas, a small village and church. In one of the deep bottoms of this
neighborhood was betrayed the unfortunate prince Richard II. who had been
deceived by the earl of Northumberland to go along with him from Conwy to meet
Bolingbroke, to settle amicably the quarrel between them. Hereabouts he
suddenly found himself surrounded by a large band of armed men, placed there by
the treacherous earl, who seizing on Richard, delivered him captive to the
usurper in Flint castle See the whole story, agreeably expressed by suitable
prints from old illuminated MSS. in Mr. Strutt's Regal Antiquities.
.

A LITTLE farther on the right hand, high above the road, is Cefn Ogo, CEFN OGO.
a lofty precipice; white, unless where darkened by the ivy which spreads along
the front. In the middle is the most magnificent entrance into a cave which
Britain can boast. It seems like the portal of a noble cathedral, arched, and
divided within by what has the appearance of a great column.

FROM near this place begins the rich arable flat, which extends over Rudland
Marsh, and beyond Prestatyn in Flintshire. The small town of Abergeleu lies
near the sea, ABERGELEU
about a mile from Cefn Ogo. It lies near the clayey cliffs which impend over
the sea. Tradition says, that in old times that element had overwhelmed a vast
tract of inhabited country once extending northward; a dateless, nameless,
epitaph on the churchyard wall is called in as evidence. Yma mae'n gorwedd in
monwent mihangel, gwr oeddai annedd dair miltor in y gogledd. In this
churchyard lies a man who lived three miles to the north of it. But, as better
proof, I have observed, at low water, far from the clayey banks, a long tract
of hard loam, filled with the bodies of oak trees, tolerably entire; but so
soft as to be cut with a knife as easily as wax.

OF this parish was Marchud ap Cynan, MARCHUD AP CYNAN.
cotemporary with Roderic the Great, and one of the tribes of North Wales whose
posterity gave princes to the British empire. His seat was Brynffanigl, where
likewise his descendant, the great Ednyfed Vychan, sometimes resided.

ABERGELEU is bounded to the right by high limestone hills, at times productive
of lead ore. On one of them, projecting from the rest, called Coppa yr Wylfa,
COPPA YR WYLFA.
or the mount of the watchtower, is a very strong British post. The front is a
great precipice; out of whose interstices grows the Aria Theophrasti; and
across the accessible part are defenses of stone and earth. In a glen beneath
is a ditch, called Ffos y Bleiddiaid, or the ditch of the Wolves; possibly from
the frequency of those animals in these parts. Mr. Llwyd, in his Itinerary,
speaks of a mount near Abergeleu divided in two, on which formerly stood a
castle, called Pen y Pi^l, PEN Y PI^L.
possibly a residence of the ancient lords.

FROM Abergeleu I ascended to the neighboring parish of Cegidoc, or, as the
English call it, St. George. It was formerly annexed to St. Asaph, and the
parishioners were obliged to repair the street wall of the churchyard.

HIGH above this place, on the top of a hill called Pen y Parc, is a very
strong post, said to have been occupied by Owen Gwynedd after his fine retreat
before Henry II; CAMP OF OWEN GWYNFDD.
whom he kept here at bay, and politically secured his dominions from further
invasion: for it was on this spot, not among the Snowdon hills, as Lord
Lyttelton ii. 385. 3d ed. octavo.
supposes, that our gallant prince made a most effectual stand, and stopped all
further progress of the invader. On the accessible sides are double and treble
ditches and ramparts, the others are sufficiently guarded by precipices. The
area is near three quarters of a mile round, and, near the edge of the steep
part, facing Rudland, is smoothed into the form of a terrace.

ST. GEORGE had in this parish his Holy Well, SUPERSTITIONS.
at which the British Mars had his offering of horses; for the rich were wont
to offer one, to secure his blessing on all the rest. He was the tutelar saint
of those animals; all that were distempered were brought, sprinkled with the
water, and this blessing bestowed: Rhad DUW a Sant SIOR arnat. The blessing of
GOD and St. George be on thee.

THE well of St. Aelian, a parish not far from Llandrillo in Caernarvonshire,
has been in great repute for the cures of all diseases, by means of the
intercession of the saint; who was first invoked by earnest prayers in the
neighboring church. He was also applied to on less worthy occasions, and made
the instrument of discovering thieves, and of recovering stolen goods. Some
repair to him to imprecate their neighbors, and to request the saint to afflict
with sudden death, or with some great misfortune, any persons who may have
offended them. The belief in this is still strong; for three years have not
elapsed since I was threatened by a fellow (who imagined I had injured him)
with the vengeance of St. Aelian, and a journey to his well to curse me with
effect.

I SHALL here bring into one point of view the several religious customs used
among us in former times; RELIGIOUS CUSTOMS.
which have been gradually dropped, in proportion as the age grew enlightened.
Several were local, several extended through the whole country: perhaps some,
which were expressive of their hatred of vice, or which had a charitable end,
might as well have been retained, notwithstanding the smack of folly that was
often to be perceived in them.

IN church, at the name of the Devil, an universal spitting seized the
congregation, as if in contempt of that evil spirit; and whenever Judas was
mentioned, they expressed their abhorrence of him by smiting their breasts.

IF there be a Fynnon Vair, the well of our Lady, or any other saint, the water
for baptism was always brought from thence; and after the ceremony was over,
old women were very fond of washing their eyes in the water of the font.

PREVIOUS to a funeral, it was customary, when the corpse was brought out of
the house and laid upon the bier, for the next of kin, be it widow, mother,
sister, or daughter (for it must be a female) to give, over the coffin, a
quantity of white loaves, in a great dish, and sometimes a cheese, with a piece
of money stuck in it, to certain poor persons. After that they present, in the
same manner, a cup of drink, and require the person to drink a little of it
immediately. When that is done, all present kneel down; and the minister, if
present, says the Lord's Prayer: after which, they proceed with the corpse; and
at every cross-way, between the house and the church, they lay down the bier,
kneel, and again repeat the Lord's Prayer; and do the same when they first
enter the churchyard. It is also customary, in many places, to sing psalms on
the way; by which the stillness of rural life is often broken into, in a manner
finely productive of religious reflections.

To this hour, the bier is carried by the next of kin; a custom considered as
the highest respect that filial piety can pay to the deceased. This was a usage
frequent among the Romans of high rank; and it was thought a great continuance
of the good fortune which had attended Metellus Macedonicus through his whole
being, that when he had, in the fullness of years, passed out of life by a
gentle decay, amidst the kisses and embraces of his nearest connections, he was
carried to the funeral pile on the shoulders of his four sons Valor. Max. lib.
vii. c. 1.
; and, let me add, that each one of them had enjoyed the greatest offices of
the commonwealth Plinii, Hist. Not. lib. vii. c. 44.
.

AMONG the Welsh it was reckoned fortunate for the deceased if it should rain
while they were carrying him to church, that his bier might be wet with the dew
of heaven.

IN some places it was customary for the friends of the dead to kneel, and say
the Lord's Prayer over the grave, for several Sundays after the interment; and
then to dress the grave with flowers.

Manibus date lilia plenis.
Purpureos spargam flores; animamque nepotis
His saltem accumulem donis, et fungar inani
Munere.
Bring fragrant flowers, the fairest lilies bring,
With all the purple beauties of the spring.
These gifts at lest, these honors I Will bestow
On the dear youth, to please his shade below.
WARTON. IT is still usual to stick, on the eve of St. John the Baptist, over
the doors, sprigs of St. John's wort, or in lieu of it the common Mugwort. The
intent was to purify the house from evil spirits; in the same manner as the
Druids were wont to do with Vervaine, which still bears with the Welsh the
significant title of Cas began Gythral, or the Demons aversion.

UPON Christmas Day, PLYGAN.
about three o'clock in the morning, most of the parishioners assembled in
church, and after prayers and a sermon, continued there singing psalms and
hymns with great devotion till broad day; and if, through age or infirmity, any
were disabled from attending, they never failed having prayers at home, and
carols on our SAVIOR'S nativity. The former part of the custom is still
preserved; but too often perverted into intemperance. This act of devotion is
called Plygan, or the Crowing of the Cock. It has been a general belief among
the superstitious, that instantly,

at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
The extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine.
But during the holy season, the Cock was supposed to exert his power
throughout the night; from which, undoubtedly originated the Welsh word Plygan,
as applied to this custom. Accordingly, Shakespeare finely describes this old
opinion:

Some say, that ever against that season comes
Wherein our SAVIOR'S birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning sings all night long:
And then, they say, no spirit walks abroad:
The nights are wholesome: then no planets strike:
No fairy takes: no witch has power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is the time.
SOON after leaving St. George, KINMAEL.
I passed by Kinmael house and park, in a lofty situation on the left. This
place had been, during four generations, the property of the Hollands, of a
noble English descent, long settled in this part of Britain, and branched into
several respectable families. The pedigrees derive them from a Sir Thomas
Holland, who, tradition says, came, with another brother, into Wales in
troublesome times. I have reason to suppose them to have been William and
Thomas, the two younger sons of John Holland, duke of Exeter; who died in 1446,
and left to each of them an annuity of forty pounds Dugdale's Baron, ii. 81.
. They were of a most unpopular family, therefore probably retired to shun the
miseries they might experience in that age of civil discord. Pierce Holland,
eleventh in descent from Sir Thomas, made his settlement at Kinmael by his
marriage with Catherine, daughter to Richard ap Evan ap Dafydd Vychan and Alice
his wife, heiress of the place, daughter of Gryffydd Lloyd Ap Evan ap Rhys ap
Gryffydd Lloyd ap Rohyn ap Rhys ap Robert.
. In the last century, one of his descendants had two daughters. Colonel
Carter, an officer in the service of the parliament, made choice of Catherine,
the youngest, and took the estate with her. A wag said, that he had chosen the
best piece of Holland in the country. He left the eldest sister Mary to Colonel
Price of Rhiwlas, a royalist. About fifty years ago, a descendant of his, John
Carter, Esquire alienated the place to the late Sir George Win, Bart.

IN a very wet situation, VAENOL.
beneath Kinmael, is Vaenol; one of the best old houses in the county of Flint.
It was built in 1595, by John Lloyd, a younger son of Wickwer, and register of
St. Asaph in the reign of Queen Elizabeth; a place extremely profitable, before
the powers of the church were abridged. At this place, Brynpolin, and Wickwer,
had been chapels of ease to St. Asaph, and three out of the four vicars did
duty at them in turn. A fine stone coffin, from that of Vaenol, lies in the
garden of this house.

IN my way from Kinmael, BODLE-WITHAN.
see Bodle-withan, the seat of John Williams, Esquire a purchase of his father,
second son to Sir William, speaker of the house of commons. Previous to that,
it had been for many generations the property of the Humphries, descended from
Rhys Goch, brother to Gweryd ap Rhys, one of the fifteen tribes of North Wales,
and cotemporary with Owen Gwynedd.

Descend to Pengwern, PENGWERN.
the seat of Sir Edward Lloyd, Bart.; an excellent new house, built by him on
the site of the old one, which had been built by Elen, sister to Archbishop
Williams, for the son of her first husband, Evan Gryffydd, owner of the place.
Her second husband was Sir Peter Mutton. The portrait of her brother, in a
clergyman's dress, with the seals and arms of Lincoln, of which see he was
possessed during the time he was lord keeper, is preserved here. Another, of
Sir Peter Mutton in his scarlet robes, a ruff, and great hat; and another of
Lady Mutton, a handsome woman, in a black gown, high hat, and with a feather
fan, and great kerchief, aet. 45, 1631. From hence I passed through Rudland and
Newmarket to the comforts of my fireside.

FROM DOWNING TO MONTGOMERY AND SHREWSBURY.
ON Wednesday, July 4th 1776, I left home; breakfasted with the reverend Mr.
Lloyd at Caerroys, and with him descended into the pretty little vale, which
leads from Mold to Denbigh; and immediately on crossing it ascend the steep and
lofty side of Bwlch Coed y Mynydd, a great hill, the last of the Clwydian
chain, before it is broken by the straight of Bodvari. On the side of this
hill, at Llys Coed y Mynydd, toward the left, lived Ednowain Bendew, or
Ednowain the Strongheaded, lord of Tegengl in 1079, and one of the fifteen
tribes of North Wales.

THESE Llwythau, TRIBES OF NORTH WALES.
or tribes, were the nobility of North Wales. They commenced extremely early;
and, at different times, were lords of distinct districts, and called to that
honor by several princes. The latest were about the time of Dafydd ap Owen
Gwynedd, who began his reign in 1169. We are left ignorant of the form by which
they were called to this rank.

All we know is, that each of them enjoyed some office in the court of our
princes, which seems to have been hereditary, and probably to be attendant on
the honor.

AFTER reaching the summit of the hill, a rich and extensive view presented
itself, of the fertile vale of Clwyd beneath, and the great range of our alpine
country, at length jutting into the sea at the bold promontories of Llandudno
and Penmaen Mawr. The descent into the vale is gradual, along a beautiful
terrace, for a considerable space far above it. Vron-yw, the seat of John
Madocks, Esquire commands a delightful prospect. Its master adds to the many
illustrious proofs we have at this period, that the modern Welsh are as eminent
in persuasive rhetoric as our Gaulish neighbors were in days of yore.

PASS by the small churches of Llan-Gwifan, Llan-Dyrnog, Llan-Gynbafal, and
Llan-Rhychan, dedicated to the Saints Gwyfan, Tyrnog, Cynhafal, and Rhychan,
all in the county of DENBIGH, and diocese of Bangor. Beneath the church of
Llanbeder, reach nearly the bottom of the vale; and continue my journey through
Ruthin, and along Nantclwyd, by a good old house of the same name.

AFTER resting one night at Corwen, proceed as far as Llandrillo, on the road
to Bala; and near that village turn to the left into a narrow glen, much
wooded, watered by a rude torrent, and bounded by high hills. At its extremity,
near a farm called Blaen y Cwm, MILLTIR GERRIC.
begin to ascend Milltir Gerrig, or the Stoney Mile; a Bwlch, or pass amidst
the Berwyn hills, about a mile in length, with the mountains, black with heath,
soaring on each fide to a stupendous height. It is the great pass in these
parts from Meirionyddshire into and divides the counties: the latter is called
by the Welsh, Sir Tree Faldwyn, or the shire of the town of Baldwin, lieutenant
of the marches in the time of the Conqueror, who built the town; the name of
which was afterward changed to that of Montgomery, derived from Roger de
Montgomery, the founder of the castle: which name it gave to the county when it
was formed into one by Henry VIII. The first member that appears on record was
Edward Leech, Esquire who sat in 1542. Humphry Llwyd justly celebrates the
fertility of its valleys, the stature and beauty of its inhabitants; but
stigmatizes them with the character of idleness, and of being addicted to
useless amusements Commentariolum, 92.
.

The descent from this pass is very steep; but a fine road was then forming,
with the great view of giving the Irish a shorter way into their country,
through Oswestry, and over the Bwlch, through the county of Meirionydd. This is
one of the vast designs of the present age, which will effect communications
with places before almost inaccessible.

ON arriving at the bottom, I again found myself in narrow vales, loftily
bounded. After about three miles riding reached Llangynog, LLANGYNOG.
a small village, in the parish of the same name, in the diocese of St. Asaph.
This place was the source of short-lived wealth to the maternal relation of the
present earl of Powys. LEAD MINE.
A lead mine was discovered here in the year 1692, which was in most parts a
vein of three yards and a half thick, and was worked to the depth of a hundred
yards, when the water became too powerful. It continued in a flourishing state
during a period of near forty years; yielded about four thousand tons annually:
was sold at 7 l. a ton, and smelted on the spot; and brought in a clear revenue
to the family of twenty thousand pounds a year.

A SLATE quarry has been discovered of late years in the parish. About 904,000
were sold from November 1, 1775, to November 1, 1776; which sell at the rate of
from 6 s. to 20 s. a thousand; but the want of water carriage is a great loss
to the work.

AT about two miles distance from Llangynog I turned up a small valley to the
right, to pay my devotions to the shrine of St. Monacella, ST. MONACELLA.
or, as the Welsh style her, Melangell. Her legend relates, that she was the
daughter of an Irish monarch, who had determined to many her to a nobleman of
his court. The princess had vowed celibacy. She fled from her father's
dominions, and took refuge in this place, where she lived fifteen years without
seeing the face of man. Brochwel Yscythrog, prince of Powys, being one day a
hare-hunting, pursued his game till he came to a great thicket; when he was
amazed to find a virgin of surprising beauty, engaged in deep devotion, with
the hare he had been pursuing under her robe, boldly facing the dogs who
retired to a distance, howling, notwithstanding all the efforts of the
sportsmen to make them seize their prey. Even when the huntsman blew his horn,
it stuck to his lips. Brochwel heard her story; and gave to God and her a
parcel of lands, to be a sanctuary to all that fled there. He desired her to
found an abbey on the spot. She did so, and died abbess, in a good old age. She
was buried in the neighboring church, called Pennant, CHURCH OF PENNANT
MELANGELL.
and from her distinguished by the addition of Melangell. Her hard bed is shown
in the cleft of a neighboring rock. Her tomb was in a little chapel, or
oratory, adjoining to the church, and now used as a vestry-room. This room
still is called Cell-y-bedd, or the Cell of the Grave; but her relics, as
well as her image, have been long since removed: but I think the last is still
to be seen in the churchyard. The legend is perpetuated by some rude wooden
carvings of the saint, with numbers of hares scuttling to her for protection.
She properly became their patroness. They were called Mwyn Melangell -- St.
Monacella's Lambs. Till the last century, so strong a superstition prevaled,
that no person would kill a hare in the parish; and even later, when a hare was
pursued by dogs, it was firmly believed, that if any one cried God and St.
Monacella be with thee, it was sure to escape See her life.
.

IN the churchyard is a stone with the figure of an armed man, which now
serves as a common gravestone, but once covered the remains of the eldest son
of Owen Gwynedd, Jorwerth Drwyndwn, TOMB OF JORWERTH DRWYNDWN.
or Edward with the broken nose, who was put aside of the succession on account
of the blemish Powel's Hist* Wales, 227.
. Hither he had fled for refuge from the cruelty of his brother Dafydd ap Owen
Gwynedd, this place having been one of our most celebrated sanctuaries. On his
shield is inscribed Hic jacet Etwart. Tradition says, he was killed not far
from hence, at a place called Bwlch Croes Jorwerth.

THIS valley is exceedingly picturesque: enclosed by hills on all sides, except
its entrance; watered by the Tanat, which springs not far off. The upper end is
bounded by two vast precipices, down which, at times, fall two great cataracts;
between them juts out the great and rude promontory of Moel ddu Mawr, which
almost divides the precipices into equal parts: and all together formed a fine
and solemn retreat for devotees. On the side of this valley is the house of
Llechweddgarth, the property of Thomas Thomas, Esquire Continue my journey for some
time along the valley, then ascend and descend a series of grassy hills of a
moderate height, and observe in many parts the narrower passes crossed by
entrenchments, in old times designed to interrupt the inroads of an invader. It
is said, that a Roman road goes near this place toward Aberystwyth. BODFACH.
Descend to Bodfach, the seat of my friend Bell Lloyd, Esquire by virtue of his
marriage with Miss Price, heiress of the place. This and several other estates,
even as far as the borders of Shropshire, belonged to the Kyffins, so named
from being Kyffiniad, or borderers. They were descended from Eneon Evell, or
Eneon the Twin, brother to Kynric Evell, illegitimate sons of Madoc ap Meredydd
ap Blyddyn ap Cynven, prince of Powys; who gave Eneon his portion in this
country, and Kynric his in Molesdale and its neighborhood. Owen Brogynton,
eldest of his natural children, was settled in Edeirnion.

THE valley about Bodfach expands, is admirably cultivated, is watered by the
Cain, and prettily bordered by low hills finely wooded. The town and church of
Llanvyllin happily fill one angle, and vary the view.

FROM Bodfach I made an excursion to Llwydiarth, LLWYDIARTH.
a large old house in the parish of Llanwddyn, seated in a hilly naked country.
It was formerly the property of the great family of the Vaughans, descended
from Aleth Hen, king of Dived, or Pembrokeshire. The estate was conveyed to the
late Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, by his first wife, daughter and heiress to the
last owner. From one part of the ride had a view into Cardiganshire, and of the
great naked mountain of Plynlimmon, covered with heath, or moory grass.

I CANNOT omit in this place mention of an excursion formerly made to
Llanrhaiadr in Mochnant, a neighboring parish, partly in this county, partly in
Denbighshire. LLANRHAIADR IN MOCHNANT.
The church is seated in the last, dedicated to St. Dogvan, son of Brychan. Dr.
William Morgan, who first translated the Bible into Welsh, was vicar of this.
He was rewarded by Queen Elizabeth with the bishopric of Llandaff, in 1595,
and was removed to that of St. Asaph in 1601, where he died September 10th,
1604, and was interred in the cathedral.

THE facetious but learned preacher Dr. South, was the last rector of the
parish. On his decease, the rectorial tithes were appropriated by act of
parliament to the maintenance of the choir and repair of the cathedral church of
St. Asaph.

I MUST speak with due respect of the memory of the late worthy vicar, PISTILL
RHAIADR.
Dr. Worthington; to whose hospitable house I was indebted for a seasonable
reception, the wet evening which fortunately preceded my visit to the
celebrated cataract Pistill Rhaiadr. It terminates the precipitous end of a
very narrow valley, and, as it were, divides a bold front of the Berwyn
mountains. After sliding for some time along a small declivity, it darts down
at once two-thirds of the precipice; and, falling on a ledge, has, in process
of time, worn itself a passage through the rock, and makes a second cataract
beneath a noble arch which it has formed; on the slippery summit of which, a
daring shepherd will sometimes terrify you with standing. The second fall
reaches the bottom, and assumes the name of the Rhaiadr, or the cascade. The
desect of this noble fall, is the want of wood. When I visited it, the approach
was very bad; but that is not only effectually remedied by the late benevolent
vicar, but, as I am informed, he has besides erected a cottage, as a retreat to
the traveller from the fury of a storm.

THE abundance of sheep, which enliven these hills, brought, at the time I
visited the country, great wealth into it. The flannel manufacture, and that of
a coarse cloth for the army, and for the covering the poor negroes in the West
Indies, is manufactured in most parts of the county. It is sent and sold in the
rough to Shrewsbury; a practice very contrary to the interest of the country.

LEAVE Bodfach; and, for the sake of a beautiful view, am led by Mr. Lloyd, a
little out of my way, to the top of a hill, from whence is a prospect of a rich
expanded vale, with the church of Llanvechan in the midst. Part is bounded by
low and fertile hills. The great rock of Llan y Mynach, the magazine of
limestone for a vast tract of country, closes one side; beyond them extends the
great flat of Shropshire, with the Wrekin hill rising insulated in the distant
ground. I returned through Llanfyllin, LLANFYLLIN.
a small town, which had a charter bestowed on it by Llewelyn ap Gryffydd ap
Gwynwynwyn, in the reign of Edward II. and confirmed by Edward de Charlton,
lord of Powys. This gave the burgesses exemption from tolls, Theme throughout
his territories, Gileam, and Hampsum. They could take, imprison, and try, any
thieves or malefactors; and, should such escape, they had liberty of pursuing
them for a league round the town. Any stranger residing in it, and paying scot
and lot for a year, became free. It is governed by two bailiffs, chosen
annually; who, among other privileges granted it by Charles II, were made
justices of the peace within the corporation, during the time of their office
Cambden, ii. 783.
.

RIDE for some time on the Oswestry road. Ascend to the right; go near Bryn
Gwyn, a seat of William Mostyn, Esquire above which is a circular British post.
Numbers of them front the low country, on the hills which jut into it, as if
guards to protect the internal parts from invasion. Across the road, in one
place, I met the vestiges of a very strong rampart, to defend a pass into the
vale of Meivod, which soon after appeared in view. The church and village are
situated in the middle of the valley, VALE OF MEIVOD.
which is quite flat; extends in length more than five miles, and about half a
mile broad. Three parts are bounded by low hills, prettily wooded; one end
opens into the plain, and is finely terminated by the Freiddin hills, a vast
mass, and conspicuous feature in this county, and part of Shropshire. The
Vyrnyw, called by Dr. Powel, Marnovia, a beautiful river, winds along the
middle of the vale. Its borders rich in wheat, rye, and grass.

THE church is dedicated to St. Tyssilio, a prince of Powys, the supporter of
the British churches against Austin the Monk. In old times it belonged to the
abbey of Strata Marcella, Ystrat Marchell, in this county. It is the mother
church to Pool and Guildsfield; all which, in the 17th of Henry VII. the bishop
of St. Asaph had license to appropriate to himself Notitia on St. Asaph
diocese, MS.
. The vicarage of Meivod is now appropriated to Christ-church, Oxford. It is a
place of great ecclesiastical antiquity. There is reason to suppose, that it
took its name from its having been, in the very early ages of Christianity, the
residence of a hermit or recluse; for Meudwyfod implies a hermit's habitation,
and Lan is frequently added to many Welsh words, to imply them to have been
enclosed places; such as Gwinllan, a vineyard; Corlan, a sheepfold; Ydlan, a
stackyard: so that Meudwylan would signify the precinct of the hermit, and, by
the assistance of a Roman termination, become Meudwylanium; and that, readily,
more latinized into Mediolanum, the name we find it bears in the Itinerary Iter
Britanniarum.
, where it is placed between Bovium Bangor and Rutunium Rowton. We find it
again in the Chorography of the Ravenna's, and in Ptolemy Horsely, 374. 492.
. If those periods are supposed to have been too early for the institution of
monastic life in this island, I must defend my opinion by that of the learned
Tanner, who reasonably supposes it to have been nearly coeval with Christianity
in Great Britain Preface.
.

THE Roman antiquity rests upon the authority of one of our older writers
Girald. Cambr. Itin. Dr. Bowel's note, c. iv. lib. ii.
; who mentions that in his time there were considerable remains of venerable
antiquity; that several foundations, floors, and causeways, have been dug up;
but whether any coins, arms, or inscriptions, have been met with, does not
appear. Cambden also mentions a field, called Erw'r Porth, or the field of the
gate, where he concludes might have stood one of the Portae, or gates Cambden,
ii. 781, 782.
.

To revert to the Christian antiquities: Meivod is said to have been the
archdeaconry of all Powystand, and that it had two churches besides the
present. Whether the chapel, whose ruins were standing in no very remote
period, and was called Eglwys Gwyddfarch, from a British saint of this country,
might not have been one, I cannot say; the other was named Eglwys Vair, or the
church of the Virgin, which was built in 1155 Powel, 205.
.

IN the chief church were interred the princes and great men of Powys; among
whom may be enumerated Madoc ap Meredydd ap Blyddyn ap Cynvyn, prince of Powys,
who died in 1160, at Winchester, and was conveyed here; and the noble Gryffydd
Maelor, lord of Bromefield, who died in 1188 Powel, 210. 242.
.

THE churchyard of the present is not less than nine acres, CHURCHYARD.
and yields to the minister as many pounds, as a pasture.

NOT far above Meivod is an union of two rivers, both of the name of Vyrnyw:
both of them diverge considerably from each other, and take their rise remote
from one another. The poetical topographer Draiton therefore very justly styles
the river FORKT Vurnway, bringing Tur and Tano^: growing rank,
She plies her toward the pool Canto vi.
.
Both are large streams, in many places black and deep. Soon beyond their
junction the ground rises. On a steep bank, above one of the rivers, stood
Mathraval, once the seat of the princes of Powis; the name at present preserved
only by a farm-house. I could easily trace the site of the ancient castle: it
occupied the space of about two acres. One side was guarded by the steep over
the river; the other three sides by a vast rampart of stone and earth, and a
very deep fosse: a high exploratory mount, on which perhaps had been a castelet,
fills one corner; from which is a clear view of all that passes up and down the
vale.

AFTER, this place was deserted by its princes, the castle was possessed, or,
as Dr. Powel says, built by Robert de Vepont, a potent baron, high in favor
with King John. It is most probable that he only restored, and strengthened it
with new works. In 1112, Llewelyn ap Jorwerth laid siege to it; but the king
coming with a potent army, obliged Llewelyn to retire, and after that caused
the castle to be demolished Hist. Wales, 267.
.

IN Gwern Ddu, a wood opposite to Mathraval, beyond the river, is a circular
entrenchment; and in a field, beyond the other branch, is a round mount; both
which certainly had respect, in early times, to the fortress at Mathraval. I
must therefore agree with the learned Burton's conjecture, that this might have
been the Mediolanum of the Romans; it having been customary with British as
well as Saxon princes, to have their palaces where formerly Roman stations had
their situation and being Burton's Com. 132.
Let me add also, that this might have been the winter station; and the low
Meivod, subject to overflowings from the river, the summer station.

THE country beyond Mathraval grows hilly, clayey, and barren. Pass by the
church of Llangyniw; to the left is Dolarddyn, where Henry VII. is said to have
lodged a night.

A FEW miles farther I rid through the village of Castle Caereneon, seated on
the Vyrnyw. A castle was built here in 1155, by Madoc ap Meredydd, prince of
Powys Powel, 205.
. I had not leisure to enquire whether there were any remains.

THE country for seven miles more continued hilly, CRYGYNNOG.
and full of unpleasant commons. Reach Crygynnog, the seat of Arthur Blainey,
Esquire whose hospitality I experienced for two or three days. Under his conduct I
saw every thing in the neighborhood which merited attention. The very worthy
owner is descended from Brochwel Yschythrog. The elder branch of the family has
been ennobled in Ireland, since the year 1620, by the title of Lord Blainey of
Monaghan; an honor well earned by Sir Edward Blainey, Knight, by services in
Ireland in the reigns of Queen Elizabeth and her successor.

ONE evening I was conducted to Castle Dolforwyn, CASTLE DOLFORWYN.
a castle on a high ridge of a hill, very steep, and almost surrounded by
wooded dingle. At the bottom runs a small brook, which falls into the Severn
about a mile distant. This fortress is very ruinous, being built with the small
shattery stone of the country, and resembles much, in its masonry, Castle
Dinas Bran. On the two more accessible sides are deep trenches, cut through the
rock. It commands a fine view of the rich vale of Severn. According to Dugdale
Monast. ii. 223.
, it was built by Dafydd ap Llewelyn, a prince who reigned from 1240 to 1246;
but I prefer the authority of John Dafydd Rhys, quoted by the reverend Mr. Evan
Evans Dissertatio de Bardis, 92.
; which assures us it was founded by that worthy prince Bleyddyn ap Cynvyn,
between the years 1065 and 1073. Roger de Mortimer obtained a grant of it,
together with the castles of Kedewen and Keri, from Edward I. in 1278, to hold
to himself and his heirs, by the service of three knights fees Dugdale Baron,
i. 142.
.

WHAT is the origin of the name of Dolforwyn, or the Meadow of the Maiden, I
cannot with any certainty pronounce; but from some legendary tradition of the
country, I suspect that it has allusion to the story of Sabra, or Sabrina, of
which our poets have made so beautiful an use. SABRINA, HER STORY.
She was (says Jeffry of Monmouth) daughter of Locrine king of Britain, by
Estrildis, one of the three captive virgins of matchless charms, which he took
after he had defeated Humber king of the Huns, to whom they belonged. Locrine
had divorced his former queen Guendolen in her favor. On the death of the
British monarch, Guendolen assumed the government, pursued Estrildis, and Sabra
her daughter, with unrelenting cruelty, and caused them to be drowned in the
river; which, with a slight alteration, assumed the name of the
innocent-victim. Milton, in his brief and elegant description of our rivers,
speaks of The Severn swift, guilty of maiden's death. But in his incomparable
mask of Comus, he enters fully into her sad story, and makes her the goddess of
Chastity, and calls her from the deep To undo the charmed band
Of true virgin, here distressed,
Through the force, and through the wile
Of unblest inchanter vile.


No reader of taste will, I am sure, be displeased with me for relating the
history of the goddess in the beautiful numbers of our poet.

SABRINA is her name, a virgin pure;
Whilome she was the daughter of Locrine,
That had the scepter from his father Brute.
She, guiltless damsel, flying the mad pursuit
Of her enraged, stepdame Guendolen,
Commended her fair innocence to the flood,
That stayed her flight with his cross-flowing course.
The water-nymphs, that in the bottom played.
Held up their pearled wrists, and took her in,
Bearing her strait to aged Nereus' hall;
Who, piteous of her woes, reared her lank head,
And gave her to his daughters to imbathe
In nectar'd lavers, strow'd with asphodil;
And, through the porch and inlet of each sense,
Dropped in ambrosial oils, till she revived,
And underwent a quick immortal change,
Made Goddess of the river. Still she retains
Her maiden gentleness, and often at eve
Visits the herds along the twilight meadows,
Helping all urchin blasts, and ill-luck signs,
That the shrewd meddling else delights to make;
Which she with precious vial'd liquors heals.
For which the shepherds, at their festivals,
Carol her goodness loud in rustic lays;
And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream
Of pansies, pinks, and gaudy daffadils.
And, as the old swain said, she can unlock
The clasping charm, and thaw the numming spell*
If she be right invoked in warbled song;
For maidenhood she loves, and will be swift
To aid a virgin, such as was herself,
In hard besetting need.
NOT far from Dolforwyn is Abervechan, ABERVECHAN.
an old house; which, after being owned by the Blaineys, the Prices, and the
Lloyds, is now possessed by Sir Gervase Clifton, Baronet, by virtue of his
marriage with the heiress of the place, daughter of Richard Lloyd, Esquire

FROM hence, we descended into the vale of Severn, and cross the river on a
wooden bridge. It is the misfortune of this part of the country to be destitute
of several most necessary materials. The rich are obliged to burn wood instead
of coal; and the poor, a wretched turf. Lime is extremely remote; and stone fit
for masonry at a vast distance. From the head of the Severn, as low as
Llandreinio, there is not a stone bridge. Should it happen, in any remote
period, that timber should fail, the better sort of people must probably be
reduced to distress for want of fuel; and at times one part of the country
become inaccessible to the other for want of bridges. The moral of this is,
PLANT, and PRESERVE YOUR WOODS!

VISIT Tre' Newydd, NEWTOWN.
or Newtown, a neat small town, with a good market, on the banks of the Severn.
In a pretty park, near to the town, is the seat of the Pryses. The family
derives itself from Elystan Glodrydd, one of the five royal tribes of Wales,
prince of all the country between Wye and Severn, and earl of Hereford in right
of his mother Rhiengar, daughter of Grono ap Tudor Trevor. It became possessed
of this place about the time of Henry VI. SIR JOHN PRYSE.
The late owner, Sir John Pryse, was a gentleman of worth, but of strange
singularities. He married three wives; and kept the two first who died, in his
room, one on each side of his bed; his third declined the honor of his hand
till her defunct rivals were committed to their proper place.

DURING the season of miracles worked by Bridget Bostock of Cheshire, who
healed all diseases by prayer, faith, and an embrocation of fasting-spittle,
multitudes resorted to her from all parts, and kept her salival glands in full
employ. Sir John, with a high spirit of enthusiasm, wrote to this wonderful
woman to make him a visit at Newtown Hall, in order to restore to him his third
and favorite wife. His letter will best tell the foundation on which he built
his strange hope, and very uncommon request. EURYDICES oro properata retexite
fila.

Purport of Sir JOHN PRYCE'S Letter to Mrs. BRIDGET BOSTOCK. 1748.
MADAM,
HAVING received information by repeated advices, both public and private,
that you have of late performed many wonderful cures, even where the best
physicians have failed; and that the means used appear to be very inadequate to
the effects produced; I cannot but look upon you as an extraordinary and
highly-favoured person. And why may not the same most merciful God, who enables
you to restore sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, and strength to the
lame, also enable you to raise the dead to life? Now, having lately lost a
wife, whom I most tenderly loved, my children an excellent stepmother, and our
acquaintances a very dear and valuable friend, you will lay us all under the
highest obligations: and I earnestly entreat you, for God Almighty's sake, that
you will put up your petitions to the Throne of Grace on our behalf, that the
deceased may be restored to us, and the late Dame Eleanor Price Widow of --
Jones, Esquire of Buckland, Brecknockshire.
be raised from the dead. -- If your personal attendance appears to you to be
necessary, I will send my coach and six, with proper servants, to wait on you
hither, whenever you please to appoint. -- Recompense of any kind, that you
could propose, would be made with the utmost gratitude; but I wish the bare
mention of it is not offensive to both God and you.

I am, Madam, Your most obedient, and very much afflicted humble servant, JOHN
PRICE.


THE following day our ride was directed toward Caer Sws, a place of Roman
antiquity. Our way lay over some high grassy lands. ROMAN ROAD.
On Gwyn Vynydd was easily traced the Roman road, called Sarn Swsan. It runs
from Caer Sws, points toward Meivod, and is distinctly traced as far as the
banks of the Vyrnyw, near Llyssin. I am not able to pursue it either to or from
Meivod; but the late Dr. Worthington assured me, that it was met with in his
parish, at Street Vawr, near Coed y Clawdd; that it crossed Rhos y Brithdir to
Pen y Street, and from thence to Llam-jwrch, to Caerfach, which is supposed to
have been a small Roman camp. Dr. Worthington supposed, that this road tends to
Chester.

NOTWITHSTANDING it is rather out of its place, let me speak of another road in
the same parish, and mentioned to me by the same gentleman. This seems to lead
from Rutunium, Rowton in Shropshire. It crosses the Tanat at Gartheryr; from
whence it passes through Street y Planirau to Maen-gwynedd, and winds up Bwlch
Maen Gwynedd, and retains the name of Ffordd Gam Elen, or the winding road of
Helen Dr. Worthington's Letter, on his parish, addressed to me, Nov. 29th 1774.
.

To return to Gwyn-vynydd. CAER SWS.
I observed, on the side of the Roman road, a small sub-oval camp. The road
conducts us to Caer Sws, a hamlet with a few houses, on the side of the Severn.
The adjacent fields are divided, to this day, from each other by lanes, which
intersect each other, as it were to point the very places which had formed the
ancient streets. On the north-west sides are hollows, which possibly were part
of the fosses of the old precincts. Bricks have been found; one was presented
to me, with letters that baffle my guess. The figure of them is given, for the
conjecture of the more profound antiquary.



As to coins, I have heard of only one being met with; and the owner could not
ascertain to me the emperor. This station is unnoticed by every Roman writer.

OPPOSITE to it, RHOS DDIARBED.
at some distance from the river, is Rhos Ddiarbed, or the common where no
quarter was given. The reason is now lost. In an adjacent field is a camp of a
very uncommon form. At the south is a vast exploratory mount, of a conic form,
surrounded with a fosse of a vast depth. On the north part of the fosse is an
oblong area, about seventy yards wide in the greatest diameter; guarded by a
very high rampart, and on the outside by a ditch. In the lower part is a porta,
opening into a great rectangular camp, about two hundred yards long, and above
one hundred broad. Opposite to the other porta is a second, placed at the
extremity; but there are no others, as usual in Roman camps, which this
certainly was, but an eccentric one, prout loci qualitas aut necessitas
postulaverat. The whole is encompassed with a rampart and ditch. In a field
opposite to Caer Sws are some trenches, perhaps relative to the camp. The
former I suppose to have been the winter, this the summer station.

FROM hence I returned into the road. On the right opens another vale, watered
by the Carno. The mountains of Carno, like the mountains of Gilboa, were
celebrated for the fall of the mighty. BATTLE OF CARNO.
The fiercest battle in our annals happened, in 1077, amidst these hills; when
Gryffydd ap Cynan, supported by Rhys ap Tudur, prince of South Wales, disputed
the sovereignty of North Wales with Trahaern ap Caradoc, the reigning prince,
followed by Caradoc ap Gryffydd and Meilir, sons of Rywallon ap Gwyn, his
cousin-germains. After a most bloody contest, victory declared itself; in favor
of the first; Trahaern and his kinsmen, disdaining flight, fell on the spot;
and Gryffydd ap Cynan was put into possession of his rightful throne, which he
filled during fifty-seven years with great dignity.

The church of Carno belonged to the knights of St. John of Jerusalem, CHURCH.
who are said to have had a house near it. As one part of their business was
the protection of their fellow creatures from violence, it is very possible
that they might have had a station in these parts, which were long filled with
a lawless banditti.

IN view is Park, the residence of -- Herbert, Esquire I have been informed that
Queen Elizabeth kept here a stud of horses. Possibly the famous breed of
Spanish horses, introduced into the country by Robert earl of Shrewsbury
Willis's Bangor, 291.
, might render these parts distinguished for an excellent kind, even so late as
the reign of that great princess.

REACH Llanddinam, LLANDDINAM.
a church, prettily seated on a little headland jutting into the vale. This is
a vicarage belonging to the chapter of Bangor; and the comportions were vested
in the dean and chapter in 1685, for repairing the cathedral, and augmenting
the vicarages thereof Girald. Itin. Cambriae, lib. ii. c. 12.
. Opposite to Llanddinam, on the summit of a high mountain, is a British post,
called Y Caer Vychan, Y CAER VYCHAN.
or the Little Fortress, surrounded with a number of fosses, from one to five,
according as the strength or weakness of the parts required.

MY journey was continued along a most beautiful road. The vale grows narrow,
is bounded by lofty hills, whose bottoms are in many places skirted with
beautiful hanging woods; those of Berth-Lwyd are far the most considerable.
BERTH-LWYD.
The poor remains of the ancient house of that name stand in the valley; its
masters were the old family of the Llwyds, descended from Dyngad, second son of
Tudor Trevor. Dafydd, seventeenth in descent from Dungad, first took the name
of Llwyd, and probably gave the additon of title to the house. It continued in
the family several generations after; and of late years passed, by purchase, to
Sir Edward Lloyd, Baronet.

ABOUT a mile farther is Llanidlos, LLANIDLOS.
a small town, with a great market for yarn, which is manufactured here into
fine flannels; and sent weekly, by waggon-loads, to Welsh Pool. The church is
dedicated to St. Idlos. Within are six arches: the columns surrounded with neat
round pillars, ending in capitals of palm-leaves. The inhabitants assert, that
they were brought from the abbey of Cwm Her in Radnorshire. A date on the roof
is 1542, which soon followed the period of monastic ruin in this kingdom.

THIS is a country of sheepwalks. The flocks, like those of Spain, are driven
to them from distant parts to feed on the summer herbage. The farms in the
valleys are only appendages, SLATE.
for winter habitations and provisions. A coarse slate is found in the
neighboring hills; but there still remains, in many parts, the ancient covering
of the country, shingles, heart of oak split and cut into form of slates. This
was introduced by the Saxons, as the word is derived from Schindel, which
signifies the same thing.

A LITTLE beyond Llanidlos the vale closes. The Severn here dwindles into an
inconsiderable stream. By wonderful instinct, Salmon force their way from the
ocean, higher up even than this distant spot, for the sake of depositing their
spawn. The other fish are Trouts, Samlets, Graylings, and Pike. The river runs
in a hollow to its source, fifteen miles distant, in Plynlimmonis ardua moles,
the vast hill of Plynlimmon. PLYNLIMMON.
I was dissuaded from making it a visit, being informed that it was an
uninteresting object: the base most extensive, the top boggy, and the view over
a dreary and an almost uninhabited country. THAT part lay in the county of
Montgomery, and part in Cardiganshire; and that, besides the Severn, it gave
rise to the Ridal, which flows to the sea near Aberystwyth; and the Wye, which,
precipitating from its fountains down some most romantic rocks, continues its
course till it falls into the Severn below Chepstow I was told, that the road
to it from Cregynnan was by Caer Sws, Park, and Treveglws; and that from the
last it is necessary to get a guide to conduct the traveller over the mountains.
.

AFTER a most pleasing ride, return to Cregynnan with my good host, the best
shewer of a country I ever had the good fortune of meeting.

ON the morning I took leave of Cregynnan, and, attended by Mr. Blainy, skirt
the hilly country. Our ride was chiefly through narrow lanes. Stop to see the
church of Bettws, BETTWS CHURCH.
seated in a bottom, dedicated to St. Beuno, and formerly belonging to the
nunnery of Llanlugan, in this county. The steeple makes a figure in these
parts. It was built by one of its ministers; whose figure, in priestly
vestments, carved on a brass plate, is fastened to one of the walls. He thus
relates his story.

orate pro anima
Johannis ap Meredyth de Powisia
Quondam vicarius hujus ecclesiae de Bettws I.
In cujus tempore aedificatum est campanile:
Ibidem sicut emptae sunt tres campanae,
Et facta sunt in dicta ecclesia multa alia
Bona opera. Ipso vicario pro posse auxiliante
Cujus animae propitietur DEUS. Amen.
Dat ipso vivente, A. D. 1531.

This brass was originally fixed on a great slab of oak, still in its place on
the floor, which also is covered with oak: so scarce was stone, so plentiful
wood! The great chest is made of a single trunk of oak.

A LITTLE further, on the top of a hill on the left, is a great exploratory
mount; and I was informed that on the same range is a post, called Pen y Gaer,
PEN Y GAER.
surrounded by three trenches.

FROM a hill, called Cefn Uppol, is a most delightful view of the vale of
Severn, the river; and beyond appear the long extent of Cerri hills, even on
the top, Corndon hill, Longment, the Tetterstones, and the rugged mass of
Freiddin.

ON the left is the house of Vaynor, VAYNOR.
once the property of the Prices; but, by the marriage of the heiress, in the
last century, to George Devereux, Esquire was transferred to the Viscounts
Hereford. But on the death of Price Devereux, tenth of that honor, was, by
will, alienated to persons foreign to the name and blood.

DESCEND into the vale. Cross the Severn. Ride along the road through the midst
of a Roman camp, ROMAN CAMP.
called the Gaer, seated in the parish, or rather chapelry, of Fordin. It is of
the usual rectangular form. A little beyond, near the house of Nantcribba, the
seat of Lord Viscount Hereford, rises a great conoid rock. A few years ago, on
taking away the top, were discovered the remains of a little fort; A SMALL FORT.
and on paring away the rubbish, it appeared to have been square, with a round
tower probably at each corner: one is tolerably entire, and is only nine feet
diameter within; the walls seven feet seven inches thick. There had been some
small square rooms, with doorcases of good freestone: the rest of the building
is of rough stone, cemented with clay. This place was probably ruined by fire;
for I observed some melted lead, mixed with charcoal, and several pieces of
vitrified stuff. There is no history relative to it. It must be very ancient,
for on the top is the stool of a vast oak. The base of the rock is surrounded
with a ditch, cut through it, leaving only a narrow pass to the sort. At a
distance is another trench. Offa's ditch lies about two hundred yards from the
rock. Enter a part of SHROPSHIRE, at Walcot; and, keeping southerly, soon reach
Chirbury, CHIRBURY.
a church and village, which give name to the hundred, and title to the
celebrated flower of chivalry Edward Lord Herbert, in whom madness and
abilities kept equal pace. This hundred did, in old times, belong to the castle
of Montgomery, which was then reputed to be in it. In the 7th of Edward VI.
Chirbury hundred was given by the crown to Edward Herbert and his heirs; but
Charles I. in the 3d year of his reign, permitted Sir Edward Herbert to
alienate it to William Neye and Thomas Gardener, Esqrs

NEAR this village stood a priory of Benedictines, PRIORY.
founded in the reign of King John. The church was given to the priory with all
the lands along the road side, as far as Merebroc. By a composition between
Prior Philip and the parson of Montgomery, the right of burials and christening
was reserved to the church of Chirbury. The same year the Prior had a grant of
the tithes of Montgomery wood, and the mill. Hubert de Burgh was a benefactor
to this house. In 1280 the prior and convent removed to Snede, the place of
their first constitution and abode, it being represented that Chirbury was not
so proper a place for celebrating divine mysteries; but this removal was not to
affect the souls of those buried at Chirbury, to whom they were bound to do the
same services as before the removal: neither were the religious to lose any of
their rights at Chirbury Halston MSS.
.

THIS house maintained a prior and five or six monks. Its revenues 66 l. 8 s. 7
d. according to Dugdale; and 87 l. 7 s. 4 d. according to Speed Tanner.
. The last prior was Oliver Middleton. (probably of the old family of Middleton
Hall in this parish); who had a pension for life of 8 l. per annum Willis, ii.
190.
Two miles farther is the town of MONTGOMERY, A small neat town, MONTGOMERY.
partly built on the slope, partly on the summit of a hill, beneath the shadow
of a much higher. It owes its foundation to Baldwyn, lieutenant of the marches
to William the Conqueror, from whom the Welsh called it Tree Faldwyn. That he
also built a castle here, or some kind of defense, is probable; for we are
informed, that in the year 1092, Roger de Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury,
entered Powisland, and won the town and castle of Baldwyn; I suppose at that
time possessed by the Welsh. Roger fortified the place, and called it after his
own name, Montgomery; but in 1094, the Welsh took the castle, put the garrison
to the sword, and carried destruction through the neighboring parts. The king,
William Rufus, assembled a vast army, and repossessed himself of the low parts
of the country. The earl of Shrewsbury rebuilt the castle, which the Welsh had
destroyed. It was again ruined; but we are not informed of the period: only we
are told that Henry III. built a new castle there in 1221 Powel, 280.
. Henry granted it to his great justiciary Hubert de Burgh, with two hundred
marks annually, and a greater salary in case of war Dugdale Baron. i. 695.
. During the time it was possessed by Hubert, it was besieged by the Welsh; but
speedily relieved by the English. Many bloody skirmishes happened about this
time in the neighborhood; in one of which was taken by the Welsh, William de
Breose, a potent baron, who was obliged to pay a considerable sum for his
ransom. In 1231, Llewelyn assembled a great army, and so terrified Hubert that
he evacuated the castle, which was seized and burnt by the exasperated prince
Powel, 287.
.

ON an inquisition taken on the reversal of the attainder of the famous Roger
Mortimer, earl of March, in 1354 Dugdale Baron. i. 147.
, he was found to have been possessed of it at his death, and also of the
hundred of Chirbury; in which, at that time, the castle and manor of Montgomery
were reputed to lie. It continued in the family at the time of the death of his
grandson Roger; for it formed part of the jointure of his widow Dugdale Baron.
i. 147.
, and probably remained in his descendant Edmund, who died without issue.

I LEAVE a long interval before I discover any thing more of this place. Lord
Herbert speaks of it as the habitation of some of his ancestors His Life, p. 5.
; I suppose, holding it from the crown, as steward of the castle, and of the
hundred of Chirbury.

IN the civil wars it was seized for the use of the parliament, SIEGE IN 1644.
by Sir Thomas Middleton, in 1644; who, on the appearance of the king's army,
was obliged to make a sudden retreat to Oswestry, and leave it ill provided
both with garrison and provisions. The royal forces, under Lord Biron, laid
siege to it; but Sir Thomas, being joined by Sir William Brereton, Sir John
Meldrum, and Sir William Fairfax, returned, under the command of Brereton, with
about three thousand men, to the relief of the place. The king's army was five
thousand strong; who, on approach of the enemy, took possession of the hill
above the castle. BATTLE SEPTEMBER 18TH.
The castle was relieved, and a most bloody battle ensued. The king's army
descended from their post, and, making a most vigorous attack on the forces of
the parliament, at first gained considerable advantage; but the last, actuated
by despair, made the most violent efforts: at length, obtained a most complete
victory. The pursuit was continued, near twenty miles. Above five hundred were
slain, and fourteen hundred taken prisoners. The loss on the side of the
parliament only forty slain, and about sixty wounded Drake's Parl. Hist. xiii.
285. Whitelock, 104.
. The castle met with the fate of all others, being dismantled by order of the
commons.

THE remains impend over the town. CASTLE DESCRIBED.
They stand on a projecting ridge, of a great height and steepness, and,
toward the end, quite precipitous. The relics of this fortress are very
small. It had been divided by four fosses cut in the rock; each perhaps had its
drawbridge. Between the end of the buildings and the precipice is a level
spot, the yard or parade of the place.

AT the bottom of the hill, in the vale, is a small fortification, of the same
kind with those used by the Saxons, and by the Welsh also, having in it a high
mount.

ON a hill, BRITISH POST.
not far from the castle, is a stupendous British post. The approach is guarded
by four great ditches, with two or three entrances toward the main work; where
two or three fosses run across the hill, the end of which is sufficiently
guarded by the steepness.

THIS, and the preceding pieces of military antiquity, show the importance of
this place in early times: the first was probably in being when Baldwyn made
himself master of this country, notwithstanding the original name has totally
perished.

FROM the summit of the British post is a fine view of the vale of Montgomery,
which is very extensive, and bounded by the hills of Shropshire.

THE town was once defended by walls, TOWN.
strengthened by towers. It had also four gates; Chirbury, Arthur's, Keri, and
Kedewen gate Leland Itin. vii. 16.
. There was a grant of Edward I. to Bogo de Knouill, constable of the castle,
giving him leave to sell certain wood on Corndon forest, for repairing the
walls and fosses round the town and castle; and another, for the same purpose,
from Edward III. permitting a toll for seven years on several articles which
were brought there to be sold: among others, are enumerated Squirrel skins
Sebright MSS.
.

HENRY III. granted by charter, that the borough of Montgomery should have the
privilege of a free borough, with other liberties Cambden, ii. 780.
. The first burgess that was summoned to parliament was in the 27th of Henry
VIII. The first who appears to have sat was William Herbert, in the year 1542.
The town is governed by two bailiffs, and twelve burgesses, or
common-council-men. The member is elected by the burgesses, and returned by the
bailiffs. The electors are about eighty Willis, Notitia Parl. iii. 78. and part
ii. 9.
. Llanidlos, Welsh Pool, and Llanvyllin, were contributory; but are now
excluded from any share in the election.

WHETHER, in old times, this town abounded, more than is usual, with ladies of
free lives and conversation, I do not pretend to say; but very early the free
burgesses had the privileges of the Gogingstoole, Cuckingstool, or Cokestool,
GOGINGSTOOLE.
or, what the Saxons called the Scealfing-stole. Quia, says my authority, per
objurgatrices et meretrices multa mala in villa oriuntur: and these were to
have the judgment de la Goginstoole; and therein to be placed, with naked feet
and disheveled hair, as an example to all beholders Blunt's Tenures, 150.
. Probably this was not found to answer the end intended; therefore immersion,
or ducking, was in after times added, as an improvement, and to effect a
radical cure.

THE church is dedicated to St. Nicholas; CHURCH.
is in the diocese of Hereford, in the gift of the king; and formerly a chapel
to Chirbury. Within is a handsome monument of Richard Herbert, Esquire father to
the famous Lord Herbert. He is represented in armor; and by him lies his lady,
Magdalene, daughter of Sir Richard Newport of High Arcol. In front are their
numerous progeny. He died in 1597. The monument was erected by his lady, who
survived him several years; and, after discharging, with exemplary care, her
duty to their children, married, at the end of twelve years, Sir John Danvers,
brother to Henry earl of Danby; and died in 1627.

THE house called Blackhall, BLACKHALL.
once the hospitable residence of the family, stood at the bottom: a fosse marks
tha spot; for it was consumed by fire. The lodge in Limore Park, at a small
distance from the town, was enlarged on this occasion^ is still kept up, and
shows a venerable wooden front.

ON leaving Montgomery, MYNYDD DIGOLL.
I took, for four or five miles, nearly the same road as I did in coming to it.
Passed under Mynydd Digoll. On this mountain may be said to have expired the
liberties of Wales; for here, was the last contest against the power of our
conqueror. BATTLE.
After the death of Llewelyn, the northern Welshmen set up Madoc, cousin to our
slain prince; who assembled a great army, and, after several eminent victories,
at Caernarvon, near Denbigh, Knockin, and again on the marches, was here
overthrown, in 1294, by the collected power of the lord marchers, after a
well-fought, and long-contested engagement Powel, 380, 381.
.

I MUST add, that on this mountain Henry VII. mustered the friends who promised
to join him from North Wales and Shropshire, and did not find one who had
failed of his appointment. On which account the Welsh call it Digoll, or
Without Loss: the English name it the Long Mountain.

CROSS the Severn, near Llanlafryn, the seat of Price Jones, Esquire Soon after
gaining this side of the river, I turned a little out of the road to POWYS
CASTLE, POWYS CASTLE.
the seat of the earl of Powys, placed on the ridge of a rock, having scarcely
any area; which, in common with most mansions sprung from castellated origin,
are far from desirable situations. This retains a mixture of castle and
mansion. You enter between two rounders: there are also remains of round towers
in other parts. Near the castle is a long gallery, a hundred and seventeen feet
by twenty. It was once a hundred and sixty-seven feet; but an apartment has
been taken out of one end. This is of a later date than the other building, and
was detached from it by a fire, about fifty years ago.

IN the parlour, within the dwelling house, is a full-length of Roger Palmer,
earl of Castlemain; PORTRAIT OF EARL OF CASTLEMAIN.
who owed his peerage to his wife, a royal mistress, and afterward duchess of
Cleveland. He is represented dictating to a secretary; and dressed in a black
wig, a cravat, and red mantle. James II. sent him on an embassy to the Pope, to
reconcile the church of these kingdoms to the holy see, after their long lapse
to herefy. The politic pope saw the folly of the design, and never received the
ambassador without being seized with a most seasonable fit of coughing, which
always interrupted the subject of his errand. At length, wearied with delay, he
was advised to take pet, and threaten to leave Rome, His holiness, with great
sang froid, told him, that since such was his resolution, he affectionately
recommended him to travel early in the morning, and to rest at noon, least he
should endanger his health: and so ended this ridiculous business A full
account is given by Mission, iii. p. 176 to 207.
.

THE great staircase is adorned with paintings, by Lanscroon, complimentary to
Queen Anne.

THERE are two large rooms, above stairs, hung with old tapestry. The ceiling
of one is stuccoed with most ridiculous paintings of the zodiac.

NEXT is a long narrow gallery, filled with bad portraits. The (titular) duke
of Powys, a post-abdication creation, is represented in his great wig and
robes. He followed the fortune of James II. and died at St. Germain's in 1696.
His wife, Elizabeth, daughter to the marquis of Worcester, is painted in blue
and ermine.

IN one ceiling is much incense to the ladies of the family, daughters to
William, second marquis of Powys. One is represented as TRUTH; Lady Throgmorton
appears as another Virtue; Lady Mary as Minerva; and justice is seen driving
away Envy, Malice, and other Vices. Few ladies have made so conspicuous a
figure as Lady Mary. She was engaged deeply in the Missisipi scheme, and dreamt
of millions; aimed at being royal consort to the late Pretender: failed in her
plans, and, with another noble adventurer, retired to Spain, in search of the
gold in the mines of Asturias.

The crown of Poland, venal twice an age,
To just three millions stinted modest Gage:
But nobler scenes Maria's dreams unfold;
Hereditary realms, and worlds of gold.
Congenial souls! whose life one avarice joins,
And one sat buries in the Asturian mines.
THE views from this height, of Welsh Pool, the vale, and Freiddin hills, are
very fine; but, from the situation, experience the horrible vicissitudes of
cold and heat. GARDENS.
The gardens are to be descended to by terraces below terraces, a laborious
series of flights of steps, covering rock, which one De Valle had blasted away
in former days. The gardens were filled with waterworks: the whole in imitation
of the wretched taste of St. Germains en Lay, which the late family had a most
unfortunate opportunity of copying.

THE first notice I find of this place is about the year 1110; when the
renowned Briton, Cadwgan ap Bleddyn ap Cynvyn, sought here an asylum from the
persecution of his kindred; and began a castle. At that time it was called Y
Trellawng. While he was intent on the business, his nephew Madoc came on him
unawares and slew him Powel, 170.
The building was continued, perhaps by Gwenwynwyn; SIEGES IN 1191.
for in 1191 it was besieged by Hubert archbishop of Canterbury: who met at
first with a most vigorous resistance. At length, the prelate sent for a
company of miners, and proceeded so successfully, that the besiegers, seeing
the walls undermined, and the enemy three to one, surrendered on the most
honorable terms. The archbishop fortified it more strongly, and placed a strong
garrison in it; but soon after Gwenwynwyn attacked it in his turn, and had the
good fortune to reduce it on the very terms which his own garrison had
received. At this time it was called the castle of Gwenwynwyn at the Pool
Powel, 248.
.

HIS son Gryffydd probably took part with the English; SUCCESSION.
for in 1233 Llewelyn ap Jorwerth overthrew this fortress; which now assumed
the name of Castle Coch, or Red Castle, from the color of the stones The same,
288.
.

HIS grandson, Owen ap Gryffydd ap Gwenwynwyn, remained in possession of the
place. He left a daughter, called Hawys Gadarn, or Hawys the hardy. Four of her
uncles The same, 215.
disputed her title to her father's land, alleging, that a female was incapable
of inheriting. Hawys wisely made a friend of Edward II; who married her to John
de Charlton, born near Wellington in Shropshire, in 1268, and styled Valectus
Domini Regis The same, 217.
It continued in their posterity several generations. The barony and title were
afterward conveyed to Sir John Gray of Northumberland, by his marriage with
Jane, eldest daughter of Edward Lord Powys Dugdale Baron. ii.
It remained in their descendants till the reign of Henry VIII; the title
became then extinct by the death of Edward Gray. I cannot trace the succession
of the estate, till I find it in possession of Sir William Herbert, second son
of the earl of Pembroke; who got it by purchase in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. He was created Lord Powys and was ancestor to the marquisses of
Powys. In 1644, in the time of Piercy Lord Powys, the castle was taken by Sir
Thomas Middleton, his lordship made prisoner, and the place pillaged Whiteleck,
106.
George earl of Powys is the present owner, in right of his mother, Barbara,
daughter and sole heiress of Lord Edward Herbert, brother of the last marquis
of Powys. Seventeen manors are still dependent in the county on this castle.

WELSH POOL, WELSH POOL.
a good town, is seated in the bottom, not far from the castle. Great
quantities of flannel, brought from the upper country, are sent from hence to
Shrewsbury. The Severn begins to be navigable at the Poole stake, about three
quarters of a mile from the town. This place owned the same lord as the castle.
Gryffydd did homage for the lordship of Powys at Chester, in 1355, to Edward
prince of Wales, by the title of Lord of Poole Powel, 382.
: his title was also frenchified into de la Pole Ayleff's Calendar, 102.
.

BELONGING to the church is a very fine chalice of pure gold, containing a wine
quart. GOLDEN CHALICE
The following inscription on this rich donation, fully confutes the vulgar
story of its having been the penitential gift of a successful transport, and
sets the relation in the true light.

Those DAVIES Anglorum in Africa plaga^
Occidentali procurator generalis
Ob vitam multifaria DEI misericordia ibidem conservatam
Calicem hunc e purissimo auro Guiniano conflatum
C.LX.VIII. minis valentem, DEI honori et ecclesiae
de Welsh Poll ministerio, perpetuo sacrum voluit.
A quo usu S. S. si quis facinorosus eundem calicem
In posterum alienaret (quod avertat DEUS) DEI vindicis
Supremo tribunali poenas Iuat.
Call. Ap^ ix. M.DCLXIL.
ALMOST opposite to Poole, on the other side of the Severn, is Buttington,
BUTTINGTON.
the Butdigingtune of the Saxons; where, in 894, the Danes, under Hesten, after
traversing great part of England, took their station. The generals of king
Alfred instantly blocked them up, and that so closely,. that the Pagans were
obliged to eat their horses for want of subsistence. At length, actuated by
despair and famine, attempting to force their way through the Saxon army, were
defeated with such slaughter, that a very few escaped to their own country Sax.
Chr. 94, 95.
.

THE country from Poole toward Llanymynach is most beautifully broken into
gentle risings, prettily wooded. GILESFIELD
Gilesfield church and village are prettily situated under the hills. The
church is dedicated to St. Giles; formerly it belonged to the Cistertian abbey
of Ystrat Marchell, or Strata Marcella, Alba domus de Marcella, vall. crucis,
or Pola, ABBEY OF STRATA MARCELLA.
seated between this place and Poole. There is no doubt but it was founded by
Owen Cyveiliog, and, as Tanner says, in 1170 Tamer, 716.
His son Gwenwynwyn, in 1201, gave to GOD, the glorious Virgin his mother, and
the monks of Strathmarchel, for the repose of his soul, all the pasturage in
the province of Cyveiliog A copy of the charter is in my possession. As it
escaped Sir W. Dugdale, I print it in the Appendix.
Tanner suspects that Madoc ap Gryffydd Maelor refounded this monastery; but by
his charter it should seem, that he only gave to it a piece of land, on which
to found a cell, or some appendage to it: and this, he says, was done at the
request of four abbots; among whom is mentioned Philip himself, actual abbot of
Strathmarchel Dugdale Monast. i. 896.
; a proof that the house was then existent. In the beginning of the reign of
Edward III. the Welsh monks were removed to English abbeys, and replaced by
English monks; and this monastery made subject to the visitation of that of
Buildas, in Shropshire. Its revenues at the dissolution, according to Dugdale,
were 64 l. 14 s. 2 d. to Speed, 73 l. 7 s. 3 d. Queen Elizabeth granted it to
Rowland Hayward and Thomas Dixon.

PASS by Garth, the seat of Devereux Mytton, Esquire Go by the small church of
Llandysilio, LLANDYSILIO.
a chapel in Llandrinio parish; and soon after ford the Vyrnyw, and deviate a
little from my intended route along the banks of the Severn, to visit the
public-spirited Mr. Evans, of Llwyn y Groes, near Llanymynach; who, in a most
disinterested manner, at his own hazard, is undertaking a beautiful map of
North Wales. Continue at his house till morning, and, in his company,
LLANYMYNACH.
visit Llanymynach. The church and village stand in a pretty situation, on a
bank above the Vyrnyw; and very advantageous for trade. It lies at the opening
of three valleys, at the intersection of two great public roads, and on a river
navigable into the Severn, (which runs only three miles from the place) for
some months in the year, for barges of fifty tons. Great quantities of slates
are sent from hence to Bristol; and, of late years, up the Stourport canal, to
Birmingham, and other places.

ASCEND Llanymynach hill, HILL.
a vast rock, with the surface covered with a verdant turf; beneath which is a
pearl-colored marble, beautifully veined with red, and streaked with white, and
capable of a good polish. This is the limestone of the place. GREAT LIMEWORKS.
The quantity burnt on this hill is inconceivable, and the increase is ten
times greater since the improvement of the Montgomeryshire roads; for it is
carried even for manure thirty miles into that county. The season of carriage
begins in March, and ends in October. The hill is of a considerable length and
breadth: slopes upwards from the side next to the village, and on the upper
part ends in a vast and long precipice. Its bowels are probably replete with
minerals. MINERALS.
Copper, lead ore, and calamine, have been found there of late years; but there
are undeniable proofs of its having been worked by the Romans. WORKED BY THE
ROMANS.
In a great artificial cave, formed into several meanders in search of the
ores, have been discovered Roman coins; among them, an Antoninus and a
Faustina. Near the coins were found the skeleton of a man at full length: on
his left arm a bracelet, and by his side a battle-ax. Burnt bones and ashes are
often found on the hill; and near the north-west part of the precipice are
numbers of large pits, in form of inverted cones, supposed to have been the
work of the Romans.

ON the slope of the hill, ANCIENT DIKES AND FOSSES.
in the more accessible part, runs, from top to bottom, a stupendous rampart of
loose stones, with a fosse at the foot of it; and at certain, distances beyond
are two other parallel fosses, in many places cut through the rock with vast
labor. It has been thought that the Romans were the people who made these
works; but I rather think them to have been British, as they are so similar to
those which constitute the strength of the British post. Offa's dike may be
traced on this hill; but is plainly different from the others. The wall of the
churchyard is placed on the former.

FROM the summit of the hill is a most delightful view: one way, of the vast
flat of Shropshire, with its various rising boundaries. The Freiddin hills form
a noble group opposite to this eminence; which together rise most
magnificently, like two great capes, at the entrance into the vale of Severn;
which, from hence to Llanidlos, is between thirty and forty miles in length.

THE view to the south is into Montgomeryshire; and is a series of little
vales, lodged between small wooded risings. A plain lies immediately beneath
the precipice of the hill, finely watered, by the Tanat and the Vyrnyw, there
uniting. Immediately beneath the rock is Blodwell Hall, BLODWELL HALL.
a deserted seat, once the property of the Tanats; conveyed to the Matthews by
the marriage of Jane, daughter and heiress of Maurice Tanat. The property was
again transferred, by the marriage of Ursula, daughter and heiress of Roger
Matthew, to Sir John Bridgeman, Baronet, grandfather to the present owner.

NOT far from hence stood the castle of Carreg Hwva, a place of which I know
nothing more, CARREG HWVA CASTLE
than that it had been taken and pillaged, in 1162, by Owen Cyveilioc and Owen
ap Madoc ap Meredydd Powel, 219.
It was soon restored; for in the year 1187, the last was slain here in the
night, by Gwenwynwyn and Cadwallon, the sons of his former colleague The same,
241.
.

FROM Llanymynach I rode to the New Bridge, NEW BRIDGE.
a bridge of seven arches, over the Vyrnyw, about three miles above the ford.
The river is kept confined by a dam, for the sake of a mill, and forms a fine
reach. The overflowing makes a pretty cascade; and the views upwards, of small
valleys and hanging woods, are exceedingly beautiful.

THE river merits the title of Piscosus Amnis, as much as any I know. FISH OF
THE VYRNYW AND TANAT.
The number of fish which inhabit it, animate the waters, and add greatly to
its beauty. Ausonius does not neglect that remark, in his elegant poem on the
Mosel. Intentos tamen usque oculos errore fatigant
Interludentes examina lubrica pisces,
I have not examined whether the Mosel affords more than is contained in the
following list. Fish.
Salmon, * Trout, * Samlet, Grayling, * Minnow, Perch, Rough, or Pope, Carp,
Tench, Roach, * Dace, Gudgeon, Bleak, * Chub, * Loche, Bullhead, or Miller's
Thumb, Shad, *Eel, Lamprey, Flounder,
When in season.
Christmas to July. March to September. Ditto. March to November. April to
September. May to the end of September. April to September. April to July.
April to September. Ditto. Ditto. June, July, August. April to June. March to
September. April to September. March and April. June, July, August. May to
September.
Of these, only the species marked which * frequent the Tanat; which falls into
the Vyrnyw near the spot where this enumeration was made: such preference do
fish give to certain waters.

PASS again by Llandysilio. Go over Dongay common; and, near the seat of
Francis Lloyd, Esquire ride through the village of Llandreinio, and by the church
of the same name. Cross Llandreinio bridge, of three arches, a new and handsome
structure. Near it is the seat of Clopton Price, Esquire an useful and active
promoter of all public designs within his sphere.

AFTER crossing the Severn, my road lay at the foot of that great mass of rocky
mountains, distinguished by the names of Freiddin, Moel y Gollfa, and Cevn y
Castle. Their bases are prettily skirted with woods; above which the mountains
suddenly present a most tremendous and precipitous front. On Crew green, far to
the left, starts up Belin Mount, a round insulated rock, remote from its
congenial hills. See beneath me a vast extent of flat and wet country, the
great plain of part of Shropshire. The village and parish of Melverly lie on
the opposite side of the Severn, near the place where the Vyrnyw is discharged
into it. The spot is called, from that circumstance, Cymmerau, or the Conflux.

WITHIN sight of the vast mountains I have just mentioned, Gwalchmai, the son
of Meilir, composed a most beautiful poem. His genius was equally formed for
poetry and war. After being under arms the whole night, charmed with the
approach of day, and the beauty of the surrounding prospect, the melody of
birds, and the murmurs of the waters, he forgets all care, and, despising the
danger of the imminent foe, thus bursts out into the ode called Gorhoffed
GWALCHMAI, or the Favorite of GWALCHMAI; beginning

Mochddwyreawg huan dyffestist Maws, etc. A fragment preserved in the reverend
Mr. Evan Evans's ingenious Dissertatio de Bardes, p. 83. The hero was of the
house of Trefeilir in Anglesey.


Rise, Orb of Day! the eastern gates unfold,
And show thy crimson mantle fringed with gold.
Contending birds sing sweet on every spray;
The skies are bright; -- arise, thou Orb of Day!
I. Gwalchmai, call; in song, in war renowned,
Who, Lion-like, confusion spread around.
The live-long night, the Hero and the Bard
Near Freiddin's rocks have kept a constant guard;
Where cool transparent streams in murmurs glide,
And springing grass adorns the mountain's side;
Where snow-white Sea-mews in the current play,
Spread their gay plumes, and frolic through the day.
R. W. RAINALDUS Warin Comes held Meverlei in the manner in which every thing
was held in these parts, from the lord paramount, Roger earl of Shrewsbury. In
the time of the Confessor it was held by one Edric. Soon after the conquest it
was possessed by the Fitz-alans, till the 9th of Queen Elizabeth; when it was
alienated, by Henry earl of Arundel, to Thomas Young, archbishop of York; who
sold it to -- Willaston Halston MSS. The Warin here mentioned, was of a
different race from the family of the Fitz-warins.
.

NEAR a small brook, quit Montgomeryshire, and enter the county of SALOP, OR
SHROPSHIRE. Visit, a little to the right, Wattleburg castle, an old house, with
a square tower of far more ancient date. It lies on the Roman road from
Llanrbaiadr in Mochnant See p.
Mr. William Mytton conjectures, that the site might have been a station of a
party of the Vandals, sent into Britain by the emperor Probus; and that the
word is corrupted from Vandelsburgh, a name given it by the Saxons; there being
a rampart of that name in Lincolnshire, and derived, as is supposed, from the
same cause. At the time of the conquest, Edric possessed it. Roger Corbet, son
of Corbet a noble Norman, succeeded him. Afterward it was given to a younger
son of the Corbets of Caux castle. It continued long in that family. At length
fell into the line of Gwenwynwyn, lord of Powys, and his descendant, called
Fulk Mowddwy, died in possession of it, but without children, in the second of
Henry V. Sir Hugh de Burgh succeeded, by virtue of his marriage with Elizabeth,
sister to Fulk. By the marriage of Angbarad, one of de Burgh's four
grand-daughters, it devolved to the Leightons; and is now the property of their
descendant, Sir Charlton Leighton, Baronet.

A LITTLE farther is Loton, LOTON HALL.
the seat of the family; which is of Saxon origin, and takes its name from
Leighton, a parish in this county. Not far from the house are the remains of
the ancient mansion or castle of Alberbury; ALBERBURY.
small, but very strong: a square tower, and some walls, yet exist. Leland
says, it was the castle of Fulk Fitzwarine, (on whose father, Guarine de Metz,
a noble Lorainer, William the Conqueror had bestowed this manor) founder of the
abbey of Alberbury, ABBEY.
which, stood at a small distance from hence, on the banks of the Severn. It
was founded in the time of Henry I. and was a cell of the Benedictines of
Grammont in France. Being an alien priory, Henry Chichley, archbishop of
Canterbury, begged it of Henry VI. toward the endowment of his new college of
All Souls Goodwin Praesul. Angl. 181.
; to which it has ever since belonged, together with the presentation to the
vicarage. This religious house was also called Album Monasterium Leland Itin.
v. 89.
.

A LITTLE to the east of Alberbury is Routon, ROUTON.
the seat of the Listers, a family long resident here. Prior to their
possession, it belonged to the lords Strange of Knockin, who had here a castle;
which was demolished in 1266, by Prince Llewelyn ap Gryffydd; but was rebuilt
very soon after by John Lord Strange Dugdale Baron. i. 665.
Near this spot is supposed to have stood the Roman Rutunium: but not a trace
of it is to be seen. The modern name preserves part of the ancient.

FROM hence I turned toward the Severn; and, on a lofty bank above the river,
at Little Shrawardine, saw a vast artificial mount, the former site of some
castelet. From this place I descended to the Severn, and, crossing the river,
at this time fordable, I visited the castle and village of Great Shrawardine,
SHRAWARDINE.
seated on the opposite bank. Rainaldus held it at the conquest. It fell
afterward to the Fitzalans, and continued many centuries in their family;
excepting for a short time, on the attainder of Edmund earl of Arundel, in the
reign of Richard II. when it was given to Roger de Mortimer, earl of March; and
again, in the same reign, when it was bestowed on William earl of Wiltshire,
after the cruel execution of Richard earl of Arundel. But in the next reign his
attainder was reversed, and his fortunes restored to his son. Henry, last earl
of the family, sold it to Sir Thomas Bromley, lord chancellor of England; who,
in 1582, with the queen's license, settled it on Sir George Bromley, Knight,
and his heirs. He was of an ancient family in this county. John, an ancestor of
his, had the hospital of Molay Bacon, in the county of Baieux, in France,
bestowed on him by Henry V. on what was called the rebellion of Alan de
Beaumont, the prior possessor. John, and his lawful descendants, were to hold
it of the crown by the tenure of doing homage, and presenting to the king and
his successors a girdle, in the castle of Baieux, annually, on the feast of St.
John the Baptist Herald's Visitation of Shropshire, 1584, etc. in HALSTON
library, p. 44.
By another grant, of his kinsman Hugh de Stafford, Dominus de Bourghchier, he
had forty pounds a year, during life, charged on his lands in Staffordshire and
Warwickshire, for his gallant behavior in a skirmish near Corbie, in Normandy,
where he rescued the royal standard of Guienne The same.
, which had been committed to the care of Hugh de Stafford. The grant is dated
from Madely, on March 10th, in the fourth year of Henry V.

ONLY three or four fragments of the castle remain. CASTLE.
It had never been considerable; was placed on a low mount, and destitute of
outworks. The property of the castle, and the estates belonging to it, were of
late years sold to the late Lord Clive.

THE river, from the neighborhood of Shrawardine, begins to grow very
beautiful. The banks are elevated, and often clothed with hanging woods. In
places, they recede from the verge of the channel, and leave a verdant space of
intervening meadow.

REPASS the river, and go through the village of Forde. Leave on the right
Dintle, the property of Leighton Delamore Griffith, Esquire and Onslow, the
property of Rowland Wing field, Esquire. ONSLOW.
The last gave name to the noble family of Onslow, who were settled here as
early as the time of Henry III. On the north side of the river, on a delightful
bank, are situated the church and village of Montford; MONTFORD.
which gave title, in 1741, to Henry Bromley, Esquire. BRIDGE.
A little farther is Montford bridge, consisting of four arches. There had been
one at this place before the year 1291; for at that time the sheriff of the
county summoned the executors of John de Hegerwas to appear at the assizes, to
give an account of what materials had been gotten, and what money was in the
testator's hands, who had died before it was finished. In 1374, or the 48th of
Edward III. it was found to be out of repair; which induced the king to grant
it pontage, or a toll for three years Parochial antiquities of Shropshire, by
Mr. William Mytton, MS. in folio. -- I beg here to give some account of my
worthy uncle, to whose labors I am so much indebted. He was a younger brother
of the house of Halston, see vol. i. page 234, of this Tour. He was designed
for the church; but, by reason of certain political scruples, declined the
pursuit of the profession. He then totally gave himself up to the study of
antiquity, chiefly that of his own county; consulted all the records he could
get access to; and, with vast pains and accuracy, formed the volume I refer to.
But his designs extended to the giving a most complete history of Shropshire:
for which purpose he had made immense collections, which he left behind
undigested; besides a numerous and elegant collection of drawings of monuments,
etc. done by an artist he kept for that purpose. Death prevented the execution
of his plans. He died on the 8th of September 1746, aged 51, at Habberly, an
ancient estate of his elder brother's, where he had retired for some years, to
enjoy, at leisure, the pursuit of his favorite studies.
, to effect the reparation.

SHREWSBURY is four miles, in almost a direct line, from this place; but I
preferred following the course of the river, tempted by the extreme beauty of
the ride. I crossed Montford bridge, turned to the right, and went over the
Perry, not far above its junction with the Severn. MITTON.
The hamlet of Mitton, i. e. Middle Town, lies in the midst of the narrow neck
of land between the two rivers. The Severn here makes a great bend, and forms,
on the opposite side, a peninsula, with so very narrow an isthmus, as to
occasion it to be called the Isle of Up Rossal; THE ISLE.
being encompassed by the river for the space of five miles, except at the
entrance, which forms a neck of only three hundred and eighty yards in breadth.
The isle is a most compact estate of Humphrey Sandford, Esquire and lies in the
parish of St. Chad. This place formerly belonged to Sir Francis Englefield,
Knight, a gentleman zealous for the old religion at the time of the
Reformation, and a principal officer about the person of the Princess Mary,
afterward queen. At the accession of Edward VI. he was sent for (with others
of her household) by the Protector and council, to forbid them hearing of mass
in the princess's house. They refused obedience, and, in consequence, were
imprisoned for several months. On the accession of Mary, he received the
strongest proofs of her gratitude for his fidelity. In the very first year of
the following reign, he quitted the kingdom, with many other zealots, and was
indefatigable in promoting the interests of Mary queen of Scots. He was
attainted in the year 1585, and all his estates confiscated; but some legal
difficulties arising, in 1593 a new act was passed, which fully confirmed the
former Ruffhead's Statutes at Large, ii. 653 676.
Sir Francis died in 1592, at Valladolid, and his body was interred there in
the English college. This estate of his was granted by Queen Elizabeth to
Richard Sandford, Esquire an officer of the crown, and ancestor to the present
owner; a family long before possessed of other estates in the neighborhood.

FITTES, FITTES.
the parish church of Mitton, is seated at a small distance, on an eminence,
with a large exploratory mount not remote from it. From a field, not far from
the churchyard, is a most beautiful view of the Severn, which lies far
beneath, at the foot of the steep banks, clothed with hanging woods, or
darkened with yews of enormous size. The river is seen winding round the isle;
and the isle itself, a tract of rich land mixed with trees, slopes gracefully
to the margin of the water. A long and narrow wooded island diversifies the
view, by dividing the river into two channels; which reunite, and run under
Leighton shelf, a high cliff, which forms a noble finishing on that part. Above
the fore-ground of this rich prospect are numberless mountains of different
forms; all together forming the finest view this country can boast.

IN the course of my ride, pass by the upper and lower Berwick; one the seat of
-- Betton, Esquire the other of Thomas Powis, Esquire both commanding most delicious
views of the river and town of SHREWSBURY. They are both in the parish of St.
Mary, Shrewsbury. SHREWSBURY.
My entrance into the town was through the North Gate; which, for greater
security, in reality consists of two gates, at a small distance from one
another, with a round tower on each side.

THE castle stands on an eminence on the left. CASTLE.
Only one part with two rounders remain, and the walls of the north and eastern
sides. The keep was on a large artificial mount; which shows this fortress to
have been of Saxon or British origin, notwithstanding the foundation is
ascribed to the great earl of Shrewsbury, Roger de Montgomery. The inside is
cleared from buildings, excepting one house. The whole castle-yard is a garden;
and the mount is at present admirable only for its beautiful view.

THE town of Shrewsbury is seated within a peninsula, with the ground finely
sloping, in most parts, to the river. The castle was judiciously placed on a
narrow isthmus, two hundred yards wide, which connects it to the main land.
Roger de Montgomery, FOUNDED BY ROGER DE MONTGOMERY.
on whom almost the whole county was bestowed by the Conqueror, besides a
hundred and fifty-eight manors in other parts of the kingdom, made this his
principal seat. In order to extend his fortifications, he demolished forty-one
houses; for this part of the town, at that period, was very populous. These
houses paid taxes; yet no remittance was made to the owners, notwithstanding
the greatness of their loss. The first constable was Warine the Bald, a man of
small stature, but great courage. This place continued in the possession of the
two sons of Roger de Montgomery: Hugh, who was slain in Anglesey, and that
monster of cruelty See Dugdale Baron i. 31.
Robert, surnamed de Belesme; who, after various struggles, was at length
obliged to surrender this place, his honors, and all his mighty possessions,
into the hands of his sovereign, Henry I. As soon as it became a royal
fortress, the lands and demesnes, which followed it, were parceled out into
serjeanties for its defense. Thus Robert, the son of Adam de Leyton, was
obliged by his tenure to continue in this castle fifteen days, cum una balista,
with one cross-bow; and William de Wichard held the manor of Cold Hatton, to
keep ward in this castle, at his own expense, twenty days, in time of war, cum
uno equo, lorica, capello ferreo, et lancea. The constables were usually men of
the first note; and very often it was committed to the care of the sheriff of
the county. After it had been dismantled in the civil wars, it was granted by
Charles II. to Francis lord viscount Newport, afterward earl of Bradford. In
our times, it got into the hands of Pulteney earl of Bath, and is now in those
of William Pulteney, Esquire

THE first attempt toward the walls of this town, WALLS.
was made by Robert de Belesme; who, to defend it against the king's forces,
then marching against him, drew a wall from each side of the castle across the
isthmus to the waterside. One is still remaining, and, as I have been
informed, terminated with a square tower: both these walls are preserved in
Speed's plan of the place. The town was not defended by walls till the year
1219; when Henry III. strongly urged the inhabitants to consider of some means
of defense against an enemy. At first he made them a grant of various small
tolls; but at length, finding those insufficient, was obliged to assist them:
but the work went on so slowly, that they were not completed in less than
thirty-two years. The town was paved in the next reign, by the assistance of
certain customs granted for that purpose.

IN almost every part, the original walls were at a distance from the river.
Those on the south-east side of the town are kept in good repair, and form
pleasant but interrupted walks, by reason of flights of steps. Those on the
north-west side are entirely covered with houses. Beneath them is a narrow
field, extending from the School to the Welsh Bridge; along the verge of which,
close to the river, in 1645, ROWSHILL WALL.
was built another wall, called Rowshill wall: the materials of which are said
to have been brought from Shrawardine castle.

THERE are many historical evidences of the antiquity of the town. TOWN.
It had been, for many ages, the capital of Powis-land, and the seat of the
princes. Brochmail Yscithroc, who lived about the year 607, is said to have had
his palace on the spot where St. Chad's church now stands Powel, 22.
The Welsh called it Pen-Gwern, or the Head of the Alder-groves; and Ymwithig,
or the Delight, I suppose, of our princes. The period in which the town arose,
is not certainly known; but it is supposed to have been on the ruin of the
Roman Uriconium, the Vreken Ceaster of the Saxons, and the modern Wroxeter, a
small village, about four miles from hence, upon the Severn; where may be still
seen a large fragment of the ancient wall.

IN the time of Edward the Confessor, IN SAXON TIMES.
Scrobbes Byrig, as the Saxons called it, was a considerable place. At that
period there were two hundred and fifty-two houses, and the burgesses paid
yearly 7 l. 16 s. 8 d. in excise. Whenever the king lay in the town, twelve of
the chief inhabitants kept watch about his person; and if he came there to
hunt, the better sort of burgesses, who kept horses, rode armed as his guard,
and the sheriff sent thirty-six footmen for their support, while the king was
resident among them. When the king left the town, the sheriff sent twenty-four
horses to Lenteurde, to conduct him to the first stage in Staffordshire.

WHEN the sheriff went against the Welsh, which he had frequent occasion of
doing, it was customary to summon thirty-six men at Marseteley park, to give
their service for eight days. Those who neglected to go, forfeited forty
shillings.

THE king had here three masters of the mint, who, like the other coiners of
the county, were obliged to pay him twenty shillings at the end of fifteen
days, while the money was out of the mint, and while it was current. The town
paid in all twenty pounds yearly: the king had two-thirds, the sheriff one. As
soon as the Norman reign commenced, it paid to its new earl forty pounds.

THE first charter extant (for that of Henry I. is lost) was one in 1189,
CHARTERS.
from Richard I. It confirms all its ancient customs and privileges; for which
the town was to pay forty marks in silver, including ten for the purpose of
providing a brace of hunters for the royal personage. It likewise grants to the
burgesses the town and all its appurtenances, which had been seized by Henry I.
on the forfeiture of Earl Robert. King John, in 1199, enlarged their charter,
permitting the citizens to elect two substantial discreet persons of their body
as bailiffs for the government of the town; and that the common council might
choose four others, to determine all pleas of the crown in the corporation, and
to be a check on the bailiffs themselves. Various other charters, with
additional privileges, were granted by succeeding princes, till Queen Elizabeth
made it a body corporate; and Charles I. confirmed and enlarged her royal
charter. It now consists of a mayor, twenty-four aldermen, and forty-eight
assistants, who are called the common council. They have also a recorder; two
chamberlains, annually chosen by the mayor, aldermen, and assistants; a
steward, a sword bearer, and three sergeants at mace.

THIS town sent members from the beginning. The right of voting rests in
burgesses living in the town, and paying to church and poor, according to a
resolution of the house in 1709; but in 1714, it was resolved that foreign
burgesses had a right to vote.

THERE is in this town no manufacture considerable enough to merit mention; but
it draws very great profit from those of Montgomeryshire. This place is the
chief mart for them. About 700,000 yards of Welsh webs, a coarse kind of
woollen cloth, are brought here annually, to the Thursday market; and bought up
and dressed, that is, the wool is raised on one side, by a set of people called
Shearmen. At this time only forty are employed; but in the time of Queen
Elizabeth the trade was so great, that not fewer than six hundred Anderson's
Dict. i. 405.
maintained themselves by this occupation. The cloth is sent chiefly to
America, to clothe the Negroes; or to Flanders, where it is used by the
peasants.

FLANNELS, both coarse and fine, are brought every other Monday (except when
fairs intervene) to Welsh Pool; and are chiefly consumed in England, to the
amount of about 7 or 800,000 yards. The Shrewsbury drapers go every market to
Welsh Pool, for the sake of this commerce.

THE disposition of the streets in Shrewsbury is extremely irregular, STREETS.
as is the case with all ancient towns not of Roman origin. Many of the
buildings are old; but the modern buildings are in general scattered in various
places.

THE free school stands near the castle, in a broad handsome street.
FREE SCHOOL.
It was founded by Edward VI. in 1552; who endowed it with tithes, at that time
amounting to 20 l. 8 s. and empowered the bailiffs, burgesses, and their
successors, to appoint one schoolmaster, and one under-schoolmaster; and, with
the consent of the bishop of Lichfield, to frame statutes for its government.
Queen Elizabeth added considerably to the endowments, so that at present the
revenues are very large. The building was originally of wood; but in 1595, a
beautiful and extensive edifice of stone arose in its place, which contains the
school, houses for the masters, and a library filled with a valuable collection
of books, and several curiosities; among them are three large sepulchral
stones, discovered by ploughing at Wroxeter.

The first has on its summit a pine-cone between two lions, and beneath the
pediment, a rose. The first is taken from the Picea, what Pliny calls Feralis
Arbor Picea -- Feralis Arbor, et funebri indicio ad fores posita, ac rogis
virens. Hist. Not. lib. xvi. c. 10.
, expressive of the melancholy subject, and not infrequent on memorials of this
kind. Such was the great brass cone, five yards high, which stood on the top of
the mausoleum of Adrian, now the tower of St. Angelo, and is still preserved in
the garden of the Belvedere Flaminius Vacca, in Montfaucon's travels, Engl. ed.
322. Wright's travels, i. 273.
The inscription denotes the death of C. MANNIVS SECUNDUS, of the town of
Pollentia, a Beneficiarius or veteran in the xxth legion, who had served his
time, and was called again into service by the entreaties of a chief legate.

THE second stone has on the upper part a human face, two dolphins, and two
serpents. Beneath are three pannels. In the first is commemorated, by her
husband, Placida, aged fifty-five, and thirty years his wife. In the next is an
inscription to Deuccus, a boy fifteen years old, son to the same person: Cur.
agente patre. The third panel is a blank; so it is probable (as was hinted to
me by a most ingenious friend) that the man, who had erected this monument,
designed to have been buried in the same place with his wife and son; but dying
elsewhere, this panel remains unfilled.

The third stone is inscribed to M. Petronius, signifer, or standard bearer to
the Legio quatuor decima gemina, or the fourteenth double legion; or a legion
in which two had been formed into one. As this legion never was in Britain, the
learned Dr. Ward See his account of these three stones in the Ph. Tr. xlix.
part i. 196.
guesses, that Petronius only came for his health, and died here.

A PRETTY wooden model of a hypocaust, discovered at the same place with the
stones, is also preserved here.

THE public buildings of this town are not of note sufficient to be mentioned.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
Among the hotels of the great men of past time, Charlton-house, now the
theater, was the residence of the Charltons, lords of Powys. This was probably
founded by John de Charlton in 1326, when he fortified it by the permission of
Edward II Philips, 145.
Vaughan Place is another ancient house, the property of John Mytton of
Halston, Esquire derived from the marriage of his ancestor Reginald Mytton, about
the year 1376, with Elinor, sole heiress Haymon, son of Sir Thomas Vaughan
Mytton Pedigree.
of this town.

The infirmary was, INFIRMARY.
within my memory, a private house. It was opened on April 25th 1747. Since
that time, to June 24th 1782, have been admitted 14,040 in-patients; of which
8,453 were cured, 1,459 relieved. 17,693 out-patients; of which 13,234 were
cured, 864 relieved.
The annual subscription of the last year amounted to L. 909.

Two bridges connect this peninsula with the country. WELSH BRIDGE.
The Welsh Bridge is a very ancient structure, of six arches; with a very
handsome embattled gateway at one end. On each side is a round tower, and over
the entrance a statue of a prince in armor, generally supposed to be intended
for Richard duke of York; for beneath his feet is a rose-sprig, a device usual
on the seals of that great prince Sandford's General. p. 386. tab. 374.
This probably was a favorite town of the Plantagenets; for Elizabeth, queen to
Edward IV. found an asylum here during her husband's contests for the crown;
and here was delivered of her second son, Richard duke of York, and her third,
George duke of Bedford The same, pp. 415. 417.
This was not the original site of the statue; it having been fixed here after
it had been removed from another place in 1695 Philips, 148.
At the Welsh end of the bridge formerly stood another tower of great strength,
calculated to repel the inroads of my countrymen.

ON an eminence above Frankwel, MILLINGTON'S HOSPITAL.
a suburb beyond the bridge, stands Millington's hospital, a handsome brick
building, founded in 1734, by the will of Mr. James Millington of this town,
Drapier. It maintains twelve poor housekeepers of Frankwel (single persons) and
a charity-school for twenty boys and twenty girls of the same district, if to
be found there; and if not, to be taken out of the nearest part of the parish
of St. Chad: there to be instructed, and fitted for trades suitable to their
stations; to have prayers constantly read, morning and evening, on school-days,
(for which the chaplain is to have twenty pounds a year); and finally, they are
to be decently clothed twice a year. The poor housekeepers are to receive 3 l.
10 s. a year apiece, a load of coal, and a new coat, or gown, annually. These
poor people are to be, on vacancy, elected out of ten others, properly
qualified; who, till their election, are to receive likewise, annually, a new
coat, or gown, apiece. Mr. Millington besides founded in Magdalen college,
Cambridge, two exhibitions of forty pounds a year for two scholars, to be
elected from his grammar school; and when in orders, one of them is to be
elected chaplain of the school, in the room of the clergyman who happens not to
be so qualified, and who must, in that case, resign. The founder was a true
churchman; for all dissenters, and all persons not truly orthodox, are to be
excluded.

THE new bridge is on the side of the town, NEW BRIDGE.
and is a very handsome building, of seven arches. It was begun in 1769, and
built by subscription, under the direction of Mr. Gwyn, architect, a native of
Shrewsbury. This succeeded a very ancient and incommodious narrow bridge, with
the usual obstruction, a gateway. It consisted, in the time of Leland, of four
arches, besides the drawbridge Leland, Itin. iv. 99.
It formerly was called the East bridge, and the Stone bridge.

NOT far from hence, ABBEY.
on the side of the river, stood the great mitred abbey of St. Peter and St.
Paul, founded in 1083 by Roger earl of Shrewsbury, and his countess Adelissa.
It was built on the site of a timber church, erected by Siward; who exchanged
it, and probably the ground about it, with the earl for the village of
Langafielda; which Siward, at his death, bequeathed to the new foundation. It
was peopled with Benedictine monks from Seez, in Normandy, who arrived hungry
and naked. Roger himself, with the permission of his lady, was shorn, and
became a monk of his own abbey, and enriched it with the coat of St. Hugh, of
the monastery of Cluni; which he sometimes wore himself as a most precious
relic. He endowed the house largely, and encouraged every body who held under
him to do the same. Among the after endowments, I smile at these good men
receiving from earl Hugh the tithe of all the venison in Shropshire, except
such which ranged in the woods of Wenlock. The founder died in 1094, and was
interred here, as was his son Hugh, slain in Anglesey. Fulcheredus, a man of
great eloquence, was first abbot. Robert, the fourth abbot, whom Mr. William
Mytton names Pennant, procured with infinite difficulty, and, as I have in p.
47 related, enriched the abbey with the relics of St. Wenefrede, and
enshrined them, much to the emolument of his house. William Beauchamp, earl of
Warwick, by will dated August 8, 1437, ordered four images of gold, everich of
them of the weight of twenty pounds of gold, to be made after my similitude,
with mine arms, holding an ancre between his hands, to be presented to the
shrines of four different churches; one of which was to be that of St.
Wenefrede in Shrewsbury Hearze's Collections. The Earl's Will;
. I have, in vol. i. p. 34, of my Tour, given an account of the fraternity
established here in honor of the saint, about the year 1396. Thomas Butler was
last abbot. At the dissolution, Dr. Lee, and Master Henly, were sent down. They
convened the abbot and monks to the chapter house; caused some deeds to be
signed with the common seal of the house, then ordered an officer to break it,
and declared the convent to be dissolved Mr. W. Mytton.
Butler was allowed a pension of eighty pounds a year, and lesser sums to the
monks Willis, i, 171.
The revenues at the dissolution are reckoned by Dugdale at only 132 l. 4 s. 10
d. Speed, with more probability, says they were 515 l. 4 s. 3 d. The site was
granted by Henry VIII. to Edward Watson, and Henry Herdson Tanner, 445.
Queen Elizabeth made the church parochial. This church was called St. Crux, or
the Holy Cross, in the abbey of Shrewsbury, and still retains the name.

IN so great a length of time the church underwent great alterations. Some of
the round arches are to be seen within, and some of the doors are of the same
species of architecture; most of the other parts are more modern. The west
window is an elegant piece of sharp-pointed Gothic, and above is a statue. The
tomb of the founder is preserved in the church; on which is represented his
figure in mail and a mantle, and in the attitude of drawing his sword.



IN the garden is a most beautiful stone pulpit, open on all sides. I refer the
reader to the print as the best description.

THE Gray Friars, FRANCISCANS.
or Franciscans, had a house a little to the south of the new bridge, not far
from the town-walls. It was founded on the motion Hawyse, daughter of Owen ap
Gryffydd, prince of Powys, and wife to John Charleton, lord of Powys Leland,
Itin.
Charleton died in the year 1353; Hawyse before him, and was interred in this
convent. At the dissolution it was granted to Richard Andrews and Nicholas
Temple. The remains are fi^^ed up into a private house.

A LITTLE farther is that beautiful walk the Quarry, bordering on the river,
and planted with rows of trees. It is the property of the corporation, and the
pasturage part let to the inhabitants, and the profits distributed to the
burgesses. In 1569 this ground was set to three persons for ten years, for the
annual acknowlegement of a red rose, on condition they brought water in leaden
pipes, as high as it would run, for the use of the town, from Brodwel near Crow
Meole; which was effected in 1579.

ON a lofty bank, ORPHAN-HOUSE.
opposite to these walks, is seated the Orphan-house, a fine brick building,
with thirteen windows in front, and two small wings. It was begun in 1760, and
designed to receive part of the foundlings from the great hospital in London.
They were first to have been put out to nurse in the neighborhood, and at a
proper age to have been brought into the house, and under proper masters and
mistresses to be taught such arts as would make them useful members of society.
On the decline of the capital hospital, this great building became useless and
is at present no more than a place of confinement for prisoners of war.

BEYOND the quarry, AUGUSTINES.
close to the river, stood the house of Augustine friars. Leland Itin. iv. 100.
says, it was founded by one of the Staffords; and that several persons of
note, slain in the battle of Shrewsbury, were interred here, and in the church
of the Black friars. The friars of this house lay under a very bad fame; it is
even said, that a neighboring lane took its name from their nocturnal amors.
Dr. Powel seems to think, that the celebrated Incubi were nothing more than
mendicant friars; who might encourage the notion, in order to remove scandal
from themselves, and their religious paramours. Hi, says the zealous annotator,
Incubi daemones ita religiosas virgins illis diebus opprimebant, ut nulla eos
crucis signatio, nec aqua benedicta, nec ipsum corporis CHRISTI sacramentum,
abigere valeret Girald, Camb. Itin. lib. ii. c. 8.
.

The house of the Black friars, or Dominicans, DOMINICANS.
stood near St. Mary's, Water Lane. It is said that Richard, a burgess of this
town, by the king's license, built them a church in 1264; but the foundation of
the friery is ascribed to Maud Lady Genevil, wife of Jeffry Lord Genevil, who
lived in the reigns of Henry III. and Edward I. They had confirmation of what
they held here from Edward III. and likewise were permitted to make an aqueduct
in the ground belonging to their house.

MOST of the parochial churches are of great antiquity. CHURCHES.
That of St. Chad was probably founded by the Saxons soon after the expulsion
of the Welsh. At the Conquest it was found to be collegiate, and to have a dean
and ten prebendaries. In 1393 the old church was burnt down by the
carelesseness of a workman. The fellow seeing the mischief he had done, ran
home, put some money in his pocket, and attempting to escape, was drowned in
fording the river, near the stone bridge. In this church is the monument of
Richard Onslow and his wife, with their figures recumbent: he dressed in a
bonnet and gown. This gentleman was of the law; was twice member for Steyning
in Sussex, and was ancestor to the honorable Arthur Onslow, speaker of the
house of commons, and the present Lord Onslow. The former, in 1742, paid such
respect to his memory as to cause this memorial of him to be repaired. Richard
Onslow died of a pestilential fever in 1571.

ST. MARY'S, and St. Alcmund's, are remarkable for their handsome spire
steeples. The first is said to have been founded by King Edgar Philips, 90.
; the last, by the heroine Elfleda Tanner, 445.
: each of them had been collegiate. But the church which is said to be the most
ancient, is that of St. Giles, ST. GILES.
seated at the skirt of the suburbs, beyond the abbey. It is small, and only
remarkable for the vast size of one side of the roof. It had the honor of
receiving the bones of St. Wenefrede before they were deposited in the shrine
in the abbey. It is called in Doomsday book, the parish of the city Philips, 84.
; which gives it stronger clame to antiquity than any of the others. It is now
annexed to the church of the Holy Cross, or the abbey.

AMONG the more remarkable civil transactions may be reckoned the parlements
held in this town. The first was summoned formally by writ. By the first, the
lords to appear on September 13th 1283; the second writ directed the commonalty
of every county to choose two knights; the third, to the cities and boroughs;
the fourth, to the judges. At this august assembly was tried and condemned
David, brother to Llewelyn, last prince of Wales: his perfidy to Edward, and
his treasons to his country, before his reconciliation with his brother,
rendered him an object of detestation. Eleven earls, and an hundred barons,
were commissioned to try him Drake's Parl. Hist. i. 89
, as a subject of England; for he had received from Edward a barony, and a
considerable pension. He was the first who suffered the death of a traitor, in
the form of the sentence now in use; which he underwent in its fullest extent.

ANOTHER parliament was held here in 1397; it was called the Great Parliament, on
account of the number of people assembled in it. Here the unfortunate Richard,
by this obsequious senate, obtained a stretch of power unknown before; and, by
a strange concession, obtained that the whole power of the nation should
devolve on the king, twelve peers, and six commoners. The Pope's bull was
thought necessary to confirm so irregular a proceeding Rapin, i. 469.
.

THE military transactions relative to this place were numerous; but so brief,
and so rapid, that I shun mention of all, except three. BATTLE OF SHREWSBURY.
The first was the important battle on St. Magdalene's eve, July 22d 1403,
which is best known by the name of that of Shrewsbury, between Henry IV. and
the brave Henry Percy, surnamed Hotspur. It was the design of the northern
insurgents to make themselves masters of this town, and here to strengthen
their forces by a junction with the great Glyndwr and his countrymen. They made
rapid marches through Lichfield and Stafford; but the active Henry, stimulated
by the advice of the earl of Dunbar, a Scotch nobleman, then in his army,
advanced with a speed which saved his crown, and proved the destruction of his
enemies. He flung himself into Shrewsbury, as some assert Sto^^, 329,
, at the instant that the insurgents were going to scale the walls. He
immediately quitted the town, and encamped before the gates. The high spirit of
Percy would not suffer him to wait till the arrival of Glyndwr, who was no
farther distant than Oswestry: so that only four thousand of the Welsh were
able to join the northern forces. Percy sent that night Thomas Kaiton and
Thomas Salvaigne, two of his esquires, with a most reproachful manifesto,
concluding, in the romantic manner of the times, with hurling defiance in his
teeth. WE defy thee, DEFIANCE.
thy fautoures and compliers, as common traitors, and destroyers of the
realm, and the invadours, oppressors, and confounders of the very true and
right heirs to the crown of England; which thing we entende with our hands
to prove this day, Almighty GOD helpyng us Halle, fol. xxii.


THE fight began early in the morning, and very near to the town; for the
spirited Percy had made his advances much sooner and nearer than the king
expected. The onset was made in Oldfield, or Bulfield, at a small distance
beyond a little brook, north of the north-gate; and the battle raged toward
Berwick Carte, ii. 659.
, and as far as what is now called Battlefield. Let the old historians paint
the conflict in their plain but animated language.

THE king perceivyng that the battayll was nerer than he either thought or
looked for, least that long tarryinge might be a minishyng of his strength,
set his battayles in good order; likewise did his enemies, which both in
puissaunce and courage were nothing to him inferior. Then suddenly the trumpets
blewe: the kings part cried St. George upon them; the adversaries cried
Esperaunce Percie; and so furiously the armies joined. The Scotts, which had
the forward on the lords side, intending to be revenged of their old
displeasures done to them by the English nation, set so fiercely on the kings
forward, that they made them draw back, and had almost broken their arraie.
The Welshemen also, which sith the kings departure out of Wales, had lurked
and lien in wooddes, mountaignes, and marshes, heringe of this battayl toward,
came to the aid of the earls, and refreshed the weary people with new
succors. When a fearful messenger had declared to the king that his people
were beaten down on every side, it was no need to bid him stir; for suddenly
he approached with his fresh battaill, and comforted, hartened, and encouraged
his part so, that they took their hearts to them, and manly fought with their
enemies. The Prince Henry that day help much his father; for though he were
sore wounded in the face with an arowe, yet he never ceased, either to fight
where the battaill was most strongest, or to courage his men where their
hearts was most danted. This great battaill continued three long hours with
indifferent fortune on both parts. That at last the king, crying SAINT
GEORGE, VICTORY! brake the arraie, and entered into the battaill of his
enemies; and fought fiercely, and adventured so far into the battaill, that
the Earl Douglas struck him down, and slew Sir Walter Blonte, and three
other, appareled in the kings suite and clothyng, saying, I marvaill to see so
many kings s suddenly arise again. Others say, that the earl of Dunbar
withdrew the king from the place that he flood in; which was a good turn for
him; for the aforesaid Henry Percy, and E. Douglas (then whom was never man
more stout) raged so that the K. standert was overthrown, and those about it
slain; among whom was slain Edmund E. of Stafford, Sir Walter Blunt, the K.
standert-bearer, Sir Nicholas Langford, Sir John Cokayne, Sir John Calverley,
Sir John Massy, baron of Podington, with many other knights and gentlemen
Stow, 329.
According to Halle's account, the king himself slew with his hand, that
day, xxxvii persons of his enemies. The other of his part encouraged by his
doings, fought valiauntly, and slew the Lord Percie, called Sir Henry
Hotspurre, the best capetain on the part adverse. When his death was known,
the Scotts fled, the Welshmen rann, the traitors were overcome. Then neither
wooddes let, nor hills stopped the fearful hearts of them that were
vanquished to fly; and in that flighte the Earl Douglas, which for have
falling from the cragge of a mountaigne (Haghmond Hill.) was taken; and, for
his valiauntness, of the king freely and frankely delivered. On the kings part
were slain xvi c. persons, and above v thousand on the other; and as to the
Scotts, few or none escaped alive Halle, fol. xxii.
.





THE body of gallant Percy was found among the slain, and delivered to Thomas
Nevil, Lord Furnival, to be interred; but the next day the king ungenerously
ordered it to be taken up, placed between two millstones in Shrewsbury, and
guarded by armed men; after which he caused it to be beheaded and quartered,
and hung in different parts of the kingdom Stew, 329.
.

HENRY, after slaughtering five thousand people in his bad cause, most piously
returned thanks to the Giver of all victories; BATTLEFIELD CHURCH.
and erected, or permitted to be erected, on the spot probably stained with
most blood, the collegiate church of Battlefield, in the parish of Albrighton,
about three miles from Shrewsbury. The royal license permits Roger Ive, rector
of the chapel of Albright-Husee, to erect, on a piece of ground he had obtained
from Richard Husee, a chapel, to be dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene; of which
the said Ives and his heirs were to be master. There was also to be five
chaplains, who were to pray for the good state of the king while he lived, and
after death, for his soul, and those of Richard Husee and Isolda his wife, and
those of their heirs, and finally, for the souls of all that fell in battle on
that fatal spot Dugdale Monast. iii. pars ii. 185.
Its clear revenues at the dissolution were 54 l. 1 s. 10 d Tanner, 456.
.

THE church had been a small but handsome building of stone, with a tower
steeple. The west part is unroofed; but the chancel is neatly fitted up, and
serves as a chapel to the parish of Albrighton. Over the outside of the east
window is the statue of Henry IV. armed, and crowned. In the windows is some
painted glass with several arms, chiefly of the Corbets, to whom the place
belongs; among them are those of Richard Corbet, who died bishop of Norwich in
1635. It appears by the arms of the sea of Oxford joined with his own, that he
enjoyed that see when they were painted. He was a celebrated poet Two editions
of his poems were published after his death. See his Life in the British
Biography, ii. 1472
, as well as an eloquent preacher; which recommended him so greatly to James I.
that he made him one of his chaplains, and in 1620 bestowed on him the deanery
of Christ-church.

IN August 1485 the town made some show of resisting the passage of the earl of
Richmond, EARL OF RICHMOND'S PASSAGE THROUGH, IN 1485.
afterward Henry VII. in his way to meet Richard III. and give him battle. My
authority says, that The head bailey, Master Myttoon, being stout royste
gentilman, on demand being made of entrance; answered, saying, that he knew no
king but only King Richard, whose lyffetenants he and his fellows were; and
before he should entir there, he should go over his belly, meaning thereby,
that he would be slain to the ground, and that he protested vehementlye on the
oath he had tacken; but on better advice, Master Myttoon permitted the king
to pass; but to save his oath, the said Myttoon lay alonge the ground, and his
belly upwardes, and so the said earl stepped over him, and saved his oath
Philips, 41.


IT is affirmed that Henry brought with the army which landed in Wales, BRINGS
THE SWEATING SICKNESS.
that dreadful pestilence, the sweating sickness, or Sudor Anglicanus, which
for above sixty years after infested this kingdom, at different periods. In
many places it swept away a third of the people. It begun with a sweat, which
never left the patient till it destroyed him, or rill he recovered. It had many
of the symptoms of the plague; restlessness, anxiety, sickness, ravings,
drowsiness, faintness, palpitations; but it never was attended with eruptive
spots, buboes, or carbuncles, attendant on the other scourge of heaven. It
always began with the affection of one part, the sense of a hot vapor running
through the whole limb. The crisis never exceeded twenty-four hours; Dr. Caius,
on that account, calls it Ephemera Britannica: but oftener death ensued in
three or ten. There were places in which scarce one in a hundred escaped
infection. Toward the latter end of the visitation the malignancy abated; for
in 1528, out of forty thousand who were seized in London, only two thousand
died. The patient was to wait the event, just as he happened to be seized,
whether in bed or in his clothes. It is a mistake to suppose, as many have
done, that it was a disease peculiar to England, and that Englishmen only, let
them have been where they would, were seized with it. It certainly originated
neither in England, nor among Englishmen; but among the foreign levies of the
duke of Richmond, raked out of hospitals and jails, and buried in filth, and
crowded on board the transports, so as naturally to generate a distemper among
subjects so admirably pre-disposed See the ingenious and pleasing Biographical
Memoirs of Medicine in Great Britain, by Mr. John Aikin of Warrington, p. 119
to 127.
Let me add, that it ended in this town in 1551; but not with that mildness as
was observed in the later visitations in other places: for not fewer than nine
hundred and ninety died in a few days The same.
.

IN the civil wars of the last century Shrewsbury was garrisoned by the king,
TOWN TAKEN IN 1644 BY GENERAL MYTTON.
many of the works greatly strenthened, and a strong sort erected above
Frankwell, to prevent the town being commanded from the adjacent heights. Sir
Michael Earnly was left governor, and Captain Crow lieutenant of the castle.
General Mytton, who lay with a small garrison at Wem, and was representative
for this town, determined to surprise it. He made two unsuccessful attempts;
but on February 21st, 1644, with such forces as he could collect, he renewed
his enterprise. He sent the foot along the Severn side, and by the help of some
carpenters, who cut down the palisades between the castle and the river, formed
an entrance. Forty dismounted troopers scaled the walls in a low part near the
council-house, supported by the musketeers, and three hundred and fifty foot
surprised the main-guard in the marketplace, and killed the captain. The
castle fore-gate was next secured, and the drawbridge let down for the
admittance of the horse. At one in the afternoon the castle was surrendered, on
condition that the Irish should be given up, and the English march to Ludlow.
Crow was soon after hanged for his treachery, or cowardice. The governor, and
great numbers of people of rank in the county, were taken prisoners; and the
town was plundered, notwithstanding the general had offered his soldiers a
great bounty to forbear all acts of violence. Much booty was found in the town,
a considerable magazine, and the baggage belonging to Prince Maurice. Mytton
was made governor of the town, and received the thanks of the house for his
good services.

I DETERMINED to conclude my tour by a journey to Caer Caradoc, a post of the
celebrated British hero Caractacus. I went over the new bridge; passed by
Condover, CONDOVER.
a remarkably handsome and commodious house for its time, built by Sir Thomas
Owens, who died in 1598, one of the judges in the King's Bench Herald's
Visitation of Shropshire.
It is seated at the edge of a fine park; from which are variety of beautiful
views. This place passed to my eldest maternal uncle Richard Mytton of Halston,
Esquire by virtue of his marriage with Miss Owen, heiress of the place. The eldest
of the two daughters of the match conveyed it by marriage to the late Sir
Charlton Leighton; and it is now possessed by Nicholas Smythe, Esquire in right of
his wise, Anna Maria, daughter to Sir Charlton.

NOT far from Condover is Pitchford, PITCHFORD.
the seat of Adam Ottley, Esquire an ancient and venerable timber house, with a
hall suitably furnished with helmets, cuirasses, and broad swords. Here is
preserved a portrait of my respected predecessor in the line of natural
history, FRANCIS WILLUGHBY, Esquire painted in 1659, at the early age of thirteen,
when he was a member of Trinity college, Cambridge. His complexion is very
fair, his hair very long and flaxen; he has a book in his hand; is dressed in
the academic habit, and has on a very large turnover. He was heir to the
magnificent house of Wollaton near Nottingham. After passing his short but
amiable life in instructive travels, and the study of nature, and at the time
of meditating a voyage to explore the productions of the new world, he was
snatched, in 1672, at the age of thirty-seven, by a fatal pleurisy.

NEAR the house is a most remarkable pond, which flings up in hot weather a
vast quantity of strong bitumen, greatly resembling pitch, which gives name to
the place. It serves all the uses of that commodity; and an oil, most
efficacious in many disorders, has been for a considerable time past extracted
from it.

NEAR the eight mile-stone from Shrewsbury, I reached Longnor, LONGNOR.
the house of my respected old friend Joseph Plymley, Esquire Near it is Longnor
Hall, the seat of Robert Corbet, Esquire bequeathed to him by his relation, the
late Sir Richard Corbet, Bart. It is a good brick house, built in 1670 by Sir
Richard, a predecessor of the late owner. It is seated in a pretty vale, and
commands a fine view of Caer Caradoc, and Lawly Hill. The portrait of the
founder is in the house. He had been chairman of the committee of elections in
the reign of Charles II. and died aged 43, in 1683.

HERE is an admirable portrait of Margaret, widow of James earl of Salisbury,
and daughter of John earl of Rutland; the countenance dejected, but extremely
beautiful. She is dressed in very picturesque weeds: a three-quarters, by Sir
Godfrey Kneller.

HER daughter, Lady Margaret, first married to Lord Stawel, afterward to Lord
Ranelagh: extremely beautiful; an half-length, by the same hand. A portrait of
this lady is among the beauties at Hampton Court: a picture of her husband is
in this house.

LADY Mildred, youngest daughter of Margaret countess of Salisbury, and wife to
Sir Uvedale Corbet, son of Sir Richard, is painted in half-length; a fine
spirited figure. Here is also a very pleasing picture of her daughter
Elizabeth, painted in France, by Le Guard. She died unmarried, of a cancer in
her breast, in 1724, and was buried in St. Margaret's, Westminster; and had the
honor of an epitaph by Mr. Pope inscribed on her tomb.

AMONG other pictures, is a most exquisite one, by an unknown hand, of our
SAVIOR raising Lazarus. Two persons support the body; one is exerting all his
strength, the other seems at the moment sensible of the returning life of the
object of the miracle. Amazement appears in various forms in the spectators: in
some is a fullness of conviction, mixed with wonder and thanksgiving; in others,
surprise unmixed with any other passion: but in a high priest appears a high
degree of vexation. The body is a fine composition, of the re-animation of
putridity.

A LARGE picture of St. Peter denying our Lord, is a fine performance, by
Gerard Honthurst: confusion of face, fear, and consciousness of falsehood, are
strongly expressed in the visage of the frail apostle; which seems perceived by
a girl, who is (with a candle in her hand) questioning him, and in whose
countenance are the strongest marks of her being convinced of the falseness of
his asseverations.

FROM this vale I formerly visited Acton Burnel, ACTON BURNEL.
about three miles distant, the seat of its respectable owner Sir Edward
Smythe, Baronet; whose family came possessed of it in the 1st of Charles II.
CASTLE.
Not far from the house is the castle; a square building, with a square tower
at each corner. Its founder, or perhaps restorer, was Robert Burnel Leland's
Itin, viii. 107. Fuller's Br, Worthies Shropshire, 4.
, bishop of Bath and Wells, treasurer, and afterward chancellor of England;
who in 1292 was sent to the marches of Scotland, where he was employed on no
less an affair than to demand of the Scots, what they had to object to the
clame of his master to the right and exercise of the superiority and direct
dominion over their kingdom Drake's Parl. Hist. i. 100, 101.
In this office he died, and was carried to be interred in his cathedral at
Wells. He was of a very ancient family, dignified with barons, or knights, from
the time of the Conquest; but he had acquired great wealth, which he laid out
with true munificence. By certain monuments with the arms of the family, in the
church of Burnel in Normandy, it is supposed that they came originally from
that country. The castle was honored by a session of parliament in 1284: the
lords sat in the fortress, the commons in a great barn, the gable ends of
which are still to be seen. The Statutum de Mercatoribus, enacted here, is,
from the place, known by the name of the statute of Acton Burnel. It is
probable that it was by the influence of the prelate, that his habitation was
so distinguished.

HIS successor in the castle was Sir Edward Burnel, who served in many actions
in Scotland, under Edward I. and appeared with great splendour. He was always
attended with a chariot decked with banners; on which, as well as on the
trappings of his horses, were depicted his arms. He married Alice, daughter of
Lord Despenser, by whom he had no issue. On his decease, in 1315, his sister
Maud became sole heir. She married first John Lord Lovel of Tichemersh,
surnamed The Rich; he died in 1335. Her second husband was John de Handlow, who
died in 1346, and left by her one son, named Nicholas Lord Burnel, the subject
of much contest in the court of chivalry with a Robert de Morley, CURIOUS TRIAL
ABOUT A COAT OF ARMS.
on account of the arms which Nicholas bore, in right of certain lands of the
barony of Burnel, bestowed on him by his mother. These arms de Morley had
assumed without any just pretense; but because, as he declared, it was his will
and pleasure so to do, and that he would defend his so doing. Probably he had
no arms of his own, having been the first of his family who had appeared in a
military capacity. He had served as esquire to Sir Edward Burnel, without any
other domestic than one boy; and ever since the death of his master assumed the
arms in dispute. It happened that they both were at the fiege of Calais, under
Edward III. in 1346, arrayed in the same arms. Nicholas Lord Burnel, challenged
the arms as belonging to the Burnels only, he having at that time under his
command a hundred men, on whose banners were his proper arms. Sir Peter Corbet,
then in his retinue, offered to combat with Robert de Morley in support of the
right which his master had to the arms; but the duel never took place, probably
because the king denied his assent. The suit was then referred to the court of
chivalry, held on the sands before Calais, before William Bohun, earl of
Northampton, high constable of England, and Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick,
earl marshal. The trial lasted several days; when Robert, apprehending that the
cause would go against him, took an opportunity, in presence of the king, to
swear by God's flesh, that if the arms in question were adjudged from him, he
never more would arm himself in the king's service. On this the king, out of
personal regard for the signal services he had performed in those arms, and
considering the right of Nicholas Lord Burnel, was desirous to put an end to
the contest with as little offense as possible. He therefore sent the earl of
Lancaster, and other lords, to Nicholas, to request that he would permit Robert
de Morley to bear the arms in dispute for the term of his life only; which
Nicholas, out of respect to the king, assented to. The king then directed the
high constable, and earl marshal, to give judgment accordingly. This they
performed in the church of St. Peter, near Calais; and their sentence was
immediately proclaimed by a herald, in the presence of the whole army there
assembled.

ROBERT de Morley was seized with his last illness in Burgundy, in the year
1360, when the English army was on its return from the blockade of Paris.
Feeling the approach of death, he directed that his banner, with the arms of
Burnel, should, upon his decease, be delivered to Nicholas Lord Burnel, in
pursuance of the judgment before passed in the court of chivalry; and
accordingly his banner-bearer, having in his hands the banner rolled up,
delivered it to Lord Burnel, in presence of numbers of the nobility, convened
as witnesses of the ceremony. Lord Burnel died in the year 1382, and was
interred in Acton Burnel church, under an altar tomb, with a brass inlaid in it
of the figure of an armed man, and a brass label, inscribed, Hic jacet Dominus
Nich Burnel, miles, dominus de Holgot, qui ob. 120 die Jan. A.D. 1382. Cujus
animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

AMONG the witnesses in this cause were several lords and knights, and many
very ancient people, some of them above a hundred years of age; one of a
hundred and forty, and one of a hundred and twenty, probably of Shropshire, as
may be collected from their names, and the testimony they gave relative to the
descents of the Burnels, and several private affairs of the family, which were
likely to be best known in the neighborhood of their residence This account is
from a curious MS. I had the pleasure of receiving from Sir Edward Smythe.
.

FROM Longnor I visited Caer Caradoc. After a ride of about three miles, I fell
accidentally on the steepest ascent, and, after a laborious clamber up a green
and smooth ascent, now and then mixed with small fragments of lava, I reached
the summit, impeded a little by the first ditch and rampart, in a place where,
from the exceeding steepness, they seemed totally unnecessary. A little higher
is the second ditch, with a vast agger of stones, now sodded over. The area is
irregular, of pretty considerable extent. On the more accessible side are three
fosses and ramparts. The entrance and approach are very conspicuous, and may
even at present be easily traveled on horseback. The area slopes upwards, and
ends in a peak.

NOTWITHSTANDING this place is styled Caer Caradoc, it certainly was not that
which was attacked by Ostorius, and so admirably described by Tacitus. It
agrees only in this part of the description, which is common to most British
posts, Hinc montibus arduis, and si qua clementer accedi poterunt modum valli
saxa praesiruit; but it wants the following, Et prasluebat amnis vada incerto.
The learned editor of Cambden Cambden, i. 646, 647, In Rocque's map of
Shrcpshire it is called Caer Car^de^.
places it at Gair Ditches, about three miles south of Clun, on the left of the
road to Knighton; and gives, as I am informed, a faithful description of the
trenches and ramparts. I never saw the place, therefore am uncertain on what
river it stood, the fords of which were such matter of difficulty. No such
river is to be seen near the post I ascended; it therefore could not have been
the spot on which our hero was defeated: yet it is highly probable that it had
been a post occupied by him, and that it was named from that circumstance. It
has from very remote times been traditionally considered as a strong hold of
his; and, within no great number of years, a society of gentlemen, struck with
admiration of his virtue, met annually on the hill to celebrate his name in
prose or verse. In one year a gentleman The reverend Mr. SNEYD DAVIES.
, distinguished as much by his modesty as his great ingenuity, inspired with
the subject, almost instantly delivered the most brilliant part of the history
of Caractacus Taciti Annal lib. xii.
in the following lines; which, I flatter myself, will relieve my
long-suffering readers after the satiety of my Welsh pen, now hung up for ever.

ALL ROME was still, and nations stood at gaze;
Forth came the mighty Chief august in chains,
Unbroken, unsubdued; his dauntless brow
Lost not it is conscious grandeur: round he looked
With steady glare, a lion in the toils;
Yet, mindful of his fate, to Caesar's throne
He bowed majestic, and thus calmly spoke:
"Had moderation swayed my prosperous days,
"Rome had beheld me Caesar's guest and friend,
"Nor blushed; descended from a sceptered race
"That ruled Britannia's independent isle
"Beyond all annals of recording fame.
"If Rome commands, must vassal worlds obey?
"What, not resist! Who not defend their rights
"Deserve not. Cowards only should be slaves.
"Yes, I had arms, and wealth, and friends, and fame.
"What, tamely give them up? Disgrace indeed!
"That I so long withstood your baffled powers,
"Forgive me, Roman Virtue, that offense.
"Had I a cheap and easy conquest proved,
"My ruin and your glory had been less.
"Oblivion soon had veiled my dastard name,
"Unworthy Caesar's pity. Death or life
"Are at his dread disposal. That, or This,
"I neither fear to meet, nor scom to ask."
Yes, noble Captive, said the lord of Roms,
Thy life is sacred, and thy freedom sealed.
My sole ambition, soaring high, requires.
Amid my banners and triumphal arcs.
To bear thy valiant country's glorious name.
He spoke, loud thundering acclamations rung,
And shouts that tore the Capitol, proclaimed
Imperial mercy to the gallant foe.
All eyes are fixed in wonder! Some admire
His front erect, broad limbs, and martial port;
All praise the unwearied valor that durst cope
With Roman prowess, and well-nigh prevailed.
Not bold Jugurtha, nor the Syrian king,
Nor Persius rest of Alexander's crown,
Attracted more regard and gazing awe.
Even Claudius, in his radiant seat sublime,
The world's great master, with his legions fierce,
His glittering eagles, all his trophied pomp
And pride begirt, looked little on his throne.
Brave CARADOC, applauded by thy foes,
What shall thy friends, thy grateful Britons say?
What columns, and what altars rear of fame?
Thrice told five hundred courses of the sun,
Thy age is green, thy laurels freshly bloom.
Yet on thy well-fought hill, whose stony brow
O'erlooks the subject plains, the generous youth
Gladsome repair with annual flowers and song,
And festal music, to record thy praise.
O for more sparks of thy heroic fire!
If aught regarding this dull orb of earth,
Boils not thy rage, and thy great spirit chases,
To see the rivals of all-conquering Rome,
Thy hardy Britons, foiled by tinsel France?
Imagination, frowning, pictures thee
With featured variations, scorn and shame.
Heuries and Edwards thunderbolts of war,
Where is the lion-heart, the sweeping sword,
That purpled Agincourt's and Cressy's fields?
Assit, inspire our host! But chiefly thou,
The champion, guardian-genius of this isle,
Hover around our tents; thy airy lance
Direct, and spread thy visionary shield!
Call, rouse thy countrymen! To arms, To arms.
Ye ancient Bards, ye mystic Druids, hail!
Prophetic transport seizes me; I see,
Though dim the prospect, from this craggy height
Unrolling clouds that open a beauteous scene
Of joy and triumph. Hark! they shout.I see
Britannia's Lion Gallia's ensign seize;
Britannia's Trident vindicate the main,
Her colors waving in Columbian skies
Victorious. Peace returns, and Albion smiles.
Proceed, ye Britons; lo! the kindled fire
In this unwarlike breast! My veteran Muse
Shall march along; in spirit-breathing strains
Sound her Pierian trumpet, to awake
Her sleeping country; in her laureled hand
A chaplet bear to grace the victor's brow.
APPENDIX
No 1. INSCRIPTION ON CERTAIN MARBLES IN MOSTYN LIBRARY, BROUGHT FROM NARBONNE.
vol. i, p. 11.


NO II. EXTRACTS OUT OF A MANUSCRIPT TREATISE OF THE LORDSHIPS MARCHERS IN
WALES, TAKEN AUGUST 1740. vol. i. p. 245.
[The Treatise was borrowed of Thomas Lloyd of Overton, Esq]

THE treatise shows,

1. How, why, and when, the lordships marchers were first erected. 2. How, why,
and when, they were suppressed. And, 3. How they may be known, and tried, at
this day, from other lordships, that were not lordships marchers.
For the true knowledge and perfect understanding of the state of lordships
marchers in Wales, the following questions are fit to be moved:

1. When lordships marchers began in Wales? 2. How long the creating lordships
marchers in Wales continued? 3. When the same was given over, and why? 4. Why
they were at first ordained, and to what end they served? 5. How they became
lordships marchers, and to have regal authority? 6. How long they continued
their force and authority from their first erection? 7. When they were spoiled
of their liberty, and the same was resumed into the king's hands? 8. Why they
were deprived of their regal power? 9. How they are to be known at this day?
10. Why they were at first, and are now, called lordships marchers; and how
they first took the name? 11. What difference is at this day between them and
other lordships?
WALES was the refuge to the ancient Britons, when they were driven by the
Saxons out of England; and there they preserved the ancient blood royal of
their kings, their laws, and ancient language, from the fury of the Saxons.

There continued an implacable hatred and wars between the two nations. And
though the heptarchy was reduced to a monarchy by Egbert king of the
West Saxons (who first called that part England) yet he and his successors
received no obedience or subjection from the kings or princes of Wales; but
they held Wales as absolute monarchs, and acknowledged no superior under God.

Here Cadwallader (the last king of Britain of the British line) and his
desendants, did govern the people, as their lawful kings and princes, all the
time of the Saxon government.

When William the Conqueror subdued England, he dispossessed the Saxon issue of
the crown; he rooted out most of their nobility, and brought in his own people,
the Normans: and when he was in quiet possession of the kingdom, the Welsh took
no notice of his conquest over the Saxons; but accounted of it only as a war
between two strange nations.

Long before the Conquest, all Wales fell to Roderick the Great; who divided it
between his three sons: to Cadell he gave South Wales, containing 25 cantreds;
to Anarawd, North Wales, of 15 cantreds; and to Mervyn, Powys, of 14 cantreds.

The issue of these three sons possessed Wales, according to the said division,
in the Conqueror's time; viz. Rice, son of Theodore, ruled South Wales;
Griffith ap Conan, North Wales; and Blethyn ap Confyn, Powys. These three
princes would never acknowledge that the Conqueror had any superiority over
Wales: and for this reason there arose cruel wars between them, and they made
daily incursions on each other.

The kings of England often invaded the borders of Wales, and forced the
inhabitants to fly to the mountains; and the Welsh, at other times, made diverse
inroads over Severn, and carried great spoils out of England. This so provoked
them, that they resolved to make a conquest of Wales; but the roughness of the
country, the hills, woods, and bogs, was such a protection, that a great army
could hardly be brought to annoy them; but were often forced to return home
with lofss. As William Rufus, and Henry II. who entered Wales three times with
royal armies; King John made war upon Llewelin ap forwerth, prince of North
Wales, and Henry III. upon Llewellin ap Griffith, which brought great loss to
themselves, as well as damage to the Welsh.

The kings of England, seeing it difficult to make a conquest of Wales by a
great army, gave to the lords, and other great men of England, such countries
in Wales as they could win from the Welshmen. These are the words of diverse of
their grants.

By these means many were drawn to bring great armies of Englishmen and Normans
into Wales; who conquered many great lordships; which they held to them and
their heirs for ever, of the kings of England, as lands purchased by conquest.

The kings of England having built diverse strong towns of garrison on the
frontiers of Wales, after the Conquest; such as Bristow, Gloucester, Worcester,
Salop, and Chester; as places ready to chastise the Welshmen upon all attempts,
the great men began to invade the countries next to those towns; as namely,
Peter Corbet for Cause; Mortimer for Wigmore; Fitz-alan for Clun and Oswestry;
Walter Lacy for Ewyas-Lacy; Dru de Baladan for Abergaveny; Monthault for
Hawarden; Gilbert lord of Monmouth for Monmouth; Fulk Fitz-warren for
Whittington; Roger le Strange for Elesmere: and shortly after came Robert
Fitz-hamon, with his twelve knights, into Glamorgan; Bernard Newmarch into
Brecknock; Strongbow to Dyfed or Pembrokeshire; Martin to Kemes; Morris de
Londres to Cydwel and Cornwallon; Lacy earl of Lincoln to Rhos and Rhyvoniog,
now the lordship of Denbigh; Brewis to Gower, Buelt, Radnor, Melenith, and
Elvel; and to Roger Mortimer the country now called Chirk, then called
Mochnant, and to Cynlleth and Nantheudw and others to other lordships.

That the lords might the better govern the people when subdued, they were
suffered to take upon them such prerogative and authority, as were fit for the
quiet government of the country.

The ancient historiographer, Lampridius, says, that the kings of England did
then use the same policy with lands on the borders of Scotland.

No record to be found in the Tower of London, or elsewhere, of any grant to be
a lordship marcher in Wales. The king's writs, out of the courts at
Westminster, did not run into Wales, except Pembrokeshire; which was counted
part of England, and called Little England beyond Wales. Nor were there any
sheriffs to execute such writs: but the lords did execute laws themselves over
the people which they subdued; which the kings permitted for a time.

No charters of these liberties could conveniently be granted, for three
reasons.

1. The kings of England did not know beforehand what lands a lord should
conquer, or whether he should conquer any; and therefore could not grant any
liberties within a certain precinct or territory. 2. The lords, after their
conquest of any country, were not overhasty to purchase any charter; because
they were not sure but that those lands might be restored, by composition
between the kings of England and the princes, of Wales, as they sometimes were:
or they might be recovered by force, and the lords expelled. But, 3. The
learned say, that the lords marchers had no charters of such liberties, because
the liberties were of so high a nature, so royal, and so united to the crown,
that, by the law, it was not in the king's power to grant them from the crown.
The government by lords marchers continued in Wales till the time of Henry
VIII; who, perceiving the Welsh to live in quietness and subjection, thought
they might be governed by civil laws, as the English were. And therefore, anno
27, c. 24, he resumed most of those jurisdictions into his own hands, and
appointed justices of peace, sheriffs, and other officers; and divided the
country into shires. He governed them by the laws of England; and left little
or no authority to the lords marchers.

The lords, at their, conquest of the country, built castles for themselves,
and towns for their followers, in the most fertile part: and by this means the
towns and castles in Wales were built, as may be seen in the ancient charters
of those towns.

Pembroke, Tenby, and Haverfordwest, by Strongbow; William de Valence, and the
Hastings, being his posterity: Newport, by Martin lord of Kemes: Cydwely, by
Londres; and augmented afterward by the duke of Lancaster, to whom it came by
marriage.

Swansey, Oystermouth, Loghor, Radnor, Buelt, Raiadr, and others, by the
Brewises; from whom they came to the Mortimers and Beauchamps, by a female
issue of Brewis: Brecknock, by Bernard Newmarch.

Blaen-Llyfney, by Herbert: Caerdiff and Cowbridge, by Fitzhamon, and the earls
of Gloucester: Neath, by Greenfield: Abergaveny, by Dru de Baladan, Miles earl
of Hereford, and others, his posterity: Ruthin, by Lord Gray: Denbigh, by Lacy
earl of Lincoln.

Some of these were towns before the Conquest; but, being destroyed in the
winning of them, they were rebuilt by the lords.

The lords held their lordships of the kings of England in chief, as of the
crown immediate, by serving the king in his wars with certain numbers of men;
and they were bound to keep their castles with sufficient men and munition, for
the keeping of the king's enemies in subjection.

They executed the English laws, for the most part, within their lordships; and
brought them to be of English tenure; and to pass the same according to the
laws of England, by fine, recovery, feoffment, and livery of seisin. But such
parts as they left to the ancient inhabitants to possess, were by some lords
suffered to be held after the old Welsh custom, the laws of Howel Dda; which
was, to pass the same by surrender in court (which they called Cof Ls, and Ystn
Wialen, whereof the word Ystynnol was derived): and where that custom was
permitted, there is no deed to be found of any lands before the 27th Henry
VIII. when Wales was made shire-ground; but, for such lands as were turned to
English tenures, you may find deeds of two, three, or four hundred years past,
written in Latin, or French, as was used in England in those days.

The laws of England were brought in by the lords marchers, because the laws of
the land were unknown to the English: but they suffered the ancient tenants to
retain some part of the old Welsh laws; such as the use of gavelkind, for
parting lands between the brothers, and the passing of lands by surrender in
court. And for this, in many lordships, there is a Welsh court for the
Welshmen, called Welchrie; and another for the English, called Englishrie. In
some lordships the lands were divided by gavelkind, but passed by feoffments;
from whence comes English tenure, and Welsh dole: in Welsh, Cyfraith Saesnig, a
Rhan-Cymraig. And the lords had the wardship of all the brethren, as if they
had been sisters.

The lords marchers increased in number, till Llewellin ap Griffith, the last
prince of Wales, was slain, anno 11 Ed. I; who then took the principality of
Wales into his hands, and gave it to Edward II. his son, and made him prince of
Wales. Since which time no more lordships marchers could be erected; for the
Welsh in general submitted themselves to the kings of England.

Since the principality came to the kings of England, no lord marcher could
claim any liberty or prerogative, more than they had before, without a grant.

Edward I. immediately held a parliament at Ruthlan castle; and there ordained
laws and officers, to govern Wales after the English manner.

The lordship of Pows had not its original from conquest:, as the lordships
marchers had; but in this manner:

Griffith, son of Meredith ap Blethyn, lord of Pows, seeing the king of
England, and English lords, preparing themselves to conquer Wales, did, in
discretion and policy, submit himself to Henry I. and yielded to hold his
lordship of the king of England in chief, as the lords marchers did, and to do
the king the like service; and thereupon was suffered to hold the same to him
and his heirs; and was created lord Pows by the said Henry I. and made baron of
the parliament of England.

His descendant, Haws Gadarn, fell to be the king of England's ward, by reason
of the alteration of the tenure in capite; who gave her in marriage to a
valiant gentleman of his, named John Charlton. And so the lordship of Pows came
to the possession of the English lords. ( Mowthwy, and others, did the same).
These (with the lords marchers) held their lordships of the kings in chief, and
not of the princes of Wales.

The lord of Pows thus submitting himself to the king of England, the comots in
that lordship continue whole and entire to this day; and there is a court baron
in every one of them, But the lords marchers, to reward those that assisted
them in their conquests, gave them diverse manors; and so divided the comots
into several parts, and erected a court baron in each. The comots were six;
Carcinion, Mechan uwch-Coed, Mechan is-Coed, Mochnant, Llannerch-hudol, and
Ystrad-marchell.

The like may be found in the counties of Anglesey, Caernarvon, Merioneth,
Flint, Carmarthen, and Cardigan; where the ancient comots remain entire,
without alteration; and retain their ancient names and bounds, and keep the
same courts. The reason is, because they were not conquered by the lords
marchers, but continued in the hands of the princes of Wales, till Llewellin,
the last prince, was slain by Edward I.

It appears by ancient record, that the lordship of Bromefield and Yale,
anciently called Dinas Bran, being the chief castle of the lordship, came to
the possession of English lords, as follows:

Emma, daughter to Lord Audley, and widow to Griffith ap Madog, lord of
Bromefield and Yale, Chirk, Nantheudw, Maelor, and other lands, parcel of
ancient Pows having four sons, between whom their father's inheritance was
divided; strife grew between her and her husband's kindred about the custody of
her sons: they fearing, that if the sons should be brought up by the mother in
England, they would become English; and rather incline to the king of England,
than to the princes of Wales. But the mother getting into her possession the
two eldest, Madog and Llewellin; the first having to his part Bromefield and
Yale, and the other, Chirk and Nantheubw; and not being able to keep them to
herself, nor to remain in quiet upon her jointure, she delivered her sons to
Edward I. showing that by right they were his wards, because their ancestors
had formerly made their submission to the kings of England. The king took them
to his ward; and committed Madog, the eldest, to the care of John earl Warren;
and Llewellin to Roger Mortimer, third son to Ralph Lord Mortimer, of Wigmore.
The two guardians having the sons and their lands in their custody, Earl Warren
built the castle of Holt in Bromefield, and Roger Mortimer the castle of Chirk,
and placed garrisons of English in each, to defend the country from the Welsh.
And the wards dying shortly after, without issue, the said guardians still kept
the lands, and obtained grants of the king to hold the same, 10th of Edward I;
only the castle of Hope, and lands thereto belonging, were reserved to the king
in Earl Warren's grant. The ancient rent of Bromefield and Yale, was 730 l. a
year.

Emma being molested in her jointure, because she had delivered her sons to the
king, and so procured the coming of those lords to build the castles of
Bromefield and Chirk, she desired the king to take Maelor, her jointure, and to
give her lands in England for it; which the king did, and so got into,
possession of Maelor Saesnaeg, and held the same ever after; not suffering any
of the heirs to have it, pretending that they were rebels against him.

No lord marcher without a castle, and a sufficient garrison to suppress such
of the Welsh as should annoy the king's subjects; and therefore all castles had
towns close to them, inhabited by the English. And, by 4 Henry IV. c. 32, it is
enacted, that castles and walled towns in Wales should be possessed by valiant
Englishmen, strangers to the seigniories.

The charters of those towns give great liberty to the English; but no Welshman
might be a burgess, or purchase any land therein; see 2 Henry IV. c. 12. and
20. It was also enacted, that no Welshman should have any castle or fortress,
saving such as was in the time of Edward I. except bishops and temporal lords.

The more to encourage the English to conquer Wales the kings of England
created them peers of the realm, by the name of lords baron of the places they
conquered. Their number once was twenty-one; but now are reduced to one, viz.
Abergaveny, who is the first lord baron of England. The rest lost their name
and place, by coming either to the crown, or to lords who had other places and
titles in parliament. The castles in Wales were about 143.

The Welsh submitted to Henry VII. because he was paternally descended from
their princes: and his son, Henry VIII. made several statutes for the future
government of them, anno 27.

Lords marchers seized on the goods of their tenants, who died intestate.

All the lordships marchers have lost their ancient jurisdictions and
authorities, which were the common signs whereby they were known; so that it is
now a doubt which were such lordships. But they may still be known by several
tokens.

1. There can be no lordship marcher but such as was subdued before the death
of Prince Llewellin. 2. Such lordship must be held of the king in chief, and
not of the principality of Wales. 3. It must have been in ancient time the
inheritance of some English lord. 4. If any suit arose about the title, it was
to be pleaded at common law, in Westminster Hall; and there were fines levied
of those lordships, and none other in Wales. 5. The escheator of the marches of
Wales did in ancient time inquire of the tenure, and find office post mortem of
the lord; and that by writ out of the chancery of England. And as those
lordships were not in any shire in England, and the king had no escheators to
enquire of the tenure of them, the same was laid on the escheator of the next
English shire. And such escheators had the charge, care, and survey of all
lordships marches that were holden of the king. And such escheator was to go
into any lordship marcher in Wales, and swear an inquest, and find an office
after the death of the lord, and inquire of the tenure and value of the
lordship. -- N. B. All offices of other manors, that were holden of the king,
as of his principality, were found, by virtue of writs out of the king's
exchequer, of Caernarvon, or Chester, for North Wales; and Carmarthen, or
Cardigan, for South Wales; and out of Pembroke, for lands in that earldom. 6.
These lords, by stat. 24 Henry VIII. c. 9, have the penalty for killing of
wainlings, and for nonappearance at their courts; and, by stat. 26 Henry VIII.
c. 4, and 27, c. 26, they have the forfeiture of common mainprize,
recognizances, mizes; power to keep court-barons and court-leets; and to have
waifs, strays, infangthefe, outfangthefe, treasure-trove, deodands, goods and
chattels of felons, persons condemned, and outlawed: and also wreck de mere,
wharfage, and custom of strangers.
From the river Tifi, in South Wales, to the river Conwy, in North Wales, there
was no lordship marcher; but all that country remained wholly to the princes of
Wales, until the principality came to the crown by Prince Llewellin's death.

As the river Severn was the ancient limit between Wales and England, a doubt
has arisen, why all the land that is over that river, viz. all Herefordshire,
and so much as is part of Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, and Shropshire, had
not been lordships marchers, as the rest of Wales was, that was won since the
Conquest.

The reason is this: All Herefordshire, and those parts of the other counties,
were won from the Welsh in, or shortly after, the time of Offa king of Mercia.
The Welsh were expelled thence, the country was new planted with Englishmen;
and this was long before the dividing of England into shires. The same was
annexed to the kingdom of Mercia; and so, as part of that kingdom, it came to
the hands of king Alfred, who first divided England into shires. He finding
those countries subdued, and the Welsh expelled, divided them with the rest on
the other side Severn. He added part to Gloucestershire, part to
Worcestershire, and part to Shropshire; and made Herefordshire a shire of
itself.

Here lies the difference between conquering of Wales by the Saxons and the
Normans.

So much of Wales as the Saxon kings won, they did it at their own charge, and
for their own use; and did not suffer their subjects to deal therein. But the
Norman conqueror, contenting himself with the realm of England, did not bend
his forces against Wales more than he was forced to do, by their invading of
his people and country; and he, and his successors, thought it better policy to
give to the nobility such parts of Wales as they could conquer.

Herefordshire was not won since the Conquest, appears from the lordship of
Urchinfield; which is ancient demesne-lands; such as is not to be found in
England, but what was in the possession of its kings before the Conquest. See
Silas Tailor, of Urchinfield, in his History of Gavelkind, p. 106: and Humphrey
Lhwyd, in his Fragment of the Description of Wales; his Latin book, p. 52,
first edition; English translation, p. 63: whose words, as Bryan Twyne
translates, are, Gwr Reunwe makes one of the six states, that met at the mouth
of the river Dyvi, to choose Maelgwyn Gwynedd king, about the year 560. P. 74,
of his Breviary of Britain.

Not far from thence, viz. Lamstre, or Llanlieni, is the ancient city Henfford,
standing upon Wye, or more truly Gwy; in old time called Ferleg, now Hereford.

Toward Severn are Malvern hills; and in the corner between Severn and Wye,
not far from the town of Ross, is that renowned wood, which, from the Danes, is
called the forest of Dean.

These regions, with all Herefordshire beyond Wye, before they were possessed
by the English, were termed, in British, Euryenwe; and the inhabitants, Eurnwr:
of which there remains somewhat in the word Urchinfield. The Welsh called it
Ergnig, and afterward Ergenel; and no marvel, since the lest portion thereof
retains now the name of Powys.

It appears by some records in the Tower,

I. That King Edward I. anno 11, (when he slew Prince Llewellin, and thereby
got possession of the principality of Wales) being at Aberconwy, and fearing
that there would be a scarcity of victuals, wrote to the officers of all the
good towns and countries in South Wales, (that were subdued by the lords
marchers) that they should cause victuals to be brought out of those parts to
Montgomery, in Quindena Paschae; next following, to furnish the king's army. In
this manner:

Ballivis mercatoribus et probis hominibus de -- Swansey. This is the chief
town of the lordship of Gower. Majori, ballivis, probis hominibus et
mercatoribus de Bristol. Ballivis, etc. de -- Cardiff. The chief town of
Glamorgan. Ballivis, etc. de -- Strongoule. The chief town of Netherwent in
Monmouthshire. Ballivis, etc. de -- Haverford. Ballivis, etc. de -- Pembroke.
Ballivis, etc. de -- Thalgarn. Ballivis, etc. de -- Sto Claro. Ballivis, etc.
de -- Kemys. Ballivis, etc. de -- Kilgaran. Ballivis, etc. de -- Caerleon.
Ballivis, etc. de -- Caermardn. Ballivis, etc. de -- Cardigan. Ballivis, etc.
de -- Brecknock. Ballivis, etc. de -- Kydwely. Ballivis, etc. de -- Uske.
Ballivis, etc. de -- Lanstephan. Ballivis, etc. de -- Austedn. Ballivis, etc.
de -- Monmouth. Ballivis, etc. de -- Bergaven. Ballivis, etc. de -- Blenllevny.
Ranulph, monk of Chester, says (l. 7. c. 38. fol. 379.) that Prince Llewellin
was slain about the feast of St. Lucy.

2. That King Edward II. in his wars against Robert de Bruce, king of Scotland,
wrote to these lords marchers, to send to his aid a certain number of men,
there mentioned, out of their several lordships. His letters patents are dated
June 18, anno 3 Edward II.

The same king, in the same year, writes to those lords, to abate a certain
number of their men; because he did not want them.

King Edward III. fearing the invasion of the Scots, writes to the lords
marchers, to have the seacoast watched, the men of the country armed, their
castles strengthened and furnished, and themselves to act as lieutenants in
their several lordships. Dat. apud Berewicum super Twedam, Jun. 24, anno regni
10.

And he appoints William de la Zouch de Mort. Mari, and Gilbert Talbot (his
justices of South Wales) to be captains and leaders of the said lords and their
people against the Scots, if they should invade those parts.

N. B. The king did not write to any part of the six shires which were the
principality of Wales; but only to such parts as were subdued by the lords
marchers; who held their lordships immediately of the king. The king had men
out of the principality-lands, to serve him in those wars; but the commissions
are not to be found among the King's records in the Tower. For the prince of
Wales (who then held the principality) wrote for men out of the principality,
to serve his father in his wars.

The records of this remain among the prince's records; and are not to be found
among the records in the Tower.

No III. CAPITULATION OF DENBIGH CASTLE. vol. ii. p. 38.
Articles of agreemt concluded and agreed upon the fourteenth day of October.
1646, by and between Luitenant Coll. Mason, Lt Coll. Twisleton, Simon
Thellwall, Esquire Roger Hanmer, Esquire Thomas Edwards, Esquire Capt Robert Farrar, and
Nathaniell Barnett, Clerk, commissionrs appointed by General Mitton, on yt
one ptie; L. Coll. Griffith, L. Coll. Win, Major Manley, Major Reynalds, John
Eaton, Esquire John Thellwall, Esquire Kenricke Eaton, Esquire comrs appointed by Coll.
William Salusbury, gournor of the town and castle of Denbigh, on the other
party; for, touching, and concerning ye surrender of the s^ town and castle,
as ffolloweth:

1. THAT the town and castle of Denbighe, with all ye ordinance, arms,
amunito^, and pvisions of war, with all magazines and stoores thereunto
belonginge; as allsoe all goods, money, plate, and househouldstuffe, of with
kind soeur, belonging to any pson or persons whatsoever, except such as be
allowed in the ensuinge articles, shall be delivered to General Mitton, or
whom he shall appoint, wthout any wilful spoil or embezelmt, upon the 27
day of this instant October. for ye service of ye plimt. 2. That Coll. William
Salusbury, gouernr of ye town and castle of Denbigh, with his servants, and all
that to him belongs, and all officers and soldiers of horse and foot, as well
reformed officers and volunteere soldiers as others, and all other officers
with there servants, and all yt apptaynes to them, shall march out of the town
and castle of Denbigh, with there horses, and arms proportionable to there
prsent or past comands, flyinge colors, drums beatinge, matches light at both
ends, bullet in the mouth; euty soldier to have 12 chardges of powder, match
and bullet pportionable, with bag and baggage pporly to them belonginge; and all
psons of quality, clergymen, and gentlemen, with there servants, horses, and
arms, in like manner with bag and bagage, and all goods to them pporly
belonginge, to any place wthin x miles, such as the gournor shall make choice
of; where, in regard ye king has noe army in the field, or garrison
vnbeseidged, to march to, the common soldiers shall lay down there arms
(there swords excepted): with arms, so laid down, shall be delivered up to
such as General Mytton shall appoint to receive them. 3. That all officers and
soldiers, as well reformed as others, and all other the psons aforesaid, who
shall desire to go to there homes or ffrinds, shall have ye generals pass
and ptextion for the peaceable repair to, and aboade at ye several places
they shall so desire to go into; and such of them as shall desire it, shall
have free qter allowed them in all there march from Denbigh to those seurall
places, they marching 6 miles a day, and stayinge but one night in a place; the
officers, as well reformed as others, with equipage of horses, and complete
arms, answerable to there prsent or past commands; ye psons of quality,
clergymen, and gentlemen, with there servaunts, horses, and arms; and common
troopers with there horses and swords; and all to pass with bag and bagage, as
aforesd; and yt it shall be noe prjudice to any of there ffrinds for receavinge
or intertainmt of any of them; and yt all officers and soldiers, who shall
desire to take intertaynmt for any foreign kingdom or estate, shall have
free qter allowed them for 40 days, from there march out of Denbighe, they
marchinge 6 miles a day, and stayinge but one night in a place, as aforesd; and
shall have passes for officers and there servants, with there horses and arms,
to go and treat with any foreign embassedor or agent, for entertainmt; and
all of them to have passes to march, the officers with there complete arms,
and horses pportionable to there prsent or past, comands; and the common
soldiers with there swords only, and all with bag and bagage, to any convenient
port of this kingdom, to be transported; and the gournr of such port or
garrison, or gouernr next adjoyninge, shall take care for there safty duringe
there aboade there and until shippinge can be pvided, and weather seasonable,
they payinge for there qters after the sd forty days expired; and shall assist
them for pcuringe vessels for there transportance, at the usual rates
accustomed for fright; and noe oaths or engagemts whatsoever, duringe there sd
stay, or at there transportation, be imposed upon them, savinge an engagmt by
pmise not to do any prjudiciall to the parliamt. 4. That the gournor and
officers, and all others wthin the sd garrison, shall be allowed, and assisted
in pcuringe a sufficient number of carts, teames, and other necessaries, for
the caringe away of the goods allowed them by these articles, at any time wthin
4 days, besides Sunday, before the surrender of the garrison, and for the
space of 2 months after, to there several houses; provided it be to any place
wthin the generals quarters. 5. That noe gentleman, clergyman, officers, or
soldiers, nor any other pson or psons whatsoeur, comprised wthin this
capitulation, shall be reproached, or have any disgraceful speeches or
affronts offered to them, or be stopped, plundered, or injured in there march,
rendevouz, qters, journeyes, or places of aboade; if any such thing shall
befall, satisfan^ to be given at the judgmt of 2 or more of ye comrs, they
being equal in number of each party; nor shall the psons aforesd, nor any of
them, be entised or compelled to take up arms agst the king, nor be
imprisoned, restrained, sued, impleaded, or molested for any matter or cause
wtsoeur, before the surrending of this garrison, be it public or private
interest, duringe the space of 6 months, after the rendringe hereof, they
doing nothing prjudiciall to the parliamt. And if any officer, soldier, or
psons wtsoeuer, be sick or wounded, so that they cannot at psent enjoy the
benefitt of these articles, yt such shall have liberty to stay at Denbighe
until they be recovered, and fit accomodato^ and subsistence shall be pvided
for them duringe there stay there; and then to enjoy the benefitt of these
articles. 6. That the clergymen now in the garrison, who shall not, upon
composition, or otherwise, be restored to the church livinges, shall have
liberty and passes to go to London, to obtain some fittinge allowance for the
liuelyhood of themselves and families. 7. That these articles shall extend to
the use and benefitt of strangers, of any foreign kingdom or state,
residinge wthin this garrison, together with there wives, children, servants,
horses, arms, and bag and bagage, as is allowed in the precedinge articles. 8.
That the aldermen, bayliffes, burgesses, and all other psons yt are pply
members of the corporation of Denbigh, shall continue and enjoy there ancient
gouernmt, charters, customs, ffranchises, liberties, lands, goods, debts, and
all things else, with belong unto them as a corporation, subordinate to the
im^ediate authority and power of parliamt; and shall not be molested, or
questioned, by color of any thing done or ordered by them in the capacity of
a corporation, before the rendringe of this garrison, relatinge to the
differences between his matie and the parliamt. And yt noe officer or member
of the sd corporato^, or other inhabitant of the town of Denbighe, or
liberties thereof, shall be troubled or questioned for taking up arms,
duringe the time it was a garrison, for the defense thereof. 9. That all the sd
persons, who have there dwellinge houses and families wthin the garrison, shall
continue in there houses and dwellings, and enjoy there household stuff, all
there own private stoore pply to them belonginge, and all other there goods
and pvisions wrsoeur (except arms and amunito^ as before is excepted) or
remove with there sd goods and pvision out of the garrison, at there choice and
election; provided yt this extend not to any who have houses and families wthin
ye inward ward, but that they remove there habitations wthin 14 days after the
surrending of the sd castle: and have liberty to carry all there goods and
pvisions, to them proply belonginge, alonge with them, they doing nothing
hereafter prjudiciall to ye parliamt. 10. That the townsmen, and the rest of
the inhabitants of the town, shall be chardged with noe free qter further then
the rest of the country, and then but in a proportionable way; and yt the
distribution of qters shall be with the advice of the baliffes. 11. That all
those psons comprised wthin these articles, who are resolved to go beyond
seas, shall have liberty to have and dispose of there goods and moueables
allowed by these articles, wthin the space of 6 months after the surrendringe
of the garrison, and to depart the kingdom, if they shall think fit; and that
duringe the sd space they shall be free from all oaths, engagements, and
molestation (except an engagemt by promise, not to bear arms agst the
parliamt, nor wilfully do any thing prjudiciall to there affairs.) 12. That
noe pson or psons included wthin these articles, shall be molested or
questioned for any one thing sd or donn in or concerning this war, or
relatinge to the unhappy differences between his matie and ye parliamt. 13.
That Major General Mytton allow the gournor, for his prsent subsistence, so
much of his own pp corn, grain, and pvision, as he shall conceive expedient,
now wthin the castle, by reason all his estate at prsent is seized upon, and
employed to the use of the state. 14. That if any of these articles shall in
any point be brooken or violated by any pson or psons whatsoeur wthin the
garrison, or comprised wthin the capitulan^, the fault and punishmt shall be
upon him or them only who made the violation, and not imputed to, nor chardged
upon, any other not assentinge thereunto, or not an actor in it. 15. That all
persons comprised wthin these articles shall, upon request, have a certificate
under the hand of General Mytton, that such psons were in the garrison at the
time of the surrender thereof, and are to have ye benefitt of these articles.
16. That the gournor and others in Denbigh castle, after surrender thereof,
shall have the liberty to compound for there delinquencyes, at such rates as if
they had come before the first of December last; and yt this liberty shall
extend to all but such as being under the first and 2d exception, are
excempted from pardon: This is voted by parliamt.
COPPIES OF HIS MAJESTY'S LETTERS b.
CHARLES R.

WHEREAS we have resolved to comply with the desires of our parliament, in
every thing which may be for the good of our subjects, and leave no means
un-assayed for removing all difference betwixt us: Therefore we have thought
fit, the more to evidence the loyalty of our intentions of settling a happy and
firm peace, to authorize you, upon honorable conditions, to quit and surrender
the castle of Denbigh, entrusted to you by us, and disband all the forces under
your command: for your so doing, this shall be your warrant.

Given at Newcastle, the 14th of September, 1646.
To our trusty and well-beloved Colonel William Salusbury, governor of the
castle of Denbigh.

A Copy of the private Letter which his Majesty sent to the Governor.
Newcastle, 13th of September 1646.
COLONEL Salusbury, I heartily thank you for your loyal constancy. I assure
you, that whenever it shall please God to enable me to show my thankfullness
to my friends, I will particularly remember you. As for your answer, I referr
it to the messenger, to whom I have clearly declared my mind. -- Commend me to
all my friends. So I rest,

Your most assured friend, CHARLES R.


No IV. ORIGIN OF SHERIFF'S MEN IN NORTH WALES. vol. ii. p. 82.
[Corsegeddol MS.]
JEVAN, alias John ap Gruffudd ap Madog, lived in great credit and esteem in
the days of Edward III; who gave him an annual stipend for guarding and
conducting of the justice of North Wales, with a company of archers, whilst he
should sojourn and stay in the county of Merionedd. This was occasioned by the
people of North Wales, (being unacquainted, in those days, with the English
government) did often transgress; and the justices, for the reducing them to
obedience, were driven to use severity; which incensed people sometimes to use
violence against their justices: as in South Wales, Geoffrey Clement, justice
of that country, was killed at Buelt; and W. Sutton, in North Wales. Afterward
the sheriffs of the counties were enjoined to meet the justice at his entrance
into the county, and to guard and conduct him to the utmost bound of the
county; where the sheriff of the next county did receive him.

No V. SIR JOHN WIN OF GWEDIR'S INSTRUCTIONS TO HIS CHAPLAIN, JOHN PRICE, HOW
TO GOVERN HIMSELF IN HIS SERVICE. Vol. ii. p. 140.
FIRST. You shall have the chamber, I showed you in my gate, private to
yourself, with lock and key, and all necessaries.

In the morning I expect you should rise, and say prayers in my hall, to my
houshhold below, before they go to work, and when they come in at nygt -- that
you call before you all the workmen, specially the yowth, and take account of
them of their belief, and of what Sir Meredith taught them. I beg you to
continue for the more part in the lower house: you are to have only what is
done there, that you may inform me of any misorder there. There is a baylyf of
husbandry, and a porter, who will be commanded by you.

The morninge after you be up, and have said prayers, as before, I wod you to
bestow in study, or any commendable exercise of your body.

Before dinner you are to com up and attend grace, or prayers, if there be any
public; and to set up, if there be not greater strangers, above the children
-- who you are to teach in your own chamber.

When the table, from half downwards, is taken up, then are you to rise, and to
walk in the alleys near at hand, until grace time; and to come in then for that
purpose.

After dinner, if I be busy, you may go to bowls, shuffel board, or any other
honest decent recreation, until I go abroad. If you see me void of business,
and go to ride abroad, you shall command a geldinge to be made ready by the
grooms of the stable, and to go with me. If I go to bowls, or shuffel board, I
shall like of your company, if the place be not made up with strangers.

I would have you go every Sunday in the year to some church hereabouts, to
preach, giving warning to the parish to bring the yowths at after noon to the
church to be catekysed; in which point is my greatest care that you be paynfull
and dylygent.

Avoid the alehowse, to sytt and keep drunkards company there, being the
greatest discredit your function can have.

No VI. INVENTORY OF SIR JOHN WYNNE'S WARDROBE. vol. ii. p. 141.
A noate of all my clothes: taken the eleventh day of June, 1616.

IMPRIMIS. i tawnie klothe cloak, lined thoroughe with black velvett; one
other black cloak of clothe, lined thouroughe with black velvett; another
black cloak of velvett, lined with black taffeta.

Item. ii ridinge coats of the same color, laced with silk and gold lace; i
hood and basses of the same; one other old pair of basses. Item. ii black
velvett jerkins; two clothe jerkins laced with goulde lace, of the same color.
Item. One white satin doublett, and black satin breeches; one silk grogram
colored suite; and one suite of black satin cut, that came the same time
from London. Item. One other black satin suite cut; and one black satin
doublett, with a wroughte velvett breeches. Item. One leather doublett, laced
with black silk lace; one suite of Pteropus, laced with silk and gold lace;
another suite of Pteropus, laced with green silk lace. Item. One old black
silk grogram suite cut; two black frise jerkins. Item. One black velvett
coat for a footman. Item. One redd quilte waskoote. Item. ij pare of old
boothose, tops lined with velvett in the topps. Item. ij pare of black silk
stockins; and two pare of black silk garters, laced. Item. One pare of perle
color silk stockins; one pare of white Siterop stockins; three pare of wosted
stockins. Item. ij girdles, and one hanger, wroughte with gold; one also
black velvett girdle; one black cipres scarf. Item. Nine black felt hattes,
whereof four be men's hattes; and five cipres hatbands. Item. One guilte rapier
and dagger, and one ridinge sword with a scarf, with velvet scabbards. Item.
ij pare of Spanishe leather shoes. Item. One russett frise jerkin. Item. Two
pare of leather Yamosioes, and one of clothe. Item. ij pare of white boots; one
pare of russett boots. Item. iij pare of new black boots, and five pare of
old black boots. Item. ij pare of damask spurs, iii pare of guilte spurs.
No VII. INSCRIPTION ON A MONUMENT OF THE GWEDIR FAMILY, IN LLANRWST CHURCH.
vol. ii. p. 143.
This Chapel was erected Anno Domini 1633,

BY Sr Richard Win of Gwydir, in the county of Caernarvon, Knight and
Barronet, treasurer to the high and mighty Princess Henrieta Maria, queen of
England, daughter to King Henery the fourth, king of France, and wife to our
sovereign King Charles. Where lies buried his father, Sr John Win of Gwidir,
in the county of Caernarvon, Knight and Baronet, son and heir to Maurice
Win, son and heir to John Win, son and heir to Meredith; which three
lies buried in the church of Dolwyddelan, with tombs over them. This, Meredith
was son and heir to Evan, son and heir to Robert, son and heir to Griffith,
son and heir to Carradock, son and heir to Thomas, son and heir to Roderick,
lord of Angleasy, son to Owen Gwynedd, prince of Wales, and younger brother to
David prince of Wales; who married Eme Plantageinet, sister to King Henery the
second. There succeeded this David three princes: his nephew Leolinus Magnus,
who married Jone, daughter to King John; David his son, nephew to King Henery
the third; and Leoline; the last prince of Wales of that house and line, who
lived in King Edward the first's time. Sr John Win married Sydney, who lies
buried here, the daughter of Sr William Gerrard, Knight, lord chancellor of
Ireland; by whom he had issue, Sr John Win, who died at Lucca, in Italy; Sr
Richard Win, now liveing; Thomas Win, who lies here; Owen Win, now
liveing; Robert Win, who lies here; Roger Win, who lies here; William
Win, now liveing; Maurice Win, now liveing; Ellis Win, who lies buried
at Whittford, in the county of Flint; Henery Win, now liveing; Roger Win,
who lies here: and two daughters; Mary, now liveing, married to Sr Roger
Mostyn, in the county of Flint, Knight; and Elizabeth, now liveing, married to
Sr John Bod^il, in the county of Caernarvon, Knight.

No VIII. SIR JOHN WYNNE'S LETTERS. Vol. ii. p. 145.
Letter from the Bourbonoisse to his Father, dated 1st April, 1614, giving an
Account of the Discontents in France in the beginning of the Reign of Louis
XIII.
MY humble duty premised -- Our ambassador being returned to England, and my
acquaintance in Paris retired with him; I am uncertayn where to dyrect my
lr^es, that I may be assured they may come to hand.

This state of France is in division with ytselfe; for certain of the princes
are discontentedly retired to their governments; where they fortify themselves
in the strongest cytties. Those of them who want place of importance in their
own country, join with the rest to make good the hold they find fit to make
resistance: and so many are joined together in Champaigne, being the
government of the duke of Nevers, who also is one of the number. But the chief
of all is the prince of Conde, with whom also is the duke of Vendosme, bastard
son to the late king of France; who not long since was committed to prison; but
finding that opportunite to shift him self into the habit of a scullion, he
escaped, and put himself into the company of, the malcontents, being in
number about six or 7 dukes, besides others, assembled together, upon there
guard, in the cytty of Misiers and Cedan, upon the borders of the Low
Countries, being frontyre towns of Champaign. Whence the prince of Conde writ
to the king and queen, showing the cause of his retyrednes, so far as touched
himself, being, as he said, out of the care he had of the king and kingdom,
to reform the one, and give contentment to the other; which could not be don
without the assembly of the states, which he earnestly desired, principally to
abridge the extreme taxations of the subjects; to purge the kingdom of the
unnecessarie offices, who served to no other use than to impoverish the people;
and withal to forbear to proceed in the marriadge between France and Spayn,
untyll the assembly of the estates wear dissolved, least any thing should be
concluded to the pjudice of those of the reformed religion. The lre was well
written, and carried with yt a show of great good to the common wealth; but the
people are so fearful of the name of civil war, that very few stir of the
part of the princes. It is very true that the prince of Conde was drawn into
the number by some other of the dukes, and not out of any just cause that he
has of discontent, more then for the love of some of them who he wod protect.

There is watch and ward in all towns, and good order for provision of arms,
whereof there is no want in these parts.

The queen makes great preparation to go to meet the king of Spayn, to
conclude the marriage, notwithstanding the distaste the princes have of that
proceedinge.

The report hear is, that the princes will submit themselves to the kings
mercy, and will offer themselves to attend the king to his marriage; but how
that will prove, is uncertain: for they fortify themselves daily; and, while
they speak of peace, they prepare for war. But that which will turn to there
mischife is the want of money, which all know; otherwise they are well seated to
do the king a shrewd turn. These sturrs in France causes the kingdom to be
more difficult for travail, and makes many strangers remove to other
countries; myself among the rest am resolved of my remove, with as much speed
as I may, to Savoy, and so to Pie^mont, and to see some part of Lombardie,
before the extreamitie of the heat. I have continued here in Burbonnoise to
exercise myself to ride, whereto I have applied myself among the best-natured
people of the world. God contynewe you your health, and make my return as happy
as you desire!

I rest your obedient son, JOHN WIN.
1st Aprilis 1614,
His next Lr^e is dated 26 April, 1614, from Marseilles; and directed to his
Father.
My humble duty remembered --
SYTHENCE The writing Of my last, I removed from the place where I was to
Lions, being 30 leagues Of Burbonnoise. Before I set forth, I ridd to the
Bath, which is 5 leagues distant from Moulins, as well to see the castle as other
remarkable things, which are well worthy a strangers Observion. The governor Of
The country sent expressly to cause all things to be showed me. Being arrived,
I bestowed that nyht to see the new work, which the last king caused to be built
near the spring; but that which was wonderful, was 3 enclosed places within the
bath, the waters whereof is so extreme hot, that there is not any that care
adventure to go bath himself within, though the weather be never so could:
for experience whereof, the last great frost, a young maid goinge to take up
water, her feet slipped, because of the ice, and falling into the water, was
taken up dead, being boiled by reason Of the extroardinarie heat of the
spring. The next morninge I saw the castle Of Bourbon, which is extroardinarie
well seated for strength, and adorned within with a very fair chapel, being
on of the rarest pieces Of work Of France; within which there is a piece of the
very true cross of our Savior (if we may give credit to them that have the
keepinge thereof) which was brought from Jerusalem By St. Clovis, king Of France,
with on of the thorns of the crown Of our Savior, which marvilouslie does flowr
upon the Passion day, between nine and ten of the clock; and after 10 does
vanish away. I wod upon that day have gone to see yt, but I found all men at
there devotion; so that non wod travail that day. I doubt nothing of the
omnipotency of the Almighty, who has made all things of nothing; but I make
question of many superstitious observations of these Papists, who have often
belyed God, attributinge to reliks more then to God. This thorn is enclosed in
crystal within the same that the cross is, being all set in gould, with
works of imagerie, contayninge the passion of our Savior; which the houldinge in
your hand, the bud appears at that time of the day, upon Good Friday,
remains on flowr, and so vanishes.

From thence to Lions, where I continued a week; and so by water I voyaged to
Avignon, which is belonging to the Pope: where entering into the town, I was
demanded by the guard at the gate, whence I was, and of what religion? Where
havinge related all things, according to there demand, I was let pass toward
my lodginge, being somewhat melancholic, because I supposed that I shod not
have that liberty to see all places in that town, as I desired; but havinge
encountered with a French lord of that country, of whom I inquired whether I
might freely see all places in town; who used me with that extroardinarie
kindness, that being invited to supper that night, he speak of me to the
cardinal, being vice-legat; and the next morninge brought me to the cardinal,
who was returned from mass;, having a hundred gentlemen well appointed, who in
rank went before him, by three and by three, until the pallaisie; my self
coming by with that lord, I was saluted by the legate, and honorably entertained
with many good words, tellinge me that yt was not lawful for those of our
religion to remain above, three days; but for me, I might stay as long as I
wod -- with many other circumstances of love and courtesy; enjoyninge that Id
to show me all places in town, and principally to conduct me to see a company
at a gentleman's house, who wear ready to mask and dance, in honor of a
babtisme, whereunto the cardinals brother was entreated as godfather. In end,
being after dinner at the church, to see the manner of yt, though I had before
seen the like, behold a great number of violence and musitiens came marching
before the godfather, who brought the child upon his arm (according to the
French manner) to the church; and then the ladies and gentlewomen accompanyinge
the godmother entered, and so they went to the ceremony; my self went among
the rest, and stood by to hear and see what they did: which some gentlemen
perceivinge, who had taken notice of me in the morninge, demanded of me how I
liked of the ceremony? I said well. And whether there wear great difference
between the English manner and that of France for the babtisme? I answered, for
that I had seen that they differed from us. I was further pressed by those
gent, whether yt pleased me to see the manner of yt or not? I said yea; but
that I cod not enter for the press. Then the gent made me place, and brought
me close to the place; where, in interpretinge unto me the manner of all
circumstances, he was louder than the curit who babtized the child. When all
was done, the godfather kissed the godmother openly in the church. The
company, being many that came about me, seeing I was a stranger, to hear what
the other gent and I discoursed of. I was asked by the parent of the child, in
what sort we differed in England from the manner of France in babtisme? I
answered, that our children wear not so well fed, before they received
babtisme, as this child was. The gent fell all to a laughter; for indeed the
child was so old that he was almost ready to go, and had such a broad face,
that all the company were made merry with the mouths the child made at the
priest, duringe the time he was using his office. The gent told me that yt was
the manner in these countries also to christen them when they wear 4 or 5 days
old; but for this, the godfather being in Italy, they wear constrained to
stay till his return. After the babtisme I was offered all the courtesy that I
could desire. And so I went to Aix, being the parliment of Provence, and from
thence to Marselles, where I now am. From hence to Nezi, being the duke of
Savoys country; and from thence to Genua; and thence to Lucca; and so to
Florence, which is 500 miles hence: where I shall not have so much money as will
conduct me further, but only what will maintayn me until I receive money from
England, which I humbly entreat you to use means to send me my Michaelmas rent.
Have patience with me, if I continewe a little longer then you wod; I do yt for
my experience, which I wod gain, if I may, as well as others; but without time,
a man can do but what he can. I hope you would not that I should be less
sufficient then other gent, who seek out there experience by the same means
that I do. I hope that yt shall not repent you anythinge of the course I have
taken, no more then yt does me. God send you your health, and my mother hers;
and make both of you partakers of my prayers!

Yr ever obedt son, till death, JOHN WYNN.

No IX. WARRANT FOR A STAGG OUT OF SNOWDON FOREST, 4 JULY, 1st YEAR OF QUEEN
ELIZ. 1558. vol. ii. p. 166.
I Require you to deliver, or cause to be delivered, unto the bringer hereof,
for the furniture and provision of the queens majestys household of her great
council in the marches of Wales, one stagge of this season, to be taken out of
her highness forest of Snowdon. And this bill signed with my hand, with the
queens highness warrant dormant to the lord president, and Sir Robr Townessend,
Knight, justice of Chester, and either of us, made for the same, the copy
whereof remains with you, shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in
that bequest.

Given at her highness town of Salop, the 4th day of July, in the first year of
her majestys reign, ROBT. TOWNESSEND.

To the master of the game, ranger and keeper of the queens highness forest of
Snowdon, in the county of Carnarvon, there deputy or deputies there.
ANOTHER.
AFTER my hearty commendations -- These are to require you to delyver to my
friend Maurice Win, Gent. or to the bringer hereof in his name, one of my fee
staggs or bucks of this season, due to me out of the queens majestys forest of
Snowdon: and this my lr^e shall be your warrant of the same. So fare you well.

From Cardigan, the 14th August, 1561. Yr loving friend, H. SYDNEY.

To my very loving freinde John Vaughan, forrester of the queens forest of
Snowdon, in the counties of Anglesey, Merioneth, and Carnarvon; and in his
absence to his deputy there.
No X. ACCOUNT OF SIR RICHARD BULKELEY; IN WHICH IS A STRONG DESCRIPTION OF THE
TYRANNY OF THE FAVORITE EARL OF LEICESTER.
SIR Richd Bulkeley served in parlt for the county of Anglesey, the 2d and 3d
sessions of Q. Mary, the 3d of Eliz. and 1st of James.

He was of goodly person, fair of complexion, and tall of stature. He was
temperate in his diet, not drinking of healths. In his habit, he never changed
his fashion; but always wore round breeches, and thick bumbast doublets, though
very gallant and rich. In the last year of Queen Eliz. being then somewhat
stricken in years, he attended the counsil of marches at Ludlow, in
wintertime. When the lord president Zouch went in his coach to church, or
elsewhere, Sir Richard used to ride on a great stone horse; and some time he
wod go from his lodging to church, in frost and snow, on foot, with a short
cloak, silk stockings, a great rapier and dagger, tarry all prayers and sermon
in very cold weather; insomuch yr Ld Zouch was wont to say, he was cold to see
him.

He was a great reader of history, and discourses of all estates and countries;
of very good memory; and understanding in matters belonging to housekeeping,
husbandry, maritime affairs, building of ships, and maintaining them at sea.
He drew his own letters, and answered all letters with his own hand: and being
complained of at the counsil of the marches for breach of an order of that
court, he drew his own answer -- that he cod not be evicted out of his
possession but by course of common law -- pleaded Magna Charta -- and demanded
judgment: which answer being put into court, the chief justice, Sir Richard
Shuttleworth, called for a sight thereof; and after perusal, said to the
counselors at the bar, Look, my masters, what a bone Sr Richd Bulkeley has
cast into the court, for you to tire upon: and the matter being argued, it was,
referred to the com^on law.

He was a great housekeeper, and entertainer of strangers, especially such as
passed to or from Ireland. He nobly entertained the earl of Essex in his way
there, to be lord lieutent. He made provision of all necessaries for his table
beforehand. He sent yearly two ships to Greenland for cod, ling, and other
fish; which he did use to barter in Spain for Malaga and sherrie wines; and
always kept a good stock of old sack in his cellar, which he called Amabile,
besides other wines. He kept two parks well stored with Red and Fallow Deer;
which did afford such plenty of venison, as furnished his table 3 or 4 times
every week in the season, besides pleasuring of friends. He kept several farms,
besides his demesne, in his hands, which furnished his house with fat beef,
mutton, lamb, etc. etc. He was an excellent horseman, and an expert tilter;
keeping two great stables of horses, one in Cheshire, and another in Beaumaris,
and a great studd of mares. His estate in Anglesey was L. 2500, in
Carnarvonshire L. 800, and in Cheshire L. 1000, a year: having always a great
stock of ready money lying in his chest. He kept many servants and attendants,
tall and proper men: two lacqueys in livery always ran by his horse: he never
went from home without 20 or 24 to attend him. He was a great favorite of Queen
Eliz. He had powerful friends at court, and had the gentry and commonalty of
the county of Anglesey at his service, except the Woods of Rhosmore, who were
always his ennemies.

He had great contests with Dudley earl of Leicester; who obtained the queens
letters patents under the great seal, to be chief ranger of the forest of
Snowdon: in which office he behaved very injuriously to the counties of
Merioneth, Carnarvon, and Anglesey; attempting to bring within the bounds and
limits of that forest most of the freeholders lands in those 3 counties; and
for that purpose the earl procured several commissions from the queen to
inquire of encroachments and concealments of lands. The return of the jury, in
Anglesey, not being agreeable to the earls commissioners, they went in a rage
to Carnarvon, forcibly entered the exchequer there, ransacked the records, and
carried away what they pleased; but the earl, after making many attempts, to
the great grievance of the country, was obliged to desist, being defeated in
all schemes upon Snowdon, by the power and interest and spirit of Sir Richd
Bulkeley. But, manet alta mente repostum, the earl bore a poisonous hatred to
Sir Richd; yet he continued still in favor with the queen and counsel, though
often molested by the earl, his agents and creatures.

Sr Richard being one of the deputy lewtenants of Anglesey, (upon intelligence
of the Spanish Armadas threatening England) was to cesse the country in arms;
and cessing Mr. Woods of Rhosmore, he was highly offended, and thought himself
too heavily laden: therefore went up to court to the earl of Leicester,
carrying a false tale with him, that Sir Richard Bulkeley (a little before the
attainder and execution of Those Salusbury, one of the accomplices of Anthy
Babington, the traitor, 1585) had been in the mountains of Snowdon conferring
with him, and that at a farm of Sir Richards, called Cwmligie, they had layne
together two or 3 nights. The earl, glad of this information, presently
acquaints the queen and council therewith. Sir Richard being called before the
council, and examined, absolutely denied the whole matter. And when the earl,
at yt time president of the queens counsil, did severely enforce it agt him, he
told the earl to his face, "Your father, and the very same men as now inform
against me, were like to undo my father; for, upon the death of K. Edw. 6, by
letters from your father, he was commanded to proclayme Queen Jane, and to
muster the country; which he did accordingly: and had not my mother been one of
Queen Mary's maids of honor, he had come to great trouble and danger." Hearing
these words, the counsil hushed, and rose; and Sir Richard departed. The earl
hastened to the queen, and told her the counsil had been examining Sir Richard
Bulkeley about matters of treason; that they found him a dangerous person, and
saw cause to commit him to the Tower; and that he dwellt in a suspicious corner
of the world. "What! Sir Richard Bulkeley!" said the queen; "he never intended
us any harm. We have brought him up from a boy, and have had special trial of
his fidelity: you shall not commit him." "We," said the earl, "have the care of
your majestys person, see more and hear more of the man than you do: he is of
an aspiring mind, and lives in a remote place." "Before God (replied the queen)
we will be sworn upon the holy Evangelists, he never intended us any harm;" and
so ran to the Bible and kissed it, saying, "You shall not comitt him: we have
brought him up from a boy." Then the lords of the counsill wrote a letter to Dr
Hugh Bellot, lord bishop of Bangor, to examine the truth of the accusation laid
to Sir Richards charge: which the bishop found false and forged; and so
certifyed to the counsil. Whereupon he was cleared, to the queens majestys
great content, to the abundant joy of his country, and to his own great credit
and reputation: and afterward diverse of the lords of the council wrote
letters to the justices of assize of North Wales, to publish Sir Richards
wrongs, and to notify to the queens subjects his clear innocence.

But that Sir Richard might not rest in peace, one Green, belonging to the earl
of Leicester, in the name of one Bromfeild, a pensioner, came to him, to
challenge him to meet Bromfeild in the field. "Have you no other errand (quoth
Sir Richard?)" "No," says Green. Then Sr Richard drew his dagger, and broke
Greens pate, telling him to carry that as his answer; he scorning to meet such
a knave as Bromfeild. This treatment of Green highly increased the anger of the
Earl. Bromfeild, Green, and others of his retayners, plotted mischief to the
person of Sir Richard; but he stood upon his guard, keeping always 24 stout
men, with swords, bucklers, and daggers, to defend him from their attempts.
They hired boats and wherries upon the Thames, with a design to drown Sir
Richard, as he shod go from Westminster to London; but he, being privately
informed thereof, borrowed the lord mayor of Londons barge, furnished it with
men, musquetts, billets, drums, and trumpets, and rowed along the Thames, shot
the bridge, and went down to Greenwich, where the queen kept her court at that
time; and at the landing place, over against the palace, he caused his
company to discharge their muskets, to beat their drums, and sound their
trumpets. The earl of Leycester hearing thereof, repaired to the queen, and
informed her that Sir Richard Bulkeley, more like a rebel than a subject, had
come with barges, men, musquetts, drums, and trumpets; and had shot several
pieces over against her majestys palace, to the great terror of her court; a
matter not be suffered. The queen sent for Sir Richard, and, after hearing his
apology for himself, made the earl friends with him. Within a while after, the
earl sent for Sr Richard to his chamber; who coming thither, the earl began to
expostulate with him on several wrongs and abuses he pretended to have received
at his hands; and that he had lost L. 10,000 by his opposition. But the
discourse ended in milder terms, and Sir Richard was bidden to dinner; but did
eat or drink nothing, save of what he saw the earl taste, remembering Sir Nics
Throgmorton, who was said to have received a fig at his table.

But the earl of Lycester dying in Octr 1588, Sir Richard Bulkeley, and his
country, enjoyed peace and quietness from his tyrannical oppressions, his
devices and wicked practices: and Sir Richard survived to the 28 June 1621,
when he dyed, aged 88. He had attended the coronation of ye queens Mary and
Elizabeth, and of James the 1st. His cloak, at this last coronation, cost him
L.500.

No XI. A LETTER OF ARCHBISHOP WILLIAMS, WHILE FELLOW OF ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE,
CAMBRIDGE. vol. ii. p. 295.
Right Worcester.
THE concurrence of wisdom and affection, in your last action of intending the
remove of your son, made me silent in persuading or dissuading one way or
other; though, I confess, I like better of his continuance, considering his
late desire to his book, and profitable endeavors thence amounting; which, if it
were not so surely, love should not so blind me, as to abuse your worcester. with any
the like relation. For though I confess I affect him more than I think I shall
ever do kinsman after him; yet, as Pliny speaks of his friend, Amo cum judicio,
eoque magis quo magis amo.

His scholarship being gone, upon his return from London I was bold to put him
unto fellows commons, until, either in this or some other coll. I shall enquire
out some fellowship for him; of the which preferment he shall not be capable
until he be full bachelor of arts; and that will be Easter at soonest. This
removing of him to our commons, will be some ten pounds a year more chargeable
unto you; but I do hold his choice of company (which now can be none but fellows
and gentlemen) and his occasion of hearing their discourses, will, in your own
judgment, countervail the charges: only this, for his entrance you are to
bestow a silver piece of plate upon the college, of what price you please,
above 5 marks; and to engrave your arms thereupon: and that is all the charge
of admission.

He shall not want an honorable place in commencing, since you are content to
undergo the charges.

I thank you, Sir, for your charges always with me. Your former so many
courtesies, devoided of all requital of my side, might very well free your worcester.
from any future cost that way. I have indeed with my proctorship light upon a
most loving and respectful lord, my lord chancellor; who has rather an
indulgent fatherly care of my estate, than a lordly respect, as I have, by many
immediate favors, lately tasted.

It was likewise my good fortune, for I do not, I protest, attribute it to any
merit, to give his majesty, and the prince, some extraordinary contentment at
Newmarket upon Tuesday last; what time, by appointment, I preached before them.
I had a great deal of court holy water, if I can make myself any good thereby.

I pray you, Sir, by Lent next, when your son is capable of a place, let there
be some order taken, that the money you are willing to disburse for his place,
be at London in some readiness for me to call for; for magistri nostri oculatas
habent manus, credunt quod vident.

I have brought to execution a bond of a 100 l. to pay 50 l. due to me from my
coz. Henry Williams. For God's sake, if you can tell me of any means to catch
them, or get my money, let me have your direction. It is all I have toward the
loss of time, expense of money, and toiling of my body, which I had in my good
uncle's executorship. Thus ceasing to trouble you further at this time, as not
knowing how long this letter may be in coming, I recommend my service to your
worcester. and it to God's protection. Resting ever,

Your worcester. to command to the uttermost of his power, JOHN WILLIAMS.
St. John's Coll. in Came. this 22d Nov. 1611.
No XII. THE BISHOP OF LINCOLN'S (WILLIAMS) LETTER TO SIR JOHN WIN OF GWIDIR,
BART. AFTER HIS LORDSHIP LOST THE GREAT SEAL. vol. ii. p. 295.
SIR,
WITH the remembrance of my love and best affections unto you -- Being very
sensible of that great good will you have ever borne me, I thought it not
unnecessarie to take this course with you, which I have done with noe one other
freynd in the world, as to desire you to be noe more troubled with this late
accident befallen unto me, than you shall understand I am myself. There is
nothing happened which I did not foresee, and (sithence the death of my dear
master) assuredlye expect; nor lay it in my power to prevent, otherwise than
by the sacrifisinge of my poor estate, and that which I esteem far above the
same, my reputation. I know you love me to well, to wish that I should have
been lavishe of either of these, to continue longer (yeat noe longer then one
man pleased) in this glorious miserye and splendid slaverye, wherein I have
lived (if a man may call such a toilinge a livinge) for these five years
almost. By loosinge the seal, I have lost nothing, nor my servants, by any
fault of mine; there being nothing either laid, or so much as whispered to
my charge. If we have not the opportunitye we hadd before to serve the king,
we have much more conveniencye to serve God; which I do embrace as the only
end of Gods love and providence toward me, in this sudden alteraltion.

For your son Owen Win (who, togeither with my debte, is all the object of
my wordlye thoughts and cares) I will perform toward him all that he can have
expected from me, if I live; and if I dye, I have performed it allreadye.

You need not fear any miss of me, being so just and reserved in all your
desires and requests; havinge also your eldest son near the king, and of
good reputation in the court, who can give you a good account of any thing you
shall recommend unto him.

Hopinge therefore that I shall ever hold the same place I did in your love;
which was first fixed on my person, not my late place, and which I will deserve
by all the freindlye and lovinge offices which shall lie in my power; I end
with my prayer unto God for the continuance of your health; and do rest your
very assured loveinge freynd, and cozen,

JO. LINCOLN.
Bugdon, 1 Decr 1625.
Directed to my very much honored worthy freynd and cozen, Sir John Win, Knt
and Bart.
No XIII. EXPORTS OF POTATOES FROM THE PORT OF CONWY, TO SHOW THE CULTIVATION
OF THAT USEFUL ROOT IN SO SMALL A DISTRICT. vol. ii.
An account of potatoes exported and carried coastwise from the river Conwy,
from the year 1758 to the year 1781, both years inclusive; as appears by the
custom-house books of the port of Conwy.

Year. Bushels. 1758, 1,006. 59, 260 60, nil. 61, nil. 62, 180. 63, nil. 64,
nil. 65, nil. 66, 2,129. 67, 252. 68, 132. 69, 180. 1770, 1,141. 71, 4,358. 72,
9,685. 73, 9,334. 74, 4,992. 75, 13,653. 76, 10,460. 77, 11,356. 78, 5,928. 79,
13,318. 80, 13,200. 81, 5,140. Total 106,704.

N. B. Before the year 1758, all Nant-Conwy was obliged to import this
necessary article.

No XIV. LETTER FROM EDWARD EARL OF CONWY, ABOUT UNROOFING, etc. THE CASTLE OF
CONWY. vol. ii. p. 319.
Honoble friends,
I Have had the honor to receive yor letter of the 20th Sept. in which you are
pleased to enquire of me, whether my servant Milward does act by my order, for
the taking down of the lead, timber, and iron, of Conway castle: in answer to
which question, I do by this acknowledge it to be my act and deed; and that the
said Milward is employed by me to dispose of the timber and iron, according to
such directions as I gave him; and to transporte the lead into Ireland, where I
hope it will be more serviceable to his matie, then it was in this country. And
having this opportunity of addressing myself to you, I humbly beseech you to
take off the restraint which you have put upon his proceedings, and to afford
him yor favor in it; for I am already prejudiced by the loss of shipping, and
an opportune season for transportation of the lead: yet I shall esteem this as
a particular obligation upon me, and be ready to express it by all the
service in my power to every one of you, that you are pleased to grant this at
my request; which otherwise may put me to some trouble and delay. And I doubt
not of meeting occasions to testify my being,

Honoble Sirs, Yor affectionate and obedient servt CONWAY and KILULTA.
Ragley, in Warwickshire, 6th October, 1665.
Supr scriptio. For the honoble Thomas Bulkley, Esquire Colonel Wynn, Hugh Wynn,
Esquire Thomas Vaughan, Esquire his maties Deputy Livetennants in North Wales.
No XV. HOSPITALITY AT BODSCALLAN DURING THE TIME OF THE LATE ROBERT WYNN, ESQUIRE
vol. ii. p. 323.
A Bill of Fare of the Freeholders Christmas Dinner at Bodscallan. 60 or 70
used to dine at the two tables.
NO other liquor but black strap 7 years old, being 24 bushels to a hogshead,
permitted to be drunk on St. John's day.

N. B. also some wheat roasted and thrown into this beer, to ripen it.

2 legs of boiled mutton and dressed turnips. A rump of boiled beef and dressed
cabbage; Remd by sirloin of roast beef. Boiled pork and potatoes. Roasted
turkey. Fruit pudding, baked. Mutton pie. Goose with sweet groat pudding under
it. Saddle of roasted mutton. Custard pudding. 19 minced pies. Boiled suet
pudding. Legs of roasted pork. Goose with sweet groat pudding. Mutton pie.
Roasted turkey. Fruit pudding, baked. Hand of boiled pork and potatoes. Rump of
beef boiled; Remd by sirloin of roast beef. 2 legs of muton and dressed
turnips.

SECOND TABLE.
Boiled beef. Boiled leg of mutton. Dressed roots. Goose and sweet groat
pudding. Baked pudding. Mutton pie. Minced pies, a dozen. Mutton pie. Baked
pudding. Goose and sweet groat pudding. Pease pudding. Leg of mutton. Leg of
boiled pork and potatoes.

No XVI. ADDRESS OF THE INHABITANTS OF CAERNARVONSHIRE TO RICHARD CROMWELL.
vol. ii.
The humble address of the justices of peace, the gentry, ministers, and
others, your highness dutiful and loyal subjects the inhabitants of the
county of Carnarvon.
Expresses,

THAT the present dispensation of divine providence as to his late highnesse's
death, and ordering your royal highness as successor in the government of
these nations, cannot but affect us with different considerations, as well of
judgment on the one, as of mercy on the other; and therefore, besides our
requests to the All wise disposer of these providence, that they may have
suitable improvements to his glory, and the good of the nation, we make bold,
by this our address, to express our acknowledgement of your highness in that
governmt, under which, as seated in your father, of happy memory, judgment
did run down like water, and righteousness as a mighty stream; piety was
promoted, and the ennemies of truth and peace were discountenanced; and these
our nations were made the habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness. And
seeing we find that the God of heaven (in whose hands are the hearts of
princes) has clothed your highness with a spirit, by which he has fitted you
for the management of the weighty affairs of these nations, and the conduct of
this great people, we look upon ourselves as concerned to beg of the Lord,
that he wod prosper your councels and high undertakings for the reformed
religion abroad, and reformation at home. Beseeching also your highness, that,
treading in your fathers steps, you wod go on where he began, and answer the
great expectations of the nation, in the suppression of haeresie, superstition,
profanesse, and injustice, and in supporting the divine ordinances of
magistracy and ministry; in being a father to those that fear the Lord, and
in making your person and government awful in the hearts of all your people,
by your appearance in the defense of those divine truths that tend to the
exalting of Christ, and the quiet of these nations. And for your highness happy
progress herein, you will have the prayer of

Y' highness most faithful servts, Thomas Madryn, John Jones, Minister, Ellis
Rowlands, Robt Jones, Min^, David ap Robt, Evan Lloyd, Gruffyth Jones, Robt
Owen, Hugh Gwynne, Richard Glynne, Owen Hughes, William Owen, Henry Glynne,
Owen Robert, Willm Richard, David Evans, Thomas Owen, Willm Lloyd.


No XVII. CHARTER OF GWENWYNWYN TO THE MONKS OF STRATHMARCHEL. vol. ii. p. 380.
OMNIBUS sanctae matrie ecclesiae filiis tam presentibus qua^ futuris notum
sit, quod ego Wenynwyn filius Owen Kyfciliog dedi Deo et gloriosae virgini
matri et Monachis de Stradmchell pro salute animae meae in liberam et quietam
et perpetuam eleemosynam omnes pasturas totius provinciae quae dicitur
Kyfciliog infra istos terminos, scilicet Avon Maen melyn, usque ad Llwyn y
groes, and inde in directum usque ad blaen nant hanna^g, and inde a nant
hannang usque ad ejus Aber, inde usque ad Abernant garth branddu, and per
longitudinem ipsius rivuli usque ad suum blaen, and inde indirectu^ usque ad
Carneddwen, and inde usque ad Gobleiddie, and a Pen Gobleiddie blaen nant
tylinge usque ad suum Aber, and inde Bache usque ad Aber Dyfyngwm inde per
Dyfyngwm usque ad ejus ortum, and inde usque ad Relligogey and inde usque ad
Rhydiol, and per Rhydiol usque ad gwrydkay and inde Rhydiol iterum usque ad
Aber Kamddwr Kyfciliog and ab Aber Kamddwr Kyfciliog usque ad ejus ortum, and
inde in directum usque ad blaen Einiawn, and inde per Einiawn usque ad ejus
Aber, and inde per Dyfi, usque ad Aber Dulas, and inde per Dulas usque ad ejus
ortum, and inde in directum usque ad Kefn y Bwlch, and inde usque ad blaen
Llwydo, and per Llwydo usque ad ejus Aber, and inde Dyfi, and inde usque ad
Aber Llywenith and sic per Llywenith usque ad ejus ortum, and inde in directum
rhyd pebyll va super Clawedog, and inde per Clawedog usque ad Gwernach and per
Gwernach usque ad ejus ortum, and inde sicut ducit mons superior usque ad Rhyd
Derwen, and sic per Derwen usque ad y Vyrnwy, and inde Nant er cira, usque ad
Lledwe^r and Ablaen Lleddwern in directum usque ad bon Maen Melyn. Omnes itaque
pasturas dedi ego praedictus Wenynwyn praenominatis monachis infra praefatos
terminos. -- Anno Dom. 1201.

LIST OF PLATES.
XII. CRICKAETH -- to face Page 192 XIII. Bardseye isle, from Capel Vair -- 199
XIV. Tre'r Caeri, a view and plan of -- 206 XV. A view of Clynnog, backed by
the Eift hills, taken from the road to Caernarvon -- 208 XVI. A view of
Caernarvon -- 215 XVII. The Cromlechs at Plas Newydd, in Anglesey -- 238 XVIII.
The fine view of the Menai, and the shores of Anglesey and Caernarvonshire --
239 XIX. Chapel in Beaumaris castle -- 244 XX. The PUFFIN AUK, and its bill, as
in the first, second, and third year of its life -- 251 The bills of the
RAZOR-BILL AUK in its first and second year, as observed by the reverend Mr.
Davies of Beaumaris. XXI. Llandegai church, with a view of Penmaen Mawr, and
the promontory Llandidno, or Orm's Head -- 294 XXII. A view of Conwy castle,
from the road to Mr. Holland's Arcadie -- 311 XXIII. Plan of Conwy castle,
taken by Mr. Calveley -- 312 XXIV. The hall in Conwy castle -- 313 XXV. Plan of
Conwy town, by Mr. Calveley -- 317 XXVI. The oratory in the abbey-garden,
Shrewsbury -- 404
WOODEN PLATES.
Inscription on a Brick from Caer Sws. Inscription on some Marbles from
Narbonne.
LETTER these two parts, TOUR IN WALES, vol. ii.
Bind the Corrections and Additions to the first volume, (p. 185, et seq. of
this volume) after p. 456 of the first volume; -- or, should that be bound up,
place them before the List of Plates in this volume, to prevent the disunion of
these two Parts, occasioned by my inadvertency to that point.

ERRATA.
Page 94. -- for Vi hangel read Vehangel 112. -- for to the right read to the
left 138. -- for Rhainder read Rhaiader. 223. -- for his read our 243. -- for
Dwygyfyechau read Dwygyfylchau 260. -- for Edmund Bruce read Edward 311. 319.
321. for Conway read Conwy 318. -- for 1603-4 read 1643-4 323. -- after kingdom
add of Ireland 341. -- for Conwwy read Conwy 415. -- for king's read queen's
455, 456. The words Pteropus, Siterop, and Yamosioes, were scarcely legible in
the MS. nor could any explanation be obtained about them: they are therefore
printed as nearly as possible to the writing.
INDEX.
A.
ABER, its fine cataract -- 302 Aber-arch -- 193 Aber daron, a sanctuary -- 195
Aberfraw -- 227 Abergeleu -- 335 Aber Llienawg -- 248 Aber-menai -- 223
Abrighton -- 411 Acton Burnel -- 417 Address of the county of Caernarvon to
Richard Cromwell -- App. 482 Aelian, St. his well -- 337 Alberbury castle and
abbey -- 287 Amianthus -- 275 Anglesey -- 223 Aran Mowddwy and Penllyn, two
great hills -- 68 Arennig mountains -- 68 Aria Theophrasti -- 307 Arthur's
round table celebrated 203 Asaph, St. -- 17 Asbestos -- 272 Attraction of the
clouds -- 164
B.
BACHEGRAIG, singular house 22 Bala, town -- 67 -- lake -- 69 Bala-deu-llyn --
181 Bangor -- 280 -- castle -- 283 Bardsey isle -- 196 Barmouth -- 104 Baron
hill -- 253 Barrow, bishop, his epitaph -- 20 Battlefield -- 411 Beavers --
134, 299 Beaumaris -- 242 Beddau Gwyr Ardudwy -- 130 Bed Kelert abbey -- 176
Bed Porus -- 101 Beding field, Sir Francis, an account of 391 Belesme, Robert
de -- 393 Benglog, dreadful road -- 153 Berth Lwyd -- 365 Berwyn mountain -- 62
Bettws in Montgomeryshire -- 366 Bettws Wyrion Iddon -- 134 Beuno, St. -- 209
Blackhall -- 374 Blainy family -- 356 Bodfach -- 349 Bodfari -- 24 Bodle-withan
-- 341 Bodscallan -- 323 Boduan -- 202, 207 Bodvil family -- 195 Bodychan house
and family -- 379 Bostock, Bridget, her story -- 360 Braich y Ddinas -- 306
Brees, William de, his intrigue with the wife of Prince Llewelyn 302 Bruce,
Edward, his league with Sir Gr. Llwyd -- 260 Bryn Gwin, a royal British
antiquity 230 Bulkeley, Sir Richard -- 167 Burgh, Hugh de -- 81 Burnel family
-- 417 -- Sir Edward, his coat of arms strangely disputed -- 418 Buttington,
Danes there -- 380 Bwlch Oer-ddrwys -- 85 Bwlch y Cwm Brwyneg -- 162 Bwrdd
Arthur -- 254
C.
CADER Idris -- 87 Cadvan -- 227 Cadwaladr -- ib. Caer Caradoc -- 421 Caer Gai
-- 75 Caer Hen -- 322 Caernarvon -- 214 Caer Sciont, or Caernarvon -- ib. Camp,
Roman -- 103, 367 -- of Owen Gwynedd -- 336 Canganum Promentorium -- 199
Cantrer Gwaelsd -- 113 Capel Kerrig -- 150 -- Vair -- 199 Capitulation of
Denbigh -- App. 445 Caractacus, his defeat -- 421 --, verses on -- 422 Carned
Dafyd, and Llewelyn -- 298, 300 Carnedds -- 238, 260 Carn Madryn -- 194 Carn,
batte of -- 363 Carreg Hova castle -- 383 Castle Corndochon -- 75 -- Dinas
Cortin -- 111 -- Dolforwyn -- 356 -- Prysor -- 102 Catherine y Berain -- 26
Caunant Mawr, a cataract -- 160 Cernunnos, Gaulish deity -- 112 Cerrig Druidion
-- 73 Chestnut trees, large -- 51 Chirbury -- 368 Clough, Sir Richard, the great
merchant -- 23 Clwyd vale -- 345 Clynnog abbey -- 208 Coffin, singular -- 95
Condover hall -- 415 Conovium -- 322 Conway castle -- 311 -- abbey -- 314
Copper mine, vast, in Anglesey 265 Cors-y-gedol house -- 109 Corwen -- 62
Coytmor house -- 300 -- Howel -- 145 Craig y Deryn -- 93 Crib Coch -- 172
Crickaeth -- 191 Cromlech, a triple -- 189 Cromlechs -- 211, 236, 263 Cwm
Bychan, wild scenery -- 114 Cwm Croesor -- 129 Cwm Cwmorthin, an exalted vale
ib. Cwm Dyli -- 172 Cwm in Flintshire -- 8 Cwm Idwal, and lake -- 154 Cymmer
abbey -- 98 Cynfael, falls of -- 128 Cynwyd, falls of -- 63 Cytti'er Gwyddelod
-- 125
D.
DAFYDD ap Jevan ap Einion, his gallant reply -- 121 Daniel, St. bishop of
Bangor -- 280 Dee, Dr. a Welshman -- 108 Dee, river, sacred -- 70 Denbigh -- 32
-- charter -- 39 -- siege -- 37 -- articles of capitulation App. 445 Derfel
Gadarn, St. a noted image 64 Dictum? -- 328 Diganwy castle -- ib. Dinas Dinile
-- 212 Dinas Dinorwig -- 159 Diserth castle -- 7 Dolbadern castle -- 157
Dolgelleu -- 87 Dolwydelan castle -- 135 Druidical temples, and other remains
63, 110, 308 Druids -- 229 Drws Arduddwy, a rude pass 212 Drws y Coed, copper
works there 181 Dyffryn Alled -- 46 Dyffryn Mymbyr -- 150
E.
EGGLWYS Rhos -- 328 Elphin, prince, Taliesin's poem to -- 148 Evans the
conjuror -- 108
F.
FALCONRY -- 330 Falcons, ancient Welsh -- ib. Falls of the Conwy -- 133
Fasting Woman, a strange relation of 195 Festineog -- 128 Fish, curious in
Anglesey -- 252 -- of the Vyrnyw and Tanat 384 Fittes, fine view near -- 392
Forest of Snowdon -- 166 Freiddin hill -- 385 Friar Forest's cruel execution --
64 Froissart, a beautiful copy of -- 327 Fwyall, Howel y, a valiant knight 192
Fynnon Las -- 162, 172
G.
GAI, Arthur's, foster father -- 77 Gale, or bog-myrtle, its uses -- 146 Games,
ancient Welsh -- 309 Ganor castle -- 328 Garreg, a Pharos -- 2 Gibson the dwarf
painter, and his wife 300 Gilesfield -- 380 Gloddaeth -- 325 Glyder Bach, its
curious columnar stones 151 -- Vawr -- 155 Glynlivon -- 213 Gogarth -- 330
Gorphwysfa -- 171 Grasses, Welsh -- 160 Gray, Reginald de -- 53 Gronant -- 4
Gryffydd ap Cynan -- 234, 363 --, Piers, a brave sea captain 285 Gwalchmai, a
fine fragment of his poetry -- 386 Gwdw Glass -- 308 Gwedir house -- 139 Gweli,
what -- 324 Gwyddno Goronhir, a Welsh prince 113 Gwynedd's, Owen, tomb -- 281
Gwyniaid -- 70 Gwytherin -- 46
H.
HAFFREN, see Severn. Harlech castle -- 120 Haved Lwyvog -- 174 Havodtys,
summer dairy-houses 161 Hedd Molwynog, one of the xv tribes 48 Helen, Pen Caer
-- 322 -- Fordd -- 101 Henllan -- 45 Herbert, Lady Mary, her romantic ambition
-- 376 Hirlas Owain, a poem on -- 288 Holland family -- 340 Holyhead -- 275 --
Phares -- 278 --, Roman sort there -- 277 Horns, drinking, account of -- 286
Hospitality, ancient Welsh 91, and App. 479 Hunting, ancient -- 117
I.
JESTYN, St. -- 255 Joan, princess, her coffin -- 248 Jones, Inigo -- 141 --
hated by Ben Jonson -- 143 Jones the regicide, where born 113 Jorwerth
Drwyndwn, his tomb 348 Irish, barbarity to in the civil wars 319 Isle, the,
near Shrewsbury -- 191
K.
KARRIG Druidion -- 73 Kinmael house -- 340 Klogwyn Du -- 155 Kymryd, battle of
-- 321
L.
LAKES, high, in Snowdon -- 162 Lead ore, singular clayey species 271
Leicester, earl of, his insolent letter 42 Llanasa -- 4 Llan Beblie -- 219 Llan
Bedrog -- 196 Llan-beris -- 156 Llan Cadwaladr -- 227 Llanddinam -- 364
Llanddwyn -- 226 Llandegai Archbishop Williams' monument there -- 294
Llandeniolen -- 159 Llandreinio bridge -- 385 Llandrillo -- 64 Llandudno
promontory -- 330 Llan-Elian, in Anglesey -- 264 Llan Elltid -- 98 Llanfyllin
-- 351 Llangynnog, rich lead mine there -- 346 Llanidan, druidical antiquities
there 229 Llanidlos -- 365 Llanrhaiadr in Mochnant -- 349 Llanrwst, its fine
bridge -- 141 -- church, and tombs -- 143 Llanvaes friery -- 247 Llan y Lladron
-- 96 Llanymynach fosses, and Roman lead works 381 -- great lime works -- 382
Lleder river -- 135 Llewelyn the great, his coffin -- 145 Lleweni hall -- 25
Llider mountains -- 137 Llwyd, Humphrey, celebrated antiquary 30 -- Sir
Gryffydd -- 260 Llwydiarth -- 349 Elygwy, Glyn -- 150 -- river -- 135 Llyn, a
hundred, in Caernarvonshire 200 Llyn Beris -- 158 Llyn Cader -- 179 Llyn Conwy
-- 131 Llyn Cwellyn -- 179, 222 Llyn Geirionedd -- 147 Llyn Llidaw -- 172 Llyn
Llyphaint -- 299 Llyn Nanlle -- 181 Llyn-tegid -- 69 Llyn-tegwin -- 126 Llyn y
Cwm -- 156 Llyn y Dywarchen, its floating islands 180 Llyn y Myngil, a pretty
lake -- 94 Llyn y tri Graienyn, its story -- 96 Llys Bradwin -- 89 Locusts, a
great fall of -- 191 -- drowned in the sea -- ib. Longnor hall, pictures there
-- 416 Loton hall -- 387 Lupus, Hugh, invades Anglesey 248
M.
MADOC, his insurrection -- 374 Madoc Gloddaeth -- 327 Madryn, Carn -- 194 --
house -- 195 Maelgwyn Gwynedd, his death -- 328 Maen y Campiau -- 308 Maes
Mynnan -- 24 Magnus, king of Norway, kills Hugh earl of Shrewsbury -- 247
Mallwyd -- 82 Maltraeth -- 227 Marble with asbestos in it -- 272 Marchers,
lords, account of App. 429 Margaret of Penllyn, the mighty huntress 158 -- of
Anjou retires to Harlech 122 Marle house -- 323 Mathraval, seat of the princes
of Powis 352 Maynan abbey -- 145 Mediolunum Ordovicum -- 353 Meivod -- 352
Menai straight -- 223 -- its length -- 240 Mephitic vapor -- 190 Mereddyd ap
Jevan reforms Wales 137 -- his reason for quitting his natal place -- 188
Merlin Ambrosius -- 175 Middleton, Sir Hugh -- 29 --, his letter to Sir John
Win 186 Minstrelsie, ancient Welsh -- 91 Moel Elian -- 222 -- y Don, English
defeated at -- 234 Monacella, St. her legend -- 347 Montford bridge -- 390
Montgomery town and castle -- 369 -- battle near -- 371 --, Roger de -- 370,
393 Morley, Robert de, his dispute about a coat of arms 418 Mouddwye Llan -- 79
-- Dinas -- 81 Murders, cruel -- 81, 453 Mynydd Digol -- 374 Mytton, General,
his great successes 12, 38, 54, 122, 217, 245, 319, 414 --, Sir Peter -- 45 --,
Mr, Wm. account of -- 390
N.
NANNEY, house and park -- 97 Nant Beris -- 156 Nant Colwyn -- 177 Nant Frankon
-- 153, 299 Nant Gwynan -- 173 Nant y Gwrtheyrn -- 204 Nefyn -- 202 --,
tournaments there -- 203 Newborough, once the residence of our Welsh princes --
224 Newmarket -- 2 Newtown -- 359
O.
OFFA's dike -- 368, 382 Ogwen lake -- 153 -- river -- 299 Onslow family, from
whence -- 390 Orm's Head -- 330 Ostorius conquers Caractacus -- 421
P.
PARIS mountain, its rich mines 265 --, Robert -- ib. Patriarch of Tregaian --
262 Pedigree, specimens of Welsh 50, 104 Penmaen Mawr -- 304 --, accidents on
-- 305 Penmaen Rhos -- 334 Penmon priory -- 249 Penmynnyd, seat of the Tudors
-- 256 Pezzant Melangell -- 348 --, Llan-vehangel y -- 94 Penrhyn house -- 284
Pen y Caer Helen -- 322 Perch, crooked -- 102 Pimble Mers -- 69 Pitchford hall,
bituminous spring near it -- 415 Plants at Gloddaeth -- 326 -- of Snowdon --
147, 155, 160 Plas Newydd, Anglesey, antiquities there 236 PLATES, second list
of -- 486 Plygan, the ushering in of Christmas 339 Plynlimmon -- 366 Pont
Aberglas Llyn -- 181 Pont y Pair -- 135 Porth Aithwy -- 240 Porthamel -- 231
Porth in Llyn -- 202 Posts, British 24, 58, 159, 249, 335 Pounderling, Sir
Robert -- 7, 22 Powis castle -- 375 Powys-land, succession of -- 378 Prestatyn
-- 5 Priestholm island -- 250 Pryse, Ellis, a creature of the earl of Leicester
-- 324 Puffins, history of -- 250 Pulesdon, Roger de, his sad fate -- 218
Pwllheli -- 193
Q.
QUEEN's gate at Caernarvon -- 216
R.
RAZOR-bill bird -- 252 Red Castle, see Powys Rhewlas -- 67 Rhiwaedog, battle
there -- 66 Rhiw Goch -- 102 Rhos Ddiarbed -- 363 Rhos Vynach -- 334 Rhyd yr
Halen -- 130 Rhys Goch O'ryri, a noted Bard -- 181 Richard II. where betrayed
-- 334 Robert of Rudlan -- 10 -- slain at Diganwy -- 329 Rocking stone -- 332
Roman roads -- 101, 103 -- camp -- 103, 367 Routon, the old Rutunium -- 388
Rowland, Reverend Henry, account of 233 Ruddlan -- 9 Ruug, Gryffydd ap Cynan,
betrayed there 59 Ruthin -- 52
S.
SABRINA, her story -- 357 Says Marchog -- 58 Salisbury family -- 25 Salmon,
how far they ascend rivers 365 Sarn Badrig -- 113 -- Helen -- 101, 130
Sea-fowl, vast wreck of -- 191 Segontium -- 214, 221 Sepulcher, ancient -- 262
Severn river -- 357 Shell sand, a rich manure -- 254 Sheriff's men in North
Wales, origin of App. 452 Shingles -- 364 Shrawardine, great and little -- 388
Shrewsbury -- 392 to 402 -- battle of -- 407 Sherries island -- 273 Slate
quarries -- 365 Snowdon -- 147 -- its highest top -- 162 -- forest -- 166
Snowdon plants -- 147, 155, 160 Sorbus Ancuparia, quicken-tree, its uses 147
South, Dr. -- 350 Stag, warrant for one from Snowdon. App. 465 Strathmarchel,
its charter App. 484 mdash; abbey -- 380 Suetonius, his invasion of Anglesey
231 Superstitions, ancient Welsh -- 336 Sweating sickness in Shrewsbury -- 412
Swelly, dangerous pass in the Menai 239
T.
TALIESIN, his history, and poem to Elphin -- 147, 148 Tal y Llyn -- 94 Tan y
Bwlch, its beauty -- 127,128 Teberri castle -- 93 Thelwal family -- 56 Tommin y
Bala -- 67 Torques, a golden -- 123 Towyn, inscriptions there -- 93 Traeth Mawr
-- 184 Traws Vynnydd -- 101 Trefriw -- 146 Tre-garnedd -- 260 Tremerchion -- 22
Tre'r Caeri, a great British post 206 Tre'r Dryw -- 230 Trevaen, singular hill
-- 152 Tree Valdwyn -- 369 Tribes, xv, of North Wales -- 344 Tudor, Owen, his
history -- 256 Tudwal isles -- 196 Twll Du, a strange chasm -- 154 Twr Bronw^n,
or Harlech -- 120 Tydecho, St. of Mouddwie -- 79
V.
VAD FELIN, the yellow pestilence 328 Varnel, in Caernarvonshire. -- 238 --, in
Flintshire -- 341 Vale of Clwyd -- 21, 345 Varis -- 25 Vassalage, barbarous --
241 Vaughan, engraver, a fine work of his in Llanrwst church -- 144 Vaynor --
367 Velyn Rhyd -- 127 Vo^las -- 132 Vertigern builds Dinas Emris -- 175 --, his
grave -- 204 Vyrnyw river -- 352, 383
W.
WATER-FALLS, the most curious 63 99, 100, 128, 133, 160, 302, 350 Wattlesbury
castle -- 386 Weapons of the ancient Welsh -- 235 Weather about Snowdon -- 170
Welsh, ancient customs -- 336 --, not all drunkards -- 97 -- mountaneers, their
way of life 161 -- Pool -- 379 -- golden chalice, account of ib. Wells, St.
Aelian's, superstitions at 337 -- St. George's, the same -- 336 -- Nant Beris,
the same -- 158 Williams, Archbishop, some account of 294, 319 -- Letter of his
when a tutor at Cambridge App. 472 -- Another on his resignation of the seals
App. 475 -- Sir Wm. leaves his estate to King William -- 239 Winefrede, St.
where buried -- 46 --, her bones removed to Shrewsbury -- 47 Woollen
manufacture in Wales 151, 365, 397 Wreck of birds -- 191 Wyddfa, the highest
hill in Snowdonia 162 Wynn, Sir John, the father -- 140 -- instructions to his
chaplain, App. 453 -- inventory of his wardrobe, App. 455 Sir John, the son --
145 -- his letters from France App. 458 Wynn, Sir Richard -- 144
Y.
YNYS Dywyll, the ancient name of Anglesey -- 236 Yschithroc, Brochmail, -- 395
Yspytty -- 131
Z.
ZIMENT copper -- 270
FINIS.
CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS TO THE FIRST VOLUME OF THE WELSH TOUR.
PAGE 6. Half a league -- read -- half a mile; for that is the sense of Leuca
in the Doomsday Book. See Dugdale's Warwickshire, i. 46.

Page 8. I find that coals were discovered in the township of Mostyn, as early
as the time of Edward I. as appears by an extent of that place, in the
twenty-third year of that reign Sebright MSS.
.

Page 9. Shunamitish Widow -- read -- Woman.

Page 26. In the grant to the abbey of Basingwork, of the lands in the peak of
Derbyshire, there is a clause, reserving the venison to the king, with the
consent of the abbot and convent; for the preservation of which, two foresters
were appointed by the king; but the grantees were allowed to kill hares, foxes,
and wolves Ibid.
.

Page 28. TUDOR ALED, a bard cotemporary with the abbot Thomas Pennant,
celebrates in a poem not only his hospitality, but his prowess in battle; and
compliments him on having beautified and enlarged the abbey. Among other
luxuries, I think he enumerates sugar; which might well be, for sugar was a
great article of commerce in Sicily, as early as the year 1148; so a rich abbot
might easily indulge himself in it in the fifteenth century Sebright MSS.
.

Page 36. James II. in his progress to Holywell, gave, as marks of his favor,
golden rings, with his hair plaited beneath a crystal. One is still preserved
in a neighboring family, which he had bestowed on the Roman Catholic Minister
of Holywell.

Page 82. That the British commanders used to stand on a turfy mount, or
tribunal, to harangue their soldiers, is evident from the authority of Dio
Cassius, lib. lxii. who informs us, that Boadicea delivered her animating
speech from an eminence of this kind.

Page the same. William Parry, LL.D. and member for Queensborough, was born at
Northop. He was executed before the door of the parlament-house, in 1584, for
designing the death of Queen Elizabeth. He had before rendered himself
obnoxious, for having had the courage to speak against the bill for the
expulsion of popish priests, etc. was committed to prison for his freedom, but
restored on making submission. He asserted, that his mother was a Conway, of
Boddrudan; that his father had thirty children by two wives, and died aged 108.
His enemies, on the contrary, say he was of mean parents: but be that as it
was, his abilities were considerable; but his duplicity brought him to his
fatal end. He went a voluntary spy to foreign parts, was gained over by the
Romish party, probably meant to deceive both sides; so fell a just victim to
his artifices. See Stripe's Annals.

Page 97. Hawarden castle was then garrisoned for the parliament, by a hundred
and fifty men of Sir Thomas Middleton's regiment.

Page 101. Chief Justice Glynne, in 1655, established the first precedent
reported in the books for granting a new trial, on account of excessive damages
given by the jury. -- Black. Com. iii. 388.

Page 105. Lord Chancellor Egerton was buried at Doddleston, out of affection
to his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Ravenscrost, esquire of Breton. His
mother had been a servant maid in the parish; but was the daughter of one
Sparks, of Bickerton. I have heard this remarkable anecdote of her, and the
fortunate child: The mother had been so much neglected by Sir Richard Egerton,
of Ridley, the father of the boy, that she was reduced to beg for support. A
neighboring gentleman, a friend of Sir Richard, saw her asking alms, followed
by her child. He admired its beauty, and saw in it the evident features of the
knight. He immediately went to Sir Richard, and laid before him the disgrace
of suffering his own offspring, illegitimate as it was, to wander from door to
door. He was affected with the reproof, adopted the child, and by a proper
education, laid the foundation of its future fortune.

Page 107. Septimus -- read -- Septimius.

Page 183. On the first church -- read -- on the site of, etc.

Page 185. One lance -- a mis-translation -- read -- one great dish, or
charger. Lancem, from Lanx.

Page 190. Doctor Haggarth -- read -- Haygarth.

Page 213. Holt Castle was surrendered to colonel Pope, by agreement with
general Mytton, who had left the place before possession was taken of it.

Page 214. Elizabeth, ever attentive to her prerogatives, clamed the mise on
her accession, in November 1558. She appointed a commission for the receipt; but
met with opposition in the town of Caermarthen, by the inhabitants, who
alleged, that greater sums had been raised in their county, in the reigns of
Henry VIII. and Edward VI. than was answered to the prince. Several were
imprisoned for their resistance, but afterward released; and on their petition
a compromise was made, that whenever a subsidy was granted to the prince, no
mise should be given; and the reverse when a mise was received Stripe's Annals,
i. Introduction, p. 14. who adds, that originally corn and wine was given at
the accession, to support the prince's household.
.

Page 218. The mistake about the Sir Thomas Hanmer, speaker of the house of
commons, is rectified by a leaf at the close of this, with which the possessor
of the Welsh Tour is desired to replace pp. 217. 218. of the first volume.

Page 225. An extent was made in the twenty-eighth of Edward I. at Overton,
before Richard de Mascy, justice of Chester, by which it appears, that the king
had a mill there worth twelve, pounds a year, and a fishery worth twenty; which
shows the greatness of the value of the latter in those days. The only fish
worth attending to, must have been salmon. It was an important article, not
only in private families, but, in those days, for the support of armies. In
Rymer iii. 95.
is an order for three thousand dried salmon, issued by Edward II. in 1308, in
order to enable him to set his troops in motion, to wage war against Scotland.

Page the same. A certain spot hear Soddylt, near this village, divides England
and Wales -- the provinces of Canterbury and York -- the dioceses of Litchfield
and Coventry, Chester, and St. Asaph -- the counties of Salop, Flint, and
Denbigh -- the hundreds of Oswestry, Maytor, and Bromfield -- the parishes of
Ellesmere, Overton, and Erbistock -- the townships of Duddleston, Knolton, and
Erbistock.

Page 240. JOHN, second son -- read -- John Lackland.

Page 242. Sixth line of the verses, from this -- read -- from whom.

Page 250. Whose house -- read -- the use of which.

Page 255. Richard II. with the committee of parliament, in this town determined
that the great dispute between the duke of Hereford and Mowbray duke of
Norfolk, should be decided by single combat at Coventry; both dukes having
appeared before the king at Oswestry, after the dissolution of the parliament
held at Shrewsbury. -- Drake, i. 519.

Page 260. Cae Dwn, or rather Cae Twn. The last, according to doctor Davies,
signifies fractura, than which nothing can be more expressive of the ending of
this famous work, which, as I have not long since observed, terminates in a
flat cultivated country, on the farm of Cae Twn, near Tryddyn chapel, in the
parish of Mold. The termination is remote from any hill, or place of strength:
it is therefore reasonable to imagine, that this mighty attempt was here
suddenly interrupted by some cause, of which we must ever remain ignorant.

Page 263. Sir John Owen was of this house, but not of the family, of Owen
Brogyntyn. He was descended from Hwfa ap Cynddelw, one of the fifteen tribes of
North Wales. Before Sir John Owen's family enjoyed the place, it had been long
possessed by the Lacons. It passed from them to Sir William Morris, of
Clenenny, in Caernarvonshire, by virtue of his marriage with the daughter of
William Win Lacon, Esquire and was conveyed into the family of the present owner
by the marriage of the granddaughter of that match with John, fourth son of
Robert Owen, of Bodsilin, in Anglesea. This gentleman (who was father of Sir
John) had been secretary to the great Walsingham, and made a fortune of ten
thousand pounds; a sum perhaps despised by modern secretaries, but a vast one
in those days. His master did not take such good care of himself, for he did
not leave sufficient to defray his funeral expenses.

Page 279. LLANGOLLEN. In the old church was formerly a recumbent figure, in
alabaster, of a churchman, supposed to have been St. Collen.

Page 294. Elihu Yale had been governor of Madras, and probably a very despotic
one. He hanged his groom for riding out with his horse to take the air for two
or three days, without his leave, for which Yale was called to severe account
in England. -- Harris's Coll. Voy. i. 917.

Page the same. The fine brazen eagle, which serves as a reading-desk in
Wrexham church, was the gift of John ap Gryffydd ap David, of Plas Ystivan, in
that neighborhood, in the year 1254. Its price was six pounds. -- Halston MSS.

Page 295. The steeple at Wrexham must have been built several years after the
church, if an account I received lately from a friend is well founded, that the
church was built a little before the year 1472, and in that year it was glazed
with glass from Normandy.

Page 296. Chancellor Jeffries has by him the purse, the badge of his office,
and is dressed in his baron's robes.

Page 297. His brother, Sir Thomas, was knight of Alcantara; and for the honor
of the descendants of Tudor Trevor, from whom the Jeffries are sprung, the
proofs of his descent were were admired even by the proud Spaniards, among whom
he resided long as consul at Alicant and Madrid. He had rendered himself so
acceptable to the Spanish ministry, as to be recommended to our court to
succeed lord Landsdown as British envoy; but the revolution put a stop to the
promotion.

Page 300. In the neighborhood of Gresford stood the Lower Gwersilt, a house
burnt down April the 20th, 1738, by which the country lost the worthy and
respectable family of the Shakerlies, who settled there soon after the
restoration. They were originally of Cheshire, but removed to this place almost
immediately on the return of the royal family. Colonel (afterward Sir Jeffry)
Shakerly was a distinguished loyalist, and had the command of a regiment of
horse under Charles I. During his service, he contracted a great frindship with
colone Robinson, owner of the Upper Gwersilt; which induced him, soon after the
year 1660, to purchase this estate from captain Sutton, an old cavalier,
descended from Tudor Trevor, and ruined in the royal cause. This the colonel
did, not only to re-place a considerable estate he had been obliged to sell in
Kent, in support of the cause, but to be near his friend and fellow-soldier. No
mention is made of him in any of the histories of our civil commotions,
notwithstanding he was engagd in most of the actions of any note. The following
account of what preceded the battle of Rowton-Heath, near Chester, is extremely
curious, and merits preservation; which I deliver in the manner I received it,
by the favor of his grandson, Peter Shakerley, Esquire

"THE heath upon which Sir Marmaduke Langdale was drawn up, carries the name of
Rowton Heath; a mile beyond which, in the London road from Chester, is another
heath, called Hatton Heath. The order which Sir Marmaduke had received from the
king, was only to beat Poyntz back. Sir Marmaduke performed, the same
effectually; for having marched his men over Holt Bridge undiscovered by the
enemy, who had taken the outworks and suburbs of the city on the east side
thereof, and Poyntz coming in a marching posture along the narrow lane between
Hatton Heath and Rowton Heath, Sir Marmaduke having lined the hedges, fell upon
him, and killed a great many of his men; and having so done, ordered colonel
Shakerley, who was best acquainted with that country, to get the next way he
could to the king (who lodged then at Sir Francis Gamull's house, in Chester)
and acquaint him, that he had obeyed his orders in beating Poyntz back, and to
know, his majesty's further pleasure. The colonel executed his orders with
better speed than could have been expected; for he gallopped directly to the
river Dee, under Huntingdon House, got a wooden tub (used for slaughtering of
swine) and a batting-staff (used for batting of coarse linen) for an oar, put a
servant into the tub with him, and in this desperate manner swam over the
river, his horse swimming by him (for the banks were there very steep, and the
river very deep) ordered his servant to stay there with the tub for his return,
and was with the king in little more than a quarter of an hour after he had
left Sir Marmaduke, and acquainted the king, that if his Majesty pleased to
command further orders to Sir Marmaduke, he would engage to deliver them in a
quarter of an hour; and told the king of the expeditious method he had taken,
which saved him the going nine or ten miles about, by Holt Bridge (for the
boats at Eaton were then made useless); but such delays were used by some about
the king, that no orders were sent, nor any sally made out of the city by the
king's party, till past three o'clock afternoon, which was full six hours after
Poyniz had been beaten back; and so Poyntz having all that time for his men to
recover the fright they had been put into in the morning, Poyntz rallied his
forces, and with the help of the parliament forces who came out of the suburbs
of the city to his assistance (upon whom the king's party in the city might
then successfully have fallen) put all those of the king's to the rout, which
was the loss of the king's horse, and of his design to join Montross in
Scotland, who was then understood to be in a good condition.

"THIS is what my father, the said colonel Shakerley (afterward Sir Geffrey
Shakerley) has often declared in my hearing; and since no mention is made of
him in all this history (though he faithfully, served the king in all the wars,
was personally engaged in almost all the field battles for the king, sold part
of his estate to support that service, and was for many years sequestered of
all the rest) I thought it my duty, as his eldest son and heir, to do that
justice to his memory, to insert this here, under my hand, that it may be
remembered to posterity.

"PETER SHAKERLEY."

Page 321. An ancient chronicle speaks of the phoenomenon of the comet in these
terms: And in the iiii year of King Henrie's reign, there was a sterre seyn in
the firmament yt showed him self through all the world for di'use tokenynges yt
should befall sone after: the which sterre was named and called by Clargie,
Stella Comata. -- Caxton's Croniclis, printed at St. Alban's.

Page 369. The valley in which the abbey of Valle Crucis stands, was called,
prior to the foundation of that religious house, Pant y Groes, or The Bottom of
the Cross, I suppose from that erected in memory of Eliseg. Madoc's charter was
addressed to the monks of four different monasteries, who, I imagine, were to
have charge of the building, which took many years to finish. -- Sebright MSS.

THE bard Guttun Owain composed two Owdls in praise of Davydd ap Jevan ap
Jerwerth, and of Sion, both abbots of this house. He highly commends their
hospitality; speaks of their having four courses of meat, bright silver dishes,
claret, etc. Guttun does not forget the piety of the house, and is particularly
happy in being blessed by abbot John with his three fingers covered with rings.

IN another place is mentioned Sion ap William ap Sion, as the person who
adjudged the prize at the last Eisteddfod at Caerwys, in 1568. -- The same MSS.

THE freemen of Llangollen made a grant, in part of the river near their town,
of a fishery to the monks of Valle Crucis. For want of a seal of their own,
they affixed to their grant that of Madoc, the founder of the abbey. The monks
erected new works on the river, for the purpose of taking the fish: this caused
a dispute between them and the freemen. The last referred it to the abbot and
five monks of their own choice, who were to adjust the matter on oath. Madoc
and his secretary, John Parvus, appointed a day for the purpose. The assembly
was held; the oath solemnly administered; and the abbot and monks made the
decision in their own favor. They alleged, that they had bought the right of
erecting what works they pleased, and of repairing of them, from the heirs of
Llangollen. The prince confirmed the decree, and the donation of the fishery,
by an instrument, dated in 1234.

THIS house was demolished in 1235, and is said to have been the first of the
Welsh that underwent that fate.

Page 400. Reinault received his pardon from Thomas lord Stanley, lord of the
council for Wales; and it was afterward confirmed by Edward IV. under the
great seal. -- Tower MSS.

Page 406. The first charter given to Hope, was by Edward the black prince,
dated from Chester, in the twenty-fifth year of the reign of his father, or
1351. He orders that the constable of the castle for the time being should be
the mayor, who was, after taking the sacrament, to swear on the holy
evangelists, that he would preserve the priveleges of the burgesses, granted in
the said charter; and that he should choose out of them annually, on
Michaelmas-day, two bailiffs. He adds also most of the other advantages granted
in the charters of those times: all which were afterward confirmed by Richard
II. -- Sebright MSS.

Page 414. Nannerch church. In the chancel window, Orate p. bono statu Howell
ap John ap Dda ap Ithel. He is thought to have been the founder.

Page 433. Caerwys. An Eisteddfod held there in the fifteenth of Henry VIII.
July the 2d, in which the old laws are confirmed respecting bards, in the
manner I recite. Richard ap Howel ap Jevan Vychan, of Mostyn, and Sir William
Gryffydd, and Sir Roger Salusbury, presided, assisted by Gryffydd ap Evan ap
Llewelyn Vychan, and Tyder Aled, a famous bard.

A Pencerdd might challenge any other to rehearse or sing for the prize, after
giving a year and a day's notice. If he succeeded, he carried it off; if not,
he lost his degree; and the victor kept the prize for life, but was obliged to
produce it annually on the Eisteddfod.

FINIS.

