English Housewifry. EXEMPLIFIED In above four Hundred and Fifty RECEIPTS,
Giving DIRECTIONS in most Parts of COOKERY; and how to prepare various Sorts of
SOOPS, MADE-DISHES, PASTS, PICKLES, CAKES, CREAMS, JELLIES, MADE-WINES, etc
With CUTS for the orderly placing the DISHES and COURSES; also Bills of Fare
for every Month in the Year; and an Alphabetical INDEX of the Whole.

A BOOK necessary for Mistresses of Families, higher and lower Women Servants,
and confined to Things USEFUL, SUBSTANTIAL and SPLENDID, and calculated for the
Preservation of HEALTH, and upon the Measures of FRUGALITY, being the Result of
thirty Years Practice and Experience.

By ELIZABETH MOXON.

The FOURTH EDITION.

LEEDES: Printed by James Lister; and sold by the AUTHOR at Pontefract, and J.
SWALE, Bookseller in Leedes.

THE PREFACE.

IT is not doubted but the candid Reader will find the following BOOK in
Correspondence with the Title, which will supersede the Necessity of any other
Recommendation that might be given of it.

As the Compiler of it engaged in the Undertaking at the Instance and
Importunity of many Persons of eminent Account and Distinction, so she can
truly assure them, and the World, that she has acquitted herself with the
utmost Care and Fidelity.

And she entertains the greater Hopes that her Performance will meet with the
kinder Acceptance, because of the good Opinion she has been held in by those,
her ever honored Friends, who first excited her to the Publication of her
Book, and who have been long Eyewitnesses of her Skill and Behavior in the
Business of her Calling.

She has nothing to add, but her humblest Thanks to them, and to all others
from whom she has received Favor and Encouragement.

English Housewifry.
1. To make Vermicelly Soop.
TAKE a Neck of Beef, or any other Piece; cut off some Slices, and fry them
with Butter whilst they are very Brown; wash your Pan out every Time with a
little of the Gravy; you may broil a few Slices of the Beef upon a Grid-Iron;
put all together into a Pot, with a large Onion, a little Salt, and a little
whole Pepper; let it stew whilst the Meat is tender, and skim off the Fat in
the boiling; then strain it into your Dish, and boil four Ounces of Vermicelly
in a little of the Gravy 'till it is soft: Add a little stewed Spinach; then
put all together into a Dish, with Toasts of Bread; laying a little Vermicelly
upon every Toast. Garnish your Dish with creed Rice and boiled Spinach, or
Carrots sliced thin.

2. Cucumber Soop.
Take an Houghil of Beef, break it small and put it into a Stew Pan, with Part
of a Neck of Mutton, a little whole Pepper, an Onion, and a little Salt; cover
it with Water, and let it stand in the Oven all Night, then strain it and take
off the Fat; pare six or eight middle-siz'd Cucumbers, and slice them not very
thin, stew them in a little Butter and a little whole Pepper; take them out of
the Butter and put 'em into the Gravy. Garnish your Dish with Raspings of
Bread, and serve it up with Toasts of Bread, or French Roll.

3. To make Hare Soop.
Cut the Hare into small Pieces, wash it and put it into a Stew Pan, with a
Knuckle of Veal; put it in a Gallon of Water, a little Salt, and a handful of
sweet Herbs; let it stew till the Gravy be good; fry a little of the Hare to
brown the Soop; you may put in it some Crusts of white Bread among the Meat to
thick the Soop; put it into a Dish, with a little stewed Spinach, crisp'd
Bread, and a few forc'd-meat Balls. Garnish your Dish with boiled Spinach and
Turnips, cut it in thin square Slices.

4. To make green Pease Soop.
Take a Neck of Mutton, and a Knuckle of Veal, make of them a little good
Gravy; then take half a Peck of the greenest young Pease, boil and beat them to
a Pulp in a Marble Mortar; then put to them a little of the Gravy; strain them
through a Hair Sieve to take out all the Pulp; put all together, with a little
Salt and whole Pepper; then boil it a little, and if you think the Soop not
Green enough, boil a handful of Spinach very tender, rub it through a hair
Sieve, and put it into the Soop with one Spoonful of Wheat Flour, to keep it
from running: You must not let it boil after the Spinach is put in, it will
discolor it; then cut white Bread in little Diamonds, fry them in Butter while
crisp, and put it into a Dish with a few whole Pease. Garnish your Dish with
creed Rice and red Beet Root.

You may make Asparagus Soop the same Way; only add Tops of Asparagus, instead
of whole Pease.

5. To make Onion Soop.
Take four or five large Onions, pill and boil them in Milk and Water whilst
tender, (shifting them two or three times in the boiling) beat'em in a Marble
Mortar to a Pulp, and rub them through a hair Sieve, and put them into a little
sweet Gravy; then fry a few Slices of Veal, and two or three Slices of lean
Bacon; beat them in a Marble Mortar as small as forced Meat; put it into your
Stew Pan with the Gravy and Onions, and boil them; mix a Spoonful of
Wheat Flour with a little Water, and put it into the Soop to keep it from
running; strain all through a Cullinder, season it to your Taste; then put into
the Dish a little Spinach stewed in Butter, and a little crisp Bread; so serve
it up.

6. Common Pease Soop in Winter.
Take a Quart of good boiling Pease, which put into a Pot with a Gallon of soft
Water whilst cold; add thereto a little Beef or Mutton, a little hang Beef or
Bacon, and two or three large Onions; boil all together while your Soop is
thick; salt it to your Taste, and thicken it with a little Wheat Flour; strain
it through a Cullinder, boil a little Sellery, cut it in small Pieces, with a
little crisp Bread, and crisp a little Spinach as you would do Parsley, then
put it in a Dish, and serve it up. Garnish you Dish with Raspings of Bread.

7. To make a Pease-Soop in Lent.
Take a Quart of Pease, put them into a Pot with a Gallon of Water, two or
three large Onions, half a dozen Anchovies, a little whole Pepper and Salt;
boil all together whilst your Soop is thick; strain it into a Stew Pan through
a Cullinder, and put six Ounces of Butter (worked in Flower) into the Soop to
thicken it; also put in a little boiled Sellery, stewed Spinach, crisp Bread,
and a little dried Mint powdered; so serve it up.

8. Craw-Fish Soop.
Take a Knuckle of Veal, and part of a Neck of Mutton to make white Gravy,
putting in an Onion, a little whole Pepper and Salt to your Taste; then take
twenty Craw-Fish, boil and beat them in a Marble Mortar, adding thereto a
little of the Gravy; strain them and put them into the Gravy; also two or three
Pieces of white Bread to thicken the Soop; boil twelve or fourteen of the
smallest Craw-Fish, and put them whole into the Dish, with a few Toast, or
French Roll, which you please; so serve it up.

You may make Lobster Soop the same Way, only add into the Soop the Seeds of
the Lobster.

9. To make Scotch Soop.
Take an Houghil of Beef, cut it in Pieces, with part of a Neck of Mutton, and
a Pound of French Barley; put them all into your Pot, with six Quarts of Water;
let it boil till the Barley be soft, then put in a Fowl; as soon as it is enough
put in a handful of red Beet Leaves or Brockley, a handful of the Blades of
Onions, a handful of Spinach, washed and shred very small; only let them have a
little Boil, else it will spoil the Greeness. Serve it up with the Fowl in the
Dish, garnished with Raspings of Bread.

10. To make Soop without Water.
Take a small Leg of Mutton, cut it in Slices, season it with a little Pepper
and Salt; cut three middling Turnips in round Pieces, and three small Carrots
scraped and cut in Pieces, a handful of Spinach, a little Parsley, a bunch of
sweet Herbs, and two or three Cabbage Lettice; cut the Herbs pretty small, lay
a Row of Meat and a Row of Herbs; put the Turnips and Carrots at the bottom of
the Pot, with an Onion, lay at the Top half a Pound of sweet Butter, and close
up the Pot with course Paste; then put the Pot into boiling Water, and let it
boil for four Hours; or in a slow Oven, and let it stand all Night; when it is
enough drain the Gravy from the Meat, skim off the Fat, then put it into your
Dish with some Toasts of Bread, and a little stewed Spinach; so serve it up.

11. To stew a Brisket of Beef.
Take the thin Part of a Brisket of Beef, score the Skin at the Top; cross and
take off the under Skin, then take out the Bones, season it highly with Mace, a
little Salt, and a little whole Pepper, rub it on both Sides, let it lay all
Night, make Broth of the Bones, skim the Fat clean off, put in as much Water as
will cover it well, let it stew over a slow Fire four or five Hours, with a
bunch of sweet Herbs and an Onion cut in Quarters; turn the Beef over every
Hour, and when you find it tender take it out of that Broth and drain it very
well, having made a little good strong Gravy.

A Ragoo with Sweet-breads cut in Pieces, Pullets tenderly boiled and cut in
long Pieces; take Trophels and Morels, if you have any Mushrooms, with a little
Claret, and throw in your Beef, let it stew a quarter of an Hour in the Ragoo,
turning it over sometimes, then take out your Beef, and thicken your Ragoo with
a Lump of Butter and a little Flower. Garnish your Dish with Horseradish and
Pickles, lay the Ragoo round your Beef, and a little upon the Top; so serve it
up.

12. To stew a Rump of Beef.
Take a fat Rump of young Beef and cut off the Fag End, lard the low Part with
fat Bacon, and stuff the other Part with shred Parsley; put it into your Pan
with two or three Quarts of Water, a Quart of Claret, two or three Anchovies,
an Onion, two or three Blades of Mace, a little whole Pepper, and a Bunch of
sweet Herbs; stew it over a slow Fire five or six Hours, turning it several
Times in the Stewing, and keep it close covered; when your Beef is enough take
from it the Gravy, thicken part of it with a Lump of Butter and Flower, and put
it upon the Dish with the Beef. Garnish the Dish with Horseradish and red-beet
Root. There must be no Salt upon the Beef, only salt the Gravy to your Taste.

You may stew part of a Brisket or an Ox Cheek the same Way.

13. To make Olives of Beef.
Take some Slices of a Rump (or any other tender Piece) of Beef, and beat them
with a Paste-pin, season them with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, and rub them over
with the Yolk of an Egg; make a little forced meat of Veal, Beef Suet, a few
Bread-crumbs, sweet Herbs, a little shred Mace, Pepper, Salt, and two Eggs,
mixed all together; take two or three Slices of the Beef, according as they are
in Bigness, and a lump of forced Meat the Size of an Egg; lay your Beef round
it, and roll it in part of a Kell of Veal; put it into an earthen Dish, with a
little Water, a Glass of Claret, and a little Onion shred small; lay upon them
a little Butter, and bake them in an Oven about an Hour; when they come out
take off the Fat, and thicken the Gravy with a little Butter and Flower; six of
them is enough for a Side-Dish. Garnish the Dish with Horseradish and Pickles.

You may make Olives of Veal the same Way.

14. To fry Beef Steaks.
Take your Beef Steaks and beat them with the Back of a Knife, fry them in
Butter over a quick Fire, that they may be brown before they be to much done;
when they are enough put them into an earthen Pot whilst you have fried them
all; pour out the Fat, and put them into your Pan with a little Gravy, an Onion
shred very small, a Spoonful of Catchup and a little Salt; thicken it with a
little Butter and Flower the Thickness of Cream. Garnish your Dish with Pickles.

Beef-Steaks is proper for a Side-dish.

15. Beef Steaks another Way.
Take your Beef Steaks and beat them with the back of a Knife, strew them over
with a little Pepper and Salt, lay them on a Gridiron over a clear Fire,
turning 'em whilst enough; set your Dish over a Chafing Dish of Coals, with a
little brown Gravy; chop an Onion or Shalot as small as Pulp, and put it
amongst the Gravy; (if your Steaks be not over much done, Gravy will come
therefrom;) put it on a Dish and shake it all together. Garnish your Dish with
Shalots and Pickles.

16. A Shoulder of Mutton forced,
Take a Pint of Oysters and chop them, put in a few Bread-crumbs, a little
Pepper, shred Mace, and an Onion, mix them all together, and stuff your Mutton
on both Sides, then roast it at a slow Fire, and baste it with nothing but
Butter; put into the Dripping-pan a little Water, two or three Spoonfuls of the
Pickle of Oysters, a Glass of Claret, an Onion shred small, and an Anchovie; if
your Liquor waste before your Mutton is enough put in a little more Water; when
the Meat is enough, take up the Gravy, skim off the Fat, and thicken it with
Flower and Butter; then serve it up. Garnish your Dish with Horseradish and
Pickles.

17. To stew a Fillet of Mutton.
Take a Fillet of Mutton, stuff it the same as for a Shoulder, half roast it,
and put it into a Stew Pan with a little Gravy, a Jill of Claret, an Anchovie,
and a shred Onion; you may put in a little Horseradish and some Mushrooms;
stew it over a slow Fire while the Mutton is enough; take the Gravy, skim off
the Fat, and thicken it with Flower and Butter; lay forc'd-meat Balls round the
Mutton. Garnish your Dish with Horseradish and Mushrooms.

It is proper either for a Side-dish or Bottom-dish; if you have it for a
Bottom-dish, cut your Mutton into two Fillets.

18. To Collar a Breast of Mutton.
Take a Breast of Mutton, bone it, and season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt,
rub it over with the Yolk of an Egg; make a little forc'd-meat of Veal or
Mutton, chop it with a little Beef Suet, a few Bread-crumbs, sweet Herbs, an
Onion, Pepper and Salt, a little Nutmeg, two Eggs, and a Spoonful or two of
Cream; mix all together and lay it over the Mutton, roll it up and bind it
about with coarse Inkle; put it into an earthen Dish with a little Water,
dridge it over with Flower, and lay upon it a little Butter; it will require
two Hours to bake it. When it is enough take up the Gravy, skim off the Fat,
put in an Anchovie and a spoonful of Catchup, thicken it with Flower and
Butter; take the Inkle from the Mutton and cut it into three or four Rolls;
pour the Sauce upon the Dish, and lay about it forc'd-meat Balls. Garnish your
Dish with Pickles.

It is either proper for a Side or Bottom-dish.

19. To Collar a Breast of Mutton another Way.
Take a Breast of Mutton, bone it, and season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt;
roll it up tight with coarse Inkle and roast it upon a Spit; when it is enough
lay it whole upon the Dish. Then take four or six Cucumbers, pare them and cut
them in Slices, not very thin; likewise cut three or four in Quarters length
Way, stew them in a little brown Gravy and a little whole Pepper; when they are
enough thicken them with Flower and Butter the thickness of Cream; so serve it
up. Garnish your Dish with Horseradish.

20. To Carbonade a Breast of Mutton.
Take a Breast of Mutton, half boil it, nick it cross, season it with Pepper
and Salt; then broil it before the Fire while it be enough, strinkling it over
with Bread-crumbs; let the Sauce be a little Gravy and Butter, and a few shred
Capers; put it upon the Dish with the Mutton. Garnish it with Horseradish and
Pickles.

This is proper for a Side-dish at Noon, or a Bottom-dish at Night.

21. A Chine of Mutton roasted, with stewed Sellery.
Take a Loyn of Mutton, cut off the thin Part and both Ends, take off the Skin,
and score it in the Roasting as you would do Pork; then take a little Sellery,
boil it, and cut it in Pieces about an Inch long, put to it a little good
Gravy, whole Pepper and Salt, two or three Spoonfuls of Cream and a Lump of
Butter, so thicken it up, and pour it upon your Dish with your Mutton.

This is proper for a Side-dish.

22. Mutton Chops.
Take a Leg of Mutton half Roasted, when it is cold cut it in thin Pieces as
you would do any other Meat for Hashing, put it into a Stew Pan with a little
Water or small Gravy, two or three Spoonfuls of Claret, two or three Shalots
shred, or Onions, and two or three Spoonfuls of Oyster Pickle; thicken it up
with a little Flower, and so serve it up. Garnish your Dish with Horseradish
and Pickles.

You may do a Shoulder of Mutton the same Way, only boil the Blade-bone, and
lie in the Middle.

23. A forced Leg of Mutton.
Take a Leg of Mutton, loose the Skin from the Meat, be careful you do not cut
the Skin as you loosen it; then cut the Meat from the Bone, and let the Bone
and Skin hang together, chop the Meat small, with a little Beef-suit, as you
would do Sausages; season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, a few Bread-crumbs, two
or three Eggs, a little dried Sage, shred Parsley and Lemon Peel; then fill up
the Skin with forced Meat, and lay it upon an earthen Dish; lay upon the Meat a
little Flower and Butter, and a little Water in the Dish; it will take an Hour
and a half Baking; when you dish it up lie about it either Mutton or Veal
Collops, with brown Gravy Sauce. Garnish your Dish with Horseradish and Lemon.

You may make a forced Leg of Lamb the same Way.

24. To make French Cutlets of Mutton.
Take a Neck of Mutton, cut it in Joints, cut off the Ends of the long Bones,
then scrape the Meat clean off the Bones about an Inch, take a little of the
inpart of the Meat of the Cutlets, and make it into forced Meat; season it with
Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; then lay it upon your Cutlets, rub over them the Yolk
of an Egg to make it stick; chop a few sweet Herbs, and put to them a few
Bread-crumbs, a little Pepper and Salt, and strew it over the Cutlets, and wrap
them in double Writing-Paper; either broil them before the Fire or in an Oven,
half an Hour will do them; when you dish them up, take off the Out-Paper, and
set in the midst of the Dish a little brown Gravy in a China-bason; you may
broil them without Paper if you please.

25. To fry Mutton Steaks.
Take a Loyn of Mutton, cut off the thin Part, then cut the rest into Steaks,
and flat them with a Bill, season them with a little Pepper and Salt, fry them
in Butter over a quick Fire; as you fry them put them into a Stew Pan or
earthen Pot, whilst you have fried them all; then pour the Fat out of the Pan,
put in a little Gravy, and the Gravy that comes from the Steaks, with a
Spoonful of Claret, an Anchovie, and an Onion or a Shalot shred; shake up the
Steaks in the Gravy, and thicken it with a little Flower; so serve them up.
Garnish your Dish with Horseradish and Shalots.

26. To make artificial Venison of Mutton.
Take a large Shoulder of Mutton, or a middling fore Quarter, bone-it, lay it
in an earthen Dish, put upon it a Pint of Claret, and let it lie all Night;
when you put it into your Pasty-pan or Dish, pour on the Claret that it lay in,
with a little Water and Butter; before you put it into your Pasty-pan, season
it with Pepper and Salt; when you make the Pasty lie no Paste in the bottom of
the Dish.

27. How to brown Ragoo a Breast of Veal.
Take a Breast of Veal, cut off both the Ends, and half roast it; then put it
into a Stewpan, with a Quart of brown Gravy, a Spoonful of Mushroom-powder, a
Blade or two of Mace, and Lemon Peel; so let it stew over a slow Fire whilst
your Veal is enough; then put in two or three shred Mushrooms or Oysters, two
or three Spoonfuls of white Wine; thicken up your Sauce with Flower and Butter;
you may lay round your Veal some stewed Morels and Trophels; if you have none,
some Pallets stewed in Gravy, with Artichoak bottoms cut in Quarters, dipped in
Eggs and fried, and some forc'd-meat Balls; you may fry the Sweetbread cut in
Pieces, and lay over the Veal, or fried Oysters; when you fry your Oysters you
must dip them in Egg and Flower mixed. Garnish your Dish with Lemon and Pickles.

28. A Herico of a Breast of Veal, French Way.
Take a Breast of Veal, half roast it, then put it into a Stew Pan, with three
Pints of brown Gravy; season your Veal with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; when your
Veal is stewed enough, you may put in a Pint of green Pease boiled. Take six
middling Cucumbers, pare and cut them in Quarters long Way, also two Cabbage
Lettices, and stew them in brown Gravy; so lay them round your Veal when you
dish it up, with a few forc'd-meat Balls and some Slices of Bacon. Garnish your
Dish with Pickles, Mushrooms, Oysters and Lemons.

29. To roll a Breast of Veal.
Take a Breast of Veal and bone it, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, rub
it over with the Yolk of an Egg, then strew it over with sweet Herbs shred
small, and some Slices of Bacon cut thin to lie upon it, roll it up very tight,
bind it with coarse Inkle, put it into a earthen Dish with a little Water, and
lay upon it some Lumps of Butter; strew a little Seasoning on the outside of
your Veal, it will take two Hours baking; when it is baked take off the Inkle
and cut it in four Rolls, lay it upon the Dish with a good brown Gravy Sauce;
lay about your Veal the Sweetbread fried, some forc'd-meat Balls, a little
crisp Bacon, and a few fried Oysters if you have any; so serve it up. Garnish
your Dish with Pickles and Lemon.

30. A stewed Breast of Veal.
Take the fattest and whitest Breast of Veal you can get, cut off both Ends and
boil them for a little Gravy; take the Veal and raise up the thin Part, make a
forc'd-meat of the Sweetbread boiled, a few Bread-crumbs, a little Beef Suet,
two Eggs, Pepper and Salt, a Spoonful or two of Cream, and a little Nutmeg
mixed all together; so stuff the Veal, skewer the Skin close down, dridge it
over with Flower, tie it up in a Cloth, and boil it in Milk and Water about an
Hour. For the Sauce take a little Gravy, about a Jill of Oysters, a few
Mushrooms shred, a little Lemon shred fine, and a little Juice of Lemon; so
thicken it up with Flower and Butter; when you dish it up pour the same over
it; lay over it a Sweetbread or two cut in Slices and fried, and fried
Oysters. Garnish your Dish with Lemon, Pickles and Mushrooms.

This is proper for a Top-dish either at Noon or Night.

31. To stew a Fillet of Veal.
Take a Leg of the best Whye-Veal, cut off the Dug and the Knuckle, cut the
rest into two Fillets, and take the fat Part and cut it in Pieces the thickness
of your Finger; you must stuff the Veal with the fat; make the Hole with a
Penknife, draw it through and skewer it round; season it with Pepper Salt,
Nutmeg, and shred Parsley; then put it into your Stew Pan, with half a Pound of
Butter, (without Water) and set it on your Stove; let it boil very slow, and
cover it close up, turning it very often; it will take about two Hours in
Stewing; when it is enough pour the Gravy from it, take off the fat, put into
the Gravy a Pint of Oysters and a few Capers, a little Lemon Peel, a Spoonful
or two of white Wine, and a little Juice of Lemon; thicken it with Butter and
Flower the thickness of Cream; lay round it forc'd-meat-Balls and Oysters
fried, so serve it up. Garnish your Dish with a few Capers and sliced Lemon.

32. To make Scotch Collops.
Take a Leg of Veal, take off the thick Part and cut in thin Slices for
Collops, beat them with a Paste-pin 'till they be very thin; season them with
Mace, Pepper and Salt; fry them over a quick fire, not over brown; when they
are fried put them into a Stew Pan with a little Gravy, two or three Spoonfuls
of white Wine, two Spoonfuls of Oysterpickle if you have it, and a little
Lemon Peel; then shake them over a Stove in the Stew Pan, but don't let them
boil over much, it only hardens your Collops; take the fat Part of your Veal,
stuff it with forc'd-meat, and boil it; when it is boiled lay it in the Middle
of your Dish with the Collops; lay about your Collops Slices of crisp Bacon,
and forc'd-meat-Balls. Garnish your Dish with Slices of Lemon and Oysters, or
Mushrooms.

33. To make Veal Cutlets.
Take a Neck of Veal, cut it in Joints, and flatten them with a Bill; cut off
the Ends of the Bones, and lard the thick Part of the Cutlets with four or five
bits of Bacon; season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; strew over them a few
Bread-crumbs and sweet Herbs shred fine; first dip the Cutlets in Egg to make
the Crumbs stick, then broil them before the Fire, put to them a little brown
Gravy Sauce; so serve it up. Garnish your Dish with Lemon.

34. Veal Cutlets another Way.
Take a Neck of Veal, cut it in Joints, and flat them as before, and cut off
the Ends of the long Bones; season them with a little Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg,
broil them on a Gridiron over a slow Fire; when they are enough serve them up
with brown Gravy Sauce and forc'd-meat Balls. Garnish your Dish with Lemon.

35. Veal Cutlets another Way.
Take a Neck of Veal and cut it in Slices, flatten them as before, and cut off
the Ends of the long Bones; season the Cutlets with per and Salt, and dridge
over them some Flower; fry them in Butter over a quick Fire; when they are
enough put from them the Fat they are fried in, and put to them a little small
Gravy, a Spoonful of Catchup, a Spoonful of white Wine or Juice of Lemon, and
grate in some Nutmeg; thicken them with Flower and Butter; so serve them up.
Garnish your Dish as before.

36. To collar a Calve's Head to eat Hot.
Take a large fat Head and lay it in Water to take out the Blood; boil it
whilst the Bones will come out; season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; then
lap it up round with a large Lump of forced Meat made of Veal; after which lap
it up tight in a Veal Kell before it is cold, and take great Care that you
don't let the Head break in two Pieces; then bind it up with a coarse Inkle,
lay it upon an earthen Dish, dredge it over with Flower, and lay over it a
little Butter, with a little Water in the Dish; an Hour and a half will bake
it; when it is enough take off the Inkle, cut it in two length Ways, laying the
Skin-side uppermost; when you lay it upon your Dish, you must lay round it
stewed Pallets and Artichoak bottoms fried, with forced meat Balls; put to it
brown Gravy Sauce; you may brown your Sauce with a few Trophels or Morels, and
lay them about your Veal. Garnish your Dish with Lemon and Pickle.

37. To collar a Calve's Head to eat cold.
You must get a Calve's Head with the Skin on, split it and lay it in Water,
take out the Tongue and Eyes, out off the Groin-ends, then tie it up in a Cloth
and Boil it whilst the Bones come out; when it is enough lay it on a Table with
the Skin-side uppermost, and pour upon it a little cold Water; then take off
the Hair, and cut off the Ears; mind you do not break your Head in two, turn it
over and take out the Bones; salt it very well and lap it round in a Cloth very
tight, pin it with Pins, and tie it at both Ends, so bind it up with broad
Inkle, then hang it up by one End, and when it is cold take it out; you must
make for it brown Pickle, and it will keep half a Year; when you cut it, cut it
at the Neck.

It is proper for a side or middle Dish, either for Noon or Night.

38. To make a Calve's Head Hash.
Take a Calve's Head and boil it, when it is cold take one half of your Head
and cut off the Meat in thin Slices, put it into a Stew Pan with a little brown
Gravy, put to it a Spoonful or two of Walnut-pickle, a Spoonful of Catchup, a
little Claret, a little shred Mace, a few Capers shred, or a little Mango; boil
it over a Stove, and thicken it with Butter and Flower; take the other Part of
your Head, cut off the bone Ends and score it with a Knife, season it with a
little Pepper and Salt, rub it over with the Yolk of an Egg, and strew over a
few Bread-crumbs, and a little Parsley; then set it before the Fire to broil
whilst it is brown; and when you dish up the other Part lay this in the midst;
lay about your Hash brain Cakes, forced meat Balls and crisp Bacon.

To make brain Cakes; take a handful of Bread-crumbs, a little shred
Lemon Peel, Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, Sweet-marjoram, Parsley shred fine, and the
Yolk of three Eggs; take your Brains and skin them, boil and chop them small,
so mix them all together; take a little Butter in your Pan when you fry them,
and drop them in as you do Fritters, and if they run in your Pan put in a
handful more of Bread-crumbs.

39 To hash a Calve's Head white.
Take a Calve's Head and boil it as much as you would do for Eating, when it is
cold cut it in thin Slices, and put it into a Stew Pan, with a white Gravy;
then put to it a little shred Mace, Salt, a Pint of Oysters, a few shred
Mushrooms, Lemon Peel, three Spoonfuls of white Wine, and some Juice of Lemon;
shake altogether and boil it over the Stove, thicken it up with a little Flower
and Butter; when you put it on your Dish you must put a boiled Fowl in the
midst, and a few Slices of crisp Bacon. Garnish your Dish with Pickles and
Lemon.

40. A Ragoo of a Calve's Head.
Take two Calves Heads and boil them as you do for Eating, when they are cold
cut off all the Lantern part from the Flesh in Pieces about an Inch long, and
about the breadth of your little Finger; put it into your Stew Pan with a
little white Gravy, twenty Oysters cut in two or three Pieces, a few shred
Mushrooms, and a little Juice of Lemon; season it with shred Mace and Salt, let
them all boil together over a Stove; take two or three Spoonfuls of Cream, the
Yolks of two or three Eggs, and a little shred Parsley, then put it into a stew
Pan; after you have put the Cream in you must shake it all the while; if you
let it boil it will crudle, so serve it up.

Garnish your Dish with Sippets, Lemon, and a few pickled Mushrooms,

41. To roast a Calve's Head to eat like Pig.
Take a Calve's Head, wash it well, lay it in an earthen Dish, and cut out the
Tongue, lay it loose under the Head in the Dish with the Brains, and a little
Sage and Parsley; rub your Head over with the Yolk of an Egg, then strew over
them a few Bread-crumbs and shred Parsley, lay all over it Lumps of Butter and
a little Salt, then set it in the Oven; it will take about an Hour and a half
baking; when it is enough take your Brains, Sage and Parsley, and chop them
together, put to them the Gravy that is in the Dish, a little Butter and a
Spoonful of Vinegar, so boil it up and put it in Cups, and set them round your
Head upon the Dish, take the Tongue and blanch it, cut it in two, and lay it on
each side your Head and some Slices of crisp Bacon over your Head, so serve it
up.

42. Sauce for a Neck of Veal.
Fry your Veal, and when fried put in a little Water, an Anchovie, a few sweet
Herbs, a little Onion, Nutmeg, a little Lemon Peel shred small, and a little
white Wine or Ale, then shake it up with a little Butter and Flower, with some
Cockles and Capers.

43. To boil a Leg of Lamb, with the Loyn fried about it.
When your Lamb is boiled lay it in the Dish; and pour upon it a little
Parsley, Butter, and green Gooseberries codled, then lay your tried Lamb round
it, take some small Asparagus and cut it small like Pease, and boil it Green;
when it is boiled drain it in a Cullinder, and lay it round your Lamb in
Spoonfuls. Garnish your Dish with Gooseberries, and Heads of Asparagus in Lumps.

This is proper for a bottom Dish.

44. A Leg of Lamb boiled with Chickens round it.
When your Lamb is boiled pour over it Parsley and Butter; with codled
Gooseberries, so lay the Chickens round your Lamb, and pour over the Chickens a
little white fricasey Sauce. Garnish your Dish with Sippets and Lemon.

This is proper for a top Dish.

45. A Fricasey of Lamb white.
Take a Leg of Lamb, half roast it, when it is cold cut it in Slices, put it
into a Stew Pan with a little white Gravy, a Shalot shred fine, a little
Nutmeg, Salt, and a few shred Capers; let it boil over a Stove whilst the Lamb
is enough; to thicken your Sauce take three Spoonfuls of Cream, the Yolks of
two Eggs, a little shred Parsley, and beat them well together, then put it into
your Stew Pan and shake it whilst it is thick, but don't let boil; if this do
not make it thick, put in a little Flower and Butter, so serve it up. Garnish
your Dish with Mushrooms, Oysters and Lemon.

46. A brown Fricasey of Lamb.
Take a Leg of Lamb, cut it in thin Slices and season it with Pepper and Salt,
then fry it brown with Butter; when it is fried put it into your Stew Pan with
a little brown Gravy, an Anchovie, a Spoonful or two of white Wine or Claret,
grate in a little Nutmeg, and set it over the Stove; thicken your Sauce with
Flower and Butter. Garnish your Dish with Mushrooms, Oysters and Lemon.

47. To make Pig eat like Lamb in Winter.
Take a Pig about a Month old and dress it, lay it down to the Fire, when the
Skin begins to harden you must take it off by Pieces, and when you have taken
all the Skin off, draw it, and when it is cold cut it in Quarters and lard it
with Parsley; then roast it for Use.

48. How to stew a Hare.
Take a young Hare, wash and wipe it well, cut the Legs into two or three
Pieces, and all the other Parts the same Bigness, beat them all flat with a
Paste-pin, season it with Nutmeg and Salt, then flower it over and fry it in
Butter over a quick Fire; when you have fried it put it into a Stew Pan, with
about a Pint of Gravy, two or three Spoonfuls of Claret and a small Anchovie,
so shake it up with Butter and Flower, (you must not let it boil in the stew
Pan, for it will make it cut hard) then serve it up. Garnish your Dish with
crisp Parsley.

49. How to Iug a Hare.
Take a young Hare, cut her in Pieces as you did for Stewing, and beat it well,
season it with the same Seasoning you did before, put it into a Pitcher or any
other close Pot* with half a Pound of Butter, set it in a Pot of boiling Water,
stop up the Pitcher close with a Cloth, and lay upon it some Weight for fear it
should fall on one Side; it will take about two Hours in Stewing; mind your Pot
be full of Water, and keep it boiling all the Time; when it is enough take the
Gravy from it, clear off the Fat, and put her into your Gravy in a stew Pan,
with a Spoonful or two of white Wine, a little Juice of Lemon, shred Lemon peel
and Mace; you must thicken it up as you would a white Fricasey. Garnish your
Dish with Sippets and Lemon.

50. To roast a Hare with a Pudding in the Belly.
When you have washed the Hare, nick the Legs through the Joints, and skewer them
on both Sides, which will keep her from drying in the Roasting; when you have
skewer'd her, put the Pudding into her Belly, baste her with nothing but
Butter; put a little in the Dripping-pan; you must not baste it with the Water
at all: When your Hare is enough, take the Gravy out of the Dripping-pan, and
thicken it up with a little Flower and Butter for the Sauce.

How to make a Pudding for the Hare.
Take the Liver, a little Beef Suet, Sweet-marjoram and Parsley shred small,
with Bread-crumbs and two Eggs; season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, to your
Taste, mix all together, and if it be too stiff put in a Spoonful or two of
Cream: You must not boil the Liver.

51. To make a brown Fricasey of Rabbets.
Take a Rabbet, cut the Legs in three Pieces, and the remainder of the Rabbet
the same Bigness, beat them thin, and fry them in Butter over a quick Fire;
when they are fried put them into a Stew Pan with a little Gravy, a Spoonful of
Catchup, and a little Nutmeg; then shake it up with a little Flower and Butter.
Garnish your Dish with crisp Parsley.

52. A white Fricasey of Rabbets.
Take a couple of young Rabbets and half roast them; when they are cold take
off the Skin, and cut the Rabbets in small Pieces, (only take the white part)
when you have cut it in Pieces, put it into a Stew Pan with white Gravy, a
small Anchovie, a little Onion, shred Mace and Lemon Peel, set it over a Stove,
and let it have one Boil; then take a little Cream, the Yolks of two Eggs, a
Lump of Butter, a little Juice of Lemon and shred Parsley; put them all
together, into a Stew Pan, and shake them over the Fire whilst they be as white
as Cream; you must not let it boil, if you do it will crudle. Garnish your Dish
with shred Lemon and Pickles.

53. How to make pulled Rabbets.
Take two young Rabbets, boil them very tender, and take off all the white
Meat, and pull off the Skin, then pull it all in Shives, and put it into your
Stew Pan with a little white Gravy, a Spoonful of white Wine, a little Nutmeg*
and Salt to your Taste; thicken it up as you would a white Fricasey, but put in
no Parsley; when you serve it up lay your Heads in the middle. Garnish your
Dish with shred Lemon and Pickles.

54. To dress Rabbets to look like Moor-game
Take a young Rabbet, when it is cased cut off the Wings and the Head; leave
the Neck of your Rabbet as long as you can; when you Case it you must leave on
the Feet, pull off the Skin, leave on the Claws, so double your Rabbet and
skewer it like a Fowl; put a skewer at the bottom through the Legs and Neck, and
tie it with a String, it will prevent it flying open; when you dish it up make
the same Sauce as you would do for Patridges. Three is enough for one Dish.

55. To make white Scotch Collops.
Take about four Pound of a Fillet of Veal, cut it in small Pieces as thin as
you can, then take a stew Pan, butter it well over, and shake a little Flower
over it, then lay your Meat in Piece by Piece, whilst all your Pan be covered;
take two or three Blades of Mace, and a little Nutmeg, set your stew Pan over
the Fire, toss it up together till all your Meat be White, then take half a
Pint of strong Veal Broth, which must be ready made, a quarter of a Pint of
Cream, and the Yolks of two Eggs, mix all these together, put it to your Meat,
keeping it tossing all the Time 'till they just boil up, then they are enough;
the last thing you do squeeze in a little Lemon: You may put in Oysters,
Mushrooms, or what you will to make it Rich.

56. To boil Ducks with Onion Sauce.
Take two fat Ducks and season them with a little Pepper and Salt, and skewer
them up at both Ends, and boil them whilst they are Tender; take four or five
large Onions and boil them in Milk and Water, change the Water two or three
Times in the boiling, when they are enough chop them very small, and rub them
through a Hair-sieve with the back of a Spoon, 'till you have rubbed them quite
through, then melt a little Butter, put in your Onions and a little Salt, and
pour it upon your Ducks. Garnish your Dish with Onions and Sippets.

57. To stew Ducks either wild or tame.
Take two Ducks and half roast them, cut them up as you would do for Eating,
then put them into a stew Pan with a little brown Gravy, a Glass of Claret, two
Anchovies, a small Onion shred very fine, and a little Salt; thicken it up with
Flower and Butter, so serve it up. Garnish your Dish with Onion Sippets.

58. To make a white Fricasey of Chickens.
Take two or more Chickens, half roast them, cut them up as you would do for
Eating, and skin them; put them in a Stew Pan with a little white Gravy, Juice
of Lemon, two Anchovies, shred Mace and Nutmeg, then boil it; take the Yolks of
three Eggs, a little sweet Cream and shred Parsley, put them into your Stew Pan
with a Lump of Butter and a little Salt; shake them all the while they are over
the Stove, and besure you do not let them boil lest they should crudle. Garnish
your Dish with Sippets and Lemon.

59. How to make a brown Fricasey of Chickens.
Take two or more Chickens as you would have your Dish in bigness, cut them up
as you do for Eating, and flat them a little with a Paste-pin; fry them a light
Brown, and put them into your Stew Pan with a little Gravy, a Spoonful or two
of white Wine, a little Nutmeg and Salt; thicken it up with Flower and Butter.
Garnish your Dish with Sippets and crisp Parsley.

60. Chickens Surprise.
Take half a Pound of Rice, set it over a Fire in soft Water, when it is half
boiled put in two or three small Chickens trussed, with two or three Blades of
Mace, and a little Salt; take a Piece of Bacon about three Inches square, and
boil it in Water whilst almost enough, then take it out, pare off the out
Sides, and put it into the Chickens and Rice to boil a little together; (you
must not let the Broth be over thick with Rice) then take up your Chickens, lay
them on a Dish, pour over them the Rice, cut your Bacon in thin Slices to lay
round your Chickens, and upon the Breast of each a Slice.

This is proper for a Side-dish.

61. To boil Chickens.
Take four or five small Chickens, as you would have your Dish in Bigness, if
they be small ones you may scald them, it will make them whiter; draw them, and
take out the Breast bone before you scald them; when you have dressed them, put
them into Milk and Water, and wash them, truss them, and cut off the Heads and
Necks; if you dress them the Night before you use them, dip a Cloth in Milk and
wrap them in it, which will make them white; you must boil them in Milk and
Water, with a little Salt; half an Hour or less will boil them.

To make Sauce for the Chickens.
Take the Necks, Gizzards and Livers, boil them in Water, when they are enough
strain off the Gravy, and put to it a Spoondull of Oyster-pickle; take the
Livers, break them small, mix a little Gravy, and rub them through a Hair-sieve
with the back of a Spoon; then put to it a Spoonful of Cream, a little Lemon
and Lemon Peel grated; thicken it up with Butter and Flower. Let your Sauce be
no thicker than Cream, which pour upon your Chickens. Garnish your Dish with
Sippets, Mushrooms, and Slices of Lemon.

They are proper for a Side dish or a Top-dish either at Noon or Night.

62. How to boil a Turkey.
When your Turkey is dressed and drawn, truss her, cut off her Feet, take down
the Breast Bone with a Knife, and sew up the Skin again; stuff the Breast with
a white Stuffing. How to make the Stuffing. Take the Sweetbread of Veal, boil
it, shred it fine, with a little Beef suet, a handful of Bread-crumbs, a little
Lemon Peel, part of the Liver, a Spoonful or two of Cream, with Nutmeg, Pepper,
Salt, and two Eggs, mix all together, and stuff your Turkey with part of the
Stuffing, (the rest you may either boil or fry to lay round it) dredge it with
a little Flower, tie it up in a Cloth, and boil it with Milk and Water: If it
be a young Turkey an Hour will boil it.

How to make Sauce for the Turkey.
Take a little small white Gravy, a Pint of Oysters, two or three Spoonfuls of
Cream, a little Juice of Lemon, and Salt to your Taste, thicken it up with
Flower and Butter, then pour it over your Turkey, and serve it up; lay round
your Turkey fried Oysters, and the forced Meat. Garnish your Dish with Oysters,
Mushrooms, and Slices of Lemon.

63. How to make another Sauce for a Turkey.
Take a little strong white Gravy, and some of the whitest Sellery you can get,
cut it about an Inch long, boil it whilst it be tender, and put it into the
Gravy, with two Anchovies, a little Lemon Peel shred, two or three Spoonfuls of
Cream, a little shred Mace, and a Spoonful of white Wine; thicken it up with
Flower and Butter; if you dislike the Sellery you may put in the Liver as you
did for Chickens.

64. How to roast a Turkey.
Take a Turkey, dress and truss it, then take down the Breast bone. To make
Stuffing for the Breast. Take Beef Suet, the Liver shred fine, and
Bread-crumbs, a little Lemon Peel, Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt to your Taste, a
little shred Parsley, a Spoonful or two of Cream, and two Eggs. Put her on a
Spit and roast her before a slow Fire; you may lard your Turkey with fat Bacon;
if the Turkey be young an Hour and a Quarter will roast it. For the Sauce take
a little white Gravy, an Union, a few Bread-crumbs, and a little whole Pepper,
let them boil well together, put to them a little Flower and a Lump of Butter,
which pour upon the Turkey; you may lay round your Turkey forced meat Balls.
Garnish your Dish with Slices of Lemon.

65. To make a rich Turkey Pie.
Take a young Turkey and bone her, only leave in the thigh Bones and short
Pinions; take a large Fowl and bone it, a little shred Mace, Nutmeg, Pepper and
Salt, and season the Turkey and Fowl on the Inside; lay the Fowl in the inside
of the low part of the Turkey, and stuff the Breast with a little white
Stuffing (the same white Stuffing as you made for the boiled Turkey) take a
deep Dish, lay a Paste over it, and leave no Paste in the Bottom; lay in the
Turkey, and lay round it a few forc'd-meat Balls, put in half a Pound of
Butter, and a Jill of Water, then close up the Pie; an Hour and a half will
bake it; when it comes from the Oven take off the Lid, put in a Pint of stewed
Oysters, and the Yolks of six or eight Eggs, lay them at an equal Distance
round the Turkey; you must not stew your Oysters in Gravy but in Water, and
pour them upon your Turkey's Breast; lay round six or eight Artichoak bottoms
fried, so serve it up without the Lid; you must take the Fat out of the Pie
before you put in the Oysters.

66. To make a Turkey A-la-Daube.
Take a large Turkey and truss it; take down the Breast Bone, and stuff it in
the Breast with some Stuffing, as you did the roast Turkey, lard it with Bacon,
then rub the Skin of the Turkey with the Yolk of an Egg, and strew over it a
little Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and a few Bread-crumbs, then put it into a Copper
Dish and send it to the Oven; when you dish it up make for the Turkey brown
gravy Sauce; shred into your Sauce a few Oysters and Mushrooms; lay round
Artichoak Bottoms fried, stewed Pallets, forced meat Balls, and a little crisp
Bacon. Garnish your Dish with pickled Mushrooms, and Slices of Lemon.

This is a proper Dish for a Remove.

67. Potted Turkey.
Take a Turkey, bone her as you did for the Pie, and season it very well in the
Inside and Outside with Mace, Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, then put it into a Pot
that you design to keep it in, put over it a Pound of Butter, when it is baked
draw from it the Gravy, and take off the Fat, then squeze it down very tight in
the Pot, and to keep it down lay upon it a Weight, when it is cold take Part of
the Butter that came from it, and clarify a little more with it to cover your
Turkey, and keep it in a cool Place for Use; you may put a Fowl in the Belly if
you please.

Ducks or Geese are potted the same Way.

68. How to Jugg Pigeons.
Take six or eight Pigeons and truss them, season them with Nutmeg, Pepper and
Salt, To make the Stuffing. Take the Livers and shred them with Beef Suet,
Bread-Crumbs, Parsley, Sweet-marjoram, and two Eggs, mix all together, then
stuff your Pigeons, sowing them up at both Ends, and put them into your Jugg
with the Breast downwards, with half a Pound of Butter; stop up the Jugg close
with a Cloth that no Steam can get out, then set them in a Pot of Water to
boil; they will take above two Hours Stewing; mind you keep your Pot full of
Water, and boiling all the Time; when they are enough clear from them the
Gravy, and take the Fat clean off; put to your Gravy a Spoonful of Cream, a
little Lemon Peel, an Anchovie shred, a few Mushrooms, and a little white Wine,
thicken it with a little Flower and Butter, then dish up your Pigeons, and pour
over them the Sauce. Garnish the Dish with Mushrooms and Slices of Lemon.

This is proper for a Side-dish.

69. Mirranaded Pigeons.
Take six Pigeons, and truss them as you would do for Baking, break the
Breast-bones, season and stuff them as you did for Jugging, put them into a
little deep Dish* and lay over them half a Pound of Butter; put into your Dish
a little Water. Take half a Pound of Rice, cree it soft as you would do for
Eating, and pour it upon the back of a Sieve, let it stand while it is could,
then take a Spoon and flat it like Paste on your Hand, and lay on the Breast of
every Pigeon a Cake; lay round your Dish some Puff-paste not over thin, and
send them to the Oven; about half an Hour will bake them.

This is proper at Noon for a side Dish

70. To stew Pigeons.
Take your Pigeons, season and stuff them, flat the Breast bone, and truss them
up as you would do for Baking, dredge them over with a little Flower, and fry
them in Butter, turning them round till all Sides be brown, then put them into
a Stew Pan with as much brown Gravy as will cover them, and let them stew
whilst your Pigeons be enough; then take part of the Gravy, an Anchovie shred,
a little Catchup, a small Onion or a Shalot, and a little Juice of Lemon for
Sauce, pour it over your Pigeons, and lay round them forc'd-meat Balls and
crisp Bacon. Garnish your Dish with crisp Parsley and Lemon.

71. To broil Pigeons whole.
Take your Pigeons, season and stuff them with the same Stuffing you did jugg'd
Pigeons, broil them either before a Fire or in an Oven; when they are enough
take the Gravy from them, and take of the Fat, then put to the Gravy two or
three Spoonfuls of Water, a little boiled Parsley shred, and thicken your
Sauce. Garnish your Dish with crisp Parsley.

72. Boiled Pigeons with fricasey Sauce.
Take your Pigeons, and when you have drawn and trussed them up, break the
Breast Bone, and lay them in Milk and Water to make them White, tie them in a
Cloth and boil them in Milk and Water; when you dish them up put to them white
fricasey Sauce, only adding a few shred Mushrooms. Garnish with crisp Parsley
and Sippets.

73. To Pot Pigeons.
Take your Pigeons and skewer them with their Feet cross over the Breast, to
stand up; season them with Pepper and Salt, and roast them, so put them into
your Pot, setting the Feet up; when they are cold cover them up with clarified
Butter.

74. To stew Pallets.
Take three or four large Beast Pallets and boil them very Tender, blanch and
cut them in long Pieces the length of your Finger, then in small bits the cross
Way; shake them up with a little good Gravy and a Lump of Butter; season them
with a little Nutmeg and Salt, put in a Spoonful of white Wine, and thicken it
with the Yolks of Eggs as you do a white Fricasey.

75. To make a Fricasey of Pig's Ears.
Take three or four Pig's Ears as large as you would have your Dish in bigness,
clean and boil them very tender, cut them in small Pieces the length of your
Finger, and fry them with Butter till they be brown; so put them into a
Stew Pan with a little brown Gravy, a Lump of Butter, a Spoonful of Vinegar,
and a little Mustard and Salt, thickened with Flower; take two or three Pig's
Feet and boil them very tender, fit for eating, then cut them in two and take
out the large Bones, dip them in Egg, and strew over them a few Bread crumbs,
season them with Pepper and Salt; you may either fry or boil them, and lay them
in the middle of your Dish with the Pig's Ears.

They are proper for a side Dish.

76. To make a Fricasey of Tripes.
Take the whitest seam Tripes you can get and cut them in long Pieces, put them
into a Stew Pan with a little good Gravy, a few Bread-crumbs, a Lump of Butter,
a little Vinegar to your Taste, and a little Mustard if you like it; shake it
up altogether with a little shred Parsley. Garnish your Dish with Sippets.

This is proper for a side Dish.

77. To make a Fricasey of Veal-Sweet-Breads.
Take five or six Veal Sweetbreads, according as you would have your Dish in
bigness, and boil them in Water, cut them in thin Slices the length Way, dip
them in Egg, season them with Pepper and Salt, fry them a light Brown; then put
them into a Stew pan with a little brown Gravy, a spoonful of white Wine or
Juice of Lemon, whether you please; thicken it up with Flower and Butter; and
serve it up. Garnish your Dish with crisp Parsley.

78. To make a white Fricasey of Tripes to eat like Chickens.
Take the whitest and the thickest seam Tripe you can get, cut the white Part*
in thin Slices, put it into a Stew Pan with a little white Gravy, juice of
Lemon and Lemon Peel shred, also a spoonful of white Wine; take the Yolks of
two or three Eggs and beat them very well, put to them a little thick Cream,
shred Parsley, and two or three Chives if you have any; shake altogether over
the Stove while it be as thick as Cream, but don't let it boil for fear it
crudle. Garnish your Dish with Sippets, sliced Lemon or Mushrooms, and serve it
up.

79. To make a brown Fricasey of Eggs.
Take eight or ten Eggs, according to the bigness you design your Dish, boil
them hard, put them in Water, take off the Shell, fry them in Butter whilst
they be a deep Brown, put them into a Stew Pan with a little brown Gravy, and a
Lump of Butter, so thicken it up with Flower; take two or three Eggs, lay them
in the middle of the Dish, then take the other, cut them in two, and set 'em
with the small Ends upwards round the Dish; fry some Sippets and lay round
them. Garnish your Dish with crisp Parsley.

This is proper for a side Dish in Lent or any other Time.

80. To make a white Fricasey af Eggs.
Take ten or twelve Eggs, boil them hard and pill them, put them in a Stew Pan
with a little white Gravy; take the Yolks of two or three Eggs, beat them very
well, and put to them two or three Spoonfuls of Cream, a Spoonful of white
Wine, a little Juice of Lemon, shred Parsley, and Salt to your Taste; shake all
together over the Stove till it be as thick as Cream, but don't let it boil;
take your Eggs and lay one Part whole on the Dish, the rest cut in Halves and
Quarters, and lay them round your Dish; you must not cut them till you lay them
on the Dish. Garnish your Dish with Sippets, and serve it up.

81. To stew Eggs in Gravy.
Take a little Gravy, pour it into a little Pewter Dish, and set it over a
Stove, when it is hot break in as many Eggs as will cover the Dish bottom, keep
pouring the Gravy over them with a Spoon 'till they are white at the Top, when
they are enough strew over them a little Salt; fry some square Sippets of Bread
in Butter, prick them with the small Ends upward, and serve them up.

82. How to Collar a Piece of Beef to eat Cold.
Take a Flank of Beef or Pale-board, which you can get, bone them and take off
the inner Skin; nick your Beef about an Inch distance, but mind you do not cut
through the Skin of the Outside; then take two Ounces of Saltpetre, and beat it
small, and take a large handful of common Salt and mix them together, first
sprinkling your Beef over with a little Water, and lay it in an earthen Dish,
then strinkle over your Salt, so let it stand, four or five Days, then take a
pretty large Quantity of all Sorts of mild sweet Herbs, pick and shred them
very small, take some Bacon and cut it in long Pieces the thickness of your
Finger, then take your Beef and lay one Layer of Bacon in every Nick; and
another of the Greens; when you have done season your Beef with a little beat
Mace, Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg; you may add a little Neat's Tongue, and an
Anchovie in some of the Nicks; so roll it up tight, bind it in a Cloth with
coarse Inkle round it, put it into a large Stew-pot and cover it with Water;
let the Beef lie with the End downwards, put to it the pickle that was in the
Beef when it lay in Salt, set it in a slow Oven all the Night, then take it out
and bind it tight, and tie up both Ends, the next Day take it out of the Cloth
and put it into Pickle; you must take the same Pickle it was baked in; take off
the Fat and boil the Pickle, put in a handful of Salt, a few Bay Leaves, a
little whole Jamaica and black Pepper, a Quart of stale strong Beer, a little
Vinegar and Alegar; if you make the Pickle very good, it will keep five or six
Months very well; if your Beef be not too much baked it will cut all in
Diamonds.

83. To roll a Breast of Veal to eat Cold.
Take a large Breast of Veal, fat and white, bone it and cut it in two, season
it with Mace, Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, in one Part you may strinkle a few sweet
Herbs shred fine, roll them tight up, bind them well with coarse Inkle, so boil
it an Hour and a half; you may make the same Pickle as you did for the Beef,
excepting the strong Beer; when it is enough take it up, and bind it as you did
the Beef, so hang it up whilst it be cold.

84. To pot Tongues.
Take your Tongues and salt them with Saltpetre, common Salt and bay Salt, let
them lie ten Days, then take them out and boil them whilst they will blanch,
cut off the lower part of the Tongues, then season them with Mace, Pepper,
Nutmeg and Salt, put them into a Pot and send them to the Oven, and the low
part of your Tongues that you cut off lay upon your Tongues, and one Pound of
Butter, then let them bake whilst they are tender, then take them out of the
Pot, throw over them a little more Seasoning, put them into the Pot you design
to keep them in, press them down very tight, lay over them a Weight, and let
them stand all Night, then cover them with clarified Butter: You must not salt
your Tongues as you do for Hanging.

85. How to Pot Venison.
Take your Venison and cut it in thin Pieces, season it with Pepper and Salt,
put it into your Pot, lay over it some Butter and a little Beef Suet, let it
stand all Night in the Oven; when it is baked beat them in a Marble Mortar or
Wooden-Bowl, put in part of the Gravy, and all the Fat you take from it; when
you have beat it put it into your Pot, then take the fat Lap of a Shoulder of
Mutton, take off the Out-skin, and roast it, when it is roasted and cold, cut
it in long Pieces the thickness of your Finger; when you put the Venison into
the Pot, put it in at three Times, betwixt every one lay the Mutton cross your
Pot, at an equal Distance; if you cut it the right Way it will cut all in
Diamonds; leave some of the Venison to lay on the Top, and cover it with
clarified Butter; so keep it for Use.

86. To Pot all Sorts of Wild-fowl.
When the Wild fowl are dressed take a Paste-pin, and beat them on the Breast
'till they are flat; before you roast them season them with Mace, Nutmeg,
Pepper and Salt; you must not roast them overmuch; when you draw them season
them on the Outside, and set them on one End to drain out the Gravy, and put
them into your Pot; you may put in two Layers; if you press them very flat,
cover them with clarified Butter when they are cold.

87. How to Pot Beef.
Take two Pound of the Slice or Buttock, season it with about two Ounces of
Saltpetre and a little common Salt, let it lie two or three Days, send it to
the Oven, and season it with a little Pepper, Salt and Mace; lay over your Beef
half a Pound of Butter or Beef Suet, and let it stand all Night in the Oven to
stew; take from it the Gravy and the Butter, and beat them (with the Beef) in a
Bowl, then take a quarter of a Pound of Anchovies, bone them, and beat them too
with a little of the Gravy; if it be not seasoned enough to your Taste, put to
it a little more Seasoning; put it close down in a Pot, and when it is cold
cover it up with Butter, and keep it for Use.

88. To Ragoo a Rump of Beef.
Take a Rump of Beef, lard it with Bacon and Spices, betwixt the Larding stuff
it with forced Meat, made of a pound of Veal, three Quarters of a Pound of
Beef Suet, a Quarter of a pound of fat Bacon boiled and shred well by itself, a
good Quantity of Parsley, Winter-savoury, Thyme, Sweet-marjoram, and an Onion,
mix all this together, season it with Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Salt, Jamaica and
Black Pepper, and some grated Bread, work the forced Meat up with three Whites
and two Yolks of Eggs, then Stuff it, and lay some ruff Suet in a Stew pan with
your Beef upon it, let it fry till it be brown then put in some Water, a bunch
of sweet Herbs, a large Onion stuffed with-Cloves, sliced Turnips, Carrots cut
as large as the Yolk of an Egg, some whole Pepper and Salt, half a pint of
Claret, cover it close, and let it stew six or seven Hours over a gentle Fire,
turning it very often.

89. How to make Sauce for it.
Take Trophels, Morels, Sweet-breads, diced Pallets boiled tender, three
Anchoives, and some Lemon Peel, put these into some brown Gravy and stew them;
if you do not think it thick enough, dredge in a little Flower, and just before
you pour it on your Beef put in a little white Wine and Vinegar, and serve it
up hot.

90. Sauce for boiled Rabbits.
Take a few Onions, boil them thoroughly, shifting them in Water often, mix them
well together with a little melted Butter and Water: Some add a little Pulp of
Apple and Mustard.

91. To Salt a Leg of Mutton to eat like Ham.
Take a Leg of Mutton, an Ounce of Saltpetre, two Ounces of Bay Salt, rub it in
very well, take a Quarter of a pound of coarse Sugar, mix it with two or three
handfuls of common Salt, then take and salt it very well, and let it lie a
Week, so hang it up, and keep it for Use, after it is dry use it, the sooner
the better; it will not keep so long as Ham.

92. How to salt Ham or Tongues.
Take to a middling Ham, two Ounces of Saltpetre, a Quarter of a Pound of
Bay Salt, beat them together, and rub them on your Ham very well, before you
salt it on the Inside, set your Salt before the Fire to warm; to every Ham take
half a pound of coarse Sugar, mix to it a little of the Salt, and rub it in
very well, let it lie for a Week or ten Days, then Salt it again very well, and
let it lie another Week or ten Days, then hang it to dry, not very near the
Fire, nor over much in the Air.

Take your Tongues and clean them, and cut off the Root, then take two Ounces
of Saltpetre, a Quarter of a pound of Bay Salt well beaten, three or four
Tongues, according as they are in Bigness, lay them on a thing by themselves,
for if you lay them under your Bacon it flats your Tongues, and spoils them;
salt them very well, and let them lie as long as the Hams, with the skin Side
downwards: You may do a Rump of Beef the same Way, only leave out the Sugar.

93. To boil a Knuckle of Veal with Rice.
Take a Knuckle of Veal and a Scrag of Mutton, put them into a Kettle with as
much Water as will cover them, and half a Pound of Rice; before you put in the
Rice let the Kettle be skim'd very well, it will make the Rice the Whiter; put
in a blade or two of Mace, and a little Salt, so let them boil all together
till the Rice and Meat be thoroughly enough; you must not let the Broth be over
thick; serve it up with the Knuckle in the middle of the Dish and Sippets round
it.

94. To stew Ducks whole.
Take Ducks, when they are drawn and clean washed, put them into a Stew Pan
with strong Broth, Claret, Mace, whole Pepper, an Onion, an Anchovie, and
Lemon Peel; when well stewed put in a Piece of Butter and some grated Bread to
thicken it; lay round them crisp Bacon and forced Meat Balls. Garnish with
Shalots,

95. To Pot a Hare.
Take a Hare, cafe, wash, and wipe her dry, cut her in Pieces, keep out all the
bloody parts and skins, season it with Mace, Pepper and Salt, put it into a
Pot, and lay over it a Pound of Beef Suet, let it stand all Night in a slow
Oven; when it is baked take out all the Bones, and chop it all together in a
Bowl with the Fat and Gravy that comes from it, put it tight down into a Pot,
and when cold cover it with clarified Butter: If you have no dislike to Bacon,
you may put in two or three Slices when you send them to the Oven.

96. How to make a Hare Pie.
Parboil the Hare, take out all the Bones, and beat the Meat in a Mortar with
some fat Pork or new Bacon, then soak it in Claret all Night, the next Day take
it out, season it with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg, then lay the Backbone into the
middle of the Pie, put the Meat about it with about three Quarters of a Pound
of Butter, and bake it in Puff paste, but lay no Paste in the bottom of the
Dish.

97. To make a Hare Pie another Way.
Take the Flesh of a Hair after it is skinned, and string it; take a Pound of
Beef Suet or Marrow shred small, with Sweet-marjoram, Parsley and Shalots; take
the Hare, cut it in Pieces, season it with Mace, Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg, then
bake it either in cold or hot Paste, and when it is baked open it and put to it
some melted Butter.

98. To make a Pig Royal.
Take a Pig and roast it the same Way as you did for Lamb, when you draw it you
must not cut it up, when it is cold you must lard it with Bacon, cut not your
Layers too small, if you do they will melt away, cut them about an Inch and a
Quarter long; you must put one row down the Back and one on either Side, then
strinkle it over with a few Bread-crumbs and a little Salt, and set it in the
Oven; an Hour will bake it, but mind your Oven be not too hot; you must take
another Pig of a less Size, roast it, cut it up, and lie it on each Side: The
Sauce you make for a roast Pig will serve for both.

This is proper for a bottom Dish at a grand Entertainment.

99. To roast Veal a Savoury Way.
When you have stuffed your Veal, strew some of the Ingredients over it; when
it is roasted make your Sauce of what drops from the Meat, put an Anchovie in
Water, and when dissolved pour it into the Dripping-pan, with a large Lump of
Butter and Oysters; toss it up with Flower to thicken it.

100. To make a Ham Pie.
Cut the Ham round, and lay it in Water all Night, boil it tender as you would
do for eating, take off the Skin, strew over it a little Pepper, and bake it in
a deep Dish, put to it a Pint of Water, and half a Pound of Butter; you must
bake it in Puff paste, but lay no Paste in the bottom of the Dish; when you
send it to the Table send it without a Lid.

It is proper for a top or bottom Dish either Summer or Winter.

101. To make a Neat's Tongue Pie.
Take two or three Tongues, (according as you would have your Pie in bigness;
cut off the Roots and low Parts, take two Ounces of Saltpetre, a little
Bay Salt, rub them very well, lay them on an earthen Dish with the skin Side
downwards, let them lie for a Week or ten Days, whilst they be very red, then
boil them as tender as you would have them for Eating, blanch and season with a
little Pepper and Salt, flat them as much as you can, bake them in Puff-paste
in a deep Dish, but lay no Paste in the bottom, put to them a little Gravy, and
half a Pound of Butter; lay your Tongues with the wrong Side upwards, when they
are baked turn them, and serve it up without a Lid.

102. To broil Sheep or Hog's Tongues.
Boil, blanch, and split your Tongues, season them with a little Pepper and
Salt, then dip them in Egg, strew over them a few Bread-crumbs, and broil them
whilst they be brown; serve them up with a little Gravy and Butter.

103. To pickle Pork.
Cut off the Leg, Shoulder Pieces, the bloody Neck and the Spare-Rib as bare as
you can, then cut the middle Pieces as large as they can lie in the Tub, salt
them with Saltpetre, Bay Salt, and white Salt; your Saltpetre must be beat
small, and mixed with the other Salts; half a Peck of white Salt, a Quart of
Bay Salt, and half a Pound of Saltpetre, is enough for a large Hog; you must
rub the Pork very well with your Salt, then lay a thick Layer of Salt all over
the Tub, then a Piece of Pork, and do so till all your Pork is in; lay the skin
Side downwards, fill up all the Hollows and Sides of the Tub with little Pieces
that are not bloody, press all down as close as possible, and lay on a good
Layer of Salt on the Top, then lay on the Legs and Shoulder-pieces, which must
be used first, the rest will keep two Years if not pulled up, nor the Pickle
poured from it. You must observe to see it be covered with Pickle.

104. To fricasey Calves Feet white.
Dress the Calves Feet, boil them as you would do for Eating, take out the long
Bones, cut them in two, and put them into a Stew pan with a little white Gravy,
and a Spoonful or two of white Wine; take the Yolks of two or three Eggs, two
or three Spoonfuls of Cream, grate in a little Nutmeg and Salt, and shake all
together with a Lump of Butter. Garnish your Dish with Slices of Lemon and
Currants, and so serve them up.

105. To roll a Pig's Head to eat like Brawn.
Take a large Pig's Head, cut off the Groin Ends, crack the Bones and put it in
Water, shift it once or twice, cut off the Ears, then boil it so tender that
the Bones will slip out, nick it with a Knife in the thick Part of your Head,
throw over it a pretty large Handful of salt; take half a Dozen of large Neat's
Feet, boil them while they be soft, spilt them, and take out all the Bones and
black Bits; take a strong coarse Cloth, and lay your Feet with the skin Side
downwards, with all the loose Pieces on the Inside; press them with your Hand
to make them of an equal thickness, lay them at that Length that they will
reach round the Head, and throw over them a Handful of Salt, then lay your Head
across, one thick Part one Way and the other another, that the Fat may appear
alike at both Ends; leave one Foot out to lay at the Top to make the Lantern to
reach round, bind it with Filletting as you would do Brawn, and tie it very
close at both Ends; you may take it out of the Cloth the next Day, take off the
Filletting and wash it, wrap it about it again very tight, and keep it in
Brawn-pickle.

This has been often taken for real Brawn.

106. How to fry Calves Feet in Butter.
Take four Calves Feet and blanch them, boil them as you would do for Eating,
take out the large Bones and cut them in two, beat a Spoonful of Wheat Flour
and four Eggs together, put to it a little Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, dip in your
Calves Feet, and fry them in Butter a light brown, and lay them upon your Dish
with a little melted Butter over them. Garnish with Slices of Lemon, and serve
them up.

107. How to make savoury Patties.
Take the Kidney of a Loin of Veal before it be roasted, cut it in thin Slices,
season it with Mace, Pepper and Salt, and make your Patties; lay in every Patty
a Slice, and either bake or fry them.

You may make Marrow Patties the same Way.

108. To make Egg Pyes.
Take and boil half a Dozen Eggs, half a Dozen Apples, a Pound and a half of
Beef Suet, a Pound of Currants, and shred them, so season it with Mace, Nutmeg
and Sugar to your Taste, a Spoonful or two of Brandy, and Sweetmeats if you
please.

109. To make a sweet Chicken Pie.
Break the Chicken Bones, cut them in little Bits, season them lightly with
Mace and Salt, take the Yolks of four Eggs boiled hard and quartered, five
Artichoak-bottoms, half a pound of Sun Raisons stoned, half a pound of Citron,
half a pound of Lemon, half a pound of Marrow, a few forc'd-meat Balls, and
half a pound of Currants well cleaned, so make a light Puff-paste, but put no
Paste in the bottom; when it is baked take a little white Wine, little Juice of
either Orange or Lemon, the Yolk of an Egg well beat, and mix them together,
make it hot, and put it into your Pie; when you serve it take the same
Ingredients you use for a Lamb or Veal Pie, only leave out the Artichoaks.

110. To roast Tongues.
Cut off the Roots of two Tongues, take three Ounces of Saltpeter, a little
Bay Salt and common Salt, rub them very well, let them lie a Week or ten Days
to make them Red, but no Salt, so boil them tender as they will Blanch, strew
over them a few Bread-crumbs, set them before the Fire to brown, and turn them
to make them brown on every Side.

To make Sauce for the Tongues.
Take a few Bread-crumbs, and as much Water as will wet them, then put in
Claret till they be Red, and a little beat Cinnamon, sweeten it to your Taste,
put a little Gravy on the Dish with your Tongues, and the sweet Sauce in two
Basins, set them on each Side, so serve them up,

111. To fry Calves Feet in Eggs.
Boil your Calves Feet as you would do for Eating, take out the long Bones and
split them in two, when they are cold season 'em with a little Pepper, Salt and
Nutmeg; take three Eggs, put to them a Spoonful of Flower, so dip the Feet in
it and fry them in Butter; you must have a little Gravy and Butter for Sauce.
Garnish with Currants, so serve them up,

112. To make a minch'd Pie of Calves Feet.
Take two or three Calves Feet and boil them as you would do for eating, take
out the long Bones, shred them very fine, put to them double their Weight of
Beef Suet shred fine, and about a Pound of Currants well-cleaned, a Quarter of
a Pound of candid Orange and Citron, cut in small Pieces, half a Pound of
Sugar, a little Salt, a quarter of a pound of Mace, and a large Nutmeg, beat
them together, put in a little Juice of Lemon or Verjuice to your Taste, a
Glass of Mountain Wine or Sack, which you please, so mix all together; bake
them in Puff-paste.

113. To roast a Woodcock.
When you have dressed your Woodcock, and drawn it under the Leg, take out the
bitter Bit, put in the Trales again; whilst the Woodcock is roasting set under
it an earthen Dish with either Water in or small Gravy, let the Woodcock drop
into it, take the Gravy and put to it a little Butter, and thicken it with
Flower; your Woodcock will take about an Hour in Roasting if you have a brisk
Fire; when you dish it up lay round it Wheat-bread Toasts, and pour the Sauce
over the Toasts, and serve it up.

You may roast a Patridge the same Way, only add Crumb-sauce in a Basin.

114. To make a Calves Head Pie.
Take a Calve's Head and clean it, boil it as you would do for Hashing, when it
is cold cut it in thin Slices, and season it with a little black Pepper,
Nutmeg, Salt, a few shred Capers, a few Oysters and Cockles, two or three
Mushrooms, and green Lemon Peel, mix them all well together, put them into your
Pie; it must be a standing Pie baked in a flat Pewter Dish, with a Rim of
Puff-paste round the Edge; when you have filled the Pie with the Meat, lay on
forc'd-meat Balls, and the Yolks of some hard Eggs, put in a little small Gravy
and Butter; when it comes from the Oven take off the Lid, put into it a little
white Wine to your Taste, and shake up the Pie, so serve it up without Lid.

115. To make a Calve's Foot Pie.
Take two or three Calves Feet, according as you would have your Pie in
bigness, boil and bone them as you would do for Eating, and when cold cut them
in thin Slices; take about three Quarters of a pound of Beef Suet shred fine,
half a pound of Raisins stoned, half a pound of cleaned Currants, a little Mace
and Nutmeg, green Lemon Peel, Salt, Sugar, and candid Lemon or Orange, mix all
together, and put them into a Dish, make a good Puff-paste, but let there be no
Paste in the bottom of the Dish; when it is baked, take off the Lid, and
squeeze in a little Lemon or Verjuice, cut the Lid in Sippets and lay round.

116. To make a Woodcock Pie.
Take three or four Brace of Woodcocks, according as you would have the Pie in
bigness, dress and skewer them as you would do for Roasting, draw them, and
season the Inside with a little Pepper, Salt and Mace, but don't wash them, put
the Trales into the Belly again, but nothing else, for there is something in
them that gives them a more bitterish Taste in the baking than in the roasting;
when you put them into your Dish lay them with the Breast downwards, beat them
upon the Breast as flat as you can; you must season them on the outside as you
do the inside; bake them in Puff-paste, but lay none in the bottom of the Dish,
put to them a Jill of Gravy and a little Butter; you must be very careful your
Pie be not too much baked; when you serve it up take off the Lid and turn the
Woodcocks with the Breast upwards.

You may bake Patridge the same Way.

117. To pickle Pigeons.
Take your Pigeons and bone them; you must begin to bone them at the Neck and
turn the Skin downwards, when they are boned season them with Pepper, Salt and
Nutmeg, sew up both Ends, and boil them in Water and white Wine Vinegar, a few
Bay Leaves, a little whole Pepper and Salt; when they are enough take them out
of the Pickle, and boil it down with a little more Salt, when it is cold put in
the Pigeons and keep them for Use.

118. To make a sweet Veal Pie.
Take a Loyn of Veal, cut off the thin Part length Ways, cut the rest in thin
Slices, as much as you have occasion for, flat it with your Bill, and cut off
the bone Ends next the Chine, season it with Nutmeg and Salt; take half a pound
of Raisins stoned, and half a pound of Currants well cleaned, mix all together,
and lay a few of them at the bottom of the Dish, lay a Layer of Meat, and
betwixt every Layer lay on your Fruit, but leave some for the Top; you must
make a Puff-paste; but lay none in the bottom of the Dish; when you have filled
your Pie, put in a Jill of Water and a little Butter, when it is baked have a
Caudle to put into it.

To make the Caudle, see in Receipt 177.

119. Minced Pyes another Way.
Take a pound of the finest seam Tripes you can get, a pound and a half of
Currants well cleaned, two, three or four Apples pared and shred very fine, a
little green Lemon Peel and Mace shred, a large Nutmeg, a Glass of Sack or
Brandy, (which you please) half a Pound of Sugar, and a little Salt, so mix
them well together, and fill your Petty-pans, then stick five or six bits of
candid Lemon or Orange in every Petty-pan, cover them, and when baked they are
fit for Use.

120. To make a savoury Chicken Pie.
Take half a Dozen small Chickens, season them with Mace, Pepper and Salt, both
Inside and Out; then take three or four Veal Sweet-breads, season them with the
same, and lay round them a few forc'd-meat Balls, put in a little Water and
Butter; take a little white sweet Gravy not over strong, shred a few Oysters if
you have any, and a little Lemon Peel, squeeze in a little Lemon-juice, not to
make it sower; if you have no Oysters take the whitest of your Sweet-breads and
boil them, cut them small, and put them into your Gravy, thicken it with a
little Butter and Flower; when you open the Pie, if there be any Fat skim it
off, and pour the Sauce over the Chickens Breasts; so serve it up without any
Lid.

121. To roast a Hanch of Venison.
Take a Hanch of Venison and spit it, then take a little bread Meal, knead and
roll it very thin, lay it over the fat Part of your Venison with a Paper over
it, tie it round your Venison with a Pack-thread; if it be a large Hanch it
will take four Hours Roasting, and a middling Hanch three Hours; keep it
basting all the Time you roast it; when you dish it up, put a little Gravy in
the Dish, and sweet Sauce in a Basin; half an Hour before you draw your Venison
take off the Paste, baste it, and let it be a light brown.

122. To make sweet Patties.
Take the Kidney of a Loyn of Veal with the Fat, when roasted shred it very
fine, put to it a little shred Mace, Nutmeg and Salt, about half a pound of
Currants, the Juice of a Lemon, and Sugar to your Taste, then bake them in
Puff-paste; you may either fry or bake them.

They are proper for a Side-dish.

123. To make Beef Rolls.
Cut your Beef thin as for Scotch Collops, beat it very well, and season it
with Salt, Jamaica and white Pepper, Mace, Nutmeg, Sweet-marjoram, Parsley,
Thyme, and a little Onion shred small, rub them on the Collops on one Side,
then take long bits of Beef Suet and roll in them, tying them up with a Thread;
flower them well, and fry them in Butter very brown; then have ready some good
Gravy and stew them an Hour and half, stirring them often, and keep them
covered, when they are enough take off the Threads, and put in a little Flower,
with a good Lump of Butter, and squeeze in some Lemon, then they are ready for
Use.

124. To make a Herring Pie of white salt Herrings.
Take five or six salt Herrings, wash them very well, lay them in a pretty
Quantity of Water all Night to take out the Saltness, season them with a little
black Pepper, three or four middling Onions pill'd and shred very fine, lay one
part of them at the bottom of the Pie, and the other at the Top; to five or six
Herrings put in half a pound of Butter, then lay in your Herrings whole, only
take off the Heads; make them into a standing Pie with a thin Crust.

125. How to Collar Pig.
Take a large Pig that is fat, about a Month old, kill and dress it, cut off
the Head, cut it in two down the Back and bone it, then cut it in three or four
Pieces, wash it in a little Water to take out the Blood; take a little Milk and
Water just warm, put in your Pig, let it lie about a Day and a Night, shift it
two or three times in that Time to make it white, then take it out and wipe it
very well with a dry Cloth, and season it with Mace, Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt;
take a little shred Parsley and strinkle over two of the Quarters, so roll them
up in a fine soft Cloth, tie it up at both Ends, bind it tight with a little
Filleting or coarse Inkle, and boil it in Milk and Water with a little Salt; it
will take about an Hour and a half boiling; when it is enough bind it up tight
in your Cloth again, hang it up whilst it be cold: For the Pickle boil a little
Milk and Water, a few Bay Leaves and a little Salt; when it is cold take your
Pig out of the Cloths and put it into the Pickle; you must shift it out of your
Pickles two or three Times to make it White; the last Pickle make strong, and
put in a little whole Pepper, a pretty large handful of Salt, a few Bay Leaves,
and so keep it for Use.

126. To Collar Salmon.
Take the Side of a middling Salmon, and cut off the Head, take out all the
Bone and the Outside, season it with Mace, Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, roll it
tight up in a Cloth, boil it, and bind it up with Inkle; it will take about an
Hour boiling, when it is boiled bind it tight again, when cold take it very
carefully out of the Cloth, and bind it about with Filletting; you must not
take off the Filletting but as it is Eaten.

To make Pickle to keep it in.
Take two or three Quarts of Water, a Jill of Vinegar, a little Jamaica Pepper
and whole Pepper, a large handful of Salt, boil them altogether, and when it is
cold put in your Salmon, so keep it for Use: If your Pickle don't keep you must
renew it.

You may Collar Pike the same Way.

127. To make an Oysters Pie.
Take a Pint of the largest Oysters you can get, clean them very well in their
own Liquor, if you have not Liquor enough add to them three or four Spoonfuls
of Water; take the Kidney of a Loyn of Veal, cut it in thin Slices, and season
it with a little Pepper and Salt, lay the Slices in the Bottom of the Dish,
(but there must be no Paste in the Bottom of your Dish) cover them with the
Oysters, strew over a little of the Seasoning you did for the Veal; take the
Marrow of one or two Bones, lay it over your Oysters, and cover them with
Puff-paste; when it is baked take off the Lid, put into it a Spoonful or two of
white Wine, shake it up altogether, and serve it up.

It is proper for a Side-dish, either for Noon or Night.

128. To butter Crab and Lobster.
Dress all the Meat out of the Belly and Claws of your Lobster, put it into a
Stew Pan, with two or three Spoonfuls of Water, a Spoonful or two of white Wine
Vinegar, a little Pepper, shred Mace, and a Lump of Butter; shake it over the
Stove till it be very hot, but do not let it boil, if you do it will Oil; put
it into your Dish, and lay round it your small Claws: It is as proper to put it
in Scallop Shells as on a Dish.

129. To roast a Lobster.
If your Lobster be alive tie it to the Spit, roast and baste it about half an
Hour; if it be boiled you must put it in boiling Water, and let it have one
Boil, then lie it in a Dripping-pan and baste it; when you lay it upon the Dish
split the Tail, and lay it on each Side, so serve it up with a little melted
Butter in a China Cup.

130. To make a quaking Pudding.
Take eight Eggs and beat them very well, put to them three Spoonfuls of London
Flower, a little Salt, three Jills of Cream, and boil it with a Stick of
Cinnamon and a Blade of Mace; when it is cold mix it to your Eggs and Flower,
butter your Cloth, and do not give it over much room in your Cloth; about half
an Hour will boil it; you must turn it in the boiling or the Flower will
settle, so serve it up with a little melted Butter.

131. A Hunting Pudding.
Take a Pound of fine Flower, a Pound of Beef suet shred fine, three Quarters
of a Pound of Currants well cleaned, a Quartern of Raisins stoned and shred,
five Eggs, a little Lemon peel shred fine, half a Nutmeg grated, a Jill of
Cream, a little Salt, about two Spoonfuls of Sugar, and a little Brandy, so mix
all well together, and tie it up tight in your Cloth; it will take two Hours
boiling; you must have a little white Wine and Butter for your Sauce.

132. A Calve's Foot Pudding.
Take two Calves Feet, when they are cleaned boil them as you would for Eating;
take out all the Bones; when they are cold shred them in a wooden Bowl as small
as Bread-crumbs; then take the Crumbs of a penny Loaf, three Quarters of a
Pound of Beef Suet shred fine, grate in half a Nutmeg, take half a Pound of
Currants well washed, half a Pound of Raisins stoned and shred, half a Pound of
Sugar, six Eggs, and a little Salt, mix them all together very well, with as
much Cream as will wet them, so butter your Cloth and tie it up tight; it will
take two Hours boiling; you must have a little Sack and Butter for the Sauce;
you may if you please stick it with a little Orange, and serve it up.

133. A Sagoo Pudding.
Take three or four Ounces of Sagoo, and wash it in two or three Waters, set it
on to boil in a Pint of Water, when you think it is enough take it up, set it
to cool, and take half of a candid Lemon shred fine, grate in half of a Nutmeg,
mix two Ounces of Jordan Almonds blanched, grate in three Ounces of Biscuit if
you have it, if not a few Bread-crumbs grated, a little Rose Water and half a
Pint of Cream; then take six Eggs, leave out two of the Whites, beat them with
a Spoonful or two of Sack, put them to your Sagoo, with about half a Pound of
clarified Butter, mix them all together, then sweeten it with fine Sugar, put
in a little Salt, and bake it in a Dish with a little Puff-paste about the Dish
Edge, when you serve it up you may stick a little Citron or candid Orange, or
any Sweetmeats you please.

134. A Marrow Pudding.
Take a penny Loaf, take off the Outside, then cut one half in thin Slices;
take the Marrow of two Bones, half a Pound of Currants well cleaned, shred your
Marrow, and strinkle a little Marrow and Currants over the Dish; if you have
not Marrow enough you may add to it a little Beef Suet shred fine; take five
Eggs and beat them very well, put to them three Jills of Milk, grate in half a
Nutmeg, sweeten it to your Taste, mix all together, pour it over your Pudding,
and save a little Marrow to strinkle over the Top of your Pudding; when you
send it to the Oven lie a Puff-paste round the Dish Edge.

135. A Carrot Pudding.
Take three or four clear red Carrots, boil and peel them, take the red Part of
the Carrot, beat it very fine in a Marble Mortar, put to it the Crumbs of a
penny Loaf, six Eggs, half a Pound of clarified Butter, two or three Spoonfuls
of Rose Water, a little Lemon Peel shred, grate in a little Nutmeg, mix them
well together, bake it with a Puff-paste round your Dish, and have a little
white Wine, Butter and Sugar, for the Sauce.

136. A ground Rice Pudding.
Take half a Pound of ground Rice, half cree it in a Quart of Milk, when it is
cold put to it five Eggs well beat, a Jill of Cream, a little Lemon Peel shred
fine, half a Nutmeg grated, half a Pound of Butter, and half a Pound of Sugar,
mix them well together, put them into your Dish with a little Salt, and bake it
with a Puff-paste round your Dish; have a little Rose Water, Butter and Sugar
to pour over it; you may prick in it candid Lemon or Citron if you please.

Half of the above Quantity will make a Pudding for a side Dish.

137. A Potatoe Pudding.
Take three or four large Potatoes, boil them as you would do for Eating, beat
them with a little Rose Water and a Glass of Sack in a Marble Mortar, put to
them half a Pound of Sugar, six Eggs, half a Pound of melted Butter, half a
Pound of Currants well cleaned, a little shred Lemon Peel, and candid Orange,
mix all together and serve it up.

138. An Apple Pudding.
Take half a dozen large Codlins, or Pippins, roast them and take out the Pulp;
take eight Eggs, (leave out six of the Whites) half a Pound of fine Powder
Sugar, beat your Eggs and Sugar well together, and put to them the Pulp of your
Apples, half a Pound of clarified Butter, a little Lemon Peel shred fine, a
handful of Bread-crumbs or Biscuit, four Ounces of candid Orange or Citron, and
bake it with a thin Paste under it.

139. An Orange Pudding.
Take three large Seville Oranges, the clearest Kind you can get, grate off all
the Out-rhine; take eight Eggs, (leave out six of the Whites) half a Pound of
double refined Sugar, beat and put it to your Eggs, then beat them both
together for half an Hour; take three Ounces of sweet Almonds blanched, beat
them with a Spoonful or two of fair Water to keep them from Oiling, half a
Pound of Butter, melt it without Water, and the Juice of two Oranges, then put
in the Rasping of your Oranges, and mix all together; lay a thin Paste over
your Dish and bake it, but not in too hot an Oven.

140. An Orange Pudding another Way.
Take half a Pound of candid Orange, cut them in thin Slices, and beat them in
a Marble Mortar to a Pulp; take six Eggs, (leave out half of the Whites) half a
Pound of Butter, and the Juice of one Orange; mix them together, and sweeten it
with fine powder Sugar, then bake it with a thin Paste under it.

141. An Orange Pudding another Way.
Take three or four Seville Oranges, the clearest Skins you can get, pare them
very thin, boil the Peel in a pretty Quantity of Water, shift them two or three
Times in the boiling to take out the bitter Taste; when it is boiled, you must
beat it very fine in a Marble Mortar; take ten Eggs, (leave out six of the
Whites) three Quarters of a Pound of Loaf-Sugar, beat it and put it to your
Eggs, beat them together for half an Hour, put to them half a Pound of melted
Butter, and the Juice of two or three Oranges, as they are of Goodness, mix all
together, and bake it with a thin Paste over your Dish.

This will make Cheese-Cakes as well as a Pudding.

142. An Orange Pudding another Way.
Take five or six Seville Oranges, grate them and make a Hole in the Top, take
out all the Meat, and boil the Skin very tender, shifting them in the boiling
to take off the bitter Taste; take half a Pound of long Biscuit, slice and scald
them with a little Cream, beat six Eggs and put to your Biscuit; take half a
Pound of Currants, wash them clean, grate in half a Nutmeg, put in a little
Salt and a Glass of Sack, beat all together, then put it into your Orange
Skins, tie them tight in a Piece of fine Cloth, every one separate; about three
Quarters of an Hour will boil them: You must have a little white Wine, Butter
and Sugar for Sauce.

143. To make an Orange Pie.
Take half a Dozen Seville Oranges, chip them very fine, as you would do for
preserving, make a little Hole in the Top, and scope out all the Meat, as you
would do an Apple, you must boil them whilst they are tender, and shift them
two or three Times to take off the bitter Taste; take six or eight Apples,
according as they are in Bigness, pare and slice them, and put to them part of
the Pulp of your Oranges, and pick out the Strings and Pippins, put to them
half a Pound of fine Powder Sugar, so boil it up over a slow Fire, as you would
do for Puffs, and fill your Oranges with it; they must be baked in a deep delf
Dish with no Paste under them; when you put them into your Dish put under them
three Quarters of a Pound of fine Powder Sugar, put in as much Water as will
wet your Sugar, and put your Oranges with the open Side uppermost; it will take
about an Hour and a half baking in a slow Oven; lie over them a light Puff
paste; when you dish it up take off the Lid, and turn the Oranges in the Pie,
cut the Lid in Sippets, and set them at an equal Distance, so serve it up.

144. To make a quaking Pudding another Way.
Take a Pint of Cream, boil it with one Stick of Cinnamon, take out the Spice
when it is boiled, then take the Yolks of eight Eggs, and four Whites, beat
them very well with some Sack, and mix your Eggs with the Cream, a little Salt
and Sugar, half a penny wheat Loaf, a Spoonful of Flower, a Quarter of a Pound
of Almonds blanched and beat fine, beat them altogether, wet a thick Cloth,
flower it, and put it in when the Pot boils; it must boil an Hour at least;
melted Butter, Sack and Sugar is Sauce for it; stick blanched Almonds and
candid Orange-peel on the Top, so serve it up.

145. To make Plumb Porridge.
Take two Shanks of Beef, and ten Quarts of Water, let it boil over a slow Fire
till it be tender, and when the Broth is strong, strain it out, wipe the Pot
and put in the Broth again, slice in two penny Loaves thin, cutting off the Top
and Bottom, put some of the Liquor to it, cover it up and let it stand for a
Quarter of an Hour, so put it into the Pot again, and let it boil a Quarter of
an Hour, then put in four Pound of Currants, and let them boil a little; then
put in two Pound of Raisins, and two Pound of Prunes, let them boil till they
swell; then put in a Quarter of an Ounce of Mace, a few Cloves beat fine, mix
it with a little Water, and put it into your Pot; also a Pound of Sugar, a
little Salt, a Quart or better of Claret, and the Juice of two or three Lemons
or Verjuice; thicken it with Sagoo instead of Bread; so put it in earthen Pots,
and keep it for Use.

146. To make a Palpatoon of Pigeons.
Take Mushrooms, Pallats, Oysters and Sweet-breads, fry them in Butter, put all
these in a strong Gravy, heat them over the Fire, and thicken them up with an
Egg and a little Butter; then take six or eight Pigeons, truss them as you
would for baking, season them with Pepper and Salt, and lay on them a Crust of
forced Meat as follows, viz. A Pound of Veal cut in little Bits, and a Pound
and a half of Marrow; beat it together in a Stone Mortar, after it is beat very
fine, season it with Mace, Pepper and Salt, put in the Yolks of four Eggs, and
two raw Eggs, mix all together with a few Bread-crumbs to a Paste: Make the
Sides and Lid of your Pie with it, then put your Ragoo into the Dish, and lay
in your Pigeons with Butter; an Hour and a half will bake it.

147. To fry Cucumbers for Mutton Sauce.
You must brown some Butter in a Pan, and cut six middling Cucumbers, pare and
slice them, but not over thin, drain them from the Water, then put them into
the Pan, when they are fried Brown put to them a little Pepper and Salt, a Lump
of Butter, a Spoonful of Vinegar, a little shred Onion, and a little Gravy, not
to make it too thin, so shake them well together with a little Flower.

You may lay them round your Mutton, or they are proper for a Side-dish.

148. To force a Fowl.
Take a good Fowl, pull and draw it, then slit the Skin down the Back, take the
Flesh from the Bones, and mince it very well, mix it with a little Beef Suet,
shred a Jill of large Oysters, chop a Shalot, a little grated Bread, and some
sweet Herbs, mix all together, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, make it
up with Yolks of Eggs, put it on the Bones and draw the Skin over it, few up
the Back, cut off the Legs, and put the Bones as you do a Fowl for boiling, tie
the Fowl up in a Cloth; an Hour will boil it. For Sauce take a few Oysters,
shred them, and put them into a little Gravy, with a Lump of Butter, a little
Lemon Peel shred and a little Juice, thicken it up with a little Flower, lie
the Fowl on the Dish, and pour the Sauce upon it; you may fry a little of the
forced Meat to lay round. Garnish your Dish with Lemon; you may set it in the
Oven if you have Convenience, only rub over it the Yolk of an Egg and a few
Breadcrumbs.

149. To make Strawberry and Rasberry Fool.
Take a pint of Rasberies, squeeze and strain the Juice, with a Spoonful of
Orange Water, put to the Juice six Ounces of fine Sugar, and boil it over the
Fire; then take a Pint of Cream and boil it, mix them together, and heat them
over the Fire, but not to boil, if it do it will crudle; stir it till it be
cold, put it into your Basin and keep it for Use.

150. To make a Posset with Almonds,
Blanch and beat three Quarters of a Pound of Almonds, so fine that they will
spread betwixt your Fingers like Butter, put in Water as you beat them to keep
them from Oiling; take a Pint of Sack, Cherry or Gooseberry Wine, and sweeten
it to your Taste with double refined Sugar, make it boiling Hot; take the
Almonds, put to them a little Water, and boil the Wine and Almonds together;
take the Yolks of four Eggs, and beat them very well, put to them three or four
Spoonfuls of Wine, then put it into your Pan by Degrees, stirring it all the
while; when it begins to thicken take it off, and stir it a little; put it into
a China Dish, and serve it up.

151. To make Dutch Beef.
Take the lean Part of a Buttock of Beef raw, rub it well with brown Sugar all
over, and let it lie in a Pan or Tray two or three Hours, turning it three or
four Times, then salt it with common Salt, and two Ounces of Saltpetre; let it
lie a Fortnight, turning it every Day* then roll it very straight, and put it
into a Cheese Press Day and Night, then take off the Cloth and hang it up to
dry in the Chimney; when you boil it let it be boiled very well, it will cut in
Shivers like Dutch Beef.

You may do a Leg of Mutton the same Way.

152. To make Pullony Sausages.
Take part of a Leg of Pork or Veal, pick it clean from the Skin or Fat, put to
every Pound of lean Meat a Pound of Beef Suet, picked from the Skins, shred the
Meat and Suet separate and very fine, mix them well together, add a large
Handful of green Sage shred very small; season it with Pepper and Salt, mix it
well, press it down hard in an earthen Pot, and keep it for Use.

When you use them roll them up with as much Egg as will make them roll smooth;
in rolling them up make them about the length of your Fingers, and as thick as
two Fingers; fry them in Butter, which must be boiled hot before you can put
them in, and keep them rolling about in the Pan; when they are fried through
they are enough.

153. To make an Amblet of Cockles.
Take four Whites and two Yolks of Eggs, a Pint of Cream, a little Flower, a
Nutmeg grated, a little Salt, and a Jill of Cockles, mix all together, and fry
it Brown.

This is proper for a side Dish either for Noon or Night.

154. To make a common quaking Pudding.
Take five Eggs, beat them well with a little Salt, put in three Spoonfuls of
fine Flower, take a Pint of New Milk and beat them well together, then take a
Cloth, butter and flower it, but do not give it over much room in the Cloth; an
Hour will boil it, give it a turn every now and then at the first putting in,
or else the Meal will settle to the Bottom; have a little plain Butter for
Sauce, and serve it up.

155. To make a boiled Tansey.
Take an old penny Loaf, cut off the out Crust, slice it thin, put to it as
much hot Cream as will wet it, six Eggs well beaten, a little shred Lemon Peel,
grate in a little Nutmeg, and a little Salt; green it as you did your baked
Tansey, so tie it up in a Cloth and boil it; it will take an Hour and a Quarter
boiling; when you dish it up stick it with candid Orange, and lay a Seville
Orange cut in Quarters round the Dish; serve it up with melted Butter.

156. A Tansey another Way.
Take an old penny Loaf, cut off the out Crust, slice it very thin, and put to
it as much hot Milk as will wet it; take six Eggs, beat them very well, grate
in half a Nutmeg, a little shred Lemon Peel, half a Pound of clarified Butter,
half a Pound of Sugar, and a little Salt; mix them well together. To green your
Tansey, Take a handful or two of Spinach, a handful of Tansey, and a handful of
Sorrel, clean them and beat them in a Marble Mortar, or grind it as you would
do Greensauce, strain it through a Linen Cloth into a Basin, and put into your
Tansey as much of the Juice as will green it, pour over for the Sauce a little
white Wine, Butter and Sugar; lay a Rim of Paste round your Dish and bake it;
when you serve it up cut a Seville Orange in Quarters, and lay it round the
Edge of the Dish.

157. To make Rice Pancakes.
Take half a Pound of Rice, wash and pick it clean, cree it in fair Water till
it be a Jelly, when it is cold take a Pint of Cream and the Yolks of four Eggs,
beat them very well together, and put them to the Rice, with grated Nutmeg and
some Salt, then put in half a Pound of Butter, and as much Flower as will make
it thick enough to fry, with as little Butter as you can.

158. To make Fruit Fritters.
Take a penny Loaf, cut off the out Crust, slice it, put to it as much hot Milk
as will wet it, beat five or six Eggs, put to them a quarter of a Pound of
Currants well cleaned, and a little candid Orange shred fine, so mix them well
together, drop them with a Spoon into a stew Pan in clarified Butter; have a
little white Wine, Butter and Sugar for your Sauce, put it into a China Basin,
lay your Fritters round, grate a little Sugar over them, and serve them up.

159. To make white Puddings in Skins.
Take half a Pound of Rice, cree it in Milk whilst it be soft, when it is creed
put it into a Cullinder to drain* take a penny Loaf, cut off the out Crust,
then cut it in thin Slices, scald it in a little Milk, but do not make it over
wet; take six Eggs and beat them very well, a Pound of Currants well cleaned, a
Pound of Beef Suet shred fine, two or three Spoonfuls of Rose Water, half a
Pound of powder Sugar, a little Salt, a quarter of an Ounce of Mace, a large
Nutmeg grated, and a small Stick of Cinnamon; beat them together, mix them very
well, and put them into the Skins; if you find it be too thick put to it a
little Cream; you may boil them near half an Hour, it will make them keep the
better.

160. To make black Puddings.
Take two Quarts of whole Oatmeal, pick it and half boil it, give it room in
your Cloth, (you must do it the Day before you use it) put it into the Blood
while it is warm, with a handful of Salt, stir it very well, beat eight or nine
Eggs in about a Pint of Cream, and a Quart of Bread-crumbs, a Handful or two of
Maslin Meal dressed through a hair Sieve, if you have it, if not put in
Wheat Flour; to this Quantity you make put an Ounce of Jamaica Pepper, an
Ounce of Black Pepper, a large Nutmeg and a little more Salt, Sweet-marjoram
and Thyme, if they be Green shred them fine, if Dry rub them to Powder, mix
them well together, and if it be too Thick put to it a little Milk; take four
Pound of Beef Suet, and four Pound of Lard, skin and cut it in thin Pieces, put
it into your Blood by Handfuls, as you fill your Puddings; when they are filled
and tied prick them with a Pin, it will keep them from bursting in the boiling;
(you must boil them twice) cover them close and it will make them Black.

161. An Orange Pudding another Way.
Take two Seville Oranges, the largest and clearest you can get, grate off the
outer Skin with a clean Grater; take eight Eggs, (leave out two of the Whites)
half a Pound of Loaf Sugar, beat it very fine, put it to your Eggs, and beat
them for an Hour, put to them Half a Pound of clarified Butter, and four Ounces
of Almonds blanched, and beat them with a little Rose Water; put in the Juice
of the Oranges, but mind you don't put in the Pippins, and mix all together;
bake it with a thin Paste over the bottom of the Dish. It must be baked in a
slow Oven.

162. To make Apple Fritters.
Take four Eggs and beat them very well, put to them four Spoonfuls of fine
Flower, a little Milk, about a quarter of a Pound of Sugar, a little Nutmeg and
Salt, so beat them very well together; you must not make it very thin, if you
do it will not stick to the Apple; take a middling Apple and pare it, cut out
the Core, and cut the rest in round Slices about the Thickness of a Shilling;
(you may take out the Core after you have cut it with your Thimble) have ready
a little Lard in a stew Pan; or any other deep Pan; then take your Apple every
Slice single, and dip it into your Blatter, let your Lard be very hot, so drop
them in; you must keep them turning whilst enough, and mind that they be not
over Brown; as you take them out lay them on a Pewter Dish before the Fire
whilst you have done; have a little white Wine, Butter and Sugar for the Sauce;
grate over them a little Loaf Sugar and serve them up.

163. To make an Herb Pudding.
Take a good Quantity of Spinach and Parsley, a little Sorrel and mild Thyme,
put to them a Handful of great Oatmeal creed, shred them together till they be
very small, put to them a Pound of Currants, well washed and cleaned, four Eggs
well beaten in a Jill of good Cream; if you would have it sweet, put in a
quarter of a Pound of Sugar, a little Nutmeg, a little Salt, and a Handful of
grated Bread; then meal your Cloth before you put it in close to boil; it will
take as much boiling as a Piece of Beef.

164. To make a Pudding for a Hare.
Take the Liver and chop it small with some Thyme, Parsley, Suet, Crumbs of
Bread mixed, with grated Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, an Egg, a little fat Bacon and
Lemon Peel; you must make the Composition very stiff, least it should dissolve,
and you loose your Pudding.

165. To make a Bread Pudding.
Take three Jills of Milk, when boiled, take a penny Loaf sliced thin, cut off
the out Crust, put on the boiling Milk, let it stand close covered till it be
cold, and beat it very well till all the Lumps be broke; take five Eggs beat
very well, grate in a little Nutmeg, shred some Lemon Peel, and a quarter of a
Pound of Butter or Beef Suet, with as much Sugar as will sweeten it; and
Currants as many as you please; let them be well cleaned; so put them into your
Dish, and bake or boil it.

166. To make Clare Pancakes.
Take five or six Eggs, and beat them very well with a little Salt, put to them
two or three Spoonfuls of Cream, a Spoonful of fine Flower, mix it with a
little Cream; take your Clare and wash it very clean, wipe it with a Cloth, put
your Eggs into a Pan, just to cover your Pan bottom, lay the Clare in Leaf by
Leaf, whilst you have covered your Pan all over; take a Spoon, and pour over
every Leaf till they are all covered; when it is done lay the brown Side
upwards, and serve it up.

167. To make a Liver Pudding.
Take a Pound of grated Bread, a Pound of Currants, a Pound and a half of
Marrow and Suet together cut small, three quarters of a Pound of Sugar, half an
Ounce of Cinnamon, a quarter of an Ounce of Mace, a Pint of grated Liver, and
some Salt, mix all together; take twelve Eggs, (leave out half of the Whites)
beat them well, put to them a Pint of Cream, make the Eggs and Cream warm, then
put it to the Pudding, stuff and stir it well together, so fill them in Skins;
put to them a few blanched Almonds shred fine, and a Spoonful or two of
Rose Water, so keep them for Use.

168. To make Oatmeal Fritters.
Boil a Quart of New Milk, steep a Pint of fine Flower or Oatmeal in it ten or
twelve Hours, then beat four Eggs in a little Milk, so much as will make it
like thick Blatter, drop them in by Spoonfuls into fresh Butter, a Spoonful of
Butter in a Cake, and grate Sugar over them; have Sack, Butter and Sugar for
Sauce.

169. To make Apple Dumplins.
Take half a Dozen Codlins, or any other good Apples, pare and core them, make
a little cold Butter Paste, and roll it up about the Thickness of your Finger,
so lap round every Apple, and tie them single in a fine Cloth, boil them in a
little Salt and Water, and let the Water boil before you put them in; half an
Hour will boil them; you must have for Sauce a little white Wine and Butter;
grate some Sugar round the Dish, and serve them up.

170. To make Herb Dumplins.
Take a Penny Loaf, cut off the out Crust, and the rest in Slices, put to it as
much hot Milk as will just wet it, take the Yolks and Whites of six Eggs, beat
them with two Spoonfuls of Powder Sugar, half a Nutmeg, and a little Salt, so
put it to your Bread; take half a Pound of Currants well cleaned, put them to
your Eggs, then take a Handful of the mildest Herbs you can get, gather them so
equal that the Taste of one be not above the other, wash and chop them very
small, put as many of them in as will make a deep Green, (don't put any Parsley
amongst them, nor any other strong Herb) so mix them all together, and boil
them in a Cloth, make them about they Bgness of middling Apples; about half an
Hour will boil them; put them into your Dish, and have a little candid Orange,
white Wine, Butter and Sugar for Sauce, so serve them up.

171. To make Marrow Tarts.
To a Quart of Cream put the Yolks of twelve Eggs, half a Pound of Sugar, some
beaten Mace and Cinnamon, a little Salt and some Sack, set it on the Fire with
half a Pound of Biskets, as much Marrow, a little Orange-peel and Lemon Peel;
stir it on the Fire till it becomes thick, and when it is cold put it into a
Dish with Puff-paste, then bake it gently in a slow Oven.

172. To make plain Fruit Dumplins.
Take as much Flower as you would have Dumplins in Quantity, put to it a
Spoonful of Sugar, a little Salt, a little Nutmeg, a Spoonful of light Yeast,
and half a Pound of Currants well washed and cleaned, so knead them the
stiffness you do a common Dumplin; you must have white Wine, Sugar and Butter
for Sauce; you may boil them either in a Cloth or without; so serve them up.

173. To make Oyster Loaves.
Take half a Dozen French Loaves, rasp them and make a little Hole at the Top,
take out all the Crumbs, and fry them in Butter till they be Crisp; when your
Oysters are stewed, put them into your Loaves, cover them up before the Fire to
keep hot whilst you want them; so serve them up.

They are proper either for a side Dish or middle Dish.

You may make Cockle Loaves or Mushroom Loaves the same Way.

174. To make a Gooseberry Pudding.
Take a Quart of green Gooseberries, pick, coddle, bruise and rub them through
a hair Sieve to take out the Pulp; take six Spoonfuls of the Pulp, six Eggs,
three Quarters of a Pound of Sugar, half a Pound of clarified Butter, a little
Lemon Peel shred fine, a handful of Bread-crumbs or Biscuit, a Spoonful of
Rose Water or Orange-flower Water; mix these well together, and bake it with
Paste round the Dish; you may add Sweetmeats if you please.

175. To make an Eel Pie.
Case and clean the Eels, season them with a little Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt,
cut them in long Pieces; you must make your Pie with hot Butter Paste, let it
be Oval with a thin Crust; lay in your Eels length Way, putting over them a
little fresh Butter; so bake them.

Eel Pyes are good and eat very well with Currants, but if you put in Currants
you must not use any Black Pepper, but a little Jamaica Pepper.

176. To make a Turbot-Head Pie.
Take a middling Turbot-Head, pretty well cut off, wash it clean, take out the
Gills, season it pretty well with Mace, Pepper and Salt, so put it into a deep
Dish with half a Pound of Butter, cover it with light Puff-paste, but lay none
in the Bottom; when it is baked take out the Liquor and the Butter that it was
baked in, put it into a Sauce-pan with a Lump of fresh Butter and Flower to
thicken it, with an Anchovie and a Glass of white Wine, so pour it into your
Pie again over the Fish; you may lie round half a dozen Yolks of Eggs at an
equal Distance; when you have cut off the Lid, lie it in Sippets round your
Dish, and serve it up.

177. To make a Caudle for a sweet Veal Pie.
Take about a Jill of white Wine and Verjuice mixed, make it very hot, beat the
Yolk of an Egg very well, and then mix them together as you would do mull'd
Ale; you must sweeten it very well, because there is no Sugar in the Pie.

This Caudle will do for any other Sort of Pie that is sweet.

178. To make Sweet-meat Tarts.
Make a little Shell Paste, roll it, and line your Tins, prick them in the
Inside, and so bake them, when you serve them up put in any sort of
Sweetmeats, what you please.

You may have a different Sort every Day, do but keep your Shells baked by you.

179. To make Orange Tarts.
Take two or three Seville Oranges and boil them, shift them in the boiling to
take out the Bitter, cut them in two, take out the Pippins, and cut them in
Slices; they must be baked in crisp Paste; when you fill the Petty-pans, lay in
a Layer of Oranges and a Layer of Sugar, (a Pound will sweeten a Dozen of small
Tins, if you do not put in too much Orange) bake them in a slow Oven, and Ice
them over.

180. To make a Tansey another Way.
Take a Pint of Cream, some Biskets without Seeds, two or three Spoonfuls of
fine Flower, nine Eggs, leaving out two of the Whites, some Nutmeg, and
Orange-flower Water, a little Juice of Tansey and Spinach, put it into a Pan
till it be pretty thick, then fry or bake it, if fried take Care that you do
not let it be over brown. Garnish with Orange and Sugar, so serve it up.

181. A good Paste for Tarts.
Take a Pint of Flower, and rub a Quarter of a Pound of Butter into it, beat
two Eggs with a Spoonful of double refined Sugar, and two or three Spoonfuls of
Cream to make it into Paste; work it as little as you can, roll it out thin;
butter your Tins, dust on some Flower, then lay in your Paste, and do not fill
them too full.

182. To make transparent Tarts.
Take a Pound of Flower well dried, beat one Egg till it be very thin, then
melt almost three Quarters of a Pound of Butter without Salt, and let it be
cold enough to mix with an Egg, then put it into the Flower and make your
Paste, roll it very thin, when you are setting them into the Oven wet them over
with a little fair Water, and grate a little Sugar; if you bake them rightly
they will be very fine.

183. To make a Shell Paste.
Take half a Pound of fine Flower, and a Quarter of a Pound of Butter, the
Yolks of two Eggs and one White, two Ounces of Sugar finely sifted, mix all
these together with a little Water, and roll it very thin whilst you can see
through it; when you Lid your Tarts prick them to keep them from Blistering;
make sure to roll them even, and when you bake them Ice them.

184. To make Paste for Tarts.
Take the Yolks of five or six Eggs, just as you would have Paste in Quantity;
to the Yolks of six Eggs put a Pound of Butter; work the Butter with your Hand
whilst it take up all the Eggs, then take some London Flower and work it with
your Butter whilst it comes to a Paste, put in about two Spoonfuls of Loaf
Sugar beat and sifted, and about half a Jill of Water; when you have wrought it
well together it is fit for Use.

This is a Paste that seldom runs if it be even rolled; roll it thin, but let
your Lids be thiner than your Bottoms; when you have made your Tarts, prick
them over with a Pin to keep them from Blistering; when you are going to put
them into the Oven, wet them over with a Feather dip in fair Water, and grate
over them a little double refined Loaf Sugar, it will Ice them; but don't let
them be baked in a hot Oven.

185. A short Paste for Tarts.
Take a Pound of Wheat Flour, and rub it very small, three Quarters of a Pound
of Butter, rub it as small as the Flower, put to it three Spoonfuls of Loaf
Sugar beat and sifted, take the Yolks of four Eggs, and beat them very well;
put to them a Spoonful or two of Rose Water, and work them into a Paste, then
roll them thin, and Ice them over as you did the other if you please, and bake
them in a slow Oven.

186. To make a light Paste for a Venison Pasty, or other Pie.
Take a quarter of a Peck of fine Flower, or as much as you think you have
Occasion for, and to every Quartern of Flower put a Pound and a Quarter of
Butter, break the third Part of your Butter into the Flower; then take the
Whites of three or four Eggs, beat them very well to a Froth, and put to them
as much Water as will knead the Meal; do not knead it over Stiff, so then roll
it in the rest of your Butter; you must roll it in five or six Times over at
least, and strinkle a little Flower over your Butter every Time you roll it up,
lap it up the cross Way, and it will be fit for Use.

187. To make a Paste for a standing Pie.
Take a Quartern of Flower or more if you have Occasion, and to every Quartern
of Flower put a Pound of Butter and a little Salt, knead it with boiling Water,
then work it very well, and let it lie whilst it is cold.

This Paste is good enough for a Goose Pie, or any other standing Pie.

188. A light Paste for a Dish Pie.
Take a Quartern of Flower, and break into it a Pound of Butter in large
Pieces, knead it very Stiff, handle it as lightly as you can, and roll it once
or twice, then it is fit for Use.

189. To make Cheese Cakes.
Take a Gallon of New Milk, make of it a tender Curd, wring the Whey from it,
put it into a Basin, and break three Quarters of a Pound of Butter into the
Curd, then with a clean Hand work the Butter and Curd together till all the
Butter be melted, and rub it in a hair Sieve with the Back of a Spoon till all
be through; then take six Eggs, beat them with a few Spoonfuls of Rose Water or
Sack, put it into your Curd with half a Pound of fine Sugar and a Nutmeg
grated; mix them all totogether with a little Salt, some Currants and Almonds;
then make up your Paste of fine Flower, with cold Butter and a little Sugar;
roll your Paste very thin, fill you Tins with the Curd, and set them in an
Oven, when they are almost enough take them out, then take a Quarter of a Pound
of Butter, with a little Rose Water, and part of a half Pound of Sugar, let it
stand on the Coals till the Butter be melted, then pour into each Cake some of
it, set them in the Oven again till they be brown; so keep them for Use.

190. To make Gooser Wafers.
Take a Pound of fine Flower and six Eggs, beat them very well, put to them
about a Jill of Milk, mix it well with the Flower, put in half a Pound of
clarified Butter, half a Pound of powder Sugar, half of a Nutmeg, and a little
Salt; you may add to it two or three Spoonfuls of Cream; then take your
Goofer-Irons and put them into the Fire to heat, when they are hot rub them
over the first Time with a little Butter in a Cloth, put your Blatter into one
Side of your Goofer-Irons, put them into the Fire, and keep turning the Irons
every now and then, (if your Irons be too hot they burn soon) make them a Day
or two before you use them, only set them down before the Fire on a Pewter Dish
before you serve them up; have a little white Wine and Butter for your Sauce,
grating some Sugar over them.

191. To make common Curd Cheese-Cakes.
Take a Pennyworth of Curds, mix them with a little Cream, beat four Eggs, put
to them six Ounces of clarified Butter, a quarter of a Pound of Sugar, half a
Pound of Currants well washed, and a little Lemon Peel shred, a little Nutmeg,
a Spoonful of Rose Water or Brandy, whether you please, and a little Salt, mix
altogether, and bake them in small Pettypans.

192. Cheese Cakes without Currants.
Take five Quarts of New-Milk, run it to a tender Curd, then hang it in a Cloth
to drain, rub into them a Pound of Butter that is well washed in Rose Water,
put to it the Yolks of seven or eight Eggs, and two of the Whites; season it
with Cinnamon, Nutmeg and Sugar.

193. To make a Curd Pudding.
Take three Quarts of New-Milk, put to it a little Erning, as much as will
break it, when it is scumm'd break it down with your Hand, and when it is
drained grind it with a Mustard Ball in a Bowl, or beat it in a Marble-Mortar;
then take half a Pound of Butter and six Eggs, leaving out three of the Whites;
beat the Eggs well and put them into the Curds and Butter, grate in half a
Nutmeg, a little Lemon Peel shred fine, and Salt; sweeten it to your Taste,
beat them all together, and bake them in little Pe^^ pans with fast Bottoms; a
quarter of an Hour will bake them; you must butter the Tins very well before
you put them in; when you dish them up you must lay them the wrong Side upwards
on the Dish, and stick them with either blanched Almonds, candid Orange, or
Citron cut in long Bits, and grate a little Loaf-Sugar over them.

194. To make a slipcoat Cheese.
Take five Quarts of New-Milk, a Quart of Cream, and a Quart of Water, boil
your Water, then put your Cream to it; when your Milk is New-Milk warm put in
your Erning, take your Curd into the Strainer, break it as little as you can,
and let it drain, then put it into your Fat, press it by Degrees, and lay it in
Grass.

195. To make Cream Cheese.
Take three Quarts of New-Milk, one Quart of Cream, and a Spoonful of Erning,
put them together, let it stand till it comes to the hardness of a strong
Jelly, then put it into the Mould, shifting it often into dry Clothes, lay the
Weight of three Pounds upon it, and about two Hours after you may lay six or
seven Pounds upon it; turn it often into dry Clothes till Night, then take the
Weight off, and let it lie in the Mould without Weight and Cloth till Morning,
and when it is so dry that it does not wet a Cloth, keep it in Greens till
(...) for Use; if you please you may put a little Salt into it.

196. To make Pike eat like Sturgeon.
Take the thick Part of a large Pike and scale it, set on two Quarts of Water
to boil it in, put in a Jill of Vinegar, a large Handful of Salt, and when it
boils put in your Pike, but first bind it about with coarse Inkle; when it is
boiled you must not take off the Inkle or Baising, but let it be on all the
Time it is in Eating; it must be kept in the same Pickle it was boiled in, and
if you think it be not strong enough you must add a little more Salt and
Vinegar, so when it is cold put it upon your Pike, and keep it for Use; before
you boil the Pike take out the Bone.

You may do Scate the same Way, and in my Opinion it eats more like Sturgeon.

197. To Collar Eels.
Take the largest Eels you can get, skin and split them down the Belly, take
out the Bones, season them with a little Mace, Nutmeg and Salt; begin at the
Tail and roll them up very tight, so bind them up in a little coarse Inkle,
boil it in Salt and Water, a few Bay Leaves, a little whole Pepper, and a
little Alegar or Vinegar; it will take an Hour boiling, according as your Roll
is in Bigness; when it is boiled you must tie it and hang it up whilst it be
cold, then put it into the Liquor that it was boiled in, and keep it for Use.

If your Eels be small you may robe two or three of them together.

198. To Pot Smelts.
Take the freshest and largest Smelts you can get, wipe them very well with a
clean Cloth, take out the Guts with a Skewer, (but you must not take out the
Milt and Roan) season them with a little Mace, Nutmeg and Salt, so lie them in
a flat Pot; if you have two Score you must lay over them five Ounces of Butter;
tie over them a Paper, and set them in a slow Oven; if it be over hot it will
burn them, and make them look black; an Hour will bake them; when they are
baked you must take them out and lay them on a Dish to drain, and when they are
drained you must put them in long Pots about the Length of your Smelts; when
you lay them in you must put betwixt every Layer the same Seasoning as you did
before, to make them keep; when they are cold cover them over with clarified
Butter, so keep them for Use.

199. To Pickle Smelts.
Take the best and largest Smelts you can get; gut, wash and wipe them, lie
them in a flat Pot, cover them with a little white Wine Vinegar, two or three
Blades of Mace, and a little Pepper and Salt; bake them in a slow Oven, and
keep them for Use.

200. To Stew a Pike.
Take a large Pike, scale and clean it, season it in the Belly with a little
Mace and Salt; skewer it round, put it into a deep Stew Pan, with a Pint of
small Gravy and a Pint of Claret, two or three Blades of Mace, set it over a
Stove with a slow Fire, and cover it up close; when it is enough take Part of
the Liquor, put to it two Anchoves, a little Lemon peel shred fine, and thicken
the Sauce with Flower and Butter; before you lie the Pike on the Dish turn it
with the Back upwards, take off the Skin, and serve it up. Garnish your Dish
with Lemon and Pickle.

201. Sauce for a Pike.
Take a little of the Liquor that comes from the Pike when you take it out of
the Oven, put to it two or three Anchoves, a little Lemon Peel shred, a
Spoonful or two of White Wine, or a little Juice of Lemon, which you please,
put to it some Butter and Flower, make your Sauce about the thickness of Cream,
put it into a Basin or silver Boat, and set in your Dish with your Pike, you
may lie round your Pike any Sort of fried Fish, or broiled, if you have it; you
may have the same Sauce for a broiled Pike, only add a little good Gravy, a few
shred Capers, a little Parsley, and a Spoonful or two of Oyster and Cockle
Pickle if you have it.

202. How to roast a Pike with a Pudding in the Belly.
Take a large Pike, scale and clean it, draw it at the Gills. -- To make a
Pudding for the Pike. Take a large Handful of Bread-crumbs, as much Beef Suet
shred fine, two Eggs, a little Pepper and Salt, a little grated Nutmeg, a
little Parsley, Sweet-marjoram and Lemon Peel shred fine; so mix all together,
put it into the Belly of your Pike, skewer it round and lie it in an earthen
Dish with a Lump of Butter over it, a little Salt and Flower, so set it in the
Oven; an Hour will roast it.

203. To dress a Cod's Head.
Take a Cod's Head, wash and clean it, take out the Gills, cut it open, and
make it to lie Flat; (if you have not Convenience of boiling it you may do it
in an Oven, and it will be as well or better) put it into a Copper Dish or
Earthen one, lie upon it a little Butter, Salt, and Flower, and when it is
enough take off the Skin.

Sauce for the Cod's Head.
Take a little white Gravy, about a Pint of Oysters or Cockles, a little shred
Lemon Peel, two or three Spoonfuls of white Wine, and about half a Pound of
Butter thickened with Flower, and put it into your Boat or Basin.

Another Sauce for a Cod's Head.
Take a Pint of good Gravy, a Lobster or Crab, which you can get, dress and put
it into your Gravy with a little Butter, Juice of Lemon, shred Lemon peel, and
a few Shrimps if you have them; thicken it with a little Flower, and put it
into your Basin; set the Oysters on one Side of the Dish and this on the other;
lay round the Head boiled Whitings, or any fried Fish; pour over your Head a
little melted Butter. Garnish your Dish with Horseradish, Slices of Lemon and
Pickles.

204. To stew Carp or Tench.
Take your Carp or Tench and wash them, scale the Carp but not the Tench, when
you have cleaned them wipe them with a Cloth, and fry them in a frying Pan with
a little Butter to harden the Skin; before you put them into the stew Pan, put
to them a little good Gravy, the Quantity will be according to the largeness of
your Fish, with a Jill of Claret, three or four Anchoves at least, a little
shred Lemon Peel, a Blade or two of Mace, let all stew together, till your Carp
be enough, over a slow Fire; when it is enough take Part of the Liquor, put to
it half a Pound of Butter, and thicken it with a little Flower; so serve them
up. Garnish your Dish with crisp Parsley, Slices of Lemon and Pickles.

If you have not the Convenience of stewing them, you may broil them before a
Fire, only adding the same Sauce.

205. How to make Sauce for a boiled Salmon or Turbot.
Take a little mild white Gravy, two or three Anchoves, a Spoonful of Oyster or
Cockle Pickle, a little shred Lemon Peel, half a Pound of Butter, a little
Parsley and Fennel shred small, and a little Juice of Lemon, but not too much,
for fear it should take of the Sweetness.

206. To make Sauce for Haddock or Cod, either broiled or boiled.
Take a little Gravy, a few Cockles, Oysters or Mushrooms, put to them a little
of the Gravy that comes from the Fish, either broiled or boiled, it will do
very well if you have no other Gravy, a little Catchup and a Lump of Butter; if
you have neither Oysters nor Cockles you may put in an Anchove or two, and
thicken with Flower; you may put in a few shred Capers, or a little Mango if
you have it.

207. To stew Eels.
Take your Eels, case, clean, and skewer them round, put them into a stew Pan
with a little good Gravy, a little Claret to redden the Gravy, a Blade or two
of Mace, an Anchove, and a little Lemon Peel; when they are enough thicken them
with a little Flower and Butter. Garnish your Dish with Parsley.

208. To pitch-cock Eels.
Take your Eels, case and clean them, season them with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt,
skewer them round, broil them before the Fire, and baste them with a little
Butter; when they are almost enough strinkle them over with a little shred
Parsley, and make your Sauce of a little Gravy, Butter, Anchove, and a little
Oyster Pickle if you have it; don't pour the Sauce over your Eels, put it into
a China Basin, and set in it the middle of your Dish. Garnish with crisp
Parsley, and serve them up.

209. To boil Herrings.
Take your Herrings, scale and wash them, take out the Milt and Roan, skewer
them round, and tie them with a String or else they will come loose in the
Boiling and be spoiled; set on a pretty broad stew Pan, with as much Water as
will cover them, put to it a little Salt, lie in your Herrings with the Backs
downwards, boil with them the Milt and Roans to lie round them; they will boil
in half a Quarter of an Hour over a slow Fire; when they are boiled take them
up with an Egg Slice so turn them over, and set them to drain. Make your Sauce
of a little Gravy and Butter, an Anchove, and a little boiled Parsley shred;
put it into the Basin, set it in the middle of the Dish, lie the Herrings round
with their Tails toward the Basin, and lie the Milts and Roans betwixt every
Herring. Garnish with crisp Parsley and Lemon; so serve them up.

210. To fry Herrings.
Scale and wash your Herrings clean, strew over them a little Flower and Salt:
let your Butter be very hot before you put your Herrings into the Pan, then
shake to keep them stirring, and fry them over a brisk Fire; when they are
fried cut off the Heads and bruise them, put to them a Jill of Ale, (but the
Ale must not be bitter) add a little Pepper and Salt, a small Onion or Shalot,
if you have them, and boil them all together; when they are boiled, strain
them, and put them into your Sauce-Pan again, thicken them with a little Flower
and Butter, put it into a Basin, and set it in the middle of your Dish; fry the
Milts and Roans together, and lay round your Herrings. Garnish your Dish with
crisp Parsley, and serve it up.

211. To pickle Herrings.
Scale and clean your Herrings, take out the Milts and Roans, and skewer them
round, season them with a little Pepper and Salt, put them in a deep Pot, cover
them with Alegar, put to them a little whole Jamaica Pepper, and two or three
Bay Leaves; bake them and keep them for Use.

112. To stew Oysters.
Take a Score or two of Oysters, according as you have Occasion, put them into
a small stew Pan, with a few Bread-crumbs, a little Water, shred Mace and
Pepper, a Lump of Butter, and a Spoonful of Vinegar, (not to make it sour) boil
them all together, but not over much, if you do it makes them hard. Garnish
with Bread Sippets, and serve them up.

213. To fry Oysters.
Take a Score or two of the largest Oysters you can get, and the Yolks of four
or five Eggs, beat them very well, put to them a little Nutmeg, Pepper and
Salt, a Spoonful of fine Flower, and a little raw Parsley shred, so dip in your
Oysters, and fry them in Butter a light Brown.

They are very proper to lie about either stewed Oysters, or any other Fish, or
made Dishes.

214. Oysters in Scallop Shells.
Take half a Dozen small Scallop Shells, lay in the bottom of every Shell a
Lump of Butter, a few Bread Crumbs, and then your Oysters; lying over them
again a few more Bread-crumbs, a little Butter, and a little beat Pepper, so
set them to crisp, either in the Oven or before the Fire, and serve them up.

They are proper for either a side Dish or middle Dish.

215. To keep Herrings all the Year.
Take fresh Herrings, cut off their Heads, open and wash them very clean,
season them with Salt, black Pepper, and Jamaica Pepper, put them into a Pot,
cover them with white Wine Vinegar and Water, of each an equal Quantity, and
set them in a slow Oven to bake; tie the Pot up close and they will keep a Year
in the Pickle.

216. To make artificial Sturgeon another Way.
Take out the Bones of a Turbot or Britt, lay it in Salt twenty-four Hours,
boil it with good store of Salt; make your Pickle of white Wine Vinegar and
three Quarts of Water, boil them, and put in a little Vinegar in the boiling;
don't boil it over much, if you do it will make it soft; when it is enough take
it out till it be cold, put the same Pickle to it, and keep it for Use.

217. To stew Mushrooms.
Take Mushrooms and clean them, the Buttons you may wash, but the Flaps you
must pill both inside and out; when you have cleaned them, pick out the little
ones for pickling, and cut the rest in Pieces for stewing; wash them and put
them into a little Water, give them a boil and it will take off the Faintness,
so drain from them all the Water, then put them into a pan with a Lump of
Butter, a little shred Mace, Pepper and Salt to your Taste (putting to them a
little Water) hang them over a slow Fire for half an Hour, when they are enough
thicken them with a little Flower; serve them up with Sippets.

218. To make Almond Puffs.
Take a Pound of Almonds blanched, and beat them with Orange-flower Water, then
take a Pound of Sugar, and boil them almost to a Candy height, put in your
Almonds and stir them on the Fire, keep stirring them till they be stiff, then
take them off the Fire and stir them till they be cold; beat them a quarter of
an Hour in a Mortar, putting to them a Pound of Sugar sifted, and a little
Lemon Peel grated, make it into a Paste with the Whites of three Eggs, and beat
it into a Froth more or less as you think proper; bake them in an Oven almost
cold, and keep them for Use.

219. To pot Mushrooms.
Take the largest Mushrooms, scrape and clean them, put them into your Pan with
a Lump of Butter, and a little Salt, let them stew over a slow Fire whilst they
are enough, put to them a little Mace and whole Pepper, then dry them with a
Cloth, and put them down into a Pot as close as you can, and as you lie them
down strinkle in a little Salt and Mace, when they are cold cover them over
with Butter; when you use them toss them up with Gravy, a few Bread-crumbs and
Butter; do not make your Pot over large, but rather put them into two Pots;
they will keep the better if you take the Gravy from them when they are stewed.

They are good for Fish Sauce, or any other whilst they are fresh.

220. To fry Trout or any other Sort of Fish.
Take two or three Eggs, more or less according as you have Fish to fry, take
the Fish and cut it in thin Slices, lie it upon a Board, rub the Eggs over it
with a Feather, and strew on a little Flower and Salt, fry it in fine Drippings
or Butter, let the Drippings be very hot before you put in the Fish, but do not
let it burn, if you do it will make the Fish black; when the Fish is in the
Pan, you may do the other Side with the Egg, and as you fry it lay it to drain
before the Fire till all be fried, then it is ready for Use.

221. To make Sauce for Salmon or Turbot.
Boil your Turbot or Salmon, and set it to drain; take the Gravy that drains
from the Salmon or Turbot, an Anchove or two, a little Lemon Peel shred, a
Spoonful of Catchup, and a little Butter, thicken it with Flower the Thickness
of Cream, put to it a little shred Parsley and Fennel; but do not put in your
Parsley and Fennel till you be just going to send it up, for it will take off
the Green.

The Gravy of all Sorts of Fish is a great Addition to your Sauce if the Fish
be sweet.

222. To dress Cod's Zoons.
Lie them in Water all Night, and then boil them, if they be Salt shift them
once in the boiling, when they are tender cut them in long Pieces, dress them
up with Eggs as you do Salt Fish, take one or two of them and cut into square
Pieces, dip them in Egg and fry them to lay round your Dish.

It is proper to lie about any other Dish.

223. To make Solomon Gundie to eat in Lent.
Take five or six white Herrings, lay them in Water all Night, boil them as
soft as you would do for Eating, and shift them in the boiling to take out the
Saltness; when they are boiled take the Fish from the Bone, and mind you don't
break the Bone in Pieces, leaving on the Head and Tail; take the white Part of
the Herrings, a quarter of a Pound of Anchoves, a large Apple, a little Onion
shred fine, or Shallot, and a little Lemon Peel, shred them all together, and
lie them over the Bones on both Sides, in the Shape of a Herring; then take off
the Peel of a Lemon very thin, and cut it in long Bits, just as it will reach
over the Herrings; you must lie this Peel over every Herring pretty thick.
Garnish your Dish with a few pickled Oysters, Capers, and Mushrooms if you have
any; so serve them up.

224. Solomon Gundie another Way.
Take the white Part of a Turkey, or other Fowl, if you have neither, take a
little white Veal and mince it pretty small; take a little hang Beef or
Tongues, scrape them very fine, a few shred Capers, and the Yolks, of four or
five Eggs shred small; take a Delf Dish and lie a Delf Plate in the Dish with
the wrong Side up, so lie on your Meat and other Ingredients, all single in
Quarters, one to answer another; set in the middle a large Lemon or Mango, so
lie round your Dish Anchoves in Lumps, pickled Oysters or Cockles, and a few
pickled Mushrooms, slices of Lemon and Capers; so serve it up.

This is proper for a side Dish either at Noon or Night.

225. To make Lemon Cheese Cakes.
Blanch half a Pound of Almonds, and beat them in a Stone Mortar very fine,
with a little Rose Water; put in eight Eggs, leaving out five of the Whites;
take three Quarters of a Pound of Sugar, and three Quarters of a Pound of
melted Butter, beat all together, then take three Lemon Skins, boiled tender,
the Rind and all, beat them very well, and mix them with the rest, then put
them into your Paste.

You may make a Lemon Pudding the same Way, only add the Juice of half a Lemon:
Before you set them in the Oven, grate over them a little fine Loaf Sugar.

226. To make white Ginger-Bread.
Take a little Gum-Dragon, lay it in Rose Water all Night, then take a Pound of
Jordan Almonds blanched with a little of the Gum-Water, a Pound of double
refined Sugar beat and sifted, an Ounce of Cinnamon beat with a little Rose
Water, work it into a Paste and print it, then set it in a Stove to dry.

227. To make red Ginger Bread.
Take a Quart and a Jill of red Wine, a Jill and a half of Brandy, seven or
eight Manshets, according to the Size the Bread is, grate them, (the Cursed must
be dried, beat and sifted) three Pounds and a half of Sugar beat and sifted,
two Ounces of Cinnamon, and two Ounces of Ginger beat and sifted, a Pound of
Almonds blanched and beat with Rose Water, put the Bread into the Liquor by
Degrees, stirring it all the Time, when the Bread is all well mixed take it off
the Fire; you must put the Sugar, Spices, and Almonds into it, when it is cold
print it; keep some of the Spice to dust the Prints with.

228. To make a great Cake.
Take five Pound of fine Flower, (let it be dried very well before the Fire)
and six Pound of Currants well dressed and rubbed in Cloths after they are
washed, set them in a Sieve before the Fire; you must weigh your Currants after
they are cleaned, then take three Quarters of an Ounce of Mace, two large
Nutmegs beaten and mixed amongst the Flower, a Pound of powder Sugar, a Pound
of Citron, and a Pound of candid Orange, (cut your Citron and Orange in pretty
large Pieces) and a Pound of Almonds cut in three or four Pieces long way; then
take sixteen Eggs, leaving out half of the Whites, beat your Sugar and Eggs for
half an Hour with a little Salt; take three Jills of Cream, and three Pounds
and a half of Butter, melt your Butter with part of the Cream for fear it
should be too hot, put in betwixt a Jack and a Jill of good Brandy, a Quart of
light Yeast, and the rest of the Cream, mix all your Liquors together about
Blood-warm, make a Hole in the middle of your Flower, and put in the Liquids,
cover it half an Hour and let it stand to rise, then put in your Currants and
mix all together; butter your Hoop, tie a Paper threefold, and put it at the
Bottom in your Hoop; just when they are ready to set in the Oven, put the Cake
into your Hoop at three Times; when you have laid a little Paste at the Bottom,
lay in part of your Sweetmeats and Almonds, then put in a little Paste over
them again, and the rest of your Sweetmeats and Almonds, then lay on the rest
of your Paste, and set it in a quick Oven; two Hours will bake it.

229. To make Iceing for this Cake.
Take two Pounds of double-refined Sugar, beat it, and sift it through a fine
Sieve; put to it a Spoonful of fine Starch, a Pennyworth of Gum-Arabic, beat
them all well together; take the Whites of four or five Eggs, beat them well,
and put to them a Spoonful of Rose Water, or Orange-flower Water, a Spoonful of
Juice of Lemon, beat them with the whites of your Eggs, and put in a little to
your Sugar till you wet it, then beat them for two Hours whilst your Cake is
baking; if you make it over thin it will run; when you lie it on your Cake you
must lie it on with a Knife; if you would have the Iceing very thick, you must
add a little more Sugar; wipe off the loose Currants before you put on the
Iceing, and put it into the Oven to harden the Iceing.

230. To make a Plumb Cake.
Take five Pound of Flower dried and cold, mix to it an Ounce of Mace, half an
Ounce of Cinnamon, a Quarter of an Ounce of Nutmegs, half a Quarter of an Ounce
of Lemon Peel grated, and a Pound of fine Sugar; take fifteen Eggs, leaving out
seven of the whites, beat your Eggs with half a Jill of Brandy or Sack, a
little Orange-flower Water, or Rose Water; then put to your Eggs near a Quart
of light Yeast, set it on the Fire with a Quart of Cream, and three Pound of
Butter, let your Butter melt in the Cream, so let it stand till new Milk warm,
then shim off all the Butter and most of the Milk, and mix it to your Eggs and
Yeast; make a Hole in the middle of your Flower, and put in your Yeast,
strinkle at the Top a little Flower, then mix to it a little Salt, six Pounds
of Currants well washed, cleaned, dried, picked, and plump'd by the Fire, a
Pound of the best Raisins stoned, and beat them altogether whilst they leave
the Bowl; put in a Pound of candid Orange, and half a Pound of Citron cut in
long Pieces; then butter the Garth and fill it full; bake it in a quick Oven,
against it be enough have an Iceing ready.

231. To make a Carraway Cake.
Take eighteen Eggs, leave out half of the Whites, and beat them; take two
Pound of Butter, wash the Butter clear from Milk and Salt, put to it a little
Rose Water, and wash your Butter very well with your Hands till it take up all
the Eggs, then mix them in half a Jack of Brandy and Sack; grate into your Eggs
a Lemon Rind; put in by Degrees (a Spoonful at a Time) two Pound of fine
Flower, a Pound and a half of Loaf Sugar, that is sifted and Dry; when you have
mixed them very well with your Hands, take a Thible and beat it very well for
half an Hour, till it look very white, then mix to it a few Seeds, six Ounces
of Carraway Comfits, and half a Pound of Citron and Candid Orange; then beat it
well, butter your Garth, and put it in a quick Oven.

232. To make Cakes to keep all the Year.
Have in readiness a Pound and four Ounces of Flower well dried, take a Pound
of Butter unsalted, work it with a Pound of white Sugar till it cream, three
Spoonfuls of Sack, and the Rind of an Orange, boil it till it is not bitter,
and beat it with Sugar, work these together, then clean your Hands, and grate a
Nutmeg into your Flower, put in three Eggs and two Whites, mix them well, then
with a Paste-pin or Thible stir in your Flower to the Butter, make them up into
little Cakes, wet the Top with Sack and strew on fine Sugar; bake them on
buttered Papers, well flowered, but not too much; you may add a Pound of
Currants washed and warmed.

233. To make Shrewsberry Cakes.
Take two Pound of fine Flower, put to it a Pound and a Quarter of Butter (rub
them very well) a Pound and a Quarter of fine Sugar sifted, grate in a Nutmeg,
beat in three Whites of Eggs and two Yolks, with a little Rose Water, and so
knead your Paste with it, let it lay an Hour, then make it up into Cakes, prick
them and lay them on Papers, wet them with a Feather dipped in Rose Water, and
grate over them a little fine Sugar; bake them in a slow Oven, either on Tins
or Paper.

234. To make a fine Cake.
Take five Pounds of fine Flower dried, and keep it warm; four Pounds of Loaf
Sugar pounded, sifted and warmed; five Pounds of Currants well cleaned and
warmed before the Fire; a Pound and a half of Almonds blanched, beat, dried,
slit and kept warm; five Pounds of good Butter well washed and beat from the
Water; then work it an Hour and a half till it comes to a fine Cream; put to
the Butter all the Sugar, work it up, and then the Flower, put in a Pint of
Brandy, then all the Whites and Yolks of the Eggs, mix all the Currants and
Almonds with the rest. There must be four Pound of Eggs in Weight in the
Shells, the Yolks and the Whites beat and separated, the Whites beat to a
Froth; you must not cease beating till they are beat to a Curd, to prevent
Oiling; to the Quantity of a Cake put a Pound and half of Orange-peel and
Citron shred, without Plumbs, and half a Pound of Carraway Seeds; it will
require four Hours baking, and the Oven must be as hot as for Bread, but let it
be well slaked when it has remained an Hour in the Oven, and stop it close; you
may Ice it if you please.

235. To make a Seed Cake.
Take one Quartern of fine Flower well dried before the Fire, when it is cold
rub in a Pound of Butter; take three Quarters of a Pound of Carraway Comfits,
six Spoonfuls of new Yeast, six Spoonfuls of Cream, the Yolks of six Eggs and
two Whites, and a little Sack; mix all these together in a very light Paste,
set it before the Fire till it rise, and so bake it in a Tin.

236. To make an ordinary Plumb Cake.
Take a Pound of Flower well dried before the Fire, a Pound of Currants, Two
pennyworth of Mace and Cloves, two Eggs, four Spoonfuls of good new Yeast, half
a Pound of Butter, half a Pint of Cream, melt the Butter, warm the Cream, and
mix all together in a very light Paste, butter your Tin before you put it in;
an Hour will bake it.

237. To make an Angelico Cake.
Take the Stalks of Angelico, boil and green them very well, put to every Pound
of Pulp a Pound of Loaf Sugar beaten very well, and when you think it is beaten
enough, lay them in what Fashion you please on Glasses, and as they Candy turn
them.

238. To make King Cakes.
Take a Pound of Flower, three Quarters of a Pound of Butter, half a Pound of
Sugar and half a Pound of Currants well cleaned; rub your Butter well into your
Flower, and put in as many Yolks of Eggs as will lithe them, then put in your
Sugar, Currants, and some Mace, shred in as much as will give them a Taste, so
make them up in little round Cakes, and butter the Papers you lie them on.

239. To make Breakfast Cakes.
Take a Pound of Currants well washed, (rub them in a Cloth till dry) a Pound
of Flower dried before a Fire, take three Eggs, leave out one of the Whites,
four Spoonfuls of new Yeast, and four Spoonfuls of Sack or two of Brandy, beat
the Yeast and Eggs well together; then take a Jill of Cream, and something
above a Quarter of a Pound of Butter, set them on a Fire, and stir them till
the Butter be melted, (but do not let them boil) grate a large Nutmeg into the
Flower, with Currants, and five Spoonfuls of Sugar; mix all together, beat it
with your Hand till it leave the Bowl, then flower the Tins you put the Paste
in, and let them stand a little to rise, then bake them an Hour and a Quarter.

240. To make Maccaroo^^.
Take a Pound of blanched Al^^^ds and beat them, put some Rose Water in while
beating; (they must not be beaten two small) mix them with the Whites of five
Eggs, a Pound of Sugar finely beaten and sifted, and a handful of Flower, mix
all these very well together, lay them on Wafers, and bake them in a very
temperate Oven, (it must not be so hot as for Manchet) then they are fit for
Use.

241. To make Whiggs.
Take two Pound of Flower, a Pound of Butter, a Pint of Cream, four Eggs,
(leaving out two of the Whites) and two Spoonfuls of Yeast, set them to rise a
little; when they are mixed add half a Pound of Sugar, and half a Pound of
Carraway Comfits, make them up with Sugar and bake them in a Dripping-pan.

242. To make Rasberry Cream.
Take Rasberries, bruise them, put 'em in a Pan on a quick Fire whilst the
Juice be dried up, then take the same Weight of Sugar as you have of Rasberies,
and set them on a slow Fire, let them boil whilst they are pretty stiff; make
them into Cakes, and dry them near the Fire or in the Sun.

243. To make Queen Cakes.
Take a Pound of London Flower dried well before the Fire, nine Eggs, a Pound
of Loaf Sugar beaten and sifted, put one half to your Eggs and the other to
your Butter; take a Pound of Butter and melt it without Water, put it into a
Stone Bowl, when it is almost cold put in your Sugar and a Spoonful or two of
Rose Water, beat it very quick, for half an Hour till it be as white as Cream;
beat the Eggs and Sugar as long and very quick, whilst they be white; when they
are well beat mix them all together; than take half a Pound of Currants cleaned
well, and a little shred Mace, so you may fill one Part of your Tins before you
put in your Currants; you may put a Quarter of a Pound of Almonds shred (if you
please) into them that is without the Currants; you may Ice them if you please,
but do not let the Iceing be thicker than you may lie on with a little Brush.

244. To make a Biscuit Cake.
Take a Pound of London Flower dried before the Fire, a Pound of Loaf Sugar
beaten and sifted, beat nine Eggs and a Spoonful or two of Rose Water with the
Sugar for two Hours, then put them to your Flower and mix them well together;
put in an Ounce of Carraway Seeds, then put it into your Tin and bake it an
Hour and a half in a pretty quick Oven.

245. To make Cracknells
Take half a Pound of fine Flower, half a Pound of Sugar, two Ounces of Butter,
two Eggs, and a few Carraway Seeds; (you must beat and sift the Sugar) then put
it to your Flower and work it to Paste; roll them as thin as you can, and cut
them out with Queen Cake Tins, lie them on Papers and bake them in a slow Oven.

They are proper to eat with Chocolate.

246. To make Portugal Cakes.
Take a Pound of Flower, a Pound of Butter, a Pound of Sugar, a Pound of
Currants well cleaned, and a Nutmeg grated; take half of the Flower and mix it
with Sugar and Nutmeg, melt the Butter and put it into the Yolks of eight Eggs
very well beat, and only four of the Whites, and as the Froth rises put it into
the Flower, and do so till all is in; then beat it together, still strowing
some of the other half of the Flower, and then beat it till all the Flower be
in, then butter the Pans and fill them, but do not bake them two much; you may
Ice them if you please, or you may strew Carraway Comfits of all Sorts on them
when they go into the Oven. The Currants must be plump'd in warm Water, and
dried before the Fire, then put them into your Cakes.

247. To make Plumb Cakes another Way.
Take two Pound of Butter, beat it with a little Rose Water and Orange flower
Water till it be like Cream, two Pound of Flower dried before the Fire, a
Quarter of an Ounce of Mace, a Nutmeg, half a Pound of Loaf Sugar, beat and
sifted, fifteen Eggs (beat the Whites by themselves and Yolks with your Sugar)
a Jack of Brandy and as much Sack, two Pound of Currants very well cleaned, and
half a Pound of Almonds blanched and cut in two or three Pieces length Way, so
mix all together, and put it into your Hoop of Tin; you may put in half a Pound
of candid Orange and Citron if you please; about an Hour will bake it in a
quick Oven; if you have a Mind to have it Iced a Pound of Sugar will Ice it.

248. To make a Ginger-bread-Cake.
Take two Pound of Treacle, two Pound and a Quartern of Flower, an Ounce of
beat Ginger, three Quarters of a Pound of Sugar, two Ounces of Coriander Seeds,
two Eggs, a Pennyworth of new Ale with the Yeast on it, a Glass of Brandy, and
two Ounces of Lemon Peel, mix all these together in a Bowl, and set it to rise
for half an Hour, then put it into a Tin to bake, and wet it with a little
Treacle and Water; if you have a quick Oven an Hour and a half will bake it.

249. To make Chocolate Cream.
Take four Ounces of Chocolate, more or less, according as you would have you
Dish in Bigness, grate it and boil it in a Pint of Cream, then mill it very
well with a Chocolate Stick; take the Yolks of two Eggs and beat them very
well, leaving out the Strain, mix to them three or four Spoonfuls of Cream, mix
them all together, set it on the Fire, and keep stirring it till it thicken,
but do not let it boil; you must sweeten it to your Taste, and keep stirring it
till it be cold, so put it into your Glasses or China Dishes, which you please,

250. To make white Lemon Cream.
Take a Jill of Spring Water and a Pound of fine Sugar, set it over a Fire till
the Sugar and Water be dissolved, then put the Juice of four good Lemons to
your Sugar and Water, the Whites of four Eggs well beat, set it on the Fire
again, and keep it stirring one Way till it just simmers and does not boil,
strain it through a fine Cloth, then put it on the fire again, adding to it a
Spoonful of Orange-flower Water, stir it till it thickens on a slow fire, then
strain into Basins or Glasses for your Use, do not let it boil, if you do it
will curdle.

251. To make Cream Curds.
Take a Gallon of Water, put to it a Quart of new Milk, a little Salt, a Pint
of sweet Cream, and eight Eggs, leaving out half the Whites and Strains, beat
them very well, put to them a Pint of sour Cream, mix them very well together,
and when your Pan is just at boiling (but it must not boil) put in the four
Cream and your Eggs, stir it about and keep it from settling to the Bottom; let
it stand whilst it begin to rise up, then have a little fair Water, and as they
rise keep putting it in whilst they be well risen, then take them off the Fire,
and let them stand a little to sadden; have ready a Sieve with a clean Cloth
over it, and take up the Curds with a Laddle or Egg-Slicer, whether you have;
you must always make them the Night before you use them; this Quantity will
make a large Dish if your Cream be good; if you think your Curds be too thick,
mix to them two or three Spoonfuls of good Cream, so lie them upon a China Dish
in Lumps; and serve them up.

252. To make Apple Cream.
Take half a Dozen large Apples, Codlings or any other Apples that will be
soft, and coddle them; when they are cold take out the Pulp; then take the
Whites of four or five Eggs (leaving out the Strains) three Quarters of a Pound
of double refined Sugar beat and sifted, a Spoonful or two of Rose Water, and
grate in a little Lemon Peel, so beat all together for an Hour, whilst it be
white, then lay it on a China Dish, so serve it up.

253. To fry Cream to eat hot.
Take a Pint of Cream and boil it, three Spoonfuls of London Flower, mixed with
a little Milk, put in three Eggs, and beat them very well with the Flower, a
little Salt, a Spoonful or two of fine Powder Sugar, mix them very well; then
put your Cream to them on the Fire, and boil it; then beat two Eggs more very
well, and when you take your Pan off the Fire stir them in, and pour them into
a large Pewter Dish, about half an Inch thick; when it is quite cold cut it out
in square Bits, and fry it in Butter, a light Brown; as you fry them set them
before the Fire to keep hot and crisp, to dish them up with a little white
Wine, Butter and Sugar for your Sauce in a China Cup, set it in the midst, and
grate over some Loaf Sugar.

254. To make Rice or Almond Cream.
Take two Quarts of Cream, boil it with what Seasoning you please, then take it
from the Fire and sweeten it, pick out the Seasoning and divide it into two
Parts; take a Quarter of a Pound of blanched Almonds well beat with
Orange-flower Water, set that on the Fire, and put to it the Yolks of four Eggs
well beat and strained, keep it stirring all the Time it is on the Fire, when
it rises to boil take it off, stir it a little, then put it into your Basin,
the other half set on the Fire, and thicken it with Flower of Rice; when you
take it off put to it the Juice of a Lemon, Orange-flower Water or Sack, and
stir it till it be cold, then serve it up.

255. To make Calves Foot Jelly.
Take four Calve's Feet and dress them, boil them in six Quarts of Water over a
slow Fire, whilst all the Bones will come out, and half the Water be boiled
away, strain it into a Stone Bowl, then put to them two or three Quarts more
Water, and let it boil away to one: If you want a large Quantity of Flummery or
Jelly at one Time; take two Calve's Feet more, it will make your Stock the
stronger; you must make your Stock the Day before you use it, and before you
put your Stock into the Pan take off the Fat, and put it into your Pan to melt,
take the Whites of eight or ten Eggs, just as you have Jelly in Quantity, (for
the more Whites you have makes your Jelly the finer) beat your Whites to a
Froth, and put to them five or six Lemons, according as they are of Goodness, a
little white Wine or Rhenish, mix them well together (but let not your Stock be
too hot when you put them in) and sweeten it to your Taste; keep it stiring all
the Time whilst it boil; take your Bag and dip it in hot Water, and keep it
shifting whilst it comes clear; throw a Lemon Peel or two into your Bag as the
Jelly is coming off, and put in some Bits of Peel into your Glasses.

You may make Hartshorn Jelly the same Way.

256. To make Orange Cream.
Take two Seville Oranges and peel them very thin, put the Peel into a Pint of
fair Water, and let it lie for an Hour or two; take four Eggs, and beat them
very well, put to them the Juice of three or four Oranges, according as they
are in Goodness, and sweeten them with double refined Sugar to your Taste, mix
the Water and Sugar together, and strain them through a fine Cloth into your
Tankard, and set it over the Fire as you did the Lemon Cream, and put it into
your Glasses for use.

257. To make yellow Lemon Cream.
Take two or three Lemons, according as they are in Bigness, take off the Peel
as thin as you can from the White, put it into a Pint of clean Water, and let
it lie three or four Hours; take the Yolks of three or four Eggs, beat them
very well, about eight Ounces of double refined Sugar, put it into your Water
to dissolve, and a Spoonful or two of Rose Water or Orange-flower Water, which
you can get, mix all together with the Juice of two of your Lemons, and if your
Lemons prove not good, put in the Juice of three, so strain them through a fine
Cloth into a Silver Tankard, and set it over a Stove or Chafing Dish, stiring
it all the Time, and when it begins to be as thick as Cream take it off, but
don't let it boil, if you do it will Curdle, stir it whilst it is cold, and put
it into your Glasses for use.

258. To make white Lemon Cream another Way.
Take a Pint of Spring Water, and the Whites of six Eggs, beat them very well
to a Froth, put them to your Water, adding to it half a Pound of double refined
Sugar, a Spoonful of Orange-flower Water, and the Juice of three Lemons, so mix
all together, and strain them through a fine Cloth into your Silver Tankard,
set it over a slow Fire in a Chafing Dish, and keep stirring it all the Time;
as you see it thickens take it off, it will sooner curdle than be Yellow, stir
it whilst it be cold, and put it in small Jelly Glasses for use.

259. To make Sagoo Custards.
Take two Ounces of Sagoo, wash it in a little Water, set it on to Cree in a
Pint of Milk, and let it cree till it be tender, when it is cold put to it
three Jills of Cream, boil it altogether with a Blade or two of Mace, or a
Stick of Cinnamon; take six Eggs, leave out the Strains, beat them very well,
mix a little of your Cream amongst your Eggs, then mix altogether, keep
stirring it as you put it in, so set it over a slow Fire, and stir it about
whilst it be the thickness of a good Cream; you must not let it boil; when you
take it off the Fire put in a Tea Cup full of Brandy, and sweeten it to your
Taste, then put it into Pots or Glasses for Use. You may make half the Quantity
if you please.

260. To make Almond Custard.
Boil two Quarts of sweet Cream with a Stick of Cinnamon; take eight Eggs,
leaving out all the Whites but two, beat them very well; take six Ounces of
Jordan Almonds, blanch and beat them with a little Rose Water, so give them a
boil in your Cream; put in half a Pound of powder Sugar, and a little of your
Cream amongst your Eggs, mix all together, and set them over a slow Fire, stir
it all the Time whilst it be as thick as Cream, but don't let it boil; when you
take it off put in a little Brandy to your Taste, so put it into your Cups for
use.

You may make Rice-Custard the same Way.

261. To make a Sack Posset.
Take a Quart of Cream, boil it with two or three Blades of Mace, and grate in
a long Biscuit: take eight Eggs, leave out half the Whites, beat them very well,
and a Pint of Gooseberry Wine, make it hot, so mix it well with your Eggs, set
it over a slow Fire, and stir it about whilst it be as thick as Custard; set a
Dish that is deep over a Stove, put in your Sack and Eggs, when your Cream is
boiling hot, put it to your Sack by Degrees, and stir it all the Time it stands
over your Stove, whilst it be thoroughly hot, but don't let it boil; you must
make it about half an Hour before you want it; set it upon a hot Harth, and
then it will be as thick as Custard; make a little Froth of Cream, to lay over
the Posset; when you dish it up sweeten it to your Taste; you may make it
without Biscuit if you please, and don't lay on your Froth till you serve it up.

262. To make a Lemon Posset.
Take a Pint of good thick Cream, grate into it the outermost Skin of two
Lemons, and squeeze the Juice into a Jack of white Wine, and sweeten it to your
Taste; take the Whites of two Eggs without the Strains, beat them to a Froth,
so whisk them all together in a Stone Bowl for half an Hour, then put them into
Glasses for use.

263. To make whipped Sillabubs.
Take two Porringers of Cream and one of white Wine, grate in the Skin of a
Lemon, take the Whites of three Eggs, sweeten it to your Taste, then whip it
with a Whisk, take off the Froth as it rises, and put it into your
Sillabub-Glasses or Pots, whether you have, then they are fit for use.

264. To make Almond Butter.
Take a Quart of Cream and half a Pound of Almonds, beat them with the Cream,
then strain it, and boil it with twelve Yolks of Eggs and two Whites, till it
curdle, hang it up in a Cloth till Morning and then sweeten it; you may rub it
through a Sieve with the Back of a Spoon, or strain it through a coarse Cloth.

265. To make Black Caps.
Take a Dozen of middling Pippins and cut them in two, take out the Cores and
black Ends, lay them with the flat Side downwards, set them in the Oven, and
when they are about half roasted take them out, wet them over with a little
Rose Water, and grate over them Loaf-Sugar pretty thick, set them into the Oven
again, and let them stand till they are Black; when you serve them up, put them
either into Cream or Custard, with the black Side upwards, and set them at an
equal Distance.

266. To make Sauce for tame Ducks.
Take the Necks and Gizzards of your Ducks, a Scrag of Mutton if you have it,
and make a little sweet Gravy, put to it a few Bread-crumbs, a small Onion, and
a little whole Pepper, boil them for half a Quarter of an Hour, put to them a
Lump of Butter, and if it is not thick enough a little Flower, so salt it to
your Taste.

267. To make Sauce for a Green-Goose.
Take a little good Gravy, a little Butter, and a few sealded Gooseberries, mix
all together, and put it on the Dish with your Goose.

268. To make another Sauce for a Green-Goose.
Take the Juice of Sorrel, a little Butter, and a few scalded Gooseberries, mix
them together, and sweeten it to your Taste; you must not let it boil after you
put in the Sorrel, if you do it will take off the Green.

You must put this Sauce into a Basin.

269. To make Almond Flummery.
Take a Pint of stiff Jelly made of Calves Feet, put to it a Jill or better of
good Cream, and four Ounces of Almonds, blanch and beat them fine with a little
Rose Water, then put them to your Cream and Jelly, let them boil together for
half a Quarter of an Hour, and sweeten it to your Taste; strain it through a
fine Cloth, and keep it stirring till it be quite cold, put it in Cups and let
it stand all Night, loosen it in warm Water and turn it out into your Dish, so
serve it up, and prick it with blanched Almonds.

270. To make Calve's Foot Flummery.
Take two Calve's Feet, when they are dressed, put two Quarts of Water to them,
boil them over a slow Fire till half or better be consumed; when your Stock is
cold, if it be too stiff, you may put to it as much Cream as Jelly, boil them
together with a Blade or two of Mace, sweeten it to your Taste with Loaf-Sugar,
strain it through a fine Cloth, stir it whilst it be cold, and turn it out, but
first loosen it in warm Water, and put it into your Dish as you did the other
Flummery.

271. To stew Spinach with poached Eggs.
Take two or three handfuls of young Spinach, pick it from the Stalks, wash and
drain it very clean, put it into a Pan with a Lump of Butter, and a little
Salt, keep stirring it all the Time whilst it be enough, then take it out and
squeeze out the Water, chop it and stir in a little more Butter, lie it on your
Dish in Quarters, and betwixt every Quarter a poached Egg, and lie one in the
middle; fry some Sippets of white Bread and prick them in your Spinach, so
serve them up.

This is proper for a Side Dish either for Noon or Night.

272. To make Ratify Drops.
Take half a Pound of the best Jordan Almonds, and four Ounces of bitter
Almonds, blanch and set them before the Fire to dry, beat them in a Marble
Mortar with a little White of an Egg, then put to them half a Pound of Powder
Sugar, and beat them altogether to a pretty stiff Paste; you may beat your
White of Egg very well before you put it in, so take it out, roll it with your
Hand upon a Board with a little Sugar, then cut them in Pieces, and lie them on
Sheets of Tin or on Paper, at an equal Distance, that they don't touch one
another, and set them in a slow Oven to bake.

273. To fry Artichoak Bottoms.
Take Artichoak Bottoms when they are at the full Growth, and boil them as you
would do for Eating, pull off the Leaves, and take out the Choke, cut off the
Stalks as close as you can from the Bottom; take two or three Eggs, heat them
very well, so dip your Artichoaks in them, and strew over them a little Pepper
and Salt; fry them in Butter, some whole and some in halves; serve them up with
a little Butter in a China Cup, set it in the middle of your Dish, lie your
Artichoaks round, and serve them up.

They are proper for a Side Dish either Noon or Night.

274. To fricasey Artichoaks.
Take Artichoaks, and order them the same Way as you did for frying, have ready
in a Stew Pan a few Morels and Trophels, stewed in brown Gravy, so put in your
Artichoaks, and give them a shake altogether in your Stew Pan, and serve them
up hot, with Sippets round them.

275. To dry Artichoak Bottoms.
Take the largest Artichoaks you can get, when they are at their full Growth,
boil them as you would do for Eating, pull off the Leaves and take out the
Choke; cut off the Stalk as close as you can, lie them on a Tin Dripping-pan,
or an earthen Dish, set them in a slow Oven, for if your Oven be too hot it
will brown them; you may dry them before the Fire if you have Convenience; when
they are dry put them in Paper Bags, and keep them for use.

276. To stew Apples.
Take a Pound of double refined Sugar, with a Pint of Water, boil and skim it,
and put into it a Pound of the largest and clearest Pippins, pared and cut in
Halves, if little, let them be whole; core them and boil them with a continual
Froth, till they be as tender and clear as you would have them, put in the
Juice of two Lemons, but first take out the Apples, a little Peel cut like
Threads, boil down your Syrrup as thick as you would have it, then pour it over
your Apples; when you dish them, stick them with long bits of candid Orange,
and some with Almonds cut in long bits, so serve them up.

You must stew them the Day before you use them.

277. To stew Apples another Way.
Take Kentish Pippins or John Apples, pare and slice them into fair Water, set
them on a clear Fire, and when they are boiled to mash, let the Liquor run
through a Hair-Sieve; boil as many Apples thus as will make the Quantity of
Liquor you would have; to a Pint of this Liquor you must have a Pound of double
refined Loaf Sugar in great Lumps, wet the Lumps of Sugar with the Pippin
Liquor, and set it over a gentle Fire, let it boil, and skim it well: Whilst
you are making the Jelly, you must have your whole Pippins boiling at the same
Time; (they must be the fairest and best Pippins you can get) scope out the
Cores, and pare them neatly, put them into fair Water as you do them; you must
likewise make a Syrrup ready to put them into, the Quantity as you think will
boil them in clear; make the Syrrup with double refined Sugar and Water. Tie up
your whole Pippins in a Piece of fine Cloth or Muslin severally, when your
Sugar and Water boils put them in, let them boil very fast, so fast that the
Syrrup always boils over them; sometimes take them off, and then set them on
again, let them boil till they be clear and tender; then take off the Muslin
they were tied up in, and put them into Glasses that will hold but one in a
Glass; then see if your Jelly of Apple-John's be boiled to Jelly enough, if it
be, squeeze in the Juice of two Lemons, and let it have a boil; then strain it
through a Jelly-bag into the Glasses your Pippins were in; you must be sure
that your Pippins be well drained from the Syrrup they were boiled in; before
you put them into the Glasses, you may, if you please, boil little Pieces of
Lemon Peel in Water till they be tender, and then boil them in the Syrrup your
Pippins were boiled in; then take them out and lay them about the Pippins
before the Jelly is put in, and when they are cold Paper them up.

278. To make Plumb Gruel.
Take half a Pound of Pearl Barley, set it on to Cree; put to it three Quarts
of Water; when it has boiled a while, shift it into another fresh Water, and
put to it three or four Blades of Mace, a little Lemon Peel cut in long Pieces,
so let it boil whilst the Barley be very soft; if it be too thick you may add a
little more Water; take half a Pound of Currants, wash them well and plump
them, and put to them your Barley, half a Pound of Raisins and Stone them; let
them boil in the Gruel whilst they are Plump, when they are enough put to them
a little white Wine, a little Juice of Lemon, grate in half a Nutmeg, and
sweeten it to your Taste, so serve them up.

279. To make Rice Gruel.
Boil half a Pound of Rice in two Quarts of soft Water, as soft as you would
have it for Rice Milk, with some Slices of Lemon Peel, and a Stick of Cinnamon;
add to it a little white Wine and Juice of Lemon to your Taste, put in a little
candid Orange sliced thin, and sweeten it with fine Powder Sugar; don't let it
boil after you put in your Wine and Lemon, put it in a China Dish, with five or
six Slices of Lemon, so serve it up.

280 To make Scotch Custard to eat hot for Supper.
Boil a Quart of Cream with a Stick of Cinnamon, and a Blade of Mace; take six
Eggs, both Yolks and Whites, (leave out the Strains) and beat them very well,
grate a long Biscuit into your Cream, give it a boil before you put in your
Eggs, mix a little of your Cream amongst your Eggs before you put 'em in, so
set it over a slow Fire, stirring it about whilst it be thick, but don't let it
boil; take half a Pound of Currants, wash them very well, and plump them, then
put them to your Custard; you must let your Custard be as thick as will bear
the Currants that they don't sink to the Bottom; when you are going to dish it
up, put in a large Glass of Sack, stir it very well, and serve it up in a China
Basin.

281. To make a Dish of mull'd Milk.
Boil a Quart of New Milk with a Stick of Cinnamon, then put to it a Pint of
Cream, and let them have one boil together, take eight Eggs, (leave out half of
the Whites and all the Strains) beat them very well, put to them a Jill of
Milk, mix all together, and set it over a slow Fire, stir it whilst it begin to
thicken like Custard, sweeten it to your Taste, and grate in half a Nutmeg;
then put it into your Dish with a Toast of White Bread.

This is proper for a Supper.

282. To make Leatch.
Take two Ounces of Isinglass and break it into Bits, put it into hot Water,
then put half a Pint of New Milk into the Pan with the Isinglass, set it on the
Fire to boil, and put into it three or four Sticks of good Cinnamon, two Blades
of Mace, a Nutmeg quartered, and two or three Cloves, boil it till the
Isinglass be dissolved, run it through a Hair Sieve into a large Pan, then put
to it a Quart of Cream sweetened to your Taste with Loaf Sugar, and boil them a
while together; take a Quarter of a Pound of blanched Almonds beaten in
Rose Water, and strain out all the Juice of them into the Cream on the Fire,
and warm it, then take it off and stir it well together; when it has cooled a
little take a broad shallow Dish and put it into it through a Hair Sieve, when
it is cold cut it in long Pieces, and lay it across whilst you have a pretty
large Dish; so serve it up.

Sometimes a less Quantity of Isinglass will do, according to the Goodness: Let
it be the whitest and clearest you can get.

You must make it the Day before you want it for Use.

283. To make Scotch Oysters.
Take two Pound of the thick Part of a Leg of Veal, cut it in little bits clear
from the Skins, and put it in a Marble Mortar, then shred a Pound of Beef Suet
and put to it, and beat them well together till they be as fine as Paste; put
to it a handful of Bread-crumbs and two or three Eggs, season it with Mace,
Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, and work it well together; take one Part of your
forced Meat and wrap it in the Kell, about the Bigness of a Pigeon, the rest
make into little flat Cakes and fry them; the Rolls you may either broil in a
Drigping-pan, or set them in an Oven; three is enough in a Dish, set them in
the middle of the Dish and lay the Cakes round; then take some strong Gravy,
shred in a few Capers, and two or three Mushrooms or Oysters if you have any,
so thicken it up with a Lump of Butter, and serve it up hot. Garnish your Dish
with Pickles.

284. To boil Brockley.
Take Brockley when it is Seeded, or at any other Time; take off all the low
Leaves of your Stalk and tie them up in Bunches as you do Asparagus, cut them
the same Length you peel your Stalks; cut them in little Pieces, and boil them
in Salt and Water by themselves; you must let your Water boil before you put
them in; boil your Heads in Salt and Water, and let the Water boil before you
put in the Brockley; put in a little Butter; it takes very little boiling, and
if it boil too quick it will take off all the Heads; you must drain your
Brockley through a Sieve as you do Asparagus; lie Stalks in the middle, and the
Bunches round it, as you would do Asparagus.

This is proper for either a Side Dish or a middle Dish.

285. To boil Savoy Sprouts.
If your Savoys be Cabbag'd, dress off the out Leaves and cut them in Quarters;
take off a little of the hard Ends, and boil them in a large Quantity of Water
with a little Salt; when boiled drain them, lie them round your Meat, and pour
over them a little Butter.

Any thing will boil greener in a large Quantity of Water then otherwise.

286. To boil Cabbage Sprouts.
Take your Sprouts, cut off the Leaf and the hard Ends, shred and boil them as
you do other Greens, not forgetting a little Butter.

287. To fry Parsnips to look like Trout.
Take a middling sort of Parsnips, not over thick, boil them as soft as you
would do for Eating, peel and cut them in two the long Way; you must only fry
the small Ends, not the thick ones; beat three or four Eggs, put to them a
Spoonful of Flower, dip in your Parsnips, and fry them in Butter a light brown,
have for your Sauce a little Vinegar and Butter; fry some Slices to lie round
about the Dish, and so serve them up.

288. To make Tansey another Way.
Take an old Penny Loaf and cut off the Crust, slice it thin, put to it as much
hot Cream as will wet it, then put to it six Eggs well beaten, a little shred
Lemon Peel, a little Nutmeg and Salt, and sweeten it to your Taste; green it as
you did your baked Tansey; so tie it up in a Cloth and boil it; (it will take
an Hour and a Quarter boiling) when you dish it up stick it with a little
candid Orange, and lie a Seville Orange cut in Quarters round your Dish; serve
it up with a little plain Butter.

289. To make Gooseberry Cream.
Take a Quart of Gooseberries, pick, coddle, and bruise them very well in a
Marble Mortar or wooden Bowl, and rub them with the Back of a Spoon through a
Hair Sieve till you take out all the Pulp from the Seeds; take a Pint of thick
Cream, mix it well among your Pulp, grate in some Lemon Peel, and sweeten it to
your Taste; serve it up either in a China Dish or an Earthen one.

290. To fry Parsnips another Way.
Boil your Parsnips, cut them in square long Pieces about the length of your
Finger, dip them in Egg and a little Flower, and fry them a light brown; when
they are fried dish them up, and grate over them a little Sugar; You must have
for the Sauce a little white Wine, Butter, and Sugar in a Basin, and set in the
middle of your Dish.

291. To make Apricock Pudding.
Take ten Apricocks, pare, stone, and cut them in two, put them into a Pan with
a Quarter of a Pound of Loaf Sugar, boil them pretty quick whilst they look
clear, so let them stand whilst they are cold; then take six Eggs, (leave out
half of the Whites) beat them very well, add to them a Pint of Cream, mix the
Cream and Eggs well together with a Spoonful of Rose water, then put in your
Apricocks, and beat them very well together with four Ounces of clarified
Butter, then put it into your Dish with a thin Paste under it; half an Hour
will bake it.

292. To make Apricock Custard.
Take a Pint of Cream, boil it with a Stick of Cinnamon and six Eggs, (leave out
four of the Whites) when your Cream is a little cold mix your Eggs and Cream
together, with a Quarter of a Pound of fine Sugar, set it over a slow Fire,
stir it all one Way whilst it begin to be thick, then take it off and stir it
whilst it be a little cold, and pour it into your Dish; take six Apricocks as
you did for your Pudding, rather a little higher; when they are cold lie them
upon your Custard at an equal Distance; if it be at the Time when you have no
ripe Apricocks, you may lie preserved Apricocks.

293. To make Jumbals another Way.
Take a Pound of Meal and dry it, a Pound of Sugar finely beat, and mix these
together; then take the Yolks of five or six Eggs, half a Jill of thick Cream,
as much as will make it up to a Paste, and some Corriander Seeds, lay them on
Tins and prick them, bake them in a quick Oven; before you set them in the Oven
wet them with a little Rose Water and double refined Sugar to Ice them.

294. To make Apricock Chips or Peaches.
Take a Pound of Chips to a Pound of Sugar, let not your Apricocks be too ripe,
pare them and cut them into large Chips; take three Quarters of a Pound of fine
Sugar, strew most of it upon the Chips, and let them stand till they be
dissolved, set them on the Fire, and boil them till they are tender and clear,
strowing the remainder of the Sugar on as they boil, skim them clear, and lay
them in Glasses or Pots single, with some Syrrup, cover them with double
refined Sugar, set them in a Stove, and when they are crisp on one Side turn
the other on Glasses and parch them, then set them into the Stove again; when
they are pretty dry pour them on Hair Sieves till they are dry enough to put up.

295. To make Sagoo Gruel.
Take four Ounces of Sagoo and wash it, set it over a slow Fire to cree, in two
Quatts of Spring Water, let it boil whilst it be thickish and soft, put in a
Blade or two of Mace, and a Stick of Cinnamon, let it boil in a while, and then
put in a little more Water; take it off, put to it a Pint of Claret Wine and a
little candid Orange; shift them, then put in the Juice of a Lemon, and sweeten
it to your Taste; so serve it up.

296. To make Spinach Toasts.
Take a Handful or two of young Spinach and wash it, drain it from the Water,
put it into a Pan with a Lump of Butter and a little Salt, let it stew whilst
it be tender, only turn it in the boiling, then take it up and squeeze out the
Water, put in another Lump of Butter and chop it small, put to it a Handful of
Currants plump'd, and a little Nutmeg; have three Toasts cut from a Penny Loaf
well buttered, then lie on your Spinach.

This is proper for a Side Dish either for Noon or Night.

297. To roast a Beast Kidney.
Take a Beast Kidney with a little Fat on, and stuff it all round, season it
with a little Pepper and Salt, wrap it in a Kell, and put it upon the Spit with
a little Water in the Dripping-pan; what drops from your Kidney thicken with a
Lump of Butter and Flower for your Sauce.

To make your Stuffing.
Take a handful of sweet Herbs, a few Bread-crumbs, a little Beef Suet shred
fine, and two Eggs, (leave out the Whites) mix all together with a little
Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; stuff your Kidney with one Part of the Stuffing, and
fry the other Part in little Cakes; so serve it up.

298. To stew Cucumbers.
Take middling Cucumbers and cut them in Slices, but not too thin, strew over
them a little Salt to bring out the Water, put them into a Stew Pan or
Sauce-pan, with a little Gravy, some whole Pepper, a Lump of Butter, and a
Spoonful or two of Vinegar to your Taste; let them boil all together; thicken
them with Flower, and serve them up with Sippets.

299. To make an Oatmeal Pudding.
Take three or four large Spoonfuls of Oatmeal done through a Hair Sieve, and a
Pint of Milk, put it into a Pan and let it boil a little whilst it be thick,
add to it half a Pound of Butter, a Spoonful of Rose Water, a little Lemon Peel
shred, a little Nutmeg or beaten Cinnamon, and a little Salt; take six Eggs,
(leave out two of the Whites) and put to them a Quarter of a Pound of Sugar or
better, beat them very well, so mix them all together; put it into your Dish
with a Paste round your Dish Edge; have a little Rose Water, Butter and Sugar
for Sauce.

300. To make a Calve's Head Pie another Way.
Half boil your Calve's Head, when it is cold cut it in Slices rather thicker
than you would do for Hashing, season it with a little Mace, Nutmeg, Pepper and
Salt, lie part of your Meat in the bottom of your Pie, a Layer of one and a
Layer of another; then put in half a Pound of Butter and a little Gravy; when
your Pie comes from the Oven, have ready the Yolks of six or eight Eggs boiled
hard, and lie them round your Pie; put in a little melted Butter, and a
Spoonful or two of white Wine, and give them a shake together before you lie in
your Eggs; your Pie must be a standing Pie baked upon a Dish with a Puff-paste
round the Edge of the Dish, but leave no Paste in the Bottom of your Pie; when
it is baked serve it up without a Lid.

This is proper for either Top or Bottom Dish.

301. To make Elder Wine.
Take twenty Pounds of Malaga Raisins, pick and chop them, then put them into a
Tub with twenty Quarts of Water, let the Water be boiled and stand till it be
cold again before you put in your Raisins, let them remain together ten Days,
stirring it twice a Day, then strain the Liquor very well from the Raisins
through a Canvas Strainer or Hair Sieve; add to it six Quarts of Elder Juice,
five Pounds of Loaf Sugar, and a little Juice of Sloes to make it acid, just as
you please; put it into a Vessel, and let it stand in a pretty warm Place three
Months, then bottle it; the Vessel must not be stopped up till it has done
working; if your Raisins be very good you may leave out the Sugar.

302. To make Gooseberry Wine of ripe Gooseberries.
Pick, clean and beat your Gooseberries in a Marble Mortar or Wooden Bowl,
measure them in Quarts up-heap'd, add two Quarts of Spring Water, and let them
stand all Night or twelve Hours, then rub or press out the Husks very well,
strain them through a wide Strainer, and to every Gallon put three Pound of
Sugar, and a Jill of Brandy, then put all into a sweet Vessel, not very full,
and keep it very close for four Months, then decant it off till it comes clear,
pour out the Grounds, and wash the Vessel clean with a little of the Wine; add
to every Gallon a Pound more Sugar, let it stand a Month in the Vessel again,
drop the Grounds through a Flannel Bag, and put it to the other in the Vessel;
the tap Hole must not be over near the Bottom of the Cask, for fear of letting
out the Grounds.

The same Receipt will serve for Current Wine the same Way; let them be red
Currants.

303. To make Balm Wine.
Take a Peck of Balm Leaves, put them in a Tub or large Pot, heat four Gallons
of Water scalding hot, ready to boil, then pour it upon the Leaves, so let it
stand all Night, then strain them through a hair Sieve; put to every Gallon of
Water two Pound of fine Sugar, and stir it very well; take the Whites of four
or five Eggs, beat them very well, put them into a Pan, and whisk it very well
before it be over hot, when the Skim begins to rise take it off, and keep it
skimming all the while it is boiling, let it boil three Quarters of an Hour,
then put it into the Tub, when it is cold put a little new Yeast upon it, and
beat it in every two Hours, that it may Head the better, so work it for two
Days; then put it into a sweet Roundlet, bung it up close, and when it is Fine
bottle it.

304. To make Raisin Wine.
Take ten Gallons of Water, and fifty Pound of Malaga Raisins, pick out the
large Stalks and boil them in your Water, when your Water is boiled put it into
a Tub; take the Raisins and chop them very small, when your Water is blood
warm, put in your Raisins, and rub them very well with your Hand; when you put
them into the Water, let them Work for ten Days, stirring them twice a Day,
then strain out the Raisins in a Hair Sieve, and put them into a clean harden
Bag, and squeeze it in the Press to take out the Liquor; so put it into your
Barrel; don't let it be over full, bung it up close, and let it stand whilst it
is Fine; when you tap your Wine you must not tap it too near the Bottom, for
fear of the Grounds; when it is drawn off take the Grounds out of the Barrel,
and wash it out with a little of your Wine, then put your Wine into the Barrel
again, draw your Grounds through a flannel Bag, and put them into the Barrel to
the rest; add to it two Pound of Loaf Sugar, then bung it up, and let it stand
a Week or ten Days; if it be very Sweet to your Taste, let it stand some time
longer, and bottle it.

305. To make Birch Wine.
Take your Birch Water and boil it, clear it with whites of Eggs; to every
Gallon of Water take two Pound and a half of fine Sugar, boil it three quarters
of an Hour, and when it is almost cold, put in a little Yeast, work it two or
three Days, then put it into the Barrel, and to every five Gallons put in a
Quart of Brandy, and half a Pound of stoned Raisins; before you put up your
Wine burn a brimstone Match in the Barrel.

306. To make white Current Wine.
Take the largest white Currants you can get, strip and break them in your
Hand, whilst you break all the Berries; to every Quart of Pulp take a Quart of
Water, let the Water be boiled and cold again, mix them well togother, let them
stand all Night in your Tub, then strain them through a Hair Sieve, and to every
Gallon put two Pound and a half of Six penny Sugar; when your Sugar is
dissolved, put it into your Barrel, dissolve a little Isinglass, whisk it with
Whites of Eggs, and put it in; to every four Gallons put in a Quart of Mountain
Wine, so bung up your Barrel; when it is Fine draw it off, and take out the
Grounds, (but don't tap the Barrel over low at the Bottom) wash out the Barrel
with a little of your Wine, and drop the Grounds through a Bag, then put it to
the rest of your Wine, and put it all into your Barrel again, to every Gallon
add half a Pound more Sugar, and let it stand another Week or two; if it be too
sweet let it stand a little longer, then bottle it, and it will keep two or
three Years.

307. To make Orange Ale.
Take forty Seville Oranges, pare and cut them in Slices, the best colored
Seville you can get, put them all with the Juice and Seeds into half a Hogshead
of Ale; when it is tunned up and working, put in the Oranges, and at the same
Time a Pound and a half of Raisins of the Sun stoned; when it has done Working
close up the Bung, and it will be ready to drink in a Month.

308. To make Orange Brandy.
Take a Quart of Brandy, the Peels of eight Oranges thin pared, steep them in
the Brandy forty-eight Hours in a close Pitcher, then take three Pints of
Water, put into it three Quarters of a Pound of Loaf Sugar, boil it till half
be consumed, and let it stand till cold, then mix it with the Brandy.

309. To make Orange Wine.
Take six Gallons of Water, and fifteen Pound of powder Sugar, the Whites of
six Eggs well beaten, boil them three Quarters of an Hour, and skim them whilst
any Skim will rise; when it is cold enough for working, put to it six Ounces of
the Syrrup of Citron or Lemons, and six Spoonfuls of Yeast, beat the Syrrup and
Yeast well together, and put in the Peel and Juice of fifty Oranges, work it
two Days and a Night, then tun it up into a Barrel, so bottle it at three or
four Months old.

310. To make Cowslip Wine.
Take ten Gallons of Water, when it is almost at boiling, add to it twenty-one
Pound of fine Powder Sugar, let it boil half an Hour, and skim it very clean;
when it is boiled put it in a Tub, let it stand till you think it be cold to
set on the Yeast; take a Porringer of new Yeast off the Fat, and put to it a
few Cowslips: when you put on the Yeast, put in a few every Time it is stirred,
till all the Cowslips be in, which must be six Pecks, and let it work three or
four Days; add to it six Lemons, cut off the Peel, and the Insides put into
your Barrel, then add to it a Pint of Brandy; when you think it has done
working, close up your Vessel, let it stand a Month, and then bottle it; you
may let your Cowslips lie a Week or ten Days to dry before you make your Wine,
for it makes it much finer; you may put in a Pint of white Wine that is good,
instead of the Brandy.

311. To make Orange Wine another Way.
Take six Gallons of Water, and fifteen Pound of Sugar, put your Sugar into the
Water on the Fire, the Whites of six Eggs well beaten, and whisk them into the
Water, when it is cold skim it very well whilst any Skim rises, and let it boil
for half an Hour; take fifty Oranges, pare them very thin, put them into your
Tub, pour the Water boiling hot upon your Oranges, and when it is Blood-warm
put on the Yeast, then put in your Juice, let it work two Days, and so tun it
into your Barrel; at six Weeks or two Months old bottle it; you may put to it
in the Barrel a Quart of Brandy.

312. To make Birch Wine another Way.
To a Gallon of Birch Water, put two Pound of Loaf or very fine Lump Sugar,
when you put it into the Pan whisk the Whites of four Eggs; (four Whites will
serve for four Gallons) whisk them very well together before it be boiled, when
it is cold put on a little Yeast, let it work a Night and a Day in the Tub,
before you put it in your Barrel put in a Brimstone Match burning; take two
Pound of Isinglass cut in little Bits, put to it a little of your Wine, let it
stand within the Air of the Fire all Night; take the Whites of two Eggs, beat
it with your Isinglass, put them into your Barrel and stir them about with a
Stick; this Quantity will do for four Gallons; to four Gallons you must have
two Pounds of Raisins shred, put them into your Barrel, close it up, but not
too close at the first, when it is fine, bottle it.

313. To make Apricock Wine.
Take twelve Pound of Apricocks when full Ripe, stone and pare them, put the
Paring into three Gallons of Water, with six Pounds of Powder Sugar, boil them
together half an Hour, skim them well, and when it is Blood-warm put it on the
Fruit; it must be well bruised, cover it close, and let it stand three Days;
skim it every Day as the Skim rises, and put it through a Hair Sieve, adding a
Pound of Loaf Sugar; when you put it into the Vessel close it up, and when it
is fine bottle it.

314. To make Orange Shrub.
Take Seville Oranges when they are full ripe, to three Dozen of Oranges put
half a Dozen of large Lemons, pare them very thin, the thinner the better,
squeeze the Lemons and Oranges together, strain the Juice though a hair Sieve, to
a Quart of the Juice put a Pound and a Quarter of Loaf Sugar; about three Dozen
of Oranges (if they be good) will make a Quart of Juice, to every Quart of
Juice put a Gallon of Brandy, put it into a little Barrel with an open Bung
with all the Chippins of your Oranges, and bung it up close; when it is fine
bottle it.

This is a pleasant Dram, and ready for Punch all the Year.

315. To make strong Mead
Take twelve Gallons of Water, eight Pounds of Sugar, two Quarts of Honey, and
a few Cloves, when your Pan boils take the Whites of eight or ten Eggs, beat
them very well, put them into your Water before it be hot, and whisk them very
well together; do not let it boil but skim it as it rises till it has done
rising, then put it into your Tub; when it is about Blood-warm put to it three
Spoonfuls of new Yeast; take eight or nine Lemons, pare them and squeeze out
the Juice, put them both together into your Tub, and let them work two or three
Days, then put it into your Barrel, but it must not be too full; take two or
three Pennyworth of Isinglass, cut it as small as you can, beat it in a Mortar
about a quarter of an Hour, it will not make it small; but that it may dissolve
sooner, draw out a little of the Mead into a Quart Mug, and let it stand within
the Air of the Fire all Night; take the Whites of three Eggs, beat them very
well, mix them with your Isinglass, whisk them together, and put them into your
Barrel, bung it up, and when it is fine bottle it.

You may order Isinglass this Way to put it into any sort of made Wine.

316. To make Mead another Way.
Take a Quart of Honey, three Quarts of Water, put your Honey into the Water,
when it is dissolved, take the Whites of four or five Eggs, whisk and beat them
very well together, and put them into your Pan; boil it whilst the Skim rises,
and skim it very clean; put it into your Tub, when it is warm put in two or
three Spoonfuls of light Yeast, according to the Quantity of your Mead, and let
it work two Nights and a Day. To every Gallon put in a large Lemon, pare and
strain it, put the Juice and Peel into your Tub, and when it is wrought put it
into your Barrel; let it work three or four Days, stir it twice a Day with a
Thible, so bung it up, and let it stand two or three Months, according to the
hotness of the Weather.

You must try your Mead two or three times in the above Time, and if you find
the Sweetness going off, you must take it sooner.

317. To make Cider.
Draw off the Cider when it has been a Fortnight in the Barrel, put it into
the same Barrel again when you have cleaned it from the Grounds, and if your
Apples were sharp, and that you find your Cider hard, put into every Gallon of
Cider a Pound and half of Six-penny or Five-penny Sugar; to twelve Gallons of
this take half an Ounce of Isinglass, and put to it a Quart of Cider; when your
Isinglass is dissolved put to it three Whites of Eggs, whisk them altogether,
and put them into your Barrel; keep it up close for two Months and then bottle
it.

318. To make Cowslip Wine.
Take two Pecks of Peeps, and four Gallons of Water, put to every Gallon of
Water two Pound and a Quarter of Sugar, boil the Water and Sugar together a
Quarter of an Hour, then put it into a Tub to cool, put in the Skins of four
Lemons, when it is cold bruise your Peeps, and put into your Liquor; add to it
a Jill of Yeast, and the Juice of four Lemons, let them be in the Tub a Night
and a Day, then put it into your Barrel, and keep it four Days stirring, then
clay it up close for three Weeks and bottle it. Put a Lump of Sugar in every
Bottle.

319. To make Red Current Wine.
Let your Currants be the best and ripest you can get, pick and bruise them; to
every Gallon of Juice add five Pints of Water, put it to your Berries in a
Stand for two Nights and a Day, then strain your Liquor through a hair Sieve;
to every Gallon of Liquor put two Pound of Sugar, stir it till it be well
dissolved, put it into a Roundlet, and let it stand four Days, then draw it off
clean, put in a Pound and a half of Sugar, stirring it well, wash out the
Roundlet with some of the Liquor, so tun it up close; if you put two or three
Quarts of Rasps bruised among your Berries, it makes it taste the better.

You may make white Current Wine the same Way, only leave out the Rasps.

320. To make Cherry Wine.
Take eight Pound of Cherries and stone them, four Quarts of Water, and two
Pound of Sugar, skim and boil the Water and Sugar, then put in the Cherries,
let them have one boil, put them into an earthen Pot till the next Day, and set
them to drain through a Sieve, then put your Wine into a Spicket Pot, clay it up
close, and look at it every two or three Days after; if it do not work, throw
into it a handful of fresh Cherries, so let it stand six or eight Days, then if
it be clear, bottle it up.

321. To make Cherry Wine another Way.
Take the ripest and largest Kentish Cherries you can get, bruise them very
well, Stones and Stalks altogether, put them into a Tub, having a Tap to it,
let them stand fourteen Days, then pull out the Tap, let the Juice run from
them, and put it into a Barrel, let it work three or four Days, then stop it up
close three or four Weeks, and bottle it off.

This Wine will keep many Years and be exceeding rich.

322. To make Lemon Drops.
Take a Pound of Loaf Sugar, beat and sift it very fine, grate the Rhind of a
Lemon and put it to your Sugar; take the Whites of three Eggs and whisk them to
a Froth, squeeze in some Lemon to your Taste, beat them for half an Hour, and
drop them on white Paper; be sure you let the Paper be very dry, and sift a
little fine Sugar on the Paper before you drop them. If you would have them
Yellow, take a Pennyworth of Gambouge, steep it in some Rose Water, mix to it
some Whites of Eggs and a little Sugar, so drop them, and bake them in a slow
Oven.

323. To make Gooseberry Wine another Way.
Take twelve Quarts of good ripe Gooseberries, stamp them, and put to them
twelve Quarts of Water, let them stand three Days, stir them twice every Day,
strain them, and put to your Liquor fourteen Pound of Sugar; when it is
dissolved strain it through a Flannel Bag, and put it into a Barrel, with half
an Ounce of Isinglass; you must cut the Isinglass in Pieces, and beat it whilst
it be soft, put to it a Pint of your Wine, and let it stand within the Air of
the Fire; take the Whites of four Eggs and beat them very well to a Froth, put
in the Isinglass, and whisk the Wines and it together; put them into the
Barrel, clay it close, and let it stand whilst Fine, then bottle it for Use.

324. To make Red Current Wine another Way.
Take five Quarts of red Currants, full ripe, bruise them, and take from them
all the Stalks, to every five Quarts of Fruit put a Gallon of Water; when you
have your Quantity strain them through a Hair Sieve, and to every Gallon of
Liquor put two Pounds and three quarters of Sugar; when your Sugar is dissolved
tun it into your Cask, and let it stand three Weeks; then draw it off, and put
to every Gallon a quarter of a Pound of Sugar; wash your Barrel with cold
Water, tun it up, and let it stand about a Week; to every ten Gallons put an
Ounce of Isinglass, dissolve it in some of the Wine, when it is dissolved put
to it a Quart of your Wine, and beat them with a Whisk, then put it into the
Cask, and stop it up close; when it is Fine bottle it.

If you would have it taste of Rasps, put to every Gallon of Wine a Quart of
Rasps; if there be any Grounds in the bottom of the Cask when you draw off your
Wine, drop them through a Flannel Bag, and then put it into your Cask.

325. To make Mulberry Wine.
Gather your Mulberries when they are full ripe, beat them in a Marble Mortar,
and to every Quart of Berries put a Quart of Water; when you put them into the
Tub rub them very well with your Hands, and let them stand all Night, then
strain them through a Sieve; to every Gallon of Water put three Pound of Sugar,
and when the Sugar is dissolved put it into your Barrel; take two Pennyworth of
Isinglass and clip it in Pieces, put to it a little Wine, and let it stand all
Night within the Air of the Fire; take the Whites of two or three Eggs, beat
them very well then put them to the Isinglass, mix them well together, and put
them into your Barrel, stirring it about when it is put in; you must not let it
be over full, nor bung it close up at first; let it in a cool Place and bottle
it when fine.

326. To make Blackberry Wine.
Take Blackberries when they are full ripe, and squeeze them the same Way as
you did the Mulberries. If you add a few Mulberries it will make your Wine have
a much better Taste.

327. To make Syrrup of Mulberries.
Take Mulberries when they are full ripe, break them very well with your Hand,
and drop them through a Flannel Bag; to every Pound of Juice take a Pound of Loaf
Sugar, beat it small, put it to your Juice, so boil and skim it very well; you
must skim it all the Time it is boiling; when the Skim has done rising it is
enough; when it is cold bottle it and keep it for Use.

You may make Raspberry Syrrup the same Way.

328. To make Raspberry Brandy.
Take a Gallon of the best Brandy you can get, and gather your Raspberries when
they are full ripe, and put them whole into your Brandy; to every Gallon of
Brandy take three Quarts of Rasps, let them stand close covered for a Month,
then clear it from Rasps, and put to it a Pound of Loaf Sugar; when your Sugar
is dissolved and a little settled, boil it and keep it for Use.

329. To make Black Cherry Brandy.
Take a Gallon of the best Brandy, and eight Pound of Black Cherries, stone and
put them into your Brandy in an earthen Pot; bruise the Stones in a Mortar,
then put them into your Brandy, and cover them up close, let them steep for a
Month or six Weeks, so drain it and keep it for Use.

You may distill the Ingredients if you please.

330. To make Ratify Brandy.
Take a Quart of the Best Brandy, and about a Jill of Apricock Kernels, blanch
and bruise them in a Mortar, with a Spoonful or two of Brandy, so put them
into a large Bottle with your Brandy; put to it four Ounces of Loaf Sugar, let
it stand till you think it has got the Taste of the Kernels, then pour it out
and put in a little more Brandy, if you please.

331. To make Cowslip Syrrup.
Take a Quartern of fresh picked Cowslips, put to them a Quart of boiling
Water, let them stand all Night, and the next Morning drain it from the
Cowslips; to every Pint of Water put a Pound of fine Powder Sugar, and boil it
over a slow Fire; skim it all the Time in the boiling whilst the Skim has done
rising; then take it off, and when it is cold put it into a Bottle, and keep it
for Use.

332. To make Lemon Brandy.
Take a Gallon of Brandy, chip twenty-five Lemons, (let them steep twenty-four
Hours) the Juice of sixteen Lemons, a quarter of a Pound of Almonds blanched
and beat, drop it through a Jelly-bag twice, and when it is Fine bottle it;
sweeten it to your Taste with double refined Sugar before you put it into your
Jelly Bag. You must make it with the best Brandy you can get,

333. To make Cordial Water of Cowslips.
Take two Quarts of Cowslip-peeps, a Slip of Balm, two Sprigs of Rosemary, a
Stick of Cinnamon, half an Orange-peel, half a Lemon Peel, a Pint of Brandy,
and a Pint of Ale; lay all these to steep twelve Hours, then distill them on a
cold Still.

334. To make Milk Punch.
Take two Quarts of old Milk, a Quart of good Brandy, the Juice of six Lemons
or Oranges, whether you please, and about six Ounces of Loaf Sugar, mix them
altogether and drop them through a Jelly-bag; take off the Peel of two of the
Lemons or Oranges, and put it into your Bag, when it is run off bottle it;
'twill keep as long as you please.

335. To make Milk Punch another Way.
Take three Jills of Water, a Jill of old Milk, and a Jill of Brandy, sweeten
it to your Taste; you must not put any Acid into this, for it will make it
curdle.

This is a cooling Punch to drink in a Morning.

336. To make Punch another Way.
Take five Pints of boiling Water and one Quart of Brandy, add to it the Juice
of four Lemons or Oranges, and about six Ounces of Loaf Sugar; when you have
mixed it together, strain it through a Hair Sieve or Cloth, and put into your
Bowl the Peel of a Lemon or Orange.

337. To make Acid for Punch.
Take Gooseberries at their full Growth, pick and beat them in a Marble Mortar,
and squeeze them in a harden Bag through a Press, when you have done run it
through a Flannel bag* and then bottle it in small Bottles; put a little Oil on
every Bottle, so keep it for Use.

338. To bottle Gooseberries.
Gather your Gooseberries when they are young, pick and bottle them, put in the
Cork loose, set them in a Pan of Water, with a little Hay in the Bottom, put
them into the Pan when the Water is cold, let it stand on a slow Fire, and mind
when they are Codled; don't let the Pan boil, if you do it will break the
Bottles; when they are cold fasten the Cork, and put on a little Rosin, so keep
them for Use.

339. To bottle Damascenes.
Take your Damascenes before they are full ripe, and gather them when the Dew
is off, pick off the Stalks, and put them into dry Bottles; don't fill your
Bottles over full, and cork them as close as you would do for Ale, keep them in
a Cellar, and cover them over with Sand.

340. To preserve Orange Chips to put in Glasses.
Take a Seville Orange with a clear Skin, pare it very thin from the White,
then take a Pair of Scissars and clip it very thin, and boil it in Water,
shifting it two or three times in the boiling to take out the Bitter; then take
half a Pound of double refined Sugar, boil it and skim it, then put in your
Orange, so let it boil over a slow Fire whilst your Syrrup be thick, and your
Orange look clear, then put it into Glasses, and cover it with Papers dipped in
Brandy; if you have a Quantity of Peel, you must have the larger Quantity of
Sugar.

341. To preserve Oranges or Lemons.
Take Seville Oranges, the largest and ruffest you can get, clear of Spots,
chip them very fine, and put them in Water for two Days, shifting them twice or
three times a Days, then boil them whilst they are soft; take and cut them in
Quarters, and take out all the Pippins with a Penknife, so weigh them, and to
every Pound of Orange, take a Pound and half of Loaf Sugar; put your Sugar into
a Pan, and to every Pound of Sugar a Pint of Water, set it over the Fire to
melt, and when it boils skim it very well, then put in your Oranges; if you
would have any of them whole, make a little hole at the Top, and take out the
Meat with a Tea Spoon, set your Oranges over a slow Fire to boil, and keep them
skimming all the while; keep your Oranges as much as you can with the Skin
downwards; you may cover them with a Delf-plate, to bear them down in the
boiling; let them boil for three Quarters of an Hour, then put them into a Pot
or Basin, and let them stand two Days covered, then boil them again whilst they
look clear, and the Syrrup be thick, so put them into a Pot, and lie close over
them a Paper dipped in Brandy, and tie a double Paper at the Top, set them in a
cool Place, and keep them for Use. If you would have your Oranges that are
whole to look pale and clear, to put in Glasses, you must make a Syrrup of
Pippin Jelly; then take ten or a dozen Pippins, as they are of Bigness, pare
and slice them, and boil them in as much Water as will cover them, till they be
thoroughly tender, so strain your Water from the Pippins through a Hair Sieve,
then strain it through a Flannel Bag; and to every Pint of Jelly take a Pound
of double refined Sugar, set it over a Fire to boil, and skim it, let it boil
whilst it be thick, then put it into a Pot and cover it, but they will keep
best if they be put every one in different Pots.

342. To make Jelly of Currants.
Take a Quartern of the largest and best Currants you can get, strip them from
the Stalks, and put them in a Pot, stop them close up, and boil them in a Pot
of Water over the Fire, till they be thoroughly codled and begin to look Pale,
then put them in a clear Hair-Sieve to drain, and run the Liquor through a
Flannel Bag; to every Pint of your Liquor put in a Pound of your double refined
Sugar; you must beat the Sugar fine, and put it in by Degrees, set it over the
Fire and boil it whilst any Skim will rise, then put it in Glasses for Use; the
next Day clip a Paper round, and dip it in the Brandy to lie on your Jelly; if
you would have your Jelly a light Red, put in half of white Currants, and in my
Opinion it looks much better.

343. To preserve Apricocks.
Take Apricocks before they be full ripe, stone and pare them, then weigh them,
and to every Pound of Apricocks take a Pound of double refined Sugar, beat it
very small, lie one part of your Sugar under the Apricocks, and the other Part
at the Top, let them stand all Night, the next Day put them in a Stew Pan or
Brass-pan; don't do over many at once in your Pan, for fear of breaking, let
them boil over a slow Fire, skim them very well, and turn them two or three
times in the boiling; you must but about half do them at the first, and let
them stand whilst they be cool, then let them boil whilst your Apricocks look
clear, and the Syrrup thick, put them into your Pots or Glasses, when they are
cold cover them with a Paper dipped in Brandy, then tie another Paper close over
your Pot to keep out the Air.

344. To make Marmalade of Apricocks.
Take what Quantity of Apricocks you shall think proper, stone them, and put
them immediately into a Skellet of boiling Water, keep them under Water on the
Fire till they be soft, then take them out of the Water and wipe them with a
Cloth, weigh your Sugar with your Apricocks, weight for weight, then dissolve
your Sugar in Water, and boil it to a candy Height, then put in your Apricocks,
being a little bruised; let them boil but a Quarter of an Hour, then glass them
up.

345. To know when your Sugar is at candy Height.
Take some Sugar and clarify it till it come to a candy Height, and keep it
still boiling till it become thick, then stir it with a Stick from you, and
when it is at candy Height it will fly from your Stick like Flakes of Snow, or
Feathers flying in the Air, and till it comes to that Height it will not fly,
then you may use it as you please.

346. To make Marmalade of Quinces White.
Take your Quinces and codle them as you do Apples, when they are soft pare
them and cut them in Pieces, as if you would cut them for Apple Pyes, then put
your Cores, Parings and the Waste of your Quinces in some Water, and boil them
fast for fear of turning Red, until it be strong Jelly; when you see the Jelly
pretty Strong strain it, and be sure you boil them uncovered; add as much Sugar
as the Weight of your Quinces unto your Jelly, till it be boiled to a Height,
then put in your codled Quinces and boil them uncovered till they be enough,
and set them near the Fire to harden.

347. To make Quiddeny of Red Currantberries.
Put your Berries into a Pot with a Spoonful or two of Water, cover it close,
and boil them in some Water, when you think they are enough strain them, and
put to every Pint of Juice a Pound of Loaf Sugar, boil it up Jelly Height, and
put them into the Glasses for Use.

348. To preserve Gooseberries.
To a Pound of stoned Gooseberries put a Pound and a quarter of fine Sugar, wet
the Sugar with the Gooseberry Jelly; take a Quart of Gooseberries, and two or
three Spoonfuls of Water, boil them very quick, let your Sugar be melted, and
then put in your Gooseberries* boil them till clear, which will be very quickly.

349. To make little Almond Cakes.
Take a Pound of Sugar and eight Eggs, beat them well an Hour, then put them
into a Pound of Flower, beat them together, blanch a quarter of a Pound of
Almonds, and beat them with Rose Water to keep them from Oiling, mix all
together, butter your Tins, and bake them half an Hour.

Half an Hour is rather too long for them to stand in the Oven.

350. To preserve Red Gooseberries.
Take a Pound of Six-penny Sugar and a little Juice of Currants, put to it a
Pound and a half of Gooseberries, and let them boil quick a quarter of an Hour;
but if they be for Jam they must boil better than half an Hour.

They are very proper for Tarts, or to eat as Sweetmeats.

351. Te bottle Berries another Way.
Gather your Berries when they are full grown* pick and bottle them, tie a
Paper over them, prick it with a Pin, and set it in the Oven; after you have
drawn, and when they are Codled, take them out, and when cold cork them up;
rosin the Cork over, and keep them for Use.

352. To keep Barberries for Tarts all the Year.
Take Berries when they are full Ripe, and pick them from the Stalk, put them
into dry Bottles, cork them up very close and keep them for Use.

You may do Cramberries the same Way.

353. To preserve Barberries for Tarts.
Take Barberries when full Ripe, strip them, take their Weight in Sugar, and as
much Water as will wet your Sugar, give it a boil and skim it; then put in your
Berries, let them boil whilst they they look clear and your Syrrup thick, so
put them into a Pot, and when they are cold cover them up with a Paper dipped in
Brandy.

354. To preserve Damascenes.
Take Damascenes before they are full ripe, and prick them, take their Weight
in Sugar, and as much Water as will wet your Sugar, give it a Boil and skim it,
then put in your Damascenes, let them have one Scald, and set them by whilst
cold, then scald them again, and continue scalding them twice a Day whilst your
Syrrup look thick, and the Damascenes clear; you must never let them boil; do
them in a Brass Pan, and do not take them out in the Doing; when they are
enough put them into a Pot, and cover them up with a Paper dipped in Brandy.

355. How to keep Damascenes for Tarts.
Take Damascenes before they are full Ripe, to every Quart of Damascenes put a
Pound of powder Sugar, put them into a pretty broad Pot, a Layer of Sugar and a
Layer of Damascenes, tie them close up, set them in a slow Oven, and let them
have a Heat every Day whilst the Syrrup be thick and the Damascenes enough;
render a little Sheep suet and pour over them, so keep them for Use.

356. To keep Damascenes another Way.
Take Damascenes before they be quite ripe, pick off the Stalks and put them
into dry Bottles; cork them as you would do Ale, and keep them in a cool Place
for Use.

357. To make Mango of Codlins.
Take Codlins when they are at their full Growth, and of the greenest Sort,
take a little out of the End with a Stalk, and then take out the Core; lie them
in a strong Salt and Water, let them lie ten Days or more, and fill them with
the same Ingredients as you do other Mango, only scald them oftener.

358. To pickle Currantberries.
Take Currants either red or white before they are thoroughly ripe; you must
not take them from the Stalk; make a Pickle of Salt and Water, and a little
Vinegar, so keep them for Use.

They are proper for Garnishing.

359. To keep Barberries instead of preserving
Take Barberries and lie them in a Pot, a Layer of Barberries and a Layer of
Sugar, pick the Seeds out before for garnishing Sweetmeats; if for Sauces put
some Vinegar to them*

360. To keep Asparagus or Green-Pease a Year.
Take Green-Pease, green them as you do Cucumbers, and scald them as you do
other Pickles made of Salt and Water; let it be always new Pickle, and when you
would use them boil them in fresh Water.

361. To make white Paste of Pippins.
Take some Pippins, pare and cut them in Halves, and take out the Cores, then
boil them very tender in fair Water, and strain them through a Sieve, then
clarify two Pound of Sugar with two whites of Eggs, and boil it to a candy
Height, put two Pound and a half of the Pulp of your Pippins into it, let it
stand over a slow Fire drying, keeping it stirring till it comes clear from the
Bottom of your Pan, then lie them upon Plates or Boards to dry.

362. To make green Paste of Pippins.
Take green Pippins, put them into a Pot and cover them, let them stand
infusing over a slow Fire five or six Hours, to draw the redness or sappiness
from them, and then strain them through a Hair Sieve; take two Pound of Sugar,
boil it to a candy Height, put to it two Pound of the Pulp of your Pippins,
keep it stirring over the Fire till it comes clean from the Bottom of your Pan,
then lay it on Plates or Boards, and set it in an Oven or Stove to dry.

363. To make red Paste of Pippins.
Take two Pound of Sugar, clarify it, then take Rosset and temper it very well
with fair Water, put it into your Syrrup, let it boil till your Syrrup is
pretty red colored with it, then strain your Syrrup through a fine Cloth, and
boil it till it be at candy Height, then put to it two Pound and a half of the
Pulp of Pippins, keeping it stirring over the Fire till it comes clean from the
Bottom of the Pan, then lie it on Plates or Boards, so dry them.

364. To preserve Fruit Green.
Take your Fruit when they are green, and some fair Water, set it on the Fire,
and when it is hot put in the Apples, cover them close, but they must not boil,
so let them stand till they be soft, and there will be a thin Skin on them,
peel it off, and set them to cool, then put them in again, let them boil till
they be very green, and keep them as whole as you can; when you think them
ready to take up, make your Syrrup for them; take their weight in Sugar, and
when your Syrrup is ready put the Apples into it, and boil them very well in
it; they will keep all the Year near some Fire.

You may do green Plumbs or other Fruit.

365. To make Orange Marmalade.
Take three or four Seville Oranges, grate them, take out the Meat, and boil
the Rhinds whilst they are tender; shift them three or four Times in the
boiling to take out the Bitter, and beat them very fine in a Marble Mortar; to
the Weight of your Pulp take a Pound of Loaf Sugar, and to a Pound of Sugar you
may add a Pint of Water, boil and skim it before you put in your Oranges, let
it boil half an Hour very quick, then put in your Meat, and to a Pint take a
Pound and a half of Sugar, let it boil quick half an Hour, stir it all the
Time, and when it is boiled to a Jelly, put it into Pots or Glasses; cover it
with a Paper dipped in Brandy.

366. To make Quinces white another Way.
Codle your Quinces, cut them in small Pieces, and to a Pound of Quinces take
three Quarters of a Pound of Sugar, boil it to a candy Height, having ready a
Quarter of a Pint of Quince Liquor boiled and skim'd, put the Quinces and
Liquor to your Sugar, boil them till it look clear, which will be very quickly,
then close your Quince, and when cold cover it with Jelly of Pippins to keep
the Color.

367. To make Gooseberry Vinegar.
To every Gallon of Water take six Pound of ripe Gooseberries, bruise them, and
pour the Water boiling hot upon your Berries, cover it close, and set it in a
warm Place to foment, till all the Berries come to the Top, then draw it off,
and to every Gallon of the Liquor put a Pound and half of Sugar, then tun it
into a Cask, set it in a warm Place, and in six Months it will be fit for Use.

368. To make Gooseberry Wine another Way.
Take three Pound of ripe Gooseberries to a Quart of Water, and a Pound of
Sugar, stamp your Berries, and throw them into your Water as you stamp them, it
will make them strain the better; when it is strained put in your Sugar, beat
it well with a Dish for Half an Hour, then strain it through a finer strainer
than before into your Vessel, leaving it some room to work, and when it is
clear bottle it; your Berries must be clean picked before you use them, and let
them be at their full Growth when you Use them, rather changing Color.

369. To make Jam of Cherries.
Take ten Pound of Cherries, stone and boil them till the Juice be wasted, then
add to it three Pound of Sugar, and give it three or four good Boils, then put
it into your Pots.

370. To preserve Cherries.
To a Pound of Cherries take a Pound of Sugar finely sifted, with which strew
the Bottom of your Pan, having stoned the Cherries, lay a Layer of Cherries and
a Layer of Sugar, strowing the Sugar very well over all, boil them over a quick
Fire a good while, keeping them clean skim'd till they look clear, and the
Syrrup is thick, and both of one Color; when you think them half done, take
them off the Fire for an Hour, after which set them on again, and to every
Pound of Fruit put in a quarter of a Pint of the Juice of Cherries and red
Currants, so boil them till enough, and the Syrrup is jellied, then put them in
a Pot, and keep them close from the Air.

371. To preserve Cherries for drying.
Take two Pound of Cherries and stone them, put to them a Pound of Sugar and as
much Water as will wet the Sugar, then set them on the Fire, let them boil till
they look clear, then take them off the Fire and let them stand a while in the
Syrrup, and then take them up and lay them on Papers to dry.

372. To preserve Fruit green all the Year.
Gather your Fruit when they are three Parts ripe, on a very dry Day, when the
Sun shines on them, then take earthen Pots and put them in, cover the Pots with
Cork, or bung them that no Air can get into them, dig a Place in the Earth a
Yard deep, set the Pots therein and cover them with the Earth very close, and
keep them for Use.

When you take any out cover them up again as at the first.

373. How to keep Kidney Beans all Winter.
Take Kidney Beans when they are young, leave on both the Ends, lay a Layer of
Salt at the bottom of your Pot, and then a Layer of Beans, and so on till your
Pot be full; cover them close at the Top that they get no Air, and set them in
a cool Place; before you boil them lay them in Water all Night, let your Water
boil when you put them in, (without Salt) and put into it a Lump of Butter
about the bigness of a Walnut.

374. To candy Angelico.
Take Angelico when it is young and tender, take off all the Leaves from the
Stalks, boil it in the Pan with some of the Leaves under, and some at the Top,
till it be so tender that you can peel off all the Skin, then put it into some
Water again, cover it over with some of the Leaves, let it simmer over a slow
Fire till it be Green, when it is Green drain the Water from it, and then weigh
it; to a Pound of Angelico take a Pound of Loaf Sugar, put a Pint of Water to
every Pound of Sugar, boil and skim it, and then put in your Angelico; it will
take a great deal of boiling in the Sugar, the longer you boil it and the
Greener it will be, boil it whilst your Sugar be candy Height by the Side of
your Pan; if you would have it nice and white, you must have a Pound of Sugar
boiled candy Height in a Copper-dish or Stew Pan, set it over a Chafing Dish,
and put it into your Angelico, let it have a boil, and it will candy as you
take it out.

375. To dry Pears.
Take half a Peck of good baking Pears, (or as many as you please) pare and put
them in a Pot, and to a Peck of Pears put in two Pound of Sugar; you must put
in no Water but lie the Parings on the Top of your Pears, tie them up close,
and set them in a brown Bread Oven; when they are baked lay them in a
Dripping-pan, and flat them a little with your Pan; set them in a slow Oven,
and turn them every Day whilst they be thoroughly dry; so keep them for Use.

You may dry Pippins the same Way, only as you turn them grate over them a
little Sugar.

376. To preserve Currants in Bunches.
Boil your Sugar to the fourth Degree of boiling, tie your Currants up in
Bunches, then place them in order in the Sugar, and give them several covered
Boilings, skim them quick, and let them not have above two or three Seethings,
then skim them again, and set them into the Stove in the preserving Pan, the
next Day drain them, and dress them in Bunches, strew them with Sugar, and dry
them in a Stove or in the Sun.

377. To dry Apricocks.
To a Pound of Apricocks put three Quarters of a Pound of Sugar, pare and stone
them, to a Layer of Fruit lie a Layer of Sugar, let them stand till the next
Day, then boil them again till they be clear, when cold take them out of the
Syrrup, and lay them upon Glasses or China, and sift them over with double
refined Sugar, so set them on a Stove to dry, next Day if they be dry enough
turn them, and sift the other Side with Sugar; let the Stones be broke and the
Kernels blanched, and give them a boil in the Syrrup, then put them into the
Apricocks; you must not do too many at a Time, for fear of breaking them in the
Syrrup; do a great many, and the more you do in it the better they will Taste.

378. To make Jumballs another Way.
Take a Pound of Meal dry, a Pound of Sugar finely beat, mix them together;
then take the Yolks of five or six Eggs, as much thick Cream as will make it up
to a Paste, and some Corriander Seeds; roll them and lay them on Tins, prick
and bake them in a quick Oven; before you set them in the Oven wet them with a
little Rose Water and double refined Sugar, and it will Ice them.

379. To preserve Oranges Whole.
Take what Quantity of Oranges you have a mind to preserve, chip off the Rhind,
the thiner and better, put them into Water twenty-four Hours, in that Time
shift them in the Water (to take off the Bitter) three Times; you must shift
them with boiling Water, cold Water makes them hard; put double the Weight of
Sugar for Oranges, dissolve your Sugar in Water, skim it, and clarify it with
the White of an Egg; before you put in your Oranges, boil them in Syrrup three
or four Times, three or four Days betwixt each Time; you must take out the
Inmeat of the Oranges very clean, for fear of mudding the Syrrup.

380. To make Jam of Damascenes.
Take Damascenes when they are ripe, and to two Pound of Damascenes take a
Pound of Sugar, put your Sugar into a Pan with a Jill of Water, when you have
boiled it put in your Damascenes, let them boil pretty quick, skim them all the
Time they are boiling, when your Syrrup looks thick they are enough, put them
into your Pots, and when they are cold cover them with a Paper dipped in Brandy,
tie them up close, and keep them for Use.

381. To make clear Cakes of Gooseberries.
Take a Pint of Jelly, a Pound and a Quartern of Sugar, make your Jelly with
three or four Spoonfuls of Water, and put your Sugar and Jelly together, set it
over the Fire to Heat, but don't let it boil, then put it into the Cake Pots,
and set it in a slow Oven till iced over.

382. To make Bullies Cheese.
Take half a Peck or a Quartern of Bullies, whether you please, pick off the
Stalks, put them in a Pot, and stop them up very close, set them in a Pot of
Water to boil for two Hours, and be sure your Pot be full of Water, and boil
them whilst they be enough, then put them in a Hair Sieve to drain the Liquor
from the Bullies; and to every Quart of Liquor put a Pound and Quartern of
Sugar, boil it over a slow Fire, keeping it stirring all the Time: You may know
when it is boiled high enough by the parting from the Pan, and cover it with
Papers dipped in Brandy, so tie it up close, and keep it for Use.

383 To make Jam of Bullies.
Take the Bullies that remained in the Sieve, to every Quart of it take a Pound
of Sugar, and put it to your Jam, boil it over a slow Fire, put it in Pots, and
keep it for Use.

384. To make Syrrup of Gilliflowers.
Take five Pints of clipped Gilliflowers, two Pints of boiling Water and put to
them, then put them in an earthen Pot to infuse a Night and a Day, take a
Strainer and strain them out; to a Quart of your Liquor put a Pound and half of
Loaf Sugar, boil it over a slow Fire, and skim it whilst any Skim rises; so
when it is cold bottle it for Use.

385. To pickle Gilliflowers.
Take Clove of Gilliflowers, when they are at full Growth, clip them and put
them into a Pot, put them pretty fad down, and put to them some white Wine
Vinegar, as much as will cover them; sweeten them with fine powder Sugar, or
common Loaf; when you put in your Sugar stir them up that your Sugar may go
down to the Bottom; they must be very sweet; let them stand two or three Days,
and then put in a little more Vinegar; so tie them up for Use.

386. To pickle Cucumbers sliced.
Pare thirty large Cucumbers, slice them into a Pewter Dish, take six Onions,
slice and strew on them some Salt, so cover them, and let them stand to drain
twenty four Hours; make your Pickle of white Wine Vinegar, Nutmeg, Pepper,
Cloves and Mace, boil the Spices in the Pickle, drain the Liquor clean from the
Cucumbers, put them into a deep Pot, pour the Liquor upon them boiling hot, and
cover them very close; when they are cold drain the Liquor from them, give it
another boil, and when it is cold pour it on them again; so keep them for Use.

387. To make Cupid Hedge-Hogs.
Take a Quarter of a Pound of Jordan Almonds, and half a Pound of Loaf Sugar,
put it into a Pan with as much Water as will just wet it, let it boil whilst it
be so thick as will stick to your Almonds, then put in your Almonds and let
them boil in it; have ready a Quarter of a Pound of small colored Comfits;
take your Almonds out of the Syrrup one by one, and turn them round whilst they
be covered over, so lie them on a Pewter-dish as you do them, and set them
before the Fire, whilst you have done them all.

They are pretty to put in Glasses, or to set in a Desert.

388. To make Almond Hedge-Hogs.
Take half a Pound of the best Almonds, and blanch them, beat them with two or
three Spoonfuls of Rose Water in a Marble-Mortar very small, then take six
Eggs, (leave out two of the Whites) beat your Eggs very well, take half a Pound
of Loaf Sugar beaten, and four Ounces of clarified Butter, mix them all well
together, put them into a Pan, set them over the Fire, and keep it stirring
whilst it be stiff, then put it into a China-Dish, and when it is cold put it
up into the Shape of an Hedgehog, put Currants for Eyes, and a Bit of candid
Orange for Tongue; you may leave out part of the Almonds unbeaten; take them
and split them in two, then cut them in long Bits to stick into your Hedgehog
all over, then take two Pints of Cream Custard to pour over your Hedgehog,
according to the Bigness of your Dish; lie round your Dish Edge slices of
candid or preserved Orange, which you have, so serve it up.

389. To Pot Salmon to keep half a Year.
Take a Side of fresh Salmon, take out the Bone, cut off the Head and scald it;
you must not wash it but wipe it with a dry Cloth; cut it in three Pieces,
season it with Mace, Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg, put it into a flat Pot with the
skin Side downwards, lie over it a Pound of Butter, tie a Paper over it, and
send it to the Oven, about an Hour and a half will bake it; if you have more
Salmon in your Pot than three Pieces it will take more baking, and you must put
in more Butter; when it is baked take it out of your Pot, and lie it on a
Fish-plate to drain, and take off the Skin, so season it over again, for if it
be not well Seasoned it will not keep; put it into your Pot piece by piece; it
will keep best in little Pots, when you put it into your Pots, press it well
down with the back of your Hand, and when it is cold cover it with clarified
Butter, and set it in a cool Place; so keep it for Use.

390. To make a Codling Pie.
Take Codlings before they be over old, hang them over a slow Fire to codle,
when they are soft peel off the Skin, so put them into the Water again, then
cover them up with Vine Leaves, and let them hang over the Fire whilst they be
Green; be sure you don't let them boil; lie them whole in the Dish, and bake
them in Puff-paste, but leave no Paste in the Bottom of the Dish; put to them a
little shred Lemon Peel, a Spoonful of Verjuice or Juice of Lemon, and as much
Sugar as you think proper, according to the largeness of your Pie.

391. To make a Colliflower Pudding.
Boil the Flowers in Milk, take the Tops and lay them in a Dish, then take
three Jills of Cream, the Yolks of eight Eggs, and the Whites of two, season it
with Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Mace, Sugar, Sack or Orange-flower Water, beat all well
together, then pour it over the Colliflower, put it in the Oven, bake it as you
would a Custard, and grate Sugar over it when it comes out of the Oven.

Take Sugar, Sack and Butter for Sauce.

392. To make Stock for Hartshorn Jelly.
Take five or six Ounces of Hartshorn, put it into a Gallon of Water, hang it
over a slow Fire, cover it close, and let it boil three or four Hours, so
strain it; make it the Day before you use it, and then you may have it ready
for your Jellies.

393. To make Syrrup of Violets.
Take Violets and pick them; to every Pound of Violets put a Pint of Water,
when the Water is just ready to boil put it to your Violets, and stir them well
together, let them infuse twenty-four Hours and strain them; to every Pound of
Syrrup, take almost two Pound of Sugar, beat the Sugar very well and put it
into your Syrrup, stir it that the Sugar may dissolve, let it stand a Day or
two, stiring it two or three Times, then set it on the Fire, let it be but warm
and it will be thick enough.

You may make your Syrrup either of Violets or Gilliflowers, only take the
Weight of Sugar, let it stand on the Fire till it be very hot, and the Syrrup
of Violets must be only warm.

394. To pickle Cockles.
Take Cockles at a full Moon and wash them, then put them in a Pan, and cover
them with a wet Cloth, when they are enough put them into a Stone Bowl, take
them out of the Shells and wash them very well in their own Pickle; let the
Pickle settle every time you wash them, then clear it off; when you have
cleaned them, put the Pickle into a Pan, with a Spoonful or two of white Wine
and a little white Wine Vinegar, to your Taste, put in a little Jamaica and
whole Pepper, boil it very well in the Pickle, then put in your Cockles, let
them have a ^^il and Skim them, when they are cold put them in a Bottle with a
little Oil over them, set them in a cool Place and keep them for Use.

395. To preserve Quinces whole or in Quarters.
Take the largest Quinces when they are at full Growth, pare them and throw
them into Water, when you have pared them cut them in Quarters, and take out
the Cores; if you would have any whole, you must take out the Cores with a
Scope; save all the Cores and Parings, and put them in a Pot or Pan to codle
your Quinces in, with as much Water as will cover them, so put in your Quinces
in the middle of your Parings into the Pan, (be sure you cover them close up at
the Top) so let them hang over a slow Fire whilst they be thoroughly tender,
then take them out and weigh them; to every Pound of Quince take a Pound of
Loaf Sugar, and to every Pound of Sugar take a Pint of the same Water you
codled your Quinces in, set your Water and Sugar over the Fire, boil it and
skim it, then put in your Quinces, and cover it close up, set it over a slow
Fire, and let it boil whilst your Quinces be red and the Syrrup thick, then put
them in Pots for Use, dipping a Paper in Brandy to lie over them.

396. To pickle Shrimps.
Take the largest Shrimps you can get, pick them out of the Shells, boil them
in a Jill of Water, or as much Water as will cover them, according as you have
a Quantity of Shrimps, strain them through a Hair Sieve, then put to the Liquor
a little Spice, Mace, Cloves, whole Pepper, white Wine, white Wine Vinegar, and
a little salt to your Taste; boil them very well together, when it is cold put
in your Shrimps, they are fit for Use.

397. To pickle Muscles.
Wash your Muscles, put them into a Pan as you do your Cockles, pick them out
of the Shells, and wash them in the Liquor; be sure you take of the Beards, so
boil them in the Liquor with Spices, as you do your Cockles, only put to them a
little more Vinegar than you do to Cockles.

398. To pickle Walnuts Green.
Gather Walnuts when they are as you can run a Pin through them, pare them and
put them in Water, and let them lie four or five Days, stirring it twice a Day
to take out the Bitter, then put them in strong Salt and Water, let them lie a
Week or ten Days, stirring it once or twice a Day, then put them in fresh Salt
and Water, and hang them over a Fire, put to them a little Alum, and cover
them up close with Vine Leaves, let them hang over a slow Fire whilst they be
Green, but be sure don't let them boil, when they are Green put them into a
Sieve to drain the Water from them.

399 To make a pickle for them.
Take a little good Alegar, put to it a little long Pepper and Jamaica Pepper,
a few Bay Leaves, a little Horse-raddish, a handful or two of Mustard Seed, a
little Salt and a little Rockambol if you have any, if not a few Shalots; boil
them altogether in the Alegar, which put to your Walnuts and let it stand three
or four Days, giving them a Scald once a Day, then tie them up for Use.

A Spoonful of this Pickle is good for Fish-Sauce, or a Calve's Head Hash.

400. To Pickle Walnuts Black.
Gather Walnuts when they are so tender that you can run a Pin through them,
prick them all with a Pin very well, lie them in fresh Water, and let them lie
for a Week, shifting them once a Day; make for them a strong Salt and Water,
and let them lie whilst they be Yellow, stirring them once a Day, then take
them out of the Salt and Water, and boil it, put it on the Top of your Walnuts,
and let your Pot stand in the Corner End, scald them once or twice a Day whilst
they be black.

You may make the same Pickle for those, as you did for the Green ones.

401. To pickle Oysters.
Take the largest Oysters you can get, pick them whole out of the Shell, and
take off the Beards, wash them very well in their own Pickle, so let the Pickle
settle, and Clear it off put it into a stew Pan, put to it two or three
Spoonfuls of White Wine, and a little White Wine Vinegar; don't put in any
Water, for if there be not Pickle enough of their own get a little
Cockle-pickle and put to it, a little Jamaica Pepper, white Pepper and Mace,
boil and skim them very well; you must skim it before you put in your Spices,
then put in your Oysters, and boil them in the Pickle, when they are cold put
them into a large Bottle, with a little Oil on the Top, set them in a cool
Place and keep them for Use.

402. To Pickle large Cucumbers.
Take Cucumbers and put them in a strong Salt and Water, let them lie whilst
they be thoroughly Yellow, then scald them in the same Salt and Water they lie
in, set them on the Fire and scald them once a Day whilst they are Green; take
the best Alegar you can get, put to it a little Jamaica Pepper and Black
Pepper, some Horse-Raddish in Slices, a few Bay Leaves, and a little Dill and
Salt, so scald your Cucumbers twice or thrice in this Pickle, then put them up
for Use.

403. To Pickle Onions.
Take the smallest Onions you can get, peel and put them into a large Quantity
of fair Water, let them lie two Days, and shift them twice a Day; then drain
them from the Water, take a little distilled Vinegar, put to them two or three
Blades of Mace, and a little white Pepper and Salt, boil it, and pour it upon
your Onions, let them stand three Days, so put them into little Glasses, and
tie a Bladder over them; they are very good done with Alegar; for common use,
only put in Jamaica Pepper instead of Mace.

404. To pickle Elder Buds.
Take Elder Buds when they are the bigness of small Walnuts, lie them in a
strong Salt and Water for ten Days, and then scald them in fresh Salt and
Water, put in a Lump of Alum, let them stand in the Corner End close covered
up, and scalded once a Day whilst Green.

You may do Radish Cods or Brown Buds same Way.

405. To make the Pickle.
Take a little Alegar or white Wine Vinegar, and put to it two or three Blades
of Mace, with a little whole Pepper and Jamaica Pepper, a few Bay Leaves and
Salt, put to your Buds, and scald them two or three Times, then they are fit
for Use.

406. To pickle Mushrooms.
Take Mushrooms when fresh gathered, sort the large ones from the Bottoms, cut
off the Stalks, wash them in Water with a Flannel, have a Pan of Water ready on
the Fire to boil them in, for the less they lie in the Water the better; let
them have two or three Boils over the Fire, then put them into a Sieve and when
you have drained the Water from them put them into a Pot, throw over them a
handful of Salt, stop them up close with a Cloth, and let them stand two or
three Hours on the hot Hearth or Range End, giving your Pot a shake now and
then; then drain the Pickle from them, and lie them in a Cloth for an Hour or
two, so put into them as much distilled Vinegar as will cover them; let them
lie a Week or ten Days, then take them out, and put them in dry Bottles; put to
them a little white Pepper, Salt and Ginger sliced, fill them up with distilled
Vinegar, put over them a little sweet Oil, and cork them up close; if your
Vinegar be good they will keep two or three Years: I know it by Experience.

You must be sure not to fill your Bottles above three Parts full, if you do
they will not keep.

407. To pickle Mushrooms another Way.
Take Mushrooms and wash them with a Flannel, throw them into Water as you wash
them, only pick the small from the large, put them into a Pot, throw over them
a little Salt, stop up your Pot close with a Cloth, boil them in a Pot of Water
as you do Currants when you make a Jelly, giving them a Shake now and then; you
may guess when they are enough by the Quantity of Liquor that comes from them;
when you think they are enough strain from them the Liquor, put in a little
white Wine Vinegar, and boil in it a little Mace, white Pepper, Jamaica Pepper,
and sliced Ginger; when it is cold put it to the Mushrooms, bottle them, and
keep them for Use.

They will keep this Way very well, and have more of the Taste of Mushrooms,
but they will not be altogether so White.

408. To pickle Potatoe Crabs.
Gather your Crabs when they are young, and about the bigness of a large
Cherry, lie them in a strong Salt and Water as you do other Pickles, let them
stand for a Week or ten Days, then scald them in the same Water they lie in
twice a Day whilst Green; make the same Pickle for them as you do for
Cucumbers; be sure you scald them twice or thrice in the Pickle and they will
keep the better*

409. To pickle large Buttons.
Take your Buttons, clean them and cut them in three or four Pieces, put them
into a large Sauce-pan to stew in their own Liquor, put to them a little
Jamaica and whole Pepper, a Blade or two of Mace, and a little Salt, cover it
up, let it stew over a slow Fire whilst you think they are enough, then strain
from them their Liquor, and put to it a little white Wine Vinegar or Alegar,
which you please, give it a boil together, and when it is cold put it to your
Mushrooms, and keep them for Use.

You may pickle Flaps the same Way.

410. To make Catchup.
Take large Mushrooms when they are fresh gathered, cut off the dirty Ends,
break them small in your Hands, put them in a stone Bowl, with a handful or two
of Salt, and let them stand all Night; if you don't get Mushrooms enough at
once, with a little Salt they will keep a Day or two whilst you get more, so
put them in a stew Pot, and set them in an Oven with Household Bread; when they
are enough strain from them the Liquor, and let it stand to settle, then boil
it with a little Mace, Jamaica and whole black Pepper, two or three Shallots,
boil it over a slow Fire for an Hour, when it is boiled, let it stand to
settle, and when it is cold bottle it; if you boil it well it will keep a Year
or two; you must put in Spices according to the Quantity of your Catchup; you
must not wash them, nor put to them any Water.

411. To make Mango of Cucumbers or small Mellons.
Gather Cucumbers when they are Green, cut a bit off the End and take out all
the Meat; lie them in a large Salt and Water, let them lie for a Week or ten
Days whilst they be Yellow, then scald them in the same Salt and Water they lie
in whilst Green, then drain from them the Water* Take a little Mustard Seed, a
little Horse Radish, some scraped and some shred fine, and a handful of
Shallots, a Claw or two of Garlic if you like the Taste, and a little shred
Mace; take six or eight Cucumbers shred fine, mix them amongst the rest of the
Ingredients, then fill your Mellons or Cucumbers with the Meat, and put in the
Bits at the Ends, tie them on with a String, so take as much Alegar or white
Wine Vinegar as will well cover them, and put into it a little Jamaica and
whole Pepper, a little Horse Radish and a handful or two of Mustard Seed, then
boil it, and pour it upon your Mango; let it stand in the corner End two or
three Days, scald them once a Day and then tie them up for Use.

412. To pickle Garkins.
Take Garkins of the first Growth, pick them clean, put them in a strong Salt
and Water, let them lie for a Week or ten Days whilst they be thoroughly Yellow,
then scald them in the same Salt and Water they lie in, scald them once a Day,
and let them lie whilst they are Green, then set them in the corner End close
covered.

413. To make Pickle for your Cucumbers
Take a little Alegar, (the Quantity must be equal to the Quantity of your
Cucumbers, and so must your Seasoning) a little Pepper, a little Jamaica Pepper
and long Pepper, two or three Shallots, a little Horseradish scraped or
sliced, a little Salt and a bit of Alum, boil them all together, and scald
your Cucumbers two or three Times with your Pickle, so tie them up for Use.

414. To pickle Colliflower White.
Take the whitest Colliflower you can get, break it in Pieces the bigness of a
Mushroom; take as muck distilled Vinegar as will cover it, and put to it a
little white Pepper, two or three Blades of Mace, and a little Salt, then boil
it and pour it on your Colliflowers three Times, let it be cold, then put it
into your Glasses or Pots, and wet a Bladder to tie over it to keep out the Air.

415. To pickle Red Cabbage.
Take a Red Cabbage, choose it a purple Red* for the light Red never proves a
good Color so take your Cabbage and shred it in very thin Slices, season it
with Pepper and Salt very well, let it lie all Night upon a broad Tin, or a
dripping Pan; take a little Alegar, put to it a little Jamaica Pepper, and two
or three Rases of Ginger, boil them together, and when it is cold pour it upon
your Cabbage, and in two or three Days Time it will be fit for Use.

You may throw a little Colliflower amongst it, and it will turn Red.

416. To pickle Colliflower another Way.
Take the Colliflower and break it in Pieces the bigness of a Mushroom, but
leave on a short Stalk with the Head; take some white Wine Vinegar, into a
Quart of Vinegar put six Pennyworth of Cochineal beat well, also a little
Jamaica and whole Pepper, and a little Salt, boil them in Vinegar, pour it over
the Colliflower hot, and let it stand two or three Days close covered up; you
may scald it once in three Days whilst it be Red, when it is Red take it out of
Pickle, and wash the Cochineal off in the Pickle, so strain it through a hair
Sieve, and let it stand a little to settle, then put it to your Colliflower
again, and tie it up for Use; the longer it lies in the Pickle the redder it
will be.

417. To pickle Walnuts White.
Take Walnuts when they are at full Growth and can thrust a Pin through them,
the largest sort you can get, pare them, and cut a bit off one End whilst you
see the White, so you must pare off all the Green, if you cut through the White
to the Kernel they will be spotted, and put them in Water as you pare them; you
must boil them in Salt and Water as you do Mushrooms, and will take no more
boiling than a Mushroom; when they are boiled lay them on a dry Cloth to drain
out of the Water, then put them into a Pot, and put to them as much distilled
Vinegar as will cover them, let them lie two or three Days; then take a little
more Vinegar, put to it a few Blades of Mace, a little white Pepper and Salt,
boil them together, when it is cold take your Walnuts out of the other Pickle
and put into that, let them lie two or three Days, pour it from them, give it
another boil and skim it, when it is cold put it to your Walnuts again, put
them into a Bottle, and put over them a little sweet Oil, cork them up, and set
them in a cool Place; if your Vinegar be good they will keep as long as the
Mushrooms.

418. To pickle Barberries.
Take Barberries when full Ripe, put them into a Pot, boil a strong Salt and
Water, then pour it on them boiling hot.

419. To make Barley-Sugar.
Boil Barley in Water, strain it through a hair Sieve, then put the Decoction
into clarified Sugar brought to a candy Height, or the last Degree of boiling,
then take it off the Fire, and let the boiling settle, then pour it upon a
Marble Stone rubbed with the Oil of Olives, when it cools and begins to grow
hard, cut it into Pieces, and rub it into Lengths as you please.

420 To pickle Purslain.
Take the thickest Stalks of Purslain, lay them in Salt and Water six Weeks,
then take them out, put them into boiling Water, and cover them well; let them
hang over a slow Fire till they be very Green, when they are cold put them into
a Pot, and cover them well with Beer Vinegar, and keep them covered close.

421. To make Punch another Way.
Take a Quart or two of Sherbet before you put in your Brandy, and the Whites
of four or five Eggs, beat them very well, and set it over the Fire, let it
have a Boil, then put it into a Jelly Bag, so mix the rest of your Acid and
Brandy together, (the Quantity you design to make) heat it and run it all
through your Jelly Bag, change it in the running off whilst it look fine; let
the Peel of one or two Lemons lie in the Bag; you may make it the Day before
you use it, and bottle it.

422. To make new College Puddings.
Grate an old Penny Loaf, put to it a like Quantity of Suet shred, a Nutmeg
grated, a little Salt and some Currants, then beat some Eggs in a little Sack
and Sugar, mix all together, and knead it as Stiff as for Manchet, and make it
up in the form and size of a Turkey Egg, but a little flatter; take a Pound of
Butter, put it in a Dish or stew Pan, and set it over a clear Fire in a Chafing
Dish, and rub your Butter about the Dish till it is melted, then put your
Puddings in, and cover the Dish, but often turn your Puddings till they are
brown alike, and when they are enough grate some Sugar over them, and serve
them up hot.

For a side Dish you must let the Paste lie for a quarter of an Hour before you
make up your Puddings.

423. To make a Custard Pudding.
Take a Pint of Cream, mix with it six Eggs well beat, two Spoonfuls of Flower,
half a Nutmeg grated, a little Salt and Sugar to your Taste; butter your Cloth,
put it in when the Pan boils, baste it just half an Hour, and melt Butter for
the Sauce.

424. To make fried Toasts.
Chip a Manchet very well, and cut it round ways in Toasts, then take Cream and
eight Eggs seasoned with Sack, Sugar and Nutmeg, and let these Toasts steep in
it about an Hour, then fry them in sweet Butter, serve them up with plain
melted Butter, or with Butter, Sack and Sugar, as you please.

425. To make Sauce for Fish or Flesh.
Take a Quart of either Vinegar or Alegar, put it into a Jug, then take Jamaica
Pepper whole, some sliced Ginger and Mace, a few Cloves, some Lemon Peel,
Horseradish sliced, sweet Herbs, six Shallots peeled, eight Anchoves, and two
or three Spoonfuls of shred Capers, put all these in a Linen Bag, and put the
Bag into your Alegar or Vinegar, stop the Jug close, and keep it for Use.

A Spoonful cold is an Addition to Sauce for either Flesh or Fish.

426. To make a savoury Dish of Veal.
Cut large Collops of a Leg of Veal, spread them abroad on a Dresser, hack them
with the Back of a Knife, and dip them in the Yolks of Eggs, season them with
Nutmeg, Mace, Pepper and Salt, then make forced Meat with some of your Veal,
Beef Suet, Oysters chopped, and sweet Herbs shred fine, and the abovesaid Spice,
strew all these over your Collops, roll and tie them up, put them on Skewers,
tie them to a Spit and roast them; and to the rest of your forced Meat add the
Yolk of an Egg or two, and make it up in Balls and fry them, put them in a Dish
with your Meat when roasted, put a little Water in the Dish under them, and
when they are enough put to it an Anchove, a little Gravy, a Spoonful of white
Wine, and thicken it up with a little Flower and Butter, so fry your Balls and
lie round the Dish, and serve it up.

This is proper for a side Dish either at Noon or Night.

427. To make French Bread.
Take half a Peck of fine Flower, the Yolks of six Eggs and four Whites, a
little Salt, a Pint of Ale Yeast, and as much new Milk made warm as will make
it a thin light Paste, stir it about with your Hand, but be sure don't knead
them; have ready six wooden Quart or Pint Dishes, fill them with the Paste,
(not over full) let them stand a quarter of an Hour to rise, then turn them out
into the Oven, and when they are baked rasp them. The Oven must be quick.

428. To make Gingerbread another Way.
Take three Pound of fine Flower, and the Rhind of a Lemon dried and beaten to
Powder, half a Pound of Sugar, or more if you like it, a little Butter, and an
Ounce and a half of beaten Ginger, mix all these together, and wet it pretty
Stiff with nothing but Treacle; make it into Rolls or Cakes as you please; if
you please you may add candid Orange-peel and Citron; butter your Paper to bake
it on, and let it be baked hard.

429. To make Quince Cream.
Take Quinces when they are full ripe, cut them in Quarters, scald them till
they be soft, pare them and mash the clear Part of them, and the Pulp, and put
it through a Sieve, take an equal Weight of Quince and double refined Sugar
beaten and sifted, and the Whites of Eggs beat till it is as white as Snow,
then put it into Dishes.

You may do Apple Cream the same Way.

430. To make Cream of any preserved Fruit.
Take half a Pound of the Pulp of any preserved Fruit, put it in a large Pan,
put to it the Whites of two or three Eggs, beat them well together for an Hour,
then with a Spoon take off, and lay it heaped up high on the Dish and Salver
without Cream, or put it in the middle Basin.

Raspberries will not do this Way.

431. To dry Peers or Pippins without Sugar.
Take Pears or Apples and wipe them clean, take a Bodkin and run it in at the
Head, and out at the Stalk, put them in a flat Earthern Pot and bake them, but
not too much; you must put a Quart of strong new Ale to half a Peck of Pears,
tie white Papers over the Pots that they are baked in, let them stand till
cold, then drain them, squeeze the Pears flat, and the Apples, the Eye to the
Stalk, and lay them on Sieves with wide Holes to dry, either in a Stove or an
Oven not too hot.

432. To preserve Mulberries whole
Set some Mulberries over the Fire in a Skellet or preserving Pan, draw from
them a Pint of Juice when it is strained; then take three Pound of Sugar beaten
very fine, wet the Sugar with the Pint of Juice, boil up your Sugar and skim
it, put in two Pound of ripe Mulberries, and let them stand in the Syrrup till
they are thoroughly warm, then set them on the Fire, and let them boil very
gently; do them but half enough, so put them by in the Syrrup till next Day,
then boil them gently again; when the Syrrup is pretty thick and will stand in
round drops when it is cold, they are enough, so put all in a Gally-Pot for Use.

433. To make Orange Cakes.
Cut your Oranges, pick out all the Meat and Juice free from the Strings and
Seeds, set it by, then boil it, and shift the Water till your Peels are tender,
dry them with a Cloth, mince them small, and put them to the Juice; to a pound
of that weigh a pound and a half of double refined Sugor; dip your Lumps of
Sugar in Water, and boil it to a candy Height, take it off the Fire and put in
your Juice and Peel, stir it well, when it is almost cold put it into a Basin,
and set it in a Stove, then lay it thin on Earthen Plates to dry, and as it
Candies fashion it with a Knife, and lay them on Glasses; when your Plate is
empty, put more out of your Basin.

434. To dry Apricocks like Prunella's.
Take a Pound of Apricocks before they are full Ripe, cut them in Halves or
Quarters, let them boil till they be very Tender in a thin Syrrup, and let them
stand a Day or two in the Stove, then take them out of the Syrrup, lay them to
dry till they be as dry as Prunella's, then Box them; if you please you may
pare them.

You may make your Syrrup red with the Juice of red Plumbs.

435. To preserve great white Plumbs.
To a Pound of white Plumbs take three Quarters of a Pound of double refined
Sugar in Lumps, dip your Sugar in Water, boil and skim it very well, slit your
Plumbs down the Seam, and put them into the Syrrup with the slit downwards; let
them stew over the Fire a Quarter of an Hour, skim them very well, then take
them off, and when cold cover them up; turn them in the Syrrup two or three
times a Day for four or five Days, then put them into Pots and keep them for
Use.

436. To make Gooseberry Wine another Way.
Take Gooseberries when they are full Ripe, pick and beat them in a Marble
Mortar; to every Quart of Berries put a Quart of Water, and put them into a Tub
and let them stand all Night, then strain them through a hair Sieve, and press
them very well with your Hand; to every Gallon of Juice put three Pound of
four-penny Sugar; when your Sugar is melted put it into the Barrel, and to as
many Gallons of Juice as you have, take as many Pounds of Malaga Raisins, chop
them in a Bowl, and put them in the Barrel with the Wine; be sure let not your
Barrel be over full, so close it up, let it stand three Months in the Barrel,
and when it is fine bottle it, but not before.

437. To pickle Nasturtium Buds.
Gather your little Nobs quickly after the Blossoms are off, put them in cold
Water and Salt three Days, shifting them once a Day; then make a Pickle for
them (but don't boil them at all) of some white Wine, and some white Wine
Vinegar, Shallot, Horseradish, whole Pepper and Salt, and a Blade or two of
Mace; then put in your Seeds, and stop them close up. They are to be eaten as
Capers.

438. To make Elder-flower Wine.
Take three or four Handfuls of dried Elder-flowers, and ten Gallons of Spring
Water, boil the Water, and pour it scalding hot upon the Flowers, the next Day
put to every Gallon of Water five Pounds of Malaga Raisins, the Stalks being
first picked off, but not washed, chop them grossly with a chopping Knife, then
put them into your boiled Water, stir the Water, Raisins and Flowers well
together, and do so twice a Day for twelve Days, then press out the Juice clear
as long as you can get any Liquor; put it into a Barrel fit for it, stop it up
two or three Days till it works, and in a few Days stop it up close, and let it
stand two or three Months, then bottle it.

439. To make Pearl Barley Pudding.
Take half a Pound of Pearl Barley, cree it in soft Water, and shift it once or
twice in the boiling till it be soft; take five Eggs, put to them a Pint of
good Cream, and half a Pound of powder Sugar, grate in half a Nutmeg, a little
Salt, a Spoonful or two of Rose Water, and half a Pound of clarified Butter;
when your Barley is cold mix them all together, so bake it with a Puff-Paste
round your Dish Edge.

Serve it up with a little Rose Water, Sugar and Butter for your Sauce.

440. To make Gooseberry Vinegar another Way.
Take Gooseberries when they are full Ripe, bruise them in a Marble Mortar or
Wooden Bowl, and to every unheap'd half Peck of Berries take a Gallon of Water,
put it to them in the Barrel, let it stand in a warm Place for two Weeks, put a
Paper on the Top of your Barrel, then draw it off, wash out the Barrel, put it
in again, and to every Gallon add a Pound of coarse Sugar; set it in a warm
Place by the Fire, and let it stand whilst Christmas.

441. To preserve Apricocks Green.
Take Apricocks when they are Young and Tender, codle them a little, rub them
with a coarse Cloth to take off the Skin, and throw them into Water as you do
them, and put them in the same Water they were codled in, cover them with Vine
Leaves, a white Paper or something more at the Top, the closer you keep them
the sooner they are Green; be sure you don't let them boil; when they are Green
weigh them, and to every Pound of Apricocks take a Pound of Loaf Sugar, put it
into a Pan, and to every Pound of Sugar a Jill of Water, boil your Sugar and
Water a little, and skim it, then put in your Apricocks, let them boil together
whilst your Apricocks look clear, and your Syrrup thick, skim it all the Time
it is boiling, put them into a Pot covered with a Paper dipped in Brandy.

442. To make Orange Chips another Way.
Pare your Oranges, not over thin but narrow, throw the Rhinds into fair Water
as you pare them off, then boil them therein very fast till they be Tender,
filling up the Pan with boiling Water as it wastes away, then make a thin Syrrup
with part of the Water they are boiled in, put in the Rhinds and just let them
boil, then take them off and let them lie in the Syrrup three or four Days,
then boil them again till you find the Syrrup begins to draw between your
Fingers, take them off from the Fire, and let them drain through your
Cullander, take out but a few at a Time, because if they cool too fast it will
be difficult to get the Syrrup from them, which must be done by passing every
Piece of Peel through your Fingers, and lying them single on a Sieve with the
Rhind uppermost, the Sieve may be set in a Stove, or before the Fire; but in
Summer the Sun is hot enough to dry them.

Three Quarters of a Pound of Sugar will make Syrrup to do the Peels of
twenty-five Oranges.

443. To make Mushroom Powder.
Take about half a Peck of large Buttons or Flaps, clean them and set them in
an Earthen Dish or Dripping-Pan one by one, let them stand in a slow Oven to
dry whilst they will beat to Powder, and when they are Powdered sift them
through a Sieve; take half a Quarter of an Ounce of Mace, and a Nutmeg, beat
them very fine, and mix them with your Mushroom Powder, then put it into a
Bottle, and it will be fit for Use. You must not wash your Mushrooms.

444. To preserve Apricocks another Way.
Take your Apricocks before they are full Ripe, pare them and stone them, and
to every Pound of Apricocks take a Pound of Lump Loaf-Sugar, put it into your
Pan with as much Water as will wet it; to four Pound of Sugar take the Whites
of two Eggs, beat them well to a Froth, mix them well with your Sugar whilst it
be Cold, then set it over the Fire and let it have a Boil, take it off the
Fire, and put in a Spoonful or two of Water, then take off the Skim, and do so
three or four Times whilst any Skim rises, then put in your Apricocks, and let
them have a quick boil over the Fire, then take them off and turn them over,
let them stand a little while covered, and then set them on again, let them
have another Boil and skim them, then take them out one by one; set on your
Syrrup again to boil down, and skim it, then put in your Apricocks again and
let them boil whilst they look clear, put them in Pots, when they are cold
cover them over with a Paper dipped in Brandy, and tie another Paper at the Top,
set them in a cool Place, and keep them for Use.

445. To pickle Mushrooms another Way.
When you have cleaned your Mushrooms put them into a Pot, and throw over them
a Handful of Salt, and stop them very close with a Cloth, and set them in a Pan
of Water to boil about an Hour, give them a shake now and then in the Boiling,
then take them out and drain the Liquor from them, wipe them dry with a Cloth,
and put them up either in white Wine Vinegar or distilled Vinegar, with Spices,
and put a little Oil on the Top.

They don't look so white this Way, but they have more the Taste of Mushrooms.

446. How to fry Mushrooms.
Take the largest and freshest Flaps you can get, skim them and take out the
Gills, boil them in a little Salt and Water, then wipe them dry with a Cloth;
take two Eggs and beat them very well, half a Spoonful of Wheat Flour, and a
little Pepper and Salt, then dip in your Mushrooms and fry them in Butter.

They are proper to lie about stewed Mushrooms or any made Dish.

447. How to make an Ale Posset.
Take a Quart of good Milk, set it on the Fire to boil, put in a handful or two
of Bread-Crumbs, grate in a little Nutmeg, and sweeten it to your Taste; take
three Jills of Ale and give it a Boil; take the Yolks of four Eggs, beat them
very well, then put to them a little of your Ale, and mix all your Ale and Eggs
together; then set it on the Fire to heat, keep stirring it all the Time, but
don't let it Boil, if you do it will Curdle; then put it into your Dish, heat
the Milk and put it in by Degrees; so serve it up.

You may make it of any Sort of made Wine; make it half an Hour before you use
it, and keep it hot before the Fire.

448. To make minced Pyes another Way.
Take half a Pound of Jordan Almonds, blanch and beat them with a little
Rose Water, but not over small; take a Pound of Beef Suet shred very fine, half
a Pound of Apples shred small, a Pound of Currants well cleaned, half a Pound
of powder Sugar, a little Mace shred fine, about a Quarter of a Pound of candid
Orange cut in small Pieces, a Spoonful or two of Brandy, and a little Salt, so
mix them well together, and bake it in a Puffe-paste.

449. To make a Sack Posset another Way.
Take a Quart of good Cream, and boil it with a Blade or two of Mace, put in
about a Quarter of a Pound of fine powder Sugar; take a Pint of Sack or better,
set it over the Fire to heat, but don't let it Boil, then grate in a little
Nutmeg, and about a Quarter of a Pound of powder Sugar; take nine Eggs, (leave
out six of the Whites and the Strains) beat them very well, then put to them a
little of your Sack, mix the Sack and Eggs very well together, then put to them
the rest of your Sack, stir it all the Time you are pouring it in, set it over
a slow Fire to thicken, and stir it till it be as thick as Custard; be sure you
don't let it Boil, if you do it will Curdle, then pour it into your Dish or
Basin; take your Cream boiling hot, and pour to your Sack by Degrees, stirring
it all the Time you are pouring it in, then set it on a hot Harth-stone; you
must make it half an Hour before you use it; before you set it on the Harth
cover it close with a Pewter Dish.

To make a Froth for them.
Take a Pint of the thickest Cream you can get, and beat the Whites of two Eggs
very well together, take off the Cream by Spoonfuls, and lie it in a Sieve to
drain; when you dish up the Posset lie over it the Froth.

450. To dry Cherries another Way.
Take Cherries when full Ripe, stone them, and break them as little as you can
in the Stoning; to six Pound of Cherries take three Pound of Loaf Sugar, beat
it, lie one Part of your Sugar under your Cherries, and the other at the Top,
let them stand all Night, then put them into your Pan, and boil them pretty
quick whilst your Cherries change and look clear, then let them stand in the
Syrrup all Night, pour the Syrrup from them, and put them into a pretty large
Sieve, and set them either in the Sun or before the Fire; let them stand to dry
a little, then lay them on white Papers one by one, let them stand in the Sun
whilst they be thoroughly dry, in the drying turn them over, then put them into
a little Box; betwixt every Layer of Cherries lie a Paper, and so do till all
are in, then lie a Paper at the Top, and keep them for Use.

You must not boil them over long in the Syrrup, for if it be over thick it
will keep them from drying; you may boil two or three Pound more Cherries in
the Syrrup after.

451. How to order Sturgeon.
If your Sturgeon be alive keep it a Night and a Day before you use it; then
cut off the Head and Tail, split it down the Back, and cut it into as many
Pieces as you please; salt it with Bay salt and common Salt as you would do
Beef for hanging, and let it lie 24 Hours; then tie it up very tight, and boil
it in Salt and Water whilst it is Tender; (you must not boil it over much) when
it is boiled throw over it a little Salt, and set it by till it be cold. Take
the Head and split it in two and tie it up very Tight; you must boil it by
itself, not so much as you did the rest, but salt it after the same Manner.

452. To make the Pickle.
Take a Gallon of soft Water, and make it into a strong Brine; take a Gallon of
stale Beer and a Gallon of the best Vinegar, and let all boil together, with a
few Spices; when it is cold put in your Sturgeon; you may keep it (if close
covered) three or four Months before you need renew the Pickle.

453. To make Hotch-Potch.
Take five or six Pound of fresh Beef, put it into a Kettle with six Quarts of
soft Water, and an Onion; set it on a slow Fire, and let it boil till your Beef
be almost enough; then put in the Scrag of a Neck of Mutton, and let them boil
together till the Broth be very good; put in two or three Handfuls of
Bread-crumbs, two or three Carrots, and Turnips cut small, (but boil the
Carrots in Water before you put them in else they will give your Broth a Taste)
with half a Peck of shill'd Pease, but take up the Meat before you put them in;
when you put in the Pease take the other Part of your Mutton and cut it in
Chops, (for it will take no more boiling than the Pease) and and put it in with
a few sweet Herbs shred very small, and Salt to your Taste.

You must send up the Mutton Chops in the Dish with the Hotch-Potch.

When there are no Pease to be had, you may put in the Heads of Asparagus, and
if there be neither of these to be had, you may shred in a green Savoy Cabbage.

This is a Proper Dish instead of Soop.

454. To make minced Collops.
Take two or three Pound of any tender Part of Beef, (according as you would
have the Dish in Bigness) cut it small as you would do minced Veal; take an
Onion, shred it small and fry it a light brown in butter seasoned with Nutmeg,
Pepper and Salt, and put it into your Pan with your Onion, and fry it a little
whilst it be a light Brown; then put to it a Jill of good Gravy, and a Spoonful
of Walnut Pickle, or a little Catchup; put in a few shred Capers or Mushrooms,
thicken it up with a little Flower and Butter; if you please you may put in a
little Juice of Lemon; when you dish it up Garnish your Dish with Pickle and a
few forced meat Balls.

It is proper for either side Dish or top Dish.

455. To make white Scotch Collops another Way.
Take two Pound of the solid Part of a Leg of Veal, cut it in pretty thin
Slices, and season it with a little shred Mace and Salt, put it into your stew
Pan with a Lump of Butter, set it over the Fire, keep it stirring all the Time,
but don't let it boil; when you are going to dish up the Collops put to them
the Yolks of two or three Eggs, three Spoonfuls of Cream, a Spoonful or two of
white Wine, and a little Juice of Lemon, shake it over the Fire whilst it be so
thick that the Sauce stick to the Meat* (be sure you don't let it boil) Garnish
your Dish with Lemon and Sippets, and serve it up hot.

This is proper for either side Dish or top Dish Noon or Night.

456. To make Vinegar another Way.
Take as many Gallons of Water as you please, and to every Gallon of Water put
in a Pound of four penny Sugar, boil them for half an Hour and skim it all the
Time; when it is about Blood warm put to it three or four Spoonfuls of light
Yeast, let it work in the Tub a Night and a Day, put it into your Vessel, close
up the Top with a Paper, and set it as near the Fire as you have Convenience,
and in two or three Days it will be good Vinegar.

457. To preserve Quinces another Way.
Take Quinces, pare and put them into Water, save all the Parings and the
Cores, let them lie in the Water with the Quinces, set them over the Fire with
the Paring and Cores to codle, cover them close up at the Top with the Parings,
and lie over them either a Dish-Cover or Pewter-Dish, and cover them close; let
them hang over a very slow Fire whilst they be Tender; but don't let them boil;
when they are soft take them out of the Water, and weigh your Quinces, and to
every Pound put a Pint of the same Water they were codled in, (when strained)
and put to your Quinces, and to every Pound of Quinces put a Pound of Sugar;
put them into a Pot or Pewter Flaggon, the Pewter makes them a much better
Color; close them up with a little coarse Paste, and set them in a Bread Oven
all Night; if the Syrrup be two thin boil it down, put it to your Quinces, and
keep it for Use.

You may either do it with Powder Sugar or Loaf Sugar.

458. To make Almond Cheese Cakes another Way.
Take the Peel of two or three Lemons pared thick, boil them pretty soft, and
change the Water two or three Times in the boiling; when they are boiled beat
them very fine with a little Loaf Sugar; then take eight Eggs (leave out six of
the Whites) half a Pound of Loaf or powder Sugar, beat the Eggs and Sugar for
half an Hour or better; take a quarter of a Pound of the best Almonds, blanch
and beat them with three or four Spoonfuls of Rose Water, but not over small,
take ten Ounces of fresh Butter, melt it without Water and clear off from it
the Butter Milk, then mix them all together very well, and bake them in a slow
Oven in a Puff Paste; before you put them into the Tins, put in the Juice of
half a Lemon.

When you put them in the Oven grate over them a little Loaf Sugar.

You may make them without Almonds if you please.

You may make a Pudding of the same, only leave out the Almonds.

FINIS.
A BILL of FARE FOR EVERY Season of the Year.
For JANUARY.
First Course.
AT the Top Gravy Soop.

Remove Fish.

At the Bottom a Ham.

In the middle stewed Oysters or Brawn.

For the four Corners
A Fricasey of Rabbits, Scotch Collops, boiled Chickens, Calf Foot Pie, or
Oyster Loaves.

Second Course.
At the Top wild Ducks.

At the Bottom a Turkey.

In the Middle Jellies or Lemon Posset.

For the four Corners.
Lobster and Tarts, Cream Curds, stewed Pears or preserved Quinces.

For FEBRUARY.
First Course.
At the Top a Soop remove.

At the Bottom Salmon or stewed Breast of Veal.

For the four Corners.
A Couple of Fowls with Oyster Sauce* Pudding, Mutton Cutlets, a Fricasey of
Pig's Ears.

Second Course.
At the Top Partridges.

At the Bottom a Couple of Ducks.

For the four Corners.
Stewed Apples, preserved Quinces, Custards, Almond Cheese-Cakes.

In the Middle Jellies.

For MARCH.
First Course.
At the Top a boiled Turkey, with Oyster Sauce.

At the Bottom a Couple of roast Tongues, or roast Beef

In the Middle Pickles.

Two side Dishes, a Pigeon Pie, and Calf Head Hash.

For the four Corners.
Stewed Crab or Oysters, Hunters Pudding, a brown Fricasey, stewed Eels or
broiled Whitings.

Second Course.
At the Top Woodcocks or Wild Ducks.

At the Bottom Pig or Hare.

In the Middle Jellies or Sweetmeats.

For the four Corners.
Raspberry Cream, Tarts, stewed Apples, and preserved Apricocks,

For APRIL.
First Course.
At the Top stewed Fillet of Veal.

At the Bottom a roast-Leg of Mutton.

Two Side Dishes, Salt-Fish and Beef-Steaks.

In the Middle a Hunters Pudding.

Second Course.
At the Top roast-Chickens and Asparagus.

At the Bottom Ducks.

In the middle preserved Oranges.

For the four Corners.
Damascene Pie, Cream-Curds, Lobster, and cold Pot.

For MAY.
First Course.
At the Top stewed Carp or Tench.

At the Bottom a stewed Rump of Beef.

In the Middle a Sallet.

For the four Corners.
A Fricasey of Tripes, boiled Chickens, a Pudding, Olives of Veal.

Second Course.
At the Top Rabbits or Turkey Pouts.

At the Bottom green Goose or young Ducks.

For the four Corners.
Lemon Cream, Quince Cream, Tarts, Almond Custards.

In the Middle Jellies.

For JUNE.
First Course.
At the Top roast Pike.

At the Bottom Scotch Collops,

In the Middle stewed Crab.

For the four Corners.
Boiled Chickens, Quaking Pudding, Roast Tongue, with Venison Sauce, Beans and
Bacon.

Second Course.
At the Top a Turkey.

At the Bottom Ducks or Rabbits.

In the Middle Strawberries.

Two Side Dishes, Roast Lobster and Pease.

For the four Corners.
Green Codlings, Apricock Custard, Sweetmeat Tarts, preserved Damascenes or
Flummery.

For JULY.
First Course.
At the Top green Pease Soop, remove stewed Breast of Veal white.

At the Bottom a Haunch of Venison.

In the Middle a Pudding.

Two Side Dishes, a Dish of Fish, and a Fricasey of Rabbits.

Second Course.
At the Top Partridges or Pheasants.

At the Bottom Ducks or Turkey.

In the Middle a Dish of Fruit.

For the four Corners.
Solomon-Gundie, Lobster Tarts, Chocolate Cream.

For AUGUST.
First Course.
At the Top Fish.

At the Bottom Venison Pasty.

In the Middle Herb Dumplings.

For the four Corners.
Fricasey of Rabbits, stewed Pigeons, boiled Chickens, Fricasey of Veal
Sweetbreads with Artichoak Bottoms.

Second Course.
At the Top Pheasants or Partridges.

At the Bottom wild Ducks or Teal.

In the Middle Jellies or Syllabubs.

For the four Corners.
Preserved Apricocks, Almond Cheese-Cakes, Custards, and Sturgeon.

For SEPTEMBER,
First Course.
At the Top collar'd Calf-Head, with stewed Pallets and Veal Sweetbreads, and
forced Meat Balls.

At the Bottom Udder and Tongue or a Hanch of Venison.

In the Middle an Amblet of Cockles or roast Lobster.

Two Side Dishes, Pigeon Pie and boiled Chickens.

Second Course.
At the Top a roast Pheasant.

At the Bottom a Turkey.

For the four Corners.
Partridges, Artichoak Bottoms fried, Oyster Loaves and Teal.

For OCTOBER,
First Course.
At the Top stewed Tench and Cod's Head.

At the Bottom roast Pork or a Goose.

Two Side Dishes, roast Fish, and boiled Fowl and Bacon.

For the four Corners,
Jug'd Pigeons, Mutton Collops, Beef Rolls, and Veal Sweetbreads fricasy'd.

In the middle minced Pyes or Oyster Loaves.

Second Course.
At the Top wild Fowl.

At the Bottom a Hare.

In the Middle Jellies.

Two Side-Dishes, roasted Lobster and fried Cream.

For the four Corners.
Preserved Quinces, or stewed Pears, Sturgeon, cold Tongue, and Orange Cheese
Cakes.

For NOVEMBER.
First Course.
At the Top a Dish of Fish.

At the Bottom a Turkey Pie.

Two Side Dishes, Scotch Collops, and boiled Tongue with Sprouts.

In the Middle scallop'd Oysters.

Second Course.
At the Top a Dish of wild Fowl.

At the Bottom roast Lobsters.

In the Middle Lemon Cream.

For the Four Corners.
Tarts, Curds, Apricocks, and Solomon-Gundie.

For DECEMBER.
First Course.
At the Bottom boiled Fowls.

Two Side Dishes, Bacon and Greens, and a Dish of Scotch Collops.

In the Middle minced Pyes or Pudding.

Second Course
At the Top a Turkey.

In the Middle hot Apple Pie.

For the four Corners.
Custard, Raspberry Cream, cold Pot and Crabs.

A SUPPER FOR JANUARY.
AT the Top a Dish of Plumb Gruel.

Remove, boiled Fowl*

At the Bottom a Dish of Scotch Collops.

In the Middle Jellies.

For FEBRUARY.
For the four Corners.
Lobster, Solomon Gundie, Custard, Tarts.

At the Top a Dish of Fish.

Remove, a Couple of roasted Fowls.

At the Bottom wild Ducks.

For the four Corners.
Collar'd Pig, Cheese-Cakes, stewed Apples and Curds.

In the Middle hot minced Pyes.

For MARCH.
At the Bottom a Sack Posset.

Remove, a Couple of Ducks.

At the Bottom a boiled Turkey, with Oyster Sauce.

In the Middle Lemon Posset.

Two Side Dishes, roasted Lobster, Oyster-Pye.

For the four Corners.
Almond Custards, Flumery, Cheese-Cakes, and stewed Apples.

For APRIL.
At the Top boiled Chickens.

At the Bottom a Breast of Veal.

In the Middle Jellies.

For the four Corners.
Orange Pudding, Custards, Tarts, and stewed Oysters.

For MAY.
At the Top a Dish of Fish.

At the Bottom Lamb Steaks or Mutton.

In the Middle Lemon Cream or Jellies.

Two Side Dishes, Tarts, Raspberry Cream.

For the four Corners.
Veal Sweetbreads, stewed Spinach, with poch'd Eggs and Bacon, Oysters in
scallop'd Shells, boiled Chickens.

For JUNE.
At the Top boiled Chickens.

At the Bottom a Tongue.

In the Middle Lemon Posset.

For the four Corners.
Cream Curds or Custards, potted Ducks, Tarts, Lobsters, Artichoaks or Pease.

For JULY.
At the Top Scotch Collops.

At the Bottom roast Chickens.

In the Middle stewed Mushrooms.

For the four Corners.
Custards, Lobster, split Tongue, and Solomon-Gundie.

For AUGUST.
At the Top stewed Breast of Veal.

At the Bottom roast Turkey.

In the Middle Pickles or Fruit.

For the four Corners.
Cheese-Cakes and Flumery, preserved Apricocks, preserved Quinces.

For SEPTEMBER.
At the Top boiled Chickens.

At the Bottom a carbonaded Breast of Mutton, with Caper Sauce.

In the Middle Oysters in scallop Shells, or stewed Oysters.

Two Side Dishes, hot Apple Pie and Custard.

For OCTOBER.
At the Top Rice Gruel.

Remove, a couple of Ducks.

At the Bottom a boiled Turkey with Oyster Sauce.

In the Middle Jellies.

For the four Corners.
Lobster or Crab, Black Caps, Custard or Cream, Tarts or coller'd Pig.

For NOVEMBER.
At the Top Fish.

At the Bottom Ducks or Teal.

In the Middle Oyster Loaves.

Remove, a Dish of Fruit.

Two Side Dishes, minced Pyes, Mutton Steaks, with Mushrooms and Balls.

For DECEMBER.
At the Top boiled Chickens.

At the Bottom a Dish of Scotch Collops or Veal Cutlets.

In the Middle Brawn.

Remove, Tarts.

For the four Corners.
Boiled Whitings or fried Soles, new College Puddings, Pullony Sausages, Scotch
Custard.

A Supper in Summer.


1. Boiled Chicken's. 2. Preserved Oranges or Apricocks. 3. Flummery. 4.
Asparagus. 5. Lemon Posset. 6. Roast Lobster. 7. Stewed Apples. 8. Almond
Cheese-Cakes. 9. Lamb.
A Dinner in Summer.


1. Cod's Head or Salmon. 2. Boiled Chickens. 3. A fine Pudding or roasted
Lobster. 4. Beans and Bacon. 5. Stewed Breast of Veal.
Second Course.


1. Two young Turkeys or Ducklings. 2. Stewed Apples, 3. Custards. 4. Jellies
or Lemon Posset. 5. Tarts. 6. Preserved Damascenes. 7. Green Goose or young
Rabbits.
A Dinner in Winter.


1. A Soop. 2. Scotch Collops. 3. Boiled Chickens. 4. Stewed Oysters or roasted
Lobster. 5. A Hunter's Pudding. 6. Roasted Tongue. 7. A Ham or Roast Beef.
Remove. 1. Fish.
Second Course.


1. A Turkey. 2. Almond Cheese-Cakes. 3. Sturgeon. 4. Partridges. 5. Jellies.
6. A Hare or Woodcocks. 7. Collar'd Beef. 8. Cream Curds. 9. Ducks or Pig.
A Supper in Winter.


1. Gruel or Sack Posset: 2. Tarts. 3. Lobster. 4. Jellies or Lemon Cream. 5.
Solomon Gundie. 6. Custards. 7. Boiled Turkey with Oyster Sauce. Remove. 1.
Wild Duck.
INDEX.
A
ALMOND Posset, to make Page. 86 -- Cakes, do. Page. 169 -- Cheese Cakes, do.
Page. 212 -- Puffs do. Page. 116 -- Butter, do. Page. 138 -- Flumery, do. Page.
139 Amblet of Cockles, do. Page. 88 Apple Dumplins, do. Page. 96 -- to Stew.
Page. 142 -- another Way ibid. Artichoak Bottoms to fry Page. 140 -- to
fricasey. Page. 141 -- to dry. ibid Apricock Pudding, to make Page. 149 --
Custard, do. ibid. -- Chips, or Peaches, do. Page. 150 -- to preserve. Page.
167 -- to make Marmalade. Page. 168 -- to dry. Page. 178 -- do, like
Prunella's. Page. 201 -- to preserve Green Page. 203 -- do another Way. Page.
205 Ale Orange, to make. Page. 156 -- Posset, do. Page. 206 Asparagus, or green
Pease, to keep. Page. 172 Angelico, to candy. Page. 177
B.
BEEF, Brisket to stew. Page. 11 Beef Rump, do. Page. 11 -- Olives, to make.
Page. 12 -- Rolls, do. Page. 71 -- Rump, to ragoo. Page. 54 -- Collar'd to eat
cold. Page. 50 -- Dutch to make. Page. 87 -- to Pot. Page. 53 -- Steaks, to
fry. Page. 13 -- do another Way. ibid -- to Bottle. Page. 170 Black Caps, to
make. Page. 138 Brandy Orange to make. Page. 156 -- Lemon, do, Page. 167 --
black Cherry, do. Page. 166 -- Raspberry, do. Page. 166 -- Ratify, do. Page.
166 Brockley, to boil. Page. 146 Beast Kidneys, do. Page. 151 Beans Kidney, to
keep. Page. 176 Buttons Mushroom, to pickle. Page. 191 Barberries to keep,
instead of preserving. Page. 172 -- to pickle. Page. 195 -- to preserve for
Tarts. Page. 170 -- to keep all the Year. ib. Barley Sugar, to make. Page. 195
C.
CABBAGE, to pickle. Page. 193 Cake Carraway, to make Page. 123 -- great, do.
Page. 120 -- Iceing for it. Page. 121 -- Biscuit, to make. Page. 128 --
Raspberry Cream Page. 127 Cake Portugal, do. Page. 129 -- Orange, do. Page. 200
-- Shrewsbury, do. Page. 124 -- Gingerbread, do. Page. 130 -- Seed, do. Page.
125 -- Queen, do. Page. 128 -- King, do. Page. 126 -- Angelico, do. ibid. --
Creakfast, do. ibid. -- fine, do. Page. 124 -- to keep all the Year. Page. 123
-- Plumb, do. Page. 122 -- Plumb, another Way. Page. 130 -- Do. ordinary. Page.
125 Calve's Head, collar'd to eat bet. Page. 25 -- Do. to eat cold. Page. 26 --
Hash'd. ibid. -- Do. white. Page. 27 -- Pie of, to make. Page. 66 -- do another
Way. Page. 152 -- to Ragoo. Page. 28 -- to roast, to eat like Pig. ibid. --
Feet, to fricasy white. Page. 61 -- to fry in Butter. Page. 63 -- Do. in Eggs.
Page. 65 -- to make minced Pie of. ibid. -- to make Pie of. Page. 66 -- Jelly,
to make. Page. 133 -- Flumery, do. Page. 139 Catchup, do. Page. 191 Cheese
Cakes, do. Page. 103 -- Lemon, do. Page. 119 -- common, do. Page. 105 --
without Currants, do. ibid. Cheese Slipcoat to make. Page. 106 Cheese Bullies,
do. Page. 180 -- Cream, do. Page. 106 Cherries to preserve for drying. Page.
176 -- to preserve. Page. 175 -- to dry. Page. 208 Colliflower, to pickle
white. Page. 193 -- another Way. Page. 194 Chickens to fricasy white. Page. 36
-- Do. brown. Page. 37 -- Surprise. Page. 37 -- to boil. Page. 38 Collops
Scotch, to make. Page. 23 -- another Way. Page. 31 -- another Way. Page. 211
Collops minced, to make Page. 210 Cod's Head, to dress. Page. 110 Cod's Zoons,
do. Page. 118 Cockles, to pickle. Page. 185 Cordial Water of Cowslips to make.
Page. 167 Cowslip, Syrrup, do. ibid. Cracknels, do. Page. 129 Cream Lemon, do.
Page. 131 -- Do. to make Yellow. Page. 135 -- Do. another Way. ib. -- Orange.
Page. 134 -- Quince. Page. 199 -- of any preserved Fruit ibid. -- to fry to eat
hot. Page. 132 -- Chocolate to make. Page. 130 -- Gooseberry, do. Page. 148 --
Apple, do. Page. 132 -- Curds, do. Page. 131 -- Rice or Almond do. Page. 133
Cucumbers, to pickle. Page. 181 -- another Way. Page. 188 -- to make Mango of.
Page. 192 Cucumbers, to make pickle for. Page. 193 -- to stew. Page. 151 -- to
fry for Mutton Sauce. Page. 85 -- Soop, to make. Page. 6 -- Currant-berries, to
pickle. Page. 171 -- to preserve in Bunches. Page. 178 -- to make Jelly of.
Page. 166 Custard Almond. Page. 136 -- Sagoo. ibid. -- Scotch, to eat hot.
Page. 144 Cider, to make. Page. 161
D.
DAMASCENES, to preserve. Page. 170 -- Do. for Tarts. Page. 174 Damascenes to
keep. ibid. -- to bottle. Page. 165 Drops Ratify, to make. Page. 140 -- Lemon,
do. Page. 163 Ducks to boil. Page. 36 -- to stew. ibid. -- Do. to stew whole.
Page. 57 Dumplings Herb, to make. Page. 96 -- plain Fruit. Page. 97 -- Apple.
Page. 9^
E.
EELS to collar. Page. 107 -- to stew. Page. 112 -- to pitchcock. ibid. -- Pie,
to make Page. 98 Eggs to fricasy white. Page. 49 -- Do. brown. Page. 48 -- to
stew in Gravy. Page. 49 -- Pie to make. Page. 63 Elder Buds to pickle, Page.
189 Elder, to make Pickle for. ibid.
F.
FOWL, to force. Page. 85 Friters fruit, to make. Page. 90 -- Apple, do. Page.
93 -- Oatmeal, do. Page. 96 Fruit to preserve green. Page. 173 -- do. all the
Year. Page. 176 French Bread, to make. Page. 198
G
GIRKINS, to pickle. Page. 193 Gilliflowers, do. Page. 180 Gingerbread white.
Page. 120 -- red. ibid. -- another Way. Page. 198 Gooseberry Cake. Page. 180 --
to bottle. Page. 198 -- to preserve. Page. 169 -- Do. red. ibid. Gruel Sagoo
Page. 152 -- Plumb. Page. 143 -- Rice Page. 144 Goofer Wafers to make. Page.
104
H
HAMS or Tongues, to salt. Page. 55 Hare, to stew. Page. 31 -- to Pot Page. 57
-- to Jugg. Page. 32 -- to roast with a Pudding in the Belly. ibid. Hedge Hogs
Cupid, to make. Page. 1^1 -- Almond. Page. 1^^ Herrings, to boil. Page. 113 --
to fry. ibid. -- to pickle Page. 114 -- to keep all the Year. Page. 115 Hotch
potch, to make. Page. 209
I
JAM Cherry, to make Page. 175 -- Bullies, do. Page. 180 -- Damascenes, do.
Page. 179 Jambals, do. Page. 149 -- another Way, Page. 178
L
LAMB Leg of boiled, with Loyn fried. Page. 29 -- with Chickens. Page. 30 --
fricasy white. ibid -- fricasy brown. Page. 31 Lobster or Crab, to roast Page.
75 -- to butter. Page. 74 Leatch, to make. Page. 145 Leaves Oyster, do. Page.
98
M
MACAROONS, to make. Page. 127 Mango of Codlins. Page. 171 Mead strong, to
make. Page. 160 -- another Way. ibid. Milk mull'd, to make a Dish of. Page. 145
Mulberries, to preserve whole. Page. 200 Muscles, to pickle. Page. 186
Mushrooms, to Pot. Page. 116 -- to Stew ibid. -- to pickle. Page. 189 --
another Way. Page. 190 -- another Way. Page. 206 -- to fry. ibid. -- Powder, to
make. Page. 205 Mutton stewed Fillet of. Page. 14 -- Shoulder forced. ib. --
Breast to collar. Page. 15 -- Do. another Way. Page. 16 Mutton, Do. to
carbonade. Page. 16 -- Chine roasted, with Sellery, Page. 17 -- Chops, to make,
ib. -- Leg forced. ibid. -- French Cutlers, to make. Page. 18 -- Steaks to fry.
Page. 19 -- artificial Venison, to make ibid. -- Leg of, to salt to eat like
Ham. Page. 55
N.
NEAT's, Tongue Pie, to make Page. 59 Nasturtian Buds to pickle Page. 202
O
ONIONS to pickle. Page. 188 Orange Chips to preserve to put into Glasses.
Page. 165 -- or Lemons, to preserve. ibid. -- Chips, another Way. Page. 204 --
Marmalade, to make. Page. 174 -- to preserve whole. Page. 179 -- Tarts, to
make. Page. 100 -- Oysters Scotch to make. Page. 146 -- to stew, Page. 114 --
to fry. ibid -- to Scallop Page. 115 -- to pickle. Page. 188
P.
PALLETS stewed. Page. 46 Pancakes, clare. Page. 95 -- Rice. Page. 90 Parsnips
to fry, to look like Trout. Page. 147 Parsnips, do. another Way. Page. 148 --
Paste to make for a standing Pie. Page. 103 -- for Tarts. Page. 100 -- do.
another Way. Page. 101 -- do. -- do. ibid. -- for Venison Pasty. Page. 102 --
of Pippins, white. Page. 172 -- of do. green. ibid -- of do. red Page. 173
Patties savoury, to make Page. 63 -- sweet Page. 71 Pears to dry Page. 177
Pears or Pippins to dry with out Sugar. Page. 199 Pigeons to make a Pulpatoon
Page. 84 -- to stew. Page. 44 -- to pot. Page. 46 -- boiled with fricasy Sauce.
Page. 45 -- marmonaded. Page. 44 -- to jugg Page. 43 -- to pickle, Page. 68 --
to broil whole Page. 45 Pig Royal to make Page. 58 -- to collar Page. 72 --
Ears, to fricasy* Page. 46 -- to eat like Lamb in Winter Page. 31 -- Head,
rolled to eat like Brawn. Page. 62 Pike to eat like Sturgeon Page. 107 -- to
stew Page. 108 -- to roast with a Pudding in the Belly. Page. 109 Plumbs, to
preserve. Page. 201 Plumb Porridge, to make Page. 83 Pork, to pickle Page. 60
Posset Sack, to make Page. 207 -- to make Froth for Page. 208 -- Lemon. Page.
137 Potatoe Crabs to pickle Page. 191 Pudding black, to make Page. 91 --
Custard Page. 97 -- Orange Page. 92 -- do. another Way. Page. 80 -- do. another
Way. ib -- do. another Way. Page. 81 -- do. another Way. ib -- Oatmeal, do.
Page. 152 -- Apple, do. Page. 79 -- Ground Rice, do Page. 78 -- Gooseberry, do.
Page. 98 -- College, do. Page. 196 -- Potatoe. Page. 79 -- Carrot. Page. 78 --
Quaking to make Page. 83 -- do. another Way. Page. 88 -- do. another Way. Page.
75 -- Sagoo. Page. 77 -- Pearl Barley. Page. 203 -- Calve's Foot. Page. 76 --
Hunting. ibid. -- Liver. Page. 95 -- for Hare. Page. 94 -- Herb. Page. 93 --
Curd. Page. 105 -- white in Skins. Page. 49 -- Marrow. Page. 77 -- Bread. Page.
9^ -- Colliflower. Page. 18^ Punch Milk, to make. Page. 167 -- another Way.
Page. 168 -- another Way. ibid. -- Acid for to make. ib. Purslain to pickle.
Page. 196 Pie rich, to make. Page. 41 Pie, Eel. Page. 98 -- Turbot Head. Page.
99 -- Herring. Page. 72 -- Orange. Page. 82 -- Ham. Page. 59 -- Woodcock. Page.
67 -- sweet Chicken. Page. 64 -- savoury, do. Page. 70 -- sweet Veal. Page. 69
-- Caudle for. Page. 99 -- Hare. Page. 57 -- another Way. Page. 58 -- minced.
Page. 207 -- another Way. Page. 69 -- Oyster. Page. 74 -- Codlin. Page. 183
Pickle for Salmon. Page. 73
Q.
QUIDENNY, to make. Page. 169 Quinces, to preserve. Page. 158 -- do. another
Way. Page. 21^ -- Cream, to make Page. 199 -- to make white. Page. 174 --
Marmalade, to make Page. 168
R
RABBETS, to fricasy brown. Page. 33 -- Do. white. Page. 34 -- pulled. ibid. --
dressed, to look like Moor-game. Page. 35 Raspberry and Strawberry Fool, to
make. Page. 86
S.
SALMON, to collar. Page. 73 -- to pot. Page. 182 Sprouts Savoy, to boil. Page.
147 -- Cabbage, do. ibid. S^^ce for Rump of Beef. Page. 54 Sauce for Neck of
Veal. Page. 29 -- for Turkey. Page. 40 -- for boiled Rabbits. Page. 55 -- for
Pike. Page. 109 -- for boiled Salmon or Turbot. Page. 111 -- for Haddock or
Cod. Page. 112 -- for Salmon or Turbut. Page. 117 -- for tame Ducks. Page. 138
-- for green Goose. Page. 139 -- another Way. ibid. -- for Chickens. Page. 38
-- for Turkey, another Way. Page. 40 -- for Tongues. Page. 65 -- for Cod's
Head. Page. 110 -- for a Cod's Head, another Way. ibid. -- for Flesh or Fish.
Page. 197 Soop Vermicelly. Page. 5 -- Hare. Page. 6 -- green Pease. Page. 7 --
Onion. ibid -- Do. in Winter. Page. 8 -- Do. in Lent. ibid. -- Craw Fish. Page.
9 -- Scotch. ibid. -- Do without Water. Page. 10 Sausages Pollony, to make.
Page. 87 Shrimps to pickle. Page. 186 Shurb Orange. Page. 159 Solomon-Gundie,
to eat in Lent. Page. 118 -- another Way. Page. 119 Smelts, to pot. Page. 108
-- to pickle. ibid. Spinach, stewed with Eggs. Page. 140 Spinach Toasts, to
make. Page. 151 Sturgeon artificial, to make. Page. 115 -- how to order. Page.
209 -- how to make pickle for ibid. Sugar to know when candy. Height. Page. 168
Syllababs whipped, to make Page. 137 Syrrup of Gilliflowers, to make Page. 180
-- of Mullberries. Page. 165 -- of Violets. Page. 114 Stock to make, for
Hartshorn. Jelly. ibid. Sack Posset, to make. Page. 137 Shell paste, do. Page.
101 Stuffing for Beast Kidney. Page. 151
T.
TANSEY, to make. Page. 148 -- another Way. Page. 100 -- another Way. Page. 89
-- boiled. ibid. Tarts morrow, to make. Page. 97 -- transparent. Page. 101 --
sweetmeat. Page. 100 Toasts fried, to make. Page. 197 Tongues to roast. Page.
64 -- to pot Page. 51 -- Sheep or Hog, to broil Page. 60 Tripes, to fricasey
Page. 47 -- to eat like Chickens. Page. 48 Trout, or other Fish to fry. Page.
117 Tench or Crap, to stew. Page. 111 Turkey, to boil. Page. 39 -- to roast.
Page. 40 Turkey, to pot Page. 42 -- A la-Daube. ibid.
V
VEAL Breast of, to brown Ragoo. Page. 20 -- Do. herrico. ibid -- to roll.
Page. 21 -- to stew. Page. 21 -- to stew Fillet. Page. 22 -- Breast of, to
roll. Page. 51 -- to make Savoury. Page. 197 -- to roast Savoury. Page. 59 --
knuckle, to boil. Page. 56 -- sweetbreads to fricasey. Page. 47 -- Cutlets, to
make. Page. 24 -- another Way. ibid -- another Way. ibid Venison, to pot. Page.
52 -- Hanch of, to roast. Page. 70 Vinegar, to make of Gooseberries. Page. 174
-- another Way. Page. 203 -- another Way. Page. 211
W.
WALNUTS, to pickle. green Page. 186 -- Do. black. Page. 187 -- to make Pickle
for. ibid -- Do white. Page. 194 Whigs, to make. Page. 127 Wild Fowl, to pot.
Page. 53 Wine Elder, to make. Page. 153 -- do. Flower. Page. 202 -- Goose or
Raspberry Page. 201 Wine another Way. Page. 203 -- another Way Page. 163 --
Balm, Page. 154 -- Raisin, ibid. -- Birch Page. 155 -- another Way Page. 158 --
Current. Page. 155 -- Orange Page. 157 Wine another Way Page. 158 -- Cowslip.
Page. 157 -- another Way Page. 161 -- Apricock. Page. 159 -- Red Current. Page.
162 -- another Way Page. 164 -- Cherry Page. 162 Woodcock, to roast. Page. 66
A Grand Table in Winter.


1. Vermicelly Soop. 2. Sweet Patties. 3. A fricasey of Beasts Patties. 4.
Stewed Crab. 5. Olives of Veal. 6. Preserved Damascenes. 7. Preserved Oranges.
8. Maronaded Pigeons. 9. A boiled Turkey with Oyster Sauce. 10. Cream Curds.
11. A Pyramid of dried Sweetmeats. 12. Flumery. 13. A Ham. 14. A white fricasey
of Chickens. 15. Preserved Apricocks. 16. Preserved Quinces. 17. A brown
fricasey of Rabbits. 18. A fricasey of Veal Sweetbreads. 19. Mince Pyes. 20.
Oyster Loaves. 21. Haunch of Venison or Roast Beef.
Remove. 1. Carp with Pheasant. Remove. 2. Grapes. Remove. 3.Collar'd Beef.
Remove. 4. Cheese-Cakes. Remove. 5. Quails. Remove. 8. Teal. Remove. 9. Two
roasted Lobsters. Remove. 13. Woodcocks or Partridges. Remove. 14. Artichoaks
or young Pease. Remove. 17. Snipes. Remove. 18. Tarts. Remove. 19. Collar'd
Pigs. Remove. 20. Fruit. Remove. 21. Wild Ducks.

