Frontise-Piece
The works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them thath pleafure
therein. Psalm. CXI. 2. Lo, these are part of his ways; but how little a
portion is heard of him. Job. XXVI. 14.

A DESCRIPTION Of a Great Variety of Animals and Vegetables; VIZ. BEASTS,
BIRDS, FISHES, INSECTS, PLANTS, FRUITS, AND FLOWERS.


Extracted from the most considerable Writers of NATURAL HISTORY; AND Adapted
to the Use of all Capacities, especially for the Entertainment of YOUTH.

Being a SUPPLEMENT to A Description of Three Hundred Animals. Illustrated with
above Ninety COPPER PLATES, whereon is curiously Engraven every Animal and
Vegetable described in the whole Book.

The Treasures of NATURE are inexhaustible! He spoke of trees, from the
Cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hyssop that springs out of the
wall: He spoke also of Beasts, and of Fowl, and of creeping Things, and of
Fishes. 1 Kings IV. 33. LONDON: Printed by J. T. for THOMAS BOREMAN, near
Child's Coffee-House in St. Paul's Churchyard.

M.DCC.XXXVI.

To the READER.
THE Description of Three Hundred Animals, the first Essay of this kind, for
the use of young People, having been favorably received; encouraged me to make
this Second Collection of Animals, and Vegetables; which, I hope, will prove as
successful as the former: I have some reason to expect it; because every
Invention and Improvement, that tends to delight and please young Persons,
(that this does so, is already manifested by Experience) will undoubtedly be a
fresh Motive to engage their Attention.

The Minds of Youth, like their bodily Appetites, require to be fed with some
suitable Entertainment; the most pleasing Things being wont to cloy by long and
frequent Use. Natural History is an inexhaustible Subject, which will furnish
them with a boundless Variety of Things, fit to exercise their inquisitive
Minds. And I cannot help thinking, that to encourage Youth in reading this
Subject, must be of real Benefit, both now and hereafter. It will introduce
them into a habit of Reading, from their natural Propensity to view the
Pictures, read the Names, and History of the Creatures, etc. which all seem
delighted with. But the great and chief Service it will be to them hereafter,
is bringing them acquainted with the GREAT CREATOR of all these Things, by
contemplating his stupendous Works: It will afford a delightful Satisfaction,
to search into Nature, to trace her Footsteps, and the various Methods she
takes to bring her Works to Perfection. Indeed, it cannot be expected, that
Children can understand these Things, or be able to make a right Use of them:
But by tuition, Persons of the lowest Capacity may be made to know, That the
Lord made the earth by his power, established the world by his wisdom, and
stretched out the heaven by his understanding, Jer. li. 15. And that he has
replenished the Earth whereon we dwell, with variety of Plants, Animals, etc.
some for Use, some for Ornament, and some for Delight; which give daily
demonstration of the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of the Maker and Supporter of
all these Things.

A new Study seems at first to some Persons hard, intricate, and difficult; but
after a little resolution and progress; after they become a little acquainted
with it, their Understandings are wonderfully cleared up and enlarged, the
Difficulties vanish, and the Thing grows easy, familiar, and pleasant. And sure
I am; such studies as these are vastly superior to the Tales, Fables, and
Stories of Love, used in Schools, and deserve the regard of Parents and
Teachers; as conducing more to the Honor of God, and the real Benefit of
Youth. And for our Encouragement in this Study, observe what the Psalmist
says; The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein, Psalm. cxi. 2. Which though it is principally spoken of the
Works of Providence, yet may as well he verified of the Works of the Creation.

Fig. 1. Bezoar Goat


A DESCRIPTION Of a great Variety of ANIMALS and VEGETABLES.
BOOK the First. Of Four-footed BEASTS.
Fig. 1. IS a kind of WILD GOAT bred in the East Indies, which is called, in
Latin, Capricerva; because they partake of the Deer and Goat. The Inhabitants
otherwise call them BEZOAR, from whence the Name of Bezoar arises. This Animal
is very nimble, so that he will skip from Rock to Rock. and is dangerous to the
Hunter; for he will defend himself, and sometimes kills the Indians that pursue
him. The Head of this Creature resembles that of the He-goat. The Horns are
very black; and are bended almost to his Back. The Body is covered with an
ash-colored Hair, inclining to red, much shorter than that of the Goat, and
nearest to the Deer's. The Tail is short, and turns up again: The Legs are
pretty thick; and the Feet are cleft, like those of the Goat. Bezoar is a
Stone, produced in several Parts of the Belly of this Goat. It is taken,
likewise, out of the Bellies of certain other Animals in the East Indies. It is
found in Balls of different sizes and shapes; for some are as big as a
Wall-nut; others as a Hazel-nut, (this sort, they say, is taken from a kind of
Ape, that is found particularly in a certain Island of America) and some as a
large Pea. Some are round, others oval, flat, or bunched. The Superfices of all
the sorts are smooth, polished, shining, of an olive or gray Color; and is
made use of in Medicine.

Fig. 2. The MUSK-GOAT is of the shape and color of a Hind, only it has a
longer Body: It is produced in the Kingdoms of Boutan, Tunquin, and several
other Parts of Asia. It frequents the Woods and Forests, where they hunt it;
and when it is killed, they cut out the Bladder, or Pouch, as big as a Hen's
Egg, which is found under the Belly; then they separate the coagulated Blood,
which they dry in the Sun, and reduce to a kind of light Moss, almost powdered,
of a dark reddish Color. This acquires a strong disagreeable smell. They then
wrap it up in Bladders for Transportation. And this is the Musk we use. There
are a prodigious number of Animals that yield Musk, chiefly in the Kingdom of
Boutan. They catch them usually at Springtime, or in the beginning of Summer:
For after they have been almost starved, during the Winter, because of the
Snows, that fall in those Countries ten or twelve foot deep, they come to seek
for Food; their Blood being then in a great heat, and violent fermentation. The
Musk then taken is likewise strong and spirituous, which is the reason they do
not expose it for some time to dry in the Air, lest it should quite destroy the
smell. They cannot take a great deal of Musk from any one of these, Animals,
because they have but one Cod a piece, which does not yield above three Drams
of Musk dried. They say, that the Bag, during the rutting of this Creature, has
an Abseess formed in it; which when fully ripe, it makes the Beast itch, and
rub himself against Stones, Rocks, and Stumps of Trees, till he breaks it; and
it is this Corruption, that when it is spilt and dried in the Sun, becomes
Musk. There is no impossibility in this Story; but yet it is not to be thought,
that all she Musk we have, is taken from these Abscesses. For, Fig. 2. Musk Goat
Fig. 3 Shamoy
Fig. 4 The Shagreen
is it likely, that they can follow the tract of these wild Beasts, through the
Woods and Forests, to gather up this matter; which they have thrown sometimes
into Places inaccessible, into Mire and Sands? If we had no other Musk but
that, it would be much scarcer and dearer than it is.

Fig. 3. The SHAMOY, or ROCK-GOAT, is a wild Goat no bigger than the common
Kind, which frequents the Rocks and high Hills; as the Alps, Pyrenees, etc. The
Horns of this Animal are odly turned, for they rise upright first, and then
wind forward like a Hook: It feeds upon the Plants that grows on the Sands, and
tops of the Rocks. It Is a very shy and timorous Creature: It is coated like a
Faun, having a streak running all along the Back. There is a great Trade
carried on with these Shamoy Skins; by which they convey Oil, Wine, and other
Liquids, out of the mountainous Countries; and of which they make several other
Uses: for these Shamoy Skins, being dressed, are converted into Gloves,
Breeches, etc. Because they may be washed as Linen is, and likewise be dyed
into what curious Color you please. Sometimes in the Bladder of these
Creatures is found a Stone, which is called German Bezoar, because the Germans
esteem this not inferior in Virtue to the Oriental Bezoar. The volatile Salt
and Oil, of which these Creatures, both Male and Female, afford abundance; are
esteemed of very excellent Use in Physic.

Fig. 4. The SHAGREEN is a Beast (as represented by Mr. Pomet) very much like
an Horse or Mule; and is very common in Turkey and Poland, which the Turks and
Poles make use of to carry their Baggage, as in other parts they do Mules,
Horses, etc. When this Animal is dead, they take the hinder part of his Skin,
and hang it in the Air, after having strewed it, when raw, with Mustard Seed.
They leave 'em thus exposed to the Weather several Days, then take them in and
tan 'em; and when they are dressed, export them. This Skin is very hard when
dry, and soft when steeped in Water. It is said, that what makes this Skin so
hard, is because the Animal sits down, and rests very much on his Buttocks.
They bring two Sorts of Shagreen from Turkey, viz. the gray, or ash-colored,
which is the best; and the white, or salted Shagreen. The Use of this Shagreen
is very universal for all sorts of Pocket Utensils, Watch Cases, Toys, etc.
They may dye these Skins what Color they please; but the most common are
black, green, and red. The most beautiful and dearest, is the red Color,
because of the Vermilion and Carmine with which it is dyed. Shagreen Skin is
often counterfeited in Work.

Fig. 5. The ANTELOPE is shaped very much like a Deer; and about the same
bigness; of a chestnut Color, and white under the Belly. His Horns are almost
straight from his Head up, tapering gradually, with Rings like a Screw, till
within an Inch and an half of the top. It has fine large black Eyes; a long and
slender Neck, Feet, and Legs. There are many of these Creatures in an Herd;
when at the same time they have Scouts, who by running give them Notice of an
approaching Foe. They are taken by shot, etc. being too swift for a Greyhound.
The Antelope in shape and beauty excels most of the four-footed Race. This
Creature is described in the Book of Three Hundred Animals; but the Figure
there being very faulty, nothing like the Antelope; and having since an
Opportunity of a true Draught taken from the Creature itself; I hope giving it
double will be excused.

Fig. 6. The SEA-SKINK is a small amphibious Animal, living both on Land, and
in Water. It is pretty much like a small Lizard. Many of these little Creatures
are to be found about the River Nile in Egypt. They are about half a Foot long,
and an Inch diameter, having a sharp Nose, covered with Scales. It has two
little piercing Eyes. The Mouth is divided, reaching to the place where the
Ears should be seated, had this Creature any. It has a great many little white
and red Teeth: It goes upon four Feet, little more than an Inch long, which Fig
5. The Antelope
Fig. 6. The Skink
Fig. 8 The African Man-Tiger
Fig: 7. The Indian Man-Tiger
are very much like those of an Ape's. It is covered with little round Scales,
different from those of the Head, that are long and large. It is of a greyish
Color, inclining to brown upon the Back, and of a silver gray under the Belly.
The Flesh of this Creature is used in Physic.

Fig. 7. The MAN-TIGER is bred in Africa; etc. It is of the bigness of a large
Ape or Baboon; of a brown Color on the Back and Sides; the Belly, Neck, and
Throat, of a whitish Color; the Buttocks and Face of a light blue: It has a
bunch of Hair standing up on the top of the Head; and another, resembling a
Beard, hanging under the Chin: The Vent of this Animal is placed very high on
the hinder part of its Back. It is a Beast that participates much of the subtle
and mischievous Nature of Apes and Baboons; but much more bold and fierce. Some
Writers have confidently asserted, that some of these Creatures have had the
boldness to attack the Chastity of Women. Mr. Bradley mentions one sort of Ape
brought from the East Indies, that is very vicious; and he knew one that had
more than once attempted to force a Servant of the House where he was kept. The
Man-Tiger is thought to approach the nearest the Human Species, both in Form
and Sense, of all the Brute Creation.

Fig. 8. Is a MAN-TIGER brought from Africa; which differs something from the
former. It is copied from the Figure Mr. Bradley exhibits, in the Works of
Nature. Fig. 7. is from a Painting by a good Hand, from the Creature itself.

Fig. 9. This little Creature is found at Surinam. Merian calls it, a sort of
WOOD DORMOUSE: It carries her young Ones with her, on her Back; five or six of
which, she brings forth at a time. It is of a yellowish brown Color, but its
under part is of a whitish Color. When she goes out to seek for Food, her
young Ones run about her; which, when they are full, or in danger, or for
weariness, immediately mount upon their Mother's Back, and twist their Tails
round the Tail of the old one, who forthwith carries them into her Hole.

Fig. 9. A wood Dormouse


Fig: 1 The Avosetta


BOOK the Second. Of BIRDS.
Fig. 1. THE AVOSETTA, is a Bird common at Rome and Venice, and do also
frequent our Eastern Coasts of Suffolk and Norfolk in Winter time. Its length
from the tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail, was fourteen Inches; breadth,
when the Wings were expanded, twenty one Inches; its weight nine Ounces: Its
Bill was three Inches long, slender, black, flat or depressed, reflected
upwards, which is peculiar to this Bird, ending in a very thin, slender, weak
point; the Tongue is short, not cloven; the Head of a mean size, round like a
Ball, and black above the Eyes; the Color of the whole under Side of the Body
was white, and the upper side partly white and partly black, or dark brown; its
Legs are very long, of a lovely blue Color, bare above the Knees, and the
Claws black and little; it has a back Toe, but a very small one. Mr. Albin
says, he had this Bird from Newgate-Market; it was brought to that Place with
other Wild-fowl.

Fig. 2. The BEARD-MANICA, or BEARDED-TITMOUSE, is in length from the tip of
the Bill, to the end of the Tail, about six Inches and an half; in breadth,
when the Wings are extended, ten Inches and a half; in weight nine Drams and a
half: The Bill is short, thick, and of a yellowish Color, (in the Hen dusky.)
The Head is of a dark ash Color; from the Eyes a Tuft of black Feathers hangs
down, ending in a point, representing a picked Beard, from which Mark it has
the Name of Beard-manica. The Back, upper part of the Wings, and lower part of
the Belly, and Tail, are brown; under the Chin white; the Breast, Belly, and
Thighs, of a pale yellowish white, with a tincture of brown; the Legs and Feet
black. This Bird is very singular in the care and love which he shows to the
Hen; when at Roost, he covers her all Night with his Wing. The Hen is something
smaller than the Cock, and of a more beautiful yellowish brown; the Wings and
Legs of the same Color with those of the Cock: The Hen is without the Beard,
and more pale on the Breast. -- They are found in the Salt-Marshes in Essex,
and likewise in the Fens in Lincolnshire.

Fig. 3. The JACOBINE-PIGEON, or as it is vulgarly called for shortness, the
JACK, is, if true, the smallest of all Pigeons, and the smaller still the
better: It has a range of Feathers inverted quite over the hinder part of the
Head, and reaching down on each side of the Neck to the Shoulders of the Wings,
which forms a kind of a Fryar's Hood: From hence this Pigeon has its name
Jacobine, because the Fathers of that Order all wear Hoods to cover their bald
crowns; hence the upper part of this range of Feathers is called the Hood: and
the more compact these Feathers are, and the closer to the Head, so much the
more this Bird is esteemed. The lower part of this range of Feathers is called
by us, the Chain, but the Dutch calls it the Cravat; the Feathers of this Chain
ought to be long and close, so that if you strain the Neck a little, by taking
hold of the Bill, the two sides will lap over each other in some of the best;
but there are very few Fig: 2 The Beard-manica
Fig: 3 The Jacobine Pigeon
Fig. 4 Frigate Bird
now to be found in England complete. The Jacobine ought to have a very short
Bill, the shorter the better, and a clean Pearl Eye. As for their Color, there
are reds, yellows, blues, blacks, and mottles; but be the Color of the
Feathers what they will, they ought to have a clean white Head, white Feet, and
white Tail. Of these Pigeons, some are feather-legg'd and footed, others are
not, and both sorts are equally esteemed, according to the various Inclination
of different Fancies.

Fig. 4. The FRIGATE Bird, which the Indians call so, because of the swiftness
of its flight; has a Body no bigger than a Pullet's, but its Stomach is very
fleshy: The Males are as black as Ravens. The Neck is pretty long, the Head
small, with two great black Eyes, and the Sight more piercing than the Eagle's;
The Bill is likewise pretty thick, and entirely black, about six or seven
Inches long; the upper Beak is crook'd like a Hook: The Claws are very short,
and divided as the Vulture's. The Wings of this Bird are very large, and not
without a provident design of Nature, since his Wings are sometimes employed to
carry him above a hundred Leagues from Land. It is with a great deal of
Trouble, that this Bird can raise himself upon the Branches, because of the
extraordinary length of his Wings; but when he has once taken his flight, he
keeps his Wings extended almost without any Motion or Fatigue. If sometimes the
weight of the Rain, or the violence of the Winds, force him, he mounts above
the Clouds, beyond Sight, in the middle Region of the Air; and when he is at
the highest, he does not forget where-about he is, but remembers the place
where the Dorado, or gold Fish, gives chase to the flying Fish, and then he
throws himself down like Lightning; not so as to strike upon the Water, for
then it would be difficult for him to rise again; but when he comes within
twelve or fourteen Paces, he makes a large turn, and lowering himself, as it
were insensibly, till he comes to skim the Waters where the Chase is given; in
passing, he takes up the little Fish, either with his Bill, or his Talons, and
sometimes both together. He has a great red Comb, like that of the Cock, not
upon his Head, but under the Throat; and this Comb does not appear but in the
old ones; The Females have none; the Feathers are whiter than those of the
Males, especially under the Belly. These Birds, for a long time, made a little
Island their Habitation; in like manner, as the Rooks have a Rookery, where all
of that Species thereabout, come to roost at Nights, and build their Nest in
the proper Season. This little Island was called the Isle of Frigates, and bears
the Name to this Day, though the Birds have left the Place; for in the Year 1643,
and the following Year, several People chased them so severely, that they were
forced to forsake the Isle. Father du Tertre, Apostolical Missionary in the
Antillees, moved by the large Commendations give of the Oil drawn from these
Fowls, with the Assistance of two or three more Persons, took above one hundred
of them in less than two hours time. They surpised the old ones upon the
Branches of the Trees, or in the Nests; and as they rise with a great deal of
Difficulty to take Wing, it was an easy matter to beat them down with long
Sticks. The Oil, or Fat of these Birds, is a sovereign Remedy for Sciatica
Pains; and for all others proceeding from a cold Cause: It is held in great
esteem throughout all the Indies, as a precious Medicine.

Fig. 5. The BENGAL JAY is something bigger than our English Jay: The Bill is
of an ash Color; the top of the Head blue; the Neck and Breast an ash, with a
mixture of light brown and red; the Wings are blue, as also the under part of
the Belly and Thighs; the Back and Rump are of a muddy green Color; the Tail
is of a dark blue next the Body, of a pale or bright blue in the middle, and
dark toward the end: Its Legs and Feet are of a yellowish brown; and the Claws
black.

Fig. 6. The BENGAL QUAIL is something bigger than our Quail: Its Bill is of a
dark ash, inclining to brown; the top of the Head is black, and under that a
bed of yellow; then a line or bar of black crossing from the corners of the
Mouth, and encompassing Fig: 5 A Bengal Gay
Fig: 6 Bengal Quail
Fig. 7. Bohemian-Gay
Fig. 8 Banana Bird
the under part of the Eye, and round the back part of the Head; and under that
a Bed of white; the Breast, Belly, and Thighs, are of a pale yellowish buff
Color; the under part next the Tail spotted with red: The hind part of the
Neck, Back, and covert Feathers of the Wings, are of a yellowish green,
excepting a large Mark of a pale bluish green on the Pinion of the Wings, and
another of the same color on the Rump: The Legs and Feet are of an orange
Color; the Claws of a dark muddy red.

Fig. 7. The BOHEMIAN JAY, or CHATTERER, is as big as a Blackbird; being in
length, from the point of the Bill to the end of the Tail, nine Inches;
breadth, when the Wings are extended, eighteen Inches; its Bill is of a
greenish Color; the Eyes of a beautiful red encompassed with black; the Head
somewhat flatish, and of a chestnut Color, adorned with a Crest or Tuft bending
backward, of the same Color, the top more faint: The upper part of the Neck,
Back, and covert Feathers of the Wings of an amber Color; the Breast, Belly,
and Thighs more dilute; the Quill Feathers of the Wings are of a dark ash,
inclining to black, the half of which have their Tips yellow; the Tail
blackish, except the Tip which is yellow. This Bird is said to be peculiar to
Bohemia: It feeds on Fruit, especially Grapes, which it seems very greedy of.
It is exceedingly voracious; flies in Companies, and is easily tamed.

Fig. 8. The BANANA Bird from Jamaica, is of the bigness of our English
Sterling: The Head, Neck, and upper part of the Breast, part of the Back, and
the Wings and Tail were black, except some white Spots in the upper covert
Feathers of the Wing; all the rest of the Body is of a fine gold yellow. It
resembles the Sterling in all its Actions, being very mischievous. It is a
Native of Jamaica, and other of the Caribbee Islands. Four or five of these
Birds, will set upon, and kill a large Bird or Fowl; and when dead, each one,
according to his place of Mastership, choose his part, viz. the Heart, Brains,
etc. keepin^ the part which he makes choice of, till he has satiate^ himself.
This, says Mr. Albin, I have been Eye witness too.

Fig. 9. The WARWOVWEN is almost as big a^ an Eagle; the top of his Head and
Neck, were o^ a flesh Color, bare of Feathers; the sides of the Face, Chin,
and back part of the Head, of a dar^ brown Color; the Bill long, and hooked at
the and, of a red or saffron Color, with a broad stripe of lead Color in the
middle, round the upper and under Mandible; on the base of its Bill, grew two
broad flat scalloped Caruncles of an orange Color: The Irides of the Eyes
white, circled round with scarlet: The Ruff was thick set, with soft long downy
Feathers, of an ash Color; the Back and covert Feathers of the Wings, were of
a pale buff Color; the Quill Feathers black; the Craw was of a flesh Color,
and bare of Feathers, hanging down like a Bag on the Breast; The Breast, Belly,
and Thighs were white; the Tail was composed of twelve white Feathers, tipped
almost half way with black. The Legs and Feet were of a yellowish flesh Color;
the Claws black; its Food was raw Flesh. This Bird I saw at the George Tavern
at Charing Cross, with the Cassowares; his Keepers called him the King of the
Vavows, or King of the Vultures. He was brought by a Dutch Ship from Pallampank
in the East Indies. It seems to be somewhat like that Bird which Mr. Willoughby
describes by the Name of Uruba, or the Brasil Vulture

Fig. 9 The Warwovwen


Fig. 11. The Little Owl
Fig. 10. Little Horn Owl


Fig. 10. The Little HORN-OWl is in weight about ten Ounces; its length from
the point of the Bill to the end of the Tail, fourteen Inches; its breadth,
when the Wings are extended, three Feet four Inches; its Bill black, and a
little above an Inch long; the Tongue fleshy and a little divided; the Face is
encompassed with a double row of Feathers, the outer row variegated with small
white, black, and red Lines; the inner row, under the Eyes, reddish. Its Horns
were above an Inch long, of a yellowish white, with six indented transverse
Lines of black; and in shape resembling the Ears of a Cat. The whole Bird was
covered with a delicate Plume, beautifully variegated with white, black, red,
yellow and brown Colors. The Legs of this Owl were feathered down to the Feet,
and of a light brown Color; the Claws black. These Birds are found in
mountainous and unfrequented Places, not delighting in the lower and plain
Countries. That from whence this Figure was copied, was shot on Enfield Chase:
in the Stomach of it was found Bones and Fur of Mice.

Fig. 11. Is called the LITTLE OWL: It was taken on the Coast of Ushant by my
Brother; it having lost its way at Sea, lighting on the Mast of the Ship, was
so tired that it suffered itself to be taken without any Resistance, and was
preserved and brought home by him, and given to me; and from that Bird this
Figure was taken by Mr. Albin. This little Owl was about the bigness of a
Blackbird; it weighed three Ounces; its length from the tip of the Beak to the
end of the Tail, was seven Inches and a half; breadth when the Wings were
extended, fourteen Inches: Its Bill was like that of other Owls; the Tongue a
little divided, as in the rest of this Tribe; the Ears great, the Eyes lesser
than in other Owls. The Wreath or Circle of Feathers encompassing the Face,
beyond the Ears less and less discernable; the upper part of the Body was of a
dark brown, with a Mixture of red, having transverse white Spots, intermixed
with lines and small specks of black; the Feathers about the Ears were more
variegated with black and white; the Chin and Belly of a yellowish white; the
Breast marked with long dusky Spots, enclosed with a border of white; its Wings
were prettily checkered with black and white: Its Legs feathered down to the
Claws; the Feet of a dark yellow; the Claws blackish: It had two fore Toes, and
two back Toes.

Fig. 12. The HOOPOE COCK is in weight about ten Ounces; in length, from the
tip of the Bill to the end of the Tail, twelve Inches; breadth, when the Wings
are extended, eighteen Inches; its Bill two Inches and a quarter long, black,
sharp, and something bending. The shape of the Body approaches to that of a
Plover: The Head is adorned with a most beautiful Crest two Inches high,
consisting of a double row of Feathers, reaching from the Bill to the Nape of
the Neck, all along the top of the Head; which it can at pleasure set up and
let fall; it is made up of twenty-four Feathers, some of which are longer than
others; the tips of them are black, under the black they are white, the
remaining part under the white being of a chestnut inclining to yellow; the Neck
is of a pale reddish yellow; the Breast white.

Fig. 13. The HOOPOE HEN frequented a Garden at Woodford on Epping Forest,
where they had observed it some time, and used all the means to take it they
could; but it was so shy, that it avoided all Fig. 13. Hoopoe Hen
Fig: 12. Hoopoe Cock
Fig: 14 The Flammant
their Traps that were laid for it; which the Gentleman observing, ordered it
to be shot; which was accordingly done, and sent to Mr. Albin to draw the
Figure of it. A Cock Bird of this kind was shot near Winchester in Hampshire.
These Birds are not very common in England; but about Cologn, and elsewhere in
High Germany are frequent, where they call them Widehuppe: They sit for the
most part on the Ground, sometimes on Willows, etc. They feed like Woodpeckers,
on Beetles and other Insects.

Fig. 14. The FLAMMANT was in length, from the tip of the Bill to the end of
the Claws, four Feet ten Inches and a half; in breadth, when the Wings were
extended, four Feet; the Legs sixteen Inches from the Knee to the end of the
middle Claw; its Bill five Inches and a quarter long, of a singular shape; the
upper Mandible is flat and broad, crooked and toothed; the lower thicker than
the upper; the tip black, in the young Birds of a dark blue. It is two Years
before this Bird arrives to its perfect Color; at which time it is entirely
red, except the prime Feathers of the Wings, which are black when it is at its
full bigness: its weight is about two Pounds and a half; its Legs are long, and
of a red Color, bare of Feathers a good way above the Knees; the Toes webb'd
together; the Claws black. These Birds make their Nests on Hillocks, in shallow
Water, on which they sit with their Legs extended downwards. They breed on the
Coast of Cuba and the Bahama Islands, and frequent the salt Water; a Man by
concealing himself from their sight, may kill great Numbers of them, for they
will not rise at the Report of a Gun; neither is the sight of those killed
close by them, sufficient to terrify the rest, and warn them of the Danger; but
they stand gazing, and as it were astonished, till they are most or all of them
killed. When they feed (which is always in shallow Water) by bending their
Neck, they lay the upper part of their Bill next the Ground, their Feet being
in continual Motion up and down in the Mud; by which they raise a small round
sort of Seed or Grain, resembling Millet, which they receive into their Bill;
and as there is a necessity of admitting into their Mouths some Mud, Nature has
provided the edges of their Bill with fine Teeth like those of a Comb, with
which they retain the Food, and reject the Mud that is taken in with it. They
are thought by some to feed on Fish likewise. This Figure was taken from the
Bird itself by Mr. Albin: It was brought from Sir Robert Walpole's, where it
had been kept alive in the Kitchen some time.

Fig. 15. The CARASOW COCK is almost as big as a Turkey; its Bill thick, and
hooked at the end, partly ash and partly yellow; on the Base of the upper
Mandible is a round Excrescence of the bigness of a Nutmeg, of a yellow Color;
the Eyes black; the Head and Neck covered with Feathers of a deep black like
Velvet: On its Head is a Crest of curled black Feathers with white tips turning
up spirally as far as the beginning of the Neck, which it can erect or let fall
at pleasure: All the rest of the Bird is black, excepting the lower part of the
Belly about the Vent, which is white, with a Mark of the fame Color across the
Thigh; the Legs and Feet are of a pale rusty Color.

Fig. 16. The CARASOW HEN is no less beautiful than the Cock; her Head and Neck
were black; the tips of some of the Neck-feathers white, with a broad Stripe of
white across the middle of the Crest; the Bill was of an ash Color; the
Excrescence on the Base as in the Cock, yellow: The Breast and lower part of
the Neck, Back, and Wings were of a dusky brown, the middle of the Belly white;
the tips of some of the Feathers black; the Thighs and Parts about the Vent of
a pale yellowish brown; the Tail Fig: 15. Carasow Cock
Fig: 16. Carasow Hen
Fig: 17. The Red Bird.
Fig: 18. Ganser
black, with four Bars of white at equal Distances across it; the Legs and Feet
of an ash Color. These Birds, like other domestic Fowl, are tame and
sociable, eating and drinking with any Company. The Cock of this Fowl came from
the West Indies: They are generally brought from Carasow, from whence they take
their Name. They are called by the Indians, Tecuecholi, Mountain-Bird, or
American Pheasant.

Fig. 17. The RED BIRD from Richmond. This Name is imposed on it, for want of
knowing its real Name. It was kept at Richmond Palace, when Her present Majesty
was Princess of Wales, amongst her Collection of Rarities of this kind. Mr.
Albin drew the Figure from the Bird itself, but could not meet with any one to
inform him from what Country it was brought, nor to answer some other Questions
he wanted to ask concerning it. Excepting in the Color, it is pretty much like
the Carasow Hen, and about the same bigness; its Head likewise is furnished
with a beautiful Crest, very much resembling the Crest of that Bird; and indeed
it seems to be of the same Species with that Fowl: The Disagreement that is
between them, may perhaps be only owing to the different Places they are
brought from, or such Difference as is common amongst tame Fowls. The outer
edges all round the Crest was black; the lower part of the Crest next the Head,
and part of the Neck, was of a lead Color; all the rest of the Bird, a fine
red, only the Wings and Tail somewhat darker than the Body; and the Legs and
Feet black.

Fig. 18. The GANSER may be classed with those of the Goose-kind, the Bill and
Feet being like theirs; the top and back part of the Head, Breast, Belly, and
Thighs were of a pale yellowish buff-colour, with a light tincture of reddish
brown, here and there in Spots, excepting a large Spot of reddish brown on the
middle of the Breast: The Bill was red, flat, and toothed like that of the
Goose: The forepart of the Head round the Eyes reddish brown, with a ring of
the same Color round the upper part of the Neck, joining to the Head: The back
part of the Head and Back were of a reddish brown Color: The Tail short and
black. It was web-footed, its Legs very long, and bare above Knee, both Legs
and Feet of a red Color. Its Food was the same with that of Geese, eating
Grass and Corn. The Difference between the Cock and Hen could not be
distinguished, either by the Colors or Shape, but only by the Cock's running
to the Hen with open Wings, clasping or embracing her round with them.

Fig. 19. The RED-WING'D STARLING very much resembles the common Starling in
shape and size. The whole Bird is black, except the upper part of the Wings,
which is a bright scarlet, under that a yellow: The Legs, Feet and Claws are
black. This Bird was shot near London; it was thought to be a Cage Bird, which
had bot loose: In its Gizzard was found Grubs, Beetles, and small Maggots. It
is a Native of Carolina and Virginia, in which Countries they are very
numerous. Mr. Catesby makes mention of its flying in Companies with the
Purple-Daws, and destroying the Corn wherever they come, being the most
destructive Birds in those Countries. He says it makes its Nest over the Water
amongst Reeds and Sedges, the tops of which they interweave so artfully, making
an Arch or Covering, under which they hang their Nest, (after the manner of the
Reed Sparrow) and so secure from wet, that where the Tide flows it is observed
never to reach them. It is a very active and familiar Bird, and when kept in a
Cage will learn to imitate human Speech.

Fig. 20. The RED-LEGG'D HORSEMAN is in length from the point of the Bill to
the end of the Claws, sixteen Inches; in breadth, when the Wings were expanded,
twenty four Inches; in weight eight Ounces; its Bill about two Inches long, and
slender, reddish at the Base, and black at the Point. The top of the Head, and
upper part of the Neck are of a light brown; the Feathers of the Back, and
covert Feathers of the Wings in the middle black, then brown Fig: 19 Redwing'd
Starling
Fig: 20 Red Legged Horsman
Fig. 22 Long. Tail'd Humming Bird
Fig. 21. Green Crown Bird
edged with white, which continues down to within an Inch and a half of the
Tail. The Legs are long, and of a pale reddish orange color, bare above the
Knee; the fore Toes long; the Claws small and black. This Bird was shot on the
fandy Bank of a River in Essex. The Hen is much of the same Color of the Cock,
the Legs excepted, which are of a green Color.

Fig. 21. The GREEN CROWN BIRD is a very stately fine Fowl, of the bigness of a
large Turkey. Its Body is covered with long Feathers resembling Hair; and of a
dark green Color, having a purplish cast on the Back and Sides, some broad
Stripes of red on the Wings tending downwards, the Thighs of a yellowish
buff-colour; the Legs and Toes long, of a pale yellow Color; the Claws black.
Upon the top of the Head of this Bird, grew certain shafts or stalks, bearing
little round Balls on their tops, like those of an Earl's Coronet, of a
yellowish Color: On the forepart of the Head, a little above the Bill, it has
a small red Comb, and two red Marks on each side of the Head. The Bill is
short, thick, strong, a little bowed; and of a pale yellow Color. This Bird is
found in the East Indies.

Fig. 22. The LONG-TAIL HUMMING-BIRD is the least of all the Species of this
Kind of Birds, of which Naturalists reckon nine different sorts, and the least
that we know of found upon our Globe. Its length from the beginning of the
Head, or Insertion of the Bill, to the rise of the Tail, is two Inches and a
half; that is, the Neck one Inch, and the Body an Inch and a half long: the
Head small; the Bill a little more than an Inch long, black, round, sharp and
almost straight. The Legs and Feet like those of the rest; the Feathers also of
the Body and Wings are alike disposed, but differently colored: It has a Tail
longer than any of the rest, somewhat more than three Inches, consisting of
Feathers, of which that which is nearer to its rise is shorter, the second
always longer. The Tail is forked, and the Bird in flying spreads it into two
large Horns, so that the tips of the Horns are an Inch and an half distant from
each other. The whole Head and Neck of this Bird is of a shining silken black
Color, inclining to or interchanging with blue, as in the Necks of Mallards;
the whole Back and Breast are green, shining interchangeably with golden and
seagreen, as in the second kind of these Birds. The Wings are of a
liver-colour; the Tail of of a blackish blue, shining like polished Steel blued
over. There are so great a variety of beautiful Colors, in the Feathers of all
the Kinds of these Birds; and so wonderfully resplendent, that they cannot be
well represented by any Painter: The Indians make of these Feathers the
Representations of Saints, and other things, so dexterously and artificially, to
the Life, that one would think they were drawn with a Pencil in Colors. These
Birds are fed and nourished with Honey, Dew, and the Juice of Flowers, which
they suck out of them with their Bill, or rather very long Tongue, provided and
fitted by Nature for that Use; so that being taken alive, they cannot be kept
for want of Food, but die in a short time.

Fig. 23. The PORPHYRIO is a kind of Water-Hen; its Body is all over of a
purple blue Color; the Tail of a whitish ash Color: Its Bill, Legs and Feet,
red. Pliny says, that when it drinks, it seems to bite the Water; and has
this Property by himself, to dip and wet his Meat now and and then in Water,
and then with its Foot instead of a Hand, to reach it to its Bill. The best of
this Kind, he says, are in Coinagene. Mr. Willughby (in his Ornithology) says,
neither Gesuer, nor Aldrovandus, nor himself, had ever seen this Bird, but
Pictures of it only; and seeing that the Pictures of it do much vary, and none
of those who have compiled Histories of Animals, do profess themselves to have
seen the Porphyrio; we did (says he) sometimes doubt, whether there were any
such Bird in Nature; especially seeing some of those Things which the Ancients
attribute to it, as (for Example) that it has five Toes on each Foot, are
without doubt false and fabulous. But because all the Pictures Fig: 23 Porphyrio
Fig. 24. Amadavad Bird
Fig. 25. Crown Bird
of it do agree in the figure of its Bill, Legs, Feet, and some other Parts, we
have now changed our Minds, and are more apt to believe the Affirmative, viz.
that there is such a Bird as they picture. Let others (says he) who have the
hap to see it, describe it more exactly, and so remove all Doubt and Scruple
concerning this Matter out of the Minds of the Learned and Curious. This Figure
I here exhibit was copied from a curious Drawing, belonging to a Noble Person,
whose Name I am forbid to mention.

Fig. 24. The AMADAVAD BIRD in bigness scarce exceeds the Golden-crown'd Wren.
Its Bill in shape is like a Goldfinch's; for color red: The upper side of the
Body is of a dusky Color, in some Birds lighter, in others darker; only the
Feathers growing about the Rump are of a scarlet or deep orange; the
Quill-feathers of the Wings and those of the Tail are black. The Tail itself is
an Inch and half long, made up of twelve Feathers. In some Birds the upper part
of the Breast is of a scarlet red, in others it is wholly black, as is the rest
of the Breast and Belly in all. The Color of the Feathers of these Birds vary
very much: The Legs and Feet are white; the Claws very long, like those of
Larks, but more crooked. These Amadavad Birds are brought from the East Indies.

Fig. 25. The CROWN BIRD from Mexico is of the bigness of the Thrush; its Bill
of a tawny Flesh-colors, thick and short, after the manner of the Grosbeaks. It
has a large Crest of green Feathers, which it can set up or lay down at
pleasure: The Head, Neck, Back, Breast, and part of the Belly, green; the lower
part of the Belly and Thighs of a dusky brown Color; the first four
Quill-feathers of the Wings scarlet, the fourth having fine long white Marks in
the outer Web; the rest of the Quill-feathers purple, as was also the Tail; the
covert and scapular Feathers of the Wings purple, with a Mixture of green; the
Legs and Feet of a bluish lead Color.

Fig. 26. The MANUCODIATA, or Bird of Paradise, for bigness and shape of Body,
comes near to a Swallow: The Feathers investing it are of several Colors, very
beautiful and lovely to behold: The Head like that of a Swallow, and large for
the smallness of the Body; the Bill somewhat longer than that of a Swallow. No
less than ten sorts of Birds of Paradise are described by Naturalists; which
differ in size, figure, or color, from each other. There has been diverse
Stories delivered by ancient Authors concerning these Birds, that in former
Ages were generally received and accepted for true, even by Men of Learning,
which are now discovered to be Fables, and rejected and exploded by all Men:
Such as their wanting Feet and Legs; that they lived upon Celestial Dew; that
they flew perpetually without any intermission, and took no rest but on high in
the Air, their Wings being spread; that they were never taken alive, but only
when they fell down dead upon the Ground, etc. These most beautiful Birds (as
Aldrevandus reports) are called by the Inhabitants of the Molucca Islands,
Manucadiatoe, that is, GOD 's Birds; Fig: 26. (...) of Paradise
Fig. 27. Cock Maccaw
and had in great Esteem and Veneration. They are called Birds of Paradise,
both for the excellent shape and beauty of their Bodies, and also because where
they are bred, whence they come, and whither they betake themselves, is
altogether unknown, since they are found only dead upon the Earth; so that the
Vulgar imagine them to drop out of Heaven, or Paradise. All which things are
now sufficiently refuted, and proved to be false and fabulous, both by
Eyewitnesses, and by the Birds themselves brought over entire. As for that
particular of their wanting Legs, these Birds are now well known to have Legs
and Feet as well as others; and those not short, small, nor feeble ones, but
sufficiently great and strong, and armed with crooked Talons, as being the
Members of Birds of Prey. They are brought from the East Indies.

Fig. 27. The COCK MACCAW: Its Head, Neck, Breast, Belly, and under part of the
Tail are a fine scarlet, as is also some of the covert Feathers of the Wings;
the Back, rest of the Wings, and upper part of the Tail, are of a rich blue:
The Beak is of a light ash Color, the upper Mandible tipped with black: The Legs
and Feet are of a dark ash Color.

Fig. 28. The HEN MACCAW from Jamaica, and other Parts of the West Indies: is
in length from the tip of its Bill to the end of the Tail, thirty Inches: The
Body equals that of a well-fed Capon; The Bill hooked, and in that measure that
it makes an exact Semicircle, a full Palm long. The top of the Head, the Neck,
Back, Wings, and upper side of the Tail, of a very pleasant blue or azure
Color: The Throat, Breast, Belly, Thighs, Rump and Tail underneath all of a
saffron Color. The Tail was about eighteen Inches long: The Legs very short,
thick, and of a dusky or dark Color; as are also the Feet; the Toes long,
armed with great, crooked, black Talons. It differs from the Cock, which is of
a beautiful scarlet and blue Color. These Maccaws are the largest of all the
Parrot Kind, and bear a good Price, being commonly sold for ten Guineas. This
Bird seems to be the same with that Aldrovandus calls the greatest blue and
yellow Maccaw: and like wise the Maccaw called Ararauna by the Brasilians;
described by Marggravius.

Fig. 28. Hen: Maccaw


Fig. 29. Yellow Sawrey
Fig. 30. Green Paroqueet


Fig. 29. The yellow LAWREY, or PAROQUEET, is of the bigness of a Lark, has a
very hooked Bill, of a gray Color: Its Legs and Feet are of an ash Color: It
has a very long Tail, reaching about ten Inches beyond the ends of the Wings;
both the Belly underneath, and also the Head, Neck, and Back above, are of a
beautiful reddish Color: but the Breast and lower Feathers of the Tail are of
a pale rose Color, which Tail-feathers end in a lovely blue, or Color mingled
of white and green. The Wings are chiefly green, but interwoven with red
Feathers, the one half whereof is so variegated on each side with yellow and
rose Color, that exposed to the Sun it represents a thousand varieties of
shining Colors, and can hardly be expressed by a Painter: so that this Bird
deserves to be highly prized by great Persons. These Paroqueets are brought
from the East Indies, etc. and are found chiefly in the midland Countries: They
roost and build on the highest Trees; they fly in Companies, and with great
noise, as does the whole Tribe of Parrots: They also learn to pronounce some
Words, if they be kept tame.

Fig. 30. Is the small GREEN PAROQUEET; the top of the Head and the Throat are
red; as is likewise part of the Tail; the Pinions of the Wings and Rump bluish,
all the rest of the Feathers of this Bird of a deep green: The Bill hooked, and
of a pale yellowish Color.

Fig. 31. The GREEN PARROT is on the top and sides of the Head, and Rump, of a
fine yellow, or gold Color, intermixed with red: The Shoulders of the Wings a
fine scarlet; the first, second, and third rows of covert Feathers of the
Wings, are of a beautiful green; the large Quill-feathers of a deep blue, with
white edges: The outer edges of four Feathers in the Tail, the same Color with
those on the Shoulders of the Wings.

Fig. 32. The LAWREY is the most beautiful Bird of all the Parrot Kind: The top
of its Head is of a fine purple; the Wings of a curious green, as is also the
Thighs: It has a half Circle of bright yellow under the Throat: The Neck, Back,
Belly and Tail, are of a lovely scarlet: The Legs of a lead Color; and the tip
of the Tail black. The Lawrey is as big as the large common Parrot.

Fig 31. Green Parrot
Fig. 32. The Lawrey


Fig. 33. The Batt.


Fig. 33. The BATT, or FLUTTER-MOUSE, is a Creature between a Bird and a Beast,
of which there are three Kinds that we know of, viz. the common sort, frequent
in England; another sort about one fourth bigger than the common, with Ears
twisted like Rams Horns, about an Inch and a half in measure; and a third kind
brought to us from the West Indies, whose Body is as large as a Rat, and the
Wings being extended, measure from point to point above two Feet. In these
Creatures there is no remarkable difference, but the size of their Parts. These
Animals partake of the four-footed Kind in the Make of the Head, which agrees
very much with those of the Mouse or Rat kind; the shape of the Trunk of their
Bodies likewise is much the same, and are both covered with Hair: They also
bring forth their young ones perfectly formed, like the four-footed kind, and
give them suck. They partake of the Bird kind in having only two Legs, besides
the Hooks at the pinions of their Wings; they have also the Power of flying.
The Note or Voice of these Animals is between the chirping of Birds, and the
cry of four-footed Beasts. These Creatures have not long Tails, like Animals
with four Feet. It is said, the Batt sleeps all the Winter in Holes of old
Houses and Walls; it very rarely appears in the Daytime, but flies in the dusk
of the Evening only. The Wings of a Batt are wonderful strange, consisting of
one entire Skin, webb'd together somewhat like the Feet of Waterfowl. The
Claws or Hooks on the tops of the Wings, this Creature makes use of to hang by
to any thing it is minded; whilst it is either feeding, sleeping, etc. It feeds
on Bacon, Cheese, etc. The Description of this Creature would more properly
have come in between the Beasts and Birds; but being omitted there, I chose to
place it here rather than leave it out.

BOOK the Third. Of FISHES.
Fig. 1. THE CUTTLE-FISH is a Seafish, of a very odd shape: The Covering of the
Back is a sort of Shell, Scale, or Bone, as thick as a Man's Hand, an Inch
thick in the middle, but thinner on the sides, light, hard without and spungy
within, very white, and something of a saltish taste: The Body of this Fish is
white: The Head, Feet, etc. red, blue and white intermixed. It has two large
black Eyes, encircled with red: two Trunks or kind of Arms, fixed to the Head,
which serve it for swimming, and to catch its Prey: Besides these it has six
Feet that have Teeth on their upper part, and two much larger underneath, which
shoot out from the Head like Horns: It lives on small Fish that it catches
after the manner of Angling, by letting down its two Arms or Feelers as it were
a Line, with a Crook at the end of it. It Is accounted good Meat, and brought to
the Table in several Parts of France: They are best when large, chiefly in the
Months of January, February, and March; for the most part Fig: 1. Cuttle Fish.
Fig: 2. The Croker.
they are boiled, and eat better than roasted: In Illyria the greater are
salted, and from thence carried to Venice. The Cuttle-Fish carries under its
Throat a Bladder, or Receptacle, full of an Humor blacker than Ink, which it
discharges into the Sea when in danger, to intercept the Sight of the Pursuer,
and thereby makes its escape. They generate by Embraces, in the Spring, and go
(as they say) fifteen Days; their Eggs are first white, till they put forth
their black Liquor thereon: The Young are excluded the Egg as Birds: The Male
is known as being rougher, and is said to assist the Female when in danger. The
Powder that is made of the inside of the Shell of this Fish is highly esteemed
in Medicine, and by some Persons preferred to that of Pearl.

Fig. 2. The CROKER is usually about fourteen Inches in length, of the size of
a large Mackrel, but thicker: In deeper Waters, as in the great Bay of
Chesapeak they are sometimes taken three Feet in length: The Back and upper
part of the Head of this Fish are of a brown Color; the Sides and Belly of a
light Color, tinctured with red; the Tail entirely red: It has six Fins, two
on the Back, two on the Belly, and one on each side below the Gills; the Fins
are of a light Color, striped with a faint red: The Iris of its Eyes are of a
fine gold Color; the Mouth large, furnished with very small sharp Teeth. These
Fish are found in most of the Rivers of Virginia. They are accounted tolerable
good Meat.

Fig. 3. The BONE FISH is on the upper part of the Head, Back, and Tail, of a
dusky blue Color; the Belly and Sides of a light ash Color; the Eyes
encircled with white; the Tail forked: It has four Fins; a long spiny one on
the Back, one on the Belly, and one on each side under the Gills, near the
upper part of the Belly. There are plenty of these Fish on the Coasts of the
Bahama Islands.

Fig. 4. The ISING-GLASS FISH is twenty-four Foot long, and weighs four Hundred
weight. It is usually met with in the Seas about Muscovy, in Hungary, and other
Parts of the Danube. The Back of this Fish is so well furnished with Prickles;
which stand up like the Teeth of a Saw, that there is not any Fish, how strong
soever, will dare to bite it; and the Scales, though they are small, are very
sharp, as represented in the Cut, which answers to the Original taken from the
Fish itself. The Head of this Fish is very thick, heavy and large, the Mouth
very long and open; from the Jaw hangs down two fleshy Barbels: Some have
thought from the Nature and Bulk of this Fish, that it is of the Whale-Kind.
They make the Ising-glass by cutting all the Parts of the Fish in pieces, which
they steep in hot Water, and then let it boil over a gentle Fire, till it is
dissolved and reduced into a Jelly. They spread this upon Instruments made for
the Purpose, that it may dry, and be made into a kind of Parchment. When it is
almost dry, they usually roll it up into Wreaths of different shapes and sizes.
Fig: 3. Bone Fish.
Fig: 5. Black Tail.
The Dutch furnish us with almost all we use. That which is clearest and
whitest is best; and which being boiled in Water and Milk, will almost all
dissolve. Ising-glass is of very great use in Physic.

Fig. 5. The BLACK-TAIL FISH is commonly from six to ten Inches in length, and
proportionably thick: The Back, Fins, and upper part of the Head, are of a
dusky Color, inclining to black; the Tail black, with a broad Border of yellow
round it, and forked: The Sides are of a bluish ash Color; with five Lines of
bright yellow extending from the Head to near the Tail; the Eyes encircled with
white; the Mouth large: The Head and Body in shape are pretty much like the
Bone-Fish: It is furnished with Teeth like those of a Perch.

Fig. 6. The SQUIRREL FISH is generally about twelve Inches in length, from the
tip of the Snout to the end of the Tail; though some of them grow to four times
that bigness: The whole Fish, excepting the first Fin on the Back, and the
Sides which have a shade of white, is of a beautiful scarlet Color; the Tail
forked; the Eyes large, and the Mouth small: It has six Fins, of a singular
form; the first on the Back is strengthened with many large sharp-pointed Bones,
shaped like Daggers; behind which shoots forth a long pliant sharp-pointed Fin,
in shape exactly like one Fork of the Tail; the rest as expressed in the
Figure, which is an exact Draught. This Fish is a well-tasted good eating Fish.

Fig: 6, Sea. Squirrel, on Red Perch


Fig: 7 Skip-Jack


Fig. 7. The SKIP-JACK, so called in Carolina, from its frequent skipping out
of the Water; but in Virginia it is called Green Fish, because when just taken,
the Back and upper part of the Sides appear of a fine resplendent green Color.
This Fish is about twelve Inches in length; has a large wide Mouth, both Jaws
armed with a single row of sharp Teeth; a bright Eye, encircled with yellow. It
has five Fins, and a forked Tail. Its Scales are very small, and the Fish when
alive is exceeding beautiful. It is a Fish of no disagreeable Taste, but
accounted tolerable good Meat.

Fig. 8. The GREEN EEL is of the bigness of a large common Eel, and like it in
shape. The whole Body is of a deep green, finely spotted with black. One kind
of this Fish is of a light gray Color sprinkled with innumerable black Spots;
perhaps of different Sex only: The Inhabitants of the Bahama Islands will eat
only the green sort, rejecting those which are black, as thinking them
poisonous. It is customary for these Fish, as they are lurking among the hollow
Rocks and Corals, to bite Peoples Legs that are exposed to them, though their
bite is of no worse consequence than fetching Blood.

Fig. 9. The FRESH WATER PERCH is usually small, seldom found as big as a
Man's Hand: the Back of a dark brown dusky Color; the Sides of a fine blue,
extended from the Head to the Tail, but more fainter toward the Tail; the
Belly of a lovely golden yellow; and the Tail of a dusky yellowish Color: It
has five Fins, that on the Back and those under the Belly of a bright yellow,
those on the Sides under the Gills white: The Eye is encircled with a golden
yellow; across the Gills, which are of the same blue Color as the Sides, are
diverse Lines of black pointing toward the Head; and just above the Fin on the
side, near to the Gills, is a very remarkable beautiful red Spot, and joining
to that a black one. Of these Fish there are plenty both in Carolina and
Virginia: They are chiefly found in Mill-Ponds, and other standing fresh
Waters; and called by some Ground-Pearch, from their burrowing into, and
covering themselves in the Mud or Sand.

Fig. 10. The RUDDER-FISH is of the size of a small Roach, about four or five
Inches in length: The upper part of the Body is brown, with large Spots of
dusky yellow; the lower part of the Body is alternately streaked with yellow
and white; and in the yellow Lines Dots of black: This Fish is every way
curiously marked, and beautiful to behold. These Fish are commonly to be met
with in warm Climates, and in crossing the Atlantic Ocean Ships Rudders are
seldom free from them: They seem to Fig: 9. Fresh water Perch
Fig: 10. Rudder-fish.
Fig. 11. Lane Snapper
gather their Nutriment from the Slime adhering to the Rudder and Bottom of the
Ships; and though so small a Fish, they keep pace with Ships in their swiftest
Course.

Fig. 11. The LANE-SNAPPER is in length about nine or ten Inches; the whole
Body is of a red Color, darkest on the Back; with Lines, and Dashes of bright
yellow all over the Body and Head: The Fins yellow, and the Tail red and
forked. The Eye is large encircled with red.

Fig. 12. The SEA-HAWK is a slender Fish about fourteen Inches long; of a dark
brown Color on the upper part, the Sides and Belly light. The Fins and Tail
are of a reddish brown; the Eye is encircled with the same Color. The Mouth is
very large for the size of the Fish, and well furnished with small sharp
irregular Teeth; the Tail is forked. These Fish are sometimes taken on the
Coast of Carolina, but very rare.

Fig. 13. The Bahama UNICORN-FISH is sometimes found three Feet in length: The
Body is of a very odd singular Form, thick in the middle, and tapering at both
ends; the Head resembles that of a Hog's: It has a very small Mouth, with six
Teeth only; two in the upper and four in the under Jaw: The upper part of the
Head, Back and Tail, of a dark olive Color; the Belly white; the Fins are of a
pale red. The Body and Head of this Fish was marked all over very oddly with
Lines resembling Worms and Maggots; of a beautiful skyblue Color: The Eye is
large, encircled first with yellow, then with olive, then with yellow again,
and lastly the whole circumvested with blue of the same Color with the marks
on the Body: besides those blue marks, the Body is sprinkled thinly over with
black round Spots, like Patches: It has a tapering sharp-pointed Fin or Horn,
growing out of the top of the Back, a little behind the Eyes; which it can
raise and point either backward or forward at its pleasure, and when laid along
reaches to the Fin on the Back: This Bone is very brittle, and easily broke, by
which one would not think it so defensive a Weapon as otherwise Nature seems to
have designed it for. These Fish are not eat, being thought poifonous: They
most frequent those Seas amongst the Bahama Islands, where the Corals are most
plentiful. Its Guts were full of small Shells and other coralline Substances,
most of which was ground very small; which by the strength of its Jaws Nature
has enabled it to perform.

Fig: 13. Bahama Unicorn -- fish


Fig: 14. The Blew Fish


Fig. 14. The BLUE FISH is usually about a Foot in length; though sometimes
they are found as large again: The Head is large; of an uncommon Structure, as
the Figure represents, somewhat like the Whale's, which produces the Sperma
Ceti: The Mouth small; the Eyes encircled with red; the Tail forked and stripped
with black Lines; the whole Fish of a sine blue Color. They are frequently
taken among the Bahama Islands; and in most of the Seas between the Tropicks.

Fig. 15. The Old PUDDING WIFE FISH is about a Foot in length; sometimes they
are found sixteen Inches long: The Body of this Fish was of a dark olive Color
on the Back, the Belly and Sides lighter; covered with large Scales, having the
upper edge of every Scale blue. It has a long yellow Fin on the Back, edged
with a narrow border of blue, like a Ribbon, another Fin on the Belly, near the
Tail, of the same Color, edged in like manner: It has likewise a long Fin,
shooting out from the upper part of the Belly, near the Gills, with the same
Line of blue extending from the Basis to the Point. It has a broad beautiful
Border that extends from the Fin on one side, quite under the Belly to the Fin
on the other side, representing a Girt; with five Lines of blue and yellow
alternately. The Eye is encircled with a lovely red, like Fire, from whence
shoot forth seven bright blue Rays; which gives it the beautiful appearance of
a resplendent Star. The Mouth of this Fish is not large; but its Jaws are armed
with strong sharp Teeth; the upper Mandible is loose, and can be contracted, or
drawn in upon occasion under the adjoining bony part of the Head, in like
manner as in the Hog-Fish: The Tail is of a dark brown with a broad Border of
yellow, inclining to red.

Fig: 15. Old Pudding-wife Fish


Fig: 16. Hog. Fish.


Fig. 16. The HOG-FISH is commonly about a Foot in length; yet sometimes they
are found two Feet long: The Head, Tail, Fins, and whole Body of this Fish are
of a yellowish red Color; the Belly somewhat lighter than the rest of the
Body: The Eyes are encircled with a pale red; the Tail forked. The Head
something like that of a Hog's, being sharp-snouted: The end of its upper Jaw
is furnished with large sharp Teeth; opposite to which in the under Jaw are two
of the same size; the rest of the Teeth are small, sharp, and thick-set: The
upper Jaw is gristly, and so disjoined from the Head, that, like the
Pudding-Wife Fish, it can either dilate or contract it at pleasare.

Fig. 17. The GRUNT is in length, from the tip of the Snout, to the end of the
Tail, about twelve Inches: The Back of this Fish is of a dark brown Color; the
Belly and Sides of a light ash, inclining to blue; the Fins and Tail of a light
brown: The whole Body is covered with large Scales, edged with yellow: The Head
is elegantly striped with a bright blue, and a golden yellow Color,
alternately placed; which makes it appear as if the Head was covered with a
rich stripped Satin. The Mouth of this Fish is large, the Eye encircled with
yellow, and the Tail forked.

Fig: 17. Grunt Fish


Fig: 18. The Pork Fish


Fig. 18. The PORK-FISH is commonly about twelve-Inches in length, and about
five broad; with a rising Back: The Eyes of a bright yellow; its Mouth
moderately wide, with many very small sharp Teeth: The Fins on the Back and
Belly of a deep yellow, or orange Color; the Tail of the same Color, and
forked; the Fins on the sides of a pale yellow: The Head, Back, and Sides of a
dark blue or lead Color, the Belly something lighter, six broad Lines extend
from the Head to the Tail, of a bright yellow; it has likewise a mark of the
same Color between the Head and Back, pointing down a little behind the Eye.
It is esteemed by the Bahamians a good eating Fish.

Fig. 19. The SCHOOLMASTER FISH, (so called by Mr. Catesby, but why, I know
not) is a small Fish about eight Inches in length; though sometimes they grow to
a Foot. The Head and Body is of a pale red Color: Its Fins and Tail of a
lovely gold Color. It is remarkable this Fish has no Fins on the Shoulders, or
Sides adjoining to the Gills, as usually found in most Fish; there are indeed
some few others that want it likewise.

Since it is fallen in my way in the above Description to make mention of Mr.
Catesby; I Will take this Opportunity of making Acknowledgment, of the very great
Assistance I have had from His History of the Natural Rarities of Carolina,
Virginia, etc. to which incomparable Book I am indebted for most of my Fish;
and to which I refer such curious Persons as desire a more ample and particular
Account of the Animals and Vegetables of those Countries; it containing the
most perfect Draught of the Birds, Plants, etc. as well as Fish, of any extant.

Fig: 19 School master Fish.


Fig: 20 Old-wife Fish


Fig. 20. The OLD-WIFE FISH (of which there are several Kinds) is commonly
about ten Inches in length, and five in breadth: It has a rising sharp Back;
the Belly flattish, three or four Fingers wide; from whence some have called it
the Triangular Fish: It is covered with a hard crustacious Skin, of a brown
Color, without Scales, curiously marked all over with indented. Spots, large
on the Sides, and smaller about the Head and Tail. It has a very small Mouth,
with sharp Teeth, a large Eye placed high on the Head, of a remarkable
Structure; two Nostrils or Vent-holes under the forepart of the Eye; four Fins
of a lighter brown than the Body, as is also the end of the Tail; the part of
the Tail next the Body dark, long, slender, and which the Fish can, as it
seems, draw ^p to its Body at pleasure, as it were into a Socket. These kind
are seen in passing the Tropic, where they swim in large Shoals; and likewise
in other Parts of the Indies: They are a white, firm, and wholesome eating
Fish. It is taken with a small Hook.

Fig. 21. Is the Male to the Old Wife, and therefore we call it the OLD-HUSBAND
FISH. It answers to one of those Fish Mr. Willughby describes by the Name of
Piscis Triangularis Cornutus. It is of a yellowish brown Color like the
Female, but more beautiful, finely marked all over the Body with large Marks,
representing Stars, Marbling, and other curious Figures. It has two sharp Horns
on the forepart of its Head, growing from a thick Basis, about three quarters
of an Inch in length, and though but slender yet very strong, with which it is
capable of defending itself, and like a Bull, give dangerous Wounds to the
Sides of its Enemy. His hinder part is likewise well guarded with two long
strong Bones or Fins, like his Horns, one on each side of the Belly, near the
Tail; and when closely chased, he draws up his Tail, and bids. Defiance with
these Horns to his hungry Pursuer. It is said these Fish swim in Companies,
with their Females, for their mutual Defense; and notwithstanding they frequent
the Ocean, exposed to the large, the bold, and voracious Kind, yet the Male
being so well fortified by Nature, both with Weapons of Defense and Courage to
use them, few dare attack him. The Figures of both Male and Female were taken
from the Fish themselves; sent me by Mrs. Ann Tilly, a young Lady who is fond
of such kind of Curiosities.

Fig: 21. Old. Husband Fish.


Fig. 22. Yellow Fish


Fig. 22. The YELLOW FISH is a small beautiful Fish, commonly about nine Inches
in length, though some are found twelve. The Head and Body is covered all over
with small Scales of a yellow Color, the Back somewhat darker than the Belly
and Sides. It has five Fins, a long prickly one on the Back, two under the
Belly, and one on each side behind the Gills: The Head is large, the Mouth
wide, in the under Jaw a double row of small Teeth; in the upper are three
large Teeth, with some very small ones within the Roof of the Mouth: It has a
brisk lively Eye encircled with red.

Fig. 23. The NEGRO FISH is a small Fish, from six to ten Inches in length, and
in shape not unlike a Perch; the upper part of a dark brown Color; the under
somewhat lighter: The Head and Body is sprinkled thick all over with small
bright sky-blue Spots. The Fins are of a reddish brown Color: The Eye is
encircled with a golden yellow: The Mouth wide, with a single row of sharp
Teeth in each Jaw.

Fig. 24. The TANG in the shape of its Body is something like the Bream; about
ten Inches in length, and about eight wide; though some are taken twice that
bigness: The whole Fish is of a dark blue Color: the Mouth of a very singular
Form, as the Figure expresses, without Teeth. It has a large-prickly Fin on the
Back, reaching from the Head almost to the Tail; two on the Belly, one large
like that on the Back, and a long slender one toward the Head: The Tail is
large, and spreads very wide, both sides shooting into sharp Points; and as it
wants Teeth, Nature has supplied that Deficiency by arming the Tail on each
side with a strong sharp-pointed Bone, which in defense of himself he extends
when Danger approaches. This Weapon, with its prickly Fins, seem to deter the
voracious Kind that prey on others, from attacking him. Yet I have seen (says
Mr. Catesby) a Barracuda pursue and bite off a third part of him behind; which
when he had swallowed, he deliberately bit off half the remaining part, and
devoured the whole Fish at the third Mouthful. The Tang is accounted a good
eating Fish.

Fig: 24. The Tang.


Fig: 25. Rock Fish


Fig. 25. The ROCK-FISH is usually found from twelve to eighteen Inches in
length; yet they are sometimes caught two or three Feet in length. The Head,
Back, and Fins on the Back and Belly, are of a dusky blue or lead Color, the
Belly lightish: The Fins behind the Gills are of lead Color, yellow at the
Ends. The Body is sprinkled all over with red Spots: It has a large Mouth, and
a full Eye, of a lovely scarlet Color. Mr. Catesby says, this Fish for its
poisonous Quality, has the worst Character of any other among the Bahama
Islands; but whether they are eatable from any particular Places he knew not;
many of their poisonous Fishes being not so when taken in some Places; of which
the Inhabitants can give a near guess, but sometimes they are miserably
deceived.

Fig. 26. The HIND FISH is commonly about twelve or fourteen Inches in length,
though some of them are found near twice that bigness. The whole Fish instead
of Scales was covered with a thick* Skin variously colored; viz. the Head of a
muddy red, the Back of a dark reddish brown, the Side green, and Belly whitish
with a Tincture of red* The whole sprinkled over thick with red Spots* The Fins
on the Back, Belly, and Sides of a light brown; the Tail of a dark lead Color,
inclining to blue, striped and bordered with black. It has a large Mouth, with
small Teeth; a full Eye, encircled with red and yellow mixed together: The Back
o^ this Fish is well guarded with strong sharp Fins, or Bones, set up like
sharp-pointed Stakes. The Hind-Fish are plentiful in the shallow Seas of the
Bahama Islands, and are accounted good Meat.

Fig. 26. Hind Fish


Fig: 27. The Shad


Fig. 27. The SHAD is of a light gray, with some of its Scales tinctured with
purple. It has a small Mouth, without Teeth: But what is most remarkable in
this Fish is, that the forepart of the Head was of a cartilaginous Substance,
the back-part strong and bony; which seems designed for a Shield to secure the
defenseless part, which he contracts under it when Danger approaches. It is
esteemed a good eating well-tasted Fish.

Fig. 28. The SOLDIER is a kind of Craw-Fish, found in several of the American
Isles, particularly in the Island of St. Dominico in the West Indies, where
there are great Numbers. It is about three or four Inches in legnth, and so
called, because he is clothed and armed with a foreign Shell. These Creatures
go down sometimes to the Seacoast; but whether it is to wash, and to cast
their Eggs, as the Land-Crabs do, is not known; but this is certain, that they
go to change their Shells, which every one endeavors to find out according to
his size: and finding what may fit'em, they run themselves backwards therein,
and so cloth themselves anew: and being armed like Soldiers with these foreign
Shells, they march up again to the Woods, and take up their Quarters among
hollow Trees, etc. living upon rotten Leaves, Fruit, etc. where increasing in
Bulk, and the Shell becoming too straight for them, they are obliged to go down
to the Seacoasts to change their Houses again. The Curious, who have made
Observations of what happens during this Exchange, have owned, they took a
great deal of Pleasure in the sight; for these Creatures stop at every Shell
they meet with, consider it diligently, and having met with one they like,
immediately quit the old one, and run themselves so swiftly backwards into the
other, that one would think they were either afraid of the Injury of the cold
Air, or ashamed to to be seen naked; and if two of them meet at the same time
stripped, to enter into one and the same Shell, they will bite each other, and
battle it, till such time as the weaker yields, and quits the Shell to the
Conqueror; who having clothed himself with it, takes three or four turns upon
the Shore, and if he finds it does not fit him, quits it again, and has
immediate recourse to his old one, and then seeks out for another; and thus
they will change five or six times, till they meet with one for their Purpose.
They carry in their Shells about half a Spoonful of clear Water, which is a
sovereign Remedy against the Pustles and Blisters that the wet which drops from
the Manchineel Tree raises upon the Skin.

Fig. 28. There Soldier


Caterpillar Fig: 1.
Fig: 2.


BOOK the Fourth. Of INSECTS.
Fig. 1. IS a curious CATERPILLAR; the Body of an uncommon Structure, being
exactly apiece; and of a dark green Color, marked with yellow and red:
The Edge of every Square was furnished with little round Heads or Balls,
standing at an equal distance, one on the top of each Joint or Partition, all
of them full of Hair, and of a fine scarlet Color. Its Feet, and little Claws,
were wrapped in a thin transparent Skin, as was also the covering of the Belly;
that as it crawled no Feet were seen; but by means of this little Skin, the
Caterpillar sticks fast to any thing like a Snail. It was found crawling on a
Leaf of the Battattes: on the 22d of July it made itself a Web, of an oker
Color; from whence on the 23d of August, that beautiful FLYING INSECT, Figure
2. was produced.

Fig. 2. The upper part of the Body of this Insect was black, finely marked
with a golden yellow; the Head, and part of the Wings before black, vein'd with
gold; the outer part of a yellowish brown: The under Wings of a lovely rose
Color; the Legs and under part of the Body were black. These Insects, and some
of the following ones, are found in the Indies; described by Merian.

Fig. 3. Is an INDIAN Insect of the CHA^^ER Kind; very common to be met with
upon the P^^egranate Tree; of a heavy and sluggish Nature and therefore easily
caught. It is furnished with a long Tube or Trunk, under its Nose; which it
very dexterously fixes in the sweet Flowers to suck the Honey out, through the
same. When it prepares itself for its Transformation, it lies motionless for a
considerable time, till at length the Skin on its Back breaking of its own
accord, there comes forth the FLYING INSECT, Figure 4. the Wings of which are
transparent, of a pale rose Color, streaked and veined with scarlet, and
bordered all round with a pale yellow: But what is remarkable, it preserves the
same Trunk, or Body, which the foregoing Chafer has, from whence it is
produced; leaving its old Skin or Shell, in Situation, Shape and Color,
resembling the primitive Insect; which Color was of a deep green. These Flies
are very frequently found about Surinam; they are very swift in flying,
insomuch that Merian. says, she spent several Hours in catching one only. This
Fly makes a sound like an Harp, to be perceived at a distance by its Singing;
for which reason it is called Lyricen, and by the Dutch Lierman. From these
kind of Flies, (as the Indians say) are produced the famous Fly called the
Lantern-Bearer.

Fig. 3.
Fig. 4.


Fig: 6.
Fig: 7.
Fig: 8.
Fig: 5.
Fig: 9.


Fig. 5, and 6. Are the Male and Female Moth-Flies, from whence the Silkworm
is produced, which are hatched from an Egg of the bigness of a Mustard Seed.
The SILKWORM, Fig. 7. is of a pale cream-colour inclining to white. During
this Form it constantly undergoes four Sicknesses, each lasting about three
Days, wherein it feeds not at all, but grows thicker, shorter and clearer, and
at each Sickness changes its Skin. It after changes from that of a Worm to an
Aurelia or Chrysalis, Fig. 8. whereunto it is transformed after its spinning
time; in which State it lies shut up in hot Countries for fourteen or fifteen
Days, in more temperate ones eighteen or twenty Days, without any Food known to
us: during which time this Insect leaves two Skins, both that of a Worm when it
is changed into an Aurelia, and that of an Aurelia when it becomes a Moth in
its Silk-case. Its last Transformation is from an Aurelia to a Moth, which eats
its way out through the sharp end of the Case, Fig. 9. by a Hole just big enough
to creep through. This last Change into a Moth-Fly is the Perfection of this
Insect. In this State the Male and Female couple, and soon after die; the
Female having first laid her Eggs, which are of a pale yellow Color, but in a
few Days change into a dark gray or liver Color. And, what is wonderful, these
Eggs are kept ten Months in the Year as a dead thing, taking Life again in
their Season. The first Silkworms that were brought into Europe was in the
time of Justinian the Emperor, who began his Reign A. D. 526. till then the
Europeans were so ignorant as to the Knowledge of the Production of Silk, that
they imagined it grew on the tops of Trees, as Cotton; and was in all those
Western Parts for a long time very dear, being weight for weight of equal Value
with Gold, a Pound of one costing a Pound of the other. Persia was the only
Place which the Europeans frequented, for the sake of their Silk: and it is
certain that the Persians took care, for many hundred Years, to keep their
Silk-Manufactures to themselves, not permitting the Silkworms to be carried
out of Persia, or any Persons to pass from thence into the West, who were
skilled in managing them. Justinian looking on it as a great Hardship, that the
Subjects of his Empire should buy this Manufacture of the Persians at so dear a
Rate, in order to put an end to this Imposition, sent two Monks into India,
(understanding that there was plenty of Silk in those Parts) to learn there how
the silken Trade was managed; and on their Return to bring with them (if it was
possible to be procured) some of the Species, whether Vegetable or Animal, from
which the Silk was produced; that so he might set up the Manufacture in his own
Dominions. These Monks, when they returned, told the Emperor, That the Silk was
produced by a living Creature, a Worm, which could not be brought so long a
Journey alive. But understanding from them that its Eggs might be brought; from
which the Creatures might be propagated; He sent them back a second time, to
bring him of those Eggs: Who having effected what they went about, brought to
Constantinople great Quantities, which they presented to the Emperor in great
State on Horseback, (accompanied by many of his Nobles, Senators and
Magistrates) enclosed in a Roll or Horn of Paper, with Instructions how to
breed, nourish, and draw Silk from the said Creatures: which was received with
great Applause and Admiration; and from those Eggs have been propagated all the
Silkworms, and their Silk in Europe.

At the Season of the Year for hatching the Silkworms Eggs, which, as
observed, is about the beginning of May, provide some Sheets of fine white
Cap-Paper; each of these Sheets make into the form of a Dripping-Pan, by
turning up the edges of the Paper about an Inch and half on every side: in
these Paper Pans put the Silkworms Eggs, placing them in a Chamber-Window,
where the Sun shines powerfully upon them, and securing them from Cats, Birds,
etc. there leave them Day and Night to hatch of themselves; and when you
perceive the Worms begin to come out of their Eggs, give them young
Mulberry-Leaves, or for want of them, the Leaves of Lettuce, till they can have
Mulberry-Leaves; and then keep them constantly to that Diet: After this manner,
in these Paper Troughs or Pans feed them till their Spinning-time, taking care
to clean them as often as Occasion requires; and if you are minded to remove
the Worms to other Paper Troughs, that they may lie thinner and cooler, give
them a few fresh Leaves, and the Worms will come presently upon them: These
Leaves remove with the Worms; but if they are grown large, take them gently in
your Hands, and put them into other Troughs. When the Worms have fed their full
time, and are ready to spin their Silk, roll up white Paper like a Wafer, these
pin up against the Hangings of a Room, or to Lines tied cross the Room; in
these Papers put every single Worm, as you perceive it wants to spin, which it
will begin to do generally as soon as it is put into the Paper. When the Worm
has finished its Case, and changed into an Aurelia, which is known by hearing
it rattle, when it is shaken at the Ear. Then proceed to wind off the Silk,
never suffering the Moth-Fly to eat its way out of the Case, not even of those
that are designed to propagate Seed for the next Year. A Gentleman very curious
in his Observations and Experiments upon the Silkworm, his Method in winding
off the Silk is, as soon as the Worms have finished their Bottoms, and changed
into Aurelias, to put the Bottoms into warm Water, with some Spirit of Wine in
it, which he says facilitates the winding off the Silk very much; the Ends he
finds more readily, and winds them on a Card in his Hand, without any Reel or
Machine at all: And as the Silk-Bottoms are wound off, he takes the Aurelia of
each, and places them in one of those clean Paper-Pans, erect upon the piqued
end; and when its time is accomplished, to enter upon its last Transformation
of a Moth-Fly, it will assume its new State, as well as if it had continued the
whole time in its Silk-Case; and this Method is practiced by diverse other
Persons, who wind off the Silk after the same manner. When the Silk-Moths are
come out of their Cases, being perfectly transformed, and are put into such
Paper Dripping-Pans, or Troughs, as they are bred in, there they will couple
and lay their Eggs: When that is over, the Papers with the Eggs upon them
(never attempt to take the Eggs off) are to be put into a Chest or Trunk one
upon another, among woollen Cloths; and without any other Art or Means, there
let them remain till the next Spring. Some Ladies who keep Silkworms, besides
the Pleasure they take in feeding and observing these wonderful Creatures, make
use of the Silk-Case, which they cut (after the outer Sleave or Down is off)
into artificial Flowers to wear in their Heads, which they themselves paint and
color, to imitate Nature.

Fig. 10. The Caterpillar from whence this curious BUTTERFLY was produced, was
of a fine scarlet Color, stripped with yellow: They are frequently found
crawling on the Vanilla Plant, and likewise on that called the Passion-Flower.
Merian says, she fed one of these Caterpillars till the latter end of May; it
then, according to the usual Transformation of the Butterfly Kind, changed into
an Aurelia, and on the seventh of June following, became the Butterfly in
Butterfly Fig. 10.
Fig: 11.
Fig. 13.
Fig. 12.
Fig. 14.
Fig. 15
the Plate, Fig. 11. the upper side of which was of a bright red, curiously
marked with black; the inner side of a dusky yellow, or pale saffron, richly
spotted with silver: The upper part of the inside of the Wings, next the Head,
was of a pale red with black Spots, studded with silver. These kind of
Butterflies are found in the Indies.

Fig. 12. Is a curious Insect of the BEETLE or CHAFER Kind: Its Back was black,
with a yellow mark cross the middle, in the form of a Halfmoon: The upper part
of the Wings, the Horns, Feelers, and two Joints of the Legs next the Body,
were all of a fine crimson Color; the ends of its Legs of a pale yellow; the
Body under the Wings of a bright yellow. This Insect turns its Horns back over
its Body, the points of which meet and make a kind of Circle. It was produced
from the Worm or Maggot, Fig. 13. which was found feeding on the Carduus, or
Thistle, growing in the Fields of Surinam.

Fig. 14. The great black BEETLE, or CHAFER, is produced from the Worm Fig. 15.
called in Dutch the Palmyt-Worm, because it gets its Food in the Palmer Tree.
The Worms are generated in the Trunk of this Tree in great abundance, which
feed on the Pith of it; they are a little bigger than Mites in Cheese, at
first, but at last grow to the bigness of the Figure represented in the Plate.
The Indians lay these Worms on the Fire, and when roasted eat them very
greedily, and think them a delicious Food.

Fig. 16. This Insect was produced from a Caterpillar of a bright red, and
white Color; with a black Spot on the last Crease or Partition of its Body;
the middle of which was remarkable for its little white Skin, shining like
Crystal; which as often as the Insect fetched Breath, did alternately rise and
fall again. On the 26th of August, one of these, according to the usual
Metamorphosis of Caterpillars, became the Aurelia, Fig. 17. on a Vine-Leaf,
prettily twisted and folded up; and on the 15th Day of September, that
beautiful Autumnal Fly ( Fig. 16) came from it, of a green Color, with six
white Spots on the upper part of its Body, and two on each side toward the
Tail. The under Wings were finely painted with a curious sky and red Color,
with a broad Border of pale yellow. This Insect is furnished with a very long,
and remarkable Proboscis, or Trunk, with which it sucks the Juice of the Grape,
and very dexterously fastens it in each Bunch; which is the Food it most
delights in, as does the Caterpillar in the Leaf of the Vine.

Fig. 16.
Chirelia Fig. 17.


Fig. 19.
Fig. 18.


Fig. 18. This Worm, or Caterpillar was found crawling on the Root of the white
Battattes; a Fruit of the Earth growing naturally about Surinam, which
notwithstanding are not eat: It produces a fine white Flower. By digging in a
Garden in the Month of April, some of these Caterpillars were discovered lying
at the Root of a Battattes, wrapped up in a narrow Compass: One of these had
just put on the form of a beautiful Chaser; others were less changed, but
approaching to the same. All as yet were manifestly soft, and whitish; but in a
few Hours after growing hard, they were all gradually changed into such a kind
of painted Chafer as is here represented Fig. 19. flying, which was of a deep
green, a crimson, with Stripes of yellow, etc. The Wings of which appeared in
Color much like unto a beautiful Tulip, variegated with curious Colors.

Fig. 20. This Insect, called in Dutch hell Wardelende Blad, as being a sort of
Locust; though Merian calls it a Glo-worm; is bred from an Egg, which after
natural Conjunction the Female lays in that place, in which afterward the
young Creatures to be produced can get their Food at hand; (a provident
Instinct implanted in the Parents of most, if not all Insects.) First these
little Creatures become Worms, or Caterpillars; which feeding grow and
increase; and when come to a complete bigness, they spin their Webs, and are
transformed into Aurelia's: some of which want a shorter, some a longer time to
attain their full vigor: All of which at last come out of their Shells, and
break forth moist, and their Wings very much twisted; but sometimes their Wings
grow dry, and are expanded in less than half an Hour, after they have stirred
and shaken themselves a little: so that they appear in every respect perfect as
represented in the Figure: which being thus changed, seem ten times larger than
the Aurelia's in which they were just now shut up.

Fig. 21. Is a kind of Locust found in the Indies: Merian says, her Negro, whom
she charged to search for Worms, Caterpillars, and other little Creatures,
every where in the Woods; brought her a Leaf wrapped up, which being carefully
opened, presented to her sight green Eggs, as big as Coriander Seed; from
which, in a few Days after, little black Creatures like small Pismires were
hatched; which grew by degrees till they arrived to their full bigness, as the
Figure shows: without being changed into Aurelia's, as the Glo-worms are, but
by the Growth and Increase of their Parts only. Their Wings are like a green
Leaf, strengthened with suchlike Fibers. There are several-sorts of these
Insects that differ in Color: Some are of a bright green, others of a duller
green, and others again of various and ash Color: Besides there are some to be
met with, whose Wings look like dried Leaves. Ignorant People have thought
these little Creatures themselves Fig: 20.
Fig: 21.
Fig. 24.
Fig. 22.
Fig. 23.
sprung from the Tree where they spin their Webs, because their Wings are
green, and have the form of a Leaf.

Fig. 22. The COCK-ROCH, or as Merian calls them the Kakkerlacae, are the most
remarkable of all Infects in America; because they every where do the
Inhabitants the greatest Damage, by destroying their Woollen and Linen, and
spoiling their Victuals and Drink: All manner of sweet things are their beloved
Food; for which reason they are much delighted with the Ananas, or Pineapple,
which for the richness of its Flavor, is justly called the King of Fruits.
These Insects lay their Eggs up in Heaps, which they wrap all round in a Bag,
or Web, after the manner of some Spiders: When their little Eggs are hatched,
and the young ones quite perfect, they break their Egg-shells with gnawing; and
the little Creatures run out with prodigious nimbleness: and as they are no
bigger when first hatched than Ants, they creep through Cracks and Key-holes,
into Boxes, Chests, etc. with all the ease imaginable, where they gnaw and
spoil all they can come at: till at last they grow to the bigness of the Figure
23. in the Plate, of a reddish brown Color, marked with white: having two very
long Horns; six hairy Legs, with two sharp Claws at their ends, like Forks: the
Head black, with a reddish Circle round the upper part. When the Creature is
arrived to this bigness, or full Growth; it sheds or casts its Skin; which Skin
bursting on its Back, comes forth the Cock-roch, Figure 24. which is the Insect
in its perfect State; with Wings sost and tender, at first whitish, after of a
reddish Color: The Head, Horns, legs, etc. both in shape and color the same
as before the Insect cast its Skin. Its Shell or cast Skin remaining, preserved
its primitive Form of an Insect.

Fig. 25. Is a large SPIDER seizing on the Humming-Bird. Of these kind of
Spiders, Merian tells us, she found many on the Guajava Tree, in which they
make Nests, representing a Caterpillar's Web: Their Bodies are covered all over
with Hair: they are besides furnished with sharp-pointed Teeth, with which they
give dangerous Wounds; infusing some liquid Matter from them at the same time.
Pismires are their common Food; in scarcity of which they take the young Birds
out of their Nests, and suck all the Blood out of their little Bodies. The
Humming-Bird that this Spider preys on, is thought to be the least of all
Birds; the Body, together with the Feathers, is scarce equal in bigness to a
Spanish Olive: They are very richly beautified with various Colors,
wonderfully resplendent, being finer than the very Peacock himself,-(see Page
19.) It makes its Nest in the Boughs of Trees, of the bigness of an Holland
Schilling; and lays very white Eggs, two for the most part, of an oval Figure,
not bigger than Pease. These Birds fly very swiftly, and suck Honey from the
sweet Flowers with their Wings expanded; that they hang in the Air as it were
motionless. In flying this little Bird makes a Noise like a Hornet, or Be;
hence it took its Name in English, of Humming-Bird. Merian says, she was told
these Birds are the Food of the Priests of Surinam, who are forbid to eat any
other Meat. Those kind of large Spiders, (Fig. 25.) shed their Coats now and
then, just as Caterpillars do, but are not observed to change into the flying
Kind.

Fig. 26. A Large Spider seizing on the Humming Bird


Fig. 31.
Fig. 26.
29.
30.
28.
27.


Fig. 26. This small Spider was of a scarlet Color: It was found in a Wood at
the beginning of June. They are likewise found in Gardens on the Bodies of
Trees; but are something smaller than those found in the Woods. These Spiders
are accounted venomous; and are the only Species of the Spider Kind that are
accounted so, excepting the Tarantula; Spiders being more frightful than
prejudicial to Mankind: This Spider, and all the rest described in this Book,
are drawn from the Life, and are of the natural bigness of the Spiders
themselves.

Fig. 27. Is a Spider very remarkable for its Legs and Feelers; each Joint of
the former appears as if it were placed in a Socket; the latter were globular
and hairy; and on the outer side of each, there was a bright knob of white,
incircled with yellow, which made it look as if a little Stone had been set
therein. It had eight Eyes, standing as they are placed over the Spider in the
Plate. This is a Male Spider, and was taken in a House in the Month of April:
Its Color was black where the Eyes stood; the other part adjoining to the
Belly was of a reddish chestnut; the upper side of the Belly of a yellowish dark
ash Color; and the Legs of a reddish Color.

Fig. 28. Is one of the Six-ey'd Spiders: It was taken in a Wood in the Month
of April. It was of a dark Color, with a broad Streak of light hair Color in
the middle of its Back; and a mark of the same light Color, in the form of a
Diamond, on the upper part of its Belly: The Legs were finely spotted. One of
these Spiders was taken at the beginning of June, with its Egg-bag under its
Belly.

Fig. 29. The small Long-legg'd Spider was so finely marked, that it is
impossible to describe it, either in Words or Colors; there being so fine a
Mixture of green, red, and black interchangeably put together in pretty Shapes;
the Legs were also curiously marked in the same manner: The Eyes were so small
as not to be discerned. It was taken on the Body-of a Tree in Cane-Wood, about
the middle of April.

Fig. 30. Is one of the House-Spiders: It had eight Eyes. Its Legs were finely
spotted with black, and from each Joint grew certain Hairs or Bristles: Its
Feelers were long and slender. The thick Web of this, and all the
House-Spiders, may be made use of, in the Cure of all Intermittent Fevers.

Fig. 31. Is one of the Jumping-Spiders: It had eight Eyes placed in a circular
form, as over the Head of the Spider in the Plate; and it is observable that
all the Spiders that have their Eyes standing in that form, catch their Prey by
jumping on it, like a Cat at a Mouse. It is a Creature extremely nimble in
moving any way it pleases: 'twas taken in a Garden. If you look on it with a
Microscope, it appears one of the most beautiful Spiders, that can possibly be
seen; there is so great a Variety of Marbling, in pretty Figures of several
Colors, viz. black, chestnut, red. dish, and white mixed all over the Back,
Belly, Legs and Feelers, as not to be expressed. It seems to the naked Eye to
be a greyish speckled Spider, being all over rough and hairy. The late
ingenious Dr. Hook, in his Micrography, gives the following diverting Account
of this particular Spider; as observed by the most accomplished Mr. Evelyn, in
his Travels in Italy. Of all the sorts of Insects, says he, there is none has
afforded me more Diversion than the small gray Jumping-Spider, prettily
bespeck'd with black Spots all over the Body, which the Microscope discovers to
be a kind of a Feathers like those on Butterflies Wings, or the Body of the
white Moth. It is very nimble by Fits, sometimes running, and sometimes
leaping, like a Grasshopper, then standing still, and setting itself on its
hinder Legs, will very nimbly turn its Body, and look round it self every way.
Such, says Mr. Evelin, I did frequently observe at Rome, which espying a Fly at
three or four Yards distance, upon the Balcony where I stood, would not make
directly to her, but crawl under the Rail, till being arrived right under her,
it would steal up, seldom missing its Aim: but if it chanced to want any thing
of being perfectly opposite, would, at first Peep, immediately slide down
again, till taking better notice, it would come the next time exactly upon the
Fly's Back: but, if this happened not to be within a competent Leap, then would
this Insect move so softly, as the very Shadow of the Dial seemed not to be
more imperceptible, unless the Fly moved; and then would the Spider move also
in the same proportion, keeping that just Time with her Motion, as if the same
Soul had animated both those little Bodies; and whether it were forwards,
backwards, or to either side, without at all turning her Body, like a
well-managed Horse: But if the capricious Fly took wing, and pitched upon
another Place behind our Huntress, then would the Spider whirle its Body so
nimbly about, as nothing could be imagined more swift; by which means, she
always kept the Head toward her Prey, though to appearance as immovable, as if
it had been a Nail driven into the Wood, till by that indiscernible progress,
being arrived within the Sphere of her reach, she made a fatal Leap (swift as
Lightning) upon the Fly, catching him in the Pole, where she never quitted hold
till her Belly was full, and then carried the Remainder home. I have beheld
them instructing their young ones how to hunt, which they would sometimes
discipline for not well observing; but when any of the old ones did miss a
Leap, they would run out of the Field, and hide themselves in their Crannies,
as ashamed, and not be seen abroad for four or five Hours after: for so long
have I watched the Nature of of this strange Insect, the Contemplation of whose
so wonderful Sagacity and Address has amazed me; nor do I find in any Chase
whatsoever, more Cunning and Stratagem observed. I have found some of these
Spiders in my Garden, when the Weather toward the Spring is very hot, but they
are nothing so eager of Hunting as they are in Italy.

The Spider Fig. 32. was beautifully streaked, and speckled with black all over
its Body and Legs. It had eight Eyes, standing as they are expressed over the
Spider in the Plate: At the End of its Tail there were little short things like
Feathers standing up, which it opened and shut like a Fan at pleasure. It was
taken in a Chamber-Window, about the middle of July.

Fig. 33. Was taken closed up in a Leaf, near to a Web it had made. It had
eight Eyes: The Back and Legs of this Spider looked transparent, like clear
Horn.

33 Spiders
34. Spiders
35 Spiders
32 Spiders
36 Spiders


The Spider Fig. 34. was curiously and regularly marked with Lines and Spots of
white; the Legs were yellowish and very hairy, and spotted with dark brown; the
Feelers were also spotted. It had six Eyes placed as they are expressed in the
Plate. It was found in a Garden, at the latter End of July.

The Spider Fig. 35. was of a Hair-colour, marked with a Spot and broad Line of
yellow: The upper side of the Belly had a Mark in the shape of a Cross, of a
yellow Color: The Legs were of a light Haircolour spotted with black, having
Bristles of the same Color on the Joints. It had six Eyes standing as they are
placed in the Plate. It was found in a Web in Bishops-Wood, at the Beginning of
September.

Fig. 36. The Carter, or Long-legg'd Spider, for two Particularities has very
few Creatures like it; the first, which is discoverable only by the Microscope,
is the curious Contrivance of his Eyes, of which he has only two, and those
placed upon the top of a small Pillar or Hillock, rising out of the middle of
the top of its Back, or rather the Crown of its Head; for they were fixed on
the very top of this Pillar, placed back to back, with the transparent Parts,
or Pupils, looking toward either side, but somewhat more forward than
backwards. These Eyes, to appearance, seemed to be of the very same Structure
with that of larger two-ey'd Creatures, seeming to have a very smooth and very
protuberant Cornea, and in the midst of it to have a very black Puple,
encompassed about with a kind of gray Iris. Whether it were able to move these
Eyes to and fro, I have not observed; but it is not very likely he should, the
Pillar or Neck seeming to be covered and stiffen'd with a crusty Shell; but
Nature, in all probability, has supplied that Defect, by making the Cornea so
very protuberant, and setting it so clear above the shadowing or obstructing of
its Prospect by the Body, that it is likely each Eye may perceive, though not
see distinctly, almost an Hemisphere; whence having so small and round a Body,
placed upon such long Legs, it is quickly able so to wind, and turn it, as to
see any thing distinct. This Creature, as do all other Spiders, differs very
much from most Insects in the Figure of its Eyes; for the best Microscope does
not discover its Eyes to be any ways knobb'd or pearl'd, like those of other
Infects. The second Peculiarity which is obvious to the Eye, is also very
remarkable, and that is the prodigious length of its Legs, in proportion to its
small round Body, and which are jointed, just like those of a Crab, but every
of the Parts are spun out prodigiously longer in proportion; each of these Legs
are terminated in a small Case or Shell, shaped almost like that of a
Muscle-shell, fastened to the Body in so admirable a manner, as does not a
little manifest the Wisdom of Nature in the Contrivance; for these long Leavers
(as I may so call them) of the Legs, having not the advantage of a long end on
the other side of the Hypomochlion, or Centers, on which part of the Legs move,
must necessarily require a vast Strength to move them, and keep the Body
balanced and suspended, insomuch, that if we should suppose a Man's Body
suspended by such a Contrivance, an hundred and fifty times the strength of a
Man would not keep the Body from falling on the Breast. To supply therefore
each of these Legs with its proper strength, Nature has allowed to each a large
Chest or Cell, in which is included a very large and strong Muscle; and thereby
this little Animal is not only able to suspend its Body upon less than these
eight, but to move it very swiftly over the tops of Grass and Leaves. This
Creature seems to throw its Body upon the Prey, not unlike a Jumping-Spider.
The whole Fabric, when viewed by the Microscope, appeared a very pretty one;
and could it have been dissected, as many Singularities might have been found
within it as without; perhaps, for the most part, not unlike the Parts of a
Crab, which this little Creature does in many things very much resemble. I omit
the Description of the Horns, of the Mouth which seemed like that of a Crabs;
the Speckledness of his Shell, which proceeded from a kind of Feathers, or
Hairs, and the hairiness of his Legs, his large Thorax and little Belly, and
the like, and shall only take notice, that the three Parts of the Body, namely
the Head, Breast and Belly, are in this Creature strangely confused, so that
it is difficult to determine which is which, as they are also in a Crab; and
indeed, this seems to be nothing else but an Air-Crab, being made more light
and nimble, proportionable to the Medium wherein it resides; and as Air seems
to have but one thousandth part of the Body of Water, so does this Spider seem
not to be a thousandth part of the Bulk of a Crab.

All kinds of Spiders seem to be Creatures of Prey, and to feed on other small
Infects; but their ways of catching them are very different: The Shepherd
Spider by running on his Prey; the Jumping Spider by leaping on it, other sorts
weave Nets, or Cobwebs, whereby they ensnare them; Nature having both fitted
them with Materials and Tools, and taught them how to work and weave their
Nets, and lie perdue, and to watch diligently to run on a Fly as soon as
entangled.

The Foot of a Spider is of an admirable and wonderful Mechanism, whereby he is
able to spin, weave, and climb, or run on his curious transparent Clue. Mr.
Albin, in his Natural History of Spiders, just published, has collected near
Two Hundred different sorts of these Infects. Their Thread or Web seems to be
spun out of some viscous kind of Excrement, lying in their Belly; which, though
soft when drawn out, is presently, by reason of its smallness, hardened and
dried by the ambient Air.

Of the TARANTULA.

Fig. 37. IS the TARANTULA from Baglivi; Fig. 38. from the Natural Spider in
Sir Hans Sloan's Collection. This Infect is a Spider of Apulia in Italy, of the
eight-ey'd Kind, and spins Webs: It has eight Legs, four on each side, and in
each Leg three Joints; from the Mouth proceed two Darts, in shape just like to
a Crab's Claws; these are solid, and very sharp, so that they can easily pierce
the Skin; and between those and the fore Legs there are two little Horns, or
Feelers; which it is observed to move very briskly when it approaches to its
Prey.

This, as other Spiders do, propagates its Species by laying Eggs, which are
very numerous; so that there are found sometimes in the Female, when dissected,
Tarantula Fig. 37.
Tarantula Fig: 38.
a hundred or more; and these are hatched partly by the Heat of the Mother,
partly by that of the Sun, in about twenty or thirty Days time. In the Summer
Months, especially when the Heats are greatest, as in the Dog Days, the
Tarantula creeping among the Corn in the Fields, bites the Mowers and
Passengers. In the Winter it lurks in Holes, and is scarcely seen; and if it
does bite then, it is not venomous, neither does it induce any ill Symptoms.
But in the hot Weather, although the Pain of its Bite is at first no greater than
what is caused by the Sting of a Be, yet the Part quickly after is discolored
with a livid, black, or yellowish Circle, and raised to an inflamed Swelling;
the Patient within a few Hours is seized with a violent Sickness, Difficulty of
Breathing, universal Faintness, and sometimes Trembling, with a Weakness of the
Head; being asked what the Ail is, makes no Reply, or with a querulous Voice
and melancholy Look, points to his Breast, as if the Heart was most affected.

During this mournful Scene, all the usual Medicines applied to venomous Bites,
and Cordials, are of no service; for, notwithstanding their repeated use, the
Patient growing by degrees more melancholy, stupid, and strangely timorous, in
a short time expires; unless Music be called to his assistance, which alone,
without the help of Medicine, performs the Cure. For, at the first Sound of the
Musical Instrument, although the Sick lie, as it were, in an Apoplectick Fit,
they begin by degrees to move their Hands and Feet, till at last they get up,
and fall to dancing with wonderful Vigor, at first for three or four Hours;
then they are put to Bed, refreshed from their Sweating, for a short time, and
repeat the Exercise with the same Vehemence, perceiving no Weariness or
Weakness from it, but professing they grow stronger and nimbler the more they
dance.

At this sport they usually spend twelve Hours a Day, and it continues three or
four Days; by which time they are generally freed from all their Symptoms,
which do nevertheless attack 'em again about the same time the next Year; and
if they do not take care to prevent this Relapse by Music, they fall into a
Jaundice, want of Appetite, universal Weakness, and such like Diseases; which
are every Year increased, if Dancing be neglected, till at last they prove
incurable. As Music is the common Cure, so they who are bitten are pleased,
some with one sort of it, some with another; one is raised with a Pipe, another
with a Timbrel; one with a Harp, another with a Fiddle; so that the Musicians
make sometimes several Essays before they can accommodate their Art to the
Venom; but this is constant and certain, notwithstanding this Variety, that
they all require the quickest and briskest Tunes, and are never moved by a
slow, dull Harmony.

While the Persons affected are Dancing, they lose in a manner the use of all
their Senses; like so many Drunkards, do many ridiculous and foolish Tricks;
talk and act obscenely and rudely; take great Pleasure in playing with
Vine-Leaves, with naked Swords, and red Cloths, and the like; and on the other
hand cannot bear the sight of any thing black; so that if any By-stander happen
to appear in that Color, he must immediately withdraw, or otherwise they
Relapse into their Symptoms with as much Violence as ever.

Fig. 41. American Ants
Fig: 40. Wood Ant Magnified


It may afford some Light toward understanding the Nature of this Poison, to
observe that Apulia is the hottest Part of all Italy, lying Eastward, and
having all the Summer long but very little Rain to temper the Heats; so that
the Inhabitants, as one of that Country observes, do breathe an Air, as it
were, out of a fiery Furnace: Hence their Temperament is dry, and adust, as
appears by their being generally lean, passionate, impatient, ready to Action,
quickwitted, very subject to inflammatory Distempers, Phrensies, Melancholy,
and the like; upon which account there are more mad People in this, than in all
the other Parts of Italy. As to the return of the Symptoms the next Year, that
is owing to the same excessive Heat in those Months, acting again upon the
small Remains of the venomous Ferment.

Fig. 39. IS the Large WOOD-ANT; Fig. 40. the same Magnified; Fig. 41. the
American Ants, as described by Merian, seizing on a Cockroch. This little
Animal is that great Pattern of Industry and Frugality that Solomon sends the
Sluggard to, that he may learn by the Example of the Ant; who borrows of none,
and yet is not in danger to starve; laying up in store, by a notable Diligence,
sufficient Provision in due Season against a time of Need. Dr. Hook, in his
Micrography, has some pretty Observations on this little Creature. The Ant,
says he, is of a dark brown, or reddish Color, with long Legs, on the hinder
of which it would stand up, and raise its Head as high as it could above the
Ground, that it might stare the further about it, just after the same manner as
the Hunting-Spider is observed to do: and putting my Finger toward them, they
have at first all run toward it, till almost at it; and then they would stand
round about it, at a certain distance, and smell, as it were, and consider
whether they should any of them venture any further; till one more bold than
the rest venturing to climb it, all the rest, if I would have suffered them,
would have immediately followed: Many such other seemingly rational Actions I
have observed in this little Vermin, with much Pleasure. I have observed a very
large Kind, that inhabited under the Roots of a Tree, from whence they would
sally out in great Parties, and make most grievous Havoc of the Flowers and
Fruits, in the ambient Garden, and return back again very expertly, by the same
Ways and Paths they went. It has a large Head, at the upper end of which were
two protuberant Eyes, pear^^d like those of a Fly, but smaller: Out of the
Nose, or foremost Part, issued two Horns, differing from those of a blue Fly,
though indeed they seem to be both the same kind of Organ, and to serve for a
kind of Smelling: Beyond these were two indented Jaws, which he opened
sideways, and was able to gape them asunder very wide; and the ends of them
being armed with Teeth, which meeting went between each other, it was able to
grasp and hold an heavy Body, three or four times the Bulk and Weight of its
own Body. It has only six Legs, shaped like those of a Fly, which is an
Argument that it is a winged Infect; and though I could not perceive any sign
of them in the middle part of its Body, which seemed to consist of three Joints
or Pieces; yet it is known that there are of them that have long Wings, and fly
up and down in the Air. The whole Body was cased over with a very strong
Armor, and the Belly was covered likewise with Multitudes of small white
shining Bristles; the Legs, Horns, Head, and middle Parts of its Body were
bestuck with Hairs also, but smaller and darker. In America, as Merian writes,
there are very large Ants or Pismires, which will in one Night strip whole
Trees of their Leaves. They have two crooked Teeth, cutting one upon another,
like a Pair of Pincers; by means of these, they cut the Leaves of the Trees so
that they fall to the Ground, and the Tree looks bare and naked; just as it
looks in the Winter in Europe: Thousands of Ants waising for this Booty, catch
up the Leaf as it falls on the Earth, to carry to their Homes; not so much for
their own Food as their young ones, as yet but little Worms. This whole
Proceeding seems, as if it were, done by a mutual Agreement amongst themselves;
that one Party should go up in the Tree to cut the Leaves, whilst the other
bears an equal share of the Labor in carrying them to their Cells. These Ants,
when they are arrived to their full Growth, shed their Coats, or Skins, in like
manner as do some other of the Insect Kind; and become winged: In this state
they lay their Eggs just as the Gnats do; which are afterward hatched into
little Worms, or Mites; and for the Preservation of this their Offspring it is,
that the provident Ants are so eager and vigilant to feed and nourish them: So
great is their Concern in this particular, as appears by their indefatigable
Toil, that they may very justly be esteemed as great Patterns of Tenderness and
Care of their Young, as they are for Industry and good Economy. These
industrious little Creatures make Caverns in the Earth of a great Depth, so
artificially contrived, that one would affirm it to be a piece of Man's
Ingenuity. These Ants, they say, have a perpetual Enmity with the Spiders, and
all other Infects of that Country, in the West Indies, where they are found.
When they fally out of their Caverns, which they do once a Year, an innumerable
Multitude of them comes forth, which enter Peoples Houses, range from one Room
to another; and kill diverse small Creatures they meet with, by sucking them to
Death; that large Spider, Page 62. was destroyed by this means in a Moment
almost; it was beset with such Heaps of 'em, that it could not disengage, and
free itself from Danger; it is said, that even Men themselves must fly for it,
they make their way so in Troops from one Room to another; and having
ransacked, and as it were swept the whole House, they make to the next; till at
last, they go back again to their Holes.

Fig. 42. Is the Blue FLY in its natural bigness; Fig. 43. the same Magnified.
This kind of Fly is a very beautiful Creature, and has many things about it
very notable. The Head, Eyes, Wings, and Feet, are full of Ornaments and
Contrivances; and afford no less pleasing an Object to the Mind to speculate
upon, than to the Eye to behold; there is a most admirable and curious
Mechanism in the Foot of this little Animal; whereby the Flies are enabled to
walk against the sides of Glass, perpendicularly upwards, and to contain
themselves in that Posture as long as they please; nay, to walk and suspend
themselves against the under Surface of many Bodies, as the Cieling of a Room,
or the like; and this with as great a seeming Facility and Firmness, as if they
had a natural Tendency upwards, as we are sure they Fig. 43. Blue Fly
42
have the contrary; for they cannot make themselves so light, as to stick or
suspend themselves on the under Surface of a Glass well polished and cleansed;
their Suspension therefore is wholly to be ascribed to some mechanical
Contrivance in their Feet; which what it is, being too long for my present
Design, I refer the ingenious Reader to Hooke's Micrography, where this
particular, as well as some others no less curious, are largely and
philosophically treated of All the hinder part of the Body of this Fly, is
covered with a most curious blue shining Armor, looking exactly like a
polished piece of Steel, brought to that blue Color by Annealing; all which
Armor is very thick bestuck with abundance of tapering Bristles, such as grow
on its Back, as is visible enough by the Figure. It is a Creature active and
nimble, so as there are very few Creatures like it, whether bigger or smaller,
insomuch that it will escape and avoid a small Body, though coming on it exceeding
swiftly; and if it sees any thing approaching it which it fears, it presently
squats down, as it were, that it may be the more ready for its rise. Nor is it
less hardy in the Winter, than active in the Summer, enduring all the Frosts,
and surviving till the next Summer, notwithstanding the bitter cold of our
Climate. One of these put in Spirit of Wine, was very quickly seemingly killed,
and both its Eyes and Mouth began to look very red; but upon the taking it out,
and suffering it to lie three or four Hours, and heating it with the Sun beams
cast through a Burningglass, it again revived, seeming, as it were, to have
been all the intermediate time dead Drunk, and after certain Hours to grow
fresh again and sober. The Eyes of a Fly are placed in two Clusters; and the
number of the Pearls or Hemispheres in the Clusters of a Drone Fly, according
to Dr. Hooke's Calculation, with the help of a Glass, was near fourteen
thousand: which he judged by numbering certain rows of them several ways, and
casting up the whole Contents, accounting each Cluster to contain about seven
thousand; three thousand of which were of a larger size, and four thousand to
be the number of the smaller Pearls. Though this may seem strange, other Insects,
he says, he has observed to have yet a greater number of Eyes, as the
Dragon-Fly, or Adderbolt. In living Flies, he has observed, that when any small
Mote or Dust, which flies up and down the Air, chances to light upon any part
of these knobs of the Eyes, as it is sure to stick firmly to it and not fall,
the Fly presently makes use of his two fore Feet, instead of Eyelids, with
which, as with two Brooms or Brushes, they being all bestuck with Bristles, he
often sweeps or brushes off whatever hinders the Prospect of any of its
Hemispheres; and then, to free his Feet from that Dirt, he rubs them one
against the other, cleansing them in the same manner as I have observed those
that card Wool to cleanse their Cards, by placing their Cards so as the Teeth
of both look the same way, and then rubbing them one against another. In the
very same manner do they brush and cleanse their Bodies and Wings: Other
Creatures have other Contrivances for the cleansing and clearing their Eyes.

Fig. 44. Book-worm


Fig. 44. Is the small silver-colour'd BOOK-WORM, Magnified. As among greater
Animals there are many that are scaled, both for Ornament and Defense, so are
there not wanting such also among the lesser Bodies of Insects, whereof this
little Creature gives us an Instance. It is a small white silvershining Worm or
Moth, found much conversant among Books and Papers; and is supposed to be that
which corrodes and eats Holes through the Leaves and Covers: It appears to the
naked Eya, a small glittering Pearl-colour'd Moth, which upon the removing of
Books and Papers in the Summer, is often observed to scud, and pack away to
some lurking Cranney, where it may the better protect itself from any appearing
Dangers. Its Head appears big and blunt, and its Body tapers from it toward
the Tail, smaller and smaller, being shaped almost like a Carrot. The Body is
divided into fourteen several Partitions, being the appearance of so many
several Shells, or Shields that cover the whole Body; every of these Shells are
again covered or tiled over with a multitude of thin transparent Scales, which,
from the multiplicity of their reflecting Surfaces, make the whole Animal
appear of a perfect Pearl-colour. This Insect was furnished on either side of
its Head with a Cluster of Eyes; and each of these Clusters were beset with a
row of small Bristles, much like the Cilia or Hairs on the Eyelids; and,
perhaps, they served for the same purpose. It had two long Horns; curiously
ring'd or knobb'd, having at each knob small Hairs, or Bristles, here and there
dispersed among them: besides these, it had two shorter Horns, or Feelers,
which were knotted and fringed, just as the former. It had three Tails, in
every particular resembling the two longer Horns that grow out of the Head. The
Legs of it were scaled and hair'd just like the rest, but are not expressed in
this Figure, the Creature being entangled all in Glue, and so the Legs of this
appeared not through the Glass, which looked perpendicularly upon the Back. The
Body is beset with sharp-pointed Bristles, like Spears. Dr. Hook says, This
Animal probably seeds upon the Paper and Covers of Books, and perforates in
them several small round Holes. Mr. Albin calls it the Cloth Worm, or Moth, and
says it is the very Creature that eats the woollen Cloth; and that it is
produced from a small gray speckled Moth that flies a-nights, and creeps in
among woollen Cloths, and there lays her Eggs, which are hatched in their
Season by the natural Heat of the Woollen; upon which these little Creatures
feed, till they change into a flying Insect like their Animal Parent. To
prevent the Havoc that this little Creature (which is one of the Teeth of
Time) is wont to make among woollen Cloths, etc. They should sometimes be air'd
and brushed, before the warm Season comes on for the Eggs to hatch, which will
absolutely destroy the Eggs, and preserve the Garments.

Fig. 45. Book-spider


Fig. 45. Is the Crab-like Insect, or BOOK-SPIDER. Reading one Day in
September, I chanced to observe a very small Creature creep over the Book I was
reading, very slowly; having a Microscope by me, I observed it to be a Creature
of a very unusual Form, and that not less notable, as the Figure represents.
Its natural bigness was about the size of a large Mite, or somewhat longer; it
had ten Legs, eight of which were topt with very sharp Claws, and were those
upon which he walked, seeming shaped much like those of a Crab, which in many
other things also this little Creature resembled; for the two other Claws,
which were the foremost of all the ten, were exactly formed in the manner of
Crabs or Lobsters Claws; which this little Animal did open and shut at
pleasure: It seemed to make use of those two Claws both for Feelers and
Holders; for in its motion it carried these aloft extended before, moving them
to and fro, just as a man blindfolded would do his Hands, when he is fearful of
running against a Wall; and if I put an Hair to it, it would readily take hold
of it with these Claws, and seem to hold it fast. The whole Body was cased over
with Armour-shells, as is usual in all those Kinds of crustaceous Creatures,
especially about their Bellies, and seemed of three kinds; the Head seemed
covered with a kind of scaly Shell, the Thorax with two smooth Shells, or
Rings; and the Belly with eight knobb'd ones. I could not certainly find,
whether it had under these last Shells any Wings, but I suspect the contrary;
for I have not found any winged Infect with eight Legs, two of those Legs being
always converted into Wings; and, for the most part, those that have but six,
have Wings. This Creature, though I could never meet with more than one of
them, and so could not make so many Examinations of it as otherwise I would, I
did notwithstanding, by reason of the great Curiosity that appeared to me in
its shape, delineate it, to show that, in all like-lihood, Nature had crowded
together into this very minute Infect, as many, and as excellent Contrivances,
as into the Body of a very large Crab, which exceeds it in Bulk, perhaps, some
Millions of times: It being a general Rule in Nature's Proceedings, that where
she begins to display any Excellency, if the Subject be further searched into,
it will manifest, that there is not less Curiosity in those Parts which our
single Eye cannot reach, than in those which are more obvious. [ Hooke's
Microgr.]

Fig. 46. The WEVIL, or CORN-BEETLE; Fig. 47. the same Magnified. This little
Creature was all over of a fine reddish brown Color. Upon the Head, and upper
part of the Body adjoining; and likewise upon the lower part of its Wings, were
regularly placed diverse black Spots, encircled with a resplendent white,
shining like Silver, and a small Speck of the same silver Color, placed
exactly in the middle of each of those black Spots: It had a very remarkable
Proboscis, or Trunk, long, and oddly shaped, furnished with a Pair of sharp
Forceps. Out of the end of this Trunk, the little Creature blowed a small
white, shining Bladder; with which it moistens the Corn before it eats it: This
Bladder the Insect could put out or draw in at pleasure, as might Fig. 47 Corn
Beetle magnified
Fig. 46 Wevil, or Corn Beetle
Fig: 48. American Frog
Fig: 49. Water Beetle
be very plainly observed by the Microscope. Its Horns or Feelers were knobb'd,
as if they were turned by a Turner, tipped at the ends with white, shining like
Silver. These Infects seed upon almost all kind of Grain; amongst which they
breed, and do very great Damage, especially if the Corn be kept any
considerable time. Such Ships as go long Voyages often experience this; it
being very common to have their Corn overrun with the Wevils. Though this
little Animal in its natural bigness scarce equals a Grain of Wheat, yet the
Microscope discovers it to be a Creature of great Curiosity, in the Frame and
Structure of its Parts; as the Figure expresses, which was taken from the Life,
and therefore not unworthy of a Description.

Fig. 48. Of these kind of FROGS, Meriana says, she saw several swimming in the
Water at Surinam. Their Feet was furnished with a little Ball at the end of
each Toe, by the singular Contrivance of Nature; that being so supported, they
could not only swim, but also walk over the marshy and muddy Waters: They are
of a brown, and pale green Color intermixed together, as if they were watered
with it. These Frogs leave their Spawn on the Banks of the Waters; where such
Persons as are curious to observe the Change of these Creatures, gather it, and
lay it in an earthen Vessel filled with Water, upon a green Turf, at the
bottom: The Spawn or Seed appears as a blackish Point, enclosed in a kind of
white Glue; in which it lives, and by degrees increases its Motion, till about
the eighth Day; after that they have Tails, and the little things begin to swim
in the Water, but they and shapeless young Frogs': In a few Days more their
Eyes appear, and a little after their two hind Feet; the two fore Feet likewise
coming out of the Skin in about eight Days more: After which their Tails being
rotted, drop off; and the Cremures become four-footed, and complete Frogs,
often seen scampering out of the Waters on the Land. But we must obsverve, that
both the Water, and the Turf that the Spawn is put into, must be shifted every
now and then; and the little Creatures, as soon as ever we perceive them to
move, ought to be nourished in the Water with a bit of Bread.

Fig 49. Is a Water Insect that preys upon young Frogs, which the Inhabitants
of Surinam, where it is found, call a WATER SCROPION: It seems to be rather to
the Beetle kind; in the Month of May it changes to a flying Infect.

Having had occassion to make mention of Surinam, in some of the Descriptions
of Infects; It may not be improper to infrom the Reader, that Surinam is a
Dutch Settlement in Guiana, upon the Contient of America. It first belonged to
the French, who built a Fort there; from them the English took it; and
afterward the Dutch took it from the English; in whose Hands it now remains.
Madam Meriana, a Gentlewoman of the Dutch National, (if I am rightly informed)
published a Natural History, with curious Figures, of the Insects, etc. found
in and about Surinam, from which Book the Indian Flies contained in this
Treatise are copied.

A Branch of the Coffee Tree


BOOK the Fifth. Of PLANTS, FRUITS, and FLOWERS.
Thy Plants are an Orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant Fruits, Camphire,
with Spikenard: Spikenard and Saffron, Calanius and Cinnamon, with all Trees of
Frankincense, Myrrh and Atoes, with all the chief Spices. SLOMON'S Song, IV.
13, 14.
COFFEE is the Fruit of a Tree which grows in Arabia Fleix, and is brough to us
from Mocha. The Flower of this Tree is like the white Jesfamine Flower, and the
Leaf like the Bay-leaf: The Coffee Tree is propagated by Seeds, which should be
sown soon after they are gathered from the Tree; for if they are kept but a
short time out of the Ground, they will not grow; which is the chief Reason
that this Tree has not been spread into more different Countries: for the Seeds
will not keep good long enough to be sent to any distant Place: So that in
order to cultivate this Plant in any Part of the World, it is absolutely
necessary to have it carried thither growing. But as this Difficulty is now
overcome, by the quantity of these Trees there are now growing both in Europe
and America; so we may expect to be furnished with them from many different
Parts, but especially from the Caribbee Islands, where the Trees are found to
succeed as well as in their native Soil; but whether the Coffee produced in the
West Indies, will prove as good as that brought from Mocha, Time will discover.
The Berries of this Plant are commonly ripe with us in April. Coffee is of an
excellent drying Quality; it comforts the Brain, eases Pains of the Head,
suppresses Vapors, dries up Crudities in the Stomach; prevents Sleepiness
after eating, and gives Life and Gaiety to the Spritis, etc.

TEA is the Leaf of a small Shrub, which grows plentifully in several Parts of
the East Indies: It is brought over dried from China, Japan, and Siam. These
Leaves they gather in the Spring, at which time they are little and tender, and
of the shape of the Figure in the Plate. It bears a Flower composed of five
white Leaves, formed like a Rose, and some Stamina; which, when gone, is
succeeded by a thick Cod, like a Hazel-nut, of a Chesnut-colour, in which is
found two or three Nuts or Berries, which contain in each a little luscious
Almond, of an ill Taste. The Root is fibrous, and spreads upon the Surface of
the Earth. This Shrub flourishes equally in rich or poor Ground. The Tea which
the English, Dutch, etc. bring over in curled or twisted Leaves, is thus
prepared by the Natives of the Country; who, after they have gathered it, dry
it gently before the Fire, and the Leaves in drying curl up, just as we have
them brought over. In buying Tea, choose that which is greenest, the best
scented, and which is as little broke into Dust or small Powder as possible.
They say, the chief reason that Tea is become such a Commodity throughout
Europe, is because the Duth, etc. change Sage for it, which the Japonese and
Chinese are great Lovers of: Which is not without Probability, since we have
not a Plant endowed with more Virtues than Sage, especially that sort, which Tea
Coca, or Chocolate Tree
for its singular Goodness is called Sage of Virtue among us; and doubtless, it
would be much more valued here, if it grew in India, or as far off; but because
it is common, we take little account of it, notwithstanding the Latin Proverb,
Cur morictur homo, cum crescit salvia in horto? Why will any Body die that has
Sage in his Garden? So that we need not wonder if the Chinese, etc. exchange
Tea for it. Tho! this Liquor is more used for Pleasure than for any Medicinal
Purpose, yet are there a great many good Qualities attributed to it.

The COCAO Tree, that bears the Chocolate Nut, much resembles our Heart-Cherry
Tree; but at its full Growth spreads to a greater breadth in compass, and is
something loftier: It Is well supplied with Leaves, that resemble those of the
Orange Tree; but are longer, and more sharp-pointed: It is always flourishing,
especially toward the two Solstices; for as the Leaves only fall off
successively, and as others grow again; this Tree never appears naked. The
Blossoms are regular, and like a Rose, but very small and without Smell: Every
Blossom is joined to the Tree by a slender Stalk, and leaves in falling off
long stringly Filaments, which are green, from which a yellow pointed Fruit is
formed, of the size of our Melons; which adhere to the thick Boughs or
Branches, not admitting of any Intermedium, or Stem, as Apples do. Each Fruit
contains from fifteen to twenty-five little Nuts, or Almonds; they are each of
them covered with a yellowish thin Skin; which being separated, a tender
Substance appears, which is divided into several unequal Particles, that are
olly, of good Nourishment, and leave a certain sharpness upon the Palate. These
Trees grow in all the Spanish West Indies, Jamaica, etc. They commonly bear
Fruit within seven Years space, or less, after their first Plantation; though in
the Interim they are sometimes twice or thrice removed, and great Care is taken
to secure them with Shades, that they may not be injured by the over-powerful
Heat of the scorching Sun, of which they are not in danger, when they once
become great; for being planted in Ranks and regular Walks, shady Plantane
Trees, etc. are ranged with them; and one shelters the other, both from the
parching Sun and boisterous Wind. As it is a Tree of singular Beauty, having
large, broad, ablong green Leaves, which fall back, and hang like so many
Shields, to preserve and defend the tender Fruit; so is it likewise a Tree of
great Profit to the Owner, arising from its most desirable Fruit, which grows
after an admirable manner in Cods; studded, as it were in the very Body of the
Tree, from the Earth upwards, as well as the Arms and large Boughs: But the
Fruit never grows at the Ends of the small Branches. And herein we may easily
apprehend, that if Nature had placed such bulky Fruit at the ends of the
Branches, their great weight must necessarily break them; and the Fruit would
fall before it come to Maturity. The Nuts, they say, among the Indians and
Spaniards, go for current Money, even in those Countries where Gold and Silver
are naturally produced; being to them Food and Raiment, Riches and Delight, all
at once. It seems almost unnecessary to tell the Reader, that the Use of these
Nuts is to make that well-known Liquor called Chocolate, every one being
acquainted with it.

The SUGAR-CANE grows plentifully in many Parts of the West Indies, especially
the Caribbee Islands, as Barbados, Jamaica, Nevis, etc. This Plant bears on
each Joint a Cane of five or six Foot high, adorned with long straight green
Leaves, much like to some Flags, or Flower-de-luces, but not so broad, and
carries on its top a silver-colour'd Flower, like a plume of Feathers. These
Canes are not hollow; but the Stalk is stuffed with a porous Substance, moist
and sweet in taste. When they come to Maturity, which the Planters know by
several Signs, as well as we know when our Harvest is ready; they cut the Canes
down at or above the first Joint from the Ground; laying them in Heaps, as we
usually lay our Corn in Harvest time: then they clear them from their Leaves,
and bind the Stalks in Bundles. The Sugar is made, The Sugar Cane
Nutinegs and Mace
by pressing the Canes through the Rollers of a Mill, from whence there runs a
great quantity of pleasant Juice; which being put into Boilers, the watery part
is by the force of the Fire evaporated, till it comes to a Consistency: After
which they cast it into a Mixture made of certain Ingredients, fit to cleanse
and prepare it for graining. All the time it is boiling, they take off the
Scum, which rises in great quantities, until it be fit to empty into Coolers,
that is, till it arrives to its just Body: From the Coolers, it is again
shifted into earthen Pots, with Holes in their Bottoms, and other Pots they
call Drips, under them, for receiving the Molosses; which in about a Month's
time will be separated from the Sugar; this is then knocked out of the Pots,
and put into Casks or Hogsheads, for Transportation. The Sugar-Cane in England
is very tender, and cannot be preserved without a Stove; it is kept as a great
Curiosity in the Gardens of such as love a Variety of Plants, as being the
Plant from whence the Sugar is produced.

NUTMEGS are of two sorts; distinguished by Male and Female; the latter is the
best, and most commonly used; The Male, which is a long and large Nut, is
seldom used: The Female, which is the rounder and lesser Nut, is that generally
sold in the Grocers Shops; and the Trees which bear the Female, or common
Nutmegs, grow not but in cultivated or improved Lands; but the Males, or long
Nutmegs, grow in Woods and Forests, which makes the Dutch call them Wild
Nutmegs. The Tree that produces the common, or best sort of Nutmegs, is as
large as a Pear Tree, with Leaves shaped like those of the Peach, but much
smaller: The Blossom is in the shape of a Rose, of a pleasant Smell; after the
Flower is fallen off, a Fruit appears, as large as a green Wall-nut; the Nutmeg
is the Kernel of this Fruit, which is covered with two Barks; the first is very
thick, and pulled off when the Fruit is ripe; the second is much thinner and
finer, of a reddish Color inclining to yellow: It is separated from the Nutmeg
in order to dry, and is what we call Mace. When the Nutmegs are separated from
their Barks, they dry and preserve them. The Nutmeg-Trees grow plentifully in
the great Island of Banda, in Asia, and in several other Islands in the East
Indies, belonging to the Dutch; it being a Commodity which none but themselves
are Masters of. These Isles, they say, are so stocked with Nutmeg-Trees, that
it is almost incredible; and the Climate so good, that the Trees are always
laden with this rich Fruit; and that they have three Crops a Year, viz. in
April, August, and December. This Tree, according to Mr. Tavernier, is not
planted, but grows by means of certain Birds, which swallow the Nutmegs whole,
and throw them up again, without having digested them; and the Nutmeg being
then covered with a viscous and gluey Matter, and being cast upon the Ground,
they take Root, and produce a Tree, which grows just as if it had been planted
after the manner of others.

CINNAMON is a thin Bark, taken from a Tree about the height of our Willow,
which bears a Leaf shaped like the Indian Leaf called Malabathrum. The Flowers
grow in little Cups of a light blue Color, and odoriferous, succeeded by a
Fruit of the shape and size of a small Olive, green at first, but growing black
as it ripens. The Tree, which produces Cinnamon, grows without Culture in the
Island of Ceylon, and the Trade thereof is entirely in the Hands of the Dutch,
who are Masters of the Coasts of that Island. There are nine or ten different
sorts of Cinnamon; the best sort, which grows in great plenty in Ceylon, and is
peculiar to that Island, is called by the Natives Rasse coronde, that is,
sharp, sweet Cinnamon: It is exported yearly by the Dutch East India Company,
who have ordered under several Penalties that no other sort be mixed with it.
All the several sorts of Cinnamon Trees, the best as well as the rest, must
grow a certain number of Years, before the Bark is fit to be taken off. Those
which grow in Valleys where the Soil is a sine whitish Sand, will be ripe in
five Years: others which stand in a wet slimy Soil, must grow seven or eight
Years; those are later Cinnamon Tree
which grow in the shade of other larger Trees; and their Bark has not that
Sweetness and agreeable Taste, observable in the Bark of those which grow in a
white sandy Ground, where with little wet they stand fully exposed to the Sun;
but it is rather of a bitterish Taste, something astringent, and smells like
Camphire. If the Bark be fresh taken off, that Juice which remains in the Tree
has a bitterish Taste, not unlike that of Cloves: On the contrary, if you
taste the inner Membrane of the Bark when fresh taken off, you will find it most
exquisitely sweet, and extremely agreeable to the Tasle; whereas the outer part
of the Bark differs but very little in Taste from that of the common Trees;
which shows plainly that all the Sweetness of it is owing only to the inner
Membrane. But when the Bark is laid in the Sun in order to its being dried and
wound up, this oily and agreeable Sweetness of the inner Membrane diffuses
itself throughout the whole outward part of it, (which however has been first
stripped while yet upon the Tree of its outermost greenish Coat) and imbues it
so strongly, that for the fragrancy of its Smell and the sweetness of its Taste
it is coveted all the World over. The Bark may remain upon some Trees, without
losing its Sweetness and Virtue, fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen Years, according
to the quality of the Soil they stand in; but after that time it loses by
degrees its agreeable Sweetness, and tastes stronger of Camphire: Besides, it
is then grown so thick, that if it be laid in the Sun it will no longer shrink
and wind itself up, but remain flat. In order to account for the vast quantity
of Cinnamon that has been, and is still yearly exported from Ceylon; several
Authors have affirmed, that when the Bark has been stripped off the Cinnamon
Trees, it grows again in four or five Years, and becomes fit to be stripped a
second time: but this is utterly false; for though the Trees, after the Bark has
been once taken off, are cut down to the very Ground, yet the Root quickly
pushes forth new Shoots, which grow up and ripen in five, six, seven, or eight
Years, some sooner, some later, and then yield their Bark. Thus far the old
Roots are instrumental to the Growth and Plenty of Cinnamon Trees, but their
Fruit likewise contributes very much toward the same end: And it is
particularly owing to a certain kind of wild Doves, which from their eating the
Fruit of this Tree they call Cinnamon-Eaters, that they grow so plentifully in
this Island; for the Doves, when they fetch Food for their young ones, disperse
vast quantities of the Fruit all over the Fields, which occasions the Rise of
many thousand young Trees. The Oil drawn from Cinnamon by Fire, is reckoned one
of the strongest Cordial Medicines: The Camphire which comes out of the Root,
is likewise of very great use in several Distempers; as are also the Oil of
Camphire, a very costly thing; the Leaves of the Tree, and the Oil distilled
out of them; and lastly the Fruits, with their Oil. In short, there is no part
of the Cinnamon Tree, but what is of some singular Use in Physic.

CLOVES are the Footstalk of the Flowers of the Clove Tree, plucked before
they are full blown: When the Fruit begins to appear, their Color is of a
whitish green; afterward they grow red; and at last, when ripe, of a dark
brown. These Trees grew plentifully in the Molucca Islands, till the Dutch, not
being able to hinder the English, and some other Nations from going thither,
and bringing away Cloves from thence, thought it advisable, to make themselves
entirely Masters of that Commodity, to pluck up all the Trees, and transport
them to an Island of their own, called Ternate; by which means other Nations
are forced to purchase that valuable Merchandise from them. There is no other
Art used with the Cloves after they are plucked from the Tree, but to let them
dry in the open Fields exposed to the heat of the Sun, and after that to keep
them carefully from the Air. There is also described by some Authors, the Royal
Clove; so called from bearing on its top a sort of Crown; for which reason the
King of the Country keeps it in his own Possession; and because there is 2
common fabulous Opinion; that the other Trees bow toward this as their King.

Clove Tree


Pepper


The Black East-Indian PEPPER, is the Fruit of a climbing Plant we commonly
call a Creeper; and grows in small Clusters, or Bunches, like those of our
Currants. The Seeds are small, round, and green at first; but the ripe fresh
Fruit is about the size of a large Current, and of a red Color, which in
drying turns to black. They say, the common White Pepper is only the Black
stripped of its outer Skin. This is done by first steeping it in Sea Water,
then drying it, and rubbing it in Sand. There is however another kind of
Pepper, which is naturally white, but in all other respects is like the Black.
The English and Dutch bring from the East Indies three sorts of Black Pepper,
which differ not one from the other, but according to the Places where they
grow: the finest is that of Malabar. The Tree or Bush that bears the Jamaica
Pepper, grows almost after the same manner as the Barberry Tree, but not so
lofty; and besides without Prickles; otherwise, both for Stock, Branch and
Leaf, it is very much like that Tree. The Grains or Berries are about the size
of Juniper Berries, and of an aromatic Taste, which partaking of that of all
the other Spices, it has by the English been called All-spice. This Pepper
grows plentifully in many of the Plantations in Jamaica.

GINGER is the Root of a Plant called the small Club Reed: It represents in
shape a sort of Foot at the end of every Root: Its Leaves are large, long, and
of a deep green: It bears a reddish Flower, mixed with a little green; the
whole Head of the Flower resembling a Club; from whence by some it is called
Ginger with the Club-Flower. There are two kinds of Ginger, the white or mealy,
and the hard black; but the first is reckoned by much the best. Ginger grows
both in the East and West Indies, and is very much cultivated in the Isles of
the Antilles; but the greatest quantities come from the Leeward Islands,
Barbados, Nevis, St. Christophers; and likewise from Jamaica, and other Places
thereabouts. We have now little out of the East Indies, but what is brought
thence in a Confection, called green Ginger; which they prepare in India; and
is likewise made in England and other Parts, by steeping the fresh Root two or
three Days in warm Water, keeping it in a Balneo all that time; by which means
it will grow soft and swell: They then boil it up, either flit or whole, with
refined Sugar, to a Syrup.

Ginger Plant


The Current Vine


CURRANTS that are sold by the Grocers of London, etc. and are well known for
their excellent use in Puddings, Cakes, and c. are the Fruit of the Vine, and
called the Corinth Grape, or vulgarly, the Current Grape: Of this kind there
are two or three different Colors, as red, black, and tawney. The Vine that
bears this Fruit is low, furnished with thick Leaves, very much indented, and
like all other Vines sending forth Claspers at the Joints; by which it fastens
itself to whatever Plant stands near it; and the Fruit is produced in Bunches.
These Vines grow plentifully in a vast spacious Plain that is situated behind
the Fortress of Zant in Greece. This Plain is surrounded with Mountains and
Hills, and is divided into Vineyards, in which are abundance of Cyprus, Olives,
and Houses of Pleasure, which make together with the Fortress and the Mount
Discoppo, a Prospect perfectly beautiful. When these little Grapes are ripe,
which generally happens in August, the People of Zant gather and stone them,
then spread them upon the Ground to dry, and when dried carry them into the
Town, where they are thrown through a Hole into the great Magazine, called the
Seraglio; and are there pressed so close together in a Mass, that they are
obliged to use Iron Instruments to pull them out; which done, they put 'em into
Casks or Bales of different sizes; and to make them so tight as they are
brought to us, they employ Men to tread them with their Feet, for which purpose
they rub 'em well with Oil beforehand. Currants are brought from several Places
in the Levant; but the sort we use is chiefly brought from the Islands near the
Morea. They say, the People of Zant, where these Currants grow, believe that
the Europeans use them to dye Cloths, not knowing that they are for eating. As
Currants are the Fruit of the Vine, so likewise the several kinds of Raisins
are only so many sorts of Grapes, differing according to the Countries where
they are produced. When the Grapes are ripe, they gather the Bunches, and put
them to dry in the Sun, turning them from one side to the other, by which means
they dry equally; and when dry they put 'em up into little Chests, etc. for
Transportation: Though, as some say, before they expose the Bunches to dry in the
Sun, they first dip them into a certain Liquor prepared for that purpose.

The POMEGRANATE Tree is a Shrub, whereof there are two kinds; one cultivated
in Gardens, and the other wild. The Branches of the first are small, angular,
armed with Thorns; the Bark is reddish; the Leaves small, and resemble those of
the Myrtle, but less pointed, hanging by reddish Stalks, of a strong Smell,
when they are crushed or bruised. The Flower is large, of a beautiful red,
inclining to purple, composed of several Leaves, like a Rose in the hollow of a
Cup, representing a little Basket of Flowers; the Cup is oblong, hard,
purplish, large at the top, having in some measure the figure of a Bell. At the
bottom comes a Fruit, after the Flower is gone, which grows into a large round
Apple, having a thick, smooth, brittle Rind, adorned with a Crown, formed by
the top of the Cup, of a purple Hue, dark without, and yellow within: this
Apple is called the Pomegranate. The inside is divided into several Cells or
Partitions full of Seed, heaped one upon another, being fleshy, of a fine red
Color, abounding with a very pleasant Juice; and each contains in the middle
of them, an oblong Grain, of a yellow Color, and sometimes very irregularly
formed. The Wild Pomegranate is a Shrub like the former, but more rough and
thorny: They gather the Flowers when in their prime; these are dried to keep,
which are brought to us from the Levant. The Wild Pomegranate grows only in the
hot Countries. The Juice of the Pomegranate is much valued in Physic. There
are with us in England reckoned five sorts of Pomegranate Trees, chiefly
cultivated for Ornament, viz. First, the common Pomegranate, second the sweet,
third the wild, fourth the double flowered, and fifth the American dwarf
Pomegranate. The first of these Trees is now pretty common in the English
Gardens, where formerly it was nursed up in Cases, and preserved with great
Care, as was also the double Kind; Pomegranate Tree
Rice
but now they are both hardy enough to resist the severest Cold of our Climate
in open Air; and if planted against warm Walls, in a good Situation, the first
sort will often produce Fruit, which in warm Seasons will ripen tolerably well:
But as these Fruits do not ripen till late in the Autumn, so they are seldom
well tasted in England: But notwithstanding the Fruit of this Tree seldom
arrives to any Perfection in this Country, so as to render it valuable; yet for
the Beauty of its scarlet Color, together with the Variety of its Fruit, it
well deserves to have one planted in every good Garden, since the Culture is
not great which they require. The chief Care is to plant them upon a rich
strong Soil, and in a warm Situation. The double flowering kind of this Plant
is much more esteemed than the other in this Country, for the sake of its large
beautiful double Flowers, which are of a fine scarlet Color; and if the Trees
are supplied with Nourishment, will continue to produce Flowers for near three
Months successively, which renders it one of the most valuable flowering Trees
yet known. A curious account of the whole Culture and Improvement of the
Pomegranate Plant, as managed in England, may be seen in Mr. Miller's
Gardener's Dictionary, under that Word Punica.

RICE is the Product of a Plant much cultivated in most of the Eastern
Countries; and great quantities of it are brought into England, and other
European Countries every Year; where it is in great esteem for Puddings, etc.
it being too tender to be produced in these northern Countries, without the
assistance of artificial Heat: But from some Seeds formerly sent to
South Carolina, there have been great quantities produced; and it is found to
succeed equally as well there, as in its native Soil; which is a very great
Improvement to our American Settlements: it being a Seed of so great Use and
Profit, that it is called the Manna of the Poor; and throughout several
Countries, it is the chief Support of the Inhabitants. This Plant bears its
Stalk about three or four Feet high, much thicker and stronger than that of
Wheat and other Corn: The Leaves are long like the Reed, and fleshy; the
Flowers blow on the top like Barley; but the Seed, which follows, is disposed
in Clusters, each of which is enclosed in a yellow Husk, ending in a spiral
Thread, and of an oblong, or rather oval Figure. This Plant grows upon moist
Soils, where the Ground can be flowed over with Water after it is come up; so
that whoever would cultivate it in England for Curiosity, should sow the Seeds
upon a Hotbed; and when the Plants are come up, they should be transplanted
into Pots filled with rich light Earth, and placed in Pans of Water, which
should be plunged into a Hot-bed; and as the Water wastes, so it must from time
to time be renewed again. In July these Plants may be set abroad in a warm
Situation, still preserving the Water in the Pans, otherwise they will not
thrive; and toward the latter end of August they will produce their Grain,
which will ripen tolerably well, provided the Autumn proves favorable. Though
the chief use of Rice be for Food, it is sometimes made use of in Medicine: It
nourishes well, stops Fluxes, is good in Armies, Camps, and Sieges; because
it is of light Carriage, and excellent Sustenance, and easily prepared. It
increases Blood, and restores in Consumptions. choose the newest Rice, well
cleansed, large, that is to say plump, or well fed, white, and not dusty.

There are several Species of the CORK-Tree mentioned in some of the Italian
Catalogues of Plants; but the chief are the broad-leav'd ever-green Cork-Tree,
and the narrow-leav'd Cork-Tree, with smooth Edges: I shall speak only of the
first. The broad-leav'd Cork that is always green, is a Tree of a moderate
height, very much resembling the Oak; but the Trunk is bigger, bearing fewer
Boughs, and the Bark a great deal thicker, very light, spungy, and of an ash
Color, tending toward a yellow; which Bark is taken from the Tree first, and
afterward freed from an inner Bark. The Leaves of the Cork-Tree are something
like those of the Oak, but much larger and longer, likewise foster, and greener
on the outside, and Cork Tree
Tobacco Plant
a little indented: The Cups and the Acorns are also like those of the Oak.
This Tree grows in the hot Countries, as Spain, Italy, toward the Pyrenees,
and in Gascony, etc. When the Inhabitants of those Parts would make a Crop of
this Commodity, they take off the Bark of these Trees from the top to the
bottom, and lay one piece upon another, to a reasonable height, in a Pit or
Ditch that is full of Water; and having loaded it with Weights to keep it down,
they leave it in this Condition for some time; and when it is well soaked, and
laid straight, they remove it to another Ditch, and so to a third and fourth;
and after that take it out of the Water to dry: which being done, it is
transported in Bales to different Parts of the World. Choose your Cork in fine
Boards, all of a piece, not full of Knots or Chinks, of a moderate thickness,
yellowish both without and within; and when it is cut firm and entire, the less
porous the better; we commonly call this Cork, white Cork of France, because
this sort is made in Guienne, chiefly about Bayonne, from whence almost all
that is used in France comes. There is brought from the same Parts another kind
of Cork, they call Spanish Cork, which is likewise according to its usual
quality, light, plain, blackish without as if it had been burned; which, as
they say, proceeds from nothing else, but its being steeped in Seawater
instead of fresh; the inside yellowish and easy to cut, not rotten; but choose
the thickest sort you can get, that being much more esteemed, and dearer than
the thin.

Of the TOBACCO Plant there are five different Species. The first is known by
the Planters in America, under the Title of Oroonoko; of which there seems to
be two sorts, varying in the largeness and texture of their Leaves, some having
very broad, rough, roundish Leaves; and others are narrower, smoother, and do
terminate in a Point: But neither of these sorts are valued by the American
Planters, because the Produce of this, though it is much greater than the
narrow-leav'd sort, yet is not near so much esteemed by the English. The second
sort is the narrow-leav'd, commonly called the sweet-scented Tobacco, from its
having a much more agreeable Scent when smoked, than the broad-leav'd sort;
the Smoke of which is very offensive to most Persons who have not been
accustomed to it. This sort is cultivated in great plenty in Virginia, Cuba,
Brasil, and several other Parts of America; from whence it is brought to most
Parts of Europe, but especially to England, it being prohibited to be
cultivated in this Country, lest His Majesty's Revenues should be thereby
lessened; excepting a final quantity that is permitted to be cultivated for
Medicinal Use. The third sort is, the greater narrow-leav'd Perennial Tobacco,
brought from the French Settlements in the West Indies into the Royal Garden at
Paris, where it is cultivated in small quantities for making Snuff. The fourth
and fifth two smaller sorts of Tobacco, are preserved in Botanick Gardens for
Variety, but are seldom propagated for Use. The Tobacco Plants are raised from
Seed; which they sow first in a rich Ground, and when the Plants are come up,
cover them every Morning with Branches of Trees, to defend them from the
scorching heat of the Sun; and having cleared a piece of Ground to receive the
Plants, they transplant them in a rainy or moist Season, planting them down
again in rows, at about two or three Feet distance from each other, that they
may have room to spread, without the Leaves touching one another, so as to make
them rot and corrupt. After the Tobacco is thus planted, they will require no
farther Care, but only from time to time to keep them clear from Weeds, until
the Plants begin to show their Flower-Stems; at which time they cut off the
tops of them, that their leaves may be the better nourished, become larger, and
of a thicker Substance; and likewise pulling off constantly the Leaves
underneath, that hang on the Ground, so that they leave about ten or twelve
Leaves upon a Stalk, by which means they increase prodigiously, and become much
thicker. When the Tobacco is ripe, they cut and spread it upon the Ground;
after which they string it upon certain Cords, in little Knots, so that the
Plants may not touch one another; then they Cotton Plant
hang it up to dry in the Air, sheltered from the wet fifteen or twenty Days:
And when it is rightly prepared, they make or roll it into what Form is best
liked by the Buyer.

COTTON is the Product of a Plant which bears a Stalk about two Foot high,
covered with a reddish hairy Bark, divided into several short Branches: The
Leaves are a little less than the Sycamore Leaves, shaped almost like those of
the Vine, hanging to long Stalks, adorned with a kind of Nap, or Hair: The
Flowers are numerous, fine and large, having the shape or form of a Bell, slit
or cut into five or six Divisions to the bottom, of a yellow Color, mixed with
red or purple: When the Flower is fallen, it is succeeded by a Fruit the bigness
of a Filbert; which being ripe opens into three or four Partitions, from whence
appears a: Flake of Cotton, white as Snow, which swells up or tumesies by Heat,
to the size of a little Apple. It contains in it many gross Seeds, like small
Peace, oblong and cottony; each having in it a little oily Kernel, sweet to the
Taste. There is another sort of Cotton Tree that differs from the former in
bigness, for this grows to the height of four or five Feet: The Leaves indented
deep into three Parts, without Nap or Down: The Flowers and Fruit are like
those of the other Kind. Both these sorts of Cotton grow in Egypt, Syria,
Cyprus, Candia, and the Indies. In Jamaica, Barbados, and other Places in the
West Indies, the Cotton Tree usually grows to a reasonable height, spreading
sorth its Branches on all sides; with small, green, pointed Leaves; and bears
a Flower in form almost like the Sweet-Briar Rose, but of a yellowish Color:
After the Blossoms are fallen, there follows a kind of greenish round Button,
or Knob almost as big as a Tennis Ball, having a thin crusty Shell; which when
full rice is of a dark brown or blackish Color: In these round Buttons is
enclosed the Cotton, which open when ripe in several Partitions like the
former, out of which the Cotton falls, if not timely gathered: it contains
likewise a great number of small blackish Seeds, that grow enclosed in the same
Shell, which before the Cotton is made use of are picked out. There grow
likewise in some of the American Plantations, Cotton Bushes, or Shrubs, which
approach very near in likeness to those of Egypt, Arabia, etc.

The MANDRAKE Plant is distinguished by two Species; viz. the Common with a
round Fruit, called the Male Mandrake, and that with the purplish blue Flower,
called the Female Mandrake. The Leaves of the former rise directly from the
Root, above a Foot long, broader than a Man's Hand in the middle, and narrow at
both Ends, smooth, of a deep green Color, and a disagreeable Smell. The
Flowers of both these Plants are of the shape of a Bell, divided at the tops
into several Parts, which afterward becomes a globular soft Fruit, in which is
conrain'd many kidney-shap'd Seeds. The Root, as some say, represents, when it
is whole, the lower Parts of a Man, from whence it is called Anthropomorpha,
which signifies the Figure of a Man. But as to this feigned resemblance of an
human Form, which the Root of this Plant is said to carry, it is all Imposture,
owing to the Cunning of Quacks and designing Knaves, who deceive the Ignorant
with fictitious Images shaped from the fresh Roots of Briony and other Plants:
And what is reported as to the manner of rooting up this Plant, by tying a Dog
thereto, to prevent the certain Death of the Person who should dare to attempt
it, and the Groans it emits upon the Force offered, etc. it is all a fulsome
Fable: for several large Roots of this Plant have been taken up; some of which
have been transplanted into other Places, without observing any particular
difference in this from any other deeprooting Plant. Some Persons worthy of
Credit, have delivered as a Truth, that one of these Roots will remain sound
above fifty Years, and be as vigorous as a young Plant; but they should never
be removed after their Roots have arrived to any considerable size, which would
break their lower Fibers, and so stint the Plants, as that they will not
recover their former strength in two or three Years. The Female Mandrake Plant
Mandrake with the bluish purple Flower; differs from the former, in that its
Leaves are smaller, narrower, more folded, blacker, trailing on the Ground, of
a strong stinking Smell; and the Fruit less and paler, not formed like a Pear,
as some Authors will have it; but round, scented, full of Juice, and containing
very small black Seeds. The Root is about a Foot long, divided into two
Branches, brown without, white within, and furnished with some Fibers, but
nothing like the Male Plant. Both sorts grow in hot Countries, in the Plains or
mountainous Places; but the last much rarer. These Plants are propagated in
Gardens from Seeds, which should be sown upon a Bed of light Earth soon after
they are ripe; where they should remain till the latter end of August,
(observing always to keep them clear from Weeds) at which time they should be
taken up very carefully, and transplanted into the Places where they are to
remain, which should be a light deep Soil, for their Roots do always run
downwards very deep; and if the Plants are not disturbed, they will grow to a
large size in a few Years, and will produce great quantities of Flowers and
Fruit, and they will abide a great many Years. There are Mandrakes mentioned in
the 30th Chap. of Genesis, which Reuben is said to have found in the Field, in
the time of Wheat Harvest; and with which his Mother Leah purchased from her
Sister Rachel no less a Favor than the Enjoyment of her Husband. What those
Mandrakes should be that were so desirable to Rachel; whether she coveted them
for their delectable Taste, their fragrant Smell, or their beautiful Color,
does not appear: And as our learned Commentators differ in their Opinions about
it, I shall not venture to give my own; but only observe, that in the Canticles
it is said, The Mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits: Which seems to intimate, as if the Mandrakes were a Fruit of a
pleasant Taste, a fragrant Smell, and delightful to the Eye: for when Solomon
says, the Mandrakes give a smell; sure he must mean a grateful Smell, or
methinks he would hardly have introduced them to adorn a Pastoral Song: and as
he immediately adds, at our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits; it seems
to imply, that the Mandrake was likewise a pleasant Fruit, which perhaps, was
so both to the Eye and Palate: But be that as it will, this we may venture to
affirm, that the Mandrake Plants known to us now, whether wild or cultivated;
have no such desirable qualities, as to render them so valuable to the good
Women of our days, to give in exchange their Husbands for them: For these,
contrary to what is mentioned in Scripture, have a disagreeable Smell.

BALM of Gilead is a liquid white Balsam, that flows of itself (though sometimes
they make Incisions, when the Liquor flows not freely) during Summer, from the
Trunk of a Plant, called Balsamum Syriacum folio Rutae; that bears Leaves like
Rue; and white Flowers shaped like Stars; in the middle of which rise little
Berries, that are sharp at the end, in which is a small Kernel: It sticks to
the Branches by means of a very small Stalk; is green at first, and grows brown
as it ripens. When the Balsam first runs, it is of the consistence of Oil of
sweet Almonds, but by Age becomes like Turpentine, loses much of its Smell, and
grows sometimes blackish. When fresh, it is of a very agreeable aromatic
Smell, and of a Taste like Citron Peel. Jerico was once the only Place in the
World where this true Balsam was to be found; but since the Turks were Masters
of the Holy Land, they have transplanted these Shrubs into their Gardens at
Grand Cairc, etc. where they are guarded by Janisaries, or Soldiers, during the
time the Balsam flows; at which time it is very difficult for a Christian to
get a Sight of these Plants, which are desended with very high Walls, as well
as Soldiers, against their entering. And as to the Balsam, it is almost
impossible to get any upon the Place, unless it be by means of some Ambassador,
to whom the Grand Seignior has made a Present of it, or by The Soldiers who
watch this precious Liquor; by which we may understand, that what several
Persons pretend to sell for true Balsam, is nothing but white Balm of Gilead
Balsam of Peru; which they prepare with Spirit of Wine rectified, or with some
Oils distilled. Mr. Pomet says, a Friend of his made him a Present of one
Ounce, which he brought from Grand Cairo; it was of a solid Consistence, like
that of Turpentine of Chio, of a golden yellow Color, and a Citron Smell.

The CEDAR of Libanus is a very large, thick, straight Tree: Its Leaves small
and slender; being much narrower than those of the Pine Tree, disposed in
Clusters along the Branches; and the Fruit like our Pine-Apples; but grows upon
the upper part of the Branches, and stands erect, having a strong woody central
Style, by which it is firmly annexed to the Branch, so as with difficulty to be
taken off: which central Style remains upon the Branches, after the Cone is
fallen to pieces; so that they never drop off whole as the Pine-Apples do. It
is said, that from the Trunk, and the large Branches of this Tree, there flows,
during the great Heats, without any Incision, a sort of white Resin, very
clear, and of a grateful Odor; which they call Cedar-Gum, of which the largest
Trees yield not less than six Ounces a day. The Cones of the Cedar are brought
from the Levant, which, if preserved entire, will continue their Seeds for
several Years: The time of their ripening is commonly in the Spring, and are
near one Year old before we receive them; for which they are not the worse, but
rather the better. To get the Seeds out of the Cone, they split it, by driving
a sharp piece of Iron through the Center lengthways, and so pull the Seeds out
with their Fingers; which Seeds are fastened to a thin leafy Substance, as are
those of the Firr-Tree. For the ordering the Cedar Plant, see Miller's
Directions in his Gardener's Dictionary. What we find mentioned in Scripture of
the lofty Cedars, can be no ways applicable to the Stature of this Tree; since,
from the Experience we have of those now growing in England, as also from the
Testimony of several who have visited those few remaining Trees on Mount
Libanus, they are not inclined to grow very losty, but, on the contrary, extend
their Branches very far: To which the Allusion made by the Psalmist agrees very
well, when he is describing the flourishing State of a People, and says, They
shall spread their Branches like the Cedar Tree. Mr. Maundrel, in his Travels,
says, when he visited Mount Libanus, there were but sixteen large Trees
remaining; some of which were of a prodigious Bulk, but that there were many
more young Trees of a smaller size; he measured one of the largest, and found
it to be twelve Yards six Inches in girt, and yet sound, and thirty seven Yards
in the spread of its Boughs. At about five or six Yards from the Ground, it was
divided into five Limbs, each of which was equal to a great Tree. The Wood of
this famous Tree is accounted Proof against all Putrefaction of Animal Bodies:
The Saw-dust of it is thought to be one of the Secrets used by those
Mountebanks who pretend to have the embalming Mystery. This Wood is also said
to yield an Oil which is famous for preserving Books and Writings: and the Wood
is thought by my Lord Bacon to continue a thousand Years sound. Of Cedar Wood
was most of the Timber-Work of that glorious Structure, the Temple of Jerusalem.

The ANANAS is a kind of Pineapple: adorned on the top with a little Crown,
and a Bunch of red Leaves like Fire: It has a scaly Rind or Shell, like the
Pineapple; and the Fruit like the Cones of the Pine, in the Form of a
Sugar Loaf: The inside appears like that of the Melon; the Flesh is fibrous,
but dissolves in the Mouth, having the delicious Taste of the Peach, the
Quince, and the Muscadine Grape all together. It is called the King of Fruits,
because, for the richness of its Flavor, it surpasses all the known Fruits in
the World; and also for the Crown upon the Head of it, which is a peculiar Mark
of its Royalty; and at its fall produces a young King, that succeeds in all his
admirable Qualities. This Fruit is produced from an herbaceous Plant, which
has Leaves somewhat resembling those of an Aloe, and are for the most part
sawed on their Edges, but are much thinner, and not so juicy as the Aloe. From
Cedar of Libanu
The Ananus
Great American Aloe
the Fruit's resembling the Cones of the Pine Tree, it is supposed to have its
Name. Where this Plant is a Native, is not easy to determine; but it was
brought from the Factories in the East Indies, and planted in the hottest
Islands in the West Indies, where they are in great plenty and extraordinary
goodness: But it has been very lately, that it was introduced into the
European Gardens, so as to produce Fruit. The first Person who succeeded in
this Affair, was Monsieur Le Cour at Leyden in Holland, who, after a great many
Trials with little or no success, did at last hit upon a proper degree of Heat
and Management, so as to produce Fruit equally as good (though not so large) as
those which are produced in the West Indies, as has been often affirmed by
Persons who have lived many Years there; and it is to this worthy Cultivator of
Gardening, who did not spare any Pains or Expense to accomplish it, that all
the Lovers thereof are obliged for introducing this King of Fruits amongst
them; and it was from him that our Gardens in England were first supplied, though
we have since had large quantities brought from America. From the Juice of this
Fruit is made a Wine, almost equal to Malmsey Sack, and will intoxicate as soon
as the strongest Wine.

The ALOE is a Plant whose Leaves are thick and succulent, and for the most
part beset with Spines on the Edges: The Flower consists of one Leaf, is
tubulous, and cut into six Segments at the top, like the Hyacinth: The Fruit is
oblong and cylindrical; which is divided into three Cells, in which are
confined flat, and for the most part semicircular Seeds. There are a great
variety of these Plants in the curious Gardens of Botany in England, near forty
different sorts, which are Natives both of the East and West Indies; but the
most curious sorts are brought from the Cape of Good Hope. Most of the African
sorts of Aloes do produce Flowers with us Annually, when grown to a sufficient
size, which is often the second, and seldom more than the third or fourth Year,
after planting from Off-sets; but the American Aloes (which do, for the most
part, produce their Flower-stems immediately from the Center of the Plant)
seldom flower till they are of a considerable Age, and this but once during the
Life of the Plant; for when the Flower-stem begins to shoot from the middle of
the Plant (which, for the most part, is of a large size, and grows to a great
height) it draws all the Nourishment from the Leaves; so that, as that
advances, the Leaves decay: and when the Flowers are fully blown, scarce any of
the Leaves remain alive; but whenever this happens, the old Root sends forth a
numerous quantity of Off-sets for increase: And it is not till this time, that
some of these sorts can be increased. There is a vulgar Error or two relating
to the large American Aloe, which is, that it never flowers until it is an
Hundred Years old: this is a Mistake; since we have had several of them flower
in England, some of which were known not to exceed fifty Years old; and others,
that flowered many Years ago, cannot be supposed to have been in England so
long as to arrive at that Age, since they were thought too tender for our
Climate at that time, when Greenhouses were not known. Another common Error is,
that when the Flower opens, it makes a Report like that of firing a Gun: This
is sufficiently confuted by all those, who have been where these Plants have
flowered: But probably the rise of this Story might proceed from some Persons
saying, when one of these Plants flowered, it made a great Noise; meaning
thereby, that whenever one of them flowered in England, it was spread abroad as
an uncommon thing, and occasioned a great Noise among the neighboring
Inhabitants; most of whom usually repair to see it, as a thing that rarely
happens, and as a great Curiosity. In the Year 1729. in the Month of September,
one of these great American Aloes flowered in Mr. Cowell's Garden at Hoxton,
and though it was above forty Years old, did not shoot forth its Stem till
about eleven Weeks before, in which short time it shot up Sensible Plan
to the height of twenty-two Feet: The deserved Fame of this wonderful Plant
being spread abroad, occasioned a vast resort of People, of all Ranks, to see
so great a Curiosity.

The Contexture of the SENSIBLE PLANT is very surprising; for, upon touching
any of the Sprigs with Leaves on, all the Leaves on that Sprig contracting
themselves by Pairs, joined their upper Superfices close together. Upon the
dropping a Drop of Aquafortis on the Sprig betwixt the Leaves, all the Leaves
above shut presently, those below by Pairs successively after, by and by the
lower Leaves of the other Branches, and so every Pair successively, with some
little distance of time betwixt, to the top of each Sprig, and so they
continued shut for some time: But returning to the Garden the next Day, and
several Days after, found all the Leaves dilated again on two of the Sprigs;
but where the Aquafortis had dropped, upwards, dead and withered; but those
below on the same Sprig, green, and closing upon the Touch as before, and
continued so. With a Pair of Scissars, as suddenly as it could be done, one of
the Leaves was clipped off in the middle; upon which that Pair, and the Pair
above, closed presently; after a little Interval those under, and so the rest
of the Pairs to the bottom of the Sprig; and then the Motion began in the lower
Pairs on the other Sprigs, and so shut them by Pairs upwards, though not with
such distinct distances. Upon cutting off one of the harder Branches, there
came out a Liquor, without pressure; very clear, and of a bright greenish
Color, tasting at first a little bitterish, but after leaving a liquorice like
Taste behind: which probably, the Motion of this Plant upon touching might
proceed from this; that there being a constant Intercourse betwixt every Part
of this Plant and its Root, either by a Circulation of this Liquor, or a
constant pressing of the subtiler Parts of it to every Extremity of the Plant.
The above Experiments were made by Dr. Hook, on some of these Plants which
grew in a Garden in St. James's Park. I have read, that in the Passage of the
Isthmus, from Nombre de Dios to Panama, there is a whole Wood full of Sensitive
Trees, of which, as soon as they are touched, the Leaves close and move with a
rattling Noise, and twist themselves together into a winding Figure.

Indian Lanthorn Fly


Natural and Philosophical CONJECTURES ON THE IGNIS FATUUS, OR JACK IN THE
LANTHORN: Endeavoring to prove, that The LIGHT so called proceeds from Some
FLYING INSECT; And not from a FIRED VAPOR, as generally believed.

WITH A Description and Curious Figure of the Indian LANTHORN FLY, a Nocturnal
Insect, which carries a Light in dark Nights, equal to that of our Will with a
Whisp.

LONDON: Printed for T. BOREMAN, near Child's Coffee-House in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

M.DCC.XXXVI.

IGNIS FATUUS, OR JACK IN THE LANTHORN, a Flying INSECT.
THE Notion that an Ignis Fatuus, or Jack in the Lanthorn, is a fired Vapor
exhaled from boggy Places, being founded on the Judgment of many Learned and
Ingenious Persons, has so far prevailed, that the Generality of Mankind seem to
acquiesce in that Solution of this surprising Phenomenon.

An Attempt therefore to prove the contrary, and that the Light called by this
Name proceeds from some nocturnal Flying-Insect, will perhaps be deemed vain
and rash. However, I shall take the Liberty to assign the Reasons which induce
me to believe it, and my Objections to its being a Vapor; which I submit to
the Judgment of the Curious, till time and experience shall demonstrate the
real Truth.

If in my Pursuit of the Wanderer I should chance to be misled, it will be in
common with all that have followed the Chase, with this advantage, that I can
sustain no Injuries from it. And the Attempt may invite others, who may be more
successful in their Endeavors. The Conjecture must be agreeable, and the
Probability will be of some use, if it helps to dispossess fearful Country
People of their superstitious Apprehensions.

The first Hint of my Opinion I received from Meriana's Account of the famous
Indian LANTHORN FLY, published amongst her Insects of Surinam; which Account,
being not in the least foreign to the Subject, nor perhaps unpleasant to the
Reader, I shall here insert.

The Lanthorn Fly is a Nocturnal Insect, that has an Hood, or Bladder on its
Head, which gives a Light like a Lanthorn in the Night, but by Daylight is
clear and transparent, very curiously adorned with Stripes of a red and green
Color. Such a shining came forth from this Bladder in the Night, that it was
possible by the Light of it to have read Writing of tolerable large Characters.
She says, that when once upon a time, the Indians she sent to seek for Insects,
brought her of these Lanthorn Flies in great abundance, she shut them up in a
large Chest, not knowing as yet that they shone by Night; but being awaked and
frightened in the Night out of her Sleep by an unusual Noise; jumping out of
Bed, ordered a Light to be brought; not knowing what that uncommon Disturbance
which she heard in her House should be: It immediately appeared that the Noise
came from the Chest; upon which, with some disorder of Mind they opened it; but
still more frightened, they suddenly clapped the Lid down again; because in the
opening, there came as it were a Flame of Fire, as often as a new Insect flew
out: which at length being observed, and coming to themselves again, they
gathered the little Creatures together once more; admiring that so considerable
a Light should proceed from them.

The Wings and whole Body of this Insect are elegantly adorned with a Mixture
of beautiful Colors; as red, green, yellow, etc. It Is said, the Creature can
contract or dilate the Hood or Bladder over its Head at pleasure: and that they
hide all their Light when taken, but when at liberty afford it plentifully.
Accordingly, those which Meriana enclosed having the Liberty of a large dark
Chest, displayed their Light, and it being their proper time to fly,
endeavored to escape as soon as the Lid was open.

The more I considered this wonderful Account, the stronger it inclined me to
believe the Jack in the Lanthorn of our own Country, was likewise no other than
the shining of some night-flying Insect. And indeed I was too well pleased with
the Discovery I thought I had made, vainly imagining my Opinion to be singular;
nor knowing that any Person had formed the Conjecture before my self; till,
looking into the Philosophical Transactions, I was agreeably surprised, to find
that two learned and eminent Persons, the late Mr. Fr. Willughby, and Mr. Ray,
were both of the same Opinion. The late learned and ingenious Dr. Derham
indeed, who published that Account, was of a contrary Opinion: believing those
Appearances to be fired Vapors. But with due Submission to the Judgment of so
great a Man, the Account he has given of this Phenomenon, seems in every
Circumstance to agree much better with that of a living Creature, than an
inflammable Vapor. Which Account of the Ignes Fatui, I shall transcribe from
the Philosophical Transactions, for the sake of such of my Readers as are not
possessed of those Books.

But I shall first give the Reasons which incline me to believe these
Appearances only the shining of some Nocturnal Flies; because they are the
Result of such Thoughts as occurred from considering the Subject itself, before
I knew the Sentiments of those eminent Persons abovementioned.

I apprehend then that the Ignis Fatuus must be rather a flying Insect than a
Vapor, because the Properties attributed to it, such as its Motion, directing
itself which way it pleases, shunning whatever Obstruction happens in its
Passage, and the like, in which almost all Accounts agree, correspond much
better to that of an Insect flying, or the Actions of something guided by
Sense; than to that of a fired Vapor, which must be absolutely carried with
the Wind, let it blow which way it will: And may we not very naturally suppose,
that if it was only a Vapor driven by the Wind, it would some time or other
have been blown exactly to the Spot where some Persons were passing, that might
have discovered what it was; or directly to some House, Village, Town? and c. I
cannot imagine how a mere Vapor could shun any of these Obstructions. And
would a fired Vapor, if once extinct, (as these Appearances are frequently
observed to be suddenly dark, and immediately to shine again) be enkindled in a
Body any more?

Methinks, if Igues Fatui were only Vapors, they would sometimes be raised
higher in the Air than these Lights are observed to be, which seldom exceeds
six Feet above the Ground; unless it be to mount over a Hedge, or some such
thing. But their passing along a few Feet above the Ground, or surface of the
Water, very much agrees with that of some Insects in quest of their Prey; and
does not their settling of a sudden, and rising again immediately, answer
likewise? It looks very much as if they had found something which they were in
search after. From hence there appears great Reason to believe it nothing else
but a Night-flying Infect; and that the Light it carries is given either to
seek its Food with, or woo its Female, or perhaps both.

All Accounts agree, that the Ignis Fatuus is never seen but in a dark Night,
which is still a stronger Argument of its being a living Creature; for a Vapor
might be exhalld when it was not so dark, as well as when it was, and be
visible too. But supposing it a Creature that flies by Night, it may either not
sally out in light Nights, or its Organs of Sight be so adapted, as to see at
such a time without the assistance of this extraordinary Light, and not expend
its shining Matter when its natural Eyes will serve; but use this Lamp or
Lanthorn in dark Nights only, when Necessity obliges it: For perhaps, the
Materials that this shining Matter is composed of, may cost the Creature some
Labor to gather, though Nature may fit it for Use afterward. And it is not
unlikely that the supposed little Animal may have a Receptacle to preserve its
shining Matter in, which it lets out when occasion requires; for this Light is
no real Fire, but the Appearance only.

But although we are not able to give a satisfactory Account of what this Light
consists of, this carries no real Objection to its being a Night-shining Fly:
because we are well assured, that there are flying Insects peculiar to several
Countries that actually do shine in dark Nights, and yield Lights, not much
different from those of our Ignes Fatui.

To me it seems not altogether improbable, that this supposed Insect may be
furnished with a kind of natural Phosphorus, perhaps in quality not unlike the
great Mr. Boyle's Noctilucal Matter, or Night-shining Stuff; which when reduced
to a Powder, and put into a Phial, gently heated at the Fire, and then shook;
whereby the small Particles of this shining Matter being put into Motion, would
in a dark Room yield a Light very vivid. [ See Mr. Boyle's Experiments and
Observations made upon the Icy, etc. Noctiluca.] That the like Agitation may be
performed by these shining Flies naturally, without any difficulty, either by
Respiration, or by the Motion of its Wings or Legs, seems not at all improbable.

Agreeable to this is what Mr. Templer observed of the Glo-worm. Putting, says
he, the Glo-worm into a small thin Box, (such as Pills are usually sent in) May
27. between Eleven and Twelve at Night, I saw her shine through the Box very
clearly on one side, the Box shut; putting white Paper into the Box, and the
Worm into the Paper, it shined through the Paper and Box both. The next
Morning, about Eight of the Clock, she seemed dead, and holding her in a very
dark Place, I could perceive very little Light, and that only when she was
turned on her Back, and by consequence put into some little voluntary Motion.
After Sunset that Night, she walked briskly up and down in her Box, shining
clearly as the Night before. The 29th in the Morning she seemed dead again, at
Night recovered her self, and shined as well as ever in the Box. I never, says
he, saw her shine without some sensible Motion either in her Body or Legs. In
her clearst shining she extended her Body a third part beyond its usual length.
The Glo-worm having contracted her Body into a bending Posture, shined little,
the Light scarcely so big as a great Pin's head; upon touching of her she
extended her self, walked in her Box, and at first Extent shined as gloriously
as ever. Philosoph. Transact. No. 72.

The Use that I would make of these observations on the Glo-worm, is to
strengthen the Probability that the supposed Jack in the Lanthorn Fly, and
other shining Flies, as well as the Glo-worm, emit their Light, by putting the
small Particles of shining Matter into motion, from some voluntary Motion in
themselves.

It has been objected, First, that these Lights were too large for any Insect
whatever.

Second, That they were always carried along with the Wind.

Third, That they were never seen but in Salt-Marshes, or other Boggy Grounds.

And lastly, which seems to be the strongest of all the Objections; if this
Light proceeds from a flying Insect, how comes it that the Creature has never
yet been discovered? or how was it possible to have escaped the narrow Searches
of so many curious Persons, as have with indefatigable labor collected all the
Insects possible to be procured, both of our own Country, and likewise from
Abroad; and have with so great Care examined the Contexture of most Insects, as
well as larger Animals, and as it were anatomised their distinct Parts; have
been able to render a consistent and rational Account of the various Use those
Parts seemed to be designed for; and yet it should never enter into any of
their Heads, that such a Creature was a nocturnal Luminous Insect, and probably
the Ignis Fatuus, that had so. long amused and puzzled Mankind to account for?

The first Objection urges the Impossibility of an Insect carrying a Light so
large as the Ignis Fatuus appears to be.

Most Accounts agree, that these Lights commonly appear of the bigness of that
of a middling Candle, and sometimes they have been seen much smaller; though some
indeed have said, they have seen in other Countries these Appearances equal to
that of a Torch. Every one knows that Light magnifies in the Night, the darker
the Night, the bigger the Light seems to be; and what appeared so luminous at a
distance, the nearer you approach it the less it grows. The same has been
observed of the Ignis Fatuus; which, as before said, is no real Fire, but the
Appearance only. It is well known, the Lanthorn Fly of the Indies, when at
Liberty, sometimes emits a Light not far short of what is reported of the
biggest of our Jack in the Lanthorn: and this Light being contained in the
Bladder on its Head, the Creature, as is said, can either contract, or dilate
at Pleasure. The Glo-worm can increase or diminish its shining; and very
probably the supposed Jack in the Lanthorn Fly can do the same; or its Light
appearing bigger or less, may be in proportion to the Size or Perfection of the
Creature that emits it.

The second Objection is, That this Light was always carried along with the
Wind. If that were true, it would be impossible for it to shun any kind of
Obstruction in its way, whether Man, Beast, Bank, Hedge, House, etc. but would
unavoidably sometimes have been driven against some or other of them; which I
never heard it was; but on the contrary shunned them as carefully as if guided
by Sense. Besides, it can be proved by undeniable Testimony, that this Light
moves any way it pleases, just as a flying Insect would do, busied in seeking
its Food, sporting itself, or some other Employment. It must be owned, indeed,
that a flying Insect is generally carried with the Wind, not caring, or not
able (especially when it blows any thing hard) to beat against it; unless it be
such who have Homes, and young Offsprings to take care of, and whose Bodies are
fitly balanced to resist such Winds. Thus far the Motion of an Insect, will
agree with that of a Vapor carried by the Wind.

The third Objection, that the Ignes Fatui are never seen but in Salt-Marshes,
or other Boggy Places; is a great Mistake. I can produce Persons of Veracity,
that have seen these Lights flying over Fields, Heaths, and other dry Places. A
few Days since a grave Gentleman, a Person of exceeding good Knowledge, told
me, that in Hertfordshire, about eleven a Clock in a dark Night, he saw one of
these Lights flying over a fallow piece of Ground: being within three or four
Fields of his Habitation, he was perfectly acquainted with the Ground
thereabouts, and well assured there was no hazard of being led into Bogs,
Rivers, or other dangerous Places; his Curiosity led him to follow it,
resolving, if possible, to discover what it was, (for though he had heard it
was only a Vapor exhaled from the Earth, he had still some Doubt about it.) It
led him over a plowed Field, flying and twisting about from place to place;
sometimes it would suddenly disappear, and as suddenly appear again: sometimes
it would drop down, and presently rise again. Once it made directly to a Hedge
but a small distance from him, which, as soon as it came pretty near, it
mounted over; and he lost sight of it, after he had followed it a full Hour
without the least Satisfaction. He then turned about to make the best of his
way home, when presently he spied it again: but finding it next to an
impossibility to approach near enough to satisfy his Curiosity about it, and
being pretty well tired; gave over the Pursuit, and would follow it no further.
The same Person says, That in Surry he has seen in a dark Night six or seven of
these Lights at one time, flying over a boggy Common. And that he has seen
these Appearances flying over Lands where there has been neither Ponds nor Bogs.

If the Objection to its being an Insect, because seen only in Boggy Places,
would hold good; it would infallibly destroy the last Objection of its being
always carried along with the Wind. For as these Lights frequently hold
collected in a Body, for an Hour or more, as has been oftentimes observed, they
might, nay certainly would (sometimes in half that time) be driven over Fields,
and other dry Places, according to the strength of the Wind. But it will admit
of a Doubt, whether an inflammable Vapor, would continue collected in a Body
many Minutes, exposed to so much Wind as would be sufficient to carry it along,
without being very soon dissipated.

I don't deny that these Appearances are more frequently seen in Boggy, and
Marshy Grounds: The Creature may very probably feed on watery Insects; and as
all Animals are naturally endued with the Sense of knowing the sure Places
where to find their Food, so may the Jack in the Lanthorn Fly likewise frequent
watery Places for that very end; at which Places, as the most likely, the Males
may meet and woo their Females also; the flying State being the Perfection, and
last State of all the winged Tribes of Insects; in which they generate, lay
their Eggs, and after which few kinds of them long survive.

This Light being often observed to stand still as well as move, and sometimes
seeming fixed on the Surface of the Water; we may naturally suppose at such a
time it settles upon the Ground, Grass, or Weeds, as other Insects do; and may
perhaps either have found, and be devouring its Prey, or watching to catch it;
which it could not do without the assistance of this extraordinary Light.

To the last Objection; If an Ignis Fatuus were only the shining of some
Insect, how comes it that the Creature never yet was discovered, etc. I reply,
That the supposed Jack in the Lanthorn Fly's not being yet discovered, may in a
great measure be accounted for. All Night-Animals in general have Places of
Retreat, where they hide themselves in the Daytime: to these Places of
Retirement, they seem as naturally to betake themselves, as other Animals to
Rest and Sleep. Some find a proper convenient Receptacle under the Earth in
Holes; some in Timber, Stone, etc. others lying on the Ground, amongst Weeds,
or in Hedges, hollow Trees, or under the Bark, or in the Wood, etc. It would be
endless to recount the various Methods Nature has taught these little Creatures
to secure themselves from Dangers.

We all know that such Animals as fly a Nights, are sluggish and heavy in the
Daytime, not caring to stir, and with difficulty are put on the Wing; hardly
any thing less than their Preservation will force them to it; as the Bat, Owl,
Beetle, Chafer, etc. which Creatures fly only for about an Hour in the Dusk of
the Evening; and so do not stand in need of that extraordinary Light as the
supposed Jack in the Lanthorn Fly, which is always observed to sally out in
very dark Nights. And if those Animals are so sluggish, that fly in the Evening
only; what may we suppose of the Will with a Whisp, which flies chiefly when
late at Night.

The Glo-worm, as Mr. Templer observed, always seemed as if dead in the
Daytime; yet constantly at Night would be brisk, and shine as vivid as ever.

If by chance in the Daytime any Person should disclose the sluggish Jack in
the Lanthorn Fly, in its Place of Shelter or Retreat, (which perhaps may have
often happened, both in its creeping, and flying State likewise) very likely
they would destroy it, as common People do most Insects as noxious Creatures;
especially when large and uncommon: But if they should happen not to kill it,
not one in ten thousand but would leave it where they found it, without
regarding it at all.

For this reason, it is not only difficult to discover this Insect in the
Daytime; but if a thousand had been found, it would be next to an
Impossibility to know they were shining Flies; because the Part that contains
the luminous Matter, like that of the Indian Lanthorn Flies, appears by
Daylight only clear and pellucid, without any shining at all. Besides, it may
perhaps be an Insect not of the multiparous kind, consequently the seldomer to
be met with.

The Difficulty of catching this supposed Insect by Night, has been as great
hitherto, as that of knowing it by Day. For Ignes Fatui, as all agree, appear
only in dark Nights, and commonly when late; at which time the benighted
Traveller wants to be at Home, or perhaps the Stories he has heard of the Jack
in the Lanthorn's leading such as follow it into Rivers, and other dangerous
Places, deterr him from going after it. But if it happened he was neither in
haste, nor afraid; it would be almost impossible to follow it in a dark Night,
amongst Bogs, Lakes, etc. where this Insect is usually sporting and frisking
over the Waters. Should we not conclude the Person, that would perhaps risque
his Life in attempting to catch what he thinks a Vapor, more infatuated than
the Ignis Fatuus he is in pursuit after.

It was never yet known that any Person approached so near this Light, as to
discover certainly what it was. But as some Persons have attempted to draw near
it for that intent (when by chance they have seen it in a Place easy of Access,
though not one in a thousand have had the Courage to venture) the cunning Vapor,
as if sensible of their Design, and for its own Security, withdraws its Light,
as it were a dark Lanthorn, and takes that opportunity to escape; leaving the
Ignis Fatuus Hunter in the dark amongst Bogs and Fens, to find his way out
again; whilst Jack in the Lanthorn appears again, two or three hundred Yards
off, sporting over the Brooks and Meadows, exercised in its beloved Employment.

It appears upon the whole, that the various Properties observable in these
Lights carry evident Marks of Sense; to attribute them therefore to fired
Vapors moving without any Direction, is an Explication that renders the
Subject but more unintelligible.

The late ingenious R. Bradley, F. R. S. his Opinion of these Appearances was
as follows. The Ignis Fatuus, says he, or Jack in the Lanthorn, I suppose to be
no more than a Group of small enlightened Insects, rather than suppose it an
inflammable Vapor, as some have taken it to be; for if it consisted of such
Effluvia or Corpuscula as rise from the Earth or Waters, that were inflammable,
and by some Cause or other had taken Fire, they could not be of so long lasting
or duration as we find them to be; and besides, we might as reasonably expect,
that all the Effluvia arising at the same time from the same Body of Water,
should equally be inflammable as these; and so the whole Surface of the Pond,
Lake, or River, appear all in a Flame at one time. The sudden motion of this
Light from Place to Place, very much agrees with the Motion observable in
Groups of Gnats, which move in a Body, sometimes very slowly, and at other
times drive together with great swiftness. Happening, says he, to discourse
upon this Subject with the ingenious Mr. Godfrey the Chemist, that Gentleman
told me, that he had often observed this enlightened Body in some Places abroad,
and had caught some of the Insects which helped to compose it. But allowing it
to be as I say, the occasion of the Light in such Insects remains yet to be
discovered.

Of all the Accounts that I have had from Variety of People that have seen
these Lights, and with which I could have filled a large Volume, I find no
material difference in their several Relations; only that some, and indeed the
most, have seen them in watery and boggy Places, others have seen them in dry
Grounds; to some these Lights appeared of the bigness of that of a middling
Candle (which most agree in) to others bigger, and to some smaller. I shall
therefore add no other Relations but what follows, from the Philosophical
Transactions.

Of the Meteor called the Ignis Fatuus, from Observations made in England by
the Rev. Mr. W. Derham, F.R.S. and others in Italy, communicated by Sir Tho.
Dereham, Bart. F.R.S. No. 411. p. 204. Philos. Transact.

It being the Opinion of diverse skilful Naturalists (particularly Mr. Fran.
Willughby and Mr. Ray) that the Ignes Fatui are only the shining of a great
Number of the Male Glo-worms in England, or of the Pyraustae in Italy, flying
together: I was minded to consult my curious and ingenious Friend Sir Thomas
Dereham about the Phenomenon, being informed, that those Ignes Fatui are
common in all the Italian Parts. But of the Pyraustae, or Fire-Flies, he says,
he never observed any such Effects, although there is an immense Number of them
in June and July. He says moreover, that these Pyraustae are called Lucciolae,
i.e. small Lights; and that they are not the Far-falls (as Mr. Ray thought)
which are Butterflies. But I have good reason to think, that Insects are not
concerned in the Ignes Fatui from the following Observations; the first of
which I made my self, and the others I received from Italy, by the Favor of
Sir Tho. Dereham.

My own Observations I made at a Place that lay in a Valley between rocky
Hills, which I suspect might contain Minerals, in some boggy Ground near the
bottom of those Hills. Where seeing one in a calm dark Night, with gentle
Approaches I got up by degrees within two or three Yards of it, and viewed it
with all the Care I possibly could. I found it frisking about a dead Thistle
growing in the Field, until a small Motion of the Air (even such as was caused
only by the Approximation of my self) made it skip to another place, and thence
to another, and another.

It is now about fifty five Years since I saw this Phenomenon; but I have as
fresh and perfect an Idea of it, as if it was but a few Days. And as I took it
then, so I am of the same Opinion now, that it was a fired Vapor.

The Male Glo-worms I know emit their shining Light as they fly; by which means
they discover and woo their Females: but I never observed them to fly together
in so great Numbers, as to make a Light equal to an Ignis Fatuus. And I was so
near, that had it been the shining of Glo-worms, I must have seen it in little
distinct Spots of Light: but it was one continuous Body of Light.

Thus far the Doctor has related his own Observation of an Ignis Fatuus. Before
I mention the Observations which Sir Tho. Dereham procured for him in Italy; I
cannot help remarking, that in the above Account the Dr. has given of an Ignis
Fatuus, there appears a much stronger Argument of its being a living Creature,
than a Vapor: For when with gentle Approaches he got up by degrees within two
or three Yards of it, he found it frisking about a dead Thistle growing in the
Field, until a small Motion of the Air (even such as was caused only by his
continual gentle approach) made it skip to another Place, and so to another,
and another. Its frisking and playing about a Thistle, agrees much better with
that of an Insect, exercised in seeking its Food, or some other delightful
Employment; as does its skipping from place to place likewise. For I can hardly
think it possible that the Air agitated only by his Body, considering how
gently he approached the Light, could have been sufficient so to affect it, at
two or three Yards distance, as to have driven it from him; but if this was
really the Cause of its first remove, its second, third, and after removes from
place to place, must be owing to something else: And as it was a calm Night, we
cannot attribute its flight to the Wind; nor does the Doctor in the least
assign that as the Cause, any further than what proceeded from his own slow
easy Motion, which was to my thinking insufficient to effect it: Besides, if
the Motion of the Air was the only Cause of this Light's moving from place to
place; it could not be carried along in one continuous Body of Light, but would
at least be spread, if not soon dissipated: But an Insect busied in seeking its
Food, or some other Employment, we may naturally suppose, that as soon as ever
it perceived itself discovered (which it might do by the help of its Light) it
would move off, in order to secure itself from any appearing danger: And this
Solution of the Motion of the Ignis Fatuus seems to me more agreeable to Truth
than that of a Vapor. And as to the Light's exceeding that which the Male
Glo-worm emits flying; and that he never observed them to fly together in so
great Numbers, as to make a Light equal to an Ignis Fatuus; there seems good
reason to believe, that all shining Flies can at pleasure add or diminish their
Light, or perhaps the Light's being more or less, may be owing to the Size or
Perfection of the Creature. But I believe it is not a collective Body of small
Insects that composes the Ignis Fatuus; but rather one single Animal, which of
what Tribe it belongs to, remains yet to be discovered.

The Lanthorn-Fly of the Indies, seems to be of the Papilionaceous kind; though
the Indians say it is produced from the Insect Fig. 3. page 52. which agrees
better with the Chafer or Beetle kind, than that of the Butter-fly. But whether
the Ignis Fatuus be of the Papilionaceous, Libella, Beetle-kind, or any other,
in must remain a Doubt, till time discovers it: And all that is intended in
this Attempt, is only to show the probability of its being a living Animal,
rather than a Vapor; because many of the Circumstances agree well with the
former, and hardly one with the latter.

The Observations which Sir Tho. Dereham procured for the Doctor in Italy
agreeing in the general with most other Relations, and the whole being too long
to insert, I shall only extract the Heads of what that Gentleman has delivered;
and then leave the Argument to some abler Hand, whose Time and Abilities are
better suited to examine the Subject.

In Italy there are of these Lights both on the Mountains, and in the Plains;
and are pretty common in all the Territory of Bologna. To begin with the
Plains: They are frequently observed there; the Country People call them
Cularsi; perhaps from some fancied Similitude to those Birds, and because they
look upon them as Birds, the Belly and other Parts of which are resplendent
like our shining Flies. They are most frequent in watery and morasse Ground, and
there are some such Places, where one may be almost sure of seeing them every
Night, if it be dark. In the Fields near the Bridge Della Calcarata, in a
Common belonging to a Parish of S. Maria in dono, North of Bologna, one of
these fiery Appearances is very often observed to move across the Fields,
coming from another Bridge. There is another of them in the Fields of Bagnara,
almost East of Bologna, which scarce ever fails to appear in dark Nights;
particularly when it rains, or snows, as also in cold and frosty Weather: Both
these Lights are very large; that at Bagnara appeared to a Gentleman, as he was
traveling that way; it kept him Company for a Mile or better; constantly
moving before him, and casting a stronger Light on the Road than the Link he
had with him.

Lesser ones there appear a good many, some of them giving as much Light as a
lighted Torch, and some there are no bigger than the Flame of a common Candle.
All of them have the same Property, in resembling both in Color and Light, a
Flame strong enough to reflect a Luster upon neighboring Objects all around.
They are continually in Motion, but this Motion is various and uncertain.
Sometimes they rise up, at others they sink: sometimes they disappear of a
sudden, and appear again in an instant in some other Place. Commonly they keep
hovering about six Feet from the Ground. As they differ in largeness, so they
do in figure, spreading sometimes pretty wide, and then again contracting
themselves: sometimes breaking to all Appearance in two, and a very little
while after meeting again into one Body; sometimes floating like Waves, and
letting drop some Parts like Sparks out of a Fire. I have been assured, that
there is no dark Night all the Year round when they do not appear. And in the
very middle of the Winter, when the Weather is very cold, and the Ground
covered with Snow, they are observed more frequently than in the hottest
Summer. Nor does Rain or Snow in any wise prevent or hinder their Appearance;
on the contrary, they are more frequently observed, and cast a stronger Light
in rainy and wet Weather. Neither does the Wind much hurt them, though one should
think, that if it was a burning Substance, like common Fire, it should either
be dissipated in windy Weather, or extinguished by Rain; (and the same we might
expect if it was a Vapor.) But since they do not receive any damage from wet
Weather, and since on the other hand it has never been observed, that any
thing was thereby set on Fire, though they must needs in moving to and fro meet
with a good many combustible Substances; it may from thence be very reasonably
inferred, that they have some resemblance to that sort of Phosphorus which does
indeed shine in the dark, but does not burn any thing, as common Fire does. As
to the appearance of this Phenomenon in mountainous Parts, by what I have
hitherto been able to learn, they differ in nothing else but in largeness; and
all those I conversed with, that saw them in the Mountains, agree in that they
never observed any larger than the Flame of an ordinary Candle. Nor do those
that live in the Mountains call them Cularsi, which Name is perhaps used only
by the Country People in the Plains, for those large ones above described. One
thing I will beg leave to add, that according to the best Informations I have
been able to procure, these Lights are great Friends to Brooks and Rivers,
being frequently observed along the Banks of them, perhaps because the Air
carries them thither more easily than any where else. In all other particulars,
as in their Motion, the manner of their Appearance, their disappearing
sometimes very suddenly, their Light, the Height they rise to, and their not
being affected either by rainy or cold Weather, they are the very same with the
Cularsi above described, or the large Will with a Whisp, as observed in the
Plains.

A young Gentleman, a very accurate and knowing Observer of Natural
Appearances, traveling some time in the Month of March between eight and nine
in the Evening, in a mountainous Road not far from our Lady Del sarso, about
ten Miles South of Bologna, as he approached a certain River called Rioverde,
he perceived a Light, which shone very strongly upon some Stones that lay upon
the Banks. It seemed to be about two Feet above the Stones, and not far from
the Water of the River: In figure and largeness it had the Appearance of a
Parallelopepid, somewhat above a Bolognese Foot in length, and about half a
Foot high, its longest side lying parallel to the Horizon: Its Light was very
strong, insomuch that he could very plainly distinguish by it part of a
neighboring Hedge, and the Water in the River; only in the East corner of it
the Light was pretty faint, and the square Figure less perfect, as if cut off,
or darkened by the Segment of a Circle: The Gentleman's Curiosity tempted him
to examine it a little nearer; in order to which he advanced gently toward the
Place, but was surprised to find, that insensibly it changed from a bright red
to a yellowish, and then to a pale Color, in proportion as he drew nearer; and
that when he came to the Place itself, it was quite vanished. Upon this he
stepped back, and not only saw it again, but sound the farther he went from it,
the stronger and brighter it grew; nor could he upon narrowly viewing the Place
where this fiery Appearance was, perceive the least blackness, or smell, or any
Mark of an actual Fire. The same Observation was confirmed to me by another
Gentleman who frequently travels that way, and who assured me, that he had seen
the very same Light five or fix different times, in Spring and Autumn, and that
he had always observed it in the very same Shape and the same Place; which to
me seems very difficult to be accounted for. He told me farther, that once he
took particular notice of its coming out of a neighboring Place, and then
settling itself into the Figure above described. How it comes to pass, that the
nearer one approaches to these, or the like fiery Appearances, the fainter they
grow, till at last they disappear totally, I freely own my self at a loss. This
is the Substance of what I have been able to gather from several Accounts
relating to the Ignes Fatui; but as to the Causes of them I will not pretend to
assign any: I will only add, that all that ever saw any of these fiery
Appearances agree, and you may assure Mr. Derham of it, that they cast a Light
quite different from that of the shining Flies; and if you please to reflect on
the several Circumstances above related, I believe you will find, that they are
not easily, if at all, to be solved by that Hypothesis.

Notwithstanding this Conclusion of Sir Tho. Dereham's, from the Circumstances
of his Relation, I am more strongly inclined to believe the Light proceeds from
a living Animal than I was before. For let any Person but examine the
particulars of the Account Sir Thomas has given of the Ignes Fatui; and try how
far he can reconcile them to the Appearance, or Notion of a mere Vapor.

In Italy, he says, there are observed two kinds of these Lights, one on the
Mountains, the other in the Plains; those in the Plains are the largest. The
Country People call them Calarsi, because they look upon them as Birds, the
Belly and other Parts of which are resplendent like their shining Flies; that
is, their Pyraustae, or Fire-Flies, and c.

One of these fiery Appearances was often observed to move across the Fields,
coming from one Bridge to a Spot of Ground near the other. Would a fired
Vapor, think ye, be so often raised at the same Place, of the same size, and
so constantly go to the same Spot, and there fix it self? Can such an Action be
reconciled to the Notion of a Vapor? Is it not more agreeable to that of
Sense? It rather looks as as if some shining Animal sallied out at such a time
from its lurking Hole, or Place of retreat.

Another of these larger Lights appeared to a Gentleman as he was traveling,
and kept him Company for a Mile or more, constantly moving before him. How a
Vapor could do this, is beyond my Comprehension, or I believe any one's else.
As to the different Magnitudes of this Light, that is undoubtedly owing to the
different Creatures that emit it, or perhaps to the size or perfection of the
Insect.

The Ignis Fatuus appearing in a dark Night in any Weather, as Rain, Snow, and
the like; at which times they are observed to cast a stronger Light; agreeeth
much better with an Animal than a Vapor; because the shining Matter in an
Insect being enclosed, can receive no damage from any kind of Weather: whereas
a Vapor would either not be exhaled, or would soon be dissipated by the weight
of the Rain, and c. But an Insect at such a time stands in need of more Light,
and therefore displays its utmost.

As to the Ignis Fatuus that appeared to the young Gentleman, in figure and
size of a Parallelopepid, and c. which Observation was confirmed by another
Gentleman, who frequently traveled that way, that he had seen the very same
Light five or six different times, in Spring and Autumn; and that he had always
observed it in the very same shape, and the same place; and that once he took
particular Notice of its coming out of a neighboring Place, and then settling
itself into the figure above described; let any Person but duly consider the
Circumstances above related, and (as I said before) try if they can be
reconciled to the Existence and motion of a Vapor. Sir Tho. Dereham freely
owns himself at a loss to account for this; as well he might in supposing it a
mere fired Vapor. Mistaken Notions, by skilful Advocates, are often made to
appear like Truth; but Truth itself, though defended by far meaner Parts,
generally carries a stronger Conviction.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE following Account of an Ignis Fatuus I had from an intimate Friend, an
Apothecary in London, since the foregoing Dissertation on this Subject was sent
to the Press: Its confirming in a great measure some things that I delivered as
Conjectures only, made me the more willing to insert it.

Himself, in company with two other Persons, saw one of these Appearances in a
Garden about nine of the Clock in a dark Night: They at first imagined it some
Country Fellow with a Lanthorn, till approaching within about six Yards, it
suddenly disappeared; and in a small space of time appeared in a dry Field,
about thirty of forty Yards off. It disappeared as suddenly a second time, and
was seen again near an hundred Yards off; from thence it removed to a further
distance, and so to a further; till at length they spied it in another Field,
parted from the first by a thick Hedge, and so from Field to Field. Whether it
went over, or through the Hedge, could not be observed, because it passed from
one Field to the other whilst dark.

This Gentleman told me he had seen this Light diverse times afterward; it
always appeared the same, without any discernable difference either in bigness
or figure, and that several other Persons had seen it likewise.

Once he saw this Appearance in a dry Field, fixed, without Motion; the same
two Persons being with him that saw it in the Garden the first time, agreed to
try how near they could get to it; and having approached within ten or twelve
Yards, one of the Persons was for running to catch it; which hasty Proceeding
made it immediately vanish: It appeared again at little distances as before,
but seemed to pack away as it were in a Fright.

These Observations were made at Astley, seven Miles from Worcester.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE ANIMALS and VEGETABLES Described in this Volume.
BOOK I. Of four-footed BEASTS.
BEzoar Goat Page 1 Musk-Goat Page 2 Shamoy, or Rock-Goat Page 3 Shagreen Page
3 Antelope Page 4 Sea Skink Page 4 Indian Man-Tiger Page 5 African Man-Tiger
Page 5 Word Dormouse Page 6
BOOK II. Of BIRDS.
AVosetta Page 7 Bearded Titmouse Page 8 Jacobine Pigeon Page 8 Frigate Bird
Page 9 Bengal Jay Page 10 Bengal Quail Page 10 Bohemian Jay Page 11 Banana Bird
Page 11 Warwovwen Page 12 Little. Owl Page 13 Little Horn-Owl Page 13 Hoopoe
Gock Page 14 Hoopoe Hen Page 14 Flarumant Page 15 Carafow Cock Page 16 Carafow
Hen Page 16 Red Bird Page 17 Ganser Page 17 Red-wing'd Starling Page 18
Red-legg'd Horseman Page 18 Green Crown-Bird Page 19 Long-tail'd Humming Bird
Page 19 Porphyrio Page 20 Amadavad Bird Page 21 Crown Bird from Mexico Page 21
Bird of Paradise Page 22 Cock Maccaw Page 23 Hen Maccaw Page 24 Yellow Lawrey
Page 25 Green Paroqueet Page 25 Green Parrot Page 26 The Lawrey Page 26 Batt
Page 27
BOOK III. Of FISHES.
CUttle Fish Page 28 Croker Page 29 Bone-Fish Page 30 Ising-glass Fish Page 30
Black-Tail Page 31 Sea Squirrel Page 32 Green Eel Page 33 Fresh Water Perch
Page 34 Rudder-Fish Page 34 Lane Snapper Page 35 Sea Hawk Page 35 Bahama
Unicorn-Fish Page 36 Blue Fish Page 37 Old Pudding-Wife Fish Page 38 Hog-Fish
Page 39 The Grunt Page 40 Pork-Fish Page 41 Schoolmaster Fish Page 42 Old-Wife
Page 43 Old Husband Fish Page 44 Yellow Fish Page 45 Negro Fish Page 45 The
Tang Page 46 Rock-Fish Page 47 Hind-Fish Page 48 Shad Page 49 Soldier, or
Craw-Fish Page 49
BOOK IV. Of INSECTS.
A Curious Indian Caterpillar Page 51 A Fly produced from the above Caterpillar
Page 51 An Indian Chafer Page 52 A Fly from that Chafer Page 52 Silkworms Page
53 Butterfly Page 56 A curious Indian Beetle Page 57 An Indian Black Beetle
Page 57 An Insect that feeds on the Grape Page 58 A beautiful Indian Chafer
Page 59 Locust Page 60 Cock-roch Page 61 A large Indian Spider Page 62 English
Spiders Page 63 Curious Observations on the Jumping Spider Page 64 -- on the
Carter, or Long-legg'd Spider Page 67 Tarantula Page 70 Ants, or Pismires Page
73 Blue Fly Page 76 Book-Worm Page 79 Book-Spider Page 81 Wevil, or Corn-Beetle
Page 82 Indian Frog, etc. Page 83 Indian Lanthorn Fly Page 111
BOOK V. Of PLANTS, FRUITS, and FLOWERS.
COffee Page 85 Tea Page 86 Cocao, or Chocolate Tree Page 87 Sugar Cane Page 88
Nutmegs and Mace Page 89 Cinnanon Page 90 Cloves Page 92 Pepper Page 93 Ginger
Page 94 Currants and Raisins Page 95 Pomegranate Page 96 Rice Page 97 Cork-Tree
Page 98 Tobacco Page 99 Cotton Page 101 Mandrake Page 102 Balm of Gilead Page
104 Cedar of Libanus Page 105 Ananas Page 106 Great American Aloe Page 107
Sensible Plant Page 109
Printed by JOHN TILLY, 1736.


