AN ACCOUNT OF THE EXTRAORDINARY MEDICINAL FLUID, CALLED ETHER.

By M. TURNER, SURGEON, IN LIVERPOOL.

PRINTED BY JOHN SADLER, MDCCLXI.

THE Publisher of the following short Account of the ETHER having prepared,
and successfully made Use of it in his private Practice, for several Years, has
at length determined to endeavor to extend it is Utility, by thus making it
public; as he knows of no one who has ever published it is medicinal Virtues; or
offered it to Sale in it is Perfection; or given the Criteria by which they who
are unacquainted with it might distinguish the Genuine from the Spurious: And
he doubts not but every candid Person who examines it, will agree with him,
That it carries with it the strongest Marks of a valuable Addition to the
Materia Medica, and therefore ought to lie no longer in Obscurity.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE ETHER, etc.
THIS truly extraordinary Chemical Preparation is not a new Discovery, having
been known and esteemed, as a valuable Curiosity, by many of the greatest
Chemists and Philosophers, both Ancient and Modern; particularly by Sir Quere
31st, at the End of his Optics.
Isaac Newton, and the Honorable Treatise on the Producibleness of Chemical
Principles.
Mr. Boil, who both mention it in their Works, though not by this Name: And
therefore before any Thing is said of it is Virtues as a Medicine, it may not be
improper to explain the Nature of it, and enumerate a few of it is remarkable
Properties, considered as a Curiosity in Chemistry, in which Light chiefly it
has hitherto been viewed by those who have been acquainted with it.

IT is a kind of ETHEREAL OIL, produced by the Decomposition of the Vinous
Spirit by Means of the Vitriolic Acid, and differs essentially both from Vinous
Spirits and Essential Oils in several Respects, though it agrees with them in
some, as will appear hereafter: But as the Vinous Spirit may be decomposed by
means of all the three Mineral Acids, viz. the Vitriolic, the Nitrous and the
Marine, and as these all act differently on the Spirit, they will, of Course,
produce three different Kinds of ETHER; which, from the Name of the Acid
employed in making them, are termed Marine, Nitrous, or Vitriolic: The last
only is the Kind here understood, it is Properties being more singular and
extraordinary, and, as an ETHER, more perfect than either of the others; the
Reason of which seems to be, that the Vitriolic Acid is a much stronger Agent
on the Spirit, and more perfectly decomposes it, than either the Nitrous or
Marine.

IT is the most light, most volatile, and most inflammable, of all known
Liquids: It swims upon the highest rectified Spirit of Wine as Oil does upon
Water, and flies away so quickly as hardly to wet a Hand it is dropped upon;
from which Properties it probably has obtained it is Name. It is so readily
inflammable, as to take Fire at the approach of a Candle, before the Flame
touches it. Any Electrified Body will also produce the same Effect.

IT is one of the most powerful Solvents known in Chemistry: It is neither acid
nor alcaline, and therefore is perfectly free from that faline Acrimony with
which all the common Volatile Spirits abound: It has a greater Affinity with
Gold than Aqua Regia has, although it will not dissolve it in the Mass, or whilst
in it is Metallic Form; but if you add ETHER to a solution of Gold in Aqua
Regia, it presently takes all the Gold from it is former Solvent, keeping it
perfectly dissolved and suspended, without the least Precipitation; and becomes
of a yellow Color: The ETHER, thus saturated with the Gold, does not mix with
the Aqua Regia, but may readily be separated from it by simple Decantation, and
thus a true and safe Aurum potabile is readily prepared for those who want such
a Medicine. The Union of these two Substances is very remarkable, one being the
heaviest solid Body we know, and the other the lightest Liquid.

THE ETHER is remarkably cold, when dropped upon the Hand, and it affects the
Thermometer in an extraordinary Manner; for if the Ball of either a Mercurial
or Spirituous Thermometer be immersed in it, the Spirit or Mercury immediately
sinks considerably, though both the ETHER and the Thermometer have stood a
sufficient Time together to be brought to the temperature of the Room, before
the Experiment was made. The Thermometers dipped into Water, or Spirit of Wine,
in the same Manner, suffer not the least Alteration.

THEY who choose to see a further Account of the singular Effects which this
curious Fluid produces, may peruse what Doctor Frobenius, a German Chemist, has
published concerning it, in the Philosophic Transactions for the Years 1733 and
1741.

BUT the most valuable Qualities of the ETHER are it is medicinal ones; it
having been found by repeated Experience to be an excellent Remedy in most
nervous Diseases; particularly in FITS of all sorts, whether Epileptic,
Convulsive, Hysteric, Hypochondriac, or Paralytic: In habitual HEADACHES,
GOUT, RHEUMATISM, PAINS IN THE STOMACH, WINDY DISORDERS OF THE STOMACH AND
INTESTINES, HOOPING COUGH, ASTHMA, PLEURITIC PAINS, and DEAFNFSS; all which
Diseases have, in a singular Manner, been removed by it; and that the Publisher
may contribute all the Assistance he can in extending the use of this Medicine,
the following Methods of applying it are given, which have been attended with
Success.

Particular Directions for using the ETHER. In the HEADACHE.
A FIT of the Headache is almost instantly removed by applying the ETHER
externally to the Forehead, by means of a bit of Linen Rag, in the Manner
hereafter directed for it is external Application. Or it may be applied to any
other Part of the Head where the Pain lies, being first shaved, if necessary.
If the Pain is violent, a Dose of it should be also taken inwardly. In stubborn
Cases it will likewise be serviceable to snuff a little of the ETHER up the
Nostrils, either alone or mixed with equal Parts of Lavender Water, Hungary
Water, or Brandy; or it may be more convenient to apply a bit of Linen Rag,
wetted with ETHER, up the Nostrils. Any of these Means, or all of them, must
be repeated if the Pain is so urgent as to require it. To cure this Disorder
radically, when it is of long standing, and to prevent it is Return, the
Medicine must be taken inwardly for a considerable Time every Night at
Bedtime, or in violent Cases, every Night and Morning, in a small Draught of
cold Water, according to the General Direction for taking it inwardly, given p.
11. In some particular Cases, Vomits are very serviceable.

A VERTIGO.
A VERTIGO, Giddiness, or Swimming in the Head, will generally be removed by
proceeding in the sam Manner as for the Headache.

The EPILEPSY.
No Disease is more difficult to cure than the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness;
yet several Instances have occurred where the most violent Degrees of it have
been cured, even in grown Persons, by taking a Dose of this Medicine regulary
every Night and Morning for a considerable Time. The Dose must be regulated
according to the Age of the Patient, as mentioned in the General Direction,
Page 11. If a Pain is felt in any Part of the Head, the ETHER must be applied
to that Part occasionally, and it must be previously shaved, if necessary. It
will be proper to give a small Dose of Tinctura Sacra, or of the Pill. Rufi, at
proper Intervals, as once a Week or Fortnight. It will also, in most Cases, be
necessary to give now and then a Vomit. If it be suspected that the Patient has
Worms, proper Medicines to destroy them ought also to be given.

In CONVULSIONS.
IN Convulsions, or Convulsive Disorders, give the ETHER inwardly, a Dose two
three Times a Day, or oftener, according to the exigence of the Case; and it
should also be applied externally to the Forehead, or any other Part of the
Head, during the Fit. If the Patient is full of Blood, bleeding is necessary,
and if Costive, a Dose of Manna, Senna, or any gentle Laxative, or a Clyster,
should be given.

Hysteric and Hypochondriac DISORDERS.
THIS Medicine has excellent Effect in Hysteric Fits, and in all that Train of
Symptoms which Hysteric and Hypochondriac Persons are subject to; such as
Risings in the Throat threatening Suffocation, difficult Breathing, Flutterings
and Palpitations of the Heart, frequent Fainting, Lowness of Spirits, violent
Pains in the Head, Languor of the whole Body, Dullness of the Mind and Senses,
with constant Anxieties and Inquietude, etc. The Dose must be repeated
according to the urgency of the Symptoms; and the Medicine must be continued
some Time after the Complaints disappear, to prevent a Relapse. It will be
serviceable during the Use of the ETHER, especially in Case of Costiveness, to
take at proper Intervals a gentle Purge, such as Tinctura Sacra, Pill. Rufi,
Rhubarb, or Glauber's Salts. Bodily Exercise of all sorts contributes greatly
to the Cure of these Complaints, especially Riding on Horseback.

PALSY.
IN Palsies, and all Paralytic Complaints, the Patient, if a grown Person, must
take the quantity of a Tea Spoonful of the ETHER every Night and Morning. The
Dose must be lessened in young People, according to their Age. It will also be
proper to snuff a little of it up the Nostrils once or twice a Day, or apply a
bit of Rag wetted with it up the Nostrils. The ETHER must also be applied
externally to the Part affected, at least once every Day. It should likewise be
applied now and then to the Forehead, or any other part of the Head, especially
if the Tongue, Eyes, or any part of the Face or Head be affected. If the Arms
or Hands are Paralytic, the Application should be made to the lower and back
Part of the Neck, as well as to the Part affected. If the Disease has seized
the Thighs, Legs, or Feet, the Application must not only be made to them, but
likewise to the Back Bone, at the Loins. As this Medicine cannot, on account of
it is Volatility and Pungency, be properly applied to the Whole of a Paralytic
Limb at once, but only to a small Part of it, the Application therefore may be
made sometimes to one Part, and sometimes to another, as shall be thought
proper.

THIS Disease will require a longer or shorter Continuance of these Means,
according to the Degree of it, and the Time it has continued. A Vomit should be
given, and repeated now and then as the Patient can bear it; but if Vomits seem
too fatiguing, a Dose of Tinctura Sacra may be given in their room. Paralytic
Patients should use as much Bodily Exercise as possible, and the Head, Neck,
and the whole Spine, as well as the Parts affected, should be frequently rubbed
with a hot and dry Cloth till they appear red.

GOUT.
THIS Medicine is of singular Service in the Gout, not only while it continues
in the Limbs, but particularly when it flies inwards, and attacks the Head,
Stomach, or any of the internal Parts; in which Cases a few Doses will not fail
to give present Relief. It should be taken in the Quantity of a Tea Spoonful,
two or three Times every Day, or oftener, if the Case be violent, during the
Gouty Fit. It carries off the Gouty Matter by Urine, which it renders very
thick and turbid. At any Time when there is a Necessity to abate the excessive
Pain in the Part affected, the ETHER may be applied to it externally,
according to the Method given p. 12. It will be proper to continue taking the
ETHER once or twice a Day for some Time after the Fit is gone, and to begin
taking it again about the Time of it is expected Return; by which Means, though it
may not prevent the Return of the Fit, which in many Cases perhaps ought not to
be desired, yet it will shorten it is Continuance, and moderate the Pain of it.

RHEUMATISM.
IN Rheumatic Complaints the Patient must take a Dose of this Medicine every
Night and Morning, or oftener, if the Pains are violent; and it must be
continued till the Disease is removed, or longer, to prevent a Relapse. If the
Pain is fixed in any particular Part, the ETHER must be applied to it twice a
Day, as directed hereafter. It must be observed that (...) very much conduces
to the Cure of obstinate ^^^^^ic Rheumatisms, and must be repeated at proper
Intervals if necessary; the Blood in this Disease being generally very sizy.

Disorders of the Stomach and Intesti^^^.
THIS Medicine presently cures Flatulent Cholics, removes all Windy Disorders
of the Stomach and Intestines, and corrects Acidities lodged there. It is also
found to have excellent Effect in correcting that Weakness, or bad Habit of the
Stomach and Intestines, which studious Persons, and such as lead sedentary
Lives, are particularly subject to, and is attended with four Belchings,
Heart-burn, Windy Distensions, Pain and Uneasiness in the Stomach and Bowels.
It must be taken every Night and Morning, according to the General Direction
below. Care should be taken to prevent Costiveness in these Cases, which is
best removed by chewing Rhubarb, or taking it any other way, or by a Dose of
Manna, or Glauber's Salts, taken occasionally.

THE ETHER is an extraordinary Diuretic in DROPSIES: It is an excellent
Medicine in an ASTHMA, and the HICCUP; and may be looked upon as a Specific in
that Disease of Children called the HOOPING-COUGH, or CHIN-COUGH; in all which
Cases it must be taken inwardly, according to the General Direction below, and
the repetition of the Dose must be regulated by the violence of the Disease.

A DOSE of it taken at going to Bed, after Drinking too freely, has been found
to prevent the Headache, Sickness, etc. which usually follow next Morning.

IT has removed DEAFNESS, and Hardness of Hearing, by moistening a little
Cotton with a few Drops of it, putting it into the Ear, and holding the Finger
for a few Minutes over it, at the same Time snuffing a few Drops of it, mixed
with Spirit of Lavender, up the Nostrils, or putting a bit of Rag wet with the
ETHER alone up the Nostrils.

IT has frequently removed a temporary DIMNESS OF SIGHT, attended with a
Swimming or Uneasiness in the Head, by external Application to the Forehead;
and is a promising Medicine in that Sort of Blindness called a GUTTA SERENA,
and in Beginning CATARACTS, in which Cases it should be taken inwardly, as well
as applied to the Forehead, and up the Nostrils.

IT is likewise found to be of great Service in removing PLEURITIC PAINS, and
STITCHES in the Side, by applying it to the affected Part, in the Manner
directed for external Application.

The Method of taking the ETHER Inwardly.
THE General Dose for a grown Person is a common Tea Spoonful; and the best
Vehicle to take it in is a small Draught of Cold Water. If it be only stirred
in the Water with the Spoon, and the Mixture drank immediately it strikes the
Nostrils by it is Volatility, but may be thought by some as agreeable when so
taken as when the two Liquors are more intimately mixed, by shaking them
together in a Phial, and from thence pouring them into a Glass to be drank; for
though it has but little Smell in this Manner, it is more warm to the Palate than
in the other. The Patient may use the Way of Mixing he likes best, and if he
has any Objection to Water, may take it in any other agreeable cold Liquor.
Children in the Month may take two or three Drops for a Dose; those of a Year
old may take seven or eight Drops; those of five or six Years old may take from
twenty to twenty-five Drops, and so increasing according to their Years: Or it
may perhaps be better, in giving it to Children, to mix a Tea Spoonful of
ETHER, with a convenient Quantity of Water, and, shaking it well, give at a
Dose about one twentieth Part of this Mixture to a Child a Month old; about one
eighth Part to a Child twelve or fourteen Months old; to those about five Years
old one third Part of the Mixture; half of the Mixture to those about seven
Years old, and two thirds of it to those about fourteen Years old.

The Method of applying the ETHER Externally.
To apply it Externally, you must procure a Bit of Linen Rag, of such a
Dimension as to be conveniently covered by the Palm of the Hand; moisten this
Rag with a little of the ETHER as it lies upon your Palm, and instantly apply
it to the Part affected, pressing it very close, so as to prevent the Escape of
it is Fumes, for two or three Minutes, in which Time the Rag will be found dry,
and may be taken away. It will be more convenient, on some Occasions, (as in
applying it to Paralytic Parts, Rheumatic Pains, and the Gout, to place the Rag
upon a Piece of a soft, thin Bladder; and, when moistened with the ETHER, ^o
bind it gently upon the Part. A slight Redness usually appears upon the Part
after the Application, but it quickly vanishes; but it may sometimes happen,
where the Skin is very tender and too much ETHER has been applied to the
Forehead, or within the Ears, that it may affect the Skin more than the Patient
chooses; which is avoided by applying a less Quantity for the future. This is
the Secret of a present famous Practitioner, who having a Method sometimes of
concealing his Application, is said to cure the Headache, fixed Rheumatic
Pains, etc. by the Touch of his Hand.

IT is very easy to conceive, from the extreme Subtlety of this Medicine, that
it must produce many excellent Effects in such Diseases as those above
mentioned, as it is converted into Vapor by a much less Heat than the common
Animal One; so that being swallowed, it can hardly subsist in any Part of the
human Body under any Form but that of an extremely penetrating volatiliz'd
Vapor; and it is perceptible by it is Smell, as it passes through the Pores of
the Skin, several Hours after taking; so that it is stay in the Body is longer,
and it is Effects there more durable, than might be expected from such a subtle
Substance.

NOTWITHSTANDING the extreme Subtlety of the ETHER, it is perfectly innocent
and safe to take, as it contains nothing that is acrimonious or corrosive; so
that it may be given even to the youngest Children without Hesitation. It
neither purges nor vomits; nor does it increase any of the sensible
Evacuations, except that of Urine, and sometimes that of Sweat, if taken when
in Bed; but as it is so distinctly perceived by the Smell passing through the
cutaneous Pores of those who take it, it is highly probable that it increases
insensible Perspiration.

ANOTHER observable Property in this Medicine is, that it does not coagulate or
thicken the Serum of the Blood, but thins it; and therefore has direct contrary
Effects to all the common Spirituous Compositions, when either taken inwardly,
or externally applied, and is essentially different from the most subtiliz'd
Vinous Spirits; for though Spirit of Wine is used in making it, yet it is so far
decomposed by the Process, that it is Nature is entirely changed. In consequence
of this Quality in the ETHER, the Publisher has successfully dissolved some
particular obstinate Tumors, by applying it to them, when other Means have
failed -- This Hint He hopes will not pass unnoticed by the Gentlemen of the
Faculty, as it is evident no Application whatever can equal it in Subtlety and
Dissolving Power.

THE Medicine so much celebrated in Germany, and so frequently commended and
used in Practice by the late famous Professor Hoffman, under the Title of his
Liquor Mineralis Anodynus, was nearly of the same Nature with the ETHER, but
not so powerful, nor so highly subtilized.

REPEATED Experience has confirmed the Efficacy of this Medicine in all the
Diseases before mentioned; and from the Consideration of it is uncommon
Qualities, it may be presumed to be an excellent Remedy in many others, if
judiciously given: Hence it seems surprising that so valuable an Addition to
the Materia Medica as the ETHER doubtless is, should have been so much
neglected, or so little known; but the Reasons are, that the Process whereby it
was made was kept secret by some who rated the Preparation at a very
extravagant Price, and not sufficiently attended to by others, who considered
it only as a Chemical Curiosity, not as a Medicine.

THE chief Merit the Publisher of this Account pretends to, is, the
ascertaining the Medicinal Virtues of this curious Preparation, by several
Years Experience, and making them more publicly known; the reducing it is
Price, which has hitherto been so extravagant that had it is Virtues and
Properties been known, only a small number of the afflicted could have enjoyed
the Benefit of it; and, the bringing it to a greater Degree of Perfection than
any hitherto sold; what he offers being a perfectly rectified Vitriolic ETHER.

IT may not be improper to give the Marks by which good ETHER may be known. It
is perfectly colorless, except it has received some accidental Tinge from the
Cork of the Phial in which it has been kept; and so volatile as to strike the
Nose very powerfully. It Is Smell is more or less sulphurous, according to the
management of some Part of the Process. Wetting the Finger with it, or dropping
a little upon the Hand, it vanishes instantly, and leaves no Moisture behind;
so that the Part scarcely seems to have been wet. Half a Dozen Drops, dropped
together upon a Table, will disappear in a few Seconds of a Minute, and leave
only the Appearance of a large oily Ring behind; but if it leaves the least
Watery or Spirituous Moisture, or does not evaporate in much less than a
Minute, it is not good. The best ETHER will dissolve in, or mix with, a
certain Quantity of Water; and that is the best which requires the largest
Quantity of Water to dissolve it: If, therefore, to six Tea Spoonsful of Water
in a small Phial, you add one of the ETHER to be examined, cork up the Phial,
and shake them very well together; and upon standing a little while some part
of the ETHER appears at Top, in form of Oil, sufficient to cover the surface
of the Mixture, it may be pronounced good, (provided it also answers in the
other Methods of Trial) and the more appears the better is the ETHER; but if
none appears, or not enough to cover the surface of the Mixture, it was either
adulterated, or not well rectified. If to this Mixture of ETHER and Water you
add a little Salt of Tartar, and any Fermentation ensues, the ETHER was not
well rectified. Upon shaking briskly a Phial containing ETHER, if the Bubbles,
or Proof as they are usually called, do not disappear in less Time, and in
larger Bubbles, than any other Liquor, (the Vinous Alcohol perhaps excepted)
it is not Genuine.

IT is the more necessary to observe these Rules of proving the Quality of the
ETHER, as the imperfect Sorts have been found to disagree with the Stomach,
and produce other bad Effects, besides disappointing the Patient's Expectation.

THE ETHER that has the forementioned Properties, (for there are Preparations
sold by the same Name, which are very imperfect Imitations of it) is made and
sold by M. TURNER, Surgeon, in Liverpool. The Ounce Phial two Shillings; the
Half Ounce one Shilling. The Phials are square; the Word ETHER inscribed on
one Side, and M. TURNER on the opposite, and sealed with a Lion gardant, etc.
Proper Abatement will be made to Druggists, Apothecaries, or the Gentlemen of
the Faculty who use any considerable Quantity. To prevent it is escape and loss,
a small Quantity of Water is put into each Phial, which should be kept with the
Cork downwards, by which Means the ETHER is prevented, by the interposition of
the Water, from evaporating.

THE Publisher has also appointed it to be sold by Mr. R. Board, Chemist and
Druggist, in Grace Church Street; and Mr. J. Wilkie, Bookseller, at the Bible
in St. Paul's Churchyard, LONDON: and Mr. Peter Wilson, Bookseller, in
Dame-street, DUBLIN.


