THE BATTLE OF RAMILLIA: OR, THE Power of Union. A POEM.

In Five BOOKS.

By Mr. DENNIS.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Bragg at the Raven in Paternoster Row, 1706.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES, Lord HALIFAX.
My Lord,
THIS Poem which was writ with a Design to show the Prevalence and Power of
Union, could to no Person be more properly Addressed than Your Lordship, who have
ever since You have appeared in the World been so great a promoter of Union.

In those great Offices of the highest Trust; in which Your Lordship has been
employed at the same Time, both by the Prince and the People, You have always
made profession of those Public and Noble Principles which alone are capable
of Uniting the Prince and the People.

And while in the late Reign the Commons of England hearkened to Your
Lordship's Advice in Parliament, they were united in their Inclinations and
their Designs to the great People whom they represented. The Nerves of War were
duly supplied, and that War was carried on Vigorously. The Greatness of France
was sapp'd by degrees and insensibly Undermined, and prepared to receive a
terrible Shock from the first Blow it should meet with. But as soon as Your
Lordship's Enemies began to prevail in those Illustrious Assemblies, a Spirit
of Parcimony ill Understood and worse Timed crept in amongst them, and forced
the best and most discerning of Kings to make a fatal Peace, which has
endangered the Liberties of all Europe, and the Power and Traffic of this
Kingdom; and has cost this Nation so many Thousands of Lives and so many
Millions of Money, and which makes us even at present contented, in order to
the ending this just and necessary War, to furnish those Supplies in the very
midst of Scarcity, which we then grumbling withheld in the Height of the
greatest Affluence.

My Lord, The late King who was so True and so Just a Judge of Men, was so very
well convinced of Your Lordship's Services both to the Crown and the People,
that He took care by two just and two grateful Acts, that is, by calling You up
to the House of Peers, and making You Auditor of the Exchequer, that Your
Country should never want Your Service in Parliament, nor the Crown Your
Abilities in the great Employments of the State.

The extraordinary Regard which so great a King always expressed for Your
Lordship's extraordinary Merit, provoked Your Enemies to endeavor to fix on
You the odious Name of Favorite, as they have since attempted to fasten it on
some of Your Illustrious Friends. But with how much Malice, or how much
Ignorance have both Attempts been made! For a Favorite is the Prince's mere
Creature, whose only Merit is His Sovereign's Favor, and such an Object of the
Prince's Favor is always that of the Peoples Scorn and Hatred, and often
exposes the very Sovereign to the same Contempt and Hatred. Sovereign Princes
are obliged by their Duty to God, themselves and their People, to show most
Regard for those who do most for the good of the People whom They govern. And
when they perform that Duty, even Kings are Justly Honored the more for the
Merits of their Subjects. How Happy is the Nation where the Ministers of Kings
become the Darlings of the People. How Happy was England during the Time of
Your Administration! When Your Lordship was united both to the King and the
People; when the People declared aloud by their Representatives in Parliament,
that You had deserved the Honors by which the King distinguished You! How
Happy are we now, when the Queen Employs the most extraordinary Persons in the
Highest Employments, whose Praises are celebrated by the August Assemblies of
Parliament, and ecchoed by every part of the Kingdom. Since never Princes were
more universally esteemed by the People of England than the late King and the
present Queen, it is an Infallible sign that the same People approve of their
chosen Ministers.

Your Lordship, who in the late Reign was constantly employed in uniting the
King and the People, or the People and their Representatives, has been justly
thought in this to be the fittest Person to maintain Union between the two
Sovereign Princes in whom England is most concerned. With how sensible a
pleasure do all who have the Honor to know Your Lordship, consider the People
of Hanover surveying You with a venerable Awe, as a Person employed in Affairs
of the Highest Trust and the Highest Consequence by the Two greatest Princes
that ever ruled the bravest People of Europe. The late King made choice of Your
Lordship to stand in the Breach which Faction had made in the Ramparts of
Liberty. The Queen has chosen You not only to resist but to attack Faction, and
to drive it from its last Retrenchment, by settling and securing an entire
Correspondence between Her Majesty and Her presumptive Heir. And the Queen
could not possibly repose a greater Trust in Your Lordship than by employing
You in an Affair, the Success of which, was of so dear concern to Her Majesty
as the securing both the Court of Hanover and Her own Subjects, of Her hearty
Intentions in Relation to the Act of Settlement. When that Court beheld in Your
Lordship so glorious an Example of the British Greatness, how were they exalted
to think what a People they were one Day to Govern, though may that be late. They
began to think some of their future Subjects equal to Foreign Princes, and Your
Lordship was entertained with the same Honors which are paid to them.

The great Things which Your Lordship has done for uniting the Prince and the
Successor, the Prince and the People, and the People among one another, and
for resisting the Force and Artifices of the Common Enemy, ought in gratitude
to unite the Inclinations of all English Men to Your Lordship. To whom we have
all so great Obligations, that we cannot so much as pay or receive the very
least Sum without reflecting on our Engagements to the late King, and to You;
to the late King, whose Image we see upon every single Piece, and to Your
Lordship who placed it there; when in the midst of the public Indigence (an
Indigence like that of Tantalus that plagued us in the midst of Plenty, when
the Miser rolling in full Bags might then first be truly said to be literally
poor) Your Lordship by a political and noble Alchymy transmuted Pewter and
sordid Brass to Silver and fine Gold, and by an Action so great and so
beneficent, secured real Property to those at Home, who had but the Shadow of
it before, and revived and restored the expiring Credit of the Nation abroad.
Since My Lord Treasurer by his admirable Management of the Nerves of War, is so
justly said to have had so great a share in the glorious Successes of the late
Campaigns, Your Lordship sure must have no small one, since without what you
have done, there could be no Management.

These, My Lord, are the public Reasons for Addressing the following Poem to
Your Lordship. There is a private one, and that is, that when a Man contracts
so great a Debt as to make him Insolvent, the least thing that he can do is to
acknowledge what he can never pay; thus Bankrupts, when they can make no other
return, send their Creditors an Epistle. I have lately had very great
Obligations to Your Lordship: You have been pleased to take some care of my
Fortune at a Time when I most wanted it, and had least reason to expect it from
You, since several things hindered my giving that constant attendance on You,
which Persons of Quality so scrupulously exact from those of Inferior Rank,
and with which, when Your Lordship is generously pleased to Dispense, You
plainly Declare, that Your Noble Notions of Liberty are not embraced by You as
they are by many, either out of Pride, or on the account of Interest, but by a
Principle of Exalted Reason, and Goodness, and Humanity. This is the first
Opportunity which I have had since I received Your Favors of paying my
Acknowledgments to You in so public a manner, which I desire Your Lordship to
accept with Your usual Goodness. But how false or how bounded is Human Virtue!
And how few are Grateful without a Design of engaging their Benefactors or
others to Heap more Benefits on them, by showing that they can be sensible of
them. This very Address to Your Lordship is not without an Intention of
engaging You whose Judgment in these Matters is acknowledged by all the World,
to defend, as far as Your Conscience will give You leave, one of the Boldest
Poems that has been writ for several Years. But I who konw the vast Business in
which You are engaged, am presuming enough to apprehend rather Your not Reading
than Your not Liking,

I am, My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, most Faithful and most obliged
Servant, John Dennis.

THE PREFACE.
THough the attempt which I have made in the following Poem is very bold, yet I
would not have the Reader believe it Rash. I think my self obliged, then to
satisfy him without any Delay, that it is by no means designed to be a just
Epick Poem. I know too little of the Nature of that Poem, and too much of my
own infirmity ever to attempt to write one. But though this can by no means pass
for a just Epick Poem, yet is it something of the Epick Kind, and bears the
same proportion to a just Poem that a short and a faint Essay does to a full
and a perfect Treatise.

That which threw me into this way of writing was the very Subject of the Poem.
The Duke of Marlborough has laid such High Obligations upon his Country, that
nothing can be said too much of him, nor done too much for him. And this
obliged me to endeavor to do something more Bold and more Great, than any
thing that I had endeavored to do formerly.

But no Poem that is not Religious can be great without extravagance or bold
without rashness, which has been formerly proved. But there were but two ways
of writing a Religious Poem upon this Occasion. The one was to do it by way of
Hymn, and the other was to introduce Machines. The former being anticipated in
the Poem which I wrote on the Battle of Bleinem; there remained only the latter.

But here I easily foresee that the following Objection will be made, and that
is, that since what the Duke of Marlborough has done is in its self so great
and so wonderful, what occasion was there to endeavor to adorn it by Fiction.
To which I answer, that because what the Duke of Marlborough has done is in its
self so wonderful that it appears incredible, and Truth it self has the
Resemblance of Fable and of Fiction, for that very Reason I was encouraged to
embellish it with the Ornaments of Poetry. This is the Defense that Boileau has
made for himself in his fourth Epistle, for introducing Machines into his
Description of the Passage of the Rhine. And if the Apology stands good for
him, as it has always past hitherto, it is still better for me. For my Machines
are Christian whereas his are Pagan, and consequently can raise no great
Emotion in the Minds of the Readers, because they are incredible, according to
one of his own Verses.

L' esprit n'est point emu de ce qu'il ne croit pas.
If any one objects that what I make my Machines say and act will no more be
believed than what Boileau Attributes to the God of the Rhine, to that I
answer, that though things did not actually pass before and in the Battle of
Ramillies, as they are related here, yet he who believes the Christian Religion
and a particular Providence, and Reflects upon a hundred Passages in the Old
and new Testament, must allow, that there past something not altogether unlike
it. We see it is the Opinion of the Duke himself, that the Hand of God was in
it, that Heaven, which leaves most Events to common Causes, was immediately
concerned in this. Now can any thing be more reasonable for one who believes
that Heaven was immediately concerned on one side, than to believe that Hell,
which our Religion tells us is always for opposing the great Designs of Heaven,
was immediately concerned on the other. Thus the Design of this Poem is built
and the Machines are introduced upon what happened to the Duke in the Battle,
and what he himself wrote to one of our Ministers of State after it.

Thus I have given an Account of the Design of this Poem; How well that design
is executed, I must leave to the Reader. As I have consulted my Friends who are
famed for their Judgment in things of this Nature, as to what relates to the
first four Books, and have had them by me long enough to form some Judgment of
them my self, I know the Fort and the Foible of them. For the fifth I have
neither had it by me long enough to make any Judgment of it my self, nor have I
had time enough to consult my Friends about it. And therefore if there is any
thing amiss in it, I must leave it to the indulgence of the Candid Reader. I
only desire him to take notice, that having formerly described with all the
Application of which I was capable, a Battle gained by the same General, I was
obliged to take a very different method in this Poem. I have only this to add,
that I have not said so much as I thought to have done, of the Important
Consequnces of the Battle of Ramellies, because I have some thoughts of writing
a Pindarick Poem upon that great Action of Quintus Flaminius, which restored
Liberty to the Grecian Cities. Between which Illustrious Roman and the Duke of
Marlborough, a very just Parallel may be drawn.

THE BATTLE OF RAMILLIA: OR, THE Power of UNION.
LIB. I.
OF Belgian Provinces by Unions Power
Delivered in Ramillia's Plain I sing.
I sing the Triumph of that wondrous Field,
Which raised the Fame of pious Anna's Reign
Above the Glory of great Henry's Days,
And equaled Marlbro' to Heroic Chiefs
In Natures Youth and happier Climates born.
O Thou whose Wisdom and resistless Power
Has brought to light this wondrous Birth of
Celestial Guardian of this Sacred Isle,
Genius of Warlike Britain, who awhile
Have, left eternal Glory and the Sway
Of some Triumphant Hierarchy of Heaven,
To shelter and protect these happy Realms;
Thou who with blissful Charity inspired,
Infusest Charity through every Heart,
And every Soul subjected to Thy Sway,
Teaching Thy much loud Britons to subdue
The Rage of France and Hell by Love Divine;
O dart such Rays of that Seraphick Flame
Into my Breast, that all my ravished Soul
May with immortal Charity be fired,
With Sacred Love of Britain's Godlike Sons,
That raised to Heaven by that Celestial Fire,
It may attain a Song of wondrous Height,
May take a Flight above the Anonian Hill,
And may proclaim thy Wisdom and thy Power
And their Heroic Deeds in such a strain
As no fictitious Muse can ere inspire.
Now was the Sun in Taurus mounted high,
And darting down his Genial Rays from Heaven
Directly to the Bosom of the Earth,
Called forth each Plant and every tender Flower
From out their Wintry, secret warm Retreats,
And restored Nature and renewed the World;
When the Confederate Troops called out by Fate,
And by their great Commanders awful Voice
Were from their wintry warlike Stations drawn
T'appear near Tongeren in fierce Array.
Full of that conquering Spirit they appeared,
Which drove the vanquished French over Blenheim's Field.
And in their Eyes a penetrating View
Might easily discern their Triumphs past,
And their amazing Victory to come.
All Nature seem transported at that Sight,
For Tyranny, Oppression, Discord, Fraud,
Injustice, Violence, and Barbarous Rage
Are all about to be expelled the Earth,
And in their room Simplicity and Truth,
Justice, Security and gentle Ease,
And Peace and spotless Innocence, shall reign;
Therefore all Nature smiled upon that Sight
And Gods, and Men, and Earth, and Heaven rejoiced.
But Hell's black Tyrant soon took fierce Alarms
Which to infernal Torments added Stings,
And to infernal Fury fiercer Flames,
And doubled the Damnation in his Breast.
Upon the Steerage of his dusky Wings,
Up through the Ocean of the Air he sails;
In the midway he stopped between the Moon's
Resplendent Globe, and Earth's refulgent Ball,
At his great Palace there by Magic hung.
And thither a tremendous Council calls
Of Friends who now were roaming round the Earth,
In order to subject it to his Sway.
Up strait upon the Wing the Spirits sprung
At the Tartarean Trumpets thundering call,
And high above the Atmosphere they flew,
The World was in Convulsions at the Flight,
Earth trembled, sighed the Air, the Ocean groaned,
Frequent, and full th'accurst Assembly grew,
Direful Appearances, amazing Forms,
Which barely seen had Power to look Despair
And Death into the Hearts of wretched Men,
And wither in one moment all their strength.
As soon as the Infernal Crew were sat,
Up from his Throne th'outragious Tyrant rose,
His wrathful Forehead to a Frown he roul'd
That darkened all the Sky, in fixing Plagues,
Inexprimable Terrors through the Souls
Of his Tartarean Ministers, that now
With sable Wings their flaming Eyes they veiled,
And they who had th'obdurate Hearts of Fiends,
They who to all Hells Horrors were Inured,
They who eternal Torments could endure,
They could not bear their raging Tyrants Wrath
But shook like Men who frightful Fiends behold.
Collected in himself a while he stood,
But when the horrid Silence had prepared
th'accurst Assembly for his dreadful Voice
Thus from his Breast his Rage in Thunder broke*
Are ye assembled then at my dread Call?
By Hell I thought ye durst to have disobeyed,
So light, so despicable in your Ears
Has been of late the Tempest of my Voice.
But ye not only are assembled here,
But what is stranger, with those cruel Looks
And that relentless Air, with which when last
I met you here, you vainly made your Boast
You would subdue the World to my Fell Sway,
Would constitute me Universal King,
And pull the Thunderer from his noisie Throne.
Yes, yes, ye have the Looks and Meens of Fiends.
But O dire Shame, to Hell, to me, to all!
Your Deeds are so unworthy the great Name,
So Poor, so Mean, so almost dully Good,
That one would swear ye were grown Friends to Men,
And Servants to my Rival of the Sky;
Can ye be they who made your threatening vaunts,
That ever yon Planet turned about the Sun,
(With that he pointed to Resplendent Earth
As toward the East her Magnitude she rolled)
It a subjected Province should become,
Like these bright Tracts of all surrounding Air,
To our black Empire of the boundless Deep?
Can it be you who promised to or'erturn
The Kingdom there established by Heaven's King,
Who there bears Sway wherever Reason rules?
Whose Empire is where ever Law commands?
For Reason is his secret whispering Voice,
And Law his proud Command promulg'd to all?
Can it be you who promised to extend
My Empire over all yon spotty Globe?
An Empire ruled by Men instead of Laws,
Where human Passion sways and human Will;
Passion infused by us, and Will by us
Suggested and insensibly inspired?
Have ye performed what vauntingly ye swore?
No, though your Interest and your Glory both
Demanded it: for know Aerial Gods,
Where humane Passion reigns, and human Will,
There we not only Reign but are Adored.
Of this be sure Religion come from Heaven,
Will never support an Empire raised by Hell;
Nor can the dreadful Empire raised by us,
Where Tyrant Man instead of Law controuls,
Endure Religion that from Heaven descends,
Cast but your Eyes wherever we command;
And Man our Proxy reigns instead of Law;
There Men adore some vegetable Power,
Or their old crazy Priest they make their God
Or madly to Fanatic Prophets fall.
There they bow down to Stocks and sensele^ Stones;
That is, to Us and our Delusions bow,
And Tremble at the Gods they could create
Why have ye then round Earth supinely roam'd
Regardless of the grand Concern of Hell?
Or are your old seducing Arts forgot?
Or know ye not my Interests or your own?
Cast but your Eyes upon her Silver Globe,
As through the vast Abyss of Sky she rouls,
See that peculiar People chose by Heaven
To propagate its Empire upon Earth,
Which they, it seems, call Liberty, call Law
See how with Hearts too large to be confined
Within The Eternal Fences of the Main,
They pass the Limits of the boundless Deep,
And every where my Rivals Rule extend!
Survey Earths shining Ball with sharpest Ken.
What Portion of her Planet can ye find,
But where the Glory of the British Name,
Or of her Councils or her Arms resounds?
Look what even now the Britons boldly Act
In rough Germania, in Hesperian Land,
In Celtiberian and in Belgian Fields!
Mark yon assembled Squadrons near the Dyle!
Behold the conquering Spirit in their Eyes!
Hell! ye have suffered it to rise so high,
It Is irresistible by human Powers
Unless by our Auxiliar Bands sustained.
See yonder their accursed Commander comes,
And yonder Conquest towering over him flies,
Whose well known Voice, the Goddess strait obey
As at his Master's call the Falcon stoops,
And his August Appearance is the Lure
That brings her swiftly rushing from the Skies*
If once he joins those Squadrons we are lost,
His high Appearance, when they once behold,
Hell can show naught so Dreadful and so Dire
As can dismay the greatness of their Souls.
Ye Hosts of Terrors, ye remember well,
That when our fierce Auxiliar Bands sustained
Our dear Allies in Blenheim's deathless Field,
The Britons, though to every human Power,
Invincible, were forced to yield to Ours;
But when great Marlborough came impetu^^ on,
And rallied them with that Heroic Air
With which he fires the Warlike Squadro^ Souls:
Ye Stygian Gods, what Miracles we saw,
How they who Trembled but the Moment past,
Before the King of Terror's awful view,
Now fought like Gods above the reach of Fate!
His God-like Presence in a Moment raised
Their sinking Spirits and dispelled their Fears;
His Voice, his sole Appearance made them bold.
With what resistless Fury they pressed on:
Drove you with matchless Bravery on our Friends?
Though I looked on, and though I menaced high,
But all my clamor was in Thunder drowned,
Till French and Fiends together vanished all,
And Howling sunk through Danube's Ghastful yawn
Down to our Empire of the Nether Deep.
Ye know, ye Stygian Gods, and often have read,
Within the Adamantine Book of Fate,
That more amazing Wonders are reserved
To be performed by Marlborough's conquering Arm,
Unless with all our Power we interpose.
Lewis by me, and Destiny designed,
T'extend my Empire and exalt my Name,
Above all Names that are adored on Earth;
Lewis, the Great, the Wise, the second Hope (...) Hell,
The Man, the Monarch after my own Heart;
Who never yet transgrest my dread Commands,
But makes them his Employment all the Day,
And Meditation all the watchful Night;
He, the great Image of my self express,
Presumptuous, Fraudulent, Revengeful, Prou^
Implacable, Inexorable, False,
Even greatly and heroically False:
Who watchful as a roaring Lion roams
With Jaws expanded to devour his Prey,
And makes Religion his Pretense for Fraud,
For Cruelty, for dire Revenge, for Murder,
And every noble, every slagrant Vice;
O way to banish Virtue from the World!
O great Invention envied even by me!
His Genius now from Marlborough's Genius shrinks,
And unless we support him, he must fall:
And can we then forsake The Immortal Man?
Ah no! such Merit claims that at his Need
To guard him from our fierce insulting Foes,
We raise the noble Arrierban of Hell.
If Lewis falls, our Empire with him sinks,
We meet a second more opprobrious Fall,
For even from Earth, for even from Dust we fall.
O shameful Fall for us who aspired to Heaven,
For us who made Divinity our Aim!
Then Law and Reason will victorious reign,
Then Liberty eternal will become.
Then odious Virtue will possess the Earth,
And every glorious Vice be driven to Hell.
Exert your selves, ye Furies then, and act
Deeds worthy the Antagonists of Heaven.
Can ye forget? what? utterly forget
What once we acted, and what once we were?
Ah no! ye never can, for in your Breasts
Some Spirits unextinguish'd yet remain,
Some of those Godlike Spirits that inspired
Our Angel minds in that Eternal Field,
When girt with Adamant and glorious Flames*
Against the Empire of great Heaven we fought*
I must confess we lost The Immortal Day,
But yet, we fought, ye Stygian Gods, we fought
With Spirit equal to the vast Design.
Fate gave our Enemy the Field, but Ours,
Ours was the Triumph, and the Glory Ours
Of great, aspiring, unexampled Minds
Who dared against the Omnipotent to War.
Can ye remember this? Can ye reflect
That ye for Angels were an equal Match,
And yield at last to Man, to Woman yield?
For it is a Woman, O ye Powers, destroys
This mighty Champion of our Cause and Us;
For she directs, she animates, she fires
Those who over Earth the Rule of Heaven extend*
It Is she who out of pure Despite to me,
Contemns a boundless Arbitrary Reign,
And thinks it lovelier Empire, fairer Fame,
Upon my Rival poorly to depend,
Poorly to wear a Crown that Law may Rule,
And to make Reason and The Almighty Reign,
Than be her self a Sovereign Goddess owned
And by the Kingdoms of the Earth adored.
Had ye the Spirit with which once ye flamed*
There needed not this long and powerful Speech
The Godlike Cause in which ye stand engaged,
The Cause of Empire and Eternal Fame,
Would move alone your Adamantine Hearts,
And urge you to great Acts, though I were Mute*
Behold yon World, that fluctuates in the void
Know that is the Victor's Recompense Decreed*
Now see your Female Adversary there,
See her a Suppliant, Earnest, Humble, Meek,
Behold her Prostrate, Abject on her Knees,
And Trembling at that Monarch of the Sky
Whom so magnanimously we defy.
No, ye can never see this and not disdain
That she should make that floating World a Heaven,
Which we so greatly strive to make a Hell.
Thus he blasphemed aloud, and while he spoke
The Assembly all the several movements felt
The various Passions that their direful King,
Who knew so well their Hearts designed t'Inspire
Now pleased, now sad, now trembling, now enraged
With Envy wracked, or burning with disdain,
Or with desire of fierce Revenge inflamed.
When he had done, unanimous they rent
The troubled Ether with a stormy Shout,
And to the Heaven of Heavens defiance hurled,
When suddenly a burst of Thunder broke
From the Empyrean, and the avenging Bolt
Through thousands drives, and thousands lightning Blasts;
Then as a flock of ^imerous Fowl takes Wing,
And seeks the inmost Covert of the Grove,
On hearing of the Fowler's fatal Gun,
That had of old their tender pinions galled;
So on the Wing the infernal Angels sprung
Upon the Empyrean Thunders roar,
And sought the midmost Regions of the Air,
And the black Hemisphere and Realms of Night
But soon their impious daring they resumed,
And up once more to the pure Ether slew.
Among the rest, there was a fantom Dire
Of all that fell from Heaven the fiercest Fiend,
The fiercest and most cruel Fiend that fell,
Discord, the Daughter of dire Lucifer,
Begot when his prodigious Lust ran high
On Pride, when with her hottest Flames she burned;
Gigantick was her Stature and her Looks
Like Demogorgon's ^ere, at which Hell shakes.
Her Native Country was the Heaven of Heavens,
But Heaven, as soon as born, disclaimed the Fiend,
With Lightnings and with Thunders drove her out,
For Happiness still fl^es the raving Fiend,
And Peace and Joy with her can never dwell.
As from her Birth she was expelled from Heaven
So by her cruel Father's dire Decree,
She banished was from all the Bounds of Hell,
As one who might elsewhere far better serve,
The growing Empire of her dreadful Sire,
But at her parting, half her Serpent Brood
She left behind, and to the very Heart
Her own inexorable Father stung,
That with the Torment ever since he roars.
Thus banished from high Heaven, and driven from Hell,
She among miserable Mortals dwells,
A false and most inhospitable Guest,
Who all her warmest Friends torments the most:
Though banished from her Father's Realms below,
Yet not one Fiend of all the infernal Host
Endeavors to extend, with so much Zeal,
The spreading Empire of Hell's horrid sway.
To others, or her self, no Rest sh' allows,
Alternately afflicted with th'Extreams,
Of burning Fury, and tormenting Fear,
And sharp Remorse, with all her deadliest Stings,
Armed all the Fears and Furies of her Soul;
To this infernal Council she was called:
And when the Whirlwind of Applause was over,
Up rose the Subtle and the Cruel Fiend.
As rising, her Gorgonian Head she shook,
With all its Snakes, that from their livid Eyes,
Shot Hell's blue Fire, and from their baleful Mouths
Darted a Thousand forky poisnous Tongues,
A thousand Hisses at The Assembly threw;
Each frighted Spectre gave a fearful Start,
As a poor Swain that underneath his Feet,
Spies a fell Adder bloated with his Rage;
And lifting up his angry Crest on high,
Springs back, while to his Heart his Blood retire*
And none but Lucifer himself had Power,
To cast one look npon the raging Fiend,
And he himself grew Stupid at the sight,
Like old Laoeoon's dismal Statue looked,
That seems not fashioned by the Sculptor's Art,
But shows a Wretch with Horror stupid grown,
And petrified with Woe and with Despair,
And as the hideous Hag began to Scream,
Th'accurst Assembly gave a second Start,
Th'accurst Assembly gave a dreadful Yell:
With equal fright shall all The Infernal Host,
And equal Horror hear at the last Day,
The sounding clangour of The Eternal Trump,
Which universal Nature shall untune,
And the bad Angels roaring drive to Hell,
Then bar the Gates with Adamantine Bolts,
Which then shall to Eternity be closed.
Such was her Air unutterably dire,
And such her hideous Voice, and thus she spoke.
Have we the Patience then of stupid Saints,
Ye Gods, to hear all this without Reply?
Nay, our insulting Tyrant to applaud,
For his unjust and barbarous Reproach?
But this, though spoke to all, is meant to me;
For without me, not all the Host of Hell
Has power t'enlarge its dreadful Monarch's sway.
Am I of want of Knowledge then accused,
Or want of Diligence t'extend thy Power?
O burning Indignation! O Disdain!
O slander, worthy of dire Lucifer;
And dare thou thus accuse me falsely here,
Upon this Throne of thy Imperial Power,
Encompassed with ten Thousand Spirits round,
By mighty Angels served, and even by me?
From whence is all this Pomp, this Power derived?
This Emulation of the Thunderers State?
Before I knew thee, what were thou in Heaven?
A servile Ministrel bred to Cringe and Fawn,
And flatter thy proud Arbitrary Lord.
But I an Emperor made thee of a Slave;
Of a base Flatterer, a Blasphemer bold,
The Rival and the Antagonist of him,
Whom thou so slavishly obey'dst before.
Millions of Angels to thy side I drew,
I gave them Spirit to assert thy Cause
Against thy thundering Rival and his Slaves;
In that eternal Day, which though we lost,
We triumphed in defeat; O matchless Fame!
For we dissolved his universal Sway,
An Empire by our overthrow we gained:
And thou a poor precarious Lord before
Becam'st the independent King of Hell.
I founded thy Dominion upon Earth,
I propagate in humane Hearts thy Sway:
For where I dwell not, thou can never reign;
No, there dull Union dwells, there lazy Peace
And Reason, and thy hated Rivals Law.
Have I not Lewis now for fifty Years
Inspired, possessing all his mighty Soul?
I fired that Soul to all those vast Designs
That made it worthy thee, and worthy me.
His sanguinary Orders I inspired,
And then performed them with this Bloody hand,
And all the European World laid bare.
'Twas I embru'd his fierce dragooning Slaves,
In Fathers and in Brothers guiltless Blood:
A Sea of guiltless Blood this Hand has spilt:
Thy Rival's Images by Millions I
In Rancour to The Original defaced,
That thou might Triumph over the vanquished World,
And Lewis might thy great Vicegerent Reign.
If now he flies before victorious Anne,
Can I with Justice be condemned or blamed?
Think thou it is to the Woman that I yield?
No, it is to him from whom thou fledst amain,
With this Assembly here of potent Gods,
And all the great, the united Host of Hell.
It Is to that Wisdom, and that Power Divine,
Which Day and Night on that victorious Queen,
As on the conquering Hierarchies attends;
Is it my Fault if that Religious Queen,
By every Action and by every Voice,
Inspires her Britons with Celestial Love?
If by thy Rival she is taught t'employ,
Great Souls by him and Destiny designed,
And by profoundest depths of Reason fit,
T'unite her Subjects first, and then Mankind?
Am I to be condemned, if while Abroad
Great Marlborough in indissoluble Bonds,
The thwarting Interests of the Nations joins?
At Home Godolphin temperates the rage
Of Factions, which for Mastery contend,
And makes Confusion, which is weakness, yield
To Order, which is Strength, as he Above
The Rage of warring Atoms reconciled;
Or causing them t'engage with moderate Strife;
Yet Strife, where that prevails, which most agrees
With those eternal Laws that Rule the Whole,
Mingled the Elements, and made the World.
I freely own, that those our Mortal Foes
Grow more pernicious to us every Hour.
They are come t'Associate now with William's Friends;
William, whose Name we Fiends with Horror hear;
Even with his firmest faithfullest Friends they advise
Who never shrunk from his detested side,
Though with a thousand Dangers compast round,
By homebred Traitors and by foreign Foes.
Th'audacious Men, who insolently dared
To set up Liberty and pull down us,
When France and Hell reigned Paramount on Earth,
When they had naught but Ruin to expect
From such a cursed desperate Attempt:
With these they now consult, in these confide,
And these victorious Anne delights t'employ.
To Spain she Mordant and Ravigni sends,
And Montague himself to German Plains
Is hurried, in extreme despite to me,
Where his wise Councils and his powerful Voice
Threaten my very Being to destroy,
And menace all this dreadful Host in me.
Therefore unless we make one last Effort,
One great Attempt that is worthy of my Rage,
Britain Farewell, and Tyranny Adieu,
Adieu, the Reign of Hell's despotick Sway!
Britain Unanimous as well as Free,
Will soon Enfranchise and Unite the World,
But not the pow'rfullest Fiend of all that fell
From Heaven, of all that own thy boundless Sway,
Dares make that horrible Attempt but I.
And now, even now, I form the glorious Plan,
As the Confederates by uniting Thrive,
Success continuing will Cement them more:
But their Felicity to come, depends
Upon yon Squadrons in the Belgian Plains;
Should they th'adverse Event of Battle feel,
All that Great Anne has done t'unite Mankind,
I can with Ease in one Campaign overthrow.
Yon Squadrons I have viewed and have reviewed
With all the Inquisition of my Eyes.
I viewed them, and I sighed, to find their Heads
And Hearts united by great Marlborough's Care,
Which makes them the just Terror of us all.
But here by Hell, and all Hell's Powers I swear,
Hear it ye God's, who rule the unbounded Air,
Hear it ye Horrors of th'Abiss profound,
Ye black Attendants on Eternal Night!
Hear it ye Deities, assembled here
In Council, to maintain Hell's horrid Sway!
And thou whom all these dreadful Powers obey*
Whose Frown makes Gods above, and God below,
And all the frighted Universe, except
The steadfast Empyraean Tremble; Hear,
Hear me great Lucifer, while by thy self,
Thy dire inviolable self I swear
That I with Spirit great as the Design,
Great as the glorious Cause, and worthy me,
I that audacious General will destroy,
I those victorious Squadrons will overthrow,
And still in spite of Earth, in spite of Heaven,
Discord, and Lucifer, and Hell shall reign.
She said, and not expecting a Reply,
Down toward the Earth she wheeled her airy Flight;
And Lucifer dismissed The Infernal Powers.
The End of the First Book.
THE BATTLE OF RAMILLIA: OR, THE Power of UNION.
LIB. II.
NOW in the midmost Region of the Air,
Descending Discord meets the Beldame Night,
As Westward she her Sable Chariot drives,
Old Night the Fury places by her side,
And her black shaggy Mantle o'r her throws.
As Discord sat by the dark grizly Hag,
Discord more hideous seemed, and Night more foul.
As they were hurried by their coal black Steeds,
And the soft Chariot slid through Midnight Air,
A motley Equipage before, behind,
And on each side the Journeying Furies flew.
For there flew Treason with her looks askew,
And Subornation clad in dismal Black,
And Stygian Envy of a livid Hue;
And yellow Jealousy with Eyes suffus'd,
And faithless Fraud in part colored Robe,
And Murder pale distained with sanguine Dye,
And ugly Slander speckled like a Toad,
With livid Spots upon a saffron Hue
Over her Arms, her Belly, and her Thighs;
But Serpentine her Head and deadly Eyes,
And from her Mouth she hurled her forky Tongue,
And hideous was her Hiss, and mortal was her Sting.
Then lame Adultery, and Incest blind,
And sly Hypocrisy, with Holy Leer,
Came lagging in the Rear with Reverend Gown,
And darting many a sow'r Grimace he flew,
And sighed profoundly with inverted Eyes,
And banged his Stomacher with sounding Strokes;
But all affected was, and all was false;
For nervous were his Limbs, and bold his Brow;
His dimpled Cheek was of Vermilion Dye;
His Chin a Fabric with two Stories built;
His wanton Eye Balls sparkled as they rolled;
His pampered side was with a sevenfold Shield,
Defended of impenetrable Brawn;
His Paunch was prominent above the rest,
And like a goodly Promontory hung.
The Silver Moon above th'Horizon peeped,
And frighted at the monstrous Scene retired;
The conscious Stars withdrew their sickning fires,
And Nature that abhorred the dismal sight,
Redoubled all the Terrors of the Dark.
As over Campania's Viney Downs they flew,
The Sentinels of Nature took the Alarm,
The watchful Dogs in every Village bay'd,
And hungry Wolves forsook their Prey to Howl*
And the winged Prophets of Nocturnal Sky,
The fatal Raven croak'd, the ghastful ScriechOwl scream'd.
When to the glittering Palace they approached,
Where Lewis in a restless slumber lay
Upon th'uneasy Down, from the black Carr
Discord alights, the golden Turrets shook,
The Doors flew open with a hollow Groan,
And the Fiend entered where the Tyrant lay.
Then throws off her immense Gigantick Form,
And the Gorgonian Terrors of her Front,
And Maintenon appears in Shape and Air;
And she, who a fallen Angel was before,
Is a decayed affected Beauty now.
When she the Royal Curtains drew, she saw
The Tyrant tossing on the restless Plume;
Haughty and Stern, and thoughtful even in Sleep;
Revolving mighty Mischiefs in his Mind;
His Forehead furrowed by an angry Frown,
And on his clouded Brow sat cruel Care.
And now and then he gave a fearful Start,
And from his Heart drew many a guilty Groan.
Even Discord gazed with Pleasure at that sight,
And the Fiend smiled that never smiled before.
And can thou Sleep in this malignant Hour,
Said she, when every Star's against thee leagued?
How fallen, how changed from that transcendant State,
In which the gazing World admired thee once,
When thou were grown the Terror even of Kings,
And dreadful Scourge of the Worlds potent Lords!
When thou the Earth so rapidly laid'st waste,
That Victory came panting in thy Rear,
And wanted Wings t'o'rtake thy impetuous March*
When Emulous of the Meridian Sun
Thy Glory blazed, and thou had Hope to shine
Sole Monarch of the desolated Earth,
As he sole Tyrant of the desert Sky.
Yet in those Happy, in those glorious Days,
No profound Sleep could ever lull thy Soul,
And rarely, rarely Slumber closed thy Eyes.
But all the Day, and all the live long Night,
Care kept thee watching, to inflame the World,
And to divide and to destroy Mankind.
Now by victorious Marlborough brought low,
Here thou lie buried in inglorious Ease,
While with unwearied Vigilance he wakes,
And even this now the vollied Thunder grasps,
That is about to part with hideous Roar,
And all thy trembling Provinces amaze;
Strike forty Thousand of thy Veterans dead,
Strike even thee dead their Arbitrary Lord,
And with thy Person kill thy very Fame,
Unless this Moment thou prevent'st the Blow.
What fatal Hour is lost in soft Repose?
Has adverse Fortune cooled thy towering Pride,
Or has Age quenched thy noble Lust of Soul,
And that aspiring Flame that raised thy Thoughts
To Affectation even of Godhead once?
Can he who aimed erewhile at nothing less
Than reigning King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
Can he a Rival bear in Empire now?
And art thou to a poor Despondence grown,
Of Lording it o'r all this Western World?
Yet have thou Reason to despond indeed,
Unless thou art eternally Intent
To disunite whom thou pretend'st t'o'rthrow
The few Gigantick Hunters of Mankind,
Who universal Empire here acquired,
All of them vast Advantages enjoyed,
Which Heaven and Nature have denied to thee*
Cyrus, great Caesar, and the Son of Jove,
Young Hammon, led their conquering Troops themselves,
Were themselves brave, sometimes to Rashness Brave;
And the undaunted Squadrons which they led,
When they were Conquerors, were always free*
And could a more exalted Virtue boast
Than those who yielded to their conquering Arms.
But here Thou li'st supinely at Thy Ease,
And buried in opprobrious Sloth, pretend'st
To do thy Work by Journey men of War;
Yes, by Thy baffled Mareschals Thou pretend'st,
Day Laborers, who for Thy Glory drudge,
To conquer Heroes fighting for their own,
Fierce Warlike People, Thou pretend'st t'o'rcome
By the Inhabitants of soft Anjou,
Or Squadrons in delicious Touraine bred,
And by dejected and desponding Slaves,
Freeborn magnanimous Nations to o'rthrow;
But Freemen never were vanquished yet by Slaves,
Nor Warlike Nations by a wanton Crew.
If in thy great Designs Thou would succeed,
Divide those Foes, and fight them with themselves,
Then by each others Arms enslave them all,
And what Thou want in Personal Command,
Or Valor; or the Hardness of Thy Troops,
Supply by Fraud and old notorious Arts.
But take Occasion by the Forelock still,
And let no Minute pass, no Moment slip,
That may be employed to disunite their Force,
And by dividing to confound their Power.
Such an important Moment is This now,
In which Thou lie dissolved in fatal Sleep,
The Reins of Empire yielding up to Chance,
And dead and stupid to the Charms of Fame.
But though thou slumber'st, know I always wake
And Day and Night over thy dear Interest brood*
To cherish it like tender Birds their Young.
And now am come, thou dearest of Mankind,
Dearer than Pleasure to me, dear as Pride,
Dear as the Godlike Pleasure of Revenge,
Am come to rouse Thee from thy inglorious Ease,
And my own Empire to advance in Thine.
True, said the Tyrant, who had all this while
Been shaking off the Downey Bands of Sleep,
If that a strong Desire to Rule the World,
Inspires and Agitates my Highborn Soul,
It Is but to lay it at thy Lovelier Feet,
And that the Ruler of the Land and Main
May be a happier Slave and worthier Thee.
And let the boundless Liberty you take,
Which had been Death to any one but Thee,
Declare the Boundless Power thy wondrous Charms
Have given Thee over even my ambitious Soul.
But why do Thou, who have the Power to pierce
The intimat'st Recesses of my Heart,
Who rul'st it with as Arbitary Sway
As I my self would all the World control,
So cruelly upbraid me without Cause?
Can thou believe, I poorly have given over
My great Design of Universal Sway?
Can Thou believe I lie extended here
Out of a low inglorious Indolence,
Or mean Despondence of Success, which ne^^
Can seize a towering fiery Soul like mine?
No, never shall my Soul Abatement feel
Of its high Passion for eternal Fame,
But as I Thee adore with fiercer Flame
Than all that in my warmest Youth I felt,
Even for the brightest of Thy charming Sex,
For Montespan, or lovely La Fontange,
Or tender La Valiere, so Age it self
Does but augment my noble Lust of Fame;
It Is my first Principle of Life, by which
I speak, and move, and act, and think, and am*
And Lewis, when that fails, must be no more.
O could I but the Weaknesses suppress
Of this frail Flesh, and conquer the Desire
And Need of Nutriment and soft Repose,
As I th'Infirmities have overcome
Of my great Mind, extinguishing Remorse,
Driving Compassion out, and stifling Shame,
Then without Interval the glorious Cares
Of Empire should employ my Aspiring Soul,
Under which now sometimes my Nature sinks,
And I by sordid Elements are forced
To feed the thinking Parts expiring Flame,
And seek new Life within the Arms of Death*
But soon I shake off his dull Chains, and then
At once to Life and Glory I return.
Whether 'twas partial Destiny or Chance
That gave Victorious Marlborough the Day
In a dire Hour, at Bleinem's fatal Field,
(O fatal Field to all my Aspiring Thoughts,
I will forget that ever Thou have been,
And think of Universal Sway again)
Yet to the Terror of my wondering Foes,
I still recovered that amazing Blow,
Renewed the fainting Courage of Troops,
My Loss recruited and retrieved my Power.
Me can Thou then of Indolence accuse,
Or of Despondence or abated Fire?
Me, whose unwearied Care has since oppressed
The Dilatory Germans on the Rhine;
Oppressed them on Verona's wondering Stream,
And obliged Fortune, in her own Despite,
Against her worthless Favorites to declare.
O I had laid a Scheme which would have sunk,
And utterly confounded all my Foes,
If Fate in Tempests had not interposed,
Upon the Adige and the Rhine I fought.
Only with Men, and there I found Success,
In Spain I was constrained to yield to Heaven,
For 'twas the loud Artillery of Heaven
That from me snatched the Celtiberian Tower,
And baffled my whole Providence at once;
But whence can this transporting Fury Spring,
Or what makes this the great deciding Hour?
To whom the Fury eagerly replied:
By that disastrous Disappointment Spain,
The Pride for which contending Nations fight,
Depends upon this very fatal Hour,
Which here Thou squander'st in inglorious Ease.
Spain is in utmost Danger to be lost,
Unless Thou rousing wilt prevent the Blow.
And Spain in Danger will deject our Friends,
And give more daring Spirit to our Foes;
And bind them in indissoluble Bonds.
Consider how they all prepare t'Unite,
England and Scotland stretch their Sinewey Arms,
Both eager in a strict Embrace to meet,
And for the future like two Sisters live;
By their great Mother's Wisdoms reconciled.
In England too by wise Godolphin's Care,
Faction has lost its Ferment and grows mild;
The very Tygress Faction is grown tame;
The Listless Germans whom thy wondrous Arts
So nobly have divided and brought low,
Some lucid Intervals of Concord find,
And public Spirit and Will surely leave,
Their shameful Quarrels and opprobrious Sloth,
If Spain should from thy baffled Arms be torn,
That Loss will calm the fierce Hungarian's Rage,
And Spirit jealous Venice to declare
Against th'Invader of fair Italy.
If Spain the Golden Prize of Battles lost,
No Stratagem, nor Violence, nor Art,
Can thy exhausted Treasury Supply.
And then thy numerous Armies vanish all,
And leave Thee to the Scorn of thy proud Foes,
Even thy own Slaves (and that is the Blow of Fate)
Even thy own vile obsequious Slaves will rise
And take rebellious Arms against their King:
Then from the Pyrenaeans to the Rhine.
Adieu Thy Conquests, and perhaps Thy Crown,
But naught, assure thy self can Spain retrieve,
But a surprising and stupendous Blow
Struck suddenly upon the Belgian Dyle.
A sudden and surprising Blow struck there,
While this the great Campaign of Fate begins
Will give thee sure occasion to detach
Part of thy conquering Troops to Philip's Aid,
To push thy Advantage on th'astonish'd Rhine,
Thy Friend the lost Elector to restore,
And penetrate to inmost Austria's Clime,
Which then in vain shall wait great Marlborough's Aid,
That will constrain the Empire to recall
The new Supplies to Illustrious Eugene sent,
And give thee time to finish Savoy's Fate.
That fatal Blow will once again divide
Confederated Powers, will Venice awe,
Exasperate the fierce Pannonian Mars,
Amaze the Germans, and the Dutch confound,
Prevent that Union now designed between
The English and the Caledonian States,
And in both Realms rekindle factious Rage,
Rouse up thy sleeping Arbitrary Friends,
Ferment them still with more fanatic Rage,
That our declining Empire will sustain,
And will advance through all the Christian World,
And wipe away the Stains of Bleinem's shameful Day.
To whom the grizly Tyrant thus replied:
O why have thou once more so rashly roused
The Serpent slumbring in my wounded Breast,
Which when awake still gnaws my mangled Head*
And greedily devours my vital Blood.
O Bleinem! bane to my aspiring Thoughts!
At whose Idea all come tumbling from their Height.
Bleinem! the Hag that in the dead of Night,
My Fancy rides and drives soft Sleep away;
The very Tyrant of my ambitious Soul,
Blast to my Hopes of Universal Sway,
Which wither ail and die when thou appear'st,
And only by forgetting thee Revive.
'Twas there by such a rash presumptuous Fight,
As what thou now provok'st me to Repeat,
That forty Thousand of my conquering Troops,
That always conquered till that cursed Hour,
Were, like ripe Corn in Autumn, mowed in Heaps;
Those Heaps in Ranks extended on the Plain,
Too plenteous Harvest of that bloody Field?
Which broke the Hearts and Spirits of the rest,
And interrupted all my vast Designs,
Made all my Friends despond, my Foes insult,
And laid my Weakness open to the World:
For as my greatness, and my awful Power,
Lay in Opinion more than real Strength,
The Opinion which the Nations had conceived,
Fortune was grown Immutable as Fate,
And always would attend my conquering Arms,
That fatal Days Calamities Event,
Undeceived all the Christian World at once,
And made me grow the very Scorn of those
To whom I was most Terrible before.
Me would thou have repeat, the dangerous risk
Of Battle, when thou have thy self observed,
That to subdue, I must divide my Foes,
And then enslave them by each others Arms,
That warlike Nations never were Vanquished yet
By softer Ones, nor Free born Souls by Slaves;
Know thou not then, that to divide my Foes,
I must remain, not only without Fight,
But without War, O Gods, for that blessed Hour!
One short lived Truce would more advance my Fame,
And spread my Empire, than ten Victories*
He said, and thus the subtle Fiend replied:
True, if Fallacious Truce thou could obtain,
I before Victory would Truce advise;
But since thy Foes have been so often betrayed,
And mocked all Hope of faithless Peace in vain,
Therefore the Mischief ill Success has done,
Must be by sudden Victory repaired.
Nor need'st thou run a dangerous risk to overcome,
What lost the fatal Day at Blenheim's Field?
What but Presumption grown from long Success,
Which ^aus'd thee to abandon thy old Arts,
And vainly to rely on fancied Power;
Because Aetheral Victory had often
Perched on thy waving Streamers, when thy Troops,
By odds of Numbers overwhelmed their Foes,
By long Success grown insolently vain;
Thou fondly thought t'o'recome on equal Terms,
Unknowing of the Troops thou were t'engage,
And wondrous Merit of their matchless Chief.
Hence the Disaster of that Fatal Day;
But when to your old Methods you returned,
With them Success and Victory returned.
For the prevented Germans you surpised
Upon the Adige and th'astonish'd Rhine,
And both their Armies easily o'rethrew,
Both by superior Numbers overwhelmed,
And in their Leaders Absence both oppressed.
Ruin th'Allies upon the Belgian Plains
Oppressed by the same Odds, before their Chiefs
Arrive, before their various Powers are joined.
Then with Success return to thy old Arts,
And by Division break their potent League,
Thy Orders strait to the Bavarian send
Thy numerous Belgian Garrisons to drain,
And swell thy Troops assembling on the Dyle;
Then as a Torrent to a Deluge swelled,
Disdains its Banks, and makes its roaring way
With dreadful Devastation, so may they,
Scorning their Lines, overflow th'adjacent Plains*
While Desolation marks their hideous Course,
And the surpised Confederate Forces leave
The same eternal Monument of Power,
Which at Morat the famed Burgundians left.
But Rouse, lay hold upon this fatal Hour,
Think that the very next may be too late:
This Hour great Marlborough for his Camp sets forth,
Whom thou must still industriously avoid,
Avoiding Marlborough, Lewis may be Great;
Thou have already felt his nervous Arm,
Whose towering Genius all the Genii dares,
Of thy weak Marshals, which before it Cow'r;
He the great Qualities alone enjoys,
Of all thy Chiefs who are, and who have been.
Great Conde's Spirit and his wondrous Fire,
Joined with that Presence of commanding Soul,
That keeps entirely Master of it self,
And Master of the furious God of War;
When with dire Looks, and with a dreadful Roar,
He Foams, and all the God runs mad with Rage.
Great Marlborough has Luxemburgh's dispatch,
His subtle Turns, and his sagacious Views;
The Wisdom and Sedateness of Turenne,
His dauntless Valor with his Thought profound,
And vast Capacity, and all that Skill,
So admirable in the Art of Death,
Which fixed th'inconstancy of Fortunes Will,
And made her dote on Wisdom's Charms divine.
Rouse thy self then, beware that fatal Man,
Issue thy dread Commands this Moment out,
And let the great deciding Blow be given,
Ever Destiny and Marlborough arrive.
The Fury said, the Tyrant gave Consent,
To the Bavarian strait his Orders sends,
His numerous Belgian Garrisons to drain,
And swell his Troops assembling on the Dyle,
Which to the Army, through the dreary Shades,
Thence to the various Towns the impetuous Demon bore.
The End of the Second Book.
THE BATTLE OF RAMILLIA: OR, THE Power of UNION.
LIB. III.
AURORA had not painted yet the World,
With various Dies, restoring every Hue,
That Night had with her miscreant Hand expunged;
Nor were th'Attendants on the Night retired*
The starry Host of Heaven, and Host of Hell;
And still the wakeful Dog took soft Repose,
And still the prouling Wolf persu'd his Prey,
No Shepherds Pipe was on the Mountains heard,
Nor Hunters Bugle in the Ecchoing Vales;
When the shrill Trumpet roused up drowsy Mars,
Death's Bugle in the Chase of Humane Blood,
The Beasts of Nature to their Dens retired,
And the whole Forest trembled at the sound:
The Beasts of Nature feared, alas, in vain*
Though Fate a solemn Hunting had prepared,
For Man the Huntsman was, and Man the Prey.
Before the Dawn, throughout the Belgian Plains,
The Garrisons their Tyrants Voice obey;
Forth from their several Fortresses they march,
From Oudenard, Courtray, Dendermond, and Liere,
From Brussels, Louvain, Mechlin, Antwerp, Ghent.
Belgia, that lately cast to Heaven her Eyes
For Help, her Eyes, for Chains her Arms restrained;
Belgia, the Mother of a Hundred Towns,
Now Beautiful, and Rich, and Great, and Gay,
Once more with secret Pride her Sons surveys,
And once more boasts of her Immortal Race;
That joyous lift their towry Fronts on high,
As when kind Nature by the help of Art,
And secret Influence of indulgent Heaven,
Throws off a long and dangerous Disease;
Once more she to her self delightful grows,
And once more Beauty and long absent Grace,
And Strength and Joy, unspeakable return;
So the disburthen'd Belgian Towns rejoiced,
(...) which the Squadrons march by several Ways,
To reach the Camp by false Bavaria formed,
And there like Torrents in the Ocean join:
Now a more potent numerous Host they seemed*
Than that with which the Son of Jove, the East,
Or mightier Julius overcame the West.
Confiding in their Numbers they grow Fierce,
Haughty, Presumptuous, insolently Vain,
And their dilated Hearts distend with Pride,
Their Lines disdaining with a Roar they pass,
And the mad Torrent toward Ramillia rowls:
They the Confederate Troops resolve t'attack,
Before their various Nations all are joined;
Before victorious Marlborough arrives.
Now, with a chosen few, rides Villeroy,
And falfe Bavaria, to survey th'Allies;
With hideous Air, and with Gigantick Stalk,
Before them the infernal Goddess strides.
Approached Victorious Malborough she finds
Arrived, and curses the provoking sight,
She finds that from His Presence all the Troops
Assume Immortal Spirit, and an Air
So dreadful that it makes even Furies shake,
Even her the fiercest Fiend of all the Damned*
Now Discord to the Gallick Camp returned
The false Bavarian's Shape and Air assumes,
And thus she Anxious Villeroy accosts.
Have thou observed, how yon Confederate Troops
Inferior in their Numbers far to ours,
Yet carry Conquest in their flaming Eyes;
And yet their Veteran and their Boldest Troops
Have often fled before the Gallick Power,
Whence now this Spirit, this Superior Fire?
From Liberty the Marshall strait replys,
It Is from the Bravery of the English Troops,
Who with Immortal Liberty inspired,
And with the Love of Glory all inflamed,
Infect the Nations with Their noble Fire,
As Man was formed to Lord it over Beasts
Freemen were pre-ordain'd to vanquish Slaves*
And this the event had shown in William's Reig^
Had but His honest Mind suspected Thee.
To whom the Fury instantly replied,
It Is true, the English merit all our Praise,
A Nation Fierce, Magnanimous and Free,
Valiant from Freedom, from their Clima^^ Brave,
Who in their fierce Attacks with Fury made,
And in their firmness to sustain the Efforts
Of their outrageous and their pressing Foes,
Equal the Warlik'st Nations of the World,
But in their Rallying Rage surpass them all.
Your Gallick Troops with Fury know t'assault,
But never yet endured the fierce Attacks
Of their bold Foes when obstinately urged,
Our Germans with much Constancy sustain
But when our Squadrons once are broke they are lost,
The English Rally still with greater Rage
Than they at first attack th'astonish'd Foe,
While with their eager Shouts the Welkin rings.
As a fierce Bull who furiously contends
For the fair She that has his Heart subdued,
And for the Empire of the Flowery Meads,
Recedes from his proud Rival to return
With more impetuous Shock, more dreadful Rage
While with His clash the ecchoing Vale resounds,
So when the Britons from the Field retreat
They rally with no less amazing Fire.
But the great Changes of the World below
Are brought about by Heaven and not by Man;
For it is a Jealous God who rules the Sky,
Jealous of Glory and in Love with Praise.
And when the Wonders of his Might He shows
And brings to pass astonishing Events,
Events which all the under World amaze,
It Is not by Strength of Nations that He works
For that would look mere Human Might to all;
But by select Celestial Spirits sent
For that Design from His own Heaven and formed
Of finer Clay, and in a nobler Mould
Than are the vulgar Race of Mortal Men,
And animated with Diviner Fire.
That when to all th'astonish'd World they appear
With more than Human Qualities endued,
Th'astonish'd World may be constrained to own,
And they themselves confess, that what they do
Is by th'immediate Hand of Heaven performed.
The noblest Nations have derived their Fame,
And all their Greatness from the God-like few,
And when These fail them, they are lost, undone,
And grow the Scorn of their Insulting Foes,
Or are quite swallowed in th'Abyss of Time.
Marshall, reflect on Ancient Days, and say,
What wondrous Acts did Persians e're perform
Before or after their great Cyrus reigned?
Say, was not Macedon e're Philip swayed
Obscure, unworthy of the Voice of Fame?
And when victorious Alexander died,
Did not its Spirit and its matchless Fame
And Empire with the God-like Man expire?
The Romans owed the Glories of their State,
And vast extent of Empire to a few.
As by their noblest Writers is confessed.
As far as now fair England's Glory flies,
What had it done before great Edward reigned?
Except but His and Conquering Henry's Days,
Where was its Glory till Eliza came?
And by Her Wisdom and Heroic Mind
Sustained the Freedom of the Laboring World.
With Hers even England's Life and Soul expired,
And then its Neighbors meanly it betrayed,
Or turned upon it self its own inglorious Arms*
Till at the last the God-like William came,
He came, and their declining Spirits raised,
He gave them their Religion, and their Anne,
She Freedom and the Might of Malb'rough gave*
As William was betrayed, undone by me,
Marshall by us great Malborough too must fall*
On which depends to morrow's fatal Day.
For from His Presence yon audacious Troops
Derive the dauntless Spirit in their Eyes,
From which they flash intolerable Fire.
Even thou thy self, for I remarked it well;
Thou were agreeably surpised and raised
When his August Appearance thou beheld'st
Worthy the Grandeur of the immortal Mind,
Commanding as the Form of the first Man,
While His great Maker's Image He retained,
And Empire sat upon his Lordly Brow,
The World's Imperial Ruler and his own,
Before Celestial Reason had been taught
Her Subject Passion poorly to obey,
And the degenerating Mind debased
The Majesty and Empire of the Mien.
When e're His Troops behold that noble Form,
All His great Actions, all His high Exploits,
Present themselves before their wondering Minds,
Gelderland conquered with its warlike Towns*
And Liege and Limbourgh as by Magic rise,
And to their view present their stately Towers,
Dire Schellenbourg's impenetrable Fort
Carried against the Choice of all our Powers,
And Bleinem's everlasting Day appears
And stunns with Rapture their astonished Minds.
The Trumpet with its Clangour tears their Ears,
And then they charge, and once again they fight
Their Battles over, and triumph once again,
And then the World wants force to oppose their Power,
Whom to defeat we Malborough must destroy,
For firmly yon audacious Troops believe
It Is not from Fortune these Successes flow,
But from the Wisdom of their wondrous Chief,
His vast Capacity, his flaming Zeal,
His restless Labor and perpetual Thought,
His dreadless Spirit and His just Designs,
Indeed so just have been His great Designs,
So exquisite His Conduct, so profound,
Not one false step in Four renowned Campaigns,
So bright His humble Modesty has shone
In still consulting His Illustrious Friends,
His Counselors so few, so justly chose,
His Secrets kept from the most piercing Eyes,
His Constancy in executing all
That has so well consulted been, so firm,
His Spirit as a Captain so sublime
And as a Soldier so Invincible,
That Marshall to remove Him we must Hire
The fiercest and most desperate of thy Men,
For my Bavarians will that Task refuse,
Or Twenty Thousand of yon bravest Troops
Will less obstruct our great Success than He.
Had thou beheld at Bleinem's dreadful Field
In the Distress of the stupend'ous Day,
This matchless Man at once a prudent Chief
And a most daring Combatant, supply
With His own Valor every pressed Brigade,
Each brave Battalion of His fainting Host;
For wheresoever Death and Danger flew
T'appall His Squadrons with their ghastly glare,
There Malborough on the Wings of Thunder flew
Till He brought Conquest back and won the Day,
Till Fate He with Majestic Mien dispensed,
And seemed the dreadful Delegate of Jove;
Had thou seen this at Bleinem's dreadful Field,
Marshall, thou would of Victory despair,
Or else conclude this fatal Man must die.
But could thou with a sharp sagacious Eye
Survey the wonders of his matchless Mind,
What Apprehension then would pierce thy Breast,
Then what Astonishment would strike thy Mind?
For, O the jarring Talents which appear,
Uniting all their Factions in His Soul!
The Heat, the Cold, the Liveliness, the Weight,
The Gravity, th'astonishing Dispatch,
The Providence, the Intrepidity,
The Fire and the Sedateness of His Soul,
And the Revenging Thunder of His Might
Discharged without a Tempest on His Breast,
Or a black lowering Cloud upon His Brow!
Tempests without He raises and He calms,
But His great Mind immovable remains.
And these great Qualities by turns He shows,
Not as His Fancy, Humor, Passion call,
But guided all by Wisdom's sacred Law,
As he who made this all the Seasons guides,
And alters Hot and Dry, and Moist and Cold,
By what the changing Universe requires.
Is It possible we can a Moment doubt
If we this dangerous General shall destroy,
Who having these repugnant Talents joined
Confederated in his mighty Soul,
Talents which none besides of Human kind
Enjoys, appears designed by all-wise Heaven,
Who naught creates in vain to perform Deeds
Surpassing all the rest of Mortal Race.
Who the great Qualities of twenty Chiefs
Possessing still atchieves the Exploits of more*
Whose Passion for his own accursed Cause
So flaming is, so deadly is His Hate,
And so invincible to us and ours,
That not content to act in His own Sphere,
And every Hour new Wonders to perform,
He does the Duty with unwearied Pains
Of Foreign Generals, which with all their Thought,
And all the God-like Greatness of their Souls
They were unable to perform themselves.
Wherever the Allies appear in Arms
Their brave Battalians Malb'rough's Influence feel.
With Him their noblest Actions they concert,
He furnishes their bravest Chiefs with Troops,
And with unhop'd for Treasure He supplies.
Yet while to others He gives Power to act
His own unwearied Vigilence is such,
His Care, His Labor, His eternal Thought,
As if all others had refused to act,
As if th'inimitable Man were left
With Atlantean Shoulders to sustain
The more than Mortal Burden of the War.
Indeed whatever has been greatly done
In Germany, or in the Belgian Plains,
Has under his Auspicious Power been done:
For He observing with Judicious Thought,
That through a tedious War your Gallick Powers
By the Division of th'Allies prevailed,
Or owed Their Conquests to My secret Arts*
Or by their Numbers gained their great Success*
That They the Field eternally declined
Unless by vast Advantages sustained,
As conscious of the Weakness of their Cause,
The Weakness of their boldest Veteran Troops
And falseness of Imaginary Power,
Which Two set Battles fought on equal Terms
Would soon demonstrate to the Christian World,
That even in Fight they close Engagement shunned
Till they had tamed their most intrepid Foes
By odds of Numbers wearied and oppressed,
He this remarking with sagacious Thought
His Conduct in each Point to theirs opposed,
And changed the Form and Fortune of the War.
By His eternal Vigilance His Troops
Are still too numerous to be flanked by ours;
And while He meditates His great Exploits,
His secret, His impenetrable Heart
Defended stands from Treason's piercing Eye,
(That Caution from great William's Fate he drew)
Then He the fatal Hour of Combat seeks
And finds with penetrating Thought, or makes
Either halfway, he Bald Occasion meets,
Or like a Hunter He persues her Flight,
Till she at Bay her clustring Forelock turns,
Then in the dreadful Field assails your Powers,
Nor suffers you with Fury to assault;
For which you by the Christian World are famed.
Nor wages then a cool and distant War,
But presses on you with redoubled Might;
And in upon your firmest Squadrons breaks
Till with his Horse their shattered Ranks he tears,
Nor made by Nature, nor by Climate formed
The Thunder of such Fury to sustain;
And chiefly, which has rendered Him to us
A dangerous and a formidable Foe,
That no Divisions fraudulently sown
Among th'Allies might hurt the general Cause,
There is but one who breaths th'Aetherial Air,
And even that one is Malborough's second self,
So careful to augment or to maintain
Among the various Potentates abroad;
That Union which with a Celestial Voice
Great Anna to her Britains recommends;
He obviates growing Feuds, Dissensions grown
He reconciles, the Interests He adjusts,
And He concerts of each Confederate Power,
And in one general Interest mingles all,
As Streams from East and West, and North and South,
Are mixed in Ocean's vast Abyss, and lost.
He Nations, and their Kings, with Thoughts inspires,
Above all little, selfish, low Designs,
And fills them with a public glorious Fire.
In all these things the wondrous Man's concerned,
Which so destructive are to us and ours;
With so much Zeal, with such Assiduous Thought,
With such unwearied Pains, no length of Time,
Nor any Distance of Remotest Place,
Nor the Intemperance of Heat and Cold,
Nor Pleasures specious and alluring Bait,
(The God like Man, alas, no Pleasure knows,
But what the Ruler of yon Heaven pursues,
To do great Good and Glory to acquire)
No, nor the base Ingratitude of those,
Whom Day and Night He watches to preserve,
Nor ought that Earth, nor ought that Hell invents;
Naught but the Stroke of Destiny alone
Is able to obstruct His generous Course,
Is able to retard His noble Speed
In the Carrier of everlasting Fame.
But with Himself He high Designs revolves,
Or those who execute those high Designs
With that familiar Greatness He receives,
Which makes Him the Delight of all the Good,
And the Felicity of all the Brave.
As from these wondrous Talents in Him joined
All that astonishing Success proceeds
Which is become the Darling Theme of Fame,
The Theme on which the eternal Talker doats,
So by that high Success is Malbrough grown
The Joy of all the Happy Nations round,
The Hope and Consolation of the Rest,
The Confident of the most Jealous States,
The great Example of Earth's Demy-gods,
And the just wonder of the Christian World.
But with the Squadrons who his Voice obey
So sacred His Authority is grown,
So is He honored, loved, almost adored
By the brave Soldier His adopted Care,
Whom with a pious Father's tenderest Love
He guards from Danger and from Want He shields,
That when, nor Interests loud and powerful Voice,
Nor smarting Shame, nor their dear Countrey's Love,
Nor love of Glory longer can prevail
Upon their fainting Spirits to sustain
The fierce Attacks of our Assaulting Bands,
His Mien, His great Appearance fires their Souls,
His potent Voice the Squadrons new creates,
Gives them new Life, new Spirit and new Hope,
Nay, certainty of Conquest and of Fame,
But Mareshal for some Time I have observed
Surprise, and Joy, and Wonder in thy Eyes.
To whom transported Villeroy replys;
It Is true, with Joy and Wonder I have heard
Thy generous Praise of such a deadly Foe:
For when so many English have been found
Who have with basest Calumnies repaid
His mighty Benefits as great and strong
As ever Hero on his Country laid,
That Thou should do the glorious Hero right,
Thou, who by force of His victorious Arm
Art fallen from such a Height, O whither fallen!
Fallen from thy Empire, from thy Glory fallen,
From those which Thou enjoy'dst, and from the Hope
Of Those at which Thy vast Ambition aimed,
That thou should do the wondrous Hero right,
That thou should draw the lovely Features like,
And place the noble Piece in its true Light,
Shows something so magnanimously great
As all the generous English would extol,
And God-like Malborough himself admire.
To whom the Fury in Bavaria's Form,
The Praise I merit not, I must refuse,
It Is not a generous Frailty in my Mind,
But great Revenge, the Attribute of Gods,
That makes me just to Malborough's hateful Name.
Small Generosity's required to praise
A Merit which by all the World's extolled,
And which in spite of Slanders cankring Bite,
Will be the eternal Ornament of Fame.
If keen Detraction could have hurt His Name
Or Person, I Detraction would have used.
For it is with bitterest Gall that I extol
The Hero, whom to crush I must commend.
Since Calumnies have been essayed in vain,
And Slanders of the blackest hue been tried
At once his Fame and Person to destroy,
And against Both have signified no more
Than Morning Mists against the Julian Sun,
His rising Glory has dispelled them all;
It Is time to try what Truth may effect at last,
And on her own loud Champion turn her Arms.
This Hero I in just proportions drew,
That thou may be convinced by the rich Draught,
The way t'attack th'Allies with wished Success
Is this pernicious General to destroy,
That whole Brigades less Dangerous are than He.
That while yon Troops His noble Form inspires,
They will Impenetrable still remain,
And Fate will follow him as it does Jove.
If then our Interest's precious in our Eyes,
If Victory has Charms for our great Minds,
If Glory, if the vast, th'inspiring Cause
For which great Lewis steels our nervous Arms,
Which is the Empire of the Universe,
Can thaw our Blood, our drooping Spirits raise,
We must the boldest of your Men suborn
This Formidable Hero to destroy,
Or else expect a second Bleinem here,
Thou will in shameful Bonds once more be led
As thou by Conquering Eugene were before,
Or grow the Object of the Peoples Scorn
And the Parisian Rabbles Headstrong Rage,
And I shall from my Government be chased,
As from Bavaria I before was driven.
The Fury said, and Villeroy turned Pale,
And looked with Eyes unwilling to consent,
Yet fearful to deny; which when the Fiend
Observed, she with Imperious Tone rejoined,
Think it is thy Absolute, thy Awful Lord,
It Is Lewis who commands thee to obey,
Can thou assist an Arbitrary King,
To make His boundless Will His only Law,
And then examine if that Will be just?
Know thou not that it is criminal in Slaves
T'affect more Virtue than their Tyrants show.
She said, when with prevailing Shades the Night
Came on, and Villeroy's Confusion hid;
Under whose Pitchy Mantle both concealed
To execute their dire Design retired.
The End of the Third Book.
LIB. IV.
WHile Discord by great Malb'rough's Fate contrives
T'extend the Empire of Hells dreadful sway
The World's Almighty Ruler with that Eye,
That sees through all th'Infinitude of Space,
That sees through all th'Infinitude of Time,
From the Empyrean views the Raving Fiend,
And to the Son The Eternal Father speaks,
And while He speaks the Angels drop their Lyres,
And all their melting Hallelujahs cease;
The Heavens with all their Jocund Orbs are still,
Are hushed, attentive to the Voice Divine,
To which their Sounds are Discord, all the Globes
That roll through Space Immense a Moment rest,
A Moment their Eternal Course suspend,
And tremble while their great Creator speaks.
Behold, he to the Filial Godhead says,
With how much Fury our outrageous Foe
Proceeds His impious Viceroy to maintain,
Against our Servant and Vicegerent Anne,
How against Malb'rough's Life he Discord Arms,
And she the fiercest of the French suborns
T'assault Him in to Morrow's wrathful Field.
Let us against the Raging Fiend oppose
One of our Angels burning most with Zeal,
And most with blissful Charity inspired,
Let Him descend and with Celestial Might
Resist the Malice of Infernal Rage,
And betwixt Malborough interpose and Fate,
That he may Conquer and that we may Reign,
And all the Nations join in Bonds of Love,
And Quiet to the weary World return.
He said, the Angelick Bands resume their Lyres,
And their transporting Symphonies renew,
Th'Harmonious Spheres renew their wondrous Dance,
With Hallelujahs Heaven again resounds,
Immortal Transport runs through every Mind,
Immortal Pleasure brightens every Face,
In Circles the Angelick Bands embrace,
And rush into each others Arms with Joy
Which Tongues of Angels never can express,
And never can the Heart of Man conceive,
And every Circle in Seraphick Song
The God of Union sings, the God of Peace.
Next to the Deity there stood an Orb
Of glorious Seraphim, a wondrous Orb,
Who had the Wings, the Brightness and the Power
Of mighty Seraphim* but Human Forms,
Of all the bright Inhabitants of Heaven,
None burned with blissful Charity like them,
Or copied The Eternal Son like them;
Like Him in Human Shape they appeared in Heaven,
Like Him they once had Bodies of frail Flesh,
And sojourned here in Mortal Limbs below,
And long with Death and Dangers here they shone*
And Mortal Misery and Mortal Care
The Nations to unite in Bonds of Peace,
And vindicate the warring Saints below
From the abhorred usurping Reign of Hell,
From foul Idolatry and lawless Power,
And ^pread Messiah's Righteous Kingdom here
Of Sacred Liberty and Sacred Law,
And of Religion undefiled and pure.
And here, when they had suffered much and long,
And bore what none but Godlike Minds could bear,
The Immortal Spirits broke their Mortal Bands,
And swift ascended to the Heaven of Heavens
Triumphant, there in Human likeness sat
(That Human likeness which on Earth they graced)
Near to the Son of Man in Bliss enthroned,
And some Resemblance of His Glory bore
As of His Sufferings they before had born.
To this refulgent and this wondrous Orb
The Filial Godhead thus himself addres^
Ye Host of Seraphim who once were Men
Who bore the Misery of Mortal Life
Like me, and bore the cruel Pains of Death
T'unite Mankind among themselves in Love,
And spread my Father's Kingdom over Earth;
Which of ye freely will descend to save
The British Hero from impending Fate,
Him who in Charity the Nations binds
And Pious Anna's Conquering Host commands,
That we may triumph, and that we may reign,
Him Lucifer and Discord raging Fiends
Contrive with Hellish Fury to destroy.
Forth from the Spirits of that shining Orb
A glorious Spirit shoots on gorgeous Wings,
Wings with bright Purple and with Gold arrayed,
And down before the Sovereign Throne he lights.
Of all th'Angelick Sanctities of Heaven
None filled the Empyrean with the Fame
Of what He acted and He suffered here
Like Him, no Angel of all Heaven like Him
Breathed forth Immortal Love to Mortal Men.
A Crown of Radiant Beams adorned His Head,
And winged His Shoulders were, and winged His Feet,
Lightning serene flew darting from His Eyes,
And Lightning round his radiant Temples played.
And in his Face there much Resemblance shone
Of Him who once this happy Island swayed.
Who moved by Charity for wretched Men
That He the laboring Nations might preserve
Came flying on the Wings of all the Winds,
And rescued sinking Britain from Her Fate.
His Face much likeness of His Earthly Bloom,
But a more heightened beauteous likeness bore,
For now instead of Misery and Care,
And fatal Disappointment, fatal Woe,
And all the Frailties that on Dust attend,
Upon His Countenance perpetual Youth,
Celestial Vigor and Celestial Bloom,
And Immortality appeared, and Joy
Eternal, Inexpressible, Divine.
On His first Motion th'Empyrean Heaven
With tuneful Shouts of Acclamation rung,
Th'Harmonious Thunder of Extatick Joy.
When every Angel clapped His Golden Wings,
And every Angel struck His wondrous Lyre,
And sung His Praise in high Seraphick Song,
Who could vouchsafe to leave Eternal Joys,
And could to Earth the Seat of Woe descend,
Where he had born what never Mortal bore,
To rescue Malb'rough His adopted Care.
It Is like thy self, like thy own fervent Zeal,
Thou good and faithful Servant, said the Son.
With speed then to the rolling Earth descend,
And thereupon to morrow's wrathful Day
The Day for Vengeance pre-ordain'd by us,
Defend thy Malborough in Ramillia's Plain,
And He the Christian World will there defend.
But e're the Sun dispells the Shades of Night,
Present thy self in Vision to His Eyes,
And with Celestial Hope His Soul inspire
Of present Conquest, and of future Fame
On Earth, and of Eternal Glory here.
Tell Him of Provinces by Union's Power
Delivered in Ramillia's fatal Plain;
Lay His own Danger too before His Eyes
But hide the event of that, that His great Soul
And dreadless Virtue may be fully tried,
And may to Earth and Heaven more glorious shine.
With Joy descend, to honor thy Descent
On it, a wondrous Birth of Fate attends,
A wondrous change in Europe shall be wrought,
Ten thousand Terrors shall attend thy flight
And Vengeance to amaze the Impious World.
The Time by high Foreknowledge pre-ordain'd
At last is come when Satan shall no more,
Nor his Vicegerent Tyrants plague the Earth.
But Lewis was permitted to attain
To such uncommon Height of Lawless Power,
As Pelgia, Italy and Spain to add
To former Countries impiously obtained,
To grasp the Indies in his Threatening Hand,
And in his Thought the Empire of the Earth,
That Vengeance sent from us might pierce him more
By his surpizing unexpected Fall;
And the Example strike the Impious World
With greater Terror, and our Hand appear.
When He who has been fifty rolling Years
Raising the Fabric of his Power to Heaven
Shall find it in a Moment dashed to Hell
By the Revenging Thunder of our Might;
When all the Turbant Tyrants of the East
From Bosphorus to farthest Indies climb
Shall hear their Western Brother's fall, shall hear
And tremble at his Ruins hideous Sound:
When Men turned Atheists by his long Success
Shall be confounded and turn pale and shake,
And own there is a Being far-above
And an amazing Providence beyond
What their weak Minds have power to comprehend;
Then Impious War shall vex the Earth no more,
But Love Divine shall Human Hearts unite,
And Peace shall to the wearied World return.
He ended, and the Angel bowing low
Toward Earth precipitates his glorious flight
While th Empyrean Thunder loudly roars:
Th'Angelick Lyres, and Dulcimers, and Lutes,
And solemn Organs change their melting Strains,
And with fierce Warlike Symphony resound;
And when the Instruments Divine repose
Again the Thunder bellows through the Sky;
To that the Instruments again Respond,
And thrice the Thunder, thrice the wrathful Lyres
Alternate dreadful Sounds throughout the Sky.
Tremendous Signal of Revenge Divine
Of Vengeance to be executed now,
The Terrors of The Almighty take th'Alarm,
And after the descending Angel fly.
As through the Atmosphere He wheels His flight,
And cleaves with His Eternal Plumes the Air,
Of golden Light He draws a glorious Trail,
He gilds the paler Moon's Resplendent Beams,
He gilds the Silver Clouds with Golden Dye;
And all th Illustrious Horrors of the Night.
The Infernal Spirits from His passage fly,
And all the winged ill Omens of the Air;
And Care, and Pain, and Sorrow, and Despair
Fly from His Sacred Presence far away.
Before him Peace, Tranquillity and Joy,
Immortal Pleasures march before, behind
Th'amazing Terrors of The Almighty march.
As near to Judoignes fatal Plain He flew,
Like a descending Star direct He shoots
Into the Tent where Mighty Malb'rough lay,
And in a Dream fought great Ramillia's Field.
But even in Sleep his Passions he controuls
With Independent and with Lordly Sway,
His very Dream was regular, serene,
No Fear nor Rage disturbed his God-like Mind
Whom th'Angel now descended thus salutes.
Hail Champion of the Sacred Cause of Heaven!
Hail Ornament of Earth! hail Dread of Hell!
Illustrious Soul called out by me and Fate
To turn the Fortune of the Western World.
From the bright Realms of Everlasting Joy
With Pleasure I am sent to visit Thee,
O worthy Successor to me in Arms!
O Care of Heaven! O Delegate of Fate!
How have I been sollicitous beyond
What is allowed to blissful Minds above
For Anna, for Britannia, and for Thee!
And yet when I ascended up to Heaven
I neither Her nor thee entirely left;
For at my parting I left Friends below --
O Men, with whom even Angels may consult,
And on the Firmness of their faithful Zeal,
And on their vast Capacity depend!
For all my Friends are Anna's Friends and Thine,
And will unchangeably respect my choice;
But Hell and Hell's dire Missionaries here
With Rage implacable thy Life pursue,
For Bleinem in their Minds has fixed deep Wounds,
Wounds which no length of Days can cure, but Time
Exulcerates, and Festers, and Gangrenes.
From Bleinem's mortal Day worse Days they expect
No less than Ruin of their Empire here;
Therefore to Morrow all their Mortal Darts
Will levelled be at thy Illustrious Head,
And imminent the Danger is and great.
But Danger will but raise the noble Fire
Of Thy exalted Soul intent on things
Above this grovelling and this worthless World.
And if thou fall'st, like Sampson Thou will fall,
And bitterly Thy Foes lament Thy Fate;
Whatever for Thy Person Heaven ordains,
Yet Heaven its Champion never will permit
To leave the World inglorious, unrevenged,
A wondrous Victory attends thy Arms,
Great in it self and in its Sequel vast,
Whose ecchoing Sound through all the West shall run.
Transporting the glad Nations all around,
Who often shall doubt, and often suspend their Joy,
And often imagine all an empty Dream;
The Conqueror himself shall cry amazed,
It Is not our Work, alas we did it not,
The Hand of God, the Hand of God is here
For Thee, so great shall be thy high Renown,
That Fame shall think no Music like thy Name:
Around the circling Globe it shall be spread,
And to the World's last Ages shall endure.
Heroes of Ancient Times Thou shall eclipse,
And the most lofty most aspiring Man,
Shall want The Assurance in his secret Prayers
To ask such high Felicity and Fame
As Heaven has freely granted Thee, yet this
That seems so great, so glorious to Thee now
Would look how low, how vile to Thy great Mind,
If I could set before thy astonished Eyes
Th'excess of Glory and th'excess of Bliss
That is prepared for Thy aspiring Soul
When Thou arriv'st at everlasting Day.
O could embodied Mind but comprehend
The Glories of the Intellectual World,
Or I the blissful Secret were allowd;
But Fate forbids, to Mortals to reveal,
O I could lay a Scene before thy Eyes
Which would distract Thee with transporting Joy;
Fire the rich Blood in thy Illustrious Veins,
Make every Nerve with fierce Convulsions start,
Blast all thy Spirits and thy Life destroy,
Thou could not taste th'extatick Bliss and live:
As one who has lived thirty tedious Years,
And ever since his wretched Birth been Dark,
His visual Orbs with cloudy Films o'recast,
And in the Dungeon of the Body dwelt
In utter Ignorance of Nature's Works
And Wonders of this vast material World,
And has no Notion e're conceived of Light,
Or Colors, or the verdant Flowery Earth,
Or the stupendous prospect of the Sky;
If then he finds some Artist whose nice Hand
Couches the Cataracts and clears his Eyes,
And all at once a Flood of glorious Light,
And this bright Temple of the Universe,
The crystal Firmament, the blazing Sun,
All th'amazing Glories of the Heavens,
All the great Maker's high Magnificence
Come rushing through His Eyes upon His Soul,
He cannot bear th'astonishing Delight,
But starts, exclaims, and stamps, and raves, and dies:
So the vast Glories of the upper World,
If they were set before embodied Mind
Would oppress Nature and extinguish Life.
For all the Beauties of the World that is seen
As glorious as they look to Human Eyes
Are little, are contemptible to them,
Like glimmering Starlight to the Blaze of Day.
For Thee let this suffize the Share of Bliss
And Glory that is prepared for Thee above,
Is such as shall distinguish Thee from most:
For since the Glory of the Just in Heaven
Is equal to their Charity on Earth,
What must be thine who labour'st to unite,
Who labour'st to felicitate a World.
I say not this to fortify thy Mind
Against the Fear of Death, Thou have no Fear,
For Thou have been familiar with Him long,
Been often dauntless with Him Face to Face,
And calmly looked upon His Gorgon Eye,
As finding nothing there t'affright a Soul
That conscious is of Glory, Bliss and Life,
Unbounded all as vast Eternity.
Even I not more intrepid was on Earth
Than Thou, nor am not more undaunted now:
But this is said, that on this dreadful Day
Thou may do Deeds that may excel even thine,
And surpass Him who all the World transcends.
Thou shall have Millions of Immortal Minds
Glorious Spectators of thy Immortal Acts,
And towering over Thee still Thou shall behold
Bright Victory and me, he said, and now
The stormy Drum awaked the Powers of War,
And now the Angel disappears from sight,
And His Bright Shape dissolves into the Morn.
The End of the Fourth Book.
LIB. V.
FULL of the glorious Vision Malborough wakes,
For when the Angel vanished from His Eyes,
He shot half Heaven into the Heroes Mind,
His Mind was with Immortal Hope inspired,
Celestial Confidence, Celestial Fire,
A Flame that in his noble Breast aspired
To things above the Greatness of this World,
And Joy which Human Hearts can never conceive,
Unspeakable, Transporting, yet Serene,
Wisdom's Serene Companion and Her Friend,
Prophetic of Felicity and Fame.
Awaked, He rises from His Bed in haste,
And after Him in have the Sun arose,
Impatient to behold his wondrous Deeds.
Gazing He sees the Grandeur of his Mien
Exalted with a Dreadful Majesty;
And all the Honors heightened of His Eyes,
And all th'Heroick Virtues of His Mind,
All but His great Contempt of Death increased,
For that was Sovereign in His Soul before,
And while the Sun above th'Horizon rose
Ten thousand brighter Glories from the Skies
Descended to behold, or to assist
In the Contention of The Eternal Day.
For the Immortal Day was to decide
No trifling small Affairs, no mean Dispute,
The Limits of small Kingdoms, or the Bounds
Of poor Provincial Tributary Lords,
But the Contention of The Eternal Day
Was to decide in great Ramillia's Field,
If God should reign over His own Works below,
Or Hell usurp them with Tyrannick Sway.
And now the dreadful Trumpet sounds to Arms,
When distant Clangours are like Echoes heard,
Th'Angelick Trumpet of Celestial Fame,
Which to Immortal Deeds excites their Souls.
And now they march t'attack th'embattel'd Foe,
And now in terrible Array appear,
Awaiting their Commanders Awful Voice,
Like Tempests lowering in the Heavens they look
That black'ning all the Sky in silence stand
Before th'outragious Wrack of Heaven begins,
Like the Virgilian God of Winds their Chief,
Who musters sounding Storms and rules their Rage.
With pleasure He their Martial Eyes surveys
And finds them with Heroic Rage inspired,
He finds they want no Speech to raise their Souls
To mightiest Deeds, for in their Eyes He sees
They have already gained the glorious Day.
Up to the Heavens His Eyes the Hero casts,
And there the Angel with His flaming Sword
And Victory with Eagles Wings He spies
Towering along the vast Ethereal Space.
And now a glorious Flame from Heaven descends
And agitates and shakes His mighty Soul:
And this is the first Hour that e're He found
Its Movements difficult to be restrained,
With Ardor strait He gives the fatal Word,
And now the Trumpet sounds the dreadful Charge,
And like the last Eternal Trump it sounds,
For now at hand the End of Time appears,
And the expiring Worlds last ghastful Hour,
For Hideous is the Face of Nature now,
The Heavens are all on fire, the Welkin burns,
Earth trembles, and the Air tormented groans.
The warring Elements, Earth, Air and Fire
Are raging in stupend'ous motion all,
And Earth with Air confounded, and with Fire.
And Bursts of horrid Thunder rend the Heavens
And seem to be expiring Natures Groans;
But no swift Motion, no Impetuous Rage
Of missive Earth, or of exploded Air,
Or of expanded Fire can equal half
Th'outragious Motions of undaunted Minds
Divinely swift in Tenements of Clay.
While to th'Attack th'embattell'd Squadrons move,
And clashing with amazing Fury join,
On one side th'Angel and bright Victory,
On the other Discord with The Infernal Powers
And all the Auxiliaries of Heaven and Hell
Their mighty Movements for a while suspend
The Motions of frail Mortals to behold,
Who Transports of Immortal Fury show
Above the weak Condition of poor Dust
Above the frail Concerns of wretched Men.
While wondering they behold with all their Eyes
The whole Confederate and the Gallick Powers
Raging and working like divided Seas
Which Adverse Storms against each other drive,
While Jove's Artillery rattling over them flies,
All their admiring Eyes are chiefly bent
On Malborough's every Motion, every Look,
Next Him Argyle drew all their wondering Eyes,
Argyle the Young, the Beautiful, the Brave,
Fit for deep Counsels even in early Bloom,
Of Thought profound, without Experience Wise,
Without the Ruinous Expense of Years;
In Counsel all Sedateness and all Thought
But in the Bloody Field all Rage, all Fire;
Champion of Union in the Bloody Field,
Where still the God-like Youth made War for Peace.
In Cabinets He Union too advised,
And in grave Senates constantly He strove
The jarring Nations to unite in Love.
With dreadful Majesty great Malborough marched,
And like the fancied God of War He looked,
When He flies Thundering over the Plains of Thrace,
And Terrors march before His Iron Carr,
And sounding Devastation comes behind.
Argyle was like the fancied God of Love
When He contracts His Brow and bends His Bow,
And drawing his Inevitable Shafts
Wounds deeply Human Breasts t'unite their Hearts.
Without their furious Britons both appear,
And Foreign Squadrons to the Charge they lead.
But Germans, Danes and Dutch turn Britons all
When Britons Genius in its God-like Chiefs
Shines out, and fires them to Immortal Deeds,
And leads them to the Charge, unknowing to retire.
O would some Angel give me force to paint
The dreadful stalk of Discords sounding March,
Between conflicting Hosts, before her marched
Ten thousand Terrors, Natives all of Hell,
Commanded by their grizly Monarch Death.
Each stride entrenched the Earth on which she strode,
The Air was tempested, the Ether frowned,
Mean while the Snaky Horrors of her Head
Were wrapped in pitchy Clouds, from which her Eyes
Red Lightning Dart, and Thunder was her Voice.
As sternly she the Field of Death surveys,
And finds that Fate in every other part
Was doubtful, but where mighty Malb'rough shined,
There Victory, there Destiny declared;
She gives a monstrous Yell that frighting shakes
The utmost Fortresses of Belgian Land;
The Mountains tremble at the horrid Din,
The Vales re-bellow to the monstrous Roar.
When thus the Terrors and their grizly King
The Fury in a frightful Tone accosts.
Have ye then found an over-match at last?
Are ye contented basely to submit
To the Efforts of yon Confederate Powers?
Over which till Malb'rough at their Head appeared
Ye always have prevailed, nay now prevail
Over Squadrons which remote from Him engage,
But see He comes, this Thunderbolt of War!
Look how against the Storm He Headlong drives!
By all that is Impious upon us He drives!
Nay now, He Is in the midst of us! He Is here!
He unconcerned and only we amazed!
Is it then possible that one frail Man
Can thus resist the Force of all your Powers,
And drive you frighted back upon your Friends?
And can ye poorly bear th'extream Affront?
Ye Host of Terrors and thou grizly Death,
If ye are Terrors armed with deadly Stings,
If thou art Death, my cruel Offspring Death,
And not an empty Bugbear to scare Boys;
Oh fly, oh seize, dispatch th'audacious wretch
Oh pierce Him, stab Him in the vital st Part!
Ha! how aghast with stupid Eyes thou star'st,
To see this Briton amidst all thy Powers
Serene, and with a Dauntless Brow appear!
Thou Fool! with all this Calm and Dreadless Brow,
This is no God, but a mere Mortal Man,
As subject to Thy Arm as the vile Slave.
Muster Thy Terrors then in dire Array!
And scare this hitherto undaunted Brave,
Then, then be ready with thy Fatal Dart,
Let me alone to give Thee certain aim
And so dispatching one we conquer all.
But who, though Master of an Angel's Force,
An Angel's Genius, and an Angel's Voice,
Of Song Celestial, Eloquence Divine,
Can worthily describe in dreadful Style
The fearful March of the Infernal Powers
Who now prepare t'attack great Malb'rough's Life!
Grim Death his meager Skeleton expands
Into a Form Immense, then musters all
His Terrors in astonishing Array,
And charges them t'appear to Mortal Eyes.
His Terrors put on their most hideous Forms,
Forms which with Horror Nature sees and shakes,
And from its Outworks Trembling Life retreats,
And to the Heart its Citadel retires.
In Phalanx then the Hero they assail,
The God-like Hero views them and reviews,
Considers them, disdains them and repells:
But into Madness starts the generous Steed
At the dire sight, he flies, he bounds, he foams,
Flashes of Lightning from his Eye Balls fly,
And from his Nostrils curling Clouds of Smoke;
Then shrieking on his hindmost Feet he springs,
Then groans, and floundring with his Rider falls.
The Gaul and the Bavarian rend the Sky,
Discord returns the Roar of vast Applause,
And Death and all The Infernal Powers rejoice;
But through th'Allies a mortal Murmur runs,
And all their Spirit's with their Hero fallen,
And Victory has Charms for them no more;
The Heavn'ly Spirits are themselves concerned,
And for a Moment wonder what this means,
And doubt least they mistook the Voice of Fate.
The Ruffians now whom Discord had suborned
Present a Hundred Fusees at His Life,
At once an Hundred Fiery Globes discharge,
But a strong unseen Hand diverts them all.
Grim Death bestrides Him with a Giant stride,
And scowls upon Him with a Wall-ey'd glare;
Then lifting brandishes His fatal Dart,
Yet wants the power to strike but looks askew,
And cannot bear the Heroes dauntless Eye,
When Discord cries aloud, O strike my Son!
Is not our dreadful Adversary fallen,
Yes from the Pinnacle of Glory fallen,
Fallen in a Moment to the abjectest State?
O foolish Sentence! Judgment falsely past!
For hear the Angel in th'Aethereal Space.
O greatest Thou, he cries, of Mortal Men,
Who art as Dauntless in the Arms of Death
As we whom Heaven has placed above His reach!
Serene as when Thou o'recam'st at Bleinem's Field!
Then Conquest saw Thee Humble and Serene,
Death finds Thee firm and undejected now.
O greatest Thou, he cries, of Mortal Men,
Courage surpassing Human, God-like State,
Which nothing can depress and nothing raise!
Never was Mortal more severly tried,
But now it is past, and perfect art Thou found,
And worthy found to free the Laboring World.
For since within the very Arms of Death
Thou have the high Security enjoyed
Of Blissful Beings who can die no more,
Thou shall their high Felicity enjoy,
For thy unshaken Mind can bear it all.
What Angels dictate, and what Angels do
(Whose Words and Acts are swifter than our Thoughts)
In Moments, Mortals cannot speak in Hours.
Down He comes shooting on His Golden Wings,
And on the Spot in all His Glory lights
Where in the Arms of Death His Malb'rough lay.
The Hero quickened by the approach of Heaven
Springs from th'embrace of Death, and on His Feet
As swift as are the Wings of Lightning Bounds.
The Heavenly Spirits in th'Aetherial Space,
And all the Empyrean Shouts for Joy,
When He who while He sojourned here on Earth
First His Command to God-like Malbro' gave,
Sent down from Heaven now gives it Him once more.
The Troops are wild with ecstasy of Joy
To see their General from the Bonds of Death
To Conpuest and Eternal Glory rise;
Death from Immortal Splendor roaring flies
And yelling Discord flies from Love Divine.
Now the Brave Squadrons to His Aid arrive,
And now another fiery Steed present,
And with their cries the eager Hero urge
To lead them on to everlasting Fame,
The Hero mounts, the Squadrons rend the Skies,
Mounting with Him to Heaven their Spirits soar.
The Hero mounts, but Discord while He mounts
And Death outrageous to be thus repulsed
Level a Canon at His Sacred Head,
But from His Sacred Head the pondrous Ball
Diverted, Bringfield who remounts Him kills,
And consecrates Him to Eternal Fame
Who dies for such a Chief in such a Cause.
Through the Confederate Troops the Angel now
The Spirit of Celestial Union spreads,
And He who while he sojourned here on Earth
First bound the Nations in the Bonds of Love
Is sent from Heaven that Union to confirm
And to augment in great Ramillia's Field.
Malb'rough remounted feels the Joys of Heaven,
The Wisdom and the Force of Gods He feels.
And now He leads the shouting Squadrons on
Daring as if they were Immortal all;
With Hearts and Souls unanimous they advance,
United as they were one Nation all,
One Family, Relations all, and Friends.
One Interest have They all, one Noble Cause,
With Fury inexpressible They advance,
And greatly each resolves to Die for all.
The French who brave Resistance made till now,
Now can Their fierce Attacks no longer bear.
They can no longer bear their very Eyes
And fatal Meens, but fainting all recoil,
And Death and Discord with their Hell-born Host
Headlong upon their Gallick Friends are diven,
The routed Gauls Divide, Disband, Disperse,
They fly, the Angel waves His Flaming Sword,
At which expected Signal on the Wing
Th'Amazing Terrors of The Almighty stoop,
And persecute and plague their broken Rear;
Make some precipitate their shameful Flight,
While others basely beg for wretched Life,
And others Trembling Faint, and Sink, and Die
Thus Discord and the Gaul were forced to yield
To Malb'rough and to Union's Sacred Power.
The END.
ERRATA.
Page 24. line 1. for retire read retires* p. 53. l. 9. for Head r. Hear^. p.
55. l. 3. for Calamities r. Calamitous p. 56. l. 5. after mocked, a Comma.
Ibid. for in vain r. is vain.


