POEMS BY MR. JERNINGHAM. A NEW EDITION. IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON, NEW BOND-STREET.

M. DCC. XCVI.

CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
THE SHAKESPEARE GALLERY Page 1 ON THE RESIGNATION OF SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS Page
28 EPITAPHS Page 31 NORTHERN POETRY Page 37 ABELARD TO ELOISA Page 71 THE
AFRICAN BOY Page 90 ENTHUSIASM Page 95 AN APOLOGUE Page 130 THE ROOKERY 132
TINTERN ABBEY Page 135 TO BARON NOLCKEN Page 136 TO THE LATE LADY HERVEY 137
MARGARET OF ANJOU Page 139 TO THE MEMORY OF THE LATE LADY JERNINGHAM 157
SHAKSPEARE GALLERY, etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Poem does not pass any judgment upon the Pictures that are now
exhibited in the Gallery; but attempts to point out new subjects for future
Exhibitions: And, in the delineation of new subjects, attention is paid to the
principle laid down by our late great Painter, (in his notes to the translation
of Fresnoy by Mr. MASON) That palpable situation is preferable to curious
sentiment, as the Painter speaks to the eye.

THE SHAKSPEARE GALLERY.
As mused the Prophet near mild CHEBAR's stream EZEKIEL, Chap. 8th.
,
And prayed his God to dart the enlight'ning gleam,
Abrupt-descending from his airy height,
A form angelic rufh's upon his sight!
With smiling lip he cheered the hallowed Sire,
And bad his soul to Heaven's best gift aspire:
Then, with strong hand, he grasped his silver hair,
And swift conveyed him through the yielding air,
Along the unknown region of the sky,
The dread, mysterious, deep abyss on high.
There Inspiration her bright cloud withdrew,
And poured her visions on his daring view:
Then on his rapture-kindled eye arose
Those forms of splendour, those terrific shows,
With which be peopled his celestial dream,
And swelled his proud magnificence of theme.
To ENGLAND's Leading Bard thus Genius came,
Envelop'd in a robe of holy flame,
And bore him, with a whirlwind's rapid force,
Beyond the solar road, and starry course;
From which far towering and tremendous height
(While now he hovers with suspended flight)
The Poet viewed, as on a spacious plain,
Of human passions the long shadowy train:
'Twas then the favored Bard received the lore,
(Whose mystic veil was never removed before)
That revelation to his instinct given,
That ray from GOD, the energy of Heaven.
To his illumined sight was then consigned
The deep recesses of the Human Mind;
The ever-varying path of tortuous Art,
And the dark passage to the Tyrant's heart;
Th'umbrageous winding of the thorny road,
That leads to quick-ey'd Jealousy's abode;
The gathering storms that over Resentment roll;
The swelling waves that toss the fearsul soul;
The calm that breathes around the Infant's rest,
The rugged cavern of the Murd'rer's breast;
The dread materials by the Furies brought,
With which are forged Despair's tempestuous thought;
The shaft, that, mingling pleasure with the pain,
Bathes in the blood that warms the Lover's vein.
Oh Thou! the IMPERIAL GENIUS of our land!
Take a fresh garland from thy country's hand;
Triumphs unknown she hastens to proclaim,
And stamp a newborn era on thy fame!
Too long, as with the iron power of Fate,
Has Custom bolted the Historic Gate;
Enlightened BOYDELL bursts the opposing bar,
On their rude hinge the ponderous portals jar;
While the rapt Arts salute, with loud acclaim,
This rich accession to their rising name.
Genius of PAINTING! thy bright car ascend,
Bid glowing Energy thy steps attend,
Triumphant ride through the unrifled land,
And seize thy plunder with victorious hand.
Often have we heard the pure of taste complain,
Of mawkish Portraiture's eternal reign;
Of exhibitions which the art disgrace,
And pall the eye with many a vacant face.
Let Miniature erect her fairy school,
And'mid her gewgaws unmolested rule;
Let her bright dome each pleased Narcissus seek,
To her let Beauty hold her summer cheek!
Let her delineate, on her ivory plane,
The nuptial simper of the happy swain!
From these we turn to scenes of higher aim,
Where Eagle-Genius soars to nobler game;
Where Fancy, Reason, Taste, in one conjoined,
Unfold the workings of the impassioned mind.
Now to the laurell'd, academic band.
To every Artist's emulative hand,
Munificence upholds her sacred prize,
And bids the daring reach it from the skies.
While Expectation lifts the thought on high,
Methinks I view, with a prophetic eye,
In solemn state ascend that splendid Dome,
Where the proud Arts shall find an equal home;
Where, at the opening of some glorious day,
The English mind its treasures shall display;
While they, whose taste is swayed by Rigor's rule,
Shall mark the wonders of the Albion School. Another gallery is to be erected,
for the purpose of receiving the whole collection, when complete.

If time should ever obliterate the gold
Of SHAKSPEAR'S language, cast in Vigor's moul
Here shall, invested in their various guise,
The throng of his departed Forms arise!
The splendid forms his mind luxuriant drew,
The bold creations he held forth to view,
As from their grave shall burst the numerous host,
And on these walls a new existence boast.
Here shall be seen, in all her charms arrayed,
Th'impressive figure of VERONA'S Maid JULIET.
:
Closed in the dreary vault where sleep the dead,
Wrapped in the night-dress of the funeral bed,
She breaks abruptly from her iron trance,
And sends around a terror-rolling glance:
A mournful, solitary lamp shall throw
A sickly glimmering over the house of woe,
And shall the wretched PARIS give to view,
Stretched on the ground, with mien of ghastly hue:
Then shall a deeper spectacle display,
And hang over ROMEO with reluctant ray,
Disclosing his wan lips, devoid of breath,
And faint-ros'd cheek, still beautiful in death:
Then shall the beam, with weakened effort, shed
A fading glory on the FRIAR'S head.
She too shall ornament the pictured scene,
The destined victim of ITALIAN spleen: IMOGEN.

See the base wretch perform his treacherous part,
With all the subtlety of finished art!
Behold him bending over the sleeping Maid,
Her holy form to his research betrayed!
Eager some secret notice to retail,
With ravenous aim he lifts the slender veil,
And leering marks, by Nature's hand impressed,
The mole cinque-spotted on her snowy breast;
Whose scattered drops to the rapt eye excel
The crimson spots within the cowslip's bell.
Here too, as patient as the meek-ey'd dove,
Shall stand the Maid who "never told her love VIOLA.
"
Who, to her coy and fearful bosom true,
(As the unseen worm, that pales the blossom's hue)
Still let concealment on her beauty prey,
Like snow dissolving silently away.
Now, at the magic Painter's wild command,
Girt with the sea, ascends the Enchanted Land!
There stands Simplicity's endearing Child MIRANDA.

That artless Maid! the flow'ret of the wild!
Beside the margin of the wave-vex'd shore,
While all around conflicting thunders roar,
With unbound tresses, fluttering to the wind,
Her eye expressive of her tortured mind,
She views the vessel, by the surges tossed,
Now seen -- now lost -- now found -- now once more lost:
Till, madly rushing on the pointed rock,
Its bosom riven with the forceful shock,
Beyond the stretch of naval art to save,
Down, down, it hurries to the watery grave!
Now PROSPERO comes, with magic arts endu'd,
His sable garb with hieroglyphics strewn;
Long care, long study, solitude profound,
Has deepen'd on his brow reflection's wound;
His low-descending hair, o'erblanch'd with age,
Becomes the Sorc'rer, and adorns the Sage:
Ah! view him at that dread, momentous hour,
While he abjures his necromantic power!
Within the ring of Incantation's ground,
Elves, Fairies, Spirits, Demons, flock around:
Beneath his foot behold the potent wand,
Doomed never again to grace his lifted hand!
Behold the volume, which (with mystery fraught)
Predestination's darkling edicts taught,
And breathed its solemn whispers on the mind,
With dust overspread, and to neglect consigned!
Yet then the distant scenery imparts
A dire remembrance of his former arts:
The bright sun fading in his full career,
The wild stars madly starting from their sphere,
The storm-encumber'd sky, the swelling main,
The uprooted cedars stretching over the plain,
The mountain loosened by convulsive throe,
With ruin rushing to the vale below,
And the pale wretch, reversing Nature's doom,
Abruptly rising from the risted tomb!
What glowing Artist with bold hand shall claim
To draw, Oh ARIEL! thy resplendent frame?
Thou tricksy Spirit with benignant smile,
Thou playful meteor of the Enchanted Isle!
Not like a sea-nymph, robbed in sickly green,
With dappled wings, as on the Stage you are seen,
A gay transparency shall thou appear,
Thy form celestial melting into air,
With foot light-touching some fantastic height,
Prompt to depart, and stretching to thy flight.
Yet, ere we sail from this Enchanted Isle,
Let other scenes our lingering steps beguile:
There stands ANTHONIO, the suggesting fiend,
And half reveals his purpose to his friend;
His bosom swells, his madd'ning eye balls roll,
And show the workings of his inmost soul.
All that his lawless, wild conceptions dare,
In various forms hang hovering in the air:
A sword fresh-tainted with ALONZO'S blood,
A scepter swimming in a cimson flood,
A crown with dazzling ornaments overspread,
And lightly floating over SEBASTIAN'S head;
While, in the distance, rising over the bay,
Imperial Naples shall her towers display.
Lo! now, advancing on the mimic scene,
Comes forth to view the famed Egyptian Queen ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA, Act is it,
Scence 3d, at the end.
;
While anxious doubts her Soldier's mind perplex,
Behold her rise instructive to her sex!
Ah, not superior! for the female heart
Endures with fortitude the suffering part.
Towering beyond the flight of timorous love,
She bids her Warrior from her sight remove;
She points her finger to the martial plain,
Points to the active and the daring train:
The threatening axes which the Fasces bear;
The gorgeous streamers swelling to the air;
Of busy legions the thick murmuring swarms;
The thronging shields, and high emblazon'd arms;
The encumbering elephant, the rapid steed,
And spoils of former conquest, Glory's meed;
Flushed Conquest, riding in his trophied car,
And all the dread magnificence of war.
Now shall the fell, tremendous act be done:
The THANE MACBETH.
appears! -- the warning clock strikes One!
His daring, wild imaginings create
(Such the hot chaos of his mental state)
The air-born dagger, and display to view
The point obscene, distained with crimson hue.
Still, as we gaze, shall new creations rise,
And varying sceneries prolong surprise:
Ere yet the sky-lark leaves his lowly bed,
Bright on the mist-encircled mountain's head,
See jocund Day on airy tiptoe stand,
And open the gates of Heaven with radiant hand!
Now, like two lions litter'd on one day JULIUS CAESAR, Act 4th, Scene 3d.

Who range the dreary wilds, and share the prey,
I see, in dreadful harmony combined,
The illustrious Pair who dignify mankind!
The summer-cloud, that dimmed their friendship's:
The passing summer-gale has borne away;
Yet CASSIUS then upbraids the unmanly grief,
That from the moral Porch claims no relief:
With lowering aspect, but with tearless eyes,
The grief-torn, inly-bleeding friend replies:
"Ah! not in vain was I with Stoics bred,
"For yet art thou to learn, that PORTIA's dead."
The hair-dishevell'd Prophetess of Troy TROILUS AND CRESSIDA, Act, 5th, Scene
3d.

Shall next the Painter's hallowed hand employ:
She with bold Divination's meteor-eye,
Pervades the awful secrets of the sky;
The woes of her loved country she foretells,
And on her brother's death prolixly dwells.
ANDROMACHE, impressed with tender fears,
At the prophetic strain dissolves in tears;
While HECTOR's scorn-denouncing looks upbraid
The vapoury day-dreams of the wild'ring Maid:
While PRIAM, bending at the weight of age,
Revered, parental, patriarchal Sage!
Half credits, half rejects, the tragic tale,
Till terrors over his fading hopes prevail.
Whence yonder radiant form, that charms the eye?
It Is Expectation, riding through the sky!
A sword-like instrument she waves around,
Enwreath'd with coronets, with chaplets bound,
Prepared for HENRY and his faithful train,
Eager to urge the war over Gallia's plain.
Behold the Legate from the sacred Dome KING JOHN, Act 3d, Sce: 4th.

In the rich garb of sacerdotal Rome! --
CONSTANCE approaches! spurning at relief,
Attired in all the negligence of grief:
In her fierce grasp she shows her rooted hair,
Presenting well the image of Despair;
And seem to cry aloud, in accents wild,
"He talks to me, who never had a child!"
Mark where the blood-sed lamps, with crimson ray HENRY SIXTH, Part II. Act
1st, Scene 4th.

The ragged entrails of a cave display:
On a dread pile of human bones, her throne,
Sits, in rude pomp, the emaciated Crone;
She lifts a pale and withered hand on high,
And on the Phantom rolls her savage eye,
Whose doubtful form confounds the enquiring sight,
One part revealed, the other lost in night;
From this abhorred interpreter of fate,
The Hag demands the future storms of state,
When the Sixth HENRY, prince of dim renown,
Shall lose, what ill becomes him -- England's crown.
Ye, who to martial fame your spirit yield,
Who pant to reap the honors of the field,
See the Third EDWARD, from the mountain's brow,
Survey, with madd'ning glance, the plain below:
He there beholds (by sacred Glory won)
In Danger's van his dear and godlike Son:
He views with wonder, and with mingled fear,
(His eyelid glist'ning with Affection's tear)
With pride, applause, and with a Father's joy,
The first achievements of the immortal Boy HENRY FIFTH, Act 1st, Scene 2d.
!
Lo! the Eighth HENRY, from his doubts released,
Devotes to infamy the aspiring Priest HENRY EIGHTH, Act 3d, Scene 2d.

The Monarch hails him as he passes by,
With ruin leaping from his threatening eye:
The Prelate, struck as by the blast of Death,
Looks the scath'd oak upon the naked heath.
The distant scene shall yield illumined night,
With one star falling from its airy height,
Thy emblem, WOLSEY! -- thou wast England's star,
And thy rich luster dazzled from afar;
Till thou (too daring) wast, by public hate,
Flung from the splendour of thy towering state.
With fearful steps we now approach the bed
Where Scotland's King reclines his weary head:
Mark, mark the savage Thane's MACBETH.
more savage Wife,
Who brandishes aloft the thirsty knife!
One moment -- and the victim is no more;
One moment -- and he welters in his gore!
When sudden, through her soul's encircing night,
Flashes a glimmering of a moral light:
Over the calm features of the sleeping Guest
She sees her Father's image full expressed Act 2d, Scene 2d. -- LADY MACBETH.
"Had he not resembled my Father as he slept, I had don't."

It Is Nature's miracle! -- the Fiend relents,
Her altered mien a sickly smile presents;
Affection subjugates her lawless soul,
Her bosom heaves, and tears begin to roll.
Say, to whose proud ambition shall be given
A pencil glowing with the tints of Heaven,
With which the wild Enthusiast shall aspire
To body forth the ecstatic Muse of Fire? HENRY FIFTH, the Prologue.

O for a Muse of Fire, that would ascend
The brightest heaven of Invention!


At the gay opening of the splendid sky
The Seraph enters, with commanding eye,
Her radiant visitant Invention hails,
And all her waste magnificence reveals:
A diamond-rock sustains the gorgeous Queen,
That flings a brilliance over the expansive scene;
The various Arts their sovereign Mistress own,
And bend with low obeisance at her throne:
See, to the Muse the Goddess holds a crown,
Bright on whose front is charactered "RENOWN!"
A subject now unfolds of meeker claim AS YOU LIKE IT, Act 2d, Scene 3d.

Yet seeks the heart with unresisted aim:
The faithful Servant on the scene appears,
Impressed, but not o'ercharg'd with weight of years:
The glow of health still blushes on his cheek,
As on the winter-fruit the ruddy streak:
His tearful eyes his Master's wants behold,
And to those wants he yields the hoarded gold:
Methinks he says, "With this thy care assuage;
"For me. let Him be comfort to my age,
"Whose tender providence the Raven feeds,
"And to the Sparrow yields the daily seeds."
See where the chisel, with victorious strife,
Has urged the torpid matter into life!
Lo! the bold Roman to our view consigned,
His air reflective of his haughty mind;
Spite of the foldings of a mean disguise,
His frame majestic strikes the admiring eyes:
So the tall vessel, shattered by the storm,
Retains her native dignity of form:
Behold him, at the hour of conscious pride,
And prompting worth, to confidence allied,
What time he utters, with commanding air,
"My name breathes terror on a Volscian ear!"
This high, heroic task, by Genius planned,
Avows the impression of a female hand See the Basso-Relievo by the Honorable
ANN vDAMER. -- CORIOLANUS, Act 4th, Scene 5th.

Illustrious DAMER! though thy splendid name
Decks, like a star, the pinnacle of fame,
Yet only they who mark, with aspect near,
The humbler orb of thy domestic sphere,
Can tell (from all the rougher parts refined)
How Learning sits enameled on thy mind:
How still, through various life's eventful scene,
Thy friendship wears the unfading robe of green! --
NOR shall each task unfold the solemn scene
Hung with the drap'ry of the Tragic Queen:
With airy step THALIA shall advance,
And dart around her grief-expelling glance,
Group the fantastic forms of Humour's court,
And bid the Pleasures over the landscape sport.
Wherever our Bard displays his magic powers,
Wherever he treads, arise spontaneous flowers,
Which over the pallet brighter tints shall throw,
While the live pencil drinks a richer glow.
See where the Birds forsake the realms of air, See the Poems. -- "The
Passionate Pilgrim," at the end.

And to yon melancholy spot repair;
Where press the bier those images of love,
The radiant Phoenix and the faithful Dove:
Just over the summit of the funeral pyre,
Waked by the gale, ascends the sacred fire.
There Philomela swells her little throat,
To grace the requiem with her saddest note:
There too the pitying Red-breast shall be seen,
And in his bill a leaf of purest green:
The Swallow shall his circling sport forego,
And join this meek society of woe:
The joyous Sky-lark, by compassion won,
Shall check his wonted anthem to the sun,
And, swift-descending from his radiant height,
Devote his music to the hallowed rite.
Even birds s;hall here be seen of ampler form,
Who slowly sail, and dare the gathering storm:
The Vulture here shall come, at Sorrow's call,
And the dark Raven spread his hovering pall:
The Bird of JOVE shall from his heaven descend,
And with this train his awful presence blend.
Ye who, with finer siner sympathies impressed,
Avow the immaculate and feeling breast,
O white-stol'd Virgins! in long order move,
True to the ritual of the cypress grove;
And, while your souls with chaste affection burn,
With garlands deck the emblematic urn.
Ah! now the zeal that warms my throbbing heart
For all who honor the Poetic Art,
Ferments my bosom to this strong desire,
That He who led the Bard's theatric quire,
Whom England mourns -- recording still his name,
Who grappled to his own his SHAKSPEARE'S fame,
That He, by Sculptor imag'd, here may stand,
In act to speak what his great Idol planned.
Thus have we traversed the extensive plain,
Marked where the mine contains the swelling vein;
Marked where the chosen trees their branches shoot,
And plucked the leaves that veil the Golden Fruir! The Reader will be pleased
with knowing the opinion Mr. BURKE passed on this Poem when it first appeared.
The imagery, in which our great Orator conveys his sentiment, forms a new and
sublime allusion to SHAKSPEARE. In a letter, dated BEACONSYIELD, January 1791,
he says -- I have not for a long time seen any thing so well finished. The
Author has caught new fire by approaching in his perihelion so near to the sun
of our poetical system. Note of the Editor.


!
THE FOLLOWING LINES Were written on the Occasion of the late Sir JOSHUA
REYNOLDS' resigning the President's Chair at the Royal Academy.
Ye great dispensers of the magic strain,
Whose harmony delights almost to pain:
Ye rare PROMETHEI, to whose hand is given
To snatch the flame that warms the breast of heaven:
Ye too, ye Bards, illustrious heirs of fame,
Who from the sun your mental lineage claim:
Approach, and see a dear and kindred Art
Unhallowed maxims to her sons impart;
See her (become wild Faction's ready tool)
Insult the Father of the modern school.
Yet he fist entered on the barren land,
And raised on high ARMIDA'S powerful wand:
From him the Academics boast a name,
He led the way, he smoothed their path to fame:
From him the instructive lore the pupils claimed,
His doctrine nurtured, and his voice inflamed!
Oh, and is all forgot? -- The sons rebel,
And, REGAN-like, their hallowed Sire expel.
Could not his faculties, so meekly borne,
Arrest the hand that fixed the rankling thorn?
Could not the twilight of approaching age,
The silver hairs that crown the indulgent Sage,
Domestic virtues, his time-honour'd name,
His radiant works that crowd the dome of fame,
Say, could not these suppress the opprobrious scene,
And charm to slumber academic spleen?
Mark, mark the period, when the Children stung
The Parent's feelings with their serpent tongue;
It was while dimness veiled the powers of fight,
The calamity here alluded to came suddenly upon Sir JOSHUA while he was
painting.
And tinged all nature with the gloom of night!
(Not many days removed) the Master came
With wonted zeal to touch the swelling theme!
The pregnant canvas his creation caught,
And drank his rich exuberance of thought:
Decked with the beams of Inspiration's sky,
Glanced over the work his finely-frensy'd eye.
-- Malignant Fate approached -- the scenes decay,
To him the new creation fades away;
Thick night abruptly shades the mimic sky,
And clouds eternal quench the frensy'd eye!
Invention shudder'd -- Taste stood weeping near --
From Fancy's eyelid gushed the glittering tear --
Genius exclaimed -- "My matchless loss deplore,
"The hand of REYNOLDS falls to rise no more!"
EPITAPHS.
ON MISS JERNINGHAM. JANUARY 1773.
AH, venerate this hallowed ground,
And mark the infant-virtues round!
See Innocence, celestial fair,
With Childhood, Heaven's peculiar care:
See Beauty opening into bloom,
Bending over this youthful tomb:
Behold Affection that endears,
And Wit beyond an infant's years,
And Constancy (mid mortal pain,
Still, still refusing to complain)
By Sorrow led, a choral band,
Fixed on this sacred spot they stand!
And as they view this marble stone,
Their little Mistress they bemoan.
ON JAMES ROBSON, WHO DIED IN THE TWENTIETH YEAR OF HIS AGE, BY A FALL FROM HIS
HORSE.
To mark the hapless Youth's disastrous doom,
The sorrow-wedded Father rears the tomb,
On which a Mother wishes to express
The mingled pride that swells with her distress:
For he was all Affection could desire,
All Duty asked, all Friendship could require:
Simplicity was his, with strength of mind,
With every milder influence combined;
While Virtue, ardent to complete the whole,
Diffused her magic color over the soul!
ON MISS HAMILTON.
ENDOWED with all that Fortune could bestow;
With brilliancy of wit, and beauty's glow,
FRANCISCA, rising to her fifteenth year,
Stood mid the virgin train without a peer:
Her conscious bosom throbb'd to virtue warm,
While diffidence still heightened every charm:
But Heaven's decree forbad this Beauty's Queen
To act her part through beauty's short-lived scene:
A gradual illness on her figure preyed,
And slowly, slowly sunk the fading Maid:
Torn from each wish to which her youth aspired,
Unfearing -- uncomplaining -- she expired:
Thus some faint lily to its mother-ground
In silence falls -- while spring is blooming round.
LINES ON THE OF SIR JOHN ELLIOT, M.D.
THUS when the poisoned shafts of Death are sped,
The plant of Gilead bends her mournful head:
The holy balm that soothed another's pain
Over her own wound distills its charm in vain.
THE FOLLOWING LINES, DESIGNED FOR A MONUMENT OF TWO FRIENDS, Were written by
the GENTLEMAN who erected the Monument, and were translated at his request.
CONCORDES animae, quondam dum vita manebat
Nunc quoque conjunctos terra sacrata regit.
THEY whom in life the bond of Friendship bound,
Here in dread union press the funeral ground.
THE RISE AND FALL OF THE NORTHERN POETRY: A POEM, IN TWO PARTS.
TO THE EARL of ORFORD.
DEAR SIR,
I AM ambitious of inscribing this Poem to you, as a small return for the warm
commendation you bestoed upon it, when the Poem was first published. This also
gives me an opportunity, which I readily embrace, of paying a public testimony
to the exalted regard with which I remain,

Your faithful humble servant, EDWARD JERNINGHAM.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE materials that form the First Part of the following Poem are taken from
the Scandinavian poetics, The EDDA! In the remarks on the third fable of the
Edda, are these words, A powerful Being had with his breath animated the drops
out of which the first giant was formed. This Being, whom the Edda affects not
to name, was entirely distinct from Odin, who had his birth long after the
formation of the giant Ymir. -- This first agent, or Genius, whom the Edda
affects not to name, is supposed, in the following Poem, to create, from his
own immediate power, the system of the Scaldic mythology. As it would have been
impossible to introduce the whole system without running into a tedious
enumeration, the principal features of it are only retained, sufficient (it is
presumed) to give some idea of the character of the northern poetry. Among
other omissions, the reader will find that no mention is made of Gimle, the
mansion of bliss, that was appropriated to the reception of the virtuous, nor
of Nastrande, the abode of the impious; these places not being supposed to
exist in their full extent till the general destruction of the world; whereas
the hall of Odin, and the caves of Hela, were peculiarly the Elysium and the
Tartarus of the Runic poetry: they are perpetually referred to in the ancient
songs of the Scalds, and the wild system of these contrasted abodes seems well
calculated to encourage that spirit of war and enterprise which runs through
the whole Scandinavian minstrelsy.

Some expressions taken from the Edda may appear obscure without an
explanation. -- In the language of the Scalds, the world is styled the great
vessel that floats on the ages. -- The rainbow, the bridge of the gods. -- To
drink the blood of friendship, alludes to a ceremony performed by two warriors
when they enter into an alliance of friendship; they made incisions in their
arms or breast, and tasting each other's blood, they mutually swore, that the
death of the first of them who fell in battle should not pass unrevenged.

To celebrate the mass of weapons, was to fight against the Christians, whose
religious sentiments the Scandavians held in contempt, as thinking them adverse
to the spirit of war.

The Valkeries are a female troop, whom Odin sends to the field of battle upon
invisible steeds; their function is to choose such as are destined to
slaughter, and conduct their spirits to the Paradise of the Brave.

Fenris is a large wolf, who is to break his chains at the general
conflagration, and to swallow the sun.

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE NORTHERN POETRY.
PART I.
WHEN urged by Destiny the eventful year
Sailed through the portal of the northern sphere,
Of SCANDINAVIA the rude Genius rose,
His breast deep-lab'ring with creation's throes:
Thrice over his head a powerful wand he whirled,
Then called to life a new Poetic world.
First through the yawning waves that roared around,
Uprising slow from out the gulf profound,
Amidst the fury of the beating storm
The giant YMIR heaved his horrid form.
Now on the stormy cloud the rainbow glows,
Where gay Diversity her coloring throws.
Beyond the sun the Power now cast his eyes,
And bade the splendid city ASGARD ise;
Obedient to the loud creative call
She rises, circled with a crystal wall,
Her sapphire mansions crowned with opal towers,
Over which the Power a flood of radiance showers.
Now a more daring task the Genius planned,
He seized the rapid lightning in his hand,
And as around the broken rays he flung,
From the fallen spires the gods of ASGARD sprung.
See the dread Ash exalt its lofty head,
And over a wide extent its umbrage shed:
There twelve of ASGARD's gods in close divan
Sit in strict judgment on the deeds of man:
Amidst the waving boughs enthroned on high
An eagle sends around his watchful eye.
Three virgin forms, in snowy vests arrayed,
Stand in the deep recesses of the shade,
The rich endowments of whose radiant mind
Are by the Power to different acts consigned.
He gives to thee, sage URDA, to restore
The splendid deeds of times that are no more,
And (faithful as the echo to the sound)
Repeat transactions that were once renowned.
Clear to thy view, VERNANDI, are unfurled
The various scenes that fill the extensive world.
To thee, O SKULDA, the dread power is given,
To read the counsels in the breast of heaven;
With daring forecast pierce the abyss of time,
And (utt'ring first some strange mysterious rhyme)
Proclaim which babe, when reared to warlike form,
Shall over his country roll deftruction's storm;
And which, directed to a better fate,
Shall rise the pride and pillar of the state.
Next, at the awful Pow'r's commanding call,
Arose to view great ODIN'S festive hall!
Engraved with sunbeams on the crystal gate
Appeared --
-- Here they refude in splendid state,
Who, as they slept in death, reclined their head
On valor's bier, the battle's rugged bed,
Who to the bliss the intrepid claim aspired,
Who welcomed pain, and with a smile expired.
Now as the Genius waves his hallowed hand
The Valkeries appear, a female band,
Prompt to the storm of lances to repair,
On viewless steeds to scour the fields of air,
Mark as they hover over the crowded plain
The chosen chiefs, the death-devoted train.
The Power now formed the coward's dewlling place,
The seat of pain, and mansion of disgrace:
Deep under earth he fixed the drear abode,
Through which the rueful stream of anguish flowed;
Loud roar the surges through the gulf profound,
While cavern'd echoes murmur back the sound.
Close at the gate sat Death's terrific Maid,
Her meagre form in sable weeds arrayed;
Awreath of living snakes entwine her head,
And thus with shrilling voice the spectre said:
'Haste to my caves, ye impotent of heart,
'Who meanly shrink from valor's daring part,
'Ye too, who lingering on with feeble breath,
'Crept through the languor of old age to death.'
See on the horrid battle's bleeding plain
The raven-brood rejoicing over the slain!
Yet then in vain they gorge the grateful food,
Death smites them at the dire repast of blood;
When lo! their pinions to the wondering view
Combining, into one vast texture grew;
The gory heads conjoined in one dread fold,
Around the frame a grisly margin rolled:
Now self-upborne the sable banner flings
Bold to the wind its wide-expanding wings;
'Exalt', the Genius cries, 'thy plumes on high,
'Wave thy dark signal to the warrior's eye;
'Th'intrepid Youth beneath thy magic shade
'Thro' slaughtered heaps to victory shall wade Though the Raven-banner is not
mentioned in the Edda, it is of great antiquity; it was supposed to be endued
with some magical power, and to insure success.
.'
Now from a rock on which the Genius stood,
He marked below a slowly-waving wood,
Then raised his awful voice -- 'Hail, hallowed gloom,
'(Where Thought is reared, and Fancy decks her plume)
'Who hold'st within thy vast sequestered bower
'A numerous train, that wait the ripening hour:
'Resign thy charge, yield to demanding time,
'The living fathers of the Runic rhyme.'
Swift at his word the ancient sire surveyed,
Tumultuous rushing from the solemn shade,
Armed with the powerful harp, an ardent throng,
The mighty founders of the northern song.
'Twas then the Power resumed -- 'Ye chosen band,
'At Nature's furnace take your faithful stand:
'There forge the verse amidst the fiercest glow,
'And thence the thunderbolts of Genius throw;
'Rouse, rouse the tyrant from his flattering dream,
'Full at his vices wield the daring theme,
'Till over his cheek shall flash intruding shame,
'That blushing dawn of Virtue's rising flame.
'Now on the bosom of the listening Youth
'Impress, engrave the sacred form of Truth;
'Bid them, as varying life unfolds to view,
'Be still through all her scenes to honor true;
'True to the man on Friendship's list enrolled,
'Th'entrusted secret of his sold untold.
'Woe to that Chief, and blasted be his fame,
'Whose mean soul chills Affection's holy flame;
'Forgetting that he once, with zeal impressed,
'Drank the pure drops that flowed from Friendship's breast.
'Now to the realm, ye hallowed Bards, impart
'This truth, and touch with joy the human heart,
'In man's too transient perishable frame
'A glowing unabating fire proclaim,
'Which, as that frame lies mouldering into clay,
'Shall through the encircling ruin burst its way:
'Thus when a torrent of impetuous rain
'Drowns the low nest that trusted to the plain;
'High soars the bird beyond Destruction's flow,
'And owns no kindred with the wreck below.
'Then over some stately tomb's dim entrance bend,
'And from the daring harp unerring send
'(As from the sounding bow with vigor sped)
'The darts of harmony that wake the dead.
' -- Be too of prophecy the dreadful lords,
'And strike the solemn, deep, mysterious chords;
'Skill'd to reveal futurity's dark laws,
'Inforce the song with many an awful pause.
'In sounds that terrify the soul disclose
'(Veiled in the womb of time) destructive woes:
'Say whirlwinds shall provoke the roaring main;
'Say stars shall drop like glittering gems of rain:
'Say Fenris, bursting from his time-worn chains,
'Shall bear wild horror through the Runic plains;
'Doom'd while the course of havoc he shall run,
'With jaws outstretch'd to rend the falling sun.
'Say the gigantic ship, the floating world,
'Shall, on the iron rock of ruin hurled,
'Sink -- like a dream that, rushing from the mind,
'Leaves not a glimmering of its pomp behind
'Ye bold Enthusiasts, join the warlike train,
'When true to fame they seek the hostile plain;
'Bid the loud harp delight the valiant throng,
'And add the forceful eloquenc of song.
'Thinn'd of his numbers, mark the struggling Chief
'Encircled close, and severed from relief:
'Now strike the cheering harp -- it is heard no more,
'Lost in the conflict's wild increasing roar.
'Yet strike again, yet strike the note profound,
'I to the Chief will waft the inspiring sound;
'Till through the pressure of the battle's storm,
'He over the slain a rugged path shall form.
'Thus on the main when frozen fragments sail,
'And with huge mounds oppose the giant whale;
'The ocean's lord, enraged at the delay,
'Thro' stubborn crashing ice-rocks bursts his way.
'Now round some death-struck Chief in silence throng,
'While thus he breathes his own historic song: --
Though gash'd with wounds, unwounded is my fame,
In the war's field I chased the flying game;
Wrapped in the jealous veil of lingering night,
Did we not chide the time's reluctant flight?
Did not our voices hail the morning ray,
Shouting the matins of the important day?
When foreign streamers glittered to our view,
How swift our weapons from the scabbards flew!
'Twas joy to see the riven helmets fly,
'Twas joy to swell confusion's thundering cry,
'Twas joy to see (extending all around)
The hostile banners spread the lowly ground;
Methought the Danish field, thus mantled over,
Heaved conscious of the gorgeous robe it wore.
'Thus as the Chief shall mitigate his pain See the notes the Reverend Mr.
JOHNSTONE has added to his translation of the Death-song of LODBROC.

'With choral voice relieve the pausing strain:
'Now, now again your soothing tones suspend,
'And over the dying Chief attentive bend.
Rushed we not forth, at valor's daring call,
To crush the forces of the Christian Gaul?
Rushed we not forth in terrible attire,
To celebrate the mass of war a lengthening quire?
Our glittering swords, impatient of the fight,
Were the dread relics that adorned the rite.
But agony returns -- my fading breath
Denies expression to the song of death.
Farewell -- ye battle-sisters hour nigh,
Receive your prize -- and wast my soul on high!
'Now ere he sinks beneath the blow of fate,
'Reveal the honors of his future state;
'Where to his wondering vision shall expand,
'Adorn'd with heroes, a refulgent land.
'Ye glowing masters of the Scaldic song In the first rude ages rocks and trees
supplied the materials for writing, and on them were inscribed the rudiments of
that art: the trees thus marked were held in veneration, and were even believed
to enclose some supernatural agent.
,
'Still other powerful gifts to you belong:
'The lofty pine that meets the mountain gale,
'Th' expanding oak that crowns the lowly vale,
'Shall as your fingers touch the furrowed rind,
'Display the treasures of the musing mind:
'There by the voice of whispering Nature called,
'In future times shall stand the youthsul SCALD,
'There shall he meditate the Runic store,
'There woo the science of the tuneful lore;
'There view the tree with speechless wonder fraught,
'Whose womb mysterious bears the Poet's thought;
'There (from the busy world's incessant din)
'Inhale thebreathings of the Power within.
'Enough -- the power I now bestow enjoy,
'In Virtue's cause the forceful harp employ:
'Go forth, ye glorious conquerors of the mind,
'Atchieve the hallowed task to you assigned:
'Applaud the valiant, and the base control,
'Disturb, exalt, enchant the human soul'
Thus to his Minstrels spoke the awful Power --
The warm Enthusiasts own the inspiring hour;
And now dividing into many a band,
Strew their wild poetry over all the land:
So while descending with resistless tide,
The snow-flood hurries down the mountain's side,
The sun, bright sailing 'midst his ardent beams,
Melts the rude havoc into various streams;
Which rushing through the naked vales below,
Rouse vegetation as they roughly flow;
Till a new scene o'erspreads the teeming earth,
And smiling Nature hails the summer's birth.
THE END OF THE FIRST PART.
PART THE SECOND.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The temple of UPSAL was destroyed by INGO, 1075 -- a Christian cathedral was
erected on its ruins fourscore years after. At the introduction of
Christianity, the interposition of angels and the appearance of ghosts grew
familiar to the SCANDINAVIAN poetry, which was afterward enriched by
allegories, and by the accession of new images, which flowed to it through
various channels, particularly from the East. -- See RICHARDSON's Differtation.

When colleges were founded, and the general attention was directed to
classical learning, the wild conceptions of the Scaldic minstrels gradually
fell into disuse. -- This short Analysis contains the subject of the following
pages.

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE NORTHERN POETRY.
PART II.
THE gaudy dome to Pagan worship known,
By INGO's zealous hand at length overthrown;
Over the long-reaching ruins still revered,
The Gothic pile its form majestic reared.
The fretted columns of ambitious height,
And bulk enormous, fix the astonished sight;
And as they boldly rise on either hand,
Like kindred giants in dread phalanx stand:
While through the isles that stretch a lengthening way,
The umber'd windows shed terrific day.
Amidst the wonders of the new abode,
The bursting organ seemed itself a god!
Diffusing its magnificence of sound,
And sending to the soul its note profound.
The admiring numbers next the altar viewed,
Crowned with the image of the holy Rood,
Displaying the sublime awards of Heaven,
A bleeding Deity -- a world forgiven. --
The awe-struck Bards stood bound as with a spell,
While from their grasp the chilled harp lifeless fell:
The lowly valley, and the hill sublime,
Echoed no more the battle-breathing rhyme.
Thus an eclipse by terror's hand imbrown'd,
Wrapped in concealment the poetic ground;
But time at length the hovering veil withdrew,
When all the gorgeous scenery burst to view.
The Genius joy'd to see his ancient store
Enriched with many a form unknown before.
The clouds recede, while opening skies display
The angelic hierarchy in proud array:
Rank rising above rank in order due,
The splendid consistory meets his view.
Now spirits of another form appear,
And from the yawning gravestheir shadows rear!
Here glides a ghastly shade, intent to shed
A scene of terror round the murd'rer's bed:
There, 'midst the solemn silence of the night,
Beneath the half-veil'd moon's reluctant light,
The shade of buried DENMARK stalks along,
Fraught with his woes, indignant of his wrong.
See, from yon infant's tomb, ascend to sight
A little form attired in purest white:
She meets the mother bending over the tomb,
And wailing her loved girl's untimely doom.
'Hail to thy grief!' the gentle vision cries,
'Hail to those tears that trickle from thine eyes:
'Too feeling parent, mitigate thy pain,
'Nor waste thy life beneath this gloomy fane:
'Ah know, thy child with angels soars on high,
'In the bright mansions of the upper sky,
'And decked with wings that glitter to the ray,
'Plays on the sunbeams of eternal day:
'Pass a few years, to Heaven's dread will resigned,
'And thou shall leave all sorrow far behind;
'The bliss I now enjoy thou shall obtain,
'And even MARIA shall be thine again.'
At length, o'erspreading the poetic land,
Advanced the various allegoric band:
First on a flow'r-clad hill sublimely high,
Whose brow aspiring rushed into the sky,
Hope with a cheering aspect took her stand,
A radiant pencil glittering in her hand,
With this she colors the dark clouds that lower,
And threaten man with rude misfortune's shower.
Then Celibacy came, in cloisters bred,
A sluggish, shard-born form, with dust overspread:
Dead to the bliss that social life bestows,
Dead to the bliss that from affection flows,
Dead to the blandishments of female power,
He schools the priesthood in his iron bower.
Then Grace -- the HEBE of the Christian sky,
With smiling lip and comfort*beaming eye!
The angelic numbers from their thrones above
Stooped to behold this object of their love:
Thus the full host of stars in cloudless night
Gaze on the earth from their ethereal height.
His meagre form now Disappointment rears,
His cheek deep-channel'd with incessant tears,
Trailing, as still he treads the thorny plain,
Of blasted hopes the long immeasurable chain.
Now Conscience entered on the trembling scene,
And to the bad disclosed her withering mien:
But chiefly when the death-watch strikes the ear,
This dread recorder of the past draws near:
Ere sickening GERTRUDE fell to death a prey Queen of DENMARK, and mother to
HAMLET.
,
(Tradition still repeats the moral lay)
To goad the bosom of that impious dame,
To the pale suff'rer's couch prompt Conscience came,
Like a dire necromancer skilled to raise
The accusing ghosts of her departed days!
Her laboring heart sent forth distraction's sigh,
As on the Priest she cast the imploring eye:
Then to the Cross (while tears her bosom lave)
The kiss of terror, not of love, she gave:
Now, yielding to the access of wild despair,
She shrieks, and rends with savage grasp her hair:
Now to reflection's gentler power consigned,
Long plaintive tones denote her troubled mind:
At length, sad spectacle of wrath divine!
The highborn wretch expires without a sign See HENRY the VIth. the death of
CARDINAL BEAUFORD.
.
On the dire battle's late-ensanguin'd plain,
Morality stood musing over the slain!
Yet then the mourner raised her drooping head,
And thus with sacred energy she said:
'Here -- where the fatal scenes of slaughter end,
'Where hostile nations in dread union blend,
'Where sleep the great, the daring, and the proud,
'Amidst this silent solitary crowd,
'Bid the young monarch quench ambition's flame,
'And against his passions daring war proclaim.'
Thus came the instructive allegoric train,
To swell the triumph of the Scaldic reign:
The Genius now beheld a ghastly crowd,
Borne through the mid air on the evening cloud:
The sable pageantry (when near) displayed
The unhallowed form of many a horrid shade.
Envelop'd in a robe of darkest hue,
The half-existing phantom burst to view;
From out the robe a death's head seemed to rise,
Through which tremendous glar'd two fulgent eyes.
The whiftler shrill, that whosoever hears does die. SPENSER, Canto 12. B. 2d. The
time has been my senses would have cooled to hear a night-sbriek.

MACBETH, Act v. Scene 5.
He too of dreadful fame, the alarming spright,
The unnam'd lonely wanderer of the night,
Whose shriek, profaning the repose around,
Foreboded death to him who heard the sound.
With wings outstretch'd the Gryphon next was seen,
Half-eagle, lion-half, a form obscene:
To these the innumerable host adjoin'd
Of shapes uncouth, the tyrants of the mind,
Matchless in force, and splenetic of mood,
The family of death, and terror's brood.
The moon now launching on the expanse of night,
Exulting sailed amidst a flood of light;
Along whose beams (diminutive of size)
A ship aerial glided through the skies:
Which as it rode resplendent from afar,
Assumed the appearance of a shooting star!
The playful Gossimer supplied the sail,
Swelled by the pressure of the panting gale:
The deck was peopled by a sprightly band,
The little progeny from fairy land!
The scene now changed -- the mountain heaved a groan,
The bending forest breathed a sullen moan:
When lo three Lapland hags, self-pois'd on high,
Of hideous aspect, struck the wondering eye!
Their implements of art aloft they bear,
And (like the lowering cloud that loads the air)
They spread the texture of the fatal loom,
While grim night blackens to a deeper gloom.
These forms were welcomed, as they passed along,
By savage howlings of the wolf-dog throng.
Disastrous ravens to this groupe repair,
And bats, the fiends that haunt the darkened air;
And owls the groupe pursue with heavy flight,
Prophets of woe, and harpies of the night;
And they who 'midst the storm exulting soar,
And they whose talons reek with infants' gore.
See from their height the haggard shapes descend,
And to the ocean's shore their footsteps bend;
Where cavern'd deep in conclave dim they dwell,
There utter the dread curse, there breathe the spell!
Hostile to man, their machinations frame,
And act the unhallowed deed without a name.
Thus have we sketch'd, with faint imperfect hand,
The forms that peopled the poetic land,
Aerial forms (by glowing fiction dressed)
Who raised to joy, or awed the human breast.
At length, these visions fading on the sight,
The university of Copenhagen was founded by CHRISTIEN, who died 1481. --
MALLET's History of Denmark, vol. vi. p. 443.
A new creation rose at once to light;
As from a gulf the new creation sprung,
On which the classic beams their splendour flung;
While on the land which late we wandered over,
Where wild invention watched her growing store,
Where (through rich vales) with swelling surges bold,
The flood of poetry resistless rolled!
Over which the glist'ning rays of fancy played,
And near whose banks the human passions strayed,
On this rude scene of wonder and delight,
In evil moment rushed eternal night.
ABELARD TO ELOISA: A POEM.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Monastery of CLUNI, from whence ABELARD is supposed to write the following
Epistle, was founded in the year 611, near the village of Mascon, on the river
Graone. The Head of this convent (in the time of ABELARD) was distinguished for
his learning and humanity. History elevates him above the vulgar herd of monks,
by the appellation of the Venerable PETER! He extended his generous protection
to the unfortunate ABELARD, when he was under the censure of the court of Rome.

SAINT BERNARD also is connected with the story of Paraclete. This great man
stands eminently forward in the picture of the twelfth century: Born with a
mind too restless and enterprising to be confined within the circle of monastic
occupations, he rushed into the tumult of active life, and took the lead in
some of the most important transactions of that period. With an undisciplined
ardour peculiar to his character, he precipitated his country into that ruinous
measure, the second crusade. Behold him at another time hastening to the
contest that held all EUROPE in suspense, which exhibited two contending
candidates for the popedom. The authority and vehemence of BERNARD overpowered
the pretensions of ANACLETUS, and INNOCENT was seated on the papal throne. The
enemies of this celebrated Abbot never impeached his moral character; but it
must be allowal that in his zeal against the innovation of new opinions, he has
sometimes left unregarded the superior duty of charity. A letter of his to the
Cardinal GUIDO, the pope's legate in France, contains the most intolerant and
sanguinary counsel.

ABELARD in the following Epistle lays a considerable stress upon his sentence
of excommunication: In the dark ages, that spiritual humiliation was felt as
the greatest calamity; the relation, the parent, the lover, the friend,
suspended their endearing offices, and withdrew from the degraded offender.

THE following Poem has been distinguished by a beautiful sonnet, inserted in a
volume of Poems that does honor to modera poetry, by Mr. Tailor, a gentleman
whose commendation is a passport to Fame, except where it is directed (as in
the present intlance) by the amiable bias of friendship.

ABELARD to ELOISA.
YON midnight bell, that frights the peaceful air!
Commands the Fathers to their wonted prayer:
Now in long order flows the sable throng,
Like a dark, sullen stream that creeps along:
Why joins not ABELARD the sainted train?
Does torpid sloth his lingering steps detain?
These walls, that pillow steeped in tears, attest
That sleep is exiled from this tortured breast:
This lamp proclaims the same, whose trembling beam
Guides while my hand pursues the glowing theme:
While the dread secret from my soul I tear,
And unreserv'd my bosomed feelings bare.
Ah me! the passionthat my soul misled
Was checked, not conquered; buried, but not dead:
Now bursting from the grave, in evil hour,
It hastens to its prey with fiercer power,
And, vulture-like, with appetite increased
It riots on the undiminish'd feast.
Daughter of Paraclete do thou complain
In iron silence that I locked my pain?
That not to thee (soft solacer in woe)
I bad the troubled waves of Anguish flow?
Methought the course of three long years' retreat
Would scarce thy lengthening sacrifice complete:
Methought I should profane the hallowed rite,
Did my laments thy pitying ear affright:
Thus at the altar, wrapped in holy dread,
The youth of Macedon in silence bled,
Nor from his tortured and consuming hand
Dismissed the living close-adhering brand. Alluding to the boy at Athens, who,
while he was affisting at a religious ceremony, endured a burning coal that
fell on his hand, rather than disturb the facrifice.
.
But now thy flow inauguration's over,
And thou have reached Religion's tranquil shore,
Now that stern habit throws without control
Her chain of adamant around thy soul,
May not the unhappy ABELARD disclose
(To her who pities most) his train of woes?
Ye sullen gates, within whose bound confined,
The wretch who enters fiings his joys behind!
Emerging from the dome, ye crowding spires,
Which sun-robed glitter like ascending fires!
That funeral spot with many a cypress spread,
Where shriek the spirits of the guilty dead!
Yon moping forest, whose extensive sway
Admits no lucid interval of day,
No cheering vista with a trail of light
Flies through the heavy gloom of lasting night!
Ye hermitages, deep immersed in wood,
Washed by the passing tributary flood,
Whose easy waves, soft-murm'ring as they roll,
Lull the strong goadings of the feeling soul!
Ye towering rocks, to wonder's eye addressed,
Misshapen piles by Terror's hand impressed! --
Ah, not these scenes magnificently rude
To Virtue's lore have ABELARD subdued.
When late my steps drew near the peopled choir,
What erring wishes did my heart inspire?
To the deep mysteries as I advanced,
Still in thy presence was my soul entranced:
While, bending to the earth, the choral throng
Pause, ere they usher the emphatic song;
While kneeling seraphs, trembling as they glow,
Veil with their radiant wings their bashful brow;
While the deep organ (as by fear controlled)
Its solemn sound like distant thunder rolled;
While thick'ning odours dimmed the dread abode,
And the altar shudder'd at the approaching God! --
'Midst these august, terrific rites unmoved,
My guilty thoughts to other altars roved:
In Love enchas'd, a dearer image blessed
Where burns a hungry and insatiate flame
To that soft deity I blush to name.
Those hours to recollection spring renewed,
When Passion urged us, and when Pleasure wooed;
When, captur'd by Desire's voluptuous hold,
Involved -- combined -- embodied -- and insoul'd --
Forbear....Let dim Oblivion cast behind,
Words that would soil thy purity of mind:
Recall, recall that interesting hour,
When in the flush of Youth, and Beauty's flower,
(Ah! doomed, severely doomed, to meet no more)
When from each dearer self our forms we tore,
How, to Affection's finer touch consigned
My face upon thy summer cheek inclined
Felt as it dropped thy tear's celestial dew,
While sighs, not words, breathed forth our last adieu.
Intruding Fancy raised the veil between,
And showed Futurity's unwelcome scene,
Nights of long absence that expect no dawn,
Divorcing gulphs that must for ever yawn.
In thy pure soul a purer self I traced,
Our glowing minds with energy embraced,
Whence the intellectual progeny arose
Which kindred fears and kindred hopes compose,
Endearments tending to one mutual aim,
The same our sorrow, and our joy the same.
Now that thy spirit is divinely wrought,
To nobler objects flies thy soaring thought;
For free and unrestrained of human ties,
Thy soul uncaptiv'd springs into the skies!
To Contemplation's height sublime you sail,
While wings seraphic aid the hallowed gale;
From man to GOD! Perfection's dazzling source,
Unwearied you pursue your bright'ning course,
And as through station'd angels you advance,
Send on the throne of Heaven a daring glance.
For me, unequal to this dizzy height,
Undisciplined, unwing'd for mystic flight,
To speed the lingering step of cloister hours,
To science I confign'd my mental powers:
Fame met me in her path, and round my brow
Engarlanded the flowers of brightest glow.
Then swelled, disturbed with Envy's withering power,
The serpent BERNARD hissed within my bower,
Poured the black venom with insidious aim,
Chilled my soul's health, and dimmed my radiant name:
Still, still inventing some malignant plan;
Impetuous, turbulent, vindictive man!
Behind the simple, meek, monastic vest,
Ambition blazes in his troubled breast.
Averse amid the pensive shades to dwell,
He shuns the stillness of the lonely cell,
Embroils the contests that involve thegreat,
Deepens the storm that darkens over the state,
And like the bird of Jove, by vengeance driven,
Bears in his grasp the artillery of Heaven!
See ANACLE'TUS, trembling at his frown,
To INNOCENT resign the doubtful crown:
Mark, at the impulse of his bold command,
The throng that hastens to the palmy land:
See to his gaudy levee crowds resort;
See the gay tinsel'd foplings of the court:
There too the hoary sages of the law,
And military chiefs approach with awe;
There abbots, princes, cardinals, advance,
And all the splendour, all the pride of France.
As not unworthy of his sainted rage,
Now meaner objects tread his busy stage;
He bids thy ABELARD ascend the scene,
And pours the torrent of his holy spleen:
Then Persecution, with resistless sway,
Through her long-sounding floodgates burst away;
Her armory the Vatican displayed,
In all its proud magnificence arrayed;
From whence abrupt the avenging Pontiff sprung,
And at my peace the bolt of terror flung:
While over her victim (to dishonor led)
Her cloud of iron extirpation spread.
Now the pale outcast both of Heaven and earth,
I cursed the day that glimmer'd on my birth:
Degraded -- shunned -- to infamy allied,
Amidst the ruins of my soul I cried,
No more my image to her thought adjoin'd
Shall share the heaven of ELOISA'S mind:
No more (I cried) my reprobated name
Shall from her lips its daily honor claim,
No longer to the throne of GOD repair,
Borne on the wings of her triumphant prayer.
Now frenzy urged my wild'ring steps to rove
Beneath te night of yon extensive grove:
Now urged along the mountain's top to range
(Despair still haunting me through every change)
To tread the adventurous path that winds the brow
Which scowls tremendous over the vale below:
Then to the summit of yon rock I toiled,
That shoots its crags fantastically wild!
There rushed upon my view the hallowed cross,
Clothed in the garb of venerable moss!
This wonted pledge of mercy and delight
Struck on my fading hope a dark'ning blight;
No more the saving all-atoning rood
The grisly symbol of revengeit stood!
Loft in the extacy of strong despair,
With madd'ning hand I tore my rooted hair. --
'Twas then the seer of warm compassion came
To lull my tortures and dispel my shame:
"Desist," the Priest of Charity began,
"And own once more the dignity of man!
"No longer Rome and ABELARD are foes,
"The thunders of the Vatican repose;
"The holy church, by my remonstrance won,
"Grasps to her bosom her still darling son."
Hail to the tidings of that cheering voice
That bids the humbled ABELARD rejoice!
That bids his image, to her thought rejoined,
Still share the heaven of ELOISA'S mind.
No more thy person (that attractive sight)
Diffusing round ineffable delight,
Nor thy discourse, illum'd with Wisdom's ray,
Which with soft rapine steals the soul away:
That eye, where meek Dominion holds her throne;
That voice, where Music smooths her softest tone;
By liberal Nature prodigally given,
(What words cannot paint) that smile of opening Heaven:
These various charms, that pass all human praise,
These charms that once adorned my happier days,
No more shall I behold -- it is folly to complain,
Those days of splendour never must rise again.
Adieu, thou mistress of enchanting power!
Thou blissful vision of a transient hour!
For such appears (to Fancy still how dear!)
The sloping race of Rapture's swift career,
When Heaven enforcing its benign decree,
With lavish bounty gave thy form to me.
Hope now is dead, and Pleasure's knell is rung;
With sable thoughts my dreary mind is hung.
'Twas at the hour when from the sorrowing view
The glowing God of day his beams withdrew,
When Vesper all her pageantry displayed,
Fretting the sky with many an awful shade:
Here trees appeared that struggled with the storm,
There a wan cloud assumed a spectre's form:
A solitary hand here grasped a spear,
There angry meteors combated in air:
Now riding on the wind with threatening mien,
The dark, terrific phantom Death was seen:
From a thick vapour's dread unfolding womb
Now bodied forth the likeness of a tomb:
Thy form, Oh ELOISE! I clearly traced,
Thine airy arms the sepulcher embraced:
That mimic tomb my early fate foreshews,
While my soul labors with prophetic throes:
Now closes fast my short disastrous day,
To life's dark boundary I haste away.
The virtuous CLUNI still relieves my pains,
To thee will he convey my cold remains:
This kind assurance mitigates my doom,
Thou Wilt stand the guardian angel at my tomb:
Closed be this form in ELOISA's fane,
She Will sigh my requiem with a Lover's strain:
Often to my grave with sorrowful delight
Will she repair, as glooms the thick'ning night:
Burst from thy cloud, Oh Cynthia! burst away,
The holy shado of her frame display!
Let the soft texture of her lengthening shade
Repose along the spot where mine is laid!
Were thus her presence to my wishes given,
Death would rejoice, my grave would then be Heaven!
Forgive this last effusion of a heart
Which Love and Nature formed, unstained by Art;
Which midst the fears that wait on Death's decree,
With all its wonted ardor darts to thee.
Prepare, prepare for that relentless day
When the dark hearse this form shall bear away!
When, to the fane of Paraclete conveyed,
My humble bier shall at thy feet be lald:
Prepare, prepare -- throw back the vestal gate,
Receive the victim of untimely fate:
Receive the man misfortune held to view,
Still mid his woes invariably true:
The warm enthusiast (now from passion free)
Whose life was one continued hymn to thee.
Prepare, prepare -- yet check the bursting moan,
Thou to compassion exquisitely prone!
Lest glowing sympathy, with Death at strife,
Should kindle my cold ashes into life,
And my roused voice, invading Nature's laws,
Breathe in loud accents terrible applause.
THE AFRICAN BOY.
AH, tell me, little mournful MOOR,
Why still you linger on the shore?
Haste to your play-mates, haste away,
Nor loiter here with fond delay:
When Morn unveiled her radiant eye,
You hailed me as I wandered by;
Returning at the approach of Eve,
Your meek salute I still receive.
" Benign Enquirer, thou shall know
Why here my lonesome moments flow:
It Is said thy Countrymen (no more
Like rav'ning sharks that haunt the shore)
Return to bless, to raise, to cheer,
And pay Compassion's long arrear.
"It Is said the numerous Captive Train,
Late bound by the degrading Chain,
Triumphant come, with swelling sails,
'Mid smiling skies, and western gales;
They come with festive heart and glee,
Their hands unshackled -- minds as free;
They come, at Mercy's great command,
To re-possess their native land.
"The gales that over the Ocean stray,
And chase the waves in gentle play,
Methinks they whisper as they fly,
JUELLEN soon will meet thine eye!
It Is this that sooths her little Son,
Blends all his wishes into one:
Ah! were I clasped in her embrace,
I would forgive her past disgrace:
Forgive the memorable hour
She fell a prey to tyrant power;
Forgive her lost, distracted air,
Her sorrowing voice, her kneeling prayer;
The suppliant tears that galled her cheek,
And last, her agonizing shriek.
Locked in her hair, a ruthless hand
Trail'd her along the flinty strand;
A ruffian train, with clamours rude,
The impious spectacle pursued:
Still as she moved, in accents wild,
She cried aloud, My child! my child!
The lofty bark she now ascends;
With screams of woe, the air she rends:
The vessel lessening from the shore,
Her piteous wails I heard no more;
Now as I stretched my last survey,
Her distant form dissolved away.
"That day is past: I cease to mourn --
Succeeding joy shall have its turn;
Beside the hoarse-resounding deep
A pleasing anxious watch I keep:
For when the morning clouds shall break,
And darts of day the darkness streak,
Perchance along the glittering main,
(Oh, may this hope not throb in vain!)
To meet these long desiring eyes,
JUELLEN and the Sun may rise."
ENTHUSIASM: A POEM, IN TWO PARTS.
ADVERTISEMENT TO THE FIRST EDITION.
In endeavoring to display the good and bad effects occasioned by Enthusiasm,
I might have drawn many signal instances from that inexhaustible mine, the
Greek and Roman story; but it appeared to me more eligible to work upon
materials hewn from the modern quarry only: the subject, thus treated, I
conceived would come more home to the feelings of the reader. With regard to
the execution, that rests entirely on the judgment of the Public, into whose
presence I now enter, impressed with a mingled sensation of hope and
apprehension.

ENTHUSIASM.
PART I.
BEYOND the exalted sun's meridian site,
Beyond the glimmering stars ethereal height,
A brighter realm immortal spring displays,
Mid the soft breathing of unclouded days:
Where sacred minds to virtue high allied,
Aerial beings, orient forms abide,
Seraphic people! ministers of grace,
Prompt to defend and cheer the human race:
The mighty mother Earth, who bears mankind,
Is to their care and guardian power consigned.
When clashing waves swell high, and angry Fate
Tosses the laboring vessel of the state,
The chosen Angel of the appointed realm
Hastes from his throne, and grasps the trembling helm:
To some the honored privilege is given
To wast the clay-divested soul to heaven,
Weed from the feeling heart the rising sigh,
And sweep with viewless hand the clouded eye:
Each in his turn descending from above,
Performs the generous ministry of love.
Behold, superior to the sun-rob'd quire,
A female Form to regal power aspire!
High on a throne, in brighter beams arrayed,
Reigns in full pomp the Enthusiastic Maid!
Daughter of Energy, who boldly leads
The hallowed few to great and splendid deeds:
Who urges man the steep ascent to climb,
And lifts the soul to virtue's height sublime.
Thus when of late to famed Iberia's coast GIERALTAR.

Sailed over the wondering main the unnumber'd host,
Swift from her seat the impatient Goddess sprung,
An over the spot with anxious bosom hung,
Till shedding on her sons, to fame consigned,
Some emanation of her dauntless mind,
She saw the valiant long-enduring band
(Whose fall confederated nations planned)
Atchieve that deed which time shall still revere,
That British miracle to glory dear!
Long had the Enthusiast held her rank supreme,
Beloved, adored, of every voice the theme;
At length the blast of satire dimmed the rays,
Whose soft effulgence played around her praise:
The throne encircling frequent murmurs flew,
And busy charges trimmed in motley hue:
Yet then, confiding in her god-like plan,
Which warms, invigorates, and hallows man,
She dares her foes, she dares the hostile train
To shake the pillars of her steadfast reign:
Urged by her innate energy to meet
The gathering war, she quits her lofty seat,
At Reason's bar presents her holy form,
Provokes the thund'rers, and de Lands the storm.
A living crescent the bright powers display,
Rank above rank in terrible array:
While trembling silence breathes upon the train,
And expectation throbs in every vein;
Amid this scene th'accusing Angel rose,
On his stern brow bold indignation glows;
Some troubling vision, with disaster fraught,
Employs, detains, alarms his wondering thought:
-- "What rising structure rushes on my sight,
Of bulk enormous, of aspiring height? The ALEXANDRIAN LIBRARY, consisting of
four hundred thousand manuscripts, was burnt in the sixth century, by the order
of OMAR; whose enthusiastic zeal for his religion forced from him this
memorable saying: If the books contain only what is in the CORAN they are
useless, and dangerous if they contain any thing else.

The Enthusiast, hastening through the regal porch,
Waves in the eye of day a raging torch:
See (impious spectacle!) she fires the pile,
And hails the sparkles with a greedy smile:
Wide and more wide the imparted flame extends,
And now in dreadful victory ascends.
Not sumptuous palaces, not awful fanes,
Nor of old time the proud, august remains,
Not airy villas, nor majestic towers,
High massive bulwarks, nor gay pleasure's bowers,
But to the unhallowed blaze I see consigned
The splendid temple of the Poet's mind.
Ah! loved TYRTAEUS TYRTAEUS reanimated the dejected minds of the SPARTANS with
the irresistible power of his poetry, accompanied by the harp.
, towering son of fame,
Thy pages shrivel at the insatiate flame:
The glorious workings of thy pregnant heart,
The sallies from the inmost breast that start,
Eloquent threats that lawless power control,
Thy bursts of rage, and vehemence of soul.
Unrivaled leader of the ecstatic train,
Farewell (for ever lost) thy forceful strain;
Farewell (for ever lost) the Spartan song,
Which roused to conquest the dejected throng:
Did not despondence, like a gathering shower,
Hang over thy countrymen in evil hour?
Say, did she not her fenny pinions spread,
And on each bosom chilling fear-drops shed?
Thou like the sun a cheerful radiance threw,
And from the soil the noxious vapor drew,
Till the fallen soul, uprising from her death,
Inhales once more the invigorating breath.
Thy voice -- It Is Honor's call on Virtue's train:
Thy voice -- Yes, Sparta hears the inspiring strain;
To that vindictive with bold step she speeds,
And reaps the harvest of immortal deeds!
Unrivaled leader of the ecstatic quire,
Peace to the manes of thy martial lyre,
If peace can be while with licentious power
The hungry fires thy last remains devour:
Methinks thy lucid, unsubstantial frame
Now hovers over the wide destructive flame;
I see thee toss thine airy arms on high,
I hear at times thy shrill, despairing cry:
So the fond mother-bird, alarmed, distressed,
Indignant flutters round her peopled nest,
While (piteous sight!) a ruthless hand invades,
And bears away the music of the shades.
See to the dome (through many an age revered)
Which for her sons the hand of Science reared,
The fiery deluge rolls with threat'niug roar,
And sweeps away the long-collected store:
Alluring apologues addressed to youth,
Pure maxims molded in the breast of truth,
Warm from the holy lips of sages breathed,
Rich moral legacies toman bequeathed!
Celestial thoughts, which (like the favoring gales
Whose gentle pressure swells the gladsome sails)
Waft the dejected mind, with toil o'erspent,
To the gay-winding harbor of content.
Now History with a heartfelt sigh surveys
Her themes, her annals, midst the sounding blaze:
Fame smiles no more, but with an altered mien
Stands trembling at destruction's growing scence:
At length, descending like a low-hung cloud.
Oblivion over the waste expands her shroud,
Beneath whose dark'ning canopy is cast
The fond remembrance of transactions past;
Of youthful warriors, who, by glory led,
Bold in the clamorous van of danger bled,
Who, midst the storms of state and home-born wars,
Glem'd through the thick'ning shade like morning stars,
Till flung untimely from their radiant height,
Down, down they hurried to eternal night:
Of patriots, who, to honor close allied,
In times disastrous stood their country's pride!
How these sublime state-columns, tempest-proof,
Upheld, midst bursting clouds, the sacred roof,
Firm to their cause, and obstinately great,
No voice of mortal ever shall relate:
Nor shall the voice of mortal ever display,
Or annals usher to the eye of day,
The various orders of the female train
Diffused like flowerets over the smiling plain,
Who, like those flowerets in their beauty's glow,
Were swept untimely by the scythe of woe.
Here then, to keen reflection's crowded eye,
As in a deep sepulchral mansion lie,
In iron slumber wrapped, and dread repose,
A train of human virtues, human woes:
This moral loss the world must now sustain,
Swells over the boundary of domestic pain,
Calls down the gushes of the bleeding mind,
And claims the expansive sorrow of mankind."
He ceased. -- A Seraph, to his cause allied,
And firm to bartle on the accusing side,
Resumed the theme! his arm exalted high,
A wild fire flashing from his pregnant eye --
"What numerous fugitives arrest my view Alluding to the revocation of the
Edict of NANTES, in consequence of which the HUGONOTS quitted the kingdom.

Their cheek discolored with dejection's hue?
What ruthless power the wanton act decreed?
What led the monarch to this desperate deed?
Behold -- the Enthusiast at the regal chair
Breathes her inflaming whispers on his ear:
Now, now she urges his reluctant hand
To ratify the terrible command:
O hapless, lost, exterminated race,
What can atone this unprovoked disgrace?
Ye venerable men with silver hair,
Galled by the heavy yoke of thoruful care,
With dauntless soul, enshrined in feeble forms,
Ye meet the thunders of the rushing storms,
Prompt a bold war for virtue's sake to wage
Against the comforts of reposing age:
Friends, honors, kindred, country ye disclaim,
The smiles of patronage, the wreaths of fame,
Firm to endure the persecuting rod,
And in the abyss of grief to seek your God.
Ye too, ye Fair, on virtue's list enrolled,
Whom Nature fashioned in her softer mould,
In pale adversity's rude science versed,
Your feeling soul with sorrow's dart transpierc'd,
I see you slowly move, a lengthening train,
Far from the bounds of your domestic plain:
Imagination renovates the hour
Ye fell the victims of relentless power,
How still ye lingered on your native strand,
Enclosed by Friendship's small but ardent band;
How as ye wept, caressing and caressed,
Your babes were ravished from your throbbing breast.
But now, intruding on my wondering sight,
My strong abhorrence other scenes excite.
Beneath the roof, where Death's chill banners spread,
An agonizing Fair reclines her head:
Around the mournful couch of languor stand
(In hallowed vestment) a monastic band!
Yet not to act affection's sacred part,
With lenient hand to draw the rankling dart,
Through hope's gay perspective command to rise
A soothing prospect of the opening skies;
Ah! not for heavenly charity's best end
The gloomy fathers over the suff'rer bend,
But from the alarmed reluctant mind to wrest
The coy assentment to the hateful Test This relates to a penal law which
confiscated the estates of those who did not, at their deaths, renounce the
reformed religion. -- See SAURIN'S SERMONS, vol. i. page 152.

At this the mourner lifts her drooping head --
'While here I languish on affliction's bed,
Say, is it thus ye minister relief,
And whisper comfort to the soul of grief?
When harassed nature, with herself at strife,
The last gleam fading on the lamp of life,
When to the storm succeeds the welcome calm,
When angel hands reach out the victor's palm,
Must I that bliss, that heavenly prize forego,
And whelm my spirit in immortal woe?
Yet then my infants, by pale Famine led,
Must ask from Pity's hand the scanty bread;
Methinks I see them now exposed to scorn,
Their little bosoms pierced with sorrow's thorn:
Oh, what an image to a mother's sight!
The view transports me into madd'ning fright;
I yield, I yield, unfold the fatal creed,
And Mercy from his thought efface the deed!'
At these dread words, that closed the eventful scene,
Religion blushed, and veiled her awful mien:
Yet on the crime, from tyrant edicts born,
By nature from the dying mother torn,
Wrung from the bosom, by distraction riv'n,
Forgiveness dropped the holy tear of Heaven.
Now to my view, by terrors undismayed,
The glory of the priesthood stands displayed!
The virtuous Pastor JAMES SAURIN, the celebrated preacher at the HAGUE, where
he resided several years, and was at once the edification and comfort of his
exiled brethren.
of the suffering race,
Proud of his wrongs, and patient of disgrace:
Him the unhappy fugitives enclose,
While thus he speaks -- 'Ye partners of my woes,
Oh strenuous found in persecution's day,
Ye faithful, dear companions of my way,
I now behold you as the snow-wing'd dove,
Expelled the ancient mansions of her love,
Whose plumes, while clouds o'ercanopy her flight,
Assume the splendour of a purer white.
Does not dim obloquy attaint our birth?
Are not our temples levelled with the earth?
Are not our kindred, friends, in fetters bound,
Plunged in the terrors of the cavern'd ground?
And we, meek victims, as we passed along,
Endured we not the loud upbraiding throng,
While the loose soldiery added to these woes
With jeering insults and degrading blows?
It seemed as nature marked us for disgrace,
The outcast offals of the human race.
Oh thou LEWIS XIV.
, by all these horrors unappal'd,
Whom with delight I Royal Master called,
Thou, to remembrance now no longer dear,
Whom as the scourge of Heaven I still revere,
Farewell! -- Thou too, by partial Fortune blessed,
All Nature's offerings breathing at thy breast,
Thrice happy FRANCE, farewell! -- these eyes no more
Shall view thy charms, that spread from shore to shore:
Thy harvests waving with a stately pride,
Thy vintage blushing on the mountain's side;
Original and self-exuberant foil,
Refusing nothing to the hand of toil;
And where the Arts, a bright harmonious band,
Refine, exalt, and decorate the land;
Where Mirth, the native of thy social bowers,
Sheds on each lip his fascinating powers;
With thee may bliss still undiminish'd dwell,
Hail, Oh my country, and a last farewell!'
The Pastor ceased. -- The sorrow burst its bound,
With fervent lips some kissed their parent-ground;
Some, with the same tormenting thought impressed,
Tore the wild grass and flowerets from her breast,
To bear a relic of their natal plain
To scenes unknown, and realms beyond the main.
So firm, so powerful on the heart of man
(Above inconstancy's relenting plan)
Is fixed, enthroned by Nature's hallowed hand,
The glowing passion of his native land.
These are the evils (woe succeeding woe)
Which from the Enthusiast in long order flow:
Yet not for these does terror daunt her soul,
Mark that proud eye impatient of control,
See riding on that brow imperial will,
And Tyranny, the minister of ill.
Let then resentment fierce, terrific, loud,
Burst like the thunder from the rifted cloud:
The course of her devasting steps I Have run;
My journey's over, the mournful tale is done."
END OF THE FIRST PART.
ENTHUSIASM.
PART II.
Now rose a Seraph, by affection led,
A wreathing glory hovers over his head,
His flowing accents spotless candor owned,
And on his brow sat Energy enthroned:
He speaks -- "The vulture hastening to his prey,
With sounding pinions wins his distant way,
Regardless of the charms that Nature's hand
In gay profusion scatters over the land,
And, summoned by the pestilential gale,
Speeds to the carcass fest'ring in the vale:
So these accusers in their rav'ning mood
Appear to emulate the gory brood,
Unmindful of the virtues that surround
The spot on which their censures most abound.
Now deeds long past like exhalations roll,
Now nearer move, now open on the soul:
I see the pale-ey'd citizens convene,
In Hist'ry's drama, high-recorded scene EDWARD III. was so exasperated at the
long and gallant resistance he met with from the citizens of CALAIS, that he
threatened to put all the inhabitants to the sword: he desisted from this
atrocious design, on the condition that six persons should be sent to him for
the purpose of immediate execution. He required that they should approach his
presence barefooted, clothed in mourning, with ropes round their necks.
!
The dread resolve from EDWARD'S bosom sprung,
Wild consternation over their counsels flung:
With chilling, blood-recoiling thoughts impressed,
Entrancing terror deadens every breast.
At length from out the silent depth emerg'd
An ardent Chief, by glory's impulse urged:
The Enthusiast wraps him in her wak'ning fires,
And thus he utters what her soul inspires:
'Ye firm associates in the highest cause,
On whom posterity will shower applause,
Who, while calamity severely reigned,
Well the long labors of the siege sustained!
Deign to accept what my affections give,
And bid your kindred, friends, and children live:
This, this will cheer me in the trying hour,
When I shall bend at the stern tyrant's power,
And the doomed victim (as his rage decreed)
On the pure altar of my country bleed:
Ah! should my strong forebodings tell me true,
Pass one swift moment, these glad eyes shall view
The destined number of the victims rise,
To swell the rites of patriot sacrifice!' --
These words prophetic were not ardor's rant,
Five kindred bosoms warm for glory pant,
These youths the Enthusiast, sev'ring from the rest,
Informs, and breathes herself into their breast;
And now, envelop'd in her active flame,
The daring chiefs the ponderous honor claim.
See, through the applauses of the grateful throng,
The self-devoted heroes move along:
To EUSTACE now advanced a beauteous Maid,
In the rude garb of negligence arrayed,
Her auburn tresses ruffling to the wind,
Her eye expressive of her tortured mind:
Say, desperate Youth,' the wild'ring Fair exclaimed,
'What dire conception has thy bosom framed!
Oh, death-importing scenery! sight abhorred!
Whence this attire, this ignominious cord?
Impelled by frenzy, whither do thou tend?
Relent, relent, thine impious steps suspend' --
With a calm fortitude the Chieftain said,
'The path that climbs to honor's height I tread:
These joyful loud acclaims that rend the air
Would thou convert to howlings of despair?
Even love commands -- with eager step I go,
To shield CLOTILDA from impending woe.'
'What peace,' she answers, 'can I thence derive?
The lover murdered, say can joy survive?
While famine, sickness, terrors I endured,
Was this the future bliss that hope assured?
To lengthening care, to sorrow still allied,
Behold CLOTILDA stands Misfortune's bride!
Had Mercy, heav'n-descending Mercy, stole
Her gentle radiance over the conqu'ror's soul,
This day, escaped from wide affliction's wreck,
This day might I, reclining on thy neck,
Have uttered EDWARD's praise -- that thought is flown,
And each fond project of my heart o'crthrown.
When from thy wound I drew the British dart,
And with these lips embalmed th'envenom'd part,
Would that the poison like a subtle flame
Had scorched my entrails, and dissolved my frame!'
She ceased -- her eye emits a weaker glance,
While her dim reason fades into a trance:
The Youth, as if indignant of delay,
Drops her pale hand, and turns abrupt away:
Then to the partners of his fate he cried,
'Ye willing victims, to my soul allied,
Forgive, if passion's all-subduing power
Dare to profane this high important hour;
Now, free of weakness, clear of love's control,
I lead the way that runs to virtue's goal.'
Arrived at EDWARD's tent, the dauntless Youth
Resumed -- 'Invested in this garb uncouth,
If, at thy bidding, thus we meet thine eye,
For grace (the coward's hope) we heave no sigh;
Since acts of slaughter are thy soul's best food,
Oh, gorge thy rav'ning appetite of blood!' --
Now ith the glowing Youths, of equal mind,
In one resolve, one hope, one peril joined,
He stands, unawed by death, sublimely great,
True to his cause, rejoicing in his fate.
But other scenes of high illustrious fame
Burst on my soul, impatient of their claim:
Behold! the Enthusiast, freedom to regain,
Leads her stern Barons over the sacred Plain;
To the proud Monarch they exclaim -- 'Thy hand
Has touched the hallowed ark that wisdom plan'd;
The bending seer, with sorrow's weight oppressed,
Who beats in his despair his withered breast,
Shall sooner from his tortured mind efface
The wretch who plunged his daughter in disgrace,
Who in his sight compelled her to his arms,
And rudely ravished her untasted charms,
Than we forgive thy violating power,
That wrested Freedom from her native bower.'
They spoke -- each battle-axe, now reared on high,
(Catching the splendour of the unclouded sky)
Cast on the illumined field a sudden light,
Whose rapid flash o'erpower'd the monarch's sight:
Upbraiding thoughts his wavering mind assailed,
And fear, the tyrant's curse, his aspect pal'd:
At length he seals, with mean, reluctant soul,
(To BRITAIN ever dear) the immortal Roll.
Now through disclosing skies the angelic train
Pour on the enraptured ear the choral strain:
'Be cheerful praise, be salutations paid,
And hymns symphonious, to the godlike Maid,
Whose energy resists the tyrant's plan:
Joy be to Saints, and liberty to Man!' --
From Time's dark gulf, revolving back to light,
What newborn image rushes on my sight?
The bold COLUMBUS dedicates his sail
To the wild breathing of a stranger gale:
The Enthusiast bids his dauntless soul explore
Realms unreveal'd, and seas unplough'd before:
The hour now ripening in the womb of time,
The inspired adventurer reached the point sublime,
The long-obscuring veil for him was furled,
And on his vision burst another world!
Ecstatic Wonder heard the proud event,
And over the ocean the glad tidings sent:
Then Industry, as by electric stroke,
From her enduring sleep instinctive broke:
With brightest omens of her future reign,
This better VENUS rising from the main,
Saw from all harbors, rushing with the tide,
Unnumber'd vessels at her beck'ning glide:
Did it not seem as if the severed earth,
Like two fair sisters parted from their birth,
Acknowledging at length their kindred race,
Felt the warm transport of a first embrace,?
Now the same age a different scene presents,
And the bold vision labors with events:
Methinks I see, extending wide around,
A towering wood with crowding leaves imbrown'd;
Beneath whose vast display of deadly shade
Her listless length lethargic EUROPE laid:
There Superstition her deep plan designed
Against the awful sanctuary of the mind:
There the wan sorceress, haggard fiend of hell,
Midst her dim orgies muttered the dread spell.
The sun abhors to pour his radiant flood
Over the dumb horror of the slumbering wood;
Yet through the gloom of sacerdotal night
One peerless star reveals a cheerful light:
Ah! why in mystic strains eclipse his name?
Demand, Oh! LUTHER, thine unbounded fame:
Advance, advance, thou elder son of Truth,
Sublime, all-daring, restless, ardent youth!
I now behold the enthusiastic Maid
Rushing impetuous to her fav'rite's aid:
She reaches to his lips a cup of fire,
Whose living drops the leaping pulse inspire.
Revealing now his mission from the skies,
He utters to the torpid world -- 'Arise!'
The sullen forest, wrapped in tenfold night,
Swift through a thousand vistas drinks the light:
The imprisoned tenants burst the mental tomb,
While from their eyes recedes the massive gloom:
The flaky clouds admit an orient ray,
And laughing Morn unclocks the gates of day.
Prompt Apprehension sends her view around,
While her bold thoughts o'erleap their former bound,
And Joy proclaims throughout the applauding earth
The hallowed festival of Reason's birth.
Now the couched mind reveals its spotless eye,
Weak to sustain the splendour of the sky,
Till strengthening at the irradiating gleam,
It meets unblenching Truth's refulgent beam:
So when the keenly-glitt'ring darts of light
Pierce the loose film that dims the eaglet's fight,
First with an ignorant and coy survey
The dazzled bird admires the stranger day,
Then glancing on the sun with towering gaze,
Kindles his vision at the noontide blaze.
Meek Toleration, heav'n-descending Maid,
A vernal rainbow glittering over her head,
Smooths the rough path destructive feet have traced,
Adorns and peoples Persecution's waste:
She, like the FLORA of the Pagan reign,
Sprinkles with roses the enameled plain,
Bids every flower of every clime arise,
And freely breathe its incense to the skies.
See Superstition, madd'ning at the alarm,
Extend, in thunder clothed, her threatening arm,
But withering at the heart she rues the hour,
That harshly severs her diminished power:
Thus as the serpent, sleeping on the plain,
Feels the rude pressure of the loaded wain,
With apt revenge, and indignation stung,
She rears her crest, and darts her fiery tongue;
But impotent of rage, her trailing wound
She languishingly sweeps along the ground."
Here closed the Seraph his illustrious theme,
Which on his audience flashed conviction's beam.
-- And now the Enthusiast, with her hand high-rear'd,
Expressed a look demanding to be heard:
The circling Hierarchy, with one acclaim,
Urge her to vindicate her injured fame:
She, to their judgment fearlessly consigned,
Thus poured the effusion of her glowing mind: --
"Bold on a towering rock, with soul elate,
I saw BRITANNIA sit in regal state,
Around the globe she threw her vast survey,
And marked the realms devoted to her sway:
Her Western clime, her Oriental reign,
Her glory's theater the unbounded main:
I thus addressed her -- 'Hail, immortal Dame,
Who, high-exalted, crowd'st the seat of fame,
Suspend the thoughts of thine imperial state,
And listen to the event that heaves with fate --
A prosperous mother (so did Heaven ordain)
Blessed and ennobled by a numerous train,
Beheld (a stranger to affection's tie)
Her youngest born with a disclaiming eye,
And, breaking loose from every moral band,
Stretched over the innocuous babe an iron hand,
And, hard'ning in her wrath, the helpless child
Was from her presence and her thought exiled:
This little outcast lately I surveyed,
As mid the flowerets of te wild he played,
Artless and gay, himself the wilder flower,
Bare to the withering heat and quenching shower.'
BRITANNIA quick returned, with loud acclaim,
'Oh piteous infant! Oh inhuman Dame!
Where, where does she abide, that I may dart
The shaft of death into her wolfish heart?'
'Twas then I added, with indignant air,
'Dismiss thy threats, thy warm resentment spare,
Or droop thyself beneath a flood of shame,
Thine, thine the child, and thou the inhuman Dame.'
I said -- and throwing back my flowing vest,
Disclosed the infant clinging at my breast:
'Behold,' I cried, 'this flow'ret of the wild,
This orphan nursling, this rejected child,
Mark how around his brow of virtue's mold
The signs of greatness dare even now unfold;
How on the vigorous eye the morning ray
Preludes the splendour of meridian day:
Oh! doomed to act what Heaven's dread thought devised,
Thou at the font of Energy baptized,
Mavelous infant! doomed to act my plan,
AMERICANUS, hasten into man!" -- "
'Enough', the abruptly-rising Quire exclaim,
'Aspire, Enthusiast, to thy wonted fame;
Thy virtues, claims, and eminence we own,
Resume thy dignities, ascend thy throne:
Still to frail man thy daring strength impart,
Still flame the incentive Seraph of his heart;
And when the scenes of earth shall fade away,
And man shall need no more thy active ray,
Then, sacred object of our praiseful theme,
Bright emanation of the eternal beam,
Thou shall regain thy native, dread abode,
And glow for ever in the breast of GOD!'
AN APOLOGUE.
WOOED by the summer gale, an Olive stood
Beside the margin of the silver flood,
Beneath its playful gently-way'ring shade
A Syrian Rose her Eastern bloom displayed!
The flower complained, that stretching over her head
The dark'ning Olive a broad umbrage spread,
Or if admitted to a partial view,
Her blushing leaves imbibed a yellow hue.
Not unattentive to the mournful strain,
The Master heard his Syrian Rose complain:
The ready axe soon urged the fatal wound,
And bowed the stately Olive to the ground!
The Rose exulting now with full display
Gave all her beauty to the garish day;
But soon her triumph ceased -- the midday beam
Poured on her tender frame a scorching stream:
The Rose now sickening, drooping, languid, pale,
Called the soft shower, and called the cooling gale;
Nor softening shower, nor gale with cooling breath,
Approached, to save her from untimely death.
The humbled Olive saw the Rose distressed,
And thus with dying voice the flower addressed:
Ah! were it not that low-born envy stole
With all its rancour on thy yielding soul,
I might, attired in youth's unfading green,
Have still embellished the surrounding scene;
And thou, detaining still the admiring eye,
Have breathed thy little incense to the sky!
THE ROOKERY.
OH thou who dwell'st upon the bough,
Whose tree now waves its verdant brow,
And bending shades the murmuring brook,
List to my woes, dear sister Rook!
And when thou'st heard my mournful lay
Extend thy wing, and haste away;
Lest pinion-maim'd by fiery shot,
Thou should like me bewail hy lot;
Lest in thy Rookery be renewed
The tragic scene which here I viewed.
The day declined, the evening breeze
Gently rocked the silent trees,
While spreading over my peopled nest
I hushed my callow young to rest;
When suddenly an hostile sound,
Explosion dire! was heard around;
And, levelled by the hand of fate,
The flying deaths transfixed my mate;
I saw him fall from spray to spray,
Till on the distant ground he lay,
With tortured wing he beat the plain,
And never called to me again.
Many a neighbor, many a friend,
Deformed with wounds, invoked their end;
Loud uttering omen'd sounds of woe
Against man, our unrelenting foe.
These eyes beheld my little brood
Fluttering in their guiltless blood,
While trembling on the shattered tree
At length the gun invaded me;
But wayward fate, severely kind,
Refused the death I wished to find,
Oh! farewell pleasure, peace farewell!
And with the gory Raven dwell.
Was it for this I shunned retreat,
And fixed near man my social seat?
For this destroyed the insect train,
That eat unseen the infant grain?
For this I cheered (with many a note
Resounding from my artless throat)
Yon dowager of reverend mien?
Who dignifies the rural scene!
TINTERN ABBEY See the account of Tintern Abbey by the Rev. Mr. Gilpin, in his
Observations upon the River Wye.

MARK this lone seat, by Contemplation planned,
This awful relick of monastic day:
Beneath the touch of Time's reluctant hand
Slow mouldering in the silence of decay.
Nature her sheltering moss around has thrown,
As if in pity of the fading pile,
And even to cheer what sorrow calls her own
On ruin's brow has bid her flowerets smile.
The rifted arch from all connection starts,
The prostrate pillars stretch along the vale,
Yet mid the wreck of corresponding parts,
'One column stands to tell the mournful tale.'
TO THE BARON NOLCKEN, THE SWEDISH AMBASSADOR, ON HIS SUDDEN RECALL.
THINE the applause which (to long merit due)
Those judges pay who are to honor true:
Still, as before, thou art to all endeared,
Deposed, yet courted, and though fallen revered.
The following Lines were addressed to the late Lady HERVEY, mother of the Earl
of BRISTOL, a lady distinguished for her erudition and refined taste. Her house
was the receptacle of elegance and celebrity, and was a kind of passport to
fame. Our Author was fortunate in an early introduction to a Lady, on whose
list of acquaintance were found the names of LYTTLETON, CHESTERFIELD, MELCOMBE,
MARCHMONT, MANSFIELD, BOLINGBROKE, HUME, GARRICK, etc. And he has mentioned to
us, with a recollective complacency, his having basked (to use his own
expression) in the sunset of those eminent personages. -- Note of the Editor.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LADY HERVEY.
LATE in the Graces' annals have I read
The myrtle wreath adorned your youthful head;
That you unrivaled trod the Idalian green,
And that the Loves elected you their Queen:
Of jealous time despise the trivial harm,
Still by your wit you conquer, reign, and charm;
The learned throughout the realm your genius own
And HERVEY only has exchanged her throne!
ARGARET OF ANJOU, AN HISTORICAL INTERLUDE.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Historical Interlude is formed upon the plan that ROUSSEAU composed his
PYGMALION, which is a new species of Dramatic Entertainment, consisting chiefly
of a monologue, that is often suspended by the interposition of music.

The following little Drama was written for (that ornament of the Stage) Mrs.
POPE, who performed it on the night of her benefit. This Interlude has also
been performed at BRANDENBURGH House: the part of MARGARET received from the
theatrical abilities of her Serene Highness the Margravine the richest
coloring and the most impressive truth of expression.

The subject is taken from a remarkable incident in the life of MARGARET. --
That unfortunate Queen, flying with her Son into a forest after the battle of
HEXHAM, saw a Robber approach with his naked sword; and finding that she had no
means of escaping, she suddenly embraced the resolution of trusting entirely
for protection to his generosity. The man, whose humanity and generous spirit
had been obscured, not entirely lost, by his vicious course of life, was struck
with the singularity of the event, and charmed with the confidence reposed in
him; and he vowed not only to a^stain from all injury against the Queen, but to
devote himself entirely to her safety and protection. HUME.

N.B. -- The asterisks mark the pauses that admit the music.

CHARACTERS.
OFFICER. PEASANT. EDWY, the Robber. EDWARD, the Prince of WALLS. MARGARET.
MARGARET OF ANJOU.
SCENE, A FOREST. Enter OFFICER wounded, and a PEASANT. OFFICER. THE battle's
lost, the rebel arms prevail!
Confusion and precipitating rout
Urge our distracted troops. -- The King is slain.
Impelled by fear, the Queen flew to this forest,
In order to conceal her little child.

PEASANT. Shall I not lead you to my humble cottage,
There on a peaceful couch to bathe your wound?

OFFICER. Ah! rather lead me to the deep recess
Of this broad forest; happily I may find
My royal Mistress. Better I endure
The pang that gushes from this gaping wound,
Than my mind's torture for the hapless Queen.
[Exeunt.
Enter MARGARET and her SON. The fierce pursuers will not here perchance
Discover us: the thick-inwoven umbrage
Of these gigantic trees will spread concealment:
Yet as their solemn branches wave, strange fear
Possesses me; yet all is still as night.
The shouts of rebel victory are lost
And fade away, ere they can pierce these shades.
Ah! what a victory! He whose meek sway
Solicited his people's grateful love,
My HENRY! England's monarch, is no more!
While I, a wretched outcast of the throne,
Rove desolate amid these savage walks,
Of every comfort, every hope bereft:
(To her Child.) But thou, my EDWARD, still art mine! Ah lay
Thy weary limbs on yonder bank, and I
Will watch beside thee.
(Leads him to a Bank.) He sleeps unconscious of the dire distress
That hovers over his head. Kind Ignorance!
That drops her veil before his infant eyes:
Yet ash blossoms into youth, the hand
Of Time, withdrawing back the veil, shall offer
To his distracted view a throne o'erturn'd
And floating in the blood of all his friends
Ah what a sight! it urges me to madness.
Yet all that courage could effect was done:
When wild Dissension her torn banners reared,
Which insolently waved over HENRY's head,
While he beneath their shade a captive stood,
I, feeble agent! hurried to the field,
And at that moment losing all the fears
That haunt the female breast, I called to Loyalty
To snatch my HENRY from Rebellion's arm:
The valiant troops who then encircled me
On WAKEFIELD's day performed their duty well,
And on St. ALBAN's memorable plain
I saw defeated WARWICK wing his flight,
And rescued HENRY hasten to these arms.
Yet what avail these momentary triumphs!
Even while I speak my faithful HENRY lies
Extended on the plain, deformed with wounds,
While over his sacred corse the hostile band
Irreverently pass, and with vile taunts
Upbraid his overthrow: nor was I present
To solace his last moments, catch the accents
Of his departing voice, and close his fading eyes.
The illustrious youth on whose bright armor gleam'd
The morning sun! of all that valiant train
Not one remains to guard yon helpless innocent.
-- Darkness spreads: cold descending night-air chills
My bosom, while a murmuring noise, that tells
The coming storm, sounds through the conscious branches
Of this wood. Ah where shall I betake me?
(Walking in a distracted manner.)) If at some hamlet-door I knock, these robes
Will sure betray me! and the sum that is set
Upon that Infant's head, ah! will it not
Invite the simple cottager to treachery?
Yet here to brave the stern inclement sky,
With all the horrors of descending night,
My trembling heart refuses. -- I will lead
Him hence. Vain thought! Ah! to what stranger heart
Dare I conside my Son? Should he be torn
From these weak arms, yes, well, too well I know,
This anxious heart would at that moment burst.
The Power above, who sees into the depth
Of my great sorrow, knows that not to pride,
That not to Exaltation's gaudy honors
I ever entrusted my felicity.
Amid the rude misfortunes that encircled me
The pulse of pleasure throbb'd within my breast
When I embraced my Son: of him bereft,
Calamity's sharp fangs will tear my heart strings.
I feel, I feel her now, fell tygress, at
My bosom, gorging on my mangled peace!
Ye cruel ruffians, give me back my Son.
Ah me! wild fear foreruns my loss, and joins
The future moment to the present time.
(Kneeling.) Oh thou, all-seeing Providence, if ever
The scenes on earth attract thy sacred notice!
Then, let thy knowing, clear-discerning eye,
Whence radiant Pity beams, over my misfortune
Pause -- And, thus humbly as I bend resigned,
Let, let my falling ruinous state overwhelm
The Mother, but not crush the Child.
(Rising.) The night increases, I must wake my Son:
(Hanging fondly over him.) How sleep posiesses him I Perhaps this slumber
Is doomed his last -- perhaps -- what do I see?
Stretched on a bier, methinks I see him gash'd
With daggers! -- Ah! 'twas fancy bodied forth
This cruel image: still my EDWARD breathes,
And these fond arms embrace my living Child!
PRINCE. Oh Mother, lead me hence -- --


MARGARET. Say, whither shall
I lead my EDWARD?

PRINCE. Lead me to my Father!
Why do you weep? Ah, wherefore not reply?
Say, is my Father slain?

MARGARET. I know not that.


PRINCE. Whence was that noise?


MARGARET. It was the chiding gale:
Ah no, it is the sound of hostile steps.

Enter ROBBER. ROBBER. Whoever thou art, I see you are in distress;
I too am well acquainted with misfortune,
And greater still than thine; for at my door
Pale Famine sits, while starving children send
A mournful peal: if aught thou have concealed
Within this wood, give me the hoarded treasure.

MARGARET. Ah, here is all my treasure!


(Pointing to her Child.) ROBBER. Cease to trifle --
Give me thy treasure, or I Will slay thy Child.

MARGARET. Arrest that impious arm! He is thy Prince!

Talk not of want, of Misery's scourging hand
Complain no more; in me, in me behold
Distressful MARG'RET, ENGLAND'S vanquished Queen!
And all the treasure left her from the field,
The cruel havoc of this morning's fight,
Is centered in this Child.

ROBBER. Thanks to my GOD,
I Am not so lost in vice, so deep-ingulph'd
In woe, but that my Sovereign's distress
Obliterates my own.

MARGARET. Is It possible?


ROBBER. Ah! cease to wonder at the words I speak.
Of affluent parents born, my youth was reared
To virtue, letters, and to social manners:
The sacred ray that once illum'd my breast
Is shaded, not extinguished; and buried,
But not dead -- I feel it now re-kindling
The warm functions of my soul, while loyalty
Renovates my love of virtue.

MARGARET. Frankness
Like this solicits my belief.

ROBBER. Forbear
To linger here, where dangers lurk around:
I Will lead thee through some dark and winding pathway
Of this wild forest, to a neighboring river,
Where rides a bark, whose canvas courts the gales
That fly to other realms.

MARGARET. Ah! must I then
Forsake this country? Is there no safety
But in exile?

ROBBER. None! Behold how anarchy
With giant steps stalks over the trembling land!
At her approach the sumptuous palace falls;
The Norman castle stretches its long ruin
Down the mountain's side. -- With louder vehemence
The civil deluge rolls, and rushes through
The portals of the sanctuary: The temples
Are profaned, the hallowed walls dismantled,
The choirs deformed, the altars overthrown!
The ministers amidst their awful duties
Massacred, their snowy vestments drenched in blood! --
Away, away, and shun these scenes of horror.

MARGARET. Dethroned, oppressed, forsaken of all hope,
Can I, weak object! instigate teir malice?

PRINCE. Say, say, will not the ruffians spare my Mother?


ROBBER. Endearing Youth! Ah, trust not to their mercy:
The hungry wolf would sooner spare the lamb;
Their thoughts are lawlesss, daring, wild, and savage.
They Will tear that infant from thy clinging arms,
And banish him for ever from thy sight;
While thou, deserted by thy powerless friends,
Shall wander forth, a trembling fugitive,
The pointed mockery of a lawless rabble!

MARGARET. Oh, what a scene you picture to my view!


ROBBER. Haste, then, my royal Mistress, haste away!
The bark I lately mentioned is peopled,
Though by a small, a brave, intrepid band,
Devoted to my service! Their sympathies
Will catch the expanding flame that fires my soul;
That moves and urges me, in scorn of danger,
Even at the daring hazard of my life,
To save, protect, distressful Royalty!

MARGARET. Generous Stranger! lead me to your vessel:
Advance -- direct the way. -- I dare confide
Myself and my loved Child to your protection!
Reft of a crown, a husband, every friend,
Amid this mighty ruin EDWARD lives,
And wretched MARGARET still shall be a Mother!

[Exeunt. TO THE MEMORY OF THE LATE LADY JERNINGHAM.
LINES WRITTEN IN THE ALBUM AT COSSEY-HALL, NORFOLK, THE SEAT OF SIR WILLIAM
JERNINGHAM, AUGUST THE 4TH, 1786.
I.
THOU, to whose sacred page the parting guest
Confides the workings of his grateful breast,
With awful pleasure over thy form I bend,
My gift to bring -- as brother, guest, and friend.
Farewell, ye shades! (ah! not to fame unknown)
Where Elegance has reared her attic throne:
Whose beauties, to the pure of taste addressed,
In Nature's charms munificently dressed;
Whose soft amenity, with grace combined,
Display the emblem of the master's mind:
Farewell! -- Say, shall I not regret the bower
Where social intercourse endeared the hour;
Where she, whose footsteps bless this sylvan seat,
The pride and mistress of this calm retreat,
Her soul illum'd with Wisdom's piercing beam,
Sheds round her circle the enlight'ning gleam!
II.
Ye scenes over which I cast a lingering view,
Over which affection breathes a warm adieu,
That hour I now recall with pleasing pain,
Which gave your beauties to my wish again:
Yet then, as I approached your smiling shore,
Prompt expectation gladly flew before:
Winged with gay hope, as nearer still I drew,
Hills, plains, and woods assumed a brighter hue:
Soft-wreath'd in lilac vestment, laughing May
With hailing aspect met me on the way;
The various vale with eager steps I pressed,
Praise on my tongue, and transport in my breast:
Over each loved spot I sent a fond survey,
Where in the morn of life I wont to stray;
The winding walks by memory endeared,
Where with the growing plants my youth was reared,
Embow'ring shades, in whose deep gloom immersed,
Reflection fed me, and the Muses nursed,
And, screening from my view ambition's sky,
Poured other visions on my raptured eye.
III.
Yet, Album, ere the willing task I leave,
Warm rom the heart these closing lines receive,
'Twas at the hour to contemplation due,
When evening meekly from the world withdrew,
Beneath an aged oak, in pensive mood,
I Sorrow's solitary captive stood:
When, from the rifted trunk's obscure recess,
A voice breathed forth, in accents of distress;
"Where! where is she! of mild and reverend mien,
"Once the loved mistress of this sylvan scene?" --
"Fallen -- fallen -- fallen -- fallen!" -- a distant voice replied:
The branches shook, as if to sense allied:
Wild Terror flung his strong enchantment round,
And evening hurried into night profound!
Now fond remembrance turns a willing sight,
To dwell on gayer scenes of past delight,
Pleased to behold her, midst the polished train,
With grace, with dignity, her part sustain.
To mild festivity by nature prone,
With inbred wit peculiarly her own,
Prompt every sportive incident to seize,
Diffusing pleasure with a careless case;
Of power to charm invincibly possessed,
Unfelt she glided into every breast.
There are, who, framed with an enlightened taste,
High on the critic form by judgment placed,
Who (marking well her sense with strength combined,
The scintillations of her playful mind,
An aptitude that never lost its aim)
With brilliant SEVIGNE' inwreathe her name.
To discontent, the vice of age, unknown,
Her cheerfulness maintained its envied throne:
The gay, the old, the learned, and the young,
And they whose heart pure elegance had strung,
By the soft power of her enchantment won,
Would often the glare of thronged assemblies shun,
To court her ready wit's enlivening beam,
And bask beneath its undulating gleam.
Yet often from these unnotic'd would she steal,
To soothe the bedridden stretched on Torture's wheel,
To smoothe the furrow on Misfortune's brown,
To warm the timid, and exalt the low;
With lenient hand administer relief,
And close the bleeding artery of grief.
Ah, ever dear! ah, venerable Shade!
Indulge this honor by Affection paid.
Enthroned in bliss, ah! yet forbear to shun
This holy tribute from a zealous Son.
'Twas mine, attendant on thy evening ray,
To watch the sunset of thy blameless day;
To see thee, weary of the unequal strife,
Shed the faint glimm'rings of exhausted life;
And (heavenly Moralist, sublimely great!)
At the dread opening of thy future state,
Teach by example, to thy latest breath,
Meekness in pain, and fortitude in death!
Just Published, THE THIRD EDITION OF THE WELSH HEIRESS.


