AN ESSAY ON THE LEARNING OF SHAKESPEARE.

AN ESSAY ON THE LEARNING OF SHAKESPEARE: ADDRESSED TO JOSEPH CRADOCK, Esquire THE
SECOND EDITION, WITH LARGE ADDITIONS.

BY RICHARD FARMER, B. D. Fellow of EMMANUEL-COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE; AND OF The
Society of ANTIQUARIES, LONDON.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by J. ARCHDEACON, Printer to the UNIVERSITY, For J.
WOODYER, in Cambridge; and Sold by J. BEECROFT, in Paternoster Row; J.
DODSLEY, in Pall Mall; T. CADELL, in the Strand; and M. HINGESTON, near Temple
Bar, London. M.DCC.LXVII.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
THE AUTHOR of the following ESSAY was sollicitous only for the honor of
Shakespeare: he has however, in his own capacity, little reason to complain of
occasional Critics, or Critics by profession. The very FEW, who have been
pleased to controvert any part of his Doctrine, have favored him with better
manners, than arguments; and claim his thanks for a further opportunity of
demonstrating the futility of Theoretick reasoning against Matter of Fact. It
is indeed strange, that any real Friends of our immortal POET should be still
willing to force him into a situation, which is not tenable: treat him as a
learned Man, and what shall excuse the most gross violations of History,
Chronology, and Geography?

(...) is the Motto of every Polemick: like his Brethren at the Amphitheatre,
he holds it a merit to die hard; and will not say, Enough, though the Battle be
decided. "Were it shown, says some one, that the old Bard borrowed all his
allusions from English books then published, our Essayist might have possibly
established his System." -- In good time! -- This had scarcely been attempted
by Peter Burman himself, with the Library of Shakespeare before him. -- "Truly,
as Mr. Dogberry says, for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a King, I
could find in my heart to bestow it all on this Subject:" but where should I
meet with a Reader? -- When the main Pillars are taken away, the whole Building
falls in course: Nothing has been, or can be, pointed out, which is not easily
removed; or rather, which was not virtually removed before: a very little
Analogy will do the business. I shall therefore have no occasion to trouble
myself any further; and may venture to call my Pamphlet, in the words of a
pleasant Declaimer against Sermons on the thirtieth of January, "an Answer to
every thing that shall hereafter be written on the Subject."

But "this method of reasoning will prove any one ignorant of the Languages,
who has written when Translations were extant." -- Shade of Burgersdicius! --
does it follow, because Shakespeare's early life was incompatible with a course
of Education -- whose Contemporaries, Friends and Foes, nay, and himself
likewise, agree in his want of what is usually called Literature -- whose
mistakes from equivocal Translations, and even typographical Errors, cannot
possibly be accounted for otherwise, -- that Lock, to whom not one of these
circumstances is applicable, understood no Greek? -- I suspect, Rollin's
Opinion of our Philosopher was not founded on this argument.

Shakespeare wanted not the Stilts of Languages to raise him above all other
men. The quotation from Lilly in the Taming of the Shrew, if indeed it be his,
strongly proves the extent of his reading: had he known Terence, he would not
have quoted erroneously from his Grammar. Every one has met with men in common
life, who, according to the language of the Water-poet, "got only from Possum
to Posset," and yet will throw out a line occasionally from their Accidence or
their Cato de Moribus with tolerable propriety. -- If, however, the old
Editions be trusted in this passage, our Author's memory somewhat failed him in
point of Concord.

The rage of Parallelisms is almost over, and in truth nothing can be more
absurd. "THIS was stolen from one Classick, -- THAT from another;" -- and had I
not stepped in to his rescue, poor Shakespeare had been stripped as naked of
ornament, as when he first held Horses at the door of the Playhouse.

The late ingenious and modest Mr. Dodsley declared himself "Untutored in the
lore of Greece or Rome:" Yet let us take a passage at a venture from any of his
performances, and a thousand to one, it is stolen. Suppose it be his celebrated
Compliment to the Ladies, in one of his earliest pieces, The Toy-shop: "A good
Wife makes the cares of the World sit easy, and adds a sweetness to its
pleasures; she is a Man's best Companion in Prosperity, and his only Friend in
Adversity; the carefullest preserver of his Health, and the kindest Attendant
in his Sickness; a faithful Adviser in Distress, a Comforter in Affliction, and
a prudent Manager in all his domestic Affairs." -- Plainly, from a fragment of
Euripides preserved by Stobaeus.

"(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)!" --
Par. 4to. 1623. Malvolio in the Twelfth-Night of Shakespeare has some
expressions very similar to Alnaschar in the Arabian Tales: which perhaps may
be sufficient for some Critics to prove his acquaintance with Arabic!

It seems however, at last, that "Taste should determine the matter." This, as
Bardolph expresses it, is a word of exceeding good command: but I am willing,
that the Standard itself be somewhat better ascertained before it be opposed to
demonstrative Evidence. -- Upon the whole, I may consider myself, as the
Pioneer of the Commentators: I have removed a deal of learned Rubbish, and
pointed out to them Shakespeare's track in the ever-pleasing Paths of Nature.
This was necessarily a previous Inquiry; and I hope I may assume with some
confidence, what one of the first Critics of the Age was pleased to declare on
reading the former Edition, that "The Question is now for ever decided." I may
just remark, lest they be mistaken for Errata, that the word Catherine in the
47th page is written, according to the old Orthography, for Catherine; and that
the passage in the 51st page is copied from Upton, who improperly calls Horatio
and Marcellus in Hamlet, "the Sentinels."

In p. 23. l. 23. for had probably read might have etc.




AN ESSAY ON THE LEARNING OF SHAKESPEARE: ADDRESSED TO JOSEPH CRADOCK, Esquire
"SHAKESPEARE, says a Brother of the Craft, Mr. Seward in his Preface to
Beaumont and Fletcher, 10 Vol. 8vo. 1750.
is a vast garden of criticism:" and certainly no one can be favored with more
weeders gratis.

But how often, my dear Sir, are weeds and flowers torn up indiscriminately? --
the ravaged spot is re-planted in a moment, and a profusion of critical thorns
thrown over it for security.

"A prudent man therefore would not venture his fingers amongst them."

Be however in little pain for your friend, who regards himself sufficiently to
be cautious: -- yet he asserts with confidence, that no improvement can be
expected, whilst the natural soil is mistaken for a hot-bed, and the Natives of
the banks of Avon are scientifically choked with the culture of exoticks.

Thus much for metaphor; it is contrary to the Statute to fly out so early: but
who can tell, whether it may not be demonstrated by some critic or other, that
a deviation from rule is peculiarly happy in an Essay of Shakespeare!

You have long known my opinion concerning the literary acquisitions of our
immortal Dramatist; and remember how I congratulated myself on my coincidence
with the last and best of his Editors. I told you however, that his small Latin
and less Greek This passage of Ben. Jonson, so often quoted, is given us in the
admirable preface to the late Edition, with a various reading, "small Latin and
no Greek," which has been held up to the Public for a modern sophistication:
yet whether an error or not, it was adopted above a Century ago by W. Towers in
a Panegyric on Cartwright. His Eulogy, with more than fifty others, on this
now forgotten Poet, was prefixed to the Edit. 1651.
would still be litigated, and you see very assuredly that I was not mistaken.
The trumpet has been sounded against "the darling project of representing
Shakespeare as one of the illiterate vulgar;" and indeed to so good purpose,
that I would by all means recommend the performer to the army of the braying
Faction, recorded by Cervantes. The testimony of his contemporaries is again
disputed; constant tradition is opposed by flimsy arguments; and nothing is
heard, but confusion and nonsense. One could scarcely imagine this a topic
very likely to inflame the passions: it is asserted by Dryden, that "those who
accuse him to have wanted learning, give him the greatest commendation;" yet an
attack upon an article of faith has been usually received with more temper and
complacence, than the unfortunate opinion, which I am about to defend.

But let us previously lament with every lover of Shakespeare, that the
Question was not fully discussed by Mr. Johnson himself: what he sees
intuitively, others must arrive at by a series of proofs; and I have not time
to teach with precision: be contented therefore with a few cursory
observations, as they may happen to arise from the Chaos of Papers, you have so
often laughed at, "a stock sufficient to set up an Editor in form." I am
convinced of the strength of my cause, and superior to any little advantage
from sophistical arrangements.

General positions without proofs will probably have no great weight on either
side, yet it may not seem fair to suppress them: take them therefore as their
authors occur to me, and we will afterward proceed to particulars.

The testimony of Ben. stands foremost; and some have held it sufficient to
decide the controversy: in the warmest Panegyric, that ever was written, he
apologizes "Though thou had small Latin, etc."
for what he supposed the only defect in his "beloved friend, -- -- -- -- Soul
of the age!
The applause! delight! the wonder of our stage! --
whose memory he honored almost to idolatry:" and conscious of the worth of
ancient literature, like any other man on the same occasion, he rather carries
his acquirements above, than below the truth. "Jealousy! cries Mr. Upton;
People will allow others any qualities, but those upon which they highly value
themselves." Yes, where there is a competition, and the competitor formidable:
but, I think, this Critic himself has scarcely set in opposition the learning
of Shakespeare and Jonson. When a superiority is universally granted, it by no
means appears a man's literary interest to depress the reputation of his
Antagonist.

In truth the received opinion of the pride and malignity of Jonson, at least
in the earlier part of life, is absolutely groundless: at this time scarce a
play or a poem appeared without Ben's encomium, from the original Shakespeare
to the translator of Du Bartas.

But Jonson is by no means our only authority. Drayton the countryman and
acquaintance of Shakespeare, determines his excellence to the natural Brain
In his Elegy on Poets and Poesy. p. 206. Fol. 1627.
only. Digges, a wit of the town before our Poet left the stage, is very strong
to the purpose, -- "Nature only helped him, for look through
This whole book, thou shall find he does not borow
One phrase from Greeks, not Latins imitate,
Nor once from vulgar Languages translate." From his Poem "upon Master William
Shakespeare," intended to have been prefixed, with the other of his
composition, to the Folio of 1623; and afterward printed in several
miscellaneous Collections: particularly the spurious Edition of Shakespeare's
Poems, 1640. Some account of him may be met with in Wood's Athenae.



Suckling opposes his easier strain to the sweat of learned Jonson. Denham
assures us, that all he had was from old Mother-wit. His native wood-notes
wild, every one remembers to be celebrated by Milton. Dryden observes prettily
enough, that "he wanted not the spectacles of books to read Nature." He came
out of her hand, as some one else expresses it, like Pallas out of Jove's head,
at full growth and mature.

The ever memorable Hales of Eton, (who, notwithstanding his Epithet, is, I
fear, almost forgotten,) had too great a knowledge both of Shakespeare and the
Ancients to allow much acquaintance between them: and urged very justly on the
part of Genius in opposition to Pedantry, That "if he had not read the
Classicks, he had likewise not stolen from them; and if any Topic was produced
from a Poet of antiquity he would undertake to show somewhat on the same
subject, at least as well written by Shakespeare."

Fuller, a diligent and equal searcher after truth and quibbles, declares
positively, that "his learning was very little, -- Nature was all the Art used
upon him, as he himself, if alive, would confess." And may we not say, he did
confess it, when he apologized for his untutored lines to his noble patron the
Earl of Southampton? -- this list of witnesses might be easily enlarged; but I
flatter myself, I shall stand in no need of such evidence.

One of the first and most vehement assertors of the learning of Shakespeare,
was the Editor of his Poems, the well-known Mr. Gildon; Hence perhaps the
ill-star'd rage between this Critic and his elder Brother, John Dennis, so
pathetically lamented in the Dunciad. Whilst the former was persuaded, that
"the man who doubts of the Learning of Shakespeare, has none of his own:" the
latter, above regarding the attack in his private capacity, declares with great
patriotic vehemence, that "he who allows Shakespeare had Learning, and a
familiar acquaintance with the Ancients, ought to be looked upon as a detractor
from the Glory of Great Britain." Dennis was expelled his College for
attempting to stab a man in the dark: Pope would have been glad of this
anecdote.
and his steps were most punctually taken by a subsequent labourer in the same
department, Dr. Sewel.

Mr. Pope supposed "little ground for the common opinion of his want of
learning:" once indeed he made a proper distinction between learning and
languages, as I would be understood to do in my Title Page; but unfortunately
he forgot it in the course of his disquisition, and endeavored to persuade
himself that Shakespeare's acquaintance with the Ancients might be actually
proved by the same medium as Jonson's.

Mr. Theobald is "very unwilling to allow him so poor a scholar, as many have
labored to represent him;" and yet is "cautious of declaring too positively on
the other side the question."

Dr. Warburton has exposed the weakness of some arguments from suspected
imitations; and yet offers others, which, I doubt not, he could as easily have
refuted.

Mr. Upton wonders "with what kind of reasoning any one could be so far imposed
upon, as to imagine that Shakespeare had no learning;" and lashes with much
zeal and satisfaction "the pride and pertness of dunces, who under such a name
would gladly shelter their own idleness and ignorance."

He, like the learned Knight, at every anomaly in grammar or meter, "Has hard
words ready to show why,
And tell what Rule he did it by."


How would the old Bard have been astonished to have found, that he had very
skilfully given the trochaic dimeter brachycatalectic, COMMONLY called the
ithyphallic measure, to the Witches in Macheth! and that now and then a halting
Verse afforded a most beautiful instance of the Pes proceleusmaticus!

"But, continues Mr. Upton, it was a learned age; Roger Ascham assures us, that
Queen Elizabeth read more Greek every day, than some Dignitaries of the Church
did Latin in a whole week." This appears very probable; and a pleasant proof it
is of the general learning of the times, and of Shakespeare in particular. I
wonder, he did not corroborate it with an extract from her injunctions to her
Clergy, that "such as were but mean Readers should peruse over before, once or
twice, the Chapters and Homilies, to the intent they might read to the better
understanding of the people."

Dr. Gray declares, that Shakespeare's knowledge in the Greek and Latin tongues
cannot reasonably be called in question. Dr. Dodd supposes it proved, that he
was not such a novice in learning and antiquity as some people would pretend.
And to close the whole, for I suspect you to be tired of quotation, Mr.
Whalley, the ingenious Editor of Jonson, has written a piece expressly on this
side the question: perhaps from a very excusable partiality, he was willing to
draw Shakespeare from the field of Nature to classick ground, where alone, he
knew, his Author could possibly cope with him.

These critics, and many others their coadjutors, have supposed themselves
able to trace Shakespeare in the writings of the Ancients; and have sometimes
persuaded us of their own learning, whatever became of their Author's.
Plagiarisms have been discovered in every natural description and every moral
sentiment. Indeed by the kind assistance of the various Excerpta, Sententiae,
and Flores, this business may be effected with very little expense of time or
sagacity; as Addison has demonstrated in his Comment on Chevy-chace, and
Wagstaff on Tom Thumb: and I myself will engage to give you quotations from the
elder English writers (for to own the truth, I was once idle enough to collect
such) which shall carry with them at least an equal degree of similarity. But
there can be no occasion of wasting any future time in this department: the
world is now in possession of the Marks of Imitation.

"Shakespeare however has frequent allusions to the facts and fables of
antiquity." Granted: -- and as Mat. Prior says, to save the effusion of more
Christian ink, I will endeavor to show, how they came to his acquaintance.

It is notorious, that much of his matter of fact knowledge is deduced from
Plutarch: but in what language he read him, has yet been the question. Mr.
Upton is pretty confident of his skill in the Original, and corrects
accordingly the Errors of his Copyists by the Greek standard. Take a few
instances, which will elucidate this matter sufficiently.

In the third act of Anthony and Cleopatra, Octavius represents to his
Courtiers the imperial pomp of those illustrious lovers, and the arrangement of
their dominion, -- -- -- -- "Unto her
He gave the 'stablishment of Egypt, made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
Absolute Queen."


Read Libya, says the critic authoritatively, as is plain from Plutarch, (...).

This is very true: Mr. Heath It is extraordinary, that this Gentleman should
attempt so voluminous a work, as the Revisal of Shakespeare's Text, when, he
tells us in his Preface, "he was not so fortunate as to be furnished with
either of the Folio Editions, much less any of the ancient Quarto's:" and even
"Sir Thomas Hanmer's performance was known to him only by Mr. Warburton's
representation."
accedes to the correction, and Mr. Johnson admits it into the Text: but turn
to the translation, from the French of Amyot, by Thomas North, in Folio 1579; I
find the character of this work pretty early delineated; "'It Was Greek at first,
that Greek was Latin made,
That Latin French, that French to English straid:
Thus 'twixt one Plutarch there is more difference,
Than in the same Englishman returned from France."

and you will at once see the origin of the mistake.

"First of all he did establish Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, of Cyprus, of
Lydia, and the lower Syria."

Again in the Fourth Act, -- -- -- "My messenger
He has whipped with rods, dares me to personal combat,
Caesar to Anthony. Let the old Ruffian know
I have many other ways to die; mean time
Laugh at his challenge." --


"What a reply is this, cries Mr. Upton? it is acknowledging he should fall
under the unequal combat. But if we read, -- -- -- "Let the old Ruffian know
He has many other ways to die; mean time
I laugh at his challenge." --
We have the poignancy and the very repartee of Caesar in Plutarch."

This correction was first made by Sir Thomas Hanmer, and Mr. Johnson has
received it. Most indisputably it is the sense of Plutarch, and given so in the
modern translations: but Shakespeare was misled by the ambiguity of the old
one, "Antonius sent again to challenge Caesar to fight him: Caesar answered,
That he had many other ways to die, than so."

In the Third Act of Julius Caesar, Anthony in his well-known harangue to the
people, repeats a part of the Emperor's will, -- "To every Roman citizen he
gives,
To every several man, seventy five drams --
Moreover he has left you all his walks,
His private arbours, and new-planted orchards,
On this side Tyber." --


"Our Author certainly wrote, says Mr. Theobald, On that side Tyber -- Travs
Tiberim -- prope Caesaris hortos. And Plutarch, whom Shakespeare very
diligently studied expressly declares, that he left the public his gardens and
walks, (...), beyond the Tyber."

This emendation likewise has been adopted by the subsequent Editors; but hear
again the old Translation, where Shakespeare's study lay, "He bequeathed unto
every citizen of Rome, seventy-five drachmas a man, and he left his gardens and
arbours unto the people, which he had on this side of the river of Tyber." I
could furnish you with many more instances, but these are as good as a thousand.

Hence had our author his characteristick knowledge of Brutus and Anthony, upon
which much argumentation for his learning has been founded: and hence
literatim the Epitaph on Timon, which it was once presumed, he had corrected
from the blunders of the Latin version, by his own superior knowledge of the
Original. See Theobald's Preface to K. Richard 2d. 8vo. 1720.


I cannot however omit a passage of Mr. Pope. "The speeches copied from
Plutarch in Coriolanus may, I think, be as well made an instance of the
learning of Shakespeare, as those copied from Cicero in Catiline, of Ben.
Jonson's." Let us inquire into this matter, and transcribe a speech for a
specimen. Take the famous one of Volumnia.

"Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We Have led since thy Exile. Think with thyself,
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither; since thy sight, which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts,
Constrains them weep, and shake with fear and sorrow;
Making the mother, wife, and child to see
The son, the husband, and the father tearing
His Country's bowels out: and to poor we
Thy enmity's most capital; thou barr'st us
Our prayers to the Gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy. For how can we,
Alas! how can we, for our Country pray,
Whereto we are bound, together with thy Victory,
Whereto we are bound? Alack! or we must of lose
The Country, our dear nurse; or else thy Person,
Our comfort in the Country. We must find
An eminent calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win. For either thou
Must, as a foreign Recreant, be led
With manacles thorough our streets; or else
Triumphantly tread on thy Country's ruin,
And bear the palm, for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on Fortune, 'till
These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts,
Than seek the end of one; thou shall no sooner
March to assault thy Country, than to tread
(Trust to it, thou shall not) on thy mother's womb,
That brought thee to this world."
I will now give you the old Translation, which shall effectually confute Mr.
Pope: for our Author has done little more, than thrown the very words of North
into blank verse.

"If we held our peace (my son) and determined not to speak, the state of
our poor bodies, and present sight of our raiment, would easily bewray to thee
what life we have led at home, since thy exile and abode abroad. But think now
with thy self, how much more unfortunately, then all the women living we are
come hither, considering that the sight which should be most pleasant to all
other to behold, spiteful fortune has made most fearful to us: making my
self to see my son, and my daughter here, her husband, besieging the walls
of his native country. So as that which is the only comfort to all other in
their adversity and misery, to pray unto the gods, and to call to them for
aid; is the only thing which plongeth us into most deep perplexity. For we
cannot (alas) together pray, both for victory, for our country, and for
safety of thy life also: but a world of grievous curses, yea more then any
mortal enemy can heap upon us, are forcibly wrapped up in our prayers. For
the bitter soppe of most hard choice is offered thy wife and children, to
forgo the one of the two: either to lose the person of thy self, or the
nurse of their native contrie. For my self (my son) I am determined not to
tarry, till fortune in my life time do make an end of this war. For if I
cannot persuade thee, rather to do good unto both parties, then to overthrow
and destroy the one, preferring love and nature before the malice and
calamity of wars: thou shall see, my son, and trust unto it, thou shall no
sooner march forward to assault thy country, but thy foot shall tread upon
thy mother's womb, that brought thee first into this world."

The length of this quotation will be excused for it is curiosity; and it
happily wants not the assistance of a Comment. But matters may not always be so
easily managed: -- a plagiarism from Anacreon has been detected!

"The Sun's a thief, and with his great attraction
Robs the vast Sea. The Moon's an arrant thief,
And her pale fire she snatches from the Sun.
The Sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
The Moon into salt tears. The Earth's a thief,
That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen
From general excrements: each thing's a thief."
"This, says Dr. Dodd, is a good deal in the manner of the celebrated drinking
Ode, too well known to be inserted." Yet it may be alleged by those, who
imagine Shakespeare to have been generally able to think for himself, that the
topics are obvious, and their application is different. -- But for argument's
sake, let the Parody be granted; and "our Author, says some one, may be puzzled
to prove, that there was a Latin translation of Anacreon at the time
Shakespeare wrote his Timon of Athens." This challenge is peculiarly unhappy:
for I do not at present recollect any other Classick, (if indeed, with great
deference to Mynheer De Pauw, Anacreon may be numbered amongst them) that was
originally published with two Latin By Henry Stephens and Elias Andreas. Par.
1554. 4to. ten years before the birth of Shakespeare. The former Version has
been ascribed without reason to John Dorat. Many other Translators appeared
before the end of the Century: and particularly the Ode in question was made
popular by Buchanan, whose pieces were soon to be met with in almost every
modern language.
translations.

But this is not all. Puttenham in his Art of English Poesy, 1589, quotes
some one of a "reasonable good facility in translation, who finding certain
of Anacreon's Odes very well translated by Ronsard the French poet -- comes our
Minion, and translates the same out of French into English": and his strictures
upon him evince the publication. Now this identical Ode is to be met with in
Ronsard! and as his works are in few hands, I will take the liberty of
transcribing it.

"La terre les eaux va boivant,
L' arbre la boit par sa racine,
La mer salee boit le vent,
Et le Soleil boit la marine.
Le Soleil est beu de la Lune,
Tout boit soit en haut ou en bas:
Suivant ceste reigle commune,
Pourquoy donc ne boirons-nous pas?"
Edit. Fol. p. 507. I know not, whether an observation of two relative to our
Author's acquaintance with Homer, be worth our investigation. The ingenious
Mrs. Lenox observes on a passage of Troilus and Cressida, where Achilles is
roused to battle by the death of Patroclus, that Shakespeare must here have had
the Iliad in view, as "the old Story, It was originally drawn into English by
Caxton under the name of the Recuyel of the Historyes of Troy, from the French
of the right venerable Person and worshipful man Raoul le Feure, and fynyshed
in the holy city of Colen, the 19 day of Septembre, the year of our Lord God,
a thousand four hundred sixty and enleuen. Wynken de Word printed an Edit.
Fol. 1503. and there have been several subsequent ones.
which in many places he has faithfully copied, is absolutely silent with
respect to this circumstance."

And Mr. Upton is positive that the sweet oblivious Antidote, inquired after by
Macbeth, could be nothing but the Nepenthe described in the Odyssey, "(...)." I
will not insist upon the Translations by Chapman; as the first Editions are
without date, and it may be difficult to ascertain the exact time of their
publication. But the former circumstance might have been learned from Alexander
Barclay; "Who list thistory of Patroclus to read, etc." Ship of Fools. 1570.
p. 21.
and the latter more fully from Spenser, Nepenthe is a drinck of soueragne
grace,
Deuized by the Gods, for to assuage
Hearts grief, and bitter gall away to chase --
In stead thereof sweet peace and quietage
It does establish in the troubled mind, etc."
Faerie Queen. 1596. B. 4. C. 3. St. 43.
than from Homer himself.

"But Shakespeare, persists Mr. Upton, has some Greek Expressions." Indeed! --
"We have one in Coriolanus, -- -- -- -- -- -- "It is held
That valor is the chiefest Virtue, and
Most dignifies the Haver." --
and another in Macbeth, where Banquo addresses the Weird-Sisters, -- -- -- "My
noble Partner
You greet with present grace, and great prediction
Of noble Having." --


Gr. (...). -- and (...), to the Haver."

This was the common language of Shakespeare's time. "Lie in a water-bearer's
house! says Master Matthew of Bobadil, a Gentleman of his Havings!"

Thus likewise John Davies in his Pleasant Descant upon English Proverbs,
printed with his Scourge of Folly, about 1612; "Do well and have well! --
neither so still:
For some are good Doers, whose Havings are ill."
and Daniel the Historian uses it frequently. Having seems to be synonymous
with Behavior in Gawin Douglas It is very remarkable, that the Bishop is
called by his Countryman, Sir David Lindsey, in his Complaint of our Souerane
Lordis Papingo, "In our Inglische Rethorick the Rose."

And Dunbar has a similar expression in his beautiful Poem of The Goldin Terge.


and the elder Scotch writers.

Haver, in the sense of Possessor, is every where met with: though unfortunately
the (...) of Sophocles, produced as an authority for it, is suspected by
Kuster, Aristophanis Comoediae undecim. Gr. and Lat. Amst. 1710. Fol. p. 596.
as good a critic in these matters, to have absolutely a different meaning.

But what shall we say to the learning of the Clown in Hamlet, "Ay, tell me
that, and unyoke?" alluding to the (...) of the Greeks: and Homer and his
Scholiast are quoted accordingly!

If it be not sufficient to say, with Dr. Warburton, that the phrase might be
taken from Husbandry, without much depth of reading; we may produce it from a
Dittie of the workmen of Dover, preserved in the additions to Holingshed, p.
1546.

"My bow is broke, I would unyoke,
My foot is sore, I can work no more."
An expression of my Dame Quickly is next fastened upon, which you may look for
in vain in the modern text; she calls some of the pretended Fairies in the
Merry Wives of Windsor, -- "Orphan Dr. Warburton corrects Orphan to Ouphen; and
not without plausibility, as the word Ouphes occurs both before and afterward.
But I fancy, in acquiescence to the vulgar doctrine, the address in this line
is to apart of the Troop, as Mortals by birth, but adopted by the Fairies:
Orphans, with respect to their real Parents, and now only dependant on Destiny
herself. A few lines from Spenser will sufficiently illustrate the passage.
"The man whom heavens have ordaynd to be
The spouse of Britomart, is Arthegall:
He wonneth in the land of Fayeree,
Yet is no Fary borne, ne sib at all
To Elfes, but sprung of seed terrestrial,
And whilome by false Faries stolen away,
Whiles yet in infant cradle he did crall, etc."
Edit. 1590. B. 3. C. 3. St. 26,
Heirs of fixed Destiny." and how elegant is this, quoth Mr. Upton, supposing
the word to be used, as a Grecian would have used it? (...) ab (...) -- acting
in darkness and obscurity."

Mr. Heath assures us, that the bare mention of such an interpretation, is a
sufficient refutation of it: and his critical word will be rather taken in
Greek than in English: in the same hands therefore I will venture to leave all
our author's knowledge of the Old Comedy, and his etymological learning in the
word, Desdemona. Revisal. p. 75.323. and 561.


Surely poor Mr. Upton was very little acquainted with Fairies, notwithstanding
his laborious study of Spenser. The last authentic account of them is from our
countryman William Lilly; History of his Life and Times. p. 102. preserved by
his Dupe, Mr. Ashmole.
and it by no means agrees with the learned interpretation: for the angelical
Creatures appeared in his Hurst wood in a most illustrious Glory, -- "and
indeed, says the Sage, it is not given to very many persons to endure their
glorious aspects."

The only use of transcribing these things, is to show what absurdities men for
ever run into, when they lay down an Hypothesis, and afterward seek for
arguments in the support of it. What else could induce this man, by no means a
bad scholar, to doubt whether Truepenny might not be derived from (...); and
quote upon us with much parade an old Scholiast on Aristophanes? -- I will not
stop to confute him: nor take any notice of two or three more Expressions, in
which he was pleased to suppose some learned meaning or other; all which he
might have found in every Writer of the time, or still more easily in the
vulgar Translation of the Bible, by consulting the Concordance of Alexander
Cruden.

But whence have we the Plot of Timon, except from the Greek of Lucian? -- The
Editors and Critics have been never at a greater loss than in their inquiries
of this sort; and the source of a Tale has been often in vain sought abroad,
which might easily have been found at home: My good friend, the very ingenious
Editor of the Relics of ancient English Poetry, has shown our Author to have
been sometimes contented with a legendary Ballad.

The Story of the Misanthrope is told in almost every Collection of the time;
and particulary in two books, with which Shakespeare was intimately acquainted;
the Palace of Pleasure, and the English Plutarch. Indeed from a passage in an
old Play, called Jack Drums Entertainment, I conjecture that he had before
made his appearance on the Stage.

Were this a proper place for such a disquisition, I could give you many cases
of this kind. We are sent for instance to Cinthio for the Plot of Measure for
Measure, and Shakespeare's judgment has been attacked for some deviations
from him in the conduct of it: when probably all he knew of the matter was from
Madam Isabella in the Heptameron of Whetstone. Land. 4to. 1582. She reports in
the fourth days exercise, the rare History of Promos and Cassandra. A
marginal note informs us, that Whetstone was the Author of the Commedie on that
subject; which likewise had probably fallen into the hands of Shakespeare.
Ariosto is continually quoted for the Fable of Much ado about Nothing; but I
suspect our Poet to have been satisfied with the Geneura of Turberville. "The
tale is a pretty comicall matter, and has bin written in English verse some
few years past, learnedly and with good grace, by M. George Turberuil."
Harrington's Ariosto. Fol. 1591. p. 39.
As you like it was certainly borrowed, if we believe Dr. Gray, and Mr. Upton,
from the Coke's Tale of Gamelyn; which by the way was not printed 'till a
century afterward: when in truth the old Bard, who was no hunter of MSS.
contented himself solely with Lodge's Rosalynd or Euphues' Golden Legacye. 4to.
1590. The Story of All Is well that ends well, or, as I suppose it to have been
sometimes called, Love's labor won, See Meres's Wits Treasury. 1598. p. 282.
is originally indeed the property of Boccace, Our ancient Poets are under
greater obligations to Boccace, than is generally imagined. Who would suspect,
that Chaucer has borrowed from an Italian the facetious Tale of the Miller of
Trumpington?

Mr. Dryden observes on the Epic performance, Palamon and Arcite, a poem little
inferior in his opinion to the Iliad or the Aeneid, that the name of it is
Author is wholly lost, and Chaucer is now become the Original. But he is
mistaken: this too was the work of Boccace, and printed at Ferrara in Folio,
con il commento di Andrea Bassi, 1475. I have seen a copy of it, and a
Translation into modern Greek, in the noble Library of the very learned and
communicative Dr. Askew.

It is likewise to be met with in old French, under the Title of La Theseide de
Jean Boccace, contenant les belles and chastes amors de deux jeunes Chevaliers
Thebains Arcite and Palemon.


but it came immediately to Shakespeare from Painter's Giletta of Narbon. In
the first Vol. of the Palace of Pleasure. 4to. 1566.
Mr. Langbaine could not conceive, whence the Story of Pericles could be taken,
"not meeting in History with any such Prince of Tire;" yet his legend may be
found at large in old Gower, under the name of Appolynus. Confessio Amantis,
printed by T. Berthelet. Fol. 1532. p. 175, etc.


Pericles is one of the Plays omitted in the later Editions, as well as the
early Folio's, and not improperly; though it was published many years before the
death of Shakespeare, with his name in the Title Page. Aulus Gellius informs
us, that some Plays are ascribed absolutely to Plautus, which he only retouched
and polished; and this is undoubtedly the case with our Author likewise. The
revival of this performance, which Ben. Jonson calls stale and moldy, was
probably his earliest attempt in the Drama. I know, that another of these
discarded pieces, the Yorkshire Tragedy, has been frequently called so; but
most certainly it was not written by our Poet at all: nor indeed was it printed
in his lifetime. The Fact on which it is built, was perpetrated no sooner than
1604: "William Caluerley, of Caluerley in Yorkshire, Esquire, murdered two of
his own children in his own house, then stabde his wife into the body with
full intent to have killed her, and then instantly with like fury went from
his house, to have slain his youngest child at nurse, but was prevented. He
was pressed to death in York the 5 of August. 1604." Edm. Howes' Continuation of
John Stowe's Summarie. 8vo. 1607. p. 574. The Story appeared before in a 4to.
Pamphlet. 1605. it is ommitted in the Folio Chronicle. 1631.
much too late for so mean a performance from the hand of Shakespeare.

Sometimes a very little matter detects a forgery. You may remember a Play
called the Double Falsehood, which Mr. Theobald was desirous of palming upon the
world for a posthumous one of Shakespeare: and I see it is classed as such in
the last Edition of the Bodleian Catalogue. Mr. Pope himself, after all the
strictures of Scriblerus, These however, he assures Mr. Hill, were the property
of Dr. Arbuthnot.
in a Letter to Aaron Hill, supposes it of that age; but a mistaken accent
determines it to have been written since the middle of the last century. -- --
"This late example
Of base Henriquez, bleeding in me now,
From each good Aspect takes away my trust."
And in another place, "You have an Aspect, Sir, of wondrous wisdom." The word
Aspect, you perceive, is here accented on the first Syllable, which, I am
confident, in any sense of it, was never the case in the time of Shakespeare;
though it may sometimes appear to be so, when we do not observe a preceding
Elision. Thus a line in Hamlet's description of the Player, should be printed
as in the old Folio's, "Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect." agreeably
to the accent in a hundred other places.


Some of the professed Imitators of our old Poets have not attended to this and
many other Minutiae: I could point out to you several performances in the
respective Styles of Chaucer, Spenser, and Shakespeare, which the imitated Bard
could not possibly have either read or construed.

This very accent has troubled the Annotators on Milton. Dr. Bentley observes
it to be "a tone different from the present use." Mr. Manwaring, in his
Treatise of Harmony and Numbers, very solemnly informs us, that "this Verse is
defective both in Accent and Quantity, B. 3. V. 266. "His words here ended, but
his meek Aspect
Silent yet spoke." --
Here, says he, a syllable is acuted and long, whereas it should be short and
graved!"

And a still more extraordinary Gentleman, one Green, who published a Specimen
of a new Version of the Paradise Lost, into BLANK verse, "by which that amazing
Work is brought somewhat nearer the Summit of Perfection," begins with
correcting a blunder in the fourth book, V. 540. -- -- "The setting Sun
Slowly defended, and with right Aspect --
Levelled his evening rays." -- --
Not so in the New Version.
"Meanwhile the setting Sun descending slow --
Levelled with aspect right his evening rays."
Enough of such Commentators. -- The celebrated Dr. Dee had a Spirit, who would
sometimes condescend to correct him, when peccant in Quantity: and it had been
kind of him to have a little assisted the Wights abovementioned. -- Milton
affected the Antique; but it may seem more extraordinary, that the old Accent
should be adopted in Hudibras.

After all, the Double Falsehood is superior to Theobald. One passage, and one
only in the whole Play, he pretended to have written: -- -- -- "Strike up, my
Masters;
"But touch the Strings with a religious softness:
"Teach sound to languish through the Night's dull Ear,
"'Till Melancholy start from her lazy Couch,
"And Carelessness grow Convert to Attention."


These lines were particularly admired; and his vanity could not resist the
opportunity of claiming them: but his claim had been more easily allowed to any
other part of the performance.

To whom then shall we ascribe it? -- Somebody has told us, who should seem to
be a Nostrummonger by his argument, that, let Accents be how they will, it is
called an original Play of William Shakespeare in the King's Patent, prefixed
to Mr. Theobald's Edition, 1728, and consequently there could be no fraud in
the matter. Whilff, on the contrary, the Irish Laureat, Mr. Victor, remarks,
(and were it true, it would be certainly decisive) that the Plot is borrowed
from a Novel of Cervantes, not published 'till the year after Shakespeare's
death. But unluckily the same Novel appears in a part of Don Quixote, which was
printed in Spanish, 1605, and in English by Shelton, 1612. -- The same
reasoning however, which exculpated our Author from the Yorkshire Tragedy, may
be applied on the present occasion.

But you want my opinion: -- and from every mark of Style and Manner, I make no
doubt of ascribing it to Shirley. Mr. Langbaine informs us, that he left some
Plays in MS. -- These were written about the time of the Restoration, when the
Accent in question was more generally altered.

Perhaps the mistake arose from an abbreviation of the name. Mr. Dodsley knew
not that the Tragedy of Andromana was Shirley's, from the very same cause. Thus
a whole stream of Biographers tell us, that Marston's Plays were printed at
London, 1633, "by the care of William Shakespeare, the famous Comedian." --
Here again I suppose, in some Transcript, the real Publisher's name, William
Sheares, was abbreviated. No one has protracted the life of Shakespeare beyond
1616, except Mr. Hume; who is pleased to add a year to it, in contradiction to
all manner of evidence.

Shirley is spoken of with contempt in Mac Flecknoe; but his Imagination is
sometimes fine to an extraordinary degree. I recollect a passage in the fourth
book of the Paradise Lost, which has been suspected of Imitation, as a
prettiness below the Genius of Milton: I mean, where Uriel glides backward and
forward to Heaven on a Sunbeam. Dr. Newton informs us, that this might
possibly be hinted by a Picture of Annibal Carracci in the King of France's
Cabinet: but I am apt to believe that Milton had been struck with a Portrait in
Shirley. Fernando, in the Comedy of the Brothers, 1652, describes Jacinta at
Vespers: "Her eye did seem to labor with a tear,
Which suddenly took birth, but overweigh'd
With it is own swelling, dropped upon her bosom;
Which by reflection of her light, appeared
As nature meant her sorrow for an ornament:
After, her looks grew cheerful, and I saw
A smile shoot graceful upward from her eyes,
As if they had gained a victory over grief,
And with it many beams twisted themselves,
Upon whose golden threads the Angels walk
To and again from Heaven." Middleton, in an obscure Play, called, A Game at
Chesse, has some very pleasing lines on a similar occasion: "Upon those lips,
the sweet fresh buds of youth,
The holy dew of prayer lies like pearl,
Dropped from the opening eyelids of the morn
Upon the bashful Rose." --

--


You must not think me infected with the spirit of Lauder, if I give you
another of Milton's Imitations: -- -- "The Swan with arched neck
"Between her white wings mantling proudly, rows
"Her state with oary feet." --
B. 7. V. 438, etc.

"The ancient Poets, says Mr. Richardson, have not hit upon this beauty; so
lavish as they have been in their descriptions of the Swan. Homer calls the
Swan long-necked, (...); but how much more pittoresque, if he had arched this
length of neck?"

For this beauty however, Milton was beholden to Done; whose name, I believe,
at present is better known than his writings: -- -- "Like a Ship in her full
trim,
A Swan, so white that you may unto him
Compare all whiteness, but himself to none,
Glided along, and as he glided watched,
And with his arched neck this poor fish caught." --
Progress of the Soul. St. 24.

Those highly finished Landscapes, the Seasons, are indeed copied from Nature:
but Thomson sometimes recollected the hand of his Master: -- -- -- "The stately
sailing Swan
Gives out his snowy plumage to the gale;
And arching proud his Neck, with oary feet,
Bears forward fierce, and guards his osier Isle,
Protective of his young." --


But to return, as we say on other occasions. -- Perhaps the Advocates for
Shakespeare's knowledge of the Latin language may be more successful. Mr.
Gildon takes the Van. "It is plain, that He was acquainted with the Fables of
antiquity very well: that some of the Arrows of Cupid are pointed with Lead,
and others with Gold, he found in Ovid; and what he speaks of Dido, in Virgil:
nor do I know any translation of these Poets so ancient as Shakespeare's time."
The passages on which these sagacious remarks are made, occur in the Midsummer
Night's Dream; and exhibit, we see, a clear proof of acquaintance with the
Latin Classicks. But we are not answerable for Mr. Gildon's ignorance; he might
have been told of Caxton and Douglas, of Surrey and Stanyhurst, of Phaer and
Twyne, of Fleming and Golding, of Turberville and Churchyard! but these Fables
were easily known without the help of either the originals or the translations.
The Fate of Dido had been sung very early by Gower, Chaucer, and Lydgate;
Marloe had even already introduced her to the Stage: and Cupid's arrows appear
with their characteristick differences in Surrey, in Sidney, in Spenser, and
every Sonetteer of the time. Nay, their very names were exhibited long before
in the Romaunt of the Rose: a work, you may venture to look into,
notwithstanding Master Prynne has so positively assured us, on the word of
John Gerson, that the Author is most certainly damned, if he did not care for a
serious repentance. Had our zealous Puritan been acquainted with the real crime
of De Mehun, he would not have joined in the clamor against him. Poor Jehan,
it seems, had raised the expectations of a Monastery in France, by the Legacy
of a great Chest, and the weighty Contents of it; but it proved to be filled
with nothing better than Vetches. The Friars, enraged at the ridicule and
disappointment, would not suffer him to have Christian burial. See the Hon. Mr.
Barrington's very learned and curious Observations on the Statutes. 4to. 1766.
p. 24. From the Annals d' Acquytayne, Par. 1537.

Our Author had his full share in distressing the Spirit of this restless man.
"Some Play-books are grown from Quarto into Folio; which yet bear so good a
price and sale, that I cannot but with grief relate it. -- Shackspeers Plays
are printed in the best Crowne-paper, far better than most Bibles!"




Mr. Whalley argues in the same manner, and with the same success. He thinks a
passage in the Tempest, -- -- -- "High Queen of State,
Great Juno comes; I know her by her Gait."
a remarkable instance of Shakespeare's knowledge of ancient Poetic story; and
that the hint was furnished by the Divum incedo Regina of Virgil. Others would
give up this passage for the Vera incessu patuit Dea; but I am not able to see
any improvement in the matter: even supposing the Poet had been speaking of
Juno, and no previous Translation were extant.


You know, honest John Tailor, the Water-poet, declares that he never learned
his Accidence, and that Latin and French were to him Heathen-Greek; yet by the
help of Mr. Whalley's argument, I will prove him a learned Man, in spite of
every thing, he may say to the contrary: for thus he makes a Gallant address
his Lady,

"Most inestimable Magazine of Beauty -- in whom the Port and Majesty of Juno,
the Wisdom of Jove's braine-bred Girl, and the Feature of Cytherea, This
passage recalls to my memory a very extraordinary fact. A few years ago, at a
great Court on the Continent, a Countryman of our's of high rank and character,
[Sir C. H. W.] exhibited with many other Candidates his complimental Epigram on
the Birthday, and carried the prize in triumph, "O Regina orbis prima and
pulcherrima: ridens
Es Venus, incedens Juno, Minerva loquens."
Literally stolen from Angerianus, "Tres quondam nudas vidit Priameius heroes
Luce deas; video tres quoque luce deas.
Hoc majus; tres uno in corpore: Coelia ridens
Est Venus, incedens Juno, Minerva loquens."


Delitiae Ital. Poet. by Gruter, under the anagrammatic Name of Ranutius
Gherus. 1608. V. 1. p. 189.

Perhaps the latter part of the Epigram was met with in a whimsical book, which
had it is day of Fame, Robert Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy. Fol. 1652. 6th
Edit. p. 520.


have their domestical habitation."

In the Merchant of Venice, we have an oath "By two-headed Janus;" and here,
says Dr. Warburton, Shakespeare shows his knowledge in the Antique: and so
again does the Water-poet, who describes Fortune, "Like a Janus with a
double-face."

But Shakespeare has somewhere at Latin Motto, quoth Dr. Sewel; and so has
John Tailor, and a whole Poem upon it into the bargain.

You perceive, my dear Sir, how vague and indeterminate such arguments must be:
for in fact this sweet Swan of Thames, as Mr. Pope calls him, has more scraps
of Latin, and allusions to antiquity than are any where to be met with in the
writings of Shakespeare. I am sorry to trouble you with trifles, yet what must
be done, when grave men insist upon them?

It should seem to be the opinion of some modern critics, that the personages
of classick land began only to be known in England in the time of Shakespeare;
or rather, that he particularly had the honor of introducing them to the
notice of his countrymen.

For instance, -- Rumor painted full of tongues, gives us a Prologue to one of
the parts of Henry the Fourth; and, says Dr. Dodd, Shakespeare had doubtless a
view to either Virgil or Ovid in their description of Fame.

But why so? Stephen Hawes in his Pastime of Pleasure had long before exhibited
her in the same manner, "A goodly Lady envyroned about
With tongues of fire." Cap. 1. 4to. 1555.
--
and so had Sir Thomas More in one of his Pageants, Amongst "the things, which
Master More wrote in his youth for his pastime," prefixed to his Works. 1557.
Fol.
"Fame I am called, mervayle you nothing
Though with tongues I am compassed all round."
not to mention her elaborate Portrait by Chaucer, in the Book of Fame; and by
John Higgins, one of the Assistants in the Mirour for Magistrates, in his
Legend of King Albanacte.

A very liberal Writer on the Beauties of Poetry, who has been more conversant
in the ancient Literature of other Countries, than his own, "cannot but wonder,
that a Poet, whose classical Images are composed of the finest parts, and
breath the very spirit of ancient Mythology, should pass for being illiterate:"
"See what a grace was seated on his brow!
Hyperion's curls: the front of Jove himself:
An eye like Mars to threaten and command:
A station like the herald Mercury,
New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill."
Hamlet. Illiterate is an ambiguous term: the question is, whether Poetic
History could be only known by an Adept in Languages. It is no reflection on
this ingenious Gentleman, when I say, that I use on this occasion the words of
a better Critic, who yet was not willing to carry the illiteracy of our Poet
too far: -- "They who are in such astonishment at the learning of Shakespeare,
forget that the Pagan Imagery was familiar to all the Poets of his time; and
that abundance of this sort of learning was to be picked up from almost every
English book, that he could take into his hands." For not to insist upon
Stephen Bateman's Golden book of the leaden Gods, 1577, and several other
laborious compilations on the subject, all this and much more Mythology might
as perfectly have been learned from the Testament of Creseide, Printed amongst
the Works of Chaucer, but really written by Robert Henderson.
and the Fairy Queen, It is observable, that Hyperion is used by Spenser with
the same error in quantity.
as from a regular Pantheon or Polymetis himself.

Mr. Upton, not contented with Heathen learning, when he finds it in the text,
must necessarily super-add it, when it appears to be wanting; because
Shakespeare most certainly has lost it by accident!

In Much ado about Nothing, Don Pedro says of the insensible Benedict, "He has
twice or thrice cut Cupid's bow-string, and the little Hangman dare not shoot
at him."

This mythology is not recollected in the Ancients, and therefore the critic
has no doubt but his Author wrote "Henchman, -- a Page, Pusio: and this word
seeming too hard for the Printer, he translated the little Urchin into a
Hangman, a character no way belonging to him."

But this character was not borrowed from the Ancients; -- it came from the
Arcadia of Sir Philip Sidney: "Millions of years this old drivell Cupid lives;
While still more wretch, more wicked he does prove:
Till now at length that Jove him office gives,
(At Juno's suite who much did Argus love)
In this our world a Hangman for to be
Of all those fools that will have all they see."
B. 2. Chapter 14.

I know it may be objected on the authority of such Biographers, as Theophilus
Cibber, and the Writer of the Life of Sir Philip, prefixed to the modern
Editions; that the Arcadia was not published before 1613, and consequently too
late for this imitation: but I have a Copy in my own possession, printed for W.
Ponsonbie, 1590, 4to. which has escaped the notice of the industrious Ames,
and the rest of our typographical Antiquaries.

Thus likewise every word of antiquity is to be cut down to the classical
standard.

In a Note on the Prologue to Troilus and Cressida, (which, by the way, is not
met with in the Quarto) Mr. Theobald informs us, that the very names of the
gates of Troy, have been barbarously demolished by the Editors: and a deal of
learned dust he makes in setting them right again; much however to Mr. Heath's
satisfaction. Indeed the learning is modestly withdrawn from the later
Editions, and we are quietly instructed to read, "Dardan, and Thymbria, Ilia,
Scaea, Trojan,
And Antenorides."
But had he looked into the Troy book of Lydgate, instead of puzzling himself
with Dares Phrygius, he would have found the horrid demolition to have been
neither the work of Shakespeare nor his Editors.

"Thereto his cite compassed enuyrowne
Had gates VI to enter into the town:
The first of all and strengest eke with all,
Largest also and most pryncypall,
Of mighty byldyng alone pereless,
Was by the king called Dardanydes;
And in storye like as it is found,
Tymbria was named the second;
And the third called Helyas,
The fourth gate hyghte also Cetheas;
The fyfthe Trojana, the syxth Anthonydes,
Strong and mighty both in werre and pes." The Troy Book was somewhat
modernized, and reduced into regular Stanza's, about the beginning of the last
century, under the name of the "Life and Death of Hector -- who fought a
hundred main Battles in open field against the Grecians; wherein there were
slain on both sides Fourteen Hundred and Six Thousand, Fourscore and Six
men." Fol. no date. This work, Dr. Fuller and several other critics have
erroneously quoted as the Original; and observe in consequence, that "if
Chaucer's Coin were of greater weight for deeper learning, Lydgate's were of a
more refined standard for purer language: so that one might mistake him for a
modern Writer!"

Let me here make an observation for the benefit of the next Editor of Chaucer.
Mr. Urry, probably misled by his predecessor, Speght, was determined,
Procrustes-like, to force every line in the Canterbury Tales to the same
Standard: but a precise number of Syllables was not the Object of our old
Poets. Lydgate, after the example of his Master, very fairly acknowledges,
"Well wot I much thing is wrong,
Falsely metryd both of short and long."
and Chaucer himself was persuaded, that the Rhyme might possibly be --
"Somewhat agreeable,
Though some Verse fail in a Syllable."


In short, the attention was directed to the Caesural pause, as the Grammarians
call it; which is carefully marked in every line of Lydgate: and Gascoigne in
his Certain notes of Instruction concerning the making of Verse, observes very
truly of Chaucer, "Whosoever do peruse and well consider his works, he shall
find, that although his lines are not always of one self same number of
Syllables, yet being read by one that has understanding, the longest verse
and that which has most syllables in it, will fall to the Ear correspondent
unto that which has fewest syllables in it: and likewise that which has in
it fewest syllables shall be found yet to consist of words that have such
natural sound, as may seem equal in length to a verse which has many more
syllables of lighter accents." 4to. 1575.



Land. empr. by R. Pynson. 1513. Fol. B. 2. Chapter 11. Our excellent friend Mr.
Hurd has born a noble testimony on our side of the question. "Shakespeare,
says this true Critic, owed the felicity of freedom from the bondage of
classical superstition, to the want of what is called the advantage of a
learned Education. -- This, as well as a vast superiority of Genius has
contributed to lift this astonishing man to the glory of being esteemed the
most original thinker and speaker, since the times of Homer." And hence
indisputably the amazing Variety of Style and Manner, unknown to all other
Writers: an argument of itself sufficient to emancipate Shakespeare from the
supposition of a Classical training. Yet, to be honest, one Imitation is
fastened on our Poet: which has been insisted upon likewise by Mr. Upton and
Mr. Whalley. You remember it in the famous Speech of Claudio in Measure for
Measure: "Ay, but to die and go we know not where! etc."

Most certainly the Ideas of a "Spirit bathing in fiery floods," of residing
"in thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice," or of being "imprisoned in the
viewless winds," are not original in our Author; but I am not sure, that they
came from the Platonic Hell of Virgil. -- -- "Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos: aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni."

The Monks also had their hot and their cold Hell, "the first is fire that
ever brenneth, and never gyveth light, says an old Homily: At the end of the
Festyuall, drawn out of Legenda aurea. 4to. 1508. it was first printed by
Caxton, 1483. "in help of such Clerks who excuse them for defaute of books,
and also by symplenes of conning."
-- The second is passing cold, that if a great hylle of fire were casten
therein, it should torn to ice." One of their Legends, well remembered in the
time of Shakespeare, gives us a Dialogue between a Bishop and a Soul tormented
in a piece of ice, which was brought to cure a great brenning heat in his
foot: On all souls day. p. 152.
take care you do not interpret this the Gout, for I remember M. Menage quotes
a Canon upon us, "Si quis dixerit Episcopum PODAGRA laborare, Anathema sit."

Another tells us of the Soul of a Monk fastened to a Rock, which the winds
were to blow about for a twelvemonth, and purge of it is Enormities. Indeed this
doctrine was before now introduced into poetic fiction, as you may see in a
Poem "where the Lover declares his pains to exceed far the pains of Hell,"
among the many miscellaneous ones subjoined to the Works of Surrey. Nay, a very
learned and inquisitive Brother-Antiquary, our Greek Professor, has observed
to me on the authority of Blefkenius, that this was the ancient opinion of the
inhabitants of Iceland; Islandiae Descript. Lugd. Bat. 1607. p. 46.
who were certainly very little read either in the Poet or the Philosopher.

After all, Shakespeare's curiosity might lead him to Translations. Gawin
Douglas really changes the Platonic Hell into the "punytion of Saulis in
Purgatory:" and it is observable, that when the Ghost informs Hamlet of his
Doom there, "Till the foul crimes done in his days of nature
Are burnt and purged away," --
the Expression is very similar to the Bishop's: I will give you his Version as
concisely as I can; "It is a nedeful thing to suffer panis and torment -- Sum
in the wyndis, Sum under the watter, and in the fire uthir Sum: -- thus the
money Vices -- "Contrakkit in the corpis be done away
And purgit" --
Sixte Book of Eneados. Fol. p. 191.

It seems however, that "Shakespeare himself in the Tempest has translated
some expressions of Virgil: witness the O Dea certe." I presume, we are here
directed to the passage, where Ferdinand says of Miranda, after hearing the
Songs of Ariel, -- -- "Most sure, the Goddess
On whom these airs attend."
and so very small Latin is sufficient for this formidable translation, that if
it be thought any honor to our Poet, I am loath to deprive him of it; but his
honor is not built on such a sandy foundation. Let us turn to a real
Translator, and examine whether the Idea might not be fully comprehended by an
English reader; supposing it necessarily borrowed from Virgil. Hexameters in
our own language are almost forgotten; we will quote therefore this time from
Stanyhurst: "O to thee, fair Virgin, what term may rightly be fitted?
Thy tongue, thy visage no mortal frayltie resembles.
-- No doubt, a Godesse!"
Edit. 1583.

Gabriel Harvey desired only to be "Epitaph'd, the Inventor of the English
Hexameter," and for a while every one would be halting on Roman feet; but the
ridicule of our Fellow- Collegian Hall, in one of his Satires, and the
reasoning of Daniel, in his Defense of Rhyme against Campion, presently reduced
us to our original Gothic.

But to come nearer the purpose, what will you say, if I can show you, that
Shakespeare, when, in the favorite phrase, he had a Latin Poet in his Eye,
most assuredly made use of a Translation.

Prospero in the Tempest begins the Address to his attendant Spirits, "Ye Elves
of Hills, of standing Lakes, and Groves."

This speech, Dr. Warburton rightly observes to be borrowed from Medea in Ovid:
and "it proves, says Mr. Holt, In some Remarks on the Tempest, published under
the quaint Title of "An attempt to rescue that aunciente English Poet and
Play-wrighte, Master Williaume Shakespeare, from the many Errors, faulsely
charged upon him by certain newfangled Wits." Land. 8vo. 1749. p. 81.
beyond contradiction, that Shakespeare was perfectly acquainted with the
Sentiments of the Ancients on the Subject of Enchantments." The original lines
are these. "Auraeque, and venti, montesque, amnesque, lacusque,
Diique omnes nemorum, diique omnes noctis adeste."
It happens however, that the translation by Arthur Golding His work is
dedicated to the Earl of Leicester in a long Epistle in verse, from Berwicke,
Apr. 20. 1567.
is by no means literal, and Shakespeare has closely followed it; "Ye Airs
and Winds; Ye Elves of Hills, of Brooks, of Woods alone,
Of standing Lakes, and of the Night approach ye everych one."


I think it is unnecessary to pursue this any further; especially as more
powerful arguments await us.

In the Merchant of Venice, the Jew, as an apology for his cruelty to Anthonio,
rehearses many Sympathies and Antipathies for which no reason can be rendered,
"Some love not a gaping Pig --
And others when a Bagpipe sings in the nose
Cannot contain their urine for affection."


This incident, Dr. Warburton supposes to be taken from a passage in Scaliger's
Exercitations against Cardan, "Narrabo tibi jocosam Sympathiam Reguli, Vasconis
Equitis: Is dum viveret audito Phormingis sono, urinam illico facere
cogebatur." And, proceeds the Doctor, to make this jocular story still more
ridiculous, Shakespeare, I suppose, translated Phorminx by Bagpipes.

Here we seem fairly caught; -- for Scaliger's work was never, as the term
goes, done into English. But luckily in an old translation from the French of
Peter Le Loier, entitled, A treatise of Specters, or strange Sights, Visions
and Apparitions appearing sensibly unto men, we have this identical Story from
Scaliger: and what is still more, a marginal Note gives us in all probability
the very fact alluded to, as well as the word of Shakespeare, "Another
Gentleman of this quality lived of late in Deuon near Excester, who could not
endure the playing on a Bagpipe." M. Bail has delineated the singular
character of our fantastical Author. His work was originally translated by one
Zachary Jones. My Edit. is in 4to. 1605. with an anonymous Dedication to the
King: the Devonshire Story was therefore well known in the time of Shakespeare.
-- -- The passage from Scaliger is likewise to be met with in The Optic Glass
of Humors, written, I believe, by T. Wombwell; and in several other places.


We may just add, as some observation has been made upon it, that Affection in
the sense of Sympathy was formerly technical; and so used by Lord Bacon, Sir
Kenelm Digby, and many other Writers.

A single word in Queen Catherine's Character of Wolsey, in Henry the 8th, is
brought by the Doctor as another argument for the learning of Shakespeare.

-- -- -- "He was a man
Of an unbounded Stomach, ever ranking
Himself with Princes; one that by Suggestion
Tied all the kingdom. Simony was fair play.
His own opinion was his law, in the presence
He would say untruths, and be ever double
Both in his words and meaning. He was never
But where he meant to ruin, pitiful.
His promises were, as he then was, mighty;
But his performance, as he now is, nothing.
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The Clergy ill example."
The word Suggestion, says the Critic, is here used with great propriety, and
seeming knowledge of the Latin tongue: and he proceeds to settle the sense of
it from the late Roman writers and their glossers. But Shakespeare's knowledge
was from Holingshed, whom he follows verbatim:

"This Cardinal was of a great stomach, for he compted himself equal with
princes, and by crafty Suggestion got into his hands innumerable treasure: he
forced little on simonie, and was not pitiful, and stood affectionate in his
own opinion: in open presence he would lie and seie untruth, and was double
both in speech and meaning: he would promise much and perform little: he was
vicious of his body, and gave the clergy evil example." Edit. 1587. p. 922.

Perhaps after this quotation, you may not think, that Sir Thomas Hanmer, who
reads Tyth'd -- instead of Tied all the kingdom, deserves quite so much of Dr.
Warburton's severity. -- Indisputably the passage, like every other in the
Speech, is intended to express the meaning of the parallel one in the
Chronicle: it cannot therefore be credited, that any man, when the Original was
produced, should still choose to defend a cant acceptance; and inform us,
perhaps, seriously, that in gaming language, from I know not what practice, to
tie is to equal! A sense of the word, as far as I have yet found, unknown to
our old Writers; and, if known, would not surely have been used in this place
by our Author.

But let us turn from conjecture to Shakespeare's authorities. Hall, from whom
the above description is copied by Holingshed, is very explicit in the demands
of the Cardinal: who having insolently told the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, "For
sothe I think, that half your substance were to little," assures them by way
of comfort at the end of his harangue, that upon an average the tithe should be
sufficient; "Sers, speak not to break that thing that is concluded, for some
shall not pay the tenth part, and some more." -- And again; "They said, the
Cardinal by Visitacions, making of Abbottes, probates of testamentes,
granting of faculties, licenses, and other pollyngs in his Courts legantines,
had made his threasore egall with the kings." Edit. 1548. p. 138. and 143.

Skeleton, His Poems are printed with the title of "Pithy, Pleasant, and
Profitable Works of Master Skeleton, Poet Laureate." -- But, says Mr. Cibber,
after several other Writers, "how or by what Interest he was made Laureat, or
whether it was a title he assumed to himself, cannot be determined." -- This is
an error pretty generally received, and it may be worth our while to remove it.

A facetious Author says somewhere, that a Poet Laureat, in the modern Idea, is
a Gentleman, who has an annual Stipend for reminding us of the Neva Year, and
the Birthday: but formerly a Poet Laureat was a real University Graduate.
"Skeleton wore the Laurel wreath
And past in schoels ye knoe."
says Churchyard in the Poem prefixed to his Works. And Master Caxton in his
Preface to The book of Eneydos, 1490. has a passage, which well deserves to be
quoted without abridgment: "I pray master John Skeleton, late created poet
laureate in the unyversite of Oxenforde, to oversee and correct this said
book, and taddresse and expowne whereas shall be found fault, to them that
shall require it; for him I know for suffycyent to expowne and English every
dyfficulte that is therein; for he has late translated the epystles of Tulle,
and the book of Dyodorus Syculus, and diverse other works, out of Latin into
Englisshe, not in rude and old langage, but in polyshed and ornate terms,
craftily, as he that has read Vyrgyle, Ouyde, Tullye, and all the other noble
poets and orators, to me unknowen: and also he has read the IX muses, and
understands their musicalle scyences, and to whom of them each science is
appropred: I suppose he has dronken of Elycons well!"

I find, from Mr. Baker's MSS. that our Laureat was admitted ad eundem at
Cambridge: "An. Dom. 1493. and Hen. 7. nono. Conceditur Jobi^ Skeleton Poet in
partibus transmarinis atque Oxon. Laurea ornato, ut apud nos eadem
decoraretur." And afterward, "An. 1504/5; Conceditur Jobi^ Skeleton, Poetae
Laureat. quod possit stare eodem gradu hic, quo stetit Oxoniis, and quod possit
uti habitu sibi concesso a Principe."

See likewise Dr. Knight's Life of Colet. p. 122. And Recherches sur les Poets
couronnez, par M. l' Abbe du Resnel, in the Memoires de Litterature. Vol. 10.
Paris. 4to. I736.


in his Why come ye not to Court, gives us, after his rambling manner, a
curious character of Wolsey: -- "By and by
He will drink us so dry
And suck us so nigh
That men shall scantly
Have penny or halpennye
God save his noble grace
And grant him a place
Endless to dwell
With the devil of hell
For and he were there
We nead never fear
Of the feendes black
For I undertake
He would so brag and crake
That he would than make
The devils to quake
To shudder and to shake
Like a fire drake
And with a cole rake
Bruise them on a brake
And bind them to a stake
And set hell on fire
At his own desire
He is such a grym sire!"
Edit. 1568.

Mr. Upton and some other Critics have thought it very scholar-like in Hamlet
to swear the Sentinels on a Sword: but this is for ever met with. For instance,
in the Passus primus of Pierce Plowman, "David in his days dubbed knights,
And did hem swear on her sword to serve truth ever."
And in Hieronymo, the common Butt of our Author, and the Wits of the time,
says Lorenzo to Pedringano, "Swear on this cross, that what thou say is true
--
But if I prove thee perjured and unjust,
This very sword, whereon thou took'st thine oath
Shall be the worker of thy Tragedy!"
We have therefore no occasion to go with Mr. Garrick as far as the French of
Brantome to illustrate this ceremony: Mr. Johnson's Edit. V. 8. p. 171.
a Gentleman, who will be always allowed the first Commentator on Shakespeare,
when he does not carry us beyond himself.

Mr. Upton however, in the next place, produces a passage from Henry the sixth,
whence he argues it to be very plain, that our Author had not only read
Cicero's Offices, but even more critically than many of the Editors: -- "This
Villain here
Being Captain of a Pinnace, threatens more
Than Bargulus, the strong Illyrian Pirate."
So the Wight, he observes with great exultation, is named by Cicero in the
Editions of Shakespeare's time, " Bargulus, Illyrius latro;" though the modern
Editors have chosen to call him Bardylis: -- "and thus I found it in two MSS."
-- And thus he might have found it in two Translations, before Shakespeare was
born. Robert Whytinton, 1533, calls him, "Bargulus, a Pirate upon the sea of
Illiry;" and Nicholas Grimald, about twenty years afterward, "Bargulus, the
Illyrian Robber." I have met with a Writer who tells us, that a Translation of
the Offices was printed by Caxton, in the year 1481: but such a book never
existed. It is a mistake for "Tullius of old age," by John Tiptoft, Earl of
Worcester.


But it had been easy to have checked Mr. Upton's exultation, by observing,
that Bargulus does not appear in the Quarto. -- Which also is the case with
some fragments of Latin verses, in the different Parts of this doubtful
performance.

It is scarcely worth mentioning, that two or three more Latin passages, which
are met with in our Author, are immediately transcribed from the Story or
Chronicle before him. Thus in Henry the fifth, whose right to the kingdom of
France is copiously demonstrated by the Archbishop. -- -- -- "There is no bar
To make against your Highness' claim to France,
But this which they produce from Pharamond:
In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant;
No Woman shall succeed in Salike land:
Which Salike land the French unjustly gloze
To be the realm of France, and Pharamond
The founder of this law and female bar.
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm,
That the land Salike lies in Germany,
Between the floods of Sala and of Elve, etc."
Archbishop Chichelie, says Holingshed, "did much inueie against the surmised
and false fained law Salike, which the Frenchmen allege ever against the kings
of England in bar of their just title to the crown of France. The very words
of that supposed law are these, In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant, that
is to say, Into the Salike land let not women succeed; which the French
glossers expound to be the realm of France, and that this law was made by King
Pharamond: whereas yet their own authors affirm, that the land Salike is in
Germany, between the rivers of Elbe and Sala, etc." p. 545.

It has lately been repeated from Mr. Guthrie's "Essay upon English Tragedy,"
that the Portrait of Macbeth's Wife is copied from Buchanan, "whose spirit, as
well as words, is translated into the Play of Shakespeare: and it had signified
nothing to have pored only on Holingshed for Facts." -- "Animus etiam, per se
ferox, prope quotidianis conviciis uxoris (quae omnium consiliorum ei erat
conscia) stimulabatur." -- This is the whole, that Buchanan says of the Lady,
and truly I see no more spirit in the Scotch, than in the English Chronicler.
"The words of the three weird Sisters also greatly encouraged him [to the
Murder of Duncan], but specially his wife lay sore upon him to attempt the
thing, as she that was very ambitious, brenning in unquenchable desire to bear
the name of a Queen." Edit. 1577. p. 244.

This part of Holingshed is an Abridgment of Johne Bellenden's translation of
the noble clerk, Hector Boece, imprinted at Edingburgh, in Fol. 1541. I will
give the passage as it is found there. "His wife impacient of lang tarry ( as
all women ar) specially quhare they are desirus of any purpos, gaif him great
artation to pursew the third weird, that sche micht be ane queen, calland him
often tymis febyl cowart and nocht desyrus of honouris, sen he durst not assailze
the thing with manheid and curage, quhilk is offerit to him be beniuolence of
fortoun. Howbeit sindry otheris hes assailzeit sic things before with may
terribyl jeopardyis, quhen they had not sic sickernes to succeid in the end of
their laubouris as he had." p. 173.

But we can demonstrate, that Shakespeare had not the Story from Buchanan.
According to him, the Weird-Sisters salute Macbeth, "Una Angusiae Thanum,
altera Moraviae, tertia Regem." -- Thane of Angus, and of Murray, etc. but
according to Holingshed, immediately from Bellenden, as it stands in
Shakespeare, "The first of them spoke and said, All hayle Makbeth Thane of
Glammis, -- the second of them said, Hayle Makbeth Thane of Cawder; but the
third said, All hayle Makbeth, that hereafter shall be king of Scotland." p.
243. "1 Witch. All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
2 Witch. All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
3 Witch. All hail, Macbeth! that shall be King hereafter!"
Here too our Poet found the equivocal Predictions, on which his Hero so
fatally depended. "He had learned of certain wysards, how that he ought to take
heed of Macduffe; -- and surely hereupon had he put Macduffe to death, but a
certain witch whom he had in great trust, had told, that he should never be
slain with man borne of any woman, nor vanquished till the Wood of Bernane came
to the Castle of Dunsinane." p. 244. And the Scene between Malcolm and Macduff
in the fourth act is almost literally taken from the Chronicle.

Macheth was certainly one of Shakespeare's latest Productions, and it might
possibly have been suggested to him by a little performance on the same subject
at Oxford, before King James, 1605. I will transcribe my notice of it from
Wake's Rex Platonicus: "Fabulae ansam dedit antiqua de Regia prosapia
historiola apud Scoto-Britannos celebrata, quae narrat tres olim Sibyllas
occurrisse duobus Scotiae proceribus, Macbetho and Banchoni, and illum
praedixisse Regem futurum, sed Regem nullum geniturum; hunc Regem non futurum,
sed Reges geniturum multos. Vaticinii veritatem rerum eventus comprobavit.
Banchonis enim e stirpe Potentissimus Jacobus oriundus." p. 29.

A stronger argument has been brought from the Plot of Hamlet. Dr. Gray and
Mr. Whalley assure us, that for this, Shakespeare must have read Saxo
Grammaticus in Latin, for no translation has been made into any modern
Language. But the truth is, he did not take it from Saxo at all; a Novel called
the History of Hamblet was his original: a fragment of which, in black Letter,
I have been favored with by a very curious and intelligent Gentleman, to whom
the lovers of Shakespeare will some time or other owe great obligations.

It has indeed been said, that "IF such an history exists, it is almost
impossible that any poet unacquainted with the Latin language (supposing his
perceptive faculties to have been ever so acute) could have caught the
characteristical madness of Hamlet, described by Saxo Grammaticus, "Falsitatis
enim ( Hamlethus) alienus haberi cupidus, ita astutiam veriloquio permiscebat,
ut nec dictis veracitas deesset, nec acuminis modus verorum judicio
proderetur." This is quoted, as it had been before, in Mr. Guthrie's Essay on
Tragedy, with a small variation from the Original. See Edit. Fol. 1644. p. 50.
so happily as it is delineated by Shakespeare."

Very luckily, our Fragment gives us a part of Hamlet's Speech to his Mother,
which sufficiently replies to this observation. -- "It was not without cause,
and just occasion, that my gestures, countenances and words seem to proceed
from a madman, and that I desire to have all men esteem me wholly deprived of
sense and reasonable understanding, because I am well assured, that he that
has made no conscience to kill his own brother, (accustomed to murders, and
allured with desire of government without control in his treasons) will not
spare to save himself with the like cruelty, in the blood, and flesh of the
loins of his brother, by him massacred: and therefore it is better for me to
feign madness then to use my right senses as nature has bestowed them upon
me, The bright shining clearnes thereof I am forced to hide under this shadow of
dissimulation, as the sun does her beams under some great cloud, when the
wether in summer time ouercasteth: the face of a mad man, serves to cover my
gallant countenance, and the gestures of a fool are fit for me, to the end that
guiding my self wisely therein I may preserve my life for the Danes and the
memory of my late deceased father, for that the desire of revenging his death
is so engraven in my heart, that if I dye not shortly, I hope to take such and
so great vengeance, that these Countries shall for ever speak thereof.
Nevertheless I must stay the time, means, and occasion, lest by making over
great have, I be now the cause of of mine own sudden ruin and overthrow, and
by that means, end, before I begin to effect my hearts desire: he that has
to do with a wicked, disloyal, cruel, and discourteous man, must use craft,
and politic inventions, such as a fine wit can best imagine, not to discover
his interprise: for seeing that by force I cannot effect my desire, reason
allows me by dissimulation, subtlety, and secret practices to proceed
therein."

But to put the matter out of all question, my communicative Friend
abovementioned, Mr. Capell, (for why should I not give myself the credit of
his name?) has been fortunate enough to procure from the Collection of the
Duke of Newcastle, a complete Copy of the History of Hamblet, which proves to
be a translation from the French of Belleforest; and he tells me, that "all the
chief incidents of the Play, and all the capital Characters are there in
embryo, after a rude and barbarous manner: sentiments indeed there are none,
that Shakespeare could borrow; nor any expression but one, which is, where
Hamlet kills Polonius behind the arras: in doing which he is made to cry out,
as in the Play, "a rat, a rat!" -- So much for Saxo Grammaticus!

It is scarcely conceivable, how industriously the puritanical Zeal of the last
age exerted itself in destroying, amongst better things, the innocent
amusements of the former. Numberless Tales and Poems are alluded to in old
Books, which are now perhaps no where to be found. Mr. Capell informs me, (and
he is in these matters, the most able of all men to give information) that our
Author appears to have been beholden to some Novels, which he has yet only
seen in French or Italian: but he adds, "to say they are not in some English
dress, prosaic or metrical, and perhaps with circumstances nearer to his
stories, is what I will not take upon me to do: nor indeed is it what I
believe; but rather the contrary, and that time and accident will bring some of
them to light, if not all." --

W. Painter, at the conclusion of the second Tome of his Palace of Pleasure,
1567, advertises the Reader, "because suddenly (contrary to expectation) this
Volume is risen to greater heap of leaves, I do omit for this present time
sundry Novels of merry devise, reserving the same to be joined with the rest of
an other part, wherein shall succeed the remnant of Bandello, specially such
(suffrable) as the learned French man Francois de Belleforrest has selected,
and the choysest done in the Italian. Some also out of Erizzo, Ser Giouanni
Florentine, Parabosco, Cynthio, Straparole, Sansouino, and the best liked out
of the Queen of Navarre, and other Authors. Take these in good part, with
those that have and shall come forth." -- But I am not able to find, that a
third Tome was ever published: and it is very probable, that the Interest of
his Booksellers, and more especially the prevailing Mode of the time, might
lead him afterward to print his sundry Novels separately. If this were the
case, it is no wonder, that such fugitive Pieces are recovered with difficulty,
when the two Tomes, which Tom. Rawlinson would have called justa Volumina, are
almost annihilated. Mr. Ames, who searched after books of this sort with the
utmost avidity, most certainly had not seen them, when he published his
Typographical Antiquities; as appears from his blunders about them: and
possibly I myself might have remained in the fame predicament, had I not been
favored with a Copy by my generous Friend, Mr. Lort.

Mr. Colman, in the Preface to his elegant Translation of Terence, has offered
some arguments for the Learning of Shakespeare, which have been retailed with
much confidence, since the appearance of Mr. Johnson's Edition.

"Besides the resemblance of particular passages scattered up and down in
different plays, it is well known, that the Comedy of Errors is in great
measure founded on the Menaechmi of Plautus; but I do not recollect ever to
have seen it observed, that the disguise of the Pedant in the Taming of the
Shrew, and his assuming the name and character of Vincentio, seem to be
evidently taken from the disguise of the Sycophanta in the Trinummus of the
said Author; This observation of Mr. Colman is quoted by his very ingenious
Colleague, Mr. Thornton, in his Translation of this Play: who further remarks,
in another part of it, that a passage in Romeo and Juliet, where Shakespeare
speaks of the contradiction in the nature of Love, is very much in the manner
of his Author: "Amor -- mores hominum moros and morosos efficit.
Minus placet quod suadetur, quod disuadetur placet.
Quom inopia'st, cupias, quando ejus copia'st, tum non velis. etc."
Which he translates with ease and elegance, -- -- "Love makes a man a fool,
Hard to be pleased. -- What you would persuade him to,
He likes not, and embraces that, from which
You would dissuade him. -- What there is a lack of,
That will he covet; -- when it is in his power,
He Will none on it." --
Act 3. Scene 3. Let us now turn to the passage in Shakespeare: -- "O brawling
Love! O loving hate! --
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Misshapen Chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Still-waking Sleep! that is not what it is!"
Shakespeare, I am sure, in the opinion of Mr. Thornton, did not want a Plautus
to teach him the workings of Nature; nor are his Parallelisms produced with any
such implication: but, I suppose, a peculiarity appears here in the manner of
expression, which however was extremely the humor of the Age. Every Sonetteer
characterises Love by contrarieties. Watson begins one of his Canzonets, "Love
is a sour delight, a sugared grief
A living death, an euer-dying life, etc."
Turberville makes Reason harangue against it in the same manner, "A fiery
Frost, a Flame that frozen is with Ise!
A heavy Burden light to bear! a Virtue fraught with Vice! etc."
Immediately from the Romaunt of the Rose, "Love it is an hateful pees
A free acquitaunce without reles --
An heavy burden light to bear
A wicked wawe away to wear:
And health full of malady
And charity full of envy --
A laughter that is weping aie
Rest that trauaileth night and day, etc."
This kind of Antithesis was very much the taste of the Provencal and Italian
Poets; perhaps it might be hinted by the Ode of Sappho preserved by Longinus:
Petrarch is full of it, "Pace non trovo, and non ho da far guerra,
Et temo, and spero, and ardo, and son un ghiaccio,
Et volo sopra'l cielo, and ghiaccio in terra,
Et nulla stringo, and tuttol mondo abbraccio. etc."
Sonetto 105. Sir Thomas Wyat gives a translation of this Sonnet, without any
notice of the Original, under the title of "Description of the contrarious
passions in a Lover." Amongst the Songs and Sonettes, by the Earl of Surrey,
and Others. 1574.
and there is a quotation from the Eunuch of Terence also, so familiarly
introduced into the Dialogue of the Taming of the Shrew, that I think it puts
the question of Shakespeare's having read the Roman Comic Poets in the
original language out of all doubt, Redime te captum, quam queas, minimo."

With respect to resemblances, I shall not trouble you any further. -- That the
Comedy of Errors is founded on the Menaechmi, it is notorious: nor is it less
so, that a Translation of it by W. W. perhaps William Warner, the Author of
Albions England, was extant in the time of Shakespeare; It was published in
4to. 1595. The Printer of Langbaine, p. 524. has accidently given the date,
1515, which has been copied implicitly by Gildon, Theobald, Cook, and several
others. Warner is now almost forgotten, yet the old Critics esteemed him one
of "our chief heroical Makers." -- Meres informs us, that he had "heard him
termed of the best wits of both our Universities, our English Homer."
though Mr. Upton, and some other advocates for his learning, have cautiously
dropped the mention of it. Besides this, (if indeed it were different) in the
Gesta Grayorum, the Christmas Revels of the Gray's-Inn Gentlemen, 1594, "a
Comedy of Errors like to Plautus his Menechmus was played by the Players." And
the same has been suspected to be the Subject of the goodly Comedy of
Plautus acted at Greenwich before the King and Queen in 1520; as we learn from
Hall and Holingshed: -- Riccoboni highly compliments the English on opening
their stage so well; but unfortunately, Cavendish in his Life of Wolsey, calls
it, an excellent Interlude in Latin. About the same time it was exhibited in
German at Nuremburgh, by the celebrated Hanssach the Shoemaker.

"But a character in the Taming of the Shrew is borrowed from the Trinummus,
and no translation of that was extant."

Mr. Colman indeed has been better employed: but if he had met with an old
Comedy, called Supposes, translated from Ariosto by George Gascoigne, His works
were first collected under the singular title of "A hundredth sundry Flowers
bound up in one small Poesy. Gathered partly (by translation) in the fine
outlandish Gardins of Euripides, Ovid, Petrarke, Ariosto, and others: and
partly by invention, out of our own fruitful Orchardes in England: yelding
sundry sweet savors of Tragical, Comical, and Moral Discourses, both
pleasant and profitable to the well smellyng noses of learned Readers." Black
Letter. 4to. no date.
he certainly would not have appealed to Plautus. Thence Shakespeare borrowed
this part of the Plot, (as well as some of the phraseology) though Theobald
pronounces it his own invention: there likewise he found the quaint name of
Petruchio. My young Master and his Man exchange habits and characters, and
persuade a Scenaese, as he is called, to personate the Father, exactly as in
the Taming of the Shrew, by the pretended danger of his coming from Sienna to
Ferrara, contrary to the order of the government.

Still, Shakespeare quotes a line from the Eunuch of Terence: by memory too,
and what is more, "purposely alters it, in order to bring the sense within the
compass of one line." -- This remark was previous to Mr. Johnsons; or
indisputably it would not have been made at all. -- "Our Author had this line
from Lilly; which I mention that it may not be brought as an argument of his
learning."

But how, cries an unprovoked Antagonist, can you take upon you to say, that he
had it from Lilly, and not from Terence? W. Kenrick's Review of Dr. Johnson's
Edit. of Shakespeare. 1765. 8vo. p. 105.
I will answer for Mr. Johnson, who is above answering for himself. -- Because
it is quoted as it appears in the Grammarian, and not as it appears in the
Poet. -- And thus we have done with the purposed alteration. Udall likewise in
his "Flowers for Latin speaking, gathered out of Terence, 1560," reduces the
passage to a single line, and subjoins a Translation.

We have hitherto supposed Shakespeare the Author of the Taming of the Shrew,
but his property in it is extremely disputable. I will give you my opinion, and
the reasons on which it is founded. I suppose then the present Play not
originally the work of Shakespeare, but restored by him to the Stage, with the
whole Induction of the Tinker, and some other occasional improvements;
especially in the Character of Petruchio. It is very obvious, that the
Induction and the Play were either the works of different hands, or written at
a great interval of time: the former is in our Author's best manner, and the
greater part of the latter in his worst, or even below it. Dr. Warburton
declares it to be certainly spurious: and without doubt, supposing it to have
been written by Shakespeare, it must have been one of his earliest productions;
yet it is not mentioned in the List of his Works by Meres in 1598.

I have met with a facetious piece of Sir John Harrington, printed in 1596,
(and possibly there may be an earlier Edition) called, The Metamorphosis of
Ajax, where I suspect an allusion to the old Play; "Read the book of Taming a
Shrew, which has made a number of us so perfect, that now every one can rule a
Shrew in our Country, save he that has her." -- I am aware, a modern Linguist
may object, that the word Book does not at present seem dramatick, but it was
once almost technically so: Gosson in his School of Abuse, containing a
pleasant inuective against Poets, Pipers, Players, Jesters, and such like
Caterpillars of a Commonwealth, 1579, mentions "two prose Books played at
the Belsauage;" and Hearne tells us in a Note at the end of William of
Worcester, that he had seen a MS. in the nature of a Play or Interlude,
entitled, the Book of Sir Thomas Moore." I know indeed, there is extant a very
old Poem, in black Letter, to which it might have been supposed Sir John
Harrington alluded, had he not spoken of the Discovery as a new one, and
recommended it as worthy the notice of his Countrymen: I am persuaded the
method in the old Bard will not be thought either. At the end of the sixth
Volume of Leland's Itinerary, we are favored by Mr. Hearne with a Macaronic
Poem on a Battle at Oxford between the Scholars and the Townsmen: on a line of
which, "Invadunt aulas bycheson cum forth geminantes," our Commentator very
wisely and gravely remarks: "Bycheson, id est, Son of a Byche, ut e Codice
Rawlinsoniano edidi. Eo nempe modo quo et olim Whoreson dixerunt pro Son of a
Whore. Exempla habemus cum alibi tum in libello quodam lepido and antiquo
(inter Codices Seldenianos in Bibl. Bodl.) qui inscribitur: The Wife lapped in
Morels Skyn: or the Taming of a Shrew. Ubi page 36. sic legimus: "They wrestled
together thus they two
So long that the clothes asunder went.
And to the ground he threw her tho,
That clean from the back her smock he rent.
In every hand a rod he gate,
And laid upon her a right good pace:
Asking of her what game was that,
And she cried out, Horeson, alas, alas."
Et page 42. Come down now in this seller so deep,
And Morels skin there shall you see:
With many a rod that has made me to weep,
When the blood ran down fast by my knee.
The Mother this beheld, and cried out, alas:
And ran out of the seller as she had been wood.
She came to the table where the company was,
And said out, Horeson, I will see thy heart blood."



And in fact, there is such an old anonymous Play in Mr. Pope's List. "A
pleasant conceited History, called, The Taming of a Shrew -- sundry times acted
by the Earl of Pembroke his Servants." Which seems to have been republished by
the Remains of that Company in 1607, when Shakespeare's copy appeared at the
Black-Friars or the Globe. -- Nor let this seem derogatory from the character
of our Poet. There is no reason to believe, that he wanted to claim the Play as
his own; it was not even printed 'till some years after his death: but he
merely revived it on his Stage as a Manager. -- Ravenscroft assures us, that
this was really the case with Titus Andronicus; which, it may be observed, has
not Shakespeare's name on the Title Page of the only Edition published in his
lifetime. Indeed, from every internal mark, I have not the least doubt but
this horrible Piece was originally written by the Author of the Lines thrown
into the mouth of the Player in Hamlet, and of the Tragedy of Locrine: which
likewise from some assistance perhaps given to his Friend, has been unjustly
and ignorantly charged upon Shakespeare.

But the sheet-anchor holds fast: Shakespeare himself has left some
Translations from Ovid. The Epistles, says One, of Paris and Helen give a
sufficient proof of his acquaintance with that poet; and it may be concluded,
says Another, that he was a competent judge of other Authors, who wrote in the
same language.

This has been the universal cry, from Mr. Pope himself to the Critics of
yesterday. Possibly, however, the Gentlemen will hesitate a moment, if we tell
them, that Shakespeare was not the Author of these Translations. Let them turn
to a forgotten book, by Thomas Heywood, called Britains Troy, printed by W.
Jaggard in 1609, Fol. and they will find these identical Epistles, "which being
so pertinent to our History, says Heywood, I thought necessary to translate."
-- How then came they ascribed to Shakespeare? We will tell them that likewise.
The same voluminous Writer published an Apology for Actors, 4to. 1612, and in
an Appendix directed to his new Printer Nic. Oaks, he accuses his old One,
Jaggard, of "taking the two Epistles of Paris to Helen, and Helen to Paris, and
printing them in a less volume under the name of Another: -- but he was much
offended with Master Jaggard, that altogether unknown to him, he had presumed
to make so bold with his Name." It may seem little matter of wonder, that the
name of Shakespeare should be borrowed for the benefit of the Bookseller; and
by the way, as probably for a Play as a Poem: but modern Critics may be
surprised perhaps at the complaint of John Hall, that "certain Chapters of the
Proverbes, translated by him into English meter, 1550, had before been untruely
entitled to be the doyngs of Master Thomas Sternhold."
In the same work of Heywood are all the other Translations, which have been
printed in the modern Editions of the Poems of Shakespeare.

You now hope for land: We have seen through little matters, but what must be
done with a whole book? -- In 1751, was reprinted "A compendious or brief
examination of certain ordinary complaints of diverse of our Countrymen in
these our days: which although they are in some part unjust and frivolous, yet
are they all by way of Dialogue thoroughly debated and discussed by William
Shakespeare, Gentleman." 8vo.

This extraordinary piece was originally published in 4to, 1581, and dedicated
by the Author, "To the most virtuous and learned Lady, his most dear and
sovereign Princess, Elizabeth; being enforced by her Majesty's late and
singular clemency in pardoning certain his unduetifull misdemeanour." And by
the modern Editors, to the late King; as "a Treatise composed by the most
extensive and fertile Genius, that ever any age or nation produced."

Here we join issue with the Writers of that excellent, though very unequal work,
the Biographia Britannica: I must however correct a remark in the Life of
Spenser, which is impotently levelled at the first Critics of the age. It is
observed from the correspondence of Spenser and Gabriel Harvey, that the Plan
of the Fairy Queen was laid, and part of it executed in 1580, three years
before the Gierusalemme Liberata was printed: "hence appears the impertinence
of all the apologies for his choice of Ariosto's manner in preference to
Tasso's!"

But the fact is not true with respect to Tasso. Manso and Niceron inform us,
that his Poem was published, though imperfectly, in 1574; and I myself can
assure the Biographer, that I have met with at least six other Editions,
preceding his date for it is first publication. I suspect, that Baillet is
accountable for this mistake: who in the Jugemens des Savans, Tom. 3. p. 399.
mentions no Edition previous to the 4to. Venice, 1583.

It is a question of long standing, whether a part of the Fairy Queen has been
lost, or whether the work was left unfinished: which may effectually be
answered by a single quotation. William Brown published some Poems in Fol.
1616, under the name of Britannia's Pastorals, "esteemed then, says Wood, to be
written in a sublime strain, and for subject amorous and very pleasing." -- In
one of which, Book 2. Song 1. he thus speaks of Spenser: "He sung the heroicke
Knights of Faiery land
In lines so elegant, of such command,
That had the Thracian played but half so well,
He had not left Eurydice in hell.
But e're he ended his melodious Song,
An host of Angels flew the clouds among,
And rapt this Swan from his attentive mates,
To make him one of their associates
In heavens fair Quire: where now he sings the praise
Of him that is the First and Last of Days."


It appears, that Brown was intimate with Drayton, Jonson, and Seldom, by
their poems prefixed to his Book: he had therefore good opportunities of being
acquainted with the fact abovementioned. Many of his Poems remain in MS. We
have in our Library at Emmanuel a Masque of his, presented at the Inner Temple,
Jan. 13. 1614. The subject is the Story of Ulysses and Circe.


if, say they, this piece could be written by our Poet, it would be absolutely
decisive in the dispute about his learning; for many quotations appear in it
from the Greek and Latin Classicks.

The concurring circumstances of the Name, and the Misdemeanor, which is
supposed to be the old Story of Deer-stealing, seem fairly to challenge our
Poet for the Author: but they hesitate. -- His claim may appear to be confuted
by the date 1581, when Shakespeare was only Seventeen, and the long experience,
which the Writer talks of. -- But I will not keep you in suspense: the book was
not written by Shakespeare.

Strype, in his Annals, calls the Author SOME learned Man, and this gave me the
first suspicion. I knew very well, that honest John (to use the language of Sir
Thomas Bodley) did not waste his time with such baggage books as Plays and
Poems; yet I must suppose, that he had heard of the name of Shakespeare. After
a while I met with the original Edition. Here in the Title Page, and at the end
of the Dedication, appear only the Initials, W. S. Gent. and presently I was
informed by Anthony Wood, that the book in question was written, not by William
Shakespeare, but by William Stafford, Gentleman: Fasti. 2d Edit. V. 1.208. --
It will be seen on turning to the former Edition, that the latter part of the
Paragraph belongs to another Stafford. -- I have since observed, that Wood is
not the first, who has given us the true Author of the Pamphlet.
which at once accounted for the Misdemeanour in the Dedication. For Stafford
had been concerned at that time, and was indeed afterward, as Camden and the
other Annalists inform us, with some of the conspirators against Elizabeth;
which he properly calls his unduetifull behavior.

I hope by this time, that any One open to conviction may be nearly satisfied;
and I will promise to give you on this head very little more trouble.

The justly celebrated Mr. Warton has favored us, in his Life of Dr.
Bathurst, with some hearsay particulars concerning Shakespeare from the papers
of Aubrey, which had been in the hands of Wood; and I ought not to suppress
them, as the last seems to make against my doctrine. They came originally, I
find, on consulting the MS. from one Mr. Beeston: and I am sure Mr. Warton,
whom I have the honor to call my Friend, and an Associate in the question,
will be in no pain about their credit.

"William Shakespeare's Father was a Butcher, -- while he was a Boy be
exercised his Father's trade, but when he killed a Calf, he would do it in a
high style, and make a speech. This William being inclined naturally to Poetry
and Acting, came to London, I guess, about eighteen, and was an Actor in one of
the Playhouses, and did act exceedingly well. He began early to make Essays in
dramatique Poetry. -- The humor of the Constable in the Midsummer Night's
Dream he happened to take at Crendon It was observed in the former Edition,
that this place is not met with in Spelman's Villare, or in Adam's Index; nor,
it might have been added, in the first and the last performance of this sort,
Speed's Tables, and Whatley's Gazetteer: perhaps, however, it may be meant
under the name of Crandon; -- but the inquiry is of no importance. -- It
should, I think, be written Credendon; though better Antiquaries than Aubrey have
acquiesced in the vulgar corruption.
in Bucks. -- I think, I have been told, that he left near three hundred pounds
to a Sister. -- He understood Latin pretty well, FOR he had been in his younger
years a Schoolmaster in the Country."

I will be short in my animadversions; and take them in their order.

The account of the Trade of the Family is not only contrary to all other
Tradition, but, as it may seem, to the instrument from the Herald's office, so
frequently reprinted. -- Shakespeare most certainly went to London, and
commenced Actor through necessity, not natural inclination. -- Nor have we any
reason to suppose, that he did act exceedingly well. Row tells us from the
information of Betterton, who was inquisitive into this point, and had very
early opportunities of Inquiry from Sir W. Davenant, that he was no
extraordinary Actor; and that the top of his performance was the Ghost in his
own Hamlet. Yet this Chef d' Oeuvre did not please: I will give you an original
stroke at it. Dr. Lodge, who was for ever pestering the town with Pamphlets,
published in the year 1596, Wits misery, and the Worlds madness, discovering
the Devils incarnat of this Age. 4to. One of these Devils is Hate-virtue, or
Sorrow for another man's good success, who, says the Doctor, is "a foul
lubber, and looks as pale as the Visard of the Ghost, which cried so miserably
at the Theater, like an Oister-wife, Hamlet revenge." Thus you see Mr. Holt's
supposed proof, in the Appendix to the late Edition, that Hamlet was written
after 1597, or perhaps 1602, will by no means hold good; whatever might be the
case of the particular passage on which it is founded.

Nor does it appear, that Shakespeare did begin early to make Essays in
Dramatique Poetry: the Arraignment of Paris, 1584, which has so often been
ascribed to him on the credit of Kirkman and Winstanley, These people, who were
the Curls of the last age, ascribe likewise to our Author those miserable
Performances, Mucidorus, and the Merry Devil of Edmonton.
was written by George Peele; and Shakespeare is not met with, even as an
Assistant, 'till at least seven years afterward. Mr. Pope asserts "The
troublesome Reign of King John," in 2 parts, 1611, to have been written by
Shakespeare and Rowley: -- which Edition is a mere Copy of another in black
Letter, 1591. But I find his assertion is somewhat to be doubted: for the old
Edition has no name of Author at all; and that of 1611, the Initials only, W.
Sh. in the Title Page.
-- Nash in his Epistle to the Gentlemen Students of both Universities,
prefixed to Greene's Arcadia, 4to. black Letter, recommends his Friend, Peele,
"as the chief supporter of pleasance now living, the Atlas of Poetry, and
primus Verborum artifex: whose first increase, the Arraignment of Paris, might
plead to their opinions his pregnant dexterity of wit and manifold variety of
invention." Peele seems to have been taken into the patronage of the Earl of
Northumberland about 1593, to whom he dedicates in that year, "The Honor ofthe
Garter, a Poem Gratulatorie -- the Firstling consecrated to his noble name." --
"He was esteemed, says Anthony Wood, a most noted Poet, 1579; but when or where
he died, I cannot tell, for so it is, and always has been, that most POETS die
poor, and consequently obscurely, and a hard matter it is to trace them to
their Graves. Claruit 1599." Ath. Oxon. Vol. 1. p. 300.

We had lately in a periodical Pamphlet, called, The Theatrical Review, a very
curious Letter under the name of George Peele, to one Master Henry Mark;
relative to a dispute between Shakespeare and Alleyn, which was compromised by
Ben. Jonson. -- "I never longed for thy company more than last night; we were
all very merry at the Globe, when Ned Alleyn did not scruple to affirm
pleasauntly to thy friend Will, that he had stolen his speech about the
excellency of acting in Hamlet his Tragedye, from conversaytions manifold,
which had passed between them, and opinions gyven by Alleyn touching that
subjecte. Shakespeare did not take this talk in good sort; but Jonson did put
an end to the strife with wittielie saying, this affair needs no
contentione: you stole it from Ned no doubt: do not marvel: have you not seen
him act times out of number? -- This is pretended to be printed from the
original MS. dated 1600; which agrees well enough with Wood's Claruit: but
unluckily, Peele was dead at least two years before. "As Anacreon died by the
Pot, says Meres, so George Peele by the Pox." Wit's Treasury, 1598. p. 286.




In the next place, unfortunately, there is neither such a Character as a
Constable in the Midsummer Night's Dream: nor was the three hundred pounds
Legacy to a Sister, but a Daughter.

And to close the whole, it is not possible, according to Aubrey himself, that
Shakespeare could have been some years a Schoolmaster in the Country,: on which
circumstance only the supposition of his learning is professedly founded. He
was not surely very young, when he was employed to kill Calves, and he
commenced Player about Eighteen! -- The truth is, that he left his Father, for
a Wife, a year sooner; and had at least two Children born at Stratford before
he retired from thence to London. It is therefore sufficiently clear, that poor
Anthony had too much reason for his character of Aubrey: You will find it in
his own Account of his Life, published by Hearne, which I would earnestly
recommend to any Hypochondriack;

"A pretender to Antiquities, roving, magotie-headed, and sometimes little
better than crased: and being exceedingly credulous, would stuff his many
Letters sent to A. W. with folliries and misinformations." p. 577.

Thus much for the Learning of Shakespeare with respect to the ancient
languages: indulge me with an observation or two on his supposed knowledge of
the modern ones, and I will promise to release you.

"It is evident, we have been told, that he was not unacquainted with the
Italian:" but let us inquire into the Evidence.

Certainly some Italian words and phrases appear in the Works of Shakespeare;
yet if we had nothing else to observe, their Orthography might lead us to
suspect them to be not of the Writer's importation. But we can go further, and
prove this.

When Pistol "chears up himself with ends of verse," he is only a copy of
Hanniball Gonsaga, who ranted on yielding himself a Prisoner to an English
Captain in the Low Countries, as you may read in an old Collection of Tales,
called Wits, Fits, and Fancies, By one Anthony Copley, 4to. black Letter, it
seems to have had many Editions: perhaps the last was in 1614. -- The first
piece of this sort, that I have met with, was printed by T. Berthelet, though not
mentioned by Ames, called, "Tales, and quick answers very merry and pleasant
to read." 4to. no date.
"Si Fortuna me tormenta,
Il speranza me contenta."
And Sir Richard Hawkins, in his Voyage to the South Sea, 1593, throws out the
same jingling Distich on the loss of his Pinnace.

"Master Page, sit; good Master Page, sit; Proface. What you want in meat,
we'll have in drink," says Justice Shallow's Fac totum, Davy, in the 2d Part of
Henry the 4th.

Proface, Sir Thomas Hanmer observes to be Italian from profaccia, much good
may it do you. Mr. Johnson rather thinks it a mistake for perforce. Sir Thomas
however is right; yet it is no argument for his Author's Italian knowledge.

Old Heywood, the Epigrammatist, addressed his Readers long before, "Readers,
read this thus: for Preface, Proface,
Much good do it you, the poor repast here, etc."
Works. Land. 4to. 1562. And Dekker in his Play, If it be not good, the Devil
is in it, (which is certainly true, for it is full of Devils) makes
Shackle-soule, in the character of Friar Rush, tempt his Brethren with "choice
of dishes" "To which proface; with blythe looks sit ye." Nor has it escaped
the quibbling manner of the Water-poet, in the title of a Poem prefixed to his
Praise of Hempseed, "A Preamble, Preatrot, Preagallop, Preapace, or Preface;
and Proface, my Masters, if your Stomachs serve."

But the Editors are not contented without coining Italian. "Rivo, says the
Drunkard," is an Expression of the madcap prince of Wales; which Sir Thomas
Hanmer corrects to Ribi, Drink away, or again, as it should rather be
translated. Dr. Warburton accedes to this; and Mr. Johnson has admitted it
into his Text; but with an observation, that Rivo might possibly be the cant of
English Taverns. And so indeed it was: it occurs frequently in Marston. Take a
quotation from his Comedy of What you will; 1607. "Music, Tobacco, Sack, and
Sleep,
The Tide of Sorrow backward keep:
If thou art sad at others fate,
Rivo, drink deep, give care the mate."
In Love's Labor lost, Boyet calls Don Armado, -- -- "A Spaniard that keeps
here in Court,
A Phantasme, a Monarcho." --
Here too Sir Thomas is willing to palm Italian upon us. We should read, it
seems, Mammuccio, a Mammet, or Puppet: Ital. Mammuccia. But the allusion is to
a fantastical Character of the time. -- "Popular applause, says Meres, does
nourish some, neither do they gape after any other thing, but vain praise and
glory, -- as in our age Peter Shakerlye of Paul's, and MONARCHO that lived
about the Court." p. 178.

I fancy, you will be satisfied with one more instance.

"Baccare, You are mavelous forward, quoth Gremio to Petruchio in the Taming
of the Shrew.

"But not so forward, says Mr. Theobald, as our Editors are indolent. This is a
stupid corruption of the press, that none of them have dived into. We must read
Baccalare, as Mr. Warburton acutely observed to me, by which the Italians mean,
Thou ignorant, presumptuous Man." -- "Properly indeed, adds Mr. Heath, a
graduated Scholar, but ironically and sarcastically, a pretender to
Scholarship."

This is admitted by the Editors and Critics of every Denomination. Yet the
word is neither wrong, nor Italian: it was an old proverbial one, used
frequently by John Heywood; who has made, what he pleases to call, Epigrams
upon it.

Take two of them, such as they are, "Backare, quoth Mortimer to his Sow:
"Went that Sow back at that biddyng trow you?"
"Backare, quoth Mortimer to his sow: se
Mortimers sow speakth as good latin as he."
Howel takes this from Heywood, in his Old Sawes and Adages: and Philpot
introduces it into the Proverbs collected by Camden.

We have but few observations concerning Shakespeare's knowledge of the Spanish
tongue. Dr. Gray indeed is willing to suppose, that the Plot of Romeo and
Juliet may be borrowed from a COMEDY of Lopes de Vega. But the Spaniard, who
was certainly acquainted with Bandello, has not only changed the Catastrophe,
but the names of the Characters. Neither Romeo nor Juliet; neither Montague nor
Capulet appears in this performance: and how came they to the knowledge of
Shakespeare? -- Nothing is more certain, than that he chiefly followed the
Translation by Painter from the French of Boisteau, and hence arise the
Deviations from Bandello's original Italian. It is remarked, that "Paris, though
in one place called Earl, is most commonly styled the County in this Play.
Shakespeare seems to have preferred, for some reason or other, the Italian
Conte to our Count: -- perhaps he took it from the old English Novel, from
which he is said to have taken his Plot." -- He certainly did so: Paris is
there first styled a young Earl, and afterward Count, Countee, and County;
according to the unsettled Orthography of the time.

The word however is frequently met with in other Writers; particularly in
Fairfax: "As when a Captain does besiege some hold,
Set in a marish or high on a hill,
And tries ways and wiles a thousand fold,
To bring the piece subjected to his will;
So fared the County with the Pagan bold. etc."
Godfrey of Bulloigne. Book 7. St. 90. "Fairfax, says Mr. Hume, has translated
Tasso with an elegance and ease, and at the same time with an exactness, which
for that age are surprising. Each line in the original is faithfully rendered
by a correspondent line in the translation." The former part of this character
is extremely true; but the latter not quite so. In the Book above-quoted Tasso
and Fairfax do not even agree in the Number of Stanza's.


It seems however from a passage in Ames's Typographical Antiquities, that
Painter was not the only Translator of this popular Story: and it is possible
therefore, that Shakespeare might have other assistance.

In the Induction to the Taming of the Shrew, the Tinker attempts to talk
Spanish: and consequently the Author himself was acquainted with it, "Paucus
pallabris, let the World slide, Sessa." But this is a burlesque on Hieronymo;
the piece of Bombast, that I have mentioned to you before: "What new device
have they devised, trow?
Pocas pallabras, etc. --


Mr. Whalley tells us, "the Author of this piece has the happiness to be at
this time unknown, the remembrance of him having perished with himself:"
Philips and others ascribe it to one William Smith: but I take this opportunity
of informing him, that it was written by Thomas Kyd; if he will accept the
authority of his Contemporary, Heywood.

More has been said concerning Shakespeare's acquaintance with the French
language. In the Play of Henry the fifth, we have a whole Scene in it: and in
other places it occurs familiarly in the Dialogue.

We may observe in general, that the early Editions have not half the quantity;
and every sentence, or rather every word most ridiculously blundered. These,
for several reasons, could not possibly be published by the Author; Every
writer on Shakespeare has expressed his astonishment, that his author was not
solicitous to secure his Fame by a correct Edition of his performances. This
matter is not understood. When a Poet was connected with a particular
Playhouse, he constantly sold his Works to the Company, and it was their
interest to keep them from a number of Rivals. A favorite Piece, as Heywood
informs us, only got into print, when it was copied by the ear, "for a double
sale would bring on a supicion of honesty." Shakespeare therefore himself
published nothing in the Drama: when he left the Stage, his copies remained
with his Fellow-Managers, Heminge and Condell; who at their own retirement,
about seven years after the death of the Author, gave the world the Edition now
known by the name of the first Folio; and call the previous publications
"stolen and surreptitious, maimed and deformed by the frauds and stealths of
injurious impostors." But this was printed from the Playhouse Copies; which in
a series of years had been frequently altered through convenience, caprice, or
ignorance. We have a sufficient instance of the liberties taken by the Actors,
in an old pamphlet, by Nash, called Lenten Stuff, with the Praise of the red
Herring, 4to. 1599. where he assures us, that in a Play of his, called the Isle
of Dogs, "four acts, without his consent, or the least guess of his drift or
scope, were supplied by the Players."

This however was not his first quarrel with them. In the Epistle prefixed to
Greene's Arcadia, which I have quoted before, Tom. has a lash at some "vain
glorious Tragedians," and very plainly at Shakespeare in particular; which will
serve for an answer to an observation of Mr. Pope, that had almost been
forgotten: "It was thought a praise to Shakespeare, that he scarce ever blotted
a line: -- I believe the common opinion of his want of learning proceeded from
no better ground. This too might be thought a praise by some." -- But hear
Nash, who was far from praising: "I leave all these to the mercy of their
Mother Tongue, that feed on naught but the crumbs that fall from the
Translator's trencher. -- That could scarcely Latinize their neck verse if they
should have need, yet English Seneca read by Candlelight yields many good
sentences -- he will afford you whole Hamlets, I should say, Handfuls of
tragical speeches." -- I cannot determine exactly when this Epistle was first
published; but, I fancy, it will carry the original Hamlet somewhat further
back than we have hitherto done: and it may be observed, that the oldest Copy
now extant is said to be "Enlarged to almost as much again as it was." Gabriel
Harvey printed at the end of the year 1592, "Four Letters and certain
Sonnetts, especially touching Robert Green:" in one of which his Arcadia is
mentioned. Now Nash's Epistle must have been previous to these, as Gabriel is
quoted in it with applause; and the Four Letters were the beginning of a
quarrel. Nash replied, in "Strange news of the intercepting certain Letters,
and a Convoy of Verses, as they were going privilie to victual the Low
Countries, 1593." Harvey rejoined the same year in "Pierce's Supererogation, or
a new praise of the old Ass." And Nash again, in "Have with you to
Saffron-walden, or Gabriell Harvey's hunt is up; containing a full answer to
the eldest Son of the halter-maker. 1596."

Dr. Lodge calls Nash our true English Aretine: and John Tailor, in his Kicksey
Winsey, or a Lerry Come-twang, even makes an oath "by sweet Satyricke Nash his
urne." -- He died before 1606, as appears from an old Comedy, called, "The
return from Parnassus."


and it is extremely probable, that the French ribaldry was at first inserted
by a different hand, as the many additions most certainly were after he had
left the Stage. -- Indeed, every friend to his memory will not easily believe,
that he was acquainted with the Scene between Catharine and the old
Gentlewoman; or surely he would not have admitted such obscenity and nonsense.

Mr. Hawkins, in the Appendix to Mr. Johnson's Edition, has an ingenious
observation to prove, that Shakespeare, supposing the French to be his, had
very little knowledge of the language.

"Est-il impossible d'eschapper la force de ton Bras?" says a Frenchman. --
"Brass, cur?" replies Pistol.

"Almost any one knows, that the French word Bras is pronounced Brau; and what
resemblance of sound does this bear to Brass?" --

Mr. Johnson makes a doubt, whether the pronunciation of the French language
may not be changed, since Shakespeare's time, "if not, says he, it may be
suspected that some other man wrote the French scenes:" but this does not
appear to be the case, at least in this termination, from the rules of the
Grammarians, or the practice of the Poets. I am certain of the former from the
French Alphabeth of De la Mothe, Land. 1592, 8vo.
and the Orthoepia Gallica of John Eliot; Land. 1593. 4to. Eliot is almost the
only witty Grammarian, that I have had the fortune to meet with. In his Epistle
prefatory to the Gentle Doctors of Gaul, he cries out for persecution, very
like Jack in that most poignant of Satires, the Tale of a Tub, "I pray you be
ready quickly to cavil at my book, I beseech you heartily calumniate my
doings with speed, I request you humbly control my method as soon as you
may, I earnestly entreat you hiss at my inventions, etc."
and of the latter from the Rhymes of Marot, Ronsard, and Du Bartas. --
Connections of this kind were very common. Shakespeare himself assisted Ben.
Jonson in his Sejanus, as it was originally written; and Fletcher in his Two
noble Kinsmen.

But what if the French scene were occasionally introduced into every Play on
this Subject? and perhaps there were more than one before our Poet's. -- In
Pierce Penilesse his Supplication to the Devil, 4to. 1592. (which, it seems,
from the Epistle to the Printer, was not the first Edition,) the Author, Nash,
exclaims, "What a glorious thing it is to have Henry the fifth represented on
the Stage leading the French King prisoner, and forcing both him and the
Dolphin to swear fealty!" -- And it appears from the Jests of the famous
Comedian, Tarlton, 4to. 1611. that he had been particularly celebrated in the
Part of the Clown in Henry the fifth; but no such Character exists in the Play
of Shakespeare. -- Henry the sixth has ever been doubted; and a passage in the
above-quoted piece of Nash may give us reason to believe, it was previous to
our Author. "How would it have joyed brave Talbot (the terror of the French) to
think that after he had lain two hundred year in his Toomb, he should triumph
again on the Stage; and have his bones new embalmed with the tears of ten
thousand spectators at least (at several times) who in the Tragedian that
represents his person, imagine they behold him fresh bleeding." -- I have no
doubt but Henry the sixth had the same Author with Edward the third, which has
been recovered to the world in Mr. Capell's Prolusions.

It has been observed, that the Giant of Rabelais is sometimes alluded to by
Shakespeare: and in his time no translation was extant. -- But the Story was in
every one's hand.

In a Letter by one Laneham, or Langham, for the name is written differently,
It is indeed of no importance, but I suspect the former to be right, as I find
it corrupted afterward to Lanam and Lanum.
concerning the Entertainment at Killingwoorth Castle, printed 1575, we have a
list of the vulgar Romances of the age, "King Arthurz book, Huon of Burdeaus,
Friar Rous, Howleglass, and GARGANTUA. Meres This Author by a pleasant mistake
in some sensible Conjectures on Shakespeare lately printed at Oxford, is quoted
by the name of Master. Perhaps the Title Page was imperfect; it runs thus
"Palladis Tamia. Wits Treasury. Being the second part of Wits Commonwealth, By
Francis Meres Master of Arts of both Universities."

I am glad out of gratitude to this man, who has been of frequent service to
me, that I am enabled to perfect Wood's account of him; from the assistance of
our Master's very accurate List of Graduates, (which it would do honor to the
University to print at the public expense) and the kind information of a
Friend from the Register of his Parish: -- -- He was originally of
Pembroke-Hall, B. A. in 1587, and M. A. 1591. About 1602 he became Rector of
Wing in Rutland; and died there, 1646, in the 81st year of his Age.


mentions him as equally hurtful to young minds with the Four Sons of Aymon,
and the Seven Champions. And John Tailor has him likewise in his catalogue of
Authors, prefixed to Sir Gregory Nonsense. I have quoted many pieces of John
Tailor, but it was impossible to give their original dates. He may be traced as
an Author for more than half a Century. His Works were collected in Folio,
1630. but many were printed afterward; I will mention one for the Humor of the
Title. "Drink and welcome, or the famous History of the most part of Drinks
in use in Great Britain and Ireland; with an especial Declaration of the
Potency, Virtue, and Operation of our English Ale: with a description of all
sorts of Waters, from the Ocean Sea to the Tears of a Woman. 4to. 1633." -- In
Wits Merriment, or Lusty Drollery, 1656. we have an "Epitaph on John Tailor,
who was born in the City of Gloucester, and died in Phoenix Alley, in the 75
year of his age; you may find him, if the worms have not devoured him, in
Covent Garden Churchyard." p. 130. -- He died about two years before.


But to come to a conclusion, I will give you an irrefragable argument, that
Shakespeare did not understand two very common words in the French and Latin
languages.

According to the Articles of agreement between the Conqueror Henry and the
King of France, the latter was to style the former, (in the corrected French of
the modern Editions,) "Nostre tres cher filz Henry Roy d' Angleterre; and in
Latin, Praeclarissimus Filius, etc." What, says Dr. Warburton, is tres cher in
French, praeclarissimus in Latin! we should read praecarissimus. -- This
appears to be exceedingly true; but how came the blunder? it is a typographical
one in Holingshed, which Shakespeare copied; but must indisputably have
corrected, had he been acquainted with the languages. -- "Our said Father,
during his life, shall name, call, and write us in French in this manner: Nostre
tres chier filz, Henry Roy d' Engleterre -- and in Latin in this manner,
Praeclarissimus filius noster." Edit 1587. p. 574.

To corroborate this instance, let me observe to you, though it be nothing
further to the purpose, that another error of the same kind has been the
source of a mistake in an historical passage of our Author; which has
ridiculously troubled the Critics.

Richard the third Some inquiry has been made for the first Performers of the
capital Characters in Shakespeare.

We learn, that Burbage, the alter Roscius of Camden, was the original Richard,
from a passage in the Poems of Bishop Corbet; who introduces his Host at
Bosworth describing the Battle, "But when he would have said King Richard died,
And called a Horse, a Horse, he Burbage cried."


The Play on this subject mentioned by Sir John Harrington in his Apology for
Poetry, 1591, and sometimes mistaken for Shakespeare's, was a Latin one,
written by Dr. Leg; and acted at St. John's in our University. some years
before 1588, the date of the Copy in the Museum. This appears from a better MS.
in our Library at Emmanuel, with the names of the original Performers.

It is evident from a passage in Camden's Annals, that there was an old Play
likewise on the subject of Richard the second; but I know not in what language.
Sir Gelley Merrick, who was concerned in the harebrained business of the Earl
of Essex, and was hanged for it with the ingenious Cuffe in 1601, is accused
amongst other things, "quod exoletam Tragoediam de tragica abdicatione Regis
Ricardi secundi in publico Theatro coram Conjuratis data pecunia agi curasset."


harangues his army before the Battle of Bosworth, "Remember whom ye are to
cope withal,
A sort of vagabonds, of rascals, runaways --
And who does lead them but a paltry fellow
Long kept in Britain at our Mother's cost,
A milksop, etc." --


"Our Mother," Mr. Theobald perceives to be wrong, and Henry was somewhere
secreted on the Continent: he reads therefore, and all the Editors after him,
"Long kept in Bretague at his mother's cost."

But give me leave to transcribe a few more lines from Holingshed, and you will
find at once, that Shakespeare had been there before me: -- "Ye see further,
how a company of traitors, thieves, outlaws and runnagates be aiders and
partakers of his feat and enterprise. -- And to begin with the earl of Richmond
captain of this rebellion, he is a Welsh milksop -- brought up by my Moother's
means and mine, like a captive in a close cage in the court of Francis duke of
Britain." p. 756.

Holingshed copies this verbatim from his Brother Chronicler Hall, Edit. 1548.
fol. 54. but his Printer has given us by accident the word Moother instead of
Brother; as it is in the Original, and ought to be in Shakespeare. I cannot
take my leave of Holingshed without clearing up a difficulty, which has
puzzled his Biographers. Nicholson and other Writers have supposed him a
Clergyman. Tanner goes further, and tells us, that he was educated at
Cambridge, and actually took the Degree of M. A. in 1544. -- Yet it appears by
his Will, printed by Hearne, that at the end of life he was only a Steward, or
a Servant in some capacity or other, to Thomas Burdett Esquire of Bromcote in
Warwickshire. -- These things Dr. Campbell could not reconcile. The truth is,
we have no claim to the education of the Chronicler: the M. A. in 1544, was not
Raphael, but one Ottiwell Holingshed, who was afterward named by the Founder
one of the first Fellows of Trinity College.


I hope, my good Friend, you have by this time acquitted our great Poet of all
piratical depredations on the Ancients, and are ready to receive my Conclusion.
-- He remembered perhaps enough of his schoolboy learning to put the Hig, hag,
hog, into the mouth of Sir Hugh Evans; and might pick up in the Writers of the
time, Ascham in the Epistle prefixed to his Toxophilus, 1571, observes of them,
that "Many English writers, usinge strange words, as Lattine, French, and
Italian, do make all things dark and hard. Ones, says he, I communed with a
man which reasoned the English tongue to be enriched and increased thereby,
saying: Who will not praise that feast, where a man shall drink at a dinner
both wine, ale, and beer? Truly (quoth I) they be al good, every one taken by
himself alone, but if you put Malmesye, and sack, red wine and white, ale
and beer, and al in one pot, you shall make a drink neither easy to be
known, nor yet wholesome for the body."
or the course of his conversation a familiar phrase or two of French or
Italian: but his Studies were most demonstratively confined to Nature and his
own Language.

In the course of this disquisition, you have often smiled at "all such
reading, as was never read:" and possibly I may have indulged it too far: but
it is the reading necessary for a Comment on Shakespeare. Those who apply
solely to the Ancients for this purpose, may with equal wisdom study the TALMUD
for an Exposition of TRISTRAM SHANDY. Nothing but an intimate acquaintance with
the Writers of the time, who are frequently of no other value, can point out
his allusions, and ascertain his Phraseology. The Reformers of his Text are for
ever equally positive, and equally wrong. The Cant of the Age, a provincial
Expression, an obscure Proverb, an obsolete Custom, a Hint at a Person or a
Fact no longer remembered, has continually defeated the best of our Guessers:
You must not suppose me to speak at random, when I assure you, that from some
forgotten book or other, I can demonstrate this to you in many hundred Places;
and I almost wish, that I had not been persuaded into a different Employment.

Though I have as much of the Natale Solum about me, as any man whatsoever; yet,
I own, the Primrose Path is still more pleasing than the Fosse or the Watling
Street: "Age cannot wither it, nor custom stale
It Is infinite variety." --
And when I am fairly rid of the Dust of topographical Antiquity, which has
continued much longer about me than I expected; you may very probably be
troubled again with the ever fruitful Subject of SHAKESPEARE and his
COMMENTATORS.

FINIS.

