REMARKS ON THE USES OF THE DEFINITIVE ARTICLE IN THE GREEK TEXT OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT.

REMARKS ON THE USES OF THE DEFINITIVE ARTICLE IN THE GREEK TEXT OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT; CONTAINING MANY NEW PROOFS OF THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST, FROM PASSAGES,
WHICH ARE WRONGLY TRANSLATED IN THE COMMON ENGLISH VERSION.

BY GRANVILLE SHARP, ESQUIRE.

TO WHICH IS ADDED A PLAIN MATTER-OF-FACT ARGUMENT FOR THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST,
BY THE EDITOR.

DURHAM: PRINTED AND SOLD BY L. PENNINGTON. 1798.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE first part of the following Remarks on the uses of the definitive article
in the Greek Text of the New Testament was printed in the second Fasciculus of
the Museum Oxoniense. A Supplement to the Remarks was at the same time promised
to be published in the third Fasciculus of the Museum. But as many learned
friends concurred with the Editor in thinking that the Remarks contain a very
valuable accession to the evidences of Christ's divinity, he was unwilling to
detain the Supplement, which exemplifies the Rules of the Remarks, any longer
from the public, and has therefore prevailed on Mr Sharp to permit him to
publish it with the Remarks. He earnestly recommends them both to Mr
Wakefield's most deliberate consideration.

To Mr Sharp's Remarks and Supplement he has subjoined a plain historical proof
of the divinity of Christ founded on Christ's own testimony of himself attested
and interpreted by his living witnesses and enemies, the Jews, -- on the
evidence of his trial and crucifixion, and on the most explicit declarations of
the Apostles after the Resurrection of Christ. What appeared to him to be a
substantial and unanswerable argument, he has, in this little exercise on the
subject, endeavored to render an easy and popular proof, of our Savior's
divinity. It was printed separately for the use of the unlearned part of his
parishioners, and is subjoined to this treatise for the convenience of other
unlearned readers, and such as may not have much considered the subject.

DURHAM, Nov. 1798.
CONTENTS.
RULE I. When two personal nouns, of the same cafe, are connected by the
copulative (...), if the former has the definitive article, and the latter has
not, they both relate to the same person. page 4 EXAMPLES.
1. (...), 5 2. (...), 22 3. (...), 23 4. (...), 26 5. (...), 29 30 6. (...),
34 7. (...), 34 8. (...), 35
Common Version.
1. The God and Father of our Lord. 2. To God, even the Father.
Corrected Version.
3. In the kingdom of Christ, even of God. 4. According to the grace of Jefus
Christ, our God and Lord. 5. Before Jesus Christ, the God and Lord; or, our God
and Lord; for the definitive article has sometimes the power of a possessive
pronoun. 6. The glorious appearing of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ.
7. Through the righteousness of Jesus Christ, our God and Savior. 8. And
denying our only Master, God, and Lord, Jesus Christ.
Common Version.
3. In the kingdom of Christ, and of God. 4. According to the grace of our God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ. 5. Before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 6. The
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. 7. Through
the righteousness of God, and of our Savior, Jesus Christ. 8. And denying the
only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
RULE II. If both nouns have the article, but not the copulative, they relate
to the same person, page 7 RULE III. If the first has the article, and the
second has not, and there is no copulative, they relate also to the same
person, 9 RULE IV. If the nouns are not personal, they relate to different
things, or qualities, 10 RULE V. If personal nouns, of the same case, are
connected by the copulative, and the first has not the article, they relate to
different persons, 11 RULE VI. If they are connected by the copulative, and
both have the article, they relate also to different persons, 12
A LETTER TO THE REV. MR -- CONCERNING THE USES OF THE GREEK ARTICLE (...) IN
THE NEW TESTAMENT.
Old Jewry, London 10th June, 1778. DEAR SIR,
WHEN I look upon the date of your last obliging letter, I am much ashamed that
I have so long neglected to acknowledge the receipt of it. The truth is, I
began a letter a few days afterward; but recollecting that I had written on
the same subject (viz. the use of the Greek article (...) and copulative (...))
to a very learned friend, at a great distance in the country, I was willing to
wait for his answer, lest it should oblige me to make any alterations in my
rules; and so, indeed, it (...) proved; for he objected to my first rule (as it
was then stated) and has cited several exceptions to it, which (...) thought
sufficient to set it entirely aside: but this, I am convinced, is going too
far, and would be (...) injury to truth. The use therefore which I have made of
my friend's objections, has been, to correct my rule, and add to it such
limitations as might include the several exceptions, cited by my learned
friend, as well as others, that are similar to them.

The waiting for my friend's answer and the necessary corrections in
consequence of it, together with a variety of other engagements, has prevented
me from complying with your request so soon as I could have wished; but I shall
now submit to your consideration and candor, the rules in question; and beg
that you will be pleased to favor me with whatever examples may occur in the
course of your reading, either as exceptions to invalidate the first rule, or
as proofs to establish and confirm it. The reasons of my recommending the first
rule more particularly to your attention, is, because it is of much more
consequence than any of the rest, as it will enable us (if the truth of it be
admitted) to correct the translation of several important texts in the present
English version of the New Testament, in favor of a fundamental article of our
church, which has, of late, been much opposed and traduced, I mean the belief
that our Lord Jesus Christ is truly God.

RULE I.
When the copulative (...) connects two nouns of the same case [viz. nouns
(either substantive, or adjective; or participles) of personal description
respecting office, dignity, affinity, or connection, and attributes, properties
or qualities good or ill] if the article (...), or any of it is cases, preceeds
the first of the said nouns or participles, and is not repeated before the
second noun or participle, the latter always relates to the same person that is
expressed or described by the first noun or participle; i. e. it denotes a
further description of the first named person, as -- (...) Matt. xii. 22. And
again (...). 2 Cor. i. 3. This last sentence contains two examples of the first
rule. See also in 2 Cor. xi. 31, (...) etc. Also in Ephesians. vi. 21, (...). Also in
Heb. iii. 1, (...), etc. See also in 2 Pet. ii. 20, -- (...), etc. And again in
2 Pet. iii. 2, -- (...). And again in 2 Pet iii. 18, -- (...). Also in
Philippians iv. 20, -- (...), etc. In Rev. xvi. 15, -- (...), etc. And in Col.
ii. 2, -- (...), The distinction of persons mentioned in this sentence is
praserved by the insertion of the article (...) before (...), which had been
omitted before (...).
, (...), etc. And in 1 Thef. iii. 11, -- (...) This solemn ejaculation for the
divine direction is addressed jointly to the God and Father, and to our Lord
Jesus This text is clearly a supplication to Christ for providential
assistance; and being addressed to him jointly with God the Father, most
certainly amounts to supreme worship, because the direction of Providence
belongs to God alone: so that a prayer for it addressed to Christ, were he
merely a minister or dispenser of God's providence and not also truly God,
would be utterly unlawful; and more especially so, if such an inferior
dispenser of providence (one that was not truly God) was to be addressed
jointly with the heavenly Father; for that would be blasphemous.
; (so that here is good authority for offering up prayers to Christ, which some
have lately opposed) and the distinction of the persons is preserved (as in the
last example) by again inserting the article (...) before (...), which had been
omitted before (...). The apostle James also used the same mode of expression
-- (...), etc. James i. 27. And there are at least a dozen other places, viz.
(Romans xv. 6.1. Cor. xv. 24. Gal. i. 4. Ephesians. v. 20. Col. i. 3, and 12 Some
copies have not the words (...) in this twelfth verse, but only (...), in which
last case this verse affords an example only of the second rule.
and iii. 17. 1 These. i. 3. 1 These. iii. 13. 2 These. ii. 16. James iii. 9. Rev.
i. 6.) wherein "the God and Father" is mentioned exactly according to this
rule; and there is no exception or instance of the like mode of expression that
I know of, which necessarily requires a construction different from what is
here laid down; EXCEPT the nouns be proper names, or in the plural number; in
which cases there are many exceptions; though there are not wanting examples,
even of plural nouns, which are expressed exactly agreeable to this rule.

As the examples which I have annexed to my first rule consist of texts,
wherein the sense is so plain, that there can be no controversy concerning the
particular persons, to whom the several nouns are applicable, it will be
thought, I hope, that I have already cited a sufficient number of them to
authenticate and justify the rule. There are several other texts wherein the
mode of expression is exactly similar, and which therefore do necessarily
require a construction agreeable to the same rule, though the present English
verson has unhappily rendered them in a different sense, and has thereby
concealed from the mere English reader many striking proofs concerning the
Godhead ((...) Col. ii. 9.) of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The rules
which follow are intended only to illustrate the particularity of the several
sentences which fall under the first rule, by showing in other sentences, the
different senses that are occasioned by adding, omiting, or repeating the
article as well with the copulative as without it.

RULE, II.
A repetition of the article before the second noun, if the copulative be
omitted, will have the same effect and power: for it also denotes a further
description of the same person, property or thing, that is expressed by the
first noun; as in the following examples.

-- (...) Luke i. 47. -- (...), etc. Luke ii. 26. (...), John i. 29. (...),
John iv. 42. -- (...), John v. 23. (...), John vi. 27. This verse contains
three examples. (...), etc. John xx. 31. -- (...) The apostle, in this text,
expressly calls our Lord Jesus Christ " the Great SHEPHARD OF THE SHEEP,"
(...); and the apostle Peter entitles him "THE CHIEF SHEPHERD," -- (...) 1 Pet.
v. 4. which compare with Psaim xxiii. 1. "JEHOVAH is my SHEPHERD," and with
Isaiah xl. 9, 10, 11. "O Zion that brings good tidings," etc. say unto the
cities of Judah, Behold YOUR GOD! Behold the Lord JEHOVAH will come in mighty
(power), and HIS arm shall rule for him: behold HIS reward is with him, and HIS
work before him. HE, (i. e. the Lord JEHOVAH) " shall feed HIS flock like a
SHEPHERD: he shall gather the lambs with his arm," etc. etc. To explain this
still further, the prophet Ezekiel foretold that " all shall have one
Shepherd," Ezekiel xxxvii. 24. And Christ himself expressly acknowledged that
eminent pastoral character, saying I am the good Shepherd;' (...), and I know
MY sheep and am known of MINE,' (John x. 14.) And a little further (v. 27.) our
Lord mentions the true mark by which his flocks are known, viz. that of Hearing
his voice (compare with 95th psalm) My sheep (said our Lord) hear my voice, and
I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, etc. which
power of giving eternal life cannot be an attribute of any person that is not
truly God, and one with Jehovah, or the heavenly Father, as, in the 30th verse,
he is expressly declared to be, "I and my Father are one," (...), we are one;
in which brief expression, both the plurality and the unity of the two persons
are unquestionably asserted.
(...) etc. Heb. xiii. 20. This sentence also contains three examples.

(GENERAL EXCEPTION.)
Except when genitive cases depend on one another in succession, as (...), 2
Cor. iv. 3. And again (...) etc. Colos. ii. 2.

RULE, III.
And the omission of the copulative between two or more nouns (of the same
case) of personal description or application, even without the article before
the second noun, will have the same effect; viz. will denote a further
description of the same person, property or thing, that is expressed by the
first noun; as in the following examples.

(...), Romans ii. 19, 20.

(...), (...). In the modern printed editions the reading is (...), but in the
Complutensian and several of the oldest editions it is (...), as also in the
Alexandrian and other old MSS. as well as the ancient versions, and the
citations of the Fathers; for which see Wetstein's Testimony. Now compare this
expression ((...)) with 1 Pet. ii. 17. (...); and also with 2 Kings xvii. 35,
and 36. ye shall not fear (rendered by the seventy (...)) other gods; but
JEHOVAH, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt, etc. him shall ye fear.
(...)Ephesians. v. 20, 21. (...)etc. Tit. i. 1. (...), Here the command of Christ
is mentioned jointly with the command of God himself; which is a mode of
expression never used concerning any other man, but the Man Christ Jesus our
Lord " by whom are all things: (1 Cor. viii. 66. Hebrews i. 2. John i. 3. Col.
i. 16.) and "by whom all things consist." Col. i. 17.
(...), 1. Tim. i. 1.

RULE, IV.
Yet it is otherwise when the nouns are not of personal description, or
application; for then they denote distinct things or qualities, as (...). 1 Timothy i. 2. 2 Timothy i. 2. Titus i. 4. In all these three texts, and in 2 John 3,
there is a mannifest supplication made to Christ, jointly with God the Father,
for grace, mercy, and peace; all divine gifts: the supplications, therefore,
must necessarily be considered as acts of supreme worship to both.
See also 2 John 3, (...).

RULE, V.
And also when there is no article before the first noun, the insertion of the
copulative (...) before the next noun, or name, of the same case, denotes a
different person or thing from the first; as in the following examples.
(...)etc. James i. 1. (...). Ephesians. iv. 31. This last sentence contains four
examples of the fifth rule. (...). 2 Cor. i. 2. 1 Ephesians. i. 2. Gal. i. 3.
Philem. 3. (...). Ephesians. vi. 23. The supplications for grace and peace jointly
from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ in all these five texts
last cited, are so many unquestionable instances of prayer and supreme worship
to CHRIST, as being a free disposer of those divine gifts jointly with his
Almighty Father, agreeable to what I have already remarked above on 1 Thessalonians.
iii. 11, and Titus i. 1.


EXCEPT the numerical adjective (...) precedes the first noun, in which case
the copulative (...) will have the same effect that it has between two nouns
where only the first is preceded by the article, agreeable to the first rule,
as (...). Ephesians. iv. 6.

RULE VI.
And as the insertion of the copulative (...) between nouns of the same case
without articles (according to the fifth rule) denotes that the second noun
expresses a different person, thing, or quality from the preceding noun, so
likewise, the same effect attends the copulative, when each of the nouns are
preceded by articles; as in the following examples. -- (...). John i. 17.
(...). John ii. 22. -- (...). John xi. 44. (...). Col. ii. 2. -- (...). 2 Timothy
i. 5. -- (...). 1 Pet. iv. 11.

EXCEPT distinct and different actions are intended to be attributed to one and
the same person, in which case if the sentence is not expressed agreeable to
the three first rules, but appears as an exception to this sixth rule, or even
to the fifth, (for this exception relates to both rules) the context must
explain, or point out plainly the person to whom the two nouns relate, as in 1 Thessalonians. iii. 6, (...), etc. And also in John xx. 28, (...). If the two nouns
(viz. (...) and (...)) were the leading nominative substantives of a sentence,
they would express the descriptive qualities or dignities of two distinct
persons according to the sixth rule; but, in this last text, two distinct
divine characters are applied to one person only; for the context clearly
expresses to whom the words were addressed by Thomas; which perspicuity in the
address clearly proves, likewise, the futility of that gloss for which the
Arians and Socinians contend; viz. that Thomas could not mean that Christ was
his God, but only uttered, in his surprise, a solemn exclamation or ejaculation
to God. The text, however, expressly relates, that our Lord first addressed
himself to Thomas: (...) (that is without doubt, to JESUS) (...). So that both
these distinct titles (for they are plainly mentioned as distinct) were
manifestly addressed (...) to that one person Jesus, to whom Thomas replied, as
the text expressly informs us. The language is so plain, when the whole context
is considered, that the Socinian perversion of it is notorious. See also 1 Cor.
i. 24, -- (...), Example of the exception to the fifth rule.
and Acts ii. 36. There are also other examPles of this exception, which
equally prove that Christ is God, as (...). Example of the exception to the
sixth rule.
(...). Example of the exception to the sixth rule.
Rev. i. 17, 18.

These are the words of him whom John saw (...), with a two edged sword
proceeding out of his mouth; which was undoubtedly a representation of the
(...), or word of God, as this declaration alludes plainly to his death and
resurrection. (...). And again in the second chapter, ver. 8. (...) Example of
the exception to the sixth rule.
(and the same infallible mark of distinction is added, to prove which of the
divine persons is here to be understood) (...). Now though the explanation
which Grotius has given us of these titles ((...)) is certainly true when
applied to Christ, yet it does not appear to be the whole truth, or the full
meaning that ought to be attributed to these titles, either in the Revelation
or else where; for they have a manifest reference to the supreme titles of the
Almighty in the first chapter, and 8th verse, (which also contains examples of
this exception) (...). And in the 22d chapter, 13th verse, where these titles,
(...), are, manifestly by the context, to be understood as the titles of
Christ, we find them explained by these other titles (...), to which Grotius
has attributed a much inferior and less comprehensive meaning. (...). And as I
have shown in my Tract on the Law of Nature, etc. p. 270 and 271 that these
titles, " the first and the last," are ancient titles of Jehovah in the Old
Testament, to declare his eternal existence, there can be no just reason for
giving them an inferior sense, when they are applied to Christ, who was truly
Jehovah, as a variety of texts do demonstrate. [ Law of Nature, p. 248, to 345.]

Another example of the exception to the fifth rule occurs in the Rev. xx. 2,
-- (...). These are two different names or appellatives attributed (by the
explanatory words (...)) to the same Old Serpent.

THE END OF THE RULES.
The various uses of the article and copulative, expressed in the five last
rules and their exceptions, must amply illustrate, to every attentive reader,
the difference and particularity of those sentences which fall under the first
and principal rule; and therefore I may now proceed with more confidence to
point out several important corrections that ought to be made in our common
translation of the New Testament, if the several sentences, which fall under
the first rule, be duly weighed and considered; -- corrections which may be
fairly defended, I apprehend, by the authority of the several examples from
which these rules were formed.

EXAMPLES
Of sentences, which fall under the FIRST RULE, and are improperly rendered in
the English version.

Example I. 2 Pet, i. 1. -- (...). As the Article (...) is not repeated before
the next descriptive noun (...), it is manifest that both the nouns are to be
referred to one and the same person; and therefore, in order to turn it into an
intelligible English phrase, the proper name to which the two descriptive nouns
refer ought to be placed first, as By the righteousness of Jesus Christ OUR
GOD, and our SAVIOR. Among the various readings collected by Curcellaeus, it
appears, that, in some copies, the word (...) was not repeated after (...), and
I have by me twenty different editions (including those of Erasmus, Stephens,
Dr. Mill, Bengelius, etc.) which follow that reading; viz. (...); in which case
a literal rendering into English will sufficiently express the sense of the
Greek, without transposing the proper name, viz. Through the righteousness of
our God and Savior Jesus Christ. The sense and purport, however, is exactly
the same in both the readings, and, in the old English editions, has generally
been expressed in the terms required by my first rule; viz. In the
righteousness that comes of our God and Savior Jesu Christ (fol. edit.
1549.) -- Through the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ. (12mo
edit. 1595.) -- By the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ. (4to
edit. 1599.) -- The righteousness of Jesus Christ our God and Savior. (margin
of the folio, edit. 1611.) And even in the margin of our present version, the
proper reading is inserted, of our God and Savior, manifestly referring both
titles to one person. The learned Beza also remarks on the words of this text,
Ista necesse est conjunctim legamus, quia unicus est articulus, ut copiosius
diximus Tit. ii. 13. Itaque continet etiam hic locus manifestum divinitatis
Christi testimonium. The two nouns are referred to Christ also in the Syriac
version. There seems, therefore, to be ample authority for my first rule.

Exam. II. Titus ii. 13. -- (...). In some few copies a comma is inserted
between (...) and (...), but without authority. The abovementioned note of Beza
upon this text, is too long to be inserted here at ^ength, and therefore I must
refer you to the author himself. He insists, however, that these two titles do
not refer to two distinct persons, because the article (...) omitted before the
second. In the present English version it is rendered the glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: but so great is the difference
between the idiom of the Greek tongue, and that of the English, that a literal
translation will not always express the same sense, without some little
transposition in the order of the words; and therefore, though the pronoun
(...) is placed after the two descriptive nouns that are applicable only to one
person as they are expressed in the Greek, yet the rendering of the said
pronoun in English ought to be PREFIXED to the said descriptive nouns, in order
to express the same sense in a proper English phrase; as, the glorious
appearing of OUR great God and Savior Jesus Christ. This is the rendering of
the learned Hugh Broughton, according to a printed English bible, corrected
with a pen, in my collection. It might, indeed, be literally rendered without
transposition of the pronoun, viz. the great God and Savior OF US, instead of
OUR great God and Savior; but the latter is more agreeable to the general mode
of expressing that pronoun in English. Thus Christ is not only entitled God,
but even the "great God," according to the plainest grammatical construction of
the text; and indeed, if we duly weigh the evidence of his being really
Jehovah, and one with the Father, [(...): the plural verb (...) ( "we are")
marking the plurality, or distinction of more person than one, as much as the
noun (...) marks the unity of their existence] he must necessarily be esteemed
the great God, As we believe that three persons exist in one and the same God,
we cannot believe any one of them to be less than God, without denying the
unity of the Godhead. And as each person is God, it follows, that each must be
the great God: Theophylact bears an explicit testimony to this conclusion in
his commentary on St. Paul's epistle to Titus, ii. 13. (...) (says the learned
and venerable commentator, exultingly, on the authority of this passage) (...).
Now what becomes of their objections, who degrade the dignity of the Son, not
allowing him even the name of God? Let them learn from this passage, that he is
not only God, but the great God. He is called great not relatively, by
comparison with another inferior God, but, absolutely, from his own native and
essential greatness. Whitby, in his note on the same passage of Titus, has
given some very solid reasons for applying the terms (...) to our Savior. His
words are: Here it deserves to be noted, that it is highly probable, that
Jesus Christ is here styled the great God; first, because in the original the
article is prefixed only before the great God, and therefore seems to require
this construction, "the appearance of Jesus Christ the great God and our
Savior." Secondly, because as God the Father is not said properly to appear,
so the word (...) never occurs in the New Testament, but when it is applied to
Jesus Christ, and some coming of his; the places in which it is to be found,
being only these, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 8. 1 Timothy vi. 14.2 Tim. i. 10. and iv. 1.8.
Thirdly, because Christ is emphatically styled our hope, the hope of our glory,
Col. i. 27.1 Tim. i. 1. And lastly, because not only all the ancient
commentators on the place, do so interpret this text, but the Ante-Nicene
fathers also; Hippolytus (Antichrist. sect. 64.) speaking of "the appearance of
our God and Savior Jesus Christ; and Clemens of Alexandria (ad Gent. p. 5, 6.)
proving Christ to be both God and Man, our Creator, and the author of all our
good things, from these very words of St. Paul. Vid. tract. de vera Christi
deitate, p. 44, 45. Hammond also in his literal marginal version translates
(...), thus, "the appearance of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus
Christ. EDITOR.

The remainder of this letter is lost. The author had not Ieisure to copy the
original letter before he sent it to the gentleman to whom it was addressed,
and therefore he requested him to return it as soon as he had perused and
considered it; but the gentleman neglected this request; and the author, after
several years solicitation, obtained only a part of the letter (as far as is
here copied) and the remainder (which was written on a separate half sheet) he
has never yet been able to recover. He had however a short memorandum of the
several texts, which were explained in the latter part of the letter; and
having since had favorable opportunities of examining the said texts, and of
copying them very accurately from the ancient Alexandrian manuscript in the
British Museum, he has been enabled to make some short remarks on the versions
of all the said texts, which may serve as a sufficient Supplement to this
imperfect letter. Some notes have been added to this printed copy which were
not in the original letter.

G. S.


because there is but ONE GOD. G. S.

EXAMPLES TO THE GRAMMATICAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION, etc.
EXAMPLE, I. ACTS XX. 28.
(...).

The warning of the apostle Paul to the presbyters of the church of Ephesus,
which is thus rendered in the common english version, Take heed therefore unto
yourselves, and to all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood.

In the Alexandrian MS. and a few other MSS. instead of (...), which is the
most general reading, the word (...) is substituted; but many old MSS. have
both words, (...), whereby the text is brought within the construction of the
1st rule, and should be rendered, -- "To feed the church of the Lord, even of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood."

Though there is no word in the Greek to correspond with this word "even," so
as that it might be deemed a literal rendering, yet this english word is
frequently used by our translators to express the identity of person, when a
copulative, in the greek text, joins a second substantive (i. e. of personal
description without an article,) to the former substantive, preceded by an
article, agreeable to the first rule, as in Romans, xv. 6. (...) and I. Cor.
xv. 24. (...). both of which are rendered, -- "God, even the father," (instead
of the literal rendering the God and father) that the identity of person may be
the more obvious. See also II. Cor. i. 3. (...). This sentence contains two
successive examples of the first rule, and is rendered Blessed be God, even the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort See also James iii. 9. (...) I. These. iii. 13. (...). II. These. ii.
16. (...). Besides these six examples, wherein the word even, in the english
version, expresses the the copulative, there are also 13 viz. 2. Cor. xi. 31.
Gal. i. 4. Ephesians. i. 3. and 4. 6. and 5. 20. Philip. iv. 20. Col. i. 3. and 2.
2. and 3. 17. I. These. i. 3. and 3. 11. James, i. 27. 1. Peter, i. 3.
other examples of the first rule, in the New Testament: i. e. altogether 19
examples, respecting our heavenly father alone; and therefore the 9 examples of
the same mode of expression, produced in this and the following pages,
respecting the son, and holy spirit, ought certainly to be rendered in a sense
suitable to the same uniform rule of construction, to express the identity of
persons, because the same mode of grammatical expression is used in them all.

EXAMPLE, No. II. EPHESIANS, v. 5.
-- (...)

In the common english version the sentence is rendered "no whoremonger etc."
has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God. As if two persons
had been mentioned in the original text; but as the part of the sentence, above
cited, is the generally approved reading of the printed greek copies, and as
this reading is confirmed by the Alexandrian MS. and by all other greek MSS. of
known authority, it affords an unquestionable proof against the apostasy of the
Socinians in their denial of divine honor to our Lord the Christ, or Messiah,
who, according to the idiom of the greek Tongue, is in this text expressly
entitled (...), "GOD," though the proof does not appear in the english version.
Let it be remarked that the two substantives of personal description (...) and
(...) are joined by the copulative (...), and that the article (...) preceeds
the first, and that there is no article before the word (...), whereby,
according to the first rule, both titles are necessarily to be applied to one
and the same person, and (if literally rendered in english) should be -- "has
not inheritance in the kingof the Christ and God." But this literal rendering
does not sufficiently express the necessary doctrine of the greek, that the
Christ is also God, and therefore, to help the english idiom, and to
accommodate the rendering more strictly to the true meaning of the greek, the
name of Jesu, which is necessary to be understood, might very fairly be
inserted in italies, or between hooks, to supply the necessary sense of the
greek; -- as "in the kingdom of (Jesus) the Christ and God:" or else to be
rendered -- "in the kingdom of Christ (even) of God" -- as recommended in the
first example.

EXAMPLE, III. PHILIPIANS iii. 3.
(...).

This is rendered in our common version, -- For we are the circumcision, which
worship God IN the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh.

In the London Polyglott, and many other valuable editions, the reading is
(...), but in the Alexandrian MS. it is (...), which seems to be the true
reading; because the other is so unusual an expression, that the generality of
translators have forced a construction, which the context itself cannot fairly
bear, even if the dative case, (...), was admitted to be the true reading,
unless another word, the preposition (...), be also added to it before (...),
as in John iv. 23. and Romans viii. 9. where the sense, which they have applied
to this text, was really intended; but, without this addition, (as we may
fairly judge by those examples) the literal rendering ought to be, We are the
circumcision, who worship the spirit God. Whereas they have commonly rendered
it as if the preposition (...) was really inserted in this text before the
dative (...), as in the two examples before cited, viz. "Qui spiritu servimus
dec." or Qui spiritu colimus Deum or as in the Syriac version "Qui deo servimus
in spiritu." (fyr.) or as in the common english version, Which worship God in
the spirit. But there is no such preposition in the greek. The difficulty
therefore of rendering the common reading ((...)) without supposing this
addition of EN to be understood before (...), proves that the reading of the
Alexandrian MS. in this text is really to be prefered, (...) Many other ancient
and valuable greek MSS. as Dr Mill has restified, have this reading (...), but
Augustine testified that, in his time, all or almost all greek copies, and many
latin had the reading "SPIRITUI DEI." Plures enim Codices etiam Latini sic
habent, qui SPIRITUI DEI servimus. GRAECT autem OMNES, AUTPENE OMNES. In
nonnullis autem exemplaribus LATINIS invenimus non SPIRITUI DEI SERVIMUS, sed
SPIRITUI DEO SERVIMUS. Sed qui in hoc erravit et authoritati graviori cedere
detrectavit, etc.

In Wetstein's edition the word (...) is subjoined with this mark ^ to denote
the preferable reading.


(...) "who worship the spirit of God," whereby the apostle and Timothy, as an
example to the church at Philippi, assert their profession that they pay divine
honor to the spirit of God, and that they glory in Christ.

EXAMPLE, IV. 11. THESE. i. 12.
(...).

This, in the common english version, is rendered (very erroneously) as if two
distinct persons were mentioned, viz. "according to the grace of our God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ." But if two distinct persons had really been intended to
be expressed as (by innumerable examples of the grammatical construction of
sentences for the accurate distinction of persons peculiar to the greek tongue,
used in the greek testament, from which the preceding rules were formed) may
be demonstrated, the article would have been repeated (according to the sixth
rule) after the copulative and before the second substantive (...). For it is
manifest that the insertion of the comma, in some greek copies, after (...), is
a modern interpolation; because the expedient of breaking sentences into small
divisions or particles by commas, to preserve the necessary distinctions, was
not anciently used (nor likely to have been used) by the ancient writers of the
greek tongue, who were accustomed to much more accurate distinctions in their
various peculiar modes of grammatical expression, specified in the six
preceding rules.

Whole sentences are, indeed, distinguished in the oldest greek MSS. by a
single point placed at their end, sometimes toward the top of the line,
sometimes in the middle, and sometimes toward the bottom; but apparently no
distinction of time has been intended by any of these three different modes of
placing the point, for they are all placed indiscriminately to the most obvious
and full termination of sentences; and therefore we may be assured that, in all
these three different modes of placing them, they were originally intended only
as periods to conclude the sentences; so that when we find them in the place of
commas, to distinguish merely the parts or particles of a sentence, there is
great reason to suspect that they have been the additions of later times.

In the Alexandrian MS. the text before us is awkwardly divided by one of these
points, placed after the word (...), which point, for the reason before given,
must necessarily be deemed a period, and which did not exist in the original
text of the sacred penman.

The intention of the transcriber or interpolator by adding this point to the
text (for it cannot justly be attributed to the original writer) has been
probably to make a distinction of persons; as if two persons had been named in
the text instead of one, in like manner as the comma is added after the word
God, in the english version, without any authority.

But the necessary grammatical construction of the whole sentence taken
together detects the interpolator, and demonstrates the absurdity of supposing,
that any such point ever existed in the original text, because the words, which
are severed by the supposititious period, cannot form a grammatical sentence
(according to the ordinary modes of expression used in the greek tongue) by
themselves alone; so that the obvious sense of the context demonstrates their
necessary connection with the preceding words in one entire sentence; and
demonstrates also, at the same time, the ignorance and fallacy of the
interpolator, who attempted to make two sentences of it by inserting a full
period.

If literally rendered, it ought to be -- according to the grace of the God and
Lord of us Jesus Christ; but, more in the idiom of our own language, it might
be justly rendered, according to the grace of Jesus Christ our God and Lord. In
either way the necessary doctrine of our Lord's divine nature, manifestly
intended to be expressed in the original, is duly retained in the proposed
version.

EXAMPLE, V. 1. TIM. V. 21.
(...). etc.

This, in the common english version, is rendered -- I charge (thee) before God
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these
things, etc.

The word (...) is omitted in the Alexandrian MS. which, however, agrees in
every other particular; for no points whatever are inserted between the
substantives; so that we have the testimony even of this MS. for a clear
declaration that Jesus is God, as well as Lord; and after the next copulative,
which connects the mention of different Persons according to the sixth rule,
the adverb (...) (before) though not expressly repeated is plainly to be
understood, as -- 'I charge' (thee) 'before the God and Lord' "Jesus" (or
rather 'before Jesus the God and Lord, and' (before) the elect angels, that
thou observe these things. Thus far the testimony of the Alexandrian MS. But,
according to the commonly received text of the greek, it ought to be rendered,
in the english idiom, -- I charge (thee) before Jesus Christ the GOD and LORD,
and (before) the elect angels, etc.

EXAMPLE, VI. 11. TIM. iv. 1.
(...) etc.

In the common english version this is rendered I charge (thee) therefore
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead,
etc.

In the greek of this text, as it is commonly printed, the article (...) is
repeated before (...), which, so far, affords an excuse for the present english
version in placing the comma after the word God, to denote two distinct
persons, according to the sixth rule; but in the Alexandrian MS. and several
other old copies the article (...) is not repeated after the copulative before
(...), so that the expression is exactly similar to the declaration of our
Lord's divine nature by the same apostle in the preceding example, viz. I. Tim.
v. 21. In some printed editions the word (...) is also omitted, but in the
Geneva edition of 1620, with Scaliger's Notes, the word (...) is inserted, and
the article (...) omitted, whereby the title (...) (God) must necessarily be
construed in such a manner that it may be clearly understood in all versions to
be expressly applied to Christ, as it really is in the original. The
transcriber or interpolator of the Alexandrian MS. however, being aware of this
doctrine, has endeavored to pervert it, by adding a full period after the word
(...) as (...). But this period is unquestionably supposititious, because the
words before and after the period are not two distinct sentences, but
obviously, portions only of one entire sentence, which must necessarily be
construed together, according to the ordinary rules of expression in the greek
tongue, as I have remarked on a preceding example, whereby a second substantive
of personal description, without an article before it, joined by a copulative
to a preceding substantive of the like nature, and in the same case, with an
article before it, must necessarily denote a farther description of the same
person, expressed by the first substantive, (whenever there is an article
before the first substantive and none before the second) so that the insertion
of the period in the Alexandrian MS. after (...) is utterly vain, because the
copulative sufficiently proves the connection of the two substantives in one
clear sentence, and the omission of the article before the second substantive
induces the necessity of applying the same grammatical construction whereby
alone the due distinction of persons is so peculiarly maintained in the greek
tongue, and not by points. The text should therefore be rendered, -- I charge
(thee) therefore, before the God and Lord Jesus Christ, etc. or rather (to
render the doctrine more obvious in the english idiom) -- I charge (thee)
therefore, before Jesus Christ the God and Lord, who shall judge the quick and
the dead, etc. And thus the texts in the two last examples will perfectly
accord as the uniform expressions of the same apostle, asserting, in both, the
divinity of his Lord and Savior, by whom he had been personally summoned to
bear his testimony to the gentiles, as being an eye and ear witness of his
glorious majesty.

Our Socinian Sadducees, who have impiously entitled our Lord "a mere man,"
and "nothing but a man," and simple human nature, will not be able to digest
this necessary doctrine, until they humble themselves to receive instructions
from the holy scriptures.

EXAMPLE, VII. TIT. ii. 13.
-- (...).

The present version of these words, in the english testament, is -- Looking
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. This text (though the next in order, according to the
usual mode of arranging the books of the new testament) has already been
produced as the second example in the preceding letter. I have since however
examined the Alexandrian MS. and find that it agrees exactly with the above
citation of this text, except that a point has been added in the MS. after the
word (...) or (...). On which it is necessary to observe that the same remarks
are obviously applicable to this superfluous and absurd addition of the point,
or period, that I have made on the texts, II. These. i. 12. and II. Tim. iv. 1.
in the fourth and sixth examples of this tract. For as the proper effect and
purposes of periods is to separate words into distinct sentences, it is obvious
that the words, which follow the supposititious period in this text, are
incapable of a grammatical construction without reference to the preceding
words, connected by the copulative; and therefore the note of separation (a
period) cannot possibly have been intended by the inspired writer. This
testimony therefore of the sacred text in favor of the necessary doctrine of
our Lord's divine nature ought not to be withheld from the mere english reader.

I am persuaded that our modern Socinians would not have made so much clamor
about the necessity of a new translation, had they been aware that a more close
and literal rendering of the original text (even in passages which had escaped
their calumnious charges of corruption, and their arrogant attempts at
imaginary correction) must necessarily cut up their favorite system by the
roots.

The text in question, if the truth of the original be duly regarded, must
inevitably be rendered, Expecting the blessed hope and appearance of the glory
of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ.

EXAMPLE, VIII. II. PET. i. 1.
-- (...).

Which in the common english version, is thus imperfectly rendered, -- through
the righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

This text, though the eighth in order, according to the proper order of the
books, was the first example cited in my letter; and I have only to remark
farther, that the Alexandrian MS. perfectly agrees with the present common
approved reading of the greek text. In Dr Woide's printed copy of the said MS.
there is a point inserted after the word (...), which is not in the MS. but
that is manifestly a merely accidental typographical error.

The Rev. Mr Cruttwell has remarked (in his useful edition of the english bible
with Bishop Wilson's notes) that the words rendered in our present version,
viz. -- of God and our Savior Jesus Christ were rendered -- of our God and
Savior Jesus Christ in the versions of Wiclif, Coverdale, Mathews, Cranmer, in
the Bishops (bible) (the) Geneva, (the) Rhemish, (bibles) and by Doddridge,
Westley, Scattergood, and Purver; which is altogether a noble testimony of both
ancient and modern times against the Socinian impiety. The english reader
should undoubtedly be informed of the true meaning of these words in a proper
english idiom, as, -- Through the righteousness of Jesus Christ our God and
Savior: -- which is agreeable to a literal rendering into latin by the late
learned Dr Thomas Mangey, prebendary of Durham, viz. -- "Jesu Christi Dei et
servatoris nostri."

EXAMPLE, IX. JUDE, iv.
-- (...).

This, in the common english version, is imperfectly rendered, -- and denying
the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

I made a transcript of this text, several years ago, from the Alexandrian MS.
which I copied or rather drew, letter by letter, in size and shape as exactly
as the eye could discern. In this transcript the word (...) is omitted, as in
the MS. but I did not, at that time, perceive that there was any point or mark
after the word (...), and I was therefore, much surprised, afterward, in
comparing the said transcript, with the elegant edition of my late very worthy
and respectable friend the Rev. Dr Woide (who printed a copy of the new
testament from the Alexandrian MS. with new types in imitation of the letters
of the MS.) to find that he had inserted a point, in his new edition, after the
word (...). I was very consident that I could not discern any such point, when
I examined the MS. and yet, as I entertained the highest respect and esteem for
the veracity and accuracy of Dr Woide (of which he was, indeed, truly worthy)
it was necessary to have this matter properly explained; and I was rendered
perfectly aware by Dr Velthusen's account of his examining an ancient MS. that
the feint lines and marks in the very old MSS. are liable to bear different
appearances, according to the different degrees of light in which they are seen.

I therefore took the first opportunity, afterward, of going once more to
examine the MS. and on a more close inspection, I perceived, indeed, the feint
mark which occasioned Dr Woide's insertion of the period, in his edition; but
being afterward assisted by the worthy librarian the Rev. Mr Harper, in a
still more attentive and accurate examination of the mark with a magnifying
glass, I was satisfied that it had not been intended for a period, but only for
a short line of connection, because it is nearly three times as long as it is
broad.

But if any person, from the authority of Dr Woide's edition, should be still
inclined to suppose that it is really a point, I must request them carefully to
consider what I have before remarked on the fourth, sixth and seventh examples
in this tract, respecting the addition of points in greek manuicripts; and
also, concerning the more accurate modes of Grammatical distinction in the
greek tongue, which rendered the smalier points, or particles of time (such as
semicolons and commas) absolutely unnecessary in the greek scripture; and, in
addition thereto, let him observe, particularly on the text before us, that a
point in that place, after (...) (in the middle of the sentence, between the
accusative noun and verb) is utterly inconsutent with grammar and common sense;
and though the word (...), has been omitted in the Alexandrian MS. (perhaps for
the same reason that some men would wish to prove the insertion of the point
after (...)) yet, happily, neither of these alterations would at all affect, or
injure the manifest testimony of the apostle Jude, to Christ's almighty power
and divinity, for -- the only potentate and Lord of us Jesus Christ, is
equivalent to a full declaration of Christ's Divinity, as well as of his
almighty power; and with respect to the insertion of the supposed point, they
must perceive, if they duly consider the text, that the words (...) and (...)
cannot (consistently with the necessary grammatical sense of the greek, and the
usual modes of expression, or idiom of that language) be separated either by
points or construction, so as to be applied to two different persons, because
the article is not repeated after the copulative, before (...): so that Christ
alone, was unquestionably that -- "only potentate," or sovereign Lord, who was
denied by the lascivious persons, against whom the apostle Jude bore testimony
of their reprobacy, and of their having denied the Lord who had redeemed them.
Dr Hammond's rendering of the text before us, may, therefore, be
conscientiously maintained, viz. "and our only master God and Lord Jesus
Christ," making (says he) -- "those three the several attributes of Jesus
Christ." But as the doctor has been pleased to add, that -- This interpretation
proceeds upon that way of punctuation, which is ordinarily retained in our
copies, there being no comma after (...), I am obliged to protest against that
reason, for the other reasons already given; and to insist, that the
grammatical construction of the greek text is, of itself, our sufficient and
best warrant to justify that literal rendering.

But the applying to Christ this supreme title, -- "the only potentate God"
(and, also in a former text, the supreme title of -- "the great God") may
perhaps induce some persons to conceive that this grammatical system of
construction, if admitted as a rule, for all texts, in which the same mode of
expression renders it applicable, will sometimes prove rather too much, and may
be liable to favor a modern sect of Unitarians, who have adopted the Sabellian
notions of the late Baron Swedenborg, and who assert, that -- Jesus Christ is
the only God; that is, they understand this in so peculiar a sense, that they
do not seem properly to acknowledge the personality of the holy spirit, any
more than a very opposite sect of Unitartans do, the modern Socinians, who
impiously assert (in the opposite extreme to that the of Swedenborgians) that
Jesus Christ was a mere man, and nothing but a man, according to one of their
teachers, and -- "simple human nature," according to another: and some of them
have even presumed to charge the members of the church of England with
idolatry, This unjust charge of idolatry against the unquestionable principles
of the ancient catholic church, prosessed by the church of England, affords a
notable skreen to the Latin church, by indiscriminately confounding all the due
distinctions, whereby a charge of idolatry is applicable; and this should teach
us to be aware of what we should have to expect on the removal of all tests and
restraints from such indiscriminate teachers; and, likewise, from all other
sectaries (as much as from the pontifical hierarchy, seated on the throne of
the dragon) who do not regulate their faith and practice by the plain doctrines
of the holy scriptures. For, indeed, no man is justly entitled to have a vote,
or share in the legislature of this, or of any other christian nation, unless
he (at least) prosesses to regulate his principles of action, by the two first
foundations of ENGLISH LAW, viz. natural and revealed religion, to which (as
being two witnesses of God) universal obedience is due, so that no statute of
parliament can be valid, nor any other law, custom, or practice, sufferable, if
it be at all inconsistent with either of these two indispensible foundations.
For, without these, MEN retain, indeed, the form, but not the dignity of MAN;
because they are subject to the impulse of spirits, immical to the nature of
man; and are, thereby, liable to be rendered, in disposition and practice, the
most noxious of beasts, even -- a generation of vipers; and therefore, the
knowledge of our own NATURE, and of the principles of action in MAN, what they
are, and what they ought to be (which by the scriptures alone is revealed to
us) is the first and most essential branch of philosaphy, whatsoever our modern
skeptical philosophers may think to the contrary; for how should men be on
their guard against invisible enemies, of whose very existence they are
ignorant? -- But, by the holy scriptures we are informed, that -- the prince of
the power of the air works in the children of disobedience; -- and,
certainly, wherever this satanical inspiration manifestly takes place among
men, their descriptive title cannot be more accurately expressed than in the
terms, which our Lord himself (as well as John the baptist before him) applied
to the haughty scepticks whom they opposed -- a generation of vipers, (Matthew
xii. 34.) and -- "serpents" (Matthew xxiii. 33.) expressly alluding thereby to
the satanical inspiration by which they became the children, or generation of
the old serpent, as our Lord plainly warned them at another time; -- Ye are of
YOUR FATHER THE DEVIL -- and the lusts of YOUR FATHER ye will do; -- he was a
MURDERER from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. etc. Men, therefore,
who will not be limited by the two first foundations of English law, are
unworthy to b^ admitted to an equal participation of civil rights in any free
christian state whatever; because true liberty cannot be maintained without
that perfection of law, which arises only from these indispensible rules of
action.

They are indispensible, because we can have no hope that our constitutional
establishment of natural and religious rights (to the glory of God, peace on
earth, and "good will toward men") can possibly be maintained, if such persons
are admitted to a share of legistative authority, who do not acknowledge the
only foundations on which, alone, that happy constitution is built.


because they pay the divine honor that is due to their Lord and Savior; and
to the holy spirit, their -- "other comforter."

So that both these sects of prosessed Unitarians (as well as their Unitarian
brethern, the Mahometans) are, by mistaken notions of the divine unity, seduced
from perceiving and acknowledging the declarations throughout the holy
scriptures of the unquestionable existence of three divine persons in one only
divine nature, or Godhead. The old Arians (though their sect was probably
represented by that -- "fallen star," which opened the -- bottomess lpit, for
the emission of the armed locusts of the Arabian heresy, more strictly
Unitarians than themselves Since I wrote the above remark, respecting the
Mahometans and Arians, a more striking accomplishment of the prophecy,
respecting the fallen star that opened the bottomless pit, has occurred to me,
in the character of Nestorius, archbishop of Constantinople, and metropolitan
of the greek church, whose doctrine was, in effect, still "more Unitarian than"
that of Arius; for the consequences of his denying the miraculous birth of our
Lord, and asserting that -- "Christ born of the Virgin Mary, was not the son of
God;" must necessarily be, that he was -- "a mere man," and -- nothing but a
man, according to the openly declared notions of our modern Socinians, which,
in this point, is strictly Mohammedan! With this false and antichristian
doctrine "the third part of the rivers and fountains of waters" (viz. the
sources of the nations and the people of the Greek Empire, the third great
monarchy) was embittered and prepared for the scorpion-like scourge of
mohammedan tyranny.

On account of this blasphemous doctrine, Nestorius was deposed (by the
judgment of a great counsel of his peers the christian bishops) from his
dignity as archbishop of the greatest city (at that time) in christendom, and
from being metropolitan, as it were, of the Greek Empire; (the third great
monarchy) and, therefore, he might truly be said to have fallen from the
highest elevation of ecclesiastical dignity; so that no prophetical type could
more amply prefigure this rejection, than -- "the falling of a flar from
heaven," -- the heaven or firmament of the then amply established episcopal
authority throughout the Roman empire. And the Unitarian doctrine of this
fallen star (I mean Unitarian in the Mohammedan and Socinian sense of that term)
seems also to have been the very "key" whereby "the bottomlels pit" was opened
to let out the noxious and diabolical vapor of Mahometanism, for it is really
the leading, and first inculcated tenet in all the public professions of that
baneful heresy. And it is remarkable that a Nestorian monk, Sergius, professing
the same blasphemous doctrine (this -- "key of the bottomless pit" forged by
Nestorius) should actually have been an assistant to Mahomet in producing his
pretended revelations; and, it is still more remarkable, that all the
scorpion-like scourges of the Mohammedan conquest (first, LAWLESS TYRANNY and
the suppression of all popular rights; secondly, ROBBERY and WAR notoriously
sanctioned or authorized by this pretended religion against all nations and
people that do not receive their doctrine; and thirdly, the fatal renewal of
the old pagan oppressions of slave-holding and slave-dealing, Such diabolical
enormities may surely be compared to the dark exhalations of -- "the bottomless
pit;" and therefore our English promoters of slave-holding, and slave-dealing
(who have carried these Mohammedan oppressions to a greater excess, even than
the Mahometans themselves) have ample reason to dread the approaching time of
divine retribution, when God will -- destroy the destroyers of the earth, and
shall cause those that now -- "lead into captivity" (and surely, likewise, all
their abettors) -- "to be led into captivity!"
which had been happily extinguished by the general influence of christian
benevolence) should have completely pervaded all those eastern and southern
regions, of the third Empire, wherever the doctrines of Nestorius had been
previously adopted, and had embittered the rivers and fountains of the waters
to prepare them for this signal retribution, justly due to such antichristian
apostates, who deny the true rock on which the catholic church is built, viz.
that "Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God;" or, as St. John has
expressed the peculiar sonship, or filiation, of Christ, viz. " the ONLY
BEGOTTEN SON which is in the bosom of the father." (John i. 18. compare with
ver. 14. and chap. iii. 16 and 18.)

All the arguments produced by the learned Vitringa to prove that Arius was the
fallen star, are certainly much more applicable to Nestorius, as being an
archbishop and metropolitan of the empire, and therefore more fitly prefigured
by a star. And that the smoke from -- "the bottomless pit," which was let out
by this fallen star, was really the mist or diabolical darkness of
Mahometanism, seems to have been very fairly proved by our learned countryman,
Joseph Mede.


) allowed, indeed, that Christ was God, yet they supposed him to be so, in an
inferior degree; by which they unwarily acknowledged a superior God, and an
inferior God; i. e. more Gods than one, contrary to the true Unitarian doctrine
of the primitive churches, which always held and asserted the unity of God
(like the church of England to this day) as much as they held it necessary to
acknowledge the three divine persons; both of which doctrines are inevitable
and indispensible, while we profess to regulate our faith by the testimonies of
the holy scriptures, as handed down to us, without presuming to exercise the
Socinian expedient of lopping off, or altering (as a supposed corruption or
interpolation) every text of scripture that opposes the system or set of
notions that we happen to have adopted: And therefore the true Unitarian
christian, who acknowledges but one God, -- one Jehovah, -- one divine nature,
((...)) or Godhead, and at the same time, nevertheless, is convinced, that
three divine persons are really revealed to us, under the title of Jehovah I
need not, here, recite the proofs of these assertions, because I have already
produced a great variety of examples, collected from the old as well as the new
testament, in my tract on the -- "Law of nature and principles of action in
man," from p. 234. to p. 301.
in the old testament; and under the title of (...) -- or God, in the new
testament; and that the supreme attributes of the DIVINE NATURE are applied to
each, in both testaments, will, of course, be aware also, that each of these
divine persons must necessarily be -- "the great God," and -- the only
potentate as there is but -- "one God" -- one only supreme power, or Godhead.

So that the effect of my grammatical rule, when applied to the two particular
texts before mentioned (viz. Tit. ii. 13. and Jude iv.) will not (in the
opinion of such true christians) seem to exceed the truth. Especially when
compared with the concurrent reasons and testimonies quoted in the note p. 20.
EDITOR.


Though the apostle Paul asserted to the Colossians (ii. 9.) concerning Christ,
that -- in him dwells ALL the fullness of the Godhead ((...)) "bodily" --
((...), -- a term of indisputable personality) yet, surely, this was without
the least disparagement to the supreme divinity of the almighty father, and of
the holy spirit, because they are; also, necessarily included in the same
(...), or Godhead, as there is but one God; and, therefore, as -- it pleased
all fuiness to dwell in the person of our Lord Jesus, (Col. i. 19) we may more
easily comprehend, why he required -- "that all" (men) should honor the son,
EVEN AS they honor the father, that is, undoubtedly, with supreme honor,
(...), EVEN AS, or, according as, -- "they honor the father." And our Lord
said expressly, -- He that honors not the son (that is, according to the
measure before declared, -- "EVEN AS they honor" or ought to honor, the
father) honors not the father which has sent him, (John v. 23.) and he also
claimed expressly to be glorified with the father himself. -- "And now O
father" (said he) GLORIFY THOU ME WITH THINE OWNGELF, with the glory which I
had with thee before the world was, (John xvii. 5.) thereby asserting both his
pre-existence and supreme dignity. Christians therefore, who humbly receive
these, and the many other revelations of Christ's divinity, have the less
difficulty in acknowledging the doctrines of the ancient catholic churches, and
the declarations of our creeds. But let all other men likewise, who profess to
believe in the name of Christ, earnestly enquire, in the first place, as the
first means of progress to the true faith, whether they are really "willing"
(for this is given is the true proof of faith -- (...)) to conform themselves
to the will of God, as revealed in all the most obvious declarations and
injunctions of holy scripture, and more particularly to the purity, which is
expressly called -- "the will of God" viz. the sanctification of their bodies
For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain
from fornication: that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel
in sanctification and honor; noth the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which known (...) God: that no one should go beyond or defraud his
brother, etc. I. These. iv. 3. 6.
which cannot otherwise be capable of becoming -- Temples of the holy Ghost; an
indispensible state both of body and mind for all christians to maintain; for,
in that case, they may assuredly rely on God's absolute promise, through
Christ, that -- if any one shall be WILLING to do HIS WILL he shall know of the
doctrine whether it be of God; or whether I speak (said our Lord) "from
myself." (John vii. 17.)

DEO SOLI GLORIA.
A PLAIN MATTER-OF-FACT ARGUMENT FOR THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST,
QUESTION.
FOR what END did Christ COME INTO THE WORLD?

A. Christ was "manifested in the flesh, (that is, was made man,) -- TO DIE FOR
THE SINS OF MANKIND, -- to destroy the works of the devil -- to redeem us from
all iniquity, and to purity unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good
works." (1 Cor. xv. 3. -- 1 John iii. 8. -- Tit ii. 14.)

Q. Where was Christ before he came into this world, and was manifested in the
flesh?

A. He was in Heaven. "He came down from Heaven. He was with God his Father,
before the world was, before the foundation of the world: he was in the bosom
of his Father, and in his Father's Glory." (John iii. 13. vi. 33. 62. i. 1.
xvii. 5. 24.

Q. How was his manifestation in the flesh made known to the world?

A. By the message of an angel to Mary his mother, to Joseph, and to certain
shepherds.

Q. Under what name was be made known?

A. He was called JESUS, a Savior, the Son of God, the Son of the Highest.

Q. Who was the mother of Jesus?

A. The Virgin Mary.

Q. Was any prophesy fulfilled by the birth of Jesus Christ?

A. Yes: "all this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken of
the Lord by the prophet, saying, behold, a virgin shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name EMMANUEL, which being
interpreted, is GOD WITH US." (Matt. i. 22, 23. Isaiah vii. 14.)

Q. What was Christ put to death for?

A. For blasphemy, as the Jews thought it, in calling himself the Son of God.

Q. In what did the Jews say the blasphemy consisted?

A. In this, that he being, as they supposed, a mere man, called God his own
Father, thereby declaring himself to be equal with God, and to be God. (John v.
18. x. 33.)

Q. What did Christ ever say of himself, which implied, that he was God?

A. He said that he was one with God, and partook of the glory of God, before
the world was, that is, from all eternity.

Catechist. Repeat the passage, in which this is said.

A. "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine ownself, with the glory
which I had with thee, before the world was." (John xvii. 5.)

Q. What did Christ ever say of himself, which implied, that he was equal with
God?

A. He said that "he and his Father are one:" that "the Father has given all
things into his power:" that "what things soever the Father does, these also
does the Son likewise:" that "the Father has committed all judgment to the
Son, that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father." (John
x. 30. -- iii. 35. -- v. 19. -- v. 22.)

Q. Who were the first witnesses, in Christ's time, in proof of Christ's
divinity?

A. His enemies, the unbelieving Jews, both the people, and their rulers.

Q. Do you call the unbelieving Jews prior witnesses to the Apostles?

A. Yes: because this great truth, THE DIVINTY OF CHRIST, was hid from the
Apostles, as well as the rest of their countrymen, till after Christ's
RESURRECTION FROM THE DEAD. Christ first asserted himself to be God, by calling
God his Father, and himself the Son of God, in a sense, which implied, that he
was equal with God, and was God; for so even his unbelieving hearers understood
it: -- the Jews condemned him to death for it: -- the Apostles preached it.

Q. As Christ knew, that this was the sense in which the Jews understood his
testimony of himself, when they first charged him with blasphemy for it, did
he, at his trial, attempt to deny the charge?

A. No: he admitted the charge and confirmed it, and died for it; and appealed
to the day of judgment, as their future proof of it.

Catechist. Repeat the passage.

A. When "the high priest asked him, and said unto him, art thou the Christ,
the Son of the Blessed? Jesus said, I am: and (as a proof of it,) YE shall (at
the last day) see (me) the Son of man fitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds of Heaven." (Mark xiv. 61, 62.)

Q. If Christ had not been the Messiah, the Son of God, in the sense in which
they understood him, would he not have undeceived them?

A. If Jesus Christ had not been the Messiah, the Son of God, in the sense, in
which the Jews understood him, he would have undeceived them, to save his own
life, and to free them from a very great delusion.

Q. But Jesus Christ was put to death for calling himself the Son of God; what
then do you conclude?

A. I conclude that Jesus Christ really was what they charged him with calling
himself, THE SON OF GOD; and in the sense in which they understood him; that
is, that he was EQUAL WITH GOD; and was God.

Q. You say that in the lifetime of Christ the Apostles appeared not to know
that Christ was God; what was their opinion after he rose from the dead?

A. Convinced by his resurrection from the dead, according to his promise that
he would raise himself from the dead, they believed him to be "their Lord and
there God" -- "the word made flesh;" "God manifested in the flesh;" in whom
dwelt ALL the fullness of the Godhead bodily; Emmanuel," or, "God with us" --
"the creator and upholder of all things," who "in the beginning" of all things
"was with God, and was God" -- "the true God and eternal life;" and "over all
God blessed for ever." (John xx. 28. -- John i. 14. 1 Timothy iii. 16. Coi. ii. 9.
Matt. i. 23. -- John i. 2. Heb. i. 3. John i. 1. -- 1 John v. 20. Romans ix. 5.
Whatever difficulty may be found in the various readings of any of these
passages, it must vanish, like a mist, in the full light of their united
evidence. To them we may confidently add the very important testimonies which
in the preceding remarks and examples Mr Sharp has most happily recovered from
the erroneous constructions of the common version.
)

Q. Now tell me in few words, what you collect from Christ's testimony of
himself, as attested by the Jews of his own time, condemned by the rulers, but
universally propagated by the Apostles?

A. The conclusion to be drawn from it, is, that Christ, the Son of God, is one
with God, and equal with God, and is God. Christ asserted it; the Jews
condemned him to die for it; he sealed his testimony with his blood. The
Apostles, convinced by his resurrection from the dead, believed it, and
preached it, and died for it.

Catechist. The Jews, then, put Christ to death, as an impostor and blasphemer;
and yet Christians have believed in him and worshipped him, as the Son of God,
for almost eighteen hundred years. How do you account for this?

A. It was in the decrees of God, that Christ should die for the sins of
mankind: If the Jews had believed him to be the Son of God, they would not have
put him to death: -- if he had not been put to death, as he was, he would not
have "borne our sins in his own body on the cross," that is, he would not have
died for our sins, THE END, for which he CAME INTO THE WORLD; -- he would not
have given that great and inestimable proof of the truth of Scripture, and of
his own promises, which HE did, by rising from the dead; -- and the Apostles
would not have given that sure evidence of their own belief in Christ, the
ground and confirmation of OURS, which THEY did, by dying for their crucified
Lord and Master.

FINIS.

