VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A COMI-TRAGEDY.

PASSAGES SELECTED BY DISTINGUISHED PERSONAGES, ON THE GREAT LITERARY TRIAL OF
VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A Comi-Tragedy.

"WHETHER IT BE -- OR BE NOT FROM THE IMMORTAL PEN OF SHAKSPEARE?" VOLUME III.

FOURTH EDITION.

-- "Open me a huge Wardrobe aboundinge in motlie habittes, and mark how
fantasticallie poor mortals will arraie themselves!" VORT. and ROW LONDON:
PRINTED BY H. BROWN, FOR J. RIDGWAY, YORK-STREET, ST. JAMES'S-SQUARE.

IRELAND, versus SHAKESPEARE!!!
By the COURT.
IT having in our sapiency been discovered, through the course of the present
important CAUSE, that more evidence may sometimes be given, where much has
already been received --

It is ordered, for the furtherance of strict poetical justice in said Cause,
that no solemn ADJUDICATION be made therein, until final default of testimony
extractive, be made appear by due proclamation, through our trusty, and well
beloved, FILAZER, the EDITOR of those Diurnal Records, ycleped the MORNING
HERALD!

(Signed) POLONIUS
Die Martis 11o, 1798.
CONTENTS.
A Ad -- ngt -- n, Mr. Henry 96 And -- rs -- n, Lord M-y-r 65 Ang -- sh, Miss
54 Anstr -- r, Sir J. 57 As -- ph, Lady St. 76
B B -- me, Lady 34 B -- nb -- y, Sir Chapter 63 B -- d -- tt, Sir Francis 87 B --
kl -- y, Countess of 88 B -- rw -- l, Mr. 39 Bl -- gh, Hon. Miss 52 Br -- die --
l, Mrs. 58 Br -- d -- d, Mrs. 46 B -- k -- g -- m, March. of 60
C C -- nt -- y, Archb -- p of 9 C -- ll, Lady 38 C-mpb-l, Mrs. ci-devant Miss
W -- ll -- s 50 C -- rp -- r, Lady Almeria 74 C -- wd -- r, Lord 77 C -- rk,
Countess of 82 C -- rd -- n, Earl of 83 C -- h -- r, Lady 84 C -- lp -- is,
Vice-Adm. 85 Con -- gh -- m, Lady 92
D D -- rh -- st, Lady 4 D -- nt, Mr. 27 D -- by, Countess of 30 D -- y, Mr. 31
D -- cre, Lady 40 D -- l, Sir Lionel 53 D -- nc -- n, Adm. Lord 61 D -- nc --
n, Hon. Miss 66 D -- m, Bishop of 81
E Ed -- n, Hon. Miss 12 Ed -- ds, Mr. Bryan 71
F F -- n -- ni, Mad. 26 Fitzg -- ld, Lady E. E. 90 Fitzg -- ld, Lady Edward 95
F -- ll -- t -- n, Col. 23
G G -- nn -- g, Miss 10 Gr -- nv -- le, Lord 41 G --, Prince William 45
H H -- m -- lt -- n, Duke of 13 H -- le, Mrs. 22 H -- l -- d, Lady 42 H-w-rd
de W-ld-n, Lady 44 H -- st -- gs, Mr. 47 H -- d, Adm. Lord 59 H -- ght -- n,
Sir H -- 67 H -- wkes -- ry, Lord 69 H -- rtf -- d, March. of 72 H -- ref -- d,
Lord Visc. 73 H -- rc -- t, Countess of 86
J J -- rv -- s, Adm. Sir John 17
K K -- n -- d, Lord 1 K -- ng, Hon. Miss 68
L L -- ds, Duchess of 64 L -- wr -- ce, Dr. 79 L -- ghb -- gh, Lady 94
M M -- nd -- p, Lady 24 M -- r -- ce, Capt. 43 M-nsf-d, Css. Dow. of 62 M --
cn -- m -- a, Mr. [of Streatham] 75 M -- nto, Lord 91
N N -- wn -- m, Ald -- n 7 N -- res, Lady C. G. 28 N -- lf -- n, Rear-Adm. 49
N -- th, Lady Ann 70
O O -- le, Miss 2 Oxf -- d, Earl of 29 Og -- lvie, Miss 36
P P -- ck -- t, Ald -- n 3 P -- lh -- m, Mrs. 6 P -- g -- t, Lady Jane 8 P --
lw -- th, Lady Bell 18 P -- rr, Rev. Dr. 19 P -- tt, Rt. Hon. Wm. 21
R R -- se, Mr. Sec. 33 R -- del -- fe, Sir Chapter F. 55
S S -- ph -- a, Princess 16 S -- vb -- ge, Miss 20 S -- ff -- k, Earl of 25
Str -- f -- d, Hon. Mrs. 32 Scr -- pe, Mrs. 80 Sc -- t, Rev. Dr. [
Anti-Sejanus] 93 Sp -- r, Earl 37 St -- t, Mrs. 48 Sh -- ftsb -- y, Countess of
56
T Th -- rl -- w, Miss 14 T -- t -- n, Sir Thomas 35 T -- ill -- r, Lady -- 78
V V -- nc -- v -- r, Capt. 15
W W -- ch -- r, Bishop of 89
Y Y -- k, Duke of 5

PASSAGES. SELECTED AS SUFFRAGES ON THE FIFTIETH DAY's TRIAL.
CCIV. -- LORD K -- N -- D.
-- "I tell thee, Urvin, he is a Lord, and that a keen one! -- Why, man, he
was once more poor, than now he is proud, until jogging up on foot from
the other side the Tweede, he did contrive to repose his Scottishe crownette on
the rich toilette of a Monielender's daughter! -- thence took his honors a
more stately pollishe, being set in gold! -- Now he has nightlie
divinations of Jeweish aggrandizements, and will dream you of naught but
lotteries, and loanes; -- nay, and a wiser man had not prevented it, he would
have turned his eldest born into a Blew-coate Boy, to have a hand hereditarie
in every wheel of fortune!" PAGE 6. -- GENUINE. CCV. -- MISS O -- LE.
-- "Heaven befriende us, sister Blanch! and, in its next shower of sweet
husbands, send us a comely couple! -- Marry, but we can accommodate our
lordly masters more ways than one, or else be-shame our breeding up! -- If
they allow us not to comb their conjugal heads, we can, at least, carry
their palfries, and ride them saddle-less to water; so that, when we are found
useless as Grooms of the chamber, we may be convertible into those of the
stable! -- Nay, and the worst do befall us, we can lay aside our tomboye
tricks, and comport ourselves like reasonable women, sans further ogle-ing!"

PAGE 25. -- GENUINE. CCVI. -- ALD -- N P -- CK -- T.
-- "When they did expunge those empty heads from off the frontlet of our
Citie's gate, mine own was set thereon, and did most wittinglie devise, how
to dismantle our Temple's bar to public inter-cursion. To build a good
right civique fame, one must be constrained to pull you down the stouter works
of ancient men! -- and the mind, my masters, must be kept in concussion also,
or the brain of an ordinary citizen would curdle over, like green
ducke's-weede upon a gardenne ponde!"

PAGE 1. -- GENUINE. CCVII. -- LADY D -- RH -- ST.
-- "When first the sightless youth by me was viewed,
"I sighed, and hoped, in any lowly shape,
"That I might guide his slow be-darken'd way!
"Vain worldly objects thus shut out -- save one --
"This, on his minde's keen eye did always hang
"Like a night-gendered miste, which does eclipse
"All Nature's fairer prospects wide around!
"My heart did proudly gain its early wish! --
"With me, the solace now of all his wrongs,
"Love's cruse of oil Mr. MALONE remarks, though on what authority is not
declared, that these are punnistical allusions of the immortal Bard, to the
VIRGIN NAME of the fair LADY, and the retail occupation of her SIRE, a worthy
resident in those days of LOWER THAMES STREET.
shall never run to waste,
"Although it be no longer pitcher'd Mr. MALONE remarks, though on what
authority is not declared, that these are punnistical allusions of the immortal
Bard, to the VIRGIN NAME of the fair LADY, and the retail occupation of her
SIRE, a worthy resident in those days of LOWER THAMES STREET.
up:
"For I will shun the modishe steps of those
"Who first themselves do blind their giddie Lords,
"Then lead them darkling to a direr fate!"
PAGE 12. -- GENUINE. FIFTY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
CCVIII. -- H. R. H. the DUKE of Y -- K.
-- "Yes, that is the Prince,
"Whose pulse of youth intemperatelie ran
"In earlier days! -- How goodly now the change,
"To view him classed with chieftains of renown --
"Hear a pure blessinge dwell on every tongue
"Through vet'ran ranks, -- and see his palace gates,
"With proud delighte, spring open to receive
"The mild dispenser of domestique peace! --
"So peers the radiance of a summer's sun,
"When spring's light clouds have fleeted far away!"
PAGE 100. -- GENUINE. CCIX. -- MRS. P -- LH -- M.
-- "Pooh, Nardina! -- we women of the chamber may as soon think of
traveling to heaven on our backs, as into his Highness' favor by virtue of
simple obedience. -- Methinks one might ensure it by a proscription of all
within the wane of his short-lived pleasure! -- but then we must promulgate
freely, and without respect of persons: -- nay, the prouder she be whom his
fancy has discarded, the nobler game for us full cry to follow!"

PAGE 73. -- Not GENUINE. CCX. -- ALD -- N N -- WN -- M.
"Sirs! it is wondrous hard, that I, a Citizen and Vintner, should find my
popularitie under parre, for discompting a princely reputation at a mavelous
small premium, which not a mortal amongst you would underwrite even at cent.
per cent.! -- I opened not this account current on the score of compound
interest; for I was flattered that my comeliness of person would well befitte
the purlieus of a Court; -- on this I indiscreetlie drew a bill at sight upon
his Highness' favor, which being not duly honored, came back again
protested!"

PAGE 43. -- Not GENUINE. CCXI. -- LADY JANE P -- G -- T.
"In features she is fashioned like her sex,
"With luring eye, and roseate smile equipt,
"To catch you silly gazers on their way:
"But for the airy magique of a shape,
"She does as far, in Nature's modelling,
"Her modern sisterhoode out-peere, -- as did
"The love-formed statue all the ancient world,
"Which Arte's proud rivalrie could never reach!"
PAGE 66. -- GENUINE. FIFTY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
CCXII. -- ARCHB -- P OF C -- NT -- Y.
"This morn our Lorde's prime Abbotte I beheld,
"In rich pontificalibus arraied!
"If, as in worldly stature he does grow
"Erect in grace right spiritual -- he will prove
"The stoutest buttraffe of our Mother Church! --
"Let Us heed not those who impiouslie say
"That troops of holy emptie-stomach'd seeres
"Now trencherlesse do leave the Abbie gate,
"For whom, in pious days, alas, gone by,
"The buttrie-doores did hospitablie open! --
"Nor those, who tell us that celestial soundes
"Of sackbutte, psalmodie, and dulcimer,
"Are drowned now in shrill Italia's strains! --
"And yet his Excellence may well assume
"To point men out a nearer road to bliss,
"By making them new heavens here on earth!"
PAGE 100. -- Not GENUINE. CCXIII. -- MISS G -- NN -- G.
-- " Marvina, Sir, bless her poor heart, has been no better entreated by
those from whom she sprung, than by the villainous world she does inhabitte!
-- the former made her a silly bait for their own ambition, and the latter
derided the abasement of its miscarriage: -- then became she dry nurse to a
withered Duchess, who, in recompense for her fidelity, left her even without
a deathe-bed blessinge! -- and now is she constrained to live by her own
wits, of which, she thanks Heaven, neither fortune, nor friends can so
baselie beguile her!"

PAGE 46. -- GENUINE. CCXIV. -- MR. C -- NC -- N.
-- "Arrah! but this foreign warfare abroad is a poor kind of trade for us
Jontlemen at home, who thrive best by the sweet arts of peace and good
plenty! -- By my own pretty conscience, and I am destined to be scratched by
a rantipole Lady of quality to boot! -- Och! but I had rather meet three
flying devils in the bogge of Kilkennie, than one mad daughter of old King Faro
upon dry land! -- ^aithe, and I think it was pretty well, to be bothered out
of one's light gold for a scrap of waste paper, without being tongue-tied to
one's good behavior by a piece of quality binding into the bargain!"

PAGE 14. -- Not GENUINE. CCXV. -- HON. MISS ED -- N.
-- "In virgin wildness thus each flow'rette bloomed
"'Mid earthly paradise, ere its fair face
"By sinne's illicit intercourse was blurred.
"Keep then the worlde's insidious arts aloof,
"That man, with serpent-tongue, may not beguile
"Primaeval innocence like this!" --
PAGE 81. -- GENUINE. FIFTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CCXVI. -- DUKE OF H -- M -- LT -- N.
-- "You may marvelle how it came to pass, but, certes, Sir, he did once
possess a wife, formed from the purest modelle of the antique world! -- Soon,
however, she was constrained to divorce herself from bed and boarde, to
shun that multiplying, which her heart did loathe! -- Then betook he to the
chuck-ribbe of another man, a stage-going rantipole, who, decked in all her
Grace's jewelrie, did the counterfeite of a Duchess so lasciviouslie enacte,
that this leathernpated Lord transportinglie did swear she was his only
Bona-roba!"

PAGE 33. -- Not GENUINE. CCXVII. -- MISS TH -- RL -- W.
"You are my Sire, great Lord! so nature speaks,
"Although my humble destiny denies
"That in the worlde's fair face, or here is that bore me,
"I should this blessinge modestly declare. --
"Some portion of that pride, however, I Will boaste,
"Which does right bluntly appertain to you;
"So that I never, to gratify my heart,
"Can say the thing I mean not, -- to deceive you."
PAGE 89. -- GENUINE. CCXVIII. -- CAPT. V -- NC -- V -- R.
-- "Rememberest thou not, Alberto, that, in the southern latitudes, we did a
flat odd fish descrie, with finnes for circumnavigation formed, who tossed
the brinie element around him with the breathe of a fantastique nostrille, as
if it were created for his own single pastime? -- but, cast on shore, he
crawled not unlike to other quadrupeddes, who ever and anon must lick the
duste!"

PAGE 4. -- GENUINE. CCXIX. -- PRINCESS S -- PH -- A.
"Well, sister Gertrude, you, thus elder borne,
"With this worlde's happiness may trifle on,
"And of your royalle hearts make duckes and drakes,
"As it does please ye! -- But, for my poor part,
"When I do turn a wommane's mind to wedde,
"None shall at distance traffic thus with mine.
"They woo by proxy in so false a key,
"That when you come to view each other's face,
"You shrink aghast from features thus disguised,
"And falsely pictured on a courtly mind!
"In soothe, I never will yield this little hand
"But in the joyful presence of mine eye,
"And then my tongue may gladly say -- Amen!"
PAGE 18. -- GENUINE. FIFTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CCXX. -- ADMIRAL SIR JOHN J -- RV -- S.
"Upon the fretteful bosom of the deep
"A course of long inquietude he steered,
"Untille that hopeful morn, which peering showed
" Castillian streamers hemme the horizon round!
"The winds now leagueing on the Britton's side,
"Bore his rough barques amid the haughty foe,
"Then left him on their reeking deckes to carve
"His own, and countrie's glory! How he played
"The gallant seaman's part, those best can tell
"Who saw the foe's proud banners floute the sky,
"Then furled lowly at the conqueror's feet!"
PAGE 74. -- GENUIN^ CCXXI. -- LADY BELL. P -- LW -- TH.
"Pshaw, man! a soul with ever so plain a coveringe may grace its
benevolencies right nobly. Show me the face, however coarslie modelled, that
can put you fair deeds out of countenance! So learned is this same Oresterna,
that she has set the wits of the whole Vattican to their last stake to
keep discourse with her alive in the dead languages! Her religion also you do
question wrongfullie; for it is purelie Christian, in despite of her Mahomedan
whiskers, a due portion of which she does lick in with her daily food, as
dried cattle do oaten straw in a farmeyarde!"

PAGE 104. -- Not GENUINE. CCXXII. -- REV. DR. P -- RR.
-- "On my reverence, good Sirs, I am an Orthographer most villainouslie
entreated! -- The varlettes took me at a non plus, just emerging from the
suddes of our village tonsor, with my temples fresh shorn of their natural
strength! Moreover, I had no pipe to smoke their waggeries withal? -- I should
have tried their poetique fictionne by the genuine rules of syntaxe, and then
their false concords had been most apparent! In lack of this, like a dull water
foul have they ensnared me! Nay, it is well in Christian charity I went no
further; for the knaves did entreat my affidavit of their deeds, expecting, as
a Priest, that I should swear through a churche-door, to save themselves from
d -- mn -- tion!"

PAGE 100. -- Not GENUINE. CCXXIII. -- MISS S -- WB -- GE.
"To public virtue who so little known,
"But bears some patriotte impresse on his mind
"Of blooming Erva's sire? -- Beholding her,
"Quick we retrace those lineaments of worth
"Which so enwrapp'd mankind, but brighter still
"Displaie their radiance now mid virginne charms!"
PAGE 34. -- GENUINE. FIFTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCXXIV. -- RT. HON. WM. P -- TT.
"What illes betide the manne, who seeks to rest
"His hope, upon the frail, and footlesse top
"Of vain Ambition's ladder! -- His ascent
"A ray of guileful fortune circleth round,
"To lure the slaveish gaze of base idolaters!
"So gapeing crowdes are drawn at first to view
"The mimique vaulter soaring high in air,
"'Till the spent actor can no longer poise
"His giddie frame by pride inflated: then
"The sated ingrates, turning from the scene,
"With tauntes, and jeeres, do loudlie greet his fall!"
PAGE 100. -- GENUINE. CCXXV. -- MRS. H -- LE.
-- "Thanks to my manly stars, it did belike me better, from my youth, to
tell convivial tales arounde the festive board, than go and count over girlish
dimples in my glass. -- Sirs, I was trained with gallantes of the passing age,
who could say a choice thing with a good grace, -- marry, and do one, when
occasion served, right merrily to boot! -- But mark me sons of Jollitie; if
I follow not the dinner clothe of diaper so soon as do the squeamish of my
sex, I tarry more for the flavor of your wit, than your wine!"

PAGE 45. -- GENUINE. CCXXVI. -- COL. F -- LL -- T -- N.
-- "Yclep me what you please, you shall find me a marvel-monger, but not
fabulous! -- I belie no man's judgment, unless prompted thereto by the
recognition of mine own superior senses! -- By my maiden buckler did I swear,
and that right truly, that, as Statesmen, we are all journieing beside our
fair wits, and all this, I fear, for foul purposes! -- Yet, Sirs! is there
a door open to our political salvation, turning upon the honorable hinge of
one manne's single valor! -- of him, who by art magique, did transform the
pen of a Lay Clerk into the truncheon of a Champagne Marshalle, -- who has
fought with brother-statesmen on all sides, as well as subjects, in the senate,
and in the field! -- who heroicallie traversed all regionnes, both hot and
cold! -- who has denied, in the teeth of Welsh philosophers, that the moon
was made of cheese that is green; and was the first of mankind to discover,
that the Dragon of Wantlie had no sting in his tail!"

PAGE 14. -- Not GENUINE. CCXXVII. -- LADY M -- ND -- P.
"A pair of honest eyes may fondly look
"On this old frame-worke to a noble mind,
"'Till admiration's self does lack a pause!
"She Is not the fretted boaste of high-arched domes,
"But the dispensing visitant of peace,
"Who seeks the lowly roof in search of woes
"She was ordained luxuriouslie to share!"
PAGE 54. -- GENUINE. FIFTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCXXVIII. -- EARL OF S -- FF -- K.
-- "By virtue of the ermined crownette on my browe, I did demand an audience
of the regalle ear within the privy closette. I went not, like a bungling
burglarer, to this work of state, by crooked steps, or dark; marry, I
sought the presence in the open front of day! -- The tale was round, and to
the purporte; and my tongue did descant on the sweet sobriety of Peace so
potentlie, that answer had his Highness none to give, to what my wit, and
wisdom thus propounded!" PAGE 18. -- GENUINE. CCXXIX. -- MADEMOISELLE F -- N
-- NI.
-- "Come, come, my pretty prattlinge Cozz, we'll bicker no more about the
virtue of our progenitors, like green gosslings on an open common! -- The
world is bountiful enough to me to acknowledge my descent either from a wise
Wit, or a weak Lord, to both of whom has baselie been imputed the sin of
my begetting! Thus the odds are two to one, at least, but I had a father
amongst them! though, like the cuckooe, she that hatched me, made any bird she
pleased to father, -- nay, and feather well her nestelinge into the bargain!"

PAGE 107. -- GENUINE. CCXXX. -- MR. D -- NT.
-- "Because I did accommodate the Kinge's Prime Ruler with the loan of a tax
on quadrupeddes canine, the curres on the other side the Senate, have forced a
run of wit upon me, in lack of other currencie, and now bark at me for the
deed sans ceasing! -- Nay, some of them hamper me with daily baskettes of
dead turnspittes, while others do hang their puppies on the knocker of my
bank, denoting thereby, that I am little more than a discounter of
dogge-skins!"

PAGE 77. -- Not GENUINE. CCXXXI. -- LADY C. G. N -- RES.
"Hear, Madame, now, an outcast daughter speak! --
"If it is the failinge of puissante blood
"To curdle in our veins, and back repelle
"The genial flowings of the human heart,
"Why not an humbler current be instilled
"To cheque the ensanguined malady of pride? --
"I fear me I Would a mother but per-chaunce,
"And not by any of those tender laws
"With which so closely Nature does unite
"Her smiling progeny! -- To me you have talked
"So vainlie of the honors of our house,
"That now by modesty, each peasant hutte
"Approves itself the sweeter habitation! --
"Oh, can you wonder, then, if, from false pomp,
"Fruitful to me of misery alone,
"I sought life's quietude in simpler scenes,
"And found it in an humble husbande's arms?"
PAGE 89. -- GENUINE. FIFTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCXXXII. -- EARL OF OXF -- D.
"By this right hand of Mortimer, my Lords,
"They did this proteste of mine heart purloine,
"Which the sublimer judgment of mine head,
"'Mid night's thick lucubrations had compounded!
"'It Is not but I the feate might reatchieve
"In caballistique symbolles, fitting well
"My state perturbed: but again to view
"Of Cambrian whiskers such a prowling pair,
"Scenting it here instincktivelie around,
"To filch my treasure from our upper shelfe,
"As 'twere a fragment vile of mouldied cheese --
"The lordly pride, and prudence of my house,
"Can never stomache to digestion!
PAGE 64. -- GENUIN^ CCXXXIII. -- COUNTESS OF D -- BY.
"Come! come! since you are now my wedded Lord -- you shall command me as you
please -- I will refrain from laughter, though my poor sides do crack
themselves with the forbearance! -- Then sans merriment, if these be their
chief actresses, I marvel not that the service of the State be managed so
unprofitablie! The poor souls think, that if the blood but riot nobly in
their veins, they have no occasion for more wit, or plain sense, than falls
to the moderate share of a gray wild-goose! How such creatures played
themselves into the stately drama of the Court, who could not earne clean
straw by their atchievings in a boarded barn, is past my finding out! -- For
my own poor part, my Lord, I will the Countess so enacte, and wear mine
ermined crownette with such thrift, that the insidious world shall find no
spotte thereon, nor cause of fault with him who kindly placed it on a
grateful browe!

PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. CCXXXIV. -- MR. D -- Y.
-- "Enamoured of some or other of my rare qualities, his Highness does
continue to load me with his prime civilities! -- Whether I am debtor for all
this to my wit, or that portion of witte's master piece my pocket does
contain, I wotte not! -- But yester morn he did my countenance resemble to the
Sun, which had journied roseilie from the East to his full at noone day: and
the self-same eve he bade me sit familiarlie by his side, to talk of
friendly loanes, and such like courtesies. -- Marry, there be those of my
acquaintance, who, envious of these honors, would blight their future
harvesting; but I heed them not, though one sarcasticallie says, that 'everie
dog has his day!' -- and another, 'that I Thomas Day, shale soon bid my
moneys a good night!"

PAGE 14. -- Not GENUINE. CCXXXV. -- Hon. Mrs. STR -- F -- D.
"Sad rendings do betide that widowed heart,
"Whose girlish panting after wedded bliss,
"Did in its extacie so early raise
"Twinne beauties to dispute her sov'rain sway!
"Now by the side of cold neglecte I sit,
"And see by slow, but torturing degrees
"The luscious homage of adoring eyes,
"By parricidal arts thus wrested from me!"
PAGE 100. -- Not GENUINE. FIFTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCXXXVI. -- Mr. Sec. R -- SE.
"Upon my honor, Sirs, I am condemned most unjustlie! -- As a serving man
of the State, I have drudged too hard for scantie pickings, to be thus hardilie
entreated. -- To no one breathinge owe I aught on the score of friendship, or
goode-wille -- yet do they cause hue and cry against me, as though I were the
worlde's defaulter! -- Nay, since the regalle treasury has somewhat run to
waste, men's eyes inquisitivelie do search, as if the loss were to be found
beneathe my humble goods, and chatels; when " I can take my God to witness,
(and he will come along with me) that I am as poor a creature as any in his
Highnesse' realm!"

PAGE 10. -- GENUINE. No. CCXXXVII. -- Lady B -- ME.
"Come, come, my higher titled sisters, now are you too elate: her Grace, our
husbande-hunting Mother, has exercised her wits in 'vantage for us all; and,
though she caughte no unfledged Duke for me, she has at least a nestlinge
Marquisse taken, with which my little harte's content! -- She tells me, both
his eyes are fashioned out of briliantes from the East, and that the rest of
this my dea^er self, is formed of precious jewelrie throughout! -- If it be
so, look lasses to it, or my gay spark may yours yet outshine, and I, his
bonnie BROOM, sweep a proud train before you!"

PAGE 16. -- Not GENUINE. No. CCXXXVIII. -- Sir THOMAS T -- T -- N.
-- "I stopped me only, in Minceing-lane, for a contraband glass of Carraway
Comfitte, at the luscious hand of TURGO's sleeping partner, and the Varlette
has demanded of me, payment through the nose for this little lippe-full of
simple compoundes! -- He did allege, that I had leakage given to a tierce of
precious Coniaque, most choicelie brought to proof; when, in verity, we no
more than shook an ullage casque upon the lees between us! Troth I did
proteste, by the first-blown honors of my Knighthoode, the allegation was not
true; yet this retailer of sinful provocatives, called him forth twelve
worldly minded sottes, who charged me on their oaths usurious, five thousand
Ducattes for this fancied waste of perisheable wares!"

PAGE 77. -- Not GENUINE. CCXXXIX. -- Miss OG -- LVIE.
-- -- " Rowena did not so;
"For while the vain, and giddie of her sex
"Strove emulouslie to deform, and blurre
"The fairer excellencies of the mind,
"She all its native dignity uphelde
"By 'complishments in reason's school acquired,
"Making their cloathelesse beauty shrink abashed
"From merit, so by modesty arrayed!"
PAGE 114. -- GENUINE. FIFTY-NINETH DAY's TRIAL.
No. CCXL. -- Earl SP -- R.
"Fie on your salte-water fates, who, from his cradle arristocratique, did
bemounte this lande-nursed Lord upon the proudest courser of the maine, and
bade him rule the headestrong quadrupedde by guidance of his tail! -- Awhile
he rode over Bisquay's troubled seas, until his senses with his seat he lost,
then, floundering, ploughed the deep! the pitying Mermaides flewe to his
relief, and combed his tearefull locks; while Neptune's self deridinglie
looked on, and cracked his coral-mailed sides with laughter!"

PAGE 87. -- GENUINE. No. CCXLI. -- Lady C -- LL.
-- "Stir thee betimes good Blanch! and endite me unnumbered cards of
complimente, invitinglie devised! so shall we out-telle the visitants to Noah's
arque, where all Godde's animals of kinds distinguished did congregate in
paires! Nay, we may boaste perchance, more tongues than did the builders of
proud Babel's tower confound! Sacque-possets let me have enough; and bid, that
lemmon-waters flow in plenty round our dates, on cupboardes daintilie
be-dight! Thus shall the Dames of common men in envy learn, that they have
neither means, nor manners to convoke like me assemblage of the great!"

PAGE 10. -- GENUINE. No. CCXLII. -- Mr. B -- RW -- L.
-- "Laugh, and it so please you, my merry masters; but true it is, that I was
broiled for years beneath the radiance of a burning sun, that my
constitution might be warmed also, through a body so bepeppered by plannettarie
influence? -- Thus did I begette countless lacques of pagodas, that my frail
flesh might lack naught to lust after in its mortal declension! -- And now,
quitting the hauntes of men, I have established a free warren for 'tother
gender, where a single skutte in the forest is not touched without privy leave
of me, the sole Lorde-paramount! so that if any sly puppie among you be found
running by the nose, -- as licensed keeper of mine own game, I shall rate the
lurcher from his queste, with simple loss of tail!"

PAGE 67. -- GENUINE. No. CCXLIII. -- Lady D -- CRE.
'No morn, or eve, when twilight calmlie rules,
"But Elda mantled in her sable stole,
"Walks forth to seek deathe's consecrated shade.
"There on the monumental buste she leanes,
"And, 'mid her only luxury in woe,
"Reads virtues appertaininge to her Lord,
"Which the cold hand of sculpture could not trace,
"So left for purer record on her mind!"
PAGE 20. -- GENUINE. FORTIETH DAY's TRIAL.
CCXLIV. -- Lord GR -- NV -- LE.
"Why do the hungry knaves begrudge me the common crumbes of comfort, which
appertain unto my table of estate? Those abroad, rail at me in the
markettable style of Byllingsgate, because forsoothe I am daily purveyor of
mine own coddes head; while others on the opponent side of our own noble
chamber, do invidiouslie hint, that with our illustrious house, it is all fish
(particularly plaice) that comes into our net!" -- In verity we somewhat
traffic in that commodity; for while our brother of Buckingham does retaile
his finnie race by the Alluding to one of this distinguished family selling the
Carp of GOSFIELLD Park Ponds in Essex, by this scanty admeasurement, long
subsequent to the days of good QUEEN BESS!
inch superficial, I, in wholesale, buy me lumping pennieworths by the pound
avoirdupoise!

PAGE 12. -- GENUINE. CCXLV. -- Lady H -- L -- D.
"At her first enlaunchement, she was as trim a barque as ever floated on
Love's billow! but her headstrong pilotte, clapping his helm too hard a
weather, when she was light of ballast, the vessel was upsette, and soon
drifted, sans reckoning or compass, to a neighboring Coaste, where, liberated
from British Vassalage, she did become a leakie droit of Batavian Hollande!"

PAGE 35. -- Not GENUINE. CCXLVI. -- Capt. M -- R -- CE.
-- "Caparisoned in a motley jacquet with quality binding, he became a Maurice
dancer, surmounted with cappe and bells, which he jingled to the tune of other
men's folly! Thus pranced he into goodly dinners in jig-time; and, for his
night's repast, that picked he up merrily, by chaunting to unhallowed minds
the vespers of lascivious intoxication!"

PAGE 16. -- Not GENUINE. CCXLVII. -- Lady H -- W -- RD de W -- LD -- N.
-- "Within the sepulcher of her dead Lord,
"Deeply she has entombed her harte's best love,
"Keeping alone the blissful hope alive
"Of soon replighting it in realms above!
"Meanwhile, the cold abodes of poverty
"She seeks, and there with pious hand deals out
"Her meede of Christian Charity to all around!"
PAGE 4. -- GENUINE. FORTY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
CCXLVIII. -- Prince WILLIAM of G --.
-- "Since your half-witted knaves do bemeasure man's reasonable faculties by
the narrow circumference of his waiste-band, I see not how a Princely soldier
now a days is to pass muster! -- For my own part, I can woo sighingly with
most gallantes, and couch my lance, though full caparisoned, in the tented
field. -- Let the Knight Errant who can atchieve more heroicallie, enter the
listes, and he please, before me!"

PAGE 76. -- Not GENUINE. CCXLIX. -- Mrs. BR -- D -- D.
-- "Come, come, Bud! let not you and I disturb our silly pates about such
trifles! -- Where is the benefitte of gold, unless, like the genial air of
heaven, it has most free circulation? or of mansions huge with their
appurtenances, if not with occupation free? -- True, as you say, by courtesy
right conjugale, you are my Lord and Master; -- but you did always tell your
friends that you were their obedient servant: therefore have I, on our special
nights of festival, taken care that you should not befalsifie your word! --
You do forget, that I, just out of dadeing-strings, in softest dalliance did
allow great girls to be bemodelled after the likeness of your own harte's
delighte, and which are now so multiplied, that the sound of grand-damme echoes
through my ears, before, in nature's course, I Have ceased to be a mother! --
Nay, dearest chuck, you owe me many kindnesses for this -- indeed you do!"

PAGE 1. -- Not GENUINE. CCL. -- Mr. H -- ST -- GS.
"The man of spleen, high-gifted as he rose,
"Who, through my wounded honor sought my life,
"Has paid the debt of nature thus before me!
"If ever I turn toward his cold remains,
"'Twill be to breathe forgiveness over a shrine
"Which Science has so purelie consecrated!"
PAGE 18. -- GENUINE. CCLI. -- Mrs. ST -- T.
-- "Last eve, in Abbotte's lane,
"Where spectred suicides have groaned their last,
"An haggarde sorc'resse crosst me on the way,
"And wildlie asked me, if I had not borne
"A fair, and dainty daughter? -- Sans reply --
"Fly hence!" quothe she, -- "a mother be again,
"Nor longer leave upon the whirlpoole's brinke
"A child that followed thine own steps astray;" --
"Then bade me view a raven high in air,
"Which bore my destiny on sable wing! --
"I, smiling, tosst some money in her lap
"As fortune carelesslie had done by me,
"And left the wretch, unsatisfied, behind!"
PAGE 100. -- GENUINE. FORTY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
CCLII. Rear-Admiral Sir HORATIO N -- LS -- N, K. B.
"Pshawe, Tubert! why, I tell thee that this man of war, like the
fire-basqueing Salamander, cannot live but within the rake of your red-hotte
shot, and other mortal conflagrationes! nay, in admiration of their leader's
appetite, his mariners do grumble, unless they have one warm meal a day of
this diette, which would give our ordinary stomaches the harteburn!"

PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CCLIII. Mrs. C -- MPB -- L, ci-devant Miss W -- LL -- S.
-- "I do marvelle, now the honied moon has done to shine, if the same
star of lowly modesty will swaie Alberta's course, as it was wont! That she
did be-catch herself this golden plumed spark, by the art magique of
counterfeit resemblinges, no one can in verity deny; -- so shall it soon be
seen, whether she has the wit to hold him now in undisguise, or, in her
self-defence, must enacte it with this same fancy bird, to the very end of the
chapter!"

PAGE 38. -- Not GENUINE. CCLIV. -- Mr. FR -- NC -- S.
-- "If a manne's polity, which has stood the burning shame of various
climes, is to be trammelled up by the vulgar ligatures of your jurisprudence
common, at home, -- then are our liberties fittinge for little more than bands
to tie up dried provender for state cattle! -- Sir, I had fairlie entrapped me
some scores of Glocestershire wights, and intended to have fed the hungry
knaves with the pareings of their single cheese; but that fierle mountaineer of
the law, with a Welsh leeke in his bonnette, enloosed these pressers of curdes
and whey, and then threw slander over my fair fame, as thick as their own
Tewkesburie mustarde!"

PAGE 44. -- Not GENUINE. CCLV. -- Hon. Miss BL -- GH.
-- "I do begin to think me, sister Blanch,
"That womane's charms, which Fortune has not graced,
"Like the light meteors of a summer's sky,
"Attracte the momentarie gaze of men,
"Scarcely awhile their short-lived colors last! --
"For meagre vanity but thus skinne-deepe,
"Let us no longer trifle with our glass,
"But turn it to the features of the mind,
"And see if any hidden beauty there
"Has claim to be reflected?" --
PAGE 114. -- GENUINE. FORTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CCLVI. -- SIR LIONEL D -- L.
-- "His Highness, in his mavelous condescension, did entreat himself to
dine with me, but on stipulation positive, that nothing feminine should grace
our boarde: -- assenting thereunto, I have unwiselie embroiled myself with
certain of mine own householde; for my Lady Wife, who delights in true
courtesy, does so lamente this loss of the smile princely, that she has
forbidden me to feed a royalle foul thus privilie again, on peril of being
hen-pecked for the remnant of my days!"

PAGE 13. -- Not GENUINE. CCLVII. -- MISS ANG -- SH.
-- "I pray you, tell me the use of your dignified alliances, if we are not
allowed to make our daily boaste of them? Since it has pleased that
capricious jade, Fortune, to trundle a ducalle crownette over our lowly
thresholde, I have rantipolled it fashionablie with the best of them! and my
tongue, which had ever a musical propensitie to repetitions, has caught the
dulcet air of nobility so truly, that it can chaunte you no other praises now
but of her Grace, my dear be -Duchessed sister!"

PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CCLVIII. -- SIR CHARLES F -- R -- DCL -- FE.
-- "A plague on that commodity of good humor, which, coming in simple
contacte with a good digestion, has swolen up Barbolto to the full size of
carnal enormitie! -- Why, the waistband of his lower garment has dilated so
hugelie, that tailors cannot encompasse him with thrice stitched parchments!
and so fast does he pick up stones averdupoize, that hack-horses do shye at
him more than a sack of ground midlings! -- Marry, and he thus goes on, but
all God's carrying creatures, male and female, will dread the mighty pressure
of his bestrideing!"

PAGE 100. -- GENUINE. CCLIX. -- COUNTESS OF SH -- FTSB -- Y.
"If, in our teenes, a silly, wayward heart
"Has prematurelie pledged its maiden vow,
"Frailty, the chartered shield of our weak sex,
"Must penance it away! -- Who can disclaim
"Due hommage by a noble suitor sworn,
"When with soft titled kisses sealed? And yet,
"The vain illusive dream no sooner over,
"And Fortune paced her guileful footesteppes back,
"Than all her wedded votaries appear
"Of Hope's fair fancie-woven vests unrobed,
"Like spiders foiled in their dismantled Web!"
PAGE 1. -- Not GENUINE. FORTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCLX. -- SIR J. ANSTR -- R.
-- "Had I not been a judge of capilliarie jurisprudence, they had compelled me
on board ship, without my wigge judicial, or even the state dower of my now
Lady wife right legallie guaranteed! -- I do marvelle, how our Magi of the
East are to be personified, unless in full pontificalibus! -- 'Marry, Sirs,'
quothe I, 'but my fage temples shall be well secured from mortal inquisition,
and the purlieu of my body incorporeal, amplified by circumvallations of
ermined tabbie, or I depart not from his Liege's presence!' -- Thus have they
at length equipped me -- and now may they reasonably look for knottie points
of serviceable hardihoode, of which the Medes, and Persians never dreamt of
yore!"

PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CCLXI. -- MRS. BR -- DIE -- L.
-- "Thus mine harte's dear prodigalle
"From Siren harlottrie I have restored
"To recognition true of my poor charms,
"Which he, like truant boy, did abdicate!
"Our gordian knotte now nuptiallie re-twined,
"Oh marvelle not, my girls, if it should chance
"Within the circling course of nine bright moons,
"Your lovelie sisterhoode may owe increase
"To Nature's new atchieveings!"
PAGE 20. -- GENUINE. CCLXII. -- ADMIRAL LORD H -- D.
-- "Mark that rough Seaman passing by, whose years shed luster on a gallant
browe! -- To scourge the enemy around the globe, was not enough for him,
until, by conflagration of their fleetes, he did illume the fair, and smiling
face of Victory! -- Say, Mervolt, do not honors thus so nobly earned, right
well be-grace him?" PAGE 18. -- GENUINE. CCLXIII. -- MARCHIONESS OF B -- K -- G
-- M.
-- "Oh she does hold
"Your minceing dames of quality so cheap,
"As scarce to deem the best her quatre cousins!
"How often, by matron modesty impelled,
"Lays she with winning grace, her crownette by,
"To add an humbler virtue to that store
"Which does her modest Temple best adorn!"
PAGE 99. -- GENUINE. FORTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCLXIV. -- ADMIRAL LORD D -- NC -- N.
"If that be not a man of stature high
"In deeds of valor, as in mien -- no more
"I Will trust this intellectual eye of mine
"To pick me out a hardie-moulded Britton! --
"Upon Batavia's danke, and sullen coaste,
"I saw his weather-beaten pennants fly,
"Taunting their sluggish barques to battle!
"At length in ruethful moment gave they sail,
"And at their very thresholde met their fate! --
"The dreadful work of nations thus performed,
"Soon did the fury of his front subside;
"And when their Chieftain's banner graced his feet,
"A sigh of sympathy came sweetly forth,
"Presage of something nobler still, when all
"The bitterness of wrath was done away!"
PAGE 100. -- GENUINE. CCLXV. -- COUNTESS DOWAGER OF M -- NSF -- D.
"Pooh -- pooh! Tubert, -- she will have her full swing, unless the rope of
dalliance break -- or naught know I of woman's gambolles! -- Marry, man, why
you can no more keep a Flandriken dame of quality from a second snap carnalle,
than a pedlar's pad from another quarterne and penn'worth, when in manger set
before him! tie them up as tightlie as you please, and both shall slip their
halter, for the liquorish provender their appetite delights in!"

PAGE 33. -- Not GENUINE. CCLXVI. -- SIR CHAPTER B -- NB -- Y.
-- "Oh! he is the sportinge Sir, who, in the hey-daie of his youthfulle blood,
did race it over Tartarian plains with flyinge Arrabs, and left their whiskers
distances behind! -- Next run he riotte through all the looser petticoates of
Salamanca. -- But now, forsoothe, he quests it soberlie on foot, to cull out
dainties for his bed and boarde! and, for the matter of that, they are not
thrown away on him, who has a dispensing hand, well fashioned to subdue the
pressing wantes of others!"

PAGE 20. -- GENUINE. CCLXVII. -- DUCHESS OF L -- DS.
"If Nature, with a scantie-dealing hand,
"Has decked few witcheries my features round,
"At least I owe her for that Syrenne voice
"With which she did possess me: -- it is on this
"That Art does play her modulating powers,
"And woman, by its magique mynstrelsie,
"Allure man's ear, and bend its raptured sense
"In sweet accordance to her will.
"Thus can she turn the mirror of the State,
"And by reflected greatness be ennobled!"
PAGE 3. -- GENUINE. SIXTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCLXVIII. -- ALDERMAN AND -- RS -- N, LORD M -- Y -- R.
-- "Stand you by, my brother Cittes, and, as in duty bound, give to this
golden chain of mine it is reverend precedence! -- Know you not that I Am a Man
of State, on this fair side the Templar's bar, since I did escort our
Sov'rain safely to, and fro! In soothe, his Liege has hinted to me, through a
whisper of the Court, that it is his royal will, I shall in future bear a
bloody palm, to keep my nasal dignity in countenance! -- Marry, Sirs, thus
shall I be empowered, by virtue of mine own body corporate, to give issue from
these loins, which may, in better times, look even Courtiers in the face
without abashment!" PAGE 22. -- GENUINE. CCLXIX. -- HON. MISS D -- NC -- N.
-- "Beshrewe me, Coz! but I am ignorant, for which of my tall properties I
have so hugelie grown in man's esteem! -- I am most wonderfully bevisitted of
late by gaie gallants, who tender me their harte's best suite and service; yet
talk they little more to me, than of my father's deeds in arms; so that I do
fear me, after all, I owe these sudden conquests more to his mighty valor,
than to my own poor feminine atchievings!"

PAGE 12. -- Not GENUINE. CCLXX. -- SIR H -- H -- GHT -- N.
-- "Oh, he is a most steady Sir! one with most fixed principles who will sit
you for whole moons in the playing room at the Bathe, like a piece of its own
furniture immovable! -- Though chosen to the Senate, he obtrudes amongst them
neither his opinions, nor his person: nay, he is a man of so few words, that he
never said Aye in his whole life, till they did lead him the other day
blindfolded to the altarre!"

PAGE 36. -- Not GENUINE. CCLXXI. -- HON. MISS K -- NG.
"How sweet you flow'rette peered to meet the sun,
"Ere it was baselie plucked by that fell hand
"Which to its tender beauties owed protection? --
"But blighted now! behold it choked with weeds,
"Appurtenances sad of rooted woe! --
"These courts she not as types of murdered fame,
"For it does seem to be in frantic grief,
"Because the just, avenging hand of Heaven
"Has reached her merciless despoiler!" --
PAGE 14. -- GENUINE. SIXTY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCLXXII. -- LORD H -- WKES -- RY.
-- "I met me on the Kinge's highwaye, a Tom Thumb of a Lordeling, who did
boaste of mightier deeds than those of Jack the slaughterer of Giantes! He
told me he had vaulted the day before with the man of Rhodes, and beaten him
by a furlong at a single jumpe! He had just stepped into his nine-leagued
boots, and swore by the maidenheade of his nobility, that he would be at the
capital of the Gauls and back again, before he broke his fast!"

PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. CCLXXIII. -- LADY ANN N -- TH.
"After a lapse of twenty virginne years,
"He has my maiden matronhoode again
"Assailed with vows of never-altered love!
"Though all this live-long while he did endure
"The fretful yoke of a connubial life,
"Abatement of his passion find I none;
"So to this fierrie spark my hand I yielde,
"And plight obeisance to his lordly will."
PAGE 12. -- Not GENUINE. CCLXXIV. -- MR. BRYAN ED -- DS.
-- "If a man having been blessed with Godfathers and Godmothers, be despoiled
of his Christian name by those who rule us, what chance have we, my
neighbors, in such times, to maintain the remnant of our birthrightes? Why,
Sirs, they have employed their serving knaves of the press, to y'clep me by a
beastly name, denoting that I would dance, and play you silly antickes,
under the cudgel of my leader! Nay, the very Oracle of our Assembly, forgetful
of his nomenclatura, called me forth but the other day as Mr. Bruin, and thus
did he provoke a most unseemlie roar of merriment at my expenditure!"

PAGE 22. -- GENUINE. CCLXXV. -- MARCHIONESS OF H -- RTF -- D.
"'It Is not in sculptured stature, coldlie chaste,
"That ARESTINA towers above her sex:
"The world does give her fame for shapeful form
"Well molded for pre-eminence; but mark
"How in the plastique movement of each limb,
"On every charm-combining feature round,
"The animating soul of virtue breathes
"A grace that is intellectual!"
PAGE 38. -- GENUINE. SIXTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCLXXVI. -- LORD VISCOUNT H -- REF -- D.
"Adown in Brecon's rude, but fertile vale,
"One morn a noblie-gifted Sir I spied,
"Teaching obeisance to the stubborn soil!
"A yoke of milke-white oxen did fore-pace
"His steps, awhile the pollish-breasted ploughe
"Traced furrowed lines beneath his skillful hand.
"Strait asked I of this man, who, in these days,
"Dared give primaeval dignity to scenes
"Of rustique cast? -- They told me he was one
"Of Brittain's Peers! -- Then mark me well, quoth I,
"The earth, ennobled thus, soon to its Lord,
"In plenteous stores, right gratefully shall give
"Its honorable produce back!"
PAGE 44. -- GENUINE. CCLXXVII. -- LADY ALMERIA C -- RP -- R.
-- "They tell me I have not done amiss in bartering a littel of my woman's
beauty, for a better portion of worldly wisdom. -- I would not have been
hand-maiden to any household thus long, without knowing my why? and my
wherefore? -- However, in pure friendship to her Highness, I will continue
cheerfullie to undertake those familie-affayres, for which her own infirmities
do unfitte her, and leave it to the Duke to reckon on my deserts accordingly!"

PAGE 18. -- Not GENUINE. CCLXXVIII. -- MR. M -- CN -- M -- A, [of Streatham.]
-- "The wagges of the Court would insinuate against me, that mine is the
House of Call for politic confederation: moreover, that I do retaile out
state projects at the tippling sign of the Irishe Piper! Truth it is, that I
put good cheer before my guests; but if there be any treason among 'em, it
must be found in their own wits, and not in M'Nab's old wine! -- That some
of their midnight deeds have savoured of darkness, I cannot well deny; but
that, indeed, was only after quaffing so incontinently, that they could not
see!"

PAGE 7. -- GENUINE. CCLXXIX. -- LADY ST. AS -- PH.
"That is the second flowerette which her Lord
"Connubiallie has culled out. -- The first,
"Though sweet in budde, did wither on his breast,
"Ere it had reached its bloome! -- But now, in soothe,
"Has he selected, from a Northern clime,
"With fairer hope that time will here mature
"His harte's amended choice!" --
PAGE 34. -- GENUINE. SIXTY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCLXXX. -- LORD C -- WD -- R.
"I do appeal me to your Council's boarde,
"And ask redress of honour-wounding wrongs.
"You did not make me Cawdor's titled Lord,
"To see me truckle to a Cambrian Thane.
"Remember, Sire, in days of peril past,
"I met upon our beach the insulting Gauls,
"And for the oars they quitted, gave them chains!
"For this, and such like services of state,
"I do expect supremacy of power,
"Within this scantie limit of our Isle;
"Or that the miserable moietie I hold
"Be taken back, in noveltie to grace
"Some lowly Chief, on whose quiescent mind
"Divided rule may sit at ease!" --
PAGE 77. -- Not GENUINE. CCLXXXI. -- LADY -- T -- ILL -- R.
"When I was sick at heart, I found, like Death,
"That Love did all distinctions level! -- Oh! then
"My equalizing soul, true to its source,
"Sighed not for ostentatious aid -- but bade
"That her own Doctor Nature should call in.
"He coldlie did approach my restless couch,
"But found my feverous pulse beat quick and high;
"Still he insensibly my case mistook,
"Although my crimsoned visage spoke it clear,
"Until perforce I told him where it lay,
"And how to medicine its only cure!"
PAGE 48. -- GENUINE. CCLXXXII -- DR. L -- WR -- CE.
-- "I did betake me, to other morn, to Father L -- wr -- ce, a Soothe-sayer,
and grave Oracle of the Arches, one who does retaile you civille law, and
politiques most villainoussie compounded! -- I found him in learned
tribulation, having just escaped the COMMONS not Doctorial, where, being far
from home, he did make it a dubitable question with his own pericranium,
whether he had risen by his head, or on his feet? -- The wagges had laughed
incontinently at his confusion, and told his Reverence to his bearde, that he
had been assessing his five senses quintuplie, without levying from thence one
grain of common understanding!"

PAGE 104. -- GENUINE. CCLXXXIII. -- MRS. SCR -- PE.
-- "In soothe, good Nurse, it is hard
"That I, who sought a Husbande's fonder arms,
"Soon as I quitted yours, am now of both
"Bereft! -- The gapeing eyes of other men
"Still speak me somewhat more than passing fair,
"Which my own mirror proudly does reflect:
"And yet my wedded heart, just in its teenes,
"Is now divorced, and its first plighted love
"Cast in its infancy away!"
PAGE 45. -- Not GENUINE. SEVENTIETH DAY's TRIAL.
CCLXXXIV. -- BISHOP OF D -- M.
"You ask me, Lady, how my frame could feel
"The shock of magique wantonness so far?
"Your interrogatorie thus I solve --
"In my minde's scopefull eye I viewed the dance,
"Where, on the optique nerve of mortal sense
"It spread lewd gesticulations wide!
"In blaunched lawne though man be purelie robed,
"Yet has the boundless will of Heaven ordained
"It should begirt rebellious flesh and blood!
"How then, I pray you, Madam, so endued,
"These maddening fantasies can Nature bear
"To flash across her poor, distempered brain,
"And keep frail manhood in subjection?"
PAGE 18. -- Not GENUINE. CCLXXXV. -- COUNTESS OF C -- RK.
-- "No -- no, my Lord!
"My woman's will must be your sov'rain law,
"Though at the altar's base my tongue did plight
"Obedience, 'twas but a weak, fleeting vow,
"Which after-thought was bound to remedy.
"Here then, imperiously, I do demand
"(In sure avoidance of domestique strife),
"Through all this life's concerns pertaining you,
"Due vassalage! -- holding in fiefe of me
"Your crownette, -- and your sword!"
PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CCLXXXVI. -- EARL OF C -- RD -- N.
-- "If my Lady Wife be not overgone these eighteen moons with son and heir
of mine own begetting, then know I naught of the net proceeds of noble
manhood! -- Why, Sir, but the other night, in my repose -- (but mark, it is enter
nous), -- the littel sightless rogue did fairlie kick his much delighted sire,
in place I dare not nominate: -- taking the hint, no sooner came the morn, than
I did hie me forth, and, with his cradle, bought me up rich swaddling clothes
in plenty, to await the time of his forthcoming!"

PAGE 80. -- GENUINE. CCLXXXVII. -- LADY C -- H -- R.
-- "I was beguiled
"To cut those flowing tresses from my neck,
"Which men so much admired; and now they say,
"That I have banished from their wanton home
"The littel Loves, which used to ambush there!
"Surely I am not thus of beauty shorn,
"(As man of yore was of his mortal strength!)
"Doomed to recline my fair dejected head,
"Like flowrette fair most prematurelie cropped!"
PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. SEVENTY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
CCLXXXVIII. -- VICE ADMIRAL C -- LP -- IS.
-- "Give me a Tar, who serves his country truly, and without much
imparlance; so that, when an enemy does hold disputation with him, he
answers in repartee, and cuts off his chain of argument by a quick exchange
of chaine-shotte! -- I knew a salt water Chief of this stamp, who silenced the
mutiny of his ship by the same splice of eloquence, and for which his
Sov'rain, in admiration of the deed, did command him to display the Red Flag
at his own gallant main!"

PAGE 13. -- GENUINE. CCLXXXIX. -- COUNTESS OF H -- RC -- T.
-- "I pray thee, Spaldo, give not thy tongue propensitie to courtly slander.
-- That Lady is the prime-moveable feminine about the Queene's person, which
may account for its having been handled, in time of yore, rather freely. --
It argues mavelous greatness for one nobly bred, to be able in her spleen,
to descant boldly on Royal weaknesses; and when the fit of obsequience does
return, to bend, and lick the very duste beneath her Highnesse's sandals! --
Marry, knave, to be in perfect tune with the times, one must have an alarm,
that will ring you all the changes of the State, from the treble key of
sycophancie, down to the lower basse of courtly discontent! -- "

PAGE 88. -- Not GENUINE. CCXC. -- SIR FRANCIS B -- D -- TT.
-- "Should this whimsical Knight have sworn to urge perpetual strife with
nature, he will keep his word! -- Why, Sir, he can combatte with all the
spiteful elements, one after the other, in their bitterest wrath, and laugh at
his own discomfiture: nay, he will now lick read fierrie bars of iron, till
his tongue grow hissing hot, and then mount upon tavern benches, and make
you flameing declamations! Heaven, in its waste of bounty, did bestow upon
his head a liberal covering of hair, but he has displaced it even to the
nodde of his neck, that none of it might stand in the way of his political
exaltation!"

PAGE 4. -- GENUINE. CCXCI. -- COUNTESS OF B -- KL -- Y.
-- "Is it not passing strange,
"That from the teeming brain of one demure,
"A progeny so great should issue forth
"To claim pre-eminence? -- How 'twas contrived
"In l^stful privitie to gender thus,
"And procreate, -- mankind do marvel much!
"But mark forsooth -- the blush of shame gone out
"In the fair face of an astonished world,
"Her little dark^ings she does now array,
"Rich in the trappings of their father's house,
"To try how such usurpings will befitte
"The dormant pri^e of Tudor's outcast race!"
PAGE 36. -- GENUINE. SEVENTY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
CCXCII. -- BISHOP OF W -- CH -- R.
-- "Nay, nay, good brother Abbotte -- by the mass; but we are all of the
Church Militant, -- and therefore bound by the cannon, to fight, as well as
pray! I am not for letting our common clothe go forth to wage our battles of
defense, and not budge a single inch ourselves, although we piouslie commend
the Lord of Hosies to war upon their side: -- Do ye all as best belikes your
reverend fantasies -- but, for mine own part, I Will not be knocked of the head,
like a lewd goat kneelinglie -- that is poz!!"

PAGE 33. -- Not GENUINE. CCXCIII. -- LADY E. E. FITZG -- LD.
"Come, Geraldine, it is meet we hie to Court,
"And there our virgin fealty displaye.
"What 'though a shoot has wildlie took its course,
"And from the stem it has disgraced, been torn; --
"A pair of hearts they shall in us behold
"Chaste in their loyalty, as in their love!"
PAGE 6. -- GENUINE. CCXCIV. -- LORD M -- NTO.
"About apostacy go tell the winds! --
"To the State's vantage, rightly held supreme,
"All earthly peccadilloes must give way. --
"Have I not crown, and glittering scepter gained,
"To chafe those temples which, in soothe I found
"Most heavilie en-diadem'd before?
"While on mine own obedient head I placed
"Naught but a feathered cappe, with pretty belles,
"On which man's vanity may one day ring
"Its own dumb peale of courtly triumph!"
PAGE 7. -- GENUINE. CCXCV. -- LADY CON -- GH -- M.
"A monied scrivener was her thriftie sire,
"Whose dame did lustilie repaie him back
"Full compounde interest of wedded love!
"Hence does Alberta all her sex o'ertoppe
"In statured height, as well as peerlesse charms,
"Boasting no source from that puissante blood,
"Which, with a scurvied arrogancy taintes
"Some of the proudest skins within our isle!"
PAGE 66. -- GENUINE. SEVENTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CCXCVI. -- Rev. DR. [ Anti-Sejanus] SC -- T.
-- "If your holy Soothsayers, are with their gray hairs, to be revisitted by
the politic sins of their youth, then will anointed men be placed in
purgatory everlasting! -- But the other Sabbathe, when I was propounding passive
obedience to the good housewives of that piscatorie town called Scarborough,
came there a Capittaine of a military cohort, who did draw from me my fair
congregation by the sound of trumpette, blown at the very door of the
tabernacle! -- I did appeal me to my countrie's laws for this offense against
the statutes divine; when the Jurors for our Sov'rain Lord the King, in lack
of reverence for the Church, awarded me but a cracked teaster for so
abominable a waste of reputation cleriqual!"

PAGE 77. -- Not GENUINE. CCXCVII. -- LADY L -- GHB -- GH.
-- "Remember, Sirs,
"'It Is not a wordie warfare you have to wage,
"Nor, by the varying flippancie of tongue
"To victory must you aspire! -- Behold,
"And on the spottlesse bannerette record
"Deeds worthy of fair Science, and her sons!
"It has been hallowed at the altar's base,
"And from my feeble hands, in pur^st faith,
"Now does it emulouslie pass to yours,
"That all which woman's loyalty can hope
"By manly fortitude may be achieved!
PAGE 78. -- GENUINE. CCXCVIII. -- LADY EDWARD FITZG -- LD.
"Why must my wayward destiny be writ
"In hideous scrolls by goutes of kindred blood! --
"Scarce had I worn the ensanguined horrors out
"Of a reputed Sire's too rutheful fate,
"Than the last threade of life was torn in twain,
"By fond affection given as a stay,
"On which one hope might perilouslie hang!"
PAGE 88. -- GENUINE. CCXCIX. -- MR. HENRY AD -- NGT -- N.
-- "Since I am reputed Wit-cracker to the Prime Ruler of the realm, he must
right honorably let me pouch a little of the State-kernel, else shall I make
the beardes of his Courtiers wagge, to the miserable tune of mine own
improvidence!"

PAGE 33. -- GENUINE. END OF VOL. III.

