VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A COMI-TRAGEDY.

PASSAGES SELECTED BY DISTINGUISHED PERSONAGES, ON THE GREAT LITERARY TRIAL OF
VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A Comi-Tragedy.

"WHETHER IT BE -- OR BE NOT FROM THE IMMORTAL PEN OF SHAKSPEARE?" VOLUME I.

SEVENTH EDITION.

-- "Open me a huge Wardrobe aboundinge in motlie habittes, and mark how
fantasticallie poor mortals will arraie themselves!" VORT. and ROW. LONDON:
PRINTED BY H. BROWN, FOR J. RIDGWAY, YORK-STREET, ST. JAMES'S-SQUARE.

DEDICATION.
TO THE Most NOBLE! -- Most ILLUSTRIOUS! Most PUISSANT! -- Most MAGNIFICENT!
Most IRRADIATING star motif IN THE BRIGHT GALAXY OF THE BRITISH PEERAGE, JAMES
MARQUIS OF SALISBURY, K.G. etc! etc! etc! etc! etc! etc!
Most curious LORD,
THE disputed RECORDS of ANCIENT POESY here enclosed, would be debased by a
deposit in any other hands, than that cleanly pair, which so peculiarly
appertain to your Lordship, as CUSTOS ROTULORUM of the MUSES! I discharge but
my official duty then, in placing them under your stupendous protection! -- But
as MAGICO-MANAGER of the WHITE-WAND, and GRAND MASTER of REFINED ARTS, you must
allow me to look up to your HIGH MIGHTINESS with the rest of mankind, -- an
astonished Gazer!

I am, Most Noble, most etc. etc. Your lowest FOOTSTOOL. RALPH REGISTER, Clerk
of ASSIZE, Oyer and Terminer, In the COURTS LITERARY, etc. etc.
FETTER-LANE, Oct. 5, 1795.
PREFACE.
As far as this interesting TRIAL. has gone, it has been conducted with that
rigid impartiality which so particularly distinguishes the various Courts of
BRITISH JURISPRUDENCE! -- How it may terminate can be known only to the ruler
of these great events: indeed, from the contrariety of weighty evidence already
advanced, and the cloud of testimonies yet to be adduced, it would be highly
indecorous, to indulge even a conjecture upon the probability of its decision!!

The COURT have wisely resolved to sit without further adjournment, in order
now to receive at their Bar, the evidence of the first POLITICAL, and LITERARY
Characters, against whom, exceptions were so ingeniously taken by Council, but
which however have all been most constitutionally overruled. These being gone
through, the sage and learned POLONIUS in person, will sum up the whole
evidence, and after delivering a solemn and eloquent charge from the Bench,
receive from the GRAND INQUEST, that VERDICT. which no doubt, will soon tend to
the complete administration of LITERARY JUSTICE, by setting this GREAT QUESTION
at rest for ever!!!

VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A COMI-TRAGEDY.
PENDING the distinguished inquest under which the fact is now trying, whether
the newly discovered DRAMA, is, or is not from the pen of SHAKSPEARE, it would
be highly indecorous to hazard a single conjecture upon it. -- The EDITOR,
therefore, will content himself with merely giving a faithful transcript of all
that has been successively recorded on this important subject in that
fashionable Intelligencer the MORNING HERALD: only remarking, that whatever may
be the final issue of the TRIAL, the passages selected from the Piece itself by
the several VOTERS, pro and con. must remain indelible proofs of the
discriminative taste of those, who have here so characteristically enrolled
themselves in defense of our BELLES LETTRES.

The following is the paragraphical CHAIN by which this great Literary Concern
has been brought into such general notice; viz.

PARAGRAPH.
The SHAKSPEARE discoveries, said to be made by the son of Mr. IRELAND, of
Norfolk-street, are the Tragedy of LEAR, and another entitled VORTIGERN and
ROWENA, now first brought to light, and both in the Bard's own handwriting: --
in the same chest are said to have been also found an antique MELANGE of love
letters! -- professions of faith! -- billet doux! -- locks of hair! -- and
family receipts! -- The only danger, respecting faith in the discovery, seems
to be from the indiscretion of finding too much! If poor CHATTERTON had
contented himself, with drawing literary treasure in moderation from the
monkish chest of ROWLEY, his own inventive genius had probably remained unknown!

ANOTHER.
Mr. IRELAND's Tragedy of VORTIGERN, whether sterling, or fictitious, is to go
to Drury Lane. Mr. SHERIDAN, says, "it is the finest play that SHAKSPEARE ever
wrote! -- not that he has had leisure yet to read it -- but he had it from an
authority as classical, and unquestionably as his own judgment; viz. the solemn
assurance of the great Lord SALISBURY himself, a Critic, only six removes, by
lineal descent, from Mr. SHERIDAN's own immortal BURLEIGH!

FOR THE MORNING HERALD.
Mr. EDITOR,
Your SHAKSPEARE correspondents know but little of what is going forward in the
mine of discovery! Lord, Sir, if they wish to get at the whole truth, they must
dip deep into the old chest, as the ancients did into the Pierean well! --
indeed they are not correct even in what they have stated. For instance, -- the
precious LOCK OF HAIR! how comes it, they were so ignorant, as not to know,
that Mr. Justice COLIC, the first Hair Merchant in the universe, has
critically inspected it, and, regardless of the sacred head of fiction from
whence it was shorn, he, as a man of business, could only be brought to say,
that if the whole string were as good as the sample, it was worth no more in
the trade, than 3s. 9d. an ounce? -- The pointed distich on the envelope,
however, as his Grace of LEEDS declares, is worth a million! -- Here it is:
"Ere Age with twinge your nerves does shocke,
"Catch Love, like Time, by the forelocke!"
By which our annotators will no doubt tell us, that the Warwickshire WAG
quaintly inculcates the youthful libertinism of -- catch, as catch can! --
Among the more recent treasures, are a moth-eaten under PETTICOAT, an undoubted
original! Mr. MALONE, who, with all his ability, knows but little about
petticoats, says, this could be no part of the paraphernalia of the immortal
Bard; -- but Mrs. PIOZZI, and the whole Blue Stocking Club, are decidedly of a
contrary opinion, and that for the best of all feminine reasons; viz. because
Miss HATHAWAY, when she became Mrs. SHAKSPEARE, never failed to wear the
BREECHES! -- we have also Mr. Boswell's authority for this, amongst other
domestica facta of the Poet. The next curiosity for the amateurs, is, a love
VALENTINE, surrounded, according to ancient usage, with hearts! cupids! doves!
and darts! and in the center, a typifying figure of a cock without a comb,
(according to antique spelling) with this inexplicable anagram: "If to my arms
you will fondlye roame,
"Despighte of Dadde, I Will cut your Comb!"
W. S.

From this, some of the inspecting Literati are cruel enough to infer, that
SHAKSPEARE must have had an intriguc with the daughter of his ancient enemy
John a COOMBE, -- the undoubted ancestor of the present Opposition ALDERMAN,
who has the honor of bearing that distinguished name!

The last MORCEAU I shall treat you with at this time, is selected from the
RECEIPTS, viz. "A RECIPEE how to make a GOODLY PLUMBE PUDINGE."

Even Mr. STEEVENS admits the unquestionable authenticity of this valuable
addendum to the cullnary art, by declaring, that Shakspeare could not endure
the stones of plumbs, which, from setting his teeth on edge, were called jar
raisins; and literally gives an appropriate citation of the following passage,
from the Poet's own words, which will certainly be received as the best
glossary to his own plumb pudding: "SYLVUS. -- Put dates enough into the bag:
but, dearest chuck, I prithee make me geldings of the PLUMBES!"

You shall have further documents, equally important and authentic, in a few
days, from, Mr. Editor,

Yours, A Modern ANTIQUARIAN,

PARAGRAPH.
We have it from high authority, that the merits of the great question,
respecting the originality of the newly discovered PLAY, are put into a train
of investigation, before a LITERARY COURT of ENQUIRY, which cannot fail of the
most candid, and judicious decision: -- It will be managed under the auspices
of an illustrious personage, who fortunately unites in his singular character,
all the critical and judicial talents, requisite for so solemn a disquisition!

March 20.
TO CORRESPONDENTS.
* The PROCESSION, on opening the LITERARY COURT to try the important QUESTION,
whether VORTIGERN and ROWENA, is, or is not from the PEN of SHAKSPEARE? is
intended for tomorrow's HERALD.

PARAGRAPH.
March 23.
VORTIGERN AND ROWENA!!!
IT is with much concern we announce, that the PROCESSION, preparatory to
opening the Literary Court of Inquest, to try whether this DRAMA is, or is not
written by SHAKSPEARE, was obliged to be suspended till Wednesday by an
unpleasant accident. Signor DELPINI, that man of mighty mouth, who was to have
walked as Champion to a PRODIGIOUS COURTIER, unfortunately dislocated his jaw
bone in practicing an Aristocratic Grin, in compliment to his illustrious
Patron! -- However, the Sieur FOLLET, almost equally great in the happy
distortions of the human countenance, has kindly undertaken this interesting
part, and to be ready in it, that day at noon, when this introductory spectacle
will certainly take place, and our readers be no longer kept in a state of
anxious expectancy!

March 26.
FOR THE MORNING HERALD. VORTIGERN AND ROWENA! A COMI-TRAGEDY!
Yesterday morning, at eleven o'clock, the several Officers, and other great
Personages, assembled at the HUM MUMS, in Covent Garden, and from thence
marched to the LITERARY COURT, in Norfolk-street, in the following STATE
PROCESSION, viz.

Four MUTES, With their fore fingers placed on their lips.

A Bronze of Signor DELPINI,

In his happiest style of face!

THE LOCK OF HAIR

Of Miss HATHAWAY, afterward the happy

MRS. SHAKSPEARE,

Borne by Mr. Justice COLIC, Hair Merchant,

His train supported by an Unlicensed HAIR-DRESSER, dishevelled, and without
powder! preceded by a Banner, dedicated

To WIGGISM!

The Chief COOK of the Crown and Anchor Tavern, with cheeks a la blaze!
carrying -- on a trencher -- The Book of FAMILY RECEIPTS! Six TRUNK MAKERS, two
and two.

The Antique TRUNK

Covered with ASS-SKIN still perfect, but surcharged with moth, black beetles,
and cob-webs! -- the flappets of the covering supported by the six Senior
ANNOTATORS on the Immortal BARD, and their train upheld by an equal number of
FARCE Writers. -- A Banner following, inscribed

Sacred to FICTION!

The PROMPTER of DRURY LANE, gagged!

The Dramatic FAITH of Mr. SHERIDAN,

Delicately concealed in a Snow-drop,

And borne by Mr. KEMBLE, riding on an ELEPHANT,

Over whom waved a Streamer displaying the word MANAGEMENT!

A Groupe of SPIRITS -- blue! red! black! and gray!

A Waxen Semblance of

The Mighty BURLEIGH!

His Banner advanced before, displaying

Three DRIED NEATS TONGUES,

The Family Arms, with their Motto,

"ELOQUENCE!"

The DANISH CHAMBERLAIN POLONIUS,

With his White Wand of Office, and his Train supported by

Three OPERA EUNUCHS!

The Sieur FOLLET,

In the Armor of HAMLET's GHOST, bearing the

Club of HERCULES, as his CHAMPION.

An Embossed MONEY-BAG,

With "LICENSES at any PRICE!"

Inscribed in Golden Characters.

Six FIDDLERS, with broken bows!

Six FEMALE SINGERS, weeping!

BANNER -- "Sacred to HARMONY!"

Sir FRETFUL,

Carried in torture on his own WHEEL!

The BLUE-Stocking CLUB

Slip-shod, and garter'd below knee!

VORTIGERN,

Represented by Mr. Kiddy DAVIS, as the only Gentleman of either Theater,
skilled in the Etiquette of Saxon Dignities, supported by the Under HARLEQUIN
os Drury -- Mr. DAVIS making it a special request, that his Train-bearer might
be one who well understood trap!

DRAMATIC PERFORMERS,

Walking in pairs, after the antique fashion of

entering NOAH's ARK.

SCENT-^ERS, etc. etc. etc.

The august procession entered the COURT about one, when the Commission was
opened in due form: the interesting particulars of which, we hope to record on
Friday next.

FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
VORTIGERN AND ROWENA: A COMI-TRAGEDY.
AS soon as the Court was opened with all due formalities, the DANISH
CHAMBERLAIN, Lord POLONIUS, arose, and gracefully made an obeisance to himself
in a spacious Mirror, which was instantly returned by a figure of similar
dignity, from this STATE REFLECTOR, dexterously placed in the front of the
CHAIR, that his Lordship might have the judicial advantage of seeing what he
himself was about, which no other person in the Court could ever know, or
possibly divine! -- The Sieur FOLLET, as Chamberlain's Grand CHAMPION, then
gigantically advanced, and after throwing down his gauge, and thrice
brandishing his Herculean Club, affixed a written PROCLAMATION to its butt,
when placing the smaller end on the bridge of his nose, the following
preliminary CHALLENGE became visible to all around; viz. "If any one present
dare gainsay, that the Lord POLONIUS is the most witty! most wise! most
valorous! most eloquent! most disinterested! most beloved! most puissant! most
chaste! let him come forth, and I, the unworthy Champion of that mighty Lord,
will tell him, that he lies in his teeth; and, from my furious wrath the Lord
deliver his miserable carcass!!?"



[Here an enraged Musician indignantly advanced, with an intent, as was
supposed, to take up the glove: but was prevented, in being humanely knocked
down by one of the Beef-caters.] -- A nod mandatory was now given from the
Chair as a cue to the principal Harlequin, who, waving his dagger of lath over
a richly inlaid tablet, a pair of folding doors of ophir flew open, and
discovered an irradiating glory of ethereal blue and gold, darting its
transcendent beams on the Title Page of an antique volume in quarto, curiously
filligreed, and fretted with moths and earwigs, and entitled VORTIGERN AND
ROWENA;

On Harlequin waving his lath a second time, a light colored cloud gently
descended to a soft strain of Aeolian measure, which opening, displayed a
scrowl with this Inscription -- Ye, of the School of Nature, as of Art, draw
near,
"And faithful verdict give
"Between the sacred memory
"Of your Immortal BARD
"And his Accusers. by whom he now stands Charged
"As the Villifier of his own fair fame,
"In penning the COMI-TRAGEDY now before you!
"Peruse, therefore, this Dramatic RECORD,
"And your several judgments pronounced thereon.
"By selecting severally a Passage from the same,
"Which shall be enregistered,
"In affirmation, or negation of that
"LITERARY FACT, which the majority
"Of your suffrages must finally decide.
"APPROACH!"


The instantaneous pressing forward of the Literati! Cognoscenti! Diletanti!
etc. etc. of both sexes, to inspect the Record, was so great and violent, that
it reached even the Chair of State like an electric shock! when Polonius,
rising up, in dignified dismay, signified to his officers, by the pale
vibration of his nostrils, that it was his mighty pleasure the Court should be
adjourned! This was effected by the talismatic sword of Harlequin as soon as
possible, but not till a few pushing characters of the Literary Jurors had
fixed on the following passages, and enregistered their votes thereon; viz.

PASSAGES SELECTED AS SUFFRAGES ON THE FIRST DAY's TRIAL; viz.
I. -- Lady CHAPTER C -- B -- LL.
-- "LOOK what a shape!
"Limbs fondly fashioned in the wanton moulde
"Of Nature! -- Warm in Love's sly wytcheries,
"And scorninge all the draperie of Art,
"A spider's loome now weaves her thin attire,
"Through which the roguish tell-tale winds
"Do frolic as they list!"
PAGE 17. -- Guilty. II. -- Mr. B -- F -- Y.
"I do remember him a quaker boy to a Lisbon Vintner, who at morn washed his
facre face in the Tagus to admire it in its glass! -- Next a grande compounder
of sours and sweetes -- himself the quintessence of both? Then was he a
medlar in debate, until his eloquence leaked to the lees: now makes he oceans
of plum wine, and, by contacte between water and brown sugar, will he muddle
Christian men, as wary Dames catch flies!"

PAGE 83. -- Not Guilty. III -- Lady A. MURRAY.
-- "A lovely stem,
"Whose cyon grafted from a Royal stock,
"Earl^ ^tte forth one sweet, and tender blossom,
"And then neglected, wildlie run to ruin!"
PAGE 13. -- Not Guilty. IV. -- Lord TH -- RL -- W.
-- "He is a rough Smythe,
"Who over warm work, swears, more than whistles;
"He makes poor punie knaves the bellows blow,
"But when the iron's well inflamed, forth comes
"His mighty sledge, and thumps the pliante metalle
"To his purpose!"
PAGE 108. -- Guilty. V. -- Mr. ST -- V -- NS.
-- "He was, by "an indenture to wit," apprenticed to a twister of common
sense, and afterward set up fancie-monger on his own bottom: he lives now by
stitching motlie buttons on dead Bards' jackets! And yet this varlet has
humor; for he will laughe you till his sides crack at his own comical
disfigurements!"

PAGE 34. -- Not Guilty. SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
ON resuming the Grand Literary COURT on Saturday, order was happily restored,
by an emanation of that official wisdom with which the LORD POLONIUS is so
peculiarly gifted! A golden padlock, it seems, had been most delicately affixed
that morning to the antique clasps of the COMI-TRAGEDY. This, at first,
naturally excited a little surprise, but it was soon dispelled by the very
graceful delivery of the following State Paper, from the courtly hand of Mr.
Kiddy DAVIS, of the Theater Royal, Covent Garden, whom the Manager has kindly
lent, as SAXON REPRESENTATIVE in waiting of the heroic VORTIGERN!

(COPY.)

BY AUTHORITY!!

It is ORDERED, that no person, of what rank, quality. or degree soever, shall
presume to take any part, share, or interest in, or give any public opinion on,
the sacred DRAMA of Vortigern and Rowena, until such person shall have been
first duly invested with a Two Guinea stamped LICENSE, under our hand and seal,
on pain, and peril of being prosecuted with the utmost rigor, as a Vagabond,
under the wholesome statute, entitled, "The Vag^ant ACT!" "so wisely instituted
for the correction of such State abuses!

(Signed) POLONIUS.
(Counter signed) FOLLET. G. C.

This was allowed by all the knowing ones present, to be a thou, ht of the most
profound polity, and equal to any thing recorded of the sagacious House of
BURLEIGH! It naturally branched itself into a twofold good; viz. 1. as a
touchstone of insurance as to the qualification. and ability of voters! --
2dly -- which his Lordship's liberality must mark as the principal
consideration. -- it instantly made the Literary Inquest more select, tended to
exped^e the proceedings of the Court, and thus pa^tically expose the endless
duration of Hastings' Impeachment. Licenses were accordingly taken out by those
who were prepared for this voluntary LEVY: and those who were not, were very
decorously kicked out of Court!

Another decree of a subordinate kind, likewise passed, viz. to change the
suffrage, annexed to the chosen Passages, from GUILTY and Not GUILTY, to
"GENUINE" and " Not GENUINE;" -- the vulgar repetition of the sound of guilt,
etc. being sometimes observed to raise a demi-blush of confusion on the
OFFICIAL cheek! -- The solemn business of the day then commenced.

The following is the List of Licenced VOTERS, and their selected Passages,
enregistered at this Sitting, which we are promised in time for tomorrow's
publication, viz. 5. Marg. ANS -- H. 6. Earl H -- WE. 7. Hon Mrs. ST -- N --
PE. 8. Mrs. FIIZ -- T. 9. Lord CH -- R. 10. Marquis TOW -- D.


The CLERK in COURT has directed us to make an Frratum in our first day's
report, on the Passage which Mr. B -- F -- Y had so aptly selected for his
conscientious suffrage to repose on! -- we therefore request that the
Cognoscenti will erase, and thus amend the Record: For "washed his facre face
in the Tagus,"
Write "washed his fair in the Tagus,
"To admire it in its glass, etc."


This emendation is unquestionably due to common decency as well as common
sense. The word facre, as a Saxon derivative, unfortunately signifies sallow!
it cannot therefore be supposed by those in any habits with the worthy Member
for Yarmouth. that a Gentleman, naturally conscious of so fair a face himself,
could have selected a passage thus personally repugnant to his own taste and
feelings!

VI. -- Marg -- ne of AN -- P -- CHAPTER
"Oh! she would enacte you, from earliest youth, scenes to bewitche men's
eyes! and ears! and hearts! -- Of late she did perform the QUEEN right
regallie; and got a goodly Sir to play her FOOL! -- Heaven bless her
Highness: for she has had her ups, and downs in this mad world in
plenty!"

PAGE 3. -- Not GENUINE. VII. -- Earl H -- WE.
-- "At ebb of fleetinge life,
"One deed of arms he valiantly achieved,
"Of warlike enterprise! -- Alofte he bore
"The British standarde to that ruthlesse coaste,
"Where Gallicke streamers deeply stained with blood,
"Braved the indigant sky! there proudly conquered:
"Oh! nobly done! -- With laurel wreathe well graced,
"Now let the vet'ran Chief seek calm retreat,
"Cheered by the radiance of his settinge sun,
Lest Chance should mar, by palsied stroke his fame!"
PAGE 12. -- GENUINE. VIII. -- Hon. Mrs. ST -- N -- PE.
-- "ROWENA heard the tale,
"Smiled midde her grief, over all his val'rous deeds,
"Then asked, in tears, his story over again!"
PAGE 7. -- GENUINE. IX. -- Lord CH -- R.
"How can I shifte me more? -- Have I not run through all the colors of the
changeful sky? -- My coat and doublette, are they not threadbare grown in
turninge? -- Were not my very skin seen through, I^d try the the other side
of that to please you!" PAGE 76. -- GENUINE. X. -- Mrs. FITZ -- T.
-- "O! lengthened torture of suspense.
"And must I grace a Courtly Rival's triumph?
" -- Bend stubborn heart, and lowly learn to me^te
"The toweringe eye of her, whose picture^ charms
"At distance won the fickle truante from thee.
"(...) too near thy weaknesses were seen,
And so they are now most speedily forgotten!"
PAGE 2. -- Not GENUINE. X -- Marq -- s TOW -- D.
"Of all your sharp-brain'd fellows, give me a we wit! Why, he is the Prince
of Bottle Conjurors! he will draw you six long corkes in the twinklinge of a
landladie's eye! -- At Lent, a spice of the mo^al man comes over him; now
wears he sackcloth, and loathinge his wine, chauntes strains of psalmodie in
doleful spirit: -- At Lammas, the flesh again prevails, and then earrols he
tales of bawdrie, 'till he sendes the Moon shame-faced to bed!" PAGE 4. --
GENUINE. THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
XI. -- Lord E -- DL -- Y.
-- "Why, he is no JEWE! I saw him eat Porke with a Pigge-driver, and
afterward go forth, and hunt the Strande for a little sweet fauce to the
flesh! -- Heaven bless him; for he has a true Christian heart, that bids him
open his palm to all that need it!" PAGE 11. -- Not GENUINE. XII -- Duchess of
Y -- K.
-- "That Is her, the mirrore of her sex,
"Reflecting graces that adorn her state!
"View ye that eye uplifte, of purest blue?
"Not for her patiente self she asks a boon,
"But sighs for blessings wide on all arounde her!"
PAGE 3. -- GENUINE. XIII. -- Miss OC -- E.
"Where could I place my likinge more worthily, than on his manlye wit, and
playful parts? -- An antiente aunte of mine, who is sande-blinde, feign would
have crossed my love -- but I told her I had eyes, and could choose my own
partner for Bindman's buffe! -- My father, heaven thank it, is a goodly man of
the Church, and well-natured -- for he coaxed my chinne, and smiling said --
forget not, Child, to work me out a MITRE in chaine-stitche!" PAGE 1. --
GENUINE. XIV. -- Sir JOHN S -- N^ -- ^.
-- "A ploddinge Sir, that daily held
"Fantastic converse with his mother Earth!
"A mighty an analyzer of all that is (...)!
"He Would turn the skin of a poor barley-corne
"Full six times over its back, t'explore its gender
"Bred in that frugal clime, where man per force
"Makes his poor breeches of the cuttinge winds,
"He thought the humble her^ies in this might have
"Precedence; so he moved, kind soul, to cloathe
"The SHEEP, by special Act of Senate!"
PAGE 6. -- Not GENUINE XV. -- Lady AR -- R.
-- "Mine was the early art
"To banishe Nature's blushes from the cheek
"I learnt it of a Dyer's wife in SPAIN,
"Whose sace in Tyrian die was so engram'd,
"That Turkey Cocks assailed her as she paste!"
PAGE 21. -- Not GENUINE. XVI. -- Mr. T -- TH -- MP -- N.
"I met in the Vale of Eveshame the spawne of a Jew^ Ped^: He had wisely made
the most of his father's wares, for he wore them right swaggeringlie on hrs
own back! -- He was an odd fish -- talked of ducattes, as of duckes, and
drakes -- and swore he was circumcised in the flesh, to become a mender of the
State!" PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
XVII. -- P -- ss of W -- L -- S.
-- "She came
"A lovelie stranger to a foreigne clime,
"To seal her virgin wowe, and proudly win
"A People's homage! --
"Rough was her passage over! for three long Moons
"The fretful elements conspired in wrath
"To wrest her from her LORD! -- but now arrived,
"Of this sweet, tender plant, O thou possessed,
"Keep from its root the briar's thornie snare,
"And baneful creeping ivy of a Court:
"So may this fair exoticke bless our soil,
"And bloome therein at peace!"
PAGE 2. -- GENUINE. XVIII. -- Duke of P -- D.
"These habiliments of tissued honor, hang so looslie on me, that with
reverence to my Grace, I am taken for little more than one decked out in other
men's deserts. -- Let that pass. But say, on what state feature of my visage,
dare any man read Dupe? It Is true that I am a serving man of the Court! -- Do
all that wiser men command me -- Keep my Kinge's Council, and mine own place
-- Then dupe me no Dupes! And, were I not afraid of staininge my Courtly
Doublet, I might scratch out that filthy word with daggers: But I Will be no
man's dupe in such bloody deeds, that is poz!" PAGE 100. -- Not GENUINE. XIX.
-- D -- ss of C -- D.
-- "How Is this? a marriage regalle,
"And I not bidden to the feast? -- The times
"Are shamefully untuned -- What then availes
"The mind well-fashion'd for a Court intrigue?
"Or art to lime the giddie royalle bird
"Ere he can soar on pinion of discretion?
"But as they have piqued my woman's pride,
"Let them look to it! -- The honied-moon gone down,
"I Will play the cat^-cousin yet among 'em!"
PAGE 101. -- GENUINE. XX. -- Sir WM. D -- LB -- N.
"A KNIGHTE begotten at a retreat in the holy wartes^ and now drie-nursed by
his Alma Matter! He is a moral master of propriety, and was at odds with a
cross-legged Oxforde Tailor, for turning out his toes on Sundai^ -- So pious is
his regard for every man's soul, that he strives to pack it off to heaven in
its best bib, and tucker!" PAGE 1. -- GENUINE XXI. -- Hon. Mrs. D -- R.
-- "She, from a block of Parian marble,
"Drew cold antipathies against flesh and blood,
"Which custom turned to loathinge. Naught could move
"Her wrapped imagination, save some part,
"Or limb, graced into muscular proportion
"By her own hand, so fair, and so creative:
"On this she would gaze, and bend to sacrifice,
"With strange delighte!"
PAGE 4. -- Not GENUINE. XXII. -- Mr. B -- KE.
"I knew a busy Esquire who consumed his days in rakeing fierrie coals
under the Cauldron of the State to make hot water! -- yet he had genius, with
which he sublimelie soared beyond human ken! it was also beautiful -- for it
scorned to traverse in a strait line; -- heaven bless such wits from the
foul fiende?"

PAGE 13. -- Not GENUINE. FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
XXIII. -- Earl of C -- RL -- LE.
"Though once a Commissioner on a simple embassy, am I enacted a bondman
perpetual under the huge SEAL of folly? -- Being both my friends, and
Statesmen now at odds, you do mine honor much injury! You have stuck me up
as a pent-house, under which to meet, and call each other foul names by
virtue of your prerogative courtly! Doubtless, you will next expecte to shoot
deadly metal at each other, through my stately body! -- But thanks to my
Wit, I have the gift of rhyme; so will I specially indite my grievances in
meter, that wise men may admire, and pity me!"

PAGE 22. -- Not GENUINE. XXIV. -- Marc -- ss T -- NS -- D.
-- "How she was won
"To yielde her virgin heart so stranglie up,
"No one has chronicled; that Gossip save,
"Whose ill-engender'd tales of foul report,
" Truth smothers soon as borne. -- Oh! once betrothed,
"She, midde the rank infections of a Court,
"Bore her bewitchinge beauties with such grace,
"That not a lawless eye dare gaze upon them!
"Faithful to plighted vows, her youthful course
"She run with adverse years; and spighte of blood,
"Kept her quick pulse by lowly temp'rature,
"Cool as the lagginge current of her Lorde's;
"And thus in chastity so rare, -- became
"The envied mother of a lovelie race!"
PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. XXV. -- Mr. C -- NN -- G.
"Before the moulting time, he promised to be a pretty Bird, of hopeful
Song! -- A blyster on the back of the State Chyrurgeon, for clippinge my
young Dawe under the tongue, to make him more eloquente! Indeed, Dame, the
poor cut foul has never prattled to any tune since!"

PAGE 2. -- GENUINE. XXVI. -- Miss B -- Y ST -- T.
"They called for Little Figure, as I dealt,
"And -- Omen dear! -- up came the KING of Hearts!
" -- Would that he were not of the royalle blood!
"And yet it is none of that produe current bids
"Mine tingle thus through every little vein;
"Oh no! -- true love is far above all state:
"His looks are Princely -- but his sighs, and vows,
"Blende soft, and sweet with mine of humbler birthe!"
PAGE 117. -- GENUINE. XXVII. -- Ad. M'BRIDE.
"I had sacked their fair City, but that the renigadoes of Dunkirke, like so
many sea-moles, raised shoales, and sande-bankes to pick up my deep-water
barques! -- The Cowardes knew me well, and so came not within the reach of my
red-hot shot! -- The first convenient Moon at fulle, I Will try the knaves on
the other tacke -- till then, I must content me with the good reports the
daily Newesmen do so prettily promulgate of my fame!"

PAGE 99. -- Not GENUINE. XXVIII. -- Duke of D -- ^.
-- "Here Damsels! view
"A Knighte gallante, bedeekt in Beauties' spoils!
"Her Roya^le ssemblance at my breast I wear,
"But have not said, her love she gave me with it;
"Of that no matter: -- but by your bright eyes
"She had the most invitinge rubbie lip,
"That France through all her womanhood could boaste!
" -- Mark ye this ribbande of Imperial blue?
"If it were not her own soft gar^,
"Yet, I proteste, transportinglie 'twas gained,
"By the sweet breathe of her solicitude:
"What could a Regal beauty more?"
PAGE 11. -- GENUINE. SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
XXIX. -- Sir S -- D -- Y SM -- TH.
-- "When I served the Royalle SWEEDE, he gave my valor fulle credence for
what it did intend! -- but my surly countriemen are keen reckoners to pass
a runninge account with -- they will have the clear sum total of blood, and
conflagration! Suppose ye, the French, deep skilled in the arts magique,
might rebuilde the Ships which my prowess did annihilate -- how am I to
blame? -- I burnte them all to sea-charcoale, and that in the twinklinge of my
own Northern Star, as I am a Knighte, and a Circumnavigator? Had I thought
that my report would have been unaccredited, I might have sworn that I ate
them into the bargain!" PAGE 33. -- GENUINE. XXX. -- D -- tc -- ss of R -- T
-- D.
"Were I a Woman with an Angel face,
"By birthe distinguished, and with children blessed,
"I would not blurre the stock of such fair fame,
"By apeing of the wanton thing I am not!
"Youth's giddie meteor, Lady, is gone bye,
"Lost in declension midde new blazinge stars:
"Why then through Follie's ever changeful sky
"Its tracklesse course pursue? -- Have you not seen,
"When heaven's own constellations 'gin to wane,
"More, and more chaste, and envied they do shine,
"Ey'n to their farewelle settinge!"
PAGE 108. -- GENUINE. XXXI. -- CH -- S WY -- D -- M.
-- "I knew him, the other side the Appenines, on hi^ youtheful travel, a
fellow of much honest worth, -- one wedded to his friend, and flaske! -- No
sooner did the Dog star rage, than out he sallied forth among the softer
sex, a gaie gallante! -- and, by the mass, the rantipole dames of quality
made the most of him! -- Good nature was his foible; for he rode you his daily
roundes through Padua on horseback, to keep honest men's wives quiet! -- Even
his hunter would stop, as 'twere by animal instincte, at the newest sign of
the horns! -- The wagge has had his dave -- and now calmlie sits ^e down, and
talks of ^raile achievements paste, like an invalided warriore, unfit for
bodily service!"

PAGE 4^. -- Not GENUINE. XXXII. -- C -- ss of AL -- M -- LE.
"Oh' she could shifte almost her lovelie sex --
'To every motion give a varying grace!
"This day she would lead the TROOP in the tented field!
"Next -- walk a furious match against gaffer TIME!
"At head of HOUNDS now hunte the wily Fox,
"Outstripe her Lord, and claim the culprit's brushe!
"Then urge the Chariot race with fiery steeds!
"Or steer the VESSEL through overwhelming seas!
" -- I marvel, when in air she will learn to fly!
"Oh wings she soon must have to soar alofte,
'And draw men's eyes adoringlie toward heaven!
PAGE 7. -- Not GENUINE. SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
XXXIII. -- Earl FITZ -- M.
"They sent me over seas, to be tossed by one of my own Irishe Bulls! -- When
I thought to play on them a Yorkshire bite, slily came there forth one
further from the North, who cabbaged all my buckram, and left my state doublet
without body lineing! -- Oh, Sir, they have treated me most insultinglie! -- I
have been caught in their Courte-trappe, like a Dunstable Lark, and now they
intend to roaste and baste me, without any of the crumbes of comfort! But, by
the grace of G -- d, and the Bishop of mine own anointing, I have preserved
true my Catholic says!"

PAGE 77. -- GENUINE, XXXIV. -- C -- ss D -- LK -- TH.
"So fair a blossom has not Scotia graced,
"Since the dire days of Beauties' martyred Queen
"Her bridal Maids no amorous flowret strewn
"Before Rowena, -- nature's sweetest bud,
"Who chastely blushed herself a damask rose;
"'It Was almost sin to pluck it! I marvel much,
"Whether that envied chief, her Northern Lord,
"Will give such hopeful loveliness in bloom,
"To the rude breathe of Caledonian climes!"
PAGE 121. -- Not GENUINE. XXXV. -- Comm^dore P -- NE.
"To serve a Prince right courteously, you should be no maker of mince meat!
-- Amphibious must you be! -- prompt to atchieve strange deeds by land, or
water! on shore, his Highness' wantes, and wishes execute, before the fancy
royalle has time to fashion them: and when your barke's afloate, give up your
pliant sails to amorous winds, and fetch him cargoes of untried love from
every point of the compass!"

PAGE 19. -- GENUINE. XXXVI. -- Mrs. S -- WB -- GE.
-- "How truly widowed weeds
"Depict the semblance of a Woman's sorrow!
"Well do they name these mournful ribands Love --
"Emblems of joye that is past, and love that is yet in store
"Come hither Blanch -- say how I look to-daie
"For if my glass speak true, this sorrow feigned
"Does charminglie become me!"
PAGE 20. -- Not GENUINE. EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
XXXVII. -- Earl of UX -- GE.
-- "I am myself descended from the antiente loins of Alexander the Copper
Smithe! but it matters not how a great man was either borne or begotten, if
chance do but stand his Godfather! -- I knew a fellow, destined by fate to
scratche like a mole under ground, 'till delvinge there one luckie day, he
spied a vein of shinirge care, on which he set men of more genius than
himself to work him out a Crownette -- This, decked with belles and feathers,
on his own temples of unblushinge metal formed, did he swaggeringlie place,
for all men's eyes to marvelle at!"

PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. XXXVIII. -- Sir CHAPTER T -- N -- R.
-- "Give me a SOLDIER of fortune, who can afforde to hunte his enemy abroad
with blood hounds! Re turninge home, he may champion fate to the uttermoste,
and stand you undauntedlie a throw of the diceboxe, more deadly than the
rattle of Bellona's cannon"

PAGE 23. -- Not GENUINE. XXXIX. -- C -- ss of P -- MF -- T.
-- "Oh, Sir! I Will wager you
"The Lapedaries skille against that of nature!
"It matters not how plain the entablature
"Round which the cunninge artiste does besette
"His sparklinge jewelrie -- What Dame can lack
"The living luster of an hazle eye,
"Whose vacancie a brilliant gem filles up?
" -- Or who the poutinge ripeness of a lip,
"Which rubies so enchantinglie supply?"
PAGE 66. -- GENUINE XL. -- Mr. C -- WITH -- NE.
-- "My wife's BANK is as firm as the proud one which the Londonne
Merchantes do intend for their fair city! -- I puncte at it mine ownselfe
in the family way, so both are gainers; for though she may cock me out of my
coin, I have my night's amusement for my money!"

PAGE 30. -- Not GENUINE. NINTH DAY's TRIAL.
XLI. -- Mar -- ss S -- Y.
-- "As I am not more coylie fashioned than the huntress Dian, I find no
sport in the Chase, unless they mount me on a mettled steed -- one retaining
all the powers which bounteous Nature gave him! I rode a geldinge in my
youtheful days -- but the dull Mule had not one pace to please me! It joies me
most to be in at the extatic death! -- but how that can be, I marvel, unless
a woman be gaillie mounted?"

PAGE 25. -- Not GENUINE. XLII. -- Earl of CH -- TF -- D.
-- "Between you and me, he is become no less a creature, than the ear-wig of
the Caxon Royale! -- To be a bearer of wondrous tidings, is his soule^
delighte; and when he cannot pick up his budg^ fulle of tales, how
marvelouslie will he com 'em! -- He Is chuck full of antickes -- and he will fetch
and carry post, like an over-sea dog, so that you do but laughe, and spit on a
crust for his foolerie!"

PAGE 110. -- GENU^ XLIII. -- Mrs ED. B -- V -- IE.
"Think not you gaze upon a statue here,
"Whose beauties live but on an outward form!
"Inspecte the movements of Isphina's mind,
"And these will sanctione Man's idolatry!
" -- Her maiden modesty she still retains
"Through all the duties of a wedded life.
"With meltinge energies of soul endued,
"See with what grace she mildly yields her own,
"Or rules by reason's charm another's will ^
"Oh let this lovelie gem be fairlie copied." --
PAGE 44. -- GENUINE XLIV. -- Earl of J -- Y.
-- "I follow out Sovereigne Lord the Prince in Kendal Green, to hunte the
hind, and heart, to the sound of mine own horn! -- Passing Hearne's ^ate,
our last ring in the forest, my roane mare made a false step, and wisking me
over her ears, the jade must have split me, had I not fortunately fell into a
buckthorne bush, where, as good luck would have it, I hung securely (...)
own dear head!" PAGE 3 -- Not GENUINE. TENTH DAY's TRIAL.
XLV. -- Duke of N -- K.
"Should a man in these hurlie-burlie days, be permitted to wear a head on
his shoulders, let him not quarrel about the color of it! -- but if they
powder mine, they shall eat it into the bargain! -- I Will wear my nob as long
as I can, in sable, for the frailties of my body! -- The knaves knew that my
sole delighte were in rape and canarie, and therefore have they clapped a
double tax on our Women, and Wine!" PAGE 55. -- GENUINE. XLVI. -- C -- ss M --
X -- H.
-- "That insinuatinge creature Man,
"Wooes us to cut the Gordian knot in twain,
"Which ties the slender band of wedded love!
"Though Woman's trained to trim the Vestale lamp,
"It will not save her from the gazing eye
"Of lawless rapture! -- Over my witching face,
"I throw my flowinge ringlets as I pass,
"To guarde me from their looks lascivious;
"And yet the wanton winds weave them in snares
"To trap me silly men so very fast,
"That for my foul I cannot set them free!"
PAGE 30. -- Not GENUINE. XLVII. -- Mr. B -- DH -- D.
"Our House is sometimes haunted with evil sprites of fantastic shapes, and
colors! Once in twelve moons, they turn it out of the windows, and I am
placed below to catch it! -- The neighbors say, there is rare wit in all
these doings -- but in the quiet meekness of my heart, I never could find it
out!"

PAGE 88. -- GENUINE. XLVIII. -- Mrs. P -- ZI.
"I knew her the wife of honest Guzman, a good compounder of Malte, and
Hoppes; -- then had she the reasonable use of her mother tongue. -- No sooner
was he defuncte, than she became enamoured of foreigne dignities, -- wedded a
Milanese piper, and traveled over the Appenines to the tune of his box of
whistles! -- On her return, she set up a feminine manufactorie, for weavinge
conversations superfine! -- These tabbies pronounced the destinies of their
own sex like Sybils, and became haters of mankind, because men liked them
not! nay, the whimsical jades wore stockings of skie-blue, not having a leg
among 'em to catch an eye, without the noveltie of colouringe!"

PAGE 68. -- GENUINE. ELEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
XLIX. -- Sir R -- B -- T M -- CKR -- H.
"I have ventured at last to be touched with cold iron, which argufies
consequence, as well as valor! -- To have a shininge blade whipped across my
humble shoulder, by the dexter hand of Sovereigntie, gives me the polish of
gentilitie, which rubs out every spot of vulgar rust! At the first call to the
presence royale, Caming up!^ says I, as cheerfullie as ever! on which the
Lords and Ladies of the Court, in admiration of my wit, were pleased to
laugh most heartily! -- Should any meddlinge fool ask of me, how I came
thus ^ignified? -- marry the answer's plame; because I got my moneys darkly,
and as it were in the night, so in the wisdom of greater men than myself, I
was thought right worthy to be be -knighted!"

PAGE 22. -- GENUINE L. -- Lady C -- NL -- FE.
-- "When summer revels 'gin,
"And through the woodland scenes, the beugle horn
"Calls forth the merry ARCHERS -- blithe I lead
"My buskined nymphs, equipt with graceful bow,
"To try their skille in Cheshire's bloominge vale!
"If with more art my feathered arrows fly
"True to the target's center -- quick I turn
"A careless ear to flatterie's buzzing train.
"Content with that fair-gotten meede of health,
"Which sportive innocence bestows!"
PAGE 112. -- Not GENUINE. LI. -- Lord C -- TN -- Y.
-- "I saw it flutteringe over a bank of violettes, gaier than a May-born
butterfly! -- If our Naturalists look not to it, we shall loose, I fear, the
stock of this sweet non-descript in cold extinction; for, by the maste, it
seems too delicate, to endure the vulgar tones of procreation!"

PAGE 78. -- GENUINE. LII. -- Miss H -- TH -- M.
-- "Nay, nay, flout me as you please, I Will keep my spinster's humor! What
care I, if I am doomed to dance an ape in the other world? -- is it not better
far, than being chained to one in this? -- Tell me, -- have I not a warm
husband in my bags of gold, in value of which the sneakinge fellows would
feign make me a wife! -- For this coin of mine, which I know how to take care
of myself, all men are my most devoted! -- swear I have more personal
attractions than the Sea-born Goddess, and that my circuitous waiste is more
delicatelie shaped than even Dian's gridle -- admirable conceits! But I have
laughed at the humor of these poor knaves so long, it is no marvel I have
grown FAT!" PAGE 66. -- GENUINE. TWELETH DAY's TRIAL.
LIII. -- D -- ss of GL -- R.
-- "I scorn to ask of fate
"Why I, so regallie allied to thrones,
"Am thus debarred my lawful rightes of state,
"Of homage, fealty, and courtly rank?
"In this long banishment from all my claims,
"My woman's pride does still sustain
"The lofty bearings of a princely mind!
"Rather than mingle with the motlie herd,
"Which (...) the fleetinge noblesse of our land,
"In dignified obscurity I Will dwell,
"And diet on mine own proud spleen till death!"
PAGE 21. -- GENUINE. LIVE. -- Earl of L -- S -- R.
"Why, Sir, he has climbed every arm of the mighty tree of Genealogy, like a
School-boie after Rookes nests; and can point you out the oldest branch, which
bore his great forefather as its first fruit! -- He has a most sensitive
nostril for the flowers of antiente Nobility -- and will smell you out the
stock from our red or white (...), a furlonge off! -- He now delights in the
sleeping languages of past days, and therefore has he been created great
Lord Decypherer of the dead ^etters! -- As an Antiquarian he is most
dexterous, for he proved, in the teethe of the Court, that he was born before
his father, and therefore ought to be first thought of; and, in truth, so he
was, for he slipped his head into an Earl's (...), which they had been preparing
for his Sire!" PAGE 114. -- Not GENUINE. LV. -- Lady EL -- TH F -- R.
"You say, that Rowena should not have been compelled to wed according to the
Law Canonical -- marry, why? because the Law of Nature, which was the first,
does allow unto every Spinster to burn and the like, after her own discretion?
So that the world be but well stocked with sucklings, male and female, it
matters not how they were born or begotten. If they find not out their real
Dams, give them but a good Foster Mother, and that will content them!" PAGE 13.
-- GENUINE. LVI. -- Earl of A -- LE.
"Oh, short indeed was that pale honie-moone
"Which shone on our green loves! Could she not bear
"The mild remonstrance which affection moved,
"To shield our blended pride from painful claims
"Necessity might rudely press! -- Alas,
"It from that breaste, which I so fondly made
"The secret treasury of all my thoughts,
"I could not counsel ask, nor seek repose,
"'It Was well to sever thus our fates in twain! --
"Come, little offspring of our short-lived bl^e,
"Dear tokens of your parents' happier days,
"Take now the other share of my soul's love,
"Which she that bore you deems not worth her keepinge!"
PAGE 44. -- Not GENUINE. THIRTEENTH DAY's TRIAL.
LVII. -- P -- ss EL -- TH.
-- "Heaven bless her mertie heart! and keep all sorrow from it! -- She is
the sweet-tuned fiddle of her father's Court, where no true pastime can be
known without her! -- Each bower, and hall, she decks with such true grace,
that you might swear wherever she moves, perpetual Spring attends her: -- Oh!
blithsome Princess! long may the mirthe of innocence be thine, and thou the
fair dispenser of its power, to turn aside those barbed shaftes, which fate
full often does forge. wherewith to wound the bosom of a King!"

PAGE 114. -- GENUINE LVIII. -- Earl GR -- R.
-- "I met a Yeeman-pricker of the Chase, who, piteous fellow, -- pointed me
sadly out, a noble ancient Staz, the feats, and frolickes of whose youth
were gone! -- At rutringe time, now does he seek the rushie-bottomed glen,
thence to behold his successors trip by in lusty rivalrie, leading the amorous
herd at pleasure over the heathe, while he does deeply sigh for sportes now
paste, and shed in lonelie solitude his horns!"

PAGE 4. -- GENUINE. LIX. -- D -- ss H -- L -- N.
"Soft, unsuspicious sisterhood of mine,
"Ere you the hand of innocence bestow
"On wooinge man -- mark well, I pray,
"The temper of his mind! -- Oh! wed ye not
"To brutal fulleness, in Lordly shape,
"Or low vulgaritie disguised in state.
"Unheedinge this, incautioussie I fell
"From all the virgin pleasures of my youth,
"To miseries almost confined to me,
"The titled shadow of a widowed WIFE!"
PAGE 88. -- Not GENUINE. LX. -- Sir Jos. B -- KS.
"Why have I circled wide the varying poles?
"Searched Nature to her source in every clime,
"Surveyed her animals, her plants, and flowers,
"Learnt every particle of sand by name,
"And lowly dust of which vain man's compounded?
"Why ransacked thus the ever-changeful globe,
"But to extend the social intercourse
"'Twixt Heaven's created beings? -- This I Have done,
"And molded to one common will with mine
"Two Alluding, as Mr. MALONE shrewdly suspects, to the extraordinary whim of a
Naturalist in those days, who devoted his latter years to the humane office of
taming a TOAD, and a BADGER! After reconciling their rude antipathies, he
domesticated them with so much address to his own family, as at last to boast
of them, as a pair of the most rational beings in the whole circle of his
acquaintance!
Creatures opposite in Nature's scale;
"Unbente their aukwarde dignity of mind,
"To share with me equality of rights.
"Two years their bashful modesty I wooed,
"Ere they, by joint consent, would imitate
"Man's daily avocations: docile grown,
"They now will reason with me on the square,
"Hop where I walk, and rest if I but pause!
"Eat when I feed, and sleep at my repose!
"Thus we instinctivelie philosophize
"On all our little wantes for fleetinge life!"
PAGE 21. -- GENUINE. FOURTEENTH DAY's TRIAL.
LXI. -- M -- q -- ss of S -- Y.
-- "Yes, that is the great POLONIUS himself! -- He does expect the humble
homage of our knee -- and must have it! I prithee call him not a shallow-witted
Lord, when his wise head is crammed so full of brains, that he knows not
which way to turn them! -- Some whimsical God, in heathenish days! decreed,
that he should be born a lofty man, and a mighty! -- He is the Custos Morum
of the Harmonique Spheres, under whose authority poor Bardes, and Minstrels,
are whipped from tything to tything! -- likewise a deep Astronomer, skilled in
the signs from Taurus to Capricorn! and so great a Naturaliste, that he knows
the buddinge season by the note of the prophetic Cuckoe!"

PAGE 87. -- GENUINE. LXII. -- Lady W -- M R -- L.
"Oh, dearest Nurse! and it be like its father, as you say, and a lovelie boy,
see quickly if it is pretty mouth be furnished with a tongue! -- and it be
tied, I pray you cut, with tender care, the ligature in twain, that the
malady of silence be not entailed upon our line of Males! Were it a girl --
such pains were useless, as its Grand Mama, who has not yet the fruitful art
forsworn, full often declared, no female progeny of hers could be devoid of
prattling powers!"

PAGE 187. -- GENUINE LXIII. -- Duke of R -- M -- D.
-- "With front of cold, and weather-beaten brass,
"Sullen he moved, and slow, like batt'ring-ramme,
"As if he planned indignantlie to raze
"His own proud battelments! -- then suddenly
"With humble crest he spoke! --
"In mine own works, chin-deep was I entrenched,
"Covered with bastions raised from mines of gold,
"Defyinge sap! or siege! or coup-de-main!
"Till one howitzer, mounted on an height,
"So galled my flank -- dismounted all my gunnes,
"That I a parlie beat! -- no honors asked,
"Bat marched me out, unable to contend
"Against the wratheful ORDINANCE of Heaven!"
PAGE 101. -- Not GENUINE. LXIV. -- Lady W -- L -- CE.
"These are not the times to stand upon a punctilious observance of sex, or to
hide a masculine boi^ under the flimsie veil of female delicacie! -- Look upon
the Scottish bonn^e BEL^? -- a (...) citizen of ever^ land! She wears you
men's fi^ebegs looselie like a Turk! -- can box with Datchet bargemen, -- sw^
^ke a mermaid with her fair face upwards! -- and push low quarte with the
nimblest masters of the assault! -- So amphibioussie created, as to be ready
for any service, by sea, or land! I Have seen her toss off a glass of flip, and
dance a reele on deck, while the weather-beaten vessel was shaking under three
reefed sails! -- Put on shore, she would (...) to the beat of martial drum,
hoiste up her under-petticoat to dry, and while it was shot at by Kentishe
Volunteers, laugh at the b^ling marksmen, for not hitting the target in the
bud's eye!"

PAGE 55. -- GENUINE. FIFTEENTH DAY's TRIAL.
LXV. -- Princess R -- L.
"No, in good soothe! -- I am not one of those
"To breathe out sighs for that vain creature Man
"To lord it over me in an unknown clime!
"Too soon the soft delusion of his tongue
"A changeful husband turns to wanton dames!
"Let others then in patient silence sit,
"And see each Lady of their Court carest,
"Or lowly handmaid of their house preferred;
"But I Will never pine, or fade in splendid sorrow,
"Compelled to wear the semblance of delighte,
"While my swollen heart is rending with its grief!
"In peace domestique rather let me dwell
"Within the bosom of my native isle,
"Nor barter blessings of a British growthe,
"For foreigne misery in state arrayed!"
PAGE 132. -- GENUINE. LXVI. -- Duke of M -- GH.
-- "He was a mavelous admirer of the Ancients, and recommended the antique
coinage to the treasury of his friends, content himself with hoardinge up the
golden produce of the modern mints! In wordlie wisdom he had a right saving
knowledge, so that he wasted you no more words, than pistorines! -- As a
great man he panted after elbowe-roome -- and gained it, by adding unnumber'd
acres to his vaste domaines! He followed not his martial progenitor in
surrounding vast Empires, but indulged himself in the pacifique plan of drawing
a line of circumvallation round a single Shire! -- For this, upon his table
sovereignlie becarpetted, do lie the maps, and charts of neighboring demesnes,
which, as a mortal with an earthlie-minde, his eye does greedily devour!" PAGE
99. -- Not GENUINE. LXVII. -- Mr. T -- R -- V -- S.
"I marvel whether it be profitable, or not, in Jewe, or Gentile, to chaunte
ballades of bawdrie for loose Lords, and crack luscious jokes to yielde them
the kernels, (...) time has lest him tootheless?"

PAGE 181. -- GENUINE. LXVIII. -- Lady D -- Y T -- MP -- N.
"In days of yore, I drew God's Creatures male about me by the light of a
lovelie countenance! I had an eye then which made some of them smart for it:
but that is gone bye. So now with lengthened veil, and demitie coats cut short,
I sallie forth in every flauntinge breeze, and make them prance like madmen
after me, to the elastic spring of my well-turned leg; while I, a flying
Daphne, chide the rude winds which give it to their view! -- As for the lost
expression of an eye, it matters not, because a willing tongue abundantly
supplies it!"

PAGE 48. -- Not GENUINE. SIXTEENTH DAY's TRIAL.
LXIX. -- Lord K -- Y -- N.
-- "If he be not great grandson to the pepper-corn Llewellen, then know I
naught of the race of A^^te Britons! -- but let that pass. -- When a
striplinge, he did serve by virtue of indenture tripartite, old Capia^, a sly
b^g fox of the Law hard bye the W^ken! there picked he up the minor quirkes,
and quidlibets; but to the darker mysteries of the black Art, he entered a
demurrer! From retailinge Law thus in small portions averdupoise, he became by
degrees the great dispenser of that wholesome drug to the King's wide
commonweal! Still kept he his balance so nicelie poised, that yieldinge to
no other weighte, a single scruple of his own conscience would turn the beam.
Some liken him to a cholorique Chymiste, whose virtue is tried by his own fire;
-- but what heedes the outward wrath of him, who has a mind within, pure
as the mountain air which first he breathed!"

PAGE 237. -- GENUINE. LXX. -- C -- ss W -- DG -- VE.
-- "Far from the world retired,
"In plaintive widowhoode she past her days!
"The deeplie-graven image of her Lord
"Was treasured at her heart, and there fast bound
"By the dear pledges of a well-tried love!
"Each fleetinge hour she called her little train,
"Looked for some featured copy of their Sire,
"In fond expectancie that she might trace
"A buddinge likeness in each youthful mind,
"Sweet proxy of the noble worth she lost!"
PAGE 166. -- GENUINE. LXXI. -- Earl P -- T.
"Yes, yes, I tell you! the same COUNT TIVOLIO who did penance last Lent at
the Roman Carnival! A man of taste so much refined, that he will dance along
the flintie way to Mantua barefooted, to the tune of a good dinner, so that you
call not on him to pay the piper! He has a nature created with exquisite
sensibilitie for bodily endurance! He says in verity, that man was fashioned
for long sufferinges; that if they toss him up a chimnie like a pancake, he
ought not to murmur -- nor complain of those who may kindly beat him as they
do a Turkey carpet, to get the dirt out of it by manual compunction!"

PAGE 91. -- Not GENUINE. LXXII. -- D -- ss of G -- D -- N.
"Ken you that Dame from the other side the Tweede? -- It Is the gaie wife of the
puissant Thane! -- Becoming, as Gossip Fame reports, an analyser of Burgundian
juices, they caught her fair face like the wildfire of St. Anthony, and
cruelly marred its beauties! -- Under the radiance of her own countenance,
she can now warmlie delineate all Heaven's created things by their proper
names, without further blushinge! -- Rearing a brood of March chicks wisely,
she did kindly accommodate two sucking Dukes with a pair of them, as great
bridale bargains! and for her pretty nestlinge that remains, she does promise
to herself as good a market! -- Ever merry is her heart, that trips it
lightly to a joyous reele, and politic her head, that games her the
choicest secrets that pass between the poles!" PAGE 113. -- Not GENUINE.
SEVENTEENTH DAY's TRIAL.
LXXIII. -- D -- ke of G -- FT -- N.
"How is it, lordie Senators, that a smuggled dash of the blood regalle
curdlinge in a mortal man's veins, should freeze up the genial currente of his
soul? -- If any one has need to gaze upon the puissante Hugoito, it must be
at distance vast! for he is more lofty than any other of God's creatinge, by
many cubittes! Prouder in prosperity than a pampered War-horse, although in
jeopardie of state he bends his raven crest, till you may drive him before you
like a pinioned Storke: so imperious in a field of hunters, that every one is
inclined to become his WHIPPER-IN right heartily! It Is said an aguish kind of
love fit attacked him, tottering under the excess of power, and that the same
palpitation shook him out of his Mistress, and hi^ Place! A raie of sunshine
once rudely broke over the dark horizon of his visage, and forced a smile;
but in penance for the familiar deed, he has thenceforth doomed his face to
the planetarie influence of a diget's eclipse!" PAGE 123. -- Not GENUINE.
LXXIV. -- C -- ss of D -- BY.
"Lo! mild Rowena to her friends restored,
"And all the meedes of innocence and peace,
"Looks on the troubled waters she has past
"With wonder at her own deliverance!
"Still her fair browe its diadem displaies,
"Which female arts would sain have wrested from her,
"Pitying she sees a rival queen be-deckt
"With fancied coronettes of changeful hue;
"While she with wit and pleasantrie beguiles
"The fleetinge hours; nor does a painful sighe
"Her bosom move, save one of penitence
"For waywarde errors of unguided youth!
"Oh! there be those, who sufferinge like her
"Had sighed their little hearts in twain -- nay wept ^
"Two lovelie eyes to ceaseless founts of sorrow!"
PAGE 44. -- Not GENUINE. LXXV. -- Lord B -- G -- VE.
"Why, even in the goe-carte of the schools was he made to prattle like unto a
linguiste of Athens, having his gums rubbed every morninge with a Greek coral
by his Alma Matter! -- With his years grew an itchinge ambition to become a
maker of orations in the dead languages, which few men livinge might
comprehend: for this, he attempted to speak with the pebble of Demosthenes in
his mouth before the astonished Senate, which becominge unmanageable, it did
unfortunatelie begagg the aspireinge Declaimer!"

PAGE 54. -- Not GENUINE. LXXVI. -- C -- ss of B -- K -- M -- RE.
-- "Playing in all shapes, and kinds, does marvellouslie delighte me! -- I
can play most adroitlie at a reunde game; and a busy knife and forke at a
round table! -- Although our Stage be on the decline, I marvel much if it can
fall while I continue the maine prop of the Theater! -- Whenever I do enacte,
bear I not all before me? -- Even the last time I did perform a movinge part
in a piece military at the Duke's privy Drama, as I carried off the west end
of a fortified town in my retreat through the side wings of his Grace's
scenerie! The next part I do aslume will be that of the Jewishe Shylocke,
findinge my own property of bearde -- after which I will have my pound of
flesh for supper, or my cook shall answer for the defaulte by loss of his
vocation!"

PAGE. 166. -- Not GENUINE. EIGHTEENTH DAY's TRIAL.
LXXVII. -- Earl of H -- TH.
"Though begotten in a cloudie night, he was most nobly brought forth under
lunar influence, and therefore soon became a dabbler in mysteries celestial!
He was so well with the plannettes, that he could put you off an Eclipse for
three weeks upon a stretch, to the great confusion of all astronomers! --
Descended from King Bladud in a converse line, he did decree himself
hereditarie ruler of the tepid Baths, and there tumbled into hot water by
virtue of his own special prerogative! -- As for Minstrels, and Shew-folkes,
he banished them his dominion, because they played the fool more wisely than
their better!"

PAGE 114. -- GENUINE. LXXVIII. -- P -- ss M -- RY.
"Amid the princely blossoms which adorn
"Old Windsor's happy shades, can nature show
"A fairer flower to bless each ^avish'd sense?
"More bloominge as she seems in beautie's scale,
"Her mind with all the social graces st^'d,
"Grows riper yet in sweet benevolence. --
"Heroic youths, for chivalrie renowned,
"When foreigne warfares shall no longer rage,
"Turn to this isle your royale course in peace;
"Here viewing well the lovelie treasure, say,
"Is It fittinge this fair form should fade unseen,
"Like the pale lilly in sequestered vale?"
PAGE 222. -- Not GENUINE. LXXIX. -- Arch -- p of Y --.
"In these hacking times of war, see that your mitred Abbottes be formed out of
blusse materials -- men who will fall to fightinge ere they have whistled over
their holy mattins! -- Commend unto me for the head of the true Church
Militante, the most reverend Thwack-haussen! -- he has a mighty arm for
conqueringe the stubborn flesh of others, and from his earliest days has
ruled it with a birchen scepter!" PAGE 23. -- Not GENUINE. LXXX. -- Mrs. C --
NC -- N.
-- "Our house is destined for the seen of whimsical adventures! Unrobeinge
myself in my chamber the other night, methoughte I heard some strange noise
not far distant from my bed! -- fearfullie I searched in vain, the place most
likely to conceal a man -- but lookinge underneath the vallence, I espied one,
at the sight of whom my life-bloode ebhed, and in my swoone the russian
'scap'd away! -- What his busine^ could be under the bed I cannot divine -- but
he meant no good, or surely he had not been there!" PAGE 321. -- GE^
NINETEENTH DAY's TRIAL.
LXXXI. -- Mrs. M -- ST -- RS
"Havocke I wotte, has this fair Siren made
"Mid poor men's mortal hearts, bestricken with
'The keeene blue lightning of her roguish eyes
"Still Beautie's flauntinge banner she displaies
"With all the little loves so clustered round,
"That TIME himself enlistes her gaie gallante,
"Bids all her years roll pleasurablie on,
"Allows nor furrowe to despoile her browe,
'Nor single rose-bud to forsake her cheek,
"That to his desolating power no charge
Might lie, for loss of loveliness so rare!"
PAGE ^23 -- GE^ LXXXII. -- Duke of C^ -- ^
-- "Amphibious formed,
"Over sea and land indignantlie he rolled,
"As if no element beneathe the stars
"Were worthy his dominion! -- Yet stooped he
"To female yoke, and humbly then became
"The foster father of some merry prankes
"Which his harte's Qu^n with other folk had played
"Though he is a Princely Chief of bouncing words
"One pepperinge vollie of her comicke clacke
"Larums his mighty soul to mute subjection!"
PAGE 44. -- Not GENUINE LXXXIII. -- Miss P -- LH -- M.
"Oh! the she-sharkes who surrounde the tables of chance, devoured all my
ducattes in my youth, and now they shie at my misery, like a priest at a
poor mendicant! -- I am nightlie refused the loan of a ^ingle stake for one
solitary cock; so that, biteinge my fingers ends in madness, I sit now an
idle spectator of ^ortune's miscluefe, without a consoleing share in the
undoinge of others!" PAGE 20. -- Not GENUINE LXXXIV. -- Mr. M -- ^LET -- N.
"What art thou, memory, but a rash obtruder? -- (...) a fell despoiler of
man's fortune! The little share of thy retentive faculty I do possess, I will
use as wary men do a dark lantern, making it visible on lie to illumine
their own pathe! -- For my part, I Will put a remembrance on no one's words --
not even on my own, if it be not my good pleasure -- Why should I wear a
memory, like a tablet on a market cross, to make inquisitive knaves as wise
as myselfe' -- I am well traveled in the manners of the East; so that, would
men derive information from me, it must be as from the radiant dial, which
answers interrogatorie none, unless you make the sun to shine right smilinglie
upon it!" PAGE 10. -- GENUINE TWENTIETH DAY's TRIAL.
LXXXV. -- Marquess C -- NW -- S.
-- "What though his body
"Yielde to the frail infirmities of nature,
"His lofty mind achievements has in store,
"Over which brighte Honor proudly may displaie
"His purest standarde! -- Not in carnaged fields
"Beflowed with human gore, are we to search
"For his fair fame, but in surviving hosts,
"In vanquished countries, and their prostrate chiefes
"Rescued by him from wanton desolation:
"Such are the heroicke deeds which Virtue claims
"Of mighty valor!"
PAGE 76. -- GENUINE LXXXVI. -- Miss VAN -- CK.
-- "They shall find me somebodie in the P^ Chamber, since they have chosen me
Bearer of her Highnesse' Privy Purse! -- Though as yet but an (...) honor, I
do accept it in the fullness of my grace right thankfully. -- Now that I grow
in state, as well as stature, the PRINCE may comment at his pleasure on the
comeliness of my person; and I will give the Wag a grilled Capon, with catches
and glees, whenever it may suite his royale humor to sojourne with me soberlie
at midnighte!"

PAGE 22. -- Not GENUINE. LXXXVII. -- Earl of INC -- Q -- N.
-- "By the holy St. Patricke, but I have been a spend-thrifte after the
polite arts, by which I might be able one day or the other to t^rn a saving
penny! -- Being born executor to Sir Lancelot, the great ^mner, I had the
over-rummaging of all his pieces, both dead and alive! Och! to be sure and I
did not epsy me a pretty tight kit-cat among them, in which there was g^e
keepinge: so with a little ^yle varris^s of Blarney, I brought out the beauties
of the sweet Crat^, to secure them, do you see, in my own private Collection!"
PAGE 33. -- Not GENUINE. LXXXVIII. -- C -- ss of B -- SR -- CHAPTER
"Far you might trace ROWENA's sad return
"By tears incessante which bedewed her way
"Ah! wherefore journie into distante climes
"For that repose the mind had lost at home?
"Swiftly the rumor of our early deeds
"Flies on before us, and does of-times blighte
"Those poppie flowrets which our fancy reared
"To strew oblivious over our sorrows past! --
"Rest now fair wanderer within our isle;
"And if domestique solace thou would know,
"Oh shun the Circe arts of thine own sex,
"Which ruin more, than those of man's undoing!"
PAGE 101. -- GENUI^ TWENTY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
LXXXIX. -- Duke of R -- TL -- D.
-- "If I had not escaped me from the under-petticoates of these d^atinge
DOWAGERS, they would have smothered my peeringe manhood with the warmthe of
their maternal affection! -- One of them read me nightlie lectures on the
beauties paramount of the antique; and these, with boyish rapture, did I
estudie, until her Grace, my better-knowinge Mother, chid me for my folly, and
bade me launche my buoyant barque upon the flowing tide of youtheful
transportes!" PAGE 87. -- GENUINE. XC. -- March -- ss of T -- CHP -- ^.
"Say, when you likened it to new fallen snow,
"And planted countlesse kisses on my hand,
"Was it in rapture over its outward shape,
"Or what its golden palm did then contain?
"Whatever the motive of this worshipe -- take it,
"And all the treasure which it does possess:
"I pray you look not scrupulouslie nice
"At its contents; of g^lde there is enough
"To rub, and polishe over the rustic spots
"With which dire poverty does sometimes blu^
"The noblest ermine! -- How it were begotte.
"That heed not now: should some be found that is base,
"'It Is fitter barter for those bauble plumes
"With which weak women do their pride ennoble!
"Husband this wealth right well my Lord, if not
"Your wife; 'twill aid you in those times of need,
"When vain distinctions may be trod to duste,
"And all your plighted vows be lost in air!
" -- So take me as you found me, SCOT, and lot!
"But see you fairlie deal at present by me,
"For I was trained to know when people do Mr. MALONE, but with a becoming
diffidence on so delicate a point, is inclined to think "that the immortal BARD
here levels a favorite PUN at some family anecdotes, well known at that era
in the Annals of GAMING."
play foul."
PAGE 210. -- Not GENUINE. XCI. -- Mr. Secretary W -- ND -- M.
-- "How sharply set are all his seven wits for the affairs of State!
Amidst our Sovereigne Lorde's right sapiente advisers, that is the man who will
make the most of a shattered brain, my life on it! By the mass, but he will
sub-divide you the pericranium human into as many crooked axioms as there be
hairs on the scalpe of a wild Indian! then so deeply skilled is he in your
mathematiques, that he will set any one's toothe on edge by the mere fileing of
his logical saw! -- Most wisely did they constitute him their Secretary of
WARFARE, because he could write a legible hand in slaughter; nay, and prove
upon a pinche, by his bob-minors and majors, that the Constitution is
physically undone, unless it be let blood freely in the KYNGE's name!" PAGE
123. -- GENU^ XCII. -- Mrs. GR -- Y.
"This wedded spark of mine would make a husband far more conjugal, if he
were a Statesman less consequential! -- At times, when I do fondly interpret
the language of a look, to the gaze of admiration on the person he did swear
to love, for better and for worse -- he does my very soul bechill with some
exclamation of -- the GENTLEMAN in his eye!" -- Now quickly turning round,
threatens to -- " divide the House" -- with which in wedlock he en^owed me! --
Anon he whispers in mine ear somewhat of " a motion he would make;" -- but
soon, alack, cries out, "I Have lost it by the previous question!" -- Heaven
defend his sweet wits, and direct them to one fair point of love or
politiques, for, in their divided state, I fear he will mar them both!"

PAGE 44 -- Not GENUINE. TWENTY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
XCIII. -- Sir JOSEPH M -- WB -- Y.
"I am neighbor, at next door, to Sir HUGO BO^SKIM, the sturdie Knighte, who
picked up his crumbes in the pig-market! The comely sausage-women hand by the
Poultrie do bend the knee of curtisie to his Worship, because he deals
hugelie in swtne's flesh! -- Once on a time he was accounted a man of wit,
and then fitly chosen to represent his own hoggerie in sage convention.
Moreover, he had an intrigue with an underlinge of the Muses, from whence
sprung Ch^mas Ca^rols, and Bellmen's Verses, to the mavelous annoyance of
sound sleepers!"

PAGE 66 -- Not GENUINE XCIV. -- Countess of CH -- TH -- M.
"Aye! there is a creature feminine, of whom
"The world may proudly boast. -- With store of charms
"And blandishments that so bedeck the sex,
"She, from the yieldinge of her gentle heart,
"Has walked fair honor's hand-maide, -- early shunned
"The flauntinge scenes of Court parade, to act
"The humbler duties of domestique life.
"Simpl^e attired, as innocent in mind,
"With all the sweet benevolences graced,
"Her polish, 'came by habit so engrained,
"That Slander's biteing ^ile could never touch it!"
PAGE 55. -- GENUINE. XCV -- Mr. STR -- T, (late Member for MALDO^
-- "No idle prater he, but a dealer in few words; and those he does
vouchsafe to utter, carry with them a convincing charm! There is even such
magique in his monosyllables, that a single negation of his in the Senate has
struck your Partie-mongers dumb!"

PAGE 46. -- GENUINE XCVI. -- Lady MARY D -- NC -- N.
-- "Because it did her Ladie-ship delighte, to mount her on some barren
staff, like birchen broom, she was a WEIRD SISTER, wrongfullie y'clep'd! --
In verity she is the widowed remnant of the DUNCAN race, allied to rapes, and
massacres of yore! -- for this has she unsexed herself to mortal sight, that
men might marvel on her gender, and she avoid those perils known to both! --
She has a meltinge soul for melody, which in charity she lendes to knaves
despoiled, who chaunte their early loss in lamentable strames!"

PAGE 39. -- Not GENUINE. TWENTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
XCVII. -- Lord W -- M G -- RD -- N.
"Time was, I roved through Beautie's gay parter^e,
"And culled the sweetest blossoms of the spring:
"But now, alack! mine own poor leaf grows sear
"And fades with the frailties of the flesh!
"Then what avail the youthful days I Have known,
"The silly hearts with perjured vows I Have limed,
"And all the pageantrie of lawless love?"
PAGE 66. -- Not GENUINE XCVIII. -- Mrs. M -- IN -- L.
-- "My kennel-bred Spark, does fume and frette, like one of his own mad
pack, at the parchinge drought which thus his Chase delays. -- Indeed I think
it long myself ere he can hie his mettled hounds once more to cover -- till
then, the harvest is kept back from which I yearlie reap my gaier
prodigalities. For this, like DIAN, do I sit the jollie matron of an Hunter's
boarde, while minor Dukes and whelp-linge Lords with Bumpers charged, to me
appeal, on flyinge Leapes which they so madlie take? -- whose learthern gaskins
are of trimmest shape? or who does talihoo the sighted Fox in strains of
loudest dissonance?"

PAGE 56. -- Not GENUINE. XCIX. -- Admiral Lord BR -- DP -- T.
-- "That sturdie son of Neptune does mine (...) suite right well ^ -- wherever
his streamers fly, the^ (...) be-lorde it over the element of waters, that not
a (...) Gallique barque will he permit to ride in surety on it -- Roughe as
the blowinge tempest of the North is h^ afloate -- but when on shore, the
milder influences prevail again, and swaye his mind to calm urbanitie"

PAGE 114. -- GENUINE C. -- D -- ss of D -- V -- RE.
"Say, how can earth's gross meteor, long abide,
"When heaven's own planets topple from their height?
"You lovelie orb which now is on the wane,
"And but by shepherdes seen at twilight gray,
"Was once the morning star that did arise
"Most radiantlie be-gemmed? -- A gazing world
"Confessed its genial influence around!
"Wise men did journie from the East to view't,
"And bend in humble adoration of its power!
"But now it is falling from its circled heighte,
"To leave a darkened void 'mid beautie's sphere!"
PAGE 221. -- GENUINE. END OF VOL. I

