AN EXCURSION TO BRIGHTHELMSTONE, MADE IN THE YEAR 1789, By HENRY WIGSTEAD and
THOMAS ROWLANDSON;

DEDICATED (BY PERMISSION,) TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF WALES.

Embellished with EIGHT ENGRAVINGS in Aqua Tinta, from Views taken on the Road,
to, and at that Place.

LONDON. PRINTED (WITH THE TYPES OF STEPHENSON's BRITISH LETTER-FOUNDRY,) FOR
G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER-ROW.

M,DCC,XC.

INTRODUCTION.
THE following descriptive Account of an Excursion to Brighthelmstone, is
intended to give those, who have not visited that delightfully situated Town
and its Environs, an Idea of the Pleasures with which a lively and feeling Mind
will be impressed, on viewing those Scenes which the Authors have endeavored
to illustrate.

Brighthelmstone, -- formerly an insignificant Village, is now become highly
interesting on several Accounts. -- The purity of the Air, the ever-varying
Prospect of the Sea, the excellent Accommodations for Strangers, and the
acknowledged Superiority of the Bathing Machines; -- these and many other
Considerations will always have a powerful Influence on Persons of true Taste,
-- but when we also consider that a Personage as remarkable for Generosity and
Affability and as distinguished for discerning and rewarding Merit as he is
exalted by his Birth, has fixed upon this cheerful and salubrious Spot for his
Summer Residence, we are not surprised at seeing a Multitude of Persons of both
Sexes (the Pride and Admiration of Britain) following the Royal Visitor to the
English Baiae. Of the Roads which lead to Brighthelmstone, that immediately
from London being most frequented, the Authors have endeavored to familiarize
it to the Traveller by the Pen and Pencil.

The various Scenes which are introduced are slightly represented, and intended
merely to impress the Mind with the general Effects of Nature. -- It is, in
short, a Conversation Narrative, illustrated occasionally with SKETCHES of
those Scenes and Incidents which seemed most worthy of Notice.

AN EXCURSION TO BRIGHTHELMSTONE
CROSSING the Thames over Westminster-Bridge, we entered the County of Surry --
of which we think it necessary to prefix a general but concise Description.

SURRY is terminated, on the West, by Hampshire; on the South, by Sussex; on
the East, by Kent; and on the North, by the River Thames. -- It is 39 Miles in
Length from Rotherhithe, in the East, to Trensham, in the West; and 26 Miles in
breadth, from the Thames, in the North, to Awfold, in the South: and 146 Miles
in Circumference. It contains 780 Square Miles, or about 499, 000 Acres; near
28,900 Houses; 14 Hundreds: 140 Parishes; 11 Market Towns; 550 Villages and
Hamlets; and about 171,000 Inhabitants. --

In this County are several Royal Palaces, and a great Number of Noblemen and
Gentlemen's Villas. -- The Air and the Soil, in the interior Parts, are very
different from what they are at the Extremities. -- On the Borders, the Air is
Mild and healthy; and the Soil, fertile in Corn and Hay, with a Proportion of
Woodland, -- especially in the South, about Holmsdale; and in the North, near
the Thames. But, in the interior Parts, the Air is bleak, and the Soil, in
general, sandy and sterile. -- The Principal Rivers, which abound with Fish are
(exclusive of the Thames) the Mole, the Wey, and the Wandle. The Mole, which
rises in the South East of the County, obtained its Name from its Sinking in
the Earth at the Foot of Box-Hill, and after having run under Ground for two
Miles, emerging again at Leatherhead; from whence it continues its Course
Northwards, and falls into the Thames at a Village called Moulsey. The Wey
enters this County from Hampshire, near Farnham; and runs Eastward to
Godalming; there turning to the North, it becomes navigable to Weybridge, where
it falls into the Thames. -- The Wandle rises near Carshalton, and runs with a
clear, though small Stream, famous for Trout, by Merton-Abbey, to Wandsworth,
where it falls into the Thames.

The first Place, that deserves Notice, after we had passed Westminster-Bridge,
was KENNINGTON, a Village near Lambeth, and one of the Eight Precincts of that
Parish. -- On the Common of the same Name, a temporary Gibbet is frequently
erected for the Execution of Criminals in the County of Surry. -- About 2 Miles
farther, and 3 Miles and a half from London, is CLAPHAM, a very agreeable
Village. -- On the adjacent Common are many neat and pleasantly situated
Houses, chiefly inhabited by Citizens, who enjoy a pure Country air, at a
convenient Distance from the Center of Business, London. -- Here a handsome
Church was built in 1776, by the Contribution of the Parishioners; a
School-house also was formerly built, for the Education of poor Children.

Passing through BALLAM, situated about one Mile beyond Clapham, and proceeding
rather more than a Mile beyond, we arrived at UPPER-TOOTING; a delightful
Village. -- There is, however, besides its situation, nothing remarkable in it
except an Almshouse, built in 1709 by the Mother of Sir John Bateman, Lord
Mayor of London, for the Reception of Six poor Women, to be nominated by the
Heir of the Family.

SUTTON


About a Mile and a half, South East, is LOWER TOOTING, not worthy of
particular Notice.

Not far from Upper-Tooting, at a Village called MARTIN, or MERTON, Kenulph,
King of the West Saxons, was murdered in the House of a Lady, whom he tenderly
loved: -- It is also celebrated for a stately Abbey, erected here by Henry the
First, for the Reception of Canons of the Order of St. Augustine; Part of the
Walls remain, but very insufficient to convey an Idea of its ancient
Magnificence.

Pursuing our Journey, -- about 2 Miles beyond Lower-Tooting, we arrived at
MITCHAM, a well inhabited Village, and extremely well situated. -- The
following Anecdote, curious in its Circumstances, we hope will not be
misplaced, -- One H. Smith, who, by the Occupation of a Silversmith in London,
had acquired a considerable Fortune, formed the strange Resolution of spending
the Remainder of his Days as a Common Beggar. He confined his Limits to the
County of Surry, where he was known by the Appellation of "Dog Smith;" but
having given Offense to an Inhabitant of this Town, he was, by a Justice of the
Peace, ordered to be publicly whipped. This he resented so much, that he left,
at his Death, Fifty Pounds a Year, or One Thousand Pounds in Money, to every
Market Town in the County, -- Mitcham excepted.

Here is a Fair on the 12th of August, for Cattle, Toys, etc.

SUTTON, -- 11 Miles from London, is the first Post Stage. -- The Cock, kept by
Fuller, is an excellent Inn, where the Traveller may be supplied with good
Chaises, and able Horses. -- This Village is very pleasantly situated; and the
Air is no pure and healthy, that with the additional Inducement of eating the
celebrated Banstead-Down Mutton, many of the Citizens of London resort here on
Sundays.



Proceeding over Walton-Heath about 9 Miles beyond Sutton, we came to
Reigate-Hill; a remarkably bold Elevation, from whence is a delightful Prospect
of the South Downs in Sussex. But, near the Road, (which is scoop'd out of the
Hill,) the Declivity is so steep and abrupt, that the Spectator cannot help
being struck with Terror, though softened by Admiration. -- The Sublime and the
Beautiful are here perfectly united; Imagination is fully exercised, and the
Mind delighted.

REIGATE, the second Post Stage, is 23 Miles from London. -- It is situated in
the Vale of Holmsdale, and beautifully surrounded with Hills; is an Ancient
Borough by Prescription, and is governed by a Bailiff, chosen annually at the
Manor Court. -- Here is a handsome Church, a Charity School, and a Market
House. This last was, formerly a Chapel, dedicated to Thomas a Becket. -- There
are also some inconsiderable Remains of a very ancient Castle, in one of the
Apartments of which the Barons, who were in Arms against King John, are said to
have held their private Meetings.

At the White-Hart the Traveller is certain of meeting with every Accommodation
he can wish; good Posthorses, an excellent Larder, genuine Wines, etc. which
have rendered Mrs. Sully worthy the Encouragement she meets with. -- His ROYAL
HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF WALES, in his Excursions to Brighthelmstone frequently
dines here.

A Fair is held at Reigate on Whit-monday; and another on the 14th of September.

In the Reign of King Henry the Third, William Warren, Earl of Surry, founded a
Priory of Black Canons, at the bottom of a Hill adjoining to Reigate, which is
now a Dwelling House.

Near Reigate are two Boroughs, GATTON and BLECHINGLEY; -- each of which sends
two Members to Parliament.

GATTON is a Borough by Prescription; near which Place some Roman Coins have
been found.

BLECHINGLEY has nothing particularly remarkable.

We, therefore, proceeded on our Journey 'till we arrived on the Borders of
SUSSEX; of which County it may not be improper, before we enter it, to give a
short Description.

The Name of SUSSEX is derived from a Word which signified the County of the
South Saxons. It is terminated on the North, by Surry; on the East and North
East, by Kent; on the South, by the British Channel; and on the West, by
Hampshire. Its length is 75 Miles; its breadth 28, and its Circumference 195;
containing 1444 square Miles; divided into 6 Rapes or Laths; to each of which,
there formerly belonged a Castle, a River, and a Forest. -- It is, besides,
subdivided into 65 Hundreds, which include 342 Parishes, 1 City, 16
Market Towns, 1,065 Villages and Hamlets, and has 14, 880 Houses.

The Air of this County is in general wholesome, though to Strangers, it is
sometimes productive of Agues. In the North Parts, it is rather foggy, but
healthy; and upon the Downs, it is remarkably pure. The hilly Parts are
naturally less fertile than the others; but the Vales, and especially the
Weald, are highly productive. -- The South Downs, from whence is a beautiful
prospect, are generally covered with Sheep, remarkable for the fineness of
their Wool; a great Quantity of which is too often clandestinely smuggled into
France, (notwithstanding the Attention of the Legislature to this great
Object), to the great Injury of the British Woollen Manufactures. The Middle
Part of the County is beautifully interspersed with Meadows, Pasture Grounds,
Woods and Corn Fields; the last of which produce great Abundance of Wheat and
Barley. The North Part abounds in Woods, which furnish the Dock-Yards with
large Quantities of valuable Timber, and supply the Iron-Works, in the Eastern
Part of the County with Charcoal. -- The principal Rivers are the Arun, the
Adur, the Ouse, and the Rother. The smaller Rivers are the Lavant, the
Cuchmeer, the Ashburn, and the Astem. SUSSEX is in the Province of Canterbury,
and in the Diocese of Chichester.

CRAWLEY, -- 31 Miles from London, is the first Town in SUSSEX, which we
visited; but not meeting any thing here particularly worthy of Notice,
continued our Route 'till we arrived at CUCKFIELD, -- 40 Miles distant from
London. -- Here a Fair is held, in September, resorted to by a great Number of
pretty rustic Females, and by a multitude of happy Swains.

From Cuckfield to Brighthelmstone, about 14 Miles distant, the Country is
cheerful, and the Prospects various and extensive.

PRESTON, -- 1 Mile from Brighthelmstone, is a beautiful Spot, adorned with a
great Number of venerable Elms. Preston-House is said to have been the
Residence of Anne of Cleves, Consort to Henry the Eighth; from hence she
retired to a Convent at Falmer, about 3 Miles distant where she died and was
buried.

From hence the bending Sky is seen, at an immeasurable Distance, meeting the
Surface of the Ocean, and forming the grand Curve of the sensible Horizon.

From the great Number of human Bones, which have been dug up in the
Neighborhood of Brighthelmstone, we may naturally suppose it to have been the
Scene of some great Battle; and, as the Coast of Sussex was certainly the Place
where the Belgians often landed, and at last effected a Settlement; there is no
doubt but the Ancient Britons had frequent Disputes with them, and that many
Battles were fought; one of which, probably, might have been near this Town.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when the Kingdom was threatened with an
Invasion from Spain, this was thought a Place of Importance, and there are yet
Remains of a Wall near the Sea, which seems to have been erected about that
Time.

When Charles the Second escaped from the Battle of Worcester, he wandered
through different Parts of the Kingdom, seeking an opportunity to escape to
France; and coming to this Place, attended by Lord Wilmot, and a few other
faithful Friends, so disguised, that, without being known by any of the
Inhabitants, he was, by means of a fishing Boat, safely landed in France.

Julius Caesar is said to have landed here, in one of his Expeditions against
Britain.





A great number of Druidical Monuments and Altars have been discovered in this
Neighborhood.

BRIGHTHELMSTONE, (one of the most Southern Towns in the County of Sussex) is
situated in a Bay, terminated by Beachy-Head; on the East, and by
Worthing-Point, on the West. The Stein, at Brighthelmstone, is most beautifully
situated: Three Sides of it are formed by very neat and convenient
Lodging-Houses, etc. -- The fourth is open to the Sea. The rising Downs behind,
are a Shelter and Ornament. The white Cliffs are seen trending to the East, as
far as Seaforth; and, on the West, the Eye ranges over the Liquid Expanse, and
reaches Portsdown-Hill, Spithead, the Eastern Part of the Isle of Wight, etc.

The Marine Pavilion of HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF WALES, on the West
Side of the Stein, is a striking Object, and is admirably calculated for the
Summer Residence of the Royal Personage for whom it was built; and whose
Munificence and Affability endear him to all who are not biassed by Party,
blinded by Prejudice, or hostile to dignified Merit. This Pavilion, correctly
designed, and elegantly executed, was begun and completed in five Months. --
The Furniture is adapted with great Taste to the Style of the Building. The
grand Saloon is beautifully decorated with Paintings by Rebecca, executed in
his best Manner. The toul ensemble of the Building is, in short, perfect
Harmony. The Whole was executed by Mr. Holland, under the immediate Inspection
and Direction of Mr. Weltjie, whose Attachment to his Royal Master was faithful
and disinterested. The Stables belonging to his Royal Highness are built in a
Style of convenient Simplicity, correspondent with that of the other Buildings.

The Bathing Machines are under the Care of the attentive Smoaker. The number
of beautiful Women, who every Morning court the Embraces of the Watery God, far
exceeds that of any other Bathing Place in the Kingdom.



The Market is plentifully stocked with all Kinds of excellent Provisions, and
culinary Vegetables at a very reasonable Price.

The Theater is situated in North-Street. The Company of Actors is, in general,
very respectable; most of the favorite dramatic Pieces selected from the
London Theaters, are performed in the Course of the Season with great Propriety.

There are two excellent Libraries on the Stein, kept by Messrs. Crauford and
Dulot; also a good Print-Shop by Mrs. Lay, which with Miss Currie's Shop in
North-Street, are the Places of polite Resort. From the various and excellent
Assortments of useful and ornamental Commodities at the above Places,
Selections are frequently made for a Raffle.

A good Band of Music plays on the Stein, for some Time, twice a Day. -- The
lovely Throng of Females (in all the Elegance of a light Summer's Dress, woven
in Fancy's Loom) who here suffer the Sea Breezes to riot on their Charms, is
exceedingly numerous.

In the Town is a Hot, and a Cold Bath. -- One Mile out of Town is an excellent
Chalybeate Spring, possessing all the Properties of the celebrated Tunbridge
Waters.

Of Lodging-Houses, those erected on the Stein, being most beautifully
situated, are consequently most expensive; but there are others suitable to
Persons of all Ranks and Fortunes.



At the Rooms, -- Whist, and other Clubs meet. Those who prefer Dice may also
enjoy their favorite Amusement.

The Wheatears (so called from a corrupted Translation of the French Cul blanc)
are taken in great Numbers, on the Downs near Brighthelmstone, during the
Summer Months.

The Race Ground is exceedingly well adapted to the Purpose for which it was
intended; and is one of the most beautifully situated Spots in the World. The
Prospect is wonderfully extensive and magnificent.

The Races are in July. -- There are always Three Fifties, besides several
Sweepstakes, Matches, etc. A handsome and convenient Stand, sufficiently
capacious to receive a great Number of Spectators, is erected on the Course.

At a small Distance from the Race Ground, there was formerly a Roman Station,
now called WHITEHAWKE, some Vestages of which, of a circular Form, are still
visible.

Four Miles East of Brighthelmstone, is a delightful Village called
ROTTINGDEANE; it is Situation on a Cliff, is remarkably bold and striking, and
at a convenient Distance to receive the Overflow of Strangers from
Brighthelmstone, who may, here, be accommodated with Lodgings and Bathing
Machines. -- The Road which leads to this Village, over the Downs, is extremely
pleasant, and the Prospect beautiful.

The Devil's Dyke, (formerly a Roman Encampment,) about 8 Miles North-west of
Brighthelmstone, is a wonderful Situation. -- The Prospect from hence is so
very extensive that the Eye takes in, successively, a circumference of 100
Miles; -- comprehending a great Number of Spires, Towns and Villages.

At HOOVE, -- between Brighthelmstone and New Shoreham, are the remains of a
Church, which seems to have been, originally, a Structure of great Beauty and
Grandeur.

New SHOREHAM, -- about 6 Miles from Brighthelmstone Westward, is noted for
Ship-building; in which Art the Inhabitants are allowed to excel.

NEWHAVEN, -- about 9 Miles East of Brighthelmstone, is situated at the Mouth
of the River Ouse; was formerly famous for its safe and commodious Harbor,
which is now, unfortunately choked up with Mud and Sand; but we may expect,
that, from the laudable Exertions of the Inhabitants of the Town, it will in
Time recover its former Celebrity.

FINIS.

