VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A COMI-TRAGEDY.

PASSAGES SELECTED BY DISTINGUISHED PERSONAGES, ON THE GREAT LITERARY TRIAL OF
VORTIGERN AND ROWENA; A Comi-Tragedy.

"WHETHER IT BE -- OR BE NOT FROM THE IMMORTAL PEN OF SHAKSPEARE?" VOLUME IV.

-- "Open me a huge Wardrobe aboundinge in motlie habittes, and mark how
fantasticallie poor mortals will arraie themselves!" VORT. and ROW. LONDON:
PRINTED BY H. BROWN, FOR J. RIDGWAY, PICCADILLY, FACING BOND-STREET.

IRELAND versus SHAKSPEARE!!!
By the COURT.
IT having been specially moved by our Clerk in Court, on behalf of the Editor
of the MORNING HERALD, for leave to file further evidence in the above Cause,
we have conceded to said Motion, and have thereon directed, that judgment in
said Cause should be staid and suspended, until it be ruled to the contrary.

(Signed) POLONIUS
Die Mercurii, ^o Julii, 1807.
CONTENTS.
A Ad -- ngt -- n, Mr. H. 5 Ab -- n, late March. of 16 Ab -- n, Marquis of 21,
81 Ant -- m, Countess of 24 Alb-n's, St. Duch. of 42, 80 Ad -- m, Miss 66 Ang
-- st -- n, Mr. 91 Anst -- r, Sir John 112
B B -- th, Countess of 8, 88 B -- nf -- d, Mrs. Paul 2 B -- rkl -- y, Earl of
85 B -- rg -- s, Sir Bland 51 B -- rd -- tt, Lady 8 B -- nb -- y, Sir Ch -- s
79 B -- ckf -- d, Miss 98 B -- k -- m, March. of 99 B -- sv -- I Will, Mr. 108 B
-- rn -- y, Mrs. 104 B -- df -- d, Duke of 105 Bl -- ke, Lady 108 Br -- nd, Mr.
118
C C -- rtn -- y, Mr. 27 Cr -- ft -- n, Hon. Miss 28 C -- nw -- Ilis, Marquis
32 C -- mbe, H -- v-y, Alder. 43 C -- v -- d -- sh, Lady Geo. 46 Cr -- v -- n,
Lord 49 C -- rl -- sle, Earl of 53 C -- b -- e, Mr. 55 C -- v -- nt -- y, Earl
of 61 Cant -- b -- y, Archb -- p of 73 C -- d, Earl 85 C-v-nd-sh, Lady Harriet
86 C -- yng -- m, Countess of 110 C -- v -- t -- y, Miss Georgina [now Mrs. B
-- nes] 113
D D -- v -- ns -- re, Duke of 7 D -- rs, B-tl-r, Hon. Mrs. 12 D -- gl -- s,
Marquis of 29 D -- cre, Dowager Lady 44 D -- rs -- t, Duchess of 54 D -- rsl --
y, Lord 83 D-di-y and W-rd, Lady 84 D -- r, Hon. Mrs. 119
E Eam -- r, Sir John 45 Ell -- nb, -- gh, Lord 57 E -- k -- ne, Lord Chan. 106
F F -- x, Hon. Miss 26, 50 F -- ley, Lord 47
G G -- ldf -- d, Geo. E. of 9, 59 Gr -- y, Sir Charles, K. B. 11 G -- ll -- w
-- y, Earl of 15 G -- rd -- n, Lady Georg. 62 Glenb -- vie, Lord 67 Gr -- nv --
lle, Lord 115
H Harew -- d, Lady 6 H-m-lt-n, Lady Cath. 20, 72 H -- pe, Mrs. 22 H -- rr --
s, Colonel 23 H -- od, Viscountess 52 H -- th -- m, Sir Beaumont 88 H -- ntl --
y, Marquis of 97 H-m-lt-n, Lady 116
K Kn-wles, General, [ commonly called Earl of B-nb-ry] 117
L L -- d -- n, Lady 18 L -- y -- n, Mrs. 34 L -- c -- n, Lady 36 L -- ng, Lady
Catherine 58 Ly -- n, Mrs. 89
M M -- z -- ne, Lady 10 M -- re, Mrs. 64 M -- lv -- le, Lord Vis -- t 87 M --
ra, Countess of 90
N N -- c -- lls, Mr. 39 N -- th, Mr. Dudley 69 N -- rf -- k, Duke of 101 N --
ls -- n, the Rev. Earl 114
O Or -- ge, H. R. H. the P. of 13 O -- to, Mr. 41 Oxf -- d, Countess of 56
P P -- g -- t, Lord 37 Pr -- ce, Lady Caroline 60 P -- lt -- y, Sir William 77
P -- yt -- n, Sir Harry 93 P -- ph -- m, Sir Home 95, 100 P -- nt -- n, Mrs. 96
P -- rs, Sir John 111
R Ryd -- r, Hon. Mr. 3 R -- mn -- y. Lord 25 R -- c -- mier, Madame 30 R -- ch
-- d, Duke of 107
S S -- v -- lle, L-ml-y, Mrs. 40 Sc -- tt, Sir William 63 St -- wart, Lady
Caroline 68 Sh -- d -- n, Mr. T. 71 St -- g, Sir James 74 St -- w -- t, Lady
Cath. 73 S -- ym -- r, Miss ( Piccadilly) 76 S -- ym -- r, Miss M. G. E. 82 S
-- m -- rs -- t, Duchess of 92 S -- tf -- d, Marchioness of 96
T T -- p -- st, Sir H. V T. 17 T -- mple -- wn, Lady 70 T -- ill -- r, Hon.
Mrs. Ed. 132 T -- nt -- n, Mr. Rob -- t 109
V V -- ll -- rs, Lord 33
W W -- rc -- st -- r, Bishop of 1 W -- lkes, Miss 4 W -- sl -- y, Lady Emily
31 W -- lk -- r, Mrs. 48 Whitw -- th, Lord 65
Y Y -- m -- th, Countess of 14 Y -- ng, Rev. Arthur 19

PASSAGES. SELECTED AS SUFFRAGES ON THE SEVENTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCC. -- BISHOP OF W -- RC -- ST -- R.
"On Severne's hallowed banks, this mitred Sear,
"In holy quietude is found, courtinge
"No knowledge of mankind, save that he draws
"Purelie from sacred, or from classique lore.
"Here he himself has sealed that peace above,
"To which poor wayward mortals he invites
"By the fair pattern of a well-spent life.
"His castle frowns not on the front of man,
"Nor hostile wing, nor battlement, displaies;
"Firm, and secure in those good works alone,
"Which virtue, by her consecrating spelle
"Has drawn impenetrablie round him!"
PAGE 11. -- GENUINE. CCCI. -- MRS. PAUL B -- NF -- D.
-- "'It Was Heaven's supreme decree,
"That womankinde should be created fair
"For the sweet gaze of manne's idolatry!
"So writes my travelle-making Sire; and though
"A monie-hunting husband thinks not thus,
"I Will not be cast a lilly in the shade,
"Palelie to wither, while my youth's in bloome!"
PAGE 66. -- GENUINE. CCCII. -- HON. MR. RYD -- R. Second to Mr. PIT.

-- "As sidesman, Sir, to his puissante honor on the gibbette-fringed heathe,
I did endeavor, by much imparlance, to preserve it, Sans shot, and blotte!
-- Soon as the motion was disposed of, I thought we might divide the field;
but the Seconder of the other side proposed, that we should report progressive
deeds, and pray for leave to meet again; -- on this I moved the question
previouslie arrang'd, and sine die, instantly adjourned!"

PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. CCCIII. -- MISS W -- LKES.
"I threw not off my politic disguise,
"'Till over a father's vary-sighted eyes
"The Cappe of Liberty was closely drawn.
"Now may the world behold me as I am,
"And count those frailties with a fond delight,
Which do besette a woman's pagan heart
'Whose idol is of gold!" --
PAGE 54. -- Not GENUINE. SEVENTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCIV. -- MR. H -- Y AD -- NGT -- N.
-- "Since I am reputed Wit-cracker to the Prime Ruler of the realm, he must
right honorably let me pouch a little of the State-kernel, else shall I make
the heardes of his Courtiers wagge, to the miserable tune of mine own
improvidence!"

PAGE 33. -- GENUINE. CCCV. -- LADY HAREW -- D.
-- "I tell thee, Girl, I will gadde me on in my old woman's visitations, as I
have been wont to do, sans interruption by authority supreme: they shall no
more bind my feet than my tongue by their courtly commandments! -- Prithee,
what are the enchaffings of the royal blood to me, who can pay my visit of
obeisance to them all, without stirring the coals of coffeehouse, to
enfever either the one, or the other?"

PAGE 66. -- Not GENUINE. CCCVI. -- DUKE OF D -- V -- NS -- RE.
-- "If he has heaven's fair gift of mortal speech,
"Why does he dumbly ape the creatur'd race,
"Who do an utterance to instincte give
"Which he to reason churlishlie denies?
"Possessing more of this worlde's garner'd stores
"Than might suffice an hundred worthy men,
"'Twould not detract from his puissante Grace
"Were this calm Duke (since he will not speak himself),
"To call through gratitude their voices forth,
"And this way laud his bountifulle Creator!"
PAGE 387. -- GENUINE. CCCVII. -- COUNTESS OF B -- TH.
"What can that superfluxe of wealth avail,
"Which the chill hand of mortal penury
"Has placed so miserably safe, that even
"One's own poor heart does look in vain to sind it?"
PAGE 17. -- GENUINE. SEVENTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCVIII. -- GEORGE EARL OF G -- LDF -- D.
"'It Is he alone pre-eminentlie peers,
"Who, by a mind unbroken, can sustain
"The body's pressure of unceasing illes! --
"The very Destinies which hang around
"ERESTERN's frail and perishable frame,
"Do seem to mourn his dubitable state,
"Where worth, suspended in a wayward world,
"Insurance of its fair deserts must seek
"Over a bedarken'd void, 'mid realms unknown!"
PAGE 33. -- GENUINE. CCCIX. -- LADY M -- Z -- NE.
-- "I remember me a Prisonne-keeper's daughter at Aleppo, whom a haire-brained
Count did rescue front her iron bondage; and yet, forgetful of her own
deliverance, she did afterward employ her matron-houres in settinge silken
springes, to catch you littel boys, as they do larkes on a furzeblowne
common!"

PAGE 11. -- Not GENUINE. CCCX. -- SIR CHARLES GR -- Y, K. B.
-- "He on the right flank is a toughe remnant of true British daring! -- I
remember him press Bellona's flameing carre against the sierie coursers of the
sun, under the varying signs of the zodiaque, and keep a soldier's pace with
them: -- but now, having naught to wage against in foreign climes, he will
occupy himself, forsoothe, in a kind of church-militancie, and predicate,
because he cannot sight! -- On his chrest, which well adorns the frontlette of
our isle, he does displaie a lustrous star, to which the Militaire Magi of
the East do come, and most idolatrouslie worship!"

PAGE 86. -- GENUINE. CCCXL -- HON. MRS. B -- TL -- R D -- RS.
"What can a plenitude of wealth avail
"The silly creature, destinied to bear
"A load of provender for others waste?
"That rueful morn, when Birta's feverish palm
"(Obedient to inordinate desire)
"Did at the altarre sensuallie open
"In fruitless speculation -- then was lost
"The little remnant of that precious store
"Which woman charilie should treasure up!"
PAGE 104. -- Not GENUINE. SEVENTY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXII. -- H. R. H. the PRINCE OF OR -- GE.
" Certes, good man Dominique, a Potentate does slumber you more soundly in
his own nighte-cappe, than under a crownette which he wears for other men's
repose: -- nay, and does batten more kindly on his daily comforts, when he
has bidden this worlde's state a good night!"

PAGE 27. -- GENUINE. CCCXIII. -- COUNTESS OF Y -- M -- TH.
-- "Those merrily begotten, they do say,
"By Nature's right may merrily begette.
"Where Is the proscription on those baselie born,
"When any punie thing of lordly race,
"With salving superfluxe of his high birthe
"Can take it off, by one weak, wanton noose,
"Wrought upon wedlocke's simple band? -- Thus far
"By chance thrust forward on the road to fame,
"Who knows, but like my prototype Supposed to glance at the dignified
favorite of a SOVRAIN PRINCE, in a former reign.
of yore,
"I may to regalle splendoure soon ascend?"
PAGE 44. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXIV. -- EARL OF G -- LL -- W -- Y.
-- "He is right-noblie gifted in the saving art, knowing the weight of man,
and beast, only by the scale averdupoise -- Why he will selle you a
faire-skinned daughter, and a thick-hided Galloway runt, in one lotte at so
much per stone; and barlie throw his blessinge, as the offall, into the
bargain!"

PAGE 34. -- GENUINE. CCCXV. -- LATE MARCHIONESS OF AB -- N.
"Meeklie as may befitte my subject sex,
"I fain would now be heard in that defense
"Which frailty has to make. Indignant Lord!
"When first you turned a gracious eye on me,
"I was the blessed associate of your wife;
"And whether in our unity of mind,
"By curse instinctivelie she did imparte
"A portion of that love, her rightful due --
"Or by what other means the deed were done,
"You best can tell. If, by untimelie fate,
"My heart to fruits forbidden did aspire,
"And afterward might fancy, 'twas bereft
"Of joies, God's ordinance did sanction mine.
"How could the weaker vessel stand secure,
"If no protecting hand were then out-stretch'd
"To rescue it from violence?"
PAGE 77. -- Not GENUINE. SEVENTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXVI. -- SIR H. V. T. T -- P -- ST.
-- "Come Ladde, now lead young Pharos forth
"Rich in Arabian blood! -- and quickly his,
"To give me trial of his wind, and speed!
"I have a goodly sum of ducquattes on the race,
"With that dark, congregated band of knaves,
"Who by their sable rites do baselie stain
"Old Englande's verdant turfe! Next take you heed,
"That not a creature by two legs upborne
"With wizzard face, his resting place approach,
"Lest the right honest powers of the brute
"By man's device be bruteallie subdued,
"And his heart sink ere he can reach the goal!"
PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. CCCXVII. -- LADY L -- D -- N.
-- "I thank your Grace, for all your proffered love.
"But of the spreading honors of your house
"I am not meet to be partak'resse! --
"Your fretted roof encircleth underneath
"So much of mortal's high, and dainty blood,
"That 't would be arrogance in simple me
"To place myself at such a fire side;
"Therefore by your good leave, I will awaite
"'Till Comfort in her humbler cast, does show
"A little corner of her own, where I
"May set myself connubiallie down!"
PAGE 78. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXVIII. -- REV. ARTHUR Y -- NG.
-- "Go to, slave! I have the lawe's deliverance, and therefore defy the
malice of those freeborne varlettes, who did threaten me with durance vile for
my letter most pastorallie indicted in the State's defense. -- Beshrewe me, if I
had become enamour's of Egyptian taskmasters, and peradventure thought
mankind were primitivelie ordained for bondage, what were that to any man
living, gentle or simple, mine own reverence alone excepted? Talk not to me,
of penalties of the Law, who am ordained to promulgate condemnations by the
cannons of the Gospelle! -- Why, Sirrah! he that had the felicity of my
begetting, is he not chief enregister of a congregated body of mighty men,
who do fortunately possess more of this worlde's lands, than they have
wits to tille? -- Moreover, has he not taken the shallow-soiled
understandings of some of those to farm, and thus enabled them to let there
sapience lie in fallowe? -- If he then, being so great a Scribe, could not
work out an only sonne's deliverance, though he were a Pharisee, he would be
passing strange indeed!" --

PAGE 44. -- GENUINE. CCCXIX. -- LADY CATHERINE H -- M -- LT -- N.
-- "Watch over the lovelie flowrette of yon vale,
"That ere its fibrous system could be formed
"Lost the maternal stem from whence it sprang!
"So charilie she puts her virginne beauties forth,
"That they do modestly rebuke the wanton gaze
"Of those, who seek sweet innocence out
"To cherish not, but baselie to despoile it!"
PAGE 236. -- GENUINE. SEVENTY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXX. -- MARQUIS OF AB -- N.
"When I do traffic next in this worlde's flesh,
"I Will choose me out, to deck dull Hymen's term,
"A female offering not quite so fair.
"I Have notic'd, Sir, beneath the purest veil,
"That where the woman's skin be over-fine,
"At an ungenial quarter of the moon,
"Some cursed gad-flie strikes her to the quick,
"And goades the maddening current of her blood
"To deeds of desperation! -- Oh it is then
"They toss men up like animals in air,
"For girls, and bachellors to laugh at!"
PAGE 88. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXXI. -- MRS. H -- PE.
-- "What a mavelous revolution chucke! How condescending in the High, and
Mighty Duchess, to make great folks, out of us such little bodies! -- When I
did thank her for the honor she has conferred upon us, she bade me be of
good cheer, and graciously whispered in mine ear, that she would supply us
with all courtlinesse, and good breedinge, if we would only find ducquattes,
and lowly demeanor? -- Heaven bless her Grace's condescension!"

PAGE 43. -- GENUINE. CCCXXII. -- COL. H -- RR -- ES.
-- "That Is one, who has been more annoyed by the privy shaftes of
misfortune, than the javelins of an armed host -- yet has he made proud head
against them, because his breaste was firmlie mailed round with honor! -- I
tell thee, VORTIGERN, the soldier will march more erectlie in this buffetting
world, who has first walked through it, as an upright manne!"

PAGE 101. -- GENUINE. CCCXXIII. -- COUNTESS OF ANT -- M.
"So! -- I have mourned in pennancie so long
"For a departed Lord, that I did fear
"His clay-cold ghost, and therefore have betook
"My frighted fancy to a living hope!
"And this was chronicled of maiden me! --
"Well, girl, I care not what these gossips prate,
"Or how in wedlock they do bind me up,
"So they bestow my little heart but leave
"To seal its own true fealty in love!"
PAGE 29. -- GENUINE. EIGHTIETH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXXIV. -- LORD R -- MN -- Y.
"He met his Sov'rain in the tented field
"Not clothed in wrath, as Barons moved of yore
"To wreste from tyranny a subject's rightes;
"But, with a people's fealty arrayed,
"To nerve their Prince against a rutheful foe!
"Oh! 'twas a greeteing worthy of the land,
"On which the Gods did look approveing down,
"Making, with Brittishe Chiefes, a common cause!"
PAGE 45. -- GENUINE. CCCXXV. -- HON. MISS F -- X.
"With Doctors sagelie robbed, she does dispute,
"And eloquently lead them all a dance
"Through their own mystique schools, until they shake
"Their reverent ears, and marvelling, conclude
"Her sapience praeternatural! In truth,
"She will assail you nothing but men's heads,
"Leaveing their silly hearts to be subdued
"By babie-minded misses just in teenes!"
PAGE 18. -- GENUINE. CCCXXVI. -- MR. C -- RTN -- Y.
-- "This, Sirs, is one of those unprofitable wights that will break you jeste
upon jeste, 'till they do forgette the humbler means of breakeing their own
fast! Yet is he a singular cracker of dry jokes, and plays right humorouslie
with the shelles, until he has lost the kernelles! -- Had he been of the
Squirrel race, they would have banished him their woodland craft, sor so
improvident an use of his sharp-edged instruments!"

PAGE 76. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXXVII. -- HON. HISS CR -- FT -- N.
"Why am I greeted lovelie, talle, and fair,
"To hear each rival sister graced the same?
"A purer tribute does that flow'rette know,
"Which singlie rises from a lowly stem!
"Less homage of men's eyes would me suffice,
"Were it all integrallie mine; but bliss,
"In fickle guise of subdivided love,
"Comes, like the prism's manie-coloured ray,
"To chill by fleeting over the maiden heart,
"And vanishes afar!" --
PAGE 99. -- Not GENUINE. EIGHTY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXXVIII. -- MARQUIS OF D -- GL -- S.
-- "Why, my merry masters, do you enquire of me the pedigree of that stock,
your rantipolle womenne of quality throw out at so tickellish a seasone? If
your Batavian Princes will suffer their Flanderkinne concubines to leap into
other men's paddockes, who can adventure to enwarrant the produce to be of the
bloode-royalle?"

PAGE 167. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXXIX -- MADAME R -- C -- MIER.
-- "She in her sable tresses wore
"Four shineing daggers, marvellouslie wroughte
"For mann's subduing! Each sparklinge point
"The blood-stained rubie gave; the fretted shaftes
"Were studded over with blazing jewelrie,
"Like Nighte's bright canopie surmounting all,
"That slaves, which escaped the lighteninge of her eyes,
"Her minor constellations might enswaye!"
PAGE 44. -- GENUINE. CCCXXX. -- LADY EMILY W -- SL -- Y.
-- "Passinge through our holy Cloystere, I found my hand so suddenly
entangled between the two palms of the young Friar Lorenzo, that I could not
disengage it before he had breathed upon it a love-spelle from his glowing
lips. He swore by his Alma Matter, that the Destinies had pre -ordained we
should be one flesh! Then talked he so wildlie of olive branches round about
our table, that, to save the manne's poor wits, I gave him my trothe, on
condition that his noble friends would teach his Reverence to down upon his
knees with a better grace!"

PAGE 194. -- GENUINE. CCCXXXI. -- MARQUIS C -- NW -- LLIS.
-- "Thirstlesse of blood,
"His heart approved no victory complete,
"Untille the wounds of those he had subdued
"Were oiled, and bound by Charitie's fair hand!
"Alike in councille, and the embattled field,
"Calmlie he moves. -- Not prone to parlancie,
"His words are rare, but, like his sword,
"Attempered firmlie to their point. -- Since then,
"The Soldier's clemency, and Statesman's nerve,
"In him by blendid potencie have given
"Assurance to the world of amity,
"The fadelesse laurel, wreathed with olive branche,
"Shall wave in triumph over his mural crown!"
PAGE 365. -- GENUINE. EIGHTY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXXXII. -- LORD V -- LL -- RS.
-- "The Countess, my Ladie-Mother, chucking me by the chinne the other morn,
did whisper in mine ear, that if I was observant of her denotements, I might
begette a child that would make a man of me for the remainder of my days!
Moreover, she did subjoin, that she would condescend, her illustrious self, to
become its nurse, and that with so politic an affection, as soon to make of
it -- a babe of grace!"

PAGE 235. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXXXIII. -- MRS. L -- Y -- N.
-- "Had I been a Lioness that had devoured the last cubbe of her litter, men
could not stare upon me with more holiday eyes wherever I move, or keep
themselves more circumspectly without the pounce of my ponderous pawe!"

PAGE 112. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXXXIV. -- EARL OF B -- RKL -- Y.
-- "When the blood does run riotouslie through noble veins, propelling to
achievements amorous, a sapient headed man will not betrothe his honorable
self, but as he may be unyoked again after his own free-wille and pleasure!
Matrimony, Sirs, should be as slight of wear as an holidaie bonnette that may
be doffed off at one's ease; and not as a foole's-cappe to jarr the meade in
perpetuity by the jingling of its bells!" --

PAGE 348. -- GENUINE. CCCXXXV. -- LADY L -- C -- N.
-- "I know you bind the coarser wills of men
"To gainful purposes by wily arts;
"But no base polity can regulate
"The finer movements of a woman's soul!
"Oh! press not her obedience by rude strength;
"For, though the weaker vessel, she will scorn
"Such hateful vassalage, and ever strive
"To break those sacrilegeous cords in twain
"Which warp affection from a guileless course
"That Nature pre-ordain'd!" --
PAGE 18. -- GENUINE. EIGHTY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXXXVI. -- LORD P -- G -- T.
-- "It likes me well, to see
"The gallant Chieftaines of our envied isle
"Pressing beyond the current of their blood
"To nobler fame! -- That stately youth who treades
"Yon furrowed lands, now sleeps not on his arm
"In bootlesse ease, but with unsullied steel
"To ploughshare turned, tilleth the grateful soil,
"So well it had defended!" --
PAGE 104. -- GENUINE. CCCXXXVII. -- COUNTESS OF B -- TH.
-- "Stand bye! and let this frail, and fretted frame
"Strive to disloade a pent-up mind within
"Of the rich ponderance that weighs it down!
"Ah! what availes a superfluxe of wealth,
"Placed by the chilling hand of penury
"So safe, that even one's own poor heart
"Does seek in vain to find it!"
PAGE 79. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXXXVIII. -- MR. N -- C -- LLS.
-- "Why truly, Goodman Loquardo, the times are miserably out of jointe! -- I
do remember well the days, when the words of a wise manne were sought as
precious jewelrie from far; but now are they most scoffinglie set at naught!
Marry, should you ask it of me, how they came so irreverentlie to expunge my
powers politic from the forum, and the senate? Certes, I cannot tell: so let
it pass! and the mischief fall upon their own heads. Nay, and it had not
been for the weight of my imparlancies, the State had before this been lightly
overthrown by the windy machinations of the jibe-mongers, who did assail it!"

PAGE 36. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXXXIX. -- MRS. L -- ML -- Y S -- V -- LLE.
-- "Here, Limner, take your stand!
"But in the giddie wiles of admiration,
"Loose not the powers of your mimique art.
"Now, while her tresses wantonne in the air,
"(As loathe a front divinelie arched to quitte
"In hopeless search of exaltation)
"Trace a similitude of those fair forms
"We are to gaze upon in purer realms.
"And then let white-zon'd modesty encircle all
"In one unrivaled Grace!"
PAGE 28. -- GENUINE. EIGHTY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXL. -- MR. O -- TO.
-- "'Twill sorelie greeve me, Sirs,
"To bid that worthy foreigner farewelle!
"Who by true Christian polity has staunch'd
"The worlde's long-bleeding wounds!
"But since vain GAUL demands her treasure back,
"See that his barque in peaceful triumph sail,
"And by the pure breathed blessings of our isle,
"Be calmlie wafted to the Gallique shore!"
PAGE 22. -- GENUINE. CCCXLI. -- DUCHESS OF ST. ALB -- NS.
-- "I would to Fortune, that her Grace, my Lorde's great grand-damme, NELL
GWYNNE.
had caparizoned a nimbler steed, when, by her Sov'rain paramour's command,
she did possess, for amorous dowerie, as wide a space of this rich Isle, as in
a fair daie's ride she could encircle: then might her descendant have boasted
of more laundes, and beeves, and not been left the minor constellation in
poor Charles's Waine!"

PAGE 49. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXLII. -- ALDERMAN H -- V -- Y C -- MBE.
-- "Hark ye! brother Cittes, but not fellow Citizens! I must be no more
familiarlie entreated in Common Halle, but saluted by you at great distance,
as befittes a man of travelle. I have visited foreign climes -- and within the
walls of Paris held imparlance with HIM that makes Potentates tremble! Nay, he
has condescended to speak to me upon merchandise, and talked about Malte, and
Hoppes, as though he had prime samples of both in his own illustrious
pockette! Moreover, he spoke most courteously of my personal endowments; said
that I was well favored as the Regicide Brewer of his Capital, and seemed in
his presence to carry as good a head as could a pottle of my own brown
stout. So look well, that on the score of these my new acquirementes, I do
receive some increase in your corporate obeisance!"

PAGE 108. -- GENUINE. CCCXLIII. -- DOWAGER LADY D -- CRE.
-- "Soon as the stilleste hour
"The turrette clock has toulde, yon wickette opes,
"From whence in vestment darker than the Night,
" Alvina walks her forth; and as the pathe
"Of Misery is straight, she quickly gains
"The sacred Yewe that does enshroude the tomb
"Of her departed Lord. On this sad shrine
"Her widowed heart, still wedded, pours out
"The never ebbing torrente of her woes!"
PAGE 88. -- GENUINE. EIGHTY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXLIV. -- SIR JOHN EAM -- R.
"Well! Heaven's good blessings uphold me, since, in admiration of my shineing
parts, they do thrust such weighty affairs right bodily upon me. Moreover,
Sirs, they have elevated in our Citie's chief Mansion, a bed of state for the
honorable delight of my Lady Spouse! I dream not their politic intending
therein; but per-chaunce they do expect that I should bequeathe them, in
return, some half-score of suckling Lords Mayor, as the hereditarie fruit of
their bounty!"

PAGE 104. -- GENUINE. CCCXLV. -- LADY GEORGIANA C -- V -- D -- SH.
"For mercie's sake, let not that fair Lady smile with such redundancie of
grace, nor fatten so vaste a congregation of dimples by incessant laughter,
lest, in the supremacy of youthful flesh, we may loose the blood, and
breed, of lovelie Devon!"

PAGE 212. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXLVI. -- LORD F -- LEY.
-- "I did expect that these NIMRODS of the Pichley chase had been trained to
nobler dareings! -- Mark how they stop at a vaulting leap, to calculate
whether the pleasures of this world, or the next, are best worth seeking.
These laddes might have rose in their stirruppes, had they not been borne with
the necks of green-girles, that require so much womanly caution to preserve
them!"

PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. CCCXLVII. -- MRS. W -- LK -- R.
-- "Aye! faithful Albert,
"Since fortune quittes our thresholde, few, alas!
"With pale adversity will enter here.
"While our gay doors on golden hinges daunc'd,
"What swarms of buzzing gadde-flies poured in
"On proud and glittering wings to revel through
"The celles with richest honey stored! Soon as
"A cloud came over, away these insects flewe
"Elsewhere to wanton in the gaudie sun,
"That hasteilie produced them!"
PAGE 99. -- Not GENUINE. EIGHTY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXLVIII. -- LORD CR -- V -- N.
"To Princely diadems I never shall soar
"By flightes that tower'd my Lady Mother up!
"In Honor's bright, and laudable career,
"I would adventure much. In every clime,
"Where the proud service of my Sov'rain calls,
"On warring earth, or ever-raging seas,
"I will, at least, be found obedient!"
PAGE 184. -- GENUINE. CCCXLIX. -- HON. MISS F -- X.
-- "In good soothe, neighbor, but she is most marvellouslie learned. Nay,
'twas but last Candlemass that she did be-pose three of our gravest Doctors in
all Padua out of their own books in the black-letter! -- As she has been so
favored with the gift of tongues, it is pity that her Ladieship does not
vouchsafe to give the world some semblance of her honored self, and not
bury all her prattling powers in the profittlesse grave of the dead
languages!"

PAGE 74. -- Not GENUINE. CCCL. -- SIR BLAND B -- TO -- SS.
-- "No sooner had our Lord the King dub'bed him a Knighte, than, in a
frolicke-some mood, he did bedubbe himself Knighte-errant to those jades, the
Muses. Since this, he has increased in consequential stature so, that he has
out grown the clothes that Nature, in a botching kind of way, had cut out for
him. And, if you do not keep this Sir DOGGEREL from inflating by the windy
recitation of his own numbers, he will be swollen until he litterallie burst!"

PAGE 191. -- GENUINE. CCCLI. -- VISCOUNTESS H -- OD.
"Aptly to fashion forth the female mind,
"Let that well-modell'd excellence remain,
"Which through a cheerful plenitude of years
"Has lent a social grace to all around.
"Full half a centenarie she has walked
"The even paths of constancy, and truth.
"Oh! it is a pious sight, at life's calm ebb,
"To view affection able thus to trim
"The slowlie-waneing lamp of wedded love!"
PAGE 48. -- GENUINE. EIGHTY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLII. -- EARL OF C -- RL -- SLE.
-- "I marvelle much Malverto, had his honor's Muse been of ignoble birthe,
whether she would not have limp'd it on one leg through life, like a scurvie
minstrelle: but being caparisoned in gilded trappinges, the jade now prances
with a lofty chreste, although she has not a single foot that is sound to
stand upon!"

PAGE 188. -- GENUINE. CCCLIII. -- DUCHESS OF D -- RS -- T.
-- "I did not lay
"My ducalle crownette 'neath his rising feet
"To be abas'd: but since the giddie Court
"Of wanton France his presence does demand,
"I Will follow closely with a lynx's eye,
"And from lascivious wiles protect him!
"If a cold Russe, with limbs enfurr'd, could lure
"His frame to amorous sympathy, may not
"The warm excitements of some Circe Gaul,
"By full expansion of her cloathlesse charms,
"Propell his frenzied heart to madness?"
PAGE 44. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLIV. -- MR. C -- B -- E.
-- "That, Sirs, is the dapper Vintner of East-Cheape, whose animal spirittes
are more friskie than his own outlandish wines newly bottled! -- Admire we his
dainty gray Barbary, which he got in barter of the Duke of Tunis for some
score skins of excellent Canarie: Mark how he pads the pavement, doing daily
service to the Capital in riding matches through the streets with the Prince's
pennie-poste-boys, and befittinge himself in due time to become
Purveyor-General of the petty bag!"

PAGE 5. -- GENUINE. CCCLV. -- COUNTESS OF OXF -- D.
-- "Nay, my good Lord,
"You must not lay such trifles to a heart
"That owes entire allegiance to mine.
"What is to me the levitie of mien,
"Or loose-zon'd shape transparentlie displayed
"By that Parisian dame you call my friend,
"And you yourselfe so rapturouslie view;
"I have no passions to be this way stirred,
"No blood that will in fev'rish current roll,
"In sympathy so void of sense; therefore,
"I pray you pass this tale of scandalle by!"
PAGE 74. -- Not GENUINE. EIGHTY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLVI. -- LORD ELL -- NB -- GH.
-- "I pray you, Sirs,
"When at our bar of Justice you impleade,
"Debase not heaven's fair gift of eloquence
"By words sophisticallie over-strain'd.
" -- We Have known the upright, plainlie-minded man,
"So warpt from rectitude by this misrule,
"This vile entanglement of simple sense,
"That Virtue's meede has been adjudg'd to Vice,
"And Decency has fled our Courts abashed!
"But, since by Fate's decree I have been called
"The judgment seat of Justice here to fille,
"Her sacred fount right watchfullie I Will guarde; --
"Its course of purity should downward flow;
"And shame be-light on him, that would design
"To sullie, or pervert it!" --
PAGE 189. -- GENUINE. CCCLVII. -- LADY CATHARINE L -- NG.
"Some one of you, who do administer in matters of Estate, I pray inform me,
when may this same Bourbon House to its own domestic comforts be restored? To
deal truly with you, Sirs, I do stand in much need of the restoration of
mine own House, that it may be well purged of some unseemlinesse, that with
plain English manners does but ill accord!"

PAGE 22. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLVIII. -- EARL OF G -- LF -- D.
-- "Go to! I must incontinently have died with water on my chest, had they
detained my bodie-corporate but another moon at their bathes of Palermo! --
Now hie thee, boy, to the sign of the Goat with the gilded horns, and search
me out mine old friend the Knight of the merry countenance; -- tell him, that
I have personally imported some skins of dried Canarie, the flavours of
which will hit his savorie palate well, because he may drink of it to the
amendment of his own life, scott-free!"

PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. CCCLIX. -- LADY CAROLINE PR -- CE.
"On light-foote tripping through the myrtle grove,
"I saw her first in floating vest arrayed,
"Then 'twas with grace, and diffidence she touched
" Apollo's lyre, and magically drew
"The fascinated Loves, and Graces round."
PAGE 6. -- GENUINE. EIGHTY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLX. -- EARL OF C -- V -- NT -- Y.
-- "Nay, my good Lord Abbotte, if you do still hunt after my poor
temporalities, let it be done with a little more spiritual charity. Although
the remnant of my life be scant, I pray you await its last threade as may
become your own Right Reverence! Even the currier does forbear to flaye the
hide from off the backs, until the animal be lifelesse. When on the bed of
sickness you have lain, and asked renewal of your ebbing life, think by the
forbearance of your Godde it has been given to you, and the tender mercies of
him, whose holy Minister you are!"

PAGE 88. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXI. -- LADY GEORGIANA G -- RD -- N.
-- "Come! dearest Lady Mother, and let us hence for Padua; for my heart is
sick to learn, why the love of Alberto so long does linger! And were myself a
man begirt with dirke, and doublette, no betrothed one of mine should so
unreasonablie await for bridal salutation! Sith, in obedience to your will, I
did be-mourn the deadly departure of a fancied lover, help me now, I pray you,
to enjoy the greeting of one, who swore he only lives for me!"

PAGE 44. -- GENUINE. CCCLXII. -- SIR W. SC -- TT.
-- "He rose not to the ermin'd seat he fills
"Ungracefullie, as some vain Chiefes have done,
"Through syllogysmes dexterouslie ranged,
"Against the peaceful judgment of mankind,
"To wage eternal war! He did ascend
"By nobler steps to his pre-eminence.
"The lore that truth's own eloquence bestowed,
"He hoarded not by any sordid craft,
"But did, with wide benevolence, diffuse,
"To guard the sacred rights of lowliness
"From the absorbing power of man's ambition.
"Who then more fit, betwixt our Church and State,
"To hold remittlesse equipoize?"
PAGE 204. -- GENUINE. CCCLXIII. -- MRS. M -- RE.
"Why with a fatal 'wicherie of charms
"Did Nature so invest me, as to draw
"By the wild guidelesse course of destiny
"Man to his own, and my undoing?
"What penitence may do to dry away
"The tears that have bedewed others' eyes,
"For treason against the honor of its Lord,
"This breast, by ceaseless sorrow, shall atchieve,
"Leaving the truant heart that wantoned there,
"To beat itself to apathie, and rest!"
PAGE 112. -- GENUINE. NINETIETH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLXIV. -- LORD WHITW -- TH.
"Uxorious men do less of peril find,
"From mute obedience to the female will,
"Than in vain striveings to obstruct its course!
"Whether these visittes to the CONSUL's Dame,
"In all the mockery of Regalle state,
"Befitte the prudence of my Duchess Wife,
"She best can say, who here should proxifie
"The Imperial virtues, that with spotless fame,
"So long have graced a female diademme.
"The rougher honors of our envied Isle
"Are to my watchful care consigned; and these,
"Under the dauntlesse valor of her Sons,
"I Will sturdilie uphold!"
PAGE 58. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXV. -- MISS AD -- M.
-- "An I were Nature, and had so proudly gifted you, I should have looked for
a more grateful return at your fair hands! -- Come, come, my sweet ROWENA,
you must unbend a little from this unprofitable severitie: and though you
should have coldlie sworn those cherrie-coloured lips to silence against me
-- bestow (as without offense to maiden modesty you may) some mute confession
that my faithful love offends you not. Lend to my suit one sense, if but an
ear, or by the little hope you have left me, I shall loose man's reasonable use
of every one of my poor seven!"

PAGE 99. -- GENUINE. CCCLXVI. -- LORD GLENB -- VIE.
-- "Why, Sirs of Caledonia, do you marvelle at Don Avaro's shift of fortune,
that has transformed him into a mightier Man of the Woods from a petty Lord
of a barren mountain? Coming naked into a wide world, with such an itch for
selfe-prosperities, he would have done thriftilie, even on the hill where
London Citadelle does stand, though he had been constrained to beg for a
baubee standing upon one leg! Oh, Sirs, he prophesied arightlie, when he said
that the readiest road to every Paradise, save that of fools, is by prayer
and supplication, where that which is denied you on the score of charity, you
may extort by persecution."

PAGE 39. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXVII. -- LADY CAROLINE ST -- WART.
"When to sam'd Ev'sham's fair, and fertile vale,
"In envied bloome this lovelie plant's removed,
"Free from the noxious blights that now prevail,
"Still be its native innocence retained!
"But you, to whom indulgentlie it is given
"So rare, and sweet a flowerette to save,
"Be mindful of your charge. -- If sheltered ill,
"The first proud rays of an ungenial sun
"Will burn it up; or flatt'rie's poisonous breathe
"Infect it with disease, too dire and deep
"For all the rough, and wholesome winds of heaven,
"Through keen adversity, to drive away!"
PAGE 185. -- GENUINE. NINETY-FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLXVIII. -- MR. DUDLEY N -- TH.
-- "Pooh! old man -- it is never too late to dissolve the icey bondage of an
old Bachelor's life! Why, my own vane did continue to stand so long due
North, that women began to swear by their chastity 'twas a burning shame!
Since this, the wind of my better destiny has veered about to a more genial
corner, and now blows me nuptial blessings from the amorous Southe!"

PAGE 88. -- GENUINE. CCCLXIX -- LADY T -- MPLE -- WN.
" -- In soothe, she has a roving eye
"O'erlooking beauties prominentlie fair,
"That do by witcherie decoy poor men
"To gaze with madd'ning extacie upon them!
"Anon, by quick, rebukeful glance, she calls
"Their wildlie scattered senses back again,
"Obedientlie to virtue!"
PAGE 189. -- GENUINE. CCCLXX. -- MR. T. SH -- D -- N.
"How it was good man Vardelt, that he became so preternaturallie gifted, he
best can tell that made him; but certes he has the animal world so aptly at
command, that he will draw you all things living within the magicale circle of
his vision! Nay, our race mortal he so swayeth by his art persuasive, that he
will transform every other man's enemy into his own friend! Marry, whether
it be on earth, in air, or water, it is all alike to faculties like his; for he
does deport himself so gracefullie on either, that your wild-pated women of
quality, so delighting in his sportivenesse, do pull cappes with each other,
which of them shall ascend with him to the upper regions, for foretaste of
bliss celestial! -- "

PAGE 21. -- GENUINE. CCCLXXI. -- LADY C. H -- M -- LT -- N.
-- "Nay, my good Lord, and Sire!
"Why do you press me to adventure thus
"Upon a void so treacherously smoothe,
"Whose glassie surface might in scorn reflect,
"Whatever mishap should lucklesslie ensue!
"O! it is enough, in crooked times like these,
"To keep ones feet upon a slipp'rie world,
"In which poor headless women sometimes fall,
"Never to rise again! I pray you then,
"That I may shake these dangerous sliders off,
"And rueful sorrow thus avoid!"
PAGE 33. -- Not GENUINE. NINETY-SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLXXII. -- ARCHB -- P OF CANT -- B -- Y.
-- "The good Lord Abbotte, ere our mattins closed,
"Resigned his pious breathe this morn to heaven,
"Leaveing his poor remains to be inurn'd,
"And canonized by us on earth! -- Here comes
"The Pontisse, whom our Sov'rain's will declares
"His holy successor: Though nobly raced,
"Methinkes this high pre-eminence he bears
"As he would say, 'let me his foote-steps tread,
'Who by a meek, and Christian charity,
'Did make a Churchman's holy blessinge covetted.' --
"So may the Crosier grace his hallowed hand,
"And draw his flock in quietude around him!"
PAGE 478. -- GENUINE. CCCLXXIII. -- SIR JAMES ST -- G.
" -- I pray you, brother soldiers, tell me, by what authority this same busy
world would command a gallant Knighte, one trained to arms, to impose upon
him the fulfillment of an obligation personalle? I have traversed long enough
in this same world, to be able to know my own wants and desires, and to
regulate my pursuits accordingly. -- When I am tired of a life of single
servitude, then may I, perhaps, enliste at the drum-heade of matrimony as an
uxorious Volunteere; but, Sirs! as I never could be goaded to felicity by
forced marches, so will it be difficult to prick me into any service by
ballotte, or to enchain me even to the luxuries of an under-petticoate, as a
miserable conscript."

PAGE 572. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXXIV. -- LADY CATHARINE ST -- W -- T.
-- "Heard'st thou that bugle horn
"Windinge its silverie summons through the air?
"Well might it sweetly sound, -- for, hark! again
"How respiration through those lips compresst
"Does breathe delighte! -- Let Us to the mountain's browe,
"Where fair Rowena points her glittering lance,
"Eager her plumed column there to form!"
PAGE 684. -- GENUINE. NINETY-THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLXXV. -- MISS S -- YM -- R. ( Piccadiliy.)
"Now tell me, pray my I orde,
"To whom with filial reverence I may bend,
"And humbly supplicate a father's blessinge!
"Strange and mysterious tales by stealthe I hear
"About my birthe, which have perplexed my mind,
"And much disturb my youthful quietude!
"Often on my slattering mirrore do I look,
"And sometimes think a lineament I trace,
"From which some featured semblance may arise,
"To stamp me yours by more than cold adoption!
"But soon the sieetinge vision fades away,
"And cheques the fond aspiring of my heart!"
PAGE 518. -- GENUINE. CCCLXXVI. -- SIR WM. P -- LT -- Y.
"Time was, Sirs, when a Gentleman of condition might have repaired an old
House, or taken to himself a young Wise, without public marvaille, or
imparlance; but in these presumptuous days, no man can adventure to caterre
for his own comfortes, without drawing a nest of wit crackers about his
ears! Nay, the puppies will sometimes take your work out of your hands, and
fancifullie begettinge your chaste spouse with child, make you father it for
their own lascivious amusement! In gravitie, I tell you, Sirs, these things
are pushed beyond endurance!"

PAGE 497. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXXVII. -- LADY B -- RD -- TT.
"Oh! bar our gapeing doors against those men,
"Whose darkened visages, and bloode-shotte eyes,
"Declare their dreadful conspirations! --
"Nay, my good Lord, upon my bended knees
"I do conjure, that you no longer cloud
"The gentle qualities, with which, in soothe,
"Nature has prodigally decked your mind!
"Good Heavens! how rudely does the outrage strike
"Upon the chasteful ear of decency,
"When all that appertains to your good fame,
"Is in your presence impiouslie profaned
"By tongues of wretches traitorouslie beleagu'd
"For yours, and for our Country's ruin! --
"Let me in tenderness of love command
"You go not with them forth this night!"
PAGE 483. -- GENUINE. NINETY-FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLXXVIII. -- SIR CH -- S B -- NB -- Y.
-- "An you match me that plaine-coated Knight of the Shire, then will I show
unto the world a pair of honest Senators worth their lookinge on! Why he does
hide his right hand in his bosom I trow not; for it is a clean one, and
there is no danger but that his manly heart will keep in the right place,
without manual assistance!"

PAGE 564. -- GENUINE. CCCLXXIX. -- D -- SS OF ST. A -- N'S.
-- "No more heighos! good BLANCH,
"But bring my new-bespangled vestments forth,
"And let us gaily court prosperity!
"Feel but the basie pendulum, that beats
"So quickly in this breaste! 'Twere pity sure
"To still this kind admonitor of bliss,
"And weaklie sigh one's fondest hopes away.
"Beneath a bright, and mirthfulle planette born,
"The pleasures of the moment let be mine
"In all their wild variety! and I
"Will never trespass on their sober joys
"Who seek a luxury in sadness!" --
PAGE 378. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXXX. -- M -- QUIS OF AB -- N.
"I do require, my Lords, that since his worship is come over, he be cited
straightly to appear before us, in our full pontificalibus of British
jurisprudence! Whatever be my portion of human frailty, I will abstain from
choler, if I may be permitted to catechize this sage upon his own expoundings.
Let our Sister Isle be taught by us to know, that our suprema Lex, which has
the power to take an Asiatique Pard by the beard, has no fear of her little
finger being snapped, by one of their bag'd FOXES!"

PAGE 645. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXXXI. -- MISS M. G. E. S -- YM -- R.
-- "They will not bear me from you,
"Now they do know that you're my only mother!
"For I will closely cling me to your knees,
"And with my tears be-pray them let me bide!
"They can but break my little heart by force,
"And surely that would not delight their own!
"Oh! 'twould be crueler than Death itself
"Which only took a good I never knew;
"For should they strippe me of your tender love,
"They Would make GEORGINA motherlesse indeed!"
PAGE 498. -- GENUINE. NINETY-FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLXXXII. -- LORD D -- RSL -- Y.
-- "Strange! that the nuptial knotte
"Which our progenitors have doubly tied,
"Should be unloosed, not able to sustain
"Their first begotten! -- Nay, this morn I Have heard
"My brother vauntinglie does tell the world
"That I am but The eldest son was singularly given the Christian name of "
Lord D -- rsl -- y."
baptismallie a Lord,
"While he by warmer courtesy of state
"Can paramountlie sorde it over me!
"But since from the same mould of passion cast
"I bear wild Nature's first impression --
"I Will yield no ancient honors of my house
"To any second brother's usurpation!"
PAGE 498. -- GENUINE. CCCLXXXIII. -- LADY D -- DL -- Y AND W -- RD.
-- "I like your vocal music reasonably well, so it be well-timed, and
breathe not too cold an air upon the comfortes of a warm dinner: -- nay, when
the clothe be drawn away, I can hear your 'non nobis,' my Lord, with tolerable
endurance, if it be accompanied in right glee with good harmonique glasses!"

PAGE 576. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXXXIV. -- EARL C -- D.
"Go to! I tell thee he feeds not within the purlieus of the Court, argal he
cannot be dubbed the KINGE's Jester! He may sometimes crack small jokes within
the privy presence, to make his master smile, yet has he no patent royalle
for the manufactorie of broad grinnes! -- See thou that double ell of watered
tabbie clinging so closely to his noble shoulder? Marry, but that is the
silken reward of brave doings, such as your swaggering Knights-Errant of
Salamanca had never the wit to dream of!"

PAGE 474. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXXXV. -- LADY HARRIET C -- V -- ND -- SH.
-- "Adown the mazie dance
"See how enchantinglie she floates, making
"Her wanton gazers giddie with delighte!
"Such amorous time her playful feet do beat,
"That not a pulse which vibrates from man's heart
"But with them nimbly paces!"
PAGE 632. -- GENUINE. NINETY-SIXTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCLXXXVI. -- LORD VIS -- T. M -- LV -- LE.
"Since the law of the realm has provided me a coat of mail, you may press
me to the torture, without wringing from me such responses as I am not disposed
to bestow. When I did lend my hand to enacte a statute to restrain certain
Lords, and courtly men from picking and stealing from the granarie of the
public, I looked not to be found at the Barne-door winnowing of its corn
myself! Yet do I with contrite shame remember me of one Sir Ol ver Spintext,
who, ill-placing his ladder against the arm of a fructifying tree, did saw it
off, and thus brought himself to the ground by his own handicrafte operations!"

PAGE 379. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXXXVII. -- SIR BEAUMONT H -- TH -- M.
-- "So from man's judgment seat
"May every sage in wisdom step him down,
"Ere in the pure, but palsied hand of Justice
"The balance 'gins to tremble! --
"Let care be taken of his ermin'd robes,
"That future Judges of our Isle may see
"How spotless they have been worn!"
PAGE 548. -- GENUINE. CCCLXXXVIII. -- MRS. LY -- N.
"I passed this morn a Lybian Lyoness in our forest, who, by the sleekness of
her skin, and the rotunditie of her form, seemed providentlie catered for,
although she was attended by no provider. -- Oh! she was a comely creature,
and wonderfully well shaped to keep all mortal travelers at awful distance!"

PAGE 486. -- Not GENUINE. CCCLXXXIX. -- COUNTESS OF M -- RA.
-- "Yes, well I knew
"The rough, or silken bondage was for life,
"And therefore proudly chose him from his peers!
" -- By manly virtues more ennobled far
"Than all the lineal honors of his House,
"On whom could I so permanentlie place
"The fond assurance of my virgin faith?"
PAGE 523. -- GENUINE. NINETY-SEVENTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXC. -- MR. ANG -- ST -- N.
"Madam, I do thank your Highness for your counselle, although I could have
dispensed with it most willingly. True, you have a daughter of your own; but
she is guarded by the State against such acts of disobedience -- mine has
espoused a Russe without consent or privitie of me! If he has all the savage
virtues of SIBERIA's clime, what then? I shall not thither to behold their
luster. I have been the creator of mine own fortune, and therefore must be
allowed to be the dispenser of it after my own humor. -- To say truly, Madam,
my mind is so settled on this point, that I do beseech your Highness I may be
no more entreated!"

PAGE 456. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXCI. -- DUCHESS OF S -- M -- RS -- T.
"Though prodigally stored with worldly charms,
"She does comporte herself with such a winning grace
"In this frail, flaunting age, that it does look
"As though in better days, she had been left
"A model for her way-ward sex, by which
"They might reshape themselves to virtuous seeming!"
PAGE 587. -- GENUINE. CCCXCII. -- SIR HARRY P -- YT -- N.
"Heigh over, slack-ones! -- forward! -- hark forward! for now we'll make our
play, and leave yon blowing Cocknies of the chase! May he who rides not this
high-scenting day, as the fox lays out his brushe right straight an end, be
banished from our Pichley hunt; and the man that regards his neck beyond his
renown, let him ever after whip-in but to a welter's pack!"

PAGE 463. -- GENUINE. CCCXCIII. -- MARCHIONESS OF S -- FF -- D.
-- "Well, my Lord Abbotte,
"Since you must have our sex's restless souls
"Within your holy keepinge, show them, pray,
"Some tenderness in Christian charity! --
"Time was, when absolution did fore-run
"Our tongue's soliciting; but penance now
"It seems, must even out-step transgression!
"Yet since it be your ordinance divine,
"That no sweet sound upon a Sabbathe eve
"Shall harmonize a Christian dwelling, I Will
"Bend me to it with all the grace I can!"
PAGE 372. -- GENUINE. NINETY-EIGHTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXCIV. -- SIR HOME P -- PH -- M.
"Helm hard a lee! good master! -- and we shall weather the rest of these d --
d breakers under our bow! -- the sky grows less dirtie, and the squawle
abates: -- give her another smart shake in the wind, and she will right
herself, I Will warrant you! -- Though poor Pharaoh, and his host were
swallowed up in this Red Sea, we'll scud safely through it without an anchor
left on board us! -- There! steadie -- my hearty, steadie! -- now she lies her
fair course for Old England -- where we have only to buffet some foul
winds, and cross currents, under close reefed top-sailes, -- and we gain our
port at last!"

PAGE 369. -- GENUINE. CCCXCV. -- MRS. P -- NT -- N ( ci-devant MISS G -- BB --
NS).
"Come, Sir! mount, and away! Since it has pleased Heaven to lay your old roan
Barbary under the turfe, we'll freely enjoy the sportes that are above it!
I Will try your bottom over the Beacon neck and neck, and, notwithstanding you
are aged, you shall be beaten dead hollow by sheer blood, although I carry
weight for inches!"

PAGE 486. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXCVI. -- MARQUIS OF H -- NTL -- Y.
-- "He bears a nearlie mortal wound
"As does befitte the daring mind that sought it,
"Proud to devote an honorable life
"To death for Britain's glory! -- When he moves,
"See how the veteran does gaze upon him,
"And with an overflowing eye declare,
"That by his gallant side one slaughtering day
"He fought his way to victory -- and now
"Enjoies its enviable fruit, derived
"So cheeringlie from his munificence!" --
PAGE 647. -- GENUINE. CCCXCVII. -- MISS B -- CKF -- D.
"Oh, Sir! If you're of true Castillian race,
"List not to cruel vows which fathers make
"Against their children's peace! I pray you go,
"And in your own strange country, coldlie wed
"The hopeless maiden you have never wooed;
"For my poor virgin heart is here betrothed,
"And from it is bleedinge seat must first be torn,
"Ere it can swerve from its allegiance!"
PAGE 572. -- GENUINE. NINETY-NINTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCXCVIII. -- MARCHIONESS OF B -- K -- M.
"Forth from yon cloistered door see Ella comes
"Absolved of all the frailties of our flesh,
"Fitted for instant transit to the skies,
"Or to renew the sublunarie joies
"Of this vain world, as Heaven may ordain!
" -- Sweet purifying faith, that can recloathe
"The mind in all its virgin innocence,
"And leave the heart to 'gin its daily works
"Of dalliance anew!" --
PAGE 563. -- Not GENUINE. CCCXCIX. -- SIR HOME P -- PH -- M.
-- "Sirs, I would move
"In just respect to our brave Countrymen,
"That in their absence we forbear to judge them!
"Still in arraie to meet an hostile race
"And front them bearde to bearde, oh! let us not
"Assail them serving in a foreign clyme
"By random shot, lest we ourselves should prove
"A direr foe, by wounding their fair fame,
"Than those who but encounter against their life.
"Victors or vanquished, let them home return
"Ere we by senatorial voice decree
"Our Countrie's meede of honor, or of blame!"
PAGE 44. -- Not GENUINE. CCCC. -- DUKE OF N -- RF -- K.
"It is said they do intend to investe my body corporate with some else more
of ribband garter-blew, than be required for the encompassment of an ordinary
Courtier: marry and so they ought, for in their politicalle warfare I have been
most scurvilie entreated! Did they not wrest from me my pyke martial at the
head of mine own trained band, and cashier me in the broad face of noontide
day? Nay, an their power had been commensurate with their will, they would
unmarshally have despoiled me of my truncheon to boot. And now would they
weedle me into a forgetfulness of my wrongs forsoothe! But little do they
know of that blood which they have enchaffed, or of my wounds, which are too
deep for all their Courte-plaister to cover them."

PAGE 321. -- GENUINE. CCCCI. -- HON. MRS. ED. T -- ILL -- R.
-- "Like it, Marcella?
"Oh! it is a little Heaven upon Earth!
"For one whole week I Have been a wedded wife,
"And by my wooing husband, girl, am called
"His lovelie angelle still! If marriages
"Were all thus doubly sweet, I Am very sure
"The honied moon would then for ever shine
"So bright both day and night, and prove so warm,
"That the old fashioned sun would soon be found
"An useless planette in the spheres of Love!"
PAGE 278. -- GENUINE. HUNDREDTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCCII. -- MR. B -- SV -- LLE.
"These are no times, my busy masters, to waste in dulle forbearance! Have
they not tinkered our Constitution politic until more lioles are hammered
through it, than the country has solder left to sear over -- or they have the
workeman-like skille to mend? In the abundant love I do bear this isle, I did
recommend to them a nimble-fingered tailor, who, an they had let him go
thorough stitcke with the work, would soon have given it a new bodie-lininge
of fustainne everlasting;but they have entreated him with scorn, by refusing
him a cross-legged seat on the shoppe-boarde of the State, lest he should witn
-- ess how they do cut the countrie's clothe against the grain to satisfy
their own abominable hunger after cabbage!"

PAGE 100. -- GENUINE. CCCCIII. -- MRS. B -- RN -- Y.
-- "Did I not tell thee, my little Coz, that we should hacke the spurs from
off the heels of our wou'd-be knights of the shire? -- and have we not
triumphantly achieved it? And now, good Yeomanrie of Norfolk, mark that you
abstain from your hot buttered dumplinges until your suffrages be duly
enregistered; for not a man of you shall dare taste so much as would break
the fast of a cocke-sparrowe, before we of the fairer sex are more decently
entreated, or by the womman's spirit that stirs within us, you shall pay as
dearly for it, as in their utmost rigor, the laws parliamentarie can
inflicte!"

PAGE 462. -- Not GENUINE. CCCCIV. -- DUKE OF B -- DF -- D.
"What dignity from his frail power can manne
"Derive, save where he tempers it aright
"With Christian clemency? -- What eye ever saw
"The Regent's scepter in true luster swayed,
"If by one goutte of subject-bloode distained
"That wisdom might have spared?
"O! it is a god-like ministering to calm
"A frenzied nation into bonds of peace,
"Rather than goade them on to deeds of madness!
"A diadem sitts heavy on the browe,
"Unless it is ermin'd with a people's love."
PAGE 614. -- GENUINE. HUNDRED AND FIRST DAY's TRIAL.
CCCCV. -- LORD CHAN. E -- K -- NE.
-- "In soothe, that noblie-gifted Scotte
"Does bravely bear this worlde's prosperity!
"There were amongst your Senators who thought
"That when the buoyant powers of his mind
"Had soared him to pre-eminence of state,
"He would grow giddie on the flattering height,
"And loose the distant objects left below.
"Vain all those fears! No tie of amity
"Is rudely broke, nor has he sacrificed
"One social feelinge of his heart to pride.
"So wisely placed on high, with potent sway
"To regulate the interests of mankind,
"And shield the weaker from the gripe of might,
"Safe in his custody may be reposed
"A Sov'raine's conscience with a people's rightes.!"
PAGE 37. -- GENUINE. CCCCVI. -- DUKE OF R -- CH -- D.
-- "Why should that blind jade Fortune bejiit a man out of his natural
comfortes, by loading him with honors which he sought not for? Banished the
Smoking Room of the Commones by the power of mine own dignity, it will be
expected, I suppose, that I do besitte myself for better company: -- So,
boy, lay the Trinidada sparingly before me, and plye me not so plentifully
with stoopes of dry Canarie, that I may abridge myself of deep potations; for
when a man is made perforce a Duke puissante, it would be unseemlie in him to
become as -- as an ordinary Lord!"

PAGE 212. -- Not GENUINE. CCCCVII. -- LADY BL -- KE.
"Here on this close-nipt heathe, a stout jack-hare
"We'll find, that has not prodigal'd his strength
"Away by amorous freakes -- Mind, boy, this brace
"You slip aright, and see they do not hang
"Like an ill-coupled man and wife, who fain
"Would bolt from their restraint, and swerve
"A separate course. 'Soho! Sir PAT we have found!'
"And now against your foul-stern'd cross-bred dun,
"My snowe-white Helen will I back for speed,
"Or the first-turne, or through the lengthened course,
"With all the ducattes my poor purse commandes!"
PAGE 184. -- GENUINE. HUNDRED AND SECOND DAY's TRIAL.
CCCCVIII. -- MR. ROBT. T -- NT -- N.
"To speak plainly to you, and not after the manner of the Scribes, the
Pharisees, or the Hypocrites, these same Committee Men Select do pry
themselves too sedulouslie into the secret intentions of the faithful. I
myself was placed by them into a box A place elevated for the more open
examination of witnesses on suspicious matters in Senatorial Elections. --
MALONE.
not made of Shittim-woode, and there, like unto one of the unchosen, most
familiarlie interrogated on points of political faith, to which no Christian
man endowed with saveing knowledge could in prudence make reply. Truly, Sirs,
if the consciences of the ELECT are to be thus thrown into one common
purgatory with those of ordinary transgressors, it will become difficult
hereafter to distinguish betwixt Saint, and Sinner!"

PAGE 385. -- Not GENUINE. CCCCIX. -- COUNTESS C -- YNG -- M.
-- "What mortalle man
"In visionarie transporte could behold
"A fairer being by his fancy formed? --
"At Gallia's bloode-stain'd Court, I saw her move
"Love's second Goddess in such spell-full guise,
"That he who an affrighted world enslaves
"Bent captive at her feet! Oh! had she known
"The power of her charms, she might have swayed
"The way-ward tyrante to her will, and smiled
"The world again to peace!"
PAGE 203. -- GENUINE. CCCCX. -- SIR JOHN P -- RS.
-- "No sooner had I made perambulation of Man's Isle with right valorous
celebritie, than my warm imagination be-stirred itself, to try how far the
Continent of the female world might with safety be explored. In this research
fair ARABELLA crossed my roveing view, of whose glowing charms I thought to
take an hasty, and a secret sketche; but as mine evil Genius would ordain,
upon the gilded roof of her privy chamber, a scurvie dauber from Salamancha
did sit perched; who, as I advanced in my amorous design, took him a villainous
copy of all my warmest colouringes! On this, I was most indecentlie arraigned
on charge of covert-acie against the state connubial, and condemned in penal
sums, too excessive for man of honor to liquidate, or of dignity to notice.
-- Thus in days of yore, was a proud Venetian of Virtu amerced by a tyranique
Senate in seven thousand ducattes ten times told, for kindly breathing on the
precious jewelle of a noble friend, to prove for him whether, as he supposed,
it was without flawe, or blemishe!"

PAGE 77. -- GENUINE. HUNDRED AND THIRD DAY's TRIAL.
CCCCXI. -- SIR JOHN ANST -- R.
"I crossed a lean, and wary Scotte upon the sultrie coaste of Malabarre,
seeking for gold duste with an eager eye. In his left hand he bore a pair of
scales most dexterouslie poised, like unto those which do bedeck the dexter
arm of Justice. Marry, quoth I, if men in every clime become sole Judges of
their actions, why not weigh out their own deservinges by pounds avoirdupoise,
without tarrying until the balance be made to tremble with grains, or
scruples?"

PAGE 87. -- Not GENUINE. CCCCXII. -- MISS GEORGINA C -- V -- T -- Y, (NOW MRS.
B -- NES.)
-- "On Love's adventurous winge
"Have I not taken a rash, and heedlesse slighte?
"Old Scotia's mountains darkly scowle around,
"And with their icicles but coldlie seal
"The transient bliss we have come so far to seek!
"Oh! it is a deed that sadly will inflame
"The noble blood from whence GEORGINA sprang!
"Long from their sightlesse eyes by fate estranged,
"Was It not my duty that I should remain
"A hopeful vision floating in their mind?"
PAGE 294. -- GENUINE. CCCCXIII. -- THE REV. EARL N -- LS -- N.
-- "When of necessity they transformed me into a Lord Temporalle of this
Isle for no well doing of mine own, they did conspire to unfrocke me of my
canonicalles prebendal! Not so, my Lords, quoth I! you may drive an Ox from
rich pasturage, and even goade an Ass from his bunch of thistles, but you
cannot prick a true Churchman from the stalle in which he has been well fed.
So unless you do force upon me a Bishopric to boot, I shall continue to
chaunte a requiem for the soul of the relative that made me, as an humble
Abbotte of Canterbury!"

PAGE 507. -- GENUINE. HUNDRED AND FOURTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCCXIV. -- LORD GR -- NV -- LLE.
"Right Noble Lords! the height of mine offense
"Has been, that I too tolerantlie strove
"By one convenient, and dispensing faith
"To bind in Christian polity our Isles.
"On this, some meddling Hierarchists rose,
"And on their crooked crosiers swore, that I
"By a fell rosarie's absolving beads,
"Held Catholic communion with the Pope,
"And, by my proxy kissed his mystique toe!
"Then with hot irons from their priestlie flames,
"They seared the tender conscience of his Liege,
"So that to my amazement, it became.
"Insensible to every loyal touch
"Which all my art chirurgique could essay!
"In sine, these sturdie Churchmen have prevailed,
"And by their holy priesterafte wrought my fall!
"So SOLOMON's, proud Temple was overthrown
"To set up idols made of stocks, and stones!"
PAGE 478. -- GENUINE. CCCCXV. -- LADY H -- M -- LT -- N.
"Ah, Blanch! the worlde's inquisitors but little know of me! If I did think
this deeply wounded heart could beat again in sympathy with aught that wooing
man could say, I Would tear the traitorous inmate from its seat, a bleedinge
sacrifice to plighted love! -- Bring, girl, my mournful lute, that I may call
his listening spirit down to hear those strains which he alone inspired!"

PAGE 564. -- Not GENUINE. CCCCXVI. -- GENERAL KN -- WLES, [ Commonly called
EARL OF B -- NB -- RY.]
"Why, brother Soldiers, if a man in these wonderworkinge days cannot ennoble
himself, he is fit only to dream of nights of coronettes, and go bare
headed for want of one, all the days of his life! Moulde but the dough of
mankind to your will, and you shall find no more art required to make a
modern Lord, than a Banburie Cake!"

PAGE 308. -- GENUINE. HUNDRED AND FIFTH DAY's TRIAL.
CCCCXVII. -- MR. BR -- ND.
-- "I saw just now a cholerique youth running with a firebrand toward the
Capitolle! Stay, rash boy, quoth I, for you do bear in that left hand what may
consume our city into ashes. Yet on with heedlesse step went he, enchafinge
the fiery mischief with his breath, until its violence (by Providence decreed)
dispersed the sparks it meant not to extinguish!"

PAGE 456. -- Not GENUINE. CCCCXVIII. -- HON. MRS. D -- R.
-- "Of Parian marble bring a massy block,
"And by my chisselle's wonder-working power
"I Will shape with sweet and counterfeited grace
"The Papbian Queen so witchinglie to life,
"With all Love's sexual attractions,
"That the full pulse of him who gazes on it
"Shall rise, and beat in tumult of delighte!
"Next manhoode's bolder beauties I will trace
"And sculpture forth, that bashful modesty
"Shall eye askance, and blushinglie proclaim,
"The fire of Nature in the work of Art!"
PAGE 546. -- GENUINE. END OF VOL. IV.
ADDENDA.
DRAMA.
GREEN-ROOM SELECTIONS, [From the last new-discovered Old Trunk, containing the
Posthumous Works of SHAKESPEARE.]
I. -- BY MR. KEMBLE.
"Like others of Godde's creatures, he is a man
"Of oddities compounded, fancying
"That wit can yielde, what Nature does deny!
"It will not him suffice to read you men,
"Or books, as by the ordinary mode
"Imprinted; for he will sit you up whole nights
"To punctuate a petty word awry,
"And strain a meaning that was never meant!
"And yet, can he enacte you noble deeds
"That soon obliterate these trite desectes.
"How well does he assume the Chieftain's mien;
"On whose ill-fated browe misfortune lowers?
"Or him, whose deeply lacerated pride
"Has turned abhorrent from the human race,
"Pourtraying in some lineaments himself,
"Whose mind is prone instinctivelie to hate
"The knavish sycophancie of mankind!"
PAGE 187. -- GENUINE. II. -- BY MRS. JORDAN.
"Why do thou foolishlie chew the cudde of melancholy, man, when thou may
betake thee to you boothe of comicalle enactors, and be most pleasantly purged
of it for half a ducatte? There mark thee well a sprightly jade, who does
turn men's hearts, until she gettes the best humoured side of them uppermost;
nay, her merit halts not here, for when her mirthful vizard is thrown by, she
wears the Mr. MALONE has thus observed on this passage: -- "This was an amiable
Comic Actress in the reign of ELIZABETH, not less admired for her benevolence,
than her superiority in the comic art; for while the most eminent of her
sisterhood attended only to self-aggrandizement, she humanely lent the aid of
her fascinating talents to succor the distresses of all around her."
veil of charity with so good a grace, that the invidious even of her own
sex, can scarcely spy a blemish underneath it!"

GENUINE.

III. -- BY MR. M -- ND -- N.
-- "I saw last Martinmasse, just such another odd countenanced varlette with
his huge whiskers, dancing a sarabande at the sign of the Old Catte and
Bagpipes in Lothburie! The knave, with follies enough of his own, could give
you the counterfeit resemblance of all those appertaining to other men, having
been a skip-jacke in diverse comical professions, from a mender of mouse-trappes
up to his present vocation. In the downie days of his youth, he was a plucker
of pen-feathers to a Poulterer in Leadenball, and there stripped he the wings
of tame grey-geese sufficient to endow him to become scrivener to a lean
lawyer, and to engrosse his deeds of darkness in black letter; but ^inding it
not so pleasant to play the rogue as the fool, now goes he about from tythinge
to tythinge, and makes brave earninges by letting out wry faces to full-mouthed
visitors, who can swallowe nothing but on the broad grinne!"

PAGE 486. -- GENUINE. IV. -- MRS. S -- DD -- NS.
-- "Stop here my Lords awhile,
"And view this tragique paragonne pass by,
"Who, robbed in all the counterfeites of woe,
"Deludes the noblest passions of the mind.
"Mark well those features to her purpose formed
"And supernaturallie so combined,
"That by their piteous workinges on the soul,
"They do betray it to the verge of madness!
"Grief sittes so wildlie picted on her browe,
"That she seems agoniz'd until she plead
"In Charitie's deserted cause, and save
"The remnant of some hapless race from ruin!
"Strange, how the wiles of this resistlesse art
"Should guise her mimick semblances so well,
"That she can draw from every gazer's eye
"The tear of pity, which she never sheddes!"
PAGE 433. -- GENUINE. V. -- BY MR. J. B -- NN -- ST -- R.
"Thou say truly, Goodman Spadro! -- Nature does not mould us such comical
wagges every day in the year. -- Marry, but it does require something more
than an ordinarie-witted fellow, to play the fool to his own proffittinge,
and stille keep a good humoured world his debtor! Marvel thee not, man, for
he has endowed himself with qualities sussicient to enacte the part of a
wise man sans imitation. When the merry rogue is pleased to throw his dark
eyes incontinently around him, if you had nine pair of sides, he would shake
them all with laughter! -- No variety has a voice that he cannot purloine --
nor a face that he will not borrowe, and humourouslie wear it over his own!
nay, I have known him to ape a Jewe so well, that you would swear he did not
possess one Christian virtue by natural inheritance; and yet no sooner dosss he
his artificialle doublette, than he hies him to his own fire side, and there
performs those parts This passage is supposed to allude to an Actor of those
times, who rendered himself rather singular in his profession, by paying a
moral regard to the relative duttes of a husband -- a father -- and a friend!
MALONE.
which enactinge cannot counterseit!"

PAGE 597. -- GENUINE. VI. -- BY MISS BR -- NT -- N.
-- "I dreamt last night, that over my virgin browe,
"In magical suspense, a crownette hung,
"Courting my busy hand to pluck it down!
"It was with saphires, and with rubies decked,
"And intermixed with emeraldes so bright,
"That it did lure my silly fancy on;
"Till by a purer light I spied therein
"A pointed thorn in ermin'd ambushe lie!
"At sight of this, with sudden start I woke,
"When the delusion vanished with the dream,
"And left my little, vain, aspiring heart
"To sigh itself again to calm repose!"
PAGE 248. -- GENUINE. VII. -- BY MR. EL -- ST -- N.
"In verity, his talents like me more than passinge well; for he does wear,
and shifte his masque with so adroite a skille, that he can give men better
semblances of what is frail, or perfect in their nature, than most of his
compeers have even the wit to dream of! I have seen him enacte the Mad Lover
with so amorous a phrenzie, that you would swear the fellow had lost the whole
of his seven senses in a lascivious rencontre about the hemminge of an under
petticoate! Marry but he can train you a Lady Bryde in the well-feigned
school of adversity better than any man John of them, and tame a young shrewe
in the budde, by bending her to a right obedient wife, before the honey moon
be waned! Then will he restore her to the honors of his House with so high a
grace, that he does make it questionable by his pourtraying art, whether his
Prince, or Peasante be the nobler man!"

PAGE 472. -- Not GENUINE. VIII. -- BY MRS. HENRY J -- NST -- N.
-- "Borne (when an infant grace) on flying steed,
"I Have seen her vaulted from her father's arm,
"Like a sweet cherubbe coursing through the air,
"Portentous of her fame. -- Behold her near;
"'It Is not a fancied form of loveliness,
"Or charms by scenic artifice arrayed
"To cheat men into adoration;
"But that unveiled presentment of herself,
"Which women envy, and mankind adore!
"Who then can marvelle, if, at times be seen
"A troop of suitors in her 'witching train,
"Each by some wily art intent to draw
"One sigh from her, to fan his fond desire?"
PAGE 468. -- GENUINE. THE END.

