GRAY
Engraved by (...) from an original drawing in the possession of the (...)



Published for I. Bell British Library Strand March 2d. 1782.

BELL'S EDITION.
THE POETS OF GREAT BRITAIN COMPLETE FROM CHAUCER (...) CHURCHILL.
GRAY On Thracia's Hills the Lord of War
Has curbed the fury of his Car.




Rebecca del. M^^^ard sculp.

London. Printed for John Bell British Library Octr. 21st. 1782.

THE POETICAL WORKS OF THOMAS GRAY.
WITH THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.
Thy form benign oh Goddess! wear,
Thy milder influence impart --
To soften not to wound my heart:
The generous spark extinct revive,
Teach me to love and to forgive;
Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are to feel, and know myself a man.
ODE TO ADVERSITY. Too poor for a bribe, and too proud to importune,
He had not the method of making a fortune;
Could love and could hate so was thought somewhat odd;
No very great wit; he believed in a God:
A post or a pension he did not desire,
But left church and state to Charles Townshend and Squire.
GRAY of himself. EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1782.

THE POETICAL WORKS OF THOMAS GRAY.
CONTAINING HIS ODES, MISCELLANIES, etc. etc. etc.
Hark! the Fatal Sisters join --
Hail, ye midnight Sisters! hail --
Over the glory of the land,
Over the innocent and gay,
Over the Muses' tuneful band,
Weave the funeral web of GRAY.
'Tis-done, 't is done --
He sinks, he groans, he falls, a lifeless corse --
Over his green grave, in Contemplation's guise,
Often let the pilgrim drop a silent tear,
Often let the shepherd's tender accents rise,
Big with the sweets of each revolving year,
Till prostrate Time adore his deathless name,
Fixed on the solid base of adamantine fame.
J. T. TO MEM. OF GRAY. EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno
1782.

THE LIFE OF THOMAS GRAY.
THOMAS GRAY, the subject of this narrative, was the fifth son of Mr. Philip
Gray, whose father was a considerable merchant, and who himself was engaged in
business A money-scrlvener.
, though not to the pecuniary advantage of his family, for being of a shy and
indolent temper he suffered those opportunities of improving his fortune to
escape him which others would have eagerly embraced. His son Thomas was born
Dec. 26th 1716, in Cornhill London, and sent early to Eton school under the
tuition of Mr. Antrobus his maternal uncle. This gentleman, being both a good
scholar and a man of taste, was assiduous in directing the attention of his
nephew to those sources of improvement which he afterward applied to with so
much success. During the time of Mr. Gray's continuance in this abode of the
Muses he contracted the strictest intimacy with two of their votaries, whose
dispositions in many respects were congenial with his own. One of these was the
Honorable Horace Walpole, who has been so long conspicuous for his skill in
the fine arts and his love of letters; the other Richard West Esquire. son to a
late lord chancellor of Ireland, and grandson by his mother to the celebrated
Bishop Burnet. As the accident of his uncle's being an assistant at Eton was
the cause of his going thither for his classical learning, so to this
gentleman's being Fellow of Peterhouse in Cambridge it was owing that he was
sent to the same university, and admitted in the year 1734 a Pensioner of the
same college.

The relish Mr. Gray had contracted for polite literature before his removal to
Cambridge rendered the abstruse studies which then almost wholly engrossed, and
at present too much occupy, the attention of young men altogether tasteless and
irkfome: still "Song was his favorite and first pursuit;" and though his
thoughts were directed toward the law as a profession for life, yet like
Garrick in the picture between Tragedy and Comedy, he hung back with fond
reluctance on the Muse. Nor was this bias of his inclination a little
influenced by the constant exhortations of his two friends, particularly Mr.
West, who was now removed to Christ's Church Oxford, and whose propensity to
poetry and dislike to the law appear to have even exceeded his own. After
having passed four years in college Mr. Gray returned to his father in Town,
where he remained till the following spring, at which time Mr. Walpole being
about to travel invited his friend to go along with him. The invitation was
accepted, and they accordingly set out for Italy together, but some
disagreement arising between them (occasioned, as Mr. Walpole ingenuously
confesses, less by his companion's conduct than his own) they parted at
Rheggio, from whence, after having made a short stay at Venice, Mr. Gray
returned. The time however devoted to this excursion was by no means lost:
nothing that our poet saw was suffered to escape him. From no relation, though
purposely designed for the public eye, can so much information be drawn as
from his casual letters. During this interval of his friend's absence Mr. West,
finding that his aversion to the profession for which he had destined himself
(and with a view to which he had resided some time in the Temple) became almost
insuperable, wrote to Mr. Gray on the subject, expressing in the strongest
manner the ennui that almost overwhelmed him. To this letter an answer was
returned which presents the finest picture of the writer's mind, and abounds
with a justness of thinking far beyond his years. Gray was now at Florence,
where he had spent in all eleven months, amusing himself at intervals with
poetical compositions. It was here that he conceived the design, and produced
the first book, of a didactick poem in Latin entitled De Principiis Cogitandi,
and addressed to Mr. West, a work which he unfortunately never completed. From
Florence proceeding to Venice he returned to England, deviating but little from
the route he had gone, but particularly taking once more in his way the Grand
Chartreuse, where in this visit he wrote on the album of that monastery the
following Alcaick ode: Oh Tu, severi Religio loci,
Quocunque gaudes nomine (non leve
Nativa nam certe fluenta
Numen habet, veteresque sylvas;
Praesentiorem et conspicimus Deum
Per invias rupes, fera per juga,
Clivosque praeruptos, sonantes
Inter aquas, nemorumque noctem;
Quam si repostus sub trabe citrea
Fulgeret auro, et Phidiaca manu)
Salve vocanti rite, fesso et
Da placidam juveni quietem.
Quod si invidendis sedibus, et frui
Fortuna sacra lege silentii
Vetat volentem, me resorbens
In medios violenta fluctus:
Saltem remoto des, Pater, angulo
Horas senectae ducere liberas;
Tutumque vulgari tumultu
Surripias, hominumque curis.


On the 1st of September 1741 he arrived in London; where he had not been much
more than two months before his father was carried off by the gout, a malady
from which he had long and severely suffered. As the inactivity and ill health
of the elder Mr. Gray had prevented him from accumulating the fortune he might
have acquired with ease, so his imprudence had induced him to squander no
inconsiderable part of what he possessed. The son therefore finding his
patrimony inadequate to the profession he had intended to follow without
diminishing the income of his mother and his aunt, resolved for this reason to
relinquish it; yet to silence their importunities on the subject he proposed
only to change the line of it, and accordingly went to Cambridge in the year
1742 to take his Bachelor's degree. But the inconveniences incident to a
scanty fortune were not the only evils he had now to combat. Poor West, the
friend of his heart, was overborne by a consumption and family distresses; and
these, alas! were burdens which friendship could not remove. After languishing
a considerable time under their united oppression this amiable youth fell a
victim to both on the 1st of June 1742 at Pope's, and was interred in the
chancel of Hatfield church, beneath a stone bearing the epitaph below Here
lies the body of Richard West Esquire. only son to the Right Hon. Richard West
Esquire. late Lord Chancellor of Ireland, who died the 1st of June 1742, in the
26th year of his age.
.

From the time of Mr. Gray's return out of Italy to the date of this melancholy
event he seems to have employed himself chiefly in writing, for in this
interval he communicated to Mr. West the fragment of his tragedy, and several
other pieces. The shock however of so severe a stroke disarranged his plans,
and broke off his designs. The only addition he afterward made to his
didactick poem is the apostrophe to the friend he had lost Hactenus haud segnis
Naturae arcana retexi
Musarum interpres, primusque Britanna per arva
Romano liquidum deduxi flumine rivum.
Cum Tu opere in medio, spes tanti et causa laborls,
Linquis et aeternam fati te condis in umbram!
Vidi egomet duro graviter concussa dolor
Pectora, in alterius non unquam lenta dolorem;
Et languere oculos vidi, et pallescere amantem
Vultum, quo nunquam Pietas nisi rara, Fidesque,
Altus amor Very, et purum spirabat Honestum.
Visa tamen tardi demum inclementia morbi
Cessare est, reducemque iterum roseo ore Salutem
Speravi, atque una tecum, dilecte Favoni!
Credulus heu longos, ut quondam, fallere Soles:
Heu spes nequicquam dulces, atque irrita vota!
Heu maestos Soles, sine te quos ducere flendo
Per desideria, et questus jam cogor inanes!
At Tu, sancta anima, et nostri non indiga luctus,
Stellanti templo, sincerique aetheris igne,
Unde orta es, fruere; atque o si secura, nec ultra
Mortalis, notos olim miserata labores
Respects, tenuesque vacet cognoscere curas;
Humanam si forte alta de sede procellam
Contemplere, metus, stimulosque cupidinis acres,
Gaudiaque et gemitus, parvoque in cord tumultum
Irarum ingentem, et saevos sub pectore fluctus;
Respice et has lacrymas, memori quas ictus amore
Fundo, quod possum, juxta lugere sepulchrum
Dum juvat, et mutae vana haec jactare favillae.

; and nothing can more pathetically display the feelings of a heart wounded by
such a loss than that apostrophe and the sonnet in which he gave them vent:

In vain to me the smiling mornings shine,
And redd'ning Phoebus lifts his golden fire,
The birds in vain their amorous descant join,
Or cheerful fields resume their green attire;
These ears, alas! for other notes repine,
A different object do these eyes require;
My lonely anguish melts no heart but mine,
And in my breast the imperfect joys expire:
Yet morning smiles the busy race to cheer,
And newborn pleasure brings to happier men,
The fields to all their wonted tribute bear,
To warm their little loves the birds complain;
I fruitless mourn to him that cannot hear,
And weep the more because I weep in vain.
The Ode to Spring was written early in June at Stoke, whither he had gone to
visit his mother, and sent to Mr. West before Mr. Gray had heard of his death:
how he employed his pen when this ode was returned to him with the melancholy
news we have already seen. Impressions of grief on the generality of mankind,
like characters marked on the sand of the sea, are speedily effaced by the
influx of business or pleasure, but the traces of them on the heart of Gray
were too deeply inscribed to be soon obliterated; we shall not therefore wonder
at the subjects he has chosen, nor at the solemnity with which he has treated
them. His Ode on the Prospect of Eton College, as well as the Hymn to
Adversity, were both written in the following August, and it is highly probable
that the Elegy in the Country Church yard was begun also about this time.

Having made a visit of some length at Stoke to his mother and aunt our poet
returned to Cambridge, which from this period became his principal home. The
conveniences resulting from that situation, to a person of circumscribed
fortune and a studious temper, were in his estimation more than a
counterbalance for the dislike which, on several accounts, he bore to the
place. Less pleased with exerting his own powers than in contemplating the
exertions of others, he almost wholly devoted himself to the best writers of
Greece; and so assiduously did he apply to the study of their works as in the
course of six years to have read with critical exactness almost every author of
note in that language. During this interval however he was not so entirely
occupied with his stated employment as to have no time for expressing his
aversion to the ignorance and dullness which appeared to surround him; but of
what he intended on this subject a short fragment only remains.

In the year 1744 he appears to have given up entirely his didactick poem, and
to have relinquished, for sometime at least, any further solicitations of the
Muse. Mr. Walpole, notwithstanding, being desirous to preserve what he had
already written, and to perpetuate the merit of their deceased friend,
importuned Mr. Gray to publish his own poems together with those of Mr. West;
but this Mr. Gray declined, from the apprehension that the joint stock of both
would hardly fill a small volume* A favorite cat belonging to Mr. Walpole
happening about this time (1747) to be drowned, Mr. Gray amused himself with
writing on the occasion an elegant little ode, in which he has happily united
both humor and instruction. But the following year was distinguished by a far
more important effort of his Muse; the Fragment on Education and Government,
which is superior to every thing in the same style of writing that our own
language can boast of, and perhaps any other.

ESSAY I.
-- (...)
(...)
Theoc.
As sickly plants betray a niggard earth,
Whose barren bosom starves her generous birth,
Nor genial warmth nor genial juice retains
Their roots to feed and fill their verdant veins,
And as in climes where Winter holds his reign
The soil though fertile will not teem in vain,
Forbids her gems to swell her shades to rise,
Nor trusts her blossoms to the churlish skies;
So draw mankind in vain the vital airs
Unformed, unfriended, by those kindly cares
That health and vigor to the soul impart,
Spread the young thought and warm the opening heart;
So fond Instruction on the growing powers
Of Nature idly lavishes her stores
If equal Justice with unclouded face
Smile not indulgent on the rising race,
And scatter with a free though frugal hand
Light golden showers of plenty over the land:
But Tyranny has fixed her empire there
To check their tender hopes with chilling fear
And blast the blooming promise of the year.
This spacious animated scene survey
From where the rolling orb that gives the day
His sable sons with nearer course surrounds
To either pole and life's remotest bounds:
How rude soever the exterior form we find,
However opinion tinge the varied mind,
Alike to all the kind impartial Heaven
The sparks of truth and happiness has given;
With sense to feel, with memory to retain,
They follow pleasure and they fly from pain;
Their judgment mends the plan their fancy draws,
The event presages and explores the cause;
The soft returns of gratitude they know,
By fraud clude, by force repel the foe;
While mutual wishes mutual woes endear,
The social smile and sympathetick tear.
Say, then, through ages by what fate confined
To different climes seem different souls assigned?
Here measured Laws and philosophic Ease
Fix and improve the polished arts of peace;
There Industry and Gain their vigils keep,
Command the winds and tame the unwilling deep;
Here force and hardy deeds of blood prevail,
There languid Pleasure sighs in every gale.
Often over the trembling nations from afar
Has Scythia breathed the living cloud of war,
And where the deluge burst with sweepy sway
Their arms, their kings, their gods, were rolled away:
As often have issued, host impelling host,
The blue-ey'd myriads from the Baltic coast;
The prostrate South to the destroyer yields
Her boasted titles and her golden fields:
With grim delight the brood of Winter view
A brighter day, and heavens of azure hue,
Scent the new fragrance of the breathing rose,
And quaff the pendent vintage as it grows.
Proud of the yoke, and pliant to the rod,
Why yet does Asia dread a monarch's nod,
While European freedom still withstands
The encroaching tide that drowns her lessening lands,
And sees far off with an indignant groan
Her native plains and empires once her own?
Can op'ner skies and suns of fiercer flame
O'erpow'r the fire that animates our frame,
As lamps that shed at eve a cheerful ray
Fade and expire beneath the eye of day?
Need we the influence of the northern star
To string our nerves and steel our hearts to war?
And where the face of Nature laughs around
Must sickening Virtue fly the tainted ground?
Unmanly thought! what seasons can control,
What fancied zone can circumscribe, the soul,
Who conscious of the source from whence the springs
By Reason's light on Resolution's wings,
Spite of her frail companion, dauntless goes
Over Lybia's deserts and through Zembla's snows?
She bids each slumbering energy awake,
Another touch another temper take,
Suspends the inferior laws that rule our clay:
The stubborn elements confess her sway;
Their little wants their low desires refine,
And raise the mortal to a height divine.
Not but the human fabric from the birth
Imbibes a flavor of its parent earth;
As various tracks enforce a various toil,
The manners speak the idiom of their soil.
An iron race the mountain-cliffs maintain,
Foes to the gentler genius of the plain;
For where unwearied sinews must be found
With side-long plough to quell the flinty ground,
To turn the torrent's swift-descending flood,
To brave the savage rushing from the wood,
What wonder if to patient valor trained
They guard with spirit what by strength they gained?
And while their rocky ramparts round they see,
The rough abode of Want and Liberty,
(As lawless force from confidence will grow)
Insult the plenty of the vales below?
What wonder in the sultry climes that spread
Where Nile redundant over his summer-bed
From his broad bosom life and verdure flings,
And broods over Egypt with his watery wings,
If with adventurous oar and ready sail
The dusky people drive before the gale,
Or on frail floats to neighboring cities ride,
That rise and glitter over the ambient tide?
How much it is to be wished that Gray, instead of compiling chronological
tables, had completed what he thus admirably begun! In the year 1750 he put his
last hand to the Elegy in the Country Churchyard, which when finished was
communicated first to Mr. Walpole, and by him to several persons of
distinction. I his brought Mr. Gray acquainted with Lady Cobham, and furnished
an occasion for his Long Story, a composition in which the different colors of
wit and humor are peculiarly and not less intimately blended than the shifting
hues on the faces of a diamond. The elegy having been for some time privately
transmitted from onehand to another, at length found its way into public
through The Magazine of Magazines. This disgraceful mode of appearance
subjected the Author to the necessity of exhibiting it under a less
disadvantageous form; and Mr. Bentley soon after wishing to supply every
ornament that his pencil could contribute, drew, not only for it but also for
the rest of Mr. Gray's productions The headpiece to the Long Story, exhibiting
a view of Stoke-Pogeis church and mansion, was copied from a sketch by Mr.
Gray. The Churchyard was the subject of his elegy.
, a set of designs, which were handsomely repaid by some very beautiful
stanzas, of which unfortunately no perfect copy remains. In the March of 1753
Mr. Gray sustained a loss which he long severely felt: his mother, to whom his
conduct was exemplary for the discharge of every filial duty, and who merited
all the tenderness and attention she received, was taken from him by death. The
lines in which Mr. Pope has expressed his piety, beautiful as they are, and
much as they deserve to be praised, appear notwithstanding to excite less of
sympathy than a single stroke in the epitaph on Mrs. Gray Here sleep the
remains of Dorothy Gray,


, or a passage in a letter to Mr. Mason, written the following December, on the
deaths of his father and friend: "I have seen the scene you describe, and know
how dreadful it is; I know too I am the better for it. We are all idle and
thoughtless things, and have no sense, no use in the world, any longer than
that sad impression lasts: the deeper it is engraved the better."

Mr. Gray, as is evident by a letter to Dr. Wharton, had finished his Ode on
the Progress of Poetry early in 1755; his Bard also was begun about this time,
and in the year following the beautiful fragment on the Pleasures of
Vicissitude. From the loose hints in his commonplace-book he appears to have
planned a fourth ode on the connection between genius and grandeur, but it
cannot now be ascertained if any part of it was actually written. A vacancy in
the office of Poet-Laureate was occasioned in 1757 by the death of Colley
Cibber. The Duke of Devonshire, being at that time Chamberlain, made a polite
offer of it to Mr. Gray through the hands of Lord John Cavendish his brother;
but the disgrace brought upon that office by the profligacy and inability of
some who had filled it probably induced Mr. Gray to decline the appointment.
This part of our poet's life was chiefly devoted to literary pursuits and the
cultivation of friendship. It is obvious from the testimony of his letters that
he was indefatigable in the former, and that he was always ready to perform
kind offices in the latter. Sir William Williams, an accomplished and gallant
young officer, having been killed at Bellisle, his friend Mr. Fred. Montagu
proposed to erect a monument over him, and with this view requested Mr. Gray to
furnish the epitaph. His slight acquaintance with Sir William would have been a
sufficient reason for declining the task, but the friendliness of Mr. Montagu's
disposition, and the sincerity of affliction with which he was affected,
wrought so powerfully upon Mr. Gray that he could not refuse him, though he was
by no means able to satisfy himself with the verses he wrote. The professorship
of modern languages and history in the University of Cambridge becoming vacant
in 1762 through the death of Mr. Turner, Mr. Gray was spirited up by some of
his friends to ask of Lord Bute the succession. His application however failed,
the office having been promised to Lady Lowther for the tutor of Sir James,
from a motive which reflected more honor on her Ladyship than on the gentleman
who succeeded. In 1765 Mr. Gray, ever attached to the beauties of Nature as
well as to the love of antiquities, undertook a journey to Scotland for the
purpose of gratifying his curiosity and taste. During his stay in this country
Dr. Beattie (though not the first of philosophers yet a poet inferior to none
since the death of his friend, and whom he in many respects resembled) found
the means of engaging his notice and friendship. Through the intervention of
this gentleman the Marisehal College of Aberdeen had requested to know if the
degree of Doctor of Laws would be acceptable to Gray; but this mark of their
attention he civilly declined. In December 1767 Dr. Beattie, still desirous
that his country should afford some testimony of its regard to the merit of our
poet, solicited his permission to print at the University press of Glasgow an
elegant edition of his Works. Dodsley had before asked the like favor, and Mr.
Gray, unwilling to refuse, gratified both with a copy containing a few notes
and the imitations of the old Norwegian poetry, intended to supplant the Long
Story, which was printed at first only to illustrate Mr. Bentley's designs. The
death of Mr. Brocket in the July following left another opening to the
professorship which he had before unsuccessfully sought. Lord Bute however was
not in office, and the Duke of Grafton, to preclude a request, within two days
of the vacancy appointed Mr. Gray. Cambridge before had been his residence from
choice, it now became so from obligation, and the greater part of his time
there was filled up by his old engagements or diverted to new ones. It has been
suggested that he once embraced the project of republishing Strabo, and there
are reasons to believe that he meant it, as the many geographical disquisitions
he left behind him appear to have been too minute for the gratification of
general inquiry. The like observation may be transferred to Plato and the Greek
Anthologia, as he had taken uncommon pains with both, and has left a ms. of the
latter fit for the press. His design of favoring the public with the history
of English poetry may be spoken of with more certainty, as in this he had not
only engaged with Mr. Mason as a colleague, but actually paraphrased the Norse
and Welsh poems inserted in his Works for specimens of the wild spirit which
animated the bards of ancient days. The extensive compass however of the
subject, and the knowledge that it was also in the hands of Mr. Warton, induced
him to relinquish what he had thus successfully begun. Nor did his love for the
antiquities of his country confine his researches to its poetry alone: the
structures of our ancestors and their various improvements particularly engaged
his attention. Hitherto there has nothing so authentic and accurate on the
subject of Gothic architecture appeared as the observations upon it drawn up
by Mr. Gray, and inserted by Mr. Bentham in his Hist. of Ely. Of heraldry, its
correlative science, he possessed the entire knowledge. But of the various
pursuits which employed his studies for the last ten years of his life none
were so acceptable as those which explained the economy of Nature. For botany
he acquired a taste of his uncle when young; and the exercise which for the
sake of improvement in this branch of the science he induced himself to take
contributed not a little to the preservation of his health. How considerable
his improvements in it were those only can tell who have seen his additions to
Hudson, and his notes on Linnaeus. While confined to zoology he successfully
applied his discoveries to illustrate Aristotle and others of the Ancients.
From engagements of this kind Mr. Gray's attention was neither often nor long
diverted. Excepting the time he gave up to experiments on flowers, for the
purpose of investigating the process of vegetation, (which can scarcely be
called a relaxation from his stated occupations) his only amusement was music;
nor was his acquaintance with this art less than with others of much more
importance. His skill was acquired from the productions of the best composers,
out of whose works when in Italy he had made a selection. Vocal music he
chiefly preferred. The harpsichord was his favorite instrument, but though far
from remarkable for a finished execution, yet he accommodated his voice so
judiciously to his playing as to give an auditor considerable pleasure. His
judgment in statuary and painting was exquisite, and formed from an almost
instinctive perception of those graces beyond the reach of art in which the
divine works of the great masters abound. As it was through the unsolicited
favor of the Duke of Grafton that Mr. Gray was enabled to follow the bent of
his own inclination in the choice of his studies, we shall not be surprised to
find, from a letter to Dr. Beattie, that gratitude prompted him to offer his
firstling: O Meliboee, Deus nobis haec otia fecit
Nanque erit ille mihi semper Deus: illius aram
Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.
Ille meas errare boves ut cernis, et ipsum
Ludere quae vellem, calamo permisit agresti.
Accordingly on his Grace's being elected Chancellor of the University Mr.
Gray, unasked, took upon him to write those verses which are usually set to
music on this occasion; and whatever the sarcastick Junius (notwithstanding
his handsome compliment to the poet) might pretend, this was the offering of no
venal Muse. The ode in its structure is dramatick, and it contains nothing of
the complimentary kind which is not entirely suited to the characters employed.
Not long after the bustle of the installation was over Mr. Gray made an
excursion to the sequestered lakes of Westmoreland and Cumberland. The
impressions he there received from the wonderful scenery that every where
surrounded him he transmitted to his friend Dr. Wharton in epistolary journals,
with all the wildness of Salvator and the softness of Claude. Writing in May
1771 to the same friend, he complains of a violent cough which had troubled him
for three months, and which he called incurable, adding, that till this year he
never knew what (mechancial) low spirits were. One circumstance that without
doubt contributed to the latter complaint was the anxiety he felt from holding
as a sinecure an office the duties of which he thought himself bound to
perform. The object of his professorship being twofold, and the patent allowing
him to effect one of its designs by deputy, it is understood that he liberally
rewarded for that purpose the teachers in the University of Italian and French.
The other part he himself prepared to execute; but though the professorship was
instituted in 1724, none of his predecessors had furnished a plan. Embarassed
by this and other difficulties, and retarded by ill health, the undertaking at
length became so irksome that he seriously proposed to relinquish the chair.
Toward the close of May he removed from Cambridge to Town, after having
suffered from flying attacks of an hereditary gout, to which he had long been
subject, and from which a life of singular temperance could not protect him. In
London his indisposition having increased, the physician advised him to change
his lodgings in Jermynstreet for others at Kensington. This change was of so
much benefit that he was soon enabled to return to Cambridge, from whence he
meditated a journey to his friend Dr. Wharton, which he hoped might reestablish
his health; but his intentions and hopes were delusive. On the 24th of July
1771 a violent sickness came on him while at dinner in the College-hall; the
gout had fixed on his stomach, and resisted all the powers of medicine. On the
29th he was seized by a strong convulsion, which the next day returned with
additional force, and the evening after he expired. At the first seizure he was
aware of his danger, and though sensible at intervals almost to the last, he
betrayed no dread of the terrors of death.

To delineate his portrait in this place would be needless. The reader will
acquire the best idea of his character if after perusing his life and his
writings he will use his own memory a sa cylindrick mirror, and collect into
one assemblage the scattered features. Of Mr Gray's religious opinions but
little is known; there are however sufficient traces left to show him a
believer. To Lord Bolingbroke's atheism he has written an answer. His
sentiments of Lord Saftesbury cannot be mistaken; and both Voltaire and Hume he
censures with freedom. In private life he was most respected by those who best
knew him: his heart was benevolent and his hand liberal.

On his poems it will be needless to bestow praises, or to repel the attacks of
envy and rancour. If Mr. Gray was not a poet of the first order there is no
poetry existing; and if his bold expressions be nonsense, so are the best
passages of Shakespeare and Milton, and the sublimest figures of divine
inspiration.

THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF MR. THOMAS GRAY.
Extracted from the registry of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury.
IN the name of God. Amen. I Thomas Gray of Pembroke-hall in the University of
Cambridge, being of sound mind and in good health of body, yet ignorant how
long these blessings may be indulged me, do make this my Last Will and
Testament in manner and form following. First, I do desire that my body may be
deposited in the vault made by my late dear mother in the churchyard of
Stoke-Pogeis, near Slough in Buckinghamshire, by her remains, in a coffin of
seasoned oak, neither lined nor covered, and (unless it be very inconvenient) I
could wish that one of my executers may see me laid in the grave, and
distribute among such honest and industrious poor persons in the said parish as
he thinks fit the sum of ten pounds in charity. Next, I give to George
Williamson Esquire. my second cousin by the father's side, now of Calcutta in
Bengal, the sum of five hundred pounds reduced Bank annuities, now standing in
my name. I give to Anna Lady Goring, also my second cousin by the father's
side, of the county of Sussex, five hundred pounds reduced Bank annuities, and
a pair of large blue and white old Japan china jars. Item, I give to Mary
Antrobus of Cambridge spinster, my second cousin by the mother's side, all that
my freehold estate and house in the parish of St. Michael, Cornhill London, now
let at the yearly rent of sixty-five pounds, and in the occupation of Mr.
Nortgeth perfumer, provided that she pay out of the said rent, by half-yearly
payments, Mrs. Jane Olliffe, my aunt, of Cambridge, widow, the sum of twenty
pounds per annum during her natural life; and after the decease of the said
Jane Olliffe I give the said estate to the said Mary Antrobus, to have and to
hold to her her heirs and assigns for ever. Further, I bequeath to the said
Mary Antrobus the sum of six hundred pounds new South Sea annuities, now
standing in the joint names of Jane Olliffe and Thomas Gray, but charged with
the payment of five pounds per annum to Graves Stokeley of Stoke-Pogeis in the
county of Bucks, which sum of six hundred pounds, after the decease of the said
annuitant, does (by the will of Anna Rogers my late aunt) belong solely and
entirely to me, together with all overplus of interest in the mean-time
accruing. Further, if at the time of my decease there shall be any arrear of
salary due to me from his Majesty's Treasury, I give all such arrears to the
said Mary Antrobus. Item, I give to Mrs. Dorothy Comyns of Cambridge, my other
second cousin by the mother's side, the sums of six hundred pounds old
South Sea annuities, of three hundred pounds four per cent. Bank annuities
consolidated, and of two hundred pounds three per cent. Bank annuities
consolidated, all now standing in my name. I give to Richard Stonehewer Esquire.
one of his Majesty's Commissioner's of Excise, the sum of five hundred pounds
reduced Bank annuities, and I beg his acceptance of one of my diamond rings. I
give to Dr. Thomas Wharton, of Old Park in the Bishopric of Durham, five
hundred pounds reduced Bank annuities, and desire him also to accept of one of
my diamond rings. I give to my servant, Stephen Hempstead, the sum of fifty
pounds reduced Bank annuities, and if he continues in my service to the time of
my death I also give him all my wearing apparel and linen. I give to my two
cousins abovementioned, Mary Antrobus and Dorothy Comyns, all my plate,
watches, rings, china ware, bed linen and table linen, and the furniture of my
chambers at Cambridge not otherwise bequeathed, to be equally and amicably
shared between them. I give to the Reverend William Mason, Precentor of York,
all my books, manuscripts, coins, music printed or written, and papers of all
kinds, to preserve or destroy at his own discretion. And after my just debts
and the expenses of my funeral are discharged, all the residue of my personal
estate whatsoever I do hereby give and bequeath to the said Reverend William
Mason, and to the Reverend Mr. James Brown, President of Pembroke-hall
Cambridge, to be equally divided between them, desiring them to apply the sum
of two hundred pounds to an use of charity concerning which I have already
informed them. And I do hereby constitute and appoint them, the said William
Mason and James Brown, to be joint executers of this my Last Will and
Testament. And if any relation of mine, or other legatee, shall go about to
molest or commence any suit against my said executers in the execution of their
office, I do, as far as the law will permit me, hereby revoke and make void all
such bequests or legacies as I had given to that person or persons, and give it
to be divided between my said executers and residuary legatees, whose integrity
and kindness I have so long experienced, and who can best judge of my true
intention and meaning. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal
this 2d day of July 1770.

THOMAS GRAY.
Signed, sealed, published, and declared, by the said Thomas Gray, the
testator, as and for his Last Will and Testament, in the presence of us, who in
his presence, and at his request, and in the presence of each other, have
signed our names as witnesses hereto. RICHARD BAKER. THOMAS WILSON. JOSEPH
TURNER.

Proved at London the 12th of August 1771, before the Worshipful Andrew Coltre
Ducarel Doctor of Laws and Surrogate, by the oaths of the Reverend William
Mason, Clerk, Master of Arts, and the Reverend James Brown, Clerk, Master of
Arts, the executers, to whom administration was granted, having been first
sworn duly to administer. Deputy Registers. JOHN STEVENS. HENRY STEVENS. GEO.
GOSTLING, jun.



THE TEARS OF GENIUS,
AN ODE, TO THE MEMORY OF MR. GRAY.
(By J. T^.)
ON Cham's fair banks, where Learning's hallowed fane
Majestic rises on the astonished sight,
Where often the Muse has led the favorite swain,
And warmed his soul with heaven's inspiring light,
Beneath the covert of the sylvan shade,
Where deadly cypress, mixed with mournful yew,
Far over the vale a gloomy stillness spread,
Celestial Genius burst upon the view.
The bloom of youth, the majesty of years,
The softened aspect, innocent and kind,
The sigh of sorrow and the streaming tears,
Resistless all, their various power combined.
In her fair hand a silver harp she bore,
Whose magic notes, soft warbling from the string,
Give tranquil joys the breast never knew before,
Or raise the soul on rapture's airy wing.
By grief impelled I heard her heave a sigh,
While thus the rapid strain resounded through the sky:
Haste, ye sister powers of Song!
Hasten from the shady grove,
Where the river rolls along
Sweetly to the voice of love;
Where indulging mirthful pleasures
Light you press the flowery green,
And from Flora's blooming treasures
Cull the wreath for Fancy's queen;
Where your gently-flowing numbers,
Floating on the fragrant breeze,
Sink the soul in pleasing slumbers
On the downy bed of ease.
For graver strains prepare the plaintive lyre,
That wakes the softest feelings of the soul;
Let lonely grief the melting verse inspire,
Let deep'ning sorrow's solemn accents roll.
Racked by the hand of rude Disease
Behold our favorite poet lies!
While every object formed to please
Far from his couch ungrateful flies.
The blissful Muse, whose favoring smile
So lately warmed his peaceful breast,
Diffusing heavenly joys the while,
In Transport's radiant garments dressed,
With darksome grandeur and enfeebled blaze
Sinks in the shades of night and shuns his eager gaze.
The gaudy train who wait on Spring Ode on Spring.
,
Tinged with the pomp of vernal pride,
The youth who mount on pleasure's wing Ode on the Prospect of Eton College.
,
And idly sport on Thames' side,
With cool regard their various arts employ,
Nor rouse the drooping mind nor give the pause of joy.
Ha! what forms, with port sublime Bard, an ode.
,
Glide along in sullen mood,
Scorning all the threats of time,
High above misfortune's flood?
They seize their harps, they strike the lyre,
With rapid hand, with freedom's fire;
Obedient Nature hears the lofty sound,
And Snowdon's airy cliffs the heavenly strains resound.
In pomp of state behold they wait,
With arms outstretch'd and aspects kind,
To snatch on high to yonder sky
The child of Fancy left behind;
Forgot the woes of Cambria's fatal day,
By rapture's blaze impelled they swell the artless lay.
But ah! in vain they strive to sooth
With gentle arts the torturing hours,
Adversity Ode to Adversity.
with rankling tooth
Her baleful gifts profusely pours.
Behold she comes! the fiend forlorn,
Arrayed in Horrour's settled gloom,
She strews the brier and prickly thorn,
And triumphs in the infernal doom;
With frantic fury and insatiate rage
She gnaws the throbbing breast and blasts the glowing page.
No more the soft Eolian flute The Progress of Poetry.

Breathes through the heart the melting strain,
The powers of Harmony are mute,
And leave the once-delightful plain;
With heavy wing I see them beat the air,
Damped by the leaden hand of comfortless Despair.
Yet stay, O stay! celestial Powers!
And with a hand of kind regard
Dispel the boisterous storm that lours
Destructive on the favorite bard;
O watch with me his last expiring breath,
And snatch him from the arms of dark oblivious Death!
Hark! the Fatal Sisters The Fatal Sisters, an ode.
join,
And with horrour's mutt'ring sounds
Weave the tissue of his line
While the dreadful spell resounds.
" Hail, ye midnight Sisters! hail!
" Drive the shuttle swift along,
" Let our secret charms prevail,
" Over the valiant and the strong;
" Over the glory of the land,
" Over the innocent and gay,
" Over the Muses' tuneful band,
" Weave the funeral web of Gray."
It Is done, it is done -- the iron hand of Pain
With ruthless fury and corrosive force
Racks every joint and seizes every vein:
He sinks, he groans, he falls, a lifeless corse!
Thus fades the flower, nipp'd by the frozen gale,
Though once so sweet, so lovely, to the eye,
Thus the tall oaks, when boisterous storms assail,
Torn from the earth a mighty ruin lie.
Ye sacred Sisters of the plaintive verse
Now let the stream of fond affection flow;
O pay your tribute over the slow-drawn hearse
With all the manly dignity of woe!
Often when the curfew tolls its parting knell
With solemn pause yon' Churchyard's gloom survey,
While sorrow's sighs and tears of pity tell
How just the moral of the poet's lay Elegy in a Country Churchyard.
.
Over his green grave, in Contemplation's guise,
Often let the pilgrim drop a silent tear,
Often let the shepherd's tender accents rise,
Big with the sweets of each revolving year,
Till prostrate Time adore his deathless name,
Fixed on the solid base of adamantine fame.
ODES.
ODE I.
ON THE SPRING.
Lo! where the rosy-bosom'd Hours,
Fair Venus' train, appear,
Disclose the long-expecting flowers,
And wake the purple year,
The Attick warbler pours her throat
Responsive to the cuckoo's note,
The untaught harmony of spring,
While whispering pleasure as they fly
Cool zephirs through the clear blue sky
Their gathered fragrance fling.
Wherever the oak's thick branches stretch
A broader browner shade,
Wherever the rude and moss-grown beech
O'er-canopies the glade -- a bank
O'er-canopy'd with luscious woodbine.
Shakesp. Mids. Night's Dream.
,
Beside some water's rushy brink
With me the Muse shall sit, and think
(At ease reclined in rustic state)
How vain the ardour of the crowd,
How low, how little, are the proud,
How indigent the great!
Still is the toiling hand of Care,
The panting herds repose,
Yet hark! how through the peopled air
The busy murmur glows!
The insect youth are on the wing,
Eager to taste the honey'd spring,
And float amid the liquid noon Nare per asstatem liquidam. Virg. Georg. lib. 4.
;
Some lightly over the current skim,
Some show their gayly-gilded trim,
Quick-glancing to the sun -- sporting with quick glance,
Show to the sun their waved coats dropped with gold.
Milton's Paradise Lost, b. 7.
.
To Contemplation's sober eye While insects from the threshold preach, etc. M.
Green in the Grotto. Dodsley's Miscellanies, vol. v. p. 161.
,
Such is the race of man,
And they that creep and they that fly
Shall end where they began.
Alike the busy and the gay
But flutter through life's little day,
In Fortune's varying colors dressed;
Brushed by the hand of rough Mischance,
Or chilled by Age, their airy dance
They leave, in dust to rest.
Methinks I hear in accents low
The sportive kind reply,
Poor Moralist! and what art thou?
A solitary fly!
Thy joys no glittering female meets,
No hive have thou of hoarded sweets,
No painted plumage to display;
On hasty wings thy youth is flown,
Thy sun is set, thy spring is gone --
We frolic while 't is May.
ODE II.
ON THE DEATH OF A FAVORITE CAT,
Drowned in a tub of gold fishes.
'TWAS on a losty vase's side,
Where China's gayest art had died
The azure flowers that blow,
Demurest of the tabby kind,
The pensive Selima, reclined,
Gazed on the lake below.
Her conscious tail her joy declared;
The fair round face, the snowy beard,
The velvet of her paws,
Her coat that with the tortoise vies,
Her ears of jet and em'rald eyes,
She saw, and purr'd applause.
Still had she gazed, but 'midst the tide
Two angel forms were seen to glide,
The Genii of the stream;
Their scaly armour's Tyrian hue
Through richest purple to the view
Betrayed a golden gleam.
The hapless nymph with wonder saw:
A whisker first and then a claw,
With many an ardent wish,
She stretched in vain to reach the prize:
What female heart can gold despise?
What Cat's averse to fish?
Presumpt'ous maid! with looks intent
Again she stretched, again she bent,
Nor knew the gulf between:
(Malignant Fate sat by and smiled)
The slippery verge her feet beguiled;
She tumbled headlong in.
Eight times emerging from the flood
She mewed to every watery god
Some speedy aid to send.
No Dolphin came, no Nereid stirred,
Nor cruel Tom nor Susan heard:
A favorite has no friend!
From hence, ye Beauties! undeceived,
Know one false step is never retrieved,
And be with caution bold:
Not all that tempts your wandering eyes
And heedless hearts is lawful prize,
Nor all that glisters gold.
ODE III.
ON A DISTANT PROSPECT OF ETON COLLEGE.
(...) MENANDER.
YE distant Spires! ye antique Towers!
That crown the watery glade
Where grateful Science still adores
Her Henry's King Henry VI. founder of the college.
holy shade,
And ye that from the stately brow
Of Windsor's heights the expanse below
Of grove, of lawn, of mead, survey,
Whose turf, whose shade, whose flowers, among
Wanders the hoary Thames along
His silver-winding way:
Ah happy hills! ah pleasing shade!
Ah fields beloved in vain!
Where once my careless childhood strayed,
A stranger yet to pain!
I feel the gales that from ye blow
A momentary bliss bestow,
As waving fresh their gladsome wing
My weary soul they seem to sooth,
And, redolent And bees their honey redolent of spring. Dryden's Fable on the
Pythag. System.
of joy and youth,
To breathe a second spring.
Say, father Thames! for thou have seen
Full many a sprightly race
Disporting on thy margent green
The paths of pleasure trace,
Who foremost now delight to cleave
With pliant arm thy glassy wave?
The captive linnet which enthral?
What idle progeny succeed
To chase the rolling circle's speed
Or urge the flying ball?
While some on earnest business bent
Their murmuring labors ply,
Against graver hours that bring constraint
To sweeten liberty,
Some bold adventurers disdain
The limits of their little reign,
And unknown regions dare descry:
Still as they run they look behind,
They hear a voice in every wind,
And snatch a fearful joy.
Gay hope is theirs, by fancy fed,
Less pleasing when possessed;
The tear forgot as soon as shed,
The sunshine of the breast;
Theirs buxom health of rosy hue,
Wild wit, invention ever-new,
And lively cheer of vigor born,
The thoughtless day, the easy night,
The spirits pure, the slumbers light
That fly the approach of morn.
Alas! regardless of their doom,
The little victims play!
No sense have they of ills to come,
Nor care beyond today:
Yet see how all around 'em wait
The ministers of human fate,
And black Misfortune's baleful train!
Ah! show them where in ambush stand
To seize their prey the murderous band!
Ah! tell them they are men.
These shall the fury Passions tear,
The vultures of the mind,
Disdainful Anger, pallid Fear,
And Shame that skulks behind;
Or pining Love shall waste their youth,
Or Jealousy with rankling tooth
That inly gnaws the secret heart,
And Envy wan, and faded Care,
Grim-visag'd comfortless Despair,
And Sorrow's piercing dart.
Ambition this shall tempt to rise,
Then whirl the wretch from high,
To bitter Scorn a sacrifice
And grinning Infamy:
The stings of Falsehood those shall try,
And hard Unkindness' altered eye,
That mocks the tear it forced to flow,
And keen Remorse with blood defiled,
And moody Madness And Madness laughing in his ireful mood. Dryden's Fable of
Palamon and Arcite.
laughing wild
Amid severest woe.
Lo! in the vale of years beneath
A grisly troop are seen,
The painful family of Death,
More hideous than their queen:
This racks the joints, this fires the veins,
That every laboring sinew strains,
Those in the deeper vitals rage;
Lo! Poverty, to fill the band,
That numbs the soul with icy hand,
And slow-consuming Age.
To each his sufferings; all are men
Condemned alike to groan,
The tender for another's pain,
The unfeeling for his own.
Yet ah! why should they know their fate,
Since sorrow never comes too late,
And happiness too swifty flies?
Thought would destroy their paradise.
No more; where ignorance is bliss
It Is folly to be wise.
ODE IV.
TO ADVERSITY.
-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
AESCHYLUS, in Agamemnone.
DAUGHTER of Jove, relentless power,
Thou tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge and torturing hour
The bad affright, afflict the best!
Bound in thy adamantine chain
The proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple tyrants vainly groan
With pangs unfelt before, unpitied and alone.
When first thy sire to send on earth
Virtue, his darling child, designed,
To thee he gave the heavenly birth,
And bad to form her infant mind;
Stern rugged nurse! thy rigid lore
With patience many a year she bore;
What sorrow was thou badst her know,
And from her own she learned to melt at others' woe.
Scared at thy frown terrifick fly
Self-pleasing Folly's idle brood,
Wild Laughter, Noise, and thoughtless Joy,
And leave us leisure to be good.
Light they disperse, and with them go
The summer friend, the flattering foe;
By vain Prosperity received,
To her they vow their truth, and are again believed.
Wisdom, in sable garb arrayed,
Immersed in rapturous thought profound,
And Melancholy, silent maid,
With leaden eye that loves the ground,
Still on thy solemn steps attend,
Warm Charity, the general friend,
With Justice, to herself severe,
And Pity, dropping soft the sadly-pleasing tear.
Oh! gently on thy suppliant's head,
Dread goddess! lay thy chast'ning hand,
Not in thy Gorgon terrors clad,
Nor circled with the vengeful band
(As by the impious thou art seen)
With thundering voice and threatening mien,
With screaming Horrour's funeral cry,
Despair, and fell Disease, and ghastly Poverty.
Thy form beign, O Goddess! wear,
Thy milder influence impart,
Thy philosophic train be there,
To soften not to wound my heart:
The generous spark extinct revive,
Teach me to love and to forgive;
Exact my own defects to scan,
What others are to feel, and know myself a man.
ODE V.
THE PROGRESS OF POESY. PINDARICK.
Advertisement.
WHEN the Author first published this and the following ode he was advised,
even by his friends, to subjoin some few explanatory notes, but had too much
respect for the understanding of his readers to take that liberty.

(...)
(...)
(...) --
PINDAR, Olymp. ii. I. 1.
AWAKE, Aeolian lyre! awake Awake, my glory! awake, lute and harp. David's
Psalms. Pindar styles his own poetry, with its musical accompaniements, (...),
Aeolian song, Aeolian strings, the breath of the Aeolian flute. -- The subject
and simile, as usual with Pindar, are here united. The various sources of
poetry which gives life and luster to all it touches are here described as well
in its quiet majestic progress, enriching every subject (otherwise dry and
barren) with all the pomp of diction and luxuriant harmony of numbers, as in
its more rapid and irresistible course, when swollen and hurried away by the
conflict of tumultuous passions.
,
And give to rapture all thy trembling strings.
From Helicon's harmonious springs
A thousand rills their mazy progress take,
The laughing flowers that round them blow
Drink life and fragrance as they flow.
Now the rich stream of music winds along
Deep, majestic, smooth, and strong,
Through verdant vales and Ceres' golden reign;
Now rolling down the steep amain
Headlong, impetuous, see it pour;
The rocks and nodding groves rebellow to the roar.
I. 2.
Oh! Sovereign Power of harmony to calm the turbulent passions of the soul. The
thoughts are borrowed from the first Pythian of Pindar.
of the willing soul,
Parent of sweet and solemn-breathing airs,
Enchanting shell! the sullen Cares
And frantic Passions hear thy soft control.
On Thracia's hills the lord of War
Has curbed the fury of his car,
And dropped his thirsty lance at thy command:
Perching on the sceptred hand This is a weak imitation of some beautiful lines
in the same ode.

Of Jove, thy magic lulls the feathered king
With ruffled plumes and flagging wing;
Quenched in dark clouds of slumber lie
The terror of his beak and lightnings of his eye.
I. 3.
Thee Power of harmony to produce all the graces of motion in the body.
the voice the dance obey,
Tempered to thy warbled lay:
Over Idalia's velvet green
The rosy-crowned Loves are seen
On Cytherea's day
With antic Sports and blueey'd Pleasures
Frisking light in frolic measures:
Now pursuing, now retreating,
Now in circling troops they meet;
To brisk notes in cadence beating
Glance their many-twinkling feet (...) Homer, Od. TH.
.
Slow-melting strains their queen's approach declare;
Wherever she turns the Graces homage pay:
With arms sublime, that float upon the air,
In gliding state she wins her easy way:
Over her warm cheek and rising bosom move
The bloom of young desire and purple light of love (...)
(...)
Phrynichus apud Athenoeum.
.
II. 1.
Man's feeble race what ills await To compensate the real or imaginary ills of
life the Muse was given to mankind by the fame Providence that sends the day by
its cheerful presence to dispel the gloom and terrors of the night.
!
Labor and Penury, the racks of Pain,
Disease, and Sorrow's weeping train,
And Death, sad refuge from the storms of Fate!
The fond complaint, my Song! disprove,
And justify the laws of Jove.
Say, has he given in vain the heavenly Muse?
Night and all her sickly dews,
Her specter wan and birds of boding cry,
He gives to range the dreary sky,
Till down the eastern cliffs afar Or seen the morning's well-appointed star,
Come marching up the eastern hills afar.
Cowley.

Hyperion's march they spy and glittering shafts of war.
II. 2.
In climes Extensive influence of poetic genius over the remotest and most
uncivilized nations; its connection with liberty, and the virtues that naturally
attend on it. [See the Erse, Norwegian, and Welsh, Fragments, the Lapland and
American songs, etc.]
beyond the Solar Road Extra anni solisque vias. -- Virgil. Tutta lontana dal
camin del sole. Petrarch, Canz. 2.
,
Where shaggy forms over ice-built mountains roam,
The Muse has broke the twilight-gloom
To cheer the shivering native's dull abode:
And often beneath the odorous shade
Of Chili's boundless forests laid
She deigns to hear the savage youth repeat,
In loose numbers wildly sweet,
Their feather-cinctur'd chiefs and dusky loves.
Her track wherever the goddess roves
Glory pursue, and generous shame,
The unconquerable mind and freedom's holy flame.
II. 3.
Woods that wave over Delphi's steep Progress of poetry from Greece to Italy,
and from Italy to England. Chaucer was not unacquainted with the writings of
Dante or of Petrarch. The Earl of Surry and Sir Thomas Wyatt had traveled in
Italy, and formed their taste there; Spenser imitated the Italian writers,
Milton improved on them: but this school expired soon after the restoration,
and a new one arose on the French model, which has subsisted ever since.
,
Isles that crown the Aegean deep,
Fields that cool Ilissus laves,
Or where Maeander's amber waves
In lingering lab'rinths creep,
How do your tuneful echoes languish,
Mute but to the voice of Anguish?
Where each old poetic mountain
Inspiration breathed around,
Every shade and hallowed fountain
Murmured deep a solemn sound,
Till the sad Nine, in Greece's evil hour,
Left their Parnassus for the Latian plains:
Alike they scorn the pomp of tyrant Power
And coward Vice that revels in her chains.
When Latium had her lofty spirit lost
They sought, oh Albion! next thy sea-encircled coast.
III. 1.
Far from the sun and summer-gale,
In thy green lap was Nature's darling Shakespeare.
laid,
What time, where lucid Avon strayed,
To him the Mighty Mother did unveil
Her awful face: the dauntless child
Stretched forth his little arms and smiled.
This pencil take (she said) whose colors clear
Richly paint the vernal year;
Thine too these golden keys, immortal boy!
This can unlock the gates of Joy,
Of Horror that, and thrilling Fears,
Or open the sacred source of sympathetick Tears.
III. 2.
Nor second he Milton.
that rode sublime
Upon the seraph-wings of Ecstasy,
The secrets of the abyss to spy,
He passed the flaming bounds of place and time -- flammantia moenia mundi.
Lucretius.
:
The living throne, the sapphire blaze For the spirit of the living creature
was in the wheels. -- And above the firmament that was over their heads was the
likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone. -- This was the
appearance of the glory of the Lord. Ezekiel i. 20, 26, 28.
,
Where angels tremble while they gaze,
He saw, but blasted with excess of light
Closed his eyes in endless night (...) Hom. Od.
.
Behold where Dryden's less presumptuous car
Wide over the fields of glory bear
Two coursers of ethereal race Meant to express the stately march and sounding
energy of Dryden's rhymes.
,
With necks in thunder clothed Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? Job.
and long-resounding pace.
III. 3.
Hark! his hands the lyre explore!
Bright-ey'd Fancy hovering over
Scatters from her pictured urn
Thoughts that breathe and words that burn Words that weep and tears that
speak. Cowley.
;
But ah! it is heard no more We have had in our language no other odes of the
sublime kind than that of Dryden on St. Cecilla's day, for Cowley, who had his
merit, yet wanted judgment, style, and harmony, for such a task. That of Pope
is not worthy of so great a man. Mr. Mason indeed, of late days, has touched
the true chords, and with a masterly hand, in some of his choruses -- above all
in the last of Caractacus; Hark! heard ye not yon' footstep dread? etc.
--
Oh, lyre divine! what daring spirit
Wakes thee now? though he inherit
Nor the pride nor ample pinion
That the Theban eagle bear (...) Olymp. ii. Pindar compares himself to that
bird, and his enemies to ravens that croak and clamor in vain below, while it
pursues its flight regardless of their noise.
,
Sailing with supreme dominion
Through the azure deep of air,
Yet often before his infant eyes would run
Such forms as glitter in the Muse's ray,
With orient hues unborrow'd of the sun,
Yet shall he mount, and keep his distant way
Beyond the limits of a vulgar fate,
Beneath the good how far -- but far above the great.
ODE VI.
THE BARD. PINDARICK.
Advertisement.
THE following ode is founded on a tradition current in Wales that Edward I.
when he completed the conquest of that country, ordered all the Bards that fell
into his hands to be put to death.

I. 1.
' RUIN seize thee, ruthless King!
' Confusion on thy banners wait,
' Though fanned by Conquest's crimson wing
' They mock the air with idle state Mocking the air with colors idly spread.
Shakesp. King John.
.
' Helm nor hauberk's The hauberk was a texture of steel ringlets or rings
interwoven, forming a coat of mail that sat close to the body and adapted
itself to every motion.
twisted mail,
' Nor even thy virtues, tyrant! shall avail
' To save thy secret soul from nightly fears,
' From Cambria's curse, from Cambria's tears!'
Such were the sounds that over the crested pride The crested adder's pride.
Dryden's Indian Queen.

Of the first Edward scattered wild dismay,
As down the steep of Snowdon's shaggy side Snowdon was a name given by the
Saxons to that mountainous track which the Welsh themselves call
Craigian-eryri: it included all the highlands of Caernarvonshire and
Merionethshire, as far east as the river Conway. R. Hygden, speaking of the
Castle of Conway, built by King Edward I. says, Ad ortum amnis Conway ad clivum
montis Erery; and Matthew of Westminster, ( ad an. 1283) Apud Aberconway ad
pedes montis Snowdoniae fecit erigi castrum forte.

He wound with toilsome march his long array:
Stout Glo'ster Gilbert de Clare, surnamed the Red, Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford, son-in-law to King Edward.
stood aghast in speechless trance,
To arms! cried Mortimer, Edmond de Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore. They both were
Lords Marchers, whose landslay on the borders of Wales, and probably
accompanied the king in this expedition.
, and couched his quivering lance.
I. 2.
On a rock, whose haughty brow
Frowns over old Conway's foaming flood,
Robbed in the sable garb of Woe,
With haggard eyes the poet stood;
(Loose his beard and hoary hair The image was taken from a well-known picture
of Raphael representing the Supreme Being in the vision of Ezekiel. There are
two of these paintings, both believed original, one at Florence, the other at
Paris.

Streamed like a meteor to the troubled air Shone like a meteor streaming to
the wind. Milton's Paradise Lost.
)
And with a master's hand and prophet's fire
Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre.
' Hark how each giant oak and desert cave
' Sighs to the torrent's awful voice beneath!
' Over thee, oh King! their hundred arms they wave,
' Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breathe,
' Vocal no more, since Cambria's fatal day,
' To highborn Hoel's harp or soft Llewellyn's lay.
I. 3.
' Cold is Cadwallo's tongue,
' That hushed the stormy main;
' Brave Urien sleeps upon his craggy bed:
' Mountains! ye mourn in vain
' Modred, whose magic song
' Made huge Plinlimmon bow his cloud-topp'd head.
' On dreary Arvon's The shores of Caernarvonshire, opposite to the Isle of
Anglesey.
shore they lie,
' Smeared with gore and ghastly pale;
' Far, far aloof the affrighted ravens sail,
' The famished eagle Camden and others observe that eagles used annually to
build their aerie among the rocks of Snowdon, which from thence (as some think)
were named by the Welsh Craigian-eryri, or the crags of the eagles. At this day
(I am told) the highest point of Snowdon is called The Eagle's Nest. That bird
is certainly no stranger to this island, as the Scots, and the people of
Cumberland, Westmoreland, etc. can testify: it even has built its nest in the
Peak of Derbyshire. [See Willoughby's Ornithol. published by Ray.]
screams and passes by.
' Dear lost companions of my tuneful art,
' Dear As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
That visit my sad heart --
Shakesp. Julius Caesar.
as the light that visits these sad eyes,
' Dear as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
' Ye died amidst your dying country's cries --
' No more I weep. They do not sleep:
' On yonder cliffs, a grisly band,
' I see them sit; they linger yet,
' Avengers of their native land;
' With me in dreadful harmony they join,
' And weave See the Norwegian ode that follows.
with bloody hands the tissue of thy line.'
II. 1.
" Weave the warp and weave the woof,
" The windingsheet of Edward's race;
" Give ample room and verge enough
" The characters of hell to trace.
" Mark the year and mark the night
" When Severn shall reecho with affright
" The shrieks of death through Berkley's roofs that ring,
" Shrieks of an agonizing king Edward II. cruelly butchered in Berkley Castle.
!
" She-wolf of France Isabel of France, Edward II's adulterous queen.
, with unrelenting fangs
" That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled mate,
" From thee Triumphs of Edward III. in France.
be born who over thy country hangs
" The scourge of Heaven. What Terrors round him wait!
" Amazement in his van, with Flight combined,
" And Sorrow's faded form, and Solitude behind.
II. 2.
" Mighty victor, mighty lord,
" Low on his funeral couch he lies Death of that king, abandoned by his
children, and even robbed in his last moments by his courtiers and his mistress.
!
" No pitying heart, no eye, afford
" A tear to grace his obsequies!
" Is the sable warrior Edw. the Black Prince, dead some time before his
father.
fled?
" Thy son is gone; he rests among the dead.
" The swarm that in thy noontide beam were born?
" Gone to salute the rising morn:
" Fair laughs the morn Magnificence of Rich. II's reign. See Froissard, and
other contemporary writers.
, and soft the zephir blows,
" While proudly riding over the azure realm
" In gallant trim the gilded vessel goes,
" Youth on the prow and Pleasure at the helm,
" Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind's sway,
" That hushed in grim repose expects his evening prey.
II. 3.
" Fill high the sparkling bowl Richard II. (as we are told by Archbishop
Scroop and the confederate Lords in their manifesto, by Thomas of Walsingham,
and all the older writers) was starved to death. The story of his assassination
by Sir Piers of Exon is of much later date.
,
" The rich repast prepare;
" Rest of a crown he yet may share the feast.
" Close by the regal chair
" Fell Thirst and Famine scowl
" A baleful smile upon their baffled guest.
" Heard ye the din of battle bray Ruinous civil wars of York and Lancaster.
,
" Lance to lance and horse to horse?
" Long years of havoc urge their destined course,
" And through the kindred squadrons mow their way.
" Ye Towers of Julius Henry VI. George Duke of Clarence, Edward V. Richard
Duke of York, etc. believed to be murdered secretly in the Tower of London. The
oldest part of that structure is vulgarly attributed to Julius Caesar.
! London's lasting shame,
" With many a foul and midnight murder fed,
" Revere his consort's Margaret of Anjou, a woman of heroic spirit, who
struggled hard to save her husband and her crown.
faith, his father's Henry V.
fame,
" And spare the meek usurper's Henry VI. very near being canonized. The line
of Lancaster had no right of inheritance to the crown.
holy head.
" Above, below, the Rose of snow The white and red Roses, devices of York and
Lancaster.
,
" Twined with her blushing foe, we spread;
" The bristled Boar The silver Boar was the badge of Richard III. whence he
was usually known in his own time by the name of The Boar.
in infant-gore
" Wallows beneath the thorny shade.
" Now Brother's! bending over the accursed loom
" Stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom.
III. 1.
" Edward, lo! to sudden fate
" (Weave we the woof; the thread is spun;)
" Half of thy heart Eleanor of Castile died a few years after the conquest of
Wales. The heroic proof she gave of her affection for her lord is well known.
The monuments of his regret and sorrow for the loss of her are still to be seen
at Northampton, Gaddington, Waltham, and other places.
we consecrate;
" (The web is wove; the work is done.")
' Stay, oh stay! nor thus forlorn
' Leave me unblessed, unpitied, here to mourn.
' In yon' bright track that fires the western skies
' They melt they vanish from my eyes.
' But oh! what solemn scenes on Snowdon's height
' Descending slow their glittering skirts unroll?
' Visions of glory! spare my aching sight,
' Ye unborn ages crowd not on my soul!
' No more our long-lost Arthur It was the common belief of the Welsh nation
that King Arthur was still alive in Fairyland, and should return again to reign
over Britain.
we bewail:
' All-hail, ye genuine Kings Both Merlin and Taliessin had prophesied that the
Welsh should regain their sovereignty over this island, which seemed to be
accomplished in the house of Tudor.
, Britannia's issue, hail!
III. 2.
' Girt with many a baron bold
' Sublime their starry fronts they rear,
' And gorgeous dames and statesmen old
' In bearded majesty appear;
' In the midst a form divine,
' Her eye proclaims her of the Briton-line,
' Her lion-port, her awe-commanding face Speed, relating an audience given by
Queen Elizabeth to Paul Dzialinski, ambassador of Poland, says "And thus she,
lion-like rising, daunted the malapert orator no less with her stately port and
majestical deporture than with the tartness of her princely checkes."
,
' Attemper'd sweet to virgin-grace.
' What strings symphonious tremble in the air!
' What strains of vocal transport round her play!
' Hear from the grave, great Taliessin Taliessin, chief of the Bards,
flourished in the 6th century. His works are still preserved, and his memory
held in high veneration among his countrymen.
! hear;
' They breathe a soul to animate thy clay.
' Bright Rapture calls, and soaring as she sings
' Waves in the eye of heaven her many-colour'd wings.
III. 3.
' The verse adorn again
' Fierce War, and faithful Love Fierce wars and faithful loves shall moralize
my song. Spenser's Proem to The Fairy Queen.
,
' And Truth severe, by Fairy Fiction dressed.
' In buskined measures move Shakespeare.

' Pale Grief, and pleasing Pain,
' With Horror, tyrant of the throbbing breast.
' A voice Milton.
as of the cherub-choir
' Gales from blooming Eden bear,
' And distant warblings The succession of poets after Milton's time.
lessen on my ear,
' That lost in long futurity expire.
' Fond impious man! think thou yon' sanguine cloud,
' Raised by thy breath, has quenched the orb of day?
' Tomorrow he repairs the golden flood,
' And warms the nations with redoubled ray.
' Enough for me: with joy I see
' The different doom our Fates assign:
' Be thine despair and sceptred care,
' To triumph and to die are mine.'
He spoke, and headlong from the mountain's height
Deep in the roaring tide he plunged to endless night.
ODE VII.
THE FATAL SISTERS. FROM THE NORSE TONGUE.
To be found in the Orcades of Thermodus Torfaeus; Hafniae, 1697, folio; and
also in Bartholinus.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author once had thoughts (in concert with a friend) of giving a history of
English poetry: in the introduction to it be meant to have produced some
specimens of the style that reigned in ancient times among the neighboring
nations, or those who had subdued the greater part of this island, and were our
progenitors: the following three imitations made a part of them. He afterward
dropped his design; especially after he had heard that it was already in the
hands of a person well qualified to do it justice both by his taste and his
researches into antiquity.

PREFACE.
IN the 11th century Sigurd, Earl of the Orkney-Islands, went with a fleet of
ships and a considerable body of troops into Ireland to the assistance of
Sigtryg with the silken beard, who was then making war on his father-in-law,
Brian King of Dublin. The earl and all his forces were cut to pieces, and
Sigtryg was in danger of a total defeat, but the enemy had a greater loss by
the death of Brian their king, who fell in the action. On Christmasday (the day
of the battle) a native of Caithness in Scotland saw, at a distance, a number
of persons on horseback riding full speed toward a hill, and seeming to enter
into it. Curiosity led him to follow them, till looking through an opening in
the rocks be saw twelve gigantick figures resembling women: they were all
employed about a loom, and as they wove they sung the following dreadful song,
which when they had finished they tore the web into twelve pieces, and each
taking her portion galloped six to the north, and as many to the south.

Vitt er orpit fyrir Valfalli, etc.
Note. -- The Valkyriur were female divinities, servants of Odin (or Woden) in
the Gothic mythology. Their name signifies Chusers of the slain. They were
mounted on swift horses, with drawn swords in their hands, and in the throng of
battle selected such as were destined to slaughter, and conducted them to
Valkalla, (the hall of Odin, or paradise of the brave) where they attended the
banquet, and served the departed heroes with horns of mead and ale.
Now the storm begins to lower,
(Haste, the loom of hell prepare)
Iron-sleet of arrowy shower How quick they wheeled, and flying, behind them
shot
Sharp sleet of arrowy shower --
Milt. Par. Reg.

Hurtles The noise of battle hurtled in the air. Shakesp. Jul. Caes.
in the darkened air.
Glittering lances are the loom
Where the dusky warp we strain,
Weaving many a soldier's doom,
Orkney's woe and Randver's bane.
See the grisly texture grow,
('It Is of human entrails made)
And the weights that play below
Each a gasping warriour's head.
Shafts for shuttles, dipped in gore,
Shoot the tremblings cords along:
Sword, that once a monarch bore,
Keep the tissue close and strong.
Mista black, terrifick maid!
Sangrida and Hilda see,
Join the wayward work to aid;
It Is the woof of victory.
Ere the ruddy sun be set
Pikes must shiver jav'lins sing,
Blade with clatt'ring bukler meet,
Hauberk crash and helmet ring.
(Weave the crimson web of war)
Let us go and let us fly
Where our friends the conflict share,
Where they triumph, where they die.
As the paths of Fate we tread,
Wading through the ensanguin'd field,
Gondula and Geira, spread
Over the youthful king your shield.
We the reins to slaughter give,
Ours to kill and ours to spare:
Spite of danger he shall live.
(Weave the crimson web of war.)
They whom once the desert beach
Pent within its bleak domain
Soon their ample sway shall stretch
Over the plenty of the plain.
Low the dauntless earl is laid,
Gored with many a gaping wound:
Fate demands a nobler head;
Soon a king shall bite the ground.
Long his loss shall Eirin Ireland.
weep,
Never again his likeness see;
Long her strains in sorrow steep,
Strains of immortality!
Horror covers all the heath,
Clouds of carnage blot the sun:
Sisters! weave the web of death:
Sisters! cease; the work is done.
Hail the task and hail the hands!
Songs of joy and triumph sing;
Joy to the victorious bands,
Triumph to the younger king.
Mortal! thou that hear'st the tale,
Learn the tenor of our song:
Scotland! through each winding vale
Far and wide the notes prolong.
Sisters! hence with spurs of speed;
Each her thundering falchion wield;
Each bestride her sable steed:
Hurry, hurry, to the field.
ODE VIII.
THE DESCENT OF ODIN. FROM THE NORSE TONGUE.
To be found in Bartholinus, de causis contemnendae mortis; Hafniae, 1689,
quarto.
Upreis Odinn Allda gautr, etc.
UPROSE the King of Men with speed,
And saddled straight his coal-black steed;
Down the yawning steep he rode
That leads to Hela's Niflheimr, the hell of the Gothic nations, consisted of
nine worlds, to which were devoted all such as died of sickness, old age, or by
any other means than in battle; over it presided Hela, the goddess of Death.
drear abode.
Him the Dog of Darkness spied,
His shaggy throat he opened wide,
While from his jaws, with carnage filled,
Foam and human gore distilled:
Hoarse he bays with hideous din,
Eyes that glow and fangs that grin,
And long pursues with fruitless yell
The father of the powerful spell:
Onward still his way he takes,
(The groaning earth beneath him shakes)
Till full before his fearless eyes
The portals nine of hell arise.
Right against the eastern gate
By the moss-grown pile he sat,
Where long of yore to sleep was laid
The dust of the prophetic maid.
Facing to the northern clime
Thrice he traced the Runick rhyme,
Thrice pronounced, in accents dread,
The thrilling verse that wakes the dead,
Till from out the hollow ground
Slowly breathed a sullen sound.
PROPH. What call unknown, what charms, presume
To break the quiet of the tomb?
Who thus afflicts my troubled sprite,
And drags me from the realms of Night?
Long on these mouldering bones have beat
The winter's snow the summer's heat,
The drenching dews and driving rain!
Let me, let me sleep again.
Who is he with voice unblest
That calls me from the bed of rest?

ODIN. A traveller, to thee unknown,
Is he that calls, a warriour's son.
Thou the deeds of light shall know,
Tell me what is done below,
For whom yon' glittering board is spread,
Dressed for whom yon' golden bed?

PROPH. Mantling in the goblet see
The pure bev'rage of the be,
Over it hangs the shield of gold;
It Is the drink of Balder bold;
Balder's head to death is given;
Pain can reach the sons of Heaven!
Unwilling I my lips unclose;
Leave me, leave me to repose.

ODIN. Once again my call obey:
Prophetess! arise, and say
What dangers Odin's child await,
Who the author of his fate?

PROPH. In Hoder's hand the hero's doom;
His brother sends him to the tomb.
Now my weary lips I close;
Leave me, leave me to repose.

ODIN. Prophetess! my spell obey,
Once again arise, and say
Who the avenger of his guilt,
By whom shall Hoder's blood be spilt?

PROPH. In the caverns of the west,
By Odin's fierce embrace comprest,
A wondrous boy shall Rinda bear,
Who never shall comb his raven-hair,
Nor wash his visage in the stream,
Nor see the sun's departing beam,
Till he on Hoder's corse shall smile
Flaming on the funeral pile.
Now my weary lips I close;
Leave me, leave me to repose.

ODIN. Yet a while my call obey:
Prophetess! awake, and say
What virgins these, in speechless woe,
That bend to earth their solemn brow,
That their flaxen tresses tear,
And snowy veils that float in air?
Tell me whence their sorrows rose,
Then I leave thee to repose.

PROPH. Ha! no traveller art thou,
King of Men, I know thee now;
Mightiest of a mighty line --

ODIN. No boding maid of skill divine
Art thou, nor prophetess of good,
But mother of the giant-brood!

PROPH. Hie thee hence, and boast at home
That never shall enquirer come
To break my iron-sleep again
Till Lok Lok is the evil being, who continues in chains till the twilight of
the gods approaches, when he shall break his bonds; the human-race, the stars,
and sun, shall disappear, the earth sink in the seas, and fire consume the
skies; even Odin himself, and his kindred-deities, shall perish. For a farther
explanation of this mythology see Introduction a l'Histoire de Dannemarc par
Mons. Mallat, 1755, 4to; or rather a translation of it published in 1770, and
entitled Northern Antiquities, in which some mistakes in the original are
judiciously corrected.
has burst his tenfold chain;
Never till substantial Night
Has reassumed her ancient right,
Till wrapped in flames, in ruin hurled,
Sinks the fabric of the world.

ODE IX.
THE TRIUMPHS OF OWEN. A FRAGMENT.
From Mr. Evans's specimen of the Welsh poetry, London, 1764, quarto.
Advertisement.
OWEN succeeded his father Griffin in the principality of North Wales A. D.
1120; this battle was fought near forty years afterward.

OWEN'S praise demands my song,
Owen swift and Owen strong,
Fairest flower of Rod'rick's stem,
Gwyneth's North Wales.
shield and Britain's gem.
He nor heaps his brooded stores
Nor on all profusely pours,
Lord of every regal art,
Liberal hand and open heart.
Big with hosts of mighty name
Squadrons three against him came,
This the force of Eirin hiding,
Side by side as proudly riding
On her shadow long and gay
Lochlin Denmark.
plows the watery way;
There the Norman sails afar
Catch the winds and join the war,
Black and huge along they sweep,
Burdens of the angry deep.
Dauntless on his native sands
The Dragon son The red Dragon is the device of Cadwallader, which all his
descendants bore on their banners.
of Mona stands;
In glittering arms and glory dressed
High he rears his ruby crest:
There the thundering strokes begin,
There the press and there the din,
Talymalfra's rocky shore
Echoing to the battle's rore.
Checked by the torrent-tide of blood
Backward Meinai rolls his flood,
While heaped his master's feet around
Prostrate warriors gnaw the ground.
Where his glowing eyeballs turn
Thousand banners round him burn,
Where he points his purple spear
Hasty, hasty rout is there,
Marking with indignant eye
Fear to stop and Shame to fly:
There Confusion, Terrour's child,
Conflict fierce and Ruin wild,
Agony that pants for breath,
Despair and honorable Death.
ODE X.
THE DEATH OF HOEL.
From the Welsh of Aneurim, styled The Monarch of the Bards. He flourished
about the time of Taliessin, A. D. 570. This ode is extracted from the Gododin.
[See Mr. Evans's Specimens, p. 71, 73.]
HAD I but the torrent's might,
With headlong rage and wild affright
Upon Deira's squadrons hurled
To rush and sweep them from the world!
Too, too secure in youthful pride
By them my friend, my Hoel, died,
Great Cian's son; of Madoc old
He asked no heaps of hoarded gold;
Alone in Nature's wealth arrayed
He asked and had the lovely maid.
To Cattraeth's vale in glittering row
Twice two hundred warriors go;
Every warriour's manly neck
Chains of regal honor deck,
Wreathed in many a golden link:
From the golden cup they drink
Nectar that the bees produce
Or the grape's ecstatick juice.
Flushed with mirth and hope they burn,
But none from Cattraeth's vale return
Save Aeron brave and Conan strong,
(Bursting through the bloody throng)
And I the meanest of them all,
That live to weep and sing their fall.
ODE XI.
FOR MUSIC.
Performed in the Senate House at Cambridge July 1. 1769, at the installation
of his Grace Augustus-Henry Fitzroy, Duke of Grafton, Chancellor of the
University.
I.
" HENCE, avaunt! ('it is holy ground)
" Comus and his midnight crew,
" And Ignorance with looks profound,
" And dreaming Sloth of pallid hue,
" Mad Sedition's cry profane,
" Servitude that hugs her chain,
" Nor in these consecrated bowers
" Let painted Flattery hid herserpent-train in flowers,
" Nor Envy base nor creeping Gain
" Dare the Muse's walk to stain,
" While bright-ey'd Science watches round:
" Hence, away! it is holy ground."
II.
From yonder realms of empyrean day
Bursts on my ear the indignant lay;
There sit the sainted sage, the bard divine,
The few whom Genius gave to shine
Through every unborn age and undiscovered clime.
Rapt in celestial transport they,
Yet hither often a glance from high
They send of tender sympathy
To bless the place where on their opening soul
First the genuine ardour stole.
'Twas Milton struck the deep-ton'd shell,
And as the choral warblings round him swell
Meek Newton's self bends from his state sublime,
And nods his hoary head and listens to the rhyme.
III.
" Ye brown o'er-arching Groves!
" That contemplation loves,
" Where willowy Camus lingers with delight,
" Often at the blush of dawn
" I trod your level lawn,
" Often wooed the gleam of Cynthia silver-bright
" In cloisters dim, far from the haunts of Folly,
" With Freedom by my side and soft-ey'd Melancholy."
IV.
But hark! the portals sound, and pacing forth
With solemn steps and slow
High potentates, and dames of royal birth,
And mitred fathers, in long order go:
Great Edward, with the Lilies on his brow Edward III. who added the Fleur de
lys of France to the arms of England. He founded Trinity-college.

From haughty Gallia torn,
And sad Chatillon Mary de Valentia, Countess of Pembroke, daughter of Guy de
Chatillon, Comte de St. Paul in France, of whom tradition says that her husband
Audemar de Valentia, Earl of Pembroke, was slain at a tournament on the day of
his nuptials. She was the foundress of Pembroke-college or Hall, under the name
of Aula Mariae de Valentia.
, on her bridal morn
That wept her bleeding love, and princely Clare Elizabeth de Burg, Countess of
Clare, was wife of John de Burg, son and heir of the Eaal of Ulster, and
daughter of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, by Joan of Acres, daughter of
Edward I.; hence the poet gives her the epithet of princely. She founded
Clare-hall.
,
And Anjou's Heroine Margaret of Anjou, wife of Henry VI. foundress of
Queen'scollege. The poet has celebrated her conjugal sidelity in a former ode.
, and the paler Rose Elizabeth Widville, wife of Edward IV. (hence called the
paler Rose, as being of the house of York.) She added to the foundation of
Margaret of Anjou.
,
The rival of her crown and of her woes,
And either Henry Henry the VI. and VIII. the former the founder of King's, the
latter the greatest benefactor to Trinity-college.
there,
The murdered saint and the majestic lord,
That broke the bonds of Rome.
(Their tears, their little triumphs over,
Their human passions now no more,
Save charity, that glows beyond the tomb)
All that on Granta's fruitful plain
Rich streams of regal bounty poured,
And bad these awful fanes and turrets rise
To hail their Fitzroy's festal morning come;
And thus they speak in soft accord
The liquid language of the skies:
V.
" What is grandeur, what is power?
" Heavier toil, superior pain.
" What the bright reward we gain?
" The grateful memory of the good.
" Sweet is the breath of vernal shower,
" The bee's collected treasures sweet,
" Sweet Musick's melting fall, but sweeter yet
" The still small voice of Gratitude."
VI.
Foremost, and leaning from her golden cloud,
The venerable Marg'ret Countess of Richmond and Derby, the mother of H. VII.
foundress of St. John's and Christ's colleges.
see!
" Welcome, my noble son!" she cries aloud,
" To this thy kindred train and me:
" Pleased in thy lineaments we trace
" A Tudor's The Countess was a Beaufort, and married to a Tudor; hence the
application of this line to the Duke of Grafton, who claims descent from both
these families.
fire a Beaufort's grace.
" Thy liberal heart, thy judging eye,
" The flower unheeded shall descry,
" And bid it round heaven's altars shed
" The fragrance of its blushing head;
" Shall raise from earth the latent gem
" To glitter on the diadem.
VII.
" Lo! Granta waits to lead her blooming band;
" Not obvious, not obtrusive, she
" No vulgar praise no venal incense flings,
" Nor dares with courtly tongue refined
" Profane thy inborn royalty of mind:
" She reveres herself and thee.
" With modest pride to grace thy youthful brow
" The laureate wreath Lord Treasurer Burleigh was Chancellor of the University
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
that Cecil wore she brings,
" And to thy just, thy gentle, hand
" Submits the fasces of her sway,
" While spirits blessed above and men below
" Join with glad voice the loud symphonious lay.
VIII.
" Through the wild waves as they roar
" With watchful eye and dauntless mien
" Thy steady course of honor keep,
" Nor fear the rocks nor seek the shore:
" The star of Brunswick smiles serene,
" And gilds the horrors of the deep."
MISCELLANIES.
A LONG STORY.
Advertisement.
MR. GRAY's Flegy, previous to its publication, was handed about in ms. and had
amongst other admirers the Lady Cobham, who resided in the mansion house at
Stoke-Pogeis. The performance inducing her to wish for the Author's
acquaintance, Lady Schaub and Miss Speed, then at her house, undertook to
introduce her to it. These two ladies waited upon the Author at his aunt's
solitary habitation, where he at that time resided, and not finding him at home
they left a card behind them. Mr. Gray, surprised at such a compliment,
returned the visit; and as the beginning of this intercourse bore some
appearance of romance, he gave the humorous and lively account of it which the
Long Story contains.

IN Britain's isle, no matter where,
An ancient pile of building stands The mansion house at Stoke-Pogeis, then in
the possession of Viscountess Cobham. The style of building which we now call
Queen Elizabeth's is here admirably described both with regard to its beauties
and defects; and the third and fourth stanzas delineate the fantastic manners
of her time with equal truth and humor. The house formerly belonged to the
Earls of Huntingdon and the family of Hatton.
;
The Huntingdons and Hattons there
Employed the power of Fairy hands
To raise the ceiling's fretted height,
Each panel in achievements clothing,
Rich windows that exclude the light,
And passages that lead to nothing.
Full often within the spacious walls,
When he had fifty winters over him,
My grave Lord Keeper Sir Christopher Hatton, promoted by Queen Elizabeth for
his graceful person and fine dancing. -- Brawls were a sort of figure-dance
then in vogue, and probably deemed as elegant as our modern cotillons, or still
more modern quadrilles.
led the brawls;
The seal and maces danced before him.
His bushy beard and shoestrings green,
His highcrown'd-hat and satin doublet,
Moved the stout heart of England's queen,
Though Pope and Spaniard could not trouble it.
What, in the very first beginning!
Shame of the versifying tribe!
Your history whether are you spinning?
Can you do nothing but describe?
A house there is (and that is enough)
From whence one fatal morning issues
A brace of warriors The reader is already apprised who these ladies were; the
two descriptions are prettily contrasted; and nothing can be more happily
turned than the compliment to Lady Cobham in the eighth stanza.
, not in buff,
But rustling in their silks and tissues.
The first came cap-a-pee from France,
Her conquering destiny fulfilling,
Whom meaner beauties eye askance,
And vainly ape her art of killing.
The other Amazon kind Heaven
Had armed with spirit, wit, and satire;
But Cobham had the polish given,
And tipp'd her arrows with goodnature.
To celebrate her eyes, her air --
Coarse panegyricks would but tease her;
Melissa is her nom de guerre;
Alas! who would not wish to please her?
With bonnet blue and capuchine,
And aprons long, they hid their armor,
And veiled their weapons bright and keen
In pity to the country farmer.
Fame in the shape of Mr. P^t I have been told that this gentleman, a neighbor
and acquaintance of Mr. Gray's in the country, was much displeased at the
liberty here taken with his name, yet surely without any great reason.

(By this time all the parish know it)
Had told that thereabouts there lurked
A wicked imp they call a Poet,
Who prowl'd the country far and near,
Bewitched the children of the peasants,
Dried up the cows and lamed the deer,
And sucked the eggs and killed the pheasants.
My Lady heard their joint petition,
Swore by her coronet and ermine
She Would issue out her high commission
To rid the manor of such vermin.
The heroines undertook the task;
Through lanes unknown, over styles, they ventured,
Rapp'd at the door, nor stayed to ask,
But bounce into the parlour entered.
The trembling family they daunt,
They flirt, they sing, they laugh, they tattle,
Rummage his mother, pinch his aunt,
And up stairs in a whirlwind rattle.
Each hole and cupboard they explore,
Each creek and cranny of his chamber,
Run hurry-skurry round the floor,
And over the bed and tester clamber;
Into the drawers and china pry,
Papers and books, a huge imbroglio!
Under a teacup he might lie,
Or creas'd like dogs-cars in a folio.
On the first marching of the troops
The Muses, hopeless of his pardon,
Conveyed him underneath their hoops
To a small closet in the garden.
So Rumor says; (who will believe)
But that they left the door a-jar,
Where safe, and laughing in his sleeve,
He heard the distant din of war.
Short was his joy: he little knew
The power of magic was no fable;
Out of the window wisk they flew,
But left a spell upon the table.
The words too eager to unriddle
The Poet felt a strange disorder;
Transparent birdlime formed the middle,
And chains invisible the border.
So cunning was the apparatus,
The powerful pothooks did so move him,
That will he nill he to the great house
He went as if the devil drove him.
Yet on his way (no sign of grace,
For folks in fear are apt to pray)
To Phoebus he preferred his case,
And begged his aid that dreadful day.
The godhead would have backed his quarrel,
But with a blush, on recollection
Owned that his quiver and his laurel
Against four such eyes were no protection.
The court was sat, the culprit there;
Forth from their gloomy mansions creeping
The Lady Janes and Joans repair,
And from the gallery stand peeping:
Such as in silence of the night
Come (sweep) along some winding entry,
(Styack The housekeeper.
has often seen the sight)
Or at the chapel-door stand sentry:
In peaked-hoods and mantles tarnish'd,
Sour visages enough to scare ye,
High dames of honor once that garnished
The drawingroom of fierce Queen Mary!
The peeress comes: the audience stare,
And doff their hats with due submission;
She court'sies as she takes her chair
To all the people of condition.
The Bard with many an artful sib
Had in imagination fenced him,
Disproved the arguments of Squib The steward.
,
And all that Groom Groom of the chamber.
could urge against him
But soon his rhetoric forsook him
When he the solemn hall had seen;
A sudden fit of ague shook him;
He stood as mute as poor Macleane A famous highwayman, hanged the week before.
.
Yet something he was heard to mutter,
" How in the park beneath an old-tree
" (Without design to hurt the butter,
" Or any malice to the poultry)
" He once or twice had penned a sonnet,
" Yet hoped that he might save his bacon;
" Numbers would give their oaths upon it
" He never was for a conj'rer taken."
The ghostly prudes with hagged Hagged, i. e. the face of a witch or hag; the
epithet hagard has been sometimes mistaken as conveying the same idea, but it
means a very different thing, viz. wild and farouche, and is taken from an
unreclaimed hawk called an hagard.
face
Already had condemned the sinner:
My Lady rose, and with a grace --
She smiled, and bid him come to dinner Here the story finishes; the
exclamation of the ghosts which follows is characteristick of the Spanish
manners of the age when they are supposed to have lived; and the 500 stanzas
said to be lost may be imagined to contain the remainder of their long-winded
expostulation.
.
" Jesu-Maria! Madam Bridget,
" Why, what can the Viscountess mean?"
Cried the square hoods in woeful fidget,
" The times are altered quite and clean!
" Decorum's turned to mere civility;
" Her air and all her manners show it:
" Commend me to her affability!
" Speak to a Commoner and Poet!"
[Here 500 stanzas are lost.]

And so God save our noble king,
And guard us from long-winded lubbers,
That to eternity would sing,
And keep my lady from her rubbers.
ELEGY.
WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD.
THE curfew tolls -- squilla di lontano
Che paia 'l giorno pianger, che si muore.
Dante, Purgat. 1. 8.
the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd wind slowly over the lea,
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such as wandering near her secret bower
Modest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing Morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her ev'ning-care,
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not Ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys and destiny obscure,
Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth, ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour:
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye Proud! impute to these the fault,
If Memory over their tomb no trophies raise
Where through the long-drawn aisle and fretted vault
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can storied urn or animated bust
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can Honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flattery sooth the dull cold ear of Death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire,
Hands that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of Time, did never unroll;
Chill Penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathomed caves of Ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little tyrant of his fields withstood,
Some mute inglorious Milton, here may rest,
Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
Their lot forbad; nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbad to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,
The struggling pangs of conscious Truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous Shame,
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife This part of the Elegy differs
from the first copy: the following stanza was excluded with the other
alterations;

Hark! how the sacred calm that breathes around
Bids every fierce tumultuous passion cease,
In still small accents whispering from the ground
A grateful earnest of eternal peace.


Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered Muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply,
And many a holy text around she strews
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who to dumb Forgetfulness a prey
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
Even in our ashes Ch'i veggio nel pensier, dolce mio fuoco,
Fredda una lingua, et due begli occhi chiusi
Rimaner droppo noi pien di faville.
Petrarch, Son. 169.
live their wonted fires.
For thee, who mindful of the unhonour'd dead
Do in these lines their artless tale relate,
If chance, by lonely Contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate,
Happily some hoary-headed swain may say,
" Often have we seen him at the peep of dawn
" Brushing with hasty steps the dews away
" To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
" There at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
" That wreathes its old fantastic root so high,
" His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
" And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
" Hard by yon' wood, now smiling as in scorn,
" Mutt'ring his wayward fancies, he would rove;
" Now drooping, woeful wan! like one forlorn,
" Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
" One morn I missed him on the custom'd hill,
" Along the heath Mr. Gray forgot, when he displaced by the preceding stanza
his beautiful description of the evening haunt the reference to it which he had
here left; Him have we seen the greenwood side along,
While over the heath we hy'd, our labor done,
Often as the woodlark pip'd her farewell song,
With wistful eyes pursue the setting fun.

, and near his favorite tree;
" Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
" Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood, was he:
" The next, with dirges due, in sad array
" Slow through the churchway-path we saw him borne:
" Approach, and read (for thou can read) the lay
" Engraved on the stone beneath yon' aged thorn In the early editions the
following lines were added, but the parenthesis was thought too long; There
scattered often, the earliest of the year,
By hands unseen, are showers of vi'lets sound;
The redbreast loves to build and warble there,
And little footsteps lightly print the ground.

:"
THE EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of Earth
A youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown;
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere;
Heaven did a recompense as largely send;
He gave to Misery all he had, a tear,
He gained from Heaven ('t was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose -- Paventosa speme. Petrarch, Son.
114.
)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
EPITAPH
ON MRS. CLARKE This lady, the wife of Dr. Clarke physician at Epsom, died
April 27th 1757, and is buried in the church of Beckenham, Kent.
.
Lo! where this silent marble weeps
A friend, a wife, a mother, sleeps;
A heart within whose sacred cell
The peaceful Virtues loved to dwell:
Affection warm and faith sincere,
And soft humanity were there.
In agony, in death, resigned,
She felt the wound she left behind.
Her infant image here below
Sits smiling on a father's woe,
Whom what awaits while yet he strays
Along the lonely vale of days?
A pang, to secret sorrow dear,
A sigh, an unavailing tear,
Till time shall every grief remove
With life, with memory, and with love.
TRANSLATION FROM STATIUS.
THIRD in the labors of the disk came on,
With sturdy step and slow, Hippomedon;
Artful and strong he poised the well-known weight,
By Phlegyas warned and fired by Mnestheus' fate
That to avoid and this to emulate.
His vigorous arm he tried before he flung,
Braced all his nerves and every sinew strung,
Then with a tempest's whirl and wary eye
Pursued his cast and hurled the orb on high;
The orb on high, tenacious of its course,
True to the mighty arm that gave it force,
Far overleaps all bound, and joys to see
Its ancient lord secure of victory:
The theatre's green height and woody wall
Tremble ere it precipitates its fall;
The ponderous mass sinks in the cleaving ground,
While vales and woods and echoing hills rebound.
As when from Aetna's smoking summit broke
The eyeless Cyclops heaved the craggy rock,
Where Ocean frets beneath the dashing oar,
And parting surges round the vessel roar,
'Twas there he aimed the meditated harm,
And scarce Ulysses escaped his giant arm.
A tiger's pride the victor bore away,
With native spots and artful labor gay,
A shining border round the margin rolled,
And calmed the terrors of his claws in gold.
Cambridge, May 8th 1736.
GRAY OF HIMSELF.
Too poor for a bribe, and too proud to importune,
He had not the method of making a fortune;
Could love and could hate, so was thought somewhat odd;
No very great wit, he believed in a God:
A post or a pension he did not desire,
But left church and state to Charles Townshend and Squire.
THE END.

