portrait of William Shenstone WILLIAM SHENSTONE Esqr.
(...) Thomas Hull

Cook Sc

Printed for John Bell near Exeter Exchange Strand London July. 177^



BELL'S EDITION. The POETS of GREAT BRITAIN COMPLETE FROM CHAUCER to CHURCHILL.
SHENSTONE, VOLUME I. Constant as Crystal dews impearl the Lawn
Shall Strephon's tear bedew Ophelia's Urn!
Elegy the 4th Ophelias Urn
(...) del

Hall sculp

^rinted for John Bell near Exeter Exchange Strand London Sept: 1778.



THE POETICAL WORKS OF WILL. SHENSTONE.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

WITH THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR, AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE LEASOWES.

-- Saepe ego longos
Cantando puerum memini me condere soles.
VIRG. IMITATION. -- Right well I call to mind
When (yet a boy) whole suns and lengthened days
I often employed in chanting sylvan lays.


Yet while he wooed the gentle throng,
With liquid lay and melting song,
The listening herd around him strayed,
In wanton frisk the lambkins played,
And every Naiad ceased to lave
Her azure limbs amid the wave:
The Graces danced; the rosy band
Of Smiles and Loves went hand in hand,
And purple Pleasures strewn the way
With sweetest flowers; and every ray
Of each fond Muse with rapture fired,
To glowing thoughts his breast inspired;
The hills rejoiced, the valleys rung,
All Nature smiled while SHENSTONE sung.
VERSES by -- VOL. I.

EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1778.

THE POETICAL WORKS OF WILLIAM SHENSTONE.

VOL. I.

CONTAINING HIS ELEGIES, etc. etc. etc.

Ill was he skilled to guide his wandering sheep,
And unforeseen disaster thinn'd his fold,
Yet at another's loss the swain would weep,
And for his friend his very crook was sold. --
He loved the Muse; she taught him to complain;
He saw his timorous loves on her depend:
He loved the Muse, although she taught in vain;
He loved the Muse, for she was Virtue's friend. --
He wished for wealth, for much he wished to give;
He grieved that virtue might not wealth obtain:
piteous of woes, and hopeless to relieve,
The pensive prospect sadden'd all his strain.
I saw him faint! I saw him sink to rest!
Like one ordained to swell the vulgar throng;
As though the Virtues had not warmed his breast,
As though the Muses not inspired his tongue.
ELEGY III. EDINBURG: AT THE Apollo Press, BY THE MARTINS. Anno 1778.

PREFACE.
A GREAT part of the Poetical Works of Mr. Shenstone, particularly his Elegies
and Pastorals, are (as he himself expresses it) "The exact transcripts of the
situation of his own mind," and abound in frequent allusions to his own place,
the beautiful scene of his retirement from the world. Exclusively, therefore,
of our natural curiosity to be acquainted with the history of an author whose
Works we peruse with pleasure, some short account of Mr. Shenstone's personal
character, and situation in life, may not only be agreeable, but absolutely
necessary, to the reader, as it is impossible he should enter into the true
spirit of his writings if he is entirely ignorant of those circumstances of his
life, which sometimes so greatly influenced his reflections.

I could wish, however, that this task had been allotted to some person capable
of performing it in that masterly manner which the subject so well deserves. To
confess the truth, it was chiefly to prevent his Remains from falling into the
hands of any one still less qualified to do him justice, that I have
unwillingly ventured to undertake the publication of them myself.

Mr. Shenstone was the eldest son of a plain uneducated gentleman in
Shropshire, who farmed his own estate. The father, sensible of his son's
extraordinary capacity, resolved to give him a learned education, and sent him
a commoner to Pembroke College in Oxford, designing him for the church; but
though he had the most awful notions of the wisdom, power, and goodness, of
God, he never could be persuaded to enter into orders. In his private opinions
he adhered to no particular sect, and hated all religious disputes. But
whatever were his own sentiments, he always showed great tenderness to those
who differed from him. Tenderness, indeed, in every sense of the word, was his
peculiar characteristic; his friends, his domestics, his poor neighbors, all
daily experienced his benevolent turn of mind. Indeed this virtue in him was
often carried to such excess, that it sometimes bordered upon weakness; yet if
he was convinced that any of those ranked amongst the number of his friends had
treated him ungenerously, he was not easily reconciled. He used a maxim,
however, on such occasions, which is worthy of being observed and imitated; "I
never," said he, "will be a revengeful enemy; but I cannot, it is not in my
nature, to be half a friend." He was in his temper quite unsuspicious, but if
suspicion was once awakened in him, it was not laid asleep again without
difficulty.

He was no economist; the generosity of his temper prevented him from paying a
proper regard to the use of money: he exceeded, therefore, the bounds of his
paternal fortune, which before he died was considerably incumbered. But when
one recollects the perfect paradise he had raised around him, the hospitality
with which he lived, his great indulgence to his servants, his charities to the
indigent, and all done with an estate not more than three hundred pounds
a year, one should rather be led to wonder that he left any thing behind him,
than to blame his want of economy. He left, however, more than sufficient to
pay all his debts, and by his will appropriated his whole estate for that
purpose.

It was perhaps from some considerations on the narrowness of his fortune that
he forbore to marry, for he was no enemy to wedlock, had a high opinion of many
among the fair sex, was fond of their society, and no stranger to the tenderest
impressions. One, which he received in his youth, was with difficulty
surmounted. The lady was the subject of that sweet pastoral, in four parts,
which has been so universally admired; and which, one would have thought, must
have subdued the loftiest heart, and softened the most obdurate.

His person, as to height, was above the middle stature, but largely and rather
inelegantly formed: his face seemed plain till you conversed with him, and then
it grew very pleasing. In his dress he was negligent even to a fault, though,
when young, at the university, he was accounted a beau. He wore his own hair,
which was quite gray very early, in a particular manner; not from any
affectation of singularity, but from a maxim he had laid down, that without too
slavish a regard to fashion, every one should dress in a manner most suitable
to his own person and figure. In short, his faults were only little blemishes,
thrown in by Nature, as it were on purpose, to prevent him from rising too much
above that level of imperfection allotted to humanity.

His character, as a writer, will be distinguished by simplicity with elegance,
and genius with correctness. He had a sublimity equal to the highest attempts;
yet, from the indolence of his temper, he chose rather to amuse himself in
culling flowers at the foot of the mount, than to take the trouble of climbing
the more arduous steeps of Parnassus: but whenever he was disposed to rise, his
steps, though natural, were noble, and always well supported. In the tenderness
of Elegiac poetry he has not been excelled; in the simplicity of Pastoral, one
may venture to say he had very few equals. Of great sensibility himself, he
never failed to engage the hearts of his readers; and amidst the nicest
attention to the harmony of his numbers, he always took care to express, with
propriety, the sentiments of an elegant mind. In all his writings his greatest
difficulty was to please himself. I remember a passage in one of his Letters,
where, speaking of his Love Songs, he says, -- "Some were written on occasions
a good deal imaginary, others not so; and the reason there are so many is, that
I wanted to write one good song, and could never please myself." It was this
diffidence which occasioned him to throw aside many of his pieces before he had
bestowed upon them his last touches. I have suppressed several on this account;
and if, among those which I have selected, there should be discovered some
little want of his finishing polish, I hope it will be attributed to this
cause, and, of course, be excused: yet I flatter myself there will always
appear something well worthy of having been preserved: and though I was afraid
of inserting what might injure the character of my friend, yet, as the sketches
of a great master are always valuable, I was unwilling the public should lose
any thing material of so accomplished a writer. In this dilemma it will easily
be conceived that the task I had to perform would become somewhat difficult;
how I have acquitted myself the public must judge. Nothing, however, except
what he had already published, has been admitted without the advice of his most
judicious friends; nothing altered without their particular concurrence. It is
impossible to please every one; but it is hoped that no reader will be so
unreasonable as to imagine that the Author wrote solely for his amusement: his
talents were various; and though it may perhaps be allowed that his excellence
chiefly appeared in subjects of tenderness and simplicity, yet he frequently
condescended to trifle with those of humor and drollery: these, indeed he
himself in some measure degraded, by the title which he gave them of Levities;
but had they been entirely rejected, the public would have been deprived of
some jeux d'esprits, excellent in their kind, and Mr. Shenstone's character as
a writer would have been but imperfectly exhibited.

But the talents of Mr. Shenstone were not confined merely to poetry; his
character, as a man of clear judgment and deep penetration, will best appear
from his Prose Works; it is there we must search for the acuteness of his
understanding, and his profound knowledge of the human heart. It is to be
lamented, indeed, that some things here are unfinished, and can be regarded
only as fragments: many are left as single thoughts, but which, like the sparks
of diamonds, show the richness of the mine to which they belong; or, like the
foot of a Hercules, discover the uncommon strength and extraordinary dimensions
of that hero. I have no apprehension of incurring blame from any one for
preserving these valuable Remains; they will discover to every reader the
Author's sentiments on several important subjects; and there can be very few to
whom they will not impart many thoughts which they would never perhaps have
been able to draw from the source of their own reflections.

But I believe little need be said to recommend the writings of this gentleman
to public attention. His character is already sufficiently established; and if
he be not injured by the inability of his editor, there is no doubt but he will
ever maintain an eminent station among the best of our English writers.

R. DODSLEY.

A PREFATORY ESSAY ON ELEGY.
IT is observable that discourses prefixed to poetry are contrived very
frequently to inculcate such tenets as may exhibit the performance to the
greatest advantage: the fabric is very commonly raised in the first place, and
the measures by which we are to judge of its merit are afterward adjusted.

There have been few rules given us by the critics concerning the structure of
Elegiac poetry; and far be it from the author of the following trifles to
dignify his own opinions with that denomination: he would only intimate the
great variety of subjects, and the different styles This essay was written near
twenty years ago.
in which the writers of Elegy have hitherto indulged themselves, and endeavor
to shield the following ones by the latitude of their example.

If we consider the etymology of the word e-legein, e-particulam dolendi.
, the epithet which Horace gives it Miserabiles elegos. Hor.
, or the confession which Ovid makes concerning it Heu nimis ex vero nunc tibi
nomen erit. Ovid. de Morte Tibulli.
, I think we may conclude thus much however, that Elegy, in its true and
genuine acceptance, includes a tender and querulous idea; that it looks upon
this as its peculiar characteristic, and so long as this is thoroughly
sustained, admits of a variety of subjects, which by its manner of treating
them it renders its own: it throws its melancholystole over pretty
differentobjects, which, like the dresses at a funeral procession, gives them
all a kind of solemn and uniform appearance.

It is probable that Elegies were written, at first, upon the death of intimate
friends and near relations; celebrated beauties, or favorite mistresses:
beneficent governors and illustrious men: one may add, perhaps, of all those
who are placed by Virgil in the laurel grove of his Elysium, ( Vide Hurd's
Dissertation on Horace's Epistle) Quique sui memores alios secere merendo.
After these subjects were sufficiently exhausted, and the severity of fate
displayed in the most affecting instances, the poets sought occasion to vary
their complaints, and the next tender species of sorrow that presented itself
was the grief of absent or neglected lovers; and this indulgence might be
indeed allowed them, but with this they were not contented: they had obtained a
small corner in the province of love, and they took advantage from thence, to
overrun the whole territory: they sung its spoils, triumphs, ovations, and
rejoicings Dicite Io Paean, et Io bis dicite Paean. Ovid.
, as well as the captivity and exequies that attended it: they gave the name of
Elegy to their pleasantries as well as lamentations, till at last, through
their abundant fondness for the myrtle, they forgot that the cypress was their
peculiar garland.

In this it is probable they deviated from the original design of Elegy, and it
should seem that any kind of subjects, treated in such a manner as to diffuse a
pleasing melancholy, might far better deserve the name than the facetious mirth
and libertine festivity of the successful votaries of Love.

But, not to dwell too long upon an opinion which may seem, perhaps, introduced
to favor the following performance, it may not be improper to examine into the
use and end of Elegy. The most important end of all poetry is to encourage
virtue. Epic and tragedy chiefly recommend the public virtues; Elegy is of a
species which illustrates and endears the private. There is a truly virtuous
pleasure connected with many pensive contemplations, which it is the province
and excellency of Elegy to enforce: this, by presenting suitable ideas, has
discovered sweets in melancholy which we could not find in mirth, and has led
us, with success, to the dusty urn, when we could draw no pleasure from the
sparkling bowl. As Pastoral conveys an idea of simplicity and innocence, it is
in particular the task and merit of Elegy to show the innocence and simplicity
of rural life to advantage; and that in a way distinct from Pastoral, as much
as the plain but judicious landlord may be imagined to surpass his tenant both
in dignity and understanding. It should also tend to elevate the more tranquil
virtues of humility, disinterestedness, simplicity, and innocence: but then
there is a degree of elegance and refinement no way inconsistent with these
rural virtues, and that raises Elegy above that merum rus, that unpolished
rusticity, which has given our Pastoral writers their highest reputation.

Wealth and splendour will never want their proper weight; the danger is lest
they should too much preponderate: a kind of poetry, therefore, which throws
its chief influence into the otherscale, that magnifies the sweets of liberty
and independence, that endears the honest delights of love and friendship, that
celebrates the glory of a good name after death, that ridicules the futile
arrogance of birth, that recommends the innocent amusement of letters, and
insensibly prepares the mind for that humanity it inculcates; such a kind of
poetry may chance to please, and if it please, should seem to be of service.

As to the style of Elegy, it may be well enough determined from what has gone
before: it should imitate the voice and language of grief, or, if a metaphor of
dress be more agreeable, it should be simple and diffuse, and flowing as a
mourner's veil. A versification, therefore, is desirable, which, by indulging a
free and unconstrained expression, may admit of that simplicity which Elegy
requires.

Heroic meter, with alternate rhyme, seems well enough adapted to this species
of poetry; and, however exceptionable upon other occasions, its inconveniences
appear to lose their weight in shorter Elegies, and its advantages seem to
acquire an additional importance. The world has an admirable example of its
beauty in a collection of Elegies N.B. This preface was written near twenty
years ago.
not long since published, the product of a gentleman of the most exact taste,
and whose untimely death merits all the tears that Elegy can shed.

It is not impossible that some may think this meter too lax and prosaic;
others, that even a more dissolute variety of numbers may have superior
advantages: and in favor of these last might be produced the example of Milton
in his Lycidas, together with one or two recent and beautiful imitations of his
versification in that monody. But this kind of argument, I am apt to think,
must prove too much, since the writers I have in view seem capable enough of
recommending any meter they shall choose; though it must be owned also, that the
choice they make of any is at the same time the strongest presumption in its
favor.

Perhaps it may be no great difficulty to compromise the dispute. There is no
one kind of meter that is distinguished by rhymes but is liable to some
objection or other. Heroic verse, where every second line is terminated by a
rhyme, (with which the judgment requires that the sense should in some measure
also terminate) is apt to render the expression either scanty or constrained;
and this is sometimes observable in the writings of a poet lately deceased,
though I believe no one ever threw so much sense together, with so much ease,
into a couplet, as Mr Pope: but as an air of constraint too often accompanies
this meter, it seems by no means proper for a writer of Elegy.

The previous rhyme in Milton's Lycidas is very frequently placed at such a
distance from the following, that it is often dropped by the memory (much better
employed in attending to the sentiment) before it be brought to join its
partner; and this seems to be the greatest objection to that kind of
versification: but then the peculiar ease and variety it admits of are, no
doubt, sufficient to overbalance the objection, and to give it the preference
to any other, in an Elegy of length.

The chief exception, to which stanza of all kinds is liable, is, that it
breaks the sense too regularly when it is continued through a long poem; and
this may be, perhaps, the fault of Mr. Waller's excellent panegyric. But if
this fault be less discernible in smaller compositions, as I suppose it is, I
flatter myself that the advantages I have before mentioned, resulting from
alternate rhyme, (with which stanza is, I think, connected) may at least, in
shorter Elegies, be allowed to outweigh its imperfections.

I shall say but little of the different kinds of Elegy. The melancholy of a
lover is different, no doubt, from what we feel on other mixed occasions. The
mind in which love and grief at once predominate is softened to an excess.
Love-elegy, therefore, is more negligent of order and design, and, being
addressed chiefly to the ladies, requires little more than tenderness and
perspicuity. Elegies that are formed upon promiscuous incidents, and addressed
to the world in general, inculcate some sort of moral, and admit a different
degree of reasoning, thought, and order.

The Author of the following Elegies entered on his subjects occasionally, as
particular incidents in life suggested, or dispositions of mind recommended
them to his choice. If he describes a rural landscape, or unfolds the train of
sentiments it inspired, he fairly drew his picture from the spot, and felt very
sensibly the affection he communicates: if he speaks of his humble shed, his
flocks and his fleeces, he does not counterfeit the scene, who having (whether
through choice or necessity is not material) retired betimes to country
solitudes, and sought his happiness in rural employments, has a right to
consider himself as a real shepherd. The flocks, the meadows, and the grottos,
are his own, and the embellishment of his farm his sole amusement. As the
sentiments, therefore, were inspired by Nature, and that in the earlier part of
his life, he hopes they will retain a natural appearance, diffusing at least
some part of that amusement which, he freely acknowledges, he received from the
composition of them.

There will appear, perhaps, a real inconsistency in the moral tenor of the
several Elegies, and the subsequent ones may sometimes seem a recantation of
the preceding. The reader will scarcely impute this to oversight, but will
allow that men's opinions, as well as tempers, vary; that neither public nor
private, active nor speculative, life, are unexceptionably happy, and,
consequently, that any change of opinion concerning them may afford an
additional beauty to poetry, as it gives us a more striking representation of
life.

If the Author has hazarded, throughout, the use of English or modern
allusions, he hopes it will not be imputed to an entire ignorance, or to the
least disesteem of the ancient learning. He has kept the ancient plan and
method in his eye, though he builds his edifice with the materials of his own
nation. In other words, through a fondness for his native country, he has made
use of the flowers it produced, though, in order to exhibit them to the greater
advantage, he has endeavored to weave his garland by the best model he could
find; with what success, beyond his own amusement, must be left to judges less
partial to him than either his acquaintance or his friends. -- If any of those
should be so candid as to approve the variety of subjects he has chosen, and
the tenderness of sentiment he has endeavored to impress, he begs the meter
also may not be too suddenly condemned. The public ear, habituated of late to a
quicker measure, may perhaps consider this as heavy and languid; but an
objection of that kind may gradually lose its force, if this measure should be
allowed to suit the nature of Elegy.

If it should happen to be considered as an objection, with others, that there
is too much of a moral cast dissused through the whole, it is replied, that he
endeavored to animate the poetry so far as not to render this objection too
obvious, or to risk excluding the fashionable reader; at the same time never
deviating from a fixed principle, that poetry without morality is but the
blossom of a fruit-tree. Poetry is, indeed, like that species of plants which
may bear at once both fruits and blossoms, and the tree is by no means in
perfection without the former, however it may be embellished by the flowers
which surround it.

ADVERTISEMENT
TO THE READER.
TO this edition is subjoined (for the sake of those readers to whom it may not
prove unwelcome) an explanation, or, rather, in most places, a liberal
imitation, of all the Latin inscriptions and quotations throughout this Work by
Mr. Hull. That gentleman's well-known friendship for Mr. Shenstone, and
willingness to oblige, being his sole inducements to this (as he chooses to have
it called) trifling addition, the editor thinks it no more than a just return
of gratitude to let his purchasers know to whom they are beholden for it. Be it
remembered, however, that it was executed in a country retirement, where our
eminent translators of the Classics were not at hand to be consulted.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE LEASOWES The following Description was intended to give a
friend some idea of the Leasowes -- which having been so justly admired by
persons of the best taste, and celebrated by the Muse of such an original
genius as Mr. Shenstone, it is hoped the public will not be displeased with
this slight attempt to perpetuate those beauties, which time, or the different
taste of some future possessor, may destroy.
. The seat of the late William Shenstone, Esquire.
BY R. DODSLEY.
THE Leasowes is situate in the parish of Hales Owen, a small market town in
the county of Salop, but surrounded by other counties, and thirty miles from
Shrewsbury, as it is near ten to the borders of Shropshire. Though a paternal
estate, it was never distinguished for any peculiar beauties till the time of
its late owner. It was reserved for a person of his ingenuity both to discover
and improve them, which he has done so effectually, that it is now considered
as amongst the principal of those delightful scenes which persons of taste, in
the present age, are desirous to see. Far from violating its natural beauties,
Mr. Shenstone's only study was to give them their full effect; and although the
form in which things now appear be indeed the consequence of much thought and
labor, yet the hand of Art is no way visible either in the shape of ground,
the disposition of trees, or (which are here so numerous and striking) the
romantic fall of his cascades.

But I will now proceed to a more particular description. About half a mile
short of Hales Owen, in your way from Birmingham to Bewdley, you quit the great
road, and turn into a green lane on the left hand, where, descending in a
winding manner to the bottom of a deep valley finely shaded, the first object
that occurs is a kind of ruinated wall, and a small gate, within an arch,
inscribed, "The Priory Gate." Here, it seems, the company should properly begin
their walk, but generally choose to go up with their horses or equipage to the
house, from whence returning, they descend back into the valley. Passing
through a small gate at the bottom of the fine swelling lawn that surrounds the
house, you enter upon a winding path, with a piece of water on your right. The
path and water, overshadowed with trees that grow upon the slopes of this
narrow dingle, render the scene at once cool, gloomy, solemn, and sequestered,
and form so striking a contrast to the lively scene you have just left, that
you seem all on a sudden landed in a subterraneous kind of region. Winding
forward down the valley, you pass beside a small root-house, where, on a
tablet, are these lines: " Here in cool grot and mossy cell,
" We rural Fays and Faeries dwell;
" Though rarely seen by mortal eye,
" When the pale moon, ascending high,
" Darts through yon' limes her quivering beams,
" We frisk it near these crystal streams.
" Her beams, reflected from the wave,
" Afford the light our revels crave;
" The turf, with daisies broider'd over,
" Exceeds, we wot, the Parian floor;
" Nor yet for artful strains we call,
" But listen to the water's fall.
" Would you then taste our tranquil scene,
" Be sure your bosoms be serene,
" Devoid of hate, devoid of strife,
" Devoid of all that poisons life;
" And much it 'vails you in their place
" To graft the love of human race.
" And tread with awe these favored bowers,
" Nor wound the shrubs nor bruise the flowers;
" So may your path with sweets abound,
" So may your couch with rest be crowned!
" But harm betide the wayward swain
" Who dares our hallowed haunts profane!"


These sentiments correspond as well as possible with the ideas we form of the
abode of Fairies, and, appearing deep in this romantic valley, serve to keep
alive such enthusiastic images while this sort of scene continues.

You now pass through The Priory Gate before mentioned, and are admitted into a
part of the valley somewhat different from the former, tall trees, high
irregular ground, and rugged scars. The right presents you with, perhaps, the
most natural, if not the most striking, of the many cascades here found; the
left with a sloping grove of oaks; and the center with a pretty circular
landscape appearing through the trees, of which Hales Owen steeple, and other
objects at a distance, form an interesting part. The seat beneath the ruinated
wall has these lines of Virgil inscribed, suiting well with the general tenor
of Mr. Shenstone's late situation: -- " Lucis habitamus opacis,
" Riparumque toros et prata recentia rivis
" Incolimus IMITATION. -- We dwell in shady groves,
And seek the groves with cooling streams refreshed,
And trace the verdant banks.



"


You now proceed a few paces down the valley to another bench, where you have
this cascade in front, which, together with the internal arch and other
appendages, make a pretty irregular picture. I must observe, once for all, that
a number of these protempore benches (two stumps with a transverse board) seem
chiefly intended as hints to spectators, lest in passing cursorily through the
farm they might suffer any of that immense variety the place furnishes to
escape their notice. The stream attending us, with its agreeable murmurs, as we
descend along this pleasing valley, we come next to a small seat, where we have
a sloping grove upon the right, and on the left a striking vista to the steeple
of Hales Owen, which is here seen in a new light. We now descend farther down
this shady and sequestered valley, accompanied on the right by the same
brawling rivulet running over pebbles, till it empties itself into a fine piece
of water at the bottom. The path here winding to the left conforms to the water
before mentioned, running round the foot of a small hill, and accompanying this
semicircular lake into another winding valley, somewhat more open, and not less
pleasing, than the former: however, before we enter this, it will be proper to
mention a seat about the center of this water-scene, where the ends of it are
lost in the two valleys on each side, and in front it is invisibly connected
with another piece of water, of about twenty acres, open to Mr. Shenstone, but
not his property. This last was a performance of the monks, and part of a
prodigious chain of fish ponds that belonged to Hales Abbey. The back ground of
this scene is very beautiful, and exhibits a picture of villages and varied
ground finely held up to the eye.

I speak of all this as already finished, but through some misfortune in the
mound that pounds up the water it is not completed.

We now leave The Priory upon the left, which is not meant for an object here,
and wind along into the other valley: and here I cannot but take notice of the
judgment which formed this piece of water; for although it be not very large,
yet, as it is formed by the concurrence of three valleys, in which two of the
ends are hid, and in the third it seems to join with the large extent of water
below, it is, to all appearance, unbounded. I must confess I never saw a more
natural bed for water, or any kind of lake that pleased me better; but it may
be right to mention, that this water, in its full extent, has a yet more
important effect from Mr. Shenstone's house, where it is seen to a great
advantage. We now, by a pleasing serpentine walk, enter a narrow glade in the
valley, the slopes on each side finely covered with oaks and beeches, on the
left of which is a common bench, which affords a retiring place secluded from
every eye, and a short respite, during which the eye reposes on a fine
amphitheatre of wood and thicket.

We now proceed to a seat beneath a prodigiously fine canopy of spreading oak,
on the back of which is this inscription: " Huc ades, O Meliboee! caper tibi
salvus et hoedi;
" Et si quid cessare potes, requiesce sub umbra IMITATION. Hither, O
Meliboeus! bend thy way;
Thy herds, thy goats, secure from harm, repose;
If happy leisure serve a while to stay,
Here rest thy limbs beneath these shady boughs.



."
The picture before it is that of a beautiful homescene; a small lawn of
well-varied ground, encompassed with hills and well-grown oaks, and embellished
with a cast of the piping Faunus, amid trees and shrubs on a slope upon the
left, and on the right, and nearer the eye, with an urn thus inscribed: "
Ingenio et amicitiae And on the opposite side, " G. S. posvit, TRANSLATION. To
the genius and friendship Sprinkling the ashes of a friendly bard
With tributary tears.



." The scene is enclosed on all sides by trees; in the middle only there is an
opening, where the lawn is continued, and winds out of sight.

Here entering a gate, you are led through a thicket of many sorts of willows,
into a large root-house, inscribed to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Stamford. It seems that worthy peer was present at the first opening of the
cascade, which is the principal object from the root-house, where the eye is
presented with a fairy vision, consisting of an irregular and romantic fall of
water, very unusual, one hundred and fifty yards in continuity; and a very
striking scene it affords. Other cascades may possibly have the advantage of a
greater descent and a larger torrent; but a more wild and romantic appearance
of water, and at the same time strictly natural, is what I never saw in any
place whatever. This scene, though comparatively small, is yet aggrandized with
so much art, that we forget the quantity of water which flows through this
close and overshaded valley, and are so much transported with the intricacy of
scene, and the concealed height from whence it flows, that we, without
reflection, add the idea of magnificence to that of beauty. In short, it is not
but upon reflection that we find the stream is not a Niagara, but rather a
water-fall in miniature; and that the same artifice, upon a larger scale, were
there large trees instead of small ones, and a river instead of a rill, would
be capable of forming a scene that would exceed the utmost of our ideas. But I
will not dwell longer upon this inimitable scene; those who would admire it
properly must view it, as surely as those that view it must admire it beyond
almost any thing they ever saw.

Proceeding on the right hand path, the next seat affords a scene of what Mr.
Shenstone used to call his Forest ground, consisting of wild green slopes
peeping through dingle, or irregular groupes of trees, a confused mixture of
savage and cultivated ground, held up to the eye, and forming a landscape fit
for the pencil of Salvator Rosa.

Winding on beside this lawn, which is over-arched with spreading trees, the
eye catches, at intervals, over an intermediate hill, the spire of Hales
church, forming here a perfect obelisk -- the urn to Mr. Somerville, etc.; and
now passing through a kind of thicket, we arrive at a natural bower of almost
circular oaks, inscribed in the manner following: " To Mr. DODSLEY.
" Come then, my Friend! thy sylvan taste display;
" Come hear thy Faunus tune his rustic lay:
" Ah! rather come, and in these dells disown
" The care of other strains, and tune thine own."


On the bank above it, amid the forementioned shrubs, is a statue of the
piping Faun, which not only embellishes this scene, but is also seen from the
court before the house, and from other places: it is surrounded by venerable
oaks, and very happily situated. From this bower also you look down upon the
forementioned irregular ground, shut up with trees on all sides, except some
few openings to the more pleasing parts of this grotesque and hilly country.
The next little bench affords the first, but not most striking, view of The
Priory. It is indeed a small building, but seen as it is beneath trees, and its
extremity also hid by the same, it has in some sort the dignity and solemn
appearance of a larger edifice.

Passing through a gate, we enter a small open grove, where the first seat we
find affords a picturesque view, through trees, of a clump of oaks at a
distance, overshadowing a little cottage upon a green hill: we thence
immediately enter a perfect dome or circular temple of magnificent beeches, in
the center of which it was intended to place an antique altar, or a statue of
Pan. The path serpentizing through this open grove, leads us by an easy ascent
to a small bench with this motto, -- " Me gelidum nemus
" Nympharumque leves cum satyris chori
" Secernant populo EXPLANATION. -- May the cool grove,
And gay assembled nymphs with sylvans mixed,
Conceal me from the world!



."
HOR. which alludes to the retired situation of the grove. There is also seen,
through an opening to the left, a pleasing landscape of a distant hill, with a
whited farm-house upon the summit; and to the right hand a beautiful round
slope, crowned with a clump of large firs, with a pyramidal seat on its center,
to which, after no long walk, the path conduct us.

But we first come to another view of The Priory, more advantageous, and at a
better distance, to which the eye is led down a green slope, through a scenery
of tall oaks, in a most agreeable manner, the grove we have just passed on one
side, and a hill of trees and thicket on the other, conducting the eye to a
narrow opening through which it appears.

We now ascend to a small bench, where the circumjacent country begins to open;
in particular a glass-house appears between two large clumps of trees, at about
the distance of four miles; the glass-houses in this country not ill resembling
a distant pyramid. Ascending to the next seat, which is in the Gothic form, the
scene grows more and more extended; woods and lawns, hills and valleys, thicket
and plain, agreeably intermingled. On the back of this seat is the following
inscription, which the Author told me that he chose to fix here, to supply what
he thought some want of life in this part of the farm, and to keep up the
spectator's attention till he came to scale the hill beyond.

INSCRIPTION. ' Shepherd, would thou here obtain
' Pleasure unalloy'd with pain,
' Joy that suits the rural sphere?
' Gentle Shepherd! lend an ear.
' Learn to relish calm delight,
' Verdant vales and fountains bright,
' Trees that nod on sloping hills,
' Caves that echo, tinkling rills.
' If thou can no charm disclose
' In the simplest bud that blows,
' Go, forsake thy plain and fold,
' Join the crowd, and toil for gold.
' Tranquil pleasures never cloy;
' Banish each tumultuous joy;
' All but love -- for love inspires
' Fonder wishes, warmer fires.
' Love and all its joys be thine --
' Yet ere thou the reins resign,
' Hear what Reason seems to say,
' Hear attentive, and obey.
" Crimson leaves the rose adorn,
" But beneath them lurks a thorn;
" Fair and flowery is the brake,
" Yet it hides the 'vengeful snake.
" Think not she, whose empty pride
" Dares the fleecy garb deride,
" Think not she who, light and vain,
" Scorns the sheep can love the swain.
" Artless deed and simple dress
" Mark the chosen shepherdess;
" Thoughts by decency controlled,
" Well conceived, and freely told:
" Sense that shuns each conscious air,
" Wit that falls ere well aware;
" Generous pity, prone to sigh
" If her kid or lambkin die.
" Let not lucre, let not pride,
" Draw thee from such charms aside;
" Have not those their proper sphere?
" Gentler passions triumph here.
" See! to sweeten thy repose,
" The blossom buds, the fountain flows;
" Lo! to crown thy healthful board,
" All that milk and fruits afford.
" Seek no more -- the rest is vain;
" Pleasure ending soon in pain;
" Anguish lightly gilded over:
" Close thy wish, and seek no more."


And now, passing through a wicket, the path winds up the back part of a
circular green hill, discovering little of the country till you enter a clump
of stately firs upon the summit. Over-arched by these firs is an octagonal
seat, the back of which is so contrived as to form a table or pedestal for a
bowl or goblet, thus inscribed -- " To all friends round The Wrekin!" This
facetious inscription, being an old Shropshire health, is a commemoration of
his country friends, from which this part of Shropshire is divided: add to this
that The Wrekin, that large and venerable hill, appears full in front, at the
distance of about thirty miles.

The scene is a very fine one, divided by the firs into several compartments,
each answering to the octagonal seat in the center; to each of which is
allotted a competent number of striking objects to make a complete picture. A
long serpentine stream washes the foot of this hill, and is lost behind trees
at one end, and a bridge thrown over at the other. Over this the eye is carried
from very romantic homescenes to very beautiful ones at a distance. It is
impossible to give an idea of that immense variety, that fine configuration of
parts, which engage our attention from this place. In one of the compartments
you have a simple scene of a cottage, and a road winding behind a farm-house
half covered with trees, upon the top of some wild sloping ground; and in
another a view of the town, appearing from hence as upon the shelving banks of
a large piece of water in the flat. Suffice it to say, that the hill and vale,
plain and woodland, villages and single houses, blue distant mountains that
skirt the horizon, and green hills romantically jumbled, that form the
intermediate ground, make this spot more than commonly striking -- nor is there
to be seen an acre of level ground through the large extent to which the eye is
carried.

Hence the path winds on betwixt two small benches, each of which exhibits a
pleasing landscape, which cannot escape the eye of a connoisseur.

Here we wind through a small thicket, and soon enter a cavity in the hill,
filled with trees, in the center of which is a seat, from whence is discovered,
gleaming across the trees, a considerable length of the serpentine stream
before mentioned, running under a slight rustic bridge to the right: hence we
ascend in a kind of Gothic alcove, looking down a slope, sided with large oaks
and tall beeches, which together over-arch the scene. On the back of this
building is found the following

INSCRIPTION. " O you that bathe in courtlye bliss,
" Or toil in Fortune's giddy sphere,
" Do not too rashlye deem amysse
" Of him that bydes contented here.
" Nor yet disdeigne the russet stoale
" Which over each careless lymbe he flyngs;
" Nor yet deryde the beechen bowl
" In which he quaffs the lympid springs.
" Forgive him, if at eve or dawne,
" Devoide of worldly cark, he stray,
" Or all beside some flowerye lawne
" He waste his inoffensive day.
" So may he pardonne fraud and strife,
" If such in courtlye haunt he see;
" For faults there been in busye life
" From which these peaceful glennes are free."


Below this alcove is a large sloping lawn, finely bounded, crossed by the
serpentine water before mentioned, and interspersed with single, or clumps of
oaks at agreeable distances. Further on the scene is finely varied, the hills
rising and falling toward the opposite concavities, by the side of a long
winding vale, with the most graceful confusion. Among other scenes that form
this landscape, a fine hanging wood, backed and contrasted with a wild heath,
intersected with cross roads, is a very considerable object. Near adjoining to
this is a seat, from whence the water is seen to advantage in many different
stages of its progress; or where (as a poetical friend once observed) the
proprietor has taken the Naiad by the hand, and led her an irregular dance into
the valley.

Proceeding hence through a wicket, we enter upon another lawn, beyond which is
a new theater of wild shaggy precipices, hanging coppice ground, and smooth
round hills between, being not only different, but even of an opposite
character, to the ground from which we passed. Walking along the head of this
lawn, we come to a seat under a spreading beech, with this

INSCRIPTION. " Hoc erat in votis: modus agri non ita magnus,
" Hortus ubi, et tecto vicinus jugis aquae fons,
" Et paulum sylvae super his foret. Auctius atque
" Dii melius fecere." --


IMITATION. This was my wish -- an humble spot of ground,
A garden well-dispos'd, and fenced around,
A bubbling fountain, to my dwelling nigh,
With crystal treasures stored, and never dry,
The whole defended by a modest wood. --
This was my wish -- my wish the gods allowed,
And even beyond that wish indulgently bestowed.


In the center of the hanging lawn before you is discovered the house, half hid
with trees and bushes: a little hanging wood, and a piece of winding water,
issues through a noble clump of large oaks and spreading beeches. At the
distance of about ten or twelve miles Lord Stamford's grounds appear, and
beyond these the Clee hills in Shropshire. The scene here consists of
admirably-varied ground, and is, I think, a very fine one. Hence passing still
along the top of the lawn, we cross another gate, and behind the fence being to
descend into the valley. About half way down is a small bench, which throws the
eye upon a near scene of hanging woods and shaggy wild declivities, intermixed
with smooth green slopes and scenes of cultivation.

We now return again into the great lawn at bottom, and soon come to a seat,
which gives a nearer view of the water before mentioned, between the trunks of
high overshadowing oaks and beeches, beyond which the winding line of trees is
continued down the valley to the right. To the left, at a distance, the top of
Clent hill appears, and the house upon a swell, amidst trees and bushes. In the
center, the eye is carried by a sideling view down a length of lawn, till it
rests upon the town and spire of Hales, with some picturesque and beautiful
ground rising behind it.

Somewhat out of the path, and in the center of a noble clump of stately
beeches, is a seat inscribed to Mr. Spence, in these words: IOSEPHO SPENCE,
EXPLANATION. Dedicated by friendship


.

We now, through a small gate, enter what is called The Lover's Walk, and
proceed immediately to a seat where the water is seen very advantageously at
full length; which, though not large, is so agreeably shaped, and has its
bounds so well concealed, that the beholder may receive less pleasure from many
lakes of greater extent. The margin on one side is fringed with alders, the
other is overhung with most stately oaks and beeches, and the middle beyond the
water presents the Hales Owen scene, with a group of houses on the slope
behind, and the horizon well fringed with the wood. Now winding a few paces
round the margin of the water, we come to another small bench, which presents
the former scene somewhat varied, with the addition of a whited village among
trees upon a hill. Proceeding on, we enter the pleasing gloom of this agreeable
walk, and come to a bench beneath a spreading beech that overhangs both walk
and water, which has been called The Assignation Seat, and has this inscription
on the back of it: " Nerine Galatea! thymo mihi dulcior Hyblae,
" Candidior cygnis, hedera formosior alba!
" Cum primum pasti repetent praesepia tauri,
" Si qua tui Corydonis habet te cura, venito IMITATION. O Galatea! Nereus'
lovely child,
Sweeter than Hybla thyme, more undefiled
Than down of swan, or ivy's purest white,
When the full oxen, warned by fading light,
Home to the stall their sober footsteps bend,
If Damon's dear, to Damon's call attend.



."
Here the path begins gradually to ascend beneath a depth of shade, by the side
of which is a small bubbling rill, either forming little peninsulas, rolling
over pebbles, or falling down small cascades, all under cover, and taught to
murmur very agreeably. This very soft and pensive scene, very properly styled
The Lover's Walk, is terminated with an ornamented urn, inscribed to Miss
Dolman, a beautiful and amiable relation of Mr. Shenstone's, who died of the
smallpox, about twenty-one years of age, in the following words on one side:
Peramabili suae consobrinae On the other side: Ah! Maria! EXPLANATION. --
Sacred to the memory

How much inferior


!

The ascent from hence winds somewhat more steeply to another seat, where the
eye is thrown over a rough scene of broken and furzy ground, upon a piece of
water in the flat, whose extremities are hid behind trees and shrubs, amongst
which the house appears, and makes upon the whole no unpleasing picture. The
path still winds under cover up the hill, the steep declivity of which is
somewhat eased by the serpentine sweep of it, till we come to a small bench,
with this line from Pope's Eloisa: " Divine oblivion of low-thoughted Care!"
The opening before it presents a solitary scene of trees, thickets, and
precipice, and terminates upon a green hill, with a clump of firs on the top of
it.

We now find the great use as well as beauty of the serpentine path in climbing
up this wood, the first seat of which, alluding to the rural scene before it,
has the following lines from Virgil: -- " Hic latis otia fundis
" Speluncae, vivique lacus, hic frigida Tempe,
" Mugitusque boum, mollesque sub arbore somni IMITATION. Here tranquil
leisures in the ample field,
Here caves and living lakes their pleasures yield;
Here vales invite where sports the cooling breeze,
And peaceful sleep beneath embow'ring trees,
While lowing herds surround.



."
Here the eye looking down a slope beneath the spreading arms of oak and beech
trees, passes first over some rough furzy ground, then over water to the large
swelling lawn, in the center of which the house is discovered among trees and
thickets: this forms the fore ground. Beyond this appears a swell of waste
furzy land, diversified with a cottage, and a road that winds behind a
farm-house and a fine clump of trees. The back scene of all is a semicircular
range of hills, diversified with woods, scenes of cultivation, and enclosures,
to about four or five miles' distance.

Still winding up into the wood, we come to a slight seat, opening through the
trees to a bridge of five piers, crossing a large piece of water at about half
a mile's distance. The next seat looks down from a considerable height, along
the side of a steep precipice, upon irregular and pleasing ground. And now we
turn upon a sudden into a long straight-lined walk in the wood, arched over
with tall trees, and terminating with a small rustic building. Though the walk,
as I said, be straight-lined, yet the base rises and falls so agreeably, as
leaves no room to censure its formality. About the middle of this avenue, which
runs the whole length of this hanging wood, we arrive unexpectedly at a lofty
Gothic seat, whence we look down a slope, more considerable than that before
mentioned, through the wood on each side. This view is indeed a fine one, the
eye first traveling down over well-variegated ground into the valley, where is
a large piece of water, whose sloping banks give all the appearance of a noble
river. The ground from hence rises gradually to the top of Clent hill, at three
or four miles' distance, and the landscape is enriched with a view of Hales
Owen, the late Lord Dudley's house, and a large wood of Lord Lyttleton's. It is
impossible to give an adequate description of this view, the beauty of it
depending upon the great variety of objects and beautiful shape of ground, and
all at such a distance as to admit of being seen distinctly.

Hence we proceed to the rustic building before mentioned, a slight and
unexpensive edifice, formed of rough unhewn stone, commonly called here The
Temple of Pan, having a trophy of the Tibia and Syrinx, and this inscription
over the entrance: " Pan primus calamos cera conjungere plures
" Edocuit; Pan curat oves, oviumque magistros IMITATION. Pan, god of
shepherds, first inspired our swains
Their pipes to frame, and tune their rural strains;
Pan from impending harm the fold defends,
And Pan the master of the fold befriends.



."
Hence mounting once more to the right, through this dark umbrageous walk, we
enter at once upon a lightsome high natural terrace, whence the eye is thrown
over all the scenes we have seen before, together with many fine additional
ones, and all beheld from a declivity that approaches as near a precipice as is
agreeable. In the middle is a seat with this inscription: Divini gloria rvris
EXPLANATION. O glory of the sylvan scene divine!


! To give a better idea of this, by far the most magnificent scene here, it
were, perhaps, best to divide it into two distinct parts -- the noble concave
in the front, and the rich valley toward the right. -- In regard to the
former, if a boon companion could enlarge his idea of a punch-bowl, ornamented
within with all the romantic scenery the Chinese ever yet devised, it would,
perhaps, afford him the highest idea he could possibly conceive of earthly
happiness: he would certainly wish to swim in it. Suffice it to say, that the
horizon, or brim, is as finely varied as the cavity. It would be idle here to
mention the Clee hills, the Wrekin, the Welsh mountains, or Caer Caradoc, at a
prodigious distance; which, though they finish the scene agreeably, should not
be mentioned at the Leasowes, the beauty of which turns chiefly upon
distinguishable scenes. The valley upon the right is equally enriched, and the
opposite side thereof well fringed with woods, and the high hills on one side
this long winding vale rolling agreeably into the hollows on the other. But
these are a kind of objects which, though really noble in the survey, will not
strike a reader in description as they would a spectator upon the spot.

Hence returning back into the wood, and crossing Pan's Temple, we go directly
down the slope into another part of Mr. Shenstone's grounds, the path leading
down through very pleasing home-scenes of well-shaped ground, exhibiting a most
perfect concave and unequal, till we come at a seat under a noble beech,
presenting a rich variety of fore-ground, and at, perhaps, half a mile's
distance, the Gothic alcove on a hill well covered with wood, a pretty cottage
under trees in the more distant part of the concave, and a farm-house upon the
right, all picturesque objects.

The next and the subsequent seat afford pretty much the same scenes a little
enlarged, with the addition of that remarkable clump of trees called Frankly
Beeches, adjoining to the old family-seat of the Lyttletons, and from whence
the present Lord Lyttleton derives his title.

We come now to a handsome Gothic screen, backed with a clump of firs, which
throws the eye in front full upon a cascade in the valley, issuing from beneath
a dark shade of poplars. The house appears in the center of a large swelling
lawn, bushed with trees and thicket. The pleasing variety of easy swells and
hollows, bounded by scenes less smooth and cultivated, affords the most
delightful picture of domestic retirement and tranquillity.

We now descend to a seat enclosed with handsome pales, and backed with firs,
inscribed to Lord Lyttleton. It presents a beautiful view up a valley
contracted gradually, and ending in a group of most magnificent oaks and
beeches. The right hand side is enlivened with two striking cascades, and a
winding stream seen at intervals between tufts of trees and woodland. To the
left appears the hanging wood already mentioned, with the Gothic screen on the
slope in the center.

Winding still downwards, we come to a small seat, where one of the offices of
the house, and a view of a cottage on very high ground, is seen over the tops
of the trees of the grove in the adjacent valley, giving an agreeable instance
of the abrupt inequality of ground in this romantic well-variegated country.
The next seat shows another face of the same valley, the water gliding calmly
along betwixt two seeming groves without any cascade, as a contrast to the
former one, where it was broken by cascades: the scene very significantly
alluded to by the motto, " Rura mihi, et rigul placeant in vallibus amnes,
" Flumina amem, silvasque inglorius IMITATION. Woods, vales, and running
streams, my mind enchant;
The woods and streams inglorious let me haunt.



!"


We descend now to a beautiful gloomy scene, called Virgil's Grove, where, on
the entrance, we pass by a small obelisk on the right hand, with this
inscription: P. Virgilio Maroni EXPLANATION. To Note. -- It was customary with
the Romans to give a praenomen, or first name, in the manner of our Christian
names; accordingly Virgil had that of Publius. He derived the addition of Maro
from his father, who was so called.
.


Before this is a slight bench, where some of the same objects are seen again,
but in a different point of light. It is not very easy either to paint or
describe this delightful grove: however, as the former has been more than once
attempted, I will hope to apologize for an imperfect description, by the
difficulty found by those who have aimed to sketch it with their pencil. Be it,
therefore, first observed, that the whole scene is opaque and gloomy,
consisting of a small deep valley or dingle, the sides of which are enclosed
with irregular tufts of hazel and other underwood, and the whole overshadowed
with lofty trees rising out of the bottom of the dingle, through which a
copious stream makes its way through mossy banks, enamelled with primroses, and
variety of wild wood flowers. The first seat we approach is thus inscribed:
Celeberrimo Poetae EXPLANATION. To the much celebrated Poet JAMES THOMSON, This
seat was placed near his favorite springs by W. S.


. " Quae tibi, quae tali reddam pro carmine dona?
" Nam neque me tantum venientis sibilus austri,
" Nec percussa juvant fluctu tam littora, nec quae
" Saxosas inter decurrunt fl umina valles IMITATION. How shall I thank thy
Muse, so formed to please?
For not the whisp'rings of the southern breeze,
Nor banks still-beaten by the breaking wave,
Nor limpid rills that pebbly valleys lave,
Yield such delight. --



."
This seat is placed upon a steep bank on the edge of the valley, from which
the eye is here drawn down into the flat below, by the light that glimmers in
front, and by the sound of various cascades, by which the winding stream is
agreeably broken. Opposite to this seat the ground rises again in an easy
concave to a kind of dripping fountain, where a small rill trickles down a rude
nich of rock-work, through fern, liverwort, and acquatic weeds, the green area
in the middle, through which the stream winds, being as well shaped as can be
imagined. After falling down these cascades, it winds under a bridge of one
arch, and then empties itself into a small lake which catches it a little
below. This terminates the scene upon the right; and after these objects have
for some time amused the spectator, his eye rambles to the left, where one of
the most beautiful cascades imaginable is seen, by way of incident, through a
kind of vista or glade, falling down a precipice overarched with trees, and
strikes us with surprise. It is impossible to express the pleasure which one
feels on this occasion; for though surprise alone is not excellence, it may
serve to quicken the effect of what is beautiful. I believe none ever beheld
this grove without a thorough sense of satisfaction; and were one to choose any
particular spot of this perfectly Arcadian farm, it should, perhaps, be this;
although it so well contrasts both with the terrace and with some other scenes,
that one cannot wish them ever to be divided. We now proceed to a seat at the
bottom of a large root on the side of a slope, with this inscription:

INSCRIPTION. ' O let me haunt this peaceful shade,
' Nor let Ambition ever invade
' The tenants of this leafy bower,
' That shun her paths, and slight her power.
' Hither the peaceful halcyon flies
' From social meads and open skies,
' Pleased by this rill her course to steer,
' And hide her sapphire plumage here.
' The trout, bedropp'd with crimson stains,
' Forsakes the river's proud domains,
' Forsakes the sun's unwelcome gleam,
' To lurk within this humble stream.
' And sure I hear the Naiad say,
" Flow, flow, my Stream! this devious way;
" Though lovely soft thy murmurs are,
" Thy waters lovely, cool, and fair.
" Flow, gentle Stream! nor let the vain
" Thy small unsullied stores disdain;
" Nor let the pensive sage repine,
" Whose latent course resembles thine."


The view from it is a calm tranquil scene of water, gliding through sloping
ground, with a sketch through the trees of the small pond below.

The scene in this place is that of water stealing along through a rude
sequestered vale, the ground on each side covered with weeds and field flowers,
as that before is kept close shaven. Farther on we lose all sight of water, and
only hear the noise, without having the appearance; a kind of effect which the
Chinese are fond of producing in what they call their Scenes of enchantment. We
now turn, all on a sudden, upon the high cascade which we admired before in
vista. The scene around is quite a grotto of native stone running up it, roots
of trees overhanging it, and the whole shaded over head. However, we first
approach, upon the left, a chalybeat spring, with an iron bowl chained to it,
and this inscription upon a stone: Fons Ferrvginevs EXPLANATION. To the Goddess


. Then turning to the right, we find a stone seat, making part of the aforesaid
cave, with this well-applied inscription: Intus aqvae dulces, vivoqve sedilia
saxo;
Nympharvm domvs IMITATION. Within are wholesome springs, and marble seats
Carved in the living rock, of Nymphs the blessed retreats.



.
which I have often heard Mr. Shenstone term the definition of a grotto. We now
wind up a shady path on the left hand, and crossing the head of this cascade,
pass beside the river that supplies it in our way up to the house. One seat
first occurs under a shady oak as we ascend the hill; soon after we enter the
shrubbery, which half surrounds the house, where we find two seats, thus
inscribed to two of his most particular friends. The first thus: Amicitiae et
meritis EXPLANATION. To the


: EXPLANATION. Thee, Tityrus! the pines


. and a little further the other, with the following inscription: Amicitiae et
meritis EXPLANATION. To the


. From this last is an opening down the valley over a large sliding lawn, well
edged with oaks, to a piece of water crossed by a considerable bridge in the
flat -- the steeple of Hales, a village amid trees, making on the whole a very
pleasing picture. Thus winding through flowering shrubs, beside a menageric for
doves, we are conducted to the stables. But let it not be forgot, that on the
entrance into this shrubbery the first object that strikes us is a Venus de
Medicis, beside a basin of gold-fish, encompassed round with shrubs, and
illustrated with the following inscription; -- "Semi-reducta Venus EXPLANATION.
Venus half-retired.


."
" To Venus, Venus here retired,
" My sober vows I pay;
" Not her on Paphian plains admired,
" The bold, the pert, the gay;
" Not her whose amorous leer prevailed
" To bribe the Phrygian boy;
" Not her who, clad in armor, failed
" To save disast'rous Troy.
" Fresh rising from the foamy tide,
" She every bosom warms,
" While half withdrawn she seems to hide,
" And half reveals, her charms.
" Learn hence, ye boastful sons of Taste!
" Who plan the rural shade,
" Learn hence to shun the vicious waste
" Of pomp, at large displayed.
" Let sweet Concealment's magic art
" Your mazy bounds invest,
" And while the sight unveils a part,
" Let Fancy paint the rest.
" Let coy Reserve with Cost unite
" To grace your wood or field,
" No ray obtrusive pall the sight,
" In aught you paint or build.
" And far be driven the sumptuous glare
" Of gold, from British groves,
" And far the meretricious air
" Of China's vain alcoves.
" It Is bashful Beauty ever twines
" The most coercive chain;
" It Is she that sovereign rule declines,
" Who best deserves to reign."


VERSES TO MR. SHENSTONE.
Written on a Ferme Ornee, near Birmingham,
BY THE LATE LADY LUXBOROUGH.
IT IS Nature here bids pleasing scenes arise,
And wisely gives them Cynthio to revise;
To veil each blemish, brighten every grace,
Yet still preserve the lovely parent's face.
How well the Bard obeys each valley tells,
These lucid streams, gay meads, and lonely cells,
Where modest Art in silence lurks concealed,
While Nature shines, so gracefully revealed,
That she triumphant claims the total plan,
And with fresh pride adopts the work of man.
TO WILLIAM SHENSTONE, ESQUIRE. AT THE LEASOWES.
BY MR. GRAVES.
" Veilem in amicitia sic erraremus IMITATION. In friendship thus, O! be we
still beguiled!



!"
HOR.
SEE! the tall youth, by partial Fate's decree,
To affluence born, and from restraint set free;
Eager he seeks the scenes of gay resort,
The Mall, the rout, the playhouse, and the court:
Soon for some varnished nymph of dubious fame,
Or powdered peeress, counterfeits a flame.
Behold him now, enraptured, swear and sigh,
Dress, dance, drink, revel, all he knows not why,
Till by kind Fate restored to country air,
He marks the roses of some rural fair;
Smit with her unaffected native charms,
A real passion soon his bosom warms;
And, waked from idle dreams, he takes a wife,
And tastes the genuine happiness of life.
Thus, in the vacant season of the year,
Some Templar gay begins his wild career:
From seat to seat over pompous scenes he flies,
Views all with equal wonder and surprise,
Till, sick of domes, arcades, and temples, grown,
He hies fatigued, not satisfied, to Town.
Yet if some kinder genius point his way
To where the Muses over thy Leasowes stray,
Charmed with the sylvan beauties of the place,
Where Art assumes the sweets of Nature's face,
Each hill, each dale, each consecrated grove,
Each lake, and falling stream, his rapture move.
Like the sage captive in Calypso's grot,
The cares, the pleasures, of the world forgot,
Of calm content he hails the genuine sphere,
And longs to dwell a blissful hermit here.
VERSES RECEIVED BY THE POST,
FROM A LADY UNKNOWN, 1761.
HEALTH to the Bard in Leasowes' happy groves;
Health, and sweet converse with the Muse he loves!
The humblest vot'ry of the tuneful Nine,
With trembling hand, attempts her artless line,
In numbers such as untaught Nature brings,
As flow, spontaneous, like thy native springs.
But, ah! what airy forms around me rise!
The russet mountain glows with richer dies;
In circling dance a pigmy crowd appear,
And, hark! an infant voice salutes my ear!
' Mortal! thy aim we know, thy task approve;
' His merit honor, and his genius love:
' For us what verdant carpets has he spread,
' Where, nightly, we our mystic mazes tread!
' For us each shady grove and rural seat,
' His falling streams and flowing numbers sweet!
' Did thou not mark, amid the winding dell,
' What tuneful verse adorns the mossy cell?
' There every Fairy of our sprightly train
' Resort, to bless the woodland and the plain:
' There, as we move, unbidden beauties glow,
' The green turf brightens, and the violets blow;
' And there with thoughts sublime we bless the swain,
' Nor we inspire, nor he attends, in vain.
' Go, simple Rhimer! bear this message true;
' The truths that Fairies dictate none shall rue.
' Say to the Bard in Leasowes' happy grove,
' Whom Dryads honor, and whom Fairies love --
" Content thyself no longer that thy lays,
" By others fostered, lend to others praise;
" No longer to the favoring world refuse
" The welcome treasures of thy polished Muse;
" The scattered blooms that boast thy valued name,
" Collect, unite, and give the wreath to Fame;
" Never can thy virtues, or thy verse, engage
" More solid praise than in this happiest age,
" When sense and merit's cherished by the throne,
" And each illustrious privilege their own.
" Though modest be thy gentle Muse, I ween,
" Oh! lead her blushing from the daisy'd green,
" A fit attendant on Britannia's Queen."
Ye sportive Elves! as faithful I relate
The entrusted mandates of your Fairy state,
Visit these wilds again with nightly care;
So shall my kine, of all the herd, repair
In healthful plight to fill the copious pail;
My sheep lie pent with safety in the dale;
My poultry fear no robber in the roost;
My linen more than common whiteness boast:
Let order, peace, and housewifery, be mine;
Shenstone! be fancy, fame, and fortune, thine!
COTSWOULDIA.

ON THE DISCOVERY OF AN ECHO AT EDGBASTON.
By -- --
HA! what art thon, whose voice unknown
Pours on these plains its tender moan?
Art thou the nymph in Shenstone's dale,
Who do with plaintive note bewail
That he forsakes the Aonian maids,
To court inconstant rills and shades?
Mourn not, sweet Nymph! -- Alas! in vain
Do they invite and thou complain --
Yet while he wooed the gentle throng,
With liquid lay and melting song,
The listening herd around him strayed,
In wanton frisk the lambkins played,
And every Naiad ceased to lave
Her azure limbs amid the wave:
The Graces danced; the rosy band
Of Smiles and Loves went hand in hand,
And purple Pleasures strewn the way
With sweetest flowers; and every ray
Of each fond Muse with rapture fired,
To glowing thoughts his breast inspired;
The hills rejoiced, the valleys rung,
All Nature smiled while Shenstone sung.
So charmed his lay; but now no more --
Ah! why do thou repeat -- "No more?"
Even now he hies to deck the grove,
To deck the scene the Muses love,
And soon again will own their sway,
And thou resound the peerless lay,
And with immortal numbers fill
Each rocky cave and vocal hill.
VERSES BY MR. DODSLEY, ON HIS FIRST ARRIVAL AT THE LEASOWES, 1754.
" How shall I fix my wandering eye? where find
" The source of this enchantment? Dwells it in
" The woods? or waves there not a magic wand
" Over the translucent waters? Sure, unseen,
" Some favoring power directs the happy lines
" That sketch these beauties; swells the rising hills,
" And scoops the dales to Nature's finest forms,
" Vague, undetermined, infinite; untaught
" By line or compass, yet supremely fair!"
So spoke Philenor, as with raptured gaze
He traversed Damon's farm: from distant plains
He sought his friend's abode; nor had the fame
Of that new-form'd Arcadia reached his ear.
And thus the swain, as over each hill and dale,
Through lawn or thicket, he pursued his way:
" What is it gilds the verdure of these meads
" With hues more bright than Fancy paints the flowers
" Of Paradise? What Naiad's guiding hand
" Leads, through the broider'd vale, these lucid rills,
" That, murmuring as they flow, bear melody
" Along their banks, and through the vocal shades
" Improve the music of the woodland choir?
" What pensive Dryad raised yon' solemn grove,
" Where minds contemplative, at close of day
" Retiring, muse over Nature's various works,
" Her wonders venerate, or her sweets enjoy? --
" What room for doubt? some rural deity,
" Presiding, scatters over the unequal lawns,
" In beauteous wildness, yon' fair-spreading trees,
" And, mingling woods and waters, hills and dales,
" And herds and bleating flocks, domestic fowl,
" And those that swim the lake, sees rising round
" More pleasing landscapes than in Tempe's vale
" Peneus watered. Yes, some sylvan god
" Spreads wide the varied prospect, waves the woods,
" Lifts the proud hills, and clears the shining lakes,
" While, from the congregated waters poured,
" The bursting torrent tumbles down the steep
" In foaming fury: fierce, irregular,
" Wild, interrupted, crossed with rocks and roots
" And interwoven trees; till, soon absorbed,
" An opening cavern all its rage entombs.
" So vanish human glories! such the pomp
" Of swelling warriors, of ambitious kings,
" Who fret and strut their hour upon the stage
" Of busy life, and then are heard no more!
" Yes, it is enchantment all -- And see! the spells,
" The powerful incantations, magic verse,
" Inscribed on every tree, alcove, or urn. --
" Spells! -- Incantations! -- Ah! my tuneful Friend!
" Thine are the numbers, thine the wondrous work! --
" Yes, great Magician! now I read thee right,
" And lightly weigh all sorcery but thine.
" No Naiad's leading step conducts the rill,
" Nor sylvan god presiding skirts the lawn
" In beauteous wildness, with fair-spreading trees,
" Nor magic wand has circumscribed the scene:
" It Is thine own taste, thy genius that presides,
" Nor needs there other deity, nor needs
" More potent spells than they." -- No more the swain,
For, lo! his Damon, over the tufted lawn
Advancing, leads him to the social dome.
TO MR. R. D. ON THE DEATH OF MR. SHENSTONE.
" Thee, Shepherd! thee the woods and desert caves,
" With wild thyme and the gadding vine o'ergrown,
" And all their echoes, mourn."
MILT.
It Is past, my Friend! the transient scene is closed!
The fairy pile, the enchanted vision, raised
By Damon's magic skill is lost in air!
What though the lawns and pendent woods remain,
Each tinkling stream, each rushing cataract,
With lapse incessant echoes through the dale?
Yet what avails the lifeless landscape now?
The charm's dissolved; the Genius of the wood,
Alas! is flown -- for Damon is no more.
As when from fair Lycaeum, crowned with pines,
Or Maenalus, with leaves autumnal strewn,
The tuneful Pan retires, the vocal hills
Resound no more, and all Arcadia mourns.
Yet here we fondly dreamed of lasting joys;
Here we had hoped, from noisy throngs retired,
To drink large draughts of Friendship's cordial stream,
In sweet oblivion wrapped, by Damon's verse,
And social converse, many a summer's day.
Romantic wish! in vain frail mortals trace
The imperfect sketch of human bliss -- Whilst yet
The enraptured sire his well-plann'd structure views
Majestic rising 'midst his infant groves,
Sees the dark laurel spread its glossy shade,
Its languid bloom the purple lilac blend,
Or pale laburnum drop its pensile chain,
Death spreads the fatal shaft, and bids his heir
Transplant the cypress round his father's tomb.
Oh! teach me then, like you, my Friend! to raise
To moral truths my grov'lling song; for, ah!
Too long, by lawless Fancy led astray,
Of Nymphs and groves I Have dreamed, and dancing Fauns,
Or Naiad leaning over her tinkling urn.
Oh! could I learn to sanctify my strains
With hymns, like those by tuneful Meyrick sung --
Or rather catch the melancholy sounds
From Warton's reed, or Mason's lyre -- to paint
The sudden gloom that damps my soul -- But see!
Melpomene herself has snatched the pipe
With which sad Lyttleton his Lucia mourned,
And plaintive cries, My Shenstone is no more!
R. G.

VERSES WRITTEN AT THE GARDENS OF WILLIAM SHENSTONE, ESQUIRE. NEAR BIRMINGHAM, 1756.
" Ille terrarum mihi praeter omnes
" Angulus ridet IMITATION. Whatever the beauties others boast,
That spot of ground delights me most.



."
HOR.
WOULD you these loved recesses trace,
And view fair Nature's modest face?
See her in every field-flower bloom,
Over every thicket shed pre^ume?
By verdant groves, and vocal hills,
By mossy grots, near purling rills,
Wherever you turn your wondering eyes,
Behold her win without disguise.
What though no pageant trifles here,
As in the glare of courts, appear?
Though rarely here be heard the name
Of rank or title, power or fame?
Yet, if ingenuous be your mind,
A bliss more pure and unconfined
Your step attends -- Draw freely nigh,
And meet the Bard's benignant eye:
On him no pedant forms await,
No proud reserve shuts up his gate;
No spleen, no party views, control
That warm benevolence of soul
Which prompts the friendly generous part,
Regardless of each venal art,
Regardless of the world's acclaim,
And courteous with no selfish aim.
Draw freely nigh, and welcome find,
If not the costly, yet the kind.
Oh! he will lead you to the cells
Where every Muse and Virtue dwells,
Where the green Dryads guard his woods,
Where the blue Naiads guide his floods,
Where all the Sister Graces gay,
That shaped his walk's meand'ring way,
Stark-naked, or but wreathed with flowers,
Lie slumbering soft beneath his bowers.
Waked by the stock-dove's melting strain,
Behold them rise! and, with the train
Of Nymphs that haunt the stream or grove,
Or over the flowery champain rove,
Join hand in hand -- attentive gaze --
And mark the dance's mystic maze.
" Such is the waving line," they cry,
" For ever dear to Fancy's eye!
" Yon' stream that wanders down the dale,
" The spiral wood, the winding vale,
" The path which, wrought with hidden skill,
" Slow twining, scales yon' distant hill,
" With fir invested -- all combine
" To recommend the waving line.
" The wreathed rod of Bacchus fair,
" The ringlets of Apollo's hair,
" The wand by Maia's offspring borne,
" The smooth volutes of Ammon's horn,
" The structure of the Cyprian dame,
" And each fair female's beauteous frame,
" Show, to the pupils of Design,
" The triumphs of the waving line."
Then gaze, and mark that union sweet
Where fair unequal and concave meet,
And while, quick shifting as you stray,
The vivid scenes on fancy play,
The lawn, of aspect smooth and mild,
The forest ground grotesque and wild,
The shrub that scents the mountain gale,
The stream rough dashing down the dale,
From rock to rock in eddies tossed,
The distant lake in which it is lost,
Blue hills gay beaming through the glade,
Lon^ urns that solemnize the shade,
Sweet interchange of all that charms
In groves, meads, dingles, riv'lets, farms!
If aught the fair confusion please,
With lasting health and lasting ease,
To him who formed the blissful bower,
And gave thy life one tranquil hour,
Wish peace and freedom -- these possessed,
His temperate mind secures the rest.
But if thy soul such bliss despise,
Avert thy dull incurious eyes;
Go, fix them there where gems and gold,
Improved by art, their power unfold;
Go, try in courtly scenes to trace
A fairer form of Nature's face;
Go, scorn Simplicity -- but know
That all our heartfelt joys below,
That all which Virtue loves to name,
Which Art consigns to lasting fame,
Which fixes Wit or Beauty's throne,
Derives its source from her alone.
ARCADIO.

TO WILLIAM SHENSTONE, ESQUIRE. IN HIS SICKNESS.
BY MR. WOODHOUSE.
YE flowery Plains! ye breezy Woods!
Ye Bowers and gay Alcoves!
Ye falling Streams! ye silver Floods!
Ye Grottoes, and ye Groves!
Alas! my heart feels no delight,
Though I your charms survey,
While he consumes in pain the night,
In languid sighs the day.
The flowers disclose a thousand blooms,
A thousand scents diffuse,
Yet all in vain they shed perfumes,
In vain display their hues.
Restrain, ye Flowers! your thoughtless pride,
Recline your gaudy heads,
And sadly drooping, side by side,
Embrace your humid beds.
Tall Oaks! that over the woodland shade
Your lofty summits rear,
Ah! why, in wonted charms arrayed,
Expand your leaves so fair!
For, lo! the flowers as gayly smile,
As wanton waves the tree,
And though I sadly 'plain the while,
Yet they regard not me.
Ah! should the Fates an arrow send,
And strike the fatal wound,
Who, who shall then your sweets defend,
Or fence your beauties round?
But hark! perhaps the plumy throng
Have learned my plaintive tale,
And some sad dirge or mournful song
Comes floting in the gale.
Ah, no! they chant a sprightly strain
To sooth an amorous mate,
Unmindful of my anxious pain,
And his uncertain fate.
But see! these little murmuring rills
With fond repinings rove,
And trickle wailing down the hills,
Or weep along the grove.
Oh! mock not if, beside your stream,
You hear me, too, repine,
Or aid with sighs your mournful theme,
And fondly call him mine.
Ye envious Winds! the cause display,
In whispers as ye blow,
Why did your treacherous gales convey
The poisoned shafts of woe?
Did he not plant the shady bower,
Where you so blithly meet?
The scented shrub, and fragrant flower,
To make your breezes sweet?
And must he leave the wood, the field,
The dear Arcadian reign?
Can neither verse nor virtue shield
The guardian of the plain?
Must he his tuneful breath resign,
Whom all the Muses love?
That round his brow their laurels twine,
And all his songs approve.
Preserve him, mild Omnipotence!
Our Father, King, and God!
Who clear'st the paths of life and sense,
Or stopp'st them at thy nod.
Blessed Power! who calm'st the raging deep,
His valued health restore,
Nor let the sons of Genius weep,
Nor let the Good deplore.
But if thy boundless wisdom knows
His longer date an ill,
Let not my soul a wish disclose
To contradict thy will.
For happy, happy were the change,
For such a godlike mind,
To go where kindred spirits range,
Nor leave a wish behind.
And though to share his pleasures here
Kings might their state forego,
Yet must he feel such raptures there
As none can taste below.
VERSES LEFT ON A SEAT,
THE HAND UNKNOWN.
O EARTH! to his remains indulgent be,
Who so much care and cost bestowed on thee;
Who crowned thy barren hills with useful shade,
And cheered with tinkling rills each silent glade;
Here taught the day to wear a thoughtful gloom,
And there enlivened Nature's vernal bloom.
Propitious Earth! lie lightly on his head,
And ever on his tomb thy vernal glories spread!
CORYDON, A PASTORAL. TO THE MEMORY OF WILLIAM SHENSTONE, ESQUIRE.
BY MR. J. CUNNINGHAM.
I.
COME, Shepherds! we'll follow the h^rse,
And see our loved Corydon laid;
Though sorrow may blemish the verse,
Yet let the sad tribute be paid.
They called him the Pride of the plain:
In sooth he was gentle and kind;
He marked in his elegant strain
The graces that glowed in his mind.
II.
On purpose he planted yon' trees,
That birds in the covert might dwell;
He cultured his thyme for the bees,
But never would rifle their cell.
Ye Lambkins! that played at his feet,
Go bleat -- and your master bemoan:
His music was artless and sweet,
His manners as mild as your own.
III.
No verdure shall cover the vale,
No bloom on the blossoms appear;
The sweets of the forest shall fail,
And winter discolor the year.
No birds in our hedges shall sing,
(Our hedges, so vocal before)
Since he that should welcome the spring
Can greet the gay season no more.
IV.
His Phyllis was fond of his praise,
And poets came round in a throng;
They listened, and envied his lays,
But which of them equaled his song?
Ye Shepherds! henceforward be mute,
For lost is the Pastoral strain;
So give me my Corydon's flute,
And thus -- let me break it in twain.
ELEGIES, WRITTEN ON MANY DIFFERENT OCCASIONS.
Tantum inter densas, umbrosa cacumina, fagas
Assidue veniebat; ibi haec incondita, solus,
Montibus et silvis studio jactabat inani!
VIRG.
IMITATION. The spreading beech alone he would explore
With frequent step; beneath its shady top,
(Ah! profitless employ!) to hills and groves
These indigested lays he wont repeat.


ELEGY I. He arrives at his retirement in the country, and takes occasion to
expatiate in praise of simplicity. To a Friend.
FOR rural virtues, and for native skies,
I bade Augusta's venal sons farewell;
Now 'mid the trees I see my smoke arise,
Now hear the fountains bubbling round my cell.
O may that Genius which secures my rest
Preserve this villa for a friend that is dear!
Never may my vintage glad the sordid breast,
Never tinge the lip that dares be unsincere!
Far from these paths, ye faithless Friends! depart;
Fly my plain board, abhor my hostile name!
Hence, the saint verse that flows not from the heart,
But mourns in labored strains, the price of fame!
O loved Simplicity! be thine the prize!
Assiduous Art correct her page in vain!
His be the palm who, guiltless of disguise,
Contemns the power the dull resourse to feign!
Still may the mourner, lavish of his tears,
For lucre's venal meed invite my scorn!
Still may the bard, dissembling doubts and tears,
For praise, for flattery sighing, sigh forlorn!
Soft as the line of lovesick Hammond flows,
'Twas his fond heart effus'd the melting theme;
Ah! never could Aonia's hill disclose
So fair a fountain or so loved a stream.
Ye loveless Bards! intent with artful pains
To form a sigh, or to contrive a tear!
Forego your Pindus, and on -- plains
Survey Camilla's charms, and grow sincere.
But thou, my Friend! while in thy youthful soul
Love's gentle tyrant seats his awful throne,
Write from thy bosom -- let not Art control
The ready pen that makes his edicts known.
Pleasing when youth is long expired, to trace
The forms our pencil or our pen designed!
" Such was our youthful air, and shape, and face!
" Such the soft image of our youthful mind!"
Soft whilst we sleep beneath the rural bowers,
The Loves and Graces steal unseen away,
And where the turf diffused its pomp of flowers,
We wake to wintry scenes of chill decay!
Curse the sad fortune that detains thy fair;
Praise the soft hours that gave thee to her arms;
Paint thy proud scorn of every vulgar care,
When hope exalts thee, or when doubt alarms.
Where with Oenone thou have worn the day,
Near font or stream, in meditation, rove;
If in the grove Oenone loved to stray,
The faithful Muse shall meet thee in the grove.
ELEGY II. On posthumous reputation. To a Friend.
O GRIEF of griefs! that Envy's frantic ire
Should rob the living virtue of its praise;
O foolish Muses! that with zeal aspire
To deck the cold insensate shrine with bays.
When the free spirit quits her humble frame,
To tread the skies with radiant garlands crowned,
Say, will she hear the distant voice of Fame?
Or, hearing, fancy sweetness in the sound?
Perhaps even Genius pours a slighted lay;
Perhaps even Friendship sheds a fruitless tear;
Even Lyttleton but vainly trims the bay,
And fondly graces Hammond's mournful bier.
Though weeping virgins haunt his favored urn,
Renew their chaplets and repeat their sighs;
Though near his tomb Sabaean odours burn,
The loit'ring fragrance will it reach the skies?
No; should his Delia votive wreaths prepare,
Delia might place the votive wreaths in vain;
Yet the dear hope of Delia's future care
Once crowned his pleasures and dispelled his pain.
Yes -- the fair prospect of surviving praise
Can every sense of present joys excel;
For this great Hadrian chose laborious days,
Through this, expiring, bade a gay farewell.
Shall then our youths, who Fame's bright fabric raise,
To life's precarious date confine their care?
O teach them you, to spread the sacred base,
To plan a work through latest ages fair!
Is it small transport, as with curious eye
You trace the story of each Attic sage,
To think your blooming praise shall time defy?
Shall waft, like odours, through the pleasing page?
To mark the day when, through the bulky tome,
Around your name the varying style refines?
And readers call their lost attention home,
Led by that index where true genius shines?
Ah! let not Britons doubt their social aim,
Whose ardent bosoms catch this ancient fire;
Cold interest melts before the vivid flame,
And patriot ardours but with life expire.
ELEGY III. On the untimely death of a certain learned acquaintance.
IF proud Pygmalion quit his cumb'rous frame,
Funereal pomp the scanty tear supplies,
Whilst heralds loud, with venal voice, proclaim,
Lo! here the brave and the puissant lies.
When humbler Alcon leaves his drooping friends,
Pageant nor plume distinguish Alcon's bier;
The faithful Muse with votive song attends,
And blots the mournful numbers with a tear.
He little knew the sly penurious art,
That odious art which Fortune's favorites know;
Formed to bestow, he felt the warmest heart,
But envious Fate forbade him to bestow.
He little knew to ward the secret wound;
He little knew that mortals could ensnare;
Virtue he knew; the noblest joy he found
To sing her glories, and to paint her fair!
Ill was he skilled to guide his wandering sheep,
And unforeseen disaster thinn'd his fold;
Yet at another's loss the swain would weep,
And for his friend his very crook was sold.
Ye sons of Wealth! protect the Muses' train;
From winds protect them, and with food supply;
Ah! helpless they, to ward the threatened pain,
The meagre famine, and the wintry sky!
He loved a nymph; amidst his slender store
He dared to love; and Cynthia was his theme;
He breathed his plaints along the rocky shore,
They only echoed over the winding stream.
His nymph was fair! the sweetest bud that blows
Revives less lovely from the recent shower;
So Philomel enamored eyes the rose;
Sweet bird! enamored of the sweetest flower.
He loved the Muse; she taught him to complain;
He saw his timorous loves on her depend:
He loved the Muse, although she taught in vain;
He loved the Muse, for she was Virtue's friend.
She guides the foot that treads on Parian floors;
She wins the ear when formal pleas are vain;
She tempts Patricians from the fatal doors
Of Vice's brothel forth to Virtue's fane.
He wished for wealth, for much he wished to give;
He grieved that virtue might not wealth obtain:
Piteous of woes, and hopeless to relieve,
The pensive prospect sadden'd all his strain.
I saw him faint! I saw him sink to rest!
Like one ordained to swell the vulgar throng;
As though the Virtues had not warmed his breast,
As though the Muses not inspired his tongue.
I saw his bier ignobly cross the plain;
Saw peasant hands the pious rite supply:
The generous rustics mourned the friendly swain,
But Power and Wealth's unvarying cheek was dry!
Such Alcon fell; in meagre want forlorn!
Where were ye then, ye powerful Patrons! where?
Would ye the purple should your limbs adorn,
Go wash the conscious blemish with a tear.
ELEGY IV. Ophelia's urn. To Mr. G --.
THROUGH the dim veil of ev'ning's dusky shade,
Near some lone fane, or yew's funereal green,
What dreary forms has magic Fear surveyed!
What shrouded specter Superstition seen!
But you, secure, shall pour your sad complaint,
Nor dread the meagre phantom's wan array;
What none but Fear's officious hand can paint,
What none but Superstition's eye survey.
The glimmering twilight and the doubtful dawn
Shall see your step to these sad scenes return:
Constant, as crystal dews impearl the lawn,
Shall Strephon's tear bedew Ophelia's urn.
Sure naught unhallowed shall presume to stray
Where sleep the relics of that virtuous maid;
Nor aught unlovely bend its devious way
Where soft Ophelia's dear remains are laid.
Happily thy Muse, as with unceasing sighs
She keeps late vigils on her urn reclined,
May see light groups of pleasing visions rise,
And phantoms glide, but of celestial kind.
Then Fame, her clarion pendent at her side,
Shall seek forgiveness of Ophelia's shade;
" Why has such worth, without distinction, died?
" Why, like the desert's lily, bloomed to fade?"
Then young Simplicity, averse to feign,
Shall, unmolested, breathe her softest sigh,
And Candor with unwonted warmth complain,
And Innocence indulge a wailful cry.
Then Elegance, with coy judicious hand,
Shall cull fresh flowerets for Ophelia's tomb;
And Beauty chide the Fates' severe command,
That showed the frailty of so fair a bloom!
And Fancy then, with wild ungoverned woe,
Shall her loved pupil's native taste explain;
For mournful sable all her hues forego,
And ask sweet solace of the Muse in vain!
Ah! gentle Forms! expect no fond relief;
Too much the sacred Nine their loss deplore:
Well may ye grieve, nor find an end of grief --
Your best, your brightest, favorite is no more.
ELEGY V. He compares the turbulence of love with the tranquillity of
friendship. To Melissa his friend.
FROM Love, from angry Love's inclement reign
I pass a while to Friendship's equal skies;
Thou, generous Maid! reliev'st my partial pain,
And cheer'st the victim of another's eyes.
It Is thou, Melissa, thou deserve my care;
How can my will and reason disagree?
How can my passion live beneath despair?
How can my bosom sigh for aught but thee?
Ah! dear Melissa! pleased with thee to rove,
My soul has yet survived its dreariest time;
Ill can I bear the various clime of Love!
Love is a pleasing but a various clime.
So smiles immortal Maro's favorite shore,
Parthenope, with every verdure crowned;
When straight Vesuvio's horrid caldrons roar,
And the dry vapor blasts the regions round.
Oh! blissful regions! oh! unrivaled plains!
When Maro to these fragrant haunts retired!
Oh! fatal realms! and, oh! accursed domains!
When Pliny 'mid sulphurous clouds expired!
So smiles the surface of the treacherous main,
As over its waves the peaceful halcyons play,
When soon rude winds their wonted rule regain,
And sky and ocean mingle in the fray.
But let or air contend or ocean rave;
Even Hope subside, amid the billows tossed;
Hope, still emergent, still contemns the wave,
And not a feature's wonted smile is lost.
ELEGY VI. To a Lady, on the language of birds.
COME then, Dione, let us range the grove,
The science of the feathered choirs explore,
Hear linnets argue, larks descant of love,
And blame the gloom of solitude no more.
My doubt subsides -- it is no Italian song,
Nor senseless ditty, cheers the vernal tree:
Ah! who that hears Dione's tuneful tongue
Shall doubt that music may with sense agree?
And come, my Muse! that love the sylvan shade,
^volve the mazes, and the mist dispel;
Translate the song; convince my doubting maid
^o solemn dervise can explain so well. --
Pensive beneath the twilight shades I sat,
The slave of hopeless vows and cold disdain!
When Philomel addressed his mournful mate,
And thus I construed the mellifluent strain.
" Sing on, my bird! -- the liquid notes prolong,
" At every note a lover sheds his tear;
" Sing on, my bird! -- it is Damon hears thy song,
" Nor doubt to gain applause when lovers hear.
" He the sad source of our complaining knows,
" A foe to Tereus and to lawless love!
" He mourns the story of our ancient woes;
" Ah! could our music his complaint remove!
" Yon' plains are governed by a peerless maid;
" And see! pale Cynthia mounts the vaulted sky,
" A train of lovers court the checkered shade;
" Sing on, my bird! and hear thy mates reply.
" Erewhile no shepherd to these woods retired,
" No lover blessed the glow-worm's pallid ray;
" But ill-star'd birds that, listening, not admired,
" Or listening, envied our superior lay.
" Cheered by the sun, the vassals of his power,
" Let such by day unite their jarring strains,
" But let us choose the calm, the silent, hour,
" Nor want fit audience while Dione reigns."
ELEGY VII. He describes his vision to an acquaintance.
Caetera per terras omnes animalia, etc.
VIRG.
IMITATION. All animals beside, over all the earth, etc.


ON distant heaths, beneath autumnal skies,
Pensive I saw the circling shade descend;
Weary and faint I heard the storm arise,
While the sun vanished like a faithless friend.
No kind companion led my steps aright;
No friendly planet lent its glimmering ray;
Even the lone cot refused its wonted light,
Where Toil in peaceful slumber closed the day.
Then the dull bell had given a pleasing sound;
The village cur 'twere transport then to hear;
In dreadful silence all was hushed around,
While the rude storm alone distressed mine ear.
As led by Orwell's winding banks I strayed,
Where towering Wolsey breathed his native air,
A sudden luster chased the flitting shade,
The sounding winds were hushed, and all was fair.
Instant a grateful form appeared confessed;
White were his locks, with awful scarlet crowned,
And livelier far than Tyrian seemed his vest,
That with the glowing purple tinged the ground.
" Stranger!" he said, "amid this pealing rain,
" Benighted, lonesome, whither would thou stray?
" Does wealth or power thy weary step constrain?
" Reveal thy wish, and let me point the way.
" For know, I trod the trophy'd paths of power,
" Felt every joy that fair Ambition brings,
" And lest the lonely roof of yonder bower
" To stand beneath the canopies of kings.
" I bade low hinds the towering ardour share,
" Nor meanly rose to bless myself alone;
" I snatched the shepherd from his fleecy care,
" And bade his wholesome dictate guard the throne.
" Low at my feet the suppliant peer I saw;
" I saw proud empires my decision wait;
" My will was duty, and my word was law,
" My smile was transport, and my frown was fate."
Ah me! said I, nor power I seek, nor gain;
Nor urged by hope of same these toils endure;
A simple youth, that feels a lover's pain,
And from his friend's condolence hopes a cure.
He, the dear youth! to whose abodes I roam,
Nor can mine honors nor my fields extend;
Yet for his sake I leave my distant home,
Which oaks embosom, and which hills defend.
Beneath that home I scorn the wintry wind;
The Spring, to shade me, robes her fairest tree;
And if a friend my grass-grown threshold find,
O how my lonely cot resounds with glee!
Yet, though averse to gold in heaps amassed,
I wish to bless, I languish to bestow;
And though no friend to Fame's obstrep'rous blast,
Still to her dulcet murmurs not a foe.
Too proud with servile tone to deign address;
Too mean to think that honors are my due;
Yet should some patron yield my stores to bless,
I sure should deem my boundless thanks were few.
But tell me, thou! that like a meteor's fire
Shott'st blazing forth, disdaining dull degrees,
Should I to wealth, to fame, to power, aspire,
Must I not pass more rugged paths than these?
Must I not groan beneath a guilty load,
Praise him I scorn, and him I love betray?
Does not felonious Envy bar the road?
Or Falsehood's treacherous foot beset the way?
Say, should I pass through Favour's crowded gate,
Must not fair Truth inglorious wait behind?
Whilst I approach the glittering scenes of state,
My best companion no admittance find?
Nursed in the shades by Freedom's lenient care,
Shall I the rigid sway of Fortune own?
Taught by the voice of pious Truth, prepare
To spurn an altar, and adore a throne?
And when proud Fortune's ebbing tide recedes,
And when it leaves me no unshaken friend,
Shall I not weep that ever I left the meads,
Which oaks embosom, and which hills defend?
Oh! if these ills the price of power advance,
Check not my speed where social joys invite!
The troubled vision cast a mournful glance,
And, sighing, vanished in the shades of night.
ELEGY VIII. He describes his early love of poetry, and its consequences. To
Mr. G --, 1745 N.B. Written after the death of Mr. Pope.
.
AH me! what envious magic thins my fold?
What muttered spell retards their late increase?
Such lessening fleeces must the swain behold,
That ever with Doric pipe essays to please.
I saw my friends in evening circles meet;
I took my vocal reed, and tuned my lay;
I heard them say my vocal reed was sweet:
Ah, fool! to credit what I heard them say.
Ill-fated Bard! that seeks his skill to show,
Then courts the judgment of a friendly ear;
Not the poor vet'ran, that permits his foe
To guide his doubtful step, has more to fear.
Nor could my G -- mistake the critic's laws,
Till pious Friendship marked the pleasing way:
Welcome such error! ever blessed the cause!
Even though it led me boundless leagues astray.
Could thou reprove me, when I nursed the flame
On listening Cherwell's osier banks reclined?
While foe to Fortune, unseduc'd by Fame,
I soothed the bias of a careless mind.
Youth's gentle kindred, Health and Love, were met;
What though in Alma's guardian arms I played?
How shall the Muse those vacant hours forget?
Or deem that bliss by solid cares repaid?
Thou know how transport thrills the tender breast
Where Love and Fancy fix their opening reign;
How Nature shines, in livelier colors dressed,
To bless their union, and to grace their train.
So first when Phoebus met the Cyprian queen,
And favored Rhodes beheld their passion crowned,
Unusual flowers enriched the painted green,
And swift spontaneous roses blushed around.
Now sadly lorn, from Twitnam's widowed bower
The drooping Muses take their casual way,
And where they stop a flood of tears they pour,
And where they weep no more the fields are gay.
Where is the dappled pink, the sprightly rose?
The cowslip's golden cup no more I see:
Dark and discolored every flower that blows,
To form the garland, Elegy! for thee --
Enough of tears has wept the virtuous dead;
Ah! might we now the pious rage control!
Hushed be my grief ere every smile be fled,
Ere the deep-swelling sigh subvert the soul!
If near some trophy spring a stripling bay,
Pleased we behold the graceful umbrage rise,
But soon too deep it works its baneful way,
And low on earth the prostrate ruin lies Alludes to what is reported of the
bay tree, that if it is planted too near the walls of an edifice, its roots
will work their way underneath, till they destroy the foundation.
.
ELEGY IX. He describes his disinterestedness to a friend.
I NEVER must tinge my lip with Celtic wines;
The pomp of India must I never display;
Nor boast the produce of Peruvian mines,
Nor with Italian sounds deceive the day.
Down yonder brook my crystal bev'rage flows;
My grateful sheep their annual fleeces bring;
Fair in my garden buds the damask rose,
And from my grove I hear the throstle sing.
My fellow swains! avert your dazzled eyes;
In vain allured by glittering spoils they rove;
The Fates never meant them for the shepherd's prize,
Yet gave them ample recompense in love.
They gave you vigor from your parents' veins;
They gave you toils; but toils your sinews brace;
They gave you nymphs that own their amorous pains,
And shades, the refuge of the gentle race.
To carve your loves, to paint your mutual flames,
See! polished fair, the beech's friendly rind!
To sing soft carols to your lovely dames,
See vocal grots, and echoing vales assigned!
Would thou, my Strephon! Love's delighted slave!
Though sure the wreaths of chivalry to share,
Forego the ribbon thy Matilda gave,
And giving, bade thee in remembrance wear?
Ill fare my peace, but every idle toy,
If to my mind my Delia's form it brings,
Has truer worth, imparts sincerer joy,
Than all that bears the radiant stamp of kings.
O my soul weeps, my breast with anguish bleeds,
When Love deplores the tyrant power of Gain!
Disdaining riches as the futile weeds,
I rise superior, and the rich disdain.
Often from the stream, slow-wand'ring down the glade,
Pensive I hear the nuptial peal rebound;
" Some miser weds," I cry, "the captive maid,
" And some fond lover sickens at the sound."
Not Somerville, the Muse's friend of old,
Though now exalted to yon' ambient sky,
So shunned a soul distained with earth and gold,
So loved the pure, the generous breast, as I.
Scorned be the wretch that quits his genial bowl,
His loves, his friendships, even his self, resigns;
Perverts the sacred instinct of his soul,
And to a ducat's dirty sphere confines.
But come, my Friend! with taste, with science, blessed,
Ere age impair me, and ere gold allure;
Restore thy dear idea to my breast,
The rich deposite shall the shrine secure.
Let others toil to gain the sordid ore,
The charms of independence let us sing;
Blessed with thy friendship, can I wish for more?
I Will spurn the boasted wealth of Lydia's king Croesus.
.
ELEGY X. To Fortune, suggesting his motive for repining at her dispensations.
ASK not the cause why this rebellious tongue
Loads with fresh curses thy detested sway;
Ask not, thus branded in my softest song,
Why stands the flattered name which all obey?
It Is not that in my shed I lurk forlorn,
Nor see my roof on Parian columns rise;
That on this breast no mimic star is borne,
Revered, ah! more than those that light the skies.
It Is not that on the turf supinely laid,
I sing or pipe, but to the flocks that graze;
And, all inglorious, in the lonesome shade
My finger stiffens, and my voice decays.
Not that my fancy mourns thy stern command,
When many an embryo dome is lost in air;
While guardian Prudence checks my eager hand,
And ere the turf is broken, cries, "Forbear:
" Forbear, vain Youth! be cautious, weigh thy gold,
" Nor let yon' rising column more aspire;
" Ah! better dwell in ruins than behold
" Thy fortunes mouldering, and thy domes entire.
" Honorio built, but dared my laws desy;
" He planted, scornful of my sage commands;
" The peach's vernal bud regaled his eye,
" The fruitage ripened for more frugal hands."
See the small stream that pours its murmuring tide
Over some rough rock that would its wealth display,
Displays it aught but penury and pride?
Ah! construe wisely what such murmurs say.
How would some flood, with ampler treasures blessed,
Disdainful view the scantling drops distill!
How must Velino A river in Italy, that falls 100 yards perpendicular.
shake his reedy crest!
How every cygnet mock the boastive rill!
Fortune! I yield; and see, I give the sign;
At noon the poor mechanic wanders home,
Collects the square, the level, and the line,
And with retorted eye forsakes the dome.
Yes, I can patient view the shadeless plains;
Can unrepining leave the rising wall;
Check the fond love of art that fired my veins,
And my warm hopes in full pursuit recall.
Descend, ye Storms! destroy my rising pile;
Loosed be the whirlwind's unremitting sway;
Contented I, although the gazer smile
To see it scarce survive a winter's day.
Let some dull dotard bask in thy gay shrine,
As in the sun regales his wanton herd;
Guiltless of envy, why should I repine
That his rude voice, his grating reed's, preferred?
Let him exult, with boundless wealth supplied,
Mine and the swain's reluctant homage share;
But, ah! his tawdry shepherdess's pride,
Gods! must my Delia, must my Delia, bear?
Must Delia's softness, elegance, and ease,
Submit to Marian's dress? to Marian's gold?
Must Marian's robe from distant India please?
The simple fleece my Delia's limbs enfold?
" Yet sure on Delia seems the russet fair;
" Ye glittering daughters of Disguise, adieu!"
So talk the wise, who judge of shape and air,
But will the rural thane decide so true?
Ah! what is native worth esteemed of clowns?
It Is thy false glare, O Fortune! thine they see;
It Is for my Delia's sake I dread thy frowns,
And my last gasp shall curses breathe on thee.
ELEGY XI. He complains how soon the pleasing novelty of life is over.
To Mr. J --.
AH me! my Friend! it will not, will not last!
This fairy scene that cheats our youthful eyes;
The charm dissolves; the aerial music's past;
The banquet ceases, and the vision flies.
Where are the splendid forms, the rich perfumes,
Where the gay tapers, where the spacious dome?
Vanished the costly pearls, the crimson plumes,
And we, delightless, left to wander home!
Vain now are books, the sage's wisdom vain!
What has the world to bribe our steps astray?
Ere Reason learns by studied laws to reign,
The weakened passions, self-subdu'd, obey.
Scarce has the sun sev'n annual courses rolled,
Scarce shown the whole that Fortune can supply,
Since not the miser so caressed his gold
As I, for what it gave, was heard to sigh.
On the world's stage I wished some sprightly part,
To deck my native fleece with tawdry lace!
'Twas life, 'twas taste, and -- oh! my foolish heart!
Substantial joy was fixed in power and place.
And you, ye works of Art! allured mine eye,
The breathing picture and the living stone:
" Though gold, though splendor, Heaven and Fate deny,
" Yet might I call one Titian stroke my own!"
Smit with the charms of Fame, whose lovely spoil,
The wreath, the garland, fire the poet's pride,
I trimmed my lamp, consumed the midnight oil --
But soon the paths of health and fame divide!
Often, too, I prayed, 'twas Nature formed the prayer,
To grace my native scenes, my rural home;
To see my trees express their planter's care,
And gay, on Attic models, raise my dome.
But now it is over, the dear delusion's over!
A stagnant breezeless air becalms my soul;
A fond aspiring candidate no more,
I scorn the palm before I reach the goal.
O Youth! enchanting stage, profusely blessed!
Bliss even obtrusive courts the frolic mind;
Of health neglectful, yet by health caressed,
Careless of favor, yet secure to find.
Then glows the breast, as opening roses fair;
More free, more vivid, than the linnet's wing;
Honest as light, transparent even as air,
Tender as buds, and lavish as the spring.
Not all the force of manhood's active might,
Not all the craft to subtle age assigned,
Not science shall extort that dear delight,
Which gay delusion gave the tender mind.
Adieu, soft raptures! transports void of care!
Parent of raptures, dear Deceit! adieu;
And you, her daughters, pining with despair,
Why, why so soon her fleeting steps pursue!
Tedious again to curse the drizling day!
Again to trace the wint'ry tracts of snow!
Or, soothed by vernal airs, again survey
The self-same hawthorns bud, and cowslips blow!
O Life! how soon of every bliss forlorn!
We start false joys, and urge the devious race;
A tender prey; that cheers our youthful morn,
Then sinks untimely, and defrauds the chase.
ELEGY XII. His recantation.
No more the Muse obtrudes her thin disguise,
No more with awkward fallacy complains
How every fervor from my bosom flies,
And Reason in her lonesome palace reigns.
Ere the chill winter of our days arrive,
No more she paints the breast from passion free;
I feel, I feel one loit'ring wish survive --
Ah! need I, Florio, name that wish to thee?
The star of Venus ushers in the day,
The first, the loveliest of the train that shine!
The star of Venus lends her brightest ray,
When other stars their friendly beams resign.
Still in my breast one soft desire remains,
Pure as that star, from guilt, from interest, free;
Has gentle Delia tripp'd across the plains,
And need I, Florio, name that wish to thee?
While, cloyed to find the scenes of life the same,
I tune with careless hand my languid lays,
Some secret impulse wakes my former flame,
And fires my strain with hopes of brighter days.
I slept not long beneath yon' rural bowers,
And, lo! my crook with flowers adorned I see;
Has gentle Delia bound my crook with flowers,
And need I, Florio, name my hopes to thee?
ELEGY XIII. To a friend, on some slight occasion estranged from him.
HEALTH to my friend, and many a cheerful day!
Around his seat may peaceful shades abide!
Smooth flow the minutes, fraught with smiles, away,
And till they crown our union gently glide!
Ah me! too swiftly fleets our vernal bloom!
Lost to our wonted friendship, lost to joy!
Soon may thy breast the cordial wish resume,
Ere wintry doubt its tender warmth destroy!
Say, were it ours, by Fortune's wild command,
By chance to meet beneath the Torrid Zone,
Would thou reject thy Damon's plighted hand?
Would thou with scorn thy once-lov'd friend disown?
Life is that stranger land, that alien clime;
Shall kindred souls forego their social claim?
Launched in the vast abyss of space and time,
Shall dark suspicion quench the generous flame?
Myriads of souls, that knew one parent mould,
See sadly severed by the laws of Chance!
Myriads, in Time's perennial list enrolled,
Forbid by Fate to change one transient glance!
But we have met -- where ills of every form,
Where passions rage, and hurricanes descend;
Say, shall we nurse the rage, assist the storm,
And guide them to the bosom -- of a friend?
Yes, we have met -- through rapine, fraud, and wrong:
Might our joint aid the paths of peace explore!
Why leave thy friend amid the boisterous throng,
Ere death divide us, and we part no more?
For, oh! pale Sickness warns thy friend away;
For me no more the vernal roses bloom!
I see stern Fate his ebon wand display,
And point the withered regions of the tomb.
Then the keen anguish from thine eye shall start,
Sad as thou follow'st my untimely bier;
" Fool that I was -- if friends so soon must part,
" To let suspicion intermix a fear."
ELEGY XIV. Declining an invitation to visit foreign countries, he takes
occasion to intimate the advantages of his own. To Lord Temple.
WHILE others, lost to friendship, lost to love,
Waste their best minutes on a foreign strand,
Be mine with British nymph or swain to rove,
And court the Genius of my native land.
Deluded Youth! that quits these verdant plains,
To catch the follies of an alien soil!
To win the vice his genuine soul disdains,
Return exultant, and import the spoil!
In vain he boasts of his detested prize;
No more it blooms, to British climes conveyed;
Cramped by the impulse of ungenial skies,
See its fresh vigor in a moment fade!
The exotic folly knows its native clime,
An awkward stranger, if we waft it over;
Why then these toils, this costly waste of time,
To spread soft poison on our happy shore?
I covet not the pride of foreign looms;
In search of foreign modes I scorn to rove;
Nor for the worthless bird of brighter plumes
Would change the meanest warbler of my grove.
No distant clime shall servile airs impart,
Or form these limbs with pliant ease to play;
Trembling I view the Gaul's illusive art
That steals my loved rusticity away.
It Is long since Freedom fled the Hesperian clime,
Her citron groves, her flow'r-embroider'd shore;
She saw the British oak aspire sublime,
And soft Campania's olive charms no more.
Let partial suns mature the western mine,
To shed its luster over the Iberian maid;
Mien, beauty, shape, O native soil! are thine;
Thy peerless daughters ask no foreign aid.
Let Ceylon's envied plant The cinnamon.
perfume the seas,
Till torn to season the Batavian bowl;
Ours is the breast whose genuine ardours please,
Nor need a drug to meliorate the soul.
Let the proud Sultan wound The Arcadian groves,
Or with rude lips th'Aonian fount profane;
The Muse no more by flowery Ladon roves,
She seeks her Thomson on the British plain.
Tell not of realms by ruthless war dismayed;
Ah! hapless realms! that war's oppression feel!
In vain may Austria boast her Noric blade,
If Austria bleed beneath her boasted steel.
Beneath her palm Idume vents her moan;
Raptured, she once beheld its friendly shade;
And hoary Memphis boasts her tombs alone,
The mournful types of mighty power decayed!
No Crescent here displays its baneful horns;
No turban'd host the voice of Truth reproves;
Learning's free source the sage's breast adorns,
And poets, not inglorious, chant their loves.
Boast, favored Media! boast thy flowery stores;
Thy thousand hues by chymic suns refined;
It Is not the dress or mien my soul adores,
It Is the rich beauties of Britannia's mind.
While Grenville's Written about the time of Captain Grenville's death.
breast could virtue's storesafford,
What envied flota bore so fair a freight?
The mine compared in vain its latent hoard,
The gem its luster, and the gold its weight.
Thee, Grenville! thee, with calmest courage fraught!
Thee, the loved image of thy native shore!
Thee, by the Virtues armed, the Graces taught!
When shall we cease to boast or to deplore?
Presumptuous War, which could thy life destroy,
What shall it now in recompense decree?
While friends that merit every earthly joy
Feel every anguish; feel -- the loss of thee!
Bid me no more a servile realm compare,
No more the Muse of partial praise arraign;
Britannia sees no foreign breast so fair,
And if she glory, glories not in vain.
ELEGY XV. In memory of a private family The Penns of Harborough; a place whose
name in the Saxon language alludes to an army: and there is a tradition that
there was a battle fought on the Downs adjoining, betwixt the Britons and the
Romans.
in Worcestershire.
FROM a lone tower with reverend ivy crowned,
The pealing bell awaked a tender sigh;
Still as the village caught the waving sound,
A swelling tear distream'd from every eye.
So drooped, I ween, each Briton's breast of old,
When the dull curfew spoke their freedom fled;
For, sighing as the mournful accent rolled,
" Our hope," they cried, "our kind support, is dead!"
'Twas good Palemon! -- Near a shaded pool,
A group of ancient elms umbrageous rose;
The flocking rooks, by Instinct's native rule,
This peaceful scene for their asylum chose.
A few small spires, to Gothic fancy fair,
Amid the shades emerging struck the view;
'Twas here his youth respir'd its earliest air;
'Twas here his age breathed out its last adieu.
One favored son engaged his tenderest care;
One pious youth his whole affection crowned;
In his young breast the virtues sprung so fair,
Such charms displayed, such sweets diffused around.
But whilst gay transport in his face appears,
A noxious vapor clogs the poisoned sky,
Blasts the fair crop -- the sire is drowned in tears,
And, scarce surviving, sees his Cynthio die!
Over the pale corse we saw him gently bend;
Heart-chill'd with grief -- "My thread," he cried, "is spun!
" If Heaven had meant I should my life extend,
" Heaven had preserved my life's support, my son.
" Snatched in thy prime! alas! the stroke were mild,
" Had my frail form obeyed the Fates' decree!
" Blessed were my lot, O Cynthio! O my child!
" Had Heaven so pleased, and I had died for thee."
Five sleepless nights he stemmed this tide of woes;
Five irksome suns he saw, through tears, forlorn!
On his pale corse the sixth sad morning rose;
From yonder dome the mournful bier was borne.
'Twas on those Harborough Downs.
Downs, by Roman hosts annoyed,
Fought our bold fathers, rustic, unrefin'd!
Freedom's plain sons, in martial cares employed!
They tinged their bodies, but unmasked their mind.
'Twas there, in happier times, this virtuous race,
Of milder merit, fixed their calm retreat;
War's deadly crimson had forsook the place,
And Freedom fondly loved the chosen seat.
No wild ambition fired their tranquil breast,
To swell with empty sounds a spotless name;
If fost'ring skies, the sun, the shower, were blessed,
Their bounty spread; their fields' extent the same.
Those fields, profuse of raiment, food, and fire,
They scorned to lessen, careless to extend;
Bade Luxury to lavish courts aspire,
And Avarice to city breasts descend.
None to a virgin's mind preferred her dower,
To fire with vicious hopes a modest heir:
The sire, in place of titles, wealth, or power,
Assigned him virtue; and his lot was fair.
They spoke of Fortune as some doubtful dame,
That swayed the natives of a distant sphere;
From Lucre's vagrant sons had learned her fame,
But never wished to place her banners here.
Here youth's free spirit, innocently gay,
Enjoyed the most that Innocence can give;
Those wholesome sweets that border Virtue's way;
Those cooling fruits, that we may taste and live.
Their board no strange ambiguous viand bore;
From their own streams their choicer fare they drew;
To lure the scaly glutton to the shore,
The sole deceit their artless bosom knew!
Sincere themselves, ah! too secure to find
The common bosom, like their own, sincere!
It Is its own guilt alarms the jealous mind;
It Is her own poison bids the viper fear.
Sketch'd on the lattice of the adjacent fane,
Their suppliant busts implore the reader's prayer:
Ah! gentle souls! enjoy your blissful reign,
And let frail mortals claim your guardian care.
For sure to blissful realms the souls are flown
That never flattered, injured, censured, strove;
The friends of Science! music all their own;
Music, the voice of Virtue and of Love!
The journeying peasant, through the secret shade
Heard their soft lyres engage his listening ear,
And happily deemed some courteous angel played;
No angel played -- but might with transport hear.
For these the sounds that chase unholy Strife!
Solve Envy's charm, Ambition's wretch release!
Raise him to spurn the radiant ills of life,
To pity pomp, to be content with peace.
Farewell, pure Spirits! vain the praise we give,
The praise you sought from lips angelic flows;
Farewell! the virtues which deserve to live
Deserve an ampler bliss than life bestows.
Last of his race, Palemon, now no more
The modest merit of his line displayed;
Then pious Hough Vigornia's mitre wore --
Soft sleep the dust of each deserving shade.
ELEGY XVI. He suggests the advantages of birth to a person of merit, and the
folly of a superciliousness that is built upon that sole foundation.
WHEN genius, graced with lineal splendor, glows,
When title shines, with ambient virtues crowned,
Like some fair almond's flowery pomp it shows,
The pride, the persume, of the regions round.
Then learn, ye Fair! to soften splendour's ray;
Endure the swain, the youth of low degree;
Let meekness joined its temperate beam display;
It Is the mild verdure that endears the tree.
Pity the scandal'd swain, the shepherd's boy;
He sighs to brighten a neglected name;
Foe to the dull appulse of vulgar joy,
He mourns his lot; he wishes, merits fame.
In vain to groves and pathless vales we fly;
Ambition there the bow'ry haunt invades;
Fame's awful rays fatigue the courtier's eye,
But gleam still lovely through the checkered shades.
Vainly, to guard from Love's unequal chain,
Has Fortune reared us in the rural grove;
Should ****'s eyes illume the desert plain,
Even I may wonder, and even I must love.
Nor unregarded sighs the lowly hind;
Though you contemn, the gods respect his vow;
Vindictive rage awaits the scornful mind,
And vengeance, too severe! the gods allow.
On Sarum's plain I met a wandering fair;
The look of sorrow, lovely still, she bore;
Loose flowed the soft redundance of her hair,
And on her brow a flowery wreath she wore.
Often stooping as she strayed, she culled the pride
Of every plain; she pillaged every grove!
The fading chaplet daily she supplied,
And still her hand some various garland wove.
Erroneous Fancy shaped her wild attire;
From Bethlem's walls the poor lympatic strayed;
Seemed with her air her accent to conspire,
When as wild Fancy taught her, thus she said:
" Hear me, dear Youth! oh! hear an hapless maid,
" Sprung from the sceptred line of ancient kings!
" Scorned by the world, I ask thy tender aid;
" Thy gentle voice shall whisper kinder things.
" The world is frantic -- fly the race profane --
" Nor I nor you shall its compassion move;
" Come, friendly let us wander and complain,
" And tell me, Shepherd! have thou seen my love?
" My love is young -- but other loves are young;
" And other loves are fair, and so is mine;
" An air divine discloses whence he sprung;
" He is my love who boasts that air divine.
" No vulgar Damon robs me of my rest;
" Ianthe listens to no vulgar vow;
" A prince, from gods descended, fires her breast;
" A brilliant crown distinguishes his brow.
" What, shall I stain the glories of my race,
" More clear, more lovely bright, than Hesper's beam?
" The porc'lain pure with vulgar dirt debase?
" Or mix with puddle the pellucid stream?
" See through these veins the sapphire current shine!
" 'Twas Jove's own nectar gave the ethereal hue:
" Can base plebeian forms contend with mine,
" Display the lovely white, or match the blue?
" The painter strove to trace its azure ray;
" He changed his colors, and in vain he strove:
" He frowned -- I, smiling, viewed the faint essay:
" Poor youth! he little knew it flowed from Jove.
" Pitying his toil, the wondrous truth I told,
" How amorous Jove trepanned a mortal fair;
" How through the race the generous current rolled,
" And mocks the poet's art and painter's care.
" Yes, from the gods, from earliest Saturn, sprung
" Our sacred race, through demigods conveyed,
" And he, allied to Phoebus, ever young,
" My godlike boy! must wed their duteous maid.
" Often, when a mortal vow profanes my ear,
" My sire's dread fury murmurs through the sky;
" And should I yield -- his instant rage appears;
" He darts the uplifted vengeance -- and I die.
" Have you not heard unwonted thunders roll?
" Have you not seen more horrid lightnings glare?
" 'Twas then a vulgar love ensnared my soul;
" 'Twas then -- I hardly 'scap'd the fatal snare.
" 'Twas then a peasant poured his amorous vow,
" All as I listened to his vulgar strain; --
" Yet such his beauty -- would my birth allow,
" Dear were the youth, and blissful were the plain.
" But, oh! I faint! why wastes my vernal bloom,
" In fruitless searches ever doomed to rove?
" My nightly dreams the toilsome path resume,
" And shall I die -- before I find my love?
" When last I slept, methought my ravished eye
" On distant heaths his radiant form surveyed;
" Though night's thick clouds encompassed all the sky,
" The gems that bound his brow dispelled the shade,
" O how this bosom kindled at the sight!
" Led by their beams I urged the pleasing chase,
" Till on a sudden these withheld their light --
" All, all things envy the sublime embrace.
" But now no more -- Behind the distant grove
" Wanders my destined youth, and chides my stay:
" See, see! he grasps the steel -- Forbear, my Love --
" Ianthe comes; thy princess hastes away."
Scornful she spoke, and, heedless of reply,
The lovely maniac bounded over the plain,
The piteous victim of an angry sky!
Ah me! the victim of her proud disdain.
ELEGY XVII. He indulges the suggestions of spleen: an Elegy to the winds.
Aeole! namque tibi divum Pater atque hominum rex,
Et mulcere dedit mentes et tollere vento.

IMITATION. O Aeolus! to thee the Sire supreme
Of gods and men the mighty power bequeathed
To rouse or to assuage the human mind.


STERN Monarch of the winds! admit my prayer;
A while thy fury check, thy storms confine;
No trivial blast impels the passive air,
But brews a tempest in a breast like mine.
What bands of black ideas spread their wings!
The peaceful regions of Content invade!
With deadly poison taint the crystal springs!
With noisome vapor blast the verdant shade!
I know their leader, Spleen, and the dread sway
Of rigid Eurus, his detested sire;
Through one my blossoms and my fruits decay;
Through one my pleasures and my hopes expire.
Like some pale stripling, when his icy way,
Relenting, yields beneath the noontide beam,
I stand aghast and, chilled with fear, survey
How far I Have tempted life's deceitful stream.
Where, by remorse impelled, repulsed by fears,
Shall wretched Fancy a retreat explore?
She flies the sad presage of coming years,
And sorr'wing dwells on pleasures now no more.
Again with patrons and with friends she roves,
But friends and patrons never to return;
She sees the Nymphs, the Graces, and the Loves,
But sees them weeping over Lucinda's urn.
She visits, Isis! thy forsaken stream,
Oh! ill forsaken for Boeotian air;
She deems no flood reflects so bright a beam,
No reed so verdant, and no flowers so fair.
She deems beneath thy sacred shades were peace,
Thy bays might even the civil storm repel;
Reviews thy social bliss, thy learned ease,
And with no cheerful accent cries Farewell!
Farewell, with whom to these retreats I strayed,
By youthful sports, by youthful toils, allied;
Joyous we sojourned in thy circling shade,
And wept to find the paths of life divide.
She paints the progress of my rival's vow,
Sees every Muse a partial ear incline,
Binds with luxuriant bays his favored brow,
Nor yields the refuse of his wreath to mine.
She bids the flattering mirror, formed to please,
Now blast my hope, now vindicate despair;
Bids my fond verse the lovesick parley cease,
Accuse my rigid fate, acquit my fair.
Where circling rocks defend some pathless vale,
Superfluous mortal! let me ever rove;
Alas! there Echo will repeat the tale --
Where shall I find the silent scenes I love?
Fain would I mourn my luckless fate alone,
Forbid to please, yet fated to admire;
Away, my friends! my sorrows are my own;
Why should I breathe around my sick desire?
Bear me, ye Winds! indulgent to my pains,
Near some sad ruin's ghastly shade to dwell,
There let me fondly eye the rude remains,
And from the mouldering refuse build my cell.
Genius of Rome! thy prostrate pomp display,
Trace every dismal proof of Fortune's power;
Let me the wreck of theaters survey,
Or pensive sit beneath some nodding tower.
Or where some duct, by rolling seasons worn,
Conveyed pure streams to Rome's imperial wall,
Near the wide breach in silence let me mourn,
Or tune my dirges to the water's fall.
Genius of Carthage! paint thy ruined pride;
Towers, arches, fanes, in wild confusion strown;
Let banished Marius "Inopemque vitam in tugurio ruinarum Carthaginensium
toleravit, cum Marius inspiciens Carthaginem, illa intuens Marium, alter alteri
possent esse solatio." Live. EXPLANATION. Marius endured a life of poverty under
shelter of the Carthaginian ruins; and while he contemplated Carthage, and
Carthage beheld him, they might be said mutually to resemble and account for
each other.


, lowering by thy side,
Compare thy fickle fortunes with his own.
Ah no! thou Monarch of the storms! forbear;
My trembling nerves abhor thy rude control,
And scarce a pleasing twilight sooths my care,
Ere one vast death, like darkness, shocks my soul.
Forbear thy rage -- on no perennial base
Is built frail Fear, or Hope's deceitful pile;
My pains are fled -- my joy resumes its place,
Should the sky brighten, or Melissa smile.
ELEGY XVIII. He repeats the song of Colin, a discerning shepherd, lamenting
the state of the woollen manufactory.
Ergo omni studio glaciem ventosque nivales,
Quo minus est illis curae mortalis egestas,
Avertes; victumque feres.
VIRG.
IMITATION. Thou, therefore, in proportion to their lack
Of human aid, with all thy care defend
From frozen seasons and inclement blasts,
And give them timely food.


NEAR Avon's bank, on Arden's flowery plain,
A tuneful shepherd Mr. Somerville.
charmed the listening wave,
And sunny Cotsol' fondly loved the strain,
Yet not a garland crowns the shepherd's grave!
Oh! lost Ophelia! smoothly flowed the day
To feel his music with my flames agree,
To taste the beauties of his melting lay,
To taste, and fancy it was dear to thee.
When for his tomb, with each revolving year,
I steal the musk-rose from the scented brake,
I strew my cowslips, and I pay my tear,
I Will add the myrtle for Ophelia's sake.
Shivering beneath a leafless thorn he lay,
When Death's chill rigor seized his flowing tongue;
The more I found his falt'ring notes decay,
The more prophetic truth sublimed the song.
" Adieu, my Flocks!" he said, "my wonted care,
" By sunny mountain or by verdant shore;
" May some more happy hand your fold prepare,
" And may you need your Colin's crook no more!
" And you, ye Shepherds! lead my gentle sheep,
" To breezy hills or leafy shelters lead;
" But if the sky with showers incessant weep,
" Avoid the putrid moisture of the mead.
" Where the wild thyme perfumes the purpled heath,
" Long loit'ring, there your fleecy tribes extend --
" But what avails the maxims I bequeath?
" The fruitless gift of an officious friend!
" Ah! what avails the timorous lambs to guard,
" Though nightly cares with daily labors join,
" If foreign sloth obtain the rich reward,
" If Gallia's craft the ponderous fleece purloin?
" Was it for this, by constant vigils worn,
" I met the terrors of an early grave?
" For this I led 'em from the pointed thorn?
" For this I bathed 'em in the lucid wave?
" Ah! heedless Albion! too benignly prone
" Thy blood to lavish and thy wealth resign!
" Shall every other virtue grace thy throne,
" But quick-ey'd Prudence never yet be thine?
" From the fair natives of this peerless hill
" Thou gav'st the sheep that browze Iberian plains;
" Their plaintive cries the faithless region fill,
" Their fleece adorns an haughty foe's domains.
" Ill-fated flocks! from cliff to cliff they stray;
" Far from their dams, their native guardians, far!
" Where the soft shepherd, all the livelong day,
" Chants his proud mistress to his hoarse guittar.
" But Albion's youth her native fleece despise;
" Unmoved they hear the pining shepherd's moan;
" In silky folds each nervous limb disguise,
" Allured by every treasure but their own.
" Often have I hurried down the rocky steep,
" Anxious to see the wintry tempest drive;
" Preserve," said I, "preserve your fleece, my Sheep!
" Ere long will Phillis, will my love, arrive.
" Ere long she came: ah! woe is me! she came,
" Robbed in the Gallic loom's extraneous twine;
" For gifts like these they give their spotless fame,
" Resign their bloom, their innocence resign.
" Will no bright maid, by worth, by titles, known,
" Give the rich growth of British hills to Fame?
" And let her charms, and her example, own
" That Virtue's dress and Beauty's are the same?
" Will no famed chief support this generous maid?
" Once more the patriot's arduous path resume?
" And, comely from his native plains arrayed,
" Speak future glory to the British loom?
" What power unseen my ravished fancy fires?
" I pierce the dreary shade of future days;
" Sure it is the genius of the land inspires,
" To breathe my latest breath in *** praise.
" O might my breath for *** praise suffice,
" How gently should my dying limbs repose!
" O might his future glory bless mine eyes,
" My ravished eyes! how calmly would they close!
" *** was born to spread the general joy;
" By virtue rapt, by party uncontrolled;
" Britons for Britain shall the crook employ;
" Britons for Britain's glory shear the fold."
ELEGY XIX. Written in spring 1743.
AGAIN the laboring hind inverts the soil;
Again the merchant ploughs the tumid wave;
Another spring renews the soldier's toil,
And finds me vacant in the rural cave.
As the soft lyre displayed my wonted loves,
The pensive pleasure and the tender pain,
The sordid Alpheus hurried through my groves,
Yet stopped to vent the dictates of disdain.
He glanced contemptuous over my ruined fold;
He blamed the graces of my favorite bower;
My breast, unsullied by the lust of gold;
My time, unlavish'd in pursuit of power.
Yes, Alpheus! fly the purer paths of Fate;
Abjure these scenes, from venal passions free;
Know in this grove I vowed perpetual hate,
War, endless war, with lucre and with thee.
Here, nobly zealous, in my youthful hours
I dressed an altar to Thalia's name;
Here, as I crowned the verdant shrine with flowers,
Soft on my labors stole the smiling dame.
" Damon," she cried, "if, pleased with honest praise,
" Thou court success by virtue or by song,
" Fly the false dictates of the venal race,
" Fly the gross accents of the venal tongue.
" Swear that no lucre shall thy zeal betray;
" Swerve not thy foot with Fortune's vot'ries more;
" Brand thou their lives, and brand their lifeless day -- "
The winning phantom urged me, and I swore.
Forth from the rustic altar swift I strayed,
" Aid my firm purpose, ye celestial Powers!
" Aid me to quell the sordid breast," I said;
And threw my javelin toward their hostile towers The Roman ceremony in
declaring war.
.
Think not regretful I survey the deed,
Or added years no more the zeal allow;
Still, still observant, to the grove I speed,
The shrine embellish, and repeat the vow.
Sworn from his cradle Rome's relentless foe,
Such generous hate the Punic champion Hannibal.
bore;
Thy lake, O Thrasimene! beheld it glow,
And Cannae's walls and Trebia's crimson shore.
But let grave annals paint the warrior's fame;
Fair shine his arms in history enrolled;
Whilst humbler lyres his civil worth proclaim,
His nobler hate of avarice and gold. --
Now Punic pride its final eve surveyed,
Its hosts exhausted, and its fleets on fire;
Patient the victor's lurid frown obeyed,
And saw the unwilling elephants retire.
But when their gold depressed the yielding scale,
Their gold in pyramidic plenty pil'd,
He saw the unutterable grief prevail;
He saw their tears, and in his fury smiled.
" Think not," he cried, "ye view the smiles of ease,
" Or this firm breast disclaims a patriot's pain;
" I smile, but from a soul estranged to peace,
" Frantic with grief, delirious with disdain.
" But were it cordial, this detested smile,
" Seems it less timely than the grief ye show?
" O Sons of Carthage! grant me to revile
" The sordid source of your indecent woe.
" Why weep ye now? ye saw with tearless eye
" When your fleet perished on the Punic wave;
" Where lurked the coward tear, the lazy sigh,
" When Tyre's imperial state commenced a slave?
" It Is past -- O Carthage! vanquished, honored shade!
" Go, the mean sorrows of thy sons deplore;
" Had Freedom shared the vow to Fortune paid,
" She never, like Fortune, had forsook thy shore."
He ceased -- Abashed the conscious audience hear,
Their pallid cheeks a crimson blush unfold,
Yet over that virtuous blush distreams a tear,
And falling, moistens their abandoned gold By the terms forced ipon the
Carthaginians by Scipio, they were to deliver up all the elephants, and to pay
near two millions Sterling.
.
ELEGY XX. He compares his humble fortune with the distress of others, and his
subjection to Delia with the miserable servitude of an African slave.
WHY droops this heart with fancied woes forlorn?
Why sinks my soul beneath each wintry sky?
What pensive crowds, by ceaseless labors worn,
What myriads, wish to be as blessed as I!
What though my roofs devoid of pomp arise,
Nor tempt the proud to quit his destined way?
Nor costly art my flowery dales disguise,
Where only simple Friendship deigns to stray?
See the wild sons of Lapland's chill domain,
That scoop their couch beneath the drifted snows!
How void of hope they ken the frozen plain,
Where the sharp east for ever, ever blows!
Slave though I be, to Delia's eyes a slave,
My Delia's eyes endear the bands I wear;
The sigh she causes well becomes the brave,
The pang she causes it is even bliss to bear.
See the poor native quit the Libyan shores,
Ah! not in love's delightful fetters bound!
No radiant smile his dying peace restores,
Nor love, nor fame, nor friendship, heals his wound.
Let vacant bards display their boasted woes;
Shall I the mockery of grief display?
No; let the Muse his piercing pangs disclose,
Who bleeds and weeps his sum of life away!
On the wild beach in mournful guise he stood,
Ere the shrill boatswain gave the hated sign;
He dropped a tear unseen into the flood,
He stole one secret moment to repine.
Yet the Muse listened to the plaints he made,
Such moving plaints as Nature could inspire;
To me the Muse his tender plea conveyed,
But smoothed and suited to the sounding lyre.
" Why am I ravished from my native strand?
" What savage race protects this impious gain?
" Shall foreign plagues infest this teeming land,
" And more than sea-born monsters plough the main?
" Here the dire locusts' horrid swarms prevail;
" Here the blue asps with livid poison swell;
" Here the dry dipsa writhes his sinuous mail;
" Can we not here secure from envy dwell?
" When the grim lion urged his cruel chase,
" When the stern panther sought his midnight prey,
" What fate reserved me for this Christian race Spoke by a savage.
?
" O race more polished, more severe, than they!
" Ye prouling Wolves! pursue my latest cries;
" Thou hungry Tiger! leave thy reeking den;
" Ye sandy Wastes! in rapid eddies rise;
" O tear me from the whips and scorns of men!
" Yet in their face superior beauty glows;
" Are smiles the mien of Rapine and of Wrong?
" Yet from their lip the voice of mercy flows,
" And even religion dwells upon their tongue.
" Of blissful haunts they tell, and brighter climes,
" Where gentle minds, conveyed by Death, repair;
" But stained with blood, and crimsoned over with crimes,
" Say, shall they merit what they paint so fair!
" No; careless, hopeless of those fertile plains,
" Rich by our toils, and by our sorrows gay,
" They ply our labors and enchance our pains,
" And feign these distant regions to repay.
" For them our tusky elephant expires;
" For them we drain the mine is embowell'd gold;
" Where rove the brutal nations' wild desires? --
" Our limbs are purchased and our life is sold!
" Yet shores there are, blessed shores for us remain,
" And favored isles, with golden fruitage crowned,
" Where tufted flowerets paint the verdant plain,
" Where every breeze shall medicine every wound.
" There the stern tyrant that embitters life
" Shall, vainly suppliant, spread his asking hand;
" There shall we view the billows' raging strife,
" Aid the kind breast, and waft his boat to land."
ELEGY XXI. Taking a view of the country from his retirement, he is led to
meditate on the character of the ancient Britons. Written at the time of a
rumoured tax upon luxury, 1746.
THUS Damon sung -- What though unknown to praise
Umbrageous coverts hide my Muse and me,
Or 'mid the rural shepherds flow my days?
Amid the rural shepherds I am free.
To view sleek vassals crowd a stately hall,
Say, should I grow myself a solemn slave?
To find thy tints, O Titian! grace my wall,
Forego the flowery fields my fortune gave?
Lord of my time, my devious path I bend
Through fringy woodland or smooth-shaven lawn,
Or pensile grove or airy cliff ascend,
And hail the scene by Nature's pencil drawn.
Thanks be to Fate -- though nor the racy vine,
Nor fatt'ning olive clothe the fields I rove,
Sequestered shades and gurgling founts are mine,
And every silvan grot the Muses love.
Here if my vista point the mouldering pile,
Where hood and cowl Devotion's aspect wore,
I trace the tottering relics with a smile,
To think the mental bondage is no more.
Pleased if the glowing landscape wave with corn,
Or the tall oaks, my country's bulwark, rise;
Pleased if mine eye, over thousand valleys borne,
Discern the Cambrian hills support the skies.
And see Plinlimmon! even the youthful sight
Scales the proud hill's ethereal cliffs with pain!
Such, Caer-Caradoc! thy stupendous height,
Whose ample shade obscures the Iernian main.
Bleak, joyless regions! where, by Science fired,
Some prying sage his lonely step may bend;
There, by the love of novel plants inspired,
Invidious view the clamb'ring goats ascend.
Yet for those mountains, clad with lasting snow,
The freeborn Briton left his greenest mead,
Receding sullen from his mightier foe,
For here he saw fair Liberty recede.
Then if a chief performed a patriot's part,
Sustained her drooping sons, repelled her foes,
Above or Persian luxe or Attic art
The rude majestic monument arose.
Progressive ages caroll'd forth his fame,
Sires to his praise attun'd their children's tongue,
The hoary Druid fed the generous flame,
While in such strains the reverend wizard sung:
" Go forth, my Sons! -- for what is vital breath,
" Your gods expelled, your liberty resigned?
" Go forth, my Sons! -- for what is instant death
" To souls secure perennial joys to find?
" For scenes there are, unknown to war or pain,
" Where drops the balm that heals a tyrant's wound;
" Where patriots, blessed with boundless freedom, reign,
" With misletoe's mysterious garlands crowned.
" Such are the names that grace your mystic songs,
" Your solemn woods resound their martial fire;
" To you, my Sons! the ritual meed belongs,
" If in the cause you vanquish or expire.
" Hark! from the sacred oak that crowns the groves
" What awful voice my raptured bosom warms!
" This is the favored moment Heaven approves,
" Sound the shrill trump; this instant sound, to arms."
Theirs was the science of a martial race,
To shape the lance or decorate the shield;
Even the fair virgin stained her native grace
To give new horrors to the tented field.
Now for some cheek where guilty blushes glow,
For some false Florimel's impure disguise,
The listed youth nor War's loud signal know,
Nor Virtue's call, nor Fame's imperial prize.
Then, if soft concord lulled their fears to sleep,
Inert and silent slept the manly car,
But rushed horrific over the fearful steep,
If Freedom's awful clarion breathed to war.
Now the sleek courtier, indolent and vain,
Throned in the splendid carriage, glides supine,
To taint his virtue with a foreign strain,
Or at a fav'rite's board his faith resign.
Leave then, O Luxury! this happy soil;
Chase her, Britannia! to some hostile shore;
Or fleece the baneful pest with annual spoil Alludes to a tax upon luxury,
then in debate.
,
And let thy virtuous offspring weep no more.
ELEGY XXII. Written in the year -- when the rights of sepulture were so
frequently violated.
SAY, gentle Sleep! that love the gloom of night,
Parent of dreams! thou great Magician! say,
Whence my late vision thus endures the light,
Thus haunts my fancy through the glare of day.
The silent moon had scaled the vaulted skies,
And anxious Care resigned my limbs to rest;
A sudden luster struck my wondering eyes,
And Silvia stood before my couch confessed.
Ah! not the nymph so blooming and so gay,
That led the dance beneath the festive shade,
But she that in the morning of her day
Entombed beneath the grass-green sod was laid.
No more her eyes their wonted radiance cast,
No more her breast inspired the lover's flame;
No more her cheek the Paestan rose surpast,
Yet seemed her lip's ethereal smile the same.
Nor such her hair as decked her living face,
Nor such her voice as charmed the listening crowd;
Nor such her dress as heightened every grace;
Alas! all vanished for the mournful shroud!
Yet seemed her lip's ethereal charm the same;
That dear distinction every doubt removed;
Perish the lover whose imperfect flame
Forgets one feature of the nymph he loved.
" Damon," she said, "mine hour allotted flies;
" Oh! do not waste it with a fruitless tear!
" Though grieved to see thy Silvia's pale disguise,
" Suspend thy sorrow, and attentive hear.
" So may thy Muse with virtuous fame be blessed!
" So be thy love with mutual love repaid!
" So may thy bones in sacred silence rest!
" Fast by the relics of some happier maid!
" Thou know how, lingering on a distant shore,
" Disease invidious nipt my flowery prime;
" And, oh! what pangs my tender bosom tore,
" To think I never must view my native clime!
" No friend was near to raise my drooping head,
" No dear companion wept to see me die;
" Lodge me within my native soil, I said,
" There my fond parents' honored relics lie.
" Though now debarred of each domestic tear,
" Unknown, forgot, I meet the fatal blow;
" There many a friend shall grace my woeful bier,
" And many a sigh shall rise and tear shall flow.
" I spoke, nor Fate forebore his trembling spoil;
" Some venal mourner lent his careless aid,
" And soon they bore me to my native soil,
" Where my fond parents' dear remains were laid.
" 'Twas then the youths from every plain and grove
" Adorned with mournful verse thy Silvia's bier;
" 'Twas then the Nymphs their votive garlands wove,
" And strewn the fragrance of the youthful year.
" But why, alas! the tender scene display?
" Could Damon's foot the pious path decline?
" Ah, no! 'twas Damon first attun'd his lay,
" And sure no sonnet was so dear as thine.
" Thus was I bosomed in the peaceful grave,
" My placid ghost no longer wept its doom,
" When savage robbers every sanction brave,
" And with outrageous guilt defraud the tomb!
" Shall my poor corse, from hostile realms conveyed,
" Lose the cheap portion of my native sands?
" Or, in my kindred's dear embraces laid,
" Mourn the vile ravage of barbarian hands?
" Say, would thy breast no deathlike torture feel,
" To see my limbs the felon's gripe obey?
" To see them gash'd beneath the daring steel?
" To crowds a spectre, and to dogs a prey?
" If Paean's sons these horrid rites require,
" If Health's fair science be by these refined,
" Let guilty convicts for their use expire,
" And let their breathless corse avail mankind.
" Yet hard it seems, when Guilt's last fine is paid,
" To see the victim's corse denied repose;
" Now, more severe, the poor offenceless maid
" Dreads the dire outrage of inhuman foes.
" Where is the faith of ancient Pagans fled?
" Where the fond care the wandering manes claim?
" Nature, instinctive, cries, Protect the dead,
" And sacred be their ashes and their fame!
" Arise, dear Youth! even now the danger calls;
" Even now the villain snuffs his wonted prey:
" See! see! I lead thee to you' sacred walls --
" Oh! fly to chase these human wolves away."
ELEGY XXIII. Reflections suggested by his situation.
BORN near the scene for Kenelm's Kenelm, in the Saxon heptarchy, was heir to
the kingdom of Mercia, but being very young at his father's death, was, by the
artifices of his sister and her lover, deprived of his crown and life together.
The body was found in a piece of ground near the top of Clent hill, exactly
facing Mr. Shenstone's house, near which place a church was afterward erected
to his memory, still used for divine worship, and called St. Kenelm's. See
Plot's History of Staffordshire.
fate renowned,
I take my plaintive reed, and range the grove,
And raise my lay, and bid the rocks resound
The savage force of empire and of love.
Fast by the center of yon' various wild,
Where spreading oaks embow'r a Gothic fane,
Kendrida's arts a brother's youth beguiled;
There Nature urged her tenderest pleas in vain.
Soft over his birth and over his infant hours,
The ambitious maid could every care employ,
Then with assiduous fondness cropped the flowers,
To deck the cradle of the princely boy.
But soon the bosom's pleasing calm is flown;
Love fires her breast; the sultry passions rise:
A favored lover seeks the Mercian throne,
And views her Kenelm with a rival's eyes.
How kind were Fortune! ah! how just were Fate!
Would Fate or Fortune Mercia's heir remove!
How sweet to revel on the couch of state!
To crown at once her lover and her love!
See, garnished for the chase, the fraudful maid
To these lone hills direct his devious way;
The youth, all prone, the sister-guide obeyed,
Ill-fated youth! himself the destined prey.
But now nor shaggy hill nor pathless plain
Forms the lone refuge of the sylvan game,
Since Lyttleton has crowned the sweet domain
With softer pleasures and with fairer fame.
Where the rough bowman urged his headlong steed,
Immortal bards, a polished race, retire;
And where hoarse scream'd the strepenthorn, succeed
The melting graces of no vulgar lyre.
See Thomson, loit'ring near some limpid well,
For Britain's friend the verdant wreath prepare!
Or, studious of revolving seasons, tell
How peerless Lucia made all seasons fair!
See *** from civic garlands fly,
And in these groves indulge his tuneful vein!
Or from yon' summit, with a guardian's eye,
Observe how Freedom's hand attires the plain!
Here Pope! -- ah! never must that towering mind
To his loved haunts or dearer friend return!
What art, what friendships! oh! what fame resigned!
-- In yonder glade I trace his mournful urn.
Where is the breast can rage or hate retain,
And these glad streams and smiling lawns behold?
Where is the breast can hear the woodland strain,
And think fair Freedom well exchanged for gold?
Through these soft shades delighted let me stray,
While over my head forgotten suns descend!
Through these dear valleys bend my casual way,
Till setting life a total shade extend!
Here far from courts, and void of pompous cares,
I Will muse how much I owe mine humbler fate,
Or shrink to find how much Ambition dares,
To shine in anguish, and to grieve in state!
Can thou, O Sun! that spotless throne disclose,
Where her bold arm has left no sanguine stain?
Where, show me where, the lineal scepter glows,
Pure as the simple crook that rules the plain?
Tremendous pomp! where hate, distrust, and fear,
In kindred bosoms solve the social tie;
There not the parent's smile is half sincere,
Nor void of art the consort's melting eye.
There with the friendly wish, the kindly flame,
No face is brightened and no bosoms beat;
Youth, manhood, age, avow one sordid aim,
And even the beardless lip essays deceit.
There coward Rumors walk their murderous round;
The glance that more then rural blame instills;
Whispers that, tinged with friendship, doubly wound,
Pity that injures, and concern that kills.
There anger whets, but love can never engage;
Caressing brothers part but to revile;
There all men smile, and Prudence warns the wise
To dread the fatal stroke of all that smile.
There all are rivals! sister, son, and sire,
With horrid purpose hug destructive arms;
There soft-ey'd maids in murderous plots conspire,
And scorn the gentler mischief of their charms.
Let servile minds one endless watch endure;
Day, night, nor hour, their anxious guard resign;
But lay me, Fate! on flowery banks secure,
Though my whole soul be, like my limbs, supine.
Yes; may my tongue disdain a vassal's care;
My lyre resound no prostituted lays;
More warm to merit, more elate to wear
The cap of Freedom than the crown of bays.
Soothed by the murmurs of my pebbled flood,
I wish it not over golden sands to flow;
Cheered by the verdure of my spiral wood,
I scorn the quarry where no shrub can grow.
No midnight pangs the shepherd's peace pursue;
His tongue, his hand, attempts no secret wound;
He sings his Delia, and, if she be true,
His love at once and his ambition's crowned.
ELEGY XXIV. He takes occasion, from the fate of Eleanor of Bretagne Eleanor of
Bretagne, the lawful heiress of the English crownn, upon the death of Arthur,
in the reign of King John. She was esteemed the beauty of her time; was
imprisoned forty years (till the time of her death) in Bristol castle.
, to suggest the imperfect pleasures of a solitary life.
WHEN Beauty mourns, by Fate's injurious doom,
Hid from the cheerful glance of human eye;
When Nature's pride inglorious waits the tomb,
Hard is that heart which checks the rising sigh.
Fair Eleonora! would no gallant mind
The cause of Love, the cause of Justice, own?
Matchless thy charms, and was no life resigned
To see them sparkle from their native throne?
Or had fair Freedom's hand unveiled thy charms,
Well might such brows the regal gem resign;
Thy radiant mien might scorn the guilt of arms,
Yet Albion's awful empire yield to thine.
O shame of Britons! in one sullen tower
She wet with royal tears her daily cell;
She found keen anguish every rose devour:
They sprung, they shone, they faded, and they fell.
Through one dim lattice, fringed with ivy round,
Successive suns a languid radiance threw,
To paint how fierce her angry guardian frowned,
To mark how fast her waning beauty flew.
This Age might bear; then sated Fancy palls,
Nor warmly hopes what splendor can supply;
Fond Youth incessant mourns, if rigid walls
Restrain its listening ear, its curious eye.
Believe me ** the pretense is vain!
This boasted calm that smooths our early days;
For never yet could youthful mind restrain
The alternate pant for pleasure and for praise.
Even me, by shady oak or limpid spring,
Even me, the scenes of polished life allure;
Some genius whispers, "Life is on the wing,
" And hard his lot that languishes obscure.
" What though thy riper mind admire no more --
" The shining cincture and the broider'd fold
" Can pierce like lightning through the figured ore,
" And melt to dross the radiant forms of gold.
" Furs, ermines, rods, may well attract thy scorn,
" The futile presents of capricious Power!
" But wit, but worth, the public sphere adorn,
" And who but envies then the social hour?
" Can Virtue, careless of her pupil's meed,
" Forget how ** sustains the shepherd's cause?
" Content in shades to tune a lonely reed,
" Nor join the sounding paean of applause?
" For public haunts, impelled by Britain's weal,
" See Grenville quit the Muse's favorite ease;
" And shall not swains admire his noble zeal?
" Admiring praise, admiring strive to please?
" Life," says the sage, "affords no bliss sincere,
" And courts and cells in vain our hopes renew;
" But, ah! where Grenville charms the listening ear,
" It Is hard to think the cheerless maxim true.
" The groves may smile, the rivers gently glide,
" Soft through the vale resound the lonesome lay;
" Even thickets yield delight, if taste preside,
" But can they please when Lyttleton's away?
" Pure as the swain's the breast of *** glows;
" Ah! were the shepherd's phrase like his refined!
" But how improved the generous dictate flows
" Through the clear medium of a polished mind!
" Happy the youths who, warm with Britain's love,
" Her inmost wish in *** periods hear!
" Happy that in the radiant circle move,
" Attendant orbs, where Lonsdale gilds the sphere!
" While rural faith, and every polished art,
" Each friendly charm, in *** conspire,
" From public scenes all pensive must you part;
" All joyless to the greenest fields retire!
" Go, plaintive Youth! no more by fount or stream,
" Like some lone halcyon, social pleasure shun;
" Go, dare the light, enjoy its cheerful beam,
" And hail the bright procession of the sun.
" Then, covered by thy ripened shades, resume
" The silent walk, no more by passion tossed;
" Then seek thy rustic haunts, the dreary gloom,
" Where every art that colors life is lost." --
In vain! the listening Muse attends in vain!
Restraints in hostile bands her motions wait --
Yet will I grieve, and sadden all my strain,
When injured Beauty mourns the Muse's fate.
ELEGY XXV. To Delia, with some flowers; complaining how much his benevolence
suffers on account of his humble fortune.
WHATEVER could Sculpture's curious art employ,
Whatever the lavish hand of Wealth can shower,
These would I give -- and every gift enjoy
That pleased my fair -- but Fate denies my power.
Blessed were my lot to feed the social fires!
To learn the latent wishes of a friend!
To give the boon his native taste admires,
And for my transport on his smile depend!
Blessed, too, is he whose evening ramble strays
Where droop the sons of Indigence and Care!
His little gifts their gladden'd eyes amaze,
And win, at small expense, their fondest prayer!
And, oh! the joy, to shun the conscious light;
To spare the modest blush; to give unseen!
Like showers that fall behind the veil of night,
Yet deeply tinge the smiling vales with green.
But happiest they who drooping realms relieve!
Whose virtues in our cultured vales appear!
For whose sad fate a thousand shepherds grieve,
And fading fields allow the grief sincere.
To call lost Worth from its oppressive shade,
To fix its equal sphere, and see it shine,
To hear it grateful own the generous aid;
This, this is transport -- but must never be mine.
Faint is my bounded bliss; nor I refuse
To range where daisies open, rivers roll,
While prose or song the languid hours amuse,
And sooth the fond impatience of my soul.
A while I Will weave the roofs of jasmine bowers,
And urge with trivial cares the loit'ring year;
A while I Will prune my grove, protect my flowers,
Then, unlamented, press an early bier!
Of those loved flowers the lifeless corse may share,
Some hireling hand a fading wreath bestow;
The rest will breath as sweet, will glow as fair,
As when their master smiled to see them glow.
The sequent morn shall wake the sylvan quire;
The kid again shall wanton ere it is noon;
Nature will smile, will wear her best attire;
O! let not gentle Delia smile so soon!
While the rude hearse conveys me slow away,
And careless eyes my vulgar fate proclaim,
Let thy kind tear my utmost worth o'erpay,
And, softly sighing, vindicate my fame. --
O Delia! cheered by thy superior praise,
I bless the silent path the Fates decree;
Pleased, from the list of my inglorious days
To raze the moments crowned with bliss and thee.
ELEGY XXVI. Describing the sorrow of an ingenuous mind on the melancholy event
of a licentious amor.
WHY mourns my friend? why weeps his downcast eye?
That eye where mirth, where fancy, used to shine;
Thy cheerful meads reprove that swelling sigh;
Spring never enameled fairer meads than thine.
Art thou not lodged in Fortune's warm embrace?
Were thou not formed by Nature's partial care?
Blessed in thy song, and blessed in every grace
That wins the friend, or that enchants the fair!
" Damon," said he, "thy partial praise restrain;
" Not Damon's friendship can my peace restore:
" Alas! his very praise awakes my pain,
" And my poor wounded bosom bleeds the more.
" For, oh! that Nature on my birth had frowned,
" Or Fortune fixed me to some lowly cell!
" Then had my bosom 'scap'd this fatal wound,
" Nor had I bid these vernal sweets farewell.
" But led by Fortune's hand, her darling child,
" My youth her vain licentious bliss admired;
" In Fortune's train the siren Flattery smiled,
" And rashly hallowed all her queen inspired.
" Of folly studious, even of vices vain,
" Ah, vices gilded by the rich and gay!
" I chased the guileless daughters of the plain,
" Nor dropped the chase till Jessy was my prey.
" Poor artless maid! to stain thy spotless name
" Expense, and Art, and Toil, united strove;
" To lure a breast that felt the purest flame,
" Sustained by virtue, but betrayed by love.
" Schooled in the science of Love's mazy wiles,
" I clothed each feature with affected scorn;
" I spoke of jealous doubts and fickle smiles,
" And, seigning, left her anxious and forlorn.
" Then while the fancied rage alarmed her care,
" Warm to deny, and zealous to disprove,
" I bade my words the wonted softness wear,
" And seized the minute of returning love.
" To thee, my Damon, dare I paint the rest?
" Will yet thy love a candid ear incline?
" Assured that virtue, by misfortune pressed,
" Feels not the sharpness of a pang like mine.
" Nine envious moons matur'd her growing shame,
" Ere while to flaunt it in the face of day,
" When, scorned of Virtue, stigmatized by Fame,
" Low at my feet desponding Jessy lay."
" Henry," she said, "by thy dear form subdued,
" See the sad relics of a nymph undone!
" I find, I find this rising sob renewed;
" I sigh in shades, and sicken at the sun.
" Amid the dreary gloom of night I cry,
" When will the morn's once pleasing scenes return?
" Yet what can morn's returning ray supply,
" But foes that triumph, or but friends that mourn?
" Alas! no more that joyous morn appears
" That led the tranquil hours of spotless fame,
" For I have steeped a father's couch in tears,
" And tinged a mother's glowing cheek with shame.
" The vocal birds that raise their matin strain,
" The sportive lambs, increase my pensive moan;
" All seem to chase me from the cheerful plain,
" And talk of truth and innocence alone.
" If through the garden's flowery tribes I stray,
" Where bloom the jasmines that could once allure,
" Hope not to find delight in us," they say,
" For we are spotless, Jessy; we are pure."
" Ye Flowers! that well reproach a nymph so frail,
" Say, could ye with my virgin fame compare?
" The brightest bud that scents the vernal gale
" Was not so fragrant, and was not so fair.
" Now the grave old alarm the gentler young,
" And all my fame's abhorred contagion flee;
" Trembles each lip, and falters every tongue,
" That bids the morn propitious smile on me.
" Thus for your sake I shun each human eye,
" I bid the sweets of blooming youth adieu;
" To die I languish, but I dread to die,
" Lest my sad fate should nourish pangs for you.
" Raise me from earth; the pains of want remove,
" And let me, silent, seek some friendly shore;
" There only, banished from the form I love,
" My weeping virtue shall relapse no more.
" Be but my friend; I ask no dearer name;
" Be such the meed of some more artful fair;
" Nor could it heal my peace or chase my shame,
" That Pity gave what Love refused to share.
" Force not my tongue to ask its scanty bread,
" Nor hurl thy Jessy to the vulgar crew;
" Not such the parent's board at which I fed!
" Not such the precept from his lips I drew!
" Happily, when age has silvered over my hair,
" Malice may learn to scorn so mean a spoil;
" Envy may slight a face no longer fair,
" And Pity welcome to my native soil."
" She spoke -- nor was I born of savage race,
" Nor could these hands a niggard boon assign;
" Grateful she clasped me in a last embrace.
" And vowed to waste her life in prayers for mine.
" I saw her foot the lofty bark ascend,
" I saw her breast with every passion heave;
" I left her -- torn from every earthly friend;
" Oh! my hard bosom! which could bear to leave!
" Brief let me be; the fatal storm arose;
" The billows raged, the pilot's art was vain;
" Over the tall mast the circling surges close;
" My Jessy -- flotes upon the watery plain!
" And -- see my youth's impetuous fires decay;
" Seek not to stop Reflection's bitter tear;
" But warn the frolic, and instruct the gay,
" From Jessy floting on her watery bier!"
LEVITIES: OR, PIECES OF HUMOR.
FLIRT AND PHIL: A DECISION FOR THE LADIES.
A WIT, by learning well refined,
A beau, but of the rural kind,
To Silvia made pretenses;
They both professed an equal love,
Yet hoped by different means to move
Her judgment or her senses.
Young sprightly Flirt, of blooming mien,
Watched the best minutes to be seen,
Went -- when his glass advised him;
While meagre Phil of books inquired,
A wight for wit and parts admired,
And witty ladies prized him.
Silvia had wit, had spirits too;
To hear the one, the other view,
Suspended held the scales:
Her wit, her youth, too, claimed its share;
Let none the preference declare,
But turn up -- heads or tails.
STANZAS To the memory of an agreeable Lady, buried in marriage to a person
undeserving her.
'TWAS always held, and ever will,
By sage mankind, discreeter
TO anticipate a lesser ill
Than undergo a greater.
When mortals dread diseases, pain,
And languishing conditions,
Who don't the lesser ills sustain
Of physic -- and physicians?
Rather than lose his whole estate,
He that but little wise is,
Full gladly pays four parts in eight
To taxes and excises.
Our merchants Spain has near undone
For lost ships not requiting;
This bears our noble K --, to shun
The loss of blood -- in fighting!
With numerous ills, in single life,
The bachelor's attended;
Such to avoid he takes a wife --
And much the case is mended!
Poor Gratia, in her twentieth year,
Foreseeing future woe,
Chose to attend a monkey here
Before an ape below.
COLEMIRA. A CULINARY ECLOGUE.
Nec tantum Veneris, quantum studiosa culinae.

IMITATION. Insensible of soft desire,
Behold Colemira prove
More partial to the kitchen fire
Than to the fire of Love.


NIGHT'S sable clouds had half the globe overspread,
And silence reigned, and folks were gone to bed,
When love, which gentle sleep can never inspire,
Had seated Damon by the kitchen fire.
Pensive he lay, extended on the ground,
The little Lares kept their vigils round;
The fawning cats compassionate his case,
And pur around, and gently lick his face:
To all his plaints the sleeping curs reply,
And with hoarse snorings imitate a sigh.
Such gloomy scenes with lovers' minds agree,
And solitude to them is best society.
" Could I," he cried, "express how bright a grace
" Adorns thy morning hands and well-wash'd face,
" Thou would, Colemira, grant what I implore,
" And yield me love, or wash thy face no more.
" Ah! who can see, and seeing not admire,
" Whenever she sets the pot upon the fire!
" Her hands outshine the fire and redder things;
" Her eyes are blacker than the pots she brings.
" But sure no chamber-damsel can compare,
" When in meridian luster shines my fair,
" When warmed with dinner's toil, in pearly rills,
" Adown her goodly cheek the sweat distills.
" Oh! how I long, how ardently desire,
" To view those rosy fingers strike the lyre!
" For late, when bees to change their climes began,
" How did I see 'em thrum the srying-pan!
" With her I should not envy G -- his queen,
" Though she in royal grandeur decked be seen;
" Whilst rags, just severed from my fair one's gown,
" In russet pomp and greasy pride hang down.
" Ah! how it does my drooping heart rejoice,
" When in the hall I hear thy mellow voice!
" How would that voice exceed the village bell,
" Would thou but sing, "I like thee passing well!"
" When from the hearth she bade the pointers go,
" How soft, how easy, did her accents flow!
" Get out," she cried; "when strangers come to sup
" One never can raise those snoring devils up."
" Then, full of wrath, she kicked each lazy brute,
" Alas! I envied even that salute:
" 'Twas sure misplaced -- Shock said, or seemed to say,
" He had as lief I had the kick as they.
" If she the mystic bellows take in hand,
" Who like the fair can that machine command!
" O may thou never by Aeolus be seen,
" For he would sure demand thee for his queen!
" But should the flame this rougher aid refuse,
" And only gentler medicines be of use,
" With full-blown cheeks she ends the doubtful strife,
" Foments the infant flame, and puffs it into life.
" Such arts as these exalt the drooping fire,
" But in my breast a fiercer flame inspire:
" I burn! I burn! O! give thy puffing over,
" And swell thy cheeks and pout thy lips no more!
" With all her haughty looks, the time I Have seen
" When this proud damsel has more humble been,
" When with nice airs she hoist the pancake round,
" And dropped it, hapless fair! upon the ground.
" Look, with what charming grace, what winning tricks,
" The artful charmer rubs the candlesticks!
" So bright she makes the candlesticks she handles,
" Often have I said -- there were no need of candles.
" But thou, my Fair! who never would approve,
" Or hear the tender story of my love,
" Or mind how burns my raging breast -- a button --
" Perhaps art dreaming of -- a breast of mutton."
Thus said, and wept, the sad desponding swain,
Revealing to the sable walls his pain;
But nymphs are free with those they should deny;
To those they love more exquisitely coy.
Now chirping crickets raise their tinkling voice,
The lambent flames in languid streams arise,
And smoke in azure folds evaporates and dies.
ON CERTAIN PASTORALS.
SO rude and tuneless are thy lays,
The weary audience vow
It Is not the Arcadian swain that sings,
But it is his herds that low.
ON MR. C -- OF KIDDERMINSTER'S POETRY.
THY verses, Friend! are Kidderminster Kidderminster, famous for a coarse
woollen manufacture.
stuff,
And I must own you have measured out enough.
TO THE VIRTUOSI.
HAIL, curious Wights! to whom so fair
The form of mortal flies is!
Who deem those grubs beyond compare,
Which common sense despises.
Whether over hill, morass, or mound,
You make your sportsman sallies,
Or that your prey, in gardens found,
Is urged through walks and allies;
Yet in the fury of the chase
No slope could ever retard you,
Blessed if one fly repay the race,
Or painted wing reward you.
Fierce as Camilla See Virgil.
over the plain
Pursued the glittering stranger,
Still eyed the purple's pleasing stain,
And knew not fear nor danger.
It Is you dispense the favorite meat
To Nature's filmy people,
Know what conserves they choose to eat,
And what liqueurs to tipple.
And if her brood of insects dies,
You sage assistance lend her;
Can stoop to pimp for amorous flies,
And help 'em to engender.
It Is you protect their pregnant hour;
And, when the birth's at hand,
Exerting your obstetric power,
Prevent a mothless land.
Yet, oh! however your towering view
Above gross objects rises,
Whatever refinements you pursue,
Hear what a friend advises:
A friend who, weighed with yours, must prize
Domitian's idle passion,
That wrought the death of teazing flies,
But never their propagation.
Let Flavia's eyes more deeply warm,
Nor thus your hearts determine,
To slight Dame Nature's fairest form
And sigh for Nature's vermin.
And speak with some respect of beaus,
Nor more as triflers treat 'em;
It Is better learn to save one's clothes
Than cherish moths that eat 'em.
THE EXTENT OF COOKERY.
Aliusque et idem.
EXPLANATION. Another and the same.

WHEN Tom to Cambridge first was sent,
A plain brown bob he wore,
Read much, and looked as though he meant
To be a fop no more.
See him to Lincoln's End repair,
His resolution flag,
He cherishes a length of hair,
And tucks it in a bag.
Nor Coke nor Salkeld he regards,
But gets into the House,
And soon a judge's rank rewards
His pliant votes and bows.
Adieu, ye Bobs! ye Bags! give place;
Full bottoms come instead:
Good L -- d! to see the various ways
Of dressing a calf's head!
THE PROGRESS OF ADVICE. A COMMON CASE.
Suade, nam certum est.
EXPLANATION. Advise it, for it is fixed.

SAYS Richard to Thomas (and seemed half afraid)
" I am thinking to marry thy mistress's maid;
" Now, because Mrs. Lucy to thee is well known,
" I will do it if thou bidd'st me, or let it alone.
" Nay, don't male a jest on it; it is no jest to me;
" For 'faith I Am in earnest; so, prithee, be free.
" I have no fault to find with the girl since I knew her,
" But I Would have thy advice ere I tie myself to her."
Said Thomas to Richard, "To speak my opinion,
" There is not such a bitch in King George's dominion;
" And I firmly believe, if thou knew'st her as I do,
" Thou would choose out a whipping-post first to be tied to.
" She Is peevish, she is thievish, she is ugly, she is old,
" And a liar, and a fool, and a slut, and a scold."
Next day Richard hastened to church and was wed,
And ere night had informed her what Thomas had said.
SLENDER'S GHOST. VIDE SHAKESPEARE.
BENEATH a churchyard yew,
Decayed and worn with age,
At dusk of eve methought I spied
Poor Slender's Ghost, that whimp'ring cried,
" O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!"
Ye gentle Bards! give ear,
Who talk of amorous rage,
Who spoil the lily, rob the rose,
Come learn of me to weep your woes:
" O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!"
Why should such labored strains
Your formal Muse engage?
I never dreamed of flame or dart,
That fired my breast or pierced my heart,
But sighed, "O sweet Anne Page!"
And you! whose lovesick minds
No medicine can assuage,
Accuse the leech's art no more,
But learn of Slender to deplore;
" O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!"
And ye! whose souls are held
Like linnets in a cage,
Who talk of fetters, links, and chains,
Attend, and imitate my strains;
" O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!"
And you! who boast or grieve
What horrid wars ye wage,
Of wounds received from many an eye,
Yet mean as I do, when I sigh
" O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!"
Hence every fond conceit
Of shepherd or of sage;
It Is Slender's voice, it is Slender's way,
Expresses all you have to say,
" O sweet! O sweet Anne Page!"
THE INVIDIOUS. MART.
O FORTUNE! if my prayer of old
Was never solicitous for gold,
With better grace thou may allow
My suppliant wish, that asks it now:
Yet think not, Goddess! I require it
For the same end your clowns desire it.
In a well-made effectual string
Fain would I see Lividio swing;
Hear him from Tyburn's height haranguing;
But such a cur's not worth one's hanging.
Give me, O Goddess! store of pelf,
And he will tie the knot himself.
THE PRICE OF AN EQUIPAGE.
Servum si potes, Ole, non habere,
Et regem potes, Ole, non habere.
MART. " If thou from Fortune do no servant crave,
" Believe me thou no master need'st to have."

I ASKED a friend, amidst the throng,
Whose coach it was that trail'd along?
" The gilded coach there -- don't ye mind?
" That with the footmen stuck behind."
" O Sir!" says he, "what! have not you seen it?
" It Is Damon's coach, and Damon in it.
" It Is odd, methinks, you have forgot
" Your friend, your neighbor, and -- what not!
" Your old acquaintance Damon!" -- "True;
" But faith his Equipage is new."
" Bless me," said I, "where can it end?
" What madness has possessed my friend?
" Four powdered slaves, and those the tallest,
" Their stomachs, doubtless, not the smallest!
" Can Damon's revenue maintain,
" In lace and food, so large a train?
" I know his land -- each inch of ground --
" It Is not a mile to walk it round --
" If Damon's whole estate can bear
" To keep his lad and one-horse chair,
" I own it is past my comprehension."
" Yes, Sir; but Damon has a pension -- "
Thus does a false ambition rule us,
Thus pomp delude, and folly fool us;
To keep a race of flick'ring knaves,
He grows himself the worst of slaves.
HINT FROM VOITURE.
LET Sol his annual journies run,
And when the radiant task is done,
Confess, through all the globe, 'twould pose him
To match the charms that Celia shows him.
And should he boast he once had seen
As just a form, as bright a mien,
Yet must it still for ever pose him
To match -- what Celia never shows him.
INSCRIPTION.
To the memory
Of A. L. Esquire,
Justice of the peace for this county;
Who, in the whole course of his pilgrimage
Through a trifling ridiculous world,
Maintaining his proper dignity,
Notwithstanding the scoffs of ill-dispos'd persons,
And wits of the age,
That ridiculed his behavior,
Or censured his breeding,
Following the dictates of Nature,
Desiring to ease the afflicted,
Eager to set the prisoners at liberty,
Without having for his end
The noise or report such things generally cause
In the world,
(As he was seen to perform them of none)
But the sole relief and happiness
Of the party in distress,
Himself resting easy
When he could render that so;
Not griping or pinching himself
To hoard up superfluities;
Not coveting to keep in his possession
What gives more disquietude than pleasure,
But charitably diffusing it
To all round about him;
Making the most sorrowful countenance
To smile,
In his presence;
Always bestowing more than he was asked,
Always imparting before he was desired;
Not proceeding in this manner
Upon every trivial suggestion,
But the most mature and solemn deliberation;
With an incredible presence and undauntedness
Of mind,
With an inimitable gravity and economy
Of face,
Bidding loud defiance
To politeness and the fashion,
Dared let a f -- t.
TO A FRIEND.
HAVE you never seen, my gentle Squire!
The humors of your kitchen fire?
Says Ned to Sal, "I lead a spade;
" Why don't ye play? -- the girl's afraid --
" Play something -- any thing -- but play --
" It Is but to pass the time away --
" Phoo -- how she stands -- biting her nails --
" As though she played for half her vails --
" Sorting her cards, hagling and picking --
" We play for nothing, do us? Chicken!
" That card will do -- 'blood never doubt it,
" Its not worth while to think about it."
Sal thought, and thought, and missed her aim,
And Ned, never studying, won the game.
Methinks, old Friend! it is wondrous true
That verse is but a game at loo:
While many a bard, that shows so clearly
He writes for his amusement merely,
Is known to study, fret, and toil,
And play for nothing all the while,
Or praise at most, for wreaths of yore
Never signified a farthing more,
Till having vainly toiled to gain it,
He sees your flying pen obtain it.
Through fragrant scenes the trifler roves,
And hallowed haunts that Phoebus loves,
Where with strange heats his bosom glows,
And mystic flames the god bestows.
You now none other flame require
Than a good blazing parlour fire;
Write verses -- to defy the scorners
In shit-houses and chimney-corners.
Sal found her deep-laid schemes were vain --
The cards are cut -- come, deal again --
No good comes on it when one lingers --
I Will play the cards come next my fingers --
Fortune could never let Ned loo her,
When she had left it wholly to her.
Well, now who wins? -- why, still the same --
For Sal has lost another game.
" I Have done, (she muttered;) I was saying,
" It did not argufy my playing.
" Some folks will win, they cannot choose,
" But think or not think -- some must lose.
" I may have won a game or so --
" But then it was an age ago --
" It never will be my lot again --
" I won it of a baby then --
" Give me an ace of trumps, and see!
" Our Ned will beat me with a three!
" It Is all by luck that things are carried --
" He Will suffer for it when he is married."
Thus Sal, with tears in either eye,
While victor Ned sat titt'ring by.
Thus I, long envying your success,
And bent to write and study less,
Sat down, and scribbled in a trice
Just what you see -- and you despise.
You, who can frame a tuneful song,
And hum it as you ride along,
And, trotting on the king's highway,
Snatch from the hedge a sprig of bay,
Accept this verse, however it flows,
From one that is your friend in prose.
What is this wreath, so green, so fair!
Which many wish, and few must wear?
Which some men's indolence can gain,
And some men's vigils never obtain?
For what must Sal or poet sue,
Ere they engage with Ned or you?
For luck in verse, for luck at loo?
Ah, no! it is genius gives you fame,
And Ned, through skill, secures the game.
THE POET AND THE DUN, 1741.
These are messengers
That feelingly persuade me what I am.
SHAKESPEARE.
COMES a Dun in the morning and raps at my door --
" I made bold to call -- it is a twelvemonth and more --
" I Am sorry, believe me, to trouble you thus, Sir --
" But Job would be paid, Sir, had Job been a mercer."
My friend, have but patience -- "Ay, these are your ways."
I have got but one shilling to serve me two days --
But, Sir -- prithee take it, and tell your attorney
If I have not paid your bill I have paid for your journey.
Well, now thou art gone, let me govern my passion,
And calmly consider -- Consider? vexation!
What whore that must paint, and must put on false locks,
And counterfeit joy in the pangs of the pox!
What beggar's wife's nephew, now starved, and now beaten,
Who, wanting to eat, fears himself shall be eaten!
What porter, what turnspit, can deem his case hard!
Or what Dun boast of patience that thinks of a Bard!
Well, I Will leave this poor trade, for no trade can be poorer,
Turn shoeboy, or courtier, or pimp, or procurer;
Get love, and respect, and good living, and pelf,
And dun some poor dog of a poet myself.
One's credit, however, of course will grow better.
Here enters the footman, and brings me a letter.
" Dear Sir! I received your obliging epistle,
" Your fame is secure -- bid the critics go whistle.
" I read over with wonder the poem you sent me,
" And I must speak your praises, no soul shall prevent me.
" The audience, believe me, cried out every line
" Was strong, was affecting, was just, was divine;
" All pregnant, as gold is, with worth, weight, and beauty,
" And to hide such a genius was -- far from your duty.
" I foresee that the court will be hugely delighted:
" Sir Richard for much a less genius was knighted.
" Adieu, my good Friend! and for high life prepare ye;
" I could say much more, but you're modest, I spare ye."
Quite fired with the flattery, I call for my paper,
And waste that and health, and my time, and my taper:
I scribble 'till morn, when with wrath no small store,
Comes my old friend the mercer, and raps at my door.
" Ah, Friend! it is but idle to make such a pother,
" Fate, Fate has ordained us to plague one another."
WRITTEN AT AN INN AT HENLEY.
To thee, fair Freedom! I retire
From flattery, cards, and dice, and din;
Nor art thou found in mansions higher
Than the low cot or humble Inn.
It Is here with boundless power I reign,
And every health which I begin
Converts dull Port to bright Champaigne;
Such freedom crowns it at an Inn.
I fly from pomp, I fly from plate!
I fly from Falsehood's specious grin!
Freedom I love, and form I hate,
And choose my lodgings at an Inn.
Here, Waiter! take my sordid ore,
Which lackies else might hope to win;
It buys, what courts have not in store,
It buys me freedom at an Inn.
Whoever has traveled life's dull round,
Wherever his stages may have been,
May sigh to think he still has found
The warmest welcome at an Inn.
A SIMILE.
WHAT village but has sometimes seen
The clumsy shape, the frightful mien,
Tremendous claws, and shagged hair,
Of that grim brute yclep'd a bear?
He from his dam, the learned agree,
Received the curious form you see,
Who with her plastic tongue alone
Produced a visage -- like her own --
And thus they hint, in mystic fashion,
The powerful force of education Of a fond matron's education.
. --
Perhaps yon' crowd of swains is viewing
Even now, the strange exploits of Bruin,
Who plays his antics, roars aloud,
The wonder of a gaping crowd!
So have I known an awkward lad,
Whose birth has made a parish glad,
Forbid, for fear of sense, to roam,
And taught by kind mamma at home,
Who gives him many a well-try'd rule,
With ways and means -- to play the fool.
In sense the same, in stature higher,
He shines, ere long, a rural squire,
Pours forth unwitty jokes, and swears,
And bawls, and drinks, but chiefly stares:
His tenants of superior sense
Carouse and laugh at his expense,
And deem the pastime I Am relating
To be as pleasant as bear-baiting.
THE CHARMS OF PRECEDENCE. A TALE.
" SIR, will you please to walk before?"
" -- No, pray, Sir -- you are next the door."
" -- Upon mine honor I Will not stir -- "
" Sir, I Am at home; consider, Sir -- "
" Excuse me, Sir; I Will not go first."
" Well, if I must be rude, I must --
" But yet I wish I could evade it --
" It Is strangely clownish, be persuaded -- "
Go forward, Cits! go forward, Squires!
Nor scruple each what each admires.
Life squares not, Friends! with your proceeding,
It flies while you display your breeding;
Such breeding as one's granam preaches,
Or some old dancingmaster teaches.
O for some rude tumultuous fellow,
Half crazy, or, at least, half mellow,
To come behind you unawares,
And fairly push you both down stairs!
But Death's at hand -- let me advise ye,
Go forward, Friends! or he will surprise ye.
Besides, how insincere you are!
Do ye not flatter, lie, forswear,
And daily cheat, and weekly pray,
And all for this -- to lead the way?
Such is my theme, which means to prove,
That though we drink, or game, or love,
As that or this is most in fashion,
Precedence is our ruling passion.
When college-students take degrees,
And pay the beadle's endless fees,
What moves that scientific body,
But the first cutting at a gaudy?
And whence such shoals, in bare conditions,
That starve and languish as physicians,
Content to trudge the streets, and stare at
The fat apothecary's chariot?
But that, in Charlotte's chamber (see
Moliere's Medicin malgre lui)
The leech, however his fortunes vary,
Still walks before the apothecary.
Flavia in vain has wit and charms,
And all that shines, and all that warms;
In vain all human race adore her,
For -- Lady Mary ranks before her.
O Celia! gentle Celia! tell us,
You who are neither vain nor jealous!
The softest breast, the mildest mien!
Would you not feel some little spleen,
Nor bite your lip, nor furl your brow,
If Florimel, your equal now,
Should one day gain precedence of ye?
First served -- though in a dish of coffee?
Placed first, although where you are found
You gain the eyes of all around?
Named first, though not with half the fame
That waits my charming Celia's name?
Hard fortune! barely to inspire
Our fixed esteem and fond desire!
Barely, wherever you go, to prove
The source of universal love! --
Yet be content, observing this,
Honor's the offspring of caprice;
And worth, however you have pursued it,
Has now no power -- but to exclude it:
You Will find your general reputation
A kind of supplemental station.
Poor Swift, with all his worth, could never,
He tells us, hope to rise a peer;
So, to supply it, wrote for fame,
And well the wit secured his aim.
A common patriot has a drift
Not quite so innocent as Swift;
In Britain's cause he rants, he labors;
" He Is honest, faith." -- Have patience, Neighbors,
For patriots may sometimes deceive,
May beg their friends' reluctant leave
To serve them in a higher sphere,
And drop their virtue to get there. --
As Lucian tells us, in his fashion,
How souls put off each earthly passion,
Ere on Elysium's flowery strand
Old Charon suffered 'em to land;
So, ere we meet a court's caresses,
No doubt our souls must change their dresses;
And souls there be who, bound that way,
Attire themselves ten times a day.
If then it is rank which all men covet,
And saints alike and sinners love it;
If place, for which our courtiers throng
So thick, that few can get along,
For which such servile toils are seen,
Who Is happier than a king? -- a queen.
However men aim at elevation,
It Is properly a female passion:
Women and beaus, beyond all measure,
Are charmed with rank's ecstatic pleasure.
Sir, if your drift I rightly scan,
You Would hint a beau were not a man:
Say women then are fond of places;
I wave all disputable cases.
A man, perhaps, would something linger,
Were his loved rank to cost -- a finger;
Or were an ear or toe the price on it,
He might delib'rate once or twice on it,
Perhaps ask Gataker's advice on it;
And many, as their frame grows old,
Would hardly purchase it with gold.
But women wish Precedence ever;
It Is their whole life's supreme endeavor;
It fires their youth with jealous rage,
And strongly animates their age:
Perhaps they would not sell outright,
Or maim a limb -- that was in sight;
Yet on worse terms they sometimes choose it,
Nor even in punishments refuse it.
Preeminence in pain! you cry,
All fierce and pregnant with reply:
But lend your patience and your ear,
An argument shall make it clear.
But hold, an argument may fail,
Beside, my title says, A Tale.
Where Avon rolls her winding stream,
Avon! the Muses' favorite theme;
Avon! that fills the farmers' purses,
And decks with flowers both farms and verses,
She visits many a fertile vale --
Such was the scene of this my Tale;
For it is in Ev'sham's Vale, or near it,
That folks with laughter tell and hear it.
The soil, with annual plenty blessed,
Was by young Corydon possessed.
His youth alone I lay before ye,
As most material to my story;
For strength and vigor too, he had 'em,
And 'twere not much amiss to add 'em.
Thrice happy lout! whose wide domain
Now green with grass, now gilt with grain,
In russet robes of clover deep,
Or thinly veiled, and white with sheep;
Now fragrant with the bean's perfume,
Now purpled with the pulse's bloom,
Might well with bright allusion store me, --
But happier bards have been before me!
Amongst the various year's increase
The stripling owned a field of pease,
Which, when at night he ceased his labors,
Were haunted by some female neighbors.
Each morn discovered to his sight
The shameful havoc of the night;
Traces of this they left behind 'em,
But no instructions where to find 'em.
The devil's works are plain and evil,
But few or none have seen the devil.
Old Noll, indeed, if we may credit
The words of Echard, who has said it,
Contrived with Satan how to fool us,
And bargained face to face to rule us;
But then Old Noll was one in ten,
And sought him more than other men.
Our shepherd, too, with like attention,
May meet the female fiends we mention.
He rose one morn at break of day,
And near the field in ambush lay;
When, lo! a brace of girls appears,
The third a matron much in years.
Smiling amidst the pease, the sinners
Sat down to cull their future dinners,
And caring little who might own 'em,
Made free as though themselves had fown 'em.
It Is worth a sage's observation
How love can make a jest of passion.
Anger had forced the swain from bed,
His early dues to love unpaid!
And Love, a god that keeps a pother,
And will be paid one time or other,
Now banished Anger out of door,
And claimed the debt withheld before.
If Anger bid our youth revile,
Love formed his features to a smile;
And knowing well 'twas all grimace
To threaten with a smiling face,
He in few words expressed his mind --
And none would deem them much unkind.
The amorous youth, for their offense,
Demanded instant recompense;
That recompense from each, which shame
Forbids a bashful Muse to name:
Yet, more this sentence to discover,
It Is what Bett ** grants her lover,
When he, to make the strumpet willing,
Has spent his fortune -- to a shilling.
Each stood a while, as 'twere suspended,
And loath to do what -- each intended.
At length, with soft pathetic sighs,
The matron, bent with age, replies:
" It Is vain to strive -- justice, I know,
" And our ill stars, will have it so --
" But let my tears your wrath assuage,
" And show some deference for age:
" I from a distant village came,
" Am old, G -- knows, and something lame;
" And if we yield, as yield we must,
" Dispatch my crazy body first."
Our shepherd, like the Phrygian swain,
When circled round on Ida's plain
With goddesses, he stood suspended,
And Pallas's grave speech was ended,
Owned what she asked might be his duty,
But paid the compliment to beauty.
EPILOGUE TO THE TRAGEDY OF CLEONE.
WELL, Ladies -- so much for the tragic style --
And now the custom is to make you smile.
To make us smile! -- methinks I hear you say --
Why, who can help it, at so strange a play?
The captain gone three years! -- and then to blame
The faultless conduct of his virtuous dame!
My stars! -- what gentle belle would think it treason,
When thus provoked, to give the brute some reason?
Out of my house! -- this night, forsooth, depart!
A modern wife had said -- "With all my heart --
" But think not, haughty Sir! I Will go alone;
" Order your coach -- conduct me safe to Town --
" Give me my jewels, wardrobe, and my maid --
" And, pray, take care my pinmoney be paid."
Such is the language of each modish fair;
Yet memoirs, not of modern growth, declare
The time has been when modesty and truth
Were deemed additions to the charms of youth;
When women hid their necks, and veiled their faces,
Nor romp'd, nor raked, nor star'd, at public places,
Nor took the airs of Amazons for graces:
Then plain domestic virtues were the mode,
And wives never dreamed of happiness abroad;
They loved their children, learned no flaunting airs,
But with the joys of wedlock mixed the cares.
Those times are past -- yet sure they merit praise,
For marriage triumphed in those golden days;
By chaste decorum they affection gained;
By faith and fondness what they won maintained.
It Is yours, ye Fair! to bring those days a gen,
And form anew the hearts of thoughtless men;
Make beauty's luster amiable as bright,
And give the soul as well as sense delight;
Reclaim from folly a fantastic age,
That soorns the press, the pulpit, and the stage.
Let truth and tenderness your breasts adorn,
The marriage chain with transport shall be worn;
Each blooming virgin, raised into a bride,
Shall double all their joys, their cares divide;
Alleviate grief, compose the jars of strife,
And pour the balm that sweetens human life.
A PASTORAL ODE, TO THE HONORABLE SIR RICHARD LYTTLETON.
THE morn dispensed a dubious light,
A sullen mist had stolen from sight
Each pleasing vale and hill,
When Damon left his humble bowers
To guard his flocks, to fence his flowers,
Or check his wandering rill.
Though schooled from Fortune's paths to fly,
The swain beneath each lowering sky
Would often his fate bemoan,
That he, in sylvan shades forlorn,
Must waste his cheerless even and morn,
Nor praised, nor loved, nor known.
No friend to Fame's obstrep'rous noise,
Yet to the whispers of her voice,
Soft murmuring, not a foe,
The pleasures he through choice declined,
When gloomy fogs depressed his mind,
It grieved him to forego.
Grieved him to lurk the lakes beside,
Where coots in rushy dingles hide,
And moorcocks shun the day,
While caitiff bitterns, undismayed,
Remark the swain's familiar shade,
And scorn to quit their prey.
But see the radiant sun once more
The bright'ning face of heaven restore,
And raise the doubtful dawn,
And more to gild his rural sphere,
At once the brightest train appear
That ever trod the lawn.
Amazement chilled the shepherd's frame,
To think Bridgewater's The Duchess of Bridgewater, married to Sir Richard
Lyttleton.
honored name
Should grace his rustic cell;
That she, on all whose motions wait
Distinction, titles, rank, and state,
Should rove where shepherds dwell.
But true it is, the generous mind,
By candor swayed, by taste refined,
Will naught but vice disdain;
Nor will the breast where fancy glows
Deem every flower a weed that blows
Amid the desert plain.
Beseems it such, with honor crowned,
To deal its lucid beams around,
Nor equal meed receive;
At most such garlands from the field,
As cowslips, pinks, and pansies, yield,
And rural hands can weave.
Yet strive, ye Shepherds! strive to find,
And weave the fairest of the kind,
The prime of all the spring,
If happily thus yon' lovely fair
May round her temples deign to wear
The trivial wreaths you bring.
O how the peaceful halcyons played,
Wherever the conscious lake betrayed
Athenia's placid mien!
How did the sprightlier linnets throng,
Where Paphia's charms required the song,
'Mid hazel copses green!
Lo, Dartmouth on those banks reclined,
While busy Fancy calls to mind
The glories of his line!
Methinks my cottage rears its head,
The ruined walls of yonder shed,
As through enchantment, shine.
But who the nymph that guides their way?
Could ever nymph descend to stray
From Hagley's famed retreat?
Else by the blooming features fair,
The faultless make, the matchless air,
'Twere Cynthia's form complete.
So would some tuberose delight,
That struck the pilgrim's wondering sight
'Mid lonely deserts drear,
All as at eve the sovereign flower
Dispenses round its balmy power,
And crowns the fragrant year.
Ah! now no more, the shepherd cried,
Must I Ambition's charms deride,
Her subtle force disown;
No more of Fauns or Fairies dream,
While Fancy, near each crystal stream,
Shall paint these forms alone.
By low-brow'd rock or pathless mead,
I deemed that splendor never should lead
My dazzled eyes astray;
But who, alas! will dare contend,
If beauty add, or merit blend
Its more illustrious ray?
Nor is it long -- O plaintive swain!
Since Guernsey saw, without disdain,
Where, hid in woodlands green,
The partner of his early days They were schoolfellows.
,
And once the rival of his praise,
Had stolen through life unseen.
Scarce faded is the vernal flower,
Since Stamford left his honored bower
To smile familiar here:
O formed by Nature to disclose
How fair that courtesy which flows
From social warmth sincere!
Nor yet have many moons decayed
Since Pollio sought this lonely shade,
Admired this rural maze:
The noblest breast that Virtue fires,
The Graces love, the Muse inspires,
Might pant for Pollio's praise.
Say, Thomson here was known to rest;
For him yon' vernal seat I dressed,
Ah! never to return!
In place of wit and melting strains,
And social mirth, it now remains
To weep beside his urn.
Come then, my Lelius! come once more,
And fringe the melancholy shore
With roses and with bays,
While I each wayward Fate accuse,
That envied his impartial Muse,
To sing your early praise.
While Philo, to whose favored sight
Antiquity, with full delight,
Her inmost wealth displays,
Beneath yon' ruin's moulder'd wall
Shall muse, and with his friend recall
The pomp of ancient days.
Here, too, shall Conway's name appear,
He praised the stream so lovely clear,
That shone the reeds among;
Yet clearness could it not disclose,
To match the rhetoric that flows
From Conway's polished tongue.
Even Pit, whose fervent periods roll
Resistless through the kindling soul
Of senates, councils, kings!
Though formed for courts, vouchsafed to rove,
Inglorious, through the shepherd's grove,
And open his bashful springs.
But what can courts discover more
Than these rude haunts have seen before,
Each fount and shady tree?
Have not these trees and fountains seen
The pride of courts, the winning mien
Of peerless Aylesbury?
And Grenville, she whose radiant eyes
Have marked by slow gradation rise
The princely piles of Stow;
Yet praised these unembellish'd woods,
And smiled to see the babbling floods
Through self-worn mazes flow.
Say Dartmouth, who your banks admired,
Again beneath your caves retired,
Shall grace the pensive shade;
With all the bloom, with all the truth,
With all the sprightliness of youth,
By cool reflection swayed?
Brave, yet humane, shall Smith appear;
Ye Sailors! though his name be dear,
Think him not yours alone:
Grant him in other spheres to charm;
The shepherds' breasts though mild are warm,
And ours are all his own.
O Lyttleton! my honored guest,
Could I describe thy generous breast,
Thy firm, yet polished, mind;
How public love adorns thy name,
How Fortune, too, conspires with Fame,
The song should please mankind.
A PASTORAL BALLAD, IN FOUR PARTS. Written 1733.
Arbusta humilesque myricae.
VIRG.
EXPLANATION. Groves and lowly shrubs.


I. ABSENCE.
YE Shepherds! so cheerful and gay,
Whose flocks never carelessly roam,
Should Corydon's happen to stray,
Oh! call the poor wanderers home.
Allow me to muse and to sigh,
Nor talk of the change that ye find;
None once was so watchful as I;
-- I have left my dear Phyllis behind.
Now I know what it is to have strove
With the torture of doubt and desire;
What it is to admire and to love,
And to leave her we love and admire.
Ah! lead forth my flock in the morn,
And the damps of each evening repel;
Alas! I am faint and forlorn,
-- I have bade my dear Phyllis farewell.
Since Phyllis vouchsafed me a look,
I never once dreamed of my vine,
May I lose both my pipe and my crook
If I knew of a kid that was mine.
I prized every hour that went by
Beyond all that had pleased me before;
But now they are past, and I sigh,
And I grieve that I prized them no more.
But why do I languish in vain?
Why wander thus pensively here?
Oh! why did I come from the plain,
Where I fed on the smiles of my dear?
They tell me my favorite maid,
The pride of that valley, is flown;
Alas! where with her I have strayed
I could wander with pleasure alone.
When forced the fair nymph to forego,
What anguish I felt at my heart!
Yet I thought -- but it might not be so --
'Twas with pain that she saw me depart.
She gazed as I slowly withdrew;
My path I could hardly discern:
So sweetly she bade me adieu,
I thought that she bade me return.
The pilgrim that journeys all day
To visit some far-distant shrine,
If he bear but a relic away,
Is happy, nor heard to repine.
Thus widely removed from the fair,
Where my vows, my devotion, I owe,
Soft hope is the relic I bear,
And my solace wherever I go.
II. HOPE.
MY banks they are furnished with bees,
Whose murmur invites one to sleep;
My grottoes are shaded with trees,
And my hills are white-over with sheep.
I seldom have met with a loss,
Such health do my fountains bestow;
My fountains, all bordered with moss,
Where the harebells and violets grow.
Not a pine in my grove is there seen
But with tendrils of woodbine is bound;
Not a beech's more beautiful green
But a sweetbriar entwines it around:
Not my fields, in the prime of the year,
More charms than my cattle unfold;
Not a brook that is limpid and clear,
But it glitters with fishes of gold.
One would think she might like to retire
To the bower I have labored to rear;
Not a shrub that I heard her admire,
But I hasted and planted it there.
O how sudden the jessamine strove
With the lilac to render it gay!
Already it calls for my love
To prune the wild branches away.
From the plains, from the woodlands, and groves,
What strains of wild melody flow!
How the nightingales warble their loves
From thickets of roses that blow!
And when her bright form shall appear,
Each bird shall harmoniously join
In a concert so soft and so clear,
As -- she may not be fond to resign.
I have found out a gift for my fair;
I have found where the wood-pigeons breed;
But let me that plunder forbear,
She will say 'twas a barbarous deed:
For he never could be true, she averred,
Who could rob a poor bird of its young;
And I loved her the more when I heard
Such tenderness fall from her tongue.
I have heard her with sweetness unfold
How that pity was due to -- a dove;
That it ever attended the bold,
And she called it the sister of Love.
But her words such a pleasure convey,
So much I her accents adore,
Let her speak, and whatever she say,
Methinks I should love her the more.
Can a bosom so gentle remain
Unmoved when her Corydon sighs!
Will a nymph that is fond of the plain,
These plains and this valley despise?
Dear regions of silence and shade!
Soft scenes of contentment and ease!
Where I could have pleasingly strayed,
If aught in her absence could please.
But where does my Phyllida stray?
And where are her grots and her bowers?
Are the groves and the valleys as gay,
And the shepherds as gentle, as ours?
The groves may perhaps be as fair,
And the face of the valleys as fine,
The swains may in manners compare,
But their love is not equal to mine.
III. SOLICITUDE.
WHY will you my passion reprove?
Why term it a folly to grieve?
Ere I show you the charms of my love,
She is fairer than you can believe.
With her mien she enamours the brave,
With her wit she engages the free,
With her modesty pleases the grave;
She is every way pleasing to me.
O you that have been of her train,
Come and join in my amorous lays!
I could lay down my life for the swain
That will sing but a song in her praise.
When he sings, may the nymphs of the town
Come trooping, and listen the while;
Nay, on him let not Phyllida frown,
-- But I cannot allow her to smile.
For when Paridel tries in the dance
Any favor with Phyllis to find,
O how with one trivial glance
Might she ruin the peace of my mind!
In ringlets he dresses his hair,
And his crook is bestudded around;
And his pipe -- oh! may Phyllis beware
Of a magic there is in the sound!
It Is his with mock passion to glow;
It Is his in smooth tales to unfold
" How her face is as bright as the snow,
" And her bosom, be sure, is as cold:
" How the nightingales labor the strain,
" With the notes of his charmer to vie;
" How they vary their accents in vain,
" Repine at her triumphs, and die."
To the grove or the garden he strays,
And pillages every sweet,
Then suiting the wreath to his lays,
He throws it at Phyllis's feet.
" O Phyllis!" he whispers, "more fair,
" More sweet, than the jessamine's flower!
" What are pinks in a morn to compare?
" What is eglantine after a shower?
" Then the lily no longer is white,
" Then the rose is deprived of its bloom,
" Then the violets die with despite,
" And the woodbines give up their perfume."
Thus glide the soft numbers along,
And he fancies no shepherd his peer;
-- Yet I never should envy the song,
Were not Phyllis to lend it an ear.
Let his crook be with hyacinths bound,
So Phyllis the trophy despise;
Let his forehead with laurels be crowned,
So they shine not in Phyllis's eyes.
The language that flows from the heart
Is a stranger to Paridel's tongue;
-- Yet may she beware of his art,
Or sure I must envy the song.
IV. DISAPPOINTMENT.
YE Shepherds! give ear to my lay,
And take no more heed of my sheep;
They have nothing to do but to stray,
I have nothing to do but to weep.
Yet do not my folly reprove;
She was fair -- and my passion begun;
She smiled -- and I could not but love;
She is faithless -- and I am undone.
Perhaps I was void of all thought;
Perhaps it was plain to foresee
That a nymph so complete would be sought
By a swain more engaging than me.
Ah! love every hope can inspire,
It banishes wisdom the while,
And the lip of the nymph we admire
Seems for ever adorned with a smile.
She is faithless, and I am undone;
Ye that witness the woes I endure,
Let reason instruct you to shun
What it cannot instruct you to cure.
Beware how you loiter in vain
Amid nymphs of an higher degree;
It is not for me to explain
How fair and how fickle they be.
Alas! from the day that we met
What hope of an end to my woes?
When I cannot endure to forget
The glance that undid my repose.
Yet time may diminish the pain:
The flower, and the shrub, and the tree,
Which I reared for her pleasure in vain,
In time may have comfort for me.
The sweets of a dew-sprinkled rose,
The sound of a murmuring stream,
The peace which from solitude flows,
Henceforth shall be Corydon's theme.
High transports are shown to the sight,
But we are not to find them our own;
Fate never bestowed such delight
As I with my Phyllis had known.
O ye Woods! spread your branches apace,
To your deepest recesses I fly,
I would hide with the beasts of the chase,
I would vanish from every eye.
Yet my reed shall resound through the grove
With the same sad complaint it begun;
How she smiled, and I could not but love!
Was faithless, and I am undone!
CONTENTS.
PREFACE, giving a brief account of the Author, Page 5 A prefatory Essay on
Elegy, 11 Advertisement, 20 A Description of the Leasowes, the Author's
country-seat, by R. Dodsley, 21
VERSES TO MR. SHENSTONE.
Written on a Ferme Ornee, near Birmingham, by the late Lady Luxborough, 52 To
William Shenstone, Esquire. at the Leasowes. By Mr Graves, ib. Verses received by
the post, from a Lady unknown, 1761, 54 On the discovery of an Echo at
Edgbaston, By -- -- 56 Verses by Mr. Dodsley, on his first arrival at the
Leasowes, 1754, 57 To Mr. R. D. on the death of Mr. Shenstone, 59 Verses
written at the Gardens of William Shenstone, Esquire. near Birmingham, 1756, 61 To
William Shenstone, Esquire. in his sickness. By Mr. Woodhouse, 65 Verses left on a
seat, the hand unknown, 68 Corydon, a Pastoral. To the memory of William
Shenstone, Esquire. By Mr. J. Cunningham, 69
ELEGIES, WRITTEN ON MANY DIFFERENT OCCASIONS.
I. He arrives at his retirement in the country, and takes occasion to
expatiate in praise of simplicity. To a Friend, Page 71 II. On posthumous
reputation. To a Friend, 73 III. On the untimely death of a certain learned
acquaintance, 75 IV. Ophelia's urn. To Mr. G --, 78 V. He compares the
turbulence of love with the tranquillity of friendship. To Melissa his friend,
80 VI. To a Lady, on the language of birds, 81 VII. He describes his vision to
an acquaintance, 83 VIII. He describes his early love of poetry, and its
consequences. To Mr G --, 1745, 86 IX. He describes his disinterestedness to a
friend, 89 X. To Fortune, suggesting his motive for repining at her
dispensations, 91 XI. He complains how soon the pleasing novelty of life is
over. To Mr. J --, 94 XII. His recantation, 97 XIII. To a friend, on some
slight occasion estranged from him, 98 XIV. Declining an invitation to visit
foreign countries, he takes occasion to intimate the advantages of his own. To
Lord Temple, 100 XV. In memory of a private family in Worcestershire, Page 103
XVI. He suggests the advantages of birth to a person of merit, and the folly of
a superciliousness that is built upon that sole foundation, 107 XVII. He
indulges the suggestions of spleen: an Elegy to the winds, 112 XVIII. He
repeats the song of Colin, a discerning shepherd, lamenting the state of the
woollen manufactory, 116 XIX. Written in spring 1743, 120 XX. He compares his
humble fortune with the distress of others, and his subjection to Delia with
the miserable servitude of an African slave, 123 XXI. Taking a view of the
country from his retirement, he is led to meditate on the character of the
ancient Britons. Written at the time of a rumoured tax upon luxury, 1746, 126
XXII. Written in the year -- when the rights of sepulture were so frequently
violated, 130 XXIII. Reflections suggested by his situation, 134 XXIV. He takes
occasion, from the fate of Eleanor of Bretagne, to suggest the imperfect
pleasures of a solitary life, 138 XXV. To Delia, with some flowers; complaining
how much his benevolence suffers on account of his humble fortune, Page 142
XXVI. Describing the sorrow of an ingenuous mind on the melancholy event of a
licentious amor, 144
LEVITIES: OR, PIECES OF HUMOR.
Flirt and Phil: A decision for the Ladies, 149 Stanzas to the memory of an
agreeable Lady, buried in marriage to a person undeserving her, 150 Colemira. A
culinary Eclogue, 151 On certain Pastorals, 154 On Mr. C -- of Kidderminster's
poetry, 155 To the Virtuosi, ib. The Extent of Cookery, 157 The Progress of
Advice. A common case, 158 Slender's Ghost, 159 The Invidious, 160 The Price of
an Equipage, 161 Hint from Voiture, 162 Inscription, 163 To a Friend, 164 The
Poet and the Dun, 1741, 167 Written at an Inn at Henley, 169 A Simile, ib. The
Charms of Precedence. A Tale, 171 Epilogue to the tragedy of Cleone, Page 178 A
Pastoral Ode, to the Hon. Sir Richard Lyttleton, 181 A Pastoral Ballad, in four
parts. Written 1733. I. Absence, 189 II. Hope, 191 III. Solicitude, 194 IV.
Disappointment, 196

From the APOLLO PRESS, by the MARTINS, May 16. 1778.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.

