Mr. ADDISON'S DISSERTATION Upon the most Celebrated Roman POETS, ALSO AN ESSAY
UPON THE Roman Elegiac POETS.

By Major PACK.

The THIRD EDITION.

To which is Added, ^n ESSAY upon Mr. ADDISON's Writings. By R. YOUNG, Esquire

LONDON: ^^inted for E. CURLL, over against Catherine Street in the Strand,
1721. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Nomina AUTHORUM.
I. VIRGILIUS. II. Lucretius. III. Ovidius. IV. Statius. V. Lucanus. VI.
Claudianus. VII. Horatius. VIII. Juvenalis. IX. Plautus. X. Terentius. XI.
Seneca. XII. Martialis. XIII. Catullus. XIV. Tibullus. XV. Propertius.
DISSERTATIO DE INSIGNIORIBUS ROMANORUM POETIS.
OMNIUM, in re Poetica, maxim inclaruerunt Romani, and Romanorum VIRGILIUS:
Optimae quaeque Regulae, huic Arti inservientes, non tam Criticorum Praeceptis,
quam MARONIS exemplo, sunt depromendae. Ut ideo de reliquis Heroici Carminis
Scriptoribus, recte statuamus Virtutes and Vitia, quae apud singulos occurrunt,
lectioni conferamus Virgilianae; qui, si ullibi defecerit Bucolicis, nonnunquam
puriorem immiscuit Styli elegantiam, quam quae Pastoribus conveniat; and saepe
grandior sonat Carminum Majestas, quam quae tenui avenae consona videatur. Apud
quemlibet Georgicorum librum, inimitabili quadam Sermonis Elegantia, Res
rusticae explicantur; sed ultimus, de Apum Natura, valde, praeter caeteros,
animum delectat; ubi, dum in tenui Argumento procedit Poema, solennem quandam
Sententiarum and Verborum Pompam studiose affectat Poeta. Apum ideo Opera
Cyclopum assimulat Laboribus, nec majori Carminum tumultu AENEAE and TURNI
recitat Certamina, quam hasce Insectorum Turmas inter sese depraeliantes.
Ubique exiguae Reipublicae Duces, Populi, Studia, Mores, and tenue illud
Imperium, quod intra Alvearii Angustias exercetur, venusta, nescio qua,
Carminis Magnificentia exprimuntur: Quin hoc certe in toto Opere praecipue
occurrit admirandum, quomodo, dum Plantationis, Pastionis, and Agriculturae
curas exequitur Poeta, omissis usitatioribus loquendi formulis, materiae tam
incultae locutionem Poeticam accommodaret; quomodo ignobiliori depressus
Argumento nunquam ad Stylum Plebeium Orationem demiserat: Sed tanta undique
apparet Locutionum vis, ut multi (quamvis temere) Georgicos etiam Aeneidi
praetulisse non dubitarint; sed in hoc Opere, per Argumentum, non licuit alias
Poese^s Parts praeftitisse, quam Styli and Descriptionum Elegantiam. Quod ad
utrumque attinet, illud sibi proprium semper vendicat MARONIS Pagina, ut,
quicquid exprimat, mira quadam Dulcedine animum ingrediatur, and quod
describat, melius quam si Oculis subjiciatur, tanquam praesens intueamur.

In Styli puritate proxime accedit LUCRETIUS, cujus Dictio, si obsoletae
aliquando Verborum Antiquitati, and Numeris pene solutis agnoscas, illorum
Palato, qui Roman sapiunt, persuavis videatur. In Descriptionibus tamen
CLAUDIANO secundus debetur Honos, qui amoenas Rerum Imagines ubique
venustissima contexuit Oratione, in hoc solummodo vitiosus, quod fusius, quam
par eft, semper expatietur, eosdemque Versus diversis exponat Loquendi Modis.
In hac Art sese maxim profecisse satis noverat CLAUDIANUS; de quacunque enim
re satagit, assidue semper quaerit quae describenda sunt, imo plurima sumpsit
Argumenta, quae tota in Descriptionibus occupantur, ut videre est in
Praefationibus, in Idylliis, in Libris de raptu PROSERPINAE, de PHOENICE,
HISTRICE, TORPEDINE, and plerisque Epigramatum.

OVIDIUS (ut erat Aulici Ingenii Homo) terso quidem and polito Carmine res
exhibuit amatorias, in caeteris tamen Operibus istiusmodi occurrit Sermo, quali
in Triviis uti solent: Ille enim Ingenio suo confisus de operosiori Dictione
elaboranda parum erat satis solicitus: In Libro tamen Metamorphose^s varias
optime depinxit Animalium Mutationes, dum prior paulatim exuitur Forma and nova
superinducitur.

Utrumque hoc, quod jam tractamus, Poetis Officium non raro optime praestitit
PAPINIUS; LUCANUS neutrum, cujus Dictio, quanquam multum sonat inflata, nulla
tamen Phraseorum aut Epithetorum Venustate animatur, sed Orationi magis solutae
convenit, quam Poeticae; imo certe tali plerumque utitur Verborum delectu,
qualem vel Liber dedignetur Sermo. Et quanquam in Descriptionibus saepissime
versatur, and in hujusmodi diverticula nunquam non excurrit, raro tamen, ut
debet, Opus absolvit. Jam vero, quod ad STATIUM attinet, plurima certe
composuit summis Poetarum invidenda, sed, inter magnas Virtutes, maxima
occurrunt Vitia. In Dictione enim Verba nimis admittit sesquipedalia, nullaque
de Argumento habita ratione, vana numeris miscet Tonitrua; Nec minus in
Descriptionibus peccat; nimio enim calori indulgens, dum totis viribus
excellere conatur, ultra Finem tendit opus, and in tumorem excrescit. In
utrumque hujusmodi vitium aliquando incidit CLAUDIANUS. Jam vero, quoniam de
VIRGILII Aeneidis Argumento varii multa scripserunt and praeclara, pauca
solummodo de STATII and LUCANI Carminibus sunt advertenda; utpote, quae
Latinorum omnium sola Epica haberi debent. De LuCANO id saepe in Disputationem
venit, an Historia, qua constat Pharsalicum Poema, idoneum sit Heroici Carminis
Argumentum.

Vora ideo Heroicae Poese^s Natura inquirenda est, quam, apud Librum, de
Dignitate and Augmentis Scientiarum, his Verbis, optime exhibuit VERULAMIUS
Nostras.

"De Poesi Narrativa, sive eam Heroicam appellare placet (modo hoc intelligas
de Materia, non de Versu) ea a Fundame nto prorsus nobili excitata videtur,
quod ad dignitatem humanae Naturae imprimis spectat. Cum enim Mundus sensibilis
sit, Anima rationali, dignitate, inferior, videtur Poesis haec humanae Naturae
largiri, quae Historia denegat; atque Animo, umbris rerum, utcunque
satisfacere, cum solida haberi non possint. Si quis enim Rem acutius
introspiciat, firmum ex Poesi sumitur argumentum, Magnitudinem Rerum magis
illustrem, Ordinem magis perfectum, and Varietatem magis pulchram, Animae
humanae complacere, quam, in Natura ipsa, post Lapsum, reperire ullo modo
possit. Quapropter, cum Res geftae, and Eventus, qui verae Historiae
subjiciuntur, non sint ejus Amplitudinis, in qua Anima humana sibi satisfaciat,
praesto est Poesis, quae Facta magis Heroica confingat: Cum Historia vera,
successus rerum, minime pro meritis Virtutum and Scelerum, narret; corrigit eam
Poesis, and exitus, and fortunas, secundum merita, and ex lege Nemeseos,
exhibet: Cum Historia vera, obvia rerum satietate and similitudine, animae
humanae fastidio sit; reficit eam Poesis inexpectata and varia, and
vicissitudinum plena canens. Adeo ut Poesis ista, non solum ad delectationem,
sed etiam ad Animi magnitudinem, and ad Mores conferat. Quare and merito etiam
Divinitatis cujuspiam particeps videri possit; quia animum erigit, and in
sublime rapit: rerum simulachra ad animi desideria accommodando, non animum
rebus (quod ratio facit and Historia) submittendo." Ex quo satis patet, veram
Historiam cum Epico Poemate male convenire; and proinde, LUCANUM, quoad
Argumentum, maxim desecisse. Quinque, in^illius Poemate, maxim emicant
Heroes, CAESAR, POMPEIUS, BRUTUS, CATO, and CICERO. Omnes sane tam Vita
insignes, quam Morte luctuosi; quorum Virtutes (quantum licuit per humanam
Naturam) Perfectioni isti Heroicae, quam reliqui Poetae Ducibus suis falso
tribuerunt, proxime accesserant. LUCANUS CAESARI undique oblatrat, POMPEII
Parts ambitiose fovet, sed BRUTI and CATONIS Encomia, ob Stoicum (credo) illud
Ingenium, quod cum his habuit commune, maxim celebrat: Et plurima certe, quae
LUCANO objicias, Philosophiae hujuscemodi sunt referenda. Inde immodicus iste
Ingenii tumor, and ambitiosa Sententiarum ostentatio, quam, cum illa Hominum
turba semper habet in Deliciis; inde quae magna sunt, quam quae bona sunt,
maluit praeferre. Hinc etiam, in eximia illa Poese^s Virtute, Passionibus
excitandis, ipse (qui omnes Philosophiae Affectus tanquam illicitos
existimavit) male successerat, cujus Vitii unicum tantum (ut taceam caetera)
Argumentum proferam. Postquam in Pugna Pharsalica CAESAR de POMPEIO Victoriam
reportaverit, LUCANUS maxim debuit, si aliquid ab ipsa Historia alienum
protulisset, lugubri quodam Carmine immeritam doluisse POMPEII sortem, quippe
quem, in toto Opere, summo habuit honor; vel saltem ipsum POMPEIUM (ut ingens
patuit Doloris Argumentum) aut de amissa Romae Liberate, aut de Amicorum
Mortibus, aut de propriis querentem Infortunns, introduxisse oportuit. Poeta
tamen ab omni hujusmodi Dolor tam long a best, ut POMPEIUM obnixe hortaretur,
postquam victus a Bello decesserat, ut CAESARIS Victoris sui commiserescat,
quia nempe CAESAR non sine Scelere Victoria potitus est; Nonne juvat pulsum
bellis cessisse, nec istud
Prospexisse (nefas!) spumantes caede catervas?
Respice turbatos in cursu sanguinis amnes,
Et Soceri miserere tui; Quo pectore Romam
Intrabit factus campis felicior istis?


Quis tulerit Poetam tam ridicule philosophantem? quasi vero POMPEIUS Senex,
Exul, Miser, Triumphatus, ob Victorem suum quamvis scelestum Commiserationem
quandam conciperet: Illum quidem maxim Stoice sapuisse oportuerat, qui omnibus
hisce Fortunae Donis spoliatus, tantum in nuda Virtute poneret Felicitatem. Sed
nullus Poetarum, nisi VIRGILIUS, hujusmodi afficiat Dolor: Alii plerunque, dum
moerorem aliquem Lectoribus inducerent, in illo peccant, quod nimia Prolixitate
sese in questus effundant, nec unquam satis Lachrymarum exhaustum esse
sentiant, vel Ingenium, quod maxim possint, Versibus infundendo, faciunt, ut
magis Carmina miremur, quam materiam lugeamus. De utroque cavit VIRGILIUS, qui
mera semper Simplicitate luctuosa, ut in se sunt, exhibuit; and leviter
quicquid dolet perstrinxerat: "Lamentationes enim, inquit CICERO, debent esse
breves and concisae, quia Lachryma subito exarescit, and difficile est,
Auditorem aut Lectorem, in summo illo animi animi affectu, tenere." Ut vero ad
STATIUM redeamus, illi quidem Spiritus non raro feliciter assurgit, cui dum
temperare nequit, nescio quas projicit Ampullas, and vana Carminibus addit
Numerorum Terricula menta. THEBAIDIS quidem Argumentum Ingenii sui
Truculentiae, sed non Heroico Poemati satis aptum videatur: ETEOCLES enim,
POLYNICES, and TYDEUS, quorum gesta hoc Carmine celebrantur, nihil habent
eorum, si unicam Fortitudinem demas, quae convenient Heroibus: Imo, in toto
Poemate, nulla nisi Scelerum, qualia sunt Parricidii, Perfidiae, Immanitatis,
Odiorum, proferuntur Exemplaria; dum in omnibus fere, quos suo Carmine induxit
VIRGILIUS, praeclara^ quaedam illucescunt, and in ipso AENEA summam Pietatem
erga Deos, Natum, Conjugem, Amicos, and Parentem, Oculis semper habemus
subjectam. Epitheta plerunque STATIANA multum sonant metaphorice, dum
inanimatis illa tribuuntur, quae Animalibus convenient. In Verbis tamen, nec
raro sine maxima Elegantia, Metaphoras consectatur CLAUDIANUS; VIRGILIUS in
utrisque parcissimus; STATIUS plurimas rerum similitudines composuit, multum
saepe de VIRGILII Ingenio referentes, in qua art melius successerat LUCANUS,
si aliquid unquam mediocre admiserat; sed dum VIRGILIUS ad Apes, ad Formicas,
and istiusmodi Naturae ludicra descendit, nihil unquam nisi Quercum fulminatam,
Terrae Exitium, aut Mundi Conflagrationem ebuccinat LUCANUS. Et hisce tandem,
quorum alii non operae Pretium duxerunt meminisse, de Heroicis Scriptoribus
breviter perstrictis. De Satyricis restat dicendum; quorum omnium JUVENALIS and
HORATIUS Palmam dubiam quidem fecerunt: Inter Literatos enim multum discrepat,
utrum mordax illa Ingenii acerbitas, qua suam armavit paginam JUVENALIS, an
potius HORATII festivae Irrisiones, magis Satyrae conveniant: Ut vero de
utroque rectius, statuatur, pauca prius sunt advertenda. Ob infamem vitae suae
lasciviam, etiam nunc temporis, male audit HORATIUS; Virtutem tamen semper
rigide coluit JUVENALIS: Ille in absolutissima AUGUSTI Aula versatus est, hic
in pessima DOMITIANI Tempora incidisset: Proinde, ut ad sua and Saeculi
utriusque Ingenia Opera accommodarent Poetae, HORATIUS totus in ludicro
exercetur Argumento, nec Morum Licentiam, sed indecoras quasdam Aulicorum
Ineptias plerunque insectatur; non ideo abfuisset quin irrideretur, si, aliqua
Styli severitate, ad leviuscula hujusmodi castiganda, se accinxisset:
Gravissima tamen in Temporibus suis reprehendit JUVENALIS, and de Vitiis ubique
queritur, quae vel pudeat recitare, and isti sane Materiae, summa Mentis
Indignatio, Orationis Ardor, and Ingenii Acrimonia, rectissime aptari
videantur. Quamvis ubi ad Jocularia Animum demittit, non raro Satyris
Festivitatem fundit HORATIANAM. Uterque ideo (modo diversum consulas
Argumentum) suo quidem Genere perfectissimus emicuit; in illo Ridiculum Acri
melius, in hoc Acre Ridiculo.

Reliqua certe HORATII Opera, Admiratione potius sunt digna quam Encomiis, nec
majora solum Vituperatione, sed etiam Laud.

Jam vero, quod ad Dramaticos attinet, PLAUTI and TERENTII Argumenta, Sales,
Elegantiae ubique adeo vulgantur, ut nihil de novo possit adjici.

De SENECA vero tam diverse sentiunt, ut alii inter summos Tragicorum, alii
infra Infimum annumerent: Illi quidem Ingenium valde magnum, Oration elegans and
concisa, abundat Sententiis plerunque acutis, Stoicam semper Philosophiam, quam
amplexus est, redolentibus. Unde omnibus fere, qui Artem Dramaticam parum
sapiunt, semper est in Deliciis; si tamen ad hanc respicias, Tragoediae ubique
plurimum laborant, and istud vitii (ut reliqua praetermittam) SENECAE peculiare
videatur, ut quoscunque inducat Interlocutores, nulla, ad Personas quas
sustinet, habita ratione, eundem semper unicuique tribuat loquendi modum: Omnes
severiora spirant Philosophiae Dogmata, and quae Stoae magis conveniant, quam
Theatro. Eadem semper Styli Magnificentia superbiunt Rex, and Nuncius: Imo
ipsam Nutricem (plurima enim tam acute profert) Stoicorum Praeceptis non
mediocriter imbutam sentias.

Inter Epigrammatistas potissimum emicuerunt MARTIALIS and CLAUDIANUS; Ille
semper, in extremo Poemate, Ingenii subjecit acumen, and saepe similia
insequitur Verborum Tintinnabula; Hic, per totum Epigramma, suum dispergit
Salem; and venustissima ubique utitur Latinitatis Elegantia.

Caeterum tamen Poetarum Vulgus, de istiusmodi mediocribus sunt, quos nec Dii
nec Homines concesserunt; and quamvis una aut altera apud affectatas CATULLI
Cantatiunculas, TIBULLI aut PROPERTII inhonestam paginam, and Carmina
incuriosa, illucescat Virtus, non tamen est Operae Pretium Gemmas inter
Stercora eruere.

A DISSERTATION Upon the most Celebrated Roman POETS.
OF all the Nations in the World, the Romans have most excelled in the Art of
Poetry, and even, among the Romans, VIRGIL has been the most deservedly
celebrated; from whom the justest Rules of this Art are rather to be taken,
than from the dry Precepts of the Critics. To the End, therefore, that we may
the more truly ascertain the Beauties, and Faults, which occur among the rest
of the Writers of Heroic Poetry, let us compare them with the Style of VIRGIL;
who, if he be in any Thing deficient, it is, when he has sometimes in his
Eclogues mingled such a Purity of Style, as is not entirely agreeable with the
Dialect of Shepherds; and frequently the Dignity of his Verse seems no way
consonant to the Rural Pipe. In every Book of his Georgicks, he treats of
Country Affairs with an inimitable Elegancy of Style; but, above all, we are
most delighted with his last Book, Of the Nature of BEES; where, in a Poem on
so inconsiderable a Subject, our Author purposely affects a peculiarly solemn
and pompous Style. In this Piece he compares the Labors of the BEES to those
of the Cyclops; and in the same lofty Numbers recounts the Skirmishes of these
little Insects among themselves, as he does the Rencounters of AENEAS and
TURNUS. All along, the Generals of this small Republic, the Populace, the
Factions, the Customs and Forms of Government exercised within the narrow
Limits of the Bee-hive, are described with an inexpressible Beauty and
Magnificence. Throughout the whole Work, what mostly raises our Admiration, is,
that in the Persuit of his Discourse on Planting, Grazing, and Agriculture,
(waving the common Forms of Speech) he suits his Poetic Diction to so unpolite
a Theme; how, seemingly depressed with the Meanness of his Subject, he never
sinks into a Plebeian Style; but the Force and Energy of his Expression are so
conspicuous, that many, too rashly indeed, have not scrupled to prefer the
Georgicks to the Aeneid: But in a Work of this Nature, no other Parts of Poetry
could be displayed, except an Elegance of Style and Description: In both these
Ways VIRGIL has this, peculiar to himself, that he captivates the Soul with his
wonderful Sweetness, and his Descriptions are as Lively, as if we had the
Object placed before our Eyes.

In the Purity of his Style next follows LUCRETIUS, whose Diction, allowing for
his Obsoleteness, and Numbers almost Prosaick, may challenge a Share of Praise,
in those who have any Taste of the Roman Eloquence: For Descriptions however,
the second Post of Honor is due to CLAUDIAN, who has throughout, in a most
beautiful Style, interwoven his agreeable Images; faulty in this alone, that he
expatiates upon his Subjects beyond all Decency, and frequently gives us the
same Thoughts, diversified only in Expression. CLAUDIAN well knew what a Master
he was in this Art, for on whatsoever Topic he is engaged, he diligently
searches out Matter for Description, nay most of the Subjects he has wrote
upon, are wholly such, as may be seen in his Prefaces, his Eclogues, his Books
of the Rape of PROSERPINE, his Phoenix, his Porcupine, his Cramp-fish, and most
of his EPIGRAMS.

OVID (like a true Courtier as he was) describes the Affairs of Love in neat
and polite Verse. In the rest of his Works we meet with the more vulgar Way of
Expression; for trusting to a good Genius, he was little soli^itous about
forming a more elaborate Style: but yet, in his Metamorphoses, he has Painted,
in the greatest Perfection, the various Changes of all Creatures, and the
Transformations proceed in a most easy and gradual manner.

STATIUS has frequently discharged both these Requisites of a Poet, we just now
observed; LUCAN neither, whose Diction, although very bombast, is not enlivened
either by beautiful Phrases or Epithets, but comes nearer Prose than Poetry;
nay, there is in him commonly such a mean Choice of Words, as is sometimes even
beneath Proof itself: And although he abounds in Descriptions, and is always
making Excursions of that Kind, yet he seldom finishes his Work as he ought, or
brings his Thoughts to any Justness of Conclusion.

But now, as to STATIUS, he has given us Compositions worthy of the Envy of the
best Poets. But with all his Beauties, he has greater Faults; for, in his
Expression, he makes too much use of Gigantick Words; and, not considering his
Subject, mingles useless Thunder in his Numbers; Nor is he less faulty in his
Descriptions; for, encouraging too great a Heat, while he attempts to excel, he
shoots beyond his Mark, and swells unnaturally. Of both which Extremes CLAUDIAN
is too often guilty.

And now, since there have been many Pieces written, and those of Note, on the
Subject of VIRGIL's Aeneis, (and less notice is taken of the Poetry of STATIUS
and LUCAN) to whose Productions only the Latins allow the Title of Epick
Poetry. As to LUCAN, it has been often disputed, whether History, of which the
Pharsalia consists, be a proper Subject for an Heroic Poem. For the Decision
of this Point, we must enquire into the true Nature of Heroic Poetry, which
our Countryman, the Lord BACON, has admirably described in his Treatise of The
Advancement of Learning. " -- [As for Narrative Poesy, or, if you please,
Heroical, (so you understand it of the Matter, not of the Verse) it seems to be
raised altogether from a noble Foundation, which makes much for the Dignity of
Man's Nature. For, seeing this sensible World is, in Dignity, inferior to the
Soul of Man, Poesy seems to endow human Nature with that which History denies;
and to give Satisfaction to the Mind, with, at least, the Shadow of Things,
where the Substance cannot be had. For, if the Matter be thoroughly considered,
a strong Argument may be drawn from Poesy, that a more stately greatness of
Things, a more perfect Order, and a more beautiful Variety delights the Soul of
Man, than any Way can be found in Nature since the Fall. Wherefore, seeing the
Acts and Events, which are the Subject of true History, are not of that
Amplitude, as to content the Mind of Man, Poesy is ready at Hand to feign Acts
more Heroical: Because True History reports the Successes of Business not
proportionable to the Merit of Virtues and Vices, Poesy corrects it, and
presents Events and Fortunes according to Desert, and according to the Law of
Providence: Because True History, through the frequent Satiety and Similitude of
Things, works a Distaste and Misprision in the Mind of Man; Poesy cheereth and
refreshes the Soul, chaunting Things rare, and various, and full of
Vicissitudes. So as Poesy serves and conferreth to Delectation, Magnanimity,
and Morality; and therefore it may seem deservedly to have some Participation
of Divineness, because it accommodates its Images and Descriptions to the
utmost Desire and Wish of the Soul, not subjecting the Mind to Things or Facts,
as Reason and History do."] From whence it is sufficiently manifest, that
History and Epick Poetry are by no means proper Companions; and therefore, that
LUCAN has very much failed in his principal Subject: The five Heroes, who make
the greatest Figure in his Poem, are CAESAR, POMPEY, BRUTUS, CATO, and CICERO;
each of them indeed as distinguishable in their Lives, as to be lamented in
their Deaths; Men, whose Virtues, allowing for the Frailties of Human Nature,
came nearest to that Pitch of Heroic Perfection, which other Poets have
falsely attributed to their Heroes. LUCAN every where snarls at CAESAR, and
passionately espouses POMPEY's Interest; but most of all, celebrates the
Characters of BRUTUS and CATO, for that Spirit of Stoicism, which he had
equally imbibed with them: And, indeed, most of the Faults objected to LUCAN,
are rather to be imputed to this Kind of Philosophy. From whence sprung that
boundless Vein of Wit, and that peculiar Affectation of a lofty Style; which,
like that Sect of Men, he always delighted in, and therefore gives the
Preference rather to Great, than Good Actions. And upon this Account, in
raising the Passions, (that most excellent Part of Poetry) he succeeded but
ill; because, upon the Principles of his Philosophy, the Passions themselves
were accounted as absolutely unlawful. To confirm this, (passing by many
others) I will produce but one Instance: After CAESAR had obtained the Victory
over POMFEY, in the Battle of Pharsalia, LUCAN certainly, (if he had enlarged
on any Circumstance foreign to History it self) should, upon so remarkable an
Occasion, have lamented the undeserved Fate of POMPEY, in the most mournful
Strain; especially since he pays so high a Deference to him throughout his
whole Work; or, at least, (as there was an open Field for Grief) he should have
introduced POMPEY, either complaining of Rome's lost Liberty, the Death of his
Friends, or his own Misfortunes. But LUCAN is so far from raising the Passions
to this just Height, that he warmly advises POMPEY (when vanquished, he
retires from the Field of Action) to commiserate the Condition of his Conqueror
CAESAR, because he had not won the Day, but by unjustifiable Methods. Don't you
rejoice that your superior Foes
Have snatched you from a Scene of future Woes?
That blessed in Exile you escape the Sight
Of Armies bleeding in domestic Fight?
Behold each River drags her tardy Flood,
Choked up with Carnage and distained with Blood;
Your Victor-Sire with pitying Eyes survey,
Nor envy him the Fortune of the Day.
How shall he enter Rome devoid of Shame,
Who on the public Ruins builds his Name?


Who can bear to hear the Poet Philosophizing in this ridiculous Manner? As if
POMPEY, a Man in Years, an Exile, Miserable, and Vanquished, should have any
Concern upon him for the Crimes of his Conqueror: He ought to have been very
much stoicized indeed, who, despoiled of all the Goods of Fortune, could place
the Sum of his Felicity in mere naked Virtue. But none of the Poets have
touched this Passion of Grief like VIRGIL. The Generality of other Writers,
when they attempt to move their Readers, offend in this Point, that they are
too prolix in spinning out their Complaints, and think their Flood of Tears
inexhaustible; or else, while they labor to express the Greatness of their
Genius, in the Profuseness of their Verse, rather raise our Admiration at the
Flowing of their Numbers, than excite our Pity in the Catastrophe of their
Story. VIRGIL has carefully avoided both these Extremes, and dresses his Images
of Sorrow in their Native Simplicity; and wherever he touches upon the
Pathetick, he does it with a masterly quickness: For, according to CICERO, Our
expressions of Grief ought to be short and concise, because our Tears quickly
dry up, and it is unnatural to detain either an Auditor or Reader in too long a
Suspension of Grief.

But to return to STATIUS, his Spirit is indeed lofty and aspiring, to which
while he gives too great a Loose, he runs into Bombast, and to his Poetry often
adds useless sounding Words. The Subject of his Thebais seems indeed suited to
the Barbarity of his Genius, but is beneath the Dignity of an Heroic Poem. For
neither ETEOCLES, POLYNICES, nor TYDEUS, whose Actions are recorded in this
Poem, have any thing in them, except their Fortitude, agreeable to Heroes: Nay,
throughout the whole Piece, there are no Examples produced, unless of Persons
infamous for the most flagitious Enormities, such as Parricide, Treachery,
Cruelty, and Revenge; while, on the contrary, every Thing Praiseworthy shines
bright in VIRGIL's Heroes; and in the Person of AENEAS we have placed before
our Eyes an Instance of consummate Piety toward the GOD's, his Son, his Wife,
his Friends, and his Father. The Epithets of STATIUS are generally forced and
very metaphorical, while such Properties are ascribed to Inanimates, as really
only belong to Animals. In the Choice of his Words, and frequently in his
Metaphors, he is followed by CLAUDIAN with the utmost Elegance. VIRGIL is
sparing in both these Particulars; STATIUS abounds much with Similitudes, in
which he seems to imitate VIRGIL; but in this Instance LUCAN had had better
Success, if he had hit upon the proper Medium: But while VIRGIL stoops down to
the humble Subjects of Bees, Ants, and other such like delightful Themes of
Nature; on the other Hand, LUCAN bellows out nothing but Stories of Oaks split
by Lightening, Earthquakes, and the World's Conflagration. Let this, in short,
suffice, observable, concerning the Writers of Heroic Poetry, in itself New,
and never before taken Notice of.

Something now remains to be said of the Satyrists, among whom whether JUVENAL
or HORACE have most Right to the Bays, it is dfficult to determine; for it has
been long a Dispute among the Learned, whether that Keenness and Bitterness of
Expression with which JUVENAL has armed his Satires, or HORACE's more jocose
Lampoons are most agreeable to the End of SATIRE. Now that we may give a
clearer Decision on this Head, a few Things must be premised. HORACE bears, to
this Day, an ill Character for the Looseness of his Conduct in Life. JUVENAL
was a rigid Practiser of Virtue. The one was conversant in the most perfectly
polite Court of AUGUSTUS; the other lived in the Dregs of DOMITIAN's Time; and
therefore both these Poets accommodated their Writings to the Manners of the
different Ages they lived in: For HORACE is entirely upon the ludicrous, and
persues not so much the Licentiousness of the Times, as the ridiculous
Fopperies of some particular Courtiers; for had he attempted to correct these
Trifles with Severity, he had not missed of being laughed at: But JUVENAL
lashes the grossest Crimes prevalent in his Time, and complains of Enormities
which one would be ashamed to mention; and nothing less than the highest
Resentmemt of Soul, Ardency of Expression, and Sharpness of Speech, could be an
equal Match to Crimes so notorious; though whenever he descends to be jocose,
we frequently meet with the Pleasantry of HORACE. Both of them, allowing for
the different Manner of their Writing, are perfect Masters in their several
Ways; in the one, the Ridicule appears better than the Severe, in the other,
the Severe better than the Ridicule.

The rest of HORACE's Pieces are so admirable, that they exceed our highest
Encomiums, and are not only beyond our Dislike, but above our Praise.

As to what concerns the Dramatic Poets, PLAUTUS and TERENCE bear away the
Bell, whose Plots, Turns, and Elegancy of Style, are so well known, that
nothing New can be said upon them.

As to SENECA, Mankind have had different Opinions of him; some have ranked him
with the best Tragoedians, others have sunk him below the worst. He certainly
had a great Genius, an elegant and concise Way of Expression; he abounds with
smart Turns, which always savor much of that Stoicism of which he was a
Follower, upon which Account he has always been esteemed by those who have had
little or no Taste of Dramatic Poetry; but then if we consider him as such, his
Tragedies are throughout too elaborate; and this, to pass by his other Faults,
seems peculiarly SENECA's, that he makes all his Actors (without any Regard to
the Characters they bear) talk in the same Strain; all of them inculcate rigid
philosophical Dogmata, and such Morality as is rather fit for the Schools of
the Stoics, than the Roman Theater: For with him the King and the Slave strut
in the same Buskin; nay, you may perceive the Nurse herself deeply tinged with
the Principles of Stoicism.

Among the Epigrammatists, MARTIAL and CLAUDIAN have bore the greatest
Reputaion; the first, for the severe Point in the Close of his Epigrams, and
the peculiar Jingle of his Words. The other, for dispersing the Poignancy of
his Wit throughout his Epigrams, and that in the most beautiful Latin Phrase.

The rest of the lower Class of the Latin Poets creep so low in their Numbers,
that they are beneath the Notice either of GODS or Men: And though we may now and
then discover in the affected Songs and Sonnets of CATULLUS, and the obscene
POETRY of TIBULLUS and PROPERTIUS, some not disagreeable Pieces, yet it is not
worth our while to rake the Dunghills for the sake of the JEWELS.

TENTAMEN De POETIS Romany ELEGIACIS.
SAepe Mecum ipse mirari soleo, Ex tot tantisque viris in Antiqua classicorum
Poetarum pagina Transferenda, vel operose, vel commode Jucundeque Versatis, tam
paucos Extitisse, Qui Elegiarum Scriptores, vel dignos opera sua Judicaverint,
vel quidem suo otio dignos. Haud Ego quidem possum credere, quin Hi in propria
scribendi Norma perinde feliciter Successerint, atque alii; ac proinde cum non
minori Emolumento, quam cum voluptate Legantur. Ad me quod Attinet, Affirmare
possum, Eam fuisse semper animi temperationem mei, ut Eandem vel casui proterve
fortuito vel Difficultati rerum procaciter obliquae Stomachantem, Long
facilius Lenire me, atque mulcere potuisse Senserim, Dulcem optando Comitem
Tibullum, quam vel Philosophorum Lectiones vel praecepta Theologorum
Consulendo. Quicquid enim est solenne valde, id omne, aliquam, nescio quam,
prohibitoriam Coactionis faciem, prae se far atque ostentare videtur. Adeoque
est paene semper inauspicata aut Discentis cujuslibet aut Docentis Indoles, Ut,
Ex quovis severioris disciplinae Genere, nostrae potius poena voluntatis, quam
mentis Emendatio Nascatur. Verbis Enim ita strenue contendere, ut, munus esse
rectae rationis, hoc vel illud agere, men's hominum convicta fateatur, non est
res duri forsitan plena Negotii: At vero, ad illud idem munus obeundum, aliquem
fortiter and Suaviter Impellere, Hic est plane operosus flexanimae Orationis
Labor, Hoc summum Artis Misterium. Digna quidem Haec Horatii Sententia, quae
alta mente reposta maneat. Virtus est Vitium fugere, and sapientia prima
Stultitia Caruisse.
Annon Eodem prorsus Jure dicere possimus, E voluntaria quadam Erumnarum
nostrarum Oblivione primum Surgere ad felicitatem gradum. Quem quidem Si
assequi Optume Volumus, non debere nos cogitabundam nimis, sollicitamque illam,
quae nobis est Insita, particulam Exuscitare; tumultuantes autem rerum ideas
Mulcere, and motos animi fluctus Componere, multomagis opportere Confido.

Donec Nostra hujusmodi Corpuscula, Misera illa quidem and vacillantia
navigiola, incertum hujus vitae cursum tenent, and in prope medium usque
oceanum immani and feroci ventorum vi pelluntur, Long ab aspectu Littoris
hospitibus Mansueti; Certo Certius est, Navigantes in illis animas Nostras,
Gaudia permagna Intus Oborientia Sentire, Quando ab Ingruenti extrinsecus
procella ipsae sese quasi furtim Retrahentes, and Laevatius affectantes iter,
Leniter natant voluptatis aquas, placidaque fruuntur passionis aura Secundo (ut
ita dicam) teneritatis flumini Conjuncta.

Occulta quaedam Inest Carminibus Incantatio, quae nunquam non solet been
formatum pectus grata dulcedine afficere; atque Ego quidem Opinor, in Probae
illius atque Ingenuae Classis Poetarum, Catulli nempe, Tibulli, Propertii, and
Ovidii versibus, aliquid, nescio quid, singular atque valde patheticum
Existere. Certum Est, inter illa Elegiaci ordinis carmina, Catulli perpauca
esse apt Judicatoque numeranda. At, quandocunque teneriora humanitatis
argumenta tractat, Minervae suavem afflant odorem sententiae omnes,
proprietatem prietatem vel accuratissimam sapiunt, Summamque redolent
Elegantiae amaenitatem. Ac proinde nihil aliud agere potui, quam ut Insigne
ipsius nomen in sociorum eadem studiorum ratione valentium numerum referrem.
Eminebant Hi Quatuor, in Patria sua, clari Natalibus, and, ut tum erant
tempora, re plusquam mediocri Fruebantur. Ad voluptatem traxit sua quemque
Indoles; singuli vero, recta usi ratione, eo sapientiae processerunt, ut, and
publici pravitatem negotii, and caducam prorsus Elati fastus incertique honoris
Exploraverint inanitatem. Tres Priores Jure merito dicantur Triumviratum
perinde Illustrem constituisse, atque ulla unquam protulit Aeta^; Siquidem
vivendi modum splendide otiosum spectemus. Perpolitis ornati moribus, Rerum
copia affluentes, been succedentes in amoribus, summa cum familiaritate sibi
Invicem beat conjuncti, Quamdiu vixerunt, tamdiu usque viguere humani Generis
deliciae; and tandem cum a vivorum regionibus discesserunt, eas utique omnes
discessum Lugentes Reliquere. Quantum ad Ovidium attinet, erat ille quidem
omnibus illis Apprime ornatus and morum and ingenii dotibus, quae ad absolute
fingendum hominem plane generosum conducere posse videantur. Quippe Iratus illi
Augustus, vel quod Insperato istius imperatoris occultae Lasciviae testis
aderat fortuitus, vel quod proprios a mores (utilli speciose vertebatur
Crimini) impudice nimis describebat, Eundem Annum habentem Quinquagesimum Ex
Italia in Exilium mittebat. Exul reliquum miseriae vitae tempus Languide valde
consumens inter sauromatas in Civitate (cui nomen recens Temeswaer, uti putant
Nonnulli) Extremum obiit Diem. Hujusmodi Suppliciorum Exempla non nisi Bina in
omnibus Historiarum Monumentis Esse credo reperienda, ubi, quod est punitum (si
malum quam durissime appellemus) illud inconsiderate solummodo atque temere
factum vocare possumus; Alterum Ovidii Personae sort Contigit, Rabutini
alterum. Horum quidem Principes, pari certe, illoque supremo dominandi Jure
Gaudebant, Sapientia fruebantur Pari, paribus Suspicionibus angebantur.

Haec Geniorum, quibus Hi Erant praediti, perexigua sane delineatio, Nos abunde
doceat recte Judicare, quantum Scientiae lumen, quamque dulce and Elegans
Emolumentum, Compositissima quaeque Horum Poetarum themata, mentibus afferant
been atque nitide preparatis. Ac Revera, Quam in amicitia fidem inviolatam,
Quos teneros in amore Impulsus, Quam in propinquos Benevolentiam assiduam, Quae
tandem omnium virtutum Moralium Monumenta intuemur? Quae videmus Exemplaria?
Quae, quaeso Utique, non videmus? Ut mill Ingenii ornamenta Omittam, ut
praeteream miram illam Dulcedinem and felices musicae numeros poeticae tenere
Cadentes, Ut taceam denique Genuinas illas and quasi Iammodo Spirantes vitae
Imagines, quae quidem Efficient, ut vix, prima facie, opinemur, Scenam Earandem
in saeculo perinde remoto fuisse repraesentatam, atque nobiscum magis ipsi
cogitantes revera sentimus.

Una Porro objectio non est silentio praetereunda: Quippe Crimini in universo
paene orb Christiano Ducitur Hisce Poetis, nimiam in inhonestis rerum ideis
Excogitandis Licentiam, nimiamque in eisdem exprimendis obscenitatem Affectasse.

Sed tamen est certum quid respondeam. Siquando, parva Blanditiarum suarum
quasi stratagemata Explicantes, tali verborum usi sint delectu, qualem
Religiosa dedignaretur morum simplicitas, ortam inde tamen vitiosam
oblectationem omnem, non singulari cuidam turpitudini ab his unice affectatae,
sed Communi potissimum atque Effrenatae illius, in qua viguere, aetatis
Licentiae attribuere nos debere contendo. Siquidem ejusdem reum criminis Agimus
Horatium; Habere certe debemus confitentem reum. Porro autem ipse Virgilius,
cujus ad Coelos usque tollitur Modestia, Multa in Bucolicis scripsit, quae,
apud nos, Lasciva atque ab honestate remota ponuntur. Ne plura, totum
argumentum Haec Unica Consideratio Determinat. Qui animum bonis and Intaminatis
vitae Institutis retinet Imbutum, ille cum hisce Authoribus versari facillime
potest, Omnis Expers periculi contagionis. Atque Quantum ad eos spectat, Quorum
Improbitas superat Ingenium (Execrabilius autem accidere fatuo nihil potest)
illi Proprii and insensati quidem vitii tempestate abrepti, aras focosque and
res omnes quam maxume sacras, Nequissimi cujusque facinoris perpetrandi gratai,
prosternent. At, Quandoquidem Omnia horum poetarum Carmina, uti erant primitus
and Latin scripta, tute and sine labe Legi queant; singula tamen, salva morum
pietate, anglice reddi posse, Minime Contendo. Sed, quum multa possint;
Dolendum videtur, Linguam Anglicanam non perfrui pluribus, quippe quae Ditiorem
redderent Sermonem nostrum, atque pleniorem Dulcium varietate Imaginum, quae
aeque sunt innocuae, atque sunt suaves.

Qui vero hujusce operis provinciam in se Susceperint, illi profecto
desudabunt, Cum novos passim invenient Labores Ex crebris clausulis ad ritualem
Religionis cultum and superstitiosa quaelibet Dogmata alte respicientibus
Oriundos. Hisce Exemplis abundant Ea Carmina, in quibus Reperitur maxima vis
Libidinis: Nempe Lasciviae Lenocinari Superstitio Jugiter solet. Quantum autem
ad illa attinet, quae non indecora Tralatione digna sunt, Eaquidem Omnia,
paucis illustrata Commentariis, non solum Erunt Intellectu facilia, verum Etiam
Lectoribus mere Anglicanis magnam afferent Voluptatem.

AN ESSAY UPON THE Roman ELEGIAC POETS.
I Have often wondered, that, among so Many, who have Busied or Diverted
Themselves in Translating the Ancient Classick POETS, so Few have thought the
Writers of ELEGY Worthy their Pains, or Amusement. I cannot but Believe that,
These have succeeded as happily in their Way, as the Others, and that They may
be Read with no less Advantage than Pleasure. For my own Part, I can affirm,
that when at any time my Mind has been ruffled by some peevish Accident or
Disappointment, I have always found my temper sooner Composed by taking a Turn
with TIBULLUS in my Hand, than by having recourse to the Lessons of PHILOSOPHY,
or the Precepts of DIVINES. Whatever is very solemn, carries with it, I don't
know how, somewhat of Constraint: And it frequently happens by an unlucky
Disposition either in the Pupil, or the Preacher, that Those severer Kinds of
Discipline (I speak not This with the least Irreverence) serve rather to
Punish, than Reform Us. It is perhaps no Difficult Matter to Convince One of
the Reasonableness of This or That Action, but the Secret lies in Engaging One
in the Practice. It is a Memorable Sentence of a Celebrated MORALIST This,
Virtus est vitium fugere, and Sapientia prima
Stultitia caruisse. -- Horat.
"It is the Beginning of VIRTUE to Depart from VICE; and the First Step toward
WISDOM is to Forsake our FOLLY." May it not as justly be said, The First Step
toward HAPPINESS is to Forget our MISERY? The best Method to bring That about
is not, I presume, by Alarming the THINKING FACULTY, but by Soothing and
Lulling to Rest our too Active and Unquiet REFLECTIONS.

WHILST Our poor tottering BARK continues in This Uncertain Voyage of Life, and
is so often kept out at Sea in rough and stormy Weather, far from the sight of
any Hospitable Shore, the SOUL, its PASSENGER, cannot sure but feel a mighty
Satisfaction arising within, when she finds Herself afterwads Stealing, as it
were, away under smoother Courses, and born gently down the Tide of TENDERNESS
in soft and easy Gales of PASSION.

THERE is a Charm in VERSE that never fails agreeably to Affect a Heart that is
rightly placed: And there is, in my Opinion, something peculiarly moving in the
VERSES of That Good-natured Class of POETS CATULLUS, TIBULLUS, PROPERTIUS, and
OVID. There are but Few Pieces of CATULLUS, it is true, that can strictly be
ranked among Those of the ELEGIAC ORDER: But whenever HE does Touch upon the
softer Subjects of HUMANITY, his Sentiments have the utmost Propriety and
Delicacy; and therefore I could not but mention HIM among His Companions. They
were, All Four, Men of Family and Condition in their Country. Their
Inclinations led Them naturally to PLEASURE, and Their Good Sense to a
Discovery of the Knavery of BUSINESS, and the Vanity of AMBITION. The Three
Former may be said to have Been as Extraordinary a TRIUMVIRATE, as, perhaps,
any Age has Produced, I mean in an Idle Way of Life: Polite in their MANNERS;
Easy in Their FORTUNES; Successful in Their AMORS; Happy in each Other's
ACQUAINTANCE; Beloved, in general, while they LIVED; and Universally Lamented,
when They DIED. As for OVID, He was certainly Master of all the fine Qualities
and Accomplishments that could be desired in a GENTLEMAN. But having Offended
AUGUSTUS, either by Happening to be an Unexpected Witness of that EMPEROR's
Love-Intrigues, or else by too lasciviously Describing His Own (which was the
Crime Pretended) He was Banished from ITALY in his Fiftieth Year; and
Languished out the Remainder of His Days at TAMOS (the Modern TEMESWAER as some
think) There are I believe but two Instances in Story of a Punishment like This
for What, at the worst, could be called only an Indiscretion: One in the Person
of OVID, The Other in That of RABUTIN. Their Masters were equally Absolute,
equally Wise, and equally Jealous.

FROM this Little Draught of Their Characters, One may judge how Edifying any
of Their Compositions must needs be to an Elegant Understanding. And, indeed,
What Sincerity in FRIENDSHIP, What Fondness in LOVE, What Kindness to
RELATIONS, What Instances of all the Social VIRTUES do We not meet with in
Their Writings? Not to mention a thousand Ornaments of Wit, a wonderful
Sweetness, and easy Cadence in their Numbers, and so True a Picture of Life,
that one can scarce Fancy the Scene to lie at the Distance it is placed.

THERE is One Objection, which I must not pass over, and that is generally
charged upon These POETS: Imean, Their too great License, and Obscenity in
Their Ideas and Language,

To This I would Reply, That if upon some Occasions, They seem not to have been
very Scrupulous about the Terms They made use of in Communicating their Amorous
Adventers, it ought not to be imputed to a Scandalous Singularity in THEM, but
to the Common Indulgence of the AGE in which They Flourished. HORACE must Plead
Guilty to the same Indictment. Nay, VIRGIL Himself, as Applauded as HE is for
Modesty, has left many Expressions in his ECLOGUES that might be Argued of
Wantonness. After All, the whole Matter will turn upon this Single Point. A
Person whose Principles are Uncorrupted may freely Converse with These AUTHORS
without Danger of Infection: And for Such who have more Wickedness than Wit
(the greatest Curse that can befall a FOOL) their senseless Vice will tempt Them
to Pervert even the most Sacred Things to the vilest Purposes. However, though
All their POEMS may be Read in the Originals with Safety, I do not pretend to
say They can All be Translated with Decency. But since Many of Them may, it is
Pity, I think, We have not More of Them in ENGLISH, to Enrich our Language with
a Variety of Pleasing Images that are as Innocent, as they are Delightful.

THERE is One Difficulty that will still lie upon the Hands of Any who shall
Undertake this Work, and This arises from their frequent Allusions to the
Ceremonies and Notions of Their RELIGION. Instances of This abound even in
Those Copies of their Verses that are writ the most in the Spirit of LEWDNESS:
(As SUEPRSTITION has ever been an Especial Bawd to LUST) But for All such as
are Proper to be Translated, they may be Rendered by a few Explanatory Notes
not only Intelligible, but very Entertaining, to a mere ENGLISH Reader.

FINIS.

