The Third and last Volume OF THE MEMOIRS OF Mrs. Laetitia Pilkington,

Written by HERSELF.

Wherein are occasionally interspersed, VARIETY of POEMS: As also the LETTERS
of several PERSONS of DISTINCTION: With the Conclusive Part of the Life of the
Inimitable Dean SWIFT.

Finis Coronat Opus. LONDON: Printed for R. Griffiths at the Dunciad in
Paternoster Row. 1754.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Lewis Ligonier, KNIGHT of the BATH, One of
his Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, etc. etc.
SIR,
IT IS Customary with Mankind, to deem all Dedicators Flatterers, who rather pay
Court to the Fortune of their Patrons, than to any real Merit they possess.

But in order to avoid Censure, on Account of this too obvious Meanness, I have
happily made Choice of a Gentleman, to present this last Offspring of my
beloved Mother to, of whom, had I Eloquence enough to say all that is good and
great, the World must allow 'twere but barely doing Justice to his exalted
Character.

To expatiate, Sir, on the various Points in which you excel, would be a Task
more fittly adapted to the Accuracy of a Plutarch, or the Perspicuity of a
Rapin, than a Pen so unskilled as mine, in every polished Art.

Since to display your Magnanimity in the Field, Wisdom in the Council,
singular Politeness, and universal Benevolence, demands the Flowers of
Rhetoric and Poesy.

Yet, Sir, that you are dear to the Soldier as his Honor, to the Public as a
Guardian, and to all who are blessed with a Participation of your social Hours,
as a sincere Friend and most agreeable Companion, I hope I may be allowed to
say.

I should never, Sir, have arrived at the Honor, of drawing, even this
imperfect Sketch of Sir John Ligonier, but that I retained the Sentiments from
my Mother, whose Intent it was, had she lived, to have inscribed this Volume to
you.

In this Address, therefore, Sir, at the same Time that I satisfy my own
Ambition, I do an Action, grateful to the Manes of a departed Mother; since,
though she hated Vice, and was bold enough to reprove it; Goodness like yours
was her darling Theme.

I have the Honor, to be with unspeakable Respect,

SIR, Your most devoted, Most Obedient, And most humble Servant, J. C.
Pilkington.
Long-acre, J^n. 31, 1754.
THE PREFACE.
LEST the World should imagine I published this Volume, in order to displease
my Father, or any other Person, the Reflection of which, would give me the
utmost Uneasiness, I thought it quite necessary, in this Place, to declare the
Reason it lay so long in Obscurity; and why it is at this Time made public.

My Mother, before her Death, had taken in a Number of Subscriptions in
Ireland, and after her Departure from Life, as I was left quite destitute of
Money or Friends, I was obliged to pursue the Design of Printing the Volume; to
which I was encouraged, by several Persons of real Worth and Distinction: but
though I became indebted to the Public, it was never in my power, to raise a
sufficient Sum to defray the Expense of Printing; but on the contrary, through
the Resentment of those, whom my Mother had formerly described, I was not only
basely traduced in my Reputation, but plunged into a World of Calamities, which
I may, perhaps, at some Time hereafter relate, together with the various
Passages of my Life. However, amongst many Accusations, that fell heavy on me,
one was, that I had defrauded the Public, by taking Subscriptions to a Work,
which I not only had not a Design of Printing, but one that never existed,
except in my Imagination; as they were kind enough to declare, that my Mother
never wrote such a Book.

Yet should I have been content, to have stood all this Reproach, and much
more, nay, as the Subscribers were Persons of Fortune and Humanity, whose
Contributions proceeded more from a Desire of serving me, than a Curiosity to
see the Book, I would have remained their Debtor for ever, sooner than have
brought such an Affair over; but, that having a Wife and Family to support, and
finding it impossible to obtain from my Father the smallest Succor, though I
applied to him in the most submissive and pathetick Manner: On the contrary,
when I found him endeavoring to hurt me in the Opinion of Particularly the
Lord Bishop of Derry, to whom I am much obliged.
those, with whom I had some Interest; I thought it but prudent, to acquit
myself of the Charge of Dishonesty, by delivering the Books to my Benefactors,
and at the same Time, to endeavor to make as much as possible by it. To this
end I came to London last October, but had not brought the Manuscript with me,
which was in the Hands of Mr. Powel, Printer in Dublin. I thought it prudent,
not being over-stocked with Cash, to try how a Subscription would take in
London. before I ventured to pay a Sum, which was due to Powel. I therefore
printed Proposals, and communicated my Plan to Mr. Foot, who had, when in
Ireland, professed a great Friendship for me, (not without some Cause) as will
be seen hereafter. He highly approved my Project, and assured me I might make a
considerable Sum by it; and that for his own Part, he would get me at least a
hundred Subscribers, all which, not knowing the Gentleman's real Disposition, I
sincerely believed. His Farce of the Englishman in Paris, was at this Time
acting; and I ventured to write the following Lines upon it, which I sent to
him in a Letter, and begged his Permission, to insert them in the Daily
Advertiser. To Samuel Foot, Esquire on seeing his Englishman in Paris.
When brilliant Merit justly claims Applause,
Commands Esteem, and Admiration draws;
When every Action suits to please Mankind,
Delights the Sense, and elevates the Mind:
Each Bard enraptured should exalt his Lays,
And gladly pay his tributary Praise;
Yet British Wits are silent when they see,
Thy last inimitable Comedy;
In which, a Spirit lives through every Part,
That charms, that sooths, that captivates the Heart.
It Is thine, O Foot, with a peculiar Ease,
At once to lash, t'instruct us, and to please:
So sweet, yet poignant, all your Satires flow,
That patiently from you our Faults we know;
The Dunce, the Fribble, the affected Wit,
Chastised by you, must silently submit.
Still may Britannia, with a grateful Sense,
Thy matchless Labors strive to recompense;
Thus we in Time, may every Error find,
And Foot still prove a Mirror to Mankind.


The Gentleman was pleased to honor me with the following Answer: Dear Sir,
IT is impossible for me to thank you as I ought, for your enclosed Favor; and
full as impossible for me, to answer the Contents of your obliging Letter To
correct it.
; there is at present, such a Conflict in me, between Modesty and Vanity, that
as neither can get the better, I must leave the Destination of your elegant
Piece, to your own Discretion.

I am, Dear Sir, Most sincerely Yours, SAMUEL FOOT.
Covent Garden.



An indifferent Person would now imagine, that this Gentleman was inclinable to
serve me; but whether he contracted Insincerity, in his late Tour to Paris, or
whether it is native to him, I know not. But when I went to him, with the
Subscription Papers, he took a Quantity of them, and desired me to call in
about a Week; he then excused himself, by saying he had been unwell, but
finally, when I pressed him hard, he wrote me the following polite and obliging
Note. SIR,
I am sorry the disadvantageous Light, in which some of your Countrymen have
placed you here, has put it out of my Power, to be as useful to you as I could
wish. I have sent you Half a Guinea, together with all your Subscriptions; you
will consider, that the many Calls I have of this Kind, (though not too much
for my Inclination) are a little too heavy for my Income.

Yours, etc. SAMUEL FOOT.




I shall make no Comment in this Place, upon this extraordinary Revolution;
perhaps as he says himself, It Is Pride, nay something worse, the Pocket's low.
Epilogue to the Englishman in Paris. But on his acting the Characters of Ben
the Sailor, and Buck in the Englishman in Paris one Night, some envious
anonymous Scribbler, furnished out the following Lines; and as that Gentleman's
transcendant Abilities, are superior to any low Things of this Nature, that can
be said, I hope it will not be thought Malice in me, to transcribe them here.
To S -- l F -- te, Esquire on his condescending to enact Ben and Buck.
Often have thou sought the Comic Muse in vain,
While thy strained Gesture but excited Pain;
For when Sir Courtly Nice was played by thee,
The murmuring Audience cried, it cannot be;
With like Success some other Parts you tried,
Nay, even for Favor in the Buskin vied;
But all in vain, you were compelled to drop it,
And act the Satyr, the Buffoon, and Poppet i. e. In the Haymarket.
;
Till wisely pond'ring what composed your Mind,
Where you no generous Sentiment could find;
You saw the Error, and to end Dispute,
Shined in your native Character a B -- te.
I am told, that the ludicrous Author of this, was not threatened with so
slender a Revenge as Tea or Coffee, but absolute Newgate and the Pillory; which
poor Subtersuge gave him so much Reason to pity his Antagonist, that he has
since held him incorrigible, below the Notice, even of a Scribbler.

And here I cannot help remarking at the same Time, that I return my most
sincere Acknowledgments to my noble Subscribers in England, that amongst the
Number of Persons, whose Characters my Mother had endeavored to illustrate by
due Praise, not one, except his Grace the Duke of Marlborough, and Sir John
Ligonier, to whose superlative Bounties I am unspeakably indebted, would assist
me. But as they are the greatest and noblest Characters, which compose her
Writings, I must even content myself; and though this Volume is not in Octavo,
which I at first proposed, but was afterward obliged to alter my Design, in
order to make it match the other two, I am persuaded, that as my Subscribers
are composed of the greatest and best Persons in England, they will pardon that
Defect, since it contains the purposed Quantity The Irish Edition is in Octavo.
. However, any Person who imagines they have paid too much, shall have the
Overplus returned, on sending to me.

N. B. A List of Subscribers is omitted for particular Reasons, which the
Reader will be better qualified to guess at after he has perused the ensuing
Pages.

MEMOIRS OF Mrs. Letitia Pilkington.
A Third Volume of Memoirs is really a bold Undertaking, as they are generally
light, frothy, and vain; yet I have met with such unhop'd Success, that I am
quite encouraged to proceed; more especially as my Word is passed to the
Public; and my Word I have ever held sacred. I cannot, like a certain Female
Writer, say, I hope if I have done nothing to please, I have done nothing to
offend; for truly I mean to give both Pleasure and Offense: Lemon and Sugar is
very pretty. I should be sorry to write a Satire which did not sting, nor will
I ever write a Panegyric on an Undeserver: If a Rogue should happen to be mine
honest Friend, I owe him Silence; but that is the most he can expect.

Many indeed are glad to become Purchasers of it. Persons whom I know nothing
of, come and beg I may not put them into the Third Volume; and they will
subscribe: Surely then they should knock at their own Hearts; and if it confess
a natural Guiltiness, Let it not breathe a Thought upon their Tongue
To my Dishonor --
Shakespeare. I threaten not any, nor did I ever do it; but Characters are my
Game, who Eye Nature's Walks, shoot Folly as it flies,
And catch the Manners living as they rise.


I should now be glad to know how I could prosecute my own History without
intermingling that of others; I have not lived in Deserts, where no Men abide,
nor in a Cave, like Echo; therefore it is no more in my power to grant such
unreasonable Requests, when a Book is required of me, than it is in that of an
historical Painter to give a good Piece, when he is positively commanded never
to draw the Likeness of any thing in Heaven or on Earth.

But, Oh my dear LADIES, why are you so frightened? Why so many Supplications
to a Person unacquainted with you? Have you all then a sore Place, which you
are afraid I should touch? But now Taken from the Play of Pyramus and Thisbe,
in Shakespeare's Midsummer Nights Dream.
, I say this to you, or to the same Defect: Ladies, or most fair Ladies, I
would request you not to fear, not to tremble; my Life for yours, if you think
I come as a Lion, 'twere Pity of my Life: No, no, I am no such thing; I am a
Woman, as other Women are --

But, after all, it does not a little surprise me, that every Person who
suffers a Panick, lest their own Reputations should be attacked, has not a
little Compassion for that of another: No, no! let them find a Flaw in a
Brilliant, and by the Help of their magnifying Talents, they shall dim it all
over: If they look upon this as a Virtue, it is one I shall never be emulous of.

I remember Doctor Swift told me, he once dined at a Person's House, where the
Part of the Table-Cloth, which was next to him, happened to have a small Hole
in it, which, says he, I tore as wide as I could; then asked for some Soop, and
fed myself through the Hole. The Dean, who was a great Friend to Houswifery,
did this to mortify the Lady of the House; but, upon my Word, by the general
Love of Scandal and Detraction in Dublin, one might reasonably imagine they
were all to feed themselves through the Holes, which they had made in the
Characters of others: But it is of no Consequence to me; as Treason and Malice
now have done their worst. Shakespeare.

Reputation once gone is never to be retrieved: The Wise say, it is as often
gained without Merit, as lost without a Crime; so I must comfort myself the
best I can. The Fable of Reputation, Fire, and Water, is too well known to want
a Recital; and, to quote a Paragraph from a late Letter of Mr. CIBBER'S to me,
in Answer to one of mine, wherein I had acquainted him, that a Gentleman who
had formerly been prejudiced against him, was now his very sincere Admirer; as
his Lines may in some Measure be applicable to me, I shall insert them as
follows: It is now growing too late in Life, to be much concerned about
whatever Good or Evil the World may think it worth their while to say of me.
All I have to do, is to fix a Consciousness of my own Integrity, and then let
the Devil do his worst. Truth has a strong Arm, and in that the weakest Person
living, with an honest Heart, may trust for their Protection.

So let this serve by way of Preface, while I proceed in my Narrative, or, Take
the sprightly Reed, and sing and play,
Careless of what the censuring World may say.


And here, before I proceed, to give Ease to every Heart, which may possibly
suffer any Anxiety, on Account of what might be said of them, I proclaim Peace
to all, but those who have directly affronted me. It Is but a mean Piece of
Cowardice to insult a Woman, and as some Gentlemen have had the Courage to
challenge me, by the known Laws of Chivalry, I have a right to choose the
Weapons; a Pen is mine, let them take up another, and may-hap they will meet
their Match.

But Hibernian Writers are evermore threatened, not with the Wit of their
Antagonists, but the Arm of the Flesh; and truly that is such a knock-down
Argument, as I, at least, am utterly unable to resist.

Upon my Word, were any Folly of mine to produce real Wit in another Person, I
should not be displeased to be roundly rallied.

I was very well diverted with Mr. Woodward's When this Gentleman exhibited at
Dublin, in Opposition to Mr. Foote's Tea.
Coffee, and humorous Description of me, crying, Subscribe, or else I Will paint
you like the Devil.
Though how I, who never either was a dramatick Writer, or a Player, came to
have such extraordinary Marks of Distinction paid me from the Theater, is more
than I can readily account for.

However I enjoyed the Jest, and the worst Mark of Resentment I showed, was to
send him a Crown for a Box Ticket, which he graciously accepted; and in Return,
got his Friend in the College to add six Couplets of Scurrility to his former
Encomium on me.

No marvel, for I remember the Dean told me, he paid a Man's Debt on Account of
his having wrote something tollerably good; and the next Proof he gave of his
Talents, as soon as he was released from Jail, was to write a Satire on his
Benefactor and Deliverer. I told this Passage to Mr. Cibber, who assured me he
had been just served in the same Manner.

Gratitude is, of all Virtues, the most seldom practiced; the Cause of this
Defect, I take to be our innate Pride; few Persons can bear to be under the
Weight of an Obligation, not considering that, The grateful Heart by paying
owes not,
But stands at once indebted and discharged.
MILTON. Doctor Swift very well observes, that many Persons have done a just,
many a generous, but few a grateful Act.

I have indeed experienced Gratitude, even to painful Ecstasy; especially, when
you my dear, and honored Lord Kingsborough, vouchsafe to cheer my Habitation,
with the Muses, Loves, and Graces in your Train; with all the Virtues that
adorn the Good, and every shining Excellence which distinguishes the fine
Gentleman: So Cyrus deigned to visit Zoroaster, and bless his solemn Grotto.

You have, my Lord, another Talent, which as Leisure and Fortune give you a
Power of exerting it, I hope you will; and which, by the Honor you have
allowed me, of being your Correspondent, I have discovered, and, like a true
Woman, cannot bear the Pain of keeping a Secret. Amongst all the Letters I have
yet seen published, I never saw any so truly elegant, learned, and polite, as
those with which your Lordship has condescended to honor your poor Servant:
Invoke then, my Lord, the sacred Nine; not one of the beauteous Virgins can be
coy to such a Lover, resembling so much their own Apollo. I am very certain
they have all bestowed their Favors, though you are too much the Man of Honor
to reveal it.

Let Britannia boast her Shaftesburys, Dorsets, Mulgraves; and let us tell her
in Return, we have our Kingsborough. And here I must vindicate the Learning, as
well as the Politeness of the Nobility; though it be in Opposition to Mr.
Pope's Opinion; who says, What woeful Stuff this Madrigal would be
In some starved Hackney Sonnetteer, or me?
But let My Lord once own the happy Lines,
How the Wit brightens, how the Style refines!
Why sure every Person must acknowledge, that while he is insulting his
Betters, his Ethic Epistles are little more than Lord Shaftsbury's Rhapsody
berhym'd; his Windsor Forest stolen from Cooper's Hill; and his Eloisa and
Abelard, the most beautiful Lines in it, taken from Milton's Il Penseroso; and
if I wrong his Merit, let the Learned judge. Mr. Pope says, in his Description
of the Convent, Where awful Arches, make a Noonday Night,
And the dim Windows shed a solemn Light.
MILTON says, And story'd Windows richly dight,
Shedding a dim religious Light.
Which of these is best, I leave to any Person of Taste to determine. POPE.
From the full Choir when loud Hosanna's rise,
And swell the Pomp of dreadful Sacrifice.
MILTON. There let the pealing Organ blow,
To the full-voic'd Choir below.
For Service high, etc.
But I forget, and am launching into a Criticism ever I am aware of it.

Now though I have held out the Olive Branch to my Friends, to whom I would be
kind, as the life-rendering Pelican; yet my Foes are not included in the
Treaty. You, my Lady of the Fishponds and Lakes of Lebanon, must be remembered.

And I cannot avoid paying my Acknowlegements to the Vice Queen of a certain
Village. Vice-Queen I term you, for the lovely Lady Ann Conn^lly.
Goddess of the Plains has as much Humanity and Politeness as you want, and I
cannot pay her a higher Compliment; though indeed it is no wonder, as she is
the Daughter of an English Earl, and you derive your Pedigree from a Scotch
Pedlar; I will not name you, because you shall not take the Law of me, but
describe you I will.

Pray, when I sent you a Book, how came it to entitle me to an Affront? and
your civil Message, that if my third Volume was worth reading, you would buy it
at the Stationer's: Why, it will cost you a Crown there.

But how long have you commenced a Judge of the Belles Lettres? That you may be
a competent one of Men, nobody disputes; and for your Honor, I believe a
certain Relation of mine was pretty intimate with it at *********.

And do you and your two Companions take a Frisk still, now you are grown old!
Certainly it must be as entertaining as the Witches in Macbeth.

Why, Madam, had I said that your Fa -- r died blaspheming the Almighty, and of
the foul Disease; had I said that he refused to see his Wife's Cubbs, as he
called your Sisters, at the Hour of his Death; had I said, that you hid Lady D
-- behind the Arras, to see -- Nothing -- which you said, your little Tom
Titmouse of a Husband had, you could not have used me worse.

But I scorn your low Invectives, which savor more of Malice than of Wit;
these and many other valuable Secrets, which I have the Honor of knowing of
you, shall be buried in Oblivion. Stand apart now, ye Roderick Randoms,
Foundlings, bastard Sons of Wit,
Hence, ye Profane, be far away,
All ye that bow to Idol Lusts, and Altars raise,
Or to false Heroes give fantastic Praise:


While I, the Cream of Historians, Mirror of Poets, worthy not only the Bays
but the Laurel made for mighty Conquerors, for my signal Victories, proceed in
my true History, which take as follows, from me the genuine Successor of Cid
Hamet, and immortal SWIFT: Thus much may serve by Way of Proem,
Proceed we now to Tale or Poem.


ONE Day as I was sitting in my Shop, Vide the 2d Vol. of these Memoirs.
a Woman who though very badly dressed, had a Dignity in her Air which
distinguished her from the Vulgar, stood reading the Paper I had stuck up, with
Regard to writing Letters and Petitions. At length she came in, and begged of
me to write a Petition for her, to his Majesty, from whom, as she said, she
hoped for a Pension. I asked her what Title she had to it? She said, if I could
have Patience to hear her Story, she was certain I would think she had a very
just one. As I was fond of Novelties, I assured her she could not oblige me
more; so to avoid Interruption, I took her into the Parlour, when she began her
History as follows: I am, said she, Grandaughter to the Marquis of Vendosme; my
Mother, whose Name was Margaretta de Tiaange, was one of the most celebrated
Beauties in the Court of France. The late Electress of Hanover (poor Lady,
though her Husband was crowned King of England, she never was acknowledged as
Queen) had so fond an Affection for her, that she could not think of parting
with her; but when she was married, entreated she would accompany her to
Hanover; their united Prayers prevailed on my Grandfather to give his Assent,
and the Electress placed her in Quality of the first Lady of her Bedchamber,
that she might ever have her near her Person, --

Whatever Regret my Mother felt, at the strange Difference she found between
the Court of Paris and the House of Herenhausen, yet being happy in the Favor
of her Royal Mistress, young and cheerful, she made herself quite easy; and she
and Count Conningsmark used to set their Heads together, to study what might be
most amusing to the lovely Lady.

But alas! while they thought only of Innocence, the Princess Sophia, and the
Duchess of Munster, a discarded Mistress of the Elector's, had other Schemes
in their Heads, which not long after they put in Practice, to the Destruction
of the Count, the Disgrace of the Electress, and the Banishment of every
Person, whom she honored with her Confidence.

I have frequently heard my Mother declare, that she believed there was not in
the World a more virtuous Person than the Electress, and indeed her Conduct
from the Time of her Separation from the late King, to the Hour of her Death,
sufficiently convinced the World of her unspotted Purity.

Well, in the general Ruin my Mother, as her first Favorite, was inevitably
involved: She was ordered to return home to France; and as she was a Woman of
Quality, a Man of War was fitted out for that Purpose.



I could not here avoid interrupting her, to say I wondered that the Princess
Sophia should enter into any Scheme which might in the least reflect on the
Honor of her own illustrious Family; she answered, the Princess loved nothing
so well as Dominion, and as the Ladies of France had a natural Turn to
Politics, she was afraid the Electress might interfere, so as to injure her
Power, which was almost absolute. Oh! Ambition! by what cruel Means do thou
compass thy Ends? I desired her to proceed, which she did as follows. My Mother
returned home safe, though much dejected at a Separation from her Mistress,
with whom had she been permitted, she would willingly have embraced an Exile
from the gay World. But as Time insensibly wears off Affliction, and lessens
the Object, by removing it to a greater Distance, so she began to resume her
native Cheerfulness, and once more shone at Court.

The first Night she appeared there, an English Nobleman, for as such he passed
himself, (neither did his good Mien or Politeness, in the least contradict this
generally received Opinion) paid his Addresses to her. Gallantry and
Complaisance are so much the Mode at Paris, that my Mother took all he said of
his Passion, and her Charms, merely as Words of Course, and told him so; he
answered that he found she was unacquainted with the Temper of the English,
who, above all other People, particularly valued themselves on Sincerity, and
scorned Deceit or Hypocrisy even to the Fair, to whom most Men practice it. She
answered, the Ladies in his Country must certainly be very happy; he said, the
most convincing Proof he could give of the Reality of his Passion, was, that,
provided her Heart and Hand were disengaged, he would use his utmost Endeavors
to merit both. She assured him she was entirely at her Father's Disposal, and
that if he was serious in his Declaration, he must apply to the Marquis of
Vendosme. Accordingly, next Day he paid the Marquis a Visit, and brought such
Credentials, of his being a Man of Fortune and Quality in England, that the
Marquis had but one Objection, which was an Unwillingness to part with my
Mother; however, my Father promised they would once a Year pay the Marquis a
Visit: So all Things being agreed on, the Marriage was celebrabrated with great
Pomp and Festivity.

No sooner were the Rejoicings ended, than it was whispered my Father was not a
Man of Quality, but an Impostor. This greatly afflicted both the Marquis and my
Mother; they mentioned it to my Father, who assured them it was a malicious
Falsehood, raised by some Persons who envied his Happiness. As it was too late
to retract what was done, they could only hope the best. Shortly after, my
Father urged a Necessity of his returning to London, to which the Marquis
reluctantly consented.

At Dover my Father's Chariot met them, carried them to a very handsome House,
where there were a Number of Servants in rich Liveries, waiting the Commands of
the Bride and Bridegroom.

But after all, not to hold you longer in Suspense, my Father was a Limner; but
so excellent in his Art, that he could well afford to keep his Wife like a Man
of Quality. However, as there is no Country where Persons set a higher Value on
noble Blood than France; my Mother was cruelly mortified to find herself
imposed upon, and fell into a deep Melancholy, which preying on the very Pith
of Life, she languish'd in a Consumption for three Years and died, leaving me
and another Daughter desolate Orphans.

After this Loss, which I was too young to regret, my Father brought in a
Woman, whom it seems he had some Time kept as a Mistress, to order his
Household, and take care of us, which she did so well, that at length my Father
married her.

Here happened a most strange Reverse of Fortune to us: For no sooner did this
Woman attain her Ends, than she altered her Conduct, and from a fawning
Servant, turned a haughty and despotick Tyrant. My Father was obliged to turn
off all his old Servants, because they did not pay Respect enough to her
Ladyship, for he had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him by King William.

This Step-Dame now continually endeavored to set my Father against us; till
at length, wearied out with Injuries, I hired myself as a Servant to the
Governor's Lady of St. Christophers; and she being informed who I was, treated
me with the utmost Kindness.

This unhealthful Climate soon deprived me of her, who with her dying Breath,
recommended me to the Care of the Governor; he called me up, told me her
Request, and kindly said, whoever was dear to her, it should be his particular
Care to protect, even for her Sake.

I kneeled down by the Bedside, to bless them both for their Goodness, my
Mistress took my Hand, grasped it very hard, and instantly expired.

I fainted away, and my Master, as I was afterward informed, quitted the
Chamber, bidding the Servants take care of the poor Child.

When the Funeral was over, and that the first Transports of my Master's Sorrow
were abated, he desired to see me, and renewed his kind Assurances of
Protection and Favor to me. He made me dine at his Table, saying, that my
innocent Prattle diverted his Melancholy; and I, studious to please him, did
it so effectually, that instead of my being his Servant, he became mine; and as
he was too humane and generous, to entertain a dishonorable Thought, he
proposed Matrimony to me, an Offer too considerable for me to reject.

The Evening before the Day appointed for our Nuptials, my dear Master, Friend,
and Lover, was taken very ill, on which they were deferred. But his Illness
increasing, he thought proper to have the Marriage Ceremony performed, made his
Will, and as he had no Children, left me all his Fortune, and died the next Day.

Though I cannot say I was in Love with this Gentleman, yet Gratitude made me a
sincerely sorrowful Widow; though I was young, rich, and, as the World said,
handsome.

When my Year of Mourning expired, I had several Matches proposed to me, of
which I made Choice of the worst. He was an Englishman, but to say the Truth
had nothing but his Person to recommend him. He was addicted to every Vice, and
consequently soon squandered the plentiful Fortune I had brought him.

And at last, one Day when I was abroad, he robbed the House of every thing it
contained that was valuable, and he, with a Negro Woman Servant I had, got on
board a Vessel bound for England.

I was now plunged into not only the Extremity of Sorrow, but also of Want.
However, being very expert at my Needle, particularly in Embroidery, and also
very curious in Shell Work; I set up a School, and instructed young Ladies.
Money is very easy to be got there, and so it ought, for the Island is
productive of nothing for the Service of Life, neither Fruit nor Herbage, and
consequently there are no Cattle, but what they have either from the Continent,
or salted from England.

Well; bad as the Place was, I lived there thirty Years after the Departure of
my second Husband, tolerably easy; till at length I received, from an English
Captain of a Ship, a Letter from the Sister I have mentioned, who was extremely
well married in London, and gave me a kind Invitation to come and pass the
Remainder of my Life with her.

Accordingly I embraced the first Opportunity of returning to my dear native
Country; all the Ladies entreated me to stay, but finding me determined to the
contrary, they gave me signal Marks of their Favor: Each making me a Present,
and assuring me that if ever I returned, I should be affectionately received.

We had a tolerable Voyage, even till we were in Sight of the English Shore;
when a furious Tempest arose, which set us almost beside ourselves. The Goods
were thrown over Board, so that I lost all my Clothes; and a few Minutes after,
we struck upon a Rock, but by God's Providence, not a Soul perished. All that I
saved was a Basket of Curiosities, such as the Island afforded.

But not to detain you with trivial Circumstances, I got to London, and went to
my Sister's House, which I found hung with black, she in her Coffin, and the
Hearse ready to convey her to the Grave.

This was a dreadful Disappointment to me, for I was quite a Stranger,
moneyless, and could not reasonably hope for much Favor from a Brother-in-law,
whom I had never seen, especially as the Link of the Chain which united us, was
now dissolved.

The next Day I went to him; and, upon telling him the Circumstances of my
Life, exactly as my Sister had done, he had the Goodness to give me her
Clothes; a seasonable Relief, as my own were lost.

The following Day I went into a Broker's Shop, to know if the Person who kept
it would buy some of my Merchandise: He desired me to come in, and seemed
surprised at the Variety and Beauty of my Collection; and perceiving me very
faint, for indeed I was all almost famished, he offered me a Dram; which I
refused, as I was sensible it must have got the better of one so weak as I was.

However, I accepted of some Toast and Ale, which, I really think, saved my
Life: After this Act of Civility I told my Distress to him, and he kindly gave
me a Lodging, and recommended me to you.



I wrote a Petition for this unhappy Stranger; which had no manner of Effect on
his Majesty: I afterward wrote to her Brother-in-law; who gave her Five
Guineas, with which Sum she again set out for St. Christophers; and, as I
afterward learn, the Ship, with all the Passengers, were lost.

I think this poor Lady's Life was but a continual Scene of Storms and
Misfortunes, as if Heaven had Barred her Bosom to the Thunderstone.


But alas! how shall we poor Reptiles presume to judge the Ways of Providence;
all things are ordered with Harmony and Beauty; though, like a Fly, our feeble
Ray sees but an Inch around, yet dares dislike the Structure of the Whole.

As well might a Mariner, in the midst of the wide World of congregated Waters,
hope, with his Line, to sound the deep Abyss, as our finite Minds to comprehend
the Ways of Deity. Here then let us rest,
Whatever is, is right; Wisdom and Goodness govern all.

Reader, have Patience with my Philosophic Whimsies, which I must sometimes
indulge: It Is frequent, in Conversation, to say, of those that are drowned,
That they are gone to the Bottom of the Sea; but, with due Deference to better
Judges, I cannot conceive the Ocean to have any Bottom, except near the Shore.
I have observed every single Drop of Water to be an entire Globe; put another
to it, they unite by Adhesion of Parts, like Quicksilver, to form a larger:
Thus the tributary Streams pour in globulous Chrysolites, to form that wondrous
Mass of Waters, which we term the Ocean, and which, no Doubt, goes quite
through the Center of the Earth, without any middle Way to stop it.

I know it may be here objected, that a Ship lost on one Side ought, by this
Rule, to rise at the opposite Place: Not at all; the Pressure of the Atmosphere
is everywhere equal, nor is there any such thing as up or down in Nature: As
many Stars bespread the Firmament beneath us, as above us: As Travelers, such
as have sailed round the World, sufficiently evidence; and did not the strong
Laws of Gravitation hold all in firm Union, the Sea, no Doubt, would tumble on
our Heads.

Oh! thou revered Spirit of NEWTON, who could take the Dimension of each
Planet in our Solar System, and then demonstrate to us, How other Planets
circle other Suns.
Giving us thereby the most august View of that Being, who poured forth new
Worlds to all Eternity, and peopled the Infinity of Space: If I have erred,
through Pride, in endeavoring to search into the Secrets of Nature, wherein I
may very possibly err; let thy honored Manes vouchsafe to set me right, For I
so much a Catholic will be,
As for this once, great Saint, to pray to thee.
Cowley.

I think I have scarce ever read Two better Lines than Mr. POPE's Epitaph on
this Prince of Philosophers, which, to prove my regard to him as a Poet, I will
insert: Nature, and Nature's Laws, lay wrapped in Night,
GOD said, Let Newton be, and all was Light!


His Inscription on Sir Godfrey Kneller's Monument is as remarkably bad as this
is excellent: See Westminster-Abbey.
Kneller by Heaven, and not a Master, taught,
Whose Art was Nature, and whose Pictures Thought,
When now two Ages he had snatched from Fate,
Whatever was beauteous, and whatever was great,
Rests crowned with Princes, Honors, Poets, Lays,
Due to his Merit, and brave Thirst of Praise,
Living, great Nature feared he might outvie,
Her Works, and dying, fears herself shall die.
And bad as it is, it is but a lean Translation from the Italian, an enervate
Language, well adapted to the soft Warblers of it, but incapable of manly
Strength, Dignity, or Grace.

I always find in myself a strong Inclination to Criticism, and, if I live to
finish this Volume, I shall certainly indulge it: For my Part, let the World
say what they please of Critics, I esteem them as very useful Members of the
Commonwealth of Learning. Whatever is well written will stand the Test of
strict Examination, ay, and of Ridicule too; and when that is past, the Work
appears like Gold from the Furnace, with ten-fold Luster: Therefore I fairly
invite the whole Body of Critics to canvas my Writings; if they point out an
Error I shall esteem them as Friends, and endeavor to amend: If they make an
injudicious Criticism, for some such I have seen published against me, they
prove their own Ignorance, and cannot give me a greater Triumph: I only wish I
may have a Longinus, not a Zoilus, to judge me.

Well now, Mrs. Pilkington, says, perhaps, my Reader, What, in the Name of
Wonder have we to do with all this?

Why, truly, no more, I think, than with a Buff Jerkin, or mine Hostess at St.
Albans; but I am no Methodist either in Writing or Religion; sometimes
Irregularities please; shapeless Rock, or hanging Precipice, present to the
poetic Imagination more inspiring Dreams than could the finest Garden: Where
Grove nods at Grove, each Alley has a Brother,
And half the Platform just reflects the other.
I am, in short, an Heteroclite, or irregular Verb, which can never be
declined, or conjugated.

But however, considering it was a History of myself, I promised to the World,
I now proceed in it thus:

Two very fine young Gentlemen, whom I did not know, came to buy some Prints,
and observing a large Book in Manuscript, open before me, one of them demanded,
Was that my Account-Book? I assured the Gentlemen, my Revenue was easily cast
up, and that I was but a bad Arithmetician, though I frequently dealt in
Figures and Numbers.

This Gentleman, whom I presently after found was an Earl, by his Companions
calling him by his Title, insisted on seeing the Subject of my Amusement. This
was the First Volume of my Work, which when once he had began, he went quite
through with, and gave it more Applause than ever an Author's dear Partiality
to their own Offspring could possibly make me believe it deserved.

However, his Lordship made a just Remark, That I was very fond of introducing
the Sun by way of Simile, in all my Poems, and said, he had a Mind to cut it
out wherever he met it.

I told his Lordship, he would then leave my Book in the Land of Darkness, and
the Shadow of Death.

The Earl then asked me, if I intended to print it? I said I would, if I could
get Subscribers to it, otherwise it must, like many other valuable things, be
buried in Oblivion. He gave me a Subscription, and, as it was Dinnertime, took
his Leave, with a Promise of drinking Coffee with me the next Evening; when, as
it was Sunday, I should be disengaged from Business; which Promise, however, he
did not fulfill; and having vainly expected him till Eight, I then went up
Stairs, to sit with the Countess of Yarmouth's Steward's Wife; and, on my
Return, found my Shop broke open, and every Article of my Wearing Apparel taken
away: This was a dreadful Mortification, and a sad Loss! All my Comfort was,
that the Thieves had taken nothing but what belonged to me.

This Robbery quite ruined me, as I was obliged to lay out my Money for
Necessaries to appear decent; my Landlord seized for a Quarter's Rent, though
he was my Countryman, and professed great Friendship for me.

I was once more in doleful Plight; however, I got a ready-furnish'd Lodging,
just tolerable.

One Evening, when I came Home from a Friend's, my Landlady told me, there was
a young Woman to visit me, who wept sadly that I was abroad. I asked her what
sort of a Person she was? She told me, she thought she greatly resembled me,
and that she would be with me early in the Morning: Accordingly she came, and I
knew her, at first Sight, to be my Daughter: The Surprise made me faint away;
not but I was very glad to see her, but Joy is overcoming as Grief; and when I
considered how little it was in my Power to help her, it quite surk my Spirits.
She was in a Garb which bespoke Poverty, and gave me a long Account of her
Father's Inhumanity to her, and his youngest Son.

A few Days after her Arrival came the Son I have now with me, from on board a
Privateer, as ragged as a Prodigal returned from keeping Swine; but, poor
Child, I wonder how he subsisted at all, considering the Hardships he had
suffered, and what to do with them both I could not tell: Mr. Richardson Author
of Clarissa.
was so kind to give my Son a new Suit of Clothes, which put him in a Capacity
of going amongst my Friends, from whom I received a transient Relief.

At length the Girl, finding how Matters were, went to wait on a Lady, and
Captain Meade took my Son with him on board a Man of War, with which a Number
of Transports, and others, then went on a secret Expedition, but were prevented
in their Design, by having their Intentions betrayed to the French.

Well, this was a little Respite to me: I heard Worsdale was in London, and
wrote to him, but received no Answer; a Day or two after, as I was going
through Spring-Garden, pretty early in the Morning, who should I see but the
very identical Man, standing at a Coffee-House Door!

I stopped, and looked at him, when he immediately recollected me, and seemed
overjoyed to see me: He invited me to Breakfast, and told me, he was upon his
Keeping; so that he had been obliged to quit a pretty ready-furnish'd House, he
had in Mount-Street, Berkley-Square, and leave it to the Care of a Servant, to
retire to this privileged Place.

After Breakfast he desired I would write a Letter for him to the Bavarian
Ambassador, and to two others, whom I have now forgot, to beg their Protection;
which accordingly he obtained, though not directly. He made me dine with him,
and promised to reward me when he should be at Liberty to pursue his Work; and,
in the mean time, he said, I should be welcome to his House in Mount-Street; an
Offer which I readily accepted, as well for the fine Air, as being Rent-free.

He allowed me a Shilling a Day to live on, which I could very well do: But he
came every Morning to know how much I had wrote. He would give me Fifteen
Subjects at once, and expected I should compose something excellent on every
one of them: In short, there was no End to my Labor, nor any Relaxation from
it, except sometimes a kind of troubled Sleep; for, amongst other Misfortunes,
I was not able to make my Bed, nor light the Fire; and the old Woman, his
Housekeeper, proud, ignorant, and insolent beyond Imagination, asked me, Where
the Devil I was bred, that I could not sweep Rooms, light Fires, and make Beds,
as well as other Servants; and that truly Mr. Worsdale was a Fool to hire me,
who did nothing but write all Day long.

Though I conceived a good deal of Indignation at being thought the Servant of
a Colour-grinder's Son, yet I could not forbear laughing at the Ideas of this
good Creature.

Never did any Soul lead a more solitary Life than poor Laetitia; for Worsdale
had positively ordered the old Woman not to let any human Creature come near
me; and she punctually obeyed him, more out of Malice than Integrity.

In this Sequestration from the World I wrote three Ballad Operas, one of them
plan'd on the Story of the old Song, A Pennyworth of Wit; where I have so
exalted the Wife over the Harlot, that at last, as Worsdale is a professed
Libertine, I began to think it was quite necessary to apologize for his writing
any thing to the Honor of Virtue, or exposing of Vice; so I wrote the
following Epilogue, to be spoke by a Woman: EPILOGUE to Virtue Triumphant.
DUce on it, I wonder what the Author means,
To pester thus the Stage with moral Scenes!
The Fool! He sent me hither to excuse him;
Faith I Will be even with him, and abuse him.
I hope he listens, while I speak my Thoughts
And tell, what he must bear to hear, his Faults.
First he endeavors, in a freeborn Nation,
To bring the wearing Fetters into Fashion,
Nor would have loving Couples go together,
Till they are yoked by matrimonial tether.
Here he does plainly Liberty invade,
And is, besides an Enemy to Trade:
Should his Advice be followed through the Land,
What must became of Drury, and the Strand?
In France, when Age appears through Walls of Paint,
Each battered Jade turns Devote, or Saint;
And, when her Looks no longer Love inspire,
Does wisely to a Nunnery retire:
But here should pretty Females leave off sinning,
What must they do? betake themselves to Spinning!
Why, sure, 'twou'd vex the Heart of Jew, or Turk,
To see the pretty playful Creatures work.
Well, after all his railing thus at Harlots,
It Is said, he liked them once, by lying Varlets;
And that, unless be perfectly had known 'em,
He never could so perfectly have shown 'em.
But, Jests apart, the Poet bad me say,
He to the generous Fair commends this Play,
To show their matchless Excellence designed,
And cure the roving Madness of Mankind;
To show the Fair, though Husbands may be led
By artful Wiles, to stain the nuptial Bed;
Yet Virtue shall, at last, triumphant prove,
And Husbands bless the Joys of faithful Love.
Studious the Worthy and the Good to please,
If such with Approbation crown his Lays,
Our happy Author seeks no other Praise.


I am sorry I have not the Opera, but Worsdale was too cunning for me, and
seized it, sheet by Sheet, as fast as I wrote it: And having now Liberty, by
means of the Protection, and a good deal of Work bespoke in the City, he took a
Floor near the Royal Exchange, in a large old-fashioned House, with very
antique Furniture; and there he gave me a little Room to myself; but, as it was
within-side of his Painting-room, I was a Prisoner all the Morning, and might
fast and write till Three o'Clock in the Day; then I was called to Dinner, of
Beef-steaks, or Mutton-chops, cooked by himself: The manner of our eating I
must describe.

We had four Play-bills laid for a Table-cloth, Knives, Forks, or Plates, had
we none; no matter for that -- I had a Blade,
With which my tuneful Pens were made --
And, so to make my Dinner sure,
I for a Fork employed a Skewer.
The Butter, when we had any, was deposited in the cool and fragrant Recess of
an old Shoe, a Coffee-pot of mine served for as many Uses as ever Scrub had,
for sometimes it boiled Coffee, sometimes Tea, it brought small Beer, strong
Beer, and I am more than half afraid it has been applied to less noble Uses;
but be that as it may, I Have done the Man some Service, and he knows it -- No
more of that.

He happened to paint, as he told me, the young Chevalier's Picture, at
Manchester. As he went to Richmond he left all his Pictures in my Care, when,
one Morning, a very beautiful young Lady, of about Sixteen, and her Brother, a
fine young Gentleman, came to the House: I was called down, and they walked up
Stairs; when, after a little Hesitation, the Lady asked me, could she see the
Picture of the Highlander? I answered, yes, and brought it to her: She kissed
the Face, Feet, and every Bit of it; and judging from this that she was a Roman
Catholic, a Religion that Lord Lucan, eldest Son to the Earl of Kilmalock.
Patrick Sarsfield's Neice can never hate, let who will take Offense at it; for
he was generous, noble, and humane; and, in God's Name, let every one of his
Creatures be as upright and just as he, (and no Doubt but he will look down
well pleased, and bless the fair Variety).

The young Lady repeated two Lines of a Poem of Lady Mary Wortley Montague, on
seeing this Picture: In every Linament of which we trace
The injured Saint, and Royal Martyr's Face.


Their Curiosity being satisfied, the Lady would have given me some Money: I
told her, I was not a Servant, but that, as I lodged in the House, Mr. Worsdale
left the Pictures in my Care: Madam, says she, I beg Pardon; but how can I make
you a Recompense for your Trouble? By giving me, Madam, the Remainder of the
Poem: She repeated it; and, finding I had something like Taste, she kindly
embraced me, giving me a Direction where to wait on her; and we parted, I
believe, delighted with each other; but I only speak for myself. --

Worsdale came to Town, and called on this Lady, and Gentleman: They were so
kind to praise me highly, and ask him, who I was? He declared he did not know;
he left, he said, an old Chairwoman to look after his House, perhaps it was
she. --

This Answer did not satisfy them, they were so unreasonable as to insist on
it, that I was a Gentlewoman, that they knew it by my Speech, and Hands, by my
refusing Money, and begging Poetry: But Worsdale renounced me more heartily
than ever he did the Devil, whose Servant he is. --

He came home very angry, abused me at an unmerciful rate, and told me, I
should not stay in his House, to show my Wit and Breeding, forsooth, when I had
neither; and boast of my Family, when it would have been better for me to have
been the Daughter of a Cobbler. As this Fellow always boasted of his being Sir
Godfrey Kneller's Bastard, I could not avoid telling him, that some People were
so fond of Family, that, to keep it up, they would prove themselves Sons of
Whores.

The Hour of my Deliverance, from this worse than Egyptian Bondage, now
approached; a young Woman, for whom I had wrote several Love Letters to a
Gentleman who had, it seems, kept her till he married, and then forsook her, as
indeed he ought, found me out.

The Scheme was to persuade him, that at the Time he dismissed her, she was
with Child by him, though she in Reality confessed she was never in that
Circumstance in her Life: But, Bite the Biter was fair enough; if he cheated
her out of Innocence (a Loss never to be retrieved) I think she had a just
Title to some of his Money, of which he had more than he knew how to use.

I was writing a melancholy Epistle for her, when in came Worsdale; he gave me
a furious Look, and withered all my Strength before he spoke; then he went out
of the Chamber, and sent for me, demanding of me, whether I intended to neglect
his Business, and turn Secretary for the Whores. I was really surprised, that
he of all Men, should fall so hard on kind Females; and as their Money was
honestly earned by me, and they are generally liberal, I never thought I did
any thing amiss, in helping them out with a soft Epistle: He stormed at me, she
heard him, and finding his Wrath was raised on her Account, was very much
troubled, and slipping a Guinea into my Hand softly, whispered me to come to
her House in Golden-square, and she would make me full amends for my Vexation.
-- Of all Men I ever saw, W -- e has the strongest Appearance of Charity and
Compassion, and the least of it in reality. He would take any curious Artist
out of trouble, provided their Work, which he appropriated to himself, would
yield him ten-fold Interest. Love, Favor, or even common Decency, no Person
ever met with from him, except on terms of becoming his Slave. I have often
reflected with Wonder, on the vast Propensity that appears in Persons of
Quality, to provide for the spurious Offspring of Beggars, Vagrants, etc. by
depriving themselves of the Enjoyments of Life, to amass vast Treasure, and
when that tremendous Hour arrives, in which all earthly Glories, Honors,
Wealth, and Titles, cannot give a Moment's Ease, or prolong frail Life, the
Question is, "How shall I dispose of this, to appease that God, at whose
Tribunal I expect shortly to appear? Oh! I Will leave it all to the Poor." -- As
if the Omnipotent could not see through the shallow Device, or that his eternal
Kingdom was to be purchased with their Leavings.

I have observed, that most of those, who have chosen to be public spirited
after their Death, have in their Lifetime been mere unhospitable narrow hearted
Souls; and if a Person of Birth and polite Education, had by any Misfortune
fallen into Distress, and made an Application to them, such would not fail of
meeting with an Affront, and having their Letter sent back open, with the Civil
Message, that truly my Lord or my Lady did not know any Thing of it, and had
Dependants enough of their own to provide for.

And pray now let us enquire, who are these Poor, that the public and private
are eternally providing for; are there not Collections daily in Churches,
besides the vast Legacies left to Parishes, Hospitals, etc. and yet to
Appearance no Soul the better.

Are not the Streets infested with Beggars of all Denominations? and in the
Houses, Objects that would raise Compassion in any humane, well-judging Person?

Here we shall find a poor Wretch, for a few Shillings a Week, slaving to
support a Wife and Children, and perhaps at the End of the Quarter, is stripped
by a cruel Landlord, and torn relentlesly from the Relief of his Family, while
they are exposed to the sharpest Pangs of Want, Cold and Nakedness.

And where shall they apply for Relief? if to the Parish, perhaps they may
obtain a few Half-penee, but no real Succor.

If to a beneficent Lady, who distinguishes herself, by giving a Gown once in
the Year to some particular old Beggar Women, and Sixpence a Week for their
Support, to give them a Taste of Life, (as the same Woman must not expect to be
served two Years successively) Why, truly my Lady Bountiful is not at home, or
the Servant durst not carry up any Letter or Petitions: So the poor Sufferer
may return, laden with Poverty, and swollen with Sorrow.

And yet this Lady expects to be almost deified for her Munificence, and
Patriotism; she laid out her Money on a House, not to satisfy her Vanity, but
to employ her distressed Countrymen; she never saw the Naked, but she clothed
them; nor the Sick, but she visited them; nor the Hungry or Thirsty but she
relieved them, whilst the Rich she sent empty away. In which charitable Opinion
of her own Virtues, she expects to go directly to Heaven; but now hear the
Opinion of Impartiality.

Indeed she never saw her Fellow Creatures in Distress, but she being of a
compassionate Temper, found it necessary for her own Quiet, to relieve them;
therefore, she always chose a back Room to sit in, that she might not view such
disagreeable Objects; and in order to save her Money for some great last
Stroke, if Persons of Rank dine or sup with her, they must take such as the
House affords, by which Means the Rich are always sent empty away.

If no body knows this Picture, without writing the Name under it, I will
confess myself to be as bad a Painter as W -- e.

Dean SWIFT's excellent Scheme for building an Hospital for Lunaticks and
Idiots, was of a different Cast from those of most other Men, as it was not a
Matter uttered with his last Breath, but studied, calculated, and determined
for many Years before, as the following Lines in his Elegy on his own Death
sufficiently evince. He left the little Wealth he had,
To build a House, for Fools and Mad,
And showed by one Satyrick Touch,
No Nation wanted it so much.
And according to his usual Wisdom, he committed the Regulation of it to
Gentlemen of real Worth, Honor, and Probity, in which, would others follow so
great, so laudable an Example, perhaps the many Sums that were designed for
good Mem. The Workhouse in Dublin.
Uses, but are now appropriated to the purchasing Estates, and splendid
Equipages for some particular People, might have the wished Effect of being a
universal Benefit.

The Dean could not abide the thought of being like other Mortals, forgot as
soon as his venerable Dust was conveyed to the Earth; and therefore he always
endeavored to render himself worthy of a grateful Remembrance in the Hearts of
the People; yet how true are his own Lines!

And now the Dean no more is missed,
Than if he never did exist;
Except amongst old-fashioned Folks,
Who now and then repeat his Jokes.
A remarkable Instance of his whimsical Disposition, which I omitted in my
first Volume, as I find His sacred Name remains still dear,
To every just Hibernian Ear;
I will here insert, and must say, it is with infinite Pleasure, I find that my
weak Attempts to delineate his inimitable Character, have met with such unhoped
Approbation, both here and in England; not so much for the Vanity of an Author,
as the Pleasure I feel at seeing so vast a Respect paid to his Memory.

I believe the Dean on his first coming to Ireland, was very melancholy, and
indeed it was not to be wondered at, as he was then separated from those whom
he loved, Mr. Pope, Lord Bolingbroke, etc. and in one of his Poems, he seems to
despair of meeting with Friendship in a strange Country, or that, Not a Judas
could be found,
To sell him for three Hundred Pound.
I one Day asked him how he came to write that Poem; he told me he had three
Times like to have been hanged, "and, Pox take me, said he, but I believe the
People thought I could bring the Pretender in my Hand, and place him on the
Throne."

I remember a worthy Gentleman, who had the Honor of his Acquaintance, told
me, that the Dean and some other Persons of Taste, whom I do not now recollect,
came to a Resolution to have a Feast once a Year, in imitation of the
Saturnalia, which, in heathen Rome, was held about the Time we keep our
Christmas, whereat the Servants personated their Masters, and the Masters
waited as Servants.

The first Time they put this Scheme in Practice, was at the Deanery House.
When all the Servants were seated, and every Gentleman placed behind his own
Man, the Dean's Servant took an Opportunity of finding Fault with some Meat
that was not done to his Taste, and taking it up in his Hand, he threw it in
his Master's Face, and mimick'd him in every other Foible which he had ever
discovered in him.

At this the Dean flew in a violent Rage, beat the Fellow, and put every Thing
into such Disorder, that the Servants affrighted, fled the Room; and here ended
the Feast of Saturnalia.

Stella, Mrs. Johnson, said to be his own Sister.
whom he has so beautifully praised through his Writings, was actually his
Wife, though they never, I am convinced, tasted even the chaste Joys which
Hymen allows.

It is certain, they retained for each other, a most tender Love; and though
they did not indulge the Desires of the Body, yet their Souls were united by
the strictest Bonds of divine and social Harmony.

He, in the latter Part of his Life, offered to acknowledge her as the Partner
of his Heart; but she wisely declined it, knowing that while she continued only
as a Visitor, he would treat her with Respect; which would cease, as his Temper
was unpassive, if she lived entirely with him; and every Fault of his Servants
would be attributed to her. I am certain he must have tenderly loved that Lady,
as I have been a Witness, that the bare mention of her Name has drawn Tears
from him, which it was not easy to effect.

I remember he sent for me one Morning very early, to Breakfast; and as I
always drank Tea or Coffee, I expected to have found one of these ready; but
after he had detained me two Hours, discoursing on his Household Economy, and
other Matters, amongst which one was, that a Piece of his Garden Wall had
fallen down; and "so said he," "one of my Fellows forsooth, must needs get a
Trowel and Mortar, and undertake to mend the Breach.

"I happened, continued the Dean, to spy him out of my Window at this
Employment, and called to him to know why he did that? he told me he had been
bred a Bricklayer, and that his doing it, would save me Money; so I let him
finish it, which he did very completely in about an Hour's time. I gave him a
Moidore; and Pox take me, but the Fellow instead of going as he ought, to the
Alehouse or a Whore, went and bought Silver Buckles, and is grown very proud
upon it."

I think, Sir, said I, the Man made a good Hour's Work of it.

"Come said he, shall we go to Breakfast, I know you were once Bermudas mad;
now I Will give you some of that Country Cheer; open that Drawer and reach me a
flat Bottle you will find there." I ran to obey him, and as the Drawer was low,
kneeled down to it.

I no sooner attempted to unlock the Drawer, but he flew at me and beat me most
immoderately; I again made an Effort, and still he beat me, crying, "Pox take
you, open the Drawer." I once more tried, and he struck me so hard, that I
burst into Tears, and said, Lord, Sir, what must I do?

Pox take you for a Slut, said he, "would you spoil my Lock, and break my Key?"
Why, Sir the Drawer is locked. "Oh! I beg Pardon, said he, I thought you were
going to pull it out by the Key; well, open it and do what I bid you."

I did so, and found the Bottle. "Now said he," "you must know I always
breakfast between my own House and the Church, and I carry my Provision in my
Pocket," upon this he pulled out a Piece of Gingerbread, and offered me some.

As I was terribly afflicted with the Heart-burn, the very thoughts of any
thing so dry, made me ten times worse, which I told him, and begged he would
excuse me. He positively insisted on my eating a Piece of it, which I was, on
Penalty of another Beating, obliged to comply with.

"Now, said he, you must take a Sup out of my Bottle." I just held it to my
Mouth, and found it so strong, that I entreated he would not ask me to taste
it: He endeavored to persuade me; but finding that would not avail, he threw
me down, forced the Bottle into my Mouth, and poured some of the Liquor down my
Throat, which I thought would have set my very Stomach on Fire. He then gravely
went to Prayers, and I returned home, not greatly delighted, but, however, glad
to come off no worse. I went the ensuing. Evening to pay a Visit to my Kinsman
Doctor S -- ge, then lately consecrated Lord B -- p of ****. This Gentleman,
and his Family, were extremely fond of my Father, and always pleased when I did
myself the Honor to call on them; and received me with that Ease and
Politeness, peculiar to well bred People. I congratulated the Bishop on his
Preferment: He modestly told me, that his Honors did not sit easy on him, and
that he would willingly dispense with his Friends not saluting him by his Title
of Lord, as it always made him uneasy. He then asked me, as he saw my Father's
Chariot at the Door, where I intended to go? I told him, to the Dean. Well,
said he, I beg you will give my Compliments to him, and tell him, That, as it is
to his Recommendation I owe my present Happiness, I am surprised I never had
the Pleasure of seeing him since he conferred so great a Favouron me: While I
was plain Doctor S -- ge, continued he, the Dean used to send his Wine and
Bread before him, and frequently take a Dinner with me; but now, I believe, he
is ashamed to own me: Pray speak to him, and let me know his Answer. I promised
I would, and then departed.

I found the Dean at home, and alone, which gave me an immediate Opportunity of
delivering the B -- p's Message. He listened to me very attentively, and then
said, "Oh, I remember something of it: L -- d C -- t applied to me for a Person
to make a Bishop of, whom I knew was not an honest Man; and, as I wanted the
Living of W -- b's for D -- y, I recommended S -- ge to the Bishopric, with an
Assurance, that he would answer his Excellency's Purpose; and Pox take me if I
ever thought him worth my Contempt, till I had made a Bishop of him."

The Dean then told me, that as he had no Company, and did not know how to
dispose of his time, I should have the Honor to sup with him; and, said he, I
will give you a most kingly Entertainment.

I accordingly waited, in Expectation of some extraordinary Repast, till about
Nine o'Clock, in which Interval, my Readers may be assured, I wanted not
Amusements for the Mind: However, at length, the Cloth was laid on a small
Table, and, to my great Surprise, the Servant brought up four blue Eggs, on a
China Plate: "Here, Hussy, said he, is a Plover's Egg; King William used to
give Crowns apiece for them, and thought it Profanation in a Subject to eat
one of them; as he was, amongst his other immortal Perfections, an Epicure, a
Glutton, and a -- Hold, said he, I had like to have spoken Treason: But how do
you like the Eggs?" Sir, I have eat none yet. "Well, eat like a Monarch then,
and tell me your Opinion." I did eat, and told him, I had not that elevated
Notion of his Banquet, which he might possibly have, from so great a Precedent.
"Well, said he, these Eggs cost me Sixpence apiece, which is a little
extravagant, considering a Herring will cost but a Halfpenny; but I never
exceed two; and this is the only Article in which I am luxurious."

I must here again apologize to my Reader for my frequent Digressions, in
which, however, it is possible, they will find more Entertainment than a simple
Narrative will afford.

I believe there never was any Set of People so happy in sincere and
uninterrupted Friendship, as the Dean, Doctor Delany, Mr. Pilkington, and
myself; nor can I reflect, at this Hour, on any thing with more Pleasure, than
those happy Moments we have enjoyed! It Is for this Reason I am fond of
mentioning Matters; which bring the pleasing Ideas to my Mind. I have observed,
that the Scent of a Flower, or the Tune of a Song, always conveys to
Remembrance the exact Image of the Place in which they were first noticed.
Well, therefore, in the Relation of a Story, where one Circumstance insensibly
brings on another, may a Writer, who scorns to deal in Romance, be led, like
me, to digress.

Mrs. Barber, whose Name, at her earnest Request, I omitted in my first Volume,
and who was the Lady I mentioned to have been with me, at my first Interview
with the Dean at Dr. Delany's Seat, was at this time writing a Volume of Poems,
some of which I fansy might, at this Day, be seen in the Cheesemongers,
Chandlers, Pastry-cooks, and Second-hand Booksellers Shops: However, dull as
they were, they certainly would have been much worse, but that Doctor Delany
frequently held what he called a Senatus Consultum, to correct these undigested
Materials; at which were present sometimes the Dean, (in the Chair) but always
Mrs. Grierson, Mr. Pilkington, the Doctor, and myself. One Day that he had
appointed for this Purpose, we received from him the following Lines, which, as
they contain a Compliment to me, from so eminent a Hand, I must insert: Take
notice, that as we were both diminutive in Size, Mr. Pilkington was styled
Thomas Thumb, and I his Lady fair: Mighty Thomas, a solemn Senatus I call,
To consult for Saphira, so come one and all;
Quit Books, and quit Business, your Cure and your Care,
For a long winding Walk, and a short Bill of Fare.
I Have Mutton for you, Sir; and as for the Ladies,
As Friend Virgil has it, I Have Aliud Mercedes;
For Letty, one Filbert, whereon to regale,
And a Peach for Mrs. Grierson.
pale Constance, to make a full Meal;
And for your cruel Part My Mother, who used to argue with the Doctor about his
Declamations against eating Blood.
, who take Pleasure in Blood,
I have that of the Grape, which is ten times as good:
Flow Wit to her Honor, flow Wine to her Health,
High raised be her Worth, above Titles or Wealth.


We obeyed the Summons, and had a very elegant Entertainment; and afterward
proceeded to our Business, which we completed, to the Satisfaction of all
Parties.

Of all the Gentlemen I ever knew, this I must say, that Doctor Delany excels
in one Point particularly; which is, in giving an elegant Entertainment, with
Ease, Cheerfulness, and an Hospitality, which makes the Company happy.

Lord Carteret, in his Lieutenancy, being very fond of this Gentleman, who is
indeed worthy of universal Esteem, came one Day, quite unattended, and told the
Doctor he was come to dine with him. He thanked his Excellency for the Honor
he conferred on him, and invited him to walk into his (beautiful) Gardens; which
his Excellency did, with great good Humor. They took a Turn or two, when the
Servant came to inform them, that Dinner was on the Table. The Doctor had
generally something nice, in the Season, for himself and his Mother, to whom he
behaved with true filial Tenderness and Respect; for which, no Doubt, his Days
will be long in the Land, which the Lord has given him.

The Doctor made the old Lady do the Honors of his Table; for which, nor for
the Entertainment, he never made the least Apology, but told his Lordship, that
To Stomachs cloyed with costly Fare,
Simplicity alone was rare.


This Demeanor of his was infinitely agreeable to Lord C -- t, who, though a
Courtier, hated Ceremony when he sought Pleasure, which is indeed inconsistent
with it. And what Respect soever our Nobility may think is owing to the French
Mode of cringing and complimenting, I must confess I never see it practiced,
without a peculiar Pain, which I can compare to nothing but the Apprehensions I
am under at the Sight of Tumblers, Rope-dancers, etc. such as, I believe, all
rational Creatures share, at seeing Men deform their Visages by a thousand
awkward Grimaces, and their Bodies like jointed Babies, only because it is
Alamode Francoise: Neither do we often see any but the most illiterate Coxcombs
practice it.

His Excellency, after the Cloth was taken away and the Bottle introduced,
(when consequently, the Lady departed) told the Doctor, "that he always
believed him a most well-bred Gentleman, but never had so clear a Demonstration
of it, as he had this Day seen. Others, said he, whom I have tried the same
Experiment on, have met me in as much Confusion as if I came to arrest them for
High Treason; nay, they would not give me a Moment of their Conversation;
which, and not their Dinner, I sought, but hurry from me; and then, if I had
any Appetite, deprive me of it by their fulsome Apologies for Defects. This,
said his Excellency, is like a Story I heard the Dean tell of a Lady, who had
given him an Invitation to Dinner: As she heard he was not easily pleased, she
had taken a Month to provide for it. When the Time came, every Delicacy which
could be purchased, the Lady had prepared, even to Profusion, (which you know
Swift hated.) However, the Dean was scarce seated, when she began to make a
ceremonious Harangue; in which she told him, that she was sincerely sorry she
had not a more tolerable Dinner, since she was apprehensive there was not any
thing there fit for him to eat; in short, that it was a bad Dinner: Pox take
you for a B --, said the Dean, why did you not get a better? Sure you had Time
enough! but since you say it is so bad, I Will even go Home and eat a Herring.
Accordingly he departed, and left her justly confused at her Folly, which had
spoilt all the Pains and Expense she had been at."

And here, if it will not be thought impertinent in me, to intrude into such
Company, I also have a Story, which I somewhere heard, not unapplicable to the
above.

A certain English Nobleman, who had the Honor to be sent Ambassador to
France, was said to be one of the most polite accomplished fine Gentlemen in
Europe. This reached the Ears of the French King, who thought such a Character
due to none but himself; but as every thing is proved by Trial, his Majesty
took this Method of informing his Curiosity. One Morning that the Ambassador
had a private Audience, the King told him he should be glad of his Excellency's
Company, to take an airing with him; the Ambassador did not hesitate on
accepting the Offer; but told his Majesty, he was ready to wait on him; the
King's Chariot was at the Door, which he very carelessly desired the Nobleman
to step into: No, Sir, replied the Ambassador, not before your Majesty; at
which the King burst out a Laughing, and said, "No, no, my Lord, you are not
the best bred Man in the World; otherwise you would have done what I desired,
since you might well know, that if it was not agreeable to me, I should never
have paid you the Compliment."

And indeed I have heard those who ought to be the best Judges of Manners,
declare, that in Company with Superiors, to act implicitly according to their
Directions, is the most effectual Method of being always acceptable; which
leads me to another little Circumstance related by Mrs. Percival.

This Lady, with a Company of very agreeable Persons, resolved in the
Summertime to take a Trip to the Hague; they accordingly set out, and landed
at some Place in Holland, the Name of which I have now forgot: However, on
their first Day's Journey, they stopped at an Inn to dine, and enquired what
they could have to eat; they were told there was nothing in the House but a
Neck of Veal; which, though insufficient, they desired to be dressed, as there
was not an Inn for some Miles forward; therefore they made it up with some of
their Sea Provisions, which the Servants had fortunately brought in. After
Dinner they called a Bill, and amongst other Articles of Extortion, they were
charged for Meat One Pound Four Shillings, which was so palpable an Imposition,
that though each of the Company had Fortune and Liberality enough, yet they
called for the Man, and told him they absolutely would not pay so extravagant a
Price; sooner than which, as they came merely for Pleasure, they would stay a
Month and spend a hundred Pounds a Piece in Law; the Boorish Fellow told them
that it was the common Price in this Place; which if they doubted, he was
willing to appeal to the Magistrate. This they readily agreed to, and were all
preparing for a serious Trial of the Matter, when Minheer told them, in an
ironical Tone, that he was himself the Ruling-Officer and Dispenser of Law and
Justice in that Place. Finding this to be the Fact, and that the Defendant must
be the Judge in this Cause, the Plaintiffs thought proper to submit, and paid
him.

If the Reader thinks this little Narrative is not quite in Point; which, now
it is related, I begin to find out myself, he may blot it out of his Book if he
pleases, but he shall not blot it out of my Manuscript, for that would be to
deprive me of a Page, that is worth a Crown to me: Nay, and as it is Truth, who
knows but it may prove worth two Crowns to the Reader, if he should happen to
make the same Tour.

My dear Mr. Cibber, to whom, for his Amusement, I used to relate such little
Incidents, would frequently admire what a Fund of Matter for Entertainment my
Brain contained, and he bad me write it all; since, if it pleased him, it might
possibly have the same Effect on others. This Gentleman's frequent Conversation
with the Great, gave him a better Opportunity of knowing their Disposition (as
he had infinite Penetration) than most others: In Consequence of which, he
advised me, when I ever had Occasion to solicit a Favor from any Persons of
Distinction, to take Care to Time it properly; for Instance, said he, "Never
write to him or her, of a dark foggy frosty Morning; particularly before
Breakfast, at which Time it is Ten to One, they are out of Temper; nor though
you send at any Time, and even received an unmannerly Answer, do not let a rash
Pride drive you to return the Affront, since it is impossible for you to know
what at that Instant had chagrin'd their Temper. He who will not be your Friend
at one Time, may at another; and though you never can bring him to do you any
Service, yet do not provoke him to be your Enemy; a Man may have had ill
Success at Play, missed an Appointment with a fine Woman, or twenty such
Accidents; which may for the present sour his Disposition; whereas if you
continue your Assiduities, in Process of Time he might do you more Service than
you could hope. These are Truths which I have since experienced, and I should
be wanting in Gratitude as well as Sincerity, if I did not make it public.
Here follows an Instance.

Nicholas Loftus Hume, Esquire whom I mentioned in my second Volume, that came to
see me in London, but declined subscribing to me, because he was going to the
Duke of Dorsel's to Dinner, has since my being in this Kingdom, been kind
enough to send me Five Guineas as a Subscription; for which I rest his most
obliged Servant.

I remarked to Mr. Cibber, upon this Conversation, that though the English
Nobility were outdone by none in Munificence and Liberality; yet I could by no
Means conceive, that their Buildings were the least expressive of it; since
there was scarcely one fine House in London, which was not obscured by a
monstrous high Wall, that entirely intercepted the Prospect, and took much from
the Magnificence the Streets might possibly have. He told me, it was the Method
in Italy, from whence our Peers, and others, transplanted it as a great Beauty,
because the Surprise has a vast Effect. Sir, said I, in Italy those Walls are
requisite, to keep off the extreme Heat of the Sun; and if possible to shut out
the Eye of God from their abominable Pollutions; but as we enjoy a mild and
temperate Region, and are I hope, untainted with their beastly Vices, I see no
Reason for our Peers to affect it; there is besides, generally at these Gates,
a most avaricious Cerberus, who, should a Stranger happen to stand and gaze at
any occasion of the Gates being opened, would very judiciously slap it in their
Faces, as if our Eyes, like the Sphynx of Egypt, could penetrate Stone Walls.
If you have the smallest Suit to make to his Master, the Fellow will be as dull
of Apprehension as the Mock Doctor, till you tip him the Symptoms; which when
you have given him, he prevails on the Valet to deliver it, which must also be
accompanied by a Daub in the Fist. I have computed the Expense of Writing to a
Great Man, as under, L. S. D. For Pen, Ink, and Paper, 0 0 1 For a Person to
find when his Lordship is at Home, 0 1 0 To the Porter, 0 10 6 To the Valet, 1
1 0 To the Footman, who brings the Answer, 0 5 0 The amount of which is, 1 17 7

These Observations I thought proper to communicate, as I am persuaded some of
the Nobility of England, will be curious enough to read this Work, and I do
assure them, nothing so much dims their Luster, as the Arrogance and Penury of
their Vassals; which, when they know, perhaps they may reclaim. Dean Swift
discharged a Servant only for rejecting the Petition of a poor old Woman; she
was very ancient, and on a cold Morning, sat at the Deanery Steps a
considerable Time, during which the Dean saw her through a Window, and no doubt
commiserated her desolate Condition. His Footman happened to come to the Door,
and the poor Creature besought him in a piteous Tone, to give that Paper to his
Reverence. The Servant read it, and told her with infinite Scorn, his Master
had something else to mind than her Petition. "What Is that you say, Fellow,
said the Dean, looking out at the Window, come up here.' The Man trembling
obeyed him: he also desired the poor Woman to come before him, made her sit
down, and ordered her some Bread and Wine; after which he turned to the Man,
and said, "At what time, Sir, did I order you to open a Paper directed to me?
or to refuse a Letter from any one? Hark ye, Sirrah, you have been admonished
by me for Drunkenness, idling, and other Faults, but since I have discovered
your inhuman Disposition, I must dismiss you from my Service: So pull off my
Clothes, take your Wages, and let me hear no more of you." -- The Fellow did
so, and having vainly solicited a Discharge, was compelled to go to Sea, where
he continued five Years; at the end of which time, finding that Life far
different from the Ease and Luxury of his former Occupation, he returned, and
humbly confessing, in a Petition to the Dean, his former manifold Crimes; he
assured him of his sincere Reformation, which the Dangers he had undergone at
Sea, had happily wrought, and begged the Dean would give him some Sort of
Discharge, since the Honor of having lived with him, would certainly procure
him a Place. Accordingly, the Dean called for Pen, Ink and Paper, and gave him
a Dismission, with which, and no other Fortune, he set out for London.

Among others he applied to me, who had known him at his late Master's, and
produced his Certificate; which for its Singularity, I transcribed, and believe
it may not be displeasing to the Reader. Whereas the Bearer -- served me the
Space of one Year, during which time he was an Idler and a Drunkard, I then
discharged him as such; but how far his having been five Years at Sea, may have
mended his Manners, I leave to the Penetration of those who may hereafter choose
to employ him.

J. SWIFT.
Deanery-House, Jan. 9th, 1739.



I advised him to go to Mr. Pope, who, on seeing the Dean's Handwriting, which
he well knew, told the Man, if he could produce any credible Person, who would
attest, that he was the Servant that the Dean meant, he would hire him. On this
Occasion he applied to me, and I gave him a Letter to Mr. Pope, assuring him,
that I knew the Man to have been Footman to the Dean. Upon this Mr. Pope took
him into his Service, in which he continued till the Death of his Master.

It Is now, I think, full time for me to take up my Clue, and go on with my
Memoirs; previous to which it is, however, I think, it incumbent on me, to
entreat my Readers Forgiveness for my so frequently mentioning, in the
Prosecution of my Story, a Person so contemptible, so unworthy even of Satire,
as one Worfdale, a Painter; yet those who examine these Writings will find,
that he is so unluckily interweven in my History, that it is as impossible for
me to eradicate him, as it was for Jack, in the Tale of a Tub, to strip his
Coat of its Fopperies, without visibly defacing the whole.

Worsdale went abroad, and I took an Opportunity to make my Escape, to visit
Mr. Cibber, and met, according to Custom, a very kind Reception: For his
Friendship to me was inviolable. He was writing the Character and Conduct of
CICERO considered; and did me the Honor to read it to me: I was infinitely
pleased to find, by the many lively Sallies of Wit in it, that the good
Gentleman's Spirits were undepress'd with Years; -- Long may they continue so.
This gave me an Opportunity of writing a Poem to him, which W -- e had the
Confidence to ask from me; but I did not choose to compliment him with it: [The
Editor has applied to Mr. Cibber for a Copy of this Poem, but he having
disposed of them all, we are obliged to omit it].

Mr. Cibber was exceeding well pleased when I waited on him with it, and said,
he would give it a Place, but that it wanted Correction, which he promised to
bestow on it: This I readily agreed to, being convinced his Judgment far
surpassed mine.

I waited on him next Morning, and found he had greatly improved my Work: I
thanked him for his obliging Pains, but remarked his Modesty in having struck
out some Lines, in which he was most praised.

Well, Madam, said he, there are two Guineas for your Flattery, and one more
for the Liberty I took. I blessed my Benefactor sincerely, from my Soul; he
smiled benevolent: "Come, said he, I have more good News for you; Mr. Stanhope
altered a Line, for which he desires you will accept of a Guinea: Mr. Hervey
also pays you the same Compliment, for changing one Monosyllable for another:"
To say the Truth, I only wished every Gentleman at White's had, on the same
Terms, taken the same Liberty, till my Work, like Admiral Drake's Ship, had
been so often mended, that not a Bit of the original Stuff it was composed of,
should remain; for Here, in nice Balance, Truth with Gold she weighs,
And solid Pudding, against empty Praise.


I could do no more than (after some joyful Tears) to assure Mr. Cibber, that
neither his own Favors to me, nor those he had solicited for me, should ever
be forgot, while this poor Machine of mine had any Existence.

Surely I hope we shall know our Friends after Death, that we may hold sweet
Communion with them; and -- Quaff Immortality.
Milton. If, in the melancholy Shades below,
The Flames of Friends or Lovers cease to glow,
Yet mine shall sacred last, mine undecay'd,
Burn on through Death, and animate my Shade.
Homer's Odyssey.

What strange things are thought; and Reflections, how do they wander? Who but
the Almighty can account for them? I went, when in London, to be electrified,
when finding the Motion given to a glass Globe not only made Sparks of Fire
come out of my Arm, but also set a Bowl of Sand under it a boiling, I could not
help thinking, that the Earth revolving each Day on its own Axis, must of
course take Fire, as I have seen a Chariot-wheel do: Our Globe may then become
a Comet, and the Inhabitants of others gaze on it with Surprise and Admiration.
I think no Philosopher has yet been able to tell us, by all their mathematical
Rules, what Comets are. I have been told many Stars, which once adorned the
blue etherial Space, have disappeared; Worlds perhaps lost in a Conflagration,
which no more fill the wide Expanse.

But how I ramble out of my Sphere, in a vain Attempt to soar above it, For
while this muddy Vesture of Decay,
Does grossly close me in, I cannot do it.
Milton.

I long to listen to the young eyed Cherubims, and am weary of the World; but
what of that, I gave not Life to myself, nor dare I attempt to abridge it.

Reader, excuse me; if you are a Man of Sense I am certain you will, and from
the Ladies I yet hope Compassion; though rarely met with from one Woman to
another.

Had I strayed from the Paths of Virtue, when turned out desolate to the wide
World, forsaken by all my once dear seeming Friends, and tender Relatives, I
might at least have hoped for Pity, and given Necessity as a Plea for Error:
This has made me so circumstantial in every Particular of my nine Years living
in London, where I am certain I have many Friends, and those such as would be
an Honor to any Person to gain. And I really was Ranked with their Friends,
not numbered with their Train.
Pope.

My dear and honored Lady Codrington, thou lovely Epitome of every female
Virtue, whose Ear is shut to Scandal, whose Hand is liberal, whose Chastity
immaculate, whose Zeal to serve the disstress'd unwearied, whose Friendship I
experienced when you kindly pleaded in my behalf to her Grace the late Duchess
of Marlborough, to the royal Offspring of our august Monarch, and whose
Politeness is as conspicuous as your every other amiable Virtue;

Pardon me, Abstract of all Goodness, that I dare to whisper your immortal
Name; but your sweet Epistle, when you told me it was necessary for me to write
a Letter of Acknowlegement to her Grace, which Letter I submitted to your
Ladyship's superior Judgment to correct, where there was any thing defective;
pardon my Vanity, I must insert: To Mrs. Meade.
Madam,
I Have observed that superior Geniuses have ever more a Diffidence of
themselves; you pay me a very high Compliment in believing me capable of
mending what comes from you: I wish it may have the Effect I desire, of a
farther Bounty from her Grace: I am,

Madam, your real Friend, and most obedient Servant, Eliza. Codrington.
Arlington-street.



As I had wrote my Letter to her Grace in a very small Hand, a Fault we
Scribblers are apt to run into, whence arise numerous Mistakes, I asked Lady
Codrington, whether her Grace, who was now declined into the Vale of Years,
could see to read it? She assured me, she could, as well as I: This put me in
mind of some very fine Lines, wrote on this illustrious Lady, in the Kit-cat
Toasts, which cannot but be acceptable to my Readers. On the Duchess Dowager
of Marborough:
Let others Youth esteem, this Glass shall boast,
A great, immortal, undecaying Toast,
In the quick Luster of whose radiant Eye,
Still lives the beauteous Spark of Liberty,
Whose Spirit undepress'd by fourscore Years,
Except for England's Safety knows no Fears;
From whom a Race of Toasts, and Patriots came,
England shall pledge me, when I MALBRO' name.


To all this noble Family my Respect and Gratitude are due; it is a Blessing to
our Island, that some of their Descendants, equal in Wisdom and Virtue to their
Ancestors, vouchsafe to reside in it, where may they flourish like the Cedars
of Libanus.

But to return: I was now able to quit my Confinement; for Worsdale made his
House a severe one to me: Oh how I rejoiced at my Deliverance, and took a
little decent Lodging; but my Joys were perishable as the baseless Fabric of a
Vision: Captain Meade, with whom I mentioned my Son's going on the secret
Expedition, came to tell me, that the Boy and he landed the Day before; that my
Son was seized with all the Symptoms of a violent Fever, and wanted to see me.
I went to the Captain's Lodgings, in Scotland-Yard, and found my poor Wanderer
quite lightheaded. The Captain sent a Physician and a Surgeon to him, with
Orders to the Mistress of the House to provide for him whatever was necessary,
and he would answer the Expense For many Days we despaired of his Life, till at
length God's Mercy restored him to my Prayers and Tears. When he came perfectly
to himself he told me, they had been in a violent Tempest, where, the Waves
rolling Mountains high, he was wet to his Skin, and the Ship in imminent Danger
of being lost: Captain Meade, he said, begged of God, that he might just see
his Wife and Children, and then he should die without the smallest Reluctance;
his Prayer was heard, the Storm abated, and all got safe on Shore.

As he was impatient to see his Family, he had left Directions for my Son to
follow him to Teddington, if it pleased God he recovered. As I knew nothing
could be a greater Restorative, after a Fit of Sickness, than a pure Air, I
recommended that sovereign Elixir to him: He went the Moment he was able, and
sent me the next Day the following Letter. Dear Mamma,
I Have returned to what I had just left, Sickness: The Captain is in a
malignant Fever, beyond any thing I ever saw; he knows nobody, nor has he any
Physician; I don't believe he can outlive tomorrow Night: I am really greatly
grieved, as I am sure he loved me, and on account of his poor Wife, who is
almost distracted: The four little Girls, I fear, will be quite unprovided for:
All things here are in Confusion: Adieu, my dear Mother, Heaven preserve you to

Your affectionate and dutiful Son, John Carterert Pilkington.
Teddington, Friday Morning.



My Son's Prognostic happened to prove true, the Captain expired about four
the next Morning, of which the Boy was first informed by the dismal Outcry of
the Widow and Children. This Woman's Character has something in it so far
surpassing any thing I have yet met with, that I hope it may at once divert and
instruct my Readers; the Story is genuine.

She was the Daughter of Mr. Wh -- f -- ld, of Canterbury, an ancient and
honorable Family, many of whom had Seats in Parliament; but it seems he had
strayed from the Wisdom and Virtue of his Ancestors, and devoted himself
entirely to Belial. Women and Wine were all his Joy, till he broke his Lady's
Heart: And, Oh strange to hear, shocking to human Nature! had the the Cruelty
to attempt his Virgin Daughters! one of whom, to protect herself from such
devilish Solicitations, ran away with his Coachman. She thought it neither
Shame nor Sin,
For John was come of honest Kin.
Swift.

The Heroine of our Story, being left alone, was so tormented by his incestuous
infernal Fire, that she fled to her younger Brother, who was an Apothecary, and
lived at W -- d -- r.

As he was a Bachelor, he was very glad of her, to over-see his domestic
Affairs, which, I dare say, she did very well, as she was a good Housewife,
especially in the frugal Part of Management: It happened another Apothecary
fell in love with her, but nothing could prevail on her to accept of him as a
Husband, though her Brother tried every Art he could to persuade her to it.

Things were in this Situation when Captain Mead was commanded on Duty to W --
d -- r, and as he had often been there, was well acquainted with the Town, and
as well esteemed: Miss Wh -- f -- d and her Brother, with some young Ladies,
were walking on the Terrass, when Captain Meade accosted them. They fell into
Chat, and Mr. Wh -- f -- ld invited the Captain to Supper; after which the
young Lady retired.

Mr. Wh -- f -- ld then acquainted the Captain with his Sister's obstinate
Refusal of an advantageous Match. "She has, said he, "seemed to pay a
particular Deference to every Word you spoke tonight, and, I am certain, if
you undertake the Lover's Cause, you will bring my Sister to Reason."

The Captain said it would be too abrupt to pretend to advise a Lady he had
never seen before, in so delicate a Point as that of Matrimony, wherein many
Circumstances ought to be considered, in order to a Union firm and lasting. It
may be, said he, the young Lady's Heart is pre-engaged; in that Case, how cruel
would it be to force her into a hateful Wedlock, the Consequence of which is
Misery?

Mr. Wh -- f -- ld then assured him, he had no such Intention, all he aimed at
was her Happiness: "Cultivate, added he, a Friendship with her; you may easily
do it, and discover the true Cause of her Aversion toward an honest good Man,
who loves her, and is in Circumstances to maintain her in Ease and Plenty."

Captain Mead promised all in his Power, and when, by frequenting the House, he
had got into a little Intimacy with her, he in a paternal Style, when they were
alone, expostulated with her, to no purpose: She said, she was determined never
to marry, as she was certain she should never have the Man she only could love.

He pressed very hard to know who it was; assuring her of his Friendship; and,
at the same time, laying hold of her Hand, said, he must be insensible indeed,
who did not, above all other Consideration, regard so much Tenderness and
Beauty.

He perceived she trembled, blushed, and seemed quite confounded: "Would to
God, Madam, said he, that I was the happy Occasion of all those tender Emotions
which swell your fair Bosom, how blessed should I think myself?" And are you,
said she, in a fault'ring Voice, are you in earnest, or do you only trifle with
a Weakness, which your Penetration must have observed, even from the first
Moment I beheld you?

Although this Declaration was very plain, yet it was so unexpected, that the
Captain was for some Moments at a Loss how to make a suitable Return: But,
recovering himself, he told her, Joy had made him speechless, but from that
Hour he was entirely devoted to her for Life.

He then asked her in Marriage of her Brother, who absolutely refused her to
him, on account of his being in the Army.

But as the Lady was willing to be the kind Companion of his Flight, he hired a
Chariot and Six, and took her with him.

This Story Captain Meade told me before her: Nor did she in the least attempt
to deny it; but said, she had gained a good Husband by her Sincerity.

Indeed, while I was with them, they seemed to me perfect Patterns of conjugal
Love; but her Fondness seemed to surpass all things, for she would kiss her
Husband's Linen, saying, they smelt of Violets and Roses; but truly, though I
loved my dear Relation very well, I was grown so delicate I did not like a
dirty Shirt (for that was sometimes the Case) to be offered to me as a Nosegay.

Her Piety was so great, that Whitsunday Morning, when we were going to Church,
which was near half a Mile from Captain Meade's House, a young Lady called to
us, to know, did the Bell ring? Mrs. Meade answered, yes, but finding even the
Churchyard Door not opened, she said, she would not receive the Sacrament that
Morning: I asked her, why she should not? Because, said she, I have told a Lie,
in saying the Bell rang: I told her Scruple to Doctor Hales; who joined us, and
presently dispelled her Fears, by assuring her, an innocent Mistake could never
be deemed a Lie.

Upon this we both ventured to receive the blessed Eucharist, administered to
us by a truly holy Hand; for, assuredly, Doctor Hales, yours is such. And let
no Person say, I do not reverence the Clergy, for I really do; but not any one
of them, who does not, as near as Humanity can go, aim at the Perfection of
their Maker and Redeemer.

As I have already related the Manner of Captain Meade's Death, let us see how
his pious Widow behaved herself on the Occasion; after having yell'd and
scream'd to save Appearances, she locked up his Body, and had him next Day
buried.

She desired my Son, who remained disconsolate in the House, to go to the
Tower, and bring home whatever of the Captain's was there; but he being
apprehensive that, perhaps, on Account of his Youth, and his not having a Line
with him, they might be refused to him, begged of me to accompany him; which,
as I was truly desirous of rendering any Service I could to his Family, I
readily did. When we arrived at his Apartment there, for the Officers keep one
in every Place where they are obliged to be on Guard, and told the Mistress of
the House my melancholy Errand, she gave me the Keys of his Bureau,
Portmanteau, Trunk, etc.

When I took out his Regimentals, his Sash, and many other things appertaining
to him, in which I had so often seen him arrayed, I could not refrain bursting
into Tears, to think the dear Wearer of them was now no more. Amongst other
things we found two Guineas, which was a seasonable Relief to the Widow. The
Soldiers on Duty wept like Children at his Death's sad Story. My Son conveyed
all things safe; but the Sight of them did not take the same Effect on his
Relict that they had done on me; for she only said, she was very glad to get
them.

My Boy, who colors Prints beautifully, was employed by Mr. Millan, so that he
was innocently and elegantly employed. The Sweets of getting Money made him
doubly diligent; and, to be quite undisturbed, which it was impossible he
should be with me, so many Persons coming for Letters, Petitions, etc. he took
a Lodging for himself. I was one Day exceedingly surprised when the Penny-post
brought a Letter, directed to my Son; as it was marked Teddington I opened it,
judging it was some Business that Mrs. Meade wanted to have transacted; when, O
shameful! it was a Love-letter to the Child, who was but sixteen Years of Age,
and she is four Years older than I am, with a Direction to him to meet her at a
Coffee-house in London, and an Offer of Marriage to him.

I really could scarce believe the true and credible Avouchment of my own Eyes.
Bless me! she amazed me! yet, thinking this might be a Counterfeit, I showed it
to the Boy, and desired he would go, and see into this Matter, neither of us
being acquainted with her Hand, which was a desperate bad one.

He went accordingly, and stayed most Part of the Evening abroad: When he
returned, he said he had inquired after her everywhere, and could not learn
any Tidings of her; so I conceived this Letter was either wrote by some Enemy
of hers, or else for Sport, by some of the Girls at Teddington, in order to
send him on a Wild-goose Chase.

About six Weeks after the Captain's Death an Officer inquired for me; as I did
not know him I asked, what Commands he had for me? He desired to know of me,
whether I was not a near Relation to Captain Meade: To which, answering in the
Affirmative, I desired the Gentleman to sit, for he looked as if he had
something of Importance to deliver. Pray, Madam, said he, can you inform me
what is become of the Captain's Widow; my Reason for inquiring is this; a prior
Wife has set up a Claim to the Pension, and produced a Certificate, which we
believe to be a Counterfit, as it is dated twenty Years ago, and it is but
reasonable to think she would, in that time, have asserted her just Rights. But
this is not all, the Officers have made a Collection for the Lady he
acknowledged, and the Children: But there is a Report spread, that she is
married to a Boy, young enough to be her Son, who was a Helper in the Captain's
Stable. This has damped the Charity of those who, had she even been deceived by
the Captain, would have assisted her.

I told him I had often heard the Captain relate that, in his younger Days, he
got in a League with one Mrs. Meadows, who, after having been divorced from her
Husband, set up a Coffee-house, where he boarded and lodged: He found her in
every Respect so unfaithful to him, that he quitted her. Not long after she
broke; and, being in Distress, applied to Captain Meads, who, in Consideration
of former Friendship, agreed to give her annually 20 l. provided she retired;
which she agreed to.

I cannot, Sir, said I, help thinking this is some Piece of her Contrivance:
It Is very possible, Madam, returned he; and if you will be so kind to inquire
into it, that these Reports may be confuted, it will be of the utmost
Consequence toward the future Welfare of the Widow and Orphans of your
deceased Relation. I shall pay my Respects to you again in two or three Days.
The Gentleman left me, and, after a good deal of Search amongst Mrs. Meade's
Acquaintance, I learned she lodged in the Strand. There I went, and found her
in a very indifferent Lodging; the Children were in deep Mourning, but Madam
herself was decked out very gay. After customary Compliments, I told her I was
surprised to see her out of Mourning: Why, Cawzan, for that was her manner of
Pronunciation, I am married. What, already, returned I, ever the Man you seemed
to dote on, even to Extravagance, is cold in his Grave. Cold, says she, aye,
he is cold enough, and rotten too, by this time. May be you made him so before
Death. Why should you think so? Because you seem to have thrown of common
Decency: And is this all the Respect you pay to so good a Husband? In answer to
this, and to my great Surprise, she assured me, she never was married to the
Captain in her Life.

Here was Hypocrisy! (that sly Fiend who escapes all but the piercing Eye of
GOD) in its utmost Perfection; if one may make use of such an Epithet to such a
devilish Sin. To live in Fornication, yet go to the Communion without the least
Purpose of Amendment of Life, and to pretend such strong Affection to a Man,
whose very Memory she showed she hated; I shall ever after this suspect the
Sincerity of such an over-acted Fondness.

I told her my Errand, and that I was really sorry she had put it out of my
Power to vindicate her Conduct; which, cut of Regard to the poor Children, I
would gladly have done. She told me, Doctor Hales approved of her Proceeding;
and so she did not care what I thought. Though I am certain this must have been
false, for the Doctor had such high Notions of conjugal Fidelity, that he was
true to the Ashes of his Spouse, whom he lost when he was but a very young Man,
and having an agreeable Person, a sweet Temper, and unbounded Learning, might
no Doubt have raised his Fortune by a second Marriage.

Amongst other Instances of her Hypocrisy, this Woman used to pretend, that
even small Beer got into her Head, and would severely censure any Lady who
drank a Glass of Wine; yet now, though it was but nine of Clock in the Morning
she called for a Dram, drank it off, and would have had me follow her Example,
but I had no Inclination to such a Breakfast: Besides, having no other Estate
but my Head, on which were hourly Demands, it was by no other means my Interest
to destroy it.

I took my Leave; and, when I related this to my Son, the Boy laughed
excessively; and, as he then had no manner of Respect for her, he told me, he
had gone to her according to her Appointment; that she had treated him with two
Bottles of Mountain, and pressed: him hard to marry her: Indeed I remember,
when he came home, I saw he had been drinking, but he said some young Gentlemen
of Ireland, whom he met, gave him a Bottle of Wine.

However, some time after, she made him pay for his Liquor, for she opened a
Punch-house, which I believe she still keeps, at least she did when I left
London; she wrote a Letter to my Son, to desire to see him; accordingly he
went; and Madam Temperance carried him into the Dining Room, and ordered her
Husband, who served in Quality of Waiter, to bring up a Bowl of Arrack-Punch,
and half a Dozen Glasses of Jelly. The Boy was well pleased with this sumptuous
Fare; but when the good Cheer was ended, she demanded Payment, and he was
obliged to part with his Week's Earning, which he had just received. What could
the most mercenary Prostitute have done worse?

But I believe she is sufficiently punished, for I was well assured the Groom
took the Liberty of correcting her, and nobody pitied her.

I think the Philosopher was in the wrong who wished for Windows in the human
Breast; how miserable must we have been, when we beheld those whom we esteemed
Friends, under specious Appearance, plotting our Destruction; the Object of our
Love, even in the midst of well-feign'd Rapture, wishing themselves in the Arms
of another: The Son who bows his Knee in filial Reverence to his hoary Sire,
cursing the Gout, Pitargo, and the Rheum, for ending him no sooner. In short,
the Scenes would be too shocking; they would quite imbite Life.

Those philosophical Gentlemen, who have searched into the Secrets of Nature,
have admired the Wisdom of Providence, in kindly concealing from us many
things, which known, would make us wretched: I am sure it was well for poor
Captain Meade this Woman's Breast was not transparent.

They have farther observed, that were our Perceptions stronger than they are,
the Senses, which convey Pleasure to us, would become the Instruments of
intolerrable Pain. The Touch, if tremblingly alive all over,
Would smart and agonize at every Pore.
Or quick Effluvia darted to the Brain,
Die of a Rose, in aromatic Pain.
Should Nature thunder in our opened Ears,
And stun us with the Music of the Spheres,
Pope's Essay on Man. How terrible must be our Condition?

Most married Persons, even in the happiest Wedlock, which is, at best, but
tolerable, look back with secret Regret on the sweet Hours of Freedom, when no
Anxiety reigned, such as the Care of a Family, the Sickness, or Disobedience of
Children, the total Loss of them, and a thousand Troubles which perplex the
married Life; and yet no sooner are they single, but they run into the same
Toils again, hardly affording time for a decent Mourning: Strange Infatuation!
In which, I think, the Ladies more excusable than the Men, since their Weakness
may make them want a Protector; yet they who can have Resolution enough to know
no second Bride-bed but the Grave, certainly claim a higher Degree of Respect
and Veneration.

In this aimable Light shines the present Lady Dowager Meade, who, though left a
Widow, in the Bloom of her Youth and Beauty, the Widow of a Gentleman old
enough to be her Father, who lost her sole Guardian to their Offspring, turned
all her Thoughts to the Improvement of her Childrens Minds, and Fortunes, in
both of which Heaven crowned her Goodness with Success, and the World with
Honor.

I could mention another great Lady, not unallied to her, who though she has
many Virtues, as I have acknowledged in my first Volume, being left exactly in
the same Situation, was so faithful a Steward for her Son, that with his Rents,
which she received during his Minority, she purchased an Estate for herself; a
thousand Pounds a Year Jointure not being sufficient for her, neither would she
ever come to any Account with him for the Produce of his Estate. The Gentleman
had too high a Sense of filial Piety to commence any Suit in Law against his
Mother, though she was married to a second Husband, much younger than herself,
and has been Like to a Step-dame, or a Dowager,
"Long withering out a young Man's Revenue."
Shakespeare.

I am sure, Mr. Pilkington, I pray heartily for your Life, lest I should ever
be such a Fool as to engage in new Scenes of Trouble; for if I could not keep
your Heart, properly due to me, at a Time when the flattering World called me
agreeable, Much less would my declining Age,
A second Husband's Love engage;
Nor from the Dregs of Life could I receive,
What the first sprightly Running could not give.


And now, to convince you, that I bear no Malice to you, I will tell you an
authentic Truth, true as the Gospel; for one Truth is, even by mathematical
Demonstration, adequate to another.

I was, since I came to Dublin, invited to a Widower's House to Dinner: As his
Business called him out, he had left Orders for my Reception; your youngest Son
was with me, and we were shown into a Parlour, where a Gentleman sat reading my
first Volume. I did not interrupt him, as he seemed to be deeply engaged. The
Master of the House coming in, and saying, "Mrs. Pilkington, I am very glad to
see you, and your Son;" made the Gentleman look at us attentively: After
Dinner, he told us, he had a Bond and Judgment entered on it against you, at
the Suit of Mr. Clark, the Brewer; that hitherto he had been compassionate,
supposing us to be such Creatures as your Imagination had painted us out to the
Worl^ to be: But, said he, now I am convinced of my Error, I shall show him no
farther Mercy: My Boy starting up, cried, What do you mean to do to my Father?
Nothing, said Mr. Edwards, only to try how he will brook Imprisonment; it is
full as fi^ for him as for your Mother; for my own part I was weak enough to
burst into Tears, and your Son swore a good privateer Oath, that he would shoot
any Man who should offer to distress his Father.

Mr Edward seemed surprised, as judging, no doubt, we should have rejoiced in
your Calamity, as you had done in ours; yet being of a generous, humane
Disposition, he was touched with our Sorrows, and granted that Liberty you now
enjoy to our Intercession: You know the Pers^n, and, if I set down a Falsehood,
let him disprove me.

Upon my Word, I must contradict the witty Mr. Congreve, who says, Heaven has
no Rage, like Love to Hatred turned,
Nor Hell a Fury like a Woman scorned.
For I do not hate you. I am in an Apathy, a cool Suspense from Pleasure, and
from Pain, both of which I must acknowledge I received from you; but that was
when you wrote in my Praise; and, at the very same time, said every thing
disagreeable to me: Was not this done to deceive the World? "I will make them
believe I love her; and, as she has too much Pride and Decency to complain of
me, I will indulge my Pleasure abroad, with Miss His present Wife.
N -- y S -- d -- s, or the Widow, or any W -- e."

I cannot indeed say, but Miss S -- d -- s's Father owed a Favor to Mr.
Pilkington, who kindly taking Compassion on his Necessities, when his Lady was
not satisfied with his keeping a Mistress in the House with her, and insisted
on her being dismissed: Mr. P -- n, ever humane, received her to his Habitation
with open Arms, gave the old Gentleman free Ingress and Egress, for which he
gratefully permitted the Parson to go to bed to his Daughter; indeed I should
have pitied her, had she been deceived by the Report of my Death, so
industriously spread, into Marriage; but she had it under my own Hand, that I
was living, for I did the Creature the Honor, S -- t as she is, to write to
her, in order to prevent her being imposed on. I think the Form of Matrimony
really wants an Explanation, if we go according to the strict Letter of the
Law. What a happy State must a young Woman imagine herself entering into, where
she is to be loved, honored, cherished, nay, even worshipped; she has a
Protector till the Hour of Death, who is to forsake all, even his Parents, for
her, if it be required, who endows her with his Fortune, and promises all this
solemnly at the Altar.

Then follow the Words, Those whom GOD has joined, let no Man put assunder.

Now let us see how this is really to be interpreted, at least how far this
Covenant is usually kept.

No sooner is the Honey-moon expired but the fawning Servant turns a haughty
Lord: Instead of honoring his Wife, it is Odds if he treats her with common
Civility; he shall tell her, to her Face, he wishes her Death, in order to
marry another. The Custom authorizes this free way of speaking; yet I never
knew it agreeable to any Wife, nor did I ever doubt but the Husband spoke in
the Sincerity of his Heart.

As for our being endowed with the worldly Goods of our Husbands, it is known
they are so little apt to share with us, that it has always been found
necessary, in a Marriage-Settlement, to stipulate for Pin-money, a very useful
Clause even to the Husband, and it is much better his Wife should have a Share
of his Fortune, than be obliged to a Gallant for a Trifle, which Gratitude may
make her repay in too tender a manner.

Indeed the last Article against Divorcement, I entirely disapprove of; and am
glad it has seemed good to the Wisdom of the Church to act in direct
Contradiction to it: This has made Numbers easy, and, as they tell us, it is not
lawful to separate on any Cause, save that of Adultery. A Woman of Spirit, who
is married to a sordid disagreeable Wretch, has nothing to do but to make him a
Cuckold; and then welcome thrice dear Liberty: Yet methinks the Husbands
should, in Justice, return to their Wives, when they abandon them, the Dowry
they brought with them: Now, lest my worthy Husband should say by this Rule, I
should have nothing, who had not a Portion regularly paid, and yet was a
pe^petual Fortune to him, I Will tell him a Story.

The Countess of Eglantine, one of the greatest Beauties in Scotland, fell
under the Displeasure of her Lord, for no other Cause but having brought him
seven Daughters, all charming as this fair Northern Lass, and never a Son: On
this his Lordship assured her, he was determined to sue for a Divorce. The Lady
told him, she would readily agree to a Separation, provided he gave her back
what he had with her. He, supposing she meant pecuniary Affairs, assured her
she should have her Fortune to the last Penny. Nay, nay, my Lord, said she,
"that winna do; return me my Youth, Beauty, and Virginity, and dismiss me as
soon as you please:" His Lordship being unable to answer this Demand, spoke no
more of parting with his Lady, and, ever the Year expired, she made him the
glad Father of a lovely Boy, whose Birth restored Love and Harmony to his noble
Parents. This was related to me by the late Lord Primrose; and therefore I
believe it.

But now, Mr. P -- n, though I presented you with this Piece, don't think I meant
you should take a Hint, and endeavor to end our matrimonial Warfare in the
same manner: No, no, though you linger about the Door in an Evening, in your long
Cloak, and Slops; and that I do believe thee to be my Spouse, by the amorous
Glances darted through thy Spy-glass, at the Window of my sacred and sequestered
Bower, where no profane thing, Priest, Dog, nor Worm, dare enter, I am resolved
to remain obdurate: Sooner shall Lambs make Love to Lambs, Tigers to Tigers,
and every Creature couple with its Foe, as the Poet wittily expresses it, than
I unite with thee.

Yet verily thou do manifest some Tokens of Grace, inasmuch as thou dare
not to contradict the Truth; I fancy when thy Pen-using Talents perished, thy
Pen-making ones shot forth; which have been so fortunate as to recommend thee
more effectually to a certain B -- 's Favor, than could ten hundred thousand
Folios, sprung from thy shallow Brain.

And truly this is an useful Accomplishment; I wish I possessed it, 'twould
save me some Pence in the Year; but there are different Talents bestowed on
different People; I must even rest contented with such as I have, And sooner
will I wear
My Plectrum to the Stump in using of it, Nay,
Not blacker Tube, nor of a shorter Size,
Smoaks Cambrio-Briton versed in Pedigree,
Who on a Cargo of famed Cestrian Cheese,
High over-shadowing rides.
Philips's Splend. Shill. than mine shall be, -- Ere once my learned Pate
Ducks to a golden Fool:
I make no Application.

There are many strange Ways of getting into the Favor of the Great, Pimping,
Lying, Flattering: Who can be Proof against the Force of such united Virtues?
For your great Men who have too much Honor to pay a just Debt never fail to
reward the Servant of their Vices; and it may be, some odd Knack recommends
them, where those baser Applia^s are not required. On which I have thought of a
Story not quite foreign to the present Purpose.

A Man who had a spent a good Part of his Life in dri^ing Pins into a Wall; on
the Point of each he would with infinite Dexterity throw a Pea; his Fame spread
even to the Emperor, who desired to see this matchless Son of Science;
overjoyed he came, showed his Trick to the infinite Pleasure of the Spectators;
the Emperor highly applauded him, and as he supposed this must be a Work of
long Practice to arrive at such a Proficiency in it, demanded of him how many
Years he had spent in attaining it; the Fellow being willing to inhance his own
Merit, assured the Monarch he had spent thirty Years in it; on which the
Emperor ordered him thirty Bastinadoes on the Soals of his Feet, for having so
much misspent his Time.

And, my dear Husband, if you have your Desert, you merit just such a Reward
for misapplying Time in Trifles. Writing one good Sermon, or useful Book, both
of which when I knew you, you were as capable of as most young Men, would have
tended more to your Reputation, than any merely mechanical Art.

But in short, I sincerely pity you, and if ever you want a Shilling, let me
but know it, and if I have the good Fortune to have a Guinea Subscription, for
Gentlemen seldom send me any smaller Coin, you shall not go without one.

The dignified Clergy indeed have been niggardly to me. Yet not against them
all do I bring this Accusation, many of them have even a bleeding Humanity for
the Distresses of their Fellow Creatures; and have not only pitied, but
assisted me; and while I can in that noble List inroll the sacred Names of
Berkley and Delany, Patterns of Virtue in their Lives, really apostolic in
their Doctrine, winning straying Souls with Goodness and Humility, learned as
far as Humanity can soar; surely no other of the Clergy need send me a Message
when they subscribe, not to divulge so terrible a Secret: I always in this Case
judge there is more Fear than Charity in their Contributions. But here I must
remember a certain cross Dean, to whom, as my Father was Physician, I took the
Liberty of applying. My Son went with the Letter; he came out, and cried, "Boy,
opening his ponderous and toothless Jaws, what do you want? An Answer, Sir,
said he; why, then my Answer is, I will not. My Son protested he was quite
startled at his ferocious Features and stentorian Voice. Yet, after all, we
laughed away our Indignation, as he was really not worth it.

This admirable Orator ought to have a larger Rostrum than the narrow Limits of
a Pulpit to display his graceful Action, and never-enough to be admired
Grimace. A Theater would suit his Genius; a Puppet one I mean, where glorious
Punch himself must yield the Prize.

I remember once to have seen this Reverend Flamen, in his lengthened Dress,
ascend St. Andrew's Pulpit; where, recollecting the enormous Iniquities of the
Congregation, he of sudden gave so furious a Toss to his Head, like a metalsome
Horse hard rein'd, that back fell his Wig and down flew his Sermon; which not
being well secured, fluttered in numerous Leaves about the Church, scattered
like the Ungodly, as Chaff before the Wind; the Sleepers awoke, the old Men who
dreamed Dreams, and the Virgins who saw Visions, started from their downy
Trance; and he, willing at least, to give us his Benediction, cried aloud,
"Depart ye cursed into everlasting Fire, which that ye may all do, etc. etc.
etc."

The late Lady Rawden, not long after she became a Widow, invited the Dean as
her Parish Minister, to Dinner; the Lady went to take the Air, and Sir John,
then a Child, was in the Parlour; the Dean fell into Chat with the sweet Boy,
and amongst other Questions said, do you know me? No, Sir; why I am Dean C --,
your Parish Minister. Poor Master innocently verified the old Proverb, that
Children speak Truth, for he cried out, O indeed, I heard my Mamma say, you
were the worst Preacher in Dublin: His Reverence's Wrath was hereupon so
raised, that he failed not to reproach the Lady, who, to pacify him, corrected
the poor Child: However, she could not avoid relating the Story; which I heard
from Lady Rawden, at Mrs. Percival's, to the infinite Laughter of the Auditors,
and which I from henceforth consign to Fame in these my immortal Labors.

I was much obliged to Sir John's Humanity in London, which I gratefully
acknowledge. But there is one great Man I cannot pass over; great, according to
Sergeant Kite's Definition of one, for he is full six Foot high; his Fortune
raised from the noble Spirit of Malt; for I do remember, like Prince Henry,
that poor Creature's Small-Beer, which his Father sold to mine; and from the
golden Grains arose a princely Fortune; from the humbly Dray appeared a Coach,
such as Ambassadors use when on public Occasions, they by their State give us a
Picture of the Grandeur of the Potentate they represent. For if the Man such
Honor have,
What must be his, who keeps the Knave?


Not that I would hence infer all Ambassadors to be Rogues, farther than lying
a little for the Good of their King and Country.

It was this worthy Gentleman who told them at White's that I had nothing to
publish: I had quick Intelligence of his Favor; after which Obligation he came
to visit me, and would have been very kind to me because I was a Gentlewoman, a
Person he could depend on; and he was then in Distress, being at a Distance
from his Lady and native Country; to be sure I ought to have been charitable,
but that I always stood in the Way of my own Preferment; and another unlucky
Circumstance for my Swain was, that I remembered the deplorable Condition to
which he reduced his first Wife, who died of his Love, as did also his Child,
the Nurse it was given to, and her Husband. Noble Achievements worthy of your
illustrious Birth and Lineage. For, It Is you can taint the sweetest Joy,
And in the Shape of Love destroy.
However, I should have passed you over in Silence, but that you told a
Nobleman here, I had been quite compliant to your Desire: Why then you prove
yourself a generous Lover, in sending me Five British Shillings for a Book. A
wondrous Bounty really; why your Neighbor the B -- always pays a Moidore
Commutation for Adultery; and sure you ought to give more than a Man, who by
the Power committed to him from above, is entitled to give himself Absolution.

Your hoary canting Sire was a Votary to Venus, even in old Age. When a certain
Widow, and her dancing Daughter lodged at Glasnevin, a young Gentleman who was
much enamoured of the younger Dame, used to visit her every Evening; as he did
not care to have it known, he went in through a low Window to Miss's Bedchamber:
It happened that Miss being abroad, the venerable Pair made Choice of that
Place, to indulge the gentler Passions: The young Gentleman came according to
Custom, and without Ceremony threw up the Sash, flew in, and unfortunately
started from their downy Couch the reverend Elder and the chaste Matron.

Miss following her Mother's Example, resigned her Virgin Charms to you, and
lost at once her Health and Reputation.

This might have been my unhappy Lot; but that however careless I have been
about Reputation, I was always determined not to put my own precious Person
into any Peril.

Now says my Reader, if he be a Giber, how this prating old Woman, who
certainly never had any Temptation, boasts of Chastity: Ay, it is no Matter, I
have had so many amorous Epistles, Odes, Songs, Anacreonticks, Saphics,
Lyricks, and Pindaricks, in Praise of my Mind and Person too, sent to me since
I came to Ireland; that I believe some Gentlemen, though I cannot, have found me
out to be a mavelous proper Woman. I Will get my Room hung round with
Looking-Glasses,
And entertain a score or two of Tailors;
And study Fashions to adorn my Body.


And some time or other, as I find it is the Mode in London, for the Ladies to
publish the Triumphs of their Eyes, and how many Men fell a Prey to their
Luxury; or, as Dr. Young says, Had ever Nymph such Reason to be glad?
In Duel fell three Lovers, two ran mad.
Though I cannot indeed produce such dreadful Proofs of my Beauty as some of
them; nor choose I to have my Print exhibited before my Work, but Testimonies of
Authors with Regard to it, I hope I may be allowed. The same Vanity Mr. Pope
shows in the Vindication of his Wit, Learning and Humanity may be pardoned in a
Female, in the Vindication of that far nobler Part, external Loveliness; for a
Mind in a Woman is of little Consequence. Dr. Young seems of a different Mind;
but great Authors sometimes vary: As it is now my Interest to be of his Side
the Question, I shall give his Opinion, and who knows if it should chance to be
true, but my Admirers may be real ones. What Is Female Beauty but an Air divine,
Through which the Mind's all gentle Graces shine;
They like the Sun irradiate all between,
The Body charms, because the Soul is seen.
Hence some we see are Captives of a Face,
They know not why, of no peculiar Grace.
And so much for what I never had, except according to his Judgment. There as a
Proof of my Humility, I put in my Claim, and will, like See Zenophon's Banquet.
Socrates, dispute the Prize even with Alcibiades.

Now I have mentioned this small but inimitable well wrote Book, which was
recommended to me by Dr. Swift, and which I in return commend to all such of my
fair Readers as have a Taste for real Wit, in which the divine Socrates as
conspicuously shone, as he did in Purity of Life and Constancy in Martyrdom;
that they peruse it with Care, as it will refine their Ideas and improve their
Judgments, polish their Style, show them true Beauty, and lead them gently and
agreeably to its prime Origin and Source; here they will find Divine Philosophy,
Not so harsh and rugged as some falsely think,
But musical as is Apollo's Lute;
And a perpetual Feast of nectar'd Sweets,
Where no crude Surfeit reigns.
Milton.

I must here observe in my tracing Authors through each other, Zenophon and Plato
borrowed from Socrates, whose Disciples they were. Zenophon acknowledges it as
freely as I do the Instructions I received from Dr. Swift. Lord Shafts: bury's
Search after Beauty, is copied from Socrates; Mr. Pope's Ethics stolen from
both; and the learned Mr. Hutcheson's Beauty and Harmony, an Imitation of the
great Philosophers and excellent Moralists first mentioned.

Had Mr. Hutcheson stopped at this Book, by which he had acquired some Degree of
Reputation, both as a Writer, a Divine, and a Mathematician, he had done
wisely; but O! his Essay on the Passions overturned his scarce established
Praise; if it has any Meaning, it is like dark veiled Cotyto, in her Ebon
Chair, close curtained round, impenetrably obscure, or from his Flames, No
Light, but rather Darkness visible.
I really thought it was the Defect of my Head that made me not comprehend this
Piece, till I heard the present Lord Bishop of Elphin, whose Learning or
Judgment were never yet doubted, declare he did not understand it. After all,
whether the Defect lay in the Book or the B -- p let the Reader determine.

Wollaston's Religion of Nature delineated, though frequently intermingled with
Mathematical Proofs, is yet so plain, that it demonstrates the Author's
Thoughts clearly; which whoever does, can never fail to write with equal
Perspicuity. But Learning seems encumbered with Words or technical Terms
signifying nothing; and our Schoolmasters, lest our Children should attain it
too soon if they should lead them to the Fountain from whence the Streams of
Knowledge flow copious to quench or rather to increase that Desire of it which
we observe from their first prattling Infancy, choose rather to make them begin
at the Bottom of some Rivulet, from whence, with infinite Difficulty, when they
have waded about half Way, they are obliged to retire by the Command of
another, then begin at another, till wearied they give over, and hate the
fruitless, endless, unprofitable Toil. I believe that formerly they had a
better Method of instructing than what is now practiced. I judge this by the
Eloquence shown by the Youth of those Ages, and the beautiful Pieces of Poetry
still extant, some of them styled the minor Poets; perhaps to distinguish them
from the venerable Ancients, or on Account of the juvenile Years of the Authors.

Perhaps Nature in her prime Creation was productive of more Strength and
Beauty even in the Mind, than at this Time, when Luxury and Excess pull down
our ros'd-cheek'd Youth, emaciate their Bodies, and enervate their
Understandings; for Mind and Body are so closely united, that whatever affects
the one, must of Consequence affect the other.

I hope my Reader will pardon my Reflections on the Works of those valuable
Writers I have mentioned, for I mean no Disrespect to their sacred Memories;
but as I am accused of being a Plagiary myself, which I own I am; my Intention
is to prove all Writers to be Thieves as well as their humble Servant,
Shakespeare alone excepted.

Some of my learned Correspondents send me Word I do not write these my own
Memoirs; why I fancy were I to publish their Epistles, the World would not
believe that any of them were my Assistants; but their Modesty makes them
conceal their Names, and I have no Curiosity to discover them.

With such all Authors steal their Works or buy,
Garth did not write his own Dispensary.
Pope. But Authors are a little too fond of Fame to let any one run away with
it from them, or a tolerable Performance pass for the Work of another; I speak
from Experience; I have wrote for Numbers, and do still, but no Human Creature
ever helped me out with a single Line; if they did let it appear against me,
and my Writings be torn to Fragments, or condemned to Flames.

And talking of burning, puts me in mind of dear Lord Kingsborough, who because
he saw that I endeavored to do but barely Justice to his inimitable Pen, bid
me burn all his Letters, upon which in a Passion, I snatched up my Pen, even
before his Face, and scribbled the following Lines. To the Right Hon. the Lord
KINGSBOROUGH.
For the Benefit of the illiterate, to whom these Lines may appear as obscure
as some in Persius let them read the Works of Livy and Pythagoras, and may-hap
they may guess at the meaning; if they cannot, their Time at least will be
innocently employed, till they can come at the Grand Arcana of the
Rosicrusians, or discover the Longitude.
How could my dear Lord make me such a Request?
I flatter myself, you are only in Jest;
Those Epistles which all my soft Raptures inspire,
Do you think I could bear to commit to the Fire;
Like Mutius, I Would put my own Hand in the Flame,
For the Elements used to compose your loved Name:
Should I promise Obedience, I surely should lie,
Give me a more gentle Command, I Will comply;
But here I should baffle the best of your Art,
For each Line you have wrote, is engraved on my Heart.


His Lordship was so humane, as not to insist on my Obedience; and now my Lord,
I tell you publicly, that, not the grim Tyrant Death shall divorce me from the
inestimable Treasure I possess, they shall rest with me in the Grave, next to
my Heart, When every Motion, Sense, and Pulse is over,
And even my Kingsborough beloved no more.


I have often, my Lord, reflected with Pleasure, on the Blessing my Father gave
me, when he brought your Lordship into the World; why according to the
Midwife's Phrase, you are one of his Children, and consequently my Brother, for
I must prove a Kindred to you, though I fetch it from Japheth; as I have been
long buried to my Brother, and by your Lordship's Bounty, have acquired a kind
of second Birth, New born I may a nobler Brother claim,
And joined to thine immortalize my Name.
Pardon my Presumption if I am too bold, it is owing to your Lordship's
Indulgence both to my Scribbling and Prattling Vein. So. You must excuse a
Nymph of Letters,
Thus Poets often treat their Betters.
But I think I must speak in the Superlative Mood, and call you best of Men;
for what Day of your Life passes, without a worthy Deed to crown it? Your
Virtue would sigh to lose one.

Indeed, my Lord, I love you, and if you are too great to be beloved, Be
greater greater still, and be adored.
Now, in return, I beg a Place in your Friendship, where, if I grow, the
Harvest is your own.

But Oh! I am Sick of many Griefs, And this frail Tenement of Clay,
Must quickly, very quick decay.
But, perhaps all things are ordered for the best, on which Hope, I relate what
I know to be Truth.

A Captain of a Man of War took a Fancy to despise his Wife, and engage with
another Woman: The Wife took it patiently, till at last he had the Impudence to
tell her, he would either bring his Harlot to live with her, or she and his
three Children should turn out: The Lady was confounded at so strange a
Proposal, and begged three Days time to consider of it; and then she would give
him a determinate Answer: He agreed: She told her Affliction to a Friend, and
begged her Advice; on which they resolved to consult Doctor Potter, late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury: Accordingly they took a Boat, and went to Lambeth:
The good Prelate proposed an Invocation to the Almighty to direct their
Counsels: After Prayers he desired the Lady not, by any means, to quit her
House, but to acquiesce in her Husband's Desire, and let him bring the Woman
home; and, depend on it, said he, God will assist you, and what at present
appears an Evil, will turn out a Blessing to you: So, giving them his
Benediction, they departed full of Hope of an happy Issue.

The Husband, who flattered himself that the Wife would quit the House, was not
a little astonished to find her quite submissive to his Commands, and
consenting to live with his Mistress.

Accordingly he ordered his Chariot, bade his Wife prepare Dinner, and went for
his Harlot, whom he brought home triumphant, and handed into the Dining Room;
the Wife received her with a Civility that confounded and enraged her; she
brought her a Glass of Lisbon Wine, and then left her with the Captain, who, in
a few Minutes came down, and seeing all things ready for Dinner, ordered his
Wife to go and bring the Lady down: She obeyed, but Madam called her a hundred
Names, flew at the Captain, beat him, and put herself in such a Rage, that she
fell into Fits, was seized with a Fever, and died.

After this Catastrophe, the Captain seriously reflecting on the Submission and
Virtue of his Wife, thus addressed her: My Dear, if I thought there was a
Possibility of your pardoning my past Errors, and never reproaching me with
them, I do assure you, I would never fall into them again, but make a faithful
tender Husband to you. The Lady burst into joyful Tears at this happy Change,
and kindly assured him, she would never even think of what was past: She told
him it was by the Archbishop's Advice she had acted with the Moderation she now
found to be so happy in the Event; and they both went to thank the venerable
Prelate, who truly partook in their Joy. The Captain died about a Year after,
and left his whole Fortune to his Lady, who lives an honorable Widow at
Greenwich.

Thus we may see, if we persevere in our Duty, the Almighty is not slow to
hear, nor reward; But, when we sink beneath a Load of Grief,
By unforeseen Expedients brings Relief.


I was told a pretty Circumstance of his Grace, when he was at Westminster
School: It seems he stood terribly in awe of the Rod, and having committed some
Mistake that deserved Chastisement, which Doctor Busby was very liberal in
bestowing, he was ready to die with the Apprehension of it; when a good
bold-spirited Lad, taking Compassion on him, owned the Fault, and took the
Whiping; for which his timid Friend promised to be grateful, if ever it came in
his way to serve him: They both took holy Orders, but met not till many Years
after, when his Grace was an Archbishop, his Friend remained a Curate; but
Time, which brings all things about, so ordered it, that the Archbishop and the
Curate met at a Nobleman's House: His Grace, hearing him named, recollected
both the Gentleman, the Whipping, and his own Promise of Gratitude; and finding
the Curate had no Preferment, he gave him a very good Living.

I hope these Incidents will not be disagreeable to my Readers, as I really set
down nothing but what I know to be Truth, which is more than most of our modern
Memorialists can say, who present us with Heaps of Improbabilities, and expect
implicit Faith from us; and if what some of them have told us be genuine,
though it may redound to their Profit, it never can to their Honor; for their
Actions are neither worthy being recorded, nor their Writings of being read;
the true End of Writing being to give Instruction with Pleasure, which, whoever
is so happy to do, may justly hope for a Place in the Temple of Fame: But All
human kind will needs be Wits,
"Though Millions miss for one that hits:
"Our chilling Climate, hardly bears,
"A Sprig of Bays in Fifty Years,
"Yet every Fool his Claim alleges,
"As if it grew in common Hedges.
Swift's Rhapsody.

And having once more quoted our unrivalled Dean, and being well assured no
Part of my Work can be half so agreeable or entertaining to the Public, as
that which relates to him, I shall, as far as in my Power, present them with
his lively Portraiture. The most minute Circumstances relating to so great a
Man cannot, I hope, be deemed trivial; since we find by Experience, that the
Night-Scene, so beautifully drawn by Shakespeare, between Brutus and his
Domestics, sleeping in his Tent, the little Incident of his taking the Lute
out of the Boy's Hand, and saying, when he fell asleep, This is a sleepy Tune:
-- O murtherous Sleep,
Layest thou thy leaden Mace upon my Boy,
That plays thee Music? Gentle Knave, good Night:
I will not do thee so much Wrong to wake thee;
If thou do nod, thou break'st thy Instrument,
I Will take it from thee, and, good Boy, good Night.


Do we not love him more in this amiable View of him, than in all his
Conquests; or that sad Act whereby he thought to give his Country Liberty? The
World are sufficiently acquainted with the Dean's public Character, be it then
my Task to trace him in private Life; for there only it is we can frame a true
Judgment of any Person, the rest is frequently mere Outside.

When the Dean was at Bellcamp, at the House of the Reverend Doctor Gratton, he
wrote to Doctor Delany, to come and dine with him, mighty Thomas Thumb, and her
serene Highness of Lillyput, meaning my Husband and me: Accordingly we went;
the Dean came out to meet us, and I, by Agreement, hiding my Face, Mr.
Pilkington told him they had picked up a Girl on the Road, and desired to know
whether they might bring her in? He, guessing who it was, said, let her show
her Face, and if she be likely, we'll admit her. On this I took down my Fan,
and said, O, indeed, Sir, I am: Well then, said he, give me your Hand. He led
me into a Parlour, where there were twelve Clergy men, and said, those Fellows
coming in had brought a Wench with them; but, added he, we'll give her a
Dinner, poor Devil! and keep the Secret of our Brethren: -- As most of the
Gentlemen knew me, we were very merry on this odd Introduction.

Pox on you, you Slut, said the Dean, you gave me a Hint for my polite
Conversation, which I have pursued: You said, it would be better to throw it
into Dialogue; and suppose it to pass amongst the Great; I have improved by
you: O dear Sir, said I, it is impossible you should do otherwise. Matchless
Sauciness! returned he: Well, but I Will read you the Work; which he did with
infinite Humor, to our high Entertainment.

It was Christmas time, and froze very hard: The Dean, meditating Revenge, set
the Wine before a great Fire, the Corks of the Wine being secured with Pitch
and Rosin; which began, in a little while, to melt: No sooner did the Dean
perceive they were fit for his Purpose, but he slyly rubbed his Fingers on
them, and daubed my Face all over. Instead of being vexed, as he expected I
would, I told him he did me great Honor in sealing me for his own. Plague on
her, said he, I cannot put her out of Temper; yet he seemed determined to do it,
if possible, for he asked the Company, if they had ever seen such a Dwarf? and
insisted, that I should pull off my Shoes till he measured me: To this I had no
Inclination to submit, but he was an absolute Prince, and Resistance would have
little availed me; so when I obeyed, he said, Why, I suspected you had either
broken Stockings, or foul Toes, and in either Case should have delighted to
have exposed you.

He then made me stand up against the Wainscot, leaned his Hand as heavy as he
could upon my Head, till I shrunk under the Weight, to almost half my
Proportion; then making a Mark with his Pencil, he affirmed, I was but three
Foot two Inches high.

Dinner was brought up, and I being, like Mrs. Qualmsick the Curate's Wife,
always a breeding, could not eat any; the Gentlemen guessing at my
Circumstances, by my decreasing Face, and increasing Waste, were so
over-obliging to know what I liked best; that at last I told the Dean, I wished
I was a Man, that I might be treated with less Ceremony: Why, said the Dean, it
may be you are: I wish, Sir, said I, you would put the Question to the Company,
and accordingly to their Votes, let my Sex be determined. I will, said he;
Filkington, what say you? A Man, Sir: they all took his Word; and, in Spite of
Petticoats, I was made a Man of after Dinner: I was obliged to put a
Tobacco-pipe in my Mouth; but they so far indulged me, as to let it be an empty
one; as were the Dean's, Doctor Delany's, and my Husband's.

The Dean asked me, could I play Cribbidge? I said, I could: Upon which he
called for Cards; but, upon Recollection, said, he would not play with a
Beggar, for he should stand no Chance; for if he won, he would not take the
Money, and if he lost, he must in Honor pay. But why a Beggar, Mr. Dean, said
Doctor Delany? A married Curate must of Consequence be a Beggar, returned he,
and you are another; and Pox on me, if I can ever get acquainted with any
Persons but Beggars; and I don't think but this Woman, or Man here, is in the
way of producing another. Then, Sir, I hope you will be so kind to stand
Godfather, which will secure it from so hard a Fate. So! said he, more Demands
upon me! Well, if it be a Boy, I don't much care if I do; but if it be a little
Bitch I Will never answer for her.

A Day or two after this the Dean came to Town, and summoning a Senatus
Consultum, as he called those few Friends whom he peculiarly regarded; he
placed us round a great Table, where he told us, we were an empannell'd Jury;
and he placed himself at the Head of it, where he sat as Judge. He then told
us, the Reason why we were summoned, Mr. Gratton's favorite Hen was put to
Death by an unlucky Stroke of a Whip, by one of my Fellows, as I suppose: I
accused them, and they denied the Fact; but as Murder always will come to
light, I found the Hen's Head and Neck in the Seat of my Chaise-box; and now I
want to convict the Criminal: Accordingly he ordered his three Men Servants to
come before us, and related the following Story to them: When Doctor Done,
afterward Dean of St. Paul's, London, took Possession of the first Living he
ever had, being a speculative Man, he took a Walk into the Churchyard, where
the Sexton was digging a Grave, and throwing up a Skull, the Doctor took it up,
to contemplate thereon; and found a small Sprig, or headless Nail sticking in
the Temple, which he drew out secretly, and wrapped it up in the Corner of his
Handkerchief; he then demanded of the Gravedigger, whether he knew whose Skull
that was? He said he did, very well; declaring it was a Man's who kept a
Brandy-shop, an honest drunken Fellow, who one Night taking two Quarts of that
comfortable Creature, was found dead in his Bed the next Morning: Had he a
Wife, said the Doctor? Yes, Sir: Is she living? Yes: What Character does she
bear? a very good one; only indeed the Neighbors reflected on her, because she
married the Day after her Husband was buried; though, to be sure, she had no
great Reason to grieve after him. This was enough for the Doctor, who under
Pretense of visiting all his Parishioners, called on her; he asked her several
Questions, and amongst others, What Sickness her first Husband died of? She
giving him the same Account he had before received, he suddenly opened the
Handkerchief, and cried, in an authoritative Voice, Woman, do you know this
Nail? She was struck with Horror at the unexpected Demand, and instantly owned
the Fact: And so, Fellow, said Dean Swift, do you know this Head? The Criminal
confessed his Fault, and the Jury brought him in guilty of Henslaughter, in his
own Defense, for he declared he was hungry, and did eat it, having no Malice
prepense to it, but rather Love. On Account of his Sincerity, and our
Intercession, the Dean pardoned him.

Mr. Gratton had presented the Dean with a small Cask of fine Ale, of which he
was very choice; good Malt-Liquor not being easily purchased even in Ireland.
On Sunday Evening the Dean's Set of Intimates came as usual, to pass it with
him, and he being in high good Humor, said, he would treat us with a Pot of
this Ale. I had the Honor of being entrusted with the Key of the Cellar, with
a particular Order to hold the Candle in such a Position, that it might drop
into the Tankard; as also not to put the Spiggot fast in, but let the Drink run
about. After receiving his Commands, which I promised punctually to obey, I
went down, but had scarce opened the Door, when Doctor Delany and Doctor
Sheridan were with me. O Breach of Trust, unpardonable! We sat down on a Bench,
and each of us drank; but we laughed so heartily at cheating the Dean, that he
stole down, having some Suspicion, that where there was a Woman, and two
Clergymen, there might be a Plot, and surprised us: I, in Imitation of his
Servant, told him, the Parsons seduced me, and I did drink: Pox choke you all,
said he.

In vain did I, with all the moving Eloquence of a female Orator, plead for
Pardon: The Key was taken from me, and Mr. Rochford was, before my Face,
invested with my Honors; and I, Oh fatal Sentence! condemned to be Sock-washer
to the blackguard Boy, who waited on the under Butler's under Butler.

I would have persuaded Mr. Rochford to plead in my Behalf, but he was obdurate
as Adamant; especially as by my Disgrace he rose. However, not long after, I
presented him with an humble Petition, wherein I failed not to extol the
Neatness of the Boy's Feet, since they came into my Hands, insomuch -- that not
the nicest Nose
Could, in the Dog Days, smell his Toes.


And, as a Reward, I was made Inspectoress-general of all the drinking Vessels;
but no more entrusted with the Key of the Cellar: To say the Truth, I could not
well vindicate my Conduct in that important Point.

The Dean had twenty of those agreeable Whims, which kept us all cheerful, as
was his Intent; for I suppose my Readers will believe, that neither he nor we
valued the Ale, but for the Jest's sake.

No Man living told a Story to more Advantage than the Dean; there never was a
Word too little or too much in it, it was always apt, full, clear, and concise,
truly epigrammatick.

It would be well for their Readers, if some of our Writers had learned this
happy Art; but they draw out their Tales to a tiresome Length, dwelling on
every trivial Circumstance, and omitting things of greater Consequence, and
when they would seem wise, they grow obscure. Thus the small Silkworm spins
her slender Store,
And labors till she clouds herself all over.
Pope.

The Dean told me, he did remember that he had not laughed above twice in his
Life; once at some Trick a Mountebank's Merry-Andrew played; and the other time
was at the Circumstance of Tom Thumb's killing the Ghost; and, I can assure Mr.
Fielding, the Dean had a high Opinion of his Wit, which must be a Pleasure to
him, as no Man was ever better qualified to judge, possessing it so eminently
himself.

Yet was he so free from any vain Osstentation of it, that he could suit his
Converse to the Talents of his Company; insomuch that, I believe, had they
proposed to play Push-pin, or talk Nonsense, he would have complied even with
the latter, if it had been in his Power.

I have known him fill up Rhymes, given after the manner of the French, though
he had found it true musical Rhythm, so esteemed by the Ancients; nay, he could
deal in the Pun ambiguous, or Conundrum quaint.
Which some book-learned Blockheads, for such I have seen, with each a Store of
Lumber, crude and undigested in their Brains, would no doubt have scorned: But,
as Horace observes, there is a Sweetness in sometimes mingling Folly with
Wisdom; and I am well convinced no Person, without a good Understanding, can
even play the Fool agreeably. Triflers cannot even in trifling excel,
For only solid Bodies polish well.
Young.

One Night, that I had the Honor to be in as polite a Set of Company as ever
Europe bred, they took a Fancy that each of them would imitate the Voice of a
different Animal, either Bird or Beast, each having fixed on what suited their
Inclination; they began the Consort at once: Would not any one, who had refused
to join in the Frolic, have seemed ridiculous? It Is true, indeed, this was
attended with one mortifying Consequence; for the Servants, scared at the
hideous Yelling, and concluding we were all fighting, ran hastily in to part
us; but finding all was right, they left us; however, we heard them laugh
heartily at our Entertainment.

As I have often mentioned the Dean's Charity, one ill conferred Instance of it
cannot, I believe, but make my Readers smile:

He observed a Woman, whose whole Estate was a Sieve of Fruit, which she had in
a Stall, where she sat footing worn-out Stockings. Seeing the Woman very
decent, and always at work, he judged her to be a proper Person for him to
assist; especially as, by the Report of her Neighbors, she was a very honest
Woman. The Dean asked her, why she did not try to borrow twenty Pounds, and set
up a handsome Fruitshop. Alas-a-day, Sir, said she, who would trust a poor
Creature like me with such a Sum? Why, said he, if I thought you would improve
it, I would lend it you. The Woman promised fair, and the Dean lent her the
Money; and, at the same time, wrote down the particular kinds of Fruit he would
have her furnish herself with. She was to let him know when she was stocked,
and he promised to recommend her to Customers.

The Woman, overjoyed at her good Fortune, went about five o'Clock next Morning
to a Gardener's, produced her Bill of Fare, on which they, judging by her
Appearance she could not pay for such a Cargo, laughed at her. This provoked
the Pride of the new-raised Beggar; who, to convince them of her Wealth,
produced it to their astonished View; upon which they altered their Note, and
as it was a cold Morning, said, That "Bargains were never made with dry Lips."
They drew in the poor Woman to drink plentifully of Brandy and Ale mixed.
Hotpot, which soon left her stupid in the Alehouse; but not till they had
first done her the Favor to rob her.

When she came a little to herself, the Woman of the House demanded Payment;
the Fellows being gone. She was going to pay the Reckoning, but alas! her Money
was gone too: It was in vain for her to enquire for it, everybody disavowed
the Fact; but the Gardener, out of his great Charity, gave her a Basket of
Windfalls, with which she was obliged, seeing no Remedy, to return to her
original Poverty.

The Dean vainly looked for the Product of his Charity; he could neither see
Shop, nor Woman, for she kept out of his way; at length he happened in Church
to be seized with the Cholick, and went out in the middle of Service; and who
stood at the Church-door, but the very Person? He stopped, and demanded, why he
had not heard from her, and how she proceeded? Upon this the Woman flew into a
Rage, abused him all the Way to his own House, told him, that his cursed Money
had bewitched her; that all the Neighbors knew she was a modest, virtuous,
sober Woman, and that he had made her turn Whore and Drunkard; the Dean ran in,
clapped the the Door upon her, and begged the Protection of his Domestics
against the mad Woman.

And here I must observe, that as the Dean was very justly satirical on the
Vices of human Kind, yet when he fell on Infirmities, he seemed to have done a
displeasing Act to Heaven, inasmuch as he was punished with them all in a
remarkable manner; he lived to be a Struldbrugg, helpless as a Child, and
unable to assist himself.

I say not this as any Reflection to his sacred Memory, Heaven forbid I should;
but with all the Reverence I have for the Dean, I really think he sometimes
chose Subjects unworthy of his Muse, and which could serve for no other End
except that of turning the Reader's Stomach, as it did my Mother's, who, upon
reading the Lady's Dressing Room, instantly threw up her Dinner.

Here I digress, oddly enough, on a whimsical Circumstance. Having once had the
Honor of being known to Lady ******, I took the Liberty of applying to her for
a Subscription; her Neice came out, and mistaking the Person who brought the
Letter for me, said, "Her Lady wondered at my Impudence, to apply to her, when
I knew how I had used Sir ******:" But if ever I used him, or he me, then am I
no two-legged Creature; for, to my Knowledge, I never even saw him; if the Man
did dare to contradict me, I would make him eat a Piece of my Pen: But how used
him? not unlawfully, I hope. Did your Ladyship ever see me lewdly lolling on a
Love-bed with him? No, if we ever met, he was supported by two reverend
Prelates, proper Supporters for a Christian Hero; but I never heard that the
Gentleman was addicted to Women; so that I hope I may rest uncensured by him,
and also by your L -- p.

I do this, Madam, in regard to the Gentleman's Character, for my own is of no
Consequence. It Is Bare-bit, and knawn by Treason's Canker-Tooth.
Shakespeare.

And pray now, Sir C --, for to thee I call, but with no friendly Voice. What
time? what Day? what Hour did I ever disoblige you? the Injuries you have done
me, I freely forgive, and If you please,
Will honor you with Panegyric Lays.
But then take notice you must come down handsomely; you are not Lord
Kingsborough, nor will my Verse flow spontaneous. His Virtues might the
humblest Bards inspire,
And fill their Bosoms with poetic Fire.


So now, for ever and for ever farewell, Brutus! if we do meet again, why we
shall laugh, if not, why surely we shall never weep; a more inspiring Theme
demands my Attention: So, Sir Knight of the Oracle, adieu, if thou dyest before
me, as you should, since you stepped into the World thirty Years ever my dim
Speck of Entity was animated; I have wrote your Epitaph, which I beg you may
have engraved on your Tombstone; lest you should not, I will raise you a
Monument more lasting than Brass.

I presume, by the Information of your Boots, you have read Horace, take your
Encomium. Here lies the greatest Man that ever was born,
All Womankind sincerely did he scorn,
And kept the good old Proverb in his Mind,
He that will not go before -- must go behind.


And if my Printer should dare to put a dash or blank in your illustrious Name,
I will in Capitals insert it, and you know, When in bold Capitals expressed,
The dullest Reader takes the Jest.


This, Sir, I give you as a farther Proof of my Impudence, in which I own your
Family to have far the Superiority to mine; for though some of them did
Execution in the well-fought Field, yet none of them were condemned to suffer
one: So read this, and then to Breakfast with what Appetite you may.

But after all I have said, I bear you no Ill Will; but you began with me this
Tennis-game, and I have matched my Racquet to the Balls; and, depend on it,
whoever begins with me, I bear the Motto of the Thistle: Nemo me impune
lacessit.


The Hour now came, when the Dean's Promise was to be claimed; as I brought
forth a Son, I wrote to him, but he was in the Country, and in five Days the
Boy died: The Dean did not return till I was a Fortnight brought to Bed.

He came directly to visit me: Mr. Pilkington opened the Door for him, and
brought him up to me. After wishing me Joy, he asked, where was his
Godson-elect? I told him in Heaven: The Lord be praised, said he, I thought
there was some good News in the way, your Husband looked so brisk: Pox take me,
but I was in Hopes you were dead yourself; but it is pretty well as it is, I
have saved by it, and I should have got nothing by you.

He drank a little Caudle with me, and then went away; about an Hour after his
Servant brought me a Letter, and a great Bundle of brown Paper, sealed with the
utmost Care, and twisted round with I know not how many Yards of Pack-thread;
my Curiosity led me to read the Letter before I examined the Contents of the
Paper, which, to the best of my Knowledge, was this: Madam,
I Send you a Piece of Plumb-cake, which I did intend should be spent at your
Christening; if you have any Objection to the Plumbs, or do not like to eat
them, you may return them to,

Madam, your sincere Friend and Servant, J. Swift.




I now examined the Contents of the Paper, in which I found a Piece of
Ginger-bread, in which were stuck four Guineas, wrapped in white Paper, on the
Outside of each was wrote Plumb.

I sent the Dean a real Piece of Pumb cake, with this Answer: Sir,
I Have heard that Ostridges could digest Iron, but you give me a harder Task,
when you bid me eat Gold; but suppose I should, like the rich Streams of the
Tagus, flow potable Gold, the Interpretation of which is, that I mean to drink
your Health this Minute, in a Glass of Sack; and am, with the utmost Respect,
Sir,

Your ever devoted Servant, L. Pilkington.




Just when he had fixed Mr. Pilkington to be Chaplain to Alderman Barber, the
Dean received from Spain, from one Mr. Wogan, a green Velvet Bag, in which was
contained the Adventures of Eugenius; as also an Account of the Courtship and
Marriage of the Chevalier, to the Princess Sobiesky, wherein he represents
himself to have been a principal Negotiator. It was wrote in the Novel Style,
but a little heavily: There was also some of the Psalms of David, paraphrased
in Miltonick Verse, and a Letter to the Dean, with Remarks on the Beggar's
Opera; in which he says he believes the People of England and Ireland had quite
lost all Remains of Elegance and Taste, since their top Entertainments were
composed of Scenes of Highwaymen, and Prostitutes, who all remain unpunished
and triumphant in their Crimes: He concluded with paying the Dean the
Compliment of entreating him to correct the Work.

The Dean said, he did not care to be troubled with it, and bid Mr. Pilkington
take it to London, and look it over at his Leisure, which accordingly he did.

He was scarce gone, when the Dean came to me for the Bag; I told him my
Husband had; according to his Commands, taken it with him. He protested he
never gave him any such Permission; that I was impudent to say it, and my
Husband more so to do it; the Conclusion of which was; that he ordered me to
write to him to return it immediately; and, least I should forget it, he gave
me a very good Beating. Well; I writ Mr. Pilkington an Account of the Dean's
Wrath, and he sent me the fatal Bag by a Clergyman: I directly carried it to
the Dean, and hoped he would be pleased, by my punctual and ready Obedience to
his Will; but far otherwise it fell out, for the Dean flew into a Passion, for
my daring to presume to write for it, and gave me another Beating.

But did not this more resemble the Actions of a Lunatic than of a Gentleman
of superior Wit and Knowledge? Indeed, I believe too much Learning had turned
his Head, or too deep a Search into the Secrets of Nature; as nothing could
escape his Observation. And this wrong Turn in his Brain, I fancy had possessed
him a long time before it was taken notice of, as numberless Proofs might be
produced; and even amongst the Facts that I have related there are some strong
Instances of it; had he been less witty, it would sooner have been taken notice
of; but, as the Poet observes, Great Wit to Madness sure is near allied,
And thin Partitions do their Bounds divide.


The first Proof he gave of his Incivility was affronting the Lord Lieutenant,
at the Lord Mayor's Table; who, because he had not paid his Compliments to him
in due Form, he very civilly accosted, by the extraordinary Title of, you,
Fellow with the blue String. Some little time after this, he invited two
Clergymen to take the Air with him, and when he got them into a Coach, he did
so belabour them and knock their Heads together, that they were obliged to cry
out for Assistance.

From this he fell into a deep Melancholy, and knew no body; I was told the
last sensible Words he uttered, were on this Occasion: Mr. Handel, when about
to quit Ireland, went to take his leave of him: The Servant was a considerable
Time, ever he could make the Dean understand him; which, when he did, he cried
"O! A German, and a Genius! A Prodigy! admit him." The Servant did so, just to
let Mr. Handel behold the Ruins of the greatest Wit that ever lived along the
Tide of Time, where all at length are lost.

If ought else relating to him, should occur to my Remembrance, I will
faithfully relate it; as I am certain it cannot but be acceptable to the
Public, whose Interest he had evermore at Heart, and whose Liberties on all
Occasions, he warmly and nobly asserted.

It Is mine, O honored Shade, to celebrate thy Goodness, without extenuating
thy Faults; I deal impartially, which is the true Task of an Historian, and I
would inscribe thy Tombstone, were I permitted; but without Characters, Fame
lives long. Thine will last, while Wit or Genius are admired in this sublunary
Globe.

However disagreeable it may be to me, I find I must prosecute my own History,
till my leaving London, to which Metropolis I never intend to return, as has
been insinuated, in order to hurt my Subscription: While ever I can find Means
of subsisting in my native Country, where I have received more Favor, than I
could reasonably hope for, I should esteem myself not only ungrateful, but
unjust to raise Contributions on the Public, and carry the Money from this poor
Island, to spend it in a rich and opulent City.

Besides my Days of Vanity are over. The Woods, Groves, Fountains, sacred
Recesses, dear to the Muses, would be my Choice, even had I a Fortune to
entitle me to enjoy the Splendour of a Court in its utmost Magnificence. O how I
languish for Retirement; even as the Heart pants after the Water Brooks, so
longs my Soul after it; where I might sit upon sunless Side of some Romantic
Mountain, Forest crowned. I wish my best and dearest Friend, would take this
into Consideration, and in some Part of his wide extended Domains, afford his
Muse an humble Hermitage.

I should not then be distracted with Fears of an imperious Landlord's Threats.
No; your happy Tenant would pay her Debt in Weeds, which, when I once told your
Lordship, you very politely answered, that such Verses as mine were the finest
Flowers in the Garden of the Muses.

I must here relate to your Lordship, a little Circumstance which happened to
me lately. I took a Lodging in Drumcondra-lane; the two Ladies, (Sisters) who
keep the House, kindly invited me to Dinner; it was very natural for me to
enquire what Persons of Distinction lived in our Neighborhood; they told me
Lord Kingsborough had lately purchased a House in it, a most worthy fine
Gentleman. I happened to express so much Pleasure, at hearing this agreeable
piece of News, and at the same time so warmly joined in their Sentiments, that
one of the Ladies said: Well, Madam, though you have made a Mystery of your
Name, I am certain you are Mrs. Pilkington; I am sure you are the Person;
because you speak of his Lordship, in the very same Style you have wrote of
him. I have the two Volumes.

As I found they were prepossessed in Mrs. Pilkington's Favor, I confessed
they had guessed right. But whenever I want Concealment, if your Lordship is
mentioned, I will take Care to be silent. Otherwise I shall soon betray myself,
as out of the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks. Though I am afraid,
that like holy David, it would be Grief, and Pain to me, and while I sat musing
the Fire would kindle; the Sacred Fire of Friendship and Gratitude, would
unlock my Tongue and give me Utterance, even though I had been born dumb.

Why, my dear Lord, were but a few Persons of Distinction, in your Way of
thinking, Earth itself would become a Paradise: no more would the sorrowful
Sighing of the Prisoner, nor the Voice of Lamentation be heard in our Streets,
and it is with infinite Pleasure, I see our long stained Nobility, who were only
famous for undoing, and built their Characters on Rapes and Ruin, now almost to
a Man, not only just, but beneficent; not only learned themselves, but
Encouragers of Science in others. If amongst our Country's Worthies, I name you
Lord Molesworth, who have distinguished yourself in Fields and Senates, in the
Seats of the Muses, and Academic Groves; whose well tried Valor has approved
itself; not in Rashness, but a noble Intrepidity and Scorn of Death, whenever
your God, your King, or Country, required your Service; I hope it will not
offend you, to say, may your God, your King, and Country, make you as happy, as
my much obliged, and most truly grateful Heart sincerely wishes, shall ever be
my ardent Prayer.

Your Lordship has kindly visited the Virtues of my Father on his Daughter. I
am sure I had no other Claim, to the Favors or Honors for which I am indebted
to your Lordship, and for which I rest your faithful Servant.

At length, through strange Vicissitudes, and Variety of Misfortunes, finding I
could get no Relief from Ireland, I determined, with my Son, to revisit it; and
though late in Life, try my Fortune in Hibernia. But how to compass a Journey
and a Voyage without Money, was really a difficult Task; to this End I set my
Wits to Work, to find out whether any Persons of my own Country were in London,
from whom, by revealing my Distress, I could hope for Relief. At length I
learned, that Dr. Delany was there, who never rejected the Petition of the
afflicted, even though they had no other Merit to recommend them, but that of
Anguish. My Suit was granted in the most compassionate and obliging Manner;
accompanied by his Tears for my Misfortunes, and Prayers for the Preservation
of my Soul and Body. And sure the Oraisons of one so good, must have uncommon
Efficacy in them, to turn the Sinner, and confirm the Just in well-doing, while
his own Example strengthens all his Precepts.

How different was the Reception I met with, at the Hands of this worthy Man,
from the rough Return made to my Solicitations, for a Subscription from Lady
****; who, "wondered at my Impudence in applying to her."

Ladies, let me entreat you will drop that nasty paw Word impudent, at least
don't annex it to my Name, who never yet had the Assurance to appear in any
public Place, since I came last to this Kingdom; nor ever to apply in Person
for a Favor. But a Woman who has suffered in Reputation, knows not what to do;
it is all Impudence, though her Betters have more; for that in the Captain is
but a Choleric Word, which in the Soldier is flat Blasphemy.

Upon my Word, if instead of the Impudence I am charged with; you would call me
a desolate afflicted Wretch, you would speak the Truth; for poor Laetitia is
become the Football of Fortune; but why should I complain? when the Son of Man
says, that the Foxes had Holes, and he himself had no Place to lay his Head in!
Answer me some of ye great, learned, and pious Divines; why is our Blessed
Redeemer styled the Son of Man? When we are told, that a Virgin should
conceive; that the Power of the highest should over-shadow her! How was he then
the Son of Man? We are all ordered to apply to our Heavenly Father, and
therefore may style ourselves the Children of God; why then is there any
Exception made in this Case?

I hardly dare allow myself the Liberty of thinking, lest I should do it too
deeply, and Reason be my Disease; and yet I believe it was given me to follow
and search after Truth; where then shall I find it? not on Earth, no more than
Peace or Justice, who are long fled from these lower Regions. Boldly then let
me pursue them, even to the high Place, from whence they sprung; the Seat of
Calms and Ease, the Mansions of the Blessed, where holy Hope and constant Faith,
shall be lost in Fruition of that Happiness, which has not yet entered into
the Heart of Man to conceive.

Mr. Woolaston's Religion of Nature delineated, shows us powerfully, how much a
Lie must offend the Creator; as I am taxed with numerous Quotations, which are
tedious (as some of my Readers tell me) I shall not borrow one from him, but
refer the Learned to his inimitable Work; though I am persuaded, no Person who
has not a clear Head, can taste his Beauties: And truly, I have paid myself no
small Compliment here; but, as it is written, even let it pass.

And here, Mr. Blake Ignatius Blake, Esquire
permit me to tell you, though no Person can more revere your every amiable
Quality than I do, yet as the Objection you started to my Philosophic Doctrine,
of the Ocean's having no Bottom, has deprived me of Rest ever since, I could
find in my Heart to be angry with you; You asked me then, how I could account
for Islands, which must have a Foundation? I am not sure of that, perhaps they
float like Delos. It Is demonstrable that wherever we dig deep, we find Water,
not Salt indeed like that of the Sea; but may it not be Purified by running
through the Veins of the Earth, and arise to us in fresh Fountains, mineral
Streams, or milky Currents, such as Mallow affords. Our Foundation we know is
on the Waves, our Building on the Great Deep: This was so at the first
Creation; then, when the Windows of Heaven were opened, and the deep Abyss or
Receptacle of Waters broke up; what had we but the Ruins of a World to inhabit,
the Fragments of which may swim; at least, most worthy Sir, I can find no
better Solution, for the Doubt you raised in my Mind, pray consider the
Question yourself; and if your Learning, which I own is extensive, be adequate
to your Virtue, you are better qualified to give me an Answer, than most Men
living. -- Now do I know I give your Modesty Pain, but amongst other Instances
of my Impudence, I could not forbear this.

And had I never honored you, for your own Goodness, yet your Answer when I
asked you, did you love Lord Kingsborough? "Who knows him, but must love him."!
would have commanded my Respect and best Wishes, and they both sincerely attend
you. And here, my polite Roman! John Brown of the Neal, Esquire then going to take
his Trial.
my Friend, beloved by all, but the malicious and unworthy, who persecute you
for no other Cause, but that you excel in Courage, and Learning; accept of my
Thanks, for the many fine Encomiums you have bestowed on me; think of me as one
incapable of pursuing the Advice you gave me, of forsaking a Friend in the Hour
of Calamity. Sure it is then our Duty, to administer Consolation, as far as our
Power extends; the Fortunate want it not: Your Magnanimity of Soul bears up
against the Storms of Fortune, and Amidst the Noise of Chains and Keys,
Thou can of Cupid sing;
The Warders their hoarse Bawling cease,
And Drawers watch thy String.
But, says my Reader, what have I to say to your Philosophy, or particular
Attachments? proceed in your Story; inform us how you got to Ireland? Well, now
you have reminded me of it, I think I will. To confess the Truth, I had like to
have forgotten myself; my Thoughts are apt to wander through Eternity, and Like
Pompey's transported to Regions of Day,
Disdain to be tied to a Mansion of Clay.


After receiving the worthy Doctor Delany's Bounty, which was sufficient to pay
every Debt I owed in London; which, as I was cautious in contracting any, a
Sum, though less, would have paid. But I had not a Sufficiency to answer the
Expense of traveling Charges, for two Persons. The Parliament was dissolved,
the Nobility gone to enjoy the Sweets of Spring, April having decked all Things
in fresh and fragrant Bloom; all, but wretched Humankind, from whom, whence
parted, it no more returns, to blush or beautify the Cheek again. But let us
not Sorrow after that, as those who have no Hope beyond this Life; if we can go
unstained through this World, which it is almost impossible to do, or seeing the
Errors of our Ways, forsake them; we have Assurance given us, of a joyful and
triumphant Resurrection. Mark with what Hope, upon the surrow'd Plain,
The cheerful Plowman casts the pregnant Grain;
There hid, as in a Grave, a while it lies,
Till the revolving Season bids it rise;
Till Nature's genial Power, command a Birth,
And potent call it, from the teeming Earth;
Then large Increase, the buried Treasure yields,
And with full Harvest crowns the plenteous Fields.
I wrote, in order to gain Relief, to a Prelate of Ireland, then resident in
London; I sent the Letter by the Daughter of a dissenting Clergyman, of whose
Honor and Virtue I was confident. He received her civilly, read over my
Letter, and declared he did not know me; but as he had some slight Knowledge of
my Family, there was a Guinea for me. This answered no End: But yet he gave me
some Comfort, by bidding her call again, and he would think of something for my
Service: Accordingly, in a Week's Time she went again, and again; till at
length his Lordship vouchsafed to send out a very rough Answer, not in the
least befitting his Function or Dignity, especially to one whom he knew from
her Infancy, to be a Woman of good Birth, and Education.

But I resolving to be as chuffy as he, sent him in reality another Epistle,
not over-courteous I own; yet it wrought a better Effect, than my complaining
one produced, for his Gentleman came to me early next Morning, with a very
civil Letter; and produced ten Guineas, to my unspeakable Joy; but there was a
Drawback on my Happiness, for I was obliged to return ten Shillings Change,
which I very reluctantly complied with.

With this Sum my Son and I quitted London, and being on the saving Scheme,
took Places in the Wagon. A most tiresome Way of traveling! May Morning we
set forth, our Slow-paced Cattle were adorned with Ribbands and Flowers, and
till then, I never understood the meaning of the vulgar Expression, of being as
fine as a Horse, for it seems it is customary on this Month, to present the
Waggoners with a Ribband, at every Inn; till our Flea-bitten Nags, were almost
blinded by the tawdry party-colored flowing Honors of their Heads. I was
really almost fatigued to Death, for I was called up at three o'Clock in the
Morning, though perhaps you don't set out till five. Tea or Coffee, none to be
had, unless in some of the Towns: Indeed, if I could, like our Driver, have eat
a Breakfast of Salt Beef and Cabbage at that squeamish Hour, it was laid there
ready. They bait not all Day; so one might have an Appetite by Evening, but it
happened not so to me. The Heat and Dust quite deprived me of any Inclination
to Food, and especially to the rough Fare provided.

My chief Delight was listening to the Nightingale, who then warbled forth her
love-laboured Song, to indulge the Pleasure of hearing the soft Warbler, pour
forth her plaintive and harmonious Lay: I used when we were near our resting
Place, to alight and walk through the flower-enamell'd Meads, filled with
Cowslips, Primroses, and wild Violets, for In rural Scenes the Soul of Beauty
reigns,
The Soul of Pleasure lives in rural Scenes.
POPE. My Son and I found out a sweet Place, canopy'd with Wood-bine, which had
enringed itself in Plats about a large Apple Tree, whose Blossoms shed
Perfumes, while the whole Season warbled round our Heads; we seated ourselves
under the wide spreading Shade, listening with Delight to those wild Musicians.
Suddenly the Boy cried out, O Mamma what shall I do? What is the Matter, Child?
Look at my Leg: I did so, and behold a Snake had twisted up it; I, though
heartily startled, had Presence of Mind sufficient, to beg he would not strike
it; he took my Advice, though indeed both he and I were ready to faint, and the
evil Worm crawled away, without doing him any Prejudice. But not being well
assured that all the Serpent Race, sworn Foe to Man, might be so complaisant, I
was never after tempted to sit down in Albion's fruitful Fields.

We lodged this Night at a strange old Village, whose Name I have forgot; I
believe the Inn had formerly been a Convent, by the numerous little Cells and
Cloisters, small Windows, almost darkened with Jessamine and Vines; it had a
most romantic melancholy Air, fit for studious Contemplation, but not
replenished with rich Repast, or cheerful Wine. The next Day being Sunday, a
Day of Rest, we took up our Quarters at another Inn, where we got a Chicken and
a Pint of Wine, and lived sumptuously.

We then walked out to see what kind of Curiosity this Place afforded, worth
Remark; but finding none, we strayed out on a Common, when the first Object
which struck my Sight, was that of a Man suspended high in the Air, hanging in
Chains on a Gibbet; shocking as it was, it engaged my Attention; I concluded he
must have been a most undutiful Son, when the Birds of Prey had devoured him,
and the Ravens picked out his Eyes. Suddenly I was surprised with the Voice of
a Man, who cried, O my dear Coshen Paddy, I wish those who put you there for
noting, were there themselves. I looked about, and saw fifteen or twenty Men
and Women lying in a dry Ditch; I would have fled, but considering that might
not be safe, I rather chose to walk at an easy Pace: One of the Fellows made up
to us, and asked where we were going; I told him to our Country, Ireland. Arah,
said he, are you a Catolic? I said I was! Upon I which he said, Faith poor
Paddy Lawler, who hangs there was a good one. And what, Sir, brought him to so
unfortunate an End? Why, said he, he was in Love with a proud scornful Hussy,
and she slighted him, so he met her in this Plaish, and because she would not
accept of his Shivility, he lent her a Nock on the Head, and so he got his Will
of her. She died the next Day, after she had given Information against him; to
be sure her Skull was broke, but he did not deshine that.

While he was telling me this Story, I trembled, but made the best Speed I
could to the Village, being infinitely more frightened at him, than I had been
at the Snake. He accompanied us there, for which I returned him Thanks; how
sincerely my Readers may judge. But I made a Virtue of Necessity, and gave him
fair Words. Now said he, are not all these Heretics damned Rogues? Ay, said I,
and I hope our true King will put all Villains to Death. Arrah, give me your
Fist for that; I was obliged to comply. When I got to the Inn I told him, I
should be glad of his Company, but that I had a jealous Husband, who would
certainly kill me, if he found any Man in my Company. Damn the Rogue, said he,
if I was as you, I would make him a Cuckold in a crack. I desired he would
please to accept of a Pot of Drink, which he did, and making a Leg, walked off
leaving us unmolested, and I blessed God I had purchased Life at so cheap a Rate.

That soft Answers turn away Wrath, is most assured; for I remember some Years
ago, when the Cavan Rabble were up in Arms, my Mother, Sister, and I, went to
pay a Visit at Rathfarnam, to the Lady of our excellent Eaton Stannard, Esquire who
resigned.
Recorder. On our return home, we were surrounded by a Pack of these Wretches,
who ordered my Father's Coachman to pull off his Hat to them, which he
refusing, and they being all armed with short thick Oak Tree Clubs, they swore
we should not ride in a Coach, and they walk; my Mother, with surprising
Presence of Mind, said Gentlemen, you are very welcome to the Coach, my
Daughter and I will walk, to oblige you with it; which, Villains, Ruffians, and
Murderers as they were, they would not permit, but only desired we might Huzza
for them, this notwithstanding our Terror, we cheerfully did; and my Mother
said, Gentlemen perhaps you are dry, and gave them a Crown, with which they
were so well pleased, that they huzza'd for us, offering to guard us safe to
Town; but she alleging that would be too much trouble, they left us with a
kind Assurance, that they would drink our Healths, and fight for us any Time we
stood in need of their Protection.

Nothing material happened to us till we got to Chester; we took a Survey of
the Cathedral Church, which had nothing like Beauty to recommend it, any more
than the old black Walls which environ Part of the City.

Next Day we set out for Parkgate, which was crowded with Nobility and Gentry,
waiting for a fair Wind; here we were so long detained, that my Purse was quite
exhausted, even my last Shilling gone; this was a sad Situation, we were fixed
to a Point without any Power of Moving one way or another, wanting the
necessary Agent Money. There was but one Way left, which was even to apply to
Lady Kildare, who was there; but being ashamed to do it in my Name, I even did
it in my Son's, who waited on her Ladyship with it, met a favorable Reception,
and brought home a Guinea. The Wind sprung up fair and we embarked on board the
Race Horse. As I am always deadly Sick at Sea, I chose to keep on Deck, as long
as I possibly could. My Son being well inured to the watery Element, skipped
about, and sung Marine Songs. Most of the Passengers went to their Cabbins,
when Mr. Hudson, the Clergyman, seeing my Boy speak to me, asked me, was not
that young Lad's Name Pilkington? I said Yes! I thought so said he, for he is
very like Mr. Pilkington the Clergyman; he has some Cause to be so, Sir, for he
is his Son. How can you answer for that, Madam? Why indeed, Sir, I have some
Cause of Knowledge of it, for I am that worthy Divine's Wife, and the Boy's
Mother. The Gentleman confessed the Force of my Plea, and expressed great
Compassion for us both; and I do verily believe, had he known our
Circumstances, he would have added Relief to Pity.

He seemed to be a learned and worthy Gentleman, which I had the better
Opportunity of discovering, as he, my Son, myself, and a Gentleman whom I did
not know, sat all Night in Lady Kildare's Coach, which was lashed upon Deck. We
there were becalmed, and amongst other things, Mr. Hudson said, that had he
ever been so unfortunate to take a common Woman, and she had brought forth a
Son so like him, as mine was to my Husband, he would at least have concluded
that to be his own.

Upon which I related to him a true Story. A Servant Maid who had lived with
Mr. Pilkington in Ireland, enquired of the Persons who kept the next House, who
were the new Lodgers they had got; the Name made her but more inquisitive, and
she begged I would permit her to see me, but as I had met with many a Trick in
Life, I bid my Son and Daughter sit behind the Bed Curtain, and then desired
her to come up; I asked her, did she know me; she said no indeed! but she had
lived with one Mr. Pilkington in Ireland, who had turned his Wife out of Doors;
and that he lived on Lazer's Hill. And what said I were the Names of the
Children? Why, returned she, there was Master Billy, Miss Betty, and Master
Jack! And how came you to leave him? Why, indeed he was beating Miss and Master
sadly, and I asked him why he did it? he said because they were none of his!
Oh, Sir, said I, sure Master Jack is yours, for he is your own Picture. Ay,
said he, the Mother was thinking of me when he was got. In troth, Sir, said
she, I don't doubt that, for I believe you were the nearest Person to her; for
which Offense, she was directly dismissed: And could he have found Matter
against her Life, he would have prosecuted her.

The Children knew her, and whatever little Favors she had by Stealth done for
them in my Exile, I did my utmost to return to her. A Benefit is seldom lost.

At length the Day broke and discovered us my native Earth; I hailed the Mother
Land which gave me Birth, but knowing how little Money I had, did not choose to
Land at Dunlary, which must be attended with more Expense, than I had any
Possibility of answering: The other Passengers all went ashore; 'twas about
three o'Clock, and my Boy and I waited in the Ship, not doubting but we should
be soon at Ringsend; but it happened otherwise, for we were becalmed; we once
more took our Seats in the Coach, and found there the Hammer Cloth, in which I
wrapped myself, and fell fast asleep. In the Night I was awaked by the terrible
Curses of the Captain of the Ship, who swore dreadfully we should be that
Moment lost. I dropped the Glass, and asked him what was the Matter; he said he
had fallen asleep, and trusted the Ship to one who had directly thrown us on
the North Bull. And are we then to be lost? I see no Remedy, we shall strike in
a Minut^ I pulled my Son, who laughed at my Fears, which really were very
great. The Ship struck upon a Sand-Bank, with such Force, that it rebounded on
another, and beat it almost to Pieces. However, the Morn arose, that gilded all
the flowery Plains, and presented to our View a most agreeable Prospect, both
of Land and Water; the Tide left our Ship on the Strand, so that without
Expense or Difficulty, we walked to Ringsend.

Here we took a little decent Lodging, till I could be able to remove to
Dublin; and I immediately dispatched my Son, with a Letter to a Nobleman, whom
I had formerly seen at my Father's; who obligingly sent me a Guinea: This
enabled me to dismiss my Lodging; my Son brought me a Coach, in which we put
our Portmanteau, and removed to an Apartment he had taken for me at a small
Rent in Aungier-street.

Well, Reader, I have now brought you with me to Hibernia; where you will
suppose the Daughter of a Gentleman so universally esteemed, as Doctor Van
Lewin, would, after so long an Exile, have surely found some Friends.

I wrote a very mannerly Epistle to my beloved Spouse, in which I slightly
mentioned his merciless Treatment of me, and his poor Children; and told him,
that if he would pay me the Sixty five Pounds, for which I had his Bond in
Counselor Smith's Hands, I would not only forego the Interest, which amounted
to a considerable Sum, but also immediately leave the Kingdom; provided also,
he would give me Assurance, that he would take Care of his youngest Son. I
leave every Person of Candor, to judge whether or not this was a fair
Proposal: And I most solemnly protest to Almighty God, that I had no other
intention, as there was not at that Time, above forty Pages of my First Volume
wrote; however he scorned to send me an Answer of any kind. Well, I wrote
again, yet still his Reverence was silent as the Grave.

This I confess a little incensed me; and first determined me in the Design, of
publicly vindicating my Innocence, and laying open, for universal Benefit, his
unparalled Character; in which, if I have erred, it is through Tenderness, as
his Actions, Call Virtue Hypocrite,
Pluck the fair Rose from a young innocent Love,
And plant a Blister there. --
SHAKESPEARE. I wrote to Counselor Smith, and told him how Mr. Pilkington had
treated me, and withal informed him, that if he had too much Lenity to sue him
for my lawful Right, I insisted on his delivering me the Bond, that I might put
it in Force, for the Relief of myself and my Child.

The Counselor was at a Loss how to act in so critical a Point. He knew Mr.
Pilkington's Talent, of traducing every Person, who did not act in Compliance
to his Inclination; and, on the other Hand, Justice compelled him to think I
had a Right to be paid, what had so long and so unlawfully been withheld from
me; and by which I was drove to such Extremities in London.

He therefore wrote to him, and I suppose acquainted him, how much it was out
of his Power, as an honest Man, to defend him from the Consequences of that
Bond. Mr. Pilkington finding all his Policy of no Effect in this particular
Affair, condescended to honor the Counselor with a most stupid Epistle, in
which he insinuated, "that his Motive for giving that Bond, was in order to
make me live virtuously for the future, which he could sufficiently prove I had
not done." [Produce your Evidence Mr. Parson.] "That if he was allowed only
such Time to pay it, as his Circumstances would not allow, he would try what
Remedy he could obtain from a Court of Equity, when a full State of the Case
was laid before them." These are pretty near the Words; I wish you had my dear
Spouse, as it must have given Pleasure to any Court, to see you look CONSCIENCE
in the Face.

But not to be tedious, after much Trouble and Vexation of Spirit, I procured
from him twenty Pounds at one Payment, with which I took a little rural
Habitation near Bow-Bridge.

I wrote a Letter to my dear old Friend, Mr. Cibber, and told him, that however
improbable it might seem to him, I had actually Twenty Pounds in my Pocket; and
added, that I had A little Room to lodge a Friend,
A River at my Garden's End,
and wanted nothing, but the Delights of his Conversation, to make my Situation
completely agreeable. I believe Mr. Cibber had not till then heard of my
Expedition, so that my Letter must have surpised him. By the return of the
Post, I received from his dear Hand the following humorous Epistle. To Mrs.
Laetitia Pilkington, etc.
THOU frolicksome Farce of Fortune: What! is there then another Act to come of
you yet? I thought you had some Time ago, made your final Exit. Well, but
without Wit or Compliment, I am glad to hear you are so tolerably alive. I have
your agreeable Narrative from Dublin before me, and shall, as you desire,
answer every Paragraph in its Turn, without once considering its Importance or
Connection. In the first Place, you say I have for many Years been the kind
Preserver of your Life. In this, I think I have no great Merit, as you seemed
to set so little Value on it yourself, otherwise you would have considered,
that Poverty was the most helpless Handmaid, that ever waited on a high
spirited Lady. You seem to have a Glimpse of a new World before you; think a
little how you are to squeeze through the Crowd, with such a Bundle at your
Back, and do not suppose it possible, you can have a Grain of Wit, till you
have twenty Pounds clear in your Pocket; with half that Sum, a greater Sinner
than you, may look the Devil in the Face.

Few People of Sense will turn their Backs on a Woman of Wit, that does not
look as if she came to borrow Money of them; but when Want brings her to her
Wit's End, every Fool will have Wit enough to avoid her.

I am not sure your Spouse's having taken another Wife, before you came over,
might not have proved the only Means, of his becoming a better Husband to you;
for had he picked up a Fortune, the Hush of your Prior Claim to him, might have
been worth a better separate Maintenance, than what you are now likely to get
out of him.

As to my Health and Spirits, they are as usual, and full as strong as any
body's that has enjoyed them the same Number of Years.

If the Value I have for you, gives you any Credit in your own Country, pray
stretch it as far as you think it can be serviceable to you; for under all the
Rubbish of your Misfortunes, I could see your Merit sparkle like a lost Jewel.
I have no greater Pleasure, than in placing my Esteem on those, who can feel
and value it. Had you been born to a large Fortune, your shining Qualities
might have put half the rest of your Sex out of Countenance. If any of them are
uncharitable enough to call this Flattery, tell them what a poor Devil you are,
and let that silence them.

I hope you have but one Volume of your Works in the Press, because if it meets
with any Success, I believe I could give you some natural Hints, which, in the
easy Dress of your Pen, might a good deal enliven it.

You pay your Court very ill to me, by depreciating the natural Blessings on
your Side the Water: Pray what have we to boast off, that you want, but Wealth
and insolent Dominion? Are not the Glory of God's Creation there? -- Woman,
lovely Woman there, in their highest Luster! I have seen several and frequent
Samples of them here; and have heard of many, not only from yourself, but
others, who for the agreeable Entertainments of social Life, have not their
equal Play-Fellows in Old England.

And pray what would Life be worth without them? Dear soft Souls, for now too
they are lavish of Favors, which in my Youth, they would have trembled to
trust me with. In a Word, if instead of the Sea, I had only the dry Ground Alps
to get over, I should think it but a Trip to Dublin; in the mean time, we must
even compound for such Interviews, as the Post or Packet can bring or send, to

Your real Friend and Servant, C. Cibber.




I communicated this Letter to Lord Chief Baron Bows, the Hon. Arthur Hill,
Esquire and several Persons of Taste, who were infinitely delighted with it, as
they were with many others, which I had from Mr. Cibber, and which would
considerably have embelished my Work, had I not the Misfortune to lose them, by
lending them to a Man of Distinction, who by some Accident mislaid them; so I
must even entertain you, with the neat Product of my own Brain.

Mr. Victor, whom I have mentioned in my Second Volume, and who is now
Treasurer of the Theater Royal in Smock-Alley, came to visit me several Times,
and frequently favored us with an Order to see the Play, as we were upon a
very friendly and familiar Footing. My Son used, when he had an Inclination, to
call on my Friend for a Pass; one Night he sent once or twice for that Purpose,
when the Gentleman was abroad? What does the giddy Creature do, but aukwardly
counterfeits his Hand in an Order for two. He told me of it, and said he was
sure Mr. Victor would not deny it, when he was informed who had taken that
Freedom with his Name: I laughed at the Reflection of the Jest, when it came to
be known, as Mr. Victor had had the Boy in his Arms when an Infant. Accordingly
we took a Coach, went to the Play, and the Forgery seemed to pass extremely
well. The first Act was scarce begun, when a Person entered, and as the House
was thin of Company, tapt my Son on the Shoulder. I did not apprehend the Cause
of it, but began to grow uneasy when I found him stay a full Hour; at length he
returned, and informed me, that he had been, at the Instigation of Mr. Sh -- n,
arrested by two Constables, from whom he was only delivered by the
Solicitations of Mr. Victor. This greatly astonished me, as I thought Mr. Sh
-- n ought to have had a little more Respect for the Son of a Clergyman,
especially as he was well convinced, that as I knew his Father, (whom the Dean
entertained more as a Buffoon, than a Friend or Companion) and his Mother, I
had a Power of furnishing the World with some Anecdotes, which were hitherto
unrevealed; but the Scheme of letting my Son escape was not any Lenity in him,
but a Bait to catch me going out, whom they imagined they should discover by
the Boy; but it happened that a Gentleman handed me me out, by which this
generous Intent was frustrated.

His little deformed Brother had the Assurance to tell my Son some Nights
after, that Mr. S -- n would esteem any Satire I wrote on him a Panegyric;
which when I heard, in order to oblige him with a Compliment to his Taste, I
enclosed to Mr. Victor the following Lines, to be forwarded to his Mightiness.
To Mr. S -- n.
FAIN would the Muse record thy Crimes,
And leave them to succeeding Times;
But finds it difficult to trace,
The Vices of thy motly Race;
Whether thy Insolence and Pride,
Spring from thy S -- l Father's Side.
That Pedant, who with Rod in Hand,
Could in his paultry School command,
And underneath his cruel Yoke;
Many a generous Spirit broke;
Who else were formed in Camps to shine,
Or grace the Noble Patriot Line:
Or did thou from thy Dam inherit,
Thy fordid avaricious Spirit,
Of whom I heard old SWIFT declare,
So many Vices were her Share,
That were her Sex created all,
Pure as the first before the Fall;
And but her Crimes through all distributed,
The best would merit to be gibbeted.
Thy Father he applauded next,
Studying a Wench more than a Text;
Who having got of Money store,
Lavishing all upon a Whore,
Was sent to Hell, his latest Journey,
By her base Brother an Attorney;
Such be thy Fate, thou Wretch accursed,
Or else with Spleen and Envy burst;
Or with thine Uncle, brave M'Faddin,
Whose Infamy thy Soul is clad in,
To free the suffering Stage and Nation,
Be doomed like him to Transportation.
But who thy Destiny can alter?
Thy very Looks, presage a Halter.
Oh may I live to hail the Day,
When the glad Players shall survey,
Their Tyrant stripped of all Command,
High on the well fixed Ladder stand.
And taking thence, one glorious Swing,
How will they spout, "God save the King?"
Then shall those Clothes, in which disguise,
You Would seem a Lord to vulgar Eyes.
Did not thy base and abject Mien,
Betray the Beggar's Brat within,
Be by thy Kinsman Hangman worn,
And still a Scoundrel Thief adorn.
This, Sir, I most humbly beg your Acceptance of, as it is indeed the only thing
which I could without Dissimulation say of you.

I was told, that this worthy Gentleman, in a Letter to the inimitable Mr.
Garrick, said, "We shine like Castor and Pollux, you adorn Great Britain, while
I illuminate Hibernia." Nothing sure, but his matchless Ignorance, could have
drawn so disproportionate a Parrallel. I remember the first time I had the
Pleasure of seeing Mr. Garrick perform, it was the Character of King Lear; I
was in one of the Boxes, and when he came to the mad Scene, I was so much
affected at it, that I got up insensibly, and was going out, till I was waked,
like one from a Trance, by the Lady who accompanied me, pulling me by the
Sleeve, and demanding where I was going? and to say the Truth, He made me
Marble, with too much conceiving.
MILTON. I am certain no Person was ever capable of making the Audience feel a
Part, which they did not sincerely do themselves; and I Am convinced, Mr.
Garrick never played a Part, wherein he did not, through the whole Performance,
believe himself the Man; whereas Pollux, as Sh -- n modestly styles himself, is
no other than Tom Sh -- n, though he change Dress and Perriwig twenty Times a
Night; he is indeed, Semper Eadem, worse and worse, as my Countryman has it.

This brings to my Memory, a Story of a very eminent Player, who was to perform
the Part of Hannibal. A Nobleman behind the Scenes, took the Liberty to give a
Twitch to one Tie of his Peruke. The enraged Hero turned on his Heel, and with
his martial Truncheon, smote the Peer over the Cheek. A Blow, by Heaven! and
from an Actor's Hand!
He did not stab him, for that were poor Revenge.
But when he came off the Stage, my Lord told him, he believed he thought
himself really Hannibal, when he could give with Impunity, such an Indignity,
to a Man of his Consequence. My Lord, said the Player, if I did not think
myself Hannibal, I should never be able to make the Audience do so. -- So much
for Theatrical Affairs.

I now began seriously to resolve on Publishing my Writings, and to that End
had Proposals printed. Persons were at first a little timorous, lest I should
print a List of Subscribers, and by that Means they might unwittingly give
Offense; but when I declared no Names should be inserted, I had a numerous
Contribution, from all the Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry; amongst whom, when I
name our excellent Lord Chancellor, in whom Titles and Honors had made no
Alteration, but that of increasing his Politeness, Munificence, and Liberality,
to every Individual; our Patriot Speaker; and worthy Recorder Eaton Stannard
Esquire I believe no Person of Distinction, will blush to have their Names
mentioned.

Well, at length my first Volume was finished, and I wrote a bantering Letter
to Sir J -- n F -- ke, to whom I have the Dishonor to be allied, to tell him,
that I intended to dedicate it to him, Nemine Con. He, whose Mind is truly
pictured in his ill-favored Face, told my Son, that for himself, every Body
would take it as a thing done to make him ridiculous, since he had not any
Accomplishments, that might merit an Encomium, which indeed was true, except
it is his matchless Impudence, in keeping Possession of an Estate, which his own
Mother, the Lady --, told him he had no more Right to, than to the Dukedom of
Burgundy.

When his supposed Father, Sir B -- ph F -- ke died, this young Spark was an
Ensign in the Army, and stepping at once into Affluence, he being naturally of
a covetous Disposition, refused to pay his Mother the Jointure which she
claimed, and was going to commence a Suit with her; when one Morning she called
on him and said, Hark ye, Sir John, do you resolve to go to Law with me for
what is my Right? He begged to be excused, but told her, Self-Preservation was
the first Law of Nature; so it is Sir, said she, calling him by his real
Father's Name; then you are no longer Sir J -- n F -- ke which I will go
instantly and make public.

He fell dutifully on his Knees, entreated her Pardon for his Disobedience, and
promised for the future to pay all proper Resignation to her superior
Understanding. -- This, Sir John, you and many others know to be Fact.

He pointed out to me, as a subject for everlasting Praise, my beloved Lord
Kingsborough, then Sir Robert King, and though I had not the Felicity I have
since experienced of a personal Acquaintance with him, yet the Character
pleased me, and accordingly I wrote a trifling Dedication, far inferior to his
Merit, which notwithstanding he kindly accepted, and sent me the following
Letter: Madam,
I Return you my Thanks for the Favor of your Dedication, which though I am
sensible is too high a Compliment, yet my Vanity will not permit me to refuse.
I beg you will take the Trouble to send your Servant to me tomorrow Morning,
and you will oblige,

Madam, Your devoted humble Servant, R. KING.




I accordingly sent my Son, who returned with a Letter, in which were enclosed
two Notes for ten Pounds each, The Letter was only this; Madam,
I Once more return you Thanks for the Favor you intend me, and have the
Honor to be,

Madam, Your obliged humble Servant, R. KING.
York-street, Tuesday Morning.



An obliging and easy manner of conferring the highest Favors, is what few
even amongst the most Polite have been able to arrive at, a Perfection which
alone is given to adorn a Marlborough or a Kingsborough.

But alas, how vain, how fleeting were all the Joys I ever proposed to myself.
This Nobleman, in whose Esteem I imagined myself to be so deeply riveted, that
not Fortune, Time, or Fate, could ever displace me, was, as I have since
learned, by the Insinuations of one Clancy, an old blind Beggar, whose Wants I
had often supplied, both in London and Dublin, persuaded to believe, that I had
spoken disrespectfully of his Lordship; and that my Son said he would print his
Letters, and sell them for Halspence a-piece; all which was most notoriously
false: However, it had such an Effect, that his Lordship came to me, and giving
me ten Guineas in a sort of commanding Tone, desired me to give him his
Letters; I burst into Tears, and told him, I would resign them, (or even any
thing, if possibly dearer) to his Pleasure. I went to my Drawer, took as many
as I could find, and delivered them as I would, The ruddy Drops that visit my
sad Heart.


He took them abruptly, and departing, told me he would send in the Morning for
the Remainder of them; he left me in a Condition which I am utterly incapable
of describing. A Circumstance so unlooked for, sunk me into a Train of the most
gloomy Reflections, which might have been attended with fatal Consequences, had
not the Entrance of some agreeable Company dissipated my present Reflections.

The next Morning before I was up a Chairman came and knocked at the the Door;
the Servant asked who he wanted: He said he came from Lord Kingsborough, and
must see Mrs. Pilkington herself; he told him I was not up; but he swore and
stormed, saying he would not leave the Place till he had his Lord's Letters
from me. I happened to overhear him, and desired the Maid to tell the Chairman,
I would send to his Lordship presently; I according arose, and piqued at the
Usage I had received from the Fellow, I must confess with Shame, I wrote a
little warmly on the Subject to my Lord, and without allowing myself time for
Thought dispatched it off. For I bear Anger as the Flint bears Fire,
Which much enforced, shows a hasty Spark,
And strait is cool again.
SHAKESPEARE. The fatal Epistle had scarce left my Hand, ever my Heart was
agitated with the most sensible Remorse. I in vain dispatched a Messenger after
the first, 'Twas past, 'twas gone, 'twas irrecoverable;
It reached his Hands, and he only sent for Answer, "'It Is very well:"

I believe the judicious Part of my Readers, must have apprehended that the Sin
of Ingratitude is not amongst the Number of mine, since I have endeavored
through my Work, if possible, to make the contrary conspicuous, by rendering
due Praise to all my Benefactors. Yet what could my beloved Lord imagine, but
that he had bestowed all his Favors on an unworthy Person?

I did not believe that after all the Anguish of Mind I had sustained through
my Life, any thing could move my Philosophy, (which had made me determine never
to be overjoyed or surprised, at any Advancement in Life, nor dejected or cast
down at any Adversity on this Side Futurity) so much as this.

Downy Repose was a Stranger to my Pillow, and I fell a Prey to the greatest
Languor and Heaviness of Soul. However as I knew his Lordship was filled with
the Milk of human Pity, I imagined, by apologizing for the rash Act, I should
be blessed with his forgiveness, and a Renewal of his Friendship to me, to which
End I wrote the following Lines: To the Right Hon. the Lord Kingsborough.
No more my Lord with Pleasure I expect,
Your friendly Aid my Weakness to protect.
Lost to those Transports, you have often inspired,
And every Happiness my Soul desired;
Oh where for Succor, whither shall I fly,
But buried in unheard of Sorrows die?
The Soul of Pity dwells not in a Slave,
But kind Compassion dignifies the brave.
At Darius' Woes, great Philip's Warlike Son
Was moved, when Conquests and when Toils were done.
Each Godlike Hero has a tender Part,
And Woes like mine, would melt a savage Heart.
Ever long my Soul had no Desire in View,
No Hope or Wish, but that of pleasing you.
One Smile from you could make a rich Amends,
For shattered Fortune, and the Loss of Friends:
Esteemed by you, I could with Ease survey
My Name and Honor, to the World a Prey.
But now no more, I Am ravished with that Voice,
Whose sacred Sound bids Agony rejoice,
The vernal Blooms no longer give me Ease,
Nor painted Violets my Fancy please.
Each Darling Object but elates my Grief,
And Death's cold Hand can only give Relief.
Yet, when Laetitia shall exist no more,
But Dust to Dust, as she must short, restore,
Shed one kind Tear of Pity on her Hearse,
Thou matchless Subject of her latest Verse;
And let no Stone or Marble ever tell
What Woes her Children, or herself, befell:
But, mixed and covered, with forgotten Clay,
Time shall dissolve her Memory away.


His Lordship sent me the following Answer, which only added more Weight to my
oppressed Soul. Madam,
I Am extremely honored, by that Esteem and Friendship which you profess for
me in your really fine Copy of Verses; yet, when I reflect on a late Letter of
yours, which I still have by me, I cannot help thinking myself as unworthy of
your Praises, as I was of your Threats.

I am, Madam, Your very humble Servant, --.




I concluded from this Letter, that I had lost all the Share in his Esteem,
that I once flattered myself I was possessed of; which shows the Instability of
human Affairs.

And here, gentle Reader, my Story and my Life draw to a Period. I am
convinced, from the present Situation of my Health, that I shall never live to
see this Volume published. It is the only Legacy I have to leave my poor Boy,
who, I fear, will meet with many Enemies, on account of my Writings, when it
will be out of my Power to protect him. But Oh! ye Good and Great, to you and
the Almighty I commend him; and hope that Tenderness which melted you to
compassionate my Woes, will incline you to assist him. Believe me, my dear Lord
Kingsborough, no Creature living holds your Lordship in higher Esteem than he;
and, as you told me in one of your Letters, your Inclinations were, and
Endeavors should be, to serve him, let not the Memory of my Offense prevent
your keeping that Promise sacred.

APPENDIX.
I Promised in my Proposals for printing this Volume by Subscription, to give
the Readers a Key to the first, second, and third Volumes, in this Place; but
having been advised by some judicious Friends, that such a thing would only
tend to create ill Blood, and excite a Resentment too powerful to be withstood
by so inconsiderable a Person as myself, it has been thought expedient to
furnish them with an Account of my Mother's Death; which I am the more capable
of doing, as I remained with her to her last Moments.

She had been a long time in a declining State of Health, having an extreme bad
Stomach, and Digestion: Nor did she imagine that Nature could have held out as
long as it did.

She never seemed in the least uneasy at the Knowledge of her approaching End;
often declaring, that if she could take me with her to Felicity, she would
leave this World without Reluctance.

And indeed, I am not surprised, that her maternal Love extended so far, as she
even then foresaw the Calamities which I have since sustained; and knew, that
if the World, at her first setting out as a Writer, with her extraordinary
Talents, scarce afforded her Bread, my Fate must be even harder, except I met
the Patronage of some illustrious Person.

And Providence seemed inclinable to comply with her Wish; for, in the latter
End of June, 1751, I was seized with a most violent Pleuretic Fever, which I
got by an extreme Cold, I sent for Doctor Fergus, a most eminent Physician, and
worthy Gentleman; my Mother was at this time so weak as to be obliged to keep
her Bed: When the Doctor saw me, and heard the Symptoms of my Disorder, he told
me I was a dead Man; that I should have applied some Days sooner, since he was
now of Opinion it had got too far the Ascendency over me for any Cure to be
effected: However, he ordered me to be blooded four times that Day, and then
went up to my Mother's Apartment.

She asked him his Advice upon her own Case and mine; and he told her a little
too frankly, that Nature might do something for my Recovery, but that her Death
was inevitable; she smiling, said to him, That the Worms would have but a poor
Feast of her, she being quite worn away.

Well, I was blooded according to his Order, and the Fever abated considerably.
I had the next Night an excessive Perspiration, which carried off all the
Symptoms except a little Weakness.

In the Morning a young Lady, who honored me with a particular Regard, came to
see me. She was so excessively delighted at my speedy and unexpected Recovery,
that she resolved to spend the Day with me; and my poor Mother, ever willing to
contribute to my Satisfaction, told the Nurse-keeper that she found herself
much better, and desired she might be brought to my Apartment; accordingly she
lifted my dear Mother like a Child, in her Arms, and placed her in an
Elbow-chair by my Bedside: She affected, in order to please me, to be
extremely cheerful; and the young Lady kneeled down, and asked her Blessing;
telling her she wanted to have a Wedding in the House instead of a Burying from
it. My Mother, who retained her Spirits and good Humor to the last, gave us
both her Blessing very devoutly, and her sincere Permission to marry. I had a
small Chicken dressed for my Dinner, of which my Mother partook, but her
Stomach was too weak to keep it, or a Glass of Wine, which she drank after it;
so she was obliged to be carried to Bed.

After her Departure, as the Weather was vastly warm, I ordered the Maid to
open the Sash-window; and, in the mean time, comes the Doctor; we were just
going to drink Tea: This Gentleman is a little near-sighted; but seeing the
Sash up, and Company in the Room, What, said he, this poor Boy's gone; I
thought so! And was going out: No, Sir, said I, I am still alive: Alive! said
he, And what are all these People doing here? He immediately went and darkened
the Window, taking the Company by the Shoulders, and turning them out; he then
charged the Nurse-keeper, not to open the Window, nor let any Person talk to me
for a Week.

I thought this Prescription a little hard, as I imagined myself quite well:
Accordingly the next Morning I sent the Nurse out, got up, dressed myself, and
went to my poor Mother; she was agreeably surprised to see me, but upon opening
the Curtains, I found she had a great Cast in her Eyes, which shocked me
extremely, and she told me, that every thing appeared double to her; I did not
give her to understand, that I perceived it, but told her, she looked better
than I had known her do a long Time. She said the Doctor had given her over:
Why so he did me, Madam, and yet you see I am alive; and if you will take my
Prescription, I dare say you will make a Fibber of him.

She said she would, and I proposed, that my Spouse as I called Miss C -- m,
and she, and I, should the next Morning go to Chapel Izod, a Place about three
Miles from Dublin, and spend the Day. She seemed quite pleased with my Request,
and sent to have a Landau bespoke for that Purpose.

In the Morning she was up and dressed before me, and was as sprightly as I had
ever seen her, though quite weak, insomuch that she was obliged to be carried
into the Machine and out again.

We set out before Breakfast, and went through the Phoenix Park, it was a fine
Day, and we had the Landau opened; the fresh Air vastly revived her, and she
repeated a good many Lines of the Poem on Windsor-Forest; she even complained
of being hungry. When we came to the Tavern, I ordered some Tea; and to my
infinite Surprise, my Mother called for a Plate of Ham, and some Oil and
Vinegar, eat very hearty, and drank two Glasses of White Wind.

The Readers may judge that I was overjoyed at seeing so fair a Prospect of her
Recovery; she after made a Shift to walk down into the Flower-Garden, and
seemed to enjoy the balmy Fragrance with great inward Satisfaction. I then went
in, and bespoke Dinner, which was young Ducks, and Green Pease; my Mother lay
down and slept 'till 'twas ready, at which Hour she rose, and eat very hearty:
There happened to be a Couple of Gentlemen in the House of our Acquaintance,
who after Dinner joined Company with us; and my Mother told them that the
Doctor had given her over, but she-was resolved to outlive the whole Faculty.
In short, she related twenty agreeable Stories to our infinite Entertainment.

Little did I imagine, that our present Joy was only the Prologue to the Grief
I too soon after received. We did not leave Chapel Izod till Ten at Night, when
we all set out in the Landau; I know not whether the Air might not have been
very fatal to her, for no sooner were we got a hundred Yards, but she began to
cough, and continued so all that Night, during which I sat up with her.

We lodged at this Time in the House of one Sheil, in Phraper-Lane, Dublin: We
had a first and second Floor, for which we constantly paid Ten Shillings and
Sixpence a Week; the Man of the House had been a Parish-Clerk, and had held
that Dignity under my Father for some Years; he afterward turned Farrier, or
Horse-Doctor, in which meeting with no Success, he came to Dublin, took a House
which he let to Lodgers, except the Parlours and Kitchen, and commenced a
famous Quack; I question whither the most eminent of that Profession in London,
which I take to be R -- k, ever tried more salutary Methods to destroy the
human Species, than this profound Esculapius had done, nor with more Success;
whom we shall hereafter distinguish by the Title of Doctor Sheil.

This Wretch, who was ignorant beyond Conception, was a Compound of
Pragmatacism and Hypocrisy, his Eyes were eternally bent to Heaven, with the
most solemn and austere Aspect, while his Heart was perpetrating the
Destruction of all who had the Misfortune to be thrown into his House.

The first Instance which convinced me of it, was this; the light Guineas were
now cried down, so that People would scarcely accept them on any Account. This
Doctor was very particular every Saturday to call for his Money; being the most
avaricious Mortal I had seen. It happened one Evening, that we had no Money in
the House but these Guineas, one of which was very remarkable and wanted Six
Shillings. This I gave him, and allowed him the Deficiency. In a few Days
after, every light Guinea which my Mother had, she sold, and took current
Guineas for them. She had exactly five Weight ones in her Purse. One Morning
that I went out, she left her Pocket hanging on a Chair; as she was never
suspicious of any one. When I returned, she was going to send me to pay some
Cash; when what should I see but the light Guinea I had some Days before given
Sheil. The Thing astonished me; I asked if Sheil had been in the Room, she said
no, nor any Person besides Nurse; this Nurse, under the Rose, was much addicted
to Liquor, I called her, and examined her closely about the Matter, she
strenuously denied her knowing any thing of it; at length, by Threats and
Entreaties, she confessed that Sheil had given her Half a Pint of Rum to change
them in her Pocket, he assuring her it was the same Thing.

I now besought my Mother's Permission to lay the old canting R -- l in
Newgate, but she begged, that I would let her die in Peace, and not cause her
last Moments to be disturbed with Contention; she farther conjured me not to
mention it till she was either dead, or in some other Lodging. In Compliance to
her Request, I dropped the Affair.

But notwithstanding her Desire of Quietness, this Blood-hound, for such alone
I can style him, resolved to hasten her Exit; for the next Day watching his
Opportunity, when I was out, he came up, and with an austere Countenance
demanded three Weeks Rent, which was that Day due to him, she told him in a
faint Voice, that I was gone for Money, and would pay him at my Return; but he
swore he would not be trifled with any longer; and if she did not instantly pay
him, he would turn her into the Street.

Imagine what a Shock this Behavior must be to one in her feeble Condition;
she could make no Answer, but burst into Tears. Come, Madam, said the inhuman
Cannibal, these Arts will not pass on me; give me either my Money, or Value for
it, or by G -- d you shall go out of this Lodging.

She gave him the Keys of her Drawers, and desired him to take any Movables he
thought proper for his Security, and entreated for Christian Charity he would
leave the Room, as his Presence was baneful to her.

This was all he aimed at, so very modestly helped himself to every Thing that
was valuable, and left the Room.

I returned soon after, and was greatly surprised, to see my poor Mother
trembling, and pale, so that she scarce seemed to live; she faintly looked up
at me, and said my dear Child, that Villain Sheil has been the Death of your
Mother; I knew I had not long to exist, but sure it was cruel to stab at Half
an Hour of my frail Life.

I could scarce contain the various Passions rising in my Breast; Love, Pity,
Horror, and Resentment, reciprocally took Place, and I should doubtless have
gone and taken his Life, but that filial Duty withheld me from adding to my
dear Mother's Affliction.

I prevailed on her to take a little mull'd Wine, after which she went to Bed;
and I found on the Table these Lines, which were the last she ever wrote; My
Lord, my Savior, and my God,
I bow to thy correcting Rod;
Nor will I murmur or complain,
Though every Limb be filled with Pain;
Though my weak Tongue its Aid denies,
And Daylight wounds my wretched Eyes.


I sat up with her all this Night, during which she slept little for the heavy
Cough on her Lungs; but she retained her Senses so well, that she entertained
me with many Stories, and repeated Part of a Poem written on Mrs. Waller. I
believe, Madam, said I, she is a Subscriber to you; Yes, said she, she paid the
Money to my Father. I now found her Brain begin to grow defective; which gave
the most piercing Anguish to my Heart I had ever received.

She doz'd a little about four o'Clock in the Morning; and when she awoke, told
me, she had a mighty agreeable Dream; which was, that her Father came to her in
a Mourning Coach and Six; and told her he was very angry she had been so long
ill, and yet never sent for him whom she knew was always ready to assist her: I
am come, continued he, to bring you out of all your Troubles; and with that,
took her in his Arms, like a Child, and carried her away in the Coach.

My boding Heart readily interpreted this Dream, as indeed did her own; my
Dear, said she, you know the Usage I have received from your Father, together
with the Knowledge I have that there are but few good Clergymen to be found,
have ever made me declare that I would permit none of them to visit me in my
last Hours, except dear Doctor Delany: However, since he is from Town, and the
World would add Impiety to all they have said of me, if I don't have some one
of them, pray send for the Curate of this Parish; I accordingly did, and we all
joined in Prayer; after which she fell into a good deal of Discourse with him,
and they drank a Glass of Wine together: He asked her if she forgave my Father;
and she related the following Story to him.

There was an honest Irish Papist, on his Deathbed, and when the Priest was
going to give him Absolution, he asked the sick Man, If he freely forgave all
his Enemies? Otherwise he could not administer that Sacrament to him; the Man
replied, Arah faith, Father, I do forgive every one, only Teddy Brenan, that
pounded my Cow. Nay, but, said the Priest, you must forgive him also, or I
cannot absolve you; Well, said he, Father, if I die, I will forgive him; but if
I live, I never can. Will that do, said the sick Man? Arah faith, said the
Priest, if it will not do, it must do; and accordingly proceeded.

So, Sir, said she, if I die I do forgive him; and I wish the God whom he has
offended may do the same; but if I live, mark you that, Master Parson, I never
will.

The Clergyman departed, and in about an Hour's time came a great long Letter,
written, I suppose, at the Desire of Doctor Sheil, by some of the
enthusiastical Methodists, of which Dublin is now the chief Receptacle in his
Majesty's Dominions; it was written in their whining Style, declaring that she,
my Mother, was damned beyond Redemption; that she was now on the Brink of Hell;
and that not the Blood of the Lamb could intercept her.

We both laughed at this fantastic Contrivance, and she only wished for
Strength to be able to answer it properly; but alas, that she never had.

This Day she retained her Senses tolerably till Evening, when she began to
talk incoherently. I sat up till Four in the Morning, at which time I grew very
heavy: What, said she, cannot you watch and pray a Moment, till this bitter Cup
passes from me; a Moment, and I shall be no more: Come, said she, kneel down,
and take my Blessing, and the last Adieu. With a Heart rent in twain, I
complied, and she laid her Hand on my Head, and said, very devoutly, the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, bless you; the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost,
protect and guard you, and bring you safe to everlasting Peace, where I go a
little before you; for, surely, my dear Child, I believe, through Christ, I
shall be happy hereafter.

The Words made so deep an Impression on my Soul, that I could not help
repeating them; and I do it more particularly, because some People have been
cruel enough to say, she died an Atheist; but surely every Person, who examines
her Writings, will find that she was a sincere Believer in the Doctrines of
Christianity, as taught by the Church of England; the perpetual Benefit of
which I hope she now enjoys. I remember in the Beginning of her Illness, she
called me to her; and said, I have a thing to request, and you must by no means
deny me, but promise on your Life, your Honor, and your Soul, to perform it; I
told her, as I had not often disobeyed her, she need not be so particular in
charging me; it is this, said she, in a few Days you will lose your poor little
Mother; and as you know I have no Money, your Father undoubtedly will bury me,
and, perhaps, may propose putting my Remains in his Family Burial Place; but if
you suffer that, you have my heavy Curse; nay, if it is possible, I will come
from the Grave to resent it. Lay me by my dear Father, and let our kindred
Ashes mingle together; for, were I put in the Ground with your Father, She and
her Father are buried in St. Anne's Church, Dawson-street,
The Miracle of Thebes would be renewed,
And the dividing Flames burn different Ways.
These were her very Words: Now, said she, if ever you grow rich, erect a
little square Marble Stone over me; and let this Inscription be on it; Here
lies, near the Body of her honored Father, John Vanlewen, M. D. the Mortal
Part of Mrs. LAETITIA PILKINGTON, Whose Spirit hopes for that Peace, through the
infinite Merit of CHRIST, which a cruel and merciless World never afforded her.

I sincerely promised to obey her Injunction. But to return: -- Between Five
and Six her Breath grew short, and her Eyesight failed her, I went, and
embracing her Hand, which was now almost lifeless, asked her if she knew me:
Yes, said she, you are my eldest Son, come from the College for my Blessing;
you might have called before, but God bless you. It seemed as if her not being
permitted to see him disturbed her last Moments. She then desired me to kneel
down and pray by her, which I did, still keeping her Hand in mine, I found it
grow cold, and heavy, and looking up just saw her expire with a Sigh.

I now beheld the most tender and endearing Mother departed from me: My only
Prop and Succor gone: While I saw myself ready to be exposed to all the Malice
of Fortune. I too well before experienced the obdurate Temper of my Father, to
hope any Favor from him. However, summoning up all my Philosophy, and reposing
my entire Confidence in divine Providence, I left that Scene of Sorrow and
Lamentation, and retired to take a little Repose.

I had some few Days before this secured all my Mother's Manuscripts in the
Hands of a Friend, which was very fortunate for me, since the Moment old Sheil
heard she was dead, he ran into the Dining Room, and secured every Thing he
could lay Hands on; after which he went to inform my Father of the long wished
and joyful News. He could scarce credit it at first; but when the pious Mr.
Sheil assured him on the Word of a Christian, that he spoke Truth, my Father,
with great Composure, said it had been well for her, to have died some Years
ago; old Sheil assured him, that he believed she would not have died this Bout,
but for the Fright he gave her in her Sickness; for which kind Office my Father
could not but thank him.

He gave immediate Orders for her Funeral, which you may depend on it was not
profuse; he allowed her, however a decent Oak Coffin and Shroud, and the
Nurse-keeper told me, that Sheil was so unparalleled a Wretch, that she could
scarce keep him out of the Room while she stripped the Corpse, which the Moment
she had done, and put her Shroud on, he came and took the Linen in which she
died, and secured that also.

When I arose in the Morning, the old Hypocrite asked me to Breakfast with him,
and endeavored to comfort me, by saying my Father was too good a Christian to
let me want; and that as the Cause of his Anger to me was now removed, by the
Death of my Mother, the Effect would undoubtedly cease.

I told him I expected nothing from him, nor should I, though infinitely
distressed, make any Application to him; that Nature instructed me to love and
protect my Mother, whose Cause my Duty prompted me to espouse, of which I could
not be ashamed, since I would do it, were it to be done again.

He said I ought to submit to my Father, and write to him; and, said he, those
Papers and Letters you have, send them to him, which will prove your Respect,
and I will engage to mediate Matters so well between you, that he shall allow
you Twenty Pounds a Year, though he will not see you.

As I am too apt to be credulous, had any Person, but this Man, whom my Soul
abhorred, made such Overtures, I should have thought there was something in it;
but if the Harmony of Angels proceeded from his Lips, whom I looked on as the
Murderer of my dear Mother, it would to me be hateful as the Hissing of
Serpents.

However, I listened to him, and answered that those Papers would certainly
obtain Money for me, and Promises were often broke; that as to Twenty Pounds a
Year, my Father would as soon give Twenty of his Teeth; but if the officious
Mr. Sheil would prevail on my Father to give me Fifty Pounds, I would not only
resign them, but would go to some Part of the World, where he should never hear
of me.

The latter Part of this my Father would readily agree to, nay have given me
his Blessing at my Departure, but not a Word of the Nine and Forty Pieces.
Indeed another pious Divine offered me a Sum of Money to go to America, which
because I did not consent to, he has since utterly rejected me; but a little
Time will show the World his Motives for that, and open a very unexpected Scene
to the Public; and though I have not kept my Promise to him in making the Affair
known before now, yet I take this Opportunity of informing his Reverence that I
have not forgot him.

In short, the Doctor ( Sheil I mean) went to my Father, and told my
Conditions; but he only laughed, and said I had not my Mother's Genius, and
must quickly fall into Contempt, therefore he very fairly set me at Defiance;
and should I dare to print any Thing against him, he had Interest enough to
send me over the Water. I am sorry for the disagreeable Necessity I am under of
speaking or writing any Thing to displease him, but Facts may be related, I
hope, without Offense.

The next Day Mr. Faulkner inserted the following Paragraph in his Paper.

Yesterday Morning died Mrs. Letitia Pilkington. And the Author of Pue's
Occurrences, one of the worst Papers published there, (I suppose by my Father's
Direction) inserted a very false and scandalous Paragraph; while Mr. Esdall,
who is a Gentleman of known Worth and Integrity published a genteel Encomium on
her.

A few Days after I wrote the following little Piece, which, as it was almost
my first Attempt in Rhyme, and on so particular a Subject, I hope the Readers
will pardon me for introducing it here. On the DEATH of my BELOVED MOTHER.
And shall no mournful elegiac Lay,
Thy matchless Worth and Excellence display?
From me, at least, it is but a poor Amends,
Thou tenderest Mother, and thou best of Friends;
While, from my Eyes, the streaming Sorrows run,
Accept this Tribute from thy darling Son;
Who, taught by thee, in melting Numbers tells
What agonizing Pain his Bosom swells;
What dreadful Anguish preys upon his Mind,
That thou art fled, and he remains behind:
Pleased if with you he might ascend the Sky,
To the bright Regions of Felicity;
But here no Joy, no Comfort, no Delight,
Can charm his Fancy, or divert his Sight:
Will thou from never-fading Bliss descend
Me from the Storms of Fortune to defend?
Midst the rude Strokes of adverse Fate protect,
Or in sweet Visions all my Ways direct:
Alas! too many Blessings wait on thee,
To know one anxious, tender Pang for me.
Yet sure the pure celestial Joys above,
Cannot extirpate thy maternal Love;
Which, with a Care, Description that surpast,
Defended me from each untimely Blast;
Raised me to Knowledge in each polished Art,
Refined my Manners, and improved my Heart;
Taught me from pleasing, sacred Truths to know,
The Source from whence perpetual Mercies flow:
Then, to the Throne of never-dying Worth,
Taught me to pour my Supplications forth.
May that transcendant Power, which called you hence,
Be still my Shield, my Refuge, and Defense,
Till the grim Tyrant kindly ends my Pain,
And we, enraptured, meet in Heaven again.


I never communicated these Lines to any one; and now transcribe them only from
my Memory.

Since, by writing this little Account, I have obtained the Honor of speaking
to the Public, it gives me an Opportunity of saying something in Favor of
myself, who I am convinced have been misrepresented to them, and for which, I
hope, I shall be excused, as Self-preservation is the first Law of Nature.
There are many Persons of some Note in Life, who have, on hearing me mentioned,
cried, Oh, horrid Dog, shocking Fellow, etc. Pray, Gentlemen and Ladies, for
what? Where are my Accusers; let them name the particular Crimes for which I
deserve those Epithets, or else not mention me at all.

My Lord Stafford, I think, is the only Instance which English History
furnishes us with, of a Person being condemned for accumulated Treason; nay,
even he had a fair Hearing for his Life: But these People are for condemning me
unheard, for no particular Fault, only that such and such People say so and so.

A Consciousness of this has made me resolve to write my own Life, by which
means only I shall have a Power of setting Things in a clear Light, and of
adjusting many present Ambiguities; and, though I confess the Public are
burdened with Things of this kind already, many of which have no Tendency to
reform the Manners of the Age, but rather vitiate them; yet I flatter myself,
among the Variety of real Incidents, and whimsical Revolutions I have met with,
they may find as well Entertainment, as Matter, to moralize on.

As I do by no means assume the Name of a Writer, so the Public may be assured
I shall never attempt Satyr; if my Betters have Faults, that is no Affair of
mine; I am to pursue my own Story. A Man who cannot put up with a Tweak by the
Nose, and a Foot in the Rump, is not fit to live in this fashionable World; I
therefore assure the Public, before hand, that I will be quite passive; and
though I name the Error, not the Man; by which manner of Proceeding, it is not
improbable that by the time I am fourscore, I may have an Annuity of forty
Pounds a Year; upon the Hopes of which I may reasonably subsist and keep up my
Spirits. And in this I strictly follow the Advice of a certain great Man in
Ireland, whose Place of Abode is not remote from the Phenix-Park; and whose
Acquirements have justly raised him from Obscurity to Opulence; his extensive
Plans in Building have excited an universal Admiration of his Taste in
Architecture. This worthy Person I applied to, after the Death of my Mother;
and informed him, that I was possessed of some Letters, which he had in her
Lifetime been pleased to honor her with; and that as her Papers would,
undoubtedly, fall into the Hands of a Printer, I thought proper, lest the
Publication of them might be offensive to him, to give him this Information.

He sent his Compliments by the Messenger, and desired to see me the next
Morning; I accordingly waited on him; and though my Circumstances were not in the
flow, yet, in order to convince him that I had no lucrative Motive in
addressing him, I put the Letters under a Cover, and sent them in before me.

I was then introduced to his Presence; he received me with the utmost good
Manners, desiring me to sit: Young Man, said he, I have had a Letter from you
lately, concerning some Writings of mine to your Mother; she was a Lady whom I
regarded, on account of her Father and Family, whom I well knew; and therefore
I corresponded with, and assisted her, my Letters you have here sent me; and,
young Man, I Will keep them; and will give you a Piece of Advice better than
Gold, if you will follow it.

There has been lately at my House his G -- ce the P -- te *****, and several
other Persons of the most eminent Stations in this Kingdom, and discoursing of
your Mother's Writings, introduced you; and it was said, that you had taken the
Liberty to write to several great Men, very much in the Style of your Mother;
they imagined, when she was dead, they should have heard no more of the Matter;
but you seemed to keep her Spirit alive. Now, young Man, said he, consider you
are not a Woman, from whom even a Blow cannot hurt Honor: We tolerated those
Things in her, which, in you, would be culpable in the highest degree; in
short, if you have any Talents, as I am told you have, apply them to make
Friends, instead of troubling your Head about the Follies of Mankind; find out
their Virtues, and make that your Theme. Indeed, Sir, that, said I, will be a
difficult Matter. In short, Sir, continued he, if you do not apply your Genius,
according to the Will of your Superiors, Care will be taken to send you out of
the Kingdom before you are aware of it.

I thanked him sincerely for his Admonition, which I determined from that
Moment to establish as my Principle; and, on my Return through the Park, upon
examining the Affair, found it more rational to suppose, that I should live by
writing Panygeric than Satyr, I resolved to try the Experiment, and, at the
same time, determined to bestow random Praise, no matter to me though the Person
I addressed was tainted with the most diabolical Vices, I was to form the
supposed Virtues and Graces from my own copious Idea. The first I exerted my
Talent on, was the Son of a Bashaw, then resident in these Dominions; and one
whose wise Interposition in the S -- te Matters of that Kingdom, have made him
so much the Darling of the grateful People, and so far raised Envy on this Side
the Water, that on his Return, instead of Acclamations he is accosted with
Sneers and Hisses, wherever he appears; while he, conscious of his innate
Worth, sheds a contemptuous Smile on the senseless Idiots, who are weak enough
to censure his superior Abilities.

I remembered to have heard him receive the Applause of the Senate House, for
telling Mr. S -- r, that as the Season was far advanced, and the Gentlemen
desirous of returning to their Seats, he thought it best to p -- ge the P -- t
till April ensuing.

This sublime Piece of Elocution was Matter enough for me, who, from my present
System, you will allow was a professed Sycophant; I accordingly wrote some Lines
on the Occasion, which were not of Consequence enough to subsist till this
time; therefore cannot be here recited. I waited on his L -- p, and put them
into his Hand as he stepped into his Chariot; he received them, and drove off;
the next Morning I waited at the same Place, till he was going out, and had the
Honor of a gracious Smile; upon which, I lived elegantly that Day. The
succeeding Morning I received, What? a familiar Nod! Upon which I subsisted
tollerably, till five that Afternoon. At that Time indeed, some extraordinary
Emotion in my Stomach, gave me to understand, that Nods and Smiles though
conferred by the Sons of Bashaws, will not fill the Belly.

The indifferent Success of my first Enterprise made me almost determine, never
to attempt any Thing more in that Way; though an Affair of like Nature, which
happened some Time before, might, if I had common Sense, have been sufficient
to deter me.

As I was walking one Day, pensive and pennyless through Henry-street, I saw
some Footmen and Chairmen with White Gloves and Cockades; and on enquiring the
Occasion, was told that L -- d H -- th, was that Day married to Miss K -- g; I
immediately ran to a Coffee-House, called for Pen, Ink, and Paper, and wrote a
flaming Epithalamium, which I as suddenly dispatched, resolving to have the
Start of all Grub-street. His L -- dship came out and told the Messenger, that
when Mr. Pilkington wrote better Verses, he would send him a Reward.

I was at this Time in a Window opposite to his Lordship, who saw the Man come
over and deliver me the Answer; I took a Pen, and before his Face, wrote
Extempore the following Truth: To the Right Hon. the Lord H -- th.
In a Coffee-House hurried, and pressed by my Fate,
I wrote a few Lines to get something to eat;
Perhaps, though the Subject, a Dunce might inspire,
The want of Subsistence has slackened my Fire;
But if your kind Lordship, that Want will supply,
No Man shall write faster, nor better than I.


His Lordship sent Word it was very well: It may be so, thought I, but Faith I
found it very ill.

I could not avoid repeating the Story, in some Companies I after fell into,
and whether they resented the Reception I met, or had some former Pique to that
N -- n, I shall not pretend to say, but shortly after, the following Epigram
was handed about; When in proper Terms, we Dullness would cloth,
We say you are as dull as the Hill that is in H -- th; It Is frequent in Dublin,
to say you are as stupid as the Hill of Hoath.

But would you give Dullness the Force of Record,
Say that every Thing stupid resembles my L -- d.
I should be sorry, by producing these Pieces, to be thought to harbor the
least Resentment, for the Fate of my Marriage Poem; the Judgment of a P -- r
must ever be Superior to that of the Insect, called a Scribbler, whose Views
extend no farther than a Dinner, or a Shilling; and I only relate these little
Anecdotes, to show that I am quite incapable of resenting any Thing my
Superiors are pleased to do.

As this is the first Time I have been blessed with an Opportunity, of
addressing the polite World, I find myself much inclined to prate, though I
already begin to fear I shall be censured for this impertinent Intrusion, where
I am an entire Stranger; yet as I have got so far, and my Publisher, who is a
Man of real Taste, and distinguished Abilities, neither of which, my Printer is
destitute of; as they I say, have not yet rejected any Part of this Appendix as
Nonsense, I have a strange Inclication to venture upon a Page or two more.

I remember to have seen amongst my Mother's Papers, an Advertisement which she
intended to have published in London; and as it contains some Humor, I here
recite it as well as I can recollect. Since it is become customary with every
Person, to advertise the Talents, they either in Reality or Imagination
possess; I have been told I have a Stock on my Hands, which is of no manner of
use to me, and having sold every Thing, but the Gift of God to me, if any Simon
will purchase I will dispose of it as follows:

If any illiterate Divine, from Cambridge or Oxford, has a Mind to show his
Parts in a London Pulpit, let him repair to me, and he shall have a Sermon, not
stolen from Barrow, Tillotson, or other eminent Preachers, as is frequently the
Practice, with those who have Sense enough to do it; but Fire-new from the
Mint. If any Painter has a Mind to commence Bard without Wit, and join the
Sister Arts, I also will assist him. If any Author wants a Copy of Commendatory
Verses, to prefix to his Work, or a flattering Dedication, to a worthless Great
Man; any poor Person, a Memorial or Petition, properly calculated to dissolve
the Walls of Stone and Flint which invir^n the Hearts of rich Men, P -- tes in
particular; any Printseller, Lines to put under his humorous, comic, or serious
Representations; any Player an occasional Prologue or Epilogue; any Beau a
handsome Billetdoux, from a fair Incognita; any old Maid, a Copy of Verses in
her Praise; any Lady, of high Dress, and low Quality, such as are generally the
Ladies of the Town, an amorous melting delicate Epistle; any Projector a
Paragraph in Praise of his Scheme; any extravagant Prodigal, a Letter of
Recantation to his Honored Father; any Minister of St -- te, an Apology for
his Conduct, which those Gentlemen frequently want; any Undertaker a Funeral
Elegy; or any Stone-Cutter an Epitaph; or in short, any Thing in the Poetical
Way; shall be dispatched in the most private, easy, and genteel Manner by
applying to me, and that at the most reasonable Rates.



I think this Advertisement may seriously now serve for me, since I find I have
no Means of subsisting, but by a small Smattering of Wit, which is somehow
inherent to me, to which I do assure the Readers, nothing but Necessity could
make me have Recourse. I too well know, that the greatest Genius's in that Way,
have been scarce able to keep a Coat to their Backs; therefore if some
generous, noble, or humane Person, would bestow on me a small Annuity, which
might barely set me above Want, I would resign all Pretensions to the Pen, into
the Hands of those, who by Education, and native Endowments, are better
qualified to use it. Some Persons of Rank who are inclined to banter, tell me
they would by no Means deprive the World of their Entertainment, by giving me a
Provision; but if they will please to consider, that one leisure-well-finished
Line, is of more Importance, than Volumes written in a Hurry, they will be of
another Mind. If the great Mr. Dryden had been possessed of an easy affluent
Fortune, his Works, which are now almost buried in Oblivion, would have been
had in much greater Esteem than they are; since it is impossible to think, but a
Person of so extensive a Capacity, must at one Time or other have produced
something excellent.

And since I have said so much, one Thing more, Truth, Gratitude, and Honor,
compels me to say, which is in relation to Mr. James Worsdale, so often
mentioned in these Memoirs. I Am sorry I Am obliged to confess, that I think my
Mother carried her Resentment too far, in describing the Character of this
Gentleman; but all Persons who have any superior Qualification, have generally
some Imperfection adequate to it, which is done by Providence, to show us, that
none are perfect on Earth. Thus we see, an Apollo in Music, a Swine in his
Appetite: Thus Swift, unrivaled in Wit, was a Slave to Peevishness and ill
Temper, which obscured his Merit, in the most social Hour; and my Mother, who
possessed a pretty Manner of Writing, was apt to fall too hard, on those whom she
imagined herself injured by.

However, I Am convinced Mr Worsdale never did, nor intended Injury to her, or
any other Person, as he is good-natured to a Fault, and as he has said himself,
Anxious to gain, but not to keep his Pelf,
A Friend to every Creature but himself.
And this is a Truth that I can assert, having lived some Years in his House,
which was truly hospitable to every indigent Person that fell in his Knowledge,
but particularly such as had any Pretensions to Merit.

What my Mother has said of him proceeded from some little Pique, and therefore
I hope People who read it, will only laugh at her Humor, but not seriously
reflect on it, to the Disadvantage of a Person, who is incapable of acting, but
with Honor, Justice, and Integrity, which will be more fully in my Power to
demonstrate, in the little Account I intend to give of my own Life.

And though it would exceed the small Limits I am prescribed, to apologize to
every particular Person, pointed at in this Volume, yet I hope they will be
humane enough, to harbor no Resentment against me, for any Thing it contains,
since I have before specified the Necessity I was under of publishing it; and
as many Characters are there, of which I am really ignorant; so it would be
impossible to break in upon the Connection of one Part with another, by making
Alterations, or leaving any Part out.

There were some Persons, whom my Mother was highly obliged to, and to whom,
had she lived to complete this Work, she would have returned her
Acknowledgments publicly; one of them was the Earl of Clanrickarde, a Nobleman
of most illustrious Descent, and one who conspicuously retains the united
Virtues of his Ancestors. My Mother having wrote his Lordship a Letter for a
Subscription, he sent her in Return a most polite Epistle, which I have now the
Honor to possess, in which his Lordship promised shortly to favor her with a
Visit, and in some Time he came. After having sat about half an Hour chatting,
he told her, he had promised to subscribe to her Works, but that he imagined a
Poem in her Praise, written by himself, would be of infinitely more Service to
her; upon which he delivered her a Sheet of Paper, and she really believing him
serious, was about to open it. Pardon me, Madam, said my Lord, you must not
read my Verses while I am present, or you will offend my Modesty. She laid the
Paper down, and shortly after my Lord took has Leave. When she opened it, she
found a Draft on Dillon and Company for twenty Pounds. I hope I shall obtain
his Lordship's Forgiveness for the Freedom I here take of mentioning his Name;
but I think such Actions, and such alone compose his Life, ought not to be
obscured; and though doubtless this is but a trivial Instance of the Munificence
and Honor of that worthy Nobleman, yet as my Mother was an entire Stranger,
and that his Lordship did it purely in Compassion to her Sufferings and Regard
to her Talents, she ever esteemed both the Gift, and the Manner it was given
in, as the genteelest Thing that could possibly be done: and as she did not
survive to speak her Sentiments on that Occasion, I hope I shall be pardoned
for attempting it.

FINIS.

