A LETTER FROM Mr. CONGREVE TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Viscount Cobham.

LONDON: Printed for A. Dodd near Temple Bar, and E. Nutt under the
Royal Exchange, 1729. (Price Threepence.)

A LETTER FROM Mr. Congreve, etc.
SINCEREST Critic of my Prose, or Rhyme,
Tell how thy pleasing STOWE employs thy Time,
Say, COBHAM, what amuses thy Retreat?
Or Stratagems of War, or Schemes of State?
Do thou recall to Mind with Joy, or Grief,
Great MALBRO's Actions? That immortal Chief,
Whose slightest Trophy raised in each Campaign,
More than sufficed to signalize a Reign?
Does thy remembrance rising warm thy Heart,
With Glory past, where Thou thy self had Part,
Or do thou grieve indignant, now to see,
The fruitless End of all thy Victory?
To see the Audacious Foe, so late subdued,
Dispute those Terms for which so long they su'd,
As if BRITANNIA now were sunk so low,
To beg that Peace she wonted to bestow,
Be far that Guilt! be never known that Shame!
That ENGLAND should retract her rightful Claim,
Or ceasing to be dreaded and adored,
Stain with her Pen the Luster of her Sword,
Or do thou give the Winds a far to blow.
Each vexing Thought, and heart-devouring Woe,
And fix thy Mind alone on rural Scenes,
To turn the levelled Lawns to liquid Plains,
To raise the creeping Rills from humble Beds,
And force the latent Springs to lift their Heads,
On watery Columns, Capitals to rear,
That mix their flowing Curls with upper Air.
Or do Thou, weary grown, these Works neglect,
No Temples Statues, Obblisques erect,
But catch the morning Breeze from fragrant Meads,
Or shun the noontide Ray in wholesome Shades,
Or slowly walk along the mazy Wood,
To mediate on all that is wise and good,
For Nature bountiful in thee has joined,
A Person pleasing with a worthy Mind,
Not given the Form alone, but Means, and Art,
To draw the Eye, or to allure the Heart,
Poor were the Praise in Fortune to excel,
Yet want the Way to use that Fortune well.
While thus adorned, while thus with Virtue crowned,
At Home in Peace, Abroad in Arms renowned,
Graceful in Form, and winning in Address
While well you think, what aptly you express,
With Health, with Honor, with a fair Estate,
A Table free, and eloquently neat.
What can be added more to mortal Bliss?
What can he want who stands possessed of this?
What can the fondest wishing Mother more
Of Heaven attentive for her Son implore?
And yet a Happiness remains unknown,
Or to Philosophy revealed alone;
A Precept, which unpracticed renders vain,
Thy flowing Hopes, and Pleasure turns to Pain.
Should Hope, and Fear thy Heart alternate tear,
Or Love, or Hate, or Rage, or anxious Care,
Whatever Passions may thy Mind infest,
(Where is that Mind which Passions never molest?)
Amidst the Pangs of such intestine Strife,
Still think the present Day, the last of Life;
Defer not till to Morrow to be wise,
To Morrow's Sun to thee may never rise.
Or should to Morrow chance to cheer thy Sight,
With her enlivening and unlookt-for Light,
How grateful will appear her dawning Rays!
As Favors unexpected doubly please.
Who thus can think and who such thoughts pursues,
Content may keep his Life, or calmly lose;
All Proofs of this Thou may thy self receive,
When Leisure from Affairs will give thee Leave,
Come, see thy Friend, retired without Regret,
Forgetting Care, or striving to forget;
In easy Contemplation soothing Time
With Morals much, and now and then with Rhyme,
Not so robust in Body, as in Mind,
And always undejected, though declined;
Not wondering at the World's new wicked Ways,
Compared with those of our Forefathers Days,
For Virtue now is neither more or less,
And Vice is only varied in the Dress;
Believe it, Men have ever been the same,
And all the Golden Age, is but a Dream.
FINIS.

