THE Modern Poetasters: OR, DIRECTORS no Conjurers. A FARCE. ON THE Famous Ode
Writers, Satyrists, Panegyrists, etc. of the present Times; and their Patrons,
etc. WITH The Character, and True Picture, of a late Director, and some Others.
AND An Entertaining Original Scene of Mother W -- yb -- n's Theater, as Acted
in the Hundreds of Drury, by several Poets, Directors, etc. Also an EPILOGUE on
the Times.

Written by Isaac Bickerstaff, jun. Esquire

LONDON: Printed for and Sold by T. Bickerton, at the Crown in Paternoster Row.

PERSONS.
Sauney, a Scotch Poet, come to London. Goosecap, a Pretender to the Bays,
renowned for Don Quixotism. Smart, a sprightly young Poet. Aimat, a Female
Poetaster. Wealthy, a late Director of the South Sea, whom they all Compliment.
Vpstart, his Clerk. Scentwell, a Woman of the Town. Mother W -- yb -- n,
Whores, Bawds, Bullies, etc.
The Modern Poetasters.
SCENE, The Piazza in Covent Garden.
Enter Goose-cap and Sauney, embracing each other: Sauney in a Scotch Dress,
and Goose-cap in Black, his Coat daubed all over with Snuff, a Dirty Neckcloth
round his Neck, and his Peruke hanging to one side. Goose. YOu're welcome, dear
Sauney, from the Northern Climate to a more Friendly Air, and this famous
Metropolis; where your great and exalted Genius will meet with its merited
Reward, and your poetical Abilities shine in their full Splendour.


Saun. Upon my Soul Man you say too much to an unworthy Brother -- I am a
Stranger to England, but extraordinarily pleased with your good Acquaintance,
which recompenses the Toil of my fatiguing Journey from the City of Edinburgh.


Goose. Your Toil, my Friend, you will think the greatest Pleasure of your Life,
when you find by my unequalled Pen your Character is raised to the Top Pinnacle
of Fame -- Virgil's Shade will envy the Reputation I am capable of giving you.


Saun. Virgil was an Eminent Poet: He Is unequalled in this Age, unless it be in
you.


Goose. You speak like a Man of Judgment, Brother, and I doubt not to convince
the ignorant World, that Virgil, amidst his soaring Flights and pompous
Elegance, was an Ass to S -- l.


Saun. But we shall find it a plaguey Task to persuade the giddy Multitude to
this Opinion: You may seem to resemble the Style and Manner of the Ancients,
but I fear the Colors are faint, and will not bear Examination -- They are
strong and sublime, we weak and spiritless.


Goose. I thought you Gentlemen had more of the Hibernian Quality than to
entertain a mean Opinion of your selves, and your own Capacities: Lay aside
Humility, if you intend to thrive in the English Territories, and let Conceit,
Hypocrisy and Pride take place; be bold and audacious in self-praises; learn to
Cabal, flatter, and Condemn, and the Game's your own.


Saun. To all these I Am a Stranger, my Dear --


Goose. For what did you desert your Native Country? -- Can you expect Services
from me, and you entirely unqualified?


Saun. But hold! it is not too late to learn -- I believe I can despise Merit,
and for a considerable Sum be a considerable Flatterer; but the greatest Work
is to compliment my self.


Goose. Pugh, that is the easiest Thing in the World; you have Nature on your
side, which incites Fondness in all to Works of their own Production; I can do
it with an Air of Gravity, and damn with a Grace the Misbelievers of an Untruth.


Saun. But you have the Happiness, Brother, to be Established, and it requires
some Time for a Man to be Entered in any thing, although it be in Iniquity.


Goose. Every airy Female tells ye her Ware is the best, most charming, the
most inviting, and all that -- And cannot we extol our own Verses, many
whereof describe those Beauties they falsely pretend to be Mistresses of.


Saun. Woud'nt it be better that like a fair virtuous Woman, we make no
Boastings of our selves, but let our own real Worth recommend us to Mankind.


Goose. There Is no such thing as real Worth, my Friend, it is all imaginary: The
whole Universe is a sham, and false Representation -- Generals are not always
made with Fighting, Scholars by Learning, nor Divines by Study: No, Management
and Caballing will save infinite Trouble of that kind -- It Is but to place
proper Fame-brokers at the most remarkable Parts of the Town, Fellows of good
Lungs to bellow out your Praise, the Work is done; the ignorant Populace, famed
for Credulity, will believe it with as much Eagerness as they entertain Scandal
against true Merit; and thus is a Reputation at once acquired.


Saun. But this seems, according to my Notion of Things, to be inconsistent
with true Sense, and it is contrary to all Scottish Politics; we are equally
backward in Praising as in Condemning.


Goose. Sense, Sir, is nothing else but a Rule of acting on the Principle of
Interest; so that if it promotes my Profit, I Will applaud my self, or any
senseless Wretch; and if my Fortune cannot be raised without calumniating what
is truly Great and Glorious, the doing it is an Argument of sound Sense, and
perfectly consonant with the Dictates of Nature, and the great SENECA's
Philosophy.


Saun. I cannot be of your Opinion, Brother, I must term that Abuse, which you
are pleased to call Sense, in Spite of the greatest Oratory to recommend it.


Goose. You must learn to think more advantagiously, if you expect Prosperity
here -- But that I may not be tedious in my first Lectures, we'll quit this
Conversation, and retire to a House of Diversion in the Hundreds of Drury;
we'll drink 'till we rival the Sun with our ruddy Complexions; set up all Night
with the Moon; lie with half a Dozen Virgins; break all the Windows of the
Mansion; and then, like true Sons of Parnassus, make a hasty Escape, and pay no
Reckoning, but leave that to be accounted for by the Gods.


Saun. Will not the Substitutes of Venus exhaust our Poetical Fire?


Goose. No, they will increase it. --


Saun. But have ye no Salamanders -- I fear I shall be metamorphiz'd to a
Glowworm.


Goose. None at all, my Dear -- I Will help ye to an agreeable Female with whom
Safety will be your Lot.


Saun. The Deel damn me, if I don't think the Lot of Jonas will be mine.


Goose. You Will be in no Belly of a Whale, I Will assure ye.


Saun. But perhaps of something worse -- or the Jaws of some terrible Monster
--


Goose. Let not your Courage be cast down -- Come, we'll away to Mother W -- yb
-- ns.


Enter Smart. Smart. Have I found my Enemy at last. -- ( To Goosecap) --


Goose. I Am an Enemy to nothing, but that Merit which is of a superior kind,
Sir. -- Dear Sauney, repair to Button's; I Will be with you presently. ( To
Sauny.)

Exit Sauny.
Smart. Have you any Pretense, Sir, to Merit?


Goose. As much as you have to be a Coxcomb, Sir.


Smart. The Coxcomb does not belong to me at present.


Goose. I can write Sense and English, a Capacity you are unacquainted with.


Smart. In your Walk to St. J -- 's- street, there is neither English, Sense,
nor Grammar; and your best Pieces of Poetry are but Trifles.


Goose. It would be an Honor to you, Sir, to be the Author of such Trifles.


Smart. I can receive no Honor from your Accomplishments. -- You have by good
Fortune indeed wrote one Piece that has sold, but more from the Popularity of
the Subject, than the Performance; your best Scenes of Love are notoriously
worse than those of the lowest Poet in this or any other Age. -- The few
Similies are no way adapted, and really appear like Flowers in a Dunghill. --
In your other Poetical Writings all the Beauties are borrowed: If we divest you
of your Thefts, you will resemble the Crow in the Fable, and little will remain
but Froth and Rhyme.


Goose. Thou foolish Boy, do Thee pretend to criticize on the Greatest
Genius of the Age.


Smart. You may compliment your Genius as you please, and your Friends may give
it out, but I shall take Liberty to affirm that it is far from being a perfect
one in Poetry: A perfect Genius is capable of producing a finished Piece of the
greatest Length, which is what you will never be Master of. -- A few good Lines
I confess you sometimes happen to write, but more from a Flashy Wit, than a
true Native Genius.


Goose. My Genius is eminently conspicuous in every thing I do -- Can you
peruse any Performance of mine, where I don't strike out with a surprising
Strength of Poetical Fury? -- And in my Odes, my Flights are very Extraordinary.


Smart. Your Flights are like those of the Owl, never Soaring or Lofty. If you
intend to gain a solid Reputation, you must strike out the greatest part of
what you have written: Leave off recommending the Works of others, in order to
assume the Honor of the Whole yourself, and blaming that which you cannot
mend, for no other Reason than because you have had no Hand in it.


Goose. Why all this unmerited Calumny?


Smart. Your Talent is Calumny, Brother, though preposterously mixed with
Panegyric. -- You can condemn and praise even the same thing, and at such
times as it merits neither your Censure, nor Approbation. -- You can lampoon
your best Friends, and abuse your greatest Benefactors, in their Absence; and,
supported by a Gamester, you think to Bully Mankind.


Goose. This is provoking with a Vengeance; would any one but a Poet bear all
this?


Smart. You are born to bear the Burden of your Folly, and the Repetition of
your Faults. -- A first RateMinister of State was first your Patron; him you have
commended to Excess; since you have let fly at him at least twenty Satyrs. On a
great Statesman whom you have lately praised, first a Satyr, then a Panegyric:
On a certain Noble Lord first a Panegyric, then a Lampoon: A great Commoner,
first a Satyr, then a Compliment; and many other Instances of this kind I could
enumerate: And as Hypocrisy is your Principle, the Whigs have your present
Praises, but the Tories and Jacobites your Affections.


Goose. If I should gain any Honor by beating of a Monkey, I would do it.


Smart. Come on -- I Have some Inches of my Sword at your Service.


Goose. But few Inches for a Lady I presume. -- You're a Child, and deserve the
Rod -- Farewell.

( Exit.
Smart. Adieu. -- What a vain conceited Wretch is this? He gives me an Aversion
to all Poetry and Poets, and almost to my self as one of the Number.


Enter Aimat. Aimat. Your Servant, Mr. Smart -- I Have been looking for you an
Age, and want to consult you in an Affair of the greatest Consequence.


Smart. I am at your Service. -- What is your Business, Madam?


Aim. To correct a Poem of my Writing, on the Man in the Moon.


Smart. Your Subject, Madam, is equally high with your Exalted Genius. -- I
soar beneath your airy Flights; and you might as well ask me to Correct the
Skies.


Aim. O Dear Sir, I am much obliged to ye; but I Am no Angel as yet.


Smart. Your Flights are extraordinary, Madam, I Will assure ye. -- My Pegasus is
a Jade to yours.


Aim. You shall mount mine, if you please.


Smart. I should be glad to mount -- my Dear.


Aim. Pugh, if you will not correct my Poem, I Will leave you to the Tormentors of
the Hundreds of Drury.


Smart. I may find a Woman's Case there.


Aim. You have wicked Imaginations -- My Designs are honest, but you
ungenerously construe all for the worst.


Smart. I construe every thing according to Nature, Madam, and Nature's Rules
are a Law to me.


Aim. Nature is a Jest.


Smart. When pursued jestingly, with a fair Lady, or so --


Aim. When pursued in Earnest. --


Smart. And the Gallant laid breathless at your Feet.


Aim. This is intolerable, I cannot bear it. Adieu.


Smart. Nor I neither.

( Exeunt.
Scene, Mother W -- yb -- n 's in Drury Lane.
Enter Mother W -- yb -- n, Goosecap and Sauny. Wyb. MY Sons you're welcome to
my Palace, but you dear Sauncy must first kneel down, and ask my Blessing, ever
you're admitted to my Favors.


Goose. She tells ye the Truth, Brother, it is what is customary; and though I Have
already done it, I Will lead you the way.

( He kneels down, Mother W -- yb -- n, pulls up her Coats, and pisses in his
Face.
Wyb. There, dear Son, you're doubly free. --


Saun. The De'el damn the Freedom -- What must I lose my Eyesight before I can
be admitted, for the Benefit of Feeling.


Goose. It Is nothing but a decent Sprinkling -- 'twill have an extraordinary
Effect. -- Thus Plants are watered ever they rise. --


Saun. But not between a Woman's Thighs --


Wyb. Kneel down, dear Sauney, or you shall have it standing.

(Sauney refusing to Kneel, she lets fly at him with such good Aim, that Part
of the Stream enters his Mouth.
Saun. Plague on the Blessing -- Your Water is damnable strong. --


Wyb. That Is a certain Sign of settled Health. -- You shall have another Taste,
unless you submissively kneel.


Goose. Forbear, dear Mother, he has had his Share. -- What he wants in Duty,
shall be made up by me in filial Obedience.


Saun. Pox take the Obedience -- Where is the Girl?


Goose. O Mother, I desire you to send for the lovely Mrs. Scentwell.


Wyb. Let us first drink, my Dear -- ( She calls the Maid for a Bottle of
Cherry Bounce, who comes in with it and a Glass.) -- Fill me a Bumper.


Maid. Yes, Madam.


Wyb. Dear Sauney you're the greatest Stranger, my Service to you. -- May your
Purse and -- never fail you.


Saun. A good Health, upon my Soul, Man --


Wyb. Fill him a Bumper.


Saun. Here, Brother Goosecap, here is Health to our Pleasures, and Wealth to
our Pockets. ( Drinks.


Goose. With all my Heart; about we't. -- I long for a Taste of the Brandy, and
--


Wyb. You shall have both, my Child, have a little Patience. -- Fill him a
Bumper. ( To the Maid.)


Maid. Madam, I do.


Goose. Come, here is to the longest and strongest, plumpest and fairest --


Wyb. Let it go round -- Maid do you pledge him.


Maid. Yes, Madam. ( She Drinks a large Bumper.)


Wyb. You are to take the other Glass my Friends, and then -- ( They drink round
again and again 'till the Bottle is Empty.)


Saun. Now where is Mrs. Scentwell.


Wyb. You must have one Dram more, dear Sauney; don't be impatient. -- She Will
come soon enough to cool your Pegasus. -- Maid, fetch another Bottle. ( They
drink a second Bottle of Bounce.)


Goose. Mother, you must not now detain us any longer from the Sight of the
Mistress of my Affections.


Wyb. Pay your Reckoning Gentlemen, and she shall be immediately brought in.


Saun. What is the Damage we have done?


Wyb. You Have Twelve Shillings to pay.


Saun. I Will pay this, Brother, if you will satisf^ the following Arrears. ( To
Goosecap.)


Goose. I will -- You have my Promise.


Saun. There Is the Money-bring in the Girl -- ( To Mother W -- yb -- n


Wyb. It shall be done -- ( She calls to the Mai^ and bids her bring in Mrs.
Scentwe^^


Saun. The Deel damn me if the Sight of a W^man be not plaguey dear in England
-- For ha^ this Money I could have lain with twenty Wom^^ in Scotland -- But I
hope she is very handsom^ Brother.


Goose. She Is Divinely Fair -- She has the Fa^^ of an Angel, and her lower
Cheeks are so excee^ing white, plump and beautiful, that you will (...) tempted
to kiss them.


Enter Scentwell. Scent. Gentlemen, your humble Servant --


Saun. Your Servant, Madam -- By my So^ Charming Creature -- Let me give you a
Buss^


Scent. With all my Heart, my Dear -- What can I refuse to such fine Gentlemen
-- (Sauney kisses her.


Goose. Now it is my Turn -- Madam, you're to enjoy these Ruby Lips, and this
delightful Person: Come to my Arms, and make your self Blessed --


Scent. Let me first bless my self with Liquor, my Dear -- I am thirsty, and my
Spirits are low --


Saun. Is there no Kissing without a Continuance of Tippling?


Scent. No, Sir, not at this Part of the Town.


Saun. Call for it then -- (Scentwell calls for a Bottle of Bounce, they drink
it up.


Goose. You Will now kiss me, my Dear.


Scent. Yes, with all my Heart -- ( She takes him round the Neck and kisses him.


Goose. I hope you will at last permit me to examine those Beauties which are
yours.


Scent. Let us have another Bottle, and you shall do what you please.


Saun. Call for it instantly. ( She calls for another Bottle which they drink,
and being still refused, they drink a third, and then she complies, but insists
upon Money.)


Goose. Madam, now I expect you will resign all your Charms to the ingenious Mr.
Sauney.


Scent. For Half a Piece I am at his Service.


Saun. There it is -- ( Giving her Money.)


Scent. I hope you will make me a Present of a Crown, my Dear, to buy me a Pair
of Stockings; and you shall then really do what ever you desire.


Saun. I Will give it ye -- there is the Crown.


Scent. But I want a Pair of Gloves -- Give me half a Crown more, and let me
die if I don't let you Buss Breech, or any Thing.


Saun. Pox on it -- there it is.


Scent. Now, my Dear, if you will give me a Shilling for Coach Hire to my
Lodgings, and pay the Reckoning, -- I am entirely at your Service.


Goose. Let him have his agreed for Pleasure, and the Reckoning shall
afterward be discharged.


Scent. We never trust, Sir -- There Is Eighteen Shillings to pay -- ( Calls for
the Mistress) Here, Madam, come and receive your Reckoning.


Saun. We Are jilted, be Gad -- Goosecap, you are to pay the Money demanded.


Goose. I Have but a single Sixpence in my Pocket, by Jove.


Saun. And I have not remaining a Shilling -- What shall us do, Madam -- ( To
Mother Wyb -- n.


Wyb. You must only strip, Gentlemen --


Goose. We'll neither strip nor pay ye, Mrs. Jezabel.


Wyb. Will Not ye, you will find your selves mistaken -- I Will make ye, Sirrah -- (
Pulling him by the Nose, Goosecap cries out, enter a Bully.


Bully. I Will teach you to cry out, Rascals, Villains! Do You come here to cheat
an honest industrious Woman, ye Scoundrels!

( He pulls down Sauney 's Breeches, and flogs him lustily; then he pulls off
Goosecap 's Coat, and clothes him with a Soldier's Rug, and afterward Kicks
them both out of Doors.)
Goose. This is abominable Usage -- and by no means agreeable; to a Man of
Taste -- I Will go home, and fetch my Blunderbuss.


Saun. A most damnable Pleasure -- I Will set Fire to the House, and make way to
my Lodgings by the Light of the Conflagration.

( Exeunt.
Scene changes to an Anti-Hall, in Wealthy 's House.
Enter Wealthy and Upstart. Wealth. HAVE you transferred my S -- Sea Stock?


Vpst. Yes, Sir, I have.


Wealth. How stands the present State of my Fortune?


Vpst. At about Two Millions Five hundred thousand Pounds, Sir -- Your Estate
is now beyond that of a Lord Treasurer of Great Britain, or a Comptroller of
the Finances in France.


Wealth. A Lord Treasurer is nothing to us -- We have superior Methods for the
acquiring of Fortunes to any of our Treasurers, and can make them attend our
Levees with an obsequious Air; they are first to give the Congee on all
Approaches. -- We expect to be Dukes by Title, and Princes by Possessions.


Vpst. I my self intend to be an Irish L -- d; and I don't know but my
Pretensions are most righteous; 'twill be a worthy and eminent Rise from the
Character of your Worship's Footman to that of L -- d Vpstart.


Wealth. Be not too hasty; you must first have a suitable Fortune.


Vpst. I am already worth Five Hundred Thousand Pounds, Sir; and if I marry
your Worship's Chambermaid Dulcinea, with the Addition of her Riches, I shall
be in Circumstances equal to a D -- ke.


Wealth. But you're not Master of Behavior --


Vpst. I can swear gracefully; speak what I never mean incessantly; ravish
Virgins decently; lie with other Men's Wives, and beat their Husbands out of
Door courageously; I can contemn my Betters, who have less Money, audaciously:
I can flatter, cringe to and carress a Minister of State; build magnificent
Houses, and never pay for 'em; Cheat Gamesters, and deceive a Stockjobber.


Wealth. These are uncommon Qualities indeed -- but not sufficient --


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, there is a Gentleman without who says he is come from
the City of Edinburgh on purpose to wait on you -- He desires Audience of your
Worship.


Wealth. Since his Applications are proper, let him be admitted.


Serve. It shall be as you command.

( Exit.
Wealth. This is some Gentleman of Worth, I presume, who sollicits to be a
Subscriber in the S -- S -- a Stock.


Enter Sauney bowing. Saun. I am come, Sir, a Journey from on far, to spread
your exalted Fame, and that of the unparalleled S -- S -- ea Stock. -- I have
humbly presumed to be the Author of a Poetical Performance, inscribed to your
Worship, which I hope you will accept.


Wealth. I could not expect any such thing, Sir -- ( Reads.) You say too much
of me, yet too little to the Purpose. -- I desire you will humbly take your Paper
again; but I Will thus far remember you, that when I am advanced to Lord Mayor,
for that Year, you shall be the City Laureat.


Saun. Will Not you be pleased to give me a Subscription, Sir.


Wealth. I Will willingly subscribe to your Beating Sir?


Saun. That Is very kind truly --


Wealth. If this be all your Business, quit my House.


Saun. Your Servant -- I hope you will not forget me when you're Lord Mayor.

( Exit.
Re-enter Servant. Serve. A Gentleman, Sir, has sent me to you, to desire
Admittance in an Affair of great Importance relating to your Life.


Wealth. Introduce him --


Enter Goosecap. Goose. My Business, Sir, is to congratulate you on your
accumulating the Wealth of the Indies. -- I hope you will receive some Lines on
your Immortal Fame -- ( Offering a Paper.


Wealth. Here, Tom, Tom, beat this Fellow out of my House -- Have I nothing
else to do but to be plagued with these Mortals, who come a begging in such
Numbers? Here Is my Cane, give the Lunatic his Correction.


Serve. I obey, Sir.


Goose. Devilish Fortune, to have a Cudgel for the Coin.

( Exit.
Enter Aim-at. Aim. Mr. Wealthy, I hope you will excuse this extraordinary
Trouble -- I have here brought ye my C-a-se in Rhyme, and I desire you will
please to make it your own.


Wealth. I desire to be excused, Madam -- Pox on it, I Have but just kicked one
Poet out of Doors, when another steps in.


Aim. I hope, Sir, you will not beat your humble Servant; if you engage with me,
it must not be with the same Weapon as you attacked my Brother Goosecap.


Wealth. Tom, Tom, haste hither -- remove thi^ talkative impertinent Woman.


Re-enter Servant. Serve. I will, Sir.


Aim. My Case is ruined -- What Is worse tha^ ill Luck --

Exi^
Enter Smart. Smart. Sir, My Business, I own has some Impe^tinence: I ask your
Pardon for trespassing o^ your important Moments; but Respect to you^ Merit,
Sir, is wholly the Occasion of it. -- I ha^ wrote --


Wealth. Wrote, what --


Smart. A familiar Epistle to your Honor, highly approved -- It has not the
least Grain (...) Flattery, and it is free from Satyr -- Be ple^sed to receive
it.


Wealth. You are very familiar Gentlemen truly. -- I Have had no less than three
with me this Morning on the same Errand, whom I Have Rewarded with an Oaken
Cudgel -- but you may go if you please unrewarded.


Smart. I thank you for this Favor. --

( Exit.
Wealth. These Sons of Vanity are the Plague of Greatness; the worst Disturbers
of our Repose; and we may truly say,

Poets, like Women, more than usual kind,
For Gain, are Prostitutes in Life we find;
One yields her Heavenly Form, the other lets his Mind.

EPILOGUE, Comical, and Serious; to the Play, and on the Times.
THE Farce is over, I hope my Brethren all,
Will skreen young Isaac from a W-yb-n's Fall;
If my famed Scenes, should Goosecap once provoke,
He must Revenge himself without his Cloak;
And, if He Would well his Adversary Cuff,
He should even strip himself, and Arm in Buff:
Nor does our Author Sauney's Ire regard;
He Is sure his Play will meet with this Reward,
Be Read once through -- then cursed, by Modern Bard.
But he no Quixot, nor Knight Errant, fears,
No Wit Buttonian with the Longest Ears;
Although Great Cibber in the Front appears:
No Female Poet, of the Largest Parts
He dreads to meet; with all he fairly starts;
He boldly challenges the World's Applause,
And hopes even Drury Lane approves his Cause.
But to the Times -- Ay, here his Scope I find,
Men prey on Men, and All are Prey designed;
If Cheats must only Flourish in this Isle,
And Honesty no more upon us smile;
If Crimes should go unpunished in this Age;
What may not Villainy in Time engage;
And what can we expect will end our Care,
But that we should the worst of Mis'ries share:
But may all Harpies this, this, justly see,
That there is a Debt due to their Infamy;
That Halters, Gibbets, and the Ax attend,
(And all great W-yb -- n's Plagues their Aid will lend)
To give to Villains, Traitors, a Deserved End.
A Copy of VERSES, Sent to the Author of EXCHANGE-ALLEY, a Farce, in Apr. 1720.
IF Truth-Prophetick will procure a Name,
And humorous Satyr gain a lasting Fame;
If Frauds detected, plainly made appear,
Can serve a Nation in a Poet's Sphere;
Thou Bard adventurous, well deserve my Praise,
In Spite of Fortune, shall be crowned with Bays.
If Bears and Monkeys thou have made of those
Who gain great Riches, but gain no Repose;
Like Forest Animals, their Coaches grace,
And who are fitter for another Place;
Thy Lines have Reason, and thy Thoughts are strong,
Those will acknowledge who observe 'em long:
Though Bl -- nt or F -- ll -- ws Thee with Rashness charge;
If low in Wealth, in Sense thy Fortune's large:
And what are Riches, and a glittering Train,
Without this Treasure, which conducts, the Brain:
Like Ships at Sea well fraught, with Weather crossed,
So many are in Rising Tempests lost.
O Glorious South Sea, whom the Crowds obey,
By Thee have Misers gained a powerful Sway;
Great Wealth and Treasure, but it is Credit all,
And when this fails, the great Dependents fall:
To Ashes Paper may be burnt at Will,
But Coin, though melted, is of Value still.
EPIGRAM ON THE South Sea Game.
WHEN Men against themselves combine,
And Whores, and Bawds, and Statesmen join;
The Widow, Orphan's, spoiled, undone,
Our Money fled, and Credit gone;
We, Poets, then may well conclude,
This is the Devil's Interlude.
FINIS.

