THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.

JUDGMENT OF PARIS: A MASQUE.

Written by Mr. Congreve.

-- Vincis utramque Venus.
Ov. Art. Am. L. 1. Set severally to Music, by Mr. John Eccles, Mr. Finger,
Mr. Purcel, and Mr. Weldon.

Invitat pretiis animos, and praemia ponit.
Virg. Aen. 5. Nemo ex hoc Numero -- non donatus abibit.
Ibid. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at Gray's- Inn-Gate, next Gray's-
Inn-Lane. 1701.

THE Judgment of Paris. A Masque.
The SCENE is a Landscape of a beautiful Pasture supposed on Mount Ida. The
Shepherd Paris is seen seated under a Tree, and playing on his Pipe; his Crook
and Scrip, etc. lying by him. While a Symphony is playing, Mercury descends
with his Caduceus in one Hand, and an Apple of Gold in the other: After the
Symphony he sings. MERCURY. FRom high Olympus and the Realms above,
Behold I come the Messenger of Jove;
His dread Commands I bear,
Shepherd arise and hear;
Arise and leave a while thy Rural care.
Forbear thy woolly Flock to feed,
And lay aside thy tuneful Reed;
For thou to greater Honors art decreed.

PARIS. O Hermes I thy Godhead know,
By thy winged Heels and Head,
By thy Rod that wakes the Dead,
And guides the Shades below.
Say wherefore do thou seek this humble Plain,
To greet a lowly Swain?
What does the mighty Thunderer Ordain?

MERCURY. This Radiant Fruit behold,
More bright then burnished Gold;
Three Goddesses for this Contend,
See now they descend,
And this way they bend.
Shepherd take the Golden Prize,
Yield it to the brightest Eyes.
( Juno, Pallas, and Venus, are seen at a distance descending in several
Machines.)
PARIS. O Ravishing Delight!
What Mortal can support the Sight?
Alas too weak is Human Brain,
So much Rapture to Sustain.
I faint, I fall, O take me hence,
Ere Ecstacy invades my aching Sense:
Help me Hermes or I dye,
Save me from Excess of Joy.

MERCURY. Fear not Mortal, none shall harm thee,
With my Sacred Rod I Will Charm thee;
Freely gaze and view all over,
Thou may every Grace discover.
Though a thousand Darts fly round thee,
Fear not Mortal, none shall wound thee.

For two Parts. Paris. Happy thou of Human Race,
Gods with thee would change their place;
With no God I Would change my Place,
Happy I of Human Race.
(Mercury ascends.)
While a Symphony is playing, Juno descends from her Machine, after the
Symphony she Sings. JUNO. Saturnia, Wife of Thundering Jove am I,
Beloved by him, and Empress of the Sky;
Shepherd fix on me thy wondering Sight,
Beware, and view me well, and judge aright.
(Symphony for Pallas.)
PALLAS. This way Mortal bend thy Eyes,
Pallas claims the golden Prize;
A Virgin Goddess free from Stain,
And Queen of Arts, and Arms I Reign.
(Symphony for Venus.)
VENUS. Hither turn thee gentle Swain,
Let not Venus sue in vain;
Venus rules the Gods above,
Love rules them, and she rules Love,
Hither turn thee gentle Swain.

PALLAS. Hither turn to me again;

JUNO. Turn to me for I am she,

ALL 3. To me, to me, for I am she,

VENUS. Hither turn thee Gentle Swain

JUNO. PALL. She will deceive thee,

VENUS. They will deceive thee, I Will never leave thee,

Chorus of all 3. Hither turn to me again,
To me, to me, for I am she
Hither turn thee Gentle Swain.

PARIS. I.
Distracted I turn, but I cannot decide,
So equal a Title sure never was tried,
United your Beauties, so dazzle the Sight,
That lost in amaze,
I giddily gaze,
Confused and overwhelmed with a Torrent of Light.
II.
Apart let me View then each Heavenly fair,
For three at a time there is no Mortal can bear;
And since a gay Robe an ill shape may disguise,
When each is undrest.
I Will judge of the best,
For it is not a face that must carry the Prize.

JUNO Sings. I.
Let Ambition fire thy Mind,
Thou were born over Men to Reign,
Not to follow Flocks designed,
Scorn thy Crook, and leave the Plain.
II.
Crowns I Will throw beneath thy Feet,
Thou on Necks of Kings shall tread,
Joys in Circles Joys shall meet,
Which way ere thy fancy's Lead.
III.
Let not Toyls of Empire fright,
(Toils of Empire pleasures are)
Thou shall only know delight,
All the Joy, but not the Care.
IV.
Shepherd if thou wilt yield the Prize,
For the Blessings I bestow,
Joyful I Will ascend the Skies,
Happy thou shall Reign below.

CHORUS. Let Ambition fire thy Mind,
Thou were born over Men to Reign,
Not to follow Flocks designed,
Scorn thy Crook and leave the Plain.

PALLAS Sings alone. I.
Awake, awake, thy Spirits raise,
Wast not thus thy youthful days,
Pipeing, Toying,
Nymphs decoying,
Lost in wanton and Inglorious ease.
II.
Hark, Hark! the glorious Voice of War,
Calls aloud for Arms prepare,
Drums are beating,
Rocks repeating,
Martial Music charms the joyful Air.

Symphony. PALLAS Sings. O what Joys does Conquest yield!
When returning from the Field,
Oh how glorious it is to see
The Godlike Hero Crowned with Victory!
Laurel Wreaths his Head surrounding,
Banners waveing in the Wind,
Fame her golden Trumpet sounding,
Every Voice in Chorus joined;
To me kind Swain the Prize resign,
And Fame and Conquest shall be thine:

CHORUS. O how glorious it is to see,
The God-like Hero Crowned with Victory!

(Symphony.) VENUS Sings alone. Stay lovely Youth, delay thy Choice,
Take heed lest empty Names enthrall thee,
Attend to Cythereas Voice;
Lo! I who am Loves Mother call thee.
Far from thee be anxious Care:
And racking Thoughts that vex the Great,
Empires but a gilded Snare,
And fickle is the Warriors Fate;
One only Joy Mankind can know,
And Love alone can that bestow.

CHORUS. One only Joy, etc.

VENUS Sings. I.
Nature framed thee sure for Loving,
Thus adorned with every Grace;
Venus self thy Form approving,
Looks with Pleasure on thy Face.
II.
Happy Nymph who shall enfold thee,
Circled in her yielding Arms!
Should bright Hellen once behold thee,
She Would surrender all her Charms.
III.
Fairest she, all Nymphs transcending,
That the Sun himself has seen,
Were she for the Crown contending,
Thou would own her beauties Queen.
IV.
Gentle Shepherd if my Pleading,
Can from thee the Prize obtain,
Love himself thy Conquest aiding,
Thou that Matchless Fair shall gain.

PARIS. I yield, I yield, O take the Prize,
And cease, O cease, the enchanting Song;
All Loves Darts are in thy Eyes,
And Harmony falls from thy Tongue.
Forbear O Goddess of desire,
Thus my ravished Soul to move,
Forbear to fan the raging Fire,
And be propitious to my Love.

Here Paris gives to Venus the golden Apple. Several Cupids descend, the three
Graces alight from the Chariot of Venus, they call the Howrs, who assemble;
with all the Attendants on Venus. All join in a Circle round her, and sing the
last grand Chorus; while Juno and Pallas ascend. GRAND CHORUS. Hither all ye
Graces, all ye Loves;
Hither all ye hours resort,
Billing Sparrows, Cooing Doves;
Come all the train of Venus Court.
Sing all great Cythereas Name;
Over Empire, over Fame,
Her Victory proclaim.
Sing and spread the joyful News around,
The Queen of Love, is Queen of Beauty Cround.

FINIS.

